




THREE EXCELLENT POINTS OF CHRI|STIAN DOCTRINE:

I. The Nativity of our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
II. His bitter sufferings for the sinnes of his people.
III. The fruites flowing therefrom, to those that by Faith apprehend him.

ALL PROPHECIED BY ZACHARIAH in the 8. 9. and 10. Verses of the third Chapter of his Prophecie, and explained in three Ser|mons, preached at Edinburgh by Master PETER HEWAT being Minister there.
IOHN 5. 29.
Search the Scriptures, for they testifie of me.
1 PET. 1. 10. 11.
10
Of which saluation the Prophets haue inquired and searched diligently, who prophecied of the grace that should come vnto you.
11
Searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was to come did signifie. When it testified before hand the suffering of Christ, and the glory that should follow.


EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HART. Anno 1621.




TO THE RIGHT HO|NORABLE DAVID AIKINHEID LORD Provest: And to the right Worshipfull Robert Dowgall, Iohn Maknaght, William Dick, and Henry Morison Baillies: Iohn Byres Deane of Gild, Peter Somervell The|saurer, and to the remnant of the Councill, representing the body of the good Town of EDIN|BVRGH.
_COmfortable and powerfull is that confirmation to our faith in the Messias, which is drawne from ancient Scripture, when wee see that all which was foreshadowed in the Law, and fore-spoken by the Prophets, hath the due and full accomplishment in our Lord Iesus Christ. Who being God ma|nifested1 Tim. 3. 16 in the flesh, was in the fulnes of time for the sinnes of his people crucified at Ierusalem. And thereafter de|claredRom. 1. 4 to be the Sonne of God, with power, according to the Spirit of holines by the resurrection from the dead. To this end it is, that the Lord Iesus himselfe biddeth vs search the Scriptures, for they testifie of him. He meaneth thereIohn 5. 29 of ancient Scripture, wherof there is no part which beareth not cleare and evident testimony of him. To Adam heeGen. 3. 15

was promised. Noah made petition for his sonne Iaphet, that he might be perswaded to come to the tents of Sem:Gen. 9. 27 that is, to the Church and family of the Messias. Abra|hamIohn 8. 56 saw his day, and reioyced in it. Isaac was a speciall type of him, who as he was the sonne of laughter and glad|nes:Gen. 22. 6 Iohn 19. 17 so Iesus Christ was the ioy of the sonnes of men. And as he bare on his shoulders the timber wherewith he should haue bene burnt in a sacrifice: So Iesus Christ bare on his back the Crosse whereupon he was crucified. Iacob spakeGen. 49  notably of him, and from his seed the Scepter did not de|part till he came in the flesh. Moses prayed to send him whoExod. 4. 13 was to be sent. Iehoshua hath but the name of a Saviour in type, who fighting the Lords battels, and leading the people through Iordan to the promised Land, resembleth our strong and mighty Chiftan, that Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, who subdueth his enemies, leadeth captivity captiue, and carrieth his people through the raging and swelling Ior|dan of the troubles of this life to that promised rest. All the refreshment which the people had vnder Iudges, fighting for them, and rescuing them from their oppressours, was but a shadow and a glasse to looke vnto that rest which is to be found vnder the Messias, who putteth his people in such safetie, that the red Dragon with his power cannot comeApoc. 12. 9 neere to pursue. The holy line is kept, and closeth the bookeRuth 4. 18 of Ruth with Dauid the sonne of Iesse for no other pur|pose but to point at the Messias the Son of Dauid accor|ding to the flesh. Samuel by the direction of God, anointed1 Sam. 16. 13 Dauid to be King, who was the type of Iesus Christ in his actions and sufferingt. But the seruant of Iesus Christ as he is the Messias. And therefore he acknowledgeth him to bePsa. 110. 1 2 Sam, 23, 1 his Lord. He is called the sweet singer of Israel. And they

who will looke earnestly to his Psalmes, shall find how se|cretly he tuneth his harpe, and how heauenly and melodious his song is, when he singeth of the Messias to come, his king|dome, his subiests, and the great benefit which his people inioy vnder him. The Queen of Seba came to visit Salo|monMath. 12. 4 the son of Dauid, to see the ordor of his house, and found her sight aboue the report. But behold Iesus Christ greater then Salomon. Ezra writing the history of seuen of Daniel his weekes, which make fourty nine yeares, isDan. 9. 25 leading the people to look to the end when shall come the holy One, who shall make an end of sin, and finish transgres|sion, to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring an e|uerlasting righteonsnes. Nehemiah goeth on in the same course, writing the history of seuenty yeares. In the eighteen yeares history of Esther, is it not remarkable to this pr|pose, that while as the sword was aboue the heads of the people of God, ready drawne as it were, to cut off their me|mory,Esther 7 Esther is raised vp as a comfortable instrument of their deliuery. So when the sword of Gods vengeance was drawne, to cut off the whole race of Adam with an euerla|sting destruction, in commeth Iesus Christ not looked for of Angels, nor expected of man, who setteth his people at freedome, and deliuereth them who were subiect to thatLuc. 1. 74. feare. Iob was afflicted many wayes in his goods, in his children, in his wife, in his body, in his conscience, yet is his head holden vp, and he kept from despair by the faith which he hath in the Messias, still hoping with the eyes of hisIob 19, 25. 26. 27 soule  body both, to see his Redeemer. When the Prophets come in, is not this the summe of all their Prophecy. He that readeth Esay, may read in him all the points of the E|vangell of Iesus Christ. Euery one of the succeeding Pro|phets.

holding fast the same point. And the nerer they draw to the time of the rising of that bright Star, the more clear|lyMalach. 4. 5 they spoke of him. So that the last of the Prophets being Malachie, his last breath is of Iohn the Baptist, the fore|runner of Iesus Christ. And so Christ himselfe telleth you that all the Prophets and the Law prophecied vnto Iohn,Math. 11. 13 and that by Elias, of whom Malachie spoke, is vnderstood Iohn. When the Lord Iesus came himself, all his actions, and especially his sufferings, were the accomplishment ofMath. 17. 1 Scripture, which was written of old. Vpon the mountaine of his transfiguration there is seen talking with him Mo|ses and Elias, to testifie the sweet concent and harmony be|twixt him, the Law and the Prophets. And the subiect ofLuc. 9. 31 their conference saith Luke, was of his death which he should accomplish at Ierusalem. After his resurrection in that powerfull Sermon of his, which made the hearts of the hearers to burne within them. Did he not begin at MosesLuc. 24. 27 and the Prophets, and expound vnto them in all the Scrip|tures these things that were written concerning him, it would take a long time, and fill many pages to goe through all. These few words to them that are wise in the knowledge of God, may be sufficient. Amongst the rest of the Pro|phets, our Prophet Zachary (being the last except one be|foreZach. 3 the comming of Christ) he doth most clearely point him forth. He is in this Prophecie that great Angell who taketh the filthy garments from Iehoshua. It is he only who taketh from vs the filthy garment of our sin, and cloatheth vs with the white garment of his righteousnes. It is he who putteth wickednes in an Epha, and hath cast a weight ofZach. 5. 8 Lead vpon the mouth of it. For let vs bury our sins where we will, they will rise again, except they be buried in the

buriall of Iesus Christ, from whence they shall neuer rise to our confusion here, nor condemnation after this. He isZach. 6. 12 that Branch who buildeth the spirituall Temple of GOD. Yea our Prophet is so speciall in his Prophecy of the Mes|sias, that he will tell you of his comming in to Ierusalem ri|ding on an Asse. He will tell you of the very price for whichZach. 9. 9 he was sold and betrayed, euen thirty pieces of silver. AndZach. 11. 13 in end he will conclude his Prophecy with making mention of that glorious comming to Iudgment.
These three Sermons following, are vpon the last three verses of the third Chap. of this Prophet Zachary, where. in you shall find excellent Propheticall speach of the Messias. Here haue you his Natiuity, being that Branch of the root of Iesse. 2. His suffring, being that Stone which the Lord of Hostes himself did ingraue. 3. The fruits flowing there from, which are, the remouing of sin, peace of consci|ence, and the inioying of all sort of good.
I was not of purpose that these Sermons should haue seen the light, being conscious of my own insufficiency, neither presuming vpon anything that can flow from me. But be|ing ouercome by the importunity of a kinde and louing friend, who by accident saw my papers, to whom I could re|suse nothing that was lawfull and possible for me, I was content to be requested, yea in a manner commanded. And seeing they must come forth, to whom can they more proper|ly belong then to your L. and town of Edinburgh, they be|ing my first fruits of this sort. I had with you my birth, I was educat in your schooles of learning, I serued (althogh vnworthy) twenty yeares in your publike Ministry, From which now being remoued, since I can doe you no good by publike preaching, I shalbe glad if by writing, or any other

meanes which lyeth in me, I may proue in any sort stedable. Of these Sermons you were also auditors, they being a|mongst the last which I preached there. And so may be best iudged of by you, if they be not the same which were deliuered.
It may please your L. Baillies and Councill in name of the good Town, to accept this small propine from one of your own, with the like heart and loue wherewith it is offered. Whereby if I shall but rub off me the note of ingratitude,  that your L. doth in any sort like of these trauels, I haue gained what I would, and will be hereby incouraged to vse my pen oftner, that if any good by me can redound vn|to others, the praise thereof vnder God may be yours, with whom I was bred and brought vp. Thus praying God to blesse your trauels, and make your gouernment prosperous by the propagation of the Gospell among you, and procu|ring the good of your town and Com|monwealth, I rest
Yours as it becommeth of bounden duty Mr PETER HEWAT.



To the Reader.
_LOuing and Christian Reader, I know that the great light and knowledge of this age hath bred itching eares, so that he who will giue foorth any thing in publick, must expect of his travels more carping and censuring, than profiting. The food which in the selfe is wholesome for the soule, being drawne from the pure Word of GOD, is not savorie meat to euery mans taste. They must haue strange sawces to waken their appetite and desire of reading. But let men wander in their conceits, as they please, this remaineth sure, that they who lay not the foun|dation of Faith in divinity vpon the Scripture, build not vpon the Rock. They who presume to vnder|stand aboue that which is written, remember not the Apostles precept, Rom. 12. 13. And they who thinke the Scriptures too shallow to wade in, as not affor|ding sufficient matter for their wits to worke vpon, sinke in a sea of absurdities and errours. You shall not expect in these Sermons following the large handling of these great common places of divinity, mentioned in the Title, for that you know, would require a large volume. But a plaine opening of the text adhering therevnto without digression. Wherein I will desire you not so much to regard my rude and simple do|ing, as my affection being willing to cast in my myte in

the Church Treasure, the conscience of my doing, being to me a sufficient guard against all calumnies. Thus farre onely I am bold to say, that if you will take paines to reade, you shall finde all that is set downe heere, able to abide the touch-stone of holy Scrip|ture. And if in any thing I haue erred and gone a|stray (as who can pleade perfection) then I say with holy Dauid Psal. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, and it shallbee a kindnesse. Let him reproue me, and it shalbe an excellentoyle, which shall not breake my head. The Spirit of GOD leade you in all trueth. Farewell.



LECTORI  AVTHORI.

DVlce novum veteri tibi si componere foedus,
Cernere  eventis sit rata dicta suis;
Mesiae ortum, obitum, fructum tibi  inde fluentem
Hc lege: sunt tria te judice, digna legi.
Lectaque digna feres: mea ni sententia fallat,
Lecta feres fidei non malfida tuae.
Perge, HEWETE, Sacri sic mystica pandere Verbi;
Linguaque si sileat, sic tua penna sonet.

PATRICIVS SANDAEVS.


Ad D. PETRVM HVATTVM Sermones editurum.

QVod diae assiduis sacris operere Sionis,
Laudibus adijciet posthuma fama tuis.
Scriptaque quod mandes nervosa nepotibus, aetas
Nescia noctis atrae te repetita canet.
Durabunt dum Luna micat tua dogmata, numen
Indidit eloquiis pondus HVATTE tuis.
Faenerat exigui corpus dona ampla, libelli
In parvo magnum munere munus inest.

Io. HALLVS F.




VErbis Suada tuis, sensu Hermes ludit HVATTE,
Sic tuum plenum est numine opus duplici.
Dulce sonant, dulce  sapiunt haec scripta, nec vlli
Non sapient si non invido  insipido.

GVLIELMVS HALLVS.






THE FIRST SERMON.

ZECHARIAH, 3. Chap. 8. 9. and 10. verses.
8
Heare now O Iehoshua the high Priest, thou and thy fellowes that sit before thee. For they are men wondred at. For behold I will bring forth my seruant the BRANCH.
9
For behold, the stone that I haue laid before Iehoshua: vpon one stone shalbe seuen eyes; behold I will engraue the grauing thereof, saith the Lord of Hostes, and will remoue the iniquity of that land in one day.
10
In that day saith the Lord of Hostes, shall ye call every man his neighbour vnder the vine, and vnder the sigge tree.

_THe Prophet in this Chapter goeth on in comforting the people of God with the assured hope and expectation of the ac|complishment of that worke of their be|gun deliuerie from the captivity of Ba|bylon,

incouraging them to goe forward in the buil|ding of the house of God not looking to, nor regar|ding the outward face and appearance of things, how vnlikely soeuer, but lifting their eyes to the conside|ration of h infinite wisedome, power and loue, whoRom. 11. 3.  10. 17. Psal. 103. 11. hath promised vnto them this pledge of his favour, that his Temple shall bee againe set vp in the middes of them, and they shall inioy these same outward ensignes of his blessed presence. All which for their sinnes in their banishment and captiuity, werePsal. 94. vtterly put downe and defaced.
Among the rest of these things which were in the peoples eyes, and occurred to their consideration to discourage them, this was not one of the least: thePsal. 94 91. present estate  condition of the Priesthood, which had lost all the former glory and dignity,  to them it appeared a thing altogether impossible, that euer their Priest and Priesthood should recouer the won|ted beautie. To meet with them in their doubtful co|gitation, and to raise their hearts with comfort in this same particular: There is in the beginning of this chapter, a vision concerning Iehoshua their high Priest who althogh he be (as in the vision he is represented) vile and contemptible, partlie in regard of the ma|liceApoc. 12. 10. of Sathan that pursueth him, partly in regard of his owne pollution and sinnes, which are the mater of Sathans assaults and accusations. Yet is the Lord him Ioh, 2. 1. self, euen the Messias, the great Mediatour and Ad|vocat of his Church broght in pleading for him. And in this pleading so prevailing, that Sathan gets the foyle, and is rebuked. Iehoshua is made free and absol|ued.

His filthy garments are taken from him, a crown for his head, and the ornaments besitting the Priest|hood are rendred to him.
In the Chapter conteining this heauenly  com|fortable vision, there are two chiefe and principall points. The one is the speech of God in the mouth of his Prophet anent Iehoshua the high Priest And the second is the translation of his speech from Iehoshua the Type to the great high Priest of the House of God, IESVS CHRIST. Wherein is set down the happy estate and condition of his Church and peo|ple vnder him. But leauing the first part of the Chap|ter, let vs deale with the last three Verses, wherein that which hath beene formerly spoken of the Levi|ticall Priesthood, to be restored in the person of Ieho|shua, is now declared to haue the accomplishment in the person of Iesvs Christ then to come and now exhibite, of whom Iehoshua was the type: for the Lord our God would not haue his people abide or rest in the externall shadow of that ministery, but that in it they should consider what was figured, and looke to IESVS CHRIST who was to come. And heerein may be considered. 1. That the Maiesty and dignity of1 that Priesthood before the captivity was very great. 2. In the time of the captivity, the honour of that2 Priesthood was laid as it were in the dust, and casten to the ground. The visioun representing that time brings in Iehoshua, cled in filthy garments, in a base  vile estate. 3. After the captivity, the Lord as a signe3 of his mercifull returne to his people, he restoreth the Priesthood again. And yet neither the glory of Priest

nor Temple was thought answerable to that which was of before.
Heere therefore comes in the peoples consolation to looke in through all these Types, to the glory and dignity of the Priesthood of IESVS CHRIST to come, with which in dignity and maiesty cannot enter in co~parison, the Leviticall Priesthood then standing,  now abolished. 1. The Priest and Priesthood then1 was glorious in their owne forme of glory and splen|dor:Heb. 7. But all the glory which they had, was but a sha|dow. And the end of it was to point at the glorious Priesthood of IESVS CHRIST. 2. That Priesthood2 with the glory of it, was subiect to alterations and decayes: But the Priesthood of IESVS CHRIST re|maines vnchangeable, and is euerlasting. 3. That the3 people should not rest vpon these shadowes, and to comfort them against all mutatio~s whatsoeuer. There is no solide nor stedfast way but one, looke to IESVS CHRIST. In him, as the Father hath declared, him|selfeMath. 3. 17. Math. 17. 5. well pleased. So in him only doth the soule of the beleeuer finde sound peace and contentment.
The Lord our God who typed IESVS CHRIST in the Law, and deliuered him in figures to the people in that Leviticall seruice, althogh he hath remoued the types. And we haue IESVS plainly and simply deliue|red to vs in the Word and Sacraments: Yet remaines there in his Church some teaching of this kinde and nature, wherein by outward, we are led vnto inward, and by earthly, wee are carryed vnto spirituall things. And in things concerning this life, is shadowed vnto vs things eternall, and which concerneth the life that

is to come. The glory of the Temple of old was great But what was it in comparison of the glory  beauPsal. 45 2. ty of the spirituall House of IESVS CHRIST, who is fairer then the children of men. The glory and Maie|sty of the high Priest of old was great: but what was it compared with the glory and Maiestie of our high Priest. But these types are away. What remaines yet, and shall remaine in the Church to the end of thePsal. 19. World, of that kinde of doctrine. Euen thus much. Hast thou any delight or pleasure in the beautifull shape or frame of this World, or any of the Crea|tures that are therein. Should thou rest there? No:1 Cor. 7. 31.  Ioh. 2. 17 2 Cor. 4. 18. This World and the shape and fashion of it will goe away. But thinke that all these things being but sha|dowes, they cannot by many degrees come to the re|se~blance of that delight,  these euerlasting pleasures in the life to come: for the which as thy soule should earnestly seek, so except thou get assurance to be par|taker of them, it had beene better for thee neuer to haue beene borne. The glory and Maiesty of earthlyPsal. 49. 1 Apoc. 3. 5. Apoc. 7. 9. Kings is great, yet all their glory followes them but to their graue. But O, how great is that glory, to bee crowned in Heauen, to be cloathed with fine white robes, hauing palmes in their hands in signe of victo|ry. And all this glorious estate is promised to theLuc. 12, 32. meanest subiect of the Kingdome of IESVS CHRIST. Bread is comfortable to an hungrie body, but as the hunger of the body may make thee say to him: Lord, giue vs this day our daylie bread: So knowing theMath. 6. 11 Iohn 6. 32. Apoc. 2. 17. want of thy soule, should thou not run with a petition for it to him, who hath said, I haue hid Manna to giue

you. And of whose House it may be well said, There is in it bread enough, large mercies and comforts toLue. 15. 17 the hungrie and wearied soule that comes to seeke them. Drinke is good for a thirstie body, but wilt thou not remember of thy soule, and heare him who hath said, I haue drinke to giue, whereof whosoeuerIoan. 4. 14 drinketh, shall neuer thirst againe. If we haue no ap|petite but naturall, of things concerning the body, what difference betwixt vs and the beast? But a spiri|tuall and renewed man, is he not knowen in his spiri|tuall appetite and desires, such as was that man accor|ding to Gods owne Heart, expressing his spirituallPsal. 42. 1 appetite this way: As the Hart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so panteth my soule for thee O God. Gar|ments are steedable to the naked; But remembring thy soule, heare him who calleth you to come and buy of him garments, to couer your filthy nakednes,Apoc 3. 18 that yee bee not a spectakle of shame in the sight of God, Man and Angell. With which garments whoso|euer shal not be found cled in that Day, shall cry (butApoc. 6. 16 in vaine) to hils and mountaines to fall vpon them,  cover them from the face of the Lamb. Gold is profi|table, hauing for this life the owne necessary vses; ButApoc. 6. 18 harken to him who hath to giue thee fine gold tryed by the fire, euen that better and induring substance,Luc. 10. 22 which cannot be taken from thee again. So as the Lord led his people of old from things temporall, to things spirituall. and from types to trueth: so let him take vs by the hand,  by him let vs be led from these earthly things, to spirituall things. And fro~ the things of this life, to the consideration  earnest desire of the better things of that life to come.
There is another word also to bee marked heere, There fell out many changes which were grievous to this people, their owne sins bred them great disquiet. As change in their policie, desolation in their cities,  great change in the face of their Church,  vpon their Priesthood. And when their Temple and Priest|hood was restored againe, it was a griefe to such as re|membred the dayes of old, to see the last no wayes an|swerable to the glory  beauty of the first. This do|ctrine therfore proponed by the Prophet, is to com|fort them against all such griefs,  to settle  establish their hearts against all changes whatsoeuer, and it is this, cast the eyes of your faith toward IESVS CHRIST the great High Priest to come, and there your soules shall finde rest; IESVS CHRIST who was represented in the figure of the Law,  is exhibit in the fulnes of1 Tim . 15 time. As he came in the world for this end, to saue sin ners, so is he the only stay of the Hearts of sinners, and in him is perfite remedie against all those griefes and tentations that rise here in this world, by reason of sin to oppresse the hearts of sinners. Heere all things are subiect to change and alteration, he that is knit to him, stayes vpon a rocke, with a defiance of all these worldly changes, althogh the world should be turned vpside down,  the mou~tains rolled in the mids of thePsal. 125 1 great deep, yet can he not be moued. In no thing that is here can there be found co~tentment, in him the soul hath ful delight. And when a man is as it were chased  hu~ted with griefs on all hands, with his many sins, with the devils tentations, somtimes with the ingrati|tude  malicious doing of men. It is euen vpon such

a wearyed and distressed body that Christ calleth, saying, Come to me, and I will ease you and refreshMath. 11. 28 you: we would therefore hearken to the sweet call of IESVS CHRIST, and labour to follow the Saints and seruants of God, seeking onely and finding this way contentment to our soules. Heere God by his Pro|phet willeth his people to looke ouer all that blacke cloud of ceremonies, to IESVS CHRIST. I desire, saith Paul, to know nothing but IESVS CHRIST and himPhil. 1. 25 crucified, he is to me both in life and death an advan|tage. Whom haue I, saith Dauid, in Heauen but thee,Psal. 73. 26. and there is none vpon earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh  my heart faileth, but God is the strength of my heart and portion for euer. Where shall we go to? saith Peter, hast not thou the words of eternallIohn 6. 68 Luc. 2. 29. life? What further can I wish, sayth old Simeon, ha|uing gotten Christ in the armes of my body and soul both, and sene my saluation in him. Now let thy ser|vant go in peace. Therefore as this is noted to be the great sollicitude and care of the Church to inquire for him. Tell mee, O thou whom my soule louethGant. 1. 7. where thou feedest. So if thou will proue thy selfe a true member of this Church, and be partaker of this onely consolation, inquire for him, seeke him out while he may be found, be homely with him, seekeEsay 55. 6. to be daylie farther conioyned with him, in him shall ye finde perfite ease and contentment.
In these three Verses commeth to be considered first the preface that is vsed, next the speech which is deliuered, containing so many excellent points, con|cerning the Messias, both in his person and office. In

the Preface Iehoshua and his fellowes, they are bidden hearken and advert vnto that which is to bee spoken. Iehoshua was immediatly of before wakened to atten|tion, when the Lord hauing absolued him, giues his direction to him, speaking vnto him with vehement and earnest protestation. Now hee is wakened to at|tentionVerse 6 againe, and bidden giue eare to the graue speech following, concerning the Messias. Although this with the former be but one continued Sermon, he that heard of before, hath need to heare still, he that was wakened of before, hath neede to be wakened a|gaine. And these graue and great mysteries vttered by the mouth of God himselfe, they craue vpon our part great attention. When God speakes, our eares shouldpsal. 40.  be ready to heare. In the volume of thy Booke, saith Dauid, it is written of me. This volume of the Booke of God, is the Law of God: The first words whereofDeut 5. 1 apoc 2. 3 is, Hearken Israel. The seale of all the letters written to the seuen Churches is, Let him that hath an eare heare what the spirit sayth to the Churches. No man hath his care so ready to hearken, but he hath neede continually to be put vpon, to waken him vnto atten|tion. And the meanes of this doing are many vpon the Lords part, his word a principall, his word some|timesPsal. 8. 2 in the mouthes of old men, sometimes in the mouthes of yong men to waken thy hearing. Some|times it comes with a mourning sound, sometimes with a ioyfull sound to waken thy hearing. SometimesMat. 11. 7 it comes in a mysterie, as a sealed letter, and sometimes the mysterie is revealed, and the booke opened to wa|ken thy hearing. Sometimes he that cryes in thy eare,

takes a rod in his hand of some inward or outward affliction, wherewith he choppes vpon thee, to waken thy hearing, and sometimes there may arise (for the sinnes of people) the strange noyse, and horrible sound of the Antichristian Locusts, to waken mens hearing, to bring the~ to remorse of their former care|lesseApoc. 9 3 hearing, and make them thinke and say; O how vile and blasphemous things are we compelled with our cares to heare? who would not hearken to the voice of our God in his pure and holy Word. ThePsal. 137. 3 people were thus way handled at the rivers of Babel, being forced to heare the despightfull wordes of their enemies, reproaching their seruice of GOD, and that because they did not hearken to the voyce of their GOD, being at home in their owne Land. Thus it is manifest, that no man hath his care so rea|dy and bent, but he hath need still to be wakened and stirred vp to heare what GOD sayeth to him. Moreouer there is no man so perfite a Scholler in the Schoole of CHRIST, but hath neede daylie to heare, and in hearing to learne als long as he li|ueth. And should not (as it is in this Text) the gra|vity of the matter, and the great and weighty my|steries, coming from God to vs, in the mouthes of his servants, provoke vs diligently and attentiuely to heare? My heart, sayeth Dauid, is indyting a goodPsal 45.  matter, I speake of the things which I haue made touching the King, hearken sayeth he, for my mouth will vtter wisedome, and statutes divine. HearkenPsal. 49. 1 2. 3 sayeth the Lord heere to Iehoshua. And the argument is in the matter, proponed in the wordes following,

being a speech of the Messias, of his person, his office, his sacrifice, and the good that shall come thereby to his people.
This word of the Preface wakening Iehoshua to at|tention it would be marked; first for descriuing of a great and common sinne, so common, that who canHeb .  say he is free of it. GOD hath spoken, and his Sonne IESVS CHRIST by whom hee hath spoken in these last times. hath cryed alowd vnto vs, but we haue not heard him. This is the depraved condition of the eare of all the sonnes of Adam; The smallest whisperingsGen.  of the Deuill that old serpent, are good language to vs, to which we harken readily. But the loud cryings and callings of our God, are past with a deafe care. And that to God we haue not hearkened, is it not e|vident in this? no man hath turned out of his way. It may be well said, that it wilbe the superscription of our plague and iudgment when euer it shall come, be|cause we would not heare the Lord speaking to vs. A sin which not onely brings on plague and iudgment, but a thing worse nor the plague, euen the stopping of the Lords eare, that he will not heare thee calling to him in the Day of thy Iudgement. For albeit a man be plunged in a great deepe, yet so long as he may haue commoning with God, and interchange speech with him, his estate can not be counted hard. Ionas lying in the deep of the Sea, inclosed in the belly of the whale, yet herein was his comfort, My voice came to God, and he heard me. But they that wilfully closeIonas 2 their eare, and will not heare GOD when hee speakes, they close vpon themselues the doore of

comfort, God hath promised a meeting this way, They shall cry to me euen in the day of their trouble,Prov. 1. 28. Zach. 7. 13 but I will not heare them. Let vs seeke from him the touching and opening of our eare, which hath beene so long closed. Ler vs seeke the reformation of our eare, that we who haue beene swift to heare the De|uill speaking to our great hurt in soule and body, may once resolue to heare our God speaking to our well. If thou be one of the Israell of God, remember itDeut. 5. 1 is written of thee in the first wordes of the booke of God. Hearken Israell: Sacrifice and burnt offering hepsal. 40. 6 craues not of thee. Happie is he that may come in and say a bored and prepared eare thou hast giuen me to heare thy Law. It was a signe of a perpetuall servitudeExod. 21. 6 of old, the boring of the eare. So it is a signe of that seruice wherein is true freedome and libertie, a ready and open eare to heare, and in hearing, to follow the counsels and directions of God. And we that haue so long sleeped, and either mistaken or misregarded the voice of our God: Would God we once learned the lessoun that old Eli gaue to Samuell, that wee might Sam. 3. 9 come before him with this disposition, and say. Speak Lord, for we thy seruants are ready to heare.
Another vse would be made of this discourse con|cerning the hearing of the Lords voice, that seeing trouble and affliction is one of the Lords meanes, by which he openeth the eare: Then should it draw eue|ry man and woman to a careful examination of them selues, how they haue profited in the schoole of affli|ction, and profited in this lesson of better and more carefull hearing of the Word of God. None want

their owne visitations and afflictions. And althogh Gods end in inflicting be, as hath bene said, to open the eare to heare better, yet it may be said of vs all, we haue come out of this fornace als deafe and dull in hearing as euer we were of before. Pharaoh made ma|nyExod. 8. 8 v. 5. 27. cap. 10. v. 16. 17 cap. 12. 30, 31 faire promises in the dayes of his calamity, that if the judgement were remoued, he would heare better, and hearken to the voice of God in Moyses, bidding him let the people goe. Yet the judgement being re|moued, he returned to his owne fashion, and counts as little of Gods Word, as he did before his trouble When troubles particular hath not mended our hea|ring, it argueth our disease to be great, when the pre|sages of such change and alteration, as may be the re|mouing of our candlestick, being before our eyes, yet mendeth not our hearing, an argument of a farther confirmed disease. Shall none of these moue vs? Thepsal. 76.  1 Sam. 2 23 1 Sam. 3.  1 Lord he can speake lowder yet, and hath a voice to put forth, that can make the earth and the inhabitants thereof to tremble. The voice of Eli to his sonnes was but soft, but God told him hee had a voice to put forth, the sound whereof would make all their eares to tingle. And as the Disciples, who in their drowsi|nes, would not be wakened with their masters voice, were wakened with the staues and swords of their e|nemies:Math. 26. 27 So where the sound of the word hath past as a base thing, and when all Gods doing hath not men|ded mens hearing, what wonder althogh the time come, when he that spake as a Lambe, shall roare as a Lyon. And when the Lyon roares, the beasts of theAmos 3. 8 forrest tremble. And that the Lord so put forth his

voyce in his Iudgement, as no flesh shalbe able to repell the sound of it. Who can expect other|wise?
There is a sort of hearers, who in their hearing are so dainty, whose eares are so itching, and are so continually attending novelty, that if they heare not each day a new tune, a new forme, some new and vncouth point of Doctrine, at least deliuered in an new and vncouth forme: They weary of hearing, and haue no pleasure in it, to whom let this serue for answere. There are in the Word many repetitions of one and the selfe-same thing, and they are not idle, nor in vaine For 1. the repetitions of the1 Word serue to helpe thy vnderstanding, and con|firme thy knowledge. 2. Althogh thy knowledge2 and vnderstanding were good, yet is not thy memo|ry weake and ill, able enough to reteine ill, but to let good things slip through. The repetition therefore of the Word serueth to helpe thy memory, and strengthen the same. 3. Albeit thou would say, I3 vnderstand well enough, and my memorie is good enough, yet who is able to say, my affection is good enough, and the obedience of my will is good e|nough. And als long as they are not conforme, repeti|tion of the same points of the Word is needfull, and thy affections hath need dayly to be beaten by the same hammer of the Word, till they be brought vn|der obedience. But for these who weary in hearing because of repetition, and would each day heare some new thing, Let this be an answere. Albeit thou heare euery day that same thing, and this day that

same thing which thou heard the last day, yet thou hearest euery day a new thing, insomuch as at euery hearing thou gettest sometimes a new exhortation to an old vertue, sometimes a new threatning for an old sinne, a new advertisement to learne the old lessoun of repentance. All which shall so bee put in the ac|compts of God against thee as new, that if thou shallHeb. 6. 7. 8 remaine the olde man, euery hearing bringing on a new hardnesse, shall induce a new conviction, and procure at Gods hands, an new and further Iudge|ment.
To this attention and hearing are called not only Iehoshua himselfe, but the text sayeth, his fellowes that sate before him, for they are men wondred at. By the fellowes of Iehoshua may be vnderstood the whole Church and people of God, for all, both Priest and people are called to be auditors of the voice of God, and of this Sermon, the subiect wherof is the Messias, in him yee know there is no exception of persons. There is not one way for the Priest, and another way for the people: But one common way of saluati|onDeut. 10. 17 Act. 10. 3. 4 Rom. . 11 1 pet. 1. 17 Iude 3 to all, and that is in the same Messias. The Priest is said to heare two wayes. First, heare the Worde from GOD, as that Worde by which hee1. looketh to be safe himselfe. Secondly, so heare2. from GOD, as he who must be Gods mouth a|gaine to the people, to deliuer to them evidently and faithfully his Oracles. The people are so to heare and embrace, as there is no way of safety to soule and body, but this which is proponed from the Mouth of God. Let not therefore the Priests say,

It is enough for vs if we instruct the people, and tell them what they should doe; no, thou must sit downe and learne, and heare thy selfe, if thou thy selfe would be saued. Neither let the people say, Let the Priests or the Preachers who haue their maintenance thereby, seeke the knowledge of these mysteries. If thou bee seeking eternall life, to thee it is spoken. Search the Scriptures, it is they that beare testimony of IESVSIohn 3. 39 acts 17. 11 CHRIST, and in him onely is life to be sought and found.
By the fellowes of Iehoshua may be vnderstood the rest of the Priests that were fellow-labourers with him; And as they come in called to hearing vnder this stile and title of Iehoshua his fellowes, it is to tell vs, that albeit Iehoshua was high Priest, and in that place a Type of IESVS CHRIST to come, yet hee was not set there, that in pride he should lift vp himselfe aboue his brethren: but remember they were fellowes in that same worke of God with him. The Popish pride is Deuilish, his vsurped singularity he hath not of Pe|ter, whose successor he will needes be, he calleth him|selfe1 peter 5. 1 a fellow elder with the rest. And the Pope will be a god on earth, to giue Law to all the rest. Albeit it may be thought meet for orders cause that some pre|side in the reformed Church of God, yet they would remember, Presbyters are to them as the rest of the Priests were to Iehoshua, of whom it is said, thou  thy fellowes. And three things in this kinde of superiority1 would euer be eschewed. 1. Pride, for God setteth1 Tim 3. 5 vp no man, that he should swell in conceit, that is the2 brood of the Devill. 2. Tyrannie or dominion over1 pet. 5 3

their brenhren and the Lords inheritance. Thirdly,3. idlenes, for they are not set there to looke to them|selues, and the enlarging of their owne estate, but to looke to the flock and people, which IESVS CHRISTActs 20 28 hath redeemed by his Blood. That from the Preface we may come to the words themselues, marke the last words, wherein these fellowes of Iehoshua are cal|led men of wonder, or men wondred at. If ye reteine the first interpretation, vnderstanding by the fellows of Iehoshua, all the faithfull people of God, then is there heere a certaine description of the Church and people of God, vsed also in other places of Scripture. Esay hath it in his eight Chapter, 18 verse. Behold, IEsay 8. 18 and the children which the Lord hath giuen me, are as signes and wonders in Israel. And the people and children of God are called men of wonder, or won|dred at, that is, men contemned and despised of the World; yea they are wondred at in their conversati|on1 Cor. 1. 28  doing, as mad men that should follow a course by the rest of the World, and not to goe on with1 Pet. 4. 4 them, drinking in all sort of sinne with greedines.Heb. 1. 24. 25. 26 Moyses in leauing the honours and pleasures of the Court of Pharaoh, and choosing rather to be afflicted with the people of God, was hee not heerein a man greatly wondred at? For men to account all folly in respect of IESVS CHRIST, is not this to the worldly|wisePhil. 3. 8 a matter of wonder? The mortification of the flesh, The contrition and dolor of the heart for sinne,Rom. 6. 13 psal. 51. 17 psal 6. 6 The teares of repentance, are they not to the prophan of the World matters of wonder? It is indeed in it selfe a matter wonderful, comming fro~ the rich mer|cieRom. 11 33

and bountie of God, which indeed of vs is to be admired that any should be taken out of the rotten race of Adam, and entred in this way that leades to the Kingdome of Heauen. It is vnto the prophane of the World a matter of wonder to behold this separa|tion; not that herein they obserue Gods goodnes. but that all things seeme strange to them which savour not of the flesh and of this present World. But let each one heere, as it were, stand wondring at others. The naturall and fleshly man wondring at the doings of the Children of God. The renewed man that hath receiued illumination from aboue, wondring to see men with such pleasure and delight, run vpon their owne euerlasting destruction. The day of decision is comming, when these who were heere in the eyes of the World, men wondred at, and of contempt shalbe made in the eyes of these same men, men wondred at for the greatnes of that glory which they shall inioy. And the comparing of these two together shalbe one of the stripes of the wicked, and a degree of their tor|ment. Are not these the men whom we so despised, and in contempt wondred at? and now how won|derfull is the glory and blessed estate which they are brought vnto? The Priests and they that serue at the Cor. 4. 13 Altar of God, may be heere also in a speciall manner called men wondred at. For if contempt follow the generall calling of Christianity, surely in the highest degree it followeth that speciall calling. And if ye re|gard the subiect of their ministery: It is the matter of wonder to man and Angell. The substance of all, both in old and new testament, being these same points of

the mysterie of godlines, which Paul reckons forth in the first of Timothy. Of the which subiect, because2 Tim 3. 16 the verses following speake clearely and comfortably, Let vs hauing now but shortly past ouer this Pre|face, come to speake of them.
This speach concerning Messias his comming and suffering, and the fruits of it: He beginneth with a Behold: Behold, I will bring forth my Seruant the Branch. Esay speaking of his Conception and Birth,Esay 7. 14 beginneth his speach also with a Behold: Behold a Virgin shall conceiue and beare a Son. The Angell ofLuc. 2. 9. 10 the Lord sent to the sheepheards to declare his Birth, mentioneth the same with a Behold. Behold I bring vnto you tydings of great Ioy, which shalbe to all people: for vnto you is borne this day in the Citty of Dauid, a Saviour which is CHRIST the Lord. When old Simeon, who waited for the Consolation of Israel, got CHRIST in his armes, he spake of him to his Pa|rentsLuc. 2. 34. Ioseph and Mary thus: Behold this Babe is ap|pointed for the falling and rysing of many in Israel. When Iohn the Baptist his fore-runner seeth him ap|proach vnto him, he wakens the hearts of all that were there to an earnest consideration of his Person and office with a Behold. Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the World. All thisIohn 1. 29 is to signifie as concerning the Messias these things. First, that his sending in the World, his Incarnation1 and the manner of it, his execution of his Priestly of|fice, being both the Priest, and the sacrificed Lambe: for the Father saith to him, Thou art to me a Priest for euer, after the order of Melchisedec. And yee hauePsal. 1 10. 4

heard Iohn say of him, that he is the Lambe that ta|keth away the sinnes of the World. All these were a disclosing and revelation to the World of the greatest mysterie that euer was. And therefore the Spirit by his Prophets and seruants cryeth so oft. Behold it, looke to it, and consider of it. This mysterie althogh it beganne to be revealed to Adam in that first pro|mise of the seed of the Woman to tread down theGen. 3. 15 head of the serpent: Yet in regard of the fuller mani|festation, it remained then but a secret. This mysterie all the time of the Legall seruice, and obscure cere|moniesApoc 5. 4 thereof it was but as a sealed booke. And as Iohn sayeth, when he saw there was none to open the sealed booke, he weeped, till the Lambe came. So all mankinde might haue weeped for euer, if the Lambe had not come in the fulnes of time and opened this Booke,  revealed this mysterie. That now that same may be the song of the Church and people of GOD which ye haue in the Apocalypse 5, Chapter. 13. vers.poc. 5. 13 Blessing, and glory, and honour, and power be vnto him that sitteth vpon the Throne, and to the Lambe for euer and euer. Secondly in this Booke, behold2 we are sent to looke to the degrees of the revelation of this mysterie, his Conception marvailous, his Na|tivity althogh in a base place, yet glorious: The An|gels of Heauen singing about the same, his office, myMath. 2. 1 Luc. 2. 13, 14 Servant, saith God; The Servant of the Father in a speciall kind of Service. his suffering, he was that in|graven Stone: The fruite of his suffering, I will take away the iniquity of my people in one day. Thirdly3 by this behold, we are led in all this Mysterie as in a

cleare mirrour to looke and consider 1. the deepnes1. of the Wisdome of God, in finding out such a way of mans safety, which was the wonder of Man and Angell. 2. The deepnes of the loue of God to man,2. whereof there could be no such demonstration asIud. 3 16 this: To giue his onely begotten Sonne to be his ran|some. 3. The deepnes of the Fountaine of the re|freshing3. Zach. 13. 1 mercies of God, opened in the House of Da|uid for vncleanenesse. Here is first matter of reproofe1. to vs all, that we being called to behold this great My|sterie, kept close in former time, we care no more for it, nor accompt no more of it, then if it were a commo~2. and base matter. 2. As GOD hath proceeded and gone on in the degrees of this revelation, so the World hath gone on in the degrees of ignorance and con|tempt: And so old Simeon his prophecie will proue true, This Babe is appointed for wrack and falling ofLuc. .  many, and that vpon their owne default. Thirdly, we3 being so oft called vpon by the Spirit, to behold this great Mysterie; And in this Mysterie revealed so many great things, ye must not thinke that we are called to an idle contemplation and beholding: But we must so behold him, and looke to him, as we may be blessed in our sight. He is in his Temple, stand not amased toLuc. 2. 29 behold him afarre off. But if thy soule with Simeon wait for the consolation of God, come neare, take him in thy armes, imbrace him by faith, so shall thy soule goe in peace when God cals for it, thou shall be bles|sed in thy life, blessed in thy death, and blessed for euer after this. For they that once truely appre|hend him, he will neuer part with them till he bring

them to that same place whereof he spake to the thiefe that hang on his right hand, euen the ParadiseLuc. 23. 43  Cor. 1. 23 Iohn 0. 27 of God. He is in the preaching of the Word, as it were, lifted on his Crosse. Behold him not afarre off, but come neare hand, put thy finger in the hole of his side, in the print of the naile: that is, let thy soule by Faith so rest vpon his mercies and passion, that thouIohn 20. 28 may say, My Lord, my God, my Savior. He is among you, not that ye should be alienated from him, stan|dingIohn 3. 23 afarre off as idle gasess, but come neare hand, and lay thy head in his bosome, I meane not bodily,1 but spiritually this way. First let thy faith rest vpon2 him as the perfite sacrifice for thy sinnes. Secondly, let thy Will, Reason, Iudgement and all, be subiect to3 him. Bring all captiue vnder his obedience. Thirdly, in the day of whatsoeuer griefe, lay thy head in his bosome, that is, rest vpon him. Is thy waters like the waters of Mara, bitter, heere a tree, his crosse, beholdExod. 15. 25 it not afarre off, but take it, and vse it. Cast it in with thy trouble, season it with the meditation of his suffe|ring, and thy waters shall become sweet vnto thee. In speaking now of the Messias, the Lord giueth vnto him two Names; first he calleth him his Servant. Se|condly1 he calleth him the Branch. The first Name,2 the Name of a Servant, is in divers places of ScriptureEsay 11. 42 giuen to the Messias. Esay eleuenth Chapter, 42. ver. 51. Of which Name giuen to him, there is sundry reasons: First he is so called for his obedience, done1 and performed to his Father. In seruants obedience and sidelity is required, The eyes of the seruants,Psal. 123 2 (sayeth Dauid) are toward their Masters, to wait

vpon their will, and performe their Commande|ments. No servant was ever found so faithfull andHeb. 3. 2 obedient to his Master, As IESVS CHRIST this great Servant in the House of GOD was to his Fa|ther obedient, he was euen vnto the death of theGen. 22. 9 Crosse. The obedience of Isaac is commended, that suffered himselfe without resistance to be bound of his Father. But to IESVS CHRIST, of whom Isaac was the Type, there needes no bonds. His Fathers will and pleasure was his meat and drinke, he know|ing that it was his Fathers will that he should die for the sinnes of his people, most willingly he went toIohn 4. 34 the Crosse, and protested of his willingnes, saying, No man taketh my life from me, but I lay it downeIohn 10. 18 2 willingly. Secondly, he is called the Servant of God, in regard of the assumption of the humane Nature in time, albeit the Sonne of GOD from all eternity, yet made the Servant of GOD in time, because heGal. 4. 4 was made man, made of a woman, and made vnder the Law. Thirdly, the Servant of GOD, euen for the3 forme and shape of a Servant, which he carried in the time of his exinanition and lurking of his Divinity, of which Paul speaketh clearely in the second to the Philippians and 7. verse. And himselfe sayeth, Ma|thewPhil. 2. 7 Math. 20. 28 20 Chapter, that he came not to be serued, but to serue. This style giuen to IESVS CHRIST would be considered of; first for our consolation, that we may safely  with confidence commit our selues1 vnto him, who for our cause hath vndertaken such seruice, that althogh hee bee now glorious in the Heauens, yet is not this a kinde of Service for vs,

That he interceedes for vs, to whom we may boldlie approach, hauing no need of the seruice and interces|sion2 of Saints. Secondly it serues for example to vs, that we should learne of Christ to serue, to be faith|full, to be obedient, to submit our will to the Will of God, to make his Word, and not our affections, the rule of our service. And it is well said we are servants.1 1. By the right of creation are we not servants to him,acts 17 28 of whom we haue life and all things necessary. Se|condly2 we are seruants by right of redemption, for we1 pet 1 18. 19 being captiue, the Son of God hath redeemed vs, not with the ransome of golde, siluer, or corruptible things, but with his owne precious Blood. Thirdly,3 we are seruants by right of povertie. Nothing broghtIob 1. 21 1 Tim. 6. 7 gen. 18. 20 21 we with vs in this World, all that we haue is Gods. Iacob vowed service to God, if so be he would giue4 him food and raiment. Fourthlie we are servants by right of infirmitie, wee were not able to helpe our selues. CHRIST is become our Counsellour, hee hath learned vs what to doe, he hath instructed vs in thatapo. 3. 18 which is meet for soule and bodie. Let vs seek to serue and obey him.
The second name or title giuen to the Messias, he is called the Branch. He is so called hauing respect to the former Prophecies and promises that were made of him, that it may be knowne he is no other but the same that was fore-prophecied and promised of be|fore, who was to spring and come of Dauid. Ieremy 23 Thus is it said of him: Behold the dayes come, saithIem. 23.  the Lord, that I wil raise vnto Dauid a zealous Branch, a King that shall reigne and prosper, and shall execute

Iustice and Iudgement vpon earth, he shall saue Isra|el, and shalbe called the Lord our righteousnes. TheEsay 53. 2 Prophet Esay in his 53 Chapter, hath these words of him: Hee shall grow vp as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground. The meaning is, When the family and House of Dauid is become so weake,Esay 11. 1 that it is as a dry stock, when all appearance of spring|ing or succession that way is gone, then the Lord mindfull of his promise, and able to performe that which he hath said, makes of the same dry stock this Branch to spring, and makes him as concerning the flesh comming of the Royall race, the most comfor|table King that euer the World saw.
But to consider a little of this word the Branch, he is so called for these reasons. First, as a Branch is but1. a tender and fragill thing, so was he borne in infirmi|ty, vnder great perill. There was no place to lay himLuc. 2 7 Math 2. 3 in but the Crib, and there is he not free of danger, but his life incontinent sought. Secondly, as somtime2. contrary our expectation, of a dry stock or roote a branch will bud out, that will flourish and be greene: so did he contrary the expectation of man, bud out of that dryed stock of the house of Dauid, a green and a3. flourishing Branch. Thirdly, because in him, as in a greene  flourishing branch, there doth flourish and spring the flowrs  the fruits of al excellent vertues. And this the Prophet Esay told of him in his eleuenthEsay 11 2 Chapter; The Spirit of the Lord shall rest on him. and it shall flourish this way: The Spirit of wise|dome, the Spirit of vnderstanding, the Spirit of coun|sell, the Spirit of trueth, the Spirit of peace, and all

such excellent vertues. Fourthly, because as a branch4 that hath life in it, groweth and taketh increasse from day to day. So this Branch comming foorth in the World, Luke saith of him, As he grew in stature, so hee grew in wisdome, and knowledge, in grace with GodLuc 2. 40 1 and man. Fiftly, although he came out as a small Branch, and was in the eyes of men, of no reputation, yet of a Branch is he become a great tree; and wee as dry and withered branches, are to be transplanted out of the old stock, and by faith be ingraft in him, from whom we draw spirituall life and nourishment. So sayth he himselfe Iohn 15. I am the Vine, and yee areIohn 15. 56 the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth fruit.
In this stile giuen to him, and that the Lord bring|eth him out as a Branch, yee may learne, that if yee looke to the manner of his springing, if ye looke to his outward forme, if ye consider the growth and in|cresse that he tooke, if ye consider what he calleth vsIohn 18. 36 to, to be ingraft in him, that we may be fruitfull in our soule; then shall ye easily sea that his kingdome is notHeb. 1, 2 Psal. 3. 8 of this World. Althogh he be the Heire of all, and his Father hath said to him, Aske of me, and I will giue thee the ends and coastes of the earth for thine in he|ritance, yea there is no creature can exeeme it selfe from his subiection. Yet the kingdome that he came to administer heere, is not earthly, but spirituall, the manner of administration is not earthly, but spiritu|all, the desires that hee would waken in his owne, isCol. 3. 1 not of earthly, but of spirituall things. The reward that he bringeth with him to his owne is not earthly,

nor of corrupted things, but an incorruptible CrownApoc. 2. 8.  17. 26. 27 Apoc. 3. 5. 12 21 of euerlasting glory, which shall neuer fade away.
Vses to be made heereof are these. 1. a foolish and1 fleshly conceit of the restitution of their earthly king|domes,Acts 1. 16 Luc. 24. 11 blinded the eyes of the Iewes, and made them mistake the Messias: But now the mysterie of the kingdome, being so clearely revealed, our blindnesse must be farre beyond theirs, if we should thinke that Christs comming is to establish an earthly or worldly Monarchie, or to giue his seruants ouer Kings earthly and temporal jurisdiction. Secondly, althogh CHRIST2 ought to bee followed and waited vpon for bodily provision (for the eyes of all things looke to him, andPsal 145. 15 it is he who satisfieth them.) yet that is not the chiefe thing which is to bee sought in him. It is true that CHRIST allured many to follow after him by these temporall gifts, some he fed, and some he healed. But the end was, that from the earthly, they should be led to the heauenly, and bee mooued to seeke of him a better thing. In the order of the petitions of that per|fiteMath. 8. 9 Luc. 11. 2 forme of Prayer which hee hath giuen vs. Hee knowing that we are earthly, yeeldeth as it were this farre vnto vs, that the first petition for our selues is for our daylie bread, but will not haue vs therewith to be content: But remembring hee is a spirituall King, seek the blessing of the Kingdome, seek spirituall grace to thy soule. And so he hath learned thee in the next place to say, Lord forgiue me my sinnes. Thirdly, he3 being a spirituall King, dispensing grace spirituall to his subiects: Then comparison being made, there is no choice, but hee is more worthy to bee followed

then any whatsoeuer. Moyses was a Prince, mighty in deed and in word worthy to be followed, for in theActs 7 22 following him, the people were easily fed, they nei|ther tilled, nor laboured, but were fed with Manna: but what was that? Our Master CHRIST in his own words will tell you, your fathers did eat Manna, and they died: But he giues vnto vs himselfe, the BreadIohn 6. 49 Iohn 6. 35 of Life, of which who so eateth, shall liue for euer. Ia|cob, the father of the Patriarches, a great Prince; So that the woman of Samaria speaking to IESVS CHRIST, asketh the question, Art thou greater then Iacob? what did he? he gaue vs this Well, yes, heIohn 4. 12 Iohn 4. 14 is greater: for I haue, saith he, water to giue: of which who so drinketh, shall not thirst againe.
Secondly, this point would yet be further consi|dered CHRIST the Branch, for as heerein is set out the manner of his comming forth, growth, incresse and perfection: So hath this beene also the manner of the beginning, spreading and growing of his King|dome vpon the face of the earth, yea, and in the hearts and soules of his own. Hath he not out of a dry stock, and of no appearances, raised instruments, that of smal beginnings haue brought his kingdome to a mighty growth? And how from small beginnings, the Evan|gell, which may be called the Chariot of this King, carying him to Nations and Countries, hath gone thorow, is more then evident. And in the hearts ofMath. 13. 31 Marc. 4. 30 Luc. 13. 19 his people is not the first beginning of the kingdome of Heauen, comparable to one graine of mustard seed? but afterward groweth as it were, to a great tree so fast rooted, that the hand of the Deuill cannot pull

it forth againe. This is a point serving to these vses. First, think not that it is a kingdome that can be over|turned1 or overthrown. No, althogh it were broght in appearance to a very stock, yet a branch shall ay bud forth and flourish, euen as of old he made the blood of the Martyrs, the seed of the Church. Secondly,2 nourish in thy heart the small seeds of grace, and they were als small as the smallest graine of faith, of loue, water thy heart now and then with the teares of re|pentance, seeke from God the dew of Heauen, the for|mer and the latter raine, and thou shalt finde thy smal beginnings shall come to a good perfection. Thirdly,3. seeing this King is so marvailous a worker, that out of a dry stock he can make a flourishing branch to spring Let no greatnes of trouble, or tentation, make thee e|uer to despaire of him, althogh thy eye can not per|ceiue by what meanes thy deliverance should come:Ionas 1. 17. He can make a Whale wait vpon Ionas. He can make a bush catch a Ram by the hornes in the day of Abra|hamsGen. 22. 13 great perplexity. He can open Hagars eyes in the wildernesse to see a fountaine of water, when she hadGen. 21. 19 throwne away the child desparing of his life; he that made his Son spring of a dry stock can make that same rock yeeld waters of consolation for thee. His power is infinite, he is able, his wisdome is infinite, hee can finde out meanes anow, his love is infinite, whereby he is exceeding willing to helpe all that seeke vnto him. Als long as these pillars stand (and they stand vn|changeable) Let vs neuer giue ouer, nor despaire, but let vs vphold and vnderprop our faith in holy pati|ence, to await the time of Gods comfort and delive|rance.4

Fourthly, this Branch is become a tree, and in this tree we must be ingraft, that is, by faith we must be imped in him, from whom drawing life, it is known this way, by our flourishing in all sort of Christian Pet. 1. 5 vertue. Of this flourishing the Apostle Peter maketh mention in his first Epistle, 1, chapter. 5, verse. Wher|of it is evident, that a Christian (respecting all persons and in all estates) bee in what condition he will, his faith euer flourisheth, and bringeth forth some fruit. if he looke to God, his faith flourisheth, and bringethTit 2. 12 forth godlines, if he looke to himselfe either in pros|perity or adversity his faith flourisheth in prosperity1 Thes. 5. 8 1 Pet. 5. 8 Heb. 10. 36 bringing forth temperance, and in adversity bringing forth patience. If he regard his neighbours, they are either such as are more neerely conjoyned to him, being of the same family of faith, and heere his faith flourisheth, and bringeth forth brotherly kindnes, orIohn 13. 34 Iohn 15 17 1 Iohn 4. 1 then they are more estranged from him, being not of that society:  yet here his faith flourisheth, bringing forth euen toward them Charity. Hee that this wayMath. 5. 44 Luc. 6. 27 flourisheth, he is imped in the Stock IESVS CHRIST: he that flourisheth not, he is (saith the Apostle) blind2 Pet. 1. 9. and cannot see farre off. Hee hath forgotten that hee was purged from his old sinnes.



THE SECOND SERMON.

ZECHARIAH, 3. Chap. 9. and 10. verses.
9
For behold the Stone that I haue laid before Io|shua: vpon one stone shall be seuen eyes: behold I will engraue the grauing thereof, sayeth the Lord of hostes, and I will remooue the iniquity of that land in one day.
10
In that day, saith the Lord of hostes, shall yee call euery man his neighbour vnder the Vine, and vnder the fig-tree.

_IN these last two Verses are set downe fiue excellent points concerning the1 Messias. First a new Name giuen vn|to him, and it is a name of strength and firmenesse, whereas the former two appeared names of weakenes, a Branch, and a Servant. This is a name of strength and solidity, he is a Stone, and a Stone2 laide downe by the hand of GOD himself. Secondly a new picture  prefiguring of this Stone: vpon this

Stone shalbe 7 eyes. 3. A proper word of the suffrings3 of IESVS CHRIST, whereas his father is brought in saying, And I will ingraue the grauing thereof, sayth the Lord of hostes. 4, The comfortable fruit and4. effect of his passion, in the remission of sins. I will saith the Lord, remooue the iniquity of the Land in one day. 5. The great tranquillitie and peaceable estate5. that the subiects of this Kingdome shall inioy vnder this gratious King, set downe in a borrowed speech: In that day shall euery man call his neighbour vnder the Vine, and vnder the fig-tree. The first point is of this new Name giuen to the Messias; he is now cal|led a Stone, and a Stone laide by Gods owne hand. A Stone vpon which whosoeuer is not solidely buil|ded, he shall breake the neck of his soule, and perish eternally. This name was giuen to him of before byEsay 28. 16 Esay in his 28 Chapter, Behold, sayth the Lord, I lay in Sion, a Stone a tryed Stone, a sure foundation, hee that beleeueth shall not make haste. And the Apostle Peter in his first Epistle and second Chapter, brings1 pet. 2. 6 Math. 21. 41 Acts 4. 11 in the Lord speaking of him Behold in the same ma|ner, Behold I lay in Sion a chiefe corner Stone, elect and precious, he that beleeueth in him, shall not be co~|founded. This Stone Gods hands laide before Ieho|shua, to signifie that the ground and foundation of the1 Cor. 3. 11 heavenly Ierusalem, is IESVS CHRIST? 2. He laide him before Iehoshua the high Priest, who serued in the Leviticall sacrifice. First to signifie, that the eye ofHeb. 11 39 their faith should be perpetually toward him. 2. That all that seruice and daylie shedding of blood should so respect him, that vnles it be builded on this ground

the Messias the Lambe to be slaine, his Blood that is onely able to pacifie the wrath of God, if all be not laide vpon this Altar, and vpon this stone which God himselfe hath laide downe, it is all but foolish and in vaine.
We must heere a little examine the reasons of this Name giuen to the Messias both in the Old and New Testament, which may be taken vp this way First, he is called a Stone, because hee is the maine scope of all Scripture: whatsoeuer was formerly prefigured to the Patriarches by stones or a stone, is in him truely fulfilled and accomplished. We read in the 28 Chap|terGen. 28. 11 of Genesis, of a stone that the Patriarch Iacob, be|ing weary in his Iourney, laid his head vpon, and slee|ping there, he saw that heauenly vision of the Ladder, the one end whereof touching the ground, the oppe of it reached to the Heauen, wherevpon he saw ascen|ding and descending the Angels of God. This Stone is CHRIST, vnto whom we are sent in all our wearinesPsal. 37. 5 prov. 16. 3 Math. 16. 25 to lay our head vpon him, and there to rest. Cast thy care vpon God, and he shall provide for thee, commit thy way to him. Although this Stone vnto the World appeare to be but a hard resting place, yet there is soft resting vpon it. He that casteth his care vpon him, and reposeth vpon this Stone, he shall find him first a rea|dy1. accesse to heaven, a Ladder whose top reacheth toHeb. 10.  Heauen, CHRIST himselfe is that Ladder. Secondly,2. he that casteth his care vpon him, and reposeth vponHeb. 1. 14. him, shall find the Angels ready to minister vnto him. Thirdly, he that resteth this way, and casteth his care vpon him, shall find by him strength to prevail against3.

all the mutations and tedious things of the world. It is a word serving 1. to slay in vs faithlesse care. 2. to di|recten. . 2 Math. 6. 25 Math. 11.  vs the right way to seek rest and ease to our soules against both tormenting cares, and cruciating feares. And 3 heere is our great comfort, that the writing on this Stone, are euen these same words of God, spo|ken to Iacob in his wearisome Iourney: for he that lay|eth his head this way, and committeth himselfe to God through IESVS CHRIST, he shall euen read vp|on this Stone these comfortable words: I am withGen. 2. 1 thee, I will keepe thee, I will not leaue thee, vntill I haue done that which I haue spoken vnto thee
A second Stone we reade of in Exod. 17 Chapter,. 17.  when Moyses praying for Israel, that they might pre|vaile against Amalek, he being wearyed,  his hands waxing heavy, they tooke a Stone, and put it vnder him, and he sate thereon: And Aaron and Hur suppor|ting his hands, his hands were stedfast vntill the go|ing down of the Sunne. This Stone hath also a repre|sentation of IESVS CHRIST, who is called heere, The Stone that the Lord hath laide. Our prayers must be vpon this Stone, founded vpon this ground, vpon Ie|sus Christ his Commandement, his merite, or els 14.  they are but weake and feeble, and can do no good. If our faith take fast hold on him, and our hearts be lif|ted toward him, then doe we prevaile against Amalek, the deuill, the world, and the flesh. But when our faith waxeth feeble, and our heart falleth downward, then doe they prevaile against vs. And of the example of Moyses wee are to make these vses. First, to con|sider that by reason of the great burden of flesh and

corruption which we carrie, we are subiect to great wearinesse in the best and most spirituall exercises.Heb. 1.  Secondly, meanes of wakening and stirring vp would2 be vsed. Aaron at the one hand, and Hur at the other: a Sermon this day, another the next day: the Word at the one hand, the Sacramentat the other: hearing sometime, conference at another. And all such means would be vsed to hold vp the heart that growes faintHeb. 10. 24 and feeble in spirituall exercises. Thirdly, although3 there be much wearinesse, many imperfections, great infirmitie, yet heere is the supply of all: Art thou set vpon the right Stone, vpon Iesus Christ? hee shall make thee ouercome: it may be with fighting  com|bat, euen to the going downe of the Sunne, to the end of thy life, yet in the end thou shalt prevaile. And as the going downe of the Sun is Ioyfull to the man that hath beene wearied in the fields with labour all day long, for then he goeth to his rest: So shall theIo . 7 Lord make the latter end of his owne ioyfull, after their wearisome combat in this life, they shall thenApoc. 14.  rest from their labors, and be in glory for euer.
A third stone or rock we read of, Num. 20. chap. In the day whe~ the people wanted waters,  were readyNum. 20  to perish for thirst, Moyses striking that rock with his rod, forthwith there came abunda~ce of water, wherof the people drank, and were satisfied. we cannot erre in the signification of this stone: for the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 10 cha. giues vs the same in expres words, affir|ming1 Cor. 1.  that this stone or rock is Iesus Christ. And here|by1. are we informed of these things, 1. that al mankind should haue perished for euer: And for them not a

drop of refreshment could haue beene found, if the Lord himselfe had not demonstrate and pointed out2. this Rock, euen IESVS CHRIST his Sonne. Secondly,Iohn 7. 38 from him flowes rivers of spiritual waters, euen abun|dance of consolations, to refresh the weary heart. Thirdly, as Moyses got no water from the Rock, till he3 touched it with his Rod: So must thou stretch out the Rod of thy Faith, and therewith touch CHRIST, or els thou canst draw no vertue from him: althoghLuc. 8. 46 he be a Rocke for abundance of spirituall waters in him, yet he is not so called, as though he were hard  intractable, and that it were hard to get any good from him. No, he is meek and gentle, easie to be en|treated. Thogh he be a Rock, yet the smallest touch of Faith will draw healing vertue from him. AlthoghLuc. 8. 4 Math. 12. 20 Esay 42. 1 the Rod of thy Faith be weake and smal like a bruised reed, yet he will not breake the bruised reed, nor ex|tinguish the smoaking flax. Stretch out thy witheredMath. 12. 13 hand, and touch him with thy weake faith, thou shalt draw waters of refreshment and comfort from him.
Fourthly, we reade in the 4 Chapter of Iehoshua, of 4. 5 a heape of stones which Ioshua set vp in a testimony that Israell had past with dry foot thorow Iordane. These stones are also a representation of IESVS CHRIST tovs, who is set vp as a great signe of God to vs, by whom we haue passage to eternall life, by him we shall escape all dangers, by him shall we goe with dry foote, without feare, through the valley ofPsal. 23. 4 death, and shalbe brought to that Land of rest, euen that promised Land. Feare not (saith he) little flocke. It is my Fathers will to giue you the Kingdome.Luc. 12. 31
Fiftly, we reade in the first booke of Samuel and 17Sam. 27. 49 Chapter, of a stone wherewith David killed Goliah. This stone also hath a representatio~ of IESVS CHRISTpsal 68. 18 Eph. 4. 8 who hath overthrowen the Devill, led captivity cap|tiue, bound that strong one: And it is hee in whose strength we are able to prevaile.
Sixtly, in the second Chapter of Daniel we readeDan. 2. 45. of a stone was hewed out of the mountaine without hands, wherein there is proper resemblance of his na|tivity and manner of bringing foorth in the World,Hb. 7.  Math. 1. 2. being brought from the Wombe of the Virgine, without the company of man, by the worke of the Holy Ghost.
It is not my purpose to digresse. Let it therefore be sufficient that all these places haue beene mentioned to make out this first reason, wherefore IESVS CHRIST is called a Stone: Euen, because in him is truely ful|filled all which by a stone or stones in the old Testa|ment was prefigured.
The second reason why IESVS CHRIST is called a Stone, is, Because he is that Rocke vpon which his Church is founded and builded. This the Apostle telleth vs in the first to the Corinthians and 3 Chap|ter: Another foundation can no man lay, then that1 Cor. . 1 which is already laide, that is, IESVS CHRIST. Let the Papists abuse as they please, it is of himself he meanes when speaking to Peter, he saith, Thou art Peter, andMath. 16. 1 vpon this Rock, that is, vpon me that am the Rocke, will I build my Church, vpon which shee being buil|ded, the gates of Hel shall not prevaile against her. The words of the confession of Peter referres vs to CHRIST

himself, Thou art saith he, the Son of the liuing God.Math. 6. 16 Vpon him the Sonne of the liuing God, who is God, made man in time, is founded and builded the Tim. 3. 16 Church. It is of him that these words of Dauid are toPsal. 11. 22 be vnderstood in the 118 Psal. The stone which the builders refused, is made the head of the corner. He isDn. 2. 45 in his birth Daniel his Stone, hewen out of the moun|taine without hands. In his passion he is this grauen Stone of Zacharie,  all full of eyes. In his rsurrectio~ he is Esay his Stone, a Stone laid in Sion, that whosoe|uersay 2. 16 beleeues in him shal not be confounded. He is to vs the rock of our faith  that fundament wherevpon the true Church, and euery member thereof is built.
This reason would be well considered, whereby 1.. ye may perceiue that this hath beene of before, the craft and malice of the Deuill, to make them who by profession were the builders of the House of GOD, misknow the foundation, and neglect the prin|cipall Stone of the building. Was not Caiphas and his Priests, the professed builders for the time, and what did they? they reiected with despight, and cast awayMath. 27. 16 Iesus Christ, so that Barrabbas was of more accomptRom. 1. 4 in their eyes then he. But in his resurrection hee was lifted vp and declared to bee the chiefe Stone of the building. This same craft and malice of the deuill doth still rage in the world. Is it not to be seene in the Antichristian Church, making them to reiect and cast aside the chief Stone  foundation of the building, e|uen Iesus, and to build vpon the foolish inventions and traditions of men, a building althogh it appeare to rise high, yet shall it be Babell, it shall come to

confusion. Let it be farre from vs to thinke that flesh and blood can bee sufficient for the Church to build vpon. There is no foundation but this pointed by the Finger of God, Behold the Stone that I haue laide, the same is Iesus Christ the Lord.
Secondly, as the Church in generall is a building2 set vpon this Stone  foundation, so euery member of the Church is a builder. And he would take heed how he buildeth. The instrument of thy building is Faith, he cannot build that wanteth Faith, hauing Faith, build vpon the right ground let thy Faith take hold of Iesus Christ. The more thou growest in Faith, the faster thou art built vpon this foundation. And there|fore Iude saith, Edifie your selues in your most holyIude v. 20 2 pet. . 5 faith. We are therfore to study to the dayly incres of faith,  adorne our faith with Christian vertues,  so are we well built our selues,  by our example we also edify others. Thirdly, this point wold also be conside|red,3 telling vs how sure the foundation is, and how strongly he buildeth, who buildeth vpon it. Our Ma|ster expresseth the surenesse of this foundation,  of a mans estate built this way, when he saith, that the gates of hell shall not prevaile against him. And 1. sin that draweth to hell, shall not prevail to thy condem|nation,Math. 16,  for there is no sin that can divide thee fro~ the foundation, Iesus Christ. 2. the diuell, the master tor|turer2 of hell, he shall not prevaile against thee, for heRom. 8. 35 is stronger who holdeth thee, and vpon whom thouMath 1.  art built, then the Deuill is, who would pull thee out of his hands. 3. Hell it selfe although it enlarge the3 mouth, and it be open wide, yet that is no thingsay 

against thee, for this building is a building of honour and not of confusion.
It would be also heere remembred, that the Lord IESVS who is the foundation of this building in the 6.Luc. 6. . 49 Chapter of Luke, he saith, that in hearing ye are buil|ding. And as there are two sort of hearers, so is there two sort of builders. And as they differ in the founda|tion, so the day shall try euery mans building, and eve|ry mans hearing. If ye be idle hearers, ye are foolish builders. Ye must therefore labour to heare so, that in hearing you may be building vpon the Rocke; The day of triall will come, the showres of trouble and ten|tation, and at last death it self, that will try euery mans hearing, and euery mans building; firme and sure will the estate of that man proue to be: who is founded vpon the Rock,  by faith cleaueth to IESVS CHRIST. The fall of hypocrisie, in the end will be such as there shalbe no more recovery. Let vs build vpon this Rock if we build by faith on him heere, he hath a faire buil|ding for vs in the Heauen. Albeit the outward buil|ding1 Cor. 5. 1 of the body be daylie falling downe and decay|ing, yet wee being builded in the inward Man vpon IESVS CHRIST, we haue assurance of a faire building and house prepared for vs in the Heauens.
The third reason. CHRIST is called a stone, because he is our onely refuge, our onely comfort and stay in the day of whatsoeuer trouble or tentation. There is1 Sam. 2, 1 no Rocke like our God. The Name of the Lord is a strong towre, and the Righteous runne to it, and areprov. 11. 11 safe. This Stone which the Lord hath laide downe, is firme and sure, you may trust to him you may boldly

build on him, he will not faile, what ye lay on him is sure, lay the whole repose of your soule vpon him. Heere Dauid may haue sure footing, Thou hast setpsal 40. 2 Exod. 17. 12 Gen. 28. 11 psa. 121.  my feet vpon a rock. Heere Moyses hath vphold for his hands. Heere Iacob hath rest for his head. By him shall thy feete be preserued from sliding, Thy head from dangerous and sorrowfull conceptions, and thy hands shalbe strengthened to good, and lifted vp in prayer to God.
Last heere CHRIST in comparing himselfe to a Stone, would recommend to vs three things in imita|tion of him. 1. humility, a Stone is but an humble and base thing. 2. firmenesse and stability, Be ye so hum|ble, that ye be also strong in the faith. 3. Patience, aMath, 11. 29 1 pet. 5. 9 Coloss. 2. 5 Esay 53. 7 Iam. 5. 7.  psa. 39. 9 Stone will endure much and who euer indured so much as he? And was still as a Stone not moued, to learne vs patience vnder the Hand of our God, and in the day of whatsoeuer crosse or trouble, to be silent, and still from murmuring, because hee hath done it. There is a speciall point here, wherein you must re|member that the comparison holdeth not, and in which we must be most vnlike to stones. For althogh we should be as a Stone in humility, soliditie, and pa|tience, yet must we not be as Stones in senslesnesse  stupiditie, for all the stones of this building they are1 pet. 2 5 liuely and sensible of the liuely grace and operation of God. Men senslesse not vnderstanding nor, belee|uing, are comparable to stockes and stones. And they who are senselesse of Gods grace, in this day of the dispensation of Gods grace, when it commeth to the day of trouble, or ill tydings, they are as Stones, they

are stupide and confounded, they are voide of resolu|tion. Their heart within them is as a stone cold and comfortlesse. Ye read of Nabal in the first of Samuel 25 Chap. In the morning when the wine was out of his head, remembring his former folly, hee became as a1 Sam. 2. 37 stone, that is, he was a senslesse beast, hee knew not whereupon to resolue, nor where to turne him: his heart was cold as a stone, and voide of comfort. We must be as liuely stones, founded vpon the Rock. And let the showres come, and stormes blow, we shall standLuc. 6. 48 fast, and not be moued.
And forasmuch as all are stones either vndressed or vnhewen, as we came out of Adams quarry, or then dressed, prepared, and made liuely stones of the buil|dingMath. 3. 9 of God. Of the one we are to say, God make of these stones children to Abraham: And of the other let him that is once built grow in faith, and be still more holy and righteous, and still grope faster IesusApoc. 22. 11 Christ. And as he althogh once very low, yet was ex|altedpsal. 118 22  made the head of the corner. So althogh thy estate be base, and thou subiect to great trouble, yet shall this hand who hath placed thee in the building, one day lift thee high, and giue thee a glorious place2 Cor. 5 in that building, whose craftesman and builder is not man, but the liuing God himselfe. Thus haue ye seen the reasons of this Name giuen to the Messias, hee is called a Stone.
The second point is a new kind of picture or figu|ring of this Stone. And it is this, vpon this one stone shalbe seuen eyes. In the Scriptures of God, eyes doe commonly signifie knowledge, wisdome aud vnder|standing.

Where wisdome and knowledge is, the eyes of the minde are said to bee illuminate. And where wisdome and vnderstanding is not, they are darkned and put out. It goes in the Scripture for the descrip|tion of a wise man, his eyes are in his head. As the eyeEccles. 2. 14 signifieth knowledge and wisdome: So the number of seuen importeth perfection: so the seuen Candle|sticks, and seuen Spirits of God mentioned in the Re|velation,Apoc. 1. 4. 12 they are the number of perfection. Then the sense goeth this way. Vpon this one Stone the Messi|as shalbe seuen eyes, that is, vpon him shall rest, and he shalbe filled with the perfect measure of wisdome  knowledge, and with all the rest of the gifts  graces of the Spirit, for in him is hid and laide vp the trea|sure of all heauenly knowledge and wisdome. The Prophet Esay speaketh this of him in the eleuenthEsay 11.  Chapter. The rod that shall come out of Iesse, and the branch that shall spring from that roote, there shal rest vpon him the spirit of wisedome and vnderstanding, the spirit of counsell and might, the spirit of know|ledge and of the feare of the Lord. And of this abun|dance that is in him, the Prophet speaketh in that ex|cellent Song, Psal. 45. God hath anointed thee withpsal. 45. 7, 8 the oyle of gladnes aboue thy fellowes, All thy gar|ments smell of myrrhe, aloes and cassia: he comming forth of his yvorie palace of Heauen, downe to the earth to saue man, there was nothing found in him but a sweet smell and savour of heauenly influence, and of the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, which he receiued in such fulnes. Look also about this mater to his own words Luc. 4. who being in the synagogueLuc. 4, 16

hauing in his hands the booke of Esay his Prophecie, And reading that excellent place, The Spirit of the Lord God is vpon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the Gospell to the poore, he hath sent me to heale the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captiues, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at libertie them that are bruised, to preach the ac|ceptable yeare of the Lord. Hee hauing closed the booke, and the eyes of all that were in the Synagogue being fastned vpon him: hee hath vpon that text this Sermon; This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your eares: that is: I am hee who am come with that ful|nesse of graces of the Spirit, whereof Esay fore-pro|phecied.
Then this word, vpon a Stone shalbe seuen eyes, would be marked, telling vs first, That the Father sen|ding CHRIST to so good a turne, to be as he was cal|led of before, his Servant in such a weighty busines, asCol. . 19 was matter of wonder to Man and Angell, he sent him out well furnished in his humanity, so filled and reple|nished, as neuer man receiued the Spirit in that ful|nesse that he did receiue. And of this great furniture there are two great reasons. First hee had the greatest1. work in hand and turne to do that euer was or shalbe done in the world. 2. he had many to serue. This be|hooued2 to be an euerlasting fountaine, because the streames thereof were to run to the refreshment of all that should be saued. And of this fulnesse of his we allIohn 1. 16 do receiue of. This fulnesse that was  is in CHRIST, learne you fully and perfitely to acquiesce in him, asCant. 1. 3 he who hath fully and perfitely finished the worke of

our redemption. He hath drunke out this Cup, treadMath. 26. 9 Esay 63.  forth that Wine-presse, he hath done it himself alone, and there was none to help him, being perfitely filled and replenished from Heauen to doe the turne. Set not Moyses nor Elias in a Tabernacle with him, Bring not in Mary, who her selfe hath need of a Saviour,Math 17. 4 Luc. 1. 47 nor the Saints to be partners with him in this worke. His Father sent him so perfitely furnished, and hee so perfitely hath done the turne, that as the Father hath said of him; He is my welbeloued Sonne in whom I am well pleased. So all that shalbe safe cannot but say,Math. 3. 17 Math. 17. 5 and in him onely my soule hath perfect rest and con|tentment.
2. In this we are also to learne, how the calling of God is neuer fruitlesse nor in vaine, he that sending his Sonne in the flesh to this great turne, so replenish|ed him with the graces of the Spirit, hee sendeth no man to his turne, but hee manifesteth his calling by spirituall vnction, giuing the man whom he sendeth, such measure agreeable, as he seeth meete. And for the greater worke, the greater gifts. The calling by men, may be voide and ineffectuall, the calling of God is not so. Where the gifts are not, although men haue called thee, God hath not called, where the spirituall vnction and gifts are, there is the declaration of the calling of God. 3. There is a lessoun for all men, not to be afraid to goe where God biddeth him: for albe|it the way may be hard,  he send thee to great trou|ble and affliction, yet will he send no man to vndergoe straitnesse and difficultie without furniture. If GodExod. 24. 12 say to thee with Moyses, Come vp the mountaine,

thou mayst come vp vpon his warrant, and enioy good things. If hee bid thee goe off the mountaineExod. 32. 7 where thou wilt behold things grievous to thy soule, and so change thy estate, thou must also obey, he will be with thee. He that commeth and goeth this way at the direction of God, resting vpon the furniture of God, hee shall one day call him to come vp to that mountaine of glory, from which hee shall neuer des|cend,Math. 25. 34 to taste any more of sorrow or trouble.
Fourthly, it would be remembred of vs, that IESVS CHRIST was thus way replenished, that of his fulnes we might all receiue. And so they that would goe toHeb. 7. 25 God. must go to him: And all that would be refreshedZach. 13. 1 must go to him as the Fountaine. He is that Fountain of the House of Dauid: hee was resembled by Aaron, whose ointments powred on his head, ran downe to the border of his garments. He co~meth in his Churchpsal. 133. 2 psal. 45. 8 with a faire Priestly garment, all his garments smell of myrrhe, aloes and cassia: To him as to the FountaineHeb. 9. 13. 14 we are to repaire. By him as our great High Priest, we are to be sprinkled, the sweet savour of his garmentsCant. 1. 3 shall allure vs to follow after him, And herein also is a rule of examination for men to try and examine how the garments of Christ, I meane the Crosse of Christ, his death and suffering, and the graces which he hath brought with him, do smell and savour to thee. Hee that wanteth the sense of bodily smelling, althogh there should be broken before him a boxe of the most precious ointment that can be componed, yet hath he no comfort of it. God hath sent forth in his Son to the world, a rich Box of spirituall ointment: And in his

suffring this Box may be said to haue bin broke~. And yet to the most part of the world wanting the sense to1 Cor. 1. 23 discerne what is the crosse of Christ, it is but an vnsa|vory thing. The trial of thy faith is the smell that thou hast of the ointments of Iesus Christ. The Father hath filled him with the oyle of spiritual grace. This Box is broken in the Church, to make it savory to the sons of men. The preaching of the Evangell is the carrying throw of this box  perfume, that it may smel to men. And howsoeuer to the carnal  worldly minded it be an vnsavory thing, yet they that haue faith, are able toPsal. 45. 8 say with Dauid, that his garments smell of myrrhe, aloes and cassia. Isaac smelled the savour of hisGen. 27 27 sonne Iacobs garments, as the smell of a field which the Lord had blessed. Thus doth the garments of Christ sweetly smell to the faithfull, who allured with this sweete savour draw neere to him, are blessed of him, and their hearts are lifted vp with the Song of blessing and thankes-giuing to him a|gaine.
By these seuen eyes may also be heere vnderstood a number finite for infinite of Christian men and women, that with cleare light and sauing knowledge shall see,  by faith embrace  apprehend Christ the Messias  Saviour of the world,  in that knowledge of him they shalbe safe. My righteous Seruant saythEsay 53. 11 Esay in his 53. Chapt. through the knowledge of him shall lustify many. This is life eternall to know God,Iohn 17. 3 and whom he hath sent Iesus Christ. And heere let the number of seuen, be still as the number of perfe|ction. To signifie vnto vs all that euer shalbe saued.

They shalbe safe by no other way but this, by fixing the eyes of their soules vpon this Stone that is heere laide downe, that is, by receiuing and embracing by faith, IESVS CHRIST. And heere it is properly said, their eyes shalbe vpon him. It is not said, the eyes ofLuc. 6. 49 Iam. 1. 22  Math. 7. 21 many, nor the mouthes and tongues of many. Many are hearers, whose hearing will be vnprofitable. And as for the mouthes and tongues of men, not all that say Lord, Lord, shall enter in the Kingdome, but sure|ly all that haue their eyes vpon him, the eyes of their minde and faith fast fixed this way, they shalbe safe. It is of this blessed and sauing sight that Simeon speak|eth in his song, Now let thy servant go in peace. be|cause my eyes haue seene my saluation. And then heeLuc. 2 29, 30 31, 32 Iohn 8. 56 Iohn 20, 29 sayth of him: whom thou hast prepared a light to the Nations. With this kinde of sight Abraham saw the day of his Saviour, and reioyced in it. And blessed are they who beleeue and neuer saw, sayth our Master to Thomas, that is, neuer saw him in his flesh with their bodily eyes: but the eyes of their soule are fixed vpon him. Then vpon this Stone shalbe seuen eyes, The eyes of all that euer attained or shall attaine to life and salvation. Adam was safe in this sight of him promisedGen 3, 15 Rom. 4 3 1 Cor 10. 3. 4 1 pet 1 10, 11 to him. Abraham was safe by this sight. Of Israel Paul sayth, they all did eate the same spiritual meate and drinke that same spiritual drink. The Prophets they searched in to know of his afflictions, and the glory that should follow. The Apostles in all their doctrine will tell you, There is no name giuen vs vnder heaven wherein to bee saued, but the Name of IESVS. The Martyrs with this sight were co~tent with their bloodActs 4 12

to seale that trueth which they professed. And so there is no way of saluation but this onely, by faste|ning the eyes of thy faith vpon this IESVS CHRIST. This was figured of old in the brasen Serpent, It wasIohn 3 14, 15 lifted vp in the wildernesse that the people might looke to it, and by looking to it, and trusting to Gods promise, they were cured; so by fastning the eyes of thy soule vpon IESVS CHRIST the promised Re|deemer, thou art spiritually made whole, and resto|red to life.
This point wold be marked, telling vs 1 the great desire wee should haue to see him with this spirituallCant 2. 14 sight, which bringeth with it rest  contentment. Se|condly, it is a sight not gotten without striuing and o|vercomming of such impediments as shall hinder vsLuc 19. 23 to come by it. Zacheus had a desire to see CHRIST, but there was two great impediments. The one without himselfe, the other in himselfe: without him the great preasse of the multitude: In himselfe, the lownesse of his stature. He sets himselfe ye see in his great desire to see Christ, against these impedime~ts. To eschue the multitude he runneth before, and because of his low stature, he taketh the helpe of a tree that grew by the way, and climmeth vpon it, and that not onely the eyes of Zacheus body, but of his soule was fixed vpon IESVS CHRIST, appeareth that the Lord sayth to him, This day saluation is come to thy house, thou artLuc 19.  made the child of Abraham, that is, thou hast seene me with that same sort of sight wherewith Abraham saw me, and my day, and reioyced therein. Thus must thou striue with the impediments that would hinderIohn 8. 6

thee to come to the sight of IESVS. And they are ma|ny both within and without thee. The great helpes giuen of God, whereby thou may overcome these impediments, are the word and Sacraments, heare di|ligently, receiue reverently: And thus way shalt thou attaine to that sauing sight of him. Thirdly, thou3 that attainest to this sauing sight of IESVS CHRIST. In him thou shalt see all these things. 1. perfite satis|faction1 for thy sinnes. 2. thy perfite reconciliation2 with God. 3. perfite deliuerie from hell, and the3 power of the deuill. 4. Thou wilt see and feele in4 him perfite rest and ease to the conscience, and a rea|dyHeb. 13 Heb. 7. 25 Luc. 1. 74 Rom. 5. 1 Heb. 4. 11 way and passage for thee to enter in the King|dome of heauen.
As we are to be carefull to come by this sight, so must we be carefull to grow in it: forasmuch as per|fection is with-holden from vs in this life. The man whom CHRIST restored to his sight in the 8 chapt ofMarc. 8. 22 Marke. was restored by degrees. At his first touching he saw, but obscurely, men walking like trees: at his second touching he saw clearely: So shall this same IESVS CHRIST doe with thee that waitest on him for the illumination of the eyes of thy minde. Hee shall cure thee by degrees, and at the end of thy life shall soActs 7. 56 cleare thy eyes that thou shalt see the heauens ready open to receiue thy soule. The word of God is the ho|ny of God out of the rockes. And Dauid cals it swee|ter then the hony and the hony combe. Put forth thyPsal. 19. 10 rod of faith, and taste of the sweetnesse of it. Let thy hearing be mixed with faith: And thou shalt find by the word and gracious promises thereof, thy sightHeb. 4. 2

cleared, so that after diligent hearing, thou shalt be a|ble to say, Now I see better then of before, my owne salvation, my life laid vp in Iesus Christ, and my hap|pines1 Sam 14 27 in him. Ionathan being feeble  faint, put forth his rod, and tasted of the hony that dropped from the rocks,  his eyes that before were dim, waxed cleare. Let faint  wearied hearted sinners taste of this sweet hony of the promises of God, it shall cleare their sight and make them see better their saluation in IESVS CHRIST, then of before.
The third generall point set down in these words, is about the suffrings of IESVS CHRIST. The word ex|pressing his suffring is this: Behold, I will ingraue the grauing thereof, sayth the Lord of hostes: Which al|beit they be taken by some men, to be spoken of the Nativity of CHRIST, God himselfe being the imme|diat framer and former of his Body, in the wombe ofMath. 1 20 the Virgin, yet they doe most properly concerne his Passion, as appeareth of the wordes immediatly fol|lowing, subioyned vnto his suffring. The proper effect thereof, which is, to transferre  take away the sins of the people. Of the suffrings of Christ there is heere two words. 1. they were according to the determinat counsell and appointment of his Father: for speaking of them he sayth, I graue the grauing of this Stone. 2. his suffrings were weighty and grievous: if ye consi|der first the hand that laide them on, it was the Hand of God, angrie for the sinnes of man. If yee consider next the manner and measure, there was no light nor superficiall doing heere, but it was a profound and deepe sinking and ingraving.
As for the first word, albeit in the suffrings of Christ there were many agents and instruments, The DeuilsIohn 13. 2 Math. 27. 25 Math. 2. 14 Marc. 14. 12 Luc. 22. 7 Math. 26 26 Math, 26. 27 malice, the Iewes rage, Iudas treason, Pilate his seeble|nesse in yeelding to their vnreasonable desire, the souldiers spight, of whom he suffered many things, yet this remaineth alwayes firme and sure: Nothing befell vnto him but according to the determinate counsell and decree of his Father. The Apostles al|thogh they were a long time very blind in the matter of his Kingdome, and vnderstood not, that his way to triumph was by the Crosse, yet after his ascension hauing receiued according to his promise the Holy Ghost, looke to the testimony that they gaue of his sufferings, in the 4 of the Acts, speaking to God inActs 4. 27, 2 their prayer, they say, Against thy holy Child IESVS, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate. with the Gentiles and people of Israel were ga|thered together, but what to doe? to doe whatsoeuer thy hand and thy counsell had determined before to be done. Then heere is the Father, giuing CHRIST to this suffering, and CHRIST giuing himselfe, which would be well marked and considered of vs, for other|wise wee can haue no solide comfort of his Crosse. The Father giuing him, he whose providence stretch|ethIohn . 16 1 Iohn 4. 9. Math, 10. 29 it selfe to the meanest things of the earth, without whose will, a sparrow (whereof two are solde for a farthing) falleth not to the ground. Thinke yee that without his speciall will and decree, one drop of that blood which was more precious then all the Crea|tures of the world could fall to the ground? CHRIST that sayth truely of himselfe, The Father and I amIohn 10. 30

one: and, If I please, I may call for Legions of AngelsMath. 26. 53 to defend me from the malice of men. Thinke ye that the power of the deuill or man could haue made him subiect to such pain, if he had not willingly submitted himselfe to it? That ye may therefore haue comfort in his suffring, heare him tell you, No man taketh my life from me, but I yeeld it heartily, and lay it downe willingly for your sake. It is a great providence of God, that ruleth the worke of his Sonnes suffering, according to his determinate Counsell, that heereby thou may learne to bow the knees of thy soule, and worship him: As GOD almighty, who hauing made man of nothing, was able, when he had lost himselfe, to finde out the way of his safety. 2. As GOD infinit|lyRom. 11. 33 wise, that found out a way how his iustice might be satisfied, and man also saued, and so you may haue recourse to him still, as that Fountaine of all good, the streames of whose mercie are euer flowing, and can neuer be dryed vp: for heere mayst thou reason with the Apostle. He that without thy knowledge and de|seruing, gaue his owne Sonne to indure such suffring for thee, if thou hast gotten his Sonne, and if thou be in him, what can he deny thee that thou shalt aske inRom 8. 34 his Name? But let vs consider in this word (Behold I sayth the Lord of hostes, doe graue the grauing of this Stone) The weight and gravitie of the suffering of CHRIST. In this worke of mans redemption there was no collusion betwixt the Father and the Sonne. But the Father laying him before him, as the obiect of his wrath, by reason of our sinnes, the burdens where|ofEsay 53. 3  he tooke vpon him, he spareth him not, he striketh

at him, and woundeth him deep, and to the heart with the weapons of his wrath and iudgement, and hee leaueth him not vntill his Iustice bee satisfied to the full, he forbeareth him not, nor suffereth him to get vp his Head, till he hath payed the last farthing of theIohn 19. 30 debt, and say vpon the Crosse, consummatum est. The pleasure that our first Parents tooke in sinning, hee payed well for them by paines and suffering. For their wandring and lustful eyes, lusting after that forbiddenGen. 3 6 Heb. 5 7 Gen 3. 12 Math. 27, 9 Gen. 3. 6 psal 69 2 Math. 27, 48 fruite, his eyes shed many teares. Their heads were lif|ted vp in pride against God, his Head was crowned with a crown of thornes, to the effusion of his Blood, for their delicacie in their taste, hee got vineger in his thirst to drinke. But all this may be thought but exter|nal: for their drinking of the cup of sin, to the impoy|soning of their soule; he had a cup set to his Head, of the hot wrath and anger of God, which made him cryMath, 26. 39 out, Father if it be thy will, let this cup depart fro~ me.
This is a doctrine would be marked of vs, to tell vs1 1. that man hauing sinned, there is no remeed but the Iustice of God must be satisfied to the full. Which sa|tisfaction man not being able to make himselfe, God taketh it of his own Son. And therefore it is a co~fort|les doctrine, that would haue thee turne thy eyes any other way, or would put in any thing betwixt the eye of thy soule,  that perfect satisfaction that he hath ta|ken of his own Son for thee. Secondly, Christs suffe|ring2 to the full, the Hand of God lying vpon him, and his wrath to the extremitie, which made him a heauie soule, yet his Fathers loue was not separat from him,Math. 3. 27 Math. 17. 5 that oracle remained alwayes true. He is my beloved

Son, his soule was neuer far from God, but he is ablePsal. 22. 1 Math. 27. 46 in his greatest agonie to say, My God, my God. And the like of this shall neuer come to passe in any man, that shalbe sent to suffer for his own sins: for in Gods brest there is no spark of loue nor favor toward them, that is an absolute sentence which can admit no miti|gation.Math . 4 Go ye to the devil  his angels:  in their brest there is no spark of trust to say, My God, but a perpe|tuall desperation,  an eternall separation of the soule from God. And therfore if the rich glutton is broghtMath 6 7 in, being in hell, pitying the souls of his brethren vpo~Math. 16 29 earth: Learne much more euerie one, while it is time to pity your owne soules. Heare Moyses and the Pro|phets, heare Christ himselfe, and while his Armes are stretched out, runne vnto him, that he may hide thee from the wrath of God,  saue thee from that place of torment, where there is no co~fort nor end of paine. Thirdlie, all these suffrings of Christ, althogh they are3 infinite in weight, yet are they finite in time, and ther|fore the loue of his Father, and his hard handling could well subsist, because he was to get vp his head, and to wrestle out from vnder all this paine and grief. And heerein is offered to vs a great word of comfort,Acts 2. 24 that seeing all the troubles that wee sustaine in this life, are finite, both in weight and time: For what is our life but a moment? And the Lord who afflictethPsal 103 14 vs, knoweth our mould and our shape, that we are but dust: Then although the Lord to thy sense, intreate thee hardlie, yet he is still to thee a louing Father, in regard of that glorious end that he hath appointed forRom. 8. 18 thee, whervnto momentanean troubles shall succeed

an infinite weight of Ioy and glory.
As the gravitie of Christ his sufferings is pointed at in the inflictor, God himselfe, so also in the phrase of speaking, whereby his suffring is imported, it is not a light nor superficiall going over, but a deep sinking and graving so deepe, that of him are the wordes of Ieremy to be vnderstood, Consider yee that passe by ifLament. 2. 12 there be any dolour like vnto my dolour. The wordes of Dauid in the 129 Psal. The plowers haue drawnePsal. 129. 3 deep furrowes vpon my back. And the words of EsayEsay 50. 6 Math. 26. 67 in his 50 Chapter, I giue my backe to the smiters, and my cheekes to them that plucked off the haire. The deepe ingrauing of this Stone, look to it this way, TheMath. 26. 29 Math. 26. 26 psal. 22 16 Iohn 19. 33 thornes making impression in his Head, the scourges making deepe furrowes in his backe, the nailes pier|cing his hands and feete, the souldiers speare going through his side to his Heart, so that water and blood came forth. And yet a deeper ingraving then all this, the plough of the wrath of God went deeply throughLuc. 22. 44 his Soule,  made so deep a furrow, that he did sweat Blood for water.
Now looke to and consider the grauen Stone, and therein see great matter of feare, there being heere the most fearefull declaration of Gods wath against sin, that euer was giuen great mater of loue being herein.Math. 3 16 The greatest declaration of loue that could be offered2 to mankinde. Secondly, he was so deeply grauen, that although his paine and suffering be away and ended, yet the print of his suffering is not away, but remai|neth fresh in the eyes of his Father as meritorious forHeb. 7. 7 all them that shalbe safe. Thirdly, hee was so grauen,3.

that he might take vs, and graue vs vpon his brest,  vpon the palmes of his hands, neuer to be forgetfullEsay 44 16 of vs, but to present vs blamelesse before his Father. Let the suffrings therefore, and Crosse of IESVS Christ be drawne in our hearts, not lightly nor super|ficially, but deeply grauen, that we may say with the1 Cor. 2. 2 Apostle, We desire to know nothing but Iesus Christ and him crucified.
The fourth thing mentioned in these verses, is the happy fruite and effect that followeth vpon the suffe|ring of IESVS CHRIST; it is expressed this way. I will (sayth the Lord) remoue the iniquity of the Land in one day. The grauing of Christ although painfull to him for a time, yet pleasant and comfortable to his Church for euer. For it is by reason of his sufferings that God his Father hath giuen this declaration, I wil take away and put forth of my remembrance the ini|quity and sinnes of all that repent  beleeue in him, his stripes were many, his grauing deep, his sufferings infinite in weight, although not in time. ThereforeEsay 1. 18 Rom. 8.  though thy sinnes were neuer so many, and thy ini|quities neuer so great, they are all wel payd for. Thou being in him, needest not to feare death, hell, nor con|demnation. In the words expressing this benefite of taking away the peoples sinnes, two things are to bee marked, The one is of the perfection of the worke, All3 sinne and iniquitie shalbe taken away. And the other2. is of the circumstance of time, in that day. As for the first there is promised heere, the perfect taking away of sin and iniquity. And how doth this agree with the manifold complaints of the Saints in the Scrip|ture,

of the abiding of iniquitie, and with the experi|ence euen of these who beleeued remission of sinnes, and taking away of iniquities in the Blood of Iesus Christ. Doe not the Saints in Scripture complaine of sinne, cry out vnder the burden of sinne, craving day|lie the renovation and purgation of their heart. And who hath not reason with Dauid to say, If I shouldPsal. 40. 12 Psal. 19. 12 reckon my iniquities, they are moe in number then the haires of my head, And who knoweth the errours of his life. Hath there beene, and is there manifold sinnes euen in the best children of God? how doth God then performe this promise, saying, that the day of his Sonnes death shalbe a day wherein he will take away all the sin and iniquitie of his people? for an|swer to this. When God is said in Scripture to take a|way the sinne and iniquity of his people two things are imported. The one is, that which hath the proper respect of sinne, which accuseth and condemneth vs before God, the guiltinesse of it, that is taken away. And so to take away sinne, is to forgiue sin, to cover sin, not to impute sin. In the meane time there remai|neth in the corrupt nature of man; the mater of sinne, the nourishments of sinne, sinfull concupiscences wherewith the Elect of God haue a daylie strife, not suffring this remnant sin to reigne in their mortal bo|dies. Secondly by the words of this promise is impor|ted,Rom 6. 12 that the remission of thy sinnes, that great bene|fite acquired by the death of Christ, is full, absolute and perfect, although the renovation be not as yet per|fect. His merite taketh away all the guiltinesse of thy sin, so that thou art free of condemnation, althogh at

the first all corruption be not mortified  slaine into thee. So that both these are the speeches of a renew|ed man: the one of the assurance of faith, there is noRom 8. 1 condemnation to me: the other of the complaint of sin, the flesh lusteth against the spirit. and this holdethGal. 5. 17 them in a continual exercise, striuing to a daylie mor|tification, till in end sin, as it is perfectly forgiuen, so it may be perfectly slaine and abolished, and left as a car|case, without motion, life or senses.
The other worde heere is of the circumstance of time, God saith, he will do this in one day: And the day meant of heere, is the day of the slaughter and sa|crificing of his Sonne. It may then bee demanded, was there no remission of sinnes till the day of hisApoc. 13 8 death? Is he not that that Lambe spoken of in the A|pocalypse 13. that was slaine from the beginning, was not the sinnes of faithfull Patriarches, Prophets, and Servants of GOD taken away in the vertue of that same Blood, althogh the day of the actuall shedding of it was not as yet come? For laying open this mat|ter ye must consider about the suffring of Iesus Christ, four things. 1. The ordaining of it by God the Father1 as the mean of mans redemption. 2. the typing  figu|ring2 of it, by the ceremonies of the Law,  Leviticall3 sacrifices. 3. The merite  efficacie of it. And last that4 very act it selfe, when his body was at Golgotha affix|ed to the Crosse. Now althogh this act of his suffring was in the last time, yet in the decree and ordinance of GOD, it was from the beginning. In the ceremo|nies of the Law, he was typically slain before their eies  the merite and efficacie of his death extended the

selfe to all that was safe from the beginning, and doth extend to all that shall be safe to the end of the world. These words of the promise of taking away sinne and iniquity, being narrowly looked into, you will finde they containe these necessary points that thou must know and beleeue in this comfortable Article of the remission of sinnes, as heere you are led to consider. 1. the Author of the benefite, I will take them away1. sayth the Lord. Sin being the offence of God, none hath power to forgiue or take away his offence but himselfe. And whereas God is the Author of this be|nefite, then hath it these properties. First it is sure. Se|condly1 perfect. Thirdly it is vnchangeable, and neuer2 commeth vnder revocation. Thy memory may forget3. thy sinnes for a while, and cast them vp againe, thy conscience may loose feeling of them, and cast them vp againe. But if God take them away, they shall ne|uer meet thee, neither to thy shame heere, nor con|demnation after this, A necessary point of tryall for men to examine what way they are made quite of their bypast sinnes: For although thou haue drowned them in oblivion, and put them away in forgetfulnes, yet are they not soundly taken away, till GOD take them away, that thou be able to say, God for Iesus Christ his sake hath forgiuen me them. Secondly, in these words is pointed out vnto vs the meanes, by which, remission of sins is obtained; and that is cleare by ioyning these words with the former. He said be|fore, I will graue the Stone, I will sinke it deeply, I will lay great weight of suffering vpon the back of my Sonne. What then shall follow vpon it? this same

gracious effect: I laide this great burden of pain vpon him, that I may take off the great burdens of iniquity. The meane is then whereby remission of sins is pur|chased, his bloody Passion, the grauing of the Stone, his painfull sufferings. If you aske at Iohn in his first E|pistle,1 Iohn 1. 7 and first Chapter, how men are freed of their sinnes, he will answere you, The Blood of Iesus Christ cleanseth vs from all our sinnes. If you aske at Peter in1 Pet. 1. 18, 19 his first Epistle, and first Chapter, how and by what meanes we are redeemed, he will tell you, not with gold nor siluer but with the precious Blood of the Sonne of God. And if there were no more but this, Sinners are sent to rest vpon Iesus Christ and his Blood, because it is the onelie meane of our reliefe, which GOD himselfe hath devised and found out. I wil, saith he, graue the Stone, and by that meanes take away all thy iniquitie. He that wold present to Gods eye, any other thing meritorious of the remission of his sinnes, but this graven Stone Iesus Christ cruci|fied, he must remaine comfortleffe, if it were for no other way but this, he misknoweth that way of his peace, which GOD himself hath devised and appoin|ted.
Thirdly in these wordes of the promise wee are to3 consider of the persons to whom belongeth this great benefite of taking away their iniquitie. And it is heere said, The iniquity of all the Land. A generall to be re|strained to the Church and people of God, the eyes of whose faith (as was said of before) shalbe fastened vpon this Stone. Thus saith Esay in his 33 Chapter, The people that dwell therein (meaning of theEsay 33. 24

Church) shall haue their sins forgiuen. And in his 62 Chapter. They shalbe called an holy people, the re|deemedEsay 62. 2 of the Lord, a citie soght out, and not forsa|ken. By the Arke of Noah, which was a type of theGen. 6 14 Church. It was told vs none would bee safe, but they that are within the compasse of the Church. And now the builder of the Church saw this, andGen. 9. 27 therefore made a good prayer for his son Iaphet: God perswade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem, that is, make him a member of the Church, to whom this promise is made, I will take away all thy iniquitie. Fourthly, to make this comfort that is in the promise4 of remission of sinnes firme  sure, he doth not giue to sin the common word of sin, but hee giueth it a name more expressing the weight of it, and calleth it iniquitie. Wherein he would allure vs to apprehend the comfort of the promise this way. Let no man by reason of his sinne  iniquitie despaire, when he con|sidereth these two things. First, It is I saith the Lord of1 hostes, that am the doer, that taketh away iniquity, come and reason with me. Albeit thy sinnes be many and great, is it not easie to mee to take them away. I that said to Light, and to all the rest of the Creatures,Esay 1 18 let them bee. I that can fold vp the heauens as a gar|ment,Gen. . 3 Psal. 102 26 Esay 6. 5 cannot I make thy iniquities passe away. Esay was lamenting his impuritie, and crying, Woe is me. But how easie was it to the Lord to send him com|fort, when an Angell with a slight came to him, with a coale taken from the Altar touching his lips,  tel|lingLu 22, 43 him that his sin was taken fro~ him. The thief that did hang on the right side of Christ, had experience

of this, who hauing vttered but a few words of remors for his sin, his iniquitie was instantly taken away, his2 soul made ready for the Paradise of God. 2. As look|ing to God the Author of this work, men should not despair. So considering the medicine how pretious it is, how can sinners distrust  go away comfortlesse? here is a stone deeply grauen, much blood shed. And whereas one drop of that precious blood (being the Blood of GOD) might haue bin a ransome for all the world, behold streames of blood flowing fro~ him, that thou may euer therein as it were bath thy soule. And although thy sins were neuer so great, yet heere is the medicine so large, it goeth beyond and aboue all. Last3 of all, you would mark here the phrase of speaking v|sed heere. I will saith the Lord, take away the iniquity of the Land. In the former Chapter speaking to Ieho|shua, he said to him, I haue caused thy iniquity to passe from thee. God is said to take away our sinnes, when for the merite and suffering of his Sonne, he accoun|teth of them as if they had neuer beene committed. And to ingraue this consolation in the hearts of peni|tent and beleeuing sinners, divers phrases, and sundry forms of speeches are vsed by God in Scripture. Dauidpsal 32,  in his 32 Psal. saith not, Blessed is the man that is not a sinner, no man is blessed that way: but blessed is hee whose sins are covered, to whom the Lord imputeth not his iniquity. I haue put away thy transgressions like a cloude, and thy sinnes like a mist, Esay 44Esay 44. 22 Chapter. Clouds and mists which appeare for a time, are by the brightnesse of the Sunne vtterly dispersed. When God looks vpon thee, through the bright Son

of Righteousnesse IESVS CHRIST, all thy sinnes like a mist and cloude goeth away. The King Ezechiah saith Esay in his 38 Chapt. That the Lord had castenEsay 38. 17 his sinnes behind his backe. That thing a man will not remember nor regardeth not, he turneth away his face from. This is the gracious doing of our God with his people, his amiable face is toward their persons, his back is turned vpon their sinnes. They shall neuer come in his eye, nor be remembred of him. The Pro|phetMicah 7. 19 Micah in his seuenth Chapter saith. That the Lord casteth the sinnes of his owne in the bottome of the Sea, alluding to Pharaoh  his chariots, whom he drowned in the red Sea, so that they were neuer seene againe aliue to trouble his people. So will the Lord drowne in euerlasting oblivion the sinnes of his owne, that they shall neuer meet them to effray or dis|quiet them. Heere is then the comfortable fruit of the sufferings of Christ pointed out vnto vs. God himself the engrauer of this Stone hath as it were with his owne finger written vpon his crosse Remission of sins, and taking away the iniquitie of all that beleeue inGen. 3. 6 him. Adam and his wife put forth their hands, and tooke of the fruite of that forbidden tree, wherevpon followed nakednes and shame. Stretch out thy hand, and take of the fruite of this tree, Remission of sinnes, which groweth vpon the Crosse of Iesus Christ. Righteousnes and life eternall shall follow Remission of sinnes, that great and maine benefite earnestly to bee sought for of vs all. For since all are borne sin|ners, and liue in sinne, if a man obtaine not re|mission of sinnes, it had beene better for him neuer

to haue beene borne, or being borne, it had bin better for him to haue beene a beast nor a man: for the death of the beast, is the end of all miserie to it. But the death of a man dying in his sinnes, is the begin|ning of such miserie and woe as shall neuer haue an end. There is no burden nor weight comparable to the burden of sin that hangeth so fast on, and presseth down. The burden of sicknes, of long and heavie sick|nes,Heb. 12. 1 is a heauie burden. The burden of shame and ig|nominie, a heavy burden, which maketh Dauid so ear|nestly cry to God in his 119 Psalme, to deliuer himPs. 119. 12. 39 from that shame which he feared, and his sin had de|serued. The burden of disdaine and contempt, a hea|vy burden. We are counted, saith the Apostle, the off|scowrings of the World. The burden of povertie and1 Cor 4. 13 want a heavy burden. And therefore Iacob vowed that God should be his God, if he would giue him food and rayment. And Agur the son of Iakeh, desired theProv. 30. 8, 9 Lord not to presse him with the burden of povertie, lest he should blaspheme him. But of all these burdens none of them can compare with the burden of sinne, lying vpon a mans conscience vnpardoned. And that made the Kingly Prophet, laying aside his royaltie  earthly pleasures of his Kingdome, to cry out, Blessed is the man whose sinnes are forgiuen. Seeing therforepsal. 3 1 we haue often at the desire and entisements of the de|uil eaten of the bitter fruits of sin, which althogh they looke pleasant at the first, yet shall proue bitter as gall and wormewood. Let vs resort to this tree, to IESVS CHRIST crucified, and eate of this fruite, and liue, e|uen remission of sinnes in his death. And that thou

may know that thou hast true lie tasted of this fruit and that it is no presumption, but the assurance of faith that draweth in this comfort to thy soule of the1 remission of sinnes. Consider first if thou can looke to God the Author of it, who for Christs sake hath ta|ken2 away thy sinnes, and forgiuen thy iniquitie. Se|condly by dailie teares, humiliation, mourning and weeping for sin, labour to increase thine assurance. I water my bed with teares, saith Dauid. Thirdly, letpsa. 6 6 euery one that saith, he hath gotten from God remis|sion3 of sinnes, of many sinnes, and great sinnes, change the tenor of his life, endeavour to walke more holy lie. And then although death when it commeth, strip theeRom. , 1 naked of all the pleasures that are heere, yet thou be|ing made naked and free of sinne, thou shalt not bee found in that great day, as the wicked are, but shalbe covered with the white rayment of the righteousnes, 3, 8 of IESVS CHRIST.



THE THIRD SERMON.

ZECHARIAH, 3. Chap. and 10. verse.
10
In that day, saith the Lord of hostes, shall ye call euery man his neighbour vnder the vine, and vnder the figtree.

_THe last point contained in these words is in the last verse, and that is of the happie estate of the Church and Kingdome of Christ vnder him so gracious and com|fortable a Head. As remission of sins, and taking away iniquitie, is a consequent of his suffring, and of this deep engrauing of the stone: so this peace|able estate is a necessary consequent of remission of sinnes: for all that haue remission of sins in the deathRom. 5  and suffering of Christ, of necessitie they must haue peace with God, peace in their owne heart and soule,Heb. 4, 3 which passeth vnderstanding: tranquillity and rest, which is the beginning of heauen heere, for we who beleeue, doe enter presently in our rest.
The words of the verse, if they shalbe considered with some respect to the temporall deliuerie of the people from Babylon, and their full restitution from the captivity, as was both prophecied and performed, then they offered this comfort vnto them, that albeit the dayes by past haue beene vnto them dayes of woepsal. 137 and miserie, dayes of weeping and lamentation, wherein they haue beene brought in a strange coun|trie, at the rivers of Babel to shed teares, for hearing the enemies deride their Hebrew songs, and in the re|membrance of Sion, that was of before so beautifull and glorious: yet when the Lord should returne to shew himself the captain  Defender of his Church, and should loose their yoke and bonds: that day and time of their libertie, is to bring with it a great  glo|rious change, being broght to their owne home and country, where before they were in Babel. Lying vn|der their owne Vine and Figtree, where before they lay at the rivers of Babel, each neighbour speaking comfortablie to an other, where of before they were forced to heare the rayling and out-cryings of the children of Babel. And all these in the appointed time of God, did so gratiously come to passe, that albeit in the dayes of their captivity, their sorrow was excee|ding great, yet the day of their deliuerie brought with it greater abundance of joy, and a gladnes more ex|ceeding.psal. 126.  And thus they confesse themselues in the 126 Psalme. When the Lord (say they) brought a|gaine our captivity, we were as men in a dreame. It was a worke so farre beyond our expectation, that we doubted whether we were waking or sleeping. Our

mouthes were filled with laughter. our tongues and words did show vs joyfull men: yea the worke was so great and marvailous, as at the sight thereof, the very Heathen was amased, and moued to cry out and say. Surely the Lord hath done for this people marvailous and great things.
In the signification of the wordes, as they are refer|red to the glad day of the deliuerie of the people from their bodily trouble and captivitie, these things wold be obserued. First, as it is true of Christ and his suffe|ring,1 so is it also of his members and people. The day of his ingraving, a darke day. The day of his suffering vpon the Crosse, a blacke day, the Sunne covered hisMath. 27 44 face, but the day of his resurrection a glorious day, Rom. 1. 4 such a day, saith Paul, as in it he was manifestlie decla|red to be the Sonne of God. It was so with this peo|ple heere. They had a black day of captivitie, but a glorious day of deliuerie. It is true of all his people,  these that are in covenant with him. Although theypsal. 112. 4 haue a darke day of trouble and affliction, yet there1 Iohn 3. 2 succeedes vnto it, a cleare day of comfort. Albeit they lying in the graue of affliction, it appeare not what they are, yet being raised by Gods hand, it shalbe not onely sensible to themselues, but manifest to others, that they are the children of God. Secondly, althogh all this life were an continued day of trouble, yet there is a day comming that shall recompense all, which is the day of the glorious libertie of the Sons of God. Let vs therefore hold fast these comforts,Rom. 8 2 which Dauid out of his owne sense, and inspired by the Spirit, hath laid in register to vs. To the righteous

(that is, to them that are made righteous in IESVS CHRIST) there shall arise Ioy in trouble, light inpsa, 112. 4 darknesse. God will not alwayes frowne vpon his owne: but though weeping be in the euening, IoyPsal, 30. 5 shall come in the morning. Thus the people liued in an hard and miserable case being in Babel: yet in re|gard of the promises made to them, many of them li|ued in hope of the cleare day of their deliverie. And therefore they can say in their mournfull song at the rivers of Babel, Let my hand forget to touch the harp,psal. 137. 5 and my tongue cleaue to the roofe of my mouth, if I ioy before I see the deliverance of Ierusalem past. But when the day came, according as it was promised, then are they not onely ioy full in their owne delive|rie, but in that same 126 Psalme, they register out of their experience, a sentence to stand to the perpetuall comfort of the Church, and all the members thereof, that shall goe vnder whatsoeuer crosse heere. They that sow in teares, shall reape in Ioy. Take it thereforepsa. 126. 5 and vse it as an vndoubted consolation. The teares of the Saints shall haue a succeeding Ioy, This is not so generall as all teares shall haue comfort, and all that weepe shall haue ioy. Esau had teares, and Iudas hadHeb. 12. 17 teares, and the hand of the Lord vpon most wicked men will expresse teares. But mark the phrase of the Church heere. It is not they that sow teares, but they that sow in teares, or with teares. They that in the day of Gods visitation doe sow with teares the confession of their sinnes, they that sow with teares a true acknowledgement of their owne de|serving.Heb. 57 They that sow with teares their prayers and

supplications to GOD, from whom commeth theHeb. 5. 7 reliefe of his owne, They that sowe with teares their holy promises and vowes of amendment. Assuredly although the seed-time be dolorous, the haruest shalbe fruitfull  pleasant, they shall reape remission of sinnes, they shall finde from GOD a ioyfull deli|verie. The LORD in the beginning after he had destroyed the World with water, being againe pacified, hee setteth downe in the 8. Chapter ofGen, 8. 2 Genesis, a vicissitude of these things while the world lasteth. There shall be seed-time and harvest, cold and heate, sommer and winter, day and night, als long as the earth remaineth. It is euen so with the Church of GOD and members thereof. Als long as the earth remaineth, cold and heate, som|mer and winter, darkenesse of trouble, light of de|liverie, weeping and reioycing, till in end they bee brought to that perpetuall day, and all tearesApoc. 7. 17 21. 4. bee wiped from their eyes. But leauing this of the temporall deliverie, because the speech hath beene hitherto of the Messias and his Kingdome. Heere mention is made of the secure and peaceable e|state of the subiects thereof. And that this may bee the more cleare, comparison is borrowed from the peaceable and quiet estate of subiects dwelling in a temporall and earthly Kingdome, vnder a tem|porall and earthly King. The peaceable estate of subiects in a worldlie Kingdome is set out this way. When a man may without harme or interruption, call his neighbour vnder his Vine, and vnder his Fig|tree.

In the dayes of warre or time of oppression of ene|mies, men draw apart to holes and holds, and haue not these free meetings. In the dayes or time of pesti|lence, neighbour doth not call neighbour, but neigh|bour skarreth with neighbour, yea the friend with his friend, the father with the sonne, the man with his wife. In the dayes or time of famine, neighbour doth hardly call or invite neighbour, lest as the wise Vir|ginsMath, 24 9 said to the foolish, there bee not sufficient for vs and you both. But heere is the peaceable and happie estate of a Kingdome, when openly without feare, when familiarly without danger, when vnder the vine and figtree, in plentie without scarcitie hauing the Creatures of God, not onely to necessitie, but to dele|ctation a neighbour may invite and call his neigh|bour, and peaceablie enioy the benefite of God. As this is in generall, the description of the peaceable e|state of the subiects dwelling in a Kingdome, and vn|der a King, whom God doth blesse with peace. So haue you a notable example, agreeable to the same de|scription in the Kingdome of Salomon. Of which it is said in the first Booke of the Kings, and fourth Chap|ter, That all Israel from Dan to Beersheba, dwelt safe|ly1 Kings 4. 18 vnder his vine, and vnder his figtree all the dayes of Salomon, Before wee come to the translation of this speech, to the Kingdome of Christ, something would be spoken of the comparison, that forasmuch as the Spirit of God doth here borrow and take comparison from the peaceable estate of earthly Kingdomes, to shadow out the peaceable and prosperous estate of the spirituall Kingdome of the Messias, that therfore out|ward

and worldly peace in a worldly and civill king|dome, is a good thing in it selfe, and a speciall blessing of GOD, he gaue it Salomon as a speciall blessing, hee hath bidden men seeke peace, and inquire after it, he hath bidden so far as is possible, keepe peace with allRom. 12. 18 Heb. 12. 14 men. And it is euen this outward peace which Dauid prayeth for to Ierusalem, for the Churches cause, Psal. 122. Peace be within thy walles, and prosperitie within thy palaces. This peace, a benefite it is in it self,Psal. 122. 7 but vnto men inioying it, it is not alwayes a benefite. 1. when men in their peace acknowledge GOD the1 Author of it. Secondly, when the time of peace is a2 time of the flourishing of Religion  vertue. Third|ly,3 when mens outward peace draweth not vpon them such deadnes and hardnes of heart, that they ne|glect their inward and spirituall peace with GOD. Surely the peace outward as a good thing in it selfe, so good also to them that inioy it: but because this same peace hath oftentimes drawen with it all these inconvenients, forgetfulnes of God, decay of Religi|on, fatnesse of heart and stupiditie: therfore this out|ward peace is such a benefite as the Lord hath not al|wayes seene meete for his Church. But where out|ward peace hath made her like standing water, putri|fie, he would rather breake her peace, and cast her in affliction, then that her outward peace should make her lose her spirituall life. It is a word that would be1 marked and considered of vs this way. First we al seek these outward things so farre as our iudgement or af|fection apprehendeth them to be good, without lea|uing to God how far they are expedient or inexpe|dient

for vs. Peace, prosperity, wealth and health we would haue,  we say, O how good things are these? But none of these things (although good in them|selues) are to be sought absolutely, but in so far, as he who knoweth what is meetest for vs, seeth they may tend to our chiefe well and good. And therefore A|gur hee craueth a moderation of his estate, since in both the extremities, he knew there was danger to his soule, Lord I craue not outward prosperitie and a|bundance, for I know the mischiefe of my nature, it may well make me to misknow thee, and I craue thatPro. 30 8. 9 thou would not tempt me, neither with over-great want, for there my corruption lyeth also at the waite, I feare it make me blaspheme thee. Heere is therefore a good rule of Christian desires, to seeke these things that are absolutely good, absolutely and earnestly, and of this nature is faith, loue, repentance, and such gifts1 Cor. 22. 31 as concerne the Kingdome of GOD. And in other things which are not absolutely good, to lay downe thy desires at the feet of God, that of them his hand may dispense so farre vnto thee, as he thinketh meete forthy well. Secondly, ye would consider heere of his2 outward peace and rest, how dangerous it may proue to them that are not in peace with GOD. Men may haue great outward peace, when in the meane time the very sword of Gods wrath is hanging ouer their heads. In the 1. Chapter of this Prophecie, the Angels are directed to go through the earth,  to search and try what the inhabitants therof are doing. They comeZach. 1. 11 back with their report and say, we haue walked to and fro,  behold all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest, al|thogh

they were guilty at that time of spilling much of the Saints blood, yet they thought no more of it, nor if such thing had neuer bin done. But when they are now in ease, in what estate are they with God? Luc.Verse 15. 15 verse. I am sore displeased, saith the Lord, with the heathen that are at ease: while they are at ease, the wrath of God is aboue their heads, and therefore let no man in his rest and ease, be drawne from this tryall  examination in what estate he standeth with God, whether vnder his favour or not, otherwise his ease  rest will proue a perilous thing to him. If Ionas his gladnes of heart (of whom it is said, he was exceeding glad) had beene in his God, as it was in his gourd, ex|ceeding faintnes of heart, would not haue ouertakenIonas 4 6. 7, 8 him for the withering of a gourd, the favour of God neuer fadeth nor falleth away. And if men would strengthen their hearts against the feare or sorrow that may come of the many changes that are in a mans life (for what is all but a gourd that groweth vp in a night, and withereth in a night.) Let the ioy and gladnes of thy heart be in thy God, who althoghIosh. 1 5 Heb. 13. 5 thy gourd wither, yet he shall not leaue thee, nor for|sake thee. Where there is with outward peace, a grow|ing Church, Religion flourishing, the enemies decay|ing and holden downe, we may then looke for, and expect the continuance of it. But where the contrary of these are, the Lord will rather loose our peace be|fore he lose his honour, and will rather powre vs, and turne vs from veshell to veshell, then suffer vs to sit stillIerem. 46. 1 vpon our dregs, till we lose all sense and taste of god|lines.
We come now to the translation of this speech. This outward and peaceable estate of the subiects of a peaceable Kingdome, is to forgiue and shaddow out the happie estate of the subiects of this Kingdome of Christ. And of the subiects of the Kingdome. In this comparison foure things are pointed out vnto vs.1. First their peace and tranquillity, none to molest the~, as in a peaceable Kingdome there is none to hinder a man from lying vnder his owne Vine and Figtree. Se|condly,2 their safetie and protection, they are vnder the shaddow of IESVS CHRIST as vnder the Vine, and vnder the Figtree. Thirdly, their sweet repast and3 feeding figured by the Fig and Vine. And last their4 spirituall friendship and communion among them|selues, figured in the invitation or calling each one of his neighbour vnder the Vine and Figtree. The first is then, to the subiects of this Kingdome of the Messias, is promised peace. It was said of be|fore, that vpon his graving, should follow the remo|uing of sinnes, and taking away the iniquity of his people. Now vpon the remouing of sinnes, followeth peace and quietnes. He whose sinnes are taken away, is iustified, and being iustified, we haue peace with God, Rom. 5. The Angels at the birth of IESVS, they sunga song of peace. The people at his entrie in Ieru|salem,Rom 5. 1 Luc. 2. 14 Luc. 19 38 Iohn 4. 27 they sung a song of peace that commeth by him. The great Legacie that he hath left vnto his Church and people is, My peace I leaue vnto you. And in a word he is the Author of this peace, hee is the purchaser of this peace, and hee is the effectuall worker of this peace: for to the conscience of a di|stressed

sinner, it is not the voice of the Law, it is not the voice of a mans merite, it is not the voice of an Angell, it is not the voice of the world, nor of any thing that is in the world, that will bring quietnes. It is the voice of IESVS CHRIST come from Edom withEsay 6; his red garments dyed in his Blood that quieteth the heart, saying, peace be vnto thee. And no rest to a dis|quieted soule, till she come to take vp this voice, and say: I know it is the voice of my beloued. The greatCant. 2. 8 end of Christs comming in the world, was to deliuerLuc. . 74 men from feare, and put them to rest. Before this peace come to a man, where can hee turne him, or what way can hee looke but he hath cause of great feare? If he looke vp, he hath cause of great feare, is not God his enemy? Is it not a fearefull thing to fallHeb. 10 1 Heb. 12. 29 in his hands who is a consuming fire? The man that is not in Christ, and partaker of this peace, how dare he looke to God? If he looke below, hath he not matter of feare? for hell enlargeth it selfe, and openeth theEsay 5. 14 mouth wide. If he looke behinde him, hath he not matter of feare? for then is the multitude of his by|past sinnes following him like an armie. If he looke be|fore him, hath hee not matter of feare? for O how fearefull is death to a man that is not reconciled with God. If he looke to the creatures either aboue or be|neath, what hath he but matter of feare? for how can they be in friendship with him, who is not in friend|ship with their GOD and Creator. But a man com|ming to Iesus Christ, and by a true faith ingraft in him, as a branch in the stock. He hath peace within that passeth vnderstanding. When he looketh to God

in Christ, he is his Father, and so he is at peace with him, his Father to whom he may safely trust  com|mitRom. 8 15 himselfe, to whom in his end, and at his death he may say, Father into thy hands I commit my spirit.Psa. 31. 5 Luc. 23. 46 Rom. 8. 1 When he looketh to hell, it troubleth not his peace, because there is registrat in his soule this sentence in|fallible, There is no condemnation to me that am in Iesus Christ. When he looketh to his sins, they may appeare as Pharaohs hoste to follow him, but they shal neuer overtake him. The Lord hath drowned them in the bottomlesse depth of his mercie. When he look|ethMicah 7 19 to death, death troubleth not his peace, death can nosting him, death can not take his peace from him. But by death shall he come to a more full posses|sion1 Cor. 15. 55 of his peace, if he looke to the Angels, they are his guard, if he looke to the inferiour creatures, they are his seruants, and in league and covenant with him. And so as it is said heere of the subiects of a peaceableHeb 1. 14 worldly Kingdome. Euery man shall call his neigh|bour vnder his Vine, and vnder the Fig-tree, so that man that is a subiect of the spirituall Kingdome of Ie|sus Christ, he may say: I will lay me downe quietly,Psa. 4.  and rest in peace, for thou art my Lord and my God, thou hast reconciled me to thy Father. Since thou art with me, I feare not the world, the flesh, sinne, nor the deuill.
Now for as much as all men are such louers of exter|nall peace, that rather or men dwell vnder a King, and in a Kingdome where there is daylie found bellicous instruments, the trumpet and the drumme, the thun|dering of the canon, the pitifull cry of them that are

put to the edge of the sword, they would choose ra|ther with the losse of their commoditie, to goe and dwell where they may haue peace. And many vpon this same respect, haue changed their residence. Let vs learne this point of wisdome for our soule, that we may say rather then we liue vnder the noise of the Law, and thunder of the threatnings of it, the noise of Gods Iudgement, the fearefull cry of our conscience, we will rather goe and choose to dwell in this King|dome, and bee subiects of this King, where there is such peace and rest. Happie is hee that is alrea|die a subiect of this Kingdome: seek to draw to it, for there is no true rest, peace nor tranquillity but heere.
The second thing pointed at heere of the subiects of this Kingdome, is their safetie and protection, and that is figured by lying vnder the shadow of a tree, a vine or a fig-tree. As the two former are conioyned. The Lord forgiueth sinne, vpon which followeth ioy and peace of heart, so whom the Lord forgiueth, and to whom he giueth peace, them he taketh as his owne in his protection, so that they rest safely vnder the sha|dow of his wings. These the Prophets conioyneth in his 84 Psalme. The Lord is a Sunne and shield to his owne: by the one signifying that he is comfort andPsal. 84. 11 ioy to his owne: and by the other signifying, that he is their safety  protection, all they vpon whom hath shined the beames of the louing countenance of God,  to whom God hath showne his pleasant face, theyPsa. 4. 6 liue vnder his tuition, in security against all dan|gers and assaults. The same two, as conioyned, are comfortably expressed in the words of the 27. Psal.

The Lord is my light and my saluation, he hath shi|ned vpon me like a bright Sunne: Then followethPsal. 27. 1 his security by reason of this divine protection, Who~ shall I feare? when the wicked, euen my enemies come against me, they stumbled and fell, though an hoste should come against me, I will not feare, though warre should be raised, yet in this will I trust. He that dwelleth in the secret of the most high, hee shall restPsal. 91 1 vnder the shaddow of the Almightie. And to tell how sure this protection is, he bringeth in example of one of the most fearefull  dangerous euils that can come to man, that is, the pestilence. And to expresse the ter|ror of it, he giueth it many names, it is called the feare|full pestilence, it is called the snare of the Fowler, it is called the feare of the night, and the arrow that slieth by day, And yet there is promised to the man that trusteth in God, safetie and protection in the midst of the rage of the plague. From this particular he would draw a generall, he that resteth in the secret of the most high, he who is a member of this Kingdome of Iesus Christ, he dwelleth in safetie, he lyeth vnder the shadow of his owne tree, free from all sort of euill. But this appeareth to bee against common sense and experience, for they who haue inward peace, haue not alwayes outward quietnes. And the dearest chil|dren of God haue beene, and are subiect to great out|ward mutations and troubles. How standeth this do|ctrine of their protection and safety from outward euils with their day lie experience in the contrair, may not a godlie man die by the sword, by famine, by pe|stilence? Doth a mans Religion and the feare of God

put a man in that assurance, that he may say, I can not feare the sword, famine, nor pestilence. For answer to this. The protection of the godly from these out|ward euils vnder the shadow of Christ, it standeth in three things. First, they shall feare none of them. Se|condly,1 none of them shall come neere them, as a2 plague. Thirdly, they shalbe assured of a ioyfull de|liverie3 from them: either they shall not touch thee, or if they touch thee, they shall not harme thee. They shall not harme nor hinder thy abiding heere als long as God hath appointed. Although they take away thy naturall life, they shall not harme thee, they but ha|sten thee to thy happines, and make thee interchange this life with a better.
Then, he who resteth vnder the shadow of the most high, dwelleth in safety and freedome from all these outward euils. First, because he is voide of the1 feare of them: for this is a sure word, he that feareth God with a sonnely feare, he needeth feare no other thing in the world with that beastlie and slauish feare that tormenteth mens hearts. But he that feareth notGen. 15 1 Deut, 28, 67 God, euery thing in the world, sometimes the shake2 of the leafe of a tree is fearefull to him. Secondly, in all these outward euils, they are free of feare, because the great feare being taken away, the feare of hell, what needeth a man feare any other thing. Thirdly, a3 man fearing God, and being vnder this shadow, all these outward things he feareth them not, because he is assured none of them can come neere him without the appointment of his heauenly Father. And he will find nothing by the~ but that which is for his well. ForMath. 10 29 30

doth not all things worke to the best to them that loue God. Secondly, a man dwelling and resting vn|der this shadow, he hath safetie and protection, for he is sure no plague can come neere him That is a sure word of the Psalme. If thou lye vnder the covert ofPsal. 91. 10 Gods wings, no plague shall come neere thy Taber|nacle. I call a plague, a punishment and vengeance of God for sin, begun here vpon the wicked to be conti|nued after this life,  for euer. In this sense no plague can come neere him: Was not this Stone which God laide before Iehoshua, deeply grauen and sunken for thy sins, so that God in his Iustice can neuer punish thee for them The pestilence may come neere thee, but it is no plague to thee. The King Ezechias had aEsay 38 11 pestilentiall byle, yet it was no plague to him, but a sweet messenger to make him turne him to the wall, weep vnto his God, and shed teares for his sins. Fam inVerse 2 Gen. 42. 1. may come neere to thee, as it did to the house of Ia|cob, it was no plague to him, it was a messenger to send him to Egypt, where he might learne and consider the marvailous workes of God toward him. Sicknesse may come to thee, as to Dauid. it was not to him aPsal. 41. 3. 4 plague, it was a meane to sharpen his prayer,  make him say to his God, Lord be mercifull vnto me, heale my soule, for I haue sinned against thee. And in end death may come neere thee, and a violent death, as vn|to Steuen, but who can say it was a plague to him, when through that death he seeth the Heauens rea|dyActs 7. 56 and open to receiue his soule. Thirdly, a man re|sting vnder this shaddow, he dwelleth in safetie, and hath sure and good protection, because if any of

these outward euils or calamities touch him, he is as|sured of one of these two deliueries. First if God haue further to imploy him heere, he can and will giue him temporall deliverie. Is not he Master and Comman|der of all these euils that are evill to the sense of flesh and blood. Although the sword were as neere thyGen 22 10 throate, as the knife was to Isaac, when his father Abraham was ready to kill him, and offer him a sa|crifice to GOD: yet if he haue farther to doe with thee, he can say, hold. Although the pestilence were not onely in thy house, but vpon thy body, as it was vpon Ezechiah, he can say vnto it, stay. Al|thoughEsay 38. 21 thou were brought downe to the gates of death, and of the graue, he can (if he thinke meet)Psal. 30 3 bring thee backe againe. Secondly, if he be not2 fred and deliuered temporally heere, he is sure of an eternall freedome and deliverie, whereby being perfectly freed of all euill, and all teares wiped from his eyes, he shall enioy the Face of GOD, in hisPsal. 36. 9 light, see light with full comfort and contentment for euer. And thus by lying vnder the Vine and the Fig-tree is shaddowed vnto vs, the safetie and protection of the members of this Kingdome of IESVS CHRIST. It is a point would be marked for this cause. First, men seeke many shifts, and vse sun|dry1. meanes that they may dwell in safetie, and be free of feare and danger. But seeke where they will, there is no true safetie bur here: he that resteth in the secret of the most high, shalbe sure vnder the shadow of thePsal. 91. 1 Almighty. As for al other starting holes, if God be thy enemy, his hand can draw thee foorth of them. But

out of the clift of this rocke covered by the Hand of God himselfe, the hand of man, nor the power of fleshExod. 33. 22 and blood cannot draw thee. Then happie is the man who commeth to the resolution of Dauid, Who isPsal, 8. 31 God saue the Lord? and who is a rock saue our God? And can say with him in the 32 Psalme, Thou art myPsal. 32 7 secret place, Thou preseruest me from trouble, and compassest me about with ioyfull deliverance. Se|condly, this same doctrine of Gods protection would2 also be marked and considered of you, forasmuch as there is here some rule whereby to know if you haue beene made partaker of the former great benefite, the spirituall peace that floweth of the remission of sins, whereby you are delivered from the feare of hell, euen if you feare none of these outward euils with a base and servile feare. Where a mans feare is excessiue in outward troubles or calamities, our Master himselfe will thereby iudge of the weakenes of his faith. So that his Disciples being afraid vpon the stormie Sea,Math. 8. 26. Luc. 8. 25 he saith to them, O ye of little faith. But you would discerne here betwixt fleshlie boldnes and presump|tion, and godly security in regard of this divine pro|tection. Some out of a fleshly humor and carnall pre|sumption, will with great and loftie words, set at defi|ance all sort of trouble, they care not the sword, they feare not the pestilence, no man, say they, can die be|fore his day. All this as it is but swelling vanity, so haue they no true nor solide comfort in their soule, who are puft vp therewith. But remember that thy security in the midst of these evils must be grounded this way, and goe on by these degrees. First no thing

can befall to me of accident, for God is the ruler ofPsal. 24 1 all, and als long as he hath the guiding (and that will be euermore) I that am his childe, need not to feare. Secondly, nothing can come to me that is euill, be|cause2. I am Christs, and he will suffer no euill, as euill, to come neere thee. Thirdly, nothing comming to3 me, can separate me from the loue of God in IesusRom. 8 38 39 Christ. The third thing pointed at in these words of the comparison, is the sweet repast that the members of Christ find in him, and this is expressed by two trees, the Fig-tree and the Vine. The one is meat, and the other is drinke, the meat is sweet, the drink is com|fortable. So all the members of Christ haue in him and by him sweet repast and feeding, not onely for necessity, but also for delectation, not onely meat for their hunger, but Physick and medicine for all their sicknesses and diseases. If any man (sayth Christ to theApoc. 3. 20. Church of Laodicea) open vnto me when I knock, I will come in vnto him, and suppe with him, and he with me: where by supping is signified two things: First, the great familiaritie of the Christian soule with1 Christ. Secondly, the feeding and nourishment of the2 soule with Christ, and vpon his Passion and merite. Heere by comparison fro~ earthly things, our feeding1 vpon him is resembled. He is to vs both the Fig-tree and the Vine, meat and drinke. He is compleat and perfite nourishment to the soule. 2. he is to vs the Fig|tree,2 no fruit so sweet to the bodily taste, As the ap|prehension of Iesus Christ and his merites to the for|giuenes of sin, is sweet to the soule: he is to vs the Vine-tree. No such strength or refreshment can come

of the Wine to a wearied and languishing body, as is the strength and comfort which commeth of the Blood of Christ to a wearied soule, loadened with the burden of sin. Thirdly, he is to vs the Fig-tree and3 the Vine, both meat and medicine; meate to feed vs, medicine to cure our disease. And therefore vsing this same comparison, the Church saith to him in the second Chapter of the Canticles, Stay me with thy flagons, and comfort me with thy apples, for I am sick of Loue.Cant. 2. 5
The vses of this point of doctrine are first, Seeke1 thy perfection in Christ onely, and rest vpon him as thy onely and perfect Saviour, in whom is thy perfect nourishment, and all that thou standest in need of: that in so doing thou mayst be able to meet that hea|uenly Oracle of the Father, sounded from Heauen. As he hath said, he is my welbeloued Son in whom IMath. 17 5 am well pleased: so thou mayst say, In him my soule hath perfect contentment and satisfaction. Second|ly,2 seeing nothing heere that concerneth the bodie and nourishment thereof can sufficiently shaddow out the sweetnes that is in CHRIST, and of the food which the soule findeth in him. And seeing he offe|reth himselfe to you in his Word and Sacraments. Then learne to beleeve, not because we say out of hisPsa. 34. 8 1 Kings 10 7 Word, it is so: But because you your selues haue ta|sted and felt how sweet the Lord is. And as the Queen of Seba comming to see Salomon, found her sight to goe beyond all the report that she had receiued: so if you your selues taste, you shall finde the sweetnesse that is in CHRIST, to bee aboue all that is reported

thereof. What sweetnes is in the Cup? None: but they that drinke truely of it can tell, when the soule drinketh by faith the Blood of IESVS CHRIST to the full remission of sins, and perfect reconciliation with God. Thirdly, the sicknesses and diseases of the soule3 are many, but here is medicine for all. Hardnesse of heart a great disease. There is nothing to soften it but this medicine, being bathed in the Blood of IESVS CHRIST that was shed for thy sins. Spirituall sopor and drowsinesse is a great disease of the soule, nothing so powerfull to waken it, as to drinke of this wine, e|uen the Blood of IESVS CHRIST. The too quick and sharpe sense of sinne, is a sicknes in the soule that may make a man very sad and dolorous, there is nothing to restore him but these flagons, this medicine of the death and sufferings of IESVS CHRIST. Ardent thirst and desire to be rid of trouble, yea and sometimes to bee dissolued is a paine in the soule. O but sayth the Church, stay me with thy flagons. In the apprehensi|on of Christ and his merits, we rest contented with the gratious dispensation of our God.
Thus they that are members of the spirituall king|dome of Christ, they find into him sweet  comfor|table repast and feeding. And Christ is to them the Vine and the Figtree. And now in the dayes of the preaching of the Evangell, and ministring the Sa|craments thereunto annexed, is verified in our sight that which the Church sayth in the second Chapter of the Canticles. The figtree putteth forth her greene figges, and the Vines with their tender grapes, giue a good smell. Arise my loue, my faire one, and

come away. Let vs not shift nor make excuses, but being so fairely invited, let vs come to the Supper of the great King when all things are ready, all that weeLuc, 14 17 stand in need of, or may render vs perfite delight. Let each one of vs say with the Church there, and say with the earnestnes of our soule. Lord let vs heare thyCant. 2 14 voice, for it is sweet, let vs see thy face, for it is comely. There is a word heere yet that we would be remem|bred of, lest any man should thinke this a doctrine of too great libertie, as thogh we had no more adoe, but come eat of Christs fruite, and no fruit were raued of vs, no; As Christ is compared to these trees, so are we also in the Scripture compared to trees, and to the Vinetree, to the Fig-tree, vpon which should growLuc. 13. 6 Iohn 15. 5 fruit to the glory of him who hath called vs. These two cannot stand nor agree together, that thou shoul|dest eat of the sweet figs of Christ, and drinke of his comfortable wine. And in his hunger offer him no|thingEsay 5. 4 Psal. 69. 21 but sowre grapes, in his thirst giue him vineger, and for food gall: that is, to meet all his desires of thy holy conversation with no other thing but with new sins and daylie offences, by which he is continually grieued. Remember therefore the Lord seeketh good fruit of you, as trees planted in his owne garden. If ye be like that fig-tree in the 13. Chapter of Luke, that notwithstanding all the paines that is taken vpon it,Luc. 13 6 still remaineth barren, and will yeeld no fruit: at last there will passe from him a commandement to cut thee downe: and in what Airth the tree falleth, there. 11.  it lyeth. If it fall to the North, it lyeth in the North: if to the South, it lyeth in the South. Looke in what

estate death overtaketh thee, in that same estate shalt thou remaine for euer. If thou fall in the cold North, voide of that warming heat of the consolation of Ie|sus Christ, in a cold and comfortles estate shalt thou remaine for euer. If thou fall in the warme South, euen in the armes of IESVS CHRIST, recon|ciled to God by him, in that happie estate shaltMath. 21. 19 thou remaine for euer and euer. You read of that cur|sed figtree in the 21 Chapter of Mathew, which hauing a shew of leaues, yet Christ in his hunger could not finde one fig vpon it. There is nothing more grievous and offensiue to God, then the faire leaues of a pro|fession, wanting all true fruit of godlines, and a curse more grievous is vpon them, who haue great show with no substance, then they who openly make knowne what they are. Let vs labour to bee that in deed, which we are by profession, that being trees in the garden of God, we may be fruitfull. A good fig to a hungry man, is better then ten thousand leaues: So is a good fruite of our profession better and more ac|ceptable to God, then great ostentation, multitude of words, men hauing the shew of godlines, but denying2 Tim. 3. 5 the power of the same.
The last point is, there is here also shadowed and resembled vnto vs the pleasant communion and fel|lowship that the members of Christ haue amongst themselues, that as in the peaceable estate of a worldly kingdome, neighbour doth call and invite neighbour vnder the Vine,  vnder the Figtree: So in the king|dome of Christ there is harmony, there is agreement among the members, and there is sweet and heauenly

communion: Communion of the Saints is an article of the Creed, and I referre it to that place. There is two parts of this Communion. Communion with the head, and communion among themselues. These words of the text are of the last. Again, of this co~mu|nion among the Saints there is also two parts. The one is of the liuing with the liuing: and the other is, of the liuing with the dead. It is of the first of these two that mention is made here. This communion of the liuing with the liuing, standeth in communion of affections, communion of spirituall gifts, and in some cases communion of temporall gifts. As for co~|munion of affection, they are all of one heart to God, to Christ, and among themselues. Thus is it said in theActs 4 31 fourth Chapter of the Acts, That the multitude of be|leeuers were all of one heart. And of this it commethGal. 6. 2 to passe, that they continually beare the burden oneRom. 12. 15 of another, they mourne with them that are grieued, and reioyce with them that reioyce. 2. When each man communicateth the grace that he hath gotten,1 Thess. 5 11 to the well and profite of his neighbour. And this is done when one edifieth another by example, that they may say, I will doe as yonder man doth, by ad|monition each one admonishing another, by exhor|tation each one provoking and stirring vp one ano|ther vnto good, by consolation. A word in season to aProv. 25. 11 am 5 16 man in distresse, is like apples of gold and pictures of siluer. By prayer when we pray one for another. And this communion is well resembled in this speech, when neighbour calleth neighbour vnder the Vine, and vnder the Fig-tree, that is, each member is a stir|rer

vp of another to come to Christ, and taste of his sweetnes. I reioyced, saith Dauid, when I heard neigh|bor cal neighbor, each one saying to another, Let vs gopsa. 122. 1 vp to the house of God. And you haue this same manPsal 34. 11 this way communicating his grace in the 34 Psalme. Come hither,  I shall tell you what God hath done for my poore soule, that is, I shall communicat my ex|perience with you, that ye may taste of the like. There is againe communion of temporall gifts, when accor|ding to thy power thou helpest the necessity of thy poore brethren. All this proceedeth from co~munion with God,  he that saith, he hath communion with1 Iohn 4 20 God  with Christ,  hath not this co~munion with his members, he is a lyar. To testifie therefore thy co~|munio~ with him, keep this co~munion with the Saints, loue all them that loue the Lord Iesus, be carefull notMath. 18. 6 to giue offence to any of these little ones that apper|tain to him. Let the word of exhortation to thy bro|ther be in thy mouth seasoned, so that he may see thou louest him. Let the word of comfort be in thy mouth to a wearied body. That is a singular comfort that a man hath who is of this communion, when he is so heavy and sick, that he can scarce pray himself, yet he may say, I haue the prayers of all the members of this body, and the prayer of Iesus Christ is effectuall for vsIohn 17 all. Let vs walk in this communion of Saints, that may testifie vntovs that we haue such communion with CHRIST our Head in this life. As when this life is en|ded, we shalbe brought to reigne in glory with him. To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all honour, praise and glory for euer and euer. AMEN.

FINIS.




