








HEre begynneth the volume intituled and named the recuyell of the historyes of Troye / composed and drawen out of dyuerce bookes of latyn in to frensshe by the ryght venerable persone and wor|shipfull man. Raoul le ffeure. preest and chapelayn vnto the ryght noble gloryous and myghty prynce in his tyme Phelip duc of Bourgoyne of Braband  In the yere of the Incarnacion of our lord god a thou|sand foure honderd sixty and foure / And translated and drawen out of frenshe in to englisshe by Willyam Caxton mercer of ^e cyte of London / at the coman~deme~t of the right hye myghty and vertuouse Pryncesse hys redoubtyd lady. Margarete by the grace of god. Du|chesse of Bourgoyne of Lotryk of Braband  / Whiche sayd translacion and werke was begonne in Brugis in the Countee of Flaundres the fyrst day of marche the yere of the Incarnacion of our said lord god a thousand foure honderd sixty and eyghte / And ended and fynysshid in the holy cyte of Colen the .xix. day of septembre the yere of our sayd lord god a thousand foure honderd sixty and enleuen .
And on that other side of this leef foloweth the prologe



WHan I remembre that euery man is bounden by the comandement  counceyll of the wyse man to eschewe slouthe and ydlenes why|che is moder and nourysshar of vyces and ought to put my self vnto vertuous ocupacion and be|synesse / Than I hauynge no grete charge of ocupacion folowynge the sayd counceyll / toke a frenshe booke and redde therin many strange and meruayllous histo|ryes where in I had grete pleasyr and delyte / as well for the nouelte of the same as for the fayr langage of frenshe. / whyche was in prose so well and compen|diously sette and wreton / whiche me thought I vnder+stood the sentence and substance of euery mater / And for so moche as this booke was newe and late maad and drawen in to frenshe / and neuer had seen hit in oure englissh tonge / I thought in my self hit shold be a good besynes to translate hyt in to oure englissh / to thende that hyt myght be had as well in the royame of Eng|lond as in other landes / and also for to passe therwyth the tyme. and thus concluded in my self to begynne this sayd wrke / And forthwith toke penne and ynke and began boldly to renne forth as blynde bayard in thys presente werke whyche is named the recuyell of the troian historyes And afterward whan I remembryd my self of my symplenes and vnperfightnes that I had in bothe langages / that is to wete in frenshe  in englissh for in france was I neuer / and was born  lerned myn englissh in kente in the weeld where I doubte not is spo|ken as brode and rude englissh as is in ony place of eng|lond  haue contynued by the space of / xxx. yere for the most parte in the contres of Braband. flandres holand

and zeland and thus whan alle thyse thynges cam to fore me aftyr that y had made and wretyn a fyve or six quayers y fyll in dispayr of thys werke and purposid no more to haue contynuyd therin and tho quayers leyd a part and in two yere aftyr laboured no more in thys werke And was fully / in wyll to haue lefte hyt. tyll on a tyme hit fortuned that the ry+ght hyghe excellent and right vertuous prynces my ryght redoughted lady mylady Margarete by the grace of god suster vnto ^e kynge of englond and of fra~ce. my souerayn lord Duchesse of Bourgoine of lotryk. of brabant. of lymburgh. and of luxenburgh Countes of ffla~dres of artoys  of bourgoine Pala+tynee of heynawd of holand of zela~d and of namur Maruesse of ^e holy empire. lady of ffryse of salius and of mechlyn sente for me to speke wyth her good grace of dyuerce maters among ^e whyche y lete her hyenes haue knowleche of ^e forsayd begynnyng of thys werke whiche anone comanded me to shewe the sayd .v. or .vi. quayers to her sayd grace and wh+an she had seen hem. anone she fonde a defaute in myn englissh whiche sche coma~ded me to amende a~d mo+re ouer comanded me straytli to contynue and make an ende of the resydue than not translated. whos dre+defull coma~dement y durste in no wyse disobey becau+se y am a serua~t vnto her sayde grace and resseiue of her yerly ffee and other many goode and grete benefe|tes. and also hope many moo to resseyne of her hye|nes but forthwyth wente and labouryde in the sayde translacion aftyr my symple and pour connyng also nigh as y can folouyng myn auctour mekeli beseching

the bounteuous hyenes of my said lady that of her be|nyuolence lifte to accepte  take in gree this symple  rude werke here folowyng. and yf ther be ony thyng wreton or sayd to her playsir. y shall thynke my la|bour well enployed and where as ther is defawte. ^t she arette hyt to ^e symplenes of my connyng whiche is ful small in this behalue and requyre  praye alle them that shall rede this sayd werke to correcte hyt  to hold me excusid of the rude  symple translacion And thus y ende my prologe...


HEre foloweth ^e logue of that worshipful man Raoul le feure whiche was Auctor of this present book in the ffrensh tonge:
WHan y behold  knowe the oppynyone of the men nourisshyd in ony synguler hystoryes of Troye and see and beholde also that of then to make a recuyel or gadryng to geder. y indigne haue resseyued the comandement of the ryght noble and right vertuous prynce. Philippe by the grace of ^e ma+ker of alle graces. Duc of borgoyne of lothryk of Braband and of Lymbourgh. Erle of fflaunders of Artoys and of Bourgoyne. Palatyne of hey|nawd of Holland of Ieland and of namur. Mar+quys of ^e holy Empyre Lord of fryse of salyns and of mechlyn. Certes y fynd ynowh for to thenke on for of ^e historyes wherof y wyl~ make ^e recuyel~. Alle ^e world speketh of them by bookes tra~slated out of latin in to ffresh a grete dele lasse than y ne shall trete And some ther be ^t replye a gayn their ticuler bookes wherfore y fere me to wryte more than her bookes

make mencion. But whan y consydere poyse  weye the dredfull comandement of the forsayde redoubtyd prynce whyche is cause of thys werke not for to cor+recte the bookys late solempnly translated. but onely for to augmente y yelde me obeissau~t. a~d for theschu+yng of the lasse euyll that y may. y shall make thre bookes. whiche put in one. schall take for name the Recuyell of the troia~n historyes. In the fyrst booke y schall trete of Saturne and of Iupiter. and of the begynnyng and comyng vp of Troye. and of ^e ffee+tes of. perseus. In the seconde booke I schall trete of ^e labours of hercules. rehersyng by two tymes how he destroyed Troye and in the thyrde booke I schall trete of the laste and generall destruccion of troye by the grekes. by cause of the rauysshyng of dame hela|yne wyfe of menelaus. and y schall putto the ffeetes and grete prowesses of worthy hector and of hys bredere~n. wyche ben worthi and digne of grete memo+rye and also y schall trete of the merueilo auentures and paryls of the See ^t cam vnto the grekes in their retornyng. And of the deth of the noble kyng agame+non that was duc of the Ooste And of the grete for+tunes of kyng vlixes and of his meruaill deth Soo y requyre and supplye hym that is cause of this werk And alle them that shall rede hyt for teschewe ydle+nes. that so rudely haue put my penne vnto the histo+ries afore named. that hit plese them not onely haue regarde vnto my pour consayte. but also to ^e obscure and derke abisme or sualowe where y haue gadryd them to gyder. by obeyssau~ce And vnder alle ryght humble correccions..





The begynnyng of this book sheweth the Genela+gye of Saturne and of the paccion and promys that he maad to his broder Tytan. and how he toke warre mortel agayn Iubyter his owen sone..
WHat tyme alle the Children of Noe were sprad bi the Climates. regnes and strange habitacions of ^e world By the general dyuysyon of tonges maad at the fondacion of the tour of babilon in tho dayes that the world was of gold And ^t the men in thoo dayes were stedfast  poysyng as montaygnes and Rude as stones a~d bestes. enhaunsyng their grete cora+ges foulyng and shewyng their grete saytes And that ^e Enemye of man Induced maliciously to prac+tique townes Cytees and Castels to make ceptres and diademes and to forge and make the cursid sect of goddis Among ^e possessours of ^e yle of crete ther was a riche man enhaunsed full of couetise happy of auentureuse enterprise  right riche of the grace of ffor+tune some men callid thys ma~n Celion  some men vranus he was laweful sone of Ether sone of demor+gorgon the old dweller of the Caues of archade and first begynner of ^e fals paynems goddes This vra~ had to hys wyf hys owne suster called vesca He li+uyd gloriously wyth her  had possession of ^e most parte of ^e yle of crete  habonded prossly in world+ly goodes en encresyng his naturel appetites ffirst in encresyng and ampliacion of worldli lordship and seignorye a~d secondlye in lignage  was merueillo riche he had two sonnes that is to wete Tytan  Sa+torn and two doughters that oon was called Cibelle and that othir Ceres of whom schall be maad menci+on here after  he had many othir sonnes  doughters of whom y make no mencion for as moche as they

be out of my pourpos what shall y reherce more of the glorye of this vranus he had alle thyng as he wold and was fortunat and nothyng went agaynst hym his goodes multyplied his chyldren grewe and encre+sid but Tytan the eldest sone was ffoul. euyl fauou|rid. and counterfet And saturne was merueylleusly fayr and amyable for whiche cause vesca the moder louyd moche better saturne than tytan And that by nature ffor naturelly the moders loue better her fayr chyldern than her fowle wherfore saturne was noris+shyd most in the lappe of his moder And tytan was put out and in maner bannysshid And whan saturne was grete what for his beaute and for his cunnyng and scyens and other vertues he gate the hooll loue of all the peple..
In thys tyme hyt was so that whatsomeuer man practyqued or fond ony thynges prouffytable for the comyn wlehe was recomanded solempnly and called and named a god after theyr folyssh and derke custome Saturne was named a god ffor in hys yougth by hys cunnyng he was the fyrst ffyndar to gyue instruccion of ecryng and labou|ryng the erthe and of sowyng and repyng the cor+nes And thys inuencion was applyed to saturne wyth dyuyn reuerence. wyth loue vpon loue not onely anenst vesca and vranus and hys kynnes|men but aboue mesure ayenst all the peple of crete and of the marches and contrees lyyng by and ther abowte And thus hys name aroos and was renomed that from all places men and chyldren

nobles and vyllaynes cam to his scole for to lerne.
In these dayes ^t Saturne began thus to floure  was xx. yere of age and his broder .xl. Vranus their fader by a sekenes that he had dyed and detid out of this world leuyng his wyf Vesca endowed largely of possessions. his deth was noyous and soroufull to Vesca his wife. whyche causid her to wepe out of mesur and his sones and doughtirs also they dide his obsequye reuerently in habondyng of grete and bittir sorow. the obsequye doon ther wepyng and sorow yet during vesca saw that Tytan her eldest sone pre|tended to haue and enioye the succession of his ffader she on a day callid her der sone Saturne wyth Ty|tan and other of the Contre and there reherced said vnto them that her yong sone Saturne sholde succede and haue the herytages of her husbond Tytan heryng the wyll of hys moder redoublid hys sorow and cau+sid hym to wepe grete plente of teeris and knelyd to fore his moder humbly and sayd in thys wyse Moder y am ryght infortunate whan ye wyll that my right patrymonye be put from me And that naturelli me ought to haue by ryght shold be gyuen fro me and yat because ^t y am not so well formed of membres as my broder satorne ys whiche sorow is to me pas+syng noyous ye wil putte from me my ffortune and burthe whiche ye may not do by lawfull reson y am your first sone ye haue norysshid me wyth ^e substa~ce of your blood as your chyld born in your bely .ix. mo+nethes Also y am he that first dwellid and enhabited your femynyn chambres None to fore me toke there ony seasyng whan y toke that tho ye gaf me your due

loue and sortyd to me the succession of your heryta|ges Than whens cometh thys that ye now subuerte and destroye that nature hath ones ioyned and gy|uen me. euery moder is bounden to hold the conser|uacion of the ryght of her chyld Alas moder ye wil make me bastard fro my ryght Am y a bastard was not vranus my fader. am not y he that ye were so glad fore what tyme ye felte fyrst that y was conceyued in the lawful bede of my fader your hus+bond. am y not he that ye bare and gaf me souke of your brestes and oft tymes kyst me that is to saye in my tendre dayes what tyme my membres were softe and tendre. ha moder acquyte yow ayenst me as ye beholden and bounden by ryght and knowle|che ye ^t y am tytan and for as moche as y am lasse  not so well adressyd as my broder saturne for so moche ye ought ^e more desire my mocion  furdering
Whan dame vesca herd her sone tytan speke so sadly and perfou~dely she had pyte on hym yet the pyte was not of so hye vertu that myght surmouut the grete loue that was roted by|twene her and saturne. and than she sayd to tytan her sone Tytan my sone y forsake not ^t thou tokest thy substance bytwene my sides.  by me wer brou|ght in to thys world and knowe veryly that y lo|ue the entierly and that y desire thy wele but hyt is so clere and euydent in euery mannes sight that for the deffault. lothlynes. and abhomynacion of thy membres thou art not a man sufficyent for to deffende thy fa|dres herytages with grete labour  payne ffor yf hit

happend that ony man wold make warre thou we+re not able to resiste hym what woldest thou that I shold do thy broder hath the loue of all the peple for his beaute  hys vertucuse manicres And euery man holdeth hym in reuerence and the in derision  skorne. be thou contente thou shall lakke no thyng And yf thou lakke. speke to me and y shall remedye hit but speke neuer no more to me for the heritage ffor Saturne shall obteyne by the fauour of hys wysedom meke|nes and benyngnyte  also be cause the comyn wys Iuggeth hym and seeth ^t he shall ones by the man of whom hys lyf shall shyne gloriousli..
Tytan was sore troublid of the wordes of hys moder and he began to chaunge colours and wex reed hauyng suspecion to saturne that he had contryued this mater agaynst hym wherupon he drewe hym apart to hym and sayd Saturne thenuye that thou hast to regne aboue me hath now engendryd in my hert thy mortal myschi|ef wherof the hate shall endure vnto the mortal sepa+racion of thy lyf and of myn  of my children Thou knowest wel ^t y am the eldest sone of our fader vra+nus hou art thou so hardy and p~sumptuo tenhause thi selfe aboue me by conspyred ymaginacion y wyl that thou knowe verily that lyke as thou hast conspi+red in my temporel domage semblably y shal conspire to thy eternal domage and hurt and name me from hens forth thy mortal enemye Whan saturne herd these brennyng and enflamed menasses of hys bro+der tytan he excusid hym selfe and answerd that he neuer thought in his lyf to come to the succession of

ther fader ner neuer had ymagyned ner conspyred hit Than vesca ther moder Cybelle and ceres toke the wor+des fro saturne and said to Tytan that his thretenyng to saturne was for nought ffor he shold regne and be lord and maistre. Tytan full of ffelony and more angry than he was to fore sayd playnly ^t he shold not suffre hyt Saturne had a grete parte of the pe|ple that assysted hym and gaf hym fauour And ty|tan also had other on hys syde whiche began to mur|mure that oon partie agaynst that other Alle the com+panye was sore troubled and began to threste in and enployed them to sece the noyse and to acorde tytan notwythstandyng yf hit was hard to doo for alwey he wold haue ronne vpon saturne yf he had not be hold and etted Allewey in the ende the wyse men shewed tytan by grete reson that he was the more feble and that saturne was more in the fauour of the peple and that he wold modere hym self a lytill and sayd that he shold agree and graunte the regne to saturne by condycion That yf he maryed. he shold be bounden to putte to deth alle hys Children males that shold be begoten of hys sed yf he ony had ffor the wele of bothe partyes Vesca wyth her dough|ters and the Auncyent wyse peple accorded to Tytan thys condycion And laboured so to Saturne that they brought them to the temple of theyr god Mars that was in the Cyte of Oson wherof was lord a myghty man callyd Mellyseus and that a fore the ymage of god mars Saturne swore ^t yf hym hap|pid to marye And that he had ony chyldern males

he shold slee hem alle and thus was Tytan content that hys broder shold enioye ^e lond of Crete and ^e pees was maad betwene hem boothe..

How saturne was crowned first kyng of Crete  how he fond first diuerce science wher fore the peple held hym in grete honour as a god.
AFter the trayttye maad of the pees of Tytan and Saturne Tytan syhe in hym selfe ^t he myght not worshipfully abide and dwelle beyng vnder his yonger broder had leuer goo and serche his auentures in other places than to be thral to his yong+er brother. he toke his wif his children  frendes. and departid at alauenture in dyuerce places / wher he fond ffortune so good and happy. ^t by armes and strenght he made hym selfe kyng of many diuerse roy+almes. whiche he departid vnto his children And commysed ordeyned certayn espies to espye and wayte yf his broder Saturne maried hym selfe  yf his wife broght forth men children and whether he put hem to deth. Duryng these sayd thingis. satur|ne dwellid wyth his moder and his susters Cibelle and Ceres. And began to regne wyth so grete magni+ficence that they of the contre seeyng their neyghbours by them dide do make and ordeygne kynges to regne on them. of suche as were noble and vertuous. assem+bid to gider on a day and maad saturne kyng vpon them  vpon theyr synes And crowned hym wyth grete glorie with a Crowne of lawrer wyth grete ioye / saturne anon toke  acceptid this rial honour and worship and toke the ceptre in his hand  bare the crowne on his heed regned meurely indusyng

his peple to lyue honestly  to loue vertu. and  a naked swerd to be born afore hym in sygne of iustyce. he dyde iustyce on malfacteurs and enhaunsed them that were good. he dyde do bylde a cyte whiche he named Crete because the yle bare ^e said name and was the fyrst enhabiteur  dwellar. and whan he had founded the cyte he ordeyned his palais  dwellyng place in the myddel their of in example as ^e hert is in ^e myddes of the body to mynystre to the membres so he wold ensigne  mynystre his peple.  after this he cho+se an honderd  foure wyse men whiche he institued and ordeyned counceillours and gouernours of his royame  than they of Crete seeyng ^e right grete wyse+dom of their kyng. assemblid to gyder dyuerce tymes  named hym a god and yet more they founded vnto hym a temple. an awter  an ydole beryng in that oon hand a ziekle in signyfiance that he destroyed the vices in suche wyse as the ziekle cuttyth herbes  destroieth the wedes. And in that other hand he held a serpent ^t bote his tayll for as moche as saturne said that euery man shold byte the tayle of ^e serpent that is to saye that euery man shold ffere and flee ^e euyll ende. ffor the ende oftymes is venymous as ^e tayle of a serpent And that apperyth yet dayly by ^e ende of many euyll dysposed and enuenymed men.
By the moyen of these thynges the renomee of kyng saturne grewe And the worlde was that tyme of gold. that is for to saye hyt was moche better and more haboundant in the dayes of mannes lyf and in

plente of frutes of the erthe than in ony other tyme after The poetes by thys colour compared the world at that tyme to gold whiche is moste precyous of alle metals / how well dyuerce men saye that saturne was the fyrst man that fonde the maner to melte metall and to affine gold and made hys vessell  vtensilles of his hows of dyuerce metall. And vnder thys colour they figured at that tyme the worldes to ben of gold / Than began the men by the doctryne of saturne to vse and were gold to myne the roches / to persshe the montaignes perillo / to haunt the thorny desertes / to fyght and adaunte the or|guyllous serpentes / the fiers dragons / the dedely griffons the monstrowous bestes / and to sprede a brood theyr wordly engyns. By these excersites was than saturne the fourbesshour and begynner of the style / to lerne men to take all these bestes / And fyrste fonde the maner of shotyng and drawyng of the bowe / Of this gold maad saturne hys hows. his chambres and halles to shyne by meruayllous werkynge / He was stronge and hardy / / and he had no feer ne doubte of no serpent of the montaigne ner of no monstre of desert ner of beste dwellyng in caues. He knewe the vaynes of gold in the erthe and coude decerne them from vaynes of syluer He edefyed ryche thynges of gold ioyous vnto the eye syght / and hoot and courageous to the herte / ffor at that tyme the courages by pardurable fyre chauffing the affeccions of man in maner of a contagious heet so syn|gulerly that after alleway that they coueyted / they de|syred to accomplissh. In this tyme of the golden world the creatures lyuyd and endured gretly and longe. And alle the world laboured in edyficacyon of scyence

and connyng of vertue / And that tyme were the men more vertuous in bodyly edyfyeng than euer they were syn / Amonge alle other Saturne was neuer ydle after that he had ones laboured the cornes In erynge and sawyng / He malte and fyned gold and metalles and enduced and taughte hys men to drawe the bowe and shote / He hym self fonde fyrste the bowe and the ma|nyer to goo and saylle by the see and to rowe with ly|tyll bootes by the ryuage and toke his owen playsir for to endoctryne and teche hys peple in alle these thynges and he had grete abondance of wordly goodes / reser|uyd onely he dorste not marye: and that he had sworne to putte to deth alle the men children that shold come of hys seed / wherof he was oftyme anoyed and hadd grete displaysir .


How Saturne wente to Delphos and hadd ans|wer how he shold haue a sone that shold chace hym oute of his royame / And how he maryed hym to hys suster Cybell .
WHan Saturne sawe hys palays floysshe and shyne of gold and sawe his peple obeye hym / sawe hys goldsmythes and werkers breke the montaignes with her pikois and In|struments. sawe his maryners cutte the wawes of the see wyth theyr Oores. sawe hys dyscyples lerne and laboure the erthe. sawe hys Archers shote wyth her arowes and smote and toke the byrdes dwellyng in the hye trees and fleyng by the ayer / He myght enbrace grete glorye and enhaunse in hye hys Trone and hys felicyte / but on that other syde whan he remembryd

the trayte made betwene hym and his broder Tytan he was lyke vnto the pecok that is proud of the fayr fethers diuersly fair colourd wiche he spreded roound as a whele and wyth all only loke of hys feet he le|seth all his ioye Saturne in like wise by this traittye lost alle his ioye his glorye  hys plaisance. he was long tyme ledyng this lyf now ioyous now sorow+full growyng alwey and encresyng his Roya~me and daily thought  poysed in hym selfe yf he myght marye or not ffor no thyng in the world he wold false hys oth / he was iust  trewe in dede  in word Neuertheles. nature meuyd hym  cyted hym to haue generacion and to come to compaignye of woman And this meuyng was at all tymes refresshid and renewed by a contynuel syght that he had dayly in a passyng fayr mayde. ^t is to wete his suster Cibelle whiche he saw continuelly in whom was no deffaul+te of alle ^e goodes of nature apperteyning to woman She was owt of mesure ryght humble in spekyng wyse in her werkes honeste in conuersacion  flow|ryng in alle vertuys. and fo this cause Saturne behelde her oftymes. And so happend on a tyme as he beheld her affaires and werkes / he caste his eyen on her vertues that plesid hym so gretli. that in the end he was desirous of her loue wherof his moder vesca had grete ioye and pleasir. and she ceyuyng of the desyr of Saturne. gaf hym courage  wyll to marye hym and so laboured and solicyted the mariage so effectu+elli ^t wyth grete worshyp and triumphe Saturne spousid wedded Cibelle his suster after their vsage and she was ^e first Quene of Crete. he liyng wyth

her payeng-in this wyse ^e dew dette of maryage that at thende of .ix. monthes Cybell had a sone whiche saturne dyde do put to deth acquytyng hym self of the oth that he had maad vnto hys broder tytan And of thys sone bochace maketh no mencyon. but they laye to gyder agayn and cybell conceyued than of the seed of saturne another sone with a doughter that by space of tyme apperyd grete in the moders bely..
IN thys tyme whan the lawe of nature was in his vygour and strength the men maryed wyth her sus|ters. and in especyal the paynems yf they were not content and had souffisance of oon wyf they myght take moo wyth out reproche Whan saturne knewe that hys wyf was wyth chyld the second tyme. the deth of hys fyrst sone cam to fore hym and sayd in hym self that he wold that hys wyf had ben barayne Tho he began to be ful of dyuerce fantasies and of sorowfull thoghtes and desyred to knowe what shold befalle of the fruyt of the wombe of Cybell He wente hym self forth in to the yle of delphos vn|to the Oracle of the god Appollo that gaf answer to the peple that they demaunded of thynges that shold after falle and happene And than whan he had don hys sacrefyce and maad his prayer The preste of the temple put hym in to a cloos vnder ^e awter of ^e for|sayd ydole And there he herd a grete whirlyng wynd that troublyd hym and all his wytte and vnderstan+dyng that he was in maner of a spasme or a swowne by whiche he fill to grou~d And after ^t whan he aros

hym thought that the god appollo apperid vnto hym wyth a dredfull face  said thus to hym. Saturne what meueth ^e to will to knowe thyn euyll destyne Thou hast engendrid a sone that shal take from the ^e diademe of Crete and shall banysshe the out of thy royame And shall be with out pere aboue alle peple the most fortunat man that euer was borne in Grece Aftir these wordes Saturne cam agayn to hymselfe and remembrid hym of this euyll prophecye that tou+ched the botom of hys herte and so sore anoyed and right pensyf he wente out of the oracle wyth a trou|blid herte and al bare of gladnes and al oppressyd and enuironed wyth wanhope cam to his folk and departid thens and went to ship and whan he was in his ship he henge doun his heed whiche he held not vp tyl he cam to Crete. and whan he had hys heed so enclined he began to thynk and be pensif And after many right sorowful syghes engendrid in ^e roote of malencolie said in this wise. helas saturne pour kyng what auayleth me the dignyte to be the first kyng of Crete. wat prouffyten me the dyuyne reuerences. ner what good do me my science whan y fele me in ^e put+tyng a back of fortune O fortune sone torning fraile and varyable  ployng to euery wynd lyke a rosier at leste areste that the whele ^t torneth wyth oute end may speke to me saturne the inuentor and ffynder of the comyn wele And if ^u wilte not lene me thi clere  lawhyng visage at the leste leue me thy large eeres Thou hast gyue me triumphe and glorie of Corowne and now thou suffrest me to falle fro this grete was shyp the goddes wytnes hit And what is this thou

hast consentyd my prosyte and now conspyrest my mendycite my fall and shamefull end. and enten|dest that y shall be named the vnhappy saturne yf all my lyf hath ben nouryshyd in happynes.  the end vnhappy and wofull y shall be callid  said vnhappy And all my happy fortunes and ewres shall torne more to reproche and shame than to preysyng or to ony worshyp O ffortune in what thyng haue y offen+ded. haue y foughten agayn the. or haue y doon ony fo|lye agayn the magnyfycence of the goddes Haue y re|bellyd or offended the ayres. the worldes. the heuenes the planets. the sonne. the mone. the erthe. the sees what haue y don or trespast. telle me O my god whe|re art thou. hast thou enuye to me be cause that y haue ben in thoracle of the forsayd god appollo He hath shewyd vnto me the ruyne of my ceptre the ffrous|syng and brekyng of my dyademe the troublyng of the clernes of my regne. the enhaunsyng of my chyld And the puttyng me out of my royame that shall cede of his insurreccion. alas what remede to this grete sorow ^t y haue. y haue slayn oon of my soones where fore y haue grete and bitter sorow and haue concluded in my self that neuer here after wole so cruelly spyll the lyf of my chyldren for to dye wyth hem After thys conclusyon y muste of verray force and sore aga+ynst my will retorne and contynue in my fyrst vn|naturell cruelte. ffor yf my sone that now is in the wombe of my wyf be suffryd to lyue he shall exyle me  put me out of my royame and doun of my trone whiche shal be to me ryght hard and peysant to bere and suffre pacyently And therfore hyt is better y

sle hym Alas and yf y sle hym than hit semeth me y shold resiste the wylle of the goddes whiche perauen+ture will reyse hym agayn And that shold be worse for than y shold not only be callyd an homycide and manslear but a vnnaturel murderer. not of a geant nor of a strange man of a nother land but of a right litil Child yssued of my propre vaynes bones and fflessh. that after the prenosticacion of the goddes is p~ electe and chossen to be the grettest lord of grece and souerani of all the kynges in his tyme.
SAturne thus felyng hym in grete sorow  trow+ble and alwey wors  wors as a fore is sayd began to chaunge his colowr  wex pale ful of malen+coli  of fantasies  cowde not appese his vnfortune his moste preuy men  they that were most famylier wyth hym durst not approche vnto hym seyng his so+rowful maner they were disconfort in his desolacion sorowful with his sorow.  angry wyth his anger he was in short tyme so greth turbed and so inpres+sed wyth so eygre inpression of sorow that his face was lyke vnto asshen or as he had be ded alwey af+ter many thoughtis he opend his mouth  spake all softly. y sle my self by malencolye  am aman gretely abused y haue mad an oth vnto my broder Tytan ^t y shall put all my children male to deth that shall co+me of my fflessh Parauenture the goddes wole not suffre that y shal be for sworn. and haue late me haue knowleche by my god appollo ^t my wyf hath con|ceyued a sone that shall put me out of my Royame to that end that y shold slee hym ffor as moche as y had concluded in my self to haue broken myn oth 

haue spared the lyues of my chyldren. ffor as moche as hyt is so y shall no lenger spare them yf hit happen that my sone be borne a lyue. certayn he shall be put to deth. ffor hit is better that he dye a chyld. than he shold wexe a man and wex rebelle ayenst me. and enhaunse hym self abone me by hys malyce insurrec|cion or other wyse..
IM this wille this sorowful saturne retourned in to his hous contynuyng in thys estate and sorowfull syghes and melancolyous fantasies in such wyse that Cybell durst not come in to his psence nor coude not gete of hym a ioyous syght wherfore he gate hym a surname of sorowe And was named Saturne the tryste or sorowfull. and hit was so that whan he had be in his hous certayn space. and sawe the day approche that his wyf shold be delyuerid of chylde ffor to execute hys sorowfull courage he callyd hys wyf and said / dame hit is so apparau~t that shortly thou shalt be delyueryd of the ffruyt of thy wombe yf thou be delyuerid of a sone y comaunde the vpon payne of deth. that thou slee hym. and that thou sende me his herte And whan Cibell hard these wordes and this rigorous and innaturell volente and will anon she ffill to the ground a swoune. ffor her leg|ges fayled her And in the releuyng of the swoun she kneled to fore the feet of saturne and saide on thys wise / syre haste thou no shame that will be husbond of a woman murdryng her owen child I the requyre of mercy and grace. besechyng the to haue regard that y am thy wyf and haue the hert of a woman and not of a tyraunt or a murderar Dame answerd saturne

requyre me no more of thyng towchyng thys mater hit is iuggid by a forseen and counterpeysed sentence ^t yf ^u haue a sone he shall be ded. ffor y haue promy|sid  sworn so to my broder Tytan And aboue thys y haue answer of the god appollo that in thy wombe is a sone that shall caste me out of this royame And therfore se that at his birth he be ded. as dere as thou louest thi lyf  also as y haue said send me his herte medled wyth wyn that y may drynke hit And how syre Answerd Cibelle knowest not thou that y am a woman and by propre and synguler inclinacion y haue a verray loue to smale chyldren and must gyue hem to ete  souke O wenest thou that y haue an herte so diuerce as for to foylle my handes wyth the blood of my sone y pray and requyre the to reroque thy sen+tence and be pietous to thy wyfe  generacion Thou art wyse after ^e iugement of thy peple in this partye thou shewyst thy selfe not good ffor be thy oth thou art not bounden ner holden to sle thy sone hou wel hit is trouth that alle othes maad agayn good maners ought not to be holden ffor to slee thy sone hyt is a. vi+layn caas and contrarye to honour. reson. pyte. equyte and iustyce hit is synne ageynst nature. ageynst vertu and ageynst all good maners Than thy oth for to sle thy sone is noght. and thou oughtest anulle hyt thou that art kyng. and that vpon payne of deth defendest thy peple to make murdre or homycyde. by thys thou that art myrour and example to other oughtest to be content and appease thy selfe And me semeth on that other side that thou interpretest and construest euyll ^e sentence of god appollo sayng ^t y haue in my wombe

a sone that shall put the out of thy kyngdome ffor by this hit ought to be vnderstande that the sone that y bere shall ouerlyue the and put the so out of thy kyng+dome. that is to saye in thy sepulture the day that thou shalt departe out of this world And yf this may not appese the. yf hit so happen that y haue a sone. thou ma|yste do hym to be kept in a strong towr And there to sette suche warde vpon hym that he shall neuer be of power to enhaunse hym self agayn the..
SAturne had tho the herte passyng grete. that for semblable compassion Vesca the moder Cy+bell and Ceres wepte and gaf out grete plente of teres And in like wyse all the assistentes that were in the place wepte out of mesure habou~dantly. yet ne|uertheles hit myght not softe nor attempre the hard comaundement of kyng saturne But in conclusion he said to Cibell that she shold no more procure the res+pyt of tthe lyf of his sone. but he shold be ded  she al|so with hym yf she dide not his coma~ndement. With this sorowful conclusion Cibell detid from thens all in a traunse half ded castyng abrood her armes  han|des wyth grete excesse of teres that ran lyke a ryuer from her tendre eyen. entrid in to a tour. her moder that desolate lady folowed her Sshe beyng in her chambre forfrusshid and all distemperid of sorowe began to trauayle anon  was delyuerid of a doughter and of a sone. the doughter was born to fore the sone And was sente by Ceres and born to norysshe in to the Cyte of Perthemye and was named Iuno And the sone began to laughe at comyng out of hys moders wombe and was named Iubyter...
Whan Cibell and vesca sawe ^e childe lawhe theyr teeres began to growe double. and they had not taken grete regard  hede to the chyld what tyme Cibell all angrye and corrupt wyth wanhope wyth a syghe  feble speryt sayd to her mo+der. ha my moder what pietous caas shal this be now gyue me a sharp cuttyng knyf and y shall murder my sone by innaturel errour agayn my wyll And after this vyllayns dede for my absolucion of ^e grete synne y shall murder my self also.  this is myn oppy|nion ffor after so cruell a dede  werk notwithstan|dyng ony excusacion y wyll neuer lenger lyue The moder of Cibell was tho all be wepte and greth dis|mayed whan she herd the ayer of the tendre mouth of her doughter redounde in her eres of so hard a cruelte. she beyng all affrayed sayd to her. my doughter what thynkest thou to doo. art thou enraged out of thi witte or folyssh My moder answerd Cibelle ye veryly. y am verily as ye saye. enraged out of my wytte and folissh. and yet more y am furio and wood. make me no lenger to languyssh. gyue me ^e cursid mortal knyf forgyd in an euyll houre ffor of force me muste obeye the kyng. saturne your right welbelouyd sone my ryght redoubtid husbond ^t hath comaundement ouer me. and wil schamely put me to deth yf y acom+plyssh not and fulfille his comaundement in the deth of his sone whiche he hath chargid me to slee.
AMone as vesca consideryd that her doughter said and in the errour ^t she was in. she toke the chyld that was in her armes  pluckyd hyt from her by force And alwey the chyld laughed

whan Cibell sighe her sone in the armes of her moder as a woman araged and out of her wytte she began to crye that she shold slee the Chyld or gyue hyt her agayn. or ellis she wold aryse out of her bed and go playne to kyng Saturne After thise wordes Vesca delyuerid the child to a damysell of the hows that onely was there with hem.  bad her that she shold go slee the child in the presence of Saturne or in som other place out of theyr sight The poure damysell ex|cusid her. and Vesca gaf her in comaundement and charged her wyth grete menasses that she shold go forth and take the chyld and the knyf and slee hy And so by the comaundement of these two ladies she toke the knyf many tymes and put hit to the throte of the child for to cutte hit a sonder and alwaye the noble child laughed at the knyf And whan the damy+sell saw this that hyt was innocent she myght not fynd in her hert to do hit ony harme. In this sorow and in this payne and varyacion Vesca. Cibell and the damoysel~ were a longe tyme Now they iugged hym to deth and put the knyf to his throte. and sodeynly the damoysell reuoked hit and swere that she wold neuer be secuteresse of oon so fayr a child  thus than began all thre to wepe  sobbe bewaylyng the child by so grete affeccion that hit was pyte to here After this whan they had longe wepte  sobbed  bewailed the tendre wepyng  payne of Cibell they began a lityl to attempre their hert And began to retorne to moderly pyte Cibell called her that held the child requyred her petously ^t she wold gyue her. her sone to kysse  hold in her armes. promyttyng that she wold do hym

none harme The damoysel that wyst not what shold falle delyuerd her. her tendre chyld And than whan Cybelle beheld her child with her face all bewept  alle distemprid wyth teris she kyssed his laughyng mouth more than an .c. tymes and cam agayn to her nature knowlechyng her syn and began to saye My chyld y had been wel infortunat yf y had taken thy lyf from thee y haue contended thi deth. my right swete sone Alas shal y secute the after the wyll of thy fa+der kyng saturne. hyt is his comaundement.  y owe hym obeyssance yf y obeye the culpe and synne is due to hym. yf y obeye not y make my selfe culpable of deth. a what is thys shalt thou dye by my handes. by the handes of thy propre moder ha shall thy moder be thy marterar. shal thy moder be thyn enemye bitter  mortall aduersarye for doubte of deth. y wot not what to saye but woley or woley not thou art my sone. euery moder loueth her chyld. how may y hate ^e hyt is moche better that y dye than thou. y haue liuyd longe ynowh. and thou art now first borne veryly ^u shalt not dye at thys tyme. y shal saue thy lyf or y shal dye for thy helth. requyryng the goddes my of the euyll wyll that y had ayenst the.


How saturne had comaunded to sle Iupiter ^t was new born  how hys moder cybelle sente hym to kyng mellisens wher he was norisshid.
The right sorowful lady after this cam better to her self and toke hert to her  kyssed her chyld ^t alwey laughed. and vesca beheld her contenance all newe.  satte doun on ^e bedde side where her doughter laye. there they two began to speke to geder of saturne

and of the ffortune of this child and that he had ben in grete auenture And mysid that oon vnto that other that they wold saue the child vnto her power After this mysse in the ende of dyuerse pourposes they con|cluded to send this child secretly vnto the two dough|tres of kyng Melliseus. the whiche vesca had noriss|hid in her yong age Of these two doughters that oon was named Almachee and that other Mellisee This conclusion fully fynysshid  taken. Vesca lappid and wond the child as hit ought to be And delyuerid hit vnto a damoysell beyng there psent with all thynges and gaue her charge to bere hit secretly vnto almachee and Mellisee The good damoysell enterprisid the said charge and detid out of Crete with the child at all aventure And so worshypfully guyded her that she brought the child leuyng in sauete to the cite of Oson whiche she psentyd to Almache and Mellisee. reher|syng how vesca had sent hym to hem for the grete loue and truste that she had in hem And how saturne had comaunded that his moder shold slee hit.
Anone as these two damoyselles sawe the child and vnderstoode how Saturne had iuggid hit to deth. they resseyued hit wyth pyte and in fa|uour of vesca. And promysid to nouryssh hit in the secretest and best wyse that they mochte And forth|wyth the same oure they bare the chyld vnto a mon|taygne that was nyghe to the Cite wher in dwellyd theyr nouryce in a depe hole of a Caue whyche was rychely entaylled and coruen wyth Chysell  other dyuerce instrumentis And than they sent agayn the damoysell that brought the chyld in to Crete In this

maner was the lyf of the chyld saued Almache and mellisee norisshid the child wyth the melk of a goot ffortune was to hym more propice and helpyng than nature. what shall y saye in the begynnyng whan he was put in the caue as hys nouryces on a day sawe him wepe and crye by his pre inclinacion of cyd|hood be cause he shold not be herd. they toke trpes tympane and cymbales and maad them to sowne so gretly that a gret multitude of bees ffleyng aboute the montaygne herd theyr soun. and wyth this sown en+trid in to the caue and toke an hooll by the chyld ffle+yng aboute hym wyth out ony greef or harme doyng to the child. and yet more they maad there hony wher of the child ete and was norisshed from thens forth whiche was a merueylous thyng Allewey for tachi+eue the mater begynnyng of the damoysel ^t had born thys child theder whan she cam agayn she reherced to dame cybell and vesca all her besoyne  werk. and gaf hem a ryght grete fort towchyng ^e child Than the two ladyes by meur deliberacion toke and abbeste whiche is a precious stone  brayded hit in to pouldre and after that they medlid hit wyth wyn in a cuppe of gold. and dame vesca bare hyt to her sone saturne  she habowndyng in bitter teres all bewept sayd to hym My sone thy wyf hath sent to the this drynke knowe thou veryly that she this day hath rendred.  yelden ^e fruyt of her wombe a sone and a doughter she hath sent the doughter to nourysshe in to the cite of par+themye but in the obeyng of thy strayt comaundement we haue defetyd the sone  put hym to deth / of whom the body the fflessh  the lityl tendre bones been now

torned in to asshis And she hath sent here to the. the right noble herte temprid in wyn whiche y present to the. to thende that thou do thy plesir And be no more in doute by thy sone to be put out of thy Royame.
ANon as Saturne herd the petous wordes of hys moder vnderstandyng the newe tydyngis that she said  shewd hym. he began to frowne and syd in this maner O pyte with oute pyte Ne ought not my herte be terryble angry. and restraynd with pressurs of sorow whan hit is force that to myn hert this present hert yssued of his blood and rootes be gyuen in mete and pasture for to estaunche the descoue+nable honger of myn inhonest desire Thise wordes ac|complisshid Saturne was gretly displesid and full of renewyng of sorow. drank the drynke. wenyng that hyt had ben as his moder had done hym to vnder|stonde And after went in to his chambre. and there be+gan to be gretly in melancoly And after that fothon he purposid and trowed to abstayne hym self to paye his wyf the deu dette of maryage but as ther is no so|row that ne ouer passeth. by space of tyme he forgate this sorow And lyyng with his wyf engendrid an other sone. Whiche she sauyd like as Iupiter was sa+uyd. how well that Saturne charged her to put hym to deth And this child was born to Atthenes. where he was kept and norysshyd  named Neptune yet af+ter this he laye wyth his wyf  engendryd an other sone  a doughter. whiche at time couenable were born and deted from their moder but at this tyme she told not of her sone but hid hit from saturne whiche sone was named Pluto  she dide hit to kepe in the parties

of Thesaylle that afterward was named hell. and for to content her husbonde saturne whan she was de+lyuerd of these two childern she sent to hym her dough+ter whiche was callid glanta and she dyed in her ten+dre yeres And thus of all these generacions saturne supposid ^t non had be reseruyd but Iuno his doughter to whom he wente oftymes to visite in Parthemye where he dide hit to be nourysshid wyth many noble virgyns of her eage. and also many auncient gentyl+wymen to enduce and teche hem gentilnes and vertu but of all them y wyl a while tarye now  also of Iupiter. neptune and pluto and now y wyl shewe how dardanus put his broder Iasius to deth for coue+tyse to rengne in the cyte of corynthe. and how he de|tid out of corynthe  how he sette the fyrst ston in ^e cy+te of dardane whiche afterward was named troye


How after the deth of kyng corynthus of corynthe his two sones dardanus and Iasius strof who of them shold haue ^e kyngdom and how dardan slew his broder iasius by trayson wherfore he most dete out of the contre.
IN this tyme whan crete began to be aroyame and a kyngdame and was in possession of their fyrst kyng the same wyse in the cyte of corynthe whiche stant in naples regned Corynthus ther fyrst kyng. and corin|thus had to his wyf oon of ^e doughters of kyng Ath|las of libye named Electra. they regned to geder and achieued prossly theyr lyf / they lefte after hem two sones wherof that oon was named dardanus and that other iasyus. some saye that this dardan was sone of Iupiter but bochace trowed he was lawful

sone of Corynthus as hit apperith in the sixte book of the genelagye of goddes Dardanus than and Iasius after the deth of theyr fader Corynthus and of her mo+der Electra wold succede in the royame  in no wyse they coude accorde Dardanus had an hihe  hauntayn courage and Iasius in like wyse. they argued and stroof to gyder that oon ayenst that other often tymes of this mater. and conspired and made secretly menas+ses vnder couert in suche wyse that Dardanus on a day assemblid all the peple that he coude gete for to be spryng  destroie his broder iasius  his fre~des whiche were tho assemblid in a secrete place for to treete ^e pees and to see how they myght contente  plese Dardan
WHan Iasius sawe hys broder come all in ar|mes. all his blood began to chaunge.  seeyng that his broder was esmeuyd full of euyll will demyng that this mater shold torne to grete mys+chief. he ascried and saide Alas what auayleth for to speke and counceyll  seke menes of pees betwene my broder  me. we ben betrayed. lo here is my broder that cometh vpon vs all in armes. eche ma~n saue hym self that may With these wordes Dardanus cam in to the consistorie smote his broder vnto ^e deth  said Iasius thou maist not abstayne thi self from thy machynacy|ons Thou hast enhaunsed thy self ayenst me. but now y shal make an ende of the Iasius fill doun ded among the feet of hys frendes And ther Clothes were all be sprenct  be bled of his blood Whan the frendes of Iasi+us saw this tyrannye they saued them self as well as they coude to their power and fledd from thens all araged Than Dardanus retorned to the riall palays

and the frendes of Iasius gaderd them a~d wente to ar+mes and made a noyse and murmure so grete that in a lityl space alle the cyte was strongly troublid for the deth of Iasius. whiche was gretly in the grace and fauour of all the peple of corynthe. ffor whan they herd reherced the deth of Iasius they toke grete sorow and manaced dardanus to deth. and forthwyth in effect they assemblid by grete rowtes in the stretes  sayd oon to that other Alas now is ded the loue of co+rynthyeus that had more amytye  loue to the comyn wele than dardanus. late vs goo and auenge his deth Gowe  punysshe the malefacteur. late vs no lenger tarye we shall do a meritorye werk who that euer doth iniustyce  tyrannye is not worthy to be chyef  heed of clemence ner of iustice. yf we suffre a murd|rer to reygne vpon vs. neuer shall ther good come ther of. wher the heed is seke or euyll ^e membres may not be hoole ner good. dardanus hath slayn his broder iasi+us wrongfully. hyt is vray semblable that h shall slee vs after his wyll. late vs take from hym his puis+sance. and late vs shewe that we be men distroyers of vyces and enemyes vnto all them that seken and engenderen tyrannye in her courages..
SVche were the clamours of the corynthyeus by suche noyse and semblable clamours they chauffyd them selfe and in the end assemblid in oon place. and were ful of ardent appetyt to correcte the malefactour dardanus. and his complices In this tempest  swellyng ffurour they went to the pallais where dardan had put hym self for reffuge but they fonde the yates shytte and coude not entre in to hyt

wherefore they assieged the place makyng a grete noyse and so grete tempeste that dardanus was abas+shid. and anon he assemblid hys frendes and axed them their councel~ They answerd and sayd that he and they were in grete auenture and paryll and that the peple so meued myght not lightly be appesid. and for this they said hym saue thy self and vs also with the. thou hast slayn thi broder. Iasius whom the peuple louyd in crueyllously for his benyugnyte. the trespaas is grete. syn hit is so don the best wey ought to be ta|ken we councell the that thou leue this palais. and ffynd maner to yssue out and we shall folowe the and goo wyth the and serche our auentures in other landes ffor hit shall be grete payne by possibilite euer to contente and appese this peple. how well that it is so that the Corynthieus be terryble to all them that they haue in hate and in despyte.
DArdanus heryng these wordes began to sighe and conscidered that he moste departe from his Cite by his mysfait culpe and desert he smote hym self on the brest and sayd Ha ffortune vnsted|fast what is me befalle My handes ben foule and fil|thid with the blood of my laufull broder. the insur|reccion and the rebellyon of my peple hangyng to fore myn eyen hit is force that y flee for to saue my lyf.  purpose to lyue of rauayn  thefte. What meschunce what euyll happe is this. syn hyt is so y yelde me fugy+tyf and shall go my way at alauenture be hyt. Whan the ffrendes of dardanus had vnderstande that he was concluded and purposed to saue his lyf. they ioyned to hym  appoynted to gyder that the next morn in the

first krekyng of the day they wold departe from the pallays.  take thauenture to passe by theyr enemyes sayyng that yf they myght ascape they shuld go to ^e ryuage of the see and take the kynges barge. and all they sware to helpe and accompanye eche other vnto the deth The nyght passyd the day aperyd. and than dardanus that had not restyd that nyght to his plesir but had wacchid wyth his armed men and were re+dy to take thauenture that the goddys and fortune wold gyue and send hem yssued out of ^e pallays  found the most parte of his enemyes a slepe he thres|tyd among the vyllayns  passyd forth wyth lityl resistence. that notwythstandyng the wakyng of the coryntheus he cam to his ryal shipp  toke the see  sau+vid them self. wherof ^e corynthyeus had grete sorowe
Whan dardanus sawe that he was so quyt of the fureur of ^e corynthyeus he wente saylyng by the see and descended first at the port of ^e cyte of Samos beyng in Trache. and there vytaylled hym and went to see agayn. and arryued in Asye in a quarter wher ^e land was ioynyng to the see of hel|lespond. and fyndyng this land right good fruyte|full for to enhabite. he made there his habitacion And there sette the first stone of a ryght grete cyte that he be+gan and after achieued This cyte was that tyme na+med dardane after the name of dardanus but after|ward hit was callyd Troye. dardanus peupled fyld his cyte wyth men and women whiche he gate by swetenes and fayr promesses. and that other te he conquerryd by force thefte  pillerye. he made hym self kyng of dardane  dyched the cyte aboute wyth

grete diches After longe tyme he passyd out of thys world and dyed. and lefte a sone of his wif Can|dame that was second kyng of dardane This kyng was named Erutonius and regned seuyn  fourty yere en augmentyng and encresyng his Cyte and pe|ple And at last consu~med the end of his yeres. and regned after hym Trops his sone This Troos was the thirde kyng of dardane and was a stronge man fiers and hardy en armes. and encresyd gretly hys seygnourye and his Crowne in so moche as the dar|danyens said that ther was no kyng but Troos. and named them troians And thus was Troyes enhaun|ced more than all the royames of Grece so hihlye that the kyng Tantalus of ffrigie had grete enuye. and gaf his hert  courage how he myght anulle and put doun ^e name of Tros that was his neighbour and be+gan tessaie to bryng hit doun as here after shal be said.


Of the grete werre ^t was meued betwene the pela|giens  the Epiriens and how kyng lichaon of pelage was destroyed by Iupiter. by cause of a man put to hym to ostage. whiche kyng lichaon did do rost..
The wise  subtyl virgyne Menerue as saint austyn reherseth shewid her self in this tyme by the stagne or riuer callid triton by the gretenes and subtilte of her engyne. ffor she fonde the maner to forge  make armes. and to this purpos Ovide reher|ceth that she had foughten agayn a geant named Pal+las and slewe hym by the flood of triton In the same tyme that the armes were founden And the sciences of Mynerue were practiqued by all the world a fiers descension engendrid bytwene the Epyriens and the

pelagiens ^t after were named archadyens And here of maketh mencion bochace in the fowrt book of the genelagye of goddes. amonge the pelagiens regned that tyme a kyng named lichaon eldest sone of Tytan the epiriens than enterprysed vpon the pelagiens and so maad that a right grete noyse aroos and sourded ffor whiche cause they assaylled eche other by fete of armes so felounous and aspre that booth parties suf|fryd many fowle mortall shoures than the wyse men of Epire sawe thys warre so disolute. and that they of their partye had iniustly and vnrightfully at|tamed and begon thys warre. they knowlechid their fault  went to the kyng lychaon beryng braunches of Olyue in signyfiance of pees and loue. and hym re+quyred that he wold condescende to acord and pees of bothe peuples Lichaon consideryng that his peple had as moche lost as wonne by this discencion. and that bataylles were perylous Accorded to thepiryens the pees by condicion. that they shold delyuere hym oon of thyr moste noble men suche as he wold demaunde for to be his seruaunt a space of tyme in token that they had vnryghtfully engendrid this discencion The epi|ryens consentid this condicion and delyueryd to kyng lychaon in seruitude the most noble man a mong them and thus ended the warre.
The terme and the tyme drewe ouer ^e thepiryen seruyd kyng lichaon his due tyme. and than whan the tyme was expired the epiryens as|semblid them to geder and by deliberacion of counceyl sent an Enbassade to lichaon for to trete the delyuer|ance of thepiryen Thise enbassadeurs departyd from

Epire and cam to pellage  shewid to the kyng how their man had seruyd as long as he was bounden and requyred hym that he wold rendre and delyuere hym and ratefie the pees. to that end that euer after that they myght be the more frendes to gyder. Whan lichaon that was hard of courage fiers  euyll vnto all men and also vnto his owen peple vnderstood the wordes and requestes of the epiriens he had grete sorow and angre in hym sylf and sayd to them with his mouth thynkyng contrary with his hert. that on the morne he wold feeste hem and haue hem to dyner and than he shold doo lyke as they had demaunded with these wordes the epiriens departid ioyously fro the presence of kyng lichaon. and on the morn they cam to the feste that was richely ordeynd and maad for them in gret plenteuousnes whiche was ryght fayr at the begyn|nyng. and in the ende right foul and abhomynable. for whan hit cam to the performyng of the feste. the kyng lichaon roos from the table  went vnto the kechyne and there toke the body of thepirien his seruaunt that he had murdrid the same nyght. and all rostid and soden brought hit in a grete plater to the feste and pre+sentid hit to thepiriens sayng. lo here is thepirien that hath seruyd me whiche was cause of the escheweyng of the ruyne and perdicion of epirye. y said yesterday that y shold delyuere hym thys day take hym who so wole y discharge me and put my handes from hym and wole hym no more.
Alle they that tho were psent as wel his uauntis as strangers Aswell epiriens as pellagiens had anon grete horrour whan they herd and vnderstood

the wordes of kyng Lychaon and had grete shame  furcur to beholde so hounteuse and abhomynable werk and oultrageous synne. and were so troubled that the blood wente fro their faces and leyde their han+des afore their eyen. as they that abhorred to behold the pour martir Epiryen And ther was no ma~n wyste what to saye of the infamye of the kyng lychaon vn|nethe. whan the kyng sawe them so troubled and that euery ma~n began to frowne and grugge a part. he lefte hem  wente from thens vnto his chambre And than euery ma~n rose fro the table abhorryng  eschewyng the sente and sauour of the dede ma~n And wold haue departid and goon their way all confuse. ne had ben Iupiter the sone of Saturne whiche the Epiriens had brought with them in their legacion and enbassade for as moche as he was a fair child. able  gentill For than whan he sawe that euery ma~n drewe a parte his waye. he putte hym self in the myddes of thepyriens  began his glorious enterprises and said to them in this wise. O what is this. where is the blood of the Epy|riens Are they bannyd out of hardynes. be they exyled out of valoyr and of honneste. whiche be the epiryens that by force wole expose them self to the vengea~nce of so foule  horryble dede This caas is not to be born And the terryblete of the tyra~nt lichaon is not to be re|doubtyd whan hit bleuyth vnpunysshid. ye see that the pelagyens make semblant that they be euyll payd with hym he muste be punysshid. y saye as for me y shall neuer haue pleasir in my lyf tyll y se hym refray|ned of his tyrannye..
WHat tyme the Epiryens had conceyued the grete

courage of Iupiter that was so yonge of age. they than+ked their goddes of that / that they had brought hym with hem and said to hym all with oon wys. Childe blessid be the wombe that bare the. And blessid be the goddes that forseyng this Iniure and wronge to vs and hath so enspyred vs for to brynge the wyth vs we had ben now with out courage hardines and will to do well and had not ben so hardy to haue taken ony terme of vengeance. Thy wordes haue awaked and envertued our spirytes whiche were ded and aslepe and passed by the countrepesed Infamye of the tirau~t lichaon. Thy hardynes hath maad vs hardy. thy vayl+lyance hath maad vs vaylliant and louers of vailly|ance and thy wisedom hath enlumyned vs in this cause thou shall be conduitour and ledar of this werke and comaunder and we shall obeye vnto the :..
IVpiter answerd and sayd Worshipfull lordes and sirs I am not wise ynowh for to resseyue the honour that ye do me / ner my tendre yeres shall not accepte hit. Allewey by forme of counceyle humelyed vnder alle correccion / I will well saye to yow that. that me thynketh erpedient for to be doon / yf ye fynde no man saie better than ye shall do be my counceill and aduyce ye shall take this poure epiryen in the same estate that he is delyueryd to yow and bere hym vnto the comyn place of this Cyte. ffor hit is this day sabate and ha|liday the pelagiens ben there in grete nombre and mul|tytude passyng their tyme wyth dyuerce playes and esbatementis / than ye shall shewe this pour ded man ffor hit is sayd that the kynge is not well belouyd with his owne peuple for his vnmanly werkes / this

mesfeet and trespaas is passyng foull and pyetous Anone as they shall knowe what he hath doon by this foul werke. ye shall wel secyf they shall take in this synne pleasir or dysplaisir.. yf pleasir. than hyt were abuse and folye for to speke therof for this present ty|me ony more. but muste seke remedye and retorne to Epire. yf they take displaisir. ye may playnly discou+re your courages and prouoke and calle them to purge this Cryme that is so cursid And y wene that they shall right lyggtly entende to vs and for none amytie that is betwene hym and them he shal not domyne ner regne vpon hem by tyrannye. ffor he is not their naturel lord but he is the sone of Tytan broder of Saturne  is not kyng by eleccion but by force.
Alle they that herd Iupiter thus speke meruey|led gretly of hym And accorded them to hys counceyl in suche wise that no man contraried hit ner agayn sayd hyt And so sodenly they toke the murdred epiryen  bare hym to the comyn place And ther they shewid hym openly in euery mannes sight Whan the pelagyens sawe this dede man of whom the skyn was scorched the fflessh rosted the senewes shronken. and that the bones aperyd by the ioynturs they assemblid al aboute hym in grete nombre and cas+tyng her eyen vpon hym they had so grete orrour abho+mynacyon and abasshement that her hertes trembled playned eche to othir and many went awey for com+passyon wepte and araged trembled for angre And other toke duste and pouldir and casted in to the ayer in signe of sorow cuttyng their clothis and sayng and liftyng her handes on highe O goddes almyghty what

peple ben these epiriens haue they rosted a mannes bo|dy And haue brought hit to fore vs. what mene they Are we eters of mannes flessh / or they bryng hit to vs to shew the cruelte of their courage. or they come for to ete this ded man among vs for to fere vs with all:.
IVpiter ther beyng awaityng  leyyng his eres and se|yng with his eyen the maner of the pelagiens  their contenances. Conceyuyng that they condescended in the contempnaco~n and enemyte of hym that wrought this pietous werke. Whan he had herd their reasons  had seen their wondringes. he adressid hym self amo~ge them and said in this wise. O ye men of pelage that ye esmer+ueylle yow of this vnmanly  vnnaturell werke / haue ye not y now lerned  knowe the tira~nies of your kyng lichaon he hath murdrid this man / and this man is the epirien that was delyuerid to hym at the traytte of the pees of yow and of vs for to serue hym. lo this is the guerdon and reward that he hath don to hym. he hath tirannysed right euyll and hath don hym euyll for good O what grete Infamie is to yow. that the peple  folk of euery other cyte / haue regnyng on them kynges of no+ble men and vertuous and they be crowned by elecci|ons for their vertuous dedes / ye be defferent fro them  all of a nother nature / A Tyrant is your kynge a mur|drer an Iniuste man A synnar worthy of Infamous deth / and vnworthy for to be lefte a lyue vpon the erthe Considere ye considere vnder whos hande ye be and how nyghe ye fynde your self in maladye and parcyll of deth. Whan the heed aketh alle the other membres suf+fren payne. Than ye may not be hooll and / sound / What shulle we now doo. thynke ye  counceylle ye

vs we come to you for reffuge.  demaunde yow how we ought to do and behaue vs ayenst oon that is so fowl a kyng as is lichaon Telle vs the verray trouth yf ye confesse the trouth  that ye be louers of rayson iustyce and of equyte ye shall iugge and condempne hym. ye shal leye your handes and puissances in correc+cion of hym and ye shall be depesshid of his malice.
AMon as the pelagyens vnderstood of Iupiter that lichaon their kyng had commysed this vil+layns Cryme Also that he had presentyd to the eryepins the body of their frend so ded they beyng at table. they condempned his synne and murmured agaynst hym sayng that they wold no more be go|uerned and norysshyd vnder the rodd of so peruers and vnfamous a tyrant And sayden to the epiryens that they wold abide by them and put them in theyr a|bandon. Wyth these wordes Iupiter putte hym sylf among the epiriens and by his hardynes amonesshid them to conspire agayn their kyng. wyth whiche con+spiracion acorded alle they of the cyte And the wordes of Iupiter were so agreable to hem and hys maners that they put in his hand the deth  destruccion of their kyng lichaon And to thende that he shold truste and haue affyance in them they sent for theyr armes and habillemens of warre and armed them After they as+semblid aboute Iupiter and said to hym that he shold be their capitayne and her conduitur for tachyeue this sayd werke..
IVpiter beyng ioyous of so grete an honeur and wor+ship excusid hymself but his excusacions had no place the epiriens and the pelagiens ordeynd constytuted

hym heed ouer them. And he constituted in this dignyte sette his peple in ordre / And after did hem to marche toward the palays. They had not longe goon on the way whan they sighe kynge lychaon yssue out of his palais with grete companye of his ffrendes all armed as they that had ben aduertysed of the sayd conspira|cion maad agaynst lychaon. ffelyng that his enemyes cam for tassaylle hym. ffor to shewe hym self a man of fyers corage cam a gaynst them wenyng presumtu|ously for to haue ouercomen them. And anone as they began taproche. they escryed eche other to the deth with out other counceill. And strongly esmeuyd they assamblid to batayll that was right merueyllously sharpe. Lychaon setted and ladd his peple / in ordre agaynst Iupiter / They medled hem hastely to geder wyth lytill stryf of wordes and wyth grete stryf of horyons and strokes. The stryf coste moche / but in es|peciall to lychaon. ffor his peuple were lasse in puys|sance and myght. than the men of Iupiter / whiche were stronge of grete enterprise that they fought and smote vpon the pelagiens and caste hem doun now here uow there so fiersly and so desmesurably that none mochte abyde that was afore them. Amonge alle other Iu|piter did wonder and meruaylles by his well doyng he putte lychaon in a passyng grete Errour and noy|ance. And in thys grete anoye he sued passyng fast for to haue come ronne vpon hym. But whan the fals tyrau~t sawe hym come and he sawe that Iupiter sette his strokes so myghteli. that all them that he araught were smeten doun to the erthe and confounded. Than alle hys herte began to faylle hym / And wente hym

that other syde and he had not long abiden there whan that Iupiter had vaynquysshid and ouerthrowen the pelagiens And made hem to fle from the place to fore hym. like as hit had ben the thondre or tempeste..
IN this maner whan lychaon sawe his complices and felawship in suche extremyte he fledde hym self not as a kyng. but as a pour man out of comfort and hope so desolate that he durste take non of his complices wyth hym to helpe hym away nor to comforte hym. he doub+tyd Iupiter as the deth. he so fleyng a way as said is durst not entre his palais. but yssued out of the Cyte and wente vnto a grete forest that was nyghe by. and from thens forth he was a brygant and a theef And for this cause the poetes faynen that he was torned in to a wolf That is to saye he lyued as a wolf of proies and robberyes Allewey to purpos of this mutacyon Leoncius reherceth that Lichaon so fleyng as sayd is supposyd to be sued after of Iupiter and be put to deth putte hym self in a ryuer or a grete lake and ther saued hym self. ffelyng that the water of that ryuer had a synguler prete. that is to wete that the men that put|teth them self in the water shold be torned in to wol|ues for the terme of .ix. yere And the ix. yere exspired yf they wold putte them self in the water after that agayn they shold recouure agayn their first liknes And so hit myght well be don. for lychaon putte hym self in to the water and was transumed to a wolf by the space of abouesaid. and lyuyd of thefte and pillerye in the wodes and forests waytyng oftetymes how the pellagiens gouerned them self And in the ende whan he had accomplisshid his penaunce He retorned in to

the ryuer and toke agayn his mannys forme  know+lechyng that the Cyte of pelage myght neuer be reco|uerd. and than he retorned poure and myschant vnto his fader Tytan / of whom I shall tarye a lytill. And shall telle how Iupiter began to be Amerous on Calis+to doughter of the said Lichaon ::.


How Iupiter after the disconfiture of kynge Licha+on transformed hym self in guyse of a relygious wo|man of the goddesse deane for the loue of calisto dough|ter of the said lichaon and dide with her his will::.
AFter the descomfiture of kynge lichaon whiche was transformed in guyse of a wolf and be|gan to be a rauyssheur of the substance of men of the contre. Eter of her children and murdrer of wilde bestes that he ofte tyme assaylled by rage of hunger whiche constrayned hym to cherissh  kepe his myse+rable lyf / whan the Epiryens syghe that Iupiter had vanquysshid their enemyes And that he abode maistre in the place / they brought hym with grete Ioye and glo+rye to the palais And soughte longe lichaon / ffyrst in the place where the bataile had be. And after that in the chambres of the palais / but they fonde hym not quyk+ner ded ner coude here no tydyngis of hym / and hit hap|pend that as Iupiter sought hym thus from chambre to chambre / he fonde in the hiest tour the doughter of the kynge lichaon named Calisto / whiche was passyng fayr yonge and ffresshe of coloure / the damoysell be|wepte right sorowffully the losse of her fader whiche she had all newly vnderstonde / whan Iupiter sawe her so desolate and discomforted. he sette hym doun by her  said / damoysell comforte your self  speke to me

and sece your wepyng Alas syre sayd the damoysell how shold y recomforte my self the Epiryens han slayn the kyng my fader. ought y to take consolacion in this ruyne. ought y not be angry. ought myn herte be wyth out sorow. my stomake with out sihghes and myn eyen with out wepyng an .C. thousand infortu+nes trauerse my body and corrompe me And y se me so poure a gentyl damoysel~ doughter of a kyng. that y desire more ^e deth than lyf and am more in wanhope than in hope..
WHan Iupiter knewe by the wordes of this da+moysel ^t she was doughter of kyng lychaon he had more grete pite of her than he had be fore for as moche as she was doughter of the kyng and said to her Damoysel~ appese your hert. y wote well that hit is foce that nature acquyte hym self. but ye ought to considere ^e inordinate werkes of your fader whiche ye ar bounden to bewayle. he was lasse reso+nable man than a kyng ought to be. he is not ded he hath put hym self in som place secrete to saue hym self his synnes were to infamo. and who shal beplayne  sorow hym The goddes  fortune haue suffrid the ra+baisshement  casting doun of his pride  of his tiranies hit is a rightwys thyng that ye take  haue pacience in his rightwis aduersite. ffor his demerytes gyue yow cause to take pacience where as nature enclyneth yow to vnpacience And ye ought not be inpacyent for his rephension and castyng doun. ffor like wise hyt is so that the losse of a tyrau~t torneth alle a contrey to ioye O than conforte your self damoysell the oultragious synnys ner the vnmanly furours of your fader nor his

shamefull dedes shall no thynge be dampnable vnto yow ner torne to yow preiudice. nor no man shal~ mis+saye ner do to yow. ner attouche yow in ony maner wyse I yow assure certaynly ::..
Syre answrd the mayd I thanke yow of your courtoysies and of the fayr wordes / wyche ye profere and saye vnto me I wote well that my pouerte hath maad me indygne and vnwor|thy / but whan I see that the Infortune of my fader is irrecouerable  that his Infelicyte hath no recourance / I renonce the world and pray yow that hit plese yow to trete for me vnto the epiriens that I myght goo yelde my self in to the relygion of dame Deane the noble vir|gyne / doughter of the wise Iupiter somtyme kynge of Actyque and born in this londe / where vpon ought to be remembrid. that right auncyently yssued out of pel+lage a wyse noble man. named Iupiter / of whom bo|chace maketh mencion in the first book of the genelagie of goddes / whiche Iupiter was kynge of actyque / for as moche as he Introduced the peple to honest lawes and dide first do ordeyne and halowe maryage. ffor to fore that tyme the acticyens maried hem not / but vsed women in comyn. And of this Iupiter cam a doughter named Diane. the whiche willyng tabide in thestate of virginyte maad a Cloistre in the wood of Archade where she assemblyd many virgyns that passed her tyme with huntyng and chacyng the wild bestes. ffor to torne to purpos this noble virgyne deane lyuyd the same tyme of the subuersion of the regne of lychaon / whan Iupiter vnderstod of calisto that she wold yelde

her silf with the vyrgyne. he behelde her and said vnto her And how damoysell be ye so dispeyred for a litil tribulacion that toucheth not your persone ye be yong and fayr amonge none of yow that so go in to religy+on may growe no fruyt of children Aduyse yow wel hit were better that ye abode amonge the worldly pe|ple that enplenyssh the world Many women and also men entre in to religion in their yougth that repente them in their age Syre said Calisto tempte me no more yf ther be ony gentilnes in yow resseyue the praier and request of oon so desolate  infortunat gentyl woman more desirous of the helth of my sowle than of tempo+rel plaisirs Duryng these deuyses Iupiter beheld with out cessyng this damoysell  coude not y nough com|playne her beaulte. for as moche as she wold in to re|ligion wyth grete payne whan he had herd her ans+wers and had seen how swetly she had taken hit and wold not be torned fro her wyll he said to h that her requeste shold be accomplisshid Than he called the epiriens and requyred them that they wold be content to suffre this virgyne entre in to religion What shall y say the Epiriens put the requeste in the will of Iupi|ter And Iupiter did so moche that she was conduyte and led in to the religion of virgyns After he serchid all the palais of kyng lichaon. and maad thepiriens to sease his richesses And there Iupiter abode a certayn tyme wyth so grete worship that the pelagiens and the Epiryens wold haue crowned hym to ben theyr kyng but he wold neuer consente ther to as he that con+sidered ouer his yonge age / and the variacions of for|tune. And said that hit auaylleth more to a man / and

is to hym more sure to be maad kynge in his olde age than in his yougth for the dyuerce parylls that may fall. Alleway he acorded that he wold be Capitaine of the royame And was a man of grete Iustice swete and debonnayre vnto all manyer peple ::.
THis was the first comyng vp of this right no+ble Child. whan he had submysid to his play+sance the pelagiens / he beryed thepirien that li|chaon had murdrid as hit is said afore. And did his obsequye solempnly And after he dide do brenne in to asshen the pelagiens that had ben slayn in the helpe of lichaon. And after that he sent word and did alle these thynges to be knowen and shewed to the Epy|riens that were lefte at home in Epire as to the kynge Melliseus. wherof all the epiryens. And the kynge melliseus gaf thankyngis vnto theyr goddes. But for as moche as I muste telle all after this he gaf not his herte and courage so moche to accomplissh these thynges. but ^t otherwhile he gaf hym self to remenbre and to thynke on the beaulte that he had seen in the re|ligyose Calisto wherof the sparkles of loue enuyron|ned strongly his herte / in suche wyse that day and nyght he wisshed hyre in his armes. And repentyd hym that he had consentyd that she wente in to rely|gion. And so laboured in thys manere that his reste in the nyght was taken from hym and was bastard fro the franchise of her courage.  so encresid he to loue and desire this virgine.  for to see her he made his passe time to haunte ^e woddes  continuelli to hunte ^e wild bestes in the forest wyth dame deane. wherof fortune

and anenture suffrid otherwhile that he recountrid  mette the mayde Calisto. And whan he had ones seen her that day he was all enioyed And yf he sawe her not. he had aboundance of many thoughtes that ran re+dely in his intendement. y may not alday tarye on thys mater. he thoughte ynowh how he myght come to the grace of this religieuse Calisto And alle thoughtes re+duced and brought in to on he concluded on a day in hym self that he wold putte hym in the habite of a rely+giouse woman  wold go in to the cloystre of dame diane. faynyng to be a woman and requyryng to be resseyued with the virgynes.
THis conclusion taken and ratefied in Iupiter by many deliberacions in dyuerce daies he dide do make hys womans clothyng by a secrete werkman. whiche promysed hym to kepe his secretes whan his clothyng was maad. / he assemblid thepiry+ens in an euenyng  toke his leue of them for a certayn time sayng that he wold goo allone for to do certayn secrete thynges. Thepiriens were all dismayed and de+solate whan they herde thentencion of Iupiter And pra+yed to the goddes that they wold conduyte and spede hym in his iorney. requyryng hym instantly ^t he wold retorne shortly agayn to them. And he promysed hem that he so wolde And than he with drewe hym in to his chambre and toke the keies of the grete gate. and on the morn betymes whan he was arayed and adoubyd in the vesture  clothyng of a mayde. he departyd from thens alone and entrid in to the woode  so exploytid that he cam to the habitacion of the relygiouse maydens
IVpiter had yet no berde and was whyte and fayr

colourid in the visage / whan he cam in to the relygion he knokked at the yate. And than cam to hym a pas|syng fayr mayde named Athalanta that after was wyf vnto the kynge Melleager of Achaye. And she demaunded hym what he wold. Iupiter answerd No+ble virgine Alas I am a poure woman of a noble hous I haue auowed to the goddes my virgynyte. I pray yow that ye wole presente me vnto the lady of this place. to thende that I myght serue the goddes and be of the nombre of the other virgyns. and yf hit plese the goddes I shall deserue hit anenste yow. Athalanta me+uyd of compassion in the mayde. accorded hym his re|queste. And presentyd hym to dame Deane. Iupiter spake also swetly and demeurly. and made so humble and femenyn manyers. that he semed proprely to be a mayde. Diane behelde hym well and longe. And said that she had neuer seen so fayr a mayde ner so grete and than welcomed hym and resseyued hym Than Iu+piter thanked dame diane of her grace and athalanta of her courtoisie. and had good hoope in his enterprise whan he sawe hym self so sone resseyued wythout knowyng. Than Iupiter began to lerne spynne and to werke in the silke and to done the excersitees of maidens And hit becam hym as well as he had ben a mayde / he was humble and of solitary conuersacion. he labou|red with his handes. with his eyen and his herte. with his handes he mad corporell werkes. with his eyen he beheld oftetyme secretly the beaulte of Calisto. And wyth his herte ymagynyng and edifyyng how and by what mene he myght begyle and deceyue Calisto And ofte tymes conuersid  felawshipt with her 
Hys hert was alwey in right grete payne other|while he was meuyd with grete heuynes. and otherwhile in conforte and hope to spede well and wiste not what to saye ner doo. for as muche as shame and drede were more in hym than hardynesse. what shall y saye more. he was long in this payne. more douteuous and shamefast than hardy. but in the ende he auentured hym self And ffyndyng on a day Calisto beside a well where she refresshid her as she that was wery that had ronne longe with dame dea|ne chassyng than  huntyng a wilde beste he sat hym doun by her and said My suster Calisto y me yelde to the and to thy grace. y am a man  nothyng woman thy beaute hath ouercomen my corage for to come to ^e poynt where we be now. y haue clothid me lyke a woman and a mayde. Alas y require the that thou res|seyue me vnto thy loue so shal we lyue to gyder in the religion And we shall take our deduytes and plesan+ces. a man hath nothyng in this world but his lyf. They that haue more than that. they be so moche more eureus and happy. Thou hast withdrawen the hether for displaysir. and losest thy flourisshyng yougth. Ca+listo y can not ynowh complayne ner bewaile this do|mage. y may not preyse the ynowh / y haue ben so desirous to fynde the in secrete place / that the force of my will hath ben mescried. and ^t y haue enterprised this auenture hopyng in fortune ^t she shal gyue me grace and suffre oure yougthes to be vsed to gyder secretly ffor we may comune to geder ^t oon with that other with out knowyng of ony parsone not only in the chambres but also in the busshes of this woode O my

suster take hede what I saye. And as I resseyued and exhaunced late thy prayer / I pray the resseyue and ex|haunce my requeste with out desdayn of hym that thou mayst see. is verray louer of the :.
WHan Calisto had herd Iupiter and knewe that he was a man. she was alle affrayed / and roose vp wenyng to haue fledd. but she myght not. ffor Iupiter helde her faste by her clothyng and maad her to sytte doun by hym. Clippyng her a+boute the nekke and kyssyng her by force. so moche that Calisto ascryed and said. O Iupiter what folye is this. wenest thou that I am so to be ouercome of thy flateryng wordes. I had moche leuer that the erthe wold opene and swalwe me in to his wombe. My suster Answerd Iupiter ther is no remedye that may lette that my wyll be accomplisshid. ye shall do my will and pleasir be hit be force or be hit by loue. with this word Calisto began to crye with all her myght And Iupiter began to accomplissh his pleasyr of her ther was neyther man ner woman ther aboutes that herd hit. how well the Cry of Calisto was grete. Notwythstondyng Iupiter dide his will of his body and knewe her flesshly and engendrid on her a sone. After he conforted her and promysed to helpe her in alle thynges. And to take her to his wyf yf she wold retourne to the world wyth hym. But his fayr spe|che ne his promesses myght not conforte her Ner for no thynge that he coude do or say. he coude not come in to the grace of Calysto. And allewey she sware grete othes that she wolde complayne vnto her maystres dyane. And maad so moche that Iupiter departyd

from her all desplesid for her displaisir. and so went by the woodes thynkyng what was hym befalle and also what he had to do..


How Calisto for as moche as she was with childe the goddesse dian putte her out of the order and of her compaygnye..
AT this tyme began to ryse in thentendement of Iupiter many thoughtes. and for the better he concluded in hym self to retorne agayn in to pel+lage fro whens he cam fro. And than how well that he was displesid for the enforsyng of his lady dame Calisto by loue. He departid fro the wood and so ex+ployted that he was on the morn among thepiriens in his first habite. Whan thepiryens saw Iupiter comen a+gayn. they made hym right grete chier and grete honour And the same day Iupiter faigned hym that he wold go on huntyng. and so wente and fonde the maner to speke with Calisto and requyred her that she wold be his loue. but she in no wise wold assente to hym. He retourned from the chasse so anoyed that for to passe his melancolye he departed out of the contre the fourth daye folowyng after that he had ordeyned there folk that gouerned the peple. And retorned in to the hous of kyng Melliseus who hym resseyued as his sone. and there dwellid a longe tyme with out a|uentures whereof ony mencion is maad. And also Ca+listo dwellid in pees a while. whan she herd telle and vnderstood that Iupiter was goon she was passyng ioious ffor she had hym leuer ferre than nyhe Allewey the tyme passid the fruyt of her wombe grewe And the dayes cam that diane and athalantha wyth other

virgyns apperceyued that she was with childe wher|fore they assamblyd alle in her Chapitre and callid Calisto And than spack deane to her and said. Calisto my doughter thou hast doon fornycaco~n with some man this fornycacion is not excusable / The virgyns of this place be sory of thy synne. and haue abhomynacion of thy shame. ffor this cause hit is force that thou de|parte out of this hous / thou shalt be no lenger theyr fe|lawe. thou hast maad thy self worthy to departe by the brekyng and losyng of thy virgynyte. take thyn a ray  gere and go thy wey in to som place where thou mayste be delyuerid of the fruyt that restith in the / ffor thou shalt no lenger be here with in ::.
WHan Calisto herd the goddesse Deane. And knewe that she sayd trouth. grete teeres fylle from her eyen. and wepyng by grete habon|dance excused her vpon Iupiter rehersyng of the mys|chief and auenture that she had. Deane and the may+dens had grete meruaylle of Iupiter that had them so deceyued. Calisto cryed her mercy right humbly. And many tymes offrid her self to the punycion of the may+dens. this not withstondyng how well that she was hold excused. they resseyued her not to mercy / She was condempned to go out of the Cloyster / And so moche wente the mater forth. that the pour religious woman departed fro thens all bewepte  so shamed that she wold not go to no toun. Cite. ner hous / but in to a depe caue that she had seen afore tyme in the woode And first she made her prouysion of herbes  rotes for as moche as the winter was comyng. after she entrid in

to the caue. And ther she helde her also longe tyme as the bere holdeth hym in his denne. wherfore the Archadi+ens faynen that she was torned in to a bere. And it is not to be forgoten that duryng this tyme she was delyuerid of a sone whiche she named Archas. This child was grete and huge of membres. Calisto nou|risshid hym among the wilde bestes with rotes with fruytes  herbes. and of the propre metes and proyes that the cruel~ and terrible bestes lyueden with. And ther was no beste that dide hym ony herme. ner none was so hardy to do hym ony greua~ns. And he was so cruell and fiers that at the eage of seuyn yere as hys moder angrid or troublid hym on a day. he lift vp hym silf ayenst here and wold haue slayn her. in so moche that Calisto was constraynd to flee to fore hym by the busshes and yet more to yssue out of the wood  to goo to Iupiter whiche at that tyme was in the cyte of Pellage..
ARchas poursued Calisto his moder vnto he cam with in the cyte. and so forth entrid after her in to the palais and held in his two handes grete rounde stones. Whan Calisto entrid in to the palais by auen|ture she encountrid and met with Iupiter whom she knewe And she kneled doun on the erthe to fore hym and requyred hym with affraied spirite. that he wold do her iustice of her sone that wold sle her Iupiter that nothyng knewe calisto for as moche as she was euyl clothid and half wilde and sauage. beheld the Chyld and made hym to be taken. And after he demaunded calisto what she was Sire said she y am Calisto ^t for thy synne y was long syn bannysshid out of my

religion. I haue had this child of thy seed. suche as thou seest is thy sone / I haue nourisshid hym seuyn yere in the forest amonge wilde bestes. he now wold sle me for as moche as I haue angrid hym. I pray the saue my lyf / whan Iupiter heede these wordes of calisto he was right glad and Ioyous for it was said that she was ded. And conforted her the best wise he coude / after that he callid Archas  maad the peas betwene hym and his moder / and did do clothe hym and reteyned hym in his palays And forthon the same Archas gouerned hym so wele and so wisely that at the prayer and re|queste of the pelagyens Archas was maad kynge of the contre ::.


How Titan assayled by warre his broder saturne for as moche as he had not put to deth alle his Chil|dren males ::.
IN this tyme that the yonge Archas was Crowned kynge of Pellage and that he named the Cyte Ar|chade after his name. the kynge saturne was so grete and so puysaunt. that for to ample and encrece the splendure of his natyuyte. he named hym self saturne sone of heuen and of erthe. but than as he began to stu|dye how and by what maner he myghte enhaunce the resplendour of his felicite by dyuyue mysteryes ffortune torned her back to hym ward. And as ther ne is no+thinge in erthe that may abide  endure So hit happend that Titan was all acertayned that the quene Cibell had dyuerce men children that she did do kepe secretly  so had sauyd their lyf / bochace ^e recounteth this his+torie in ^e .iiij. book of ^e genelagie of goddes saith not by

what mene Titan knewe this thyng allewey or by sus+pecion or by enuye that he had of the glorye of saturn his broder or by secret aduertisment. vnder this colour he determyned in hys courage that he wold assaylle saturne by armes And for this cause he dide assemble on a day all his sones. and them required ^t they wold ayde and helpe hym to gete the lond of Crete Sayng that he wold make warre agayn Saturne his broder and that by right and iuste tytle he had good cause. for he had not put to deth dyuerce men children that his wif Cybell had conceyued of his seed lyke as he had promysed and sworn.
THe children of Tytan ^t oon was Lychaon that at this tyme was no lenger wolf ner kynge of archade. another had to name Typhon and was kyng of Secile and of Cipres. the thirde was callid Brya+rius  was kynge of nericos. the fourte was named Ceon and was kynge of the yle of Cea. the fifth was named Egeon kynge of the see Egee and of the yle deserte. and the sixte was named Eperion kynge of plipheros. Whan they had herd the will of their fader that had pourueyed for them alle these royames that he had conquerid after his departyng out of crete. they desiryng to please hym and coueytyng the recouurance of ther ancient heritages that was tho of grete renome sayde to hym as by oon wys that they were redy to ac+complissh his good pleasir  to goo in to Crete with armed hand and sworen that they shuld constrayne saturne to seke and feche his sones and them persecute with his hand vnto the deth..
The olde Tytan had in his herte grete ioye whan he

behelde the free and grete courages of his sones. And there they promysed and swere to geder that they all shuld employe them to the recouerance of their heryta|ges. After whiche comuracion / they ordeyned in suche wise that they gaderd hem to geder at the porte of Se+cyle. And sente vnto their lordshippis to assembele men of armes  of warre. They wente and made suche dili+gence. and so exployted that there were assemblyd grete Armour and harneys and moche peple at said porte. And whan the day was comen / they so desired to laboure this mater that they departyd from Secyle with a grete Oost and took the see and so made their Iournees wyth out auenture that in fewe dayes they sayled vnto Crete And there at the porte arryued and toke londe. And than entryng fiersly in to lande they destroyed and wasted all afore them so cruelly and contynued in theyr warre so mortally that they cam vnto the Cyte of Crete where kynge Saturne dwel|lyd and was resident / and than Saturne was aduer+tysed of their comyng and discent. And than Tytan that myght no ferther passe with out bataylle or as|sault / sente to saturne a lettre wherof the tenour folow+eth. Saturne englottid of wordly honneur  couetyse of glorie. for as moche as thou art ocupier of the seyg|nourie that by right langeth to me titan thy lord  elder brother / furthermore be cause that thou art falsely per|iured. ffor thy wif hath dyuerce men children that thou hast not put to deth in like wise as thou were bounden / knowe that I am come to take possession of thy kyng|dom not apperteynyng to the but to me / wherfore come to mercy and meke thy self to grace. Or ellys make

the sure of thy parsone. ffor yf hit be possible for me y shall come and haue reson of the.
WHan saturne had redde this lettre as a man all esbayed sent for his wyf Cibell and toke her a part. and coniured and charged her to saye the trouth and telle hym what she had don wyth his children. With this charge the poure lady changid co|lour and seeyng that she was constrayned to saye the trouthe she sayd. Syr thou knowest that y am a wo+man. the herte of a woman naturelly doth werkes of pite had not y haue ben in nature an abhomynable mon+stre yf y shold haue deuourred with my hande the chil+dren of my wombe. where is that moder that shal mur+dre her children. Certes my hand was neuer man slear ner neuer shall be. y haue erred agayn thy comaunde|ment in the fauour of nature. And syn hit must nedes be said y had leuer to be murdrid than a murdrere. and to be named pietous than cruel. ffor murdre is cruelte apperteynyng to vnresonable bestes and to tyrantes And pite is naturelly apperteynyng to women. And therfore y confesse to haue born thre sones conceyued of thy seed. whiche y haue do be nourisshid secretly but demaunde me no ferther or where they be. they shal liue as longe as hit plesith fortune. wil Tytan or not. and ther is no deth wherof ony woman may be turmentid with. that shall make the places to be dyscoueryd where they be..
SAturne herynge these wordes of his wyf was so esbayed that he wist not what to answere. Not withstondyng for the better he assemblid all the wise men of his cyte. And to them sayd My brethern and

frendes what is best to be doon. Tytan my broder hath begon warre in this royame / my wyf hath confessid that she hath resseyued of me thre sones whyche she hath nourisshyd in strange land vnder the colour that I shold not slee them. Tytan assaileth me / what shall we don. Syre answerd the wyse men / where force is enhaunsed by ouer grete presumpcion. ther muste be craft to conduyte wiseli to put the hand to withstand hit / Thou hast a stronge Cyte and fulfillid with grete peple. thou art wyse for to gouerne hem. put thy self in armes. and take no regard to the quarele of titan. a man is not worthy to be a kynge / but yf hit be by his vertu and gentil~ maners Crete was neuer royame but now tytan hath ben all his lyue enclyned to vices and is en+uoluped in synne. in whyche purpos he maynteneth to come to thy Crowne / yf he enhaunce hym self. thou muste rebasshe and put hym doun this is the Remedye Helpe thy self and we shall helpe the / he that fleeth causeth his enemye to chasse hym. thus now hit may not be fled. but hit must be wythstande and to gyue arrest to our enemye. And that ryght coragiously. ffor that a man may do this day. late hym not put hit ouer tyll to morowe. Arme the than well and sewerly / And assayle from thy Cyte thyn Enemyes. yf thou so doo / thou shewest thy corage to be enhaunced gretly and not lyghtly to be ouercomen by them. And so thou mayst attempre somwhat their pryde and presumpco~n yf thou mayntene otherwyse thy self / and late them take their reste / that shall be mater and cause for to en|corage them. vpon whyche they shall enflame them self hoping to come to their aboue. whiche shal~ be to the

more harmyng than vayllable. ffor corage and hope ofte tymes men saie make men to attayne to grete and hye victoyres. notwithstondyng thou art kynge thy will be accomplisshid and fulfilled..
SAturne Answerd and said. Brethern and fren+des hit were grete shame to vs and to our  we suffred hyt to be dissypate and destroyed. Hit is force that the warre be begonne and open. euery man dispose hym to saue his worship Titan assaileth myn honour. and requyreth my dyshonour. Syn hyt is force that of this mater the armes and warre be iugges we shall arme vs this hour and poursiewe thenterte|nement of ^e ryght good auenture ^t of fortune is come to vs. And my herte telleth me that also sodeynly as our enemyes ben entrid in to this land. also sodeynly we shal make them to goo and yssue out agayn. with thys answere alle the wyse and noble men of Crete took grete plesir Than Saturne gaf the answer to the messanger of tytan And said to hym. yf tytan retourne not with in two houres that he wold come and take the batayll ayenst hym. With this answer the massan+ger retorned to tytan and said to hym thentencion of saturne. Tytan swore than that he wold neuer retorne backward tyl he had attended and abiden the batayll Saturne was a man of grete valure and hye wyll Whan the messangier of tytan was departid. he made sowne to armes. at whiche sowne the yong and olde adowbed them  made hem redy. What shall y make long processe in short tyme they were redi at the poynt And whan saturne sawe that his enemyes made no semblant to meue. he went  ascended in to his Chare

ffor in this tyme the kynges went to bataill in Chares After he yssuyd out of his Cyte and rengid his peple aboute hym / and anone after he dide do marche them agaynst Tytan :::::.
FRom as ferre as the Tytanoys sawe the Sa|turnyens come. they were right glade and made them self the grettest chiere of the worlde. And muyd them silf Ioiusly ayenst them and with a grete crye / they had grete sheldes of tree / maces and pollaxes and guysarmes of strange facions. and they were all on fote. reseruyd Tytan and his sones. whyche as Rynges had theyr Curres and Chares in whyche they were brought and caried not by the force of hors but by the puyssance of men / they approched so nyghe that they cam to fightyng and began to werke / than the archers of kynge saturne began to drawe  shote And maad the tytannoys to arest and stande also longe as their shotte dured and slowe and hurte many of them whan the shotte fayled. the tytanuoys that had grete sorowe for to be so seruid of the saturnyens / esmeuyd hem self agayn And swore that oon to that other that they wold be auengid And cam for to fight hand oon hand in whiche they enployed them so aygrely that of the noise and den~e that their axes and guisarmes smote vpon their sheldes hit semed as hit had ben thonder / At then counteryng than the batayll was right ffell / Ly|chaon. Egeon. Creon. typhon. and encheladus were in the first front / ther was many a shelde broken for the weight of the clubbes  polaxes  many heedes broken Ceon  tiphon at ^e begynnyng maintend hem self right vailliantly  conduyte her folke all with in the batayll

by the rigour of their strokes in so moche that whom they mette of the saturniens they bete hem doun. by their well doyng they were knowen and doubtyd of their enemyes in so moche that saturne maad his Chare to be lad out of the wey for the grete bruyt  noyse that they made aboute hem. there was grete effusion of blo|od. ffor the tytanuoys enforced them to haue endured in their bruyt and crye. And the saturnyens with sa|turne putte them in payne for to abate hit and breke hit And so the comyng of saturne was cause of prouesse vpon prouesse  of many oon deed. and entended oon and other so acertaynly to the werke that the most part of that day they maad grete stryf with out that none myght enioye hym for victorye ne trouble for dis+confiture. but in the ende whan the titanuoys sawe the sonne declyne as couetous of glorye and of worshyp At oon crye that Tytan made vpon saturne. Lychaon and Egeon with many other enclosed aboute hem. he beyng diskled. his chare broken by force of polhaxes and gaf hym many woundes and finably they toke hym And brought many of ^e saturnyens to deth and ouerthrewe them in disconfeture. and that werse is they were so discoragid whan they vnderstode that saturne was taken that they loste the viguers and strength of their hertes and the myghtis of their armes. And tur|ned their backis and fledd all desroyed. that the tyta+nuoys entred with hem in to the cyte and toke hit and wanne hit with out ony resistence betyng doun the pe+ple and wyth grete murdre of men women and of smale Children..
AT this tyme men myght se the ladies  matrones

of Crete take the duste and caste hit in to the ayre and renne by the stretes now here and now ther all desshe|uellyd with her here hangyng aboute her hedes castyng a ferre their atyre / and their lityll Children crying after hem the wise men of ^e toun semed out of their witte. the Cyte was so trowblyd that they myght no more / A|monge all other Cybell vesca and Seres maad grete sorow semblably with out cessyng / ffor tytan that ne|uer louyd them. cam tho in to the palays. and putte in prison Saturne and his wyf / And swore they shold neuer departe thens tyll they had put to deth all her so+nes that were come of them And furthermore Tytan dide hym do Crowne kyng of Crete / so ne auayled not the Infinite praiers and orisons that dame vesca made to tytan in the compassion of her sone saturne and of Cybell for their delyuerance / Ner the fayr spekyng of Ceres ne the teeres meuyd of charite. were of no valu the moo prayers that they made vnto Tytan / the more fonde they hym vncourtoys felon and malgracyous / He dyde do execute and put to deth alle them that held or were apparteynyg to the partye of Saturne / And by the space of four dayes vexid and troublid Crete in robbyng and shedyng the blood of the Cytezeyns / And he ne persecuted onely the men. but also women and chyldren and toke theyr goodes and departyd a|monge them that helde on hys partye / Than whan ves|sca sawe alle these thynges happene in the Cyte And that her sone tytan gouerned hym so malicyously and allewey worse and worse with out ony compassion on the peple / She cam to the pryson where Saturne and Cybell were and sayd to hem wyth a mouth

widyng dolorous sighes. Alas my children what shal ye do. what shall come of yow. how shal ye be sauyd the land of crete is not only drowned by ^e teeris and wepyng of your best frendes. but with their blood  with the blood of their wiues and children. And the herte of tytan is so terrible harded and indured that ye shal dye here in myserable payne. or ye muste put your sones to deth. syn it is so hit is better that they be put to deth and that ye sende to seke hem. whan for your lyf is none other remedye
The anger of Cibell was right aspre and sharp to here the sorowfull tidynges in so moche that her herte faylled Saturne and her moder thought on her whan she was come agayn to her self she escryed and saide. Ha my moder what saye ye to vs. haue we so grete payne for to kepe our Children and that we shold this oure abandoune them to the deth Shal~ y do trayson to my children that begyn to floryssh in right clere fame. that shall neuer beyf hit plese the gooddes y haue well leuer haue regard to my semblant Iupiter my sone hath a grete name and hath wonne the loue of the pelagiens. and of thepiriens. all the world prey+seth hym and holdeth hym oon of the vailliants men of the world. he is my sone y shal~ sende to hym and late hym haue knowleche of the myserye that y am in. by the damoysell that bare hym vnto the montaigne of oson and shall requyre hym of socours. and y hope that he is a man of so hye corage and so ewreus comyng vp that he shall socoure her. that hath don hym that merite that is worthy to haue his socours And ^t saued hym in his tendre dayes. and my hert telleth me that he shal

the trowblyng of Crete. And thankyd the damoysell And after that he torned hym vnto the kyng. and said to hym. Syre ye may now knowe  vnderstand what I am and of what hows As this damoisell witnesseth my fader and my moder ben in the handes of their ene|myes / I praye yow in their faueur that ye wyll helpe me to socoure them / And that we goo hastely oppres|syng hym that hath oppressid them / and I haue a singu|ler hope and truste in fortune that she shall helpe vs Fayr sone Answerd Melliseus knowe that I haue more of affeccion in the recourance of thy lignage than I can shewe or make semblaunt / And in signe of this I promyse to helpe the as moche as in me is possible / And than Iupiter assured the damoysell and swore vnto her that he wold put hym in armes agaynst titan and bad her retorne vnto saturne and Cybell and to comforte them in hope of right short socour / The damoi+sell departyd from thens with the wordes of Iupiter and retorned in to Crete / And told vnto saturne and cibell all that she had doon / Anone after the damoysell was departid / Iupiter sent for Archas his sone hastly with the archadiens / And also sent for the Epiriens and the parthemyens with them of the Cite of Anlacre All thise peple louyd Iupiter with grete loue and cam at his comandement in grete nombre of men of warre Iupiter welcomed them as well as he couthe / and told them the cause why he had sent for them. And told them that he was Sone vnto kynge Saturne After thise thynges he dide do be maad redy alle thyng that was necessarye vnto hys Oost / And so they departyd fro the Cyte of Oson wyth ryght a fayr compaygnye

same ignorance and will that thou knowe that thou arte the firste sone and heyr of the kyng saturne and of dame cybell. The kynge saturne thy fader as euery man knoweth had longe syn maad an Oth vnto his broder Tytan that he shold slee alle his children males that shold come of his seed for whiche cause the day of thy natyuyte he comandyd that thou sholdest be put to deth. but thy moder had pyte of the. And for to saue thy lyf she sente the secretly vnto this hows. geuyng thy fader saturne to vnderstande that she had do perse|cucion on ^e. And so for to eschewe the fureur of thy fa+der. thou hast ben here norysshyd all thy dayes And knowest not thy self what thou were. and now thou art in certayn what ioye is this to the Certaynly grete And thou oughtest to go ioyously vnto thy fader and moder presentyng thy self vnto her grace yf hyt were not that after thyse tydyngis of ioye whiche y muste nedes shewe vnto the Iupiter other tidyngis. and that is this Thy moder that hath sauyd the. thy oncle Titan holdeth her in pryson with saturne. for that. that she hath do norissh the / and he hath ouercome  venquys|shid thy fader in bataile all newly and take from hym his royame. and yet more he will do hem dye / wher|fore they praye and requyre the that thou haue pyte of them and that thou wilt employe the to go  delyuere them of the daunger that they be in at this daye.
THe kynge melliseus and Iupiter heering thise tydyngis of the damoysell meruayled them right gretely. And Iupiter was right ioyous whan he had vnderstand that he was sone of kynge saturne / and on that otherside he was sore vexid of

resseyue by this tydyng a ryght grete Ioye in knowle|chynge the place of his natyuyte / ffor more gretter Ioye he may not haue ner come to hym / than to knowe that he is the fyrst sone of the auncyent hous of Crete / And this shall torne to hym a souerayn gladnesse whan he shall see that he is requyred to come and make the reco+uerance of his fader and moder and of his contre:.


How Iupiter wyth Ayde of kynge Melliseus of epire deliuerid saturne his fader  Cibell his moder out of the prison of tytan /  how he slewe tytan in bataill:.
WHan Saturne and vesca herde Cibell so speke Vesca said that her aduyse was ryght good / And saturne was all esbaied. ffor he thought that Iupiter that he had seen at dyuerce tymes wyth kynge melliseus shold in no wise be his sone / vnnethe he coude beleue hit and gyue faith vnto the wordes of cybell And said yf Iupiter wold socoure hym he were the man to do hit / and that he was content that Cibell shold sende to seche hym as she had sayd. Than Cy|bell sent for the damoysell that knewe alle the guy|dyng of Iupiter and gaf her the charge to go vnto hym and to fornysshe the werkis. The damoisel~ Ioyeus of this enbassade departid secretly. and taried not til~ she cam vnto the hows of Melliseus / And fyndyng there Iupiter with the kynge. After the reuerence made she adressid her Orison to Iupiter  sayd to hym / Iupiter esioye the and be glad I brynge to the tidyngis of glad+nes / Neuerthelasse amonge other sorowes. ffortune that hath hold the long tyme Ignorant and not know+yng the place of thy ryght noble natyuyte / hath now certaynly suffred the discouerture  knowleche of tha

of men of arme vnto ^e nombre of sixe thousand figh+tyng men And so well spedde that in short tyme he brought hem vpon a myle nyghe the cyte of Crete:.
And there jupiter wold tarye vpon the toppe of a montaigne / and callid to hym his sone Archas that that tyme ne had but .xiij. yere of age but he was right wise and well bespoken / And gaf hym in charge that he shold go in to Crete to gyue sommance vnto the kynge tytan that he go out of the cyte / And deure to hym his fader Saturne with his moder Cibell / the yonge Archas that was hardy and had his herte hye enhaunsid with the worde of his fader wente vnto crete to the kyng tytan to whom he dide hym to be pre|sentid and sayd vnto hym thise wordes that folowe Tytan j come vnto the in thobeissance of my fader jupi+ter first sone of kynge saturne that thou holdest in cap|tyuyte / he hath ben aduertised of thoppression that thou hast don in the persone of his fader  of his moder and the deth of her sones / he signyfieth the by me that he is sone of saturne / and that he is as moche thyn enemye as thou to his sones art enemye vpon whiche j the so+mone as legat ones. twyes. thries / that thou yelde this cyte vnto his fader kyng saturne / And that as hastely as thou hast entrid therin in like wise that thou departe Childe answerd tytan thou tellest me tydynges that ben full of plasirs and of exultacion by the whiche j knowe by thy wordes that saturne hath a sone yet ly+uyng ffor by this moyen j see clereli / and also seeth all the world that by good and juste quarele j am maad kyng of this cyte / Late jupiter thy fader knowe that j doubte hym not / Nor sette nothyng at alle of hys

comyng / And also that I will no thynge do after hys comandement / Tytan sayd Archas for as moche as thou abidest in this will / I wyll no more at this tyme ocupie the. Make good wacche Iupiter is here by that tarieth for none other cause but Answer fro the for to do his deuoyr to recoure his Cyte ::.
WIth this word departid Archas fro the presence of Tytan and retorned agayn vnto his fader whan Iupiter herd the answer of tytan / he was full of gladnes / ffor he desyred no thyng but for to be in armes / And concluded with his peple. that on the morn he shold assaulte the Cyte / in caas that Tytan ffurnysshed not hem of batayll / Anone were their ten+tes made of bowes and leeues and her tabernaclis / the Osonyens. the Archadiens  the Epiryens laye vpon the grene verdure. and maad her Oost to wache / Ty+tan was than in crete. And hit is to wete whan Ar|chas was departid fro his presence / he assemblid alle his sones. and told hem thise tydyngis whiche were to them plesant and agreable. ffor they desired nothing but stryf  debate. And assured hem self to haue victorie of Iupiter as well as they had of saturne. In the same hour they sent four spies to espie the nombre of their ene+myes. And made redy their harneis. these spies went so ferre that they sawe the oost of Iupiter / and made their report to tytan of the place where his enemyes were  of what nombre of peple they bee / after the report of the said spyes. titan concluded for as moche as his enmies were but a myle from the Cite. that they shold make hem redy and go to batayll agaynst hem on the morn Eerly. the nyght passed fast / the day cam on And

than aboute the sonne rysyng Tytan mountyd vpon his Chare that was right riche and made his titanoys to renge in batayle And lefte an honderd wyth in the cyte for to kepe hit from rebellion or fro trayson / and toke all the other with hym vnder his conduyte and of his sones and his espyes ::.
IVpiter that was not ydell had the same houre sette all his men in ordenaunce / And had than brought all his folk in a fayr playne hopyng of bataile And thus tytan had not ferre ryden that he ne sawe the Ooste of jupiter / ffor this playne was all disconuerte on all sy|des / and from as ferre as eche myght see other / eche of them full of joye enforced them to make showtes and cryes And by grete desire they marched ^t oon agaynst that other vnto the comyng and smytyng of strokes Than jupiter put hym self in the front of the batayle  hauyng his bowe in his hand and his arowes by hym by his shotyng began a medlyng that was right fiers ffor on that oon side and ^e other ther were ryght good archers / and many casters of polisshid stones that fail+led neuer and that was cause of deth of many / whan the shotte and castyng of stones faylyd they began to go to geder with speres and tho began a mortall fygh+tyng hand of hand that was so sharp that of the bre|kyng of the speres and of ^e sheldes hit resouned vnto the walles of Crete / and cam to the eeres of Saturne and of Cybell the noyse wherof they began to reioye ffor they had a verry hope that Iupiter shold obteyne the victorye agaynst tytan / This hour vesca went vp vpon a hye tour that she myght see vnto the feld and ther she sawe the fightyng of the batayle / Tho helde

Iupiter his glayue in his hand  his sheld in that other and with his glayue he smote in to the thykkest of his enemyes / and with his sheld he sauyd hym self from their strookes. And with oon strook of his glayue he departyd the body of encheladus oon of the sones of tytan and caste hym on the ground at the feet of the ty|tannoys that were right sory for the deth of her felaw Iupiter assayllid them right sharply. And oon cryed slee slee / but he that so cryed was slayn a non by th handes of Iupiter that destroied the blood of his aduer+saires he was stronge. fiers / yonge and boystous and of aspre entrepryse. He defended hym vigourously as a lion. myghtely as an Olephant and eigrely as a Tygre And ne entendid only vnto the deffence of body. but to saue and rescowe alle them that were in parell vnder his warant / he did merueilleus on alle sides. The noyse and bruyt doublid and redoublid aboute hym. The Ty+tannoys began to ouerthrowe by grete routes that oon fill on his sholders that other on his sheld /  he charged so sore vpon them that his strokes myght not be sustey+ned of men. they were so strong and puyssant ::
This bataile was felono  hard at begynnyng for bothe the two ties / and ther were many of titan+noys of tharchadiens  of thepiryens hurte dede  cast vnder foot. Archas was there accompaignied of fifti ar+chadiens commysid vnto the garde of his body for as moche as he was yonge /  yet he made  put hym self m right gode deuoir to emploie hym self to the armes / melli+seus failled not / ner Titan lichaon egeon  the other syde also / Eche man dide his beste ^t he might / I can not saye how many men were ded on the ground / ne how often

tymes that oon gate vpon that other but ye shall vn+derstande that ther was none comparable vnto Iupi|ter en strengthe in conduyte ner in prowesse / ther was no thynge to hym inpossible. he ouercame the ouerco|mers / he slowe the slears / he' smote doun the smytars. he put hym self so forth and in so many places in the ba|tayle of the tytanoys that in a destrayt he cam  fonde tytan in his chare. that confounded the epiryens by sto+nes and rounde plomettes that he caste on them And cried tytan tytan for as moche as he thoughte that he faught well whan Iupiter knewe that tytan was there he drew toward hym. and as titan auauncyd his arme for to smyte vpon one epiryen. Iupiter haunsyd his swerd. and dishargyd so sore vpon his arme that he smote hit of and departid hit fro his body / wherof he had grete ioye and cryed Iupiter iupiter And tytan so hurt had grete sorow that he fyll a doun wyth in his Chare::
AT this poynt the epiriens began to corage them self / and the tytannoys were discoraged Ly|chaon and Egeon were ther fast by where they sawe her faders arme fle in to the feld they began tas|saile iupiter as men dispayred /  so began a newe med+ling where moche blood was spild but notwithston+dyng the fierste of lichaon that had Iupiter longe tyme in hate. for as moche as he had taken from hym his lord+ship Iupiter entendyd so eygrely to put tytan at vt|trau~ce that he brak his chare in to peces by the helpe of the Epiriens. And that with the swerd that he smote of his arme / he departyd the lyfe from the body of the vnhappy tytan by a mortall strook that he gaf vnto 

his herte. and than gaf he his entente and prowesse to persecute Lychaon and egeon that had gyuen to hym many strokes and horions. and adressyng his swerd vpon the hede of lychaon that the swerd wente to his herte. wherof Egeon had so grete sorow and drede. that he fledde and sauyd hym from the tempest whiche tem+peste ranne so vpon the titannoys so vnmesurabli that all were put to deth and to flight in to the feldes. som here and some ther Reseruyd oon of the sones of titan named typhon. that seyng the discomfiture cam vnto Iu+piter and said. Iupiter see here thyn enemye. fflee not after them that flee. hit shall be vnto the more honou|rable to fyghte agaynst me. that deffieth the. than to renne after the fugytifs. Neuer yet was I founden ffle+yng to fore myn enemies ner yet I shall not: thou hast slayn tytan my fader. and my broder is slayn and venquysshyd by fforce and strength And so behoueth than thys Royame muste be thyn or myn. and now late vs see who shall do best / yf I may I shalle vayn|quysshe the: and yf I ouercome the certaynli thou shalt not dye by glayue ne swerde / but by the water of the fflood that renneth alle reed and died by the blood of my kyn. to thende that thou drynke of the blood that thou hast maad renne out of her bodies / wherof I haue a grete Anoyance to endure hyt. ffor by the cours of nature me ought to take displaysir and anoye. And also to torne to grete dispyt the dysplaisyr that thou hast doon to me ::.


How Iupiter vaynquysshyd in the felde Thyphon and caste hym in the Ryuer ::.::.
THis typhon was grete and full of orguyell and pryde / whan he had said all that laye on his herte / Iupiter that had than beholde and vnderstand Answerd to hym / vaissale hast thou no knowleche what rayson and right the goddes and for+tune don for me / thou art stronge of membres and pro+cedeth fro the herte more outrageous than wise Alle|way for as moche as thou demaundest batayle. thou art welcome / make the redy shortly /  do the best that thou canst.  haste the for the caas requyreth hit with this worde thyphon smote. Iupiter so rudely vpon the hede of his shelde that he bare away a grete quarter And made Iupiter to stoupe wyth the ryght legge / ther were ther by many epiryens / that seyng Iupiter so smeten ranne and cam for to rescowe hym / but Iupi+ter wold not suffre hem that they shold helpe hym in ony maner / but bad Melliseus and Archas that they shold folowe the chaas of them that fled And than he began to assayle typhon by grete vertu and force in suche wise that he gaf hym many woundes in his bo|dy And thus began the batayle of typhon and Iupiter they were bothe stronge  able in the craft of armes they charged one vpon that other dolorously and ey|grely / hit is no nede that y declare how many strokes that oon gaf vnto that other / but y muste telle how Iu+piter so fought  smote hys enemy that he toke from hym his swerd and his shelde And whan he was in that poynt / he chargid hym vpon his sholdres by force of his armes / And bare hym to the ryuer that was all dyed wyth the blood of dede me~n:. And ther he dyde hym dye miserably castyng hym in to the flood: the

hede vnder for as moche as he had menaced Iupiter of suche deth. what shall I say more of this batayll Af|ter the deth of typhon Iupiter wente agayn to the pur|suyt of his enemyes vnto the sonne began tenclyne in to the weste and sued on by grete slaughter / but in pro|cesse of tyme whan he sawe that Tytan and the more part of his sones were ded. And that the reste of their peple were so feble and so dispersid by the feldes / that they myght neuer aryse agayn. he sowned the retrayt and reassemblid his folke the best wise he myght / and after he toke the ryght way to the Cyte hauyng grete Ioye and exultacion of his victorye. And he ne had ta+ried longe that foure Cytezyns of Crete cam vnto hym and told hym that all they of the partye of tytan were fled and that they had taken out of pryson his fader / .


How Iupiter and Saturne reconsiled them to gy|der /  how Iupiter by comandement of his fader wente for to destroie the kynge Apollo of paphes. and of the medecyn of Esculapius :.
IVpiter ressayued these Cytezyns and their tidyngis in ryght grete gladnes / and desiryng with all his herte to be with his fader  moder did so moche that he en|trid in to crete / saturne  Cibell with vesca were at the gate / whiche ressayued hym honourably  brought|hym vnto the palays. where he was fested with the kinge melleseus  archas in suche faco~n that hit might be no better / At the comyng of Iupiter many teres were wept for Ioye by dame Cibell and vesca. Cibell kyste and beclypt often tymes her sone. And alle they of the Contrey cam theder in to the palais for to feste and worshipe Iupiter and also they gaaf hym many grete

yeftes / And hit is not to be forgoten how Saturne re+reconcyled hym self vnto hym and gaf hym astate as to his sone. Duryng these thynges the body of titan was serched amonge the dede bodyes by comandement of saturne. and ther was maad for hym his obsequie so+lempne as hit apperteyneth to a kyng / semblably and vnto hys sones that were found dede in the batayle Alle the sones of tytan were not perisshid and ded in the batayle ffor amonge alle other Iopetus and bry+areus were left a lyue and flede That is to wete bry|areus in to an yle of grece named Nericos And Iape|tus fled in to a partye of libye / wher he enhabited hym self And brought with hym thre sones that he had by his wyf. wherof the eldest was named Athlas the se+cond had his name Hesperus And the thirde named hym self Prometheus. Athlas dwellid in Libye. and hesperus regned in spaigne. And were bothe vaynquys+shid by hercules as hit shall be said in the second book
FOR to holde on our purpose. whan Saturne and Iupiter had doon the obsequyes of the tita+noys. Tydynges cam to Iupiter that Appollo kyng of Paphes had resseyued partye of them that fledde fro the bataill of tytannoys / This said appollo had maad allyances vnto saturne and was sone of Iupiter of Actique. Whan Iupiter  saturne herd these tidynges. Anon saturne required Iupiter that he wold helpe to take vengeance of Appollo that was his al|lye. and that he shold destroye his enemyes: At the re|quest of saturne Iupiter entreprisid the warre: and in all haste he wente and beseged the Cyte of Paphes

and took hit with assault. and put to vttrance and destruccion all the fugytyfe that he coude fynde / and yet aboue that he despoylled Appollo of alle his rychesses and of his lordshyps so nakedly that he departyd fro Paphes not as kynge. but as a poure beggar / nd for+tune was to hym so contrarye. that he was constray|ned to kepe the shepe of kynge Ametus of thessayle In this Paas some men saye that in the tyme that Iu|piter began to mounte in hys Regne and to enbrace honour / Esculapyus sone of appollo whyche was ryght expert in medycyne. and serchyng on a day hys aduentures as he wente by a woode side he sawe from ferre where an herdeman with his lityll horne fought agaynst a basilique. that of his nature slewe the peple only with his syght / whan esculapyus sawe this. he was gretly esmeruayllyd and taryed / and he had not longe abyden. but that the herdeman had ouercome the basylique / and constraynd hym to wythdrawe hym vpon a Rocke that was there nyghe by. Escula|pius was alle esbayed with this thynge that he wis not what to saye. ffor hym thought hit was Impossi+ble for a man to ouercome oon so mortall a beste / Than whan tyme that the basylyque was wythdrawen vpon the sayd Rock / Esculapyus went hym hastely vnto the herdeman. And fyndyng that he had vpon his hede a Chapellet or garlond made of many diuerce herbes and of flowres. He Iuged incontynent that in thys forsayd Chapellet was an herbe of suche ver+tu that kepte hym from the deth and also from the sub+tyll venym of the basylique. than he dide so moche that the herdeman or shepard gaf hym hys chappelet

or garlond as innocent: And than the sayd herdeman went agayn for tassaile the basilicque / and than so|deynly of oon propre sight of his eyen the poure she|pharde fyll ded vnto the erthe .::.
Esculapius was than well assured that he had wel thought that in the chappelet was an herbe that suffisid to withstonde agayn the malicy|ous entoxicacion of thenuenymous eyen of the beste /  wyth the sayd chappelet he went to the rocke. And fought so agaynst the basilicque that he slewe hym wherof he had so grete ioye / that a herte entendyng to worship myhht haue no more / whan he had thus done he went vnto the herdman and hauyng pite on hym / he toke all the herbes oon after an other wherof the chap|pelet was maad. And put hem diuysably eche by hym self in his mouthe. And fynablely he touched only the leues of the vertueuse herbe / and so brusid hit vpon his mouth. that sodeynly he roos from deth to lyf / O mer|ueyllous vertu of herbe / men rede that by thys same herbe Ipolitus whiche cam vnto his deth. by the mene of his styfemoder that accusid hym falsely. afterward was reysed to lyf agayn /  after that he had be longe ded and drawen by busshes egghes montaygnes and thornes / whan hys body was founde that they that fonde hym leyd hym in a medowe vpon a plante of her+bes like vnto the herbe / wherof is spoken to fore by ver+tu of the whiche his woundes were heled and his lyf was gyuen and yelde vnto hym agayn.:.
For to holde on the matier whan esculapius had reysed the herdman or shepherd / he toke the herbe and the basilicque and bare hem vnto the

Cyte of paphes tellyng his aduenture. and from than forth he reysed men fro deth to lyf by vertu of the herbe and fought and ouercame basyliques / And for thys cause he gate hym so hye a name / that Iupiter was a glottyd of his glorye / and toke warre agaynst hym and slewe hym. wherof his fader appollo toke so grete sorowe in hym self / that he enterprysid the warre a|gaynst Iupiter / but Iupiter ouercame hym and constray+ned hym to suche an extremyte / that for to hyde hys name / he wente and seruyd the kynge ametus of thes|sayll as is sayd to fore. And thus whan Iupiter had vaynquysshid appollo by that oon manyer or by that other he retorned in to Crete with grete glorye / And fonde there Neptune and Pluto his brethern and Iu+no his suster that maad hym grete chyere. This Iuno was the most beauteuous woman and fayrest mayde that was in all the contre / after the retorne of Iupiter she conuersid with hym certayn space of tyme / allwey they discoueryd not their couraiges at this tyme. and by proces of tyme retorned Iuno in to parthemye with the other vyrgyns with whiche she had be nouryed and ther abode in many thoughtes and desyres / And ne maad neuer other prayers vnto the goddes. but that only they wold gyue her grace for to be wyf vnto her broder / And it is not to be forgoten that yf she was strongly sette in the loue of her broder Iupiter / as moche or more was Iupiter fermly sette in the loue of her / for for to see her only after that he had sent home alle his men of warre in her owen Contreys / And that he had establysshyd his fader Saturne in hys seygnou|rye and lordshyp. Vnder the Colour of deuocyon

he wente ofte tymes in to the cyte of Parthemye. and took pleasir to be with her ::.


How Iupiter with grete Ioye spousid his suster Iu+no. And how the kynge saturne began a warre agayn Iupiter his sone ::
ALlewey as Iupiter was besy to solicyte thus the virgyne Iuno in the cyte of parthemye for to haue the better occasion to abide there he ede|fyed a temple. And dide hit to be dedyfied vnto hys moder Cybell. And at laste dide do make an ymage or statue of a woman in ryall attyre that gaf mete vnto many smale ymages of lytil~ children in remembrance that she had saued the lyf to her children / And whan this temple was parfayt and maad vnto the dedica|cyon. Saturne and Cibell to gyder cam theder with all the nobles of the contre. and there maad a grete so+lempnyte that duryd fiftene dayes in playn gladnesse. And at this grete feste and gladnes faylled not Iupi|ter ner Iuno. ffor aboute the ende of this solempnite the nobles of the contre traytted theyr maryage. And the preste of the temple of Cybell assured and trouthed them to gyder. and anone after in the same temple their espousaylles were made and celebrered with so grete glorye Ioye and Tryumphe that hit is not possible to be rehersed And Iupiter and Iuno laye to gyder / and engendrid a doughter that they named hebe. The par+themyens for memoyre of this maryage founded there a temple where in they sette the simylacre of Iuno in ha+byte of a mayde that maryed her And alleway after that same day that Iupiter wedded Iuno. / they maad in that temple an annyuersarye  a grete feste whiche

was holde in maner of a weddynge / After alle thyse thynges than Saturne retorned in to Crete / Pluto re|torned in to a partye of Thessaylle where he founded the cyte of Helle wherof shall be spoken in the seconde book / and Neptune retorned vnto Atthenes / where the atthenyens maad hym kynge as well for his vertues as for that he was sone of saturne / at that tyme the moste renomed kynge of the world::.
IN these dayes whan saturne sawe hym quyte of tytan and of his generacions / And that he sawe his chyldren mounte from lowe places into regnes and hye chayres / Certayn all his sorowes vanysshid a way / and than began the clerenes of his regne to be paysible / All dowtes all dredes all suspeci|ons were put a waye / he had of the goodes of fortune as moche as he wolde / None was than so hardy that durst conspyre agaynst his domynacyon / he fonde hym self in peas generale / and hyt is to be supposed and le|uyd considered the regnes of his tyme and that he was in so grete peas and tranquyllyte. that he myght haue fynysshid and ended his dayes in the same / yf he hym+self had not putte hym to the warre / ffor he had Iupi|ter his sone vnto his helpe / at that tyme the most abill in armes that was in all the worlde / And longe tyme whan Saturne sawe hym thus in pease / hit happend on a day whan hit cam vnto hys mynde. that his god appollo had prenostyqued that this Iupiter shold put hym out of his royame / Sodeynli there began to engen+dre in hym a mortall hate agaynst Iupiter that had don vnto hym so many good dedes / And also seeyng that

euery man helde hym in loue. and was besy to please hym. he adioustyd fayth and gaf credence vnto his cur+sid prenosticacyon. And so suffryd hym self to be en|uolupped wyth so grete a folye that he coude neuer drawe hyt out after: And than he retorned vnto his auncyent sorowes and fantasies in suche wyse that they appered outward :.
WHan they of Crete sawe saturne so troublyde the moste pryue of his secrete counceyll enplo|yed them to comforte him. but hit helped nowht Ner they cowde not gete from his mouth the cause of suche melancolye. vnto the tyme that he had determy|ned in his herte that he shold persecute vnto the deth his sone Iupiter And than he did do assemble his pryn+ces and his councellours. and said to them / I Charge and adiure yow all by the names of all our gloryous goddes that ye saye to me the trouth and auys / what thynge shall or ought a kynge to do with a man that he doubtyth by a dyuyne answer that hath be said to hym / that this man shall put hym out of his regne and kyngdome / Whan they of Crete had vnderstande the charge and adiuracion of the kynge. they assemblyd hem self at a counceyll And there they ordeyned and toke oon that for all that other shold haue charge to gyue this answer / Syre the counceyll knowe that longe synye had an answer of your god conteynyng that ye had engendrid a sone that shold put yow out of your regne. And that dame cibell at that tyme was desyuerid of Iupiter / The counceyll prayeth yow. that ye will take hede. how what tyme ye were depryued of your Crowne and had loste hit / he delyueryd yow

and made yow quyt of all your enemyes / yf the cause of your Charge and adiuracion touche not this mater The counceyll is of oppynyon / that yf the kynge haue puyssance and myght ouer hym that he doubtyth / and that he haue cause euydent / A kynge than ought to kepe hym seur from that man for the daungiers::.
CErtes sayd saturne thauys of the counceyll is resonable ynowh / and for as moche as I must declare yow and saye yow what I mene / I am the kynge that I speke of / And the man that I doubte / is Iupiter my sone / that I fere and drede moche more than the deth In so moche that I may not endure ner take reste for hym. ffor slepyng I dreme that he ryseth ayenst me / and assailleth me in armes with grete mul+titude of Archadyens  of epiryens. and resteth vayne qucur  victorious ouer me / And wakynge I haue alle weie myn eeres opene for to herkene and espie / yf he be aboute to come on me wyth men of armes / and thus I can haue no Soulas. Playr ner Reste / and am a man loste / Thys consyderyd I wyll that he be ded. and I take the culpe and synne vpon me / and I will that ye knowe that I am your kynge and that ye to me owe obeissance / and for that I comande yow vpon payne of deth / that ther be not oon man that is so hardy to with|saye ony thynge contrarye to my will / And that eche of yow be to morn found redy in armes to fore thys pallais for to socour  serue me in this werke whiche is the grettest thynge that euer shall come to me:.


Ow they of Crete whan they had herd the comande+ment of Saturne were sore troublid  sory / and how they meuyd hem self ayenst Iupiter his sone:.
WHan they of Crete had herd the resolucion of saturne they were gretly abasshed. ffor they knewe well that saturne toke this mater gret+ly to his herte. and that he was a terryble man to of|fende. And so they knewe that wrongfully he wyl|lyd the deth of his sone Iupiter that had restored hym to his lordship by his prowesse  vailliance / Many ther were that went in to an other kyngedom because they wold not be with the fader ayenst the sone ner with the sone ayenst the fader / but ther was noman that durste be so hardy to replie agayn saturne ner saie that he dide euyll / for they dredde more his yre than to offende Iustyce. what shall I saye after the comande|ment of saturne / eche man withdrewe hym vnto his hous full of grete and bitter sorowe in herte. And ther was not oon man but he had his face charged with grete greef and pesaunt anoyau~ce ::.
The day than drewe ouer / And on the morn Sa+turne armed hym self  sowned Trompettis vnto armes. They of crete aroos this mornyng And many ther were of them that knewe thentenco~n of saturne. And allso ther were many that meruailled of that / that the kyng wold doo  coude fynde no reson wherfore he maad this armee. ffor all Crete was in pees And all the tytannoys were disparklid and put in to destruccion perdurable / Amonge all other Cybell wist not what to thynke Seeyng that saturne sent not after Iupiter She demanded hym oftentymes whe+ther he wold goo. and for what reson that he toke not Iupiter with hym in his compaygne. Iupiter was at that tyme in parthemye with his wyf Iuno / Whan

saturne had herde the demande of his wyf Cybell / alle his blood began to change. and sayd to her that all in tyme she shold knowe the place where he wold go to Cybell was wyse and subtylle. whan she herd the answer of the kynge / and sawe Incontynent the faco~n her herte gaf her that he had some euyll wyll. and had suspecion that he wold do harme to Iupiter / wher|fore she wente in to her chambre ryght pensyf. and at all auenture she sent hastely in to parthemye and syg|nefyed to Iupiter that he shold departe hastely thens and that she ymagyned that saturne his fader wold do hym displaysir / ffor he maad right grete assemble of men of armes. and there was no man that wold telle the cause wherfore::.


How kynge saturne wyth all his grete oost cam to fore the Cyte of archade ayenst Iupiter his sone:.
Hyt is to suppose that Iupiter had the herte right dysplaysant whan he had resseyuyd these ty|dynges fro hys moder cybell. and how well that she warned hym by supposyng / as she that wyst not veryly the wyll of the kynge / Allewey whan he consyderyd that he was not sent fore vnto this armee he doubtyd hym and departyd thens / and sayd to his wyf Iuno that he wold goo vnto archade concludyng in hym self that by thys meue he shold see the conduyte of his fader and to what place he enployed his armee / but he was not ferre on hys waye / whan he restyd vp|on a montaygne and loked behynd / hym that he sawe the Cyte of parthemye / that anone was enuyroned and full of men of armes of kynge saturne / that gaf

to hym a grete preef of thaduertysement of his moder / And for to see what way he entended. he taryed styll on the montaygne hauyng his eyen alwey vnto the cy+te. And anone he sawe his fader saturne mounte in to his Chare And all his arme yssue out at the same gate wher he cam fro and toke the same waye that he had taken. And that gaf hym verily to vnderstande and knowe that his fader sought hym. and so departyd from this motaigne and wente hym to Archade and told vnto his sone and to the archadiens the cause wherfore he was come  prayd hem that they wold garnysshe hem of good armures to the ende to deffende their Cyte yf hit be nede :..
THe archadyens at the request of Iupiter maad redy theyr armes and their cyte / and sente out espies vpon the waye And anone after they were come from the palais / the espies affermed to Iu+piter and Archas that they had seen the champaynes and the weyes of Archade all fulle of men of armes Anone was cryed in the Cyte in the name of their sou+uerayn lord Iupiter that euery man shold make good wache and kepe his warde / with this crye the Archa+diens armed hem with helmes  armes of leder And wente vpon the walles and towres hauyng in their handes axes. / swerdes. guysarnes. glayues and maces And they had not longe taryed there. whan they sawe come from ferre two men of Crete whiche cam to the gate and axed of the portiers yf Iupiteer were with Iune The porter whan he vnderstood what they axed answerd them that Iupiter was in the Cyte / and yf they had to do wyth hym they shold fynde hym in the

pallays. where he passid the tyme wyth his sone Ar|chas / and that he was newly come in to the toun to visyte hym. whan they of Crete herd thys they were sore troublid. ffor they sought hym that they wold not fynde / Notwythstandyng they wente in and passid forth vp to the pallays / And there fyndyng Iupiter with the nobles of archade after the reuerens made that oon of them spake and sayd. Syre we seke the /  we haue no will to fynde the / ffor we come aienst our will to execute a comission by the whiche may sonner come ruyne and trouble than peas Saturne thy fader coman+deth the that thou allone come speke with hym he hath sought them all the places of parthemye / his doughter Iuno thy wyf not thynkyng euyll. hath acertayned hym that thou art come hether / he is comen after the in armes / And we knowe not what he thynketh to doo / he was neuer so angry ne trite ne so fiers as he is now we ben hys seruauntes / fforce hath constrayned vs in his obeyssance. and after this we gyue the day to ap|pere in persone to fore hym this same hour all excusaci+ons cessyng :..
WHan Iupiter had reteyned and well putte in hys mynde the adiournement wyth hys eyen full of teeris maad his answer and said thus I meruayll me of the ryght straunge conduyte of my fader / and parauenture hit is not wyth out grete cause his royame is in peas / And I haue putte and sette hym agayn in hys royame. And now he hath putte hym self in armes wyth oute my knowleche. And syn sendeth for me that I shold allone come speke wyth hym / And that is to strange a thynge vnto me. And

he gouerneth hym not as he ought to do / ffor me ought to preyse them that haue deseruyd hit and be of valu. I haue auayled hym as moche as his royame is worth he hath othertyme sente for me to make warre / I wote neuer now what euyll wyll he hath or may haue to me. but here he is come with his armee where he hath no thyng to do Notwithstandyng he is come  deman+deth no thynge but me aloonly All thynge countyd debatyd I haue not Intencion for to obeye his comande+me~t how well that he is my fader for as moche as the suspecion is to moche apparau~t / but I am content yf he haue to do wyth me to serue hym  to come to hym by condicion that I shall be accompanyed of alle my frendes that I can gete  none otherwyse::.
The two comyssaires with this word retorned vnto saturne and told hym thentencion of Iu+piter / Saturne toke right inpaciently the An|swer of Iupiter and approched vnto Archade and be|segyd hit with grete othes makyng his auowe vnto his goddes. that yf he may haue Iupiter he with his han+des wold make sacrefice of hym. And than he sente of his moste wise men and said to hem. that in felle mena+ces they shold go somone the kynge Archas / / and the archadiens to yelde and delyuere hym Iupiter / Decla|ring openli that he were more his enemy than his sone The wise men departyd from the Oost at the comande+ment of saturne / and dide so her deuoir to somone the archadiens and said to the kynge  peple of Archade we be come vnto yow for as moche as ye sustene Iu|piter whom the kynge saturne holdeth for his enemy.  yf ye delyuere hym vnto saturne ye shall be his frendes

And yf not / he doth yow to wete that ye do kepe yow wyth good wacche and warde / ffor he hath not in the world gretter enemyes than yow ::.
By this mandement knewe Iupiter that he was hym self for whom satorne maad hys armee. The Archadiens assemblyd to councell wyth out Iupiter and spake of thys mater / and maad ans|were to the wyse men of Crete / conteynyng how they were bounden to serue Iupiter / and how they wold ke|pe hym and lyue and dye wyth hym agaynst all men aboue all other / whan the wise men had their answer retorned vnto saturne and told hym the answer of tharchadiens / Anone hastely sore achauffed be enfla|myng of grete yre. he comanded that the Cyte shold be assaylled / And anone wente to armes they of Crete in suche wise / and approched the wallys and mu|raill / that tharchadiens sawe their enemyes approche anone they sowned to armes and cam to the affraie  put hem to defende their walles by grete corage / tho was drawen  shotte many an arowe /  many a stone caste and many beten  hurte as well with in as with oute gennes bombardes ne grete artillerie was none in thys tyme in the royames / allwey they of the cyte had well the craft to cast vpon their enemies brennyng brondes  oilles  watres boillyng with asshes /  for to doo thus Iupiter had enduced  taught tharchadiens peple men  women ^t whan they of crete cam most stronge to thas+sault and supposid to haue entryd the Cyte they were chargid with fyre. oylles and skaldyng watres / that force constrayned them to go a back with grete losse of peuple / And they souned the retrayte / Saturne than

takyng the moste sorwe of the world what for that he myght not furnysshe his pleasyr as for that by the walles laye more than fowre .C. of his men ded And so retorned in to his tente after thassault passyng so|rowfull and desolate. And had so grete anoye at his herte that he mochte neyther ete ner drinke. but this not+withsta~ding he thought right well on his hurte peple and wente to their tentes. and dide do mynystre medy+cynes vnto them that were hurte ::.


How Iupiter sent his enbassadours to his fader saturne for peas. And how saturne wolde here ner en|tende to peas ::.
The Archadyens were passyng Ioyous whan they sawe and toke heed how they of Crete ces+syd with shame theyr assault / after thassault and the retrayt of bothe sides Allewey that Saturne entended to hele and gyue medecynes vnto his hurte men. Tthrchadyens assemblid a councell And by grete deliberaco~n they sente seuyn of their honorable counceyl+lours in ambassade vnto saturne / of whome that oon spack and sayd / Saturne thou knowest  oughtest to knowe that euery kynge ought tentende to lyue in peas / ffor the most fayr thyng of the world is peas Peas norysshyth prouffit by peas ar norysshid men and chyldren / townes and cytees ar vnyed and knet to geder by charite. and anexed by amerous co~myny|cacion. by peas the royames prouffyten en decoracion and bildyng fair houses In labour and ereyng the erth and in length of lyf / By peas the mannes bodyes ben hole and quyte. And hit is that thynge that causeth a man to demande souerainte. O saturne hit semeth that

thou rekkest not of this good vertu / for regnyng in peas and tranquyllite their is no kynge ner prynce that dar shewe hym agaynst thee / Thou hast not only troublid thy royalme / thou art abuser of warre for to haue peas a man ought to putte hym and dispose hym to the warre / thou doost all otherwyse. Ne seest not that thy sone Iupiter hath delyueryd the from the bondes of thyn other enemyes. And hath sette thy dyademe in a seuerte of peas where thou myght not doo wyth oute hym / Ne seest thou not for to make hym warre / thou ne mayst haue peas / And that thou destroyest and bre+kest this peas / Ne seest thou not that thys is thy sone / Ne seest thou not that thou art a monstre in nature / The fadres naturelly loue their children / the same wise rude and brute bestes kepe and holde this condycion of na|ture / Thou sekest and woldest destroye the blood of thy sone / And from whens cometh this dysnaturell appetyte / Myght hit not satysfye to thyn appetyt and ode errour the goodnes  wele that thou hast receyued late in reysyng / been thyn Interyor rancours permanent shall thy fantasyes neuer cesse / shalt thou be in Age lasse  sympler than a child / the more that men growe in age / the more be they wyse / Thou hast lasse know|leche now / than thou haddest in thy paryllous yougth and fro whens cometh this deffaulte / is this by the he|uenly Influence / yf hit be thus / where is rayson where is equyte / wher is the loue of the fader to the sone / kno+west thou not that ne had Iupiter thy sone ben / thou haddest ben yet in grete derkenes languysshyng / I syg|nefye the as aduocat of Iupiter that he loueth the as hys owen fader / And furthermore I praye the / that

thou wilt be in peas. And yf thou wille hym no good yet at the leste wille hym no harme ner encombrau~ce::.
I Sholde be sone vaynquysshyd Answerd Saturne yf thexperience of the lyf of Iupiter cam not to my sight See I not how he enhaunceth hym self the most he can see I not how the peple by his fayr and blandisshyng wordes owe hym more fauour than me / see I not that he fleeth from me. yf he be not culpable werfore fleeth he / he shal~ saye to the peple that he is Innocent Saye ye that he hath no thyng don ayenst me / I wote neuer how tharchadiens vnderstande. but yf I may ones sette my hande on them. ther was neuer so grete myschef as shall come vnto Archade. And y haue not thentencion to departe from this place tyl~ I haue put in pardurable ryne this cyte rebell ayenst me and my comandemens Syre Answerd the Archadiens syn that fayr speche may not refreyne thy passyng grete Irento thy warre be warre / kepe the well from vs and vs from the / syn the mater shall take his cours in this party god spede the ryght and fortune / we shall not longe drawe the festue hit is concluded that tharchadiens and Iupiter shall yssue to morn out of the cyte. And yf they fynde ony that assaylle them. they wyll defende their lyues This worde accomplisshid Saturne torned his back to tharchadiens shakyng his hede / And tharchadiens retorned in to their Cyte and reherred and told from the begynnyng to the ending all that they had founden And by there reporte hit was confermed that the day folowyng they shold yssue out of the cyte in suche wyse as they had purposyd amonge hem ::.
IVpiter had grete displaisir in hym self of that he sawe that his fader was so greued and wold not be con|tente / yet notwythstandyng he doubtyd not so moche that he ne toke courage to hym. and said he was more holden to kepe his lyf than to obeye the euyll wyll of his fader / that hated hym at his burthe. This nyght passid ouer / anone after that the sonne clered  lyght the ayer / aboute the thirde hour of the day Archas Iu|piter and the men of warre of the Cite wente hem in to the felde in goode ordenance. and than they were not so sone yssued of the gates / that they ne were seen of the saturnyens that waited after hem by the comandement of saturne. and so began eche agayn other a grete bruyt and noyse that it resouned vnto the Montaignes and walles. And than they began tassayle tharchadyens by shotte  stones so certaynly that whan Iupiter sawe that ther was none other remedye but to fyghte / he put hym forth formest in the fronte to fore / and so began to smyte on them that sought hym cryyng with an hye wis. lo here is Iupiter / eche man do to hym what he may
And thus began the dolourous bataill of saturne and Iupiter / ther was the fader against the sone and the sone agaynst the fader / Ther loste na|ture her fayr and recomaunded propertes. The fader sought the blood that he had engendryd. And promy+sid grete yeftes vnto them that myghte take hym / The batayll was rygourous  harde. And than wrought and foughte well Iupiter and Archas. and soue|raynly the noble Iupiter enploied so hardly his swerd temprid with stele that he smote doun sheldes  helmes and cutte of heedes and armes / and there was no man

myght resiste hys prowes Inuyncible. he made to trem+ble the moste hardiest that were ther / he made resorte  to go abacke them that had auaunced them self more than they had power and vertu. he brak the wynges of the batayle And in their most strength he entrid and encountryd many tymes saturne his fader / and was well in his power and puyssance to greue hym. but how wel~ that saturne caste on hym and gaf hym grete strokes and greuous horions. yet he wold neuer smyte agayn but said to hym ofte times. Alas my fader wher+fore sekest thou theffusion of my blood. I am thy sone and thy seruaunt. Thou hast no cause to persecute me / I shal~ not enploye myn hand vpon the. but beware and take no fyance in the archadiens. ffor yf they may haue and gete the in her power thou shalt fynde in them ly|tyll pyte ne mercy ::.
SAturne notwythstandyng these fayr wordes wold neuer refrayne his Ire but smote euer vp on Iupiter also fiersly as he mocht / Iupiter of alle his strokes toke non hede and sette lityll ther by And how wel~ that he had concyence to fight  smyte his fader / yet allewey he torned his strokes and had no co~cience to occupie his trenchant swerd vpon them of Crete. so fermly that euery strook wyth out faute was dyed with newe blood. And for to do so he en|forced hym self to shewe hit to saturne that he faught ayenst hym in vayn. and that to hym was no thyng In+possible. In alle these thynges saturne toke no regarde ner ensample. The Crye was grete aboute Iupiter / the armes were gretely exercysid. the ground was all co+ueryd with theffusion of blood. And the dede bodyes

laye oon vpon an other beheded and smyten in pecys / O right hard and sore batayle / Saturne was so enuo|lupped in his obstynacion that the blood of his men we|tyng his armes by the cours of the large woundes that Iupiter maad vnto them myght not modere his yre ner herte / And hys eyen were so blynde in his Ire that he sawe nought his ryght euydent domayge. where he sought the propre Moyen by whiche he was put out of his Royame that he dowbtyd and ayenst whiche he entendid to resiste and eschewe with his myght:.


Howe Iupiter vaynquysshid the batayll ayenst saturne his fader / and saturne fledd by the see::.
IN this batayll Iupiter sauved often tymes Saturne among the glaiues of tharchadiens /  dide good ayenst euyll / many of them of crete fought against herte know+yng that saturne had meuid  was cause of the warre And howe well they put their handes to werke / yet alleway the variaco~n that they had amonge them was cause of the losse of right grete nombre of peple /  they doubtyd Iupiter  they had no power to withstande  fight / in suche wise as they wold haue don yf they had had or felte her querele good / And by this maner was the bataill demenyd to the grete preiudyce of the satur+nyens / Iupiter put hym self in deuoyr vnto his fader / And ofte tymes Cryed in his ere that he shold wyth|drawe hym er the batayll went worse or be lost And wythstood hys strokes a grete whyle / Awaytyng that he wold conforme and conuerte hym self fro his euyll oppynyon. But than at last whan Iupiter toke hede and sawe that he wold in no wyse here hym / He opende and desployed hys vertu and the grete myght

of his armes and of his swerd. and maad suche af|fray vnto his aduersaryes. brekyng their helmes and hewyng their harnoys. not in manere of a man hauyng alday susteyned the feet And grete strokes and pey|sant of the saturnyens / but in the manere of a Champi+on ffresshe  newe of whom the strookes redowblid:..
THus than hit semed vnto the saturnyens that in multiplieng of horions  strokes the strength and puissance of Iupiter began to norissh and growe. Hys well doyng and vayllyance gaf vnto tharchadyens strengthe vpon strengthe. And vnto his enemyes grete losse of blood and also of lyf. ther was the ground bedewed with newe blood. ther were the ded bodies coueryd with newe ded men. ther was the Chare of saturne smyten in to peces. Saturne held a longe while the bataile. also longe as his might wold endure and in no wise wold flee / but in co~clusion whan his men sawe that the thynge wente for them allewey from euyll in to worse. they began to flee And torned the back and fledde / And than Saturne torned and fledde also in like wise. Tho they were folowed in the chasse so asperly and dedly. that som were slayn in the way And some sauyd hem self now here and now there / And amonge all other Saturne was so nyhe poursiewyd by Archas and some of tharchadyens that he had no leyser to retorne in to Crete. but was dryuen by force tyll he cam vnto a porte of the see that was ther by. where he sauyd hym self by moyen of a shippe that he ther fonde / And ther he wente vnto the see wyth some of them that fledde so sore greuyd and

anoyed that he moght not speke ::.
THus thys batayll ended of the fader and the sone / whan Archs sawe that saturne was sa+uyd in the see / he retorned to Iupiter hys fader that assemblid again his peple and told hym these ty|dynges / And also more ouer he assemblid his counceil~ for to wete what Iupiter shold doo / and they of the counceyll were all of the oppynyon that Iupiter shold goo in to Crete. and that they wold make hym kynge Sayyng that the goddes had shewyd clerly that they wold that he shold succede as kynge in the royame / wherof his fader was fled fro and also for so moche as they had than no heed To this counceill accorded Iu+piter / and wente to Crete / by space of tyme where he was resseyuyd for kynge / ffor the cytezeyns durst not agaynsaye hit for as moche as they wiste neuer wher saturne was become / And how well that Cibel~ and vesca maad grete sorowe for the Infortune of saturne Allewey they torned theyr sorowe in to gladnesse at the coronacion of Iupiter. and sente after Iuno / And than began Iupiter to regne in desirybuyng and depar|tyng vnto the Archadyens the tresours of hys fader / wherof they had grete Ioye and gladnes / and for this cause sayen the poettes. that Iupiter geldyd his fader and caste his genytoyrs in to the see. of whom was en+gendryd venus / That is to saye that he castyd the tre|sours of hys fader in to the belyes of his men / wherof engendryd alle delectacion whyche is comparyd and lykenyd vnto venus 


Hw Acrisius had a doughter named danes / the whiche

he did do shette in a tour for as moche as he had an An+swer that she shold haue a sone the whyche shold torne hym in to a stone ::.
IN these dayes whan Iupiter of Crete flourys|shid in honour strength prowesse nd vayl|liance. In the Cyte of Arges regned the ryght myghty kynge Acrisius / that his doughter Danes did do beshitte and kepte in a tour / ffor to knowe the gene+alogye of this kynge acrysius in this partye hit is to be noted that of Iupiter born of archade and of a damoy+sell named ysis cam a sone named Epaphus. This epa+phus engendryd a sone and a doughter the sone was named belus and regned in a partye of Egypte: And the doughter had to name Libye. and dwellyd in Af|fryque where she conceyuyd a sone named Busiers that was an vnhumayn tyraunt. as shall be said here after in the dedes of hercules / Belus than engendrid two sones. Danaus and Egistus. danaus had fifty dough+ters. and Egistus had as many sones. And thise sones and doughtres were conioyned to geder by maryage wenyng Egistus right well to haue maried his sones but he was deceyued of his wenyg. ffor danaus for enuye and couetyse to haue the succession. maad that by his doughters trayterously shold be murdryd alle fyfty sones of the said egistus the fyrst nyght of theyr esponsailles as they slepte.  all they concentid in this foule horrible cryme  synne / exept oon allone named ypermestra. whiche had a stedfast herte of pyte. ffor whan she shold haue persecutid her husbond linceus she saued hym his lyf mercifully. And also conceyued of his seed a sone that was named Abas. that after

was kynge of Arges / And he engendryd the kynge Acrysyus wherof is maad mencion in the begynnyng of this Chappitre / These were the parentes and proge|nytours of kynge Acrysius. he was ryght puyssant in rychesse / But he named hym self poure. ffor he had no Chyldren but oon doughter only whyche was na|med Danes / but for to haue a sone / he wente day by day in to temples and oracles of the goddes / And ther made many prayers and sacrefices ynowhe fastynges almesses  other suffrages / Alle these thynges myght not helpe ner brynge to exaudycion the accompllysshe|ment of his desire / His wyf cam vnto her bareyn yeres And than he was out of alle hope to haue ony chyld maale / and than he confortyd hym in danes his dough+ter / And sette hys loue so gretly in her / that he had no pleasance but only to beholde her / and that he purpo+syd that neuer noman shod haue her ner wedde her but yf he were the moste noble and vayllyant man of the world / but for as moche as in this world is no thinge pardurable / This loue was of lityll enduryng. and that by the purchas of the kynge Acrysius / ffor as the loue that he had in danes grewe in ampliacion of natu|rell Ielowsie / / he wente hym in to thoracle of god Be|lus his old grauntfader / And serchyng what shold be the destynee of his doughter / he dide hym to be answerd that of her shold come a Sone that shold torne hym in to stone :::::.
By this answer Acrysius began to falle from the grete loue that he had in his doughter / he retor|nyd sorofull and pensyf in to his hows and

becam all melancolik with out takyng Ioye ne plaisir in ony thyng that he sawe. his doughter was than yonge. he sawe her often tymes. otherwhile in cruelte and some tyme in pite / the remors of that that he trow+ed to be transformed in to stoon by hym that by destine shold be born of his doughter / meuyd hym to a cruelte in suche wyse that often tymes he determyned that he wold put her to deth And so to spille his blood to the ende for to remedye his Infortune / but whan he had take in his hand the glayue wherwyth he wened to slee her / Nature began to medle and put hym betwene bothe. And of this cruelte he maad hym to condescende to pyte. and to put a way his glayue. and to late the shedyng of her blood. that was come of his owne blood the whiche shold come to the succession of his crowne whiche his auncyent progenytours had or|deyned to fore ::.
For to saye the verite this kyng Acrisyus from thens forth toke his reste trauerse of many syghis. he coude not be assured. his doughter grewe and becam a woman she was passyng fayr and right well adressid / many kynges  grete ertheli lordes desired to haue her in mariage and wold endowe her with noble Crownes. but the kynge Acrisius re|fused all them that requyred her And ymagyned that his doughter for her grete beawte might be taken away and rauysshed. by whiche she myght by auenture haue a sone that shold torne hym in to stone. And to the ende to eschewe this parcill  daunger / he thoughte that he wold make a tour the strengest of the world And that in the same tour shold his doughter 

closed and shette duryng her lyf wyth out comyng of ony man to her / ffor he was so Ielous of her that he be leuyd her not well whan he sawe her / In the ende he sent for werkemen and forgiers of stele and of copper from alle partyes. And brought hem vnto a stronge place alle enuyronned wyth waters where was no entre but in oon place :::::..
WHan he had brought theder all his werkemen he sayd to them that he wold haue a tour made alle of copper wyth a gate departyd from the tour for to put In four  twenty men of armes for to kepe the tour yf hyt were nede / the werkemen bargay|ned with the kyng Acrisyus to make the tour and the gate / they sette on hande to the werke / the towr was maad by processe of tyme And than whan alle was achieued. Acrisyus brought / theder his doughter with out latyng her knowe his entencion. And also sone as she was in the tour he sayd to her / My only doughter hit is comen vnto my knowleche / that in serchyng thy prosperyte to my god belus / I haue ben aduertised that of the shall come a sone whiche shall conuerte  torne me in to stone  Thou knowest that euery man naturelly coueytyth and desireth thenduryng to lyue in his lyf / I loue the passyng well / and no thynge in the world so moche sauf my lyf / But certayn my lyf toucheth more ner to my herte / than thy loue / wherfore I sekyng and requyryng the remedyes ayenst myn predestynat Infortune / I wolde neur gyue the in maryage to ony man that hath required or desired the. Also to thende that generacion descende not of thy body / And that thou

sholdest haue no knowleche of man duryng my lyf / I haue do forgid this tour of copper / and wille that thou be closed and shytte therin. And that no man see the / I pray the my doughter accorde the vnto my will and desire. And take pacyence in thys place for to passe thy tyme. I shall do accompanye the with many noble vir+gynes. And shall gyue vnto the alle that / that thou canst or mayst thenke :.
WHan the noble damoysell Danes vnderstode the will of her fader she behelde the tour of cop+per for to kepe her shitte faste therin. And fur|ther she conciderid that she shold neuer marye duryng the lyf of her fader the kynge. she was sore troubled in these thynges. And by grete bitternesse and sorow|full herte began to wepe and said / Alas my fader am I born vnder so vnhappy constellacion for to be a mar|teresse and prisonner / not in the ende of myn yeres. but in my yonge tyme Not in a pryson of stone or of syme~t but in a tour of copper  laton in suche wise as I shold dwelle therin perpetuelly My fader what hast thou thought. thou enterpretest euyll the sentence of the god belus sayng that of me shall be born a sone that shall torne them to stone. ffor by this sentence. ought none other thynge be vnderstande. but that I shall haue a sone that shall regne after the. And shall torne them to stone. That is to saie that he shall putte the in to thy sepuliure.. beholde than what symplesse shall hit be to the to hold me thus enfermed and shitte in this tour My doughter answerd Acrisius thou interpretest the prenosticacion of our god belus after that the liketh to thy Ioye and prouffyt hit lieth me sore on my herte

yf thou haue a sone / he shall putte me to deth and that is my Iugement / ne wythsaye no more ayenst me I am thy fader / lorde and mayster ouer the / thou shalt abyde here eyther by loue or otherwyse / At thys conclucion whan danes sawe that she myght not contente her fer|full fader / as wyse and sage as she was she agreed and accorded to do his playsyr / Sayng hyt with the mouth and not wyth the herte / And than the kynge sente for virgynes and also olde matrones in alle the royame aboute / And delyuerid his doughter vnto them for to accompanye serue and kepe / and maad hem all to be shette and closed / After he toke leue of them coman+dyng vpon payne of deth / that they ne souffryd ony man to come and speke wyth his doughter with oute his wytyng and knowleche / whan he had thus doon he retorned in to the cyte of arges. and assemblid fourty stronge women / whiche he gaf wages  sowldye and sente hem to kepe the gate and the entre of the tour And than aroos the renomee of these thynges in so grete a sou~n  noyse that all grece was full of the meruaylles and ther was no kyng ne prynce / that ne complayned the losse of the youth of fayr danes than holden  na|med the most fair of alle the grekesses / doughter of the kynge ::::


How Iupiter in gyse of a messanger brought vnto the tour of darrayn to the damoyselles and to danes many Iewels faynyng that he cam from Iupiter::.
By this tour  by this moyen Acrisyus thought to ouercome his pdestynat Infortune / and was well cased that his doughter was in so seur a place / Alle the world spacke of her and of her tour

by compassion they co~playned her / hit was so moche spoken of this caas that Iupiter had his eeres full ther|of. And not onely his eeres but also and his herte. ffor in heryng the recomendacion of thexcessiue perfeccion of this virgyne Danes. he was amourous of her so gretli and desirously like as the mariage of hym and Iuno had be consumed. And than he began with alle his herte to thenke how and whan and in what maner he myght come to see this damoysell danes. And so mo|che he thoughte  studyed in this mater / that ther was none other thynge that he wold here of ner no deuyses of his men. saue only of them that spake of the pryson of danes And he spak gladly and deuysed with good will coueytyng Instantly to be with her / And that as well in the psence of Iuno as other wise. whiche said many tymes. that he wold that the goddes wold gyue hym grace and power to brynge this damoysell da|nes out of the tour ::
By this mene  these deuyses Iuno was in doubte and began to fele the firste sparklis of Ielousie castyng Infynyte curses and malediccions vp|on danes / and vpon all them that had sowen these ty|dynges to fore her husbond not only in couert and in her stomack / but more openly in the presence of her hus|bond shewyng euydently that she had thataynte of Ielowsie. This notwithstondyng Iupiter ne was the lasse desirous for to see danes than he was to fore / the malediccions ne curses myght not lette ne withdrawe his affeccions / whiche grewe more and more. In the ende he fonde hym self so surmounted that ther was no more contynence founden. And that in the diffinyco~n

to deuise entencions and conclusions he concluded to go vnto the gardyens and kepars of the damoysell danes and that he wold bere vnto them so largely  so many owches of gold  Iewels wyth monye of gold that he wold torne hem with his yeftes to acorde to hym  late hym entre in to the tour of danes / Than he sente for the Iewellers ^t were wonte to serue his fader saturne And maad hem make the moste ryche bagues and owches that were euer seen or thought whan the werk+men me had made apartye / / Iupiter toke hem and charged hym with all / And euyll clothed lyke as he had ben a seruaunt allone departed from crete and drewe hym to Arges the moste secretli that he myght / and so wente and cam sechyng the tour of darayn. whiche he fonde in an euenyng  sawe the walles shynyng and cam vn+to the gate where he fonde many of the matrones syt|tyng at the dore for recreacion ::.
Whan Iupiter was comen he salewed the Ma|trones and said vnto them. Noble dames the good nyght come to yow / / what tour is thys that is so noble  of so stronge facion. ffayr sone said the eldest of them. ye be not of this contre for as moche as ye knowe not the name of this tour / knowe ye cer|taynly that hit is named the tour of darayn / and this is the propre place that the kyng Acrisius hath do make for to kepe his doughter the virgyne danes / whiche is accomplisshed of all vertues and honorable manyers that her lyke is not in alle thys worlde / But the poure mayde is so moche Infortunat / that her fader acrisius holdeth her in this tour shitte for that he had an answer of hys goddes that of hys doughteer danes

shold be born a childe that shold torne hym in to stone This is the cause wherfore we ben and kepe her that no man ne conuerse with her in no faco~n And her fader is the kynge Acrisius whiche is so sore smeton to the herte with Ielowsye that yf he knewe of your beyng here. he wold sende to destroye yow. And therfore withdrawe yow and goth forth on your way. Iupi+ter heryng the answer of the woman gaf no regard vnto her wordes. sauyng his eeres / ffor he enploied his eyen vnto the regarde of the tour / And seeyng that hit was Imprenable for ony assault As well for the strength of the place where hit was founded on. as for that hit was nyghe the Cyte of Arges whyche was right stronge / he considered in hym self that for to come and see this mayde he coude not obteyne but by the mo|yen of these women. And than thus answerd to the old woman. I thanke you of your good aduertisement I am moche beholden vnto yow / but I shall yet say more vnto yow. yf hit plese yow. I am sent vnto the da+moyselles of this place fro the right myghty kynge Iu+piter of Crete for to delyuere to them certayn presentes on his behalue. wherfore I pray yow that hit please yow to gyue me assistence anenst them / whan the olde matrone vnderstood of Iupiter and that he brought presentes vnto the damoiselles she answerd hym that he was right welcome / And maad hym to entre in to a lityll chambre whiche was by the gate for to speke therin to her frendes whan they cam to visite them. And than she wente in to the chambre of danes. and there assemblid alle the women of the place and said vnto them. My felawes the kynge Iupiter of Crete greteth

yow well by oon of hys serauntes / whom I haue putte in to the chambret of the yate / he hath sayd to me that he hath brought certayn presentes. See ye now whether ye will resseyue hem or not and what I shall answere to the messanger ::.
THe damoyselles were right Ioyous and glad whan they herd these tydynges and toke their counceyll to gyder / and concluded that they wolde take and resseyue these presentes of the kynge Iupiter / Than they descended in to the chambrete and fested the mesager whiche dide hem reuerence. and said to them. Ladyes and damoyselles your renomee is so grete that hit hath meuyd the kynge Iupiter to desyre your loue / In sygne of whiche he hath sente to yow of his Iewels. and praieth yow to resseyue them in thank And that he recomandyth hym vnto the right noble grace of your maistres the kynges doughter / with these wordes Iupiter opend his sacke of lether wherin were his Iewels and delyuerid them vnto the damoyselles whan they had resseyued them and seen them what they were / they were all abasshed for to see thynges so precious and sayd that they wold goo and shewe hem to their maistresse / And forthwith they wente vp in to the tour and shewyd their present vnto danes / Sygnefyyng her that the kynge Iupiter recomandyd hym vnto her noble grace / Also sone as thys noble vir+gyne had seen these Iewels / She sayd that hit muste nedes be that Iupiter was riche  large and that the yeft that he had yeuen was more of value than all the royame of arges / and also that she wold that the man

that had brought these Iewels were fested as hit ap|perteyneth and also thanked in her name. Than the da+moyselles by the comandement of danes wente to feste the messanger of kynge Iupiter the beste wyse that they myght the moste parte of the nyght in mete and drynke / And than cam the aged woman that had first spoken with hym and said to hym. My sone the may+den danes thanketh the kynge Iupiter of the courtoysie that hit hath plesid hym to do to her damoyselles. And she taketh her self gretly beholden to hym and to yow that haue taken the payne to brynge them / yf ther may please yow ony thynge here in. spare not this hous::
DAme answerd Iupiter ye do me to moche ho+nour that oon half / yf ther be ony thynge in crete to your pleasir. Axe ye hit / and certaynly ye shall be serued wyth good herte. And than they tal|ked so longe that hit was tyme to wythdrawe hym Iupiter toke leue of the damoyselles  concluded that he wold retorne in to his contre on the morn erly. what shall I saye more Iupiter toke this nyght as moche rest as he myght. and had the herte so surprised that he awoke more than he neded for the hour was not come for that he attended for to speke to danes / He retorned secretli in to Crete And did do make newe Iewels mo+che more riche and more precious than the other were for to go a gayn and presente to the damoyselles / and as sone as was to hym possible. he gadrid to geder as many as wold charge an hors. After this on a mor|nyng erly he laded an hors with these Iewels. and with oute wetyng of ony persone / with the same he

so laboured that with oute auenture he cam vnto to the tour / And there assemblid the damoyselles  dide hem reuerence and sayd to them / Ladyes and damoyselles the kynge Iupiter hath yow so in his grace that know|yng by the reporte of me what feste and Ioye ye maad late of his Iewels / he hath sente vnto yow / and in his name I presente to yow these Iewels that I haue nowe brought / prayng that the presente may be acceptable  agreable / and that hit plaise yow to do so moche vnto your maistresse  that I myght a litil~ speke with her for to aduertise her yf hit plaise her of certain secrete thinges that towche her /  wherof I am charged by Iupiter:.


How Iupiter in the guyse of a messanger wyth many Iewels cam the seconde tyme to see danes / and how he spacke  gaf her in knowleche what he was and how he laye with her the same nyght::.
Whan Iupiter had achieuyd his purpoos / he des|ploied his merceryes / and whan the matrones had vnderstand of Iupiter that he desired to haue grace to speke with danes / They wente vnto the mayde by the counceil~ of the olde woman for to haue her oppy+nyon /  comyng with hem the olde woman she had the wordes for hem all / And said my doughter the kynge Iupiter hath sente hether the burthen of a hors of ^e most fairest Iewels that euer ye sawe / Certes hit is a tryum+phe to see them / notwithstanding we durst not resseyue them for as moche as the messanger requireth to speke with yow / whiche is vs defended by your fader / See what we shal~ doo. we ben gretly beholden vnto ^e kyng Iupiter of his courtosies. but whan we behold the strait comandement of your fader. we wyte neuer what to

do. Whan the mayden danes had herd the wordes and the tydynges of the old woman She was right pen|syf. but not for that she ne spared not to saie that. that her herte Iugged her And thus answerd. My moder ye knowe well and hit nedeth not to telle yow. that he that doeth shewe loue and curtoisie. ought to be than kyd by semblable. The kynge Iupiter as ye haue to me said hath ofte tymes doon for vs. the first good cometh from hym. me thynketh vnder all correccions. that we may well suffre hym speke with me / Hit is a lityll thinge of his seruaunt or varlet. the kynge my fader shall neuer knowe hit / hit is no nede that he knowe all that shall falle. but first shewe to hym. howe hit is defendid yow vpon the lyf that no man speke with me. And make hym promyse and swere that he shall kepe this thynge secrete ::.
THe damoisels and the olde woman Ioious of thanswer of the mayde wente doun from the tour vnto the gate. And fyndyng Iupiter besy to desploye and vnbynd his Iewels / the old woman said vnto hym / ffair sone the kynge Iupiter hath foun+den more grace here in this place anenst the maide danes than all the men in the world. Neuertheles ye ought to knowe that vpon payne of deth. hit is to yow defen+ded and to other by vs. And we ben also defended vp|on the same paine by the kynge Acrisius. that we shall late no man liuyng speke with her / The comaundeme~t of the kynge is so grete. And your requeste is not lityll Certes we dar not brynge yow vnto her alle thynge concyderid. ffor yf hit were knowen with out faute we shold be all put in to the ffyre. And perauenture yf

ye were founden here with in by the kyng that cometh often tymes hether he wolde put yow to deth / wherfore we pray yow that hit please yow to excuse vs a yenst your maystre / By the comprysyng of this answer Iu|piter fonde nought that he soughte / And than he helde hym more ner in dyspayre than he dyde in hope. but he remembrid that a beggar shold not go away for ones warnyng / And sayd vnto the olde woman to the be|gynnyng of her answer / Dame ye do well yf ye fere and drede the kyng / whiche is to me no meruayll / All way his comandement is not so strayt / but that ye may enlarge hyt yf ye wyll / he hath deffended that none shall speke wyth her / The kynge Iupiter requyreth that his seruant may saye to her sertayn thynges secrete towchyng her honour / ye shall doo that pleseth yow but in trouth yf ye acorde hym his requeste / the accorde shall not be preuidyciable to yow in ony thynge. ffor the kynge Iupiter is no pletar and knoweth so moche of the worlde / that vnto yow he had not sent me yf he had not found me secrete / And thus yf ye wold doo to hym ony pleasyr ye haue none excusacion resonable / None knoweth herof but ye and I / yf I speke vnto the Mayde by your consente / who shall accuse vs / hit shall not be ye for the mater toucheth yow / And hit shall not be .I. nor the kynge Iupiter / ffor sartaynly we had leuer dye in sorofull deth and also abyde in|deffamable payne ::::::..
FAir sone answerd the old woman / ye speke so swetly / ^t we may not / ner can yeue vnto yow the reffuse of your requeste we dare well affye

and truste in yow. Alas dame answerd Iupiter doubte ye / whan I shall fawte ayenst yow or ony other / / I be smyten with the thonder and tempeste I wold verita|bly that ye had the prerogatyf to knowe the humayn thoughtes to the ende that in Iugyng of my corage by your Iugement were the mayde assured not to haue by my cause ony Inconuenyence / with these wordes Iupi|ter drewe to his will the olde woman and all the da+moyselles as well by his subtyll langage as by his richesses / ffor short processe the old woman accorded to Iupiter that he shall haue the grace to speke with the mayde. And brought hym to fore her with all his presentes / Iupiter had than more Ioye than I can write And whan he was thus aboue in the tour of darayn in beholdyng the ample beaulte of danes his Ioye dow+blid /  he knewe her lightly by her beawte. And made vnto her reuerence sayng. Right noble  right accom|plisshid damoysell the kynge Iupiter saleweth yow by me. And sendeth vnto the women of this hous of suche goodes as fortune hath gyuen to hym. yf hit be your pleasir they shall receyue them. And after I shall saie vnto yow certayn thinges secrete whiche the kyng Iupiter your seruaunt hath chargyd me to saye vnto yow. My frende answerd danes sauf your honour the kyng Iupiter is not my seruaunt / but I my self am behol+den to hym and am his seruaunt / And thanke hym of the largesses that semeth as he had reyned gold in this place. hit is ryght agreable to me ^t the women of this tour haue your present / And hit pleseth me well also to here your charge. to thende that kynge Iupiter saye not that I were vnkynde ::.
THe Matrones and the damoiselles were pre+sent at this answer / Iupiter deliuerid vnto them his Iewels whiche they resseyued with grete gladnes / After that. danes toke the mesanger by the hande and lad hym a parte vnto the beddes syde where she maad hym to lene by her / And than whan Iupiter fonde hym so allone wyth danes / he sayd vnto her / Ryght noble damoyselle / I shall no more calle yow damoyselle but lady. ffor ye ar my lady and my only maystresse whiche haue maistred myn herte / and also haue ouercome me vnder the sowne and bruyt of your gloryous loos and name / ffor to aduertyse yow verily I am Iupiter / of whom now I haue spoken to yow at the presentacion of the Iewels / And hyt is trouth that hit is not longe sythen whan I was in my royame / for to here reported the manere how your fader helde yow shette in thys tour wyth lityll good that may acorde vnto your honour / as well as for to gete your thanke and grace. as for pyte wher with I was meuyd / I haue delyberid in my herte to employe my self vnto your de|lyuerance and also for to gete your grace / and for to execute this deliberaco~n / I haue taken partye of my tre|sours  am come hether to psent them vnto your damoi+selles / and so departid and of newe am comen agayn in hope to haue your loue / and wherof I am well contente and thanke mercy  fortune Alas madame yf I am so hardy as for to haue put my self in thauenture of my lyf for to shewe the grete loue ^t I haue in yow / excuse me. yf I haue entreprised thynge so hye that I ne me hold wor+thy to touche hyt but in the affyance of fortune  in so moche as she wil~ me fauour in this tye / madame than

in the concideracion of my wordes. ye may see my lyf as my deth And ye only may ligtly make the Iugement yf your humylite condescende in the knowleche of pyte that I haue had of yow / disposing my self in to the dah+ger / where I might be sure. I am now nyhe the Ieoparde whiche ye may saue And yf not I yeld me your pry|sonner Certes the shynyng resplendissour of your re|nomed beawte. wherof the dede passeth the renome and the tryumphe of your Incompared excellence hath enra+ched myn herte And hath brought me hether in to the pryson of your will. Alas madame behold ande see with your eyen full of swetenes and of clemence me whiche seeth not at this time / but languysshe in fute of reste in contynuell trauayll in furies redowblyd  in sighes vpon sighes whiche may not be pourueied of re|medie but by your benyngnite  amorous purueyance.
AT the begynnyng of the first recomendacyon that was maad of yow in my presence. And at the poynt that I entreprised to delyuere you out of this tour / I helde me self right ewro and happy be cause of so hye an enterpryse. but seeyng the parels where I fynde only my self syn / I wote neuer what I may saie of my self. ffor by moneth vpon moneth. weke vpon weke And day vpon day your name hath had domynacion on me. And ofte tymes hath constraynd me to be rauysshed and yet more in a traunce be desire to speke to yow. and to ymagyne how I shold come to the poynt where I now am. And not only in this. but also to fynde mercy in yow. And I pray  requyre yow right humbly that the amerous yefte of mercy ye will

to me acorde / and thus doyng ye shall do mercy to your self and haue pyte of your yonge daies whiche ye haue consentyd to lese / by the folyssh fantasies of the kynge your fader / ye knowe well that his lyf during he shal~ not suffre yow to be maried to ony man. hit is possible that your fader shall lyue as longe as ye / ffor he is stronge of membres hard and boistous / Also ye ought conceyue yf ye wyll beleue me / that your lyf hath no welthe ne playsanse only / the playsances come vnto the peple by the syght and by beholdyng of dyuerce thynges / the women syngulerly haue their pryncypal~ plaisus in her husbondes  in her generaco~n and lignyes ye ne may come here to / but yf ye haue mercy on your self / Is hit not in your consait and knowleche that no man hath but his lyf in this world / ffor as moche as ye obeie and complaise the folish comandement of your fader the kynge Acrisius / ye shall be a woman loste be+yng in this place / hit is not possible to take and haue pacience / This is to hard a thynge vnto a yonge herte to be put in prison with oute demerite / I knowe the hu|mayn affeccions and vnderstande that naturelly euery creature loueth his prouffit to fore the prouffit of an other / This is ayenst your prosperite and vtilite that ye be shitte here with Inne / how may ye haue loue vnto hym whiche is cause of two euillis. the lasse euyll is to chese syn that ye fele yowe condempned here vnto the ende of the dayes of your fader / dowte ye not but hys ende is ofte desired to his myschef for your sake. and his meschief may not ye do be don with oute grete charge of conscience / me thynketh that better hit were for yow in dyuerce facions to fynde manere to yssue and go out

of this place / and to take to husbonde some man noble  puyssant / that wold entreprise to carye yow awey secreth for to be his wyf in his contrey / by this moyen ye shall be delyuered fro the payne / where ye be in / ye shuld eschewe the deth of your fader / And lasse euyll ye shold do in fleyng his folissh comandement than to abyde in the poynt wher he hath putte yow / Madame alas thynke ye hereon for your honour and helthe as I haue sayd yow I am your seruaunt / and yf hit please yow to departe from this place / ye shall fynde no man redyer than I am for to kepe yow and conduyte I gyue my self vnto your noble comandementes for to furnissh your wyll to my power / as he that bereth allewey the remembrance of yow in the most deppest place of my mynde In slepyng I see yow and wakyng I thynke on yow I haue had neuer reste in my self ner neuer shall haue but yf hit plese yow that my fortune my destynee my happe or vnhappe come of yow / yf ye take me vnto your mercy / and that I fynde grace anenst yow I shall be the moste happyest of all happy  yf ye do otherwyse / hit may be sayd that among all vnhappy none shall go to fore me / but whan suche fortune shal come to me by your rygour I shall take hit in pacience for the No|blesse that I see in yow allewey I require yow that my herte be not pryued ne put from yowr herte. For as moche as hit toucheth me / Alle the tonges of. men can not saye ner expresse the quantite of the loue that I haue in yow / no more than they can pronounce by propre na+mes / all the sterres of heuene / by this loue I am allewey in thoughtes laboureus. en sighis anguysshous and ofte tymes in grete fere and doubte And at this oure I wote

neuer whether I lyue or not / how wel me thinketh I am here for to resseyue absolucion or mortal~ sentence Thise thinges co~sidered alas will not ye haue hym in your grace That for to deserue your loue  mercy hath abandouned and auentured his lyf as ye maye see / leuyng his ryall astate for the better to kepe his caas secrete / vnto an herte well vnderstanding fewe wordes suffisen / For conclu+sion I pray yow to gyue your herte vnto him. that hath gy+uen his vnto yow. and that ye pourueye from hens forth for ^e losse where ye now be Inne after ^e comyn Iugeme~t
WIth this Iupiter helde his pees and kept scilence and entended his eeres for to here what shold be thanswere of danes / The right noble damoysell whan she had herd his purpos. whiche she had sore no+ted And whan she sawe that he had gyuen her place to speke / how wel~ she was right assewred. she changed colour  said to hym / Syre kynge alas knowe ye well what shold be the renome that shold beleue with me. yf I shold beleue your counceyll / what shold the peple saye. madame answerd Iupiter / the worste ^t they may saye shall be ^t men shall name yow dysobeyssant vnto the folissh comandement of your fader / whiche as all the world knoweth that he hoeth yow folily in his prison here faste shitte in / And yf ye wole thus helpe your self  stele your self away / men shold bt lawhe for your yougthe shold excuse your feet. and ye shold be renomed to haue dn this fette by grete wisedom / A sire said danes ye wene to desceyue me by your fair  swete wordes / I knowe the spekinges of the argiens  also I knowe ^t I am bou~den to obeye my fader /  forthermore I am not so ignora~t but that I wold wel haue som noble man to my

husbond but that myn honour were saued / and also that more is I knowleche ^t I am gretly beholden to hym that hath departyd here wyth in so largely of his tre|sours and Iewels / and in lykewyse vnto yow yf hit be trouthe that ye be he that ye saye that ye ar / but whan I haue alle knowen and vnderstanden And seen visibli that thargiens shold deffame me to perpetuite And that my fader shold haue sent me where myn ho|nour shold strongly be defowled and put vndre foot. And also that I haue none other knowleche of yow / but by your propre declaracion I will in no wise abuse yow. ner ye shall haue no destourbance for my cause but I praye yow to thinke on other part and that ye late and suffre me only with my felawship and frendes .:.
MAdame answerd Iupiter be ye in dowte of me that I am not Iupiter kinge of crete yf I be other alle the goddes confounde me and the thonders falle on me / the swalowe of the see resseyue me. And that I be giuen to mete vnto the most venymous bestes of the world. O madame put no suspecion in my feet. as I haue said to yow. I am comen to yow not in ryall astate / but in symple aray / for to conduyte my thinges more secretly / yet at the leste / at this first tyme accorde ye my requeste / take ye day of aduise / and that to morn I may speke ones to yow. and ye shall coun|ceylle yow well this nyght.
THe noble mayde danes had than the blood esmeuyd that wyth grete payne she wiste not what to doo she durst not beholde Iupiter. For shame smote her in the eyen. This not withstandyng

her hert comaunded her to see what man he was / And whether he had the chyere of a noble man or of a kynge At hardest she toke day of aduys / And accorded to hym that she wolde speke agayn to hym on the morn / After this / she dide the tables to be coueryd by the damoysells And sayde that she wold feste the messanger of kinge Iupiter / The damoyselles heeryng that Answerd that they alle were moche bounden to feste him and to make hym grete chyere / and shewd to her their richesses that they had / all arowe in the chambre / wherof the walles shone and were bryght / what shall I saye more the da+moyselles arayed wyth the Iewellis of Iupiter / Gar|nysshid the tables wyth mete / Danes  Iupiter were sette that oon agaynst that other / the seruyse was gret and riche and had I nowh to ete / how well that Iupi+ter ne danes gaf lityll fors of etyng / Iupiter ete lasse bodyly than spirituelly / he was in traunces in doubtan|ces and feeres he had an answer by whiche he coude not glose no thyng to his prouffyt saauf oonly that he hopid that danes shold discouuere hit vnto the damo|ysselles in suche wyse as the yonge maydens ben of cus+tome to discouuere that on to that other /  that whan ony requyre them of loue that they shold be in fauour to hym the more for his yeftes / In this estate was the kynge Iupiter for his parte / The damoyselles behelde hym I nowh and sayde / that he had not the mayn|teygne of a yoman or of a seruaunt / / but of a man of ryght noble and grete facion / And aboue alle o|ther danes to whom Iupiter had gyuen cause to be pensyf / Caste her eyen vpon Iupiter vpon hys conte|nance vpon his facion vpon hys beaulte / And than

her semed that he had sayd trouth / as well than as in the nyght folowyng she began to fele the sparklis of loue / and seeyng his richesses that he had gyuen in the hows / she varyed to gyue to hym her herte and her loue of this variacion to whiche her herte enclyned / she was right acertayned and fermly / that her engyne her entendeme~t were entrelarded of habondaunt thoughtes Many noble men had required her loue afore tyme that she was shette in the tour / and coude neuer torne her herte ner cause to sighe and thenke for her requestes The only wordes of Iupiter were so ewrews and happy that constraynd her to exaudicion and parfayt pensifnes / brekyng all doutes and contrarie oppynyons


How Iupiter cam from his chambre by nyght and laye in the tour of darrain wyth the damoysell danes on the whyche he engendryd / the noble persens.
SO longe dured the ffeestoyng of Iupiter that hit was oure and tyme to wythdrawe Than danes toke leue of Iupiter and dyde do conueye hym in to a secrete chambre by her damoyselles whan Iupiter was departyd she entryd in to her chambre accompanyed only wyth the olde woman that was her maistresse whishe had charge on her aboue all other / and as sone as the olde woman had her pryuely in her chambre / as she that was malicio sayde to her / my doughter telle me of your tidynges / I must nedes knowe what thinge this messanger hath sayd to yow / Dame answerd danes. woll ye wete ye sayd the olde woman / than answerd danes / he muste come hym self and make the raiport / For he hath sayd to me so many thynges that the tenthe part is

not in my mynde / My doughter said the olde woman I thinke well he is not comen hether wyth out cause what hath he sayd / yf ye haue not all in mynde / telle me at leste / that abideth and resteth in your mynde / Dame answerd danes ye knowe well that neuer I mystrus|ted yow / And that the secretenes of myn herte to yow hath alwey ben open / I wyll now make no newe custo+mes / For to shorte this mater / he that nameth hym ser|uant of Iupiter / is Iupiter him self by his raport and hath maad grete othes that he hath do maad thyse presentes and yeftes for to speke to me / In dede he hath shewyd to me how I lose here my tyme / / And hath requyred me to be his wyf to whiche I haue not yet consentyd / but I haue taken day for to gyf an answer to morn hopyng to take your counceyll / And therfore I pray yow that ye me counceylle in that I haue to do and what answere he shall haue of me / ye knowe how I haue suffrid his yeftes to be resseyued he muste be contentid by som ma|ner / by fayr speche or other wyse.
THis olde woman had ben other tyme in the hous of kynge melliseus and there had seen Iupiter in the tyme of his retorne of his conqueste of ar|hade / and had in pertye knowleche of him syn the first day that he cam theder / this notwythstondyng she dou|tyd of his persone for as moche as men otherwhile ben like oon to an other And she had alway her eye on hym whan than she had vnderstande by danes that had told her that he was Iupiter / she was seure that hit was he in hys persone / and had grete Ioye saynge / my doughter certaynly I knowe hym that we speke and deuyse of longe tyme past / And for his persone I assure yow / hit

is he / that hath don yow to vnderstonde of / but vnto the regarde for to counceylle yow / yf ye take hym vnto your husbonde I can saye none other wyse to yow / but that he is oon of the most vailliantest men of the world and that his entrepryses ben right hye / / and yf I had a doughter the moste best manerd of the world / ther is no man leuyng that I wold gyue her sonner vnto than to hym / yf hit plesid hym to take her / ye see that not wythstandyng his symple aray that he is a goodly man he is noble / he is ryche / he is wyse / he is a kynge / ye fele in your self your corage / yf ye wole vse and ob|serue the comandement of your fader / ye may not with hym hold consistorie ne parlament / yf ye wyll absente yow from this place by good moyens ther is no man but Iupiter that may helpe yow / / I counceylle yow ney|ther that oon ne that other / chese ye and take the beste waye .
A My moder sayd danes how shold I chese my self. ther is in me neyther wytte ne entende|ment to take that I shold chese. ne for to dis|cerne the good from the ywell. and as for me I shall put hit all in to your deliberacion. and wole that ye knowe that out of this tour wold I fayn bee myn ho|nour sauyd and the honour sauyd of my felawshyp. wyth thys cam In to them alle the damoyselles of the hous and sayd to her that they had made right good chere to theyr ghest. and thus faylled the secrete deuyses of danes and of the aged woman. the damoyselles wente and fette theyr Iewels. newly presented to hem and departed them eche after her porcion saynge that to kynge Iupiter was none like / but that he was

amonge all other the moste large and the most honou|rable kynge of kynges.
THe mayde danes toke grete playsir wyth all these thinges / / whan the damoyselles had par|tyd among hem her Iewels of gold with grete Ioye / they brought danes to bedde / And departyd from her chambre whiche they lefte open by forgetyng / as they that had sette alle her mynde and entendementes on her rychesses / And so wente to theyr beddes in to theyr chambers / Iupiter liyng in his bed at this hour fonde hym self so surmountyd wyth couetyse of loue. That he was constraynd to aryse And to loke out at a wyndowe to beholde yf the day approched liftyng his eyen agayn the sterres of the heuene / And was rauys|shed in his herte by the remembrance of fayr danes and sayd / O noble danes that hath more beaulte than the sterre shynyng / And that ye shyne by souerayn cle|renes / Alas where be ye this houre / the payne that I en|dure for your cause / ye knewe not the grete Ieopardye and the paryllous paas that I haue put me in. to attayne your loue / vnkendenes. may she haue place in yow. with desdayn rygour and fiersnes / whiche ben myn enemyes enuenymed with mortall venym / O danes remembre your self of me / And thou fortune that haste so couryd me in alle myn affayres / so coure me in this present nede.
WIth this word his complaynt cessed / and gaf his entendeme~t to many sharp thoughtes that percyd his herte right pensifly / This thoughte was grete and touchyng a right auenturous enterprise all acou~tyd abatid he deterimned in him self to assaye yf he mocht

come vnto the ende of his thoughte / and arayde and clothid hym self and went out of his chambre vnto the tour / where he sawe the dore opene to his semyng And findyng trouthe that hit was open he wente vp as softely as he cowde that he shold not be herd /  and cam so ferre that he cam to the chambre of danes wher+of the dore was open In whiche chambre was a lampe brennyng / Iupiter all full of gladnes put his hede in to the chambre to beholde yf the damoysellys had ben wyth danes / and whan he had beholden that ther were none but that danes was allone in her bedde / he auen|turyd hym to go vnto her where he fond her slepyng and awoke her by kyssynge .
DAnes was so sore abasshed whan she felt her+self so kyste / that she crept wyth in the bedde. Iupiter nyghed neer so fer that he descourid her face for to speke to her / wherof she beyng a frayd opend her eyen and whan she wiste that hit was Iu|piter /  and was allone by her bedde side / she made a ryght grete shryche and crye / whan Iupiter herd this crye he was not right well assured / Neuertheles he poursued his aduenture tornyng her to hym ward and confortyng her by hys swete spekyng / he declared to her in the ende that hit was force that she muste be his wyf promyttyng to come and to fecche her in short tyme / and so longe he held her in suche deuyses / that he vnclothed hym self / and that in spekyng to here he sprange in to the bed and laye by her side. how well that she wyth sayd and wythstode hit wyth alle her myght Thanne sayde the mayde that she was betrayed And wepynge tenderly she wende to haue fled and

dide her beste to haue gon away But Iupiter toke good hede / And at the lepe that she supposid to make caught and helde her by the Arme / And made her to lye doun agayn And beclypt her and kyste her agayn / And so appesed her in suche facion that she lefte her wepynge And on the mornyng whan he roos vp from her he lefte her wyth chylde wyth a yong sone / what shall I saye more Iupiter by this hardyesse achyeuyd his feet and gate his wyll on fayre danes And made the pees of his offence The nyght passid ouer And the day came / that Iupiter muste nede aryse and departe from her / and than by necessite constraynyng hym self for to kepe the ho|nour of danes he aroos And toke his abillements trus+sed to geder and retorned in to his chambre where he wente to bedde and slepte so faste and sewrly that he awoke not tyll the hour and tyme to go to dyner.
AT this hour danes axid where was the mes|sangier of kynge Iupiter and sayde that she wolde ete with him / and that they shold brynge hym vp in to the tour secretly / Wyth the worde of da|nes two damoyselles wente doun of the tour in to the chambre of Iupiter / And findyng hym a slepe awoke hym / Wherof he was hounteus and ashamed / For the sonne was that tyme mounted hye / And than he a roos and arayed hym fastely whan he wyste that danes had sent for hym to come speke wyth here / And so came to her / whiche began to wexe reed and to lese her mayntyene and contenance whan she sawe hym. After the reuerence maad they wente and ete to gyder and made grete chyere allewey danes was a shamed and was strongly sousprysed for the caas that was

was happende to her  she myghte not abstaine to sette her eyen on the beawte of Iupiter / whiche also faylled
not on his side to beholde her by so ardent desyr / that the eyen of that oon and that other perced eche other often tymes / / In this beholdyng they passid parte of the tyme of the dyner / / whan they had taken their refeccion /  Iupi|ter and danes drewe hem a part and helden a longe par+lement of their werk / And was concluded betwene hem that Iupiter shold go in to his contre and that he shold retorne theder wyth a certayn nombre of peple for to take a way the fayre danes / and wyth this con+clusion Iupiter departyd and retourned in to crete le|uyng danes in the tour / of whom I wyll tarye for this present  retourne to speke how Tantalus the kynge of ffrygye faughte agaynst the troyans / and had ba+tayle agaynst them whyche was the first that euer was in troye.


How the kynge Tantalus of ffrygye assaylled by bataylle the kynge Troos of Troye / / and how ylyon and gammedes his sones desconfited hym in bataylle / 
WHan than the kynge troos hadde named hys cyte Troye and was mountid and enhaunced in so hye renome / That the kynges his neygh|bours as to his regard were put in lityl reuerence and lasse glorye / Many thus leesing their honours / by hys right grete worship / began to murmere ayenst hym in feet and in thought / and amonge alle other the kynge tantalus of ffrigye sone of tharchaden Iupiter kynge of actyque took in ryght grete despyte thercellence of troos and conspyred ayenst hym and made a grete assemble of men of armes / and so departed out of his

royame in entencion to destroye and spille the kynge Troos and his Cyte of Troye / This tantalus had a sone in his compaygnye named pelops / And also he left a sone at home named thiestes for as moche as he was yong / And this thiestes had a sone sins named philistenes the fader of menelaus that regned in the tyme of the thirde destruction of Troye / For to retorne to our purpoos / Than Tantalus exployted in suche wyse that he conduytyd and brought his ooste vpon the terrytorye of Troye / And dide do smyte doun and destroye alle thinge that was in theyr puyssance vnto playne destruction / Wherof the Crye and clamours of them that fledde was so grete / that in short tyme the kynge Troos was aduertysid / wherof he was not affrayed For he had the Cyte well garnysshid of peple / Also he made redy to resiste his aduersaryes / and that by suche dyligence / that whan he had herd the ty|dynges in the morenyng / In foure oures after he yssued out of Troye wyth .xxx. thousand fyghtyng men and drewe vnto the place where the frygyens were entryd.
THis noble kynge Tros had in his compaygnye two sones of whome the eldest was callyd ylion to whom cam doun from heuen the palladiu~ And the yonger was callyd Gammedes / These two sones vayllyant and hardy comen in to the feld and requyred theyr fader Troos to departe his arme in two And that he wolde graunt to them hys vawarde for to preue theyr myght vpon theyr enemyes / Troos considering that by separacion of hys peple / they that were fowled or put a back myght be socowryd whan

hit sholde come to strokes / acorded the request to his ij. sones / and toke vnto them .xij. thousand of fyghtyng men / ylion and gammedes thankyd the kynge / troos their fader / and toke leue at hym / and went forth with her fyghtyng men in suche wyse that they were a mile to fore the batayll of the kynge. and so the kyng / troos sued the batayll of his .ij. sones ylion and gammedes / And he had rydars betwene bothe comysid for to re|porte to the kynge tros whan his sones had founden. tantalus their enemye / and also the .ij. noble sones had to fore hem their diuerse espies and way tars that were sente out in to diuerce places to see and to descouuere thestate the puissance  thordenance of their enemyes whiche fonde them aboute the euenyng. and anon after they retorned vnto ylion and gammedes  bad them to make chiere / and that they had seen the enemyes of troye in a certain place that they named / and that there they had seen hem logged / And that they myght well be nowmbred by estymacion aboute .xxx. thousand fightyng men.
OF these tydynges had the troyens grete Ioye / hit was that tyme aboute mydnyght and they were logged in the ende of a valeye / ylion and gammedes anon the same hour assemblid alle the noble men of ther compaygnye /  told them what the espies had raportyd / and they demanded of them councell. all were of oppynyon that they shold suffre their oste reste yet a good houre. and after that they shold breke their faste a lityll and lightly / to thende to haue the better and longer her breth / and also to be the more corageo and also to cause hem to be the better awakyd. and this

don they shold departe for to goo assaylle theyr ene|myes / This oppynyon semed god vnto the fyue sones of the kynge / And they signyfied theyr entencion by the ryders vnto theyr fader Troos / After this they wyth|drewe hem to take a lityll theyr reste and gaf charge vnto them that kept the wacche  to awake them whan they sawe her tyme / And so they had but lityll restyd whan they were awakyd and callyd / And that eche man shold take his Armes and folowe on / This Tro+ians obeyed and knowe well hit was tyme to make redy lightly. They were neuer so Ioyous as ther were whan they knewe that they shold go to batayll / They ete and dronke attemperatly full of oon good wyll. They garnysshid hem wyth theyr Armes / And she|wid that oon to that other how they wold fight in the batayll and confunde theyr enemyes / and menassid them of an euyll recountre for them.
IT this houre the mone shone right clere / By whiche shynyng and light ylion and gamme+des putte theyr peple in araye in fayre ordenance Whan they had take the shorte refection they began to marche toward them and put hem self to fore all other they came so nyghe by mone light and by her guydes that they wer herd of them that kept wacche of theyr enemyes that they soughte / the whiche fledde vnto the tentes of kynge Tantalus and awoke hym and tolde hym that the troians were come tassaylle hym. And that they had seen hem in grete noumbre / But Tantalus beleuyd not lightly hys wacche and deffer|ryd hys arysing more than nede was / he had not longe

abyden but the troyans cam vpon his ofte and smote doun right vpon the ffrygiens so desmesurably / that the redoundyng of her strokes cam  fill in to the eeres of tantalus / whyche aroos and sprange on his feet terry+bly affrayed / wyth this affraye were awaked all the frygiens in generall some by mortell woundes and some by their cryes and some smyten anguysshously vnto the deth. In comynge on thus the troians domaged gretly their enemyes / and the more be cause many of them were not garnysshid wyth their armes. whyche were smyten doun by the gleyues of the troyans / there were beten doun labouryng mortally aglowtyng in her blood This not wyhtstondyng how well that the co+myng on of the troyans was sharp. and that ylion and gammedes approuuyd hem self sharply in their werke Tantalus and his sone pelops recuyellyd her peple that wythdrewe hem / aboute her tente  gaderd them to geder / and than whan they fonde hem in nombre suffi+sant for to entre in to bataylle / Tantalus cryed ffrigye ffrygie / and after he dyde do marche his peple ayenst the troians that all bete doun to fore hem in the place where they were arryuyd / and than began the noyse grete / For on all sides were cryes made and at the Ioynyng the tempeste was horrible that hit semed that the world shold ende in the same place.
GAmmedes and pelops encountryd to geder  full of grete corages they fought to geder so sore and hard that agrete while by the enseyg|nes that were seen vpon her heedes and vpon her armes they were like that oon to slee that other / and that oon had slayn that othyr ne had tantalus and ylion haue

ben by / For tantalus smote vpon gammedes / and ylion smote pelops and the troians  frygiens medlid that on wyth that other And ther began the slaughter and tuycion / And ther was fightyng shewyd as cham|pions / In shewyng eche man his vertu~ and his pro~|wesse so strongly for as moche as they sawe the mone go doun and declyne / And yet was not the day comen whan they fonde on the morn the place alle couerd with blode. heedes Armes and of men dede / but the nom|bre of the frigyens that ther were put to oultrance was moche gretter ten agaynst oon than of them of troye / What shall I saye alle so longe as the mone gaf his light / ther was no faute on that on side ner on that other / eche man dide his parte The mone put hym in a derk cloude And anon it waxe derk and that the medle began to cesse / And the retrayte was cryed the frigiens with drewe hem at the crye of tantalus / And the tro|ians at the crye of ylion and gammedes / And ther was none but had gladly abiden the ende of this skarmuche and tempeste.


How the kynge Tros chacyd in bataylle the kinge tantalus and how the kynge saturne cam by see sayl|ling to the porte of troyes and how the kynge troos receyuyd hym worshipfully.
AFter thys forsayd batayll whan Tantalus was withdrawen he began to caste his eyen vpon his peple whiche were alle on an hill for to wete how they were of nombre  how they had born hem self / And how moche peple he had lost.

he had lost / and wente all a boute hem wyth his sone pelops / and hym semed well that his puissance was made lasse than he had hopyd wherof he had in his herte a right grete and sharpe desplaysir / and visityng his oost in this facion the day began to aryse and in the dawnyng / two thnyges apperid and cam to the know+leche of the peple of tantalus / oon was the grete losse of his peple. and that other was the batayll of kynge troos that they sawe from ferre discouerid  approche Certes whan tantalus considerid his euydent domayge and sawe that his enemyes be cause of the socours that came to them were more stronge than he was / he fonde not in the resolucion of his empryse but dispayre and shamefull ende / and all desconfortyd he callyd his sone and his pryncipall frendes and demanded them what was best to doo / They counceyllyd hym that he shold entende to saue hym self and sayd to hym / yf he abode and attended the troyans that shold be cause of his destruction and of alle them that were lefte of his peple .
WHan tantalus vnderstode this counceyll and knewe that his prouffyt stood and was in his shamefull ende and flighte / and aboue that / that he ne myght abaysshe and put doun the name of troyes / he toke hym self by the berde that was longe by Inpacience and sayd smytyng hym self wyth his fist / O cursid enuye / thou promettyst me late to putte troye vnder my ffeet. and hast made me to ryse presump+tuesly ayenst her. Now see I well the contrarye / and that by me troye shall flowre and that more is by my cause her name shall growe and shall be enhaunsid

And that alle kynges shall tremble to fore her in my regard and beholding O false trayteresse fortune acur+sid be thou that I euer beleuyd on the / These wordes fy|nysshid he said to his sone and to other his councell and maad his peple to withdrawe a litill and a litill finably he comaunded that eche man shold saue hym self / and than they put hem all to flight / Ilion and gami+nedes toke hede and ran after and chassid hem out of the terrytorie of troye wyth grete ocsion and slaugh+ter of peple of the frigiens / And after that they had chaced hem. they sayd that they had don hem shame ynowh And lefte werke and retorned and cam a non and mette the kynge tros her fader that sued them whiche had grete Ioye / whan he sawe that they had quytte hem so well vpon his enemyes by the good con+duyte of his two sones.
THe Ioye than that Tros made to ylion and Gammedes after the batayll was grete and of good loue / Tros brought hem agayn vnto troye wyth grete worship / the troians men and wo|men resseyuyd them worshipfully / And blessid the wombe that had born hem And the brestes that yaf hem souke / The two noble sones of the kynge of whom the names were born in to alle the marches ther abou|tes wyth so grete a bruyt and noyse that not only the neyghbours of troyes cam to make allyance with kyng tros and the troians but ther cam also kynges of ma|ny ferre contrees of the est whiche coude not magnyfye ynowh the puissance of the kynge and of the cyte of Troye .
IN these dayes whan troyes shewyd the rayes of her puyssance  noblesse by the vnyuersell world / Saturn late kynge of crete saylid by the sees wyth lityll companye Not as kynge and pos+sessour of the royame. but as bannysshid and despour|ueyed of alle lande and contrey so clene that he had no place to wythdrawe hym to / ner wyste neuer wheder to go but only by desertes and by the abysmes of the see Whan he had be in this poynt a grete while thynkyng wyth out ende how he myght persecute his sone Iupi|ter / Fortune brought hym in to the see of hellespond and than beholdyng abowte hym he espyed and sawe Troyes whiche was a cyte passyng fayr and ryche and of meruaylleus gretenes / / And than what for to take hym a lityll reste as for to put away his melancoli and for to reuytayll his shipp and peple he sayled and rowed vnto the cyte and descended at the porte whan the troyans had seen the shipp of saturne / that was better and more of valu than all the shippes that they had euer seen / the maystre of the shippes of troyes. wente hastely vnto the kynge troos  sayde / ire ioye your self and make redy your hous / / I assure yow that ther is come right now vnto your porte the most riche shipp that euer was seen on the see / and me semeth this conciderid that in so noble a shipp muste be some noble or grete erthely lord that cometh vnto yow .
ANone as kynge troos herde these tidynges of the mayster maronner he desired to see so fayr a shypp / and acompaygnyed wyth his two sones went for to see at the porte and to feste them of the strange shypp / This kynge troos was courtoys

and honourable / whan he cam vnto the poort he fonde that saturne made redy his ship  disposid hym for to go vnto the cyte / And seyng the shipp he meruayllid moche For the vtensilles that were wyth in were ry|chely made / And furthermore saturne  his felawship were Armed and had no maronners he behelde her con+duyte at his comyng  knewe that they were men of warre right well in point / he thought in hym self at be+gynnyng for to arme himself  to sende for the troians But afterward whan he had seen her lityll nombre  that no shipp folowid ner sued these estragers fro no coste he chaunged his porpoos  thought And appro|chid vnto the shipp and callid saturne that moste best was arayed aboue the other  axid him what he sought he and his felaws and from what nacion they were of and cam fro / And saturne answerd to hym and sayd Syre how well I knowe not at what porte I am ar|riuyd / For as moche as my herte Iugeth me that ye be courtoys of your nature / I wole hele ner couere no thinge touching your enqueste / I was late kynge of Crete named saturne / now I e am but saturne / for my sone hath put me out sorowfully that of alle my ry|ches of alle my peple and of alle my goodes temporels me is not lefte but this only shipp that ye may see / wherfore I pray yow and requyre that hit please yow to adresse me to som lord of this contre / to the ende that I may requyre licence and congie to entre in to his lordship and to take that / That shall be necessa|rye competently to the lyf of me and of my Felaw|shypp .
THan kynge troos herd the caas of saturne com+prised in breef wordes he sayd to hym by com|passion / kynge saturne ye be well come in to the hous of troyes / In trouthe I haue grete anoyance in me self of your first anoyance for your glorious reno|mee and for the goodenes that is in yow. as ofte tymes I haue herd recountyd but wyth this anoyance two thynges gladeth and Ioyeth myn herte / that oon descen+dyng of thacomplisshement of desyr / ffor I haue desired many dayes for to see yow / and this desir is now ac|complisshid in me / and that other procedeth of hope. and in this partie I say to yow that I kynge of this con+tre haue entencion to comforte and to counceylle yow to my power and also to gyue yow so good ayde that ye shall correcte your sone and shall punysshe his per+sone in suche wyse as hit shall apperteyne for his offence / Saturne began to sighe and to take a lityll confort of the grete prouffre and good chier that the kynge troos maad to hym / and he thanked hym of so hye and ample offres / and at the goyng out of his shippe he beclippid hym in his armes and kyste his hand / What shall I saye the kyng troos brought hym in his pallays wyth all his men and fested hem as hit apperteyned for the loue of saturne / In like wyse the peple beyng aduertysed of saturne that it was he that founde the maner of labouryng of the erthe of meltyng of metals  of sayling and rowyng by the see maad so grete and playn feste at his comyng that they coude no more doo at that tyme / duryng this festoyeng whan saturne felt hym in the grace of the troians / On a day he callyd the kyng troos and his two sones / and

adressid his wordes sayng / Lordes of Troye ye haue don so moche for me / that I may neuer deserue hit / for as I haue sayd to yow. my sone is enhaunsid and lift vp aboue me / And hath taken from me my Royame. I requyre yow as moche as I may that ye wyll coun|ceylle me what thing is most conuenyent to me / And how I shall suffre and bere the Iniurye don to me .
MI broder answerd the kynge troos / This is agaynst nature to a sone / hym self to rebelle ayenst his fader / the synne and crisme is fowll and worthy of reprehension / For euery sone is boun|den by alle lawes to serue. worshippe. drede and obeye his fader / And it is no reson that ony man shold ap|proue or hold with a sone disobeyssant / your sone is of this condicion cursid and right euyll / / And I am of thoppynyon that ye shall not acquytte yow well / but yf ye to your power to maystrye  ouercome his euyll maneres / And to the ende that ye shall not excuse your euydent harmes and losses / whan ye wyll I shall dely|uere yow my sone gammedes accompanyed with .xx. thousand troians that shall socoure yow. vnto the deth Or they shall sette yow agayn in your ryall trybunall Saturne was all as recomforted whan he knewe the loue that the kynge Troos shewyd to hym / And after many thankyngus toke conclusion that he wold retorne in to crete wyth gammedes / And wold be|gynne agayn the pyetous warre of hym and of his sone / And folowyng this conclusion from than forth on / he dyde do Appoynte the shyppyng of Troye / :.

the shyppyng of troye / and alle thynges apperteynyg / and gaderd to gyder men of armes wyth grete puys|sance by the Introduction of gammedes / and whan alle thassamble had mustryd and were gaderd to gy|der / he toke leue of the kynge troos and of ylion / and wente to the see and shyppyd all his meyne and kno|wyng the situacions of the contrees by the sees / he ad|dressid his oost in to the see of egee / where as was egeus sone of tytan the grete pirate whiche durst not haue to do wyth hem in no wyse / and fro this see of egee / he dyde so moche by dyuerse Iournees that he cam and arryuyd at the first porte and hauen of crete.


How saturne by the ayde of Gammedes and of the troians retorned in to crete to fighte agaynst Iupi|ter / where he was ouercome and vaynquysshyd and Gammedes taken.
AT that our that saturne arryued in crete the sonne was torned in to the west and on the heuene began to appere the sterres. saturn knewe the porte / and toke londe hopyng to entre the contrey secretly and wente a lityll weye / and there logged his peple in a place conuenyent and dyde hem reste / ete and drynke by the space of fyfe oures / and than he awoke the oost and made the troians arme them and entre in to the royame but they were not ferre goon / but anon after the sonne rysing  approchyng a strayt passage the espyes and scowrers cam vnto saturne and gam|medes hastely / and told them that they had seen the kynge Iupiter ryght strongly accompanyed whyche kept the passage / Vpon this paas hit is to wete that whan Iupiter was departyd fro danes and fro the

tour darrain and was come in to Crete and desiryng to Accomplissh hys promesse anenst danes / he dide do Assemble his men of warre / concludyng in hym self that faithfully he wold go fecche the fair danes And brynge her vnto his contre by force of Armes. what shall I saye more / his Armee was all redy / And cam the same nyght where on the morn he hopyd to haue de|partyd / but as he was in his bed that nyght in his cite of parthemye tydynges cam to hym of the Arryuyng of the Troians / Wherfore he was constrayned by force to change his purpoos / wherof he was right sory and passing heuy marueyllously / This notwythstondyng sodeinly as thyse tydynges were freshly brought vnto hym / he aroos And toke his men of Armes that he had assemblyd / And hastely bro~ught them vnto the strayt wherof aboue is wretn / And there abode hys enemyes as wyse and well auysed. And it is not to be forgoten that in this Armee amonge his men was the kynge of mollose whiche had late founden the In|dustrye and crafte to tame and breke horses for to be ryden. And to ryde them / And was come he and his men for to serue the kynge Iupiter for his good renomee ac|companyed of an honderd men that ran as the wynde. And for this cause they were callyd centaures / And these Centaures were also terrible and cruell that they ne doubtid the puissance of kinge ne of non other what som euer they were.
FOr than to retorne to the matere entamed / whan saturne knewe that the passage was kept and that Iupiter was than aduertisid of his coming he dide do tarye his ooste  said vnto them / my children

hit behoueth that this morenyng / ye so doo in crete your deuoyr / not only in mustryng and shewyng your co|rayges / but aboue that / that ye be redoubtyd and drad lyke the thonder / asseure your self of our querelle Iupi|ter myn enemy is here where he abydeth our comyng to the batayle ordeynd / yf we wole come to the aboue of our entrepryse / hyt is nede that we drawe theder / see what ye wyll saye / Than thus answerd gammedes we ben comen in to crete for to correcte your sone / and to sette yow agayn in your siege. we shall doo that we may doo by our power and furnyssh and fighte frely wyth oute doubtance or feer / and vnto the ende that no reproche be Inposid vnto vs. I shall sende  somone your sone first or ony swerd be drawen or strook smy+ten to thende that he yelde hym vnto your obeyssance And that he come and amende his mesdedes / and than gammedes dide do come his troians by consent of sa|turne  sette hem in ordynance of batayle / and whan he had so doon he sente oon of his auncyent knyghtes a noble man vnto Iupiter and gaf hym charge to make the somacion suche as is sayd to fore / The troyan de|partyd from the oost at comandement of gammedes / and dyd so moche that he was presentyd to fore Iu|piter and sayd to hym / Iupiter thou oughtest knowe / that euery sone oweth obeyssance vnto his fader. thou doost contrarye to these thynges and shewest that thou art not sone of a kynge / but of perdicion. For thou de|spysest thy fader. In stede of reuerence thou hast hym in hate / and thou makest hym warre where thou sholdest holde hym in loue / and thou puttest hym to grete disho|nour and thy self wher thou art holde and bounden to

do hym worshippe / O Iupiter who shall gyue the abso|lucion of thy lif dwellyng in venym / who shall excuse thy synne / Thou art enemy of thy fader / the caas is so greuous that theyr is no mercy ne excusacion / but yf hyt departe fro the naturell clemence of thy fader / beholde Iupiter beholde the ende of thyn Insurrexion / Alle lawe poityf And alle lawe wreton condempne the vnto the deth And curse and Anathematyse the / hit is grete pyte thou art a goodly yong man / knowe that thy regne may not longe dure / And that thou shalt more shortly be punysshid than thou wenest perauenture at this time For gamynedes oon of the soones of Troye is here by in the helpe of saturne thy fader with. twenty thousand. fyghtyng men whiche so meneth the by me that thou re|torne in to the mercy of thy fader And yeld hym hys Royame alle excusacions set a part.
MEssanger Answerd Iupiter / yf I were suchon as ye saye / wyth Iuste rayson ye and other might gyue sentences and condempnacions vpon me / me ought here bothe partie. And I trowe yf gamy|nedes of whom ye haue spoken / had herd myn excuse he wold not be myn enemy. I answer yow that I loue my fader saturne in as moche as he is my fader. But I saye yow on that other part / that he hath often tymes wyllyd to putte me to deth he shewyng hym self my mortell aduersarye and no thyng fader. For euery fa|der naturelly loueth his sone. And After that regarde I shall kepe me from hym as from myn enemy / And wille well that the Troians knowe yf they come and Assaylle me that I shall defende me wyth alle my puyssance .
WIth this answer retorned the said troian vnto saturne and gammedes and said vnto them what he had founden / saturne and gammedes swore than the deth of Iupiter / and approchid so nyghe the strayt that they cam wyth in bowe shotte that oon nyghe vnto the other / and fro as fer as they sawe echon other they made grete cryes  showtes Iupiter had sette his puyssance in two wynges / wherof he was chyef in the formest / and yxion  his centaures were gouernours of the seconde / whan Iupiter had seen that ther was no wey but for to medle he sayd he wold begynne the batayll / and after that he had en|courayged his peple / he pryckyd his hors forth / and than happend and befell a meruayllous thyng / For from the hye clowdes aboue cam doun an egle vpon his heed / and after began to flee aboute hym makyng hym feste and cheer / and not departyd ner lefte hym duryng the batayll.
BI the fleyng of this egle Iupiter and his peple toke in them an hope of good auenture. And saturne and the troians fille in a feere and doubte that coude not come out of theyr consaytes / what shal~ I say more whan Iupiter sawe the co~duyte of the egle he had a grete Ioye in his herte / and as a man well assured in his body / he entryd among thar|chers of the troians that shotte thikke on hym / and rennyng as tempeste passid by theyr arowes / and taryed not for resistence of shotte tyll he cam among the men of armes of the troians.
THe troians had neuer seen man on hors back to fore / and whan they sawe Iupiter / they had

went he had ben half man and half hors / and ther were some that fled his comyng and som abode and fought vailliantly ayenst him than began the bataylle of ^t day They of Crete folowed Iupiter with grete Noyse of Tabours trompes and clarions And began to medle with the troians / they dide her deuoirs on bothe sides Iu|piter bare to the ground many Troians And well en+ployed his hors on whiche he rode / Gamynedes and sa+turne on that other side faylled not / Alleway Iupiter prouyd him self in Armes the as most expert aboue all other / And abandoned his body and lif vnto fierste of his enemyes and ther was no man that durst haue to do with hym or abyde him But he was slayn and put vnder foot by the trenchyng and smytyng of his swerd
CRuell and fiers was this batayll. the Tro|ians were with oute fere And dide grete pro|wesses and manly by the conduyte of saturne And of Gamynedes saturne mette Iupiter often tymes as he that sought grete strokes but Iupiter that knewe hym well / wold neuer abyde him / sayng that he wold neuer sette hand on his sone / but fled his deth vnto his powrs This notwithstondyng he sought the deth of his helpars And made no sparyng of theyr harnoys ne Armes of lether / of theyr heedys ne of theyr liues of yong ne of olde of vayllyant ne of hardy / hit was to him al~ oon he bowed neither to oon side ner to other for stroke of gleue / of mace ne of guysarme / he had ofte re|membrance of the fair danes / And desiryng to be quyt of his enemyes for to entende her deliuerance like as he had promisid vnto her. He smote of heedes and Ar|mes. Vnto hym was nothyng Inpossible At euery

At euery strook he died his glayue wyth newe blood and the egle flawe allway aboute hym now lowe now hye / wherof the troians had grete despyt in hem self .
GAmmedes the noble troian was of lityll sta|ture / Allewaye notwythstondyng he was of more gretter courayge than ony other / and vi|gourously he fought agayn them of crete / as he that en|tended nothyng but to gete worshyp and honour / what shall I saye they fought thus to gyder in this poynt from the morowe tyl~ euen / wythoute that ony of bothe partyes obteyned ony wynnyng or losse / and than saturne wythdrowe his peple on that oon syde. And Iupiter retorned wyth the kynge yxion and the centaures / and yet folowyd hym alleweyd the egle and satte vpon his tente / whyche was made of bowes and grene rysshis / ffor at that tyme tentes  pauyllons of cloyth were not had ne vsid / how be hit the makyng of lynnen cloth / and of cloth of gold and of silk was founden afore this tyme In this nyght they of troye and theye of crete made grete chere in theyr tentes and logys And dysposid them to begynne agayn on the morn the labour of armes / hoopyng alle to haue the better and victorye / the hurte men were dressid and the harnoys broken was made agayn and amended / they spack ynowe of the prowesses of oon  other / but souerainli they held theyr deuises of the egle / and spack so moche of hym that Iupiter that same nyght toke a pece of cre|mesin sayn conteynyng a yerd and an half square / and made theryn the remembrance of an egle of golde and sette hit on a spere and made a banyere / sayng that he

wolde bere that banyere in alle bataylles euer after. And that he vnderstood by the egle that hit was a to|kene to hym that he shold abide victoryous of hys ene|myes And that he shold be souerain kyng of Crete like as the Egle is kynge of alle fowlys.


How Iupiter disconfited agayn kyng satu~rne in ba|taylle and how saturne was putte to flight by see.
SVche were the deuyses of kyng Iupiter in this nyght / the whiche he passid the moste Ioyously that he coude / And visityd the hurte men and confortyd them And concluded with ixion that the day folowyng the Centaures shold haue the bataylle And they that had foughten the day afore shold reste them. After this he slept on the grene And restid hym vnto the tyme that the Centaures put hem in Aray And wente to hors back And so dide Iupiter for he had leuer deyed than haue ben ydell At this tyme saturne slept not / ner was no more lachesse founde in hym and gamynedes than was in Iupiter / they were seur that they shold be met with alle and assayled of theyr enemyes agayn. They adoubid arayed them the beste wise they couthe And aboute the sonne rysing they rengyd and wente vnto the Oost of Iupiter / encouragyng eche other to smyte and fyghte and assaylle theyr mortell enemyes hardyly for to auenge the blood of theyr felaws that were dede in the bataylle the day before.
FOr to make shorte / than the Troians were strongly achanffid by Appetyte of vengeance / And were the firste on the felde / wherof they had grete Ioye in her hertes And maad a right grete cry

But thys Ioye was anon vnto hem abaysshid and doon. For sodeynly as Iupiter and the centaures herd theyr crye they toke the banyer wyth the egle of gold theyr speres and theyr sheldes / and wyth a Ioyous soune of trompes clarions and tabours prickyd forth theyr hors whiche redounded in to the ayer and reimyng as they that helde not of heuen ne of erthe vpon theyr enemyes began to fighte / certes whan the troians sawe the centaures mountyd on horsback rennyng as the wynde they were so aferd and affrayed that they had wend neuer to haue seen light day / how wel~ they toke corage and abode them / and the centaures fought so myghtily among hem that eche oon of them bare to the erthe a troian wyth the poynt of his spere and among other gammedes was born doun to the erthe among them / and som were hurte a parte and some releuyd of hurtyng / and some wyth oute hurte / whan gammedes felte hym self among the hors feet / he was in his herte terryble angry / and sayd that he wold be shortly auengyd / anon he aroos lightly and tooke his swerd and seyng the centaure that had smyten hym doun doyng merueyllous armes among a grete meyne of his folk / that myghtily wythstood his vnmesura+ble strookes / he gaf vnto hym so grete a strook as he was lenyng on the right side to haue smyten a troian that he gaf hym a grete wounde / by whyche he was so astonyed that he drowe hym doun of his hors / and he hym self leepe vp in to the sadel~ / This centaure was named Eson and was yonge  was afterward fa+der of Iason that conquerd the golden flees / Whan than he had receyuyd the strook that gammedes had gyuen

him he made a cry so grete that .x. centaures cam rennyng And deffended him fro the presse And castyng doun oon and other bete doun the troians And caste hem doun. And sparpelid their blood that all the place was died reed / And that they fond eson and gamynedes that oon nyhe that other And seeyng gamynedes that he approu|ued hym self to conduyte and gouerne his hors And seeyng theyr felaw put doun from his hors / they were passingly supprisid with grete yre / And by mortall yre they ascryed gamynedes vnto deth the troians appro|chid / they beyng there fought manly agayn the centau|res And the centaures castyng and smytyng on gamy|nedes the troians dide theyr power to defende hym And put hem self in Iupart of deth for him For many of them were slayn And many that were sore hurt.
THese centaures were strong huge grete and lothly / the troians had more of courage than of body In this place gamynedes shewid ynowh of prowesse And of valeur And well deffended hym awhile But in the ende Fortune was to hym aduerse in suche wyse that after he had suffryd many assault And that he had seen put and caste to ground mo than a thousand troians / he beheld that other side and sawe saturne torne at playn desconfiture After he sawe that his troians lete hym to be put aback and to be put to deth wyth oute turnyng or fyghtyng agayn And alle breke / And turne the back / Also them that were aboute hym gaf hit vp and fledd / And than knowyng this disconfiture that he had no remedye ner recowerance. And that he allone myght not bere ne abide the batayll

put hym self to flight / and fled after the oder and sus|teynd as wel~ as he myght the porsuyt that the centau+res maad vpon his men / and in the ende he guyded hem vnto the poort where theyr shyppyng was.
SAturne than alle dyspayed entryd in to his shyppe wyth grete losse of troians / and gam|medes entryd in to an other / ryght angry and so dysplaysant that I can not reherce / at the entre of the shyppys / oon partye of the troians that were left were peryshyd in the see / another partye peryshyd by swerd and that other toke shyppyng / / Iupiter and yxion than|kyd theyr goddes gretly of this victorie / and concluded to gyder that they wold yet poursuye theyr enemyes by the see. for as moche as they were yet grete in nombre And yxion sayd that hit was expedient to brynge hem to plain vttrance for as moche as they had fortune wyth them / and to the ende that they shold neuer reas|semble agaynst them / Iupiter accorded this poursuyte gretly anoyed for hym semed that he taryed to longe / And yet shold tarye more yf he entryd in to the see / that he myght not be wyth danes at the day that he had promysed her / This not wyhtstondyng hopyng allewey to excuse hym vnto her he made hym redy has|tely to goo to the poursuyt of his enemyes and sent for his maryners and after went in to a temple that was ther by dedyfied vnto the god Mars.


How Iupiter after he had sacrefied the egle pour|suyd the troians and of the strong batayle that he had agaynst gammedes.
IVpiter was not so sone in the temple but the egle entryd also and sette hym on the awter.

whan Iupiter sawe that / after many thoughtes he took the egle and maad sacrefice And anon after cam tydin+ges that his mariners were redy Than he went out of ^e temple and recomanded hym vnto god Mars and cam to his maryners that had made all thyng redy / And so wente to see Accompanyed wit the Centaures And of two thousand. of his men of Crete And sayled af|ter his enemyes that he desired / For the troians fledde of force and maad all the sayle they couthe / In these two dayes Iupiter often tymes wyss hed hym with the fayr danes / And thought that his longe taryeng shold be noyous vnto her / whan than the two dayes were past / the day folowing at thre of the clock / they of crete and they of Troye began to mete to gyders vpon the see They of troye were in grete sorowe / and they of crete in grete Ioye / At this tyme saturne was not with the tro+ians as he that durste not retorne with them for his shame that was befalle and was all discomfyt in him self and in dispayr. And passed by the wawes of the see drawyng in to the eest / Whan gammedes had aspied the shyppes of Crete fro ferre / he had supposid fyrst that hit had be saturne. And taryed a while at Auere. but in proces of tyme whan gaynedes sawe the ship|pis comyng by grete force nerre / And sawe the banyere of kyng Iupiter appere / by whiche he vnderstood vary|ly that hyt was Iupiter and his enemyes And no thing saturne that he Abood.
WHan was gaminedes sore troublid callid his felawship  shewid hem the banyer with the golden egle And axid them what was best to do

They answerd to hym and sayd that satu~rne had abandonned them and gyuen hit ouer / and that they ought not to abyde and tarye / but only euery man to saue hym self / Gammedes wold fayn abyden the ba|taylle / for to proue / yf they were as fortunat  happy on the see as they were a lande / but whan he knewe the wyll of the troians / / that desired nothyng but reste / made to drawe vp ankres and sayle forth fleyng and wythdrawyng from them of crete also moche as in them was possible / Iupiter and his centaures than seyng the troians lyeng at ancre / began to araye and doube them wyth theyr harnoys / and whan they sawe theyr enemyes take vp theyr ancres / they began to showte and folowe / the pursuyt was strong and du+red thre dayes and thre nyghtes / and in the morenyng of the fourth day / gammedes and his felaws aspyed lande / and that was troye that they sawe / they drewe to the porte wyth grete Ioye / that sone was entremed|led wyth sorowe / For whan they had taken lande they behelde and sawe that theyr enemyes foloweden them and cam to the porte all arayd and redy to bata|ylle / This shame and losse smote vnto the herte of gam+medes in suche facion / that he ascryed and sayd in this wyse vnto his men.
MI brethern and my felaws fortu~ne hath doon to vs a grace / by whiche we ben brought and conduyt hether / But this grace is to vs lityll prouffit as we may playnly conceyue / lo here is the kynge Iupiter whyche hath doon to vs so grete shame as for to chasse vs vnto our owen terrytorye / and what shame shall be to hym that wyll now flee / and

more ouer who is he that now will not holde the bridell by the teth / Now behoueth not to flee / But now hit behoueth to fighte. this is force and necessitee for to venge his losses and his blood and for to recouuer wor+ship. We ben in our owen contre / yf we auenge vs not. we shall torne in to perpetuell dishonuer For socours we may not fayle / For now the troians ben vpon the walles And gon vp on the hyhe Edifices of the Cyte. that beholde our londyng. And some ther be that make them redy to well come vs. And who that now is not well couragid. neuer fare he well / late euery man en|force the vertu of his strength / For as for me. for to be hewen in pieces I shall no more flee. I pray yow that ye take courage and abide with me.
TWo thinges happend whiles he spack and she|wyd thise remonstrances vnto his felawis. the troians were aduertised of the comyng of theyr men. And of the descendyng and landyng of theyr aduersaries / And disposid them to resiste and wythstande them / And Iupiter and his men appro|chid the port / And with that gamynedes lefte war|nyng his felaws And ran vnto the porte holdyng in his hande a strong spere / his felawis took exemple in his right hye courage and folowed hym / Than began the bothe parties to make theyr cryes that went vp in to the Ayer. Iupiter and his Centaures enforced them to take londe / Gamynedes and the troians enforced them to deffende and to put hem fro the londe / Grete and sore strokes were gyuen / Many of them were perysshyd in the see / And Many ther were that her blood was shedde on the lande / But Iupiter that

had no felawe in the place gate lande in a lityll space. and susteyned the feetes of the skarmusshe by helpe of some of the centaures / that he made gammedes to ressorte aback to his felawshyp / and so exployted by the hewyng of his trenchant swerd that he made alle his men to take lande / and had lightly put gamme+des and his men to outtrance. yf out of troyes ne had co|men out the kyng Troos and ylion wyth a grete mul|titude of peple that ran vnto the rescousse and helpe of the vayllant gammedes / that for to saue hys men of|fred and put his body to Inpossible trauayll and labour.
THe kynge troos and ylion than made theyr cours out of troye in right fayr ordenance / and exposed them to bere partye of the trauayll of theyr blood / Iupiter wyth yxion and the centaures lete than them that he estemed vaynquisshid and ouercome And adressid them ayenst kynge troos and ylion and them that folowyd them / how well that they had ben feblid by the eyer and beyng on the see whyche lityll prouited them. the centaures were grete  huge / and stronge as olifantes hard as lyons and aygre as ty|gres at this tyme the weder was fayr and cleer the sonne shone fayr whan they began to medle / hit was a fayr thyng to see the recountres / and a good noyse to here the cryes / ther was many a spere tronchonnyd. and many an arowe shotte and many a staffe and guys arme broken / helmes ynowe frusshid and many skynnys of lyons beres and horses smyten and torne in to peces / This tros and ylion were right aspre and fiers in the rescous of gammedes / Iupiter and yxion

were vayllyant and desirous to gete honour And so faught and smote on the troians on the right side and on the lefte side that afore them was no resistence ne raye holden .
THe banyer of the Egle of gold was allway in the moste strength of the batayll / / the kynge Troos that had neuer seen banyer vsed in bata|ylle was gretly ameruayllyd what hit shold signefie. And ofte tymes he hardyed hym self to fight agayn them that helde hit / And wold fayn haue put hit doun and smyten hit in to pieces / But allwey he fonde there so grete strookes and so well sette / that he was fayn to go as fer back as he cam nyghe / he was vayllyant of his body And well knewe the craft of warre / Iupi+ter approwued hym many tymes and faught wyht hym in many places / And noted hym in his mynde for a notable man / ther was in hym no feer ne drede ne also in his sonnes ylion and gamynedes they yelded vnto Armes the deuoyrs / They dyde worshippe to theyr bo|dyes And to theyr puyssance / wyht oute ende they wrought and fought wyth theyr enemyes makyng theyr glayues reed in the blood of the troians / they fo|lowed with grete force in suche wyse that they faught alle that day otherwhile afore and somtyme behynde. And hit was soo in the ende that whan the sonne be|gan to go doun Gaminedes thenkyng on his grete losse and desiryng to recouure his worshippe / took a terrible and myghty Axe and enflamed of right noble courage faught on the banyer of the Egle of gold where was the most strengthe  smote doun on that oon side  other

so dismesurabli that his axe changed lightly colour and cryed wyth an hye wys troyes troyes.
IVpiter had all way an eye on the banyer / whan he herd the crye of gammedes and sawe hys exployt he knewe hym /  wherof he had grete Ioye / for he sought no man but hym / he gaf ouer the place where he was in and Ioiously addressid hym vnto hym and sayde. O vayllyant troian thou hast shewde thy prowesse all this day / And now thou manyfestestt and shewyst thy self by grete fetes of ar|mes and of grete bruyt / Thou arte only he that I seche amonge the vayllantes of troye / Not only that I pre|sume me more vayllyant in armes than thou / but for as moche as thou art he that haste assayllyd crete / and that I haue poursiewed the hether / Thou hast assaillid and fought wyth me / puyssance ayenst puyssance and now late vs fighte body ayenst body / and he take hit that may gete hit.
GAmmedes wyth this worde lyfte vp his axe. and castyng his eyen on Iupiter and of that he had herd made hym this answere / Happy and wreus kyng of crete I knowe now that thou art wor+thy to haue grace of fortune and that thou art more wyse than stronge / Thou seest that fortune is wyth the / neuerthelasse thou enhaunsest not thy self aboue me I alowe and preyse them as moche as thou dost wor|ship and honour to thyn enemye and dispreysest hym not / but ymagynest that he hath corage at his hert / knewe thou that thou doste thy self honour and wor|shyp / For for to mespryse and blame another man / no man ought to auaunce hym self / I wolde that hyt

plesid the goddes that thy fader satu~rne whiche is be|left on the see were now here / for it is myn entent that by his helpe we shold haue reson of the And I shall come ther to yf hit be to me possible / for I shold be re|couuerid of all my hurtes  losses yf I myghte adaunte and ouercome the / And wyth oute more wordes gamy+nedes late fle his axe and smote on Iupiter / Iupiter cou|ueryd him with his shelde / whiche was smyten in two pieces by the cuttyng of his axe / And than Iupiter en|uertued him self  that all that day had sousteyned and spared the poys and the fetes of Armes. And coman|dyd his folk that they shold lete hym allone with ga|mynedes for as moche as he was allone / In this place he approuyd him self ayenst the Axe of gamynedes / and employeng the steell of his swerd the most best wyse that in hym was possible.
THus began the bataylle of the two champions of Crete and of Troies they were bothe right expert to do the feet of Armes theyr Cryes were hye and fiers / they smote eche other fiersly and aygerly / the fire sprange out of theyr helmes by the myght of theyr strokes / but whan fortune was on the partye of Iupiter / What myght gamynedes doo. Hys strokes were grete And gaf vnto gamynedes many woundes / And in dede he toke from hym hys axe by the mene of a grete wounde that he had in the ryght Arme / And myght haue put hym to deth yf he had wolde. But for to make short processe / Whan he had taken hys wepen from hym he had pytie of hym And sauyd hys lyf / And dyde do take hym to foure

hym to foure centaures. and anon after hit began wexe derke / for the nyght toke from the day his light / wher|fore hit behoued hem to take reste and leue the feete of ar+mes / And so the troians wythdrewe them in to theyr cyte and they of crete vnto the porte of the see.


How the kynge troos and ylion his sone made grete sorowe for gammedes for they wyste not wher he was becomen / And how Iupiter wente to the see for to goo to arges.
WHan troos and ylion were wythdrawen / they abode at yate vnto the tyme that all the troians were comen agayn in to the cyte / as they that knewe not where gammedes was becomen / whome they sore desired for to haue founden / all they that were in the bataylle of troians were entrid And ther was no man that cowde telle the kynge tros where his sone gammedes was / or whether he was a lyue or ded / And whan he sawe that he had no mo men lefte in the felde he retorned in to his pallays sorowyng  gretely anoyed / and sente for them that were comen agayn fro crete / And enquyred of them of all the tydynges. And what they had don wyth his sone / As touchyng his sone they answerd that in the euenyng he was in the prees amonge hys enemyes but they wyst not what was comen of hym / And as touchyng of the tydynges of crete they told hym / how they had sped in theyr Iourne ayenst them and how the egle appered vnto Iupiter / And how they were ouercomen by the strength of the centaures / And how they wyste not where saturne was becomen.
THese tydynges gaf vnto the kynge troos sorow

vpon sorow and to ylion also. And the teres fill doun fro theyr eyes / And in especyall ylion wept sore be|wayling his broder in this manyre. Alas my broder alas gaminedes / where is belefte the glorie of troyes by the maleureus  vnhappy saturne / whiche hath fayled them thy nede At the lefte yf thou haddest comen agayn we to geder shold haue put vs in deuoir to haue auenged thy losse. we shold haue assayed our bodyes by fra|ternall loue for to haue recouured thyn honour / how is it Art thou perisshid by parell what harde doleance and sorow is the befalle / for to saye all / thy mesaduenture and myshappe is to preiudiciable vnto the hous of Tro+ye / Ilion fayr sone answerd Troos for oon aduersite hit behoueth not to be abasshid in the warre for non ad+uenture but to haue ferme courage / warre gyueth this day victorie to oon and on the morn taketh hit away and gyueth hit to a nother And so putteh eche out. A vertuous and a manly man vnto his singuler deth ought not to be effrayed / yf gamynedes be ded in the bataylle or yf he be taken / what remedie / hit is than ex|pedyent eyther to avenge his deth or to socoure hym. but oure enemyes ben in lityll nombre / we shall to morn fyght with them agayn And late the goddes do theyr wylles of vs / And I shall not discorage me otherwyse.
A Lyon And the nobles of Troye conforted them in the wordes of kynge Troos / and confermed his will for to go on the morn to assaylle theyr enemyes / whiles these thinges were in comenyng in the

cyte / Iupiter was in the felde and made grete chyere wyth yxion and the centaures and beyng sette at soper vpon the ground alle aboute a grete stoon. Iupiter sente for to fecche gammedes / And made hym to soupe wyth them. Gammedes was sore meuyd and had in his herte grete troble / how wel~ he toke lightly refection wyth them / For he felte ryght grete ache and smerte in his woundes / And there recomanded Iupiter hym sayng that he was the vayllyantyst man that euer was seen among the moste vayllyanst of Troyes / / and for as moche as he is in my mercy / and that it is he / that late wyth my fader descended in crete / where he had gladly planted his name in worship yf fortune wold haue souffryd hym I shalle no more warre to fore troyes / but I / shal~ entre agayn to morn in to the see / and I will
goo and putte in execucion a thyng that lyeth me now sore at the herte / And wyll well that ye knowe that I haue entencion to go vnto the royame of arges vnto the tour of darrain / for to deliuere acording to my pro|messe out of the same tour the fayr danes / whom the kynge acrysius holdeth fast shytte in wyth oute any rayson / This conclusion plesid to kynge yxion and to the centaures for as moche as they had herd spoken of the strength of the tour darrain / And they thought wel~ that the argyens myghte not holde agayn theyr strength / whan than they had eten / they entred in to theyr shippis / And thought among other thynges on the woundes of them that were hurte / / and also of gam+medes / / and than afterward they leyd hem doun on the strawe to slepe  aboute two oures to fore day they disancred them  departyd so secretly that the troian

had no knowleche therof And on the morn betymes whan kyng tros and ylion yssued out of troyes to ba+taylle rengid in good ordenance they fonde no man to haue a doo with alle / ner they coude not see ner parceyue theyr enemyes on no coste of the see / they had so fer say|lid fro the port by that tyme that they were out of sight Thus they had grete sorow meruayllusly / And cam vnto the place where the batayll had ben and buryed the dede men / but now I will tarye of them and of Iupi+ter And will retorne vnto the historie of danes.


How the kynge acrisius whan he sawe his doughter danes grete with chylde he sente her in to exyle and put her in a lityll vessell in the see at the aduenture of fortune .
THe noble damoyselle danes abode with childe of the seed of Iupiter as it is said to fore After that Iupiter was retorned in to his contre she abood passing longe in hoope ^t he shold retorne to by strengthe of peple and shold lede her in to his roiame as he vnto her had promised / In this hope she mounted ofte tymes vnto the hye wyndowes of the tour / And castyng her eyen now hether and now theder vpon the mountaygnes weyes and stretes for to awayte yf he came or myght see his men of armes and his peple of warre / And with oute ende she had alway her eres epen to herken yf she might here the trompes taours or clarions / This hope duryd longe vnto the last day that Iupiter had promisid  sore she complayned in this tyme his abiding  said vnto her self that he wold come / but

But certes whan euen was comen of the day that he had sette / and he was not comen ner herd no tydynge of hym / And whan she sawe that he cam not / and that the fruyt of her bely apperyd she wente doun fro the wyn|dowe of the hye tour / And alle rauysshyd of dispayr. entryd allone in to her chambre / And ther she began to beholde her bely / and sayde a poure bely I may no lenger hyde the / I haue couerd the vnto this tyme ho|pyng the comyng of Iupiter / the day is come and past that he shold haue comen / ther is no tydynge of hym. Alas and he hath also forgoten me. where art thou Iu+piter. Arte thou ded or a liue. yf thou be ded speke to me in spyryte in excusing the of thy defaute / Telle me what I shall do wyth thy seed. And yf thou be a lyue what ryght euyll auenture holdeth the / art thou wery of me. of danes of her that thou enforcest by reynyng golde. of her that thou so moche desiredest. Alas thou promysist me thy loue and gauyst hit vnto me And I receyued the yeft in good / / and gaf vnto the myn herte in like caas and yet more than thou wenest. And what shall this be Iupiter my loue and frende. art thou of the nature of false men as ypocrites that payne them to deceyue poure women and late them in dishonour Alas thou art oon verayly / thou haste brought me in pardura+ble shame and hast abandonned and gyuen me ouer. O malewreus man. O fals liar be thow cursid with thy rychesses / And acursid be the our that euer I sawe the / / I am euer by the putte to shame / And by the myn ende approcheth I may no lenger hyde thy werkes. where shall my childe become / euery man shall see and knowe my trespaas. Alas my fader shall put me to

deth I may not faylle of hit / for as for deth hit shall not greue / saue for the fruyt that I bere / yet shall I kepe hit as well as my self at all auenture come what may come therof .
IN thyse and semblable wordes danes passid ouer this nyght with oute slepyng or reste / fro then forth on she began to be alle melancolious. And toke this so sore to herte that she fyll in to a right greuous maladye whan the maydens that no thyng knewe of this caas sawe her so euyll disposid / they signeffied hit vnto the kynge Acrisius / And than cam the kynge to visite his doughter / And betoke her vnto the Cure of his fisicians and medecines And demanded them what maladye she had / They answerd hym in the presence of danes that she was grete with childe / and that in short tyme she shold be deliuerd / Danes ans|werd that they fayllyd to saye the trouthe / And that she had neuer knowen man And deuyed her caas as moche as in her was possible hoping alwey to liue. For she knewe well that her fader wold dampne her to deth / yf he knewe that she were with childe / and of this alle the maydens of the hous stryued agaynst the maisters sayng that they had well and seurly kept the tour that no man saue the kynge had spoken to her / but yf he were come Inuysible / Syn that they had receyuyd her in to her gouernance. wherof the kinge was gretly abasshid and sore wondryd.
WHan the kynge herd these debates and sawe the state of his doughter he was sore troblid.

For by experyence he sawe well And semed that da+nes was wyth chylde / he trowed and beleuyd better the fisiciens / than the excusacions of the maydens and of his doughter / And for to knowe the trouthe he sente alle the maydens of the place in to prison to arges / and betoke danes in kepyng to other women / And coman|ded them vpon payn of deth that they shuld telle hym yf she were or happend to be delyueryd of chyld or nay wyth in certayn tyme / whan danes sawe her in these termes she began to falle in to wepyng / the kynge ac|crisius fro this day forth cam euery day to knowe how she dyde / she wept wyth oute cessing / she spack not but vnto her herte / And she bewayled her loue and complayned on fortune sorowfully / But whan she had labouryd longe in these wepynges and that her fayr eyen were maad grete and reed aboute .xv. dayes to fore the tyme of her chyldyng she began remembre the cause why she was put in to the tour / And that the goddes had prenostykyd that she shold haue a sone that shold be kynge of arges in this remembrance she was confortyd a lityll / and whan the tyme cam of .ix. monethis she brought forth a passing fayr sone whiche the ladyes and women receyuyd and named
hym persns / And after that signefied hit vnto the kynge / but at burthe of this chylde she excusid and put oute of blame alle the damoyselles / and sayde that they were alle Innocentes of hir caas.
ANone than as the kynge acrisius knewe the veryte of his doughter / And that she had a fayr sone / he had in his herte more of sorowe than of Ioye / And condempned her to deth in dede.

and comanded to two of his marouners. that they shold take the moder  her child And put hem in a lityll boot them bothe allone And that they shuld carye them fer in to the hie see / that after shuld neuer man see them ner haue knowleche of them / The marouners durste not ref+fuse the comandement of the kinge / But by his coman|dement they wente vnto the tour darrain and toke da|nes  her sone perseus And saide vnto the damoysel~ all that / that they had charge to do / praing her humbly that she wold pardone them / and this was aboute midnyght Whan danes vnderstood that she shold be caste in to the see  her sone with her / she had hope for to escape fro thys paryll by the mene of the fortune of her sone / this notwythstondyng the trees ran doun from her eyen And wepyng tenderly she toke leue of the ladyes  da+moyselles that had her in keping / And lete her be caryed vpon the see making complainte  pietous bewaylinges
WHan the marouners had brought her vpon the see they lefte her in a litill boote  put in her lappe per|seus her fayr sone / And as hastely as they mighte they conduyte her in to the hye see with oute mete or drynke  with oute steer or gouernail~  gafe her ouer to al~ wyn+des / Than was ther many a teer wepte among the ma|rouners  danes  perse the yong childe the maroners bewailed by verray co~passion ^t they had to see suche a damoysel~ abandouned to parill of deth danes wepte in co~ceyuing the rigour of her fader / and ^e fawte ^t Iupiter had don to her / and also for the perill whiche she might not resiste / and seus wepte for ^e blowing of the winde and for ^e grosse aier of ^e see / that his tendrenes might
not well suffre to endure In this faco~n the marouners

retorned to arges / and the right disconfortyd damoy|selle danes wente forth vpon the wawes of the see at the gree and wylle of the wyndes / the wawes were right ferfull  lefte hem in to the ayer as montaygnes the wyndes blewe by grete stormes / the lityl~ boot was born and caste vpon the wawes / And often tymes danes wente and supposid to haue perysshid / but she had alwey hope in fortune. And so well hit happend that in this aduersite she was caste in to the see of apu+lye or naples / And there she was founden by auenture of a fisshar / that for pyte and charyte toke her in to his shippe and her sone and brought her a londe for as moche as hit was grete nede.
AT this tyme the noble danes was as a dede body And half goon / whan the maronner had brought her a lande she toke a rynge of gold that she bare on her finger and gaf hit to the good man prayng hym that he wold brynge her in to some hous where she myghte warme and chauffe her wyth her chyld for he was nyhe ded for cold and was all in a traunce. The maronner toke the gold ryng  broughte the damoyselle and the lityll chylde in to his hous / and made to them a good fire and broughte hem mete and drynke / Assoe as perseus felte the ayer of the fire his herte cam to hym agayn and began to lawhe on his moder / whan she sawe that / alle her sorowes torned to nought  she toke hope to her fortune she adoubid and arayed her sone her colour cam agayn she ete and dranke. what shall I saye the fisshar behelde her / and than seeyng in her so moche beawte that like to her he sawe neuer noon / he wente hym vnto the court of the

kynge of naples / and tolde him his aduenture / preising so certainly her beaute that the kinge sente hastely for to fecche her / This kinge was named pilonnus and was sone to the Auncient Iupiter / And whan danes was come to fore hym sodaynly he waxe Amorous of her. And demanded her name / her contre and the cause why that she was aduentured on the see / At begynnyng she excusid her self of alle these thinges to telle / And began to wepe / whan the kinge sawe that he conforted her and said to her that he wold take her to his wif for her beaute / And spak so fayr to her and so graciously. That she tolde hym all her lif / how she was doughter of he kinge Acrusius / and how she was shette in the tour And how Iupiter had deceyuyd her / and how her fader had putte her in the see / what shall I saye more / whan the kinge pylonnus herd alle these fortunes of the da|moysell / he had pytye of her And wedded her wyth grete honnour And dide do norysshe perseus / And gate on her a sone whiche was named danus / but of this mater I will tarye and torne agayn to the historie of Iupiter .


How Iupiter retornyng fro troyes by see encountrid the grete theef Egeon whiche he fought with and ouer came and of the tydinges that he had of danes wherof he was passing sorowfull.
WHan Iupiter was departid fro troyes as afore is sayd he made his marouners to saylle and rowe with alle diligence for to withdrawe fro the porte And for to approuche crete / for he knewe wel~ that ^e time of his promesse made to danes was expired And ^t displesid him gretly that he might not amende hit
 his marouners than dyde alle that they coude do by the space of a day naturel~ but that day past / ther roos a tempest in the see so terrible and out of mesure that hit bare many shyppys wyth theyr apparayll vnder water brake theyr sternes and helmes / and drowned alle the shyppys reseruyd only that shyppe wher Iupi|ter was in / wherfore he wepte outragyously / Thys tempeste duryd two dayes and two nyghtes / they sawe not that tyme on the heuen sonne ne mone ne ster|res / / Iupiter and they that were wyth hym wende ne|uer better haue dyed how well they escaped the deth. And toke lande on the thyrde day whan the tempest was cessid no thyng in crete ner in the see of Europe. But in the occeane so ferre that they knewe not the lan+gage of them that enhabyted the porte where they cam to Ancre.
WHan Iupiter and his peple sawe the dyuersite of the peple dwellyng in this porte and theyr manyer of lyuyng they knewe that they were fer from theyr regyon and than was Iupiter disconfor+tyd in suche wyse / that he wysshed that he had not be there ner come on the see for as moche as he knewe wel~ that he myght not accomplisshe his promesse made vnto danes his loue / he made many grete beway|linges touchyng this mater and more than I can saye / And also complayned his men that he had lost in the storme and tormente as well as he complayned the defaute of his promesse / how well whan his felaws that is to wete yxion and the centaures and gammedes had refresshid them and vytaylled them and had well putte all thynges in poynt and had taken all thynges

necessarie for theyr shippe / they disancred and departid fro this porte and toke theyr waye in to the eeste / And so exployted day by day and moneth vpon moneth that they entryd in to the see Egee / but they had not longe sayled whan egeon the grete theef and rouare. whiche helde at his will alle this see / disancred fro the porte of the yle of deserte / And acompanyed with sixe galeyes and with a thousand men of Armes cam to fore Iupiter apparayllyng them to bataylle in Intencion for to haue destroyed them.
WHan Iupiter and the Centaures sawe the con|duyte of the theef / they knewe lightly that they myght not faylle of bataylle / And sayng eche to other that they shold defende them vnto the deth / they had not longe hold parlament amonge them but they garnysshed them with theyr armes and they displayed the banyer with the egle of gold And in the displaing they made a grete Ioye as they had ben in paradis At this tyme Gamynedes had his wounde heled / whan he sawe that eche man adoubed hym to fighte sauf he whiche was prisonner / he cam And kneled doun on his knees to fore Iupiter and requyred hym right hum|bly that he wold comande to deliuere hym his harnoys for to helpe to his worshipp and also to defende his lif promittyng to do his trewe deuoyr / Iupiter toke vp ga|mynedes whan he sawe hym so meke hym self / And began to sette his loue on hym in suche wyse that hit endured vnto the deth / And that more he made that his harnoys and Armes were yolden to him / sayng that fro than forth they shall be brethern and felawis in Armes

and gammedes answerd to hym that he wolde alway abyde and dwelle his seruaunt.
AMonge these deuyses Egeon and his gallees aborded the shippe of Iupiter and escryed them to deth Egeon was in the fronte afore as capi|tayne / Iupiter behelde hym and knewe hym by his ar|mes that he bare / and yet er ony strook was smy+ten he escryed hym and sayd Theef and veray rouare and pyrate how darst thou escrye to deth hym that made the tremble and fle to fore hym at the bataylle of Crete vnder the regarde of his swerde dyed and made reed wyth the blood of the vnhappy tytannoys / beholde and see me I am Iupiter the mortal~ enemye of alle thy lignage / Thou in lyke wyse art myn enemy / and now arte come to bataylle ayenst me / hit may be well sayd that we shall renne eche vpon other by grete felonnye And that this recountre shall be right domageable for the or for me / And late the goddes doo theyr playsir.
WHan egeon vnderstode that Iupiter had sayd to hym / And that he was the destroyar of his lignage / he had the herte so surmountyd of yre and Inpacience that he coude not answere oon word And grynyng wyth the teth he began to smyte so harde toward Iupiter / that yf the strook of the axe that he helde had ben adressid / ther had neuer be remedye of his lyf / but Iupiter knewe the feet of the warre / and whan he sawe the strook come / he auoyded hit / And haunsid his glaiue and charged hit vpon egeon so seurly that he coude not auoyde the strook that was so peysant / That he was so astonyed that he made hym falle doun vpon the plankes of the galeye / Than made the pirates and

theues a grete crye and fille vpon Iupiter  his felawis Gamynedes helde his axe in his handes and was not than ydle / he dyde and wrought vayllyantly after his puyssance / And so dide the Centaures the skarmusshe was grete / And many were dede / not of the partye of Iupiter / But of the partye of the pyrates / And so la|boured the centaures that they died theyr galeyes with the blood of theyr enemyes / And that the pyrates how well they were .x. ayenst oon coude not ner myght not abide to fore them .
THus began the mortell batayll of the pyrates and of the Centaures / whan that oon galeye had fought as longe as they myght / Another came on / Thus Iupiter and Gamynedes had ynowh to doo to fighte / And they faylled not. for the more they smote the more displaysir had the pyrates / Eche of theyr strokes was the deth of a pyrate / In processe of tyme egeon came a gayn to the medle dismayed and fulfild with Inpacience / he put hym in prees to fight in the moste strength. alle dispayred to wynne alle or to lose all. At this point the bataylle was so terrible and so mortall that all the galeyes closid the shippe of Iupi+ter. And smote on hit / but this was to her vnhapp and ylfare for the moste parte of them were slayn And than gamynedes and Iupiter entrid in to the galeye of kinge Egeon. where they foughte so sore on that oon side and that other of enuie who shold do beste / That of all them that were with in / was not lefte oon man but he was slain or cast in to the see Reseruyd only Egeon whiche Iupiter toke with his hand  bonde him with an hon|derd chaynes of yron .
OF these chaynes of yron egeon had acustome for to bynde his prysonners vnto the tyme they had doon his wyll / whan the pyrates sawe the myschyef that ran vpon them / And that her maystre was ouercomen and bounden wyth the chaynes that he was wonte to tormente his prysonners wyth all / they entended to saue them self / And wythdrowe hem from the shippe of Iupiter / sayng that they had fought wyth all / were no men but deuyllis / and that they were vnhappy that cam vnto her handes / / Iupiter had but oon shippe the pirates sparklid abrood oon here  another there / And whan the centaures sawe that they sayde to Iupiter that hit ought to suffyse to haue this victorie and his enemye / And that hit was no nede to make poursuyt after the vnhappy theuys / Iupiter accorded the same and entryd agayn in to his shippe wyth gamme+des and egeon / and after made his maryners to take her cours agayn / And alleway he had in his memorie da|nes / hit nedeth not to make longe deuyses of these be|waylinges and Iournees  other auentures / he was a yere long sayling by the see / And in the ende of the yere he arryued in his royame  ther fonde foure hon|derd hors whyche they of crete presentyd hym to his byen venue.
THe quene Iuno his wyf made hym grete chiere for she louyd hym wyth all her herte / she fes|tyd hym and them that presented to hym the horses / And he put in pryson egeon / And lete gamme|des goo fre where he wold they louyd than to gyder euer after as two brethern / whan Iupiter had ben there thre dayes he toke foure honderd of his men of the moste

puyssant / And made them noble / And after made hem knyghtes gyuyng to eche of them oon of hys horses. And taughte them and enformed them the feet of Ar|mes after the discipline of yxion and of the Centaures And than whan he had don this he assemblid a thou|sand pietons or fotemen and two hounderd Archers. And in the compaygyne of them of the Centaures And of the knyghtes he departyd fro Crete fyften dayes af|ter his retorn / And sente not for pluto ne for neptune And toke his waye vnto the cyte of Arges in entencion to haue rauysshid the fayr Danes / But he had not fer goon whan he encountrid and mette oon of the citezeins of Arges a noble man And a worshipfull that recoun|ted and told to hym all the lif of Danes for as moche as he demanded hym tidynges / And assured hym on his lif that the kynge Acrisius had caste her on the see / For as moche as she had brought forth a litill sone ayenst his comandement.
WHan Iupiter herde the Caas and the Infortu~ne of Danes / he began to sorowe and sighe sore. The swete cam in to his visage And the teres in to his eyen he callyd Gamynedes and yxion And tolde hem that his viage was broken And that the kynge Acrisius had caste her in to the see for whom he made this Armee / Gamynedes and yxion conforted hym the best wyse they coude And brought hym agayn to Crete he helde hym there solitaryly a while And laye by his wif Iuno / And Iuno and her aunte seres made him good chere often tymes And so ofte came seres that ones she axid the cause of hys sorowe / He behelde the beaute of her / And that she was allone dyde so

dyde so moche to her that he had to doo wyth her / and knewe her flesshly / and that she conceyuyd of his seed a doughter / and after he determyned in his wyll that he wold goo in to secylle and conquerre the contre wyl|ling alwey to ocupie hym self in ony exercitees and toke leue of the kynge yxion and of the centaures / his shyp|pyng was redy he wente to the see  cam in to secylle and conquerd hit wyth the yle of lennos / And whan he had so doon he wente in to ytalye / And descended in to the hous of kynge Ianus / whyche receyuyd hym and made hym grete chyer / and told hym that his fader saturne was come newly for to dwelle therby / And that he was souerainly louyd of alle the peple for as moche as he taughte hem to laboure the vynes  cornes
ALle the blode changed in Iupiter whan he herde that Ianus spak to hym of his fader satu~rne. how well he wente for to see hym / and sawe hym and fonde his fader makyng and foundyng a newe cyte in the place where now stante the capytole of rome / And in suche wyse he submyttyd hym to his fader / that saturne toke hym to his grace / and made pees wyth hym / And also acorded to hym that he shold enioye fro than forth on hys royame of crete at the acorde and makyng of this pees were the kynge Ianus and the kynge euander / and they dwellyd that on nyhe that other / that is to wete Ianus in a cyte callyd lau|rence / And euander in a cyte beyng nyhe the mount. auentyn And so was the kynge ytalus of cyracuse that made in this tyme a newe cyte named albe vpon the ryuer of tybre / Alle thyse kynges made grete chiere of the pees of the fader and the sone / And thus Iupiter

abidyng there / he acqueynted hym with the wif of kinge euander named Nychostrate for as moche as she was right experte in the science of nygromancie and in char+mes and sortes / And so he lernyd this science / Iupiter after this toke leue of her and of his fader saturne and of his neyhebours / And lefte there saturne / that was there maryed agayn vnto a woman callid philiris of whom he had a sone callid picus that was fader of kynge famus husbonde of the quene fatua of whom hercules was Amorous as hit shall be said in the se|cond book / And retorned in to Crete And ther fond that his wif was deliueryd of his sone vulcan / And that his acqueyntyd amite seres was deliueryd of hys doughter named proserpine / wherof Iuno was ryght euyll plesid and contente / And complayned to Iupiter of the dishonour that he had don to her / but Iupiter sette nought ther by but laughed / And was more Ioyous of his doughter than of hys sone / For hys doughter was meruayllously fayr and wlcan his sone was foull and courbbackyd / how well for to liue in pees with Iuno he maryed seres vnto a noble man named siccam and gaf to hem the Royame of secylle and the Cyte of siracuse / And sente hem for to dwelle there with proserpina / And hit was not longe after that he sente his sone wlcan in to the yle of lennos / whome he betoke to gouerne to thre men callyd berroutes sce|ropes and pyragmon / And thyse thre men kept hym so well that he cam to cage and that he was a man of ryght enhauncyd courage and lerned alle sciences in especiall nygromancie Geomancie and promancie.

And made many meruayllous thynges that be not for to beleue wherfore I wyll tarye now of hym and of Iupiter / And I wyll trete of his sone perseus for as moche as of hym cam Alcumena.


How the quene Meduse cam to Athenes to wor|shyp in the temple the goddesse pallas / And how the kynge neptunus wax Amerous of her and how she deceyuyd hym.
IN this tyme whan Iupiter dwellyd pesibly kynge of crete / and that his sone vlcan waxed and lerned the craft of nygromancie / / In the lande of esperye / passid out of this world a kynge na|med porcus a man of right grete enterpryse / whyche the esperiens callyd god of the see of spaygne Auncy|ently named esperye as sayd is / This kynge lefte thre doughtres that had not but oon eye as the poetes saye. that is to saye that her pryncipall charge was vnto the vanytees of the world / And therfore they were callyd gorgonnes that is to saye cultyueresses or la|bourers of the erthe for as moche as they entended vnto vyces that behelde erthely thynges Of thyse dough+tres oon was named meduse that other ewryale and the thyrde scenno / Meduse that was the eldest of that other succeded in thempyre and in the royame. And the poetes saye that she had hede of a serpent / gyuyng by this to vnderstande that she was sonuerainly wyse and subtyl~ / After the deth of kynge porcus this me|duse gouuerned hyely her royame and held pyrates and men of warre / And in her begynnyng she toke and hauntyd the see of ewrope in feet and wyth right grete tryumphe descended on aday at the porte of

Attenes / and sente vnto the kynge Neptu~ne to requyre him that he wold graunte vnto her that she might entre in to his cyte for to worshippe in the temple the goddesse pallas / whiche was newly maad Neptune dide grete honour vnto the messangers of meduse / and Accorded vnto her that she shold entre in to his cite  in to the tem+ple / Forseen that she shold haue none with her saue her damoyselles / whan meduse herde the answere of kynge Neptune / she concluded that she wold go in to the tem|ple / wherof was a grete renomee  was a companyed with many damoiselles so richely arayed that hit was a tryumphe for to see / she entryd in to the temple and in to the cyte And ther she torned in to stones not only the men that behelde her but Also the women  among all other specially a quene that was named yde.
BI this hit is to vnderstande that this meduse was so of excellente beaute and was so pas|sing ryche. that all they that behelde her / gafe hem self ouer perfitly to couoyte her beaute and her ry|chesses / And therfore wryte the poetes that they were torned in to stones. For they that dispose them and gyue them to the delices of this world ben lykned and compared vnto hard stones / wherof may no good come Thus than meduse entryng in to Athenes conuertyd and torned many men in to stones in so moche that Neptunus herd these tydynges And desiryng to see this quene he wente hym in to the temple where she was in contemplacion / And he had not longe beholde her / whan he felte hym so couoytous of her and of her loue that he said to hym self that she shold be his wif. And that she shold neuer escape hym.
THis meduse was longe space in contemplacion this duryng neptune desired her beaulte more and more / and his herte Iuged in hym that he sholde come to his entencion / but anon after that his herte had made this Iugement / he a lityll debated consi|deryng the excellence of her another Iugement trauersid and ourded in his entendement that constraynd hym to saye these wordes that folowe / alas in what matyer in what sorow  in what right grete and enflamyng payne ben they that ben brennyng in loue by longe space of tyme / that I that now begynne / fynde me in so|many sighes and payne / that I wote neuer how I may in tyme come vnto this lady for to requyre her to be my wyf / she is shynyng in all beaulte and in right haboun+daunt rychesses / this is that me lackyth / she beholdeth me amonge other whiles in her prayers / hit may hap|pen well that loue may torne her herte for to make thaliance of her and me / and what is this / men saye that loue hurteth no man / but yf hit be be his eyen / yf the eyen be not made for to see / I shal~ saye that my desire shall happe well / where am I / wher I am I put me oute where is my herte where is my desir / I wote neuer what I thynke / And my thought may be abusion And myn abuse / may well be reuersid / Myn eyen perauen|ture wene to see that they see not / Myn eres ymagyne to here and yet they ben deef / I finde my self in a grete playne  vayne ataynt / and yet more in a superfluous errour more than ony man may haue / For whan I see this lady more excellente than the other in beaute and richesses / reson telleth me that she is not comen hether for me / And whan I beholde that she is allone wyth

oute men in my cyte who shall agayn saye my will. I shall requyre her to be my wif after that she hath don her deuocion / And yf she accorde to my requeste my werke shal~ doo well And yf she gaynsaye and with stande hit than I muste vse force and auctorite royall.
THus whan Neptune cam to thys conclucion Meduse aroos fro her contemplacion And lokyd right fayr Neptune wente to her And dide her reuerence / And after prayd her that she wold goo to his ryall palays for to refresshe her Meduse thankyd hym of his curtoisie And saide that she mighte not well tarye there at that tyme / whan neptune vnder+stood that she was in wyll to retorne wyth oute to Areste her in his hows ne in his cyte he was sore dis|playsid in his herte / Alleway he held manyer And drewe her a parte and said vnto her changyng colour. Madame I am sory that ye reffuse to take pacience in my hows / I am kinge of this cyte / The goddes haue not gyuen to me so moche happe / that I haue yet ony wif ony lady or damoysell / hit is so now happend that the goddes and fortune hath enspyred yow to come hether Certes hit is so now that your right hye beaute that perisshid the eye of my herte / And hath made me so co|uoytous of yow that I gyue vnto yow. herte. body. and goodes / And alle that a louer may gyue vnto his loue and lady or ony king may gyue / wherfore I pray yow that ye will descende vnto my palays / to the ende that I may haue comynycacion more secretly there / And telle vnto yow the right grete loue that I haue in yow.
ANone as Meduse vnderstood the requestes of the kynge she began to frowne and not wyl|lyng to be other wyse / she answerd to hym. Syre kynge yf hit were soo that myn herte desired ac|queyntance and co~mynycacion of oon man more than of an other in trouthe yf I so fonde me / I shold holde my self right happy findyng my self in the grace of your eyen / but the mater goth wyth me all otherwyse / I loue the men as moche oon as an other / I haue entencion to abyde and contynue in my virginite / ye be a kynge ye haue gyuen to me saufconduyt to achyeue my pylgry|mage I requyre yow that ye holde yow plesid and that ye doo in suche wyse as ye had neuer seen me / Dame sayde neptune how shall I doo that ye saye / whan my herte is all gyuen vnto yow / Syre answerd Meduse hyt behoueth fyrst to knowe and after that to loue I haue told yow hyer that I haue entencion to abyde a virgyne / what may hit prouffite yow to saye that ye haue gyuen me your herte / thyse ben but loste wordes. Dame sayd neptune the dyamond shyneth not tyl~ hit be pollisshyd / ye were neuer perauenture desired ne re|quyred of loue more than now / wherfore ye haue no more loue in oon man than in an other / wherfore ye muste vnderstand that the hauntyse maketh loue / And yf ye come wyth me I make no doubtes and soiourne that your wyll shall change And that ye shall take alyance wyth me Syre answerd Meduse my wyll is vnchangeable / notwythstondyng sayd neptune hit muste change / And abaysshe yow not. Syre ans|werd. Meduse I see no thyng that yeuyth me cause of enbaysshement. For I fele my herte ferme and

stable in his operacions / ye be a kynge and haue gyuen me saufconduyt for to furnysh my deuocion at the tem|ple of the goddesse of your cyte / Rayson and honour shold gouerne your corage / Dame said neptune yf your beaute surmounted not the beaute of other wo|men I shold consente anon your retorne but whan I con+ceyue yow formed in so hye degre of nature / that no+thing lackyth in yow / And further whan I see that the grete goddesse pallas hath enspyred yow to thys my cyte / Rayson may haue no place And how hit be by loue or by force / ye shall be my wif / For I had leuer dye And renne in to alle the deshonnours of the world Than for to faylle to haue your Allyance.
WHan Meduse that was wise had vnderstand the wordes of Neptune and sawe well that he was outragyously achauffid of her Amo|rous desire / and that she might not ascape his puyssance for her beaute / but yf hit were by ony auenture Than she changed her heer in to couleures / that is to saye that where force regned she wrought by subtilte And said vnto the kynge Syre I knowe that ye be a grete and puyssant lord / and that loue hath meuyd yow by force to take me to your wif Syn your playsir is suche I am co~tente to do all in suche wyse as ye haue demanded / and that this same day be maad the maryage of yow and me / but for more solempnly to halowe the fefte of our espousailles I requyre yow of two thinges First that I may retorne vnto the porte to my peple for to aray and dresse me with my triu~phant richesses / for I ne may em+ploye to more grete  glorie than this day of my mariage

And secondly that ye wyll do araye and adresse the ladyes of this cyte for to receyue me as hit apperteyneth For I wyll well that ye knowe that in alle the reme|nant of ladyes of the world / ye shall not finde ony that haue more meuable goodes ne richesses than I haue
NEptune was than as oon alle rauysshyd in Ioye whan he herde this answer of meduse / he thankyd her of her swete wordes And agreed to her to do in suche wyse as she had deuysed / And anon sente agayn this Meduse vnto her galleyes ho|pyng that she wold retorne agayn to be his wyf / but whan she by the subtylte of her wytte was rendred agayn at the porte / where neptune had no puyssance In stede for to retorne to the cyte / she dyde do disancre all her shippis And lete sayle falle and in all haste wyth+drewe hem fro the porte And in stede to aray her in ves+tementis nupciall she toke her armes and made all her men to arme them / And thus she ascapyd fro neptune whiche was in grete sorow merueyllously / And in grete Anger sayde that she had hede of a serpent / And that her heres were torned in to coleuuers to the ende to hyde more graciously the malice of her and the manyer how she had deceyuyd and begyled hym .
THus than ascaped meduse the handes of nep|tune by the meen of her hede serpentyne / And neptune abood conuertyd and tornyd in to stoone / that is to saye in erthely affections of richesses of meduse / And wente not after her for as moche as her puyssance surmountyd moche alle the puyssance of atthenes / Of this thynge ran the renomee thurgh all grece / And the beaute of meduse was so recomanded.

that of tho parties wente all daye many knightes auen+turyng theyr liues / And many of them were torned in to stones and many loste theyr tresors innumerable / en+forcyng them by Armes to conquere this lady / whiche withstood alle way here assaultes and assayllyng. And all way abode vainqueresse of them / Meduse sette nowht by kynge ne prince that wold haue her to wyf She was alle sette to gete and gader the tresors of the world / yf her fader had ben strongly coueytous / yet was she more couetous / And she comen agayn fro athe+nes in to her royame After she had put vnder in subiec|tion the grekes that exposed them ayenst her as said is. she so mountid in to the pe swalowe of couetyse and auarice that she made warre vnto alle her nyghebours. And dauntyd hem / and constraind them to paye her yerly grete tributes / wherby her astate and name aroos and was so greet / that the bruyt therof ran in to many ferre regions And amonge other in to the cyte of naples where regned the kyng pilonne as afore is said.
IN this tyme that the renomee of meduse was in his bruyt. Perseus sone of danes and of Iu|piter was in the verdour of his begynnyng and tempryen strength / And dayly requyred his moder and the kinge that they wold gyue hym leue to serche hys Auentures Whan than pylonnes herde speke of the haultesse of Meduse of her rapines and of her aua|rice / he behelde that his sone in lawe shold do a ver|tuous werk / yf he myght correcte her / told to perseus that he wold sende hym theder Perseus thankyd hym and sayd he wold enploye therto all his puyssance

Than the kynge pylonne sente for men of Armes and made redy thretty galeyes for thexercyte of perseus / whan all was redy / he callyd to hym on aday perseus. And dubbyd hym knyght for the ordre of cheuallrye began that tyme to be vsid in all the world hit was ordonned that that same day perseus shold go to the see / And whan the kynge had accomplisshed all the serymonye to the caas requyred in the paynems wyse Perseus toke leue of the kynge pylonne And of his moder danes  of the damoyselles And right Ioyously entryd in to his galeye / After they dysancred and de|partyd fro the port of naples wyth grete bruyt of ta|bours  trompes / And wyth banyer splayed saylyd in to the hye see / hit was a good and a fayr sight to see his departement ther was many a teer wept / euery body loued perseus for so moche as he was humble and debonayr / The Apulyens departyd neuer as longe as they myghte see hym / And than after they retorned home prayng vnto the goddes that good and right happy myght be the fortune of perseus / And the noble knyght wente by the see and by the portes wyth oute auenture / what shall I saye / he so exployted that he cam in to affrike that was named lybye at that tyme / And there wolde haue refresshid hym at a port beside the strayt of gybalter / where as was kynge Athlas the grete astrologyen / but this kynge put hym fro lan|dyng at this porte / And cam in armes ayenst hym and shewyd fro ferre signe that he wolde kepe his contre wyth the swerde / Than perseus whyche wold not there employe his Armee wythdrewe hym fro the porte en entencion to auenge hym another tyme of

that rudesse yf fortu~ne wold helpe hym / he passid the strayte and sought so longe the royame of meduse / that anone after he fonde hit and had veray tydinges by cer+tain marchantes / that he fonde labouryng on the see. that told hym that she and her susters soiourned in a cyte whiche stode on the ryuage.
GRete was the Ioye of perseus whan he vnder|stood these tydinges / his folk had grete nede of vitayll / he callid hem all  saide that they shold make hem redy and Arme them / for they were nyhe the place that they soughte / and than as they saylid alway forth aboute thre owres to fore the euen they sawe the Cyte where meduse was Inne / And more ouer they sawe meduse and her susters with grete nombre of men of warre that renged them on the porte so richely arayed and in poynt that hit was meruaylle to see. whan perseus sawe this he dyuydyd his Armee in thre egale bataylles / eche of ten galeyes and ordeyned and put in capitaynes of warre. And wysely enformed hem how to nyhe and approche the porte. And after he put hym self in the first batayll And the poetes saye that the goddes pallas gaf to hym than a shelde of cris|tall / that is to vnderstande that he approuchyd right wysely the porte that was vpon the grete see of spayne And that he conduyted hym self by suche prudence. That is likenyd to cristall / That he cam and fought hand of hand the puyssance of meduse. And that shy|nyng the ryght clere shelde of hys prudence in recey|uyng and yeuyng Infinyte strokes he gate lande and constrayned meduse to retorne in to her cyte by force

by force of armes and by prowesse / and wyth grete dyscipline and fightyng of his sowdyours / At that tyme the hede of serpent of meduse myght notwyth|stonde his firste fortunes. For she that was acusto|med to put vnder foot and ouercome alle them that ex+posed them in armes ayenst her. At this tyme was put to thextremyte / where she had put other to.


How perseus vaynquysshed in bataylle the quene Meduse and she fledde in to her cyte.
SVche was the entre of the warre that was betwene perseus and meduse where the gor|gonnes fortunat / whiche meduse had cherys|shed in right hye degree / fille doun fro the whele of for|tune / whiche whele had consented that the prudence of perseus sholde be cause of her humylieng  mekyng / This notwythstondyng meduse took corage in her self and reentryd in to her cyte / And gaf charge to oon of her men to go vnto her enemyes and to enquere of them who was chief and captayn of hem / And what thinge he soughte in her countre / The hisperyen at comandement of Meduse departyd fro the cyte And cam to the ooste of the Apuliens that entended for to logge them that nyght / he did so moche that he cam to perseus that toke his refection vpon a table that he had maad of a grete stoon of marbell and sayde to hym in this wyse. Syre the vaynqueresse of men hath sente me to thee for to en|quere what thyng thou wylt doo in her contre to the ende that she may knowe what she hath to do / Messanger answerd perseus I haue entencion to fraunchise and make fre the men fro the seruytude that thy maystresse holdeth hem in / And to make her that hath but oon eye / 

that she conuerte  torne men no more in to stones And that her richesses shall be no more the causes of the losse and dicion of knyghtes whiche wold haue her in ma+riage / For ayenst her malice of the serpente I shall be armed with prudence / and will wel~ ^t she knowe that to morn with oute lenger delaye I shal~ gyue assault vn+to her cyte / In caas she come not agaynst me in batayll.
WIth this Answere the esperien retorned vnto Meduse and recountyd vnto her all that he had herd / Meduse assemblid than alle her men of warre and said to them / hit is not meruaylle though I haue myn herte anguysshous whan after that I haue vaynquysshyd grete companyes of men of Armes that I see that shamefully we ben goon a back and withdra+wen in to this Cyte by the prowesse of an handfull of men / O what Anguysshe is this to them that haue ben in custome to ouercome and to tryumphe in alle maner warres / where ben the hye enterprises by whiche we haue made alle the sees occidentall to fere and drede vs. Where ben the glayues that had ben yolden to vs of the kynges our trybutaryes / where ben the Armes and strengthes that hath made to tremble the mountaygnes and roches of libye where be they that this day haue ta+ken feer for prowesse / drede for hardynes dishonour for honour At leste sin this thinge is so gouerned hit beho|ueth to passe the best wise we may / but now hit beho|ueth also that euery man corage and vertue hym self. And that to morn hyt be recoueryd that by vs thys day is loste / The enemyes of thys Cyte haue don vs to vnderstonde and knowe that to morn they wyll gyue vs assault / If we ne furnyssh them of bataylle.

And how hit be also that they ben trauayllyd of the ayer of the see / hit is moche better that we furnyssh them of bataylle at this tyme than we sholde abyde len|ger Oure enemyes ben straungers. here heth our triu~phe or our mortall mysaduenture / yf we ouercome them hit shall be a memorye of vs ferre and nyghe in all ho+nour / yf the caas goo contrarye we shall renne wyth the losse of our lyues in to derision and mocquerye of alle peples / And what is this shall the blood be spred a brood of them / that haue made the ground rede of the blood of other. shalle the honour be wastyd and loste And also the name that we haue goten wyth so grete labour / Alle the world taketh courage and hope / these two thynges ben also couenable in warre / as the armes And wyth oute them shall neuer man attayne to the crowne of victorye / A than take herte to yow / and dis+pose your harnoys and armes / to morn shall be the day that ye muste nede do shyne your dedes the beste wyse ye may and for to kepe your renomees and your tytles of honourable prowesse.
DAme answerd oon of ther capitayns it is grete domage / that ye ne were a man / For yf hit had be so / hit is so apparant that ye shold haue sub|iuged and put vnder alle the monarchye of men / As ye saye / we muste nedes kepe oure renome / yf fortune hath ben to vs this day froward / to morn she shal~ torn to prouffyt / the woundes and hurtes that ben made in our worship and blood we moste bere hit and take hit in gree. And our prowesse and honour shall to morn putte vs to fore the shame / we shall esuerte vs Conne not ye ryse so erly that we myght be on the

fronte of hem well a rayed apparaylid for to laboure for the prosite of your requeste / whan meduse herde the good wille of her capitayne / to whom consentid all the other / she was right Ioyous / and concluded with them that she with all her puissance shold bespringe and as+sayll her enemies at midnyght in hope to come vpon hem vnwares This co~clucion thought good vnto alle / And eche man withdrewe for to take her reste  for to make redy his harnoys Meduse slepte not moche this night as she that had the herte alway grete / and sore chargid with appetite of vengeance / And at midnyght than she sowned to armes / and made hem to be redy  adoubed. she toke her banyers ^t were right riche / her men were di+ligent I nowh to arme them for of that crafte they were well enduced / And whan they were redy  assemblid to fore ^e palais riall / Meduse  her susters yssuid oute of the gate in riche astate / and gyuyng good morow to her folk / with as litill noyse as she myght she deuidyd hem in two companyes wherof she made oon companye to departe by oon of the yates of the cyte / and she her self co~duyted that other by the yate ^t was ayenste the porte or hauen .
AT this tyme the ayer was pure and net / And the sterres twinklid / And the mone shone and put away the derknes of the nyght acordyng to her celestyall offyce / Whan meduse was in the fel|des she wente after the ryuage of the see / And supposid to haue taken perseus and his folke but she faylled. For as sone as she yssuyd out of her cyte / hit was parceyuyd of the wacchemen of the ooste of perseus.

And they signefied theyr comyng to perseus and hys men that slept in her harnoys And thus whan she ap|prochid vnto her enemyes / and had supposid to haue distressid them / / she fonde them arayed and renged in good ordenance of bataylle / wherof ther aroos a right grete crye of bothe parties / And wyth this crye ther engendryd a grete scarmuche / so eygre and fiers / that hit was nede vnto alle / to put forth her prowesses and theyr strengthes / there was many man cast doun dede vpon the sande / ther was many a swerd dyed reed wyth blood / there cam on the seconde bataylle of me|duse makyng grete bruyt in Ioynnyng of the bataylle. And than had they of naples stronge partye for to maystrye 
IN this tempeste perseus gafe hym to no reste he had alway his eyen open / his eeres bent to here / his armes enhaunsed to smyte / he was quyk and in hys grene yougthe / his swerde trenchid and cutted dispairly / he smote no man ne shelde but he al to frusshid hit and slewe doun right / Meduse that alway put her in the most strength and frayes / and moste prees by myghty grete corage / for to entretene  to holde to geder her men / seeyng often tymes the apper|tisements and the noble fetes of armes of her enemy perseus / had grete sorowe / For his only conduyte helde the apuliens in estate and aray / And ther was none that myghte resiste his strength / or at leste that had myght for to resiste hym / This thinge torned to grete displaysir to meduse / Alleway she bare this displaysir and vsid her prowesse the beste wyse she myghte / she dyde grete domage to her enemyes / And smote doun here

and there so vaylliantly that she semed moche better to be a man than a woman / And better became her to bran+dissh a swerde than to spynne or torne a spyndell.


How perseus in this bataylle slewe the myghty sus+ter of meduse and venquysshid the bataylle.
THis scarmuche than dured longe with grete betyng doun of men of Armes and of knyghtes Thenuye that meduse had of well doyng of per+seus gaf to her Armes more force and strength that na+ture had gyuen her / she was full of malice / And she coude kepe her well fro the swerd of perseus / And all way she was enuyronned of the best men she had. what shall I make longe counte they fought in this fa+cion vnto the day with oute that ony wyste to whom me shold gyue the victorye / but than like as the sonne began to sprede and shewe his bemes and rayes / In sem+blable wise perseus began to shewe the rayes of his prudence / And braundisshid his swerd And seeyng on that oon side the banyer royall he smote in to the prees. And drewe to that parte castyng men doun dede on the sandes moo than an honderd / This banyer was square four foot made of cremesin satin / And in the myddes was an ymage paintyd wherof the body was a fi|gure and facion of a woman and the hede was of a serpente .
MEduse was neuer ferre fro thys banyer / for as moche as she drewe her allwey theder to for rescuse / Whan perseus was comen theder with grete sute of hys folk he cryed perseus perseus.

And liftyng his swerd that was temprid with blood from on ende to that other / hit happend that the first strook that he gaf in this place fille vpon oon of the sus+ters of meduse so terribly that she confou~ded ded wyth a grete wounde begynnyng on her heed doun to her sto|mack / than they of naples smote on the hesperyens with alle her puyssance / Tho smote perseus endlong and ouerthwart on the right side and on the lefte side / his stro+kes were so mortall that they affrayed not only the most feble of his enemyes but alle the most strengest and also the asseured meduse.
GRete was the occision / In this point meduse en|forced her power to wythstonde the grete force of perseus / This notwythstandyng she that a fore tymes had ouercomen the men was than ouerco|men / And hauyng late the corage lifte vp and the herte more fiers than ony man / she was veynquysshid of des+payr / for the only cheuaulrous conduyte of perseus that had broken her banyer / that had smyten her men in pieces partye slayn wyth his swerd and partye fled. And that he had not only made reed his swerd and right hand wyth her blood / but the see by smale goters was made rede of the warm blood / in whiche meduse lost her ferocyte / Alle her presumpcion alle her strength and alle her vigour so euyll wente and alle the werke on her side. that whan she had seen her banyer destroyed / Whan she had seen the moste victoryous of her knigthes confounded by tempest of deth / whan she sawe her men of Armes leue the bataylle and flee to fore perseus as to fore the ymage of deth / Fynably she sawe alle her puysance torne in to destruction generall / wherof the

ende was that eche man gaf hit ouer / And euery man that myght saue hym self sauyd hym by caues And bus+shes / here oon and there an other so sore affrayed that hit was a pietous thing to here theyr cryes And many sauyd them in the cyte and many were slayn in the fle|yng / of perseus and his men.


How perseus conquerd meduse and her cyte And smote of her hede And how he wente to fyghte ayenst the kynge Athlas of septe a myghty and puyssant geant .
PErseus at thys disconfiture poursued meduse fleyng in to her cyte and entryd in with her and the moste parte of his peple with hym. That faylid hym neuer to put to deth alle the men defen|sable that they fonde to thende that no insurrection shold be ayenst them / but they spared the blood of women And lityll children by the comandement of perseus. And amonge the other as perseus had founde meduse that was put in a cisterne / he had pytye of her / how be hit he smote of her hede / in suche facion that the blood that yssuyd out engendrid pegasus the fleyng hors. by the hede that perseus smote of / of meduse is vnderstond that he toke from her her royame And depryuyd her of hit / And bannysshid her poure and nakyd / And by the fleyng hors that was engendrid of ^e blood / yssued fro her hede / is vnderstande that of her richesses Issuyng of that royame he founded and made a shippe named pegase / that is as moche to saye / as good renomee And this shippe was likened vnto an hors fleyng / For as moche as the good renomee of perseus was than born fro region to region / in suche wise / as vpon an hors fleing

And for as moche as perseus wente in this shippe in dy+uerce contrees where he gate hym a grete name.
BI this facion than perseus conquerd the hede of Meduse / and did do make pegase the most swyft shyppe that was in alle the world And abode there certayn nombre of dayes seekyng and ser|ching the tresours of meduse  the rychesses in whiche she and her susters had sette her entencion and her herte There fonde perseus stones precyous and thinges mer|uayllous / whan his shippe was made he filde hit with precyous bagues and Iuellis And leuyng in this cyte men for to gouerne hit and conduyte / he wente to the see and toke for his armes / the armes of meduse / And restyd not tyll he cam to the poort of the cyte / where regned athlas / sayng that he wold put hym vnder and subiugue hym afore er he retorned in to his contre.
THys cyte had to name septe / athlas knewe well the armes of meduse and fro as fer as he sawe pegase the shippe he knewe the armes that were therin / than he thought that meduse had be veyn|quysshyd of these strangyers and doubtyd sore theyr comyng / this notwythstondyng he dide putte his men in Armes / And bewayled moche phylotes his brother otherwyse named esperus that kept the gardyn wyth apples of gold with his doughtres whan his folk were armed he rengyd hem vpon the porte in good ordenance And anon after cam to the porte  there liuerd assaulte full of dyuerce and sharp fierstees / Athlas was yong. strong of body and puyssant of peple / he defended hym vayliantly And kepte the porte wyth the poynte of hys swerd so well that by thys assault / Perseus

conquerd no thing on him in two dayes that the assault dured / but that was more by the stronge nature of the porte than by the strength of the swerd of kinge athlas
THan whan perseus sawe that he had not folk ynow for to take this porte / he withdrewe him in to hye see  sente in to naples vnto the kinge pilonnus half the tresors of Meduse signefieng to hym his hye aduenture / And requyryng hym that he wold sende hym a thousand sowdyours / the kynge and Da|nes had grete Ioye of these tydynges / And at the re|queste of perseus assemblid fyften honderd fyghtyng men whiche they sente in to libye with theyr propre sone danus whom they ordeyned chyef and capitayne of that Armee / Whan perseus sawe come thyse fyften honderd fyghtyng men / fro as fer as he had aspied them in the see he knewe that hit was his socoure that cam to hym. and took hys hors volant / And wente to mete hem / And fonde there danus his broder / to whom he made the moste grete chyer of the world / And entrid in to his shippe / And there abode all that day festyng him / And after whan hit cam to the nyght he comanded his maryners that they shold rowe and sayle toward septe / and they saide to hym that on the morn they wold deliuere hym at the porte / with that the marouners put hem in deuoyr to do theyr craft so well that after the nyght was past aboute the sonne rysing they shewid to perseus the hauen and porte of septe.
THan was Perseus full of grete gladnesse and callyd danus and sayd to hym my broder / We ben now comen to the porte where thou shalt gete this day honour  worship / yf hit plese the goddes.

For yf the good auenture helpe vs / the honour shall appertayne vnto thee to fore me / that durst not enbrase allone by my puyssance / A than in the name of alle our goddes late vs enploye here the hede of meduse / hit is myn aduys at this tyme that she shall do torne in to stones alle them of this regyon / That is to vnderstonde that by the  thy men that by the mene of the rychesses of meduse be comen hether / they of this cyte sette to fore vs / shall be constrayned to abandone and gyue ouer theyr poort / And flee betwene the walles of stones of theyr cyte / My broder Answerd danus I haue good hoope and truste in fortune that she shall be thy helpe / but for the honour and worship of this werk hit shall not torne to my prouffit / but vnto thyn that arte sechar of so honourable awerk / And I desire no thyng in this partye but the name of a souldiour For at thy souldees enuyronned only of the loue of our fraternyte I come for to serue the / and yf the rychesses of meduse had not comen in to naples / wyth thy right good fame these warryours had not comen in to libye / than for conclu|sion hit is to conceyue / yf in this werke be honour that hit torne in to thy glorye and loenge / but this notwyth|stondyng I shall not fayle the / but for thy loue  wor|shyp I shall expose to the assault all that I may and hold of nature And I praye the to dubbe and make me knyght.
WIth this word Perseus drewe out his swerd and after gaf to danus the ordre of knyghthode and sin comanded that eche man shold garnyshe hym of his armures / And than made dysplaye banyers standardes  penous / and other recognyssances and

knowlechinges / After dide do sowne his trompettes Clarions and tabours And than after renged alle his galeyes / And them sette in right fayr and good orde|nance dide so moche that he cam to the poort / whiche was all full and enuyronned wyth libyens that were redy to caste on them speres dartes and stones. For they of that contre were right experyent of the warre / And also to aborde this poort ther was a right grete bruyt And a right greuous assemble / Perseus was in pegase and assayllyd the libyens at on ende. And danus was in another galeye and assayllyd hem in like wise / And they putte hem bothe in the moste daunger of the assault they had grete sheldes and large where with they coueryd hem / They dredde no strook of glayue ne swerde ne of stoones they put hem self in to the myddes of the porte / And there they gaf the assault where many were dede on that oon partye and on that other plente of fightars in suche wyse that at thentree ther were many apukens confounded and put a back. For they were than hoote and aspre but after thys whan they had goten land / Perseus and danus began to smyte so dismesurably vpon ^e libyens that they bete hem doun with oute remedye now here now there at right side and at lifte side alle made rede with theyr blood / Also Perseus gaf so grete a strook wyth hys glayue vnto athlas / that purposid to haue come broken the passage / that neuer after athlas had no hope / ne durst not come amonge the strokes / how well that he was grete strong and puyssant.
SO moche coueytous of victorye were perseus  danus and they of naples / the libyens had not be accustomed to finde so fiers and mortall ar+mes as them of perseus / the kynge Athlas wyst not what to saye he encouraged his peple the beste wyse he couthe / this notwithstandyng he sawe hem beten doun of his enemyes wyth oute nombre and wyth oute me|sure / and sawe forther that they of naples wan alway And whan he had seen all this / and also behelde that these men had vaynquysshid the quene meduse / he Iuged in hym self that he was not puyssant ynowh to resiste theyr strength / and the hardnes of this bataylle shuld be to hym more domageous than vayllable / so sowned he the retrayt  fled not in to his cyte / but in to a right hye montaygne that was therby / And therfore saye the poetes that athlas by the sight of the hede of meduse was torned in to a mountayn / / And fro than forth on was this hille callyd athlas and yet endureth the name vnto this day / And for as moche as athlas sauyd hym there among the stones / he founded syn a castell where he dwellyd vnto the tyme of hercules.


How Perseus torned the kynge athlas in to a stone And how the quene auria wyf of kynge pricus wax amerous of the knyght belleforon that reffused her. wherof after he had moche payne.
WHan perseus and danus sawe athlas and alle his folk put to flight First he chaced hem vnto the mountayn / where they were torned in to stones / dyeng with theyr blood caues / busshous weyes and pathes And secondly whan he had put hem vnto vt|terance / as moche as they cowde they drewe to the cyte

wherof the yates were not shette ner kepte with noman And entryng therin they ne fonde but a litill nombre of matrones and yong children whiche made a terryble grete sorowe / Alle the yong men and women were fledd vnto the feldes and had abandonned theyr cyte with theyr folk and goodes / Whan perseus and danus were with in / and sawe that hit was all abandonned to hem and her peple / Alle that they fonde / they passid that night with grete Ioye and gladnesse and makyng grete chier thankyng theyr goddes of theyr victorie That they had gyuen to them. And on the morn perseus made to bete doun the gates of this cyte. After he comanded that euery man shold take his butin And whan they were laden with alle. Perseus and danus wente to the see in to her galeyes. And so sayllyd forth leuyng athlas in the montaygne where he gafe hym vnto the studie of the science of astronomie.
IN this tyme Iupiter made aliance with kynge tros by ^e moyen of gaminedes And in signe of loue and frendshyp he gaf vnto ylion a vigue of gold whiche was sette in ^e palais of ylion as hit shal~ be said in the thirde book / and hit was not longe after ^e kynge troos consumed the cours  ende of his regne / and his obsequie was halowed  made solempnly at troye in grete habou~dance of teres / and than ylion was crowned kinge of this cyte / where he liued peasibly in a~pliacion  encresing of seygnourye and lordship / and wedded a no+ble lady of the cyte of whom he receyuyd a sone named laomedon / And for as moche as I finde not ^t ylion dide ony thing after his coronaco~n ner made other thing saue ^t he achieued  made his palais of ylion / I shall speke

hensforth of laomedon his sone that regned after hym. And here I shall leue the faytes of this ylion / and yet er I wryte of laomedon I shal~ poursiewe my matere of per+seus / and for to come therto I shall racounte an historie that fyll after that perseus had torned kynge athlas in to a mountaygyne.
IN this tyme than that perseus began to gyue his lyf vnto righte digne ocuures and werkes of noble fame. Accrisius belefader of this perseus and naturell fader of danes / was put out of his kyngdome and royame  of alle he seygnourye of arges by a conspiracion that Pricus his broder made ayenst hym And ther was left vnto acrisius of alle his royame no more but only the tour of darayn wherto he fledde for refuge / This acri|sius and pricus were naturell sones of abas lawfull sone of linceus that was only lefte a lyue of the fifty sones of egistus by the mercy of his wyf ypermestra doughter of danaus.
PRicus than hauyng vsurpyd fro his broder Acrisius the seignourye of the royame of Arges had a wyf named aurea / that was so norisshid That of custome gaf no charge but to habounde in dely|ces / and on a day she behelde amonge her seruauntes oon so well accomplisshid a knyght that nature had no thynge forgoten in hym touchyng his body / of whom she was enamoured / she was yong And her husbond pricus was auncyent in his werkes and condycions And moche lasse desired the carnall desirs than his wif did / how well they were bothe right nyhe of oon eage / This knyght thus belouyd had to name bellorophon. whan Aurea had put her studye to loue this knyght / she

solicited hym with her eyen  of semblauntes drawing him to delite  voluptuosite / but ^e trewe knight that had his herte ferme and stable whiche parceyuyd well her countenance / dissimilid fayned that he was blinde in this partye And in the ende whan the lady sawe that by semblant ne signe Amerous that she shewid / he emplo|yed him not ones for to plese her / but fled her compaynie The moste euill wyse that she myghte she entended to torne her loue in to hate / and her fayr countenances in to fierste so enuenymed that for to make hym dye / she accu+sid him to fore her husbonde the kynge pricus / sayng that he wold haue enforced her  requyred iustice Instantly.
AT this accusacion maad / bellorophon was pre|sent And sore abasshid surprisid at the begyn+nyng / but in heering the lady speke at longe he as+sewrid him self  excusid him / saing madame neuer plese hit vnto the goddes / that for to couere myn honour / I do discouere the disworship  fawlte of another / late neuer man aduance him self to deffame another this knowing I shall saye the trouthe  yf ther be ony man that wor|thely may proue ^t ayenst me / and ouercome the litill no+blesse of my herte I shall remette in Iugement of alle no|ble men ^e residue of my dayes Alas lady  fro whens is comen this abusion for to impose on me that I shold haue willed to enforce you whan or in what place was this don or where ben ^e withnesses of the cry ^t ye made at the afray where ben ^e proues that shal~ saye that euer in my lif I was with you allone / hit gyueth me meruaylle fro what herte departed this dishonour ^t ye note in me /  for what cause hit is ymagined aienst me for I wil~ wel~ ^t al~ ^e world knowe / ^t I haue seruid you trewly  loially

And that I neuer thoughte dishonour vnto yow ne vnto the kynge / to whome I praye that he wille take and make Informacion vpon my liuynge  to vnderstonde in like wyse youris And yf hit can be prouyd and ap|pere that I haue trespaced that I may be punysshid. but I praye also that yf I be founde Innocent / that I may haue light basolucion.
SIre sayd the lady that strongly was obstynat in her errour / / I make me party ayenst hym / yf than I accuse hym hit is trouthe / hit oughte not to demande wytnessis of his folye / In this caas I am worth two wytnessis / For alle the worlde knoweth that whan ony ylle man wille dishonour a woman he callyd no wytnesses ne no proues therto / and doth his damnable will the moste secretly that in hym is possible And so wende bellorophon to haue don wyth me whe|rof I requyre sentence and Iugement of hym / wyth this word Pricus assemblid his counceyll / And hit was Iuged that the lady shuld be beleuyd and that belloro|phon shuld be culpable of deth Than spack pricus to bel+lorophon and sayd / Fayr sone thou knowest  felest that I haue louyd and norisshid the louyngly thou vn|derstandest the accusacion of thy lady / the caas is so foull / that hit may not be purged by denyeng / For yf hit were so the euyll boyes and garsons shold aldaye dyshonoure as many of our women as they coude finde / In this caas the ladyes haue a prerogatyfe for to be be|leuyd / And nede not to brynge forth wytnessis / And for as moche as thy maystresse hath vaynquysshid the and requyred Iugement of thy trespaas / thou art con|dempnyd to dye / but for as moche as a fore this tyme

I haue had grete loue vnto the And that I knowe the a vaylliant man of thy body / I shall relece and attempere thys sentence in this wyse / that thou shalt goo fighte aienste the chymere of secille And yf thou maist adaunte her and maistrie / I geue the thy lif and gyue the plain ab+solucion of all / moienant that neuer after thou replicque ne reherce this trespaas.
SIre answerd bellorophon sin that fortune con|sente that I be attainte of ony infelicite / And that the preuelage of the ladies domyne and go aboue reson I had moche leuer to be vainquysshid by wrong cause  euill / than by Iuste and good cause And thanke you of the moderacion of your Iugement. And make vowe here in your presence that in all haste I shall goo in to secille to proue me ayenste the chymere And shall see yf fortune shall helpe me to gete again the lif whiche she had made me lose by your Iugement / Than the noble knyght departyd and toke leue of the kynge / of ladyes and damoyselles / Toke also his armures And goodes And made couenant and bargayned with certain ma|ronners to bringe hym to scecyll / whan they were acor+ded he wente to the see with litill compaygnye / And he was euyll at ease at his herte whan he sawe that for|tune was to hym so diuerse / how well he conforted hym self in his good quarell / And sayllyng on a day on the see of helespont his maronners lokid in to the weste And sawe come a right grete flote of shippes of warre whiche dysconforted them so sorowfully that it was wonder / And they awoke bellorophon that / that tyme slepte / And sayd that they were ded and loste.
BEllorophon confortyd his maronners the best wyse he cowde / And told hem that disconforte cowde not helpe hem / and thus spekyng a galeye of auauntage wente oute afore his felaws and fleeyng on the see like vnto a byrde adressid her vnto the shippe where in was bellorophon And aborded hit. and who that wyll demande what the name was of the galeye. And what men were ther Inne / / I shall saye hym that this was pegase and that perseus was therwythinne Seeyng that he myght speke to the maronners that caryed bellorophon to secylle / Axed and demaunded them what they were an in to what regyon they wold goo / whan bellorophon herde perseus speke / he behelde his mayntene and countenance and Iuged in hym self that he was of a good hous / and sayde to hym / Certes sire I haue moche grete Ioye of that I see that the shyppe and maronners ben so well adressid and in so good recountre as youre is / For ye seme well a knyght of no+ble feetes / And so I shall yow saye my caas after that ye haue made your arynge / At first poynt than where ye haue enquired what we bee / knowe ye that in arges we haue take our birthe / And as to the seconde I answere yow that we haue entencion to go strayt in to sccylle / to the whiche I am constrayned by the rygour of a mortal~ Iugement caste vpon me at thynstance of a lady callyd Aurea that Iniustely and vntrewly hath complaynd vpon me saynge that I wold haue enforced her / This lady that I speke of is wyf to the kynge pricus / whiche newly and fresshely hath bannysshid and excylled his broder Acrisius out of his royame / And this kynge for to plese and satysfye the accusacion of his wyf.

hath condempned me to deth / relecyng allway an hope. For the good and the agreable seruices that I haue don to him he had acorded me to lyue / yf so be hit plese the god+des that I may by possibilite vaynquysshe  ouercome a chymere that is in secylle / vnto the whiche  go for to assaye me / so I praye yow that in owr Infortune we be not lette by yow neyther by non of your compaygnye.
UAllyant knyght answerd perseus as hit is trewe that the herte of a noble man taketh pyte and compascion in the dystresse and passion of his semblable / the recorde of your caas hath percyd myn herte of a charitable mysricord  pyte / by whiche ye may seurly vnderstande not to haue by vs ony enpesche|ment vpon your Infortunat lif / and for as moche as the hertes of them that wold be endured at callyng to the crafte of Armes singulierly deliten them in auentures of grete poys and weyghte to enhaunce them / I shall accom+panye yow for two causes / the first is to expose my self to the dissipacion and destruction of the chymere yf hit ppen that ye adaunte her not / whiche I not presuppose. And the seconde is for after the chymere vaynquysshyd I may be guyded by yow vnto the royame of Arges. For fro now forth I wyll be enemye vnto the kynge pricus in the fauour of the fader of my moder the kynge Acrisius And for to late yow haue more gretter know|leche of this matere  I telle yow that I am sone of danes That same properly ^t she conceyuyd in the tour darrain of the seed of Iupiter / and that same in sone that kinge Acrisius made caste in to ^e see but this notwithstanding

I shall take no vengeance on his demerites / but for the honour of the blood and of the wombe of whome I am yssued / I shall do hym socours and ayde / And praye yow that ye wyll be my felaw and broder of Armes. And that ye will come in to my galeye / And sende home agayn your maronners in to her contres yf hit plese yow.
WHan bellorophon herde the good wordes and Answer of perseus he made alyances wyth hym and entrid in to his galeye And gaf leue to his maroners and acompanyed hym wyth perseus and danus that for loue of hym toke theyr waye vnto Secylle where they arryued by space of tyme  toke lande / And that same day bellorophon Armed hym de|siryng to finde the chymere and toke leue of perseus in suche wyse as he that putte hym in paryll of deth / The poetes write ^t this chymere had ^e hede of a lion wombe of a chieure and taylle of a serpent / but for trouthe hit was a mountayne Inhabitable that had in his heyghte aboue a passing grete caue of lyon / / and in the myddell of the hill hit was full of chieures And at the fote be|nethe hit was aduyronned and sette round aboute wyth serpentis / These lyons and serpentes were pas|sing domageable and noyous vnto the contre aboute and nyghe / whan bellorophon than sawe the mou~tayne he wente theder / and perseus and danus folowed hym they had not longe marchid / whan they sawe and be|helde mo than a thousand lityll serpentes wyth many grete dragons / / of whom some arestyd aboute belloro|phon and caste out of theyr venym / and the other passid forth and come rennyng vpon perseus and danus / 

whiche had promysid to bellorophon that they shold there doo no feet ne entreprise of Armes / but yf hit were by constraynt and in defending theyr bodyes.
ANone as these thre vayllyant knyghtes sawe these cursed bestes / they toke theyr swerdes and smote vpon and many beheded of them / but with this they had grete payne and traueylle For these bestes were cruell and full of orgueyll And hardyed them eygrely to hem / And yf they had not ben well garnys|shid with abillementis of warre / they had ther sonner haue found deth than lyf bellorophon went alleway a fore And smote doun right and heded and smote in to peces many / Perseus ne his broder danus fought not but to the bestes only that cam vpon them / whan belloro+phon had a litill holden the stour and the bataylle ayenst this vermyne and that he had founden more aspre and more byting / For the point and the egghe of his swerd was made terribly blont and smote ayenst her hard sca+les and skynnes / Than lepe doun and out of her hooles the chieures and the lions and cam doun for tassaylle the knyghte in so grete nombre that he was all enuyron+ned with them .
SOme of these bestes escapid fro him  cam to se+us and gaf hym new ocupacion for to employe his strength and prowesse / the lions lepe aboute the necke of bellorophon som tyme in suche nombre that in no parte he myght be seen / Alleway by hys abilite he coude well saue hym self / but he had neuer ascapid ther cam so moche vermyn vpon him there  bestaill  on se

and danus whiche rachid and assayllyd them / yf he had not wonne a roche vpon whiche he gate vp with grete payne and right grete swete of his body for to go vpon this roche / ther was but oon strayt waye / than siewed hym the lyons and wyth hem the other bestes / And helde hem on the way of the roche and at the fote roryng and makyng grete noyse aboute hym so terribly that perseus  danus had non other hope for the knyght but that hit had ben his laste daye / For he had so many bestes aboute hym that hit was likly that the egghe and cuttyng of his swerd myght not longe dure with oute hit had ben worn or broken / than the lions that myght not touche his bodye / boot the stones And ara|chid them wyth theyr clawes / the serpentes flewe vp in to the Ayer / And lifte vp theyr bodyes vpon theyr ta|ylles and caste fire and smoke oute of theyr throtes vnto the roche / And the moste hardiest of the lions oon after that other rengyd them in bataylle ayenst hym and shewid her teth receyuyng his strokes sore sette / And they fled not but abode as bestes famylier and sore co|ueytous of mannes blood in whome regned souerayn fierste as moche as in ony wylde beste of the world at that tyme.
HArde and meruayllous was this bataylle / as perseus and danus behelde  thoughte in what facion they myght socoure bellorophon / the no|ble knyght defended hym to his power / And beheld how he myghte saue hym fro this paryll / he caste his eyen vpon a grete stoon that henge ouer the weye of the roche wher vpon he was mou~tid / and than he thoughte yf he myghte make that stone to falle doun that he shuld

slee the moste parte of these bestes than he began a lityll and a lityll to wagge the ston and to seke the Ioyntu~|res that helde hit / and so moche labourid that in the ende he made hit to falle vpon the lions serpentes and chien|res in suche wyse that in the falling he made alle the ro+che to tremble and ferid in generall these vnhappy bestes that they were there forfrusshed like as the thonder had ronne vpon them / And yet that more is of the tombling doun / hit made the roche that bellorophon stood on so shake that he tumblid doun theron / And was so asto|nyed that he wiste neuer whether hit were day or night.
THe stone was grete / And brought doun many stones with hym / Perseus and danus at the be+gynnyng wende that alle the mountaygne had tumblid doun / And were not well assured in hem self. This notwithstondyng they beheld playnly the ende. And seyng after the noyse and tempeste that theyr fe|lawe laye vpright reuersid vpon the toppe of the roche They had supposid that he had ben ded / Than they made grete sorowe And were displaysant And approuchid the roche / where they fonde the bestes liyng vnder the stones ded And they wente vp on the mountain / And than knewe that bellorophon was not ded / wherof they recouerid grete Ioye And cessyng theyr sorow. They toke the knyght betwene theyr armes And per|seus demanded hym how hit stood with hym and how he felte hym self .


How perseus vaynquysshid the monstre of the see. And exposid hym self agayn hym for the loue of An|dromeda .
PErseus and danus awayted gladly the ans|wer of bellorophon / And they helde hym for the most beste accomplissid knyght that euer they sawe / what shall I make longe processe of this matere Perseus  danus serchid this mountayn / And wente in to the caues of the bestes / but they fonde none / And alway satte bellorophon vpon the roche For he myght not goo for the frusshyng and bruysing of his foote / And than as the two knyghtes had circuyd and goon aboute the hille / they retorned to bellorophon and than perseus sayd to hym / My broder o how well arte thou now worthy to haue of me preysing and loenge / thou haste this day don a good and an holy werk by thy worthy conduyte / thou hast goten vnto thy name the crowne of gloryous fame Thou haste passid the strayte waye and passage of Infortune fro whens thou art yssued cler as the sonne / And not only thou hast labou|red for thy wele and vtilite / but for the wele  prouffit of this regyon / For thou hast slayn the wardes of the serpentes and the portyers of the lions that kepte this contre Inhabitable / whiche shall fro hens forward be enhabited and ocupied wyth peple / Bellorophon was all a shamed whan he herde the glorye that perseus gaf vnto hym by mekenes and humylite that was in hym And answerd yf ther be ony worship in this werke that hit shall torne as well vnto hem as to hym / And they began to preyse echon other / and they ete vpon this hille that same nyght after they had made sacrefice vnto theyr goddes / And thedir camalle the Apuliens where they made grete chiere / Syn they toke alle the skynnes of the lions / and the heedes of the serpentes that were

ded in signe of victorie and charged them in theyr gale|yes And they bare with hem in to theyr galeye belloro|phon whiche myght not goo And finably they wente vnto the see And sayllyd rowed toward the poort of Athames whiche was nyghe by / but whan they wende to haue drawen vnto this porte / sodaynly ther roos a tempeste on the see so grete and hidouse / that they were constrayned to abandonne hem vnto the winde. and passid forth by the hauen and theyr fortune was suche that they were brought in to sirie / vpon the see of palestyne. And brought hem in to the porte and hauen of Ioppen / Where regned Amon and in palestyne regned cephus and phyncus .
THe same tyme that perseus arriued ther by this tempeste / the poort was so ful~ of men  women and children / that hit semed that all the world had be assemblid / perseus cam theder allone for his folk were disparklid vpon the see / some here and some there in theyr galeyes / whan the siriens sawe hym arryue by force of the winde / they assemblid a grete nombre aboute his hors volant / And the kinge Amon seeyng that hit was chargid with the hedes of lions / / he was sore abasshid And for to knowe fro whens was that ga|leye comen he enquired who was the maistre / at whiche Inquisicion answerd perseus / And demanded of the kinge courtoysly in what contre he was arryued / the kynge tolde hym that he was in sirye / And that the Royame apperteyned to him whan perseus knewe that he spack to the kynge / he sayde / Syre I am descended

vnto this poort by the disposicion of fortune / Also my men ben sore trauayllyd by the tempeste of the see / that hath ben longe troublous vnto them / I requyre and praye the that thou be contente / that I and they may come a londe here for to refresshe vs / And yf hit happen in tyme comyng that thou or ony of thyne haue to do of sembla|ble courtosie in naples whiche is the place of our domy+nacion / I promyse the by the parolle and word of a no+ble man / that the meryte and thanke shall be rendryd vnto the / the kynge answerd / noble knyght ther ben so many exploratours now adayes sayllyng by the reg|nes and contrees / that a man may not well knowe to whom he maye affye and truste / this notwythstondyng I see well by your facion / that I trowe that ye wyll not gyue vs to vnderstande other thynge than trouthe / I Abandoune to yow alle my contre / And pray yow. that ye wyll come and take pacience in my hows / And furthermore I counceylle yow / that ye departe and come out of your shippe / For yf ye abyde there longe ye shall be in grete peryll / For as moche as we knowe certaynly / that in to this poort shall come anone a mon+stre of the see that shall deuoure a right fayr virgyne and mayde / whiche is here by / bounden vpon a stoon for the cryme of her moder and by my sentence / And yf ye tarye here tyll his comynge / hit is to doubte that hit shall be the wors for yow / Bocace in the genealo|gye of the goddes ne toucheth otherwyse the cause why this mayde was thus exposed to the monstre / wherfore I passe ouer and who demandeth the name of this mayde Bocace sayth that she was named Andromadas.
WHan perseus had vnderstonden that there was

bounden this mayde / he desired to see her / for the meruail+lous Iugement that was giuen vpon her / and arayde him with riche vestementes and clothes / and sin yssued out of the galeye / And tooke out also bellorophon whiche myghte not yet sustene him self / and after he wente vnto Andromeda / There were her parentes  cosins in grete nombre whiche laboured in sorow and grete plente of teres / whan perseus sawe this maiden that was passing fayr in her degre / whiche neuer sawe her like ne paralle he had pite of her and sayd to him self that yf he mighte he wolde deliuere her fro this peryll. Than he callyd her frendes and sayd vnto them in the presence of Amon / I haue certainly grete pyte and compassion of this so fair a damoyselle / And also am esbayed how the goddes suffre and endure that she is so fortuned in her tendre yeres / yf hit so happend that she myght finde ony knight or noble man / that wolde vnbynde her And for charyte expose his body agaynst the monstre for the loue of her shold she be quyte / They answerd ye / A than sayde per|seus yf I wolde for her sake aduenture my self in this werke / And yf hit so fortuned that I had the grace to ouercome and surmounte the monstre and for to putte hym to vtterance / shall ye be contente that the mayde be my wyf / They answerd yet ye / And I promyse yow sayd perseus and swere / That she hath founden in me a knyght that shall putte his body and lif in Ieopardye for her .
WIth this worde perseus sente to feche his Armes. And after wente to the damoyselle and vnbonde

her fro~ the stone / And deliueryd her to her frendes and kynnesmen / Saynt Augustin in the boke of the cite of god reherceth that yet in the same poort is the stone that Andromeda was bounden vpon / that they of Ioppen kepe for a signe and memorye of the victorye that per|seus had of the monstre / Alle they that were there mer|uaylled gretly of the entrepryse of the knyght / and kno+wyng the monstre / they Iugged hym ded / alowyng his hardynes that they semed that hit was to grete / Oon and other spack of this matere / Perseus Armed hym Ioyously / whan he was armed he cam to Andromeda and kyste her takyng leue of her / and saide fayr mayde Praye ye vnto the goddes for your champion / that for your loue submytteth hym self vnto the peryll of deth To the ende that by your oonly suffragies I may come vnto the right stok of loue / And that we to gyder in Ioye be Ioyned in mariage whiche I bye at the prys of my lyf / Noble knyght answerd the mayde / I am more beholden to yow / than to all my kennesmen and frendes knowe ye that yf my suffrages maye obteyne anenste the goddes / ye shall retorne saulf fro this entrepryse. Than perseus went hym to fore the stoon / And Andro+meda kneled wyth grete humylite wyth bothe her knees vpon the erthe in prouokyng her goddes vnto the helpe of her champion / And ther were many matrones vpon the bancke of the see that for compassion put hem with her in contemplacion / and by this example of them alle the siryens began to praye for the prosperite of the knyght / reseruyd only the kynge phineus whiche pra|yed for his deth / And that for this cause for as moche as to fore the Iugement gyuen on Andromeda / he had

fianced and trouthplight her / so had he well willyd that the monstre had deuoured perseus to the ende that the mariage of hym and of her myght haue ben ended what shall I saye more whan perseus had so put hym self forth by the stone / he behelde toward the see and held in his hand a good glayue and passing stronge / and he ne had not longe seen the situacion and taken leyzer to see the place / whan ther sprange out of a swolowe or an abisme of the see a monstre so grete and so horrible / and so dredfull that hit semed that he had be made for to des+troye alle the world / he was rowhe  went on foure feet like a beste / And his fourme was so diffigured that none wiste wherto he myght be likened / whan than the siriens sawe hym put oute his heed of the swolowe. Ther was none so well assured but he ne tremblid for fere. And many were so afrayed that they fledde in to theyr howses and reentred in to theyr cyte. This not|witstandyng perseus as sone as he sawe hym sourdre. He ran to hym as hardy and right well assewryd and smote hym with the point of his glayue so apoint vpon the right eye that on that side he made hym blinde. Wherof the monstre felte so grete payne that he cam out of the see with open mowth and wende to haue swalo+wed perseus / And perseus wente aback a litill / And put his glayue betwene his Iawes in to his throte so fer forth / That he coude not drawe hit out agayn / And so of force hit abode in his throte more than foure foot.
TT the second strook ^e monstre made a meruaillo crye lifting vp his heed  wenyng to haue caste out the tronchon of the glaue whiche abood in his throte.

But hit wold not bee / Alwey the monstre assayllyd perseus and wende to haue swalowed hym in to his throte / And perseus alwey roof at hym wyth his swerde and put hym at defence and smote alweye at his throte and aboute nyghe his other eye / And so well entended the werke that after he had gyuen hym many woundes he made hym on the lifte eye like as he dyde of the righte eye / And than as the monstre wente here and there / And made many wentes wyth oute seeyng and knowing where he wente poursiewyng his aduenture Perseus gaf hym many woundes / serchyng his herte. And at laste he fonde hit / And fynably he adresshid so that he persed the herte of whiche strook he made hym to falle doun ded.


How phyneus wold haue had Andromeda / And how Perseus answerd hym that she shold be his wif
PAssing Ioyous and esbayed were the siryens whan they sawe the good fortune of perseus. And saiden oon to another that suche a knyght ought be preysed aboue all other men The kinge Amon toke grete playsir to see his conduyte / And seeyng the monstre labouryng in his deth he wente doun to hym en|brasing hym and sayde / Syre the goddes gouerne thy fortune / And syn they haue receyuyd the in her fauour and grace ther is none that may anoye the / In a good oure were thou here arryued demande what thou wilte And I shall do the haue hit / Syre answerd perseus / I haue preseruyd fro deth the damoyselle / I desire none other thinge but her / O vaylliant knyght sayd phineus that was there awayting thou thinkeste to gloryfie thy self for to haue goten in an half day more honour / than an

other knyght shall gete in an honderd yere / And gretly thou oughtest be recomanded / Forseen that the beaulte of this mayde deceyue the not / knowe thou that I haue trouthplighte her / and by right she ought to be my wif Many dayes ben goon and exspired that in the presence of our bisshop we promised to take eche other in ma|riage / This infortune is after comen to her / Thou haste releuyd her / And wolst therfore haue her / The begyn|nyng is fayr / but the ende is fowle And yf hit so happe that thou do me wronge / I late the wete that I shall not suffre hit For in this contre I am a kinge and haue grete puyssance Alle the glorie that thou haste goten / shall be quenchid / wherfore I praye the / that thou forbere in this caas / And that thou suffre me to take that is myn. And take thou that / that longeth to the.
DVryng these wordes perseus behelde toward the see and sawe fro fer his galeyes comyng that oon after that other adressing them toward ths poort / wherof he had right grete Ioye. And saide vnto phyneus. kynge I make no doute that thy power be grete in this contre. but knowe thou right well that I knowe no man liuyng that shall cause me to leue that longeth to me / whan I was comen hether I fonde this mayde condempnyd vnto deth / At that tyme she was alle abandonned to the deth I haue sauyd her / I saye to the that she is myn and thou ougthest to haue no regarde to ony promesse that she hath made to the or to ony other / and so I haue entencion that she shall be my wif And yf thow wylt debate and fighte for her assemble thy power and make the redy in thy bataylle / Loo here come my galeyes redy for to receyue the. And yf I hau.

not peple I now / yet I haue in my cofres the moste parte of the tresours of meduse for to sende for men of Armes in alle places where I may gete hem.
WHan phineus considerid this answere  knewe that he was the knyght that had vaynquysshid meduse / wherof that the renome was grete and ronne thorugh oute the world / he coude none otherwise answere to perseus but that he myght do his playsir. Alle the kynnysmen of Andromeda were angry with phineus for his folie And made him so ashamed that he departyd thens / And wente in to the cyte / After they wente to beholde the monstre / And than cam saillyng and rowing the apuliens vnto the poort / And they co|men brought perseus  Andromeda in to Ioppen with grete triumphe / and yet that more is / perseus and Andro+meda espousid eche other that same day and laye to ge|der And the solempnyte duryd of theyr weddyng .xv. dayes / during this tyme the siriens cam to the poort daily for to see and beholde this monstre / Plunius rehereith that of this monstre was born to rome a boon of .xl. foot longe also grete as an oliphant / late them than that rede this hystorye serche how grete and huge this mon|stre was / whan only oon of his bones was so grete / the romayns for a grete meruaylle haue and kepe that bone What shall I saye more at the ende and expiracion of this feste of the weddyng of perseus and Andromeda. Perseus toke leue of the siryens / And garnysshyd his galeyes with vitaylles departid fro Ioppen And wente to the see ledyng with hym his wif Andromeda / And fortune was to hym so good that in a litill tyme he pas|sid the sees of syrie / And cam to lande at the poort and

hauene of thebes / where he was receyuyd courtoysly of kynge Creon that than regned a yong chylde.


How perseus restablisshid in his royame the kynge Acrisius And how he slowe ^e kynge by euyll auenture.
IN thebes refresshid hem these Apuliens  made allyance with the kynge After they departid fro thens. And toke theyr waye by lande toward Arges vnder and by the conduyte of bellorophon that than was hooll and helid of his foot whiche knewe well the contre / whan bellorophon had guyded hem so nyhe Arges that in an hour they myght renne to fore the gates He signefied hit vnto perseus And than perseus made his oost to tarye in a valeye And sente danus vnto the kynge pryeus to somene hym that he shold yelde the royame vnto kynge Acrisius Danus wente to Arges. And accomplisshed the somacion. The kynge pricus answerd to hym that he was kynge And that he wold holde that he helde. And manaced perseus vnto the deth yf he departe not fro the Contrey hastely / Danus retor|ned vnto the Oost of perseus with this Answere and made to hym the reporte  Perscus than hoped that kynge prycus wold come to hym and gyue hym bataylle and had therof right grete Ioye and playsir / For he desired nothing in the world more than to be in Armes And for to entende and take hede vnto his werkes / He ordeyned that nyght that he shold departe his bataylle in three. Wherof he gaf charge of the first batayll to bellorophon Whiche requyred desired of hym the vawarde with ryght grete Instance / And he hym self helde the seconde bataylle / And to Danus he betoke the thyrde / And

And thus whan he began to sette forth bellorophon on his waye / he had not ferre gon whan he sawe fro fer the kynge pricus that knewe of theyr comyng by his espyes And had sette his batayll arengid by good ordenance.
BEllorophon had with hym but two thousand fightyng men / whan the kynge pricus sawe him come with so lityll a companye / he supposed that hit had be perceus / And wende to haue had all wonne afore the hand by auantage / And maa his pe+ple to meue agaynst hem of whiche hastely began a cru|ell and hard bataylle / And of this batayll was pricus right Ioyous at thassamble / And well employed hys Armes and his swerde and dyde meruaylles / but at that tyme that he supposid by force to haue abiden victo|rious and vainquer of his enemyes / he caste his eyen to|ward thebes and sawe perseus and his bataylle that descouerd and shewyd hem self / wherof his fortune was suche / that in the beholdyng the hede of meduse whiche he bare payntyd in his shelde of cristall / that he and alle his folk in a moment were torned in to stones That is to saye that he and all his meyne had lost theyr strengthes and corages / And that they myght no more lifte theyr swerdes than myght statues or ymages And than pricus fledde And alle they that flee myghte / some in to the cyte and some in to the feldes at all auenture. Perseus daygned not to folowe the chasse be cause of theyr poure conduyte / And thus pricus escaped the deth And abandonned and gaf ouer the contre / And wente with hem that fledde in to calidonie / where he was after+ward put to deth by hercules / And perseus wente in to the cyte of Arges / wherof the yates were open / And

With oute ony men that made ony deffence whan he was in the Cyte he made an edicte vpon capitayll payne that none be so hardy to do ony force ne violence / After that he sente to seke his geant fader Acrisius. And told to hym who he was And so deliueryd to hym agayn his Cyte and his royame .
OF this courtoysye Acrisius helde hym self gretly beholden vnto perseus and aid hym and enquy+red of his doughter danes and of theyr aduen|tures. Perseus told hym alle that he knewe. And than Acrisius was right sore desplaysant of that rudenes that he had doon And for to amende all He adoptyd perseus in to his sone. And gaf hym the full power to gouerne the Cyte And he hym self withdrewe hym in to the tour of darrayn / And than sente agayn vnto naples danus his broder / with whom wente bellorophon And he gaf vnto hem and to theyr companye grete tresors at theyr departement. Perseus sente many Argyens in to liye. And made them to enhabite the contrey. And thus abode perseus in Arges with his wyf Andromeda of whom he gate many Children That is to wete scelenus. blache Demon Erictreus and Gorgophon Whiche alle becam men. And took wyues yet regnyng the kynge Acrisius And amonge alle other gorgophon had oon wyf / Of whom he had two sonnes Alceus and Electrion Alceus engendryd Amphitrion And electrion engendryd Alcu+mena of whom cam hercules / what shall I make longe processe of the faytes and of the generacions of this Perseus He gouerned passing well the Royame. And loued moche the kynge Acrisius / But ther fille an

hard fortune vnto hym in the ende / For as he wente on a nyght allone vnto the tour of darrain in wille to visite the kynge / The gardes and kepars of the tour knewe hym not and fille vpon hym  hurte hym / whan he felte hym smyten / he put hym self to deffence / The noyse waxe grete / the kinge herde the bruyt and cam rennyng doun for to departe the medle / And threstid in to the prees in su|che wyse that perseus knewe hym not / And wyth his glayue so smote hym that he slewe hym and alle the por+ters with hym And anone after whan he cam in And fonde hym ded / he remembrid and thought he had put hym to deth after the prenosticacion of the goddes. And made grete sorow / And dyde do ordeyne his obsequye right solempnly / And at this obsequye happend for to be there Iupiter and his sone vulcan / / whiche at that tyme practicqued to geder the science of magike and ny|gromancye .
AT this tyme vulcan forged and smote the thon|ders vnto Iupiter / That is to saye that he meuyd him self by smytyng and tempestieng by fire and swerd the royames of theyr neygbours And the poetes saye and make many fables of hym wherof nedeth to make no mencion at this tyme. Perseus than dyde grete honour and worship vnto his fader Iupiter And in like wyse dyde Iupiter vnto perseus / And eche told other and reherced of theyr aduentures / but whan thobsequye was doon of kynge Acrisius. And Iupiter beheld and sawe perseus so heuy that he coude haue no Ioye / he retor+ned in to crete vnto his wif Iuno And ther he exercysed hym self in the science of magique. And than whan per+seus fonde hymself allone in Arges and sawe that he

myght recouer there no Ioye / he departed fro thens and wente vnto the cyte of micenes but he regned there not long for as moche as the deth of Acrisius renewyd all weye  coude not put hit out of his mynde And so depar+ted thens and withdrewe hym with a grete ooste in to Oryent / where he gate and conquerd by Armes a grete contre whiche he named perse after his name And there founded the cyte callid persepolis after that he had vain quysshid and put to deth liber pater whiche made hym warre And than whan he had so doon he pourueyed for his children in suche wyse that his two sonnes Alceus and electrion with Amphitrion and umena dwelde in thebes / and bachedemon regnid in perce Erecteus vpon the reed see and seclenus in uicenes / But of alle them I will tarye at this tyme And shall speke only of Amphi+trion  Alcumena that loued so well to geder That they toke day that oon to wedde that other / And the cause ^t meued me to wryte of this .ij. Is for as moche as of Alcu+mena cam hercules whiche first destroyed Troye .


How Iupiter laye with Alcumena And how quene Iuno sente two serpentes for to slee hercules / And how hercules stranglid the two serpentes.
IN this tyme whan Iupiter cam again in to crete. And ^t he with vulcan his sone  Iuno practiqued by theyr stu|dye the science of magike after that / that vulcan had for+ged ^e thondres of Iupiter Amphitrion wedded the fayr Alcumena in the cyte of thes with grete honour  also with a grete co~raignye of kinges quenes  of ladyes / the feste of these espousailles was grete Iupiter ^e kinge of crete / and the quene Iuno were there duryng the feste / Iu|piter contynuelly behelde alcumena for her grete beawte

Alcumena was the most fayr woman that euer was seen Alle his delectacion / and all his besy cure was in be|holdyng the ladyes / he desired nothinge but for to be all|way amonge the ladies And allway had the eye vpon them / but in effect he behelde Alcumena moste in especial~ In whom he had a souerain playsir / In the grete habon|dance of his sight And so sore fixed his eyen in her excel+lence / that his herte began to medle in suche wyse that he was Amorous and couetous of her loue / In this co|uoytise and desire he lete passe the solempnyte of the wed+ding And retorned in to crete / but he had not longe so|iourned there whan the said couoytise meued so certainly in hym / That on a day he began to speke of Alcumena in the presence of Iuno. And sayde vnto gamynedes his squyer. Gamynedes what semeth yow of the beaute of Alcumena. Syre sayd the squyer me thinketh she shy|neth in alle maner excellence of a lady. And that for to comprise alle her vertues / ther is no kynge so grete / but that he might well seme to be of Allyance of oon that is of lasse beaulte than she is.
WHan the quene Iuno vnderstood ^t Iupiter helde his deuises of Alcumena / At that same tyme she was sore meuyd with newe Ialousye For she had often tymes ben Ialous of Iupiter. And thought in her self that yf she myght she wold do sle and put to deth Alcumena After these deuises Iupiter felte hym self sore susprised and surmounted of the couetyse of loue. And for to ouer maister hit and to late hit passe he toke his bowe and his arowes in entencion to goo to the woode for to slee som wylde beste And wente forth ac+compaygnyed only of gamynedes / but assone as he was

yssued out of the gate / ther cam and recountryd hym oon of the knyghtes of thebes / that dyd reuerence vn|to the kynge and sayd to hym / that the kynge Creon of thebes sente hym vnto hym and requyred hym that he wold Ayde and helpe hym to warre agaynst the kynge of Thelleboye / That had trespaced agayn hym Whan the kynge Iupiter had herde the message of the knyght he was ryght Ioyous of the requeste of the kynge of Thebes / And toke the knyght by the hand and brought hym to his palays / And ther feested hym and made hym good chere / And after he sayd that with ryght good herte and will he wold so|coure and helpe the kynge Creon in his warre / The knyght of thebes wyth this Answer toke leue of kynge Iupiter / And retorned vnto thebes / Where thapparayll and ordenance was maad to goo vnto thelleboye / Hit was not longe after that the kynge Iupiter made his armye And hasted hym as moche as he myght. that shortly he myght come to the hows of thebes where he hoped to fynde Alcumena / Whan all thyng was redy he toke his waye And so spedde hym in his Iourney that he cam to thebes where he was ryght honourably and worshypfully receyuyd of the kynge the quene and of the ladies The kynge Iupiter at his comyng forgate not to loke / / yf he myght see Alcumena / But he sawe her not / wher of he was in grete payne / And wyste not what to do And he loked after Amphitryon / But he coude nowher see hym / / wherof he was more abasshyd than he was afore In this abasshement he approchyd to kynge Cre+on And demanded of hym where Amphytrion was

the kinge creon answerd him that he shold hastely come and that he assemblid his men of armes at the castell of arciancie whiche he had gyuen him This castell stood betwene thebes and atthenes vpon the ryuer And was a passing fayr place and stronge Anon as Iupiter had vnderstonde that kinge creon had gyuen Arciancie to Am+phitrion / he ymagined sone that Alcumena was in that place / And was in will to haue goon to that place / ne had ben that he dredd the talkyng of the peple And also he fered to make amphitrion Ielous / This considerid the kynge Iupiter  abode in thebes not well plesid for as moche as he myght not see Alcumena / And passid there the tyme the best wise he cowde till Amphitrion. and other were comen Than departid fro thebes the king creon And wente for to laye siege to ^e cyte of thelleboye Accompanyed with kyng Iupiter and many other. du|ring the siege they of the cyte assayllyd ofte tyme by ba|taylle agayn theyr enemyes / but they of Thebes had all way so good fortune That in the ende they of thelleboye yelded hem of alle poyntes in the wille of kynge creon. and thus whan the kinge of thebes had ouercomen and subiugned the cyte he retorned vnto his contre wyth grete Ioye .
WHan Amphitrion sawe that her enemyes were ouercomen And that ther was no more peryll. He had grete desir to goo see his wif Alcumena And for to dispose hym the more sonner to be with her He departid fro the oost wyth leue of the kynge accom+paygnyed of a squyer only / whan kynge Iupiter sawe amphitrion so departe vpon his waye / he began to thinke and auyse hym of a grete subtylte for to come to hys

entente / And he departyd fro the Ooste wyth gamy|nedes only / And as sone as he was in the felde on the way they two to geder / Iupiter entryd in to deuyses with gamynedes / And sayd to hym Gamynedes I haue grete affiance in yow and more than in ony man that ly+ueth wherfore I shall telle yow priuely a thyng secrete Whiche I shall accomplissh as me semeth / / whiche ye muste holde  kepe secrete Trouthe it is that I am Amo|rous terrybly of dame Alcumena / By no maner in the world I may not forgete her ne put her fro my desyre. how wel~ she knoweth not the payne that for her loue ha+bou~deth in me / for I neuer was so hardy to discouer to her my caas / ner neuer durste shewe hit her / for as moche as I knowe her wise chaste and vertuous / this consideryd thynking on this thyng  werk / I fynde me ful~ of abusion And confesse my folie / how wel~ I am in a maner dispair now / for I had supposid to haue fou~den the fayt of loue in Alcumena / ne had ben the sodayn detyng of amphitrion Whiche yet grueth me in maner an hope / For at the tyme that I sawe hym departe fro ^e oost for to go see his wyf in the companye of his squyer / I ymagined that in all hast I wold goo vnto Arciancie by a more ner  shorter way For I knowe the passage longe syn. And that I wold transfigure my self in the forme of amphitrion And yow in the forme of his squyer for to goo vnto alcumena and to make her vnderstond that I were Amphitrion / Gamy+nedes vpon this entencion and purpoos / I am comen on the way to go theder wyth yow / we muste nedes wynne vpon Amphitrion on this way a nyght and a day / and therfore late vs go nowe meryly / Me thynketh that loue shall helpe me / And whan Alcumena shall

see me transumed in to the forme of Amphitrion / And yow as his squyer she shall not be so wyse to parceyue myn enchauntement.
GAmynedes herkened right diligently the wyll and purpoos of Iupiter and promysid hym that he shall enploye hym in this werke as moche as in hym is possible And so they rood with good wil~ and grete desire the more short waye / and in ridyng and goyng Iupiter disposed hym in his enchantemens / he sped hym so that he arryued in an euenyng at the castell of arciancie / whan he was there arriued / he transfigured hym self and gamynedes in suche wise as he had afore purposid / And than at the same oure that Alcumena slept / And that eche man was abedde they came to the castell and so knokkyd at the yate that they awoke the porter / The porter cam to the wyndowe. And loked doun bynethe and sawe Iupiter and gamynedes by the mone lighte / hym thoughte and semed that hit was Amphy|trion and his squyer / wherfore he opend the gate and receyued them in suche wyse as he shold haue doon his lord Amphitrion / After broughte hym vnto the dore of the chambre where Alcumena slepte / And awoke her. sayyng that her lord was comen / After he retorned to kepe the gate by comandement of Iupiter And alcumena opend her chambre vnto Iupiter / whiche entrid in with grete Ioye And at thentre into this chambre / Iupiter and Alcumena toke eche other in Armes and kyssid / we|nyng Alcumena that hit had ben Amphitrion / and whan they were so beclipt eche in others Armes Alcumena de+manded hym fro whens he cam Iupiter answerd and sayd he cam fro thelleboye / and that after the yeuyng

ouer of the town and yeldyng of theyr enemyes / he depar+ted fro the Oost for the loue of her accompanyed only of his squyer / to come the hastelier to her / Than Alcumena was well contente of the wordes of Iupiter And axed hym yf he wold ete or drynke / Iupiter answerd that he wold no thyng but go to bedde with here / what shall I saye more he laye with her and had that he desired / The kynge Iupiter had neuer so grete Ioye in hym self / And go+yng to bedward bad gamynedes that he shold go to the chambre dore and abide there withoute and so gamyne|des departid fro the chambre / and Iupiter approuchid to Alcumena by grete loue And so complaysid her in loue in as moche as his power myght extende In this wise and by this facion cam Iupiter vnto the secretes and Ioye of loue In deduysing hym self with this lady. That hym se|med expedyent for to enchaunte alle them that were in the place And than he slepte with Alcumena And after he aroos / And cam to gamynedes whiche kepte the wacche at the dore. And told hym that for to conduyte this werke secretly he muste enchante alle them of that place in suche wyse that they shold not awake vnto the comyng of Amphitrion. And he wold that he shold go to the gate to awayte yf Amphitrion cam And yf hit hap+pen he sayd that he cam by day light. I shall deliuere to yow a pouldre that ye shall caste in the ayer ayenst hym. and this pouldre hath suche vertu that shall kepe amphi+trion fro approchyng this place also longe as the day en+dureth And than whan hit is nyght And he knokke at the gate. ye shall come to me And than we shall opene the gate and brynge hym to his wyf / And after that we shall retorne fro hens .
THe kynge Iupiter with these wordes wrought in his science and made his charmes and sortes in suche wyse that all they that were in ^e place myghte not awake / with oute deffetyng of his chante|ment / whan he had so do he transumed gamynedes in to the liknes of the porter and comysed hym to kepe the yate / After he retorned in to the chambre of Alcumena And shette faste the wyndowes / that no light might co+me in. And after he wente to bedde and laye wyth the lady and awoke her and there made alle the residue of the nyght  alle the day folowyng takyng his playsir with her / so acertainly that he engendrid on her a right fayr sone conceyuyd vnder the regne of the beste constel|lacion of heuen / / In the ende whan kynge Iupiter had be with her a nyght and a day / aboute the hour whan the sonne goth doun in to the occident / And that hym semed that Amphitrion shold come / he made by his science Al+cumena for to slepe. After he roos vp  made hymself in the forme of oon of the seruantes of the place / And he had not longe taryed after / That Amphitrion and his squyer cam knokke at the gate / hit was than nyght. Whan gamynedes herde hym knokke / he cam to the gate and opend hit / Amphitrion wende that hit had ben his porter He salued hym And he demanded him wher his wif was / The vaylliant porter sayde to hym that she slepte / And so brought hym vnto her chambre / And Iu+piter so goyng charmed hym that he had no desire to ete ne to drinke / Whan he was comen in to the chambre he awoke Alcumena / That was alle abasshid whan she sawe Amphitrion / she had supposid for trouthe that she had seen hym a good while to fore / and she groped

aboute her in the bedde. And wende he had dremed And whan she had groped and tasted aboute her in the bedde And that she fonde no sone there / than was she more abasshyd than she was afore / Not|withstondyng she aroos and cam vnto Amphitrion sayng to her self that she had supposid to haue seen hym afore / And that he was comen / how well she made grete chyere to her husbond sayyng to hym that she had alle the nyght dremed of his comyng / After they deuysed of many thynges. Fynably he wente to bedde wyth her / And laye with her that same hour. of whom Alcumena conceyuyd yet a sone of Amphi+tryon / Iupiter and Gamynedes departid than fro the castell / And there lefte alle them slepyng that were wyth in the place / that none awoke till hit was on the morn. they had wende that they had slept but oon nyght. But they slept a day and two nyghtes. And this werke was achieued so secretly that neuer per|sone coude espye hyt / By this maner the fyre Alcu+mena conceyued two sones that oon of Iupiter  that other of Amphitrion / By space of tyme the fruyt of her wombe began to appere ^e tidynges were born all aboute And also in to Crete and cam to the eeres of kynge Iupiter and of Quene Iuno The kyng Iupiter this heeryng Was passing Ioyous  glad in the pre|sence of Iuno He behelde gamynedes  began to wexe reed And after shewid right a good semblant and gaf preysing to the goddes for the concepcion of Alcu+mena And spak moche good of her That the Ialou|sye of this olde quene / Renewid and fresshid and plan+tid in her herte a right mortall enuye vpon Alcumena.
WIth the renewyng of this enuye the quene Iuno concluded in her corage medlid with the multe|plyance of Ialousye that she wold sle and do dye Alcumena by enchantement of sorcerye For in that crafte she was an experiente maistresse / O olde cursid woman / she helde her than musing in her herte her cursid Ialous thought And leyde her eeres to here Iupiter speke of Alcumena with oute ony thinge to repleye agayn. But finably whan she knewe that the tyme of childing of Alcumena approuchid / she departid fro crete secretly all allone and sayd to Iupiter and dyde hym to vnder|stonde that she wold go disguysed in certayn secrete pil+gremages And wente her forth vnto Arciancie / where was a temple standyng right nyghe the castell and was made in the remembrance of the goddesse dyane. This olde quene than entrid in to this temple no thing for deuocion that was in her / but for to espye yf ony per+sone cam fro the castell for tenquere of thestate of Alcu|mena / she was disfigured by her crafte / This crafte vsid after symon magus in the tyme of saynt peter / And of themperour Nero / whan she had ben there a lityll. Ga|lantyse that gouerned Alcumena was there longe in oroysons and prayers to fore the representacion of the goddesse / At thende whan she had don / she aroos fro her contemplacion / And wende to haue retorned. But thys olde quene cam ayenst her and saluyed her. And for to come vnto her purpoos she sayde to her fayntly dame I am all abasshid / wherfore Answerd galantyse / for as moche sayd she as I am not in certayn where I am. loue sayd galantise ye be at the castell of Arciancie For this temple is of the Appertenantes of the castell and

standeth betwene thebes and Athenes Dame sayd the olde Iuno I trowe that this is the place that Amphitrion and dame Alcumena dwelle / ye saye trouth sayd ga|lantyse And how fare they sayd Iuno / right well sayd galantyse my lord Amphitrion is in good poynt / and my lady Alcumena is redy to brynge forth a childe / she aby+deth ner awayteth lenger daye ne terme / And therfore I may no lenger tarye hit is tyme that I retorne to her / to the goddes I commytte yow.
GAlantys with this worde wente her to Alcume+na whiche began to trauaylle and fele the payne of childing And the false olde quene abode in the temple in entencion to do dye and slee Alcumena in suche wyse as she had purposid Than in the stede of sayng of orysons / she began to make certayn fendly  deuelissh werkes / this don she made her legges to crosse on ouer that other And satte in that wyse and than the same mo+ment  tyme ^t she had so doo Alcumena by the strenght of the sorcerie began the same wyse her legges to crosse on ouer ^e other  sat in the same manyere as the olde Iuno dide / In suche wise ^t ther was no man ne woman that might make her do otherwyse The poure alcumena felte than ^e most aspre  sharpe throwes of the world For her fruyt wold come out And she might not in no wise for as moche as her legges  thyes were so crossed on ouer that other / she cried playned pietously / and was in right greuous martirdom The mydwyues coude no re|medye / she was thre dayes holden in this poynt allway her legges crossed on ouer an other / Duryng these thre dayes galantys. And the ladyes and women on after an other cam in to the temple of dyane for to 

praye for the deliuerance of Alcumena / And alleway they fonde there the olde quene sitte with her legges cros+sid and oon ouer an other / but they fonde her neuer in oon semblance and likenes / For at eche a tyme she transfi|gured her in diuerse liknes and figures of bestes or of wo+men to thende that they shold not perceyue her ner her craft / how well she coude not so transforme herself but that galantys that ofte cam in to the temple toke hede of her / whiche fonde allwaye there a beste or a woman sitte in the manyere that Alcumena sat in her chambre. Alcumena had ben than thre dayes in payne / At the forth daye whan than galantys waxe melancolious and an|gry of that she sawe in the temple she assemblid the wo+men and sayd to them. Certayn fayr dames hit muste nedes be ^t the payne that my lady Alcumena suffreth co+meth of som sorcerye and wycchecraft / for all the payne that she hath cometh of that / that she may not departe her legges and vnfolde hem / This is myn ymaginacion. And I am of auys to pourueye sone for hit / For I haue seen in the temple at all tymes that I haue ben there more than thre dayes a woman or a beste with legges cros|sed or folden as my lady hath heres / me semeth for trouth that hit is som euyll creature / whiche willeth euyll wyll to my lady and that by her sortes constray+neth her to sitte so as she doth / yf hit be so I shall deceyue her / For oon of yow and I shall go in to the temple fay+nyng right Ioyous and glad chere / And shall thanke the goddesse dyane saynge all a hyghe that my lady is deliueryd of a fayr sone And than whan that creature that allway is there  changeth her in diuerse formes haue herd our preysing / yf hit be so that she wyll ony

ylle to my lady. I doute not but she shall lese contenance And that alle troublid she shall departe wenyng to haue faylled of her chantement / and than yf hit be trouth that I suppose. My lady may haue some maner of alle|geance of her payne .
THe women duryng these wordes remembryd hem what they had seen in the temple the wo|man  bestes that galantis spack of / And were of oppynyon that galantis shold do like as she had pur|posed / Than galantis and oon of the women departed fro the chambre and wente to the temple And entryng therin they sawe on the oon side where ^e false olde quene satte as she was wonte to doo and had transformed her in to the guyse and forme of a cowe / They passed forth by / well assured with oute makynge of ony sem|blant of sorowe or other thinge saauf only of Ioye / and whan they were comen to fore the Awter they kneled doun and Ioyned her handes to gyder and sayde. Dyane souerayn goddesse thy name be preysed in heuen and in erthe For thou haste gyuen this our to my lady Alcume+na and suffryd her to brynge forth in to this world the moste fayrest childe of the world / with these wordes they roose vp and retorned agayn. And as they wente they sawe the cowe sodainly departe out of the temple and ran vpon the feldes / And in the same tyme  Instant Alcumena aroos / and was deliuerid of .ij. fayr sones / er galantis and her felawe were comen in to the Chambre.
WHan galantis was comen vnto Alcumena and fonde ther .ij. fayr sones whiche she had brought forth / she was full of Ioye of that / that she had begyled and deceyued the false olde Iuno / she tolde than

vnto the ladyes and to Alcumena how she had seen the cowe And how she was departid fro the temple / And asscuryd them that hit was som euyll persone / And that she had holde alcumena in this daunger by sorcerye The ladyes sente after to espye the cowe / but they herde neuer after tydinges of her how well alleway they Io|yed in the natyuyte of these two sones / of these tweyne that oon of them was grete and right fayr by grete ex|cellence And that other was lityll and feble The grete chyld was the first that was born and was named hercules And that other had to name ypecleus / Hercu|les as some saye was the sonne of Iupiter and well re+semblid and was lyke vnto hym. And ypecleus was the sonne of Amphitrion / the tydinges of this natyuyte anon ran all aboute / and all they that herde speke therof made Ioye and were glad therof / reseruyd Iuno / For she had neuer Ioye in her herte after that she herde in the temple that Alcumena had made and brought forth a sone / she departid than fro the temple as sayd is in forme of a cowe / dispityng in her herte the goddesse diane And was so troublyd that she had neyther witte ne vnderstondyng And thus sorowyng whan she was a lytill withdrawen fro the temple she toke agayn her owne forme of a woman. And wente vpon the moun|tayn of Olympus / ther she waxe pensif And began to thinke her aduenture after she smote her self on ^e breste with her fyfte and sayd / what a vaylleth me to be born of the ryall blood of saturne / what auaylleth me my patrymonye of the world of golde / what auaylleth me the dyademe of crete / ne what auayllen me the sciences of the worlde that I haue lerned by grete studie  laboure

whan the goddesses ben agaynst and contrarye vnto me in alle thing. The kynge my husbonde rekketh not / ner setteth nought by me / no more in myn olde dayes than he dyde in my yougthe He hath euery day a newe lady / O what destyne / fortune wilte thou neuer torne thy whele Shall I alleway suffre my tribulacions  this payne. Certes whan thou fauourist me not And that I beholde that of all my desires. Ther is not oon that may attayne to effecte / Alle shame and vergoyne redowblith in me. And that I am so put in despair / That myn Infortune muste nedes be cause of shorting and lassing the naturell cours of my dayes / with these wordes she behelde the erthe  not the heuen And thoughte a while And after that sayde And am I not well Infortunat and born in an euyll hour My crafte and sorte auaylleth not ayenst myn enemye Alcumena I haue faylled anenst her / but cer+tes. I shall proue my self agaynst her sone / to thende that his moder may be my felawe and holde me companye to make sorowe For I shall do slee her sone. And by this mene for that she is a woman and moder I shall gyue her cause of Anger Anoye / and displaysance.
ACursid olde vyrago conspyryng than agaynst the poure Innocent Imagyned that she sholde take two serpentes charmed and coniured in the deth of the sone of her enemye / and that she wold som nyght put in to her chambre to the ende that they shold estrangle hym / with this conclusion she departyd fro the mountayn And retorned in to crete There beyng she so laboured by her scyence. That she dyde do assam|ble on a day secretly alle the serpentes of the contrey.

she was allone and well vnderstood and knewe this marchandyse / Whan she had assemblid them alle / she chasse two the most felonst and moste enuenemyd / and put hem in her lappe and bare hem home / and after away+ted aday whan kynge Iupiter was goon in a ferre vo|yage / and than faynyng yet that she wolde goo on some pilgremage / she departid allone fro crete / And dyde so moche that in disguysed figure she cam in to the castell of Arcyancye / The kyng Egeus of Athenes and the kynge Eristeus of Athique were at that tyme comen in the castell to make good chere / hit was in the euenyng whan Iuno entryd / whan she was with in she made her self Inuysible by her craft / And soughte fast aboute to finde the chambre where as was the sone of alcume|na / she sought so longe that she came to the dore of the chambre / where ther was a wyndowe open / she wente to the wyndow and loked in / And in the beholdyng she sawe two noryces and two sones / wherof she was all abasshid and began to thenke. Thus as she was pensif. Alcumena cam for to see her sones. And festyd hem in suche facion that the olde Iuno conceyuyd and knewe that bothe two were her sones / wherof she had grete Ioye / For she concluded in her fals and euyll co|rage that she wolde do strangle bothe two by the ser|pentes .
ALcumena departyd fro the chambre by space of tyme. And Iuno lete the nyghte wexe derke. The norices leyde the children in her cradels to slepe. and they slepte And after they leyde hem self doun and lepte leuyng a lampe brennyng in her chambre. Than whan they were a slepe at that tyme that Iuno

wold accomplissh her werke / she opend her lappe and made to lepe oute the two serpentes charmed enchan|ted in ^e deth of the .ii. chyldren  put hem by an hole in to the chambre / whan the venemo bestes were wythynne they lyfte vp theyr heedes / and smellyng ^e two children adressid them vnto them yeuyng the firste assault vnto ypecleus in suche wyse that they stranglid hym  there murdryd hym / After the deth of ypecleus these two ser|pentes cam vnto the cradell of hercules ^t was awaked that same tyme / whan the serpentes were comen to the cradell / they put hem / oon on that oon syde  that other on that other syde / And mounted vpon the cradell but this was to theyr euyll case / For as sone as they went vp hercules parceyued them and was a ferde be cause they were fiers and dredefull He than esuertued hym self and toke out his armes in suche myghte and puyssance that he brak the bondes in whiche he was wrapped and swaded in and so dyde that he had his Armes and his handes at large / And than whan the serpentes ran vpon hym. He put hem a backe by naturell strength and force many tymes / And fought wyth hem wyth his fystes ryght longe but fynably whan hercules sawe that the serpentes oppressyd hym more and more and cessid not to assaylle hym / He toke in eche hand oon makyng a grete Crye / And helde hem so faste and sore / that he stranglid bothe two .
THe noryces awoke at the Crye that hercules made And aroos vp hastely  wente to the cradels for to see theyr chyldren / And they fonde ypycleus ded.

and they fonde that hercules helde yet the two serpentes in his handes / sodeinly as they sawe that meruayll they cryed pyetously / with that Iuno the false wycche and sorceresse that alle had seen fledde her way sore trow|bled and terrible angry of that / that the serpentes had not wrought and achieued her purpoos as well in hercules as they had doon in ypicleus And Amphitrion with Alcumena awoke  cam in to the chambre where the noryces were whiche made sorowfull and pietous cryes And entryng therin they sawe hercules at oon side yet holdyng the serpentes / And at that other side they behelde ypicleus alle swollen of venym and ded / Than the parfonde sorowes cam and ran to the botom of her hertes / Alcumena began to crye and wepe by naturell pytye / Amphitrion was all afrayed / many damoysel|les and other folk cam in to the chambre whiche alle were aferd to take away the serpentes for fere of An|guysshe. And ther was none so hardy that durste ap|proche to hercules for the serpentis that he held in his handes whiche were swollen of the venym Allewaye hercules made no heuy ner werse chiere / but lawhed to oon and other And was there in this state so longe that the medicynes and surgions camen. and by theyr science toke fro his handes these venemous bestes / whan Am|phitrion sawe hercules deliueryd fro the serpentes / He recomforted alcumena that was nyghe ded for sorowe And made do brenne and burye ypicleus Alle they that were there had passing grete meruaille of the puissance and strengthe of hercules that was so yong a chylde. And that he had foughten ayenst the serpentes / and by excessiue strengthe and myght had strangled them.
THe nyght passed in the facion and manyer that I haue reherced / on the morn by tyme amphitrion wold shewe and manyfeste this meruayllous and glorious victorye / he dide do take hercules and made hym to be born to Atthenes in to the temple of the god Mars with the two serpentes / and he in persone wente accompanyed of kynge Eristeus / The false olde wicche Iuno folowid a ferre after in a dissimyled figure  state. Whan Amphitrion was comen in to the temple he sente for kynge Egeus And assemblyd the peple And after he toke hercules presentyng hym vnto the god Mars. Thankyng hym of the victorie that he had sente to hercu+les agaynst the serpentes. After this he lifte hym vp and shewed hercules vnto the peple recountyng and tel|ling to hem his meruayllous aduenture. And than thus whan hercules was shewyd and put in the Comyn regard and sight of the peple / And that euery man gaf hym lawde and preysyng / The false old Iuno be|yng in the prees wyth other / After that she had longe seen the noble chylde / That in all his membres he resem+blyd and was lyke to kynge Iupiter for to putte am|phitrion in Ialousye of his wyf And for to make hym to haue hercules in suspecion / she sayde vnto them that were aboute her / Certes Amphitrion is a veray fooll whan he weneth and thynketh that hercules be his sone Beholde the membres of kynge Iupiter / And the mem+bres of this childe / ye shall fynde no difference / This child and Iupiter ben bothe of oon semblance / And haue lyke figures  shappe / what that ony man saith This childe is the sone of Iupiter and of non other. whan this olde Iuno had sowen this cursid wordes.

she withdrewe her aparte oute of the prees and toke an other figure / to thende that she sholde not be knowen. And than these wordes were sowen a brood and tolde forth of them that herde hem in suche wyse / that a grete murmure sourded and aroos vpon Amphitrion / And hit was reported to hym / that men sayde that hercules was sonne of kynge Iupiter for trouthe and eche man sayd so by aduertisement of the olde Iuno / Whan Am|phitrion herde these newe tidinges / he began to beholde the childe. And in the beholding hym thoughte veryly that this childe had hooly the veray semblance and liknes of kynge Iupiter. And than began to entre in to his herte a right grete doleance and sorowe and thus after entryd in to Ialousye. Alleway he helde manyere and made as good countenance as he myghte and cowde / For to eshewe the sklaundre. And anon after that the peple were withdrawen he callyd the kynge Eristeus and prayd hym that he wold do norysshe hercules / sayng that neuer after he wolde see hym And that he beleuyd fermly that he was the sonne of Iupiter Eristeus confor+ted Amphitrion the beste wyse he coude / wenyng to him to haue put this Ialousye oute of his mynde / but he coude not / what shall I make longe rehersaylle Eristeus em|prised to kepe and nourysshe hercules / and made hym to be born in to his hous Amphitrion retorned vnto Arcian cye where he fonde Alcumena sore discomforted for these tydinges whiche she had receyuyd / And moche excused her ayenst Amphitrion / and the false olde quene Iuno wente vnto crete / of whom I shall tarye and shal~ come to speke of the first aduentures of hercules.



How hercules began to Olympades and how he waxe amerous of Megera the doughter of the kynge of Thebes And how he shewid his strength in alle ma|ner of games And apertyses.
THese tydynges of this firste Auenture of hercu|les was anon spredde by alle the prouynces of grece / Some sayden he was a bastard and the sone of Iupiter / And so recounted plante in his firste Comodye / And other susteyne that he was the verray sone of amphitrion And so recou~teth bocace in his book of the genealogye of goddes / how well / whos sone that euer he was / Eristeus had hym in kepyng And dide hym to be nourisshid hardly and not tenderly with oute the cyte of Attycque / For the kynges and the Citezeins and dwellars in townes / In this tyme made her children for to be nourisshid oute of good townes / And made hem for to lye vpon the bare erthe all nakyd for to be more stronge with oute entryng in to Cytees vnto the tyme that they had puyssance  strength to haunte armes Ligurgis had ordeyned this lawe and many other that folowe First he ordeyned that the peple shold obeye to theyr prince And that the prince shold beferme in Iustice and lyue sobrely And that marchau~tes shold doo theyr marchandyse yeuyng oon ware for an other with oute ony monoye / And that eche man shold auenge hym openly / And that a yong man shold haue in a yer but oon gowne / and that oon man shold not be more galant ner queynte than an other / and ^t no man sholde renewe wronge passid And that men of armes shold haue no wyues to thende that they myght be more sharpe  fiers in the warre And for to contente her fragylite humayn.

he ordeyned that nyghe the ostes sholde be certayn wo|men comune in places called fornyces / wherof cometh fornicacion These were the lawes that the grekes vsed in the tyme of the begynnyng and vp comyng of hercules For than to come agayn to my purpoos / hercules was norysshid in an hous that stood in the playn feldes / and was often tymes put oute in to the rayn and wynde. And laye the moste parte of that tyme vpon the erthe wyth oute ony other bedde / he laye ofter so than vpon heye or dreyd strawe In this nourysshing he waxe and grewe in alle beawte. strengthe. and prudence / he was humble. courtoys and gentill Alle good manyeres be|gan to growe and shyne in hym / he was sober in etyng and in drynkyng / he slepte gladly on the feldes / he shotte and drewe the bowe dayly / Whan the kynge Egeus of Athenes had herd spoken of him he made to be norisshid wyth hym his sonne that was named theseus / Hercu|les and Theseus were bothe of oon Age And louyd right well to gyder Theseus was strong and myghty and a fayr child and had witte ynowh / But hercules passyd And shone as ferre aboue hym as the sonne shy|neth aboue the sterres whan he was seuen yer old he ex|cersiced wrasteling and ouerthrewe And caste the gret+test and the strengest that cam to hym. Not oon and oon at ones / but .v. or .vi. or as many as he myght sette on his handes And dyde so grete fectes of strengthe / that out of thebes of Athenes and of Atticque dayly cam men / women and children for to see hym The more and elder he grewe / the more enforced his strenghte / whan he was x. yer olde ther mighte no man stande ne abide in his hande At .xiii. yer of his Age / he began to doo and sue the Armes

And of his propre mocion he thought that he wold goo vpon the mount Olympus / And there he wold abyde and answer alle maner men theder comyng by the space of .xv. dayes And to receyue them / In Armes or in wras+telyng or at ony proof or assaye of strengthe. And for to come to theffect of his enterpryse. He awayted a day whan Eristeus cam for to see hym / And sayd to hym / Syre ye haue nourysshid me vnto this tyme lyke as I were your owne sone / yf fortune were to me as contrarye as nature I knowleche that I shold be the most Infortunat childe that euer was born / Some saye that I am sonne to Iupiter / And other saye of Am+phitrion how be hit I haue no fader but yow only / That do me to be nourysshid with your substance / wherfore I drawe me vnto yow as to my fader / And adueryse yow how that I am purposid for to be on the mounte of Olympus in as hasty tyme as I goodly may / And ther I shall abide alle them that theder shall come .xv. dayes duryng full / For to furnyssh them at the spere. At swerde / at wrastlyng / and at renyng / alleway forseen that hit be by your lycence and leue. And that hit plese yow of your courtoysye to gyue to hym that shall do beste som prys / to thende for to meue the hertes of noble men vnto vaylliance that they myghte Attayne to worshippe / Eristeus answerd and sayde hercules fayr sone ye can requyre me of no thynge that is ho|nest and worshipfull but I shall be therto agreable ye be yong. how well ye be strong and puyssant. And I wote well ther is no man that may endure agaynst yow. Syn hit is so that ye haue the will. I am right well contente that ye shewe the proef.

And the strength of your yougth / and for to conduyte and brynge this enterprise vnto your worshippe / I shall araye yow as richely as yf ye were my propre sonne. My fader Answerd hercules I thanke yow of this grace and kyndenes / sin hit is so your playsir / hit beho|ueth yow to chese a man of grete vnderstandyng and of Auctorite that shall goo vnto alle the royames of these Marches for to shewe vnto the kynges prynces and gentill men the will and enterprise that I haue taken. Fayr sone saide eristeus ye saye trowth / ye shall make your lres conteynyng your entencion And sende them to me / And than whan I haue receyuyd them I shall do so good diligence That ye of reson shall be content.
AFter these deuyses and many other the kynge Eristeus went home  hercules toke enke and parchemyn / / and sette hym to wryte the lettres of the forme of his paas / whiche he wolde make And conteyned in this wyse Gretyng be to alle kynges. prin|ces. knyghtes. gentill men. ladyes and damoyselles / fro the esquyer vnknowen and well fortuned / we late yow haue knowleche that the first day of the moneth of may next folowing / the esquyer vnknowen shall be on the mounte of olimpus for to dispose hym in habille|mens conuenyent vnto Armes at the playsir of ^e goddes and fortune / and for to resseyue alle them that ben of no+ble hous and name / that will and shall come theder by the maner that foloweth / In the begynnyng the firste thre dayes he shall holde a paas of wrastling / And he that shall do beste by the Iugement of the Iuges therto comised shall wynne an elephant of sin golde / the fourth day he shall renne a forlong or a stade ayenst all them

that wole renne / And he that best renneth shall wynne a courseur leuyng / At the fyfte and sixthe dayes he shall shote wyth the hand bowe / First at the moste strayt and nyghe. And after at the moste ferre / And he that shoteth moste strayt and nyghe shall wynne a gloue of golde / And he that is best at ferre shall haue a bowe and a sheet of Arowes / At the seuenth day he shall caste the stone ayenst alle men. And he that best doth ther at. shall haue a ryche dyamont. At the eyghte day and other folowyng vnto the fyftenthe. He shall do Armes. And yf ony will proue hym self oon alone ayenst hym he shall be receyuyd forseen that duryng the first sixe dayes he shall come and presente hym vnto the Iuges And he that so doth best shall haue a riche swerde And yf hit happe that they that shall come to this feste wyll tornoye to gyder in maner of a batayll in Ioustyng wyth courtoys rochettis and fyghtyng wyth swerdes Rabatnes / The Iuges shall ordeyne Capitaynes suche as them shall seme conuenyent / And who that best doth in this excersite shall wynne a chappelet of lawrer Alle these thynges to fore wreton the sayd esquyer vnknowen promytteth to Accomplissh And prayeth vnto all noble men ladies and damoyselles that they wylle vouchesauf to come and see thassemble of no+blesse whiche shall be parformed by the playsir of the Inmortall goddes / Whiche wyll gyue to the re|ceyuours of thys mandement multeplyance of honour and encresynge of good fortune .
WHan hercules had wreton this mandement  gros+syd hit vp he sente hit to Eristeus whiche red hit

And hym semed that the Inuencion of the auctour and makar was good and right digne to be put in memorie And callid on of his knyghtes and gaf hym the charge and office to go publisshe this mandement in the courtes of alle the kynges of grece / The knyght enprised with right good herte to do the sayd office And this was the first officer of Armes that euer was / he wente to Athe|nes. Thebes. Arges. Lacedomone. Archade. Achaye. pere|lye. Magnefie. Crete. Ephese. Pepos. Triopolye  The|saylle / And alle aboute he publisshid the mandement with oute declaring who he was that shold kepe the paas / They that herde speke of the squyer vnknowen and vnderstode his hye enterprise Iugyd hym that this cam of a noble corage / And that he myght not fayle to gete honour and worshippe / The knyghte for to fur|nyssh this viage had .iiii. monethes terme to acomplissh hit / Duryng this tyme hercules disposed hym for to fur|nyssh his paas / And so dide the kynges and noble men for to come theder / What shall I make longe processe. whan the euen to fore the first day of the paas was co|men / The kynge Eristeus brought hercules vpon the mount of olimpus / And fro alle parties cam theder so many of noble men / ladyes of damoyselles that the nom+bre myght not be extemed / the mounte was full on alle sides / In this nyght ther was grete bruyt and noyse of oon and other for to make theyr tentes and loggys of bowes and leues and theyr tabernacles And hit ought not to be forgoten whan the euen was comen / the knight that had publisshid the mandement Assemblid in a co|myn tente alle the kynges that were comen theder And requyred them in the name  on the behalue of the esquyer

vnknowen / That they wold chese amonge them / suche as sholde be Iuges and gyue the prys / whan the kynges that were there had herd and vnderstond the requeste of the noble esquyer / They thankyd hym / And they Chesse thre kynges for to be theyr Iuges / That is to wete the kynge of Thebes callyd Creon The kynge of Arges named Gorgophon. And the kynge of Myron|done named Eson whiche was fader to Iason. They were wyse and rype / They enterprysed the office wyth a good herte. And that nyght passid ouer wyth grete Ioye / For they assemblid in a tente / whiche was made for to daunse / And the kynges wyth the knygh|tes yong and old wente theder And thus began the feste whiche endured to mydnyght in daunses and in songes
THe kynge Iupiter and Amphitrion were not at this assemble by the counseyll of kynge Eristeus Whiche lete hem haue knowleche secretly. That hercules was he that shold hold and kepe the paas / for to eschewe alle wordes  langage that myghte sourdre or ryse vpon the cause of the nayuyte of hercules / For amphitrion on that on side beleuyd not ^t he was his sone And / Iupiter on that other side sayde that he apperteyneth not to hym / he sente hem worde ^t they myght do no better Than not for to come to this solempnyte / whiche was moste speciall thynge  the most newe ^t euer was spo|ken of at that tyme The first day of maye at ^e oure what tyme the sonne caste his hete vpon the erthe / hercules dide do sowne a trompe for to make the ladyes to go vp in to the scaffoldes  places And anone after / they beyng mou~+tyd  sette Hercules lepe out of his tente in habillemens to wrastle And cam in to the myddis of the place or felde

Makynge reuerence vnto the Iuges. kynges and to the ladyes / he was than .xiiii. yer old full accomplisshid. Anone as he had don the reuerence The knyght Officier of Armes Made a crye and sayd / hye and excellent Iuges we late yow haue knowleche with alle kynges. knyghtes / and gentill men of Armes / Ladyes and da|moyselles That here is ^e esquyer vnknowen / comparant in his persone vpon the mount of olimpus And presen|tith him self for to fornisshe ^e contenu of his mandeme~t by ordre and after the manere that the chapitres make mencion / wherfore yf ther be ony man that will proue and assaye hym at wrastling Late hym come  he shall be receyuyd .
THeseus of Atthenes at the ende of this crye / and at the comandement of the kynge Egeus his fa|der entrid than in to the feld / he was a passing fayr childe and a gente At his comyng he salewed her|cules And sayd to hym Maister of alle habilites corpo+rall / I am come hether no thing of presumpcion but for to lerne / wherof I haue nede / and therfore I recomande me vnto your grace / My broder theseus Answerd hercu|les I may more lerne of yow / than ye of me / wherfore late vs putte vs in payne to wynne the prys / hit muste be begonnen at on ende These wordes accomplissid the two noble esquyers approchid seasid eche other / Theseus employed his puyssance / And hercules suffrid hym to do as moche as he wold or cowde / with oute shewyng and puttyng oute his vertu and myght agayn to hym. And so they shoke and lugged eche other / but finably hercules caste theseus / the moste softly and fauourably that he cowde / wherof the lawghter was grete among

the ladyes and damoyselles / Theseus than departid fro the place. And wente amonge the ladyes and damoy|sellys / Prayng them that they wold take hit in gree. That he had don / Than cam vnto the paas many yong es+quyers of whom I knowe not the names / And they la|boured and traueyllyd largely for to gete honour and worshyp. But theyr laboure prouffityd lytyll vnto them. as to the regard of the prys / For hercules caste and put to the erthe alle them that cam. And the wrast|lyng duryd foure owres contynually / At the laste at the requeste of the ladyes the Iuges made the wrastlyng to cesse for that day / Be cause that they semed that hercu+les was yong / And that he had achyeuyd a grete werke .
WHan hercules had vnderstand that the Iuges had made cesse the wrastlyng he was ryght sorowfull / For in his wrastlyng he had a singuler playsir / The Iuges wyth Eristeus cam to hym And made hym do on his Clothes and Araye hym. Af|ter they brought hym in the comyn halle where as the la|dyes were daunsyng and syngyng Ioyously / And sayd to hym that he muste daunse and synge lyke as other dide Hercules excused hym sore / His excuse myght not auaylle / He was sette on the daunce in the hande of a right fayr damoysell Named megere of yong eage / but she was right well adressid of witte and vnderstan|dyng she was doughter of kynge Creon / / whan hercules sawe hym in the hand of oon so noble a damoyselle. He was sore abasshid and shamed / The damoysell on that other syde was also shamfaste. For as she had seen hercules wrastle / she had sette alle her loue on hym.

And they wiste not / none of hem bothe what to saye. how be it in stede of wordes / they vsid preuy and couert regards hercules caught a singuler plaisir to beholde and see the damoyselle / And the more nere the damoyselle was to hercules ^e more her herte she sette on hym what shall I saye / loue in this nyght submysid and constray|ned them to loue eche other with oute spekyng / theyr be awtes was cause therof / men shold not haue founden in all grece two so fayre children ne better accomplisshid they were ynowhe beholden and seen / And in especiall hercules for his prowesse And euery man meruayllyd of hym and of his conduyte.
BI space of tyme than / hercules was broughte fro the feste in to his tente / his tente ne the tentes of the kin|ges  of the ladies were not maad but of brawnches leeues and of herbes giuyng good odour and sauour / hit was not knowen to make tentes of cloth ne of silke. Hercules passid this nyght more entendyng to thinke on the beawte of megere than for to slepe The day folo|wyng at oure competente he cam vnto the paas And there were many yong men strong and deliuer And the strengeste of alle grece / But hercules with oon Arme threwe and caste hem / And that day and the day folo|wyng he caste and putte to the erthe moo than thre hon|derd / And ther cowde not so many come to hym but he caste hem doun and put hem vnder / / with oute ony chauf|fing hym self ne greuyng / At that tyme he gate a right grete glorye  honour there. Megere often tymes behelde hym. And in like wyse dyde the ladyes and damoysel|les And many ther were that sette theyr loue in hym / and thus he passid the paas of ^e wrastling to his worship

alle thre dayes At the fourth day he assemblid alle them that were come theder for to renne / And he made them that were moste feble to ride vpon the best courseurs that were in grece / And after he shewde hem the forlonge or stadye / And made hem to meue and renne And he ran af+ter the horse and men But he passid alle them that ranne And with oute takyng ones his breth he ran the for|longe / And cam therto to fore alle the ryders  rennars. wherof he was gretely preysed and had a grete lawde. and some men saye that he ran also swyftely as an herte Of this cours that hercules made alle the world won|dred / And helde hit for a meruayllous thynge / And wrote hit in her bookes Amonge other thynges worthy to be put in memorye.
AT the fyfthe and syxthe dayes folowyng / hercu|les toke his bowe and his arowes And wente in to the place that was ordeyned for to shote in with the bowe The ladyes and the damoyselles were there / Hercules and many other shotte at most strayt and next the marke / but shotte by shotte as to ^e regarde of the nyghest / he shotte allway in a lytill rynge of golde And as for shotyng a ferre / he passid the ferthest on the felde .xxiiii. stredes his bowe was so grete that hit was the charge  burthen of a man / No man cowde bende hit but hymself Hit was a playsir to see hym / he gate grete loos and bruyt the two dayes And yet gate he more the daye folowyng / whiche was the seuenth day of ^e paas For whan hit cam to the castyng of the stoon a ferre / oon aftre another Than he caste hit in enployeng his strength in suche wise ^t he passid .vi. paas further than ony man that at that tyme enployed hym in ^e excersite Than they

that were comen to this feste cryed with a hyghe voys. the squyer vnknowen is neyther the sonne of amphitrion ne the sonne of Iupiter / but he is the sonne of god of na|ture whiche hath garnysshid hym with double force  redowblid an honderd fold / In his Innocencye he ain|quysshid the serpentes And in his yougthe he surmoun|teth in witte. force and vailliance alle the world / Bles+sid be the wombe that conceyuyd hym and bare hym for to glorifie Grece / For certes the tyme shall come ones that he shall be the glorye of the grekes and theyr trium|phe And well shall helpe them yf they haue nede.
SVche were the wordes of the kynges of the la|dyes and of the damoyselles of the nobles and of the vayllyans Eche man preysed hym in his guyse / The fayr megera herde gladly the loos and prey|sing that men gaf hym / but yet she sawe him more gladly do his feetes and vaylliances And hit is no meruayll thaugh she sawe hym gladly  gaf her to beholde hym For in hercules was / that was not in other / his beawte surmounteth the mesure to the porcion  quantite of his force and strengthe / what shall I saye after that eche man that cast wolde the stoon had doon / he wente in to the comyn tente / where many an Amerous man was with his lady / and there he began to putte hym self forth a litill / And deuyse with oon and other. And well be|cam hym / For he had a right hyhe and a cler vnderstan|dyng Megere and hercules in this euenyng often tymes behelde eche other secretly / here regardes mette and smote eche other / other while And than of force they chaun|ged colour / In this chaungyng of colour / ther was not a vayne but he was meuyd And by this meuyng grewe

amorous desires in habou~dance of fonde sighes / whiche were nourisshid in the abismes  botoms of their hertes
AMonge all other thynges for to spede the ma|tere The kynges and the auncyent knyghtes as|semblid hem in counceyll For as moche as they had many yong knyghtes that were comen and had abi|den fro the begynnyng of the feste for to do armes ayenst hercules / The puyssance and strength of hercules was well considerid in this counceyll / And for as moche as hit was verray semblable ^t no man myght dure ayenst hym / Hit was ordeyned that he shold do no Armes particuler And that the dayes that were yet to comen of the contenu of the feste fro two dayes to two dayes they sholde tornoye in maner of a bataylle / wherof shold be capitaynes two kynges that were there That is to wete tandarus that was fader of menelaus husbond of the fayr helayne / And yxion that was kynge of thesaylle. These two kynges emprysed with a good will this charge And hit was ordeyned that hercules shold late them tornoye vnto the tyme that the oon partye were at werse And that than he myghte helpe that partye so suf+fryng / vnto the tyme that he had brought hem to theyr aboue This ordenance was shewid in the tente by thof+ficyer of armes / What shall I make longe counte / They that were afore named for to fighte And do armes man for man ayenst hercules were right Ioyous of this newe ordenance / The feste than cessed And oon and other wythdrewe hem vnto on the morn till they cam to the feldes for to begynne the first tornoye / And there were well fyue honderd squyers / And thre honderd knyghtes alle Armed as for to go in to bataylle.

Reseruyd that her swerdes were rabatnes  not sharp and that her speres had rochettes of tre or of woode The kynge tandarus And the kynge yxion were richely ara+yed and well horsed And Armed well with quyer boullye / and ran in the moste hardest place of this assam+blee / ther were no more but an honderd knyghtes a hors back For the hors at ^t tyme were but litill knowen ner vsed Alle they on hors back and they a foote were par|tyd in two companyes like in nombre / that oon of these companyes was deliuerid to tandarus / And that other to yxion / And whan tandarus and yxion had all that they oughte to haue / they that had horses at the sowe of the trompe were redy for to Iuste / and ran oon ayenst an other so couragiously that they trowblid all the Ayer with duste and pouldre that roos by theyr hors feet / At the recountre eche mette with other often tymes / And ther were some ouerthrowen vnder the hors And som re+uersid and torned vp so doun at coopyng / and some ther were that brakke theyr speris knyghtly and cheuaul|rously For ther was plente of vaylliant knyghtes / but at the point whan ^e knightes on hors back had don theyr feet And that they sette her hande on her swerdes the pie|tons or footemen began to renewe the tornoye with so grete bruyt and noyse that alle the mounte redounded / on that oon side and that other ther were many speres bro+ken and sheldes vnioyned / They foyned with her speres eygrely / theyr strokes and foynes were grete eche man shewid the quantite of his force / hit was Ioyous to see. the speres flewe in the Ayer by pyeces / ther were grete cryes / None sparyd other / Auncient ne yonge. The aun+cient bete and faughte with the yong / The yonge men by

grete corage lerned and siewed the olde men Whan theyr speres were broken they toke theyr swerdes Wherof be+gan a newe stowr Ioyous  playsant in forgyng theyr helmes and hewyng on the sheldes so coragyously And in especyall they of the partye of yxion / that they of the partye of kynge tandarus were constrayned to crye her|cules vnto the rescows .
WHan hercules herde that they cryed after hym / he was passing Ioyous / For hit was noyous to hym to be ydle and to see other laboure He was nyhe by the tornoye / beholdyng them that dyde beste He had his swerde in his fyfte / At the Crye that they that were put to the werse made He wente vnto theyr ayde and helpe / And began to tornoye on the syde where were the grettest strokes gyuen / so plesantly that hi was Ioye to beholde. The kynge yxion cam agaynst hym for to susteyne his faytes and to holde to gyder his folk But certes to his byen venue hercules smote hym on the shelde in suche wyse that all a stonyed he bare hym to the erthe and doun of his hors / Tho began ther a grete showte and laughter / As well on as other began to entende to the rescousse of kynge yxion / Hercules put hym self in to the prees. And made renges on alle sydes so grete that tandarus and his folk recouerd and entrid in to the batayll of theyr countrepartye / At that tyme be|gan agayn the tornoye strong  sharpe They that ryght now fledde / toke herte. force and vertue to hem agayn by the weldoyng of hercules / and recouerd vigour  strength Hercules of all them that were there was take hede of / his strokes surmou~ted al~ other with out mesure / he brought

agayn tandarus to his aboue with litill labour Finabl he dyde so grete prowesse that day and in the dayes fo|lowyng that he was recomanded aboue alle the men of the world / what shall I make longe processe of the tor+noye and of the passe temps of this feste / ther were thre grete tornoyes and notable At eche tornoye as sone as hit happend that oon partye was put a back and to the werse / Hercules by his well doyng recouerd hem  put hem vp aboue agayn / No man toke hede but to his glorye Euery man sayd well of hym at daunces at festes euery man louyd hym / eche man hym worshippid / ther was no tonge of noble ne of vilayn but that gaf hym lawde and preysing / wherof the conclusion was suche that all the prises abode with hym And also there were gyuen to hym many giftes of the kynges that were there / The dayes of this solempnyte drewe ouer the last nyght / the kynges and the ladyes and nobles assemblid in the co|myn tente / And of oon comyn accorde they wolde that fro yer to yer they and theyr eyres shold holde and re|newe the feste that hercules had begonne and stablisshid For they sayde that hit was the moste honorable passe temps that euer was made in grece / and named the feste Olimpade / by cause of the mounte olimpus. And they had hit so recomanded that fro thens forth / they noted theyr mandemens  theyr lettres perdurable of the yere of the first olimpade / In suche wise as we saye the yere of thin carnacion These thinges ordeyned gyuen and pro+mysed / thofficyer of Armes of hercules thanked alle them that were comen to this Olimpade After that / eche toke leue of other and departid on the morn. And thus finysshid and ended this feste .



How hercules saylled by the see in to esperye. And how he vaynquysshid ^e yle with the moutons or shepe And vaynquysshid philotes And slewe his felawe.
AT the departyng hercules passeth lightly the with|drawyng  departyng of alle them that were there Reseruyd the departyng of megere / he knewe not the maladye of loue vnto the tyme that he sawe her departe in to her contre / megera wente vnto thebes / and hercules drewe hym to athenes / right pensyf  the~kyng moche on his lady And sore desiryng to see her wente in the compa+nye of Eriste vnto athenes where they fested hem foure dayes longe At the fourth day tydynges cam That vnto the poort  hauene were comen strange folk by fortune. whiche were clothed in righte plesante robes  garme~tes Whan the kynge Eristeus herde these tydynges / He sente anon for to fecche these straungers to hym / and axid hem fro whens they were They answerd hym that they were of the occident  of the regyon of hesperye / where is the regyon of hesperye sayde Eristeus And what maner contre is hit. Verayly answerd oon of them I trowe that in all the world is no better contre. For ther is ha|boundance of alle thynges that is necessarie to mannes lyf And I can well telle to yow That in the places of our conuersacion. And where we haue our hauntyse. Ther ben many yles lyyng aboute the ferthest partyes of Maurce be yonde Ampolesye Where growe alle the beste thynges that men can thynke And ther is a kynge named philotes / fayr sone of a kynge named Athlas. Whiche ben of the generacion of grekes And it is not to be vnremembryd that the kynge phylotes accompa|nyed wyth the doughters of kynge Athlas fond late an

yle right playsant / as was his auenture This yle is alle playn withoute mountaygne or valeye / hit is in suche wyse as is a gardyn alle grene. And ther ben ther in so many sheep and moutons that it is meruaylle / whiche ben kept  cherisshid there also diligently as they were of fyn golde / Of these moutons that I speke of / we haue our robes  gownes maad we and they that may haue them muste bye them at grete pris of gold / we ete ^e flessh and clothe vs with the skynnys And knowe ye for cer+tayn that in to this yle is but oon entree / And he entreth not ther in that wold For the kynge philotes and an other geant whiche ben wise and subtill and merua|yllously stronge alwey kepe thentre of the yle And all|waye that oon waketh / while that other slepeth / Cer|tes said Eristeus by that / that I vnderstonde of yow the yle that ye speke of is of grete excellence / This philotes that ye make mencion of / what man is this kynge philo|tes The straunger answerd and saide that he is the most redoubted and drad kynge of the partyes occidentall. He is a geant that by his force and strength hath con|querd the yle with the sheep. And hah putte oute them that dwellid and were inhabited there afore / he is so stronge that it is but late a goo that he sayd yf he mighte finde a man more strong  puyssant than he is / he wolde neuer after bere armes to fighte in batayll duryng the lif of that other .
THe kynge Egeus than gaf leue to the straungers to departe fro his presence and comaunded that noman shold gif hem empesshement in her retor|nyng toward theyr contre. And they wente and depar|tyd. Eristeus abode with egeus. And eristeus cam to

hercules and theseus / And wysshed by a grete desir to haue of tho moutons sayyng to hem that he wold that hit coste hym as moche golde as a payr moutons weye and that he hadde a ram and an ewe for to engendre in his contre / In that tyme were no sheep in grece Whan her+cules had herde the desire of kynge Eristeus / sodaynly he sayd to hym Syre ye haue desired here to haue a payr of moutons appertenyng to the doughters of Athlas by the conquest and Armes of the strong geant philotes I pro+myse yow here for trouth vpon my gentilesse / That fro this day thre wekes / I shall departe by water or by lande for to fecche and gete them And that I shall neuer retorne in to grece vnto the tyme that I haue founden the yle and that I shall oppose my self ayenst the geants that kepeth hit / And shall assaye yf I can gete the yle vpon them lyke as philotes hath goten hit vpon other Whan the kynge Eristeus had vnderstonde the enterpryse that her|cules made / he was passing sory For he louyd hercules as moche as he had ben his owen sone / he reprysid hym fro that hye enterprise / wenyng to haue broken hit but hercules answerd so wisely and so rypely that eristeus was contente to suffre hym to goo vnto this auenture. And theseus wyth hym.
THe renomee of this vyage was spradde anon in alle the contre / Egeus and Eristeus made redy for theyr two sones a right good galeye and well garnysshyd hit of alle maner thynges The ga|leye  alle other habillemens were alle redy in good tyme At the ende of thre wekes They wente to the see And wyth them ryght many noble grekes And rowed so forth tyll they cam in to the hyghe see.

where they sayled and rowed many dayes with oute findyng of ony auenture to speke / For at that tyme the see was but lityll vsid neyther of theues ne yet of mar|chants / what shall I saye / theyr patron in processe of tyme brought hem in to esperye that afterward was na+med spayne And ther sought so longe the yle with the sheep / that at laste arriued there / at the paas / The geant that was comysid to kepe the entre and the warde of the yle slepte not at that tyme / whan ^e grekes descendid But yssued oute of his hows And cam alle Armed vnto the strayt passage / where myghte no man gon vp but oon at ones And he cryed to the grekes / syres what seke yow here / Hercules answerd we seke the moutons that ben in this yle for to carye some of them in to grece. The geant Answerd haue ye money I nowe / yf ye haue so ye shall haue I nowe / how sayd hercules shulle we not haue them otherwyse / no sayde the geant Than sayd hercules / at the leste late vs haue them at the pris that ye haue goten hem / how sayd the geant / the kynge phylotes hath conquerd with his swerd the yle and the moutons Hercules answerd myn entencion is in like wise to con+quere the yle vpon him / yf ye wole defende hit / haste yow ye muste haue the batayll ayenst me / or ellis late me the yle that I may do ther in my wille.
ANone as the geant had vnderstande the conclu|sion of hercules / he made hym redy to defende the paas. And blewe a grete horne that was there hangyng on a tree. Atte sownyng of the horn the dough|ters of Athlas awakyd philotes. And tolde hym that some were there for to gete the paa / and that the geant had blowen the horn / Philotes with the wordes roose

vp and armed hym and cam to the paas And fonde that hercules by force had putte a back his geant That reser|uyd philotes was the most subtill man of armes of alle hisperye He was sore abasshid and began to sihe / But this notwythstandyng he had not longe soiorned there whan hercules smote the geant but on the right sholdre by suche strength and vertu that the shelde of the geant was falle fro hym and his armes alle to frusshid And his glayue entryd so ferre in to his body vnto his herte that he smote hym doun ded at his feet.
WHan philotes sawe his geant ded / He cam vnto hercules for to defende the paas sayng that he wolde auenge his geant yf he myght / Hercules had grete Ioye whan he sawe philotes come to the paas And sayd to hym kynge thou art well come / I haue now Ioye in my herte syn I shall proue my self ayenst the / men saye / ther is no strook but of the maistre nowe late vs see how we shall werke to gyder. well and happy be he / that well shall do and proue hym self. Philotes in the heeryng of these wordes cam vnto the paas  helde a grete bordone with whiche he smote sore vpon the shelde of hercules and made hym to disauale a paas / wherof philotes began to lawhe / And thoughte for to haue smeten yet hercules with that bordon / whiche was a shamed of that other strook / he kepte hym well and awayted so ^t in the smytyng he caughte hit  rached hit out of his fistes / and casted hit in to the see / than was philotes all abasshid of the force of hercules / whan he had loste his bordon he toke his swerde  cam for to fighte with hercules / philotes was at auantage / For hercules was vnder him / they assaillid ^t oon ^t other right arda~tly

and well they kepte hem bothe two / In this day they faught with oute cessyng also longe as the daye endu|red / The nyght cam oon that they muste reste / They laye there bothe two vpon the paas They slepte no thing / for hit was no tyme / bothe two kepte the wacche They en+dured hit well for they were accustomyd for to wake Thus wakyng philotes had many wordes vnto hercu|les and demaunded fro whens he was. And hercules told hym the trouthe After they spack of theyr bataylle And at the seching and pourchas of philotes They pro+mysid eche to other That yf ony of hem were vainquys+shid / he that were vainquysshid and ouercomen for to saue his lif / shold be holden to serue truly the vainqueur all his lif duryng .
DVryng these deuyses and promyses. The daye sterre That the poetes calle aurora began to arise in his regne. The ayer was cleer and nette. The sterres shone At this oure hercules caste his eyen amonge the sterres. And seeyng there Aurora shyne aboue alle other / he began to remembre his lady megere Alas Ma|dame where be ye now / I wolde hit plesid the goddes that ye remembrid as well me as I remembre yow. In trouthe the light of this sterre eschauffeth the Amorous fyre / wherof I was late seasid by thadmynystracion of yowre beawte / ye be also ferre shynyng in beawte aboue the maydens of grece as this aurora shyneth aboue alle the other sterres / of whom the nombre is so grete that no man can telle. O noble megere the right clere sterre / your remembrance enlumyneth myn herte Lyke as this sterre enlumyneth the heuen. And me thinketh that by this re|membrance whan I come to the batayll I shall preuayll

the better / wherfore I promette yowe yf fortune helpe me lyke as I desire ye shall haue your parte of alle that I shall conquere .
THe nyght drewe ouer ^e day began at the poynt of the sonne rysyng hercules was alle esioyed of the souenance and remembrance that he had had of his lady. And tooke his swerde and sayd to philotes / / we haue soiourned longe ynowhe / Lo hit is day And the sonne ryseth / hit is better that we excersite Armes now Than whan the rayes of the sonne ben gret|ter. Late vs take this tyme er the grete hete come and late eche of vs do his power / Philotes that was alle redy was ryght Ioyous whan he herde hercules / For hym toughte that he sholde sone and in lityll space spede his mater. And sayd to hym. Hercules I am redy. And was syn yesterday to achyeue thys batayll. Kepe yow as well as ye can / ye haue slayn my geant the moste subtyll man that was in alle the Occydent. Wherof I haue grete displaysir. But at the leste syn his deth may not be recouured by deth of a man / I shall put me in payne and deuoyr / to haue a newe souldyour. And that shall be ye. or elles my swerde and fortune shall fayle me / Shall I so sayd hercules and yf your swerde and fortune fayle yow / What tydynges. By my gentylnes sayd philotes that befelle me neuer. And yf my maleheure and mysauenture renne vpon me / than muste I nedes by your seruaunt by condicion / that I shall neuer after entre in to batayll at my empryse / Ne em|pryse of non other duryng your lyf / Ne for yow ne for other I shal~ neer fighte / but yf hit be / my self defendaunt

with oute other wordes the two champions approchid eche other and smote to gyder so sadly and sore that the place redounded of her strokes In a litill while they had detrenchid her sheldes by grete quarters / philotes mighte not fayle to smyte on hercules / but his strokes were no|thing so grete but that hercules myght bere hem well ynowh with oute greef or souffryng grete domage.
THus began the batayll agayn of ^e two geantes Hercules was hyhe as a geant / he was right Aspre in Armes / he dyde moche payne to gete the paas / but yet he myght neuer attayne to smyte philotes a playn strook for as moche as philotes was aboue on ^e paas / whiche conteyneth well two cubites of heighte. Whan hercules sawe and knewe that philotes kepte his paas with oute abassing or aduenturyng to come doun He thoughte subtylly that he wold fayne hym self wery And lityll and lityll after he began to smyte more febly than he dyde afore / After that he reculed hym self and smote fro ferre as he had fayllid and ben wery / the grekes were a ferd and wende he moghte no more / and than philotes sprang doun fro the paas wenyng to haue putte hym to vtterance / but than whan hercules sawe hym to fore hym And that oon was no more hyher than that other Hercules cam to his place agayn And gaf so grete a strook to philotes that he made hym recule and goo a back more than foure foot Philotes was than all abasshid / And repentyd hym that he descended fro the paas / but that was for nought for ^e repentyng myght not auaylle. Than he took corage and enhaunsed his swerd and smote hercules on the lifte arme so harde that he gaf hym a wounde that the blood sprang oute / whan

hercules sawe the Armes of philotes besprenct with his blood / he made none other countenance but that he wold sodaynly be auenged of the strook In gyuyng to philotes thre strokes wherof of the firste he brake his helme and smote hym on the heed / And of the seconde he gaf hym a grete wounde on the ryght sholder And wyth the thirde strook he made his swerd to flee out of his fystes / And than he caughte hym in his armes and after longe wrast|ling he caste hym to the erthe / In suche wise that philotes yelded hym seruaunt vnto hercules And promysid hym to serue hym trewly alle the residue of his lyf And that he wolde bere his Armes After hym in alle place where he shold goo / Hercules receyuyd to mercy phylotes. And than callyd theseus and his felauship They cam and were ryght glad and Ioyous of the victorye that he had don. Than hercules Philotes And alle the other wente in to the yle where they fonde the doughters of ath|las gretly disconfortid for the deth of the geant / and for as moche as hercules had also conquerid phylotes theyr wardayn / Hercules  phylotes confortid the doughters the beste wise they coude And there the grekes refresshid them ^e space of thre dayes / The fourth day he toke .xxx. ra~mes  .xxx. ewes / and brought hem Into theyr shippe After that they wente to the see withoute ony harme do+yng in the yle for the loue of ^e damoyselles / they departid thens and wente to the see / Accompanyed of phylotes Whiche was conquerd by hercules as sayd is / and after loued well hercules  trwly seruyd hym euer after / but of theyr Iournees I shall tarye for this tyme / And shall speke of a monstre of the see ^t the goddes sente to troye for to deuoure the fayr exione doughter to kyng laomedon



How hercules fought at the poort of troye ayenst a monstre of the see for the doughter of kynge laomedon.
IN that tyme as bochace reherceth in his genelo|gye of goddes in the thyrde chapitre of the sixte booke / Laomedon the kynge of Troye was besy to walle and mure his cyte with mures and towres to the ende to make hit more stronge / he was not well gar+nysshid of tresors ne of monoye for to accomplisshe his desire / he wente vnto the temple of the god of the sonne  of the see That were passing riche And took all the mo+ney that he cowde finde / promettyng to paye hit agayn at a certayn day  tyme sette / by the moyen of this moneye he closid and fortefied the Cyte of Troye with mures  towrs / The warke was costlewe / how be hit in lityll tyme he achieuyd hit And hit was not longe after that the werke was finysshid but the day cam in whiche la|omedon shold paye and rendre vnto the temples of the goddes the money that he had taken and borowed At whiche day. The prestes of the temples cam vnto lao|medon and demaunded hym yf he wolde rendre the obla+cions and offrynges that he had taken out of the temple Laomedon daigned not to speke to the prestes but sente hem worde shamefully that they shold retorne  kepe her temples wherfore he was afterward sore punys|shyd / For in the same nyght after that he wold not here the prestes The grete windes be gan to ryse  meue that on ayenst that other and caused the see to ryse in suche wyse that hit entryd and folowid in to the toun so ferre that hit filde the stretes full of water  drowned a grete parte of the toun Aboue this in eyghte dayes fo|lowing the sonne shone so Ardantly and gaf so grete

hete that the pepl~e durst not goo in the ayer by daye tyme And that dryed the superfluyte of the haboundance of the water of the see that was lefte / Wherof roos a cor|rupte and a mortall vapour that Infectid alle the Cyte Wherof engendryd so grete a pestelence that the moste parte of the troians were smyten to deth by the grete In|fluence of the corrupt Ayer.
BI thys pestelence they of troye fyll in grete deso|lacion The cytezeyns men and women / yong and olde dyed wyth oute spekyng sodeynly / the fader coude not ner myght not helpe his childe in necessite / ner the childe the fader at that tyme regned in troyes neyther loue ne charyte For eche man that myght saue hym self fleed a way for fere of this mortalite / and gaf ouer and lefte the cyte / And wente to dwelle in the feldes / And among all other the kynge laomedon seeyng ^e destruction of his royame wente in to the yle of delphos vnto the tem+ple of the god Appollo / for to haue the counceyll of the god towchyng the helthe of his Cyte / Wyth laomedon wente the moste noble and the most puyssant men of Troye. whan they were comen vnto the temple / They put hem in contemplacion and deuocion to fore the ydole. And the deuyll that was ther in answerd them  sayd. The money whiche was taken out of the temples / and not rendryd and payd agayn / Is cause of the maladie and vengeance of troye / And I doo alle the troians to wete that neuer shall troye be quyt of this maladye vnto the tyme that the sayd Cyte pourueye to Appese the goddes / In this wyse That is to wete that euery moneth they muste chese oon of the virgyns and may|dens whyche muste be sette on the syde for to be

deuoured by a monstre that the goddes shall sende theder And the sayd virgyns shall be chosen by lotte or auen|ture. And in this wyse muste the cyte doo for tappese the goddes perpetuelly / vnto the tyme that they finde oon man that by his armes and his myght shall ouercome the sayd monstre .
AFter these wordes and answere laomedon and the troians assemblid to counceyll vpon this matere And concluded that for the comyn wele and helthe of troye / They wolde putte her virgyns in ^e Ieopardye and auenture to the seruitude of the monstre with oute ony excepcion or reseruyng / Than they retor|ned vnto troye / and toke theyr virgynes and caste lotte amonge hem And on her that the lotte fille / was taken and brought to the see side. And anone after was seen comen oute of the Abismes or swolowe of the see so grete a tempeste that the see aroos and was troublid The see brought this monstre And a right grete flood of water lifte vp the monstre by tymes out of the see / he was as grete as a balayne or a hulke. And than he toke the vir|gyne and swalowed her in / And wente a way agayn in to the see And fro than forth the pestelence seced / thus was troyes deliueryd of theyr sekenes and maladye by the oblacions of her virgynes that were offerd vnto the monstre fro moneth to moneth / And thus as sayd is. her virgynes were deuourid / hit happend that in the ende of the moneth ^t the sorte or lotte fill on oon of the dough+ters of kynge laomedon named exiona / This doughter was yong and fayr and welbelouyd of alle the peple Whan this lotte was fallen on her / she was not oonly bewayled and sorowed of kynge laomedon her fader

and of his sone pryant and of her suster Antigone and of her cosyns and alyes / But of alle the peple men wo|men and children / Notwithstandyng theyr wepynge ner the good renomee of her cowde not saue her For for the comyn wele and helth of them alle / She was put in thauenture of the monstre / The noble virgyne was redy for tobeye. The kynge laomedon brought her vpon the see side accompanyed of noble / ladyes / and damoyselles wyth grete sute of troians goys and marchans / all they made sorowe for her an wlayned and beway+led her / what shall I saye / At the poynte that she was thus brought theder / Hercules at aventure arryued at this poort of troye wyth his moutons / and he willyng to refresshe hym there made to caste his Ankers oute / and goyng oute and takyng land he behelde on that oon side and sawe the troians wepyng and bewaylyng exiona in castyng a brood her armes / and wryngyng theyr han+des that he had pyte to see hit / And desiryng to knowe what them ayled putte hym self in to the presse /  sawe there where they bonde the fayr Exiona in the route Attyred of ryall Aournementes alle discolourd and full of teerys as she that abood no thyng but the deth Hercules meuyd wyth compassion on the damoyselle. Adressid his langage vnto kynge laomedon for as mo|che as hym semed that aboue alle them that were in the place he was a man of Auctoryte And demaunded hym wherfore ^t the damoysell was there bou~den / laomedon casted his eyen alle bewept on hym / And was alle abas|shed to see his gretenes and his beawte neuerthelesse he answerd hym what art thou ^t arte so hardy to demande me of myn Infortune / Whiche is to alle comyn in Troye

Syre said hercules I am a strounger / and I loue the wor+ship and honour of ladyes. And ther ne is thing that I might do for hem / but I wold do hit vnto my power / and for as moche as I see this damoyselle thus entretyd / In the fauour of alle ladyes I haue axed of yow the cause and I wille knowe hit or put my self in auenture for to dye with her / And ther for I demande yet agayn what trespaas or synne hath she doon / that thise men thus binde her My sone answerd laomedon I se well that ye be ig+norant and knowe not the termes and the cause / wher|fore this damoyselle my doughter is here abandonned. Ther is no man but he may well knowe hit. For she shall dye for the salute and helthe of troye And I shall telle yow how we be comen therto / The goddes of the see and of the sonne hath enmachyned ad greuyd troye with a right grete pestelence. That toke his begynnyng of a surhabondance of the see / wherof ^e stretes of troye were full in euery place of water After this deluge and flood the tyme was meruayllously hoot  outragiously By the grete heete of the sonne this see was dryed vp. Of this dryenes or drought engendrid a vapour Infecte And of this vapour ensued a pestelence. And for to re|siste this pestelence I haue ben in the oracle of the god Ap+pollo Where I haue had answer that for tappese the god+des and to sesse the pestelence / The goddes of the sonne and of ^e see wille that fro moneth to moneth be taken in troye of the virgyns by sorte or lotte for to be exposid and offryd in this place vnto a monstre of the see / The troians were content to fulfylle the wyll of the goddes and I with hem / we haue castid our lottes vpon our vir+gynes / wherof many ben swalowed and englowted by

the monstre And now the sorte or lotte is falle on my doughter will she or not / she muste nedes obeye and appayse the goddes / After her shall come another / Ther is no remedye / And this shall dure vpon the virgynes of troyes perpetuelly / For hit is the desty|ne that Troye shall neuer be quyte of this right harde seruytude and thraldom / vnto the tyme that they haue founde a man that allone shall vaynquysshe and ouer|come the forsayd monstre by his puyssance and pro+wesse / whiche shall be Impossible How be hit that it is true that alle the men of the grettest Cyte of the world can not fynde manyer to vaynquysshe hym he is so gret  dredfull / And for these thynges conside|red demande me no more My doughter shall dye for the comyn wele of the place of her natyuyte / / She was born in a good oure / whan the goddes wyll / That by lotte and this fortune she be to them offerd Syre answerd hercules / Truy I wene that vnder heuen is no Cyte so bonde and thrall as youris is. How be hit hit ought to be vnderstande ^t the goddes wille not suffre / That this malediction shall hold and endure pardurably / ye muste lyue in hope / yf fortune and the goddes will do me that grace that I myght vaynquysshe and ouercome the monstre and make Troye free of this seruitude what reward wolde ye gyue me / Truly sayd laomedon I trow not that hit be possible ^t ye shold vaynquysshe the monstre Who is he that shall expose hym to so grete a folye / hercu+les answerd / vnto a vaylliant hert is no thynge Inpossi+ble / yf I triumphe vpon the monstre  saue thy doughter

what reward shall I haue / laomedon answerd / yf thou maiste do that thou sayste / I haue two horses the beste that ben in alle the world / whiche I loue as well as halfe my royame / I shall gyue hem to the as to the beste knyghte of knyghtes and as to the moste hardyest of hardy. Syre sayd hercules. Hit is ynowh to me and suffiseth to haue the two horses. Late me allone with your doughter. I haue a trust and hope that this day I shall laboure for the wele of troye. And that I shall fraunchyse and make free the virgynes and maydens of that cyte But I praye yow yf ther be in your cyte ony grete barre of yron or of metall. That ye wille sende for to fecche hit to me for to deffende me with alle.
THe kynge laomedon and the troians were alle abasshid whan they sawe themprise that hercu|les had made And at the wordes of hercules the kinge remembrid hym of a grete clobbe of yron that laye at the entree of his palais of ylion that was so heuy that the strengeste man of troye had ynowh to doo to leye hit on his sholder he sente for hit and presentid hit to hercu|les And hercules lifte hit vp as hit had ben a litill glayue Philotes and theseus were present at alle these thinges Hercules toke leue at them and at the presse and recom|manded hym vnto theyr prayers / and forth with all the see began to rore terrybly Laomedon and the ladyes and they that were there toke leue of exione and at hercules. And recomanded them vnto the mercy of the goddes / and wente vpon the downes for to see the ende / Thus abode exione allone and all dispayred vpon the grauell with hercules / Than hercules knelid doun on his knees vpon the grauell tornyng his face vnto the Oryent. and made

his prayers vnto the godde that made the monstres  ter|rible bestes requyryng hym that he wold gyue hym force strength and vertue of power for to delyuer exione from her Infortune of the monstre / This oryson accomplisshid hercules entryd in to a lityll boot / where exione was in. And anone after the see roryng more and more grewe  aroose in suche wise that the boote floted and was lyfte vp  born by dyuerse wawes Folowyng this in a grete trowblyng of wynde whan the see was rysen in grete ha+bondance of watres hercules  the troians sawe comyng the grete horrible  vnmesurable monstre / bringyng with hym a tempeste so terrible that hit semed that all ^e mon+stres of helle had ben wyth hym he made the wawes to redowble aprely / he lyfte hym vp aboue the water  put out his mosell vnto his sholdres / that of ^e swalowyng in of the water / sprang out of his ghilles grete floodes of the see / That mounted so hye that hit semed that hit had ben a goulffre that had perced the clowdes / For to saye the veray trouthe of this monstre / he was so horrible and so ferdfull that only for to loke on and beholde / The moste hardy and assewryd of troye tremblid for fere as a leef on a tree / This notwythstandyng hercules was no thynge aferd / Allewey he comforted Exione that fyll doun as ded. He toke his clubbe. The mon|stre cam by the boot and caste his mosell vnto Exione wenyng to haue swaloghed her in / as he had doon the other vyrgynes afore / Hercules kepte her / For he smote hym so acertaynly vpon the mozell that he gaf hym a ryght grete wounde so sore and heuy to bere That he made hym to goo a back and recule in to the botom of the see / Than in the fallyng of the monstre

in to the see / the wawes a roos hyhe in to the Ayer / whe+rof hercules and exione were all wette of the wasshing and springyng of the wawes / theyr boote was born with the wawes vpon a bancke of sande where the see was so lowe / that ^e monstre mighte not well swymme with his ease vnto hem / The monstre alleway swa~me fter hem and comyng nyhe to them lifte vp his hede / and in the liftyng vp Ther yssued out of his throte so grete habondance of water of the see That the boot was full of water and sanck in suche wyse that hercules was in the see vnto the grete of his thyes And exione stood in the water vnto her myddell .
ANone as hercules sawe hym in this Auenture. he had grete displaysir in hym self More for the payne and dispayr that exione had than for the drede that he hym self had The kynge laomedon Theseus Philotes and alle the other supposed than that hercules and the damoyselle with oute rescousse had ben deuou|red of the monstre. The monstre than sekyng his proye. Leep agayn ayenst exione with a terrible wawe Her|cules had his clubbe redy on his nekke. And awayted no thing but the monstre desiryng to auenge hym of the displaysir that he had / And that he wold haue don hym Dischargid his clubbe on his heed so myghtily that the barre entryd therin and the blood sprange oute / Than was the monstre more wood vpon hercules / he cessed the assault of the damoyselle And assaylled hercules. And allwey as he lifte his heed out of the water / he desgorgid vpon the vayllyant champion grete flodes of the see / but this notwithstondyng he coude not do so moche harm vnto hercules / but that hercules dyde moche

worse to hym Hercules sued hym wyth his clubbe / and made hym to rebonte in to the botome of the see / by the peysaunt weyght of his strokes.
THe batayll endured longe betwene hercules and the monstre / / yf the monstre myght ones haue towched hercules / he wold at on gulpe haue en+glowted or swaloghed hym in / He had a wyde and a grete throte oute of mesure he maad grete noyse  bruyt. He was ardant in excersisyng his office Alleway her|cules faughte wyth hym boystously / And helde the vir|gyne by hym And what thyng that euer the monstre dide He coude not so sodeynly lyfte vp his heed out of the wa+ter / But that wyth oon strook of his clubbe he was re|bouted allwey vnto the bottom of the see / What shall I say hercules was ofte tymes in parill for to be drowned The peryll was grete and more than I can reherce For|tune was wyth hym and the damoysell / he fought and bete the monstre vayllyantly / And so exployted in smy|tyng contynuelly on his mozell and on his heed that the see withdrewe And toke fro hym the spiryte of lyf and alle to frusshid his brayn vaynquysshid hym and slowe hym / And after whan the see was withdrawen  ferre ebbed / he toke exione by the hand  broughte her vpon ^e dicque  delyuerd her vnto her fader the kynge laomedon.


How Laomedon shette hercules oute of troye And how hercules sware that he wolde auenge hym.
WHan the kynge laomedon sawe his doughter thus de+liueryd fro the monstre  troyes made quyte of the seruage of the pestelence / he enclyned and thanked par|fondly hercules After he descended vnto the see side accom+panyed of hercules these philotes And of the troians 

wente for to see and beholde the monstre that was so grete / that thre honderd horses myghte not meue hym fro the place where he was / Oon and other toke hede for to see the strokes that hercules gaf hym And they coude not see all / but in that they sawe they meruaylled For hercules had broken boones That hit semed not possible to breke / and they had founden the heed hurte in so many places. That with grete payne they cowde not knowe whether he had hede or none Of this hyhe and increable victorie the troians enioyed them meruayllously And had hercules more in grace than ony man in the world. whan they had seen and beholde the monstre ynowh they departed thens and brought hercules in to Troye / They cam not so sone vnto the dycque but they fonde exione newe clothed with newe araye and vestementes. And as for hercules all that he had vpon hym was weet and nothing drye The kynge laomedon wold haue had hym to haue chaunged his habites and wold haue gyue hym newe but the vayllyant squyer refused hit alle / sayyng that he had ben well acustomed not for to bee allwey well at his case / In this estate than laomedon brought hercules in to Troye vnto the castell of ylion and his gre+kes with hym and fested hem as hit apperteyned Her|cules and his grekes were foure dayes triumphant in ylion Duryng these foure dayes the troyans wente oute in grete rowtes for to see ^e monster / and gaf so grete loos and preysing to hercules That laomedon had enuye ther at / Dowtyng hym that the peple wold loue better hercu+les than hym / He sente hercules and his folk oute of the toun for to hunte And as sone as they were oute of Troye / He drewe vp the brygge and shette the yates

ayenst hym / Whan hercules wende for to haue entryd. Laomedon spack to hym and sayde to hym fro ferre / that he had mened by conspiracion the cyte ayenst hym And that he wold no more receyue hym in to the tou~n / hercules was passing wroth whan he vnderstood thaccusacion of laomedon And answerd hym / that neuer in his lyue he had tought ony vilanye to hym / wherin he chargid and offryd hym self to proue by bataylle in the felde and to aventure his body agayn .xxx. other / that wold saye or mayntene the contrarye / whiche offre laomedon wold not resseyue / Than hercules requyred hym / that at the leste he wold deliuere hym his horses that he had promysed hym for the victorie of the monstre Laomedon answerd that he wold none deliuere hym / wherfore sayd hercules Laomedon answerd sayd / for as moche as hit is my wyll and pleseth me so to do / Ha false  vntrewe kyng said hercules / thou withholdest me the prys and reward of my labour / and thou yeldest me euyll for good / I swere to the by the puyssance of alle my goddes / that as I haue deliueryd troye perpetuelly by my clubbe of the monstre of the see and consequently fro the swerde of pestelence. Semblably and in lyke wise by the same clubbe I shall yelde and rendre vnto troye the pestelence of deth and of warre yf the goddes yeue me the grace / And I haue Intencion for to make the troyans saye that they were happy that ben ded in the tyme of the pestelence that is passed .
HErcules full of grete yre departed wyth these wordes and lefte there the kynge laomedon that sette litill stoor of that he had sayd to hym / For he trusted and putte all his affiance in the strength of the

wallis of his cyte / and hym thougthe that no man mighte noye ner greue hym And than hercules wente agayn to his shippe and mounted in to the see with his clubbe  his sheep and his felawe theseus / Philotes helde hym self well happy for to haue ben vaynquysshid of oon so va|yllyant a man as hercules was  he enprised the office for to bere his harnoys in alle places where he wente. What shall I saye Fro troye vnto thebes fill nothyng worthy to be putte in memorie that is of record In the ende he arryued in grece And knewe by some certayn man there That kynge Eristeus was in thebes Wherof he had grete Ioye For hym toughte he sawe his lady me+gere / whiche he desired to see by grete desire / he wente vn+to thebes where he was solempnly receyuyd of ^e kinge Creon whiche had hym in grete chierte for his vaylli|ance Oon and other cam and welcomed hym he sente his sheep and moutons vnto the kynge Eristeus by phi+lotes Philotes hym self tolde and recounted how hercu|les had conquerd hem and hym also And how he had slayn his geant at the paas Of these tydinges was the kynge Eristeus passing Ioyous. And so were alle they that were there or herd speke of hit / Euery man glory|fied hercules Ladyes and damoyselles cam and well|comed hym Amonge alle other megera faylled not / she cam to hercules and wel~comed hym. And wel~became her to festoye  make hym chyer. For she was wyse and of good manyer And certes her comyng gaf more solace vnto hercules Than all the louynges  preysinges that were than gyuen to hym / how well Alle ^e world preysed and exalted hym by this voyage aboue alle the grekes / and ^e sheep were so desired / that kinges boughte

hem for the weight of golde / wherfore the historiagra|phes  poetes putte this conquest in perpetuell memorie. Wrytyng amonge his dedes in this wyse / Sustulit ma+la aurea / that is as moche to saye as he bare away the moutons of gold / For as moche as they were exty+med at prys of the weyght of goold / For mala in greke is as moche to saye as sheep in englyssh or moutons in frenshe / and so racounteth bokace in his genelogye of goddes / And so approuyth varro whi|che writeth in like wyse in his book de Agricultura.
BI this conqueste the name of hercules began to flee in heyghte and in excellence The poetes haue fayned vpon this historie That the dough+ters of Athlas had a gardyne kepte nyght and day of a serpent wakyng Wherein grewe Apples of gold And that hercules slewe this serpente And gadred and bare away the Apples By this gardyn is vnder+stonde the yle / By the serpent wakyng / the subtyll geant co~mysid to kepe hit that allway wook at the paas And by the Apples of gold ben vnderstand the sheep / Extymed to the valeur of the weyght of fyn goold / After than the presentacion maad to Eristeus of this sheep or moutons as eche man meruaylled of the prowesse of hercules Philotes adiousted and gaf to his vaynqueur hercules preysyng aboue preysyng and loenge and los aboue loos and honour aboue honour / For heeryng kynges and prynces. ladyes and damoyselles seeyng that hercules helde his pees wherof he oughte and myghte enbrace honour and worshyppe he declayred fro poynt to poynt his Ad|uenture not creable / of the monstre of Troyes.

And shewed the clubbe wherwith he had put hym to deth After that he reherced the honour and grace that he had goten in troye And the wronge that laomedon had don to hym And sayde so moche therof That they enter|prised alle to goo and warre vpon the kynge laomedon for to take vengeance of the wronge that he had don to hercules .


How hercules had batayll agaynst the kynge laome+don And how he vaynquysshid and destroyed troye the first tyme .
HIt is not possible that my penne can wryte the grace and excellente renome that hercules gate in grece at his comynge fro troye / The kynges  the princes reputed hem self happy and ewrews for to haue theyr regne in his tyme Amphitrion his fader puta|tyf began to haue hym in grace / And cam in to thebes to hym / His moder Alcumena cam also / and certes she fail+led not to haue largesses of Ioye / whan she myghte sette her eyen to see her sone / whiche was so gretly renomed. The noble lady had not seen hym in longe tyme afore. she sawe hym triumphe in honour in vayllyance and in prowesse Alle the Anoyes. greues. and displaysirs that she had for hym / be cause that he was named the sone of Iupiter / wherof she held her self Innocent were all for|goten and put in oubliance The feste was grete in thebes for the loue of hercules Men spack not but of hym and of his prowesse Creon Eristeus Egeus Amphitrion  many other assemblid them to geder And made theyr mustres and assembles for to goo vnto troye. By space of tyme theyr excersite was redy And than they toke theyr leue. And hercules was maad capytayne of this

Armee / he wente to the see accompanyed of the kyn+ges abouesayd and ten thousand men all chosen for the nones At the tyme couenable the Maryners dis|ankred And wente to saylle They saylled so longe by theyr cours wyth out Aduenture or lettyng that yet duryng theyr vitaylles they cam on a day in to frygye vnto a porte of a Cyte named laryse beyng nyghe to tenadon / This cyte was of the demayne of Troye / For whiche cause the grekes assayllyd hit and toke hit by force of armes / And after that ryfled hit and took alle that was therm And whan they had so spoyled hit They wente to tenadon Whiche was a gentilmanly cyte They assaylled hit and toke hit as they dide the cyte of larise and they put therm the fyre  brenned hit that the ayer was enflaumed in suche wise ^t hit was seen in troye how the cyte brende Thassault of tenadon dured not longe For as moche as the troyans were not aduertisid of her co|myng whan than they sawe ^e ayer so enflamed for to see fro what place the flame cam They mounted and wente vp on the hyghe edifyces of ylion and seeyng toward tenadon sawe that the cyte was alle on a fyre wherof they that sawe hit were right sory and gretly abasshid Aboue this they loked in to the see And aspyed than there the flote of ^e grekes wher+of they were more abasshid than they were afore. And than wyth oute ony more lenger taryyng they descended and wente doun in to the halle of kynge la+omedon / And sayd to hym / Alas syre what is beste to be doon / The grekes come vpon vs wyth ryght a grete flote we haue seen hem and knowe hem.

The stronge hercules manaceth yow for to destroie your cyte / Certes I beleue hit is he For for the begynnyng of the feste he hath brente tenadon / And that is that causeth the Ayer be full of fyre .
THe kynge laomedon heeryng this tydynge / began to sighe and to taste the punycion and trespaas that he had comysed and don ayenst hercules. This notwithstondyng for to gyue courage vnto his men and to his sone pryant that was that tyme of the cage of .xx. yer. he dyde do sowne to Armes And adou|bed hym with armes shewid a right fiers and hardy semblant This don he Armed pryant his sone that neuer had ben in bataylle afore and dubbyd hym knyght Af|ter he toke hym by the hande and yssued out of ylion / In yssuyng oute he mette many troyans that told hym that at his poort were desce~ded many grekes ^t had destroied tenadon And but yf he hasted hym / They sholde sone take land Laomedon with oute spekyng ony worde passid forth by them that had brought hym this tydynge And cam to a place that was there by ylion where he fonde mo than .xx. thousand troians redy armed / and seeyng them he began to Ioye in hym self And callyd the princy|pals and sayd to hem Lordes ye ben renomed in alle the world by the hyhe prowesses of your Antecessours afore that troye was wallyd they defended hit with the swerd agaynst theyr enemyes The renomed kynge Iupiter of Crete coude not gete this Cyte Ne the thesalo+nyques by theyr warre myghte neuer subdue this Cyte Hit is now happed this day that a newe assemble of enemyes come vpon this cyte as men saye They haue put the fyre in tenadon Late vs goo receyue them coragiously

And late vs make of them lyke as our faders haue made wyth other .
WHan the troians had herd these wordes of their kynge They answerd alle / that they wold lyue and dye wyth hym for the wele of the cyte and that they had Intencion to kepe hit in his honour and for to do growe theyr auncyent glorye / wyth oute holdyng of longe processe / The kynge laomedon dide than do dis|playe alle his banyers After yssued out of troye settyng and rengyng his men in good ordenance And than as he began to conduyte and lede hem forth Sodaynly he herd at the poort a passing grete noyse  bruyt of trompettes clarions and tabours of the grekes / Anone his blode began to chauffe / than his heer of his heed began to stande vp / he knewe that they were his enemyes / And as sone as they knewe the grekes with oute holdyng of ony ordre ne mesure / they meuyd them  began to renne to the poort oon to fore an other / whan they approchid the poort they aspyed the grekes that descended wyth grete puissance / than they ascryed hem vnto the deth and ran vpon hem asprely / the grekes were furnysshid of good armures  put hem to deffence / And began to skar|mussh ^t oon ^t other so desmesurably / that in thabordyng and metynge ther were many dede  hurte / hercules was there among the grekes he began to medle sharpli among the troians / he had his clubbe / certes he fested hem in suche wise that the moste strengest of his enemyes durste not abide hym / he fought fiersly in desir of vengement in couo|tise of worship  for to gete hym a name / In forsing his hand he shewid to the troians his clubbe / and made hem to fele the weyghte therof / and the strength of his Arm

And he wroughte so hyghly and dyde so vayllyantly that they that sawe hym doubtyd hym more than ^e / deth And sayden that oon vnto that other / beholde hercules. but approche hym not / hit were folye Alle that he are|cheth he sleeth and forfrusshith / we do euyll to fighte agaynst hym This is the fraunchysar of the terrible ser|uage and thraldom of troye / howe shulle we resiste his clubbe / whan the mortall monstres ben by the same put to vttrance .
SVche were the wordes of the troians / hercules faught ayenst hem fiersly / he was ferme and sta+ble / he wente afore all / the grekes folowid hym and toke a playsir to beholde hym. The Cry was grete aboute hym  what shall I saye he faughte vnto the night and neuer cessed vnto the gooyng doun of the sonne / and the troians sowned the retrayt and they departyd bothe parties / laomedon put his swerd in to his shethe whiche was all blody with grekes blood. And in like wyse dyde pryant his sonne. They reentryd in to theyr Cyte. After the scarmusshe they concluded that oon the morn they wold furnysshe theyr enemyes of batayll And the grekes logged hem in the champayne and made good chiere For they had loste but litill of her peple at her co|myng a lande This night passid ouer / whan the day ap+pered the troians  the grekes eche in his maner made hem redy to the bataylle / many of the troians wold gladly haue broken this bataylle. And prayde vnto kynge laomedon that he wold rendre and deliuere to her+cules the horses that he ought to hym / laomedon wold not do hit. But answerd that he doubtid no thing his enemyes / he had than well fyfty thousand of fightyng

men all redy / of these fyfty thousand he made two bata|yllis oon of twenty thousand and that he ladde hym self And that other of therty thousand he made pryant cap|tayne / this doon he yssued oute of troyes wyth his .xx. thousand fyghtyng men and cam vpon the feldes entring vnto the grekes .
WHan the grekes espyed comyng kynge laomedon They were full of Ioye As they that were redy for to resseyue them at the poyntes of theyr speres and with hewyng of theyr swerdes / they had maad of their ooste foure bataylles In the first was hercules And in the second was Amphitrion and Theseus And in the thyrde was the kynge Creon / And in the fourth was Eristeus / Hercules than that had the first bataylle mar|ched whan hit was tyme ayenst the kynge laomedon. And he had foure auncyent knyghtes well adresshid in the feet of armes that sette  conduyted his folk in araye and ordenance / They marched so nyhe that oon ^t other wyth grete noyse of trompes and tabours / that the Ar|chers and Arblasters began the batayll / After that that hercules had sommend laomedon to paye hym that he had promysed hym and that laomedon had made reffuse therof / The grekes were garnysshed wyth strenger bowes and shotte than the troians were / by that moyen they slowe largely of theyr enemyes / And soueraynly hercules bare hym so well that of .xl. Arowes that he shotte oon After an other he slewe .xl. of his enemyes suche as he wold chese wyth oute fayllyng.
HErcules was at that tyme the beste Archier and the moste Iuste that was in all grece / and also in all the world / he  his men as said is caste man

of the troians to the ground by theyr shotte / whan the shotte faylled hercules deliueryd his bowe vnto philo|tes that bare his harnoys and took a glayue strong and sure / whan hit cam to glayues and breking and foynyng with speres hercules that was al~way in the first fronte Leepe ayenste the kynge laomedon that was departid fro his oost afore alle other / for as moche as he rood vpon oon of the horses that he had promysed to hercules And rennyng oon ayenst that other as swyftely as they had flowen in the ayer / mette and smote eche other so sore that theyr speres brak in peces whiche sprange aboute them. Hercules passid forth and smote amonge the troians And laomedon in like wyse entryd in to the oost of the grekes. They began to handle theyr swerdes and to hewe eche vpon his enemyes Than aroos there a meruayllous noyse. They that had speres and sheldes enployed them for to Ioyne. The fyghtyng was grete. The strokes were harde The batayll was generall / for of that oon partye  that other many men were distres|sid and beten Allway the grekes were moste boystous and moste hard in Armes And more vaylliant than the troians And better helde hem to gyder than they of the ba+taylle of kynge laomedon / Hercules wrought and be|soyngnerd fast with the swerde that he had conquerd philotes. At euery strook and euery paas. He deffeted a Troian And smote of her heedes  Armes in grete ha+bondance / That hit semed that they that he towchyd had not be Armed. Laomedon was on that other syde That fayned not / but bare hym right well vpon his hors And ran fro renge to renge among the grekes. He had no reste / he conduysed his peple knyghtly / his peple

were grete in nombre / he approuched theyr enemyes so asp rely that they enclosed them And than was the tuy|sion and slaghter so grete that on alle sides a man shold not haue seen but blood  hedes  armes flee in the place and the felde .
THan theseus and amphitrion behelde the batayll of hercules so enclosed with the troians they me+uyd them and cam to his helpe er he had nede At theyr comyng they made a right grete bruyt / They thres|sted couched theyr glayues vpon the troians whiche were to ferre auauncyd / and Ioyned to them with suche prowesse that they smote doun the most stable  strengest and wente so ferre among hem  made them that were so fer comen to resorte agayn and go aback by force and strength In this goyng a back and recueyllyng the oost of laomedon was all affrayed and abasshid / The thre swerdes of Hercules of Theseus and of Amphitrion were seen flambousshyng aboue alle other in well doyng In shorte space they began to vaynquysshe and ouercome their enemyes / and shold haue brought hem to vtterance and shame / whan that the yong Pryant with his .xxx. thousand apperyd to come to the Iourney makyng so grete a noyse that alle the ground tremblid / And gaf a meruayllous sowne / and they ^t were vpon the wallys and edifices of troye made with all a grete crye / Hercu|les theseus and Amphitrion beholdyng Pryant comyng and the puissance of troye sette their peple in araye  in renges wente with a grete sute of grekes ayenst them for to sousteyne her faytes / Theseus was the firste and as|pied priant that sette and cowched his speer ayenst hym And that he cam wyth a grete corage mounted vpon

the second hors of kynge laomedon his fader And seasid with so grete myghte vpon theseus that he bare hym to the ground torned vp so doun brosing hym vpon his shelde Theseus releuyd hym right angry of this falle en+tryd among the troians smytyng and hewyng on hem with his swerde in suche fureur that he smote of the hee+des of moo than of .xxx. troians / er he cessed / the bruyt and noyse was grete aboute hym / The troians wold haue vengid them of his swerd. But ther power was not so grete they had werke ynowh to saue hem self. many grekes cam in to the Ayde and helpe of Theseus. And than they began to renewe the bataylle.
AT this tyme and at this recountre Hercules and Amphitrion were nothing ydle They were on o side / and theseus on an other At metyng ther was many a man hurte and slayn. Pryant dyde meruaylles vnto the grekes at the begynnyng / he bare hym so vaylly+antly amonge his enemyes / That he fonde no man that dyde hym ony thinge that displesid hym. He made his swerd for to taste strongly ^e blood of his aduersaryes Than as he was in this poynt / he herde aboute hercules a right hye and a right persing Crye of his peple cryyng troye Troye In despair for to haue preuayllyd / and than pryant wenyng to haue holpen / And to smyte doun ded alle them that were afore hym ran vnto the rescouse to his maleauenture For as sone as he was comen to fore hercules / And hercules sawe hym so on hors backe / He remembrid hym that hit was he that had ouerthrowen theseus to the grounde And sayd that he wold auenge hym And enhaunced his swerde and smote pryant so ru+dely vpon his helme that he was all astonyed And that

his swerd slode doun on the hors nekke and entryd in so ferre that they fyll doun bothe pryant and the hors.
WHan Pryant was so ouerthrowen hors and man / And also so estoned that he wyste not where he was / hercules was aduertysed that hit was pryant sone of the kynge laomedon / And had pyte of hym And toke hym prysonner And dide do sende hym oute of the batayll / The troians seeyng this were sore and strongly troublid and for the rescousse of hym they meuyd them self and encoraged so terribly that her+cules myght not susteyne alle the faytes of the batayll. And that the grekes were constrayned to lese place The kynge Creon than displayed his banyer and his batayll And in lyke wyse dide Eristeus  they putte hem in two wynges oon on that right side and that other on the lyfte side / And they cam rennyng in vpon the troians with so grete noyse  so grete tempeste that alle the troians felte well theyr comyng / For at that tyme they wyste not where to entende / They were so smyten afore  behynde so sore that they loste the rowte of pryant / and wiste not where he becam .
AT this entremetyng and faytes laomedon was oute of the prees / And refresshid hym / he herd saye that his sone pryant was taken. Wherfore he was passing sorowfull and had so grete payne that the swete cam to his herte  fro thens in to alle his mem|bris / and wente hym self agayn to batayll half out of his mynde / the batayll was than fell enuenymed / and most hard fightyng / but for to augmente and encrese the ouer|grete sorowe of this laomedon / he fonde that his folk

had the worse  losse and lasse foughte On that other side he sawe the horyons and strokes of the grekes so grete and so desmesurable that his men were disrenged And tharayes broken And chargid with so heuy stro+kes of the heuy glayues that they wente and torned a back and began to flee / And than whan hyt cam to the disconfiture Laomedon abode not with the laste but en|trid agayn in to his cyte as hastely as he mighte The gre+kes folowed the troians asprely and so nyhe that they entryd in with hem with grete effusion of blood Hercu+les was the firste that wan the gate And as for the gre|kes he was portier and putte in alle them that were of his knowleche / many troians passid by the cuttyng of his swerd / And many fleed away by the feldes and busshis / what shal~ I saye whan laomedon sawe that by force his cyte was taken and put in the handes and go|uernance of the grekes Right sore disconforted and all in despayr he took his doughters Exione and Antigone And his moste precyous Iewels and bagues / and fled away preuely Thenkyng that his enemyes shold make there a right grete destruction and pyllyng as they dyde For whan hercules had put his men within the cyte he abandonned to robbe and pylle Thus the troians were secuted The canellys were tempryd with theyr blood Tthe howses were beten doun / And the grete rychesses were put in to proyes And of alle the goodes of the cyte Ther was lefte nothing hoole but the palays of ylion where the ladyes and the maydens were withdrawen Hercules wolde in no wyse destroye this palays. For as moche as the ladyes made to hym a requeste for to spare hit At this pryse hercules soughte longe laomedon

in the palays of ylion And in alle places of the cyte / But he cowde here no tidyngis of hym / wherfore he was sore desplaysant And whan he had beten down the walles. that had ben made wyth the moneye of the goddes / he de|parted thens and retorned in to grece wyth grete glorye And in this wyse was Troye destroyed the first tyme. Wherfore I shall thus now make an ende of this firste booke / And shall begynne the seconde booke / where shall be shewyd how troye was reedyfyed / And how hit was destroyed the seconde tyme. And how Pryant areysed hit and made hit agayn / In contynuyng the no|ble labours of hercules now newe begonne .

Thus endeth the first book of the reueyll or gadryng to geder of the historyes of Troye.





Hiere begynneth the seconde booke of the recueill of the historyes of Troye / that speketh of the prowesses of the stronge Hercules and of his deth ::.

Howe hercules foughte ayenst thre lyons in the fo|reste of nemee. and how he slewe them and tooke their skynnys or hides ::.
IN the fyrste booke is begonnen the faytes  prowesse of the stronge and puyssau~t geant hercules. And how he destroyed fyrste the cyte of Troye vpon kynge Lao+medon after whiche feet and conqueste he retorned in to Grece. where he helde hym a certayn space of time with out doyng of ony thynge that is founde by writyng / But than as the olde Iuno by her euyll cursid enuye gaf her to ymagyne and thynke how she myght make hercules to be destroied  dye / Tidynges cam i~ to Crete that in the foreste of nemee were comen many lyons And amonge all other ther was oo~n that was sixteen palme of heyght that destroyed and wasted alle the contree. And this Iuno had warre agaynst eristens. and than for to haue aqueyntance of hercules  vnder fay+ned colour of good loue for to sende hym in to the claw+es of this lyon. she maad pees with cristens. and sende for hym to come in to Crete for to conferme the pees Eristens that thought no thynge but well wente in to Crete and brought with hym hercules / the pe was made. Iuno acqueyntid her with hercules / they cam to speke of the lyons in the forest of nemee :. And so moche spake Iuno and accountid of hem. that she said to hercules that hit were wel~ his faite for to gete hym honour and worshipp / as for to go vnto the foreste of

nemee and for to employe hym to conquere tho lyons hercules wenyng that Iuno had counceillid hym for to goo and assaylle the lyons for his worship and prouffyt / enterprysed for to goo in to the foreste / Iuno requyred hym yf that he wente that whan he had vayn+quysshid the lyons he shold retorne vnto her / hercules promysid her that he wold so doo / After he departed fro crete / and fyrste he wente in to thebes for to see me gera / and for to make his harnoys  armes to a poynt Whan the ladyes of thebes knewe that hercules wold goo ayenst the lyons of nemee / alle they complayned his yougth  they thoughte that he shlod dye there / ffor the lions were cruell  terrible Megera aboue all other was passyng sorowfull / and required the ladies that they wolde praye euristeus that he wold kepe hercules fro going vnto so daungerous a voyage / The ladyes accomplisshid the requeste of megera. And had wende to haue broken the voyage of hercules by the meen of curisteus / but they myght in no wyse lette his purpose / For hercules answerd to euristeus  vnto the ladyes / that hit was the first emprise that he had taken in hand at requeste of ony ladie / and for as moche as the quene Iuno had made hym to do hit / he had Intenco~n for to ac|complissh hit by the playsir of tho goddes  of fortune:.
HErcules was grete in herte  in courage exalted in honour he had leuer haue dyed than to haue don a thynge werof shold folowe ony dysho+noure / whan his armes were redy he adowbyd hym / af|ter he toke leue of kyng creon. of euristeus. of amphitri+on of ^e ladyes  of the damoiselles accompanyed only of philotes whiche wold neuer leue hym / he detid fro

thebes And so spedde hym in his Iourney that he cam vnto the foreste of nemee whyche stood not ser from Arges / In approching this foreste he wente two daies with out findyng bestes or men vnto the tyme that he entryng in to the foreste fonde a pastour or a hierdman named melorcus / this herdeman was mountyd vpon a grete tree / whan that he sawe hercules entre in to the woode. he ascryed hym sayng / syre ye be ded yf ye goo ony further / retorne lightly. for the fiers lyons will ete yow. or ellis come hether vp to me vpon this tree / her|cules heeryng the wordes of molorcus loked vpon the tree. demaunded hym what he was. Alas said the pas+tour I am the moste poure man of alle other / the lyons of this foreste at theyr comyng haue eten a grete herde of bestes that I haue nourisshid here by. aboue that they haue eten alle my famyllye and meyne And they haue all deuoured saue me allone whiche haue by auenture a grete while sauyd my self vpon this tree where I ete no thyng ellis but leues and akehornes. And dare not descende and come doun for fere of thre lyons whyche ben here by / whiche wyll sone assayle yow but yf ye departe and flee ::.
THe pastour fynysshyng his wordes / ther cam leepyng out of a busshe the thre lions. and mar+ched ayenst hercules roryng and criyng And openyng her eyen by so grete felonnye. that hit semed that they wold haue thurgh percyd hercules with her fell sight. The grete lyon cam fyrst / his heer stondyng vp. he was as hyhe as an olyphant and grete after the auena~nt And his hede was twyes so grete as the hede of abool. hercules seeyng them come took his glayue

and his clobbe that philotes bare / Philotes notwith+standyng his prowesse / was so sore aferde that he wente vpon the tree vnto the herdeman. Hercules sette hys clobbe vnto a tree / and toke hys glayue faste be|twene his fystes / the lyons at the approchyng brayed in her throtes / hercules smote oon of them betwene the eyen / and bare hym doun to the erthe that he satte vpon his buttokes. The grete lyon wende than to haue spron|ge~n vpon hercules and to haue taken hym in his clawes And maad a terryble leep / whan hercules sawe and knewe his entente / he torned fro hym and smote at the thirde lyon whyche was lyght and peert / And con|duysed his glayue so right  so fermely in to his throte that he rought hym to the herte what som euer resistence that he made in bytyng the glayue / and lefte hit wyth|in his body in suche wyse that he fyll doun ded / whan the two lyons sawe her felawe so arayed / they sette her clawes on the erthe / and howlid so yrously that hit semed that the thonder had spronge out of her sto|makes / All the foreste denned therof / hercules toke his swerd. the two lyons approched of newe agayn / and ran vpon hym with her pawes and hurte hym so desme+surably / that they losed his armeurs and her nayles entryng in to his flessh / they drewe hem out alle dy|ed with his blood::.
HErcules had the herte sore troublid whan he felte his woundes that the lyons had made / he hauncid his swerd  smote on oon  other / but the grete lion had his skyn so hard / that his swerd myght no more entre therm than hit myght on a grete stedy / Thus began the batayll of the lyons  of hercules / the lityll lyon was

passyng aygre and fyers he launched hym forth ofte tymes ayenst hercules. And allewey wende to haue hurte hym with his clawes that cutted lyke a ra~sour but he launched so ofte that hit was to his euyl~ helth and ease that hercules amonge after many strokes / he made to departe from his body the ryght legge ryght nyghe by the sholdre and smote hym doun by the feet of that other lyon that laye ded ::
Whan hercules sawe that he was delyuerid / of the two euyll bestes. And that he had nomore to doo but with the grete lyon. he began to haue an hope of good fortune / he had Ioye in hym self of the ba+taylle. whyche was stronge to susteyne / ffor the grete lion gaf hym grete strokes with his pawes. And putte hym ofte tymes in parill of deth / the swerd of hercules myghte neuer entre in to the skyn of the beste hit was so hard. the lyon toke his swerd betwene his teth and his nayles that wyth grete payne he pullid and ra|chid hit from hym. ffynably whan he had longe fough+ten with his swerd. And knewe well that therby he myghte reyse no blood of the lyon. he wold assaye yf his Clubbe were to hym more prouffytable. than he toke hyt / And the fyrst strook that the lyon cam vp on hym./ he gaf hym a strook wyth his clubbe so grete on his moutthe that alle his teeth braak and fyll out to fore hym. the lyon felyng the stroke maad a grete and meruayllous howling. he haunsed his pawes and wende to haue pullyd doun hercules / but he fledd the comyng of the lyon And the lyon fill to ground of the grete fiersnes  failyng that he maad And whan her|cules sawe ^t he was fallen. he leep vpon hym /  bete

hym and helde hym wyth his handes aboute the throte so dismesurably that he brought his Iawes out of her places or out of Ioynte / and made his eyen to flee out of his heed and stranglid hym and so slewe hym:.
IN doyng this feet or werke hercules shewid a synguler hardynes  an Increable force / he estranglid wyth his handes the lyon with the skyn so hard that no glayue ne swerd myghte entre ner do ony harme / he put hym to deth by excessiue vailliance / And whan he had so doon he wente to that other that lyued yet / and all to brake and tare hym as yf hit had ben a lityll lambe / After he called philotes and the pastour or herdman that were meruaillously Ioyous and glad of so highe a victorie / and hercules fonde the manyer for to fle the lyons and take of her skynnes by the helpe of the herdman / whan they had flayn hem hit was nyght / hercules demaunded the herdeman yf ther was ony hous or loggyng ther by where he myght haue mete and drynke / the herdeman brought hym to his hous wher they fonde prouision of mete  drinke / wherwith the good man feested hercules to his power / and hym semed that he was in paradys And thus hercules passid the day  the nyght / and for+gate not to thenke on his woundes that were felle and smarted that litill or nought he slepte that nyght / this notwithstanding whan the day apperid he toke leue of the herdeman  so deted /  toke his Iorney for to goo in to crete for to shewe to the quene Iuno the thre lyon skynnys  for to thanke her of her good aduertisment.


How Iuno sente hercules in to egypte for to be slayn of the tyrant Busire and how hercules slewe the ty+rant ayenst the hoope and will of Iuno:.
IN this tyme regned in Egipte the kynge busire the sone of the quene of libie / the londe of egipte was drye and not fertile but barayne. Busirie for to remedye this callid his clerkes that helden the sc+ence of Zorastes. and axed of them what he myght doo for the helthe of his royame / They counceylled them with the goddes and had answere that they muste sa|crefye vnto hem mannes blood. Whan busire that natu+relly was euyll And that had neuer doon good herde this answer. he began to tyrannyse hym self that was a tirau~t afore. and began first on his peple. takyng and pluckyng fro the moders here lytyll children and fro the men their wyues. and fro the wiues her husbondes in brennyng  fowling the te~ples of egipte with their blood / For these homysides  slaughter the droughte sessed not. but augmentid  waxe more the clerkes de|mau~ded her gooddes the cause why they had no dewes of water ner rayne fro aboue / they answerd that they wold not haue the Iuste and true blood of egypte. but the strange blood whiche they shold take  make sacre+fise therof / the goddes by this answer wold haue in sa|crefice the blood of busire. For he was strange in vertu+ous policye  ferre fro all good. And the clerkes vnder+stood that they wold haue the blood of strangers / Bu+sire aduertised of this answer cessed to secute the blo|od of egipte /  tourned his glayue vpon the blood of strangiers / and made an edycte  statute ^t no stranger shold entre in to his cyte / but he shold be sacryfied to his goddes. and that he wold do slee all the estrangers that he might gete. By this edicte  by this dampnable custome many estrangers nobles and other were putte

in sacrefice and had their blood shedde in egipte / amonge all other oon noble man of crete of the lignage of Iuno perisshed in this Infortune by the swerd of busire / the tydynges cam in to crete and there was made for hym a grete sorowe / As this sorowe was in his most cours hercules  philotes cam vnto quene Iuno / they fond her charged with teeres of wepyng in her cyte / At that tyme there were an honderd Cytees in Crete / And the kynge Iupiter held hym no more with Iuno for many causes and resons / whan than hercules was retorned vnto this lady Iuno his stepmoder / he made to her the reuerence / after he shewid to her ^e skynnys of the lions that he had slayn / And thanked her of the hyhe auen|ture that she had ensigned hym :.
THe cursid stepmoder for the retorne of hercules augmentyng her sorowe vpon newe sorowe / reseyued and fested hercules / and made to hym fayntly the grettest chiere that she coude / hit was vpon the poynt to goo to dyner / she made hym to dyne  ete wyth her / In etyng after dyuerce deuyces of the lyons she thoughte and remembrid howe she myght make hercules for to dye / she myght no better do than to sende hym in to egypte / at that tyme she concluded in her self that she wold sende hym in to egipte yf she myght / for to so doo / she chaunged the propose of the lyons / and said to hercules / your comyng agayn in saefte is to me so recomendable that your name shall be put in perpeu+ell louyng  preisyng amonge the most worthy  beste of the world / for ye haue doon many fair enterprises  fectes / In your yong childhod ye made all the world to

wondre and meruayle of the victorye of the serpentes by yow enstranglid After ye haue maad your swerd to braundysshe in the occidente in ffrygie  uow newly in Nemee / Thauentures of these places haue gyuen to yow ryght moche honour and worshippe / wherof I haue right grete Ioye. ffor eche sone ought to be glad  enioye in the well doyng of a nother And in especiall of a noble man. And specyally whan that he putteth hym in payne to vaylliantnes. euery persone is holden and bounden to councelle hym vnto his worshipp and wele / wherfor whan hit so is that ye enuertue your self fro day to day. and seke the peryls of the see and the fals daungers of the erthe. to thende for to surmou~t alle them / I aduertyse yow that in Egypte is a tyrau~t that sacrefieth all estrangiers that come in to his contre with oute rescruyng noble man or villayn. so than me semeth yf fortune will helpe yow for to go and con|quere hym. that ye shold gete grete honour and wor|ship to yow and yowres. and helthe and prouffit to all the nacions of the world. Madame answerd her+cules I am not ner neuer shall be in all my liue of suche recomendacion as ye saye  reporte. notwithstondyng for as moche as I haue grete desyre for to doo werkes that may be to the plesyr of the peple  for their helthe and wele / I promette yow. and swere that to morn with oute ony other delaye / I shall put me in deuoyr on the way for to goo in to egypte / And I shall neuer retorne agayn in to my contree vnto the tyme that I haue seen the terau~t And yf he leye or put hand on me for to sacrefyse me / I haue entencion that he shall not do hyt wyth out smytyng of strokes / / Iuno heeryng

thenterpryse of hercules had in her herte passyng grete Ioye / that day they passid in many deuyses / hercules took the skynnes of the lyons and delyuerid to certayn werkemen for to make of them a garment in maner of armour to arme hym with all / On the morn he toke leue of his stepmoder  departed fro crete / and so longe Iourneyed on the waye with philotes with oute fyn|dyng of ony auenture wherof ony memoire is had / that on a day he cam to the gate of the cyte of menphyn that was in egypte wher the tyrant busire held his residence.
WHan hercules was comen nyghe vnto the gate he toke his clobbe that philotes bare / he lefte phi+lotes there and entrid hym self in to the cyte / he had not ben longe there / ner ferre goon but busire whiche was aduertysed of his comyng by hys espyes cam a+gaynst hym with many of his complices. and with oute spekyng of ony word ran vpon hym / hercules was all well assured / he knewe the tyrant by his mayn|tien and by the syngnes that was told hym / he lyfte vp his clobbe whan he sawe hym come / and as the tyrant wold haue smyten hym with his glayue with oute ony word spekyng. he smote the tirant with his clobbe vpon the ryght syde so desmesurably that not only he bare hym vnto the erthe / but also he brake all his ryb|bys of his body / And so arayed hym that he myght neuer releue hym self after / The Egipciens seeyng busire so ouerthrowen / some ran to hym for to releue hym whiche they coude not doo for he was to heuy / And the other assailled hercules. Than was the cyte all ameuyd Hercules right Ioyous that he had so beten the tyrant

began to lerne the egypciens to knowe his clobbe / he slewe many of them. And the remenant he maad to flee. his strookes were so heuy and peysau~t that the complices of busire that were acustomed to shede man+nes blood. had their blood shedd sparkled abrood And coude not ner myght not remedie their meschance that was so grete / that hercules fillyd all the place of dede bodies. And after longe bataylle he fonde hym silf allone. ffor their was none so hardy that durste be seen to fore hym. The peples and the comonte of the egipcy|ens gaf no charge of the rescous of their kynge / whan they sawe hym beten. Alle they hated hym and sawe the bataylle fro ferre by grete rowtes / whan than her|cules had so moche doon. that he fonde no man to fight with hym. he sette doun his clubbe. And adressid hym vnto a grete companye of egipcyens that stood there And assured them that he wold no thynge don vnto them. and axed what peple they were that had assail+led hym. They answerd hym knelyng on their knees that they were manslears hangemen and peple of vi|cious and euyll lyuyng. And that their kynge that he had first beten doun was the worste of hem alle. And hadd purposed to haue put hym to deth as a strangier for to make sacrefice vnto the goddes. And they pra|yd hym. that he wold sacrefyce their sayd kynge / Hercules graunted their petycion and accorded hyt vnto the peple. And anone toke this cursid tyrau~t bu+sire that lyued yet and bare hym vpon his sholdre vnto the temple whiche the egypciens shewid to hym the fals tyrau~t cryed after helpe terribly. but his crye auayled hym not. The egypciens cryed vnto hercules

sacrefice sacrefice hym / / whan hercules cam in to the temple he sacrefised hym after ^t he had shewid to hym hys cursid euyll lyf / And than whan the fyre was put vnto the sacrefice / hit began to rayne / and the grete droughte began to faile / wherof the egypciens were so Ioyous that none coude specifye / they songe louynges  preisinges to hercules they brought hym vnto the palais and philotes also / whiche had all seen and they ordey+ned constituted hercules kynge ouer them / whiche he refused / but he ordeyned Iuges for to gouerne them Af+ter he departed  retorned vnto the quene Iuno. whiche had grete sorowe / And to kynge Creon whiche had grete Ioye for to here told recounted his prowesses:


How hercules espowsed megera and how he was made kynghte in thebes :.
IN suche wise as the yonge wyne by the labour and besynes of the labourer groweth in heighte  his bowes spred a brood full of fruyte / semblably hercules by ver+tue labouryng in hym grewe in verdur of well doyng and in fruyt of noblesse / his werkes his bowes hys braunches than began to spreed a brood  to mounte and ryse fro royame to roiame / the secrete conspiraco~ns of Iuno and her cursed enuyes myght not hurte ner my+nusshe the vertue of hercules / the more that she wenyd to abasshe and hurte hym. the more she was cause of his enhauncement / yf he were puyssant and stronge of body / he was yet more stronge of vertue for hit was sette in hym as the precyous stone is in gold / and as the odour is in the flour / And as the raye or sonne beme is in the sonne / he was belouyd of kynges. of prynces. of ladyes. of damoyselles. of nobles and

of villaines. en especial~ megera the doughter of kyngt Creon louyd hym / Certes she was not deceyued. ffor hercules loued her also. And was neuer houre but he thoughte on her. how well they durst none of them speke to other of this matyere. they were ashamed to dyscouure that / whereof they had hope to haue honour and worship. they behelde eche other / And ofte they bewayled and complayned to them self. And desy|red the day that they myghte take eche other by mary+age. And so moche they wisshed after that day that at laste hit cam. For on a morow tyde as hercules was goon vnto the wood for to take a wylde beste / he re|membrid hym of his lady. And began to speke and saie to hym sylf softely. Shall I be alleway in payne Shall myn herte neuer be eased but alway languyss|hyng in loue / I see oon and other In grete Ioye wyth her loues and ladyes. And I wote neuer how to come to the poynte of oon only that I haue chosen aboue all other / And how to achyeue my purpoos I wote ne|uer how to begynne. I dar not speke to her / ner I haue not yet requyred her of loue. ner I haue not assayed yf she wold condescende. Shall I speke to her / I wote ne+uer / yf I speke to her and than she reffuse me / I shall fall in dispayre. I shall dye for sorowe of melancolye and desplaisir I shall neuer dar come after in noble as|semblee a foot. Alas what payne. all considerid oon ty|me must come that I speke to her. yf all her frendes were of oon acorde for to gyue her to me in maryage. And she were not contente ner pleased alle were lost / the moste Ieopardye is to haue her good will and grace ffor with out her grace I may nought doo. Than hyt

is necessite I seke and requyre yf I may haue her good wyll / syn hit so is / ffor yf I slepe thus and speke not I shall neuer achyue ner come to my pourpoos:.
HErcules ferme in his purpoos esprised and en+flamed of grete desire departid from the wood and abandoned the wild beste and gaf hit ouer for to come vnto megera / thenkyng how and by what wordes he myght come and shewe to her / that laye on his herte / he wente so ferre that he cam vnto the gardyn of the palays where she was with many ladyes and damoyselles / he made to them the reuerences / After he espied the tyme that he myght speke to megera. And he waxe so pensyf that hit was meruaille / he entremeted no thynge to deuyse with the ladyes / but he drewe hym a parte in to the gardyn / whan the ladyes beheld hym so pensyf / dyuerce of them cam to hym  talked with hym. to put hym from his thoughtes  pensyfnes. but they coude not. and at laste megera cam to hym. Assone as hercules sawe her come to hym he began to syghe  cam agayn her / and she sayd to hym / hercules why are ye so pensif / put away fro you suche melancolye / And telle me of your tydynges I pray yow / lady answerd hercules I thanke yow of your good visitacyon. And syn hit pleseth yow to here of my tidynges  to knowe I shall saie to yow a paart / first I aduertyse you that the cause that I am brought  put in the abisme or swo+lowe of pensifnes  sighes that is this day comen vnto me / is by your contemplacion / ffor as I wente to the wood to hunte the remembrance of your ryght noble beaute contynuelly beyng in myn ymaginaco~n cam in to me /  made me entre in to a secret debate that is to wete

yf I shold allewey lyue vnguerdoned and vnrewar+ded of loue. And also yf I durst saie to yow that I haue sette myn herte and loue in yow. Madame this debate was grete / but in the ende I concluded to come vnto yow for to knowe the conclucion of my fortune whe|ther hit be deth or lyf / In this deliberacion thynkyng how I myght spede vnto yow. I am in this poynt and partie / where your comyng hath put me out of a right grete thought and pensifnes / ffor I wiste neuer how to come to the poynte for to speke with yow apart. as I may now do. than for to enploye the tyme / I saye to yow for trouthe. that syn the tyme of my olympiade. I haue desired yow nyght and day. And at that tyme putte myn herte in your seruytude. concludyng to loue yow pardurably. Madame I knowe and woot well that I haue enterprysed thynge that I am Indygne and not worthy / this notwithstandyng I abide your mercy and requyre yow that hit please yow to resseyue me in to your grace in suche wyse that shortly I may see the day of our maryage ::
WHan megera vnderstood the wordes of her loue hercules she was in her herte reioysed wyth grete solaas / notwithstandyng she was asha+med And all shamefaste she answerd / Helas hercu|les by what fortune fynde I me in the grace of so gentil a man as ye be / your excessiue prowes your gloryous labours your resple~dant vertues ben so moche of value that ye ar worthy to haue to wyf the flour of ladyes and the choys. with these wordes many damoyselles cam there vnto them / that causyd them to sece theyr deuyses of loue. And sayden to megera that hyt was

tyme to withdrawe her for to go dyne Megera sorow+ful~ of so hasty departyng /  that she had no more space to deuyse with her loue / ne myghte not achieue her pur|poos / by constraynt she toke leue of hercules  wente in to the halle / all refeccioned of loue / And hercules abood in the gardin all glad and Ioious of the swete answer that he had receyuyd :.
WHan the ladyes than had lefte hercules in the gardyn / also sone as they were goon / hercules assemblid Euristus  amphitrion / and said to hem that he had grete desire and will to be maried / and prayed them that they wold goo to kynge Creon to knowe yf he wold giue hym his doughter megera. They spake to kyng creon of this mariage / the kyng herd hem speke ryght gladly / ffor the mater plesyd hym / And answerd that he myght nowher better bestowe hys doughter / than to the moste noble man of the world her+cules / whom he louyd as his owen sone / whiche was so vailliant  so noble  had no felawe like vnto hym and that he was content to gyue to hym his doughter And with her all that he wold demande Euristus and amphitrion thanked the kyng of his courtoys answer Megra  hercules were sente fore / the kynge made hem to trouthplyte eche other with grete Ioye of bothe par+ties / After this in processe of tyme the day of the espow sailles  mariage was halowed with glorie. tryumphe honour  Ioye / what shal I saie they laye to gider with out more auenture / and liuyd to gyder right honestly:.
Anone after ^e solempnyte of this mariage. hercu+les cam to kyng creon  praied hym ^t he wold adubbe  make hym knyght / for as moche as

they of the royame of Ioonie were comen vnto hym.  had chosen hym for to be kynge of their Cyte for his good renomee. The kyng Creon Ioyous of that / that he was chosen for to be kynge of ycome. answerd that he wold accomplissh his desire. but he wold that this shold be don at a certayn day assigned / Saiyng that than he wold make a right noble feste where men shold Iouste and tornoye. And that he wold do come theder alle the kynges and the prynces of Grece / hercu|les Accorded and agreed the counceyll of the kynge And than the kynge sente his messagers vnto all the kynges of grece. And praied hem to be at the chiualerie and dubbyng knyght of a noble man / that shall hold a paas at a day named and sette for to furnysshe all them that shall come to the Ioustes. The Reno~me of this forsayd ffeste was a none borne and knowen vnto alle the regnes of grece / The apparayll and orde|nance was grete in thebes Oon  other disposed them for to be there. The tyme passed and the day cam / many a kynge and knyght were comen at that tyme to the|bes. Theseus and Iason the sone of kynge Eson were there amonge all other / the kynges maad grete bruyt and grete pompes aboute ten of the clocke to fore none the kyng Creon wente in to the place that was ordey+ned and arayed for the Ioustes. at a corner in the same place was a Tente / In this tente was Hercules alle alone. that same tyme the ladyes and damoyselles wente and mounted vpon the scaffoldes / the Iousters cam in to the place. No man knewe ne wiste not who was this newe knyght. what shall I saye whan the kynge Creon sawe that the knyghtes were comen

in on all sydes and that the ladyes were gon vp on the skaffoldes / he sente for hercules  made hym knyght af|ter their statutes / and than hercules mountyd vpon his hors / toke his spere  hys shelde / And escryed them that were ther to thende that eche man shold do his de|uoyr / And than oon  other that desired to haue wor|shipp toke her speres and ran ayenste hercules / And be|gan a Ioustes that was right hoote  sharpe / Their spe+res were stronge and brake not lightly / but they mette often tymes / and some ouerthrowen  smyten doun of her horses / They that myght not Iuste ayenst hercules Assayed eche other / lyke to lyke / Iason and theseus Iusted ofte tymes ayenst hercules / and pirothus sone of kynge yxion in lyke wyse / Alle they that I name mayntened them right vailliantly / Notwithstandyng aboue all other hercules abood all men / and no man myght abide his strokes but he bare hem all doun / reser|uyd Iason / / whiche encountrid hym dyuerce tymes  gaf hym many grete strokes / hercules bare doun theseus to the erthe and pirothus  well fyfty stronge knygh|tes / he dide so moche that no man abode on the place but Iason  he And than he lefte and sessed the Ioustes for the vailliance that hercules fonde in Iason / and euer af+ter he had a specyall loue to hym / / and toke acqueyn|tance of hym and fested hym  made hym grete chere::.
AT the ende of this Ioustes / knyghtes ladyes  damoyselles wente vnto the pallays / there was hercules maad kynge of yconye / the feste was grete and riche more than I can reherce / the stran|gers were gretly fested and hyghly thanked in co|mune / what shall I make longe processe / whan all the

feste was passid with honour and glorye of hercules And was no more to do wherof ony memoire is for to saye / Pirothus praid all them that were there to be at his wedding in thessalonyque at a certayn day named eche man promysid hym to go theder and be ther ate / Euery man toke leue of hercules whan tyme was come of departing. And eche man retorned in to his con+tre and place / And they coude not ynowhe meruail of the glorye habou~dynge  apperynge to habonde. growe flourysshe.  fructefie in hercules / whiche was so cour|toys and humble. And that for the grace that he had in temporall honour and worship. he was so vertu|ous that he was not the more prowde ne enhaunsid hym self / but the more meked and lowed hym self::.


How the centaures rauysshed ypodame at the wed+dyng of Pirothus. And how Hercules recouerd her agayn and vaynquysshid in batayll the centaures:.
For to contynue our matiere / than whan hercules sawe approche the day of the weddyng of pi|rothus. he disposed hym to go theder / by space of tyme he wente forth on his way and toke philotes with hym / And at alauenture toke with hym his Ar|mures of the skyn of the lyon. whan megera sawe hym departe. she was sore troublid for his departyng /  for that / ^t he toke his armours with hym / for she thought yf hercules had herd speke of ony aue~ture he wold goo theder  put hym in deuoir to assaie hym self agayn hit with grete sighes she loked after hym as ferre as she myghte / praiyng to the goddes that they wold bringe hym shortly agayn / hercules  phylotes wente forth in to the contrey also moche as they myght~ they exploited

so her Iourney that they cam in to thessalonycque / wher they were resseyued wyth grete Ioye of pirothus and of his ffrendes / they fonde there a right grete assemble of noble men. Ladyes and damoyselles / Theseus and Iason were there / the frendes of Iason wolde that Ia|son sholde be maad kynght / And for to doo that / / they presented hym to hercules whiche gaf hym the ordre of knyghthode / And hercules sayd that he had seen in hym a good begynnyng of a noble man / and yf he may lyue he shall attayne ones to thynges right hyhe and noble Amonge other thynges the day of weddyng cam. the cyte was all full of noblesse / the centaures were there / they were an honderd geantes armed that ran as the wynde / whiche the kynge yxion had ordeyned in thes saylle / of whome some dwellyd in mollose and the other in Aphyte a cyte of Epire / wherof was quene ypodame the ladye and Bryde of the weddyng / ther were many kynges and prynces of whom I haue not the names. The quene ypodame and pirothus were weddyd to gyder after their lawe / Whan the tyme of dyner was come they sette the ladye in the halle / where was maad a generall ffeste / In this ffeste alle the worlde was amply seruyd of all manyer good wy|nes and good metes / In especyall the Centaures made passyng good chyere / And dronke so moche of the stronge wynes / that the pryncypall capitayn of all named Euricus and some of the other had wordes to gyder and troublid the ffeste / In this trouble they foughte to geder / and caste eche on other pottes. pla|ters. wynes and metes so terrybly that many of them were hurte and ded. Than anone was the halle full of

noyse Euricus and fyfty of his geautes yssued out of the pres and wente to feche her harnois and armours whan they were armed they entrid in to the halle and not content of the trouble that they had maad how well that hercules and the other enteudyd to appese them that slewe eche other / they toke the quene ypo|dame and bare her out and rauysshid her and fledd away with her / whan the ladies sawe this grete out|rage / they escried all affraied / thaffraie was so grete that hercules. Iason. pirothus  theseus ran vnto them And whan they knewe that the centaures had rauys|shid the lady / at fewe wordes they wente and armed them anone ::.
HErcules dyd on the skyn of the lyon and toke his swerd his bowe  his arowes. And than wente after the geantes wyth oute abidyng of ony other companye or persone. the geantes were withdrawen vnder a tree / and there they renged them in bataylle. as they that wiste well and seurly that the firste that shold come to them shold be hercules. they hatyd hercules secretly. And they had envie of his glo|rye. they swore all the deth of hercules / and than whan they were in these termes and deuyses / Euricus aspied fro ferre hercules. and shewid hym to his felawshipp hercules was all alone and cam not a paas softely as a man. but he cam rennyng as lightly and also swyf|tely as the herte rennyth in the valeye And semed that he flawe in the ayer / the swyftenes of hercules ne abas+shyd ne affrayed not the centaures. they were well foure score. And they were alle of grete corages They toke than their glayues. polhaes. swerdes and other

habyllemens of warre / And some of the strengest of them wente ayenst hercules / on that other syde assone as hercules approchid so nyghe as he myght shote at them / he bente his bowe and with an arowe he smote a centaure named gryneus in suche wyse that the arowe perced the heed entryng by the visage and nay+led  attachid his hede vnto a tree that stoode by hynde hym. with the second arowe he smote another geant named petreus in the breste thurgh his armour that hit wente thurgh his body / with the thirde he hurte doril|las a tarrible geant  nailed his hand vnto his visage ffor whan the geant sawe the strook come he held vp his hand to fore his visage /  the arowe entrid with so grete myght as afore is sayd and made the hand to be attachid to his visage of whyche strook he was ded / he shotte many moo arowes than also longe as he had ony / and he shotte none. but yf he hurt or slewe oon of the geantes / whan his shotte was failled / the gean|tes strongly esmeuyd of that they had seen her felawes dye by the shotte of hercules / they escried vpon hercules and they enuyronned hym on all sydes / Cilarus. pheo|tones. nessus / myncus. astilo lodeum. and piseon. were the firste that smote vpon hercules with her glayues / hercules toke his swerd and cam agayn pheotones that had a grete axe so grete that hyt was a mannys bur|thon / Pheotones anone lyfte vp hys grete axe and wende to haue smyten a myghty strook vpon hercules But hercules that knewe ynowhe of the warre tor|ned hym from the strooke / And so the grete axe fylle doun to the ground / And than sodenly hercules caught that grete axe and plukkyd hit out of his handes / and

forthwith gaf hym a strook with all so grete that he smote of his right arme with the sholdre ::.
SVche was the begynnyng of the batayll of hercules  of the centaures. Cilarus smote than hercules behynde with all his myght / piseon and ledeum smote hym also all at oon tyme. notwith|stondyng hercules astnyed not ones therfore / but in retornyng to cilarus he gaf hym a strook with the axe so fermli on his helme that hit entrid in to his body that he confou~ded the geant to the erthe. And so he seruyd in lyke wyse piseon and ledeum. Iason and theseus put them than in the batayll. And well prouved her yougthe / at theyr comyng for to gyue them herte and courage. hercules threstid in to the grettest pres of the geants And so wroughte with the axe. that they cur|syd phiotones that had brought hit theder And alle them that had forged hit. In betyng and smytyng doun to fore them. hercules began than to seke ypodame. he fonde her alle be wepte right beside and nyhe Euricus / Than he spake to euricus and said to hym. thou euyll gloton thou haste this day trowblid the feste and the lady of my ffrende pirothus. And now anone I shall trowble thyn esperite. with this word he descharged the axe and smote with all euricus in suche wise on the heed that he fill doun dede / vnto the grete enbasse|ment of the other geantes. ffor in beholdyng the Axe dyed wyth the blood of curicus their capitayne. they were all abasshid. Than began hercules to smyte more and more vpon the geantes / their was none than so seure. but he was aferde ner none so ferme but he e

began to hyde hym and tremble for fere / hys strookes were not sustenable / he put his enemyes out of araye / and vnto flyght / ffinably wyth the helpe of Iason of theseus  of pirothus that were meruaillousli vaillant they vaynquysshid chassed them vnto a ryuer / wher that .xij. of them sauved them in passyng and swym+myng ouer / And all the remenant of them were perse|cuted vnto the deth / reseruyd lyncus that hercules helde prisonner / for as moche as at the discomfiture. he praid hym of mercy. and yelded hym vnto hym / Thus were the centaures destroied more by the strength  hand of hercules than by ony other / whan hercules had so doon that ther were no moo of the centaures vpon the place / he and hys felawys retorned vnto ypodame / And brought her agayn vnto the cyte with grete tryumphe / what shall I saye the ladyes recourid Ioye by the reco|urance of ypodame / and recomenced and began agayn the feste that dured after eyght dayes ryght grete and sumptuous ::.


How pluto rauysshid proserpyne / And how Or|pheus wente for her in to hell / and how the quene Se|ra cam vnto the weddyng of pirothus and how these+us and pyrothus foughte wyth Cerberus porter of the sayd helle ::.
IN this tyme that is to wete a lityll to fore the weddyng of pirothus as pluto the kynge of molose sone of Saturne and broder of Iupi|ter saylyd and wente by See sechyng hys aduen|tures / And so longe he sayled that he arryuyd in Se+cyle / And that he fonde there nyghe by the Ryuage a

right grete assamblee of Secyliens that halowed the ffeste of her goddes. whan pluto sawe this feste. he dide do arme .xx. of his felawshypp vnder their robes and garnementes. And wente in this maner for to see the feste / for to wete yf he myght fynde ony proie / this plu+to was the grettest theef and the moste lecherous man of all the world And had with hym a geant named Cerberus. ynowh ylyke vnto pluto of condico~ns and of corage / but he was moche more strenger and puys|sant of body. Alle the other were grete as geantes. and had lerned to do no thyng ellis but for to do harme and euyll And coude none other wise doo / Whan than the se+cilyens sawe pluto come and his felawes they suppo|sed that hit had be some of their neighebours that cam for to see their playes and esbatementis for as moche as they cam clothed in theyr garnementis and sawe none of their armour ne harnoys And they enforced them to synge  dau~ce / but certes their songes and their daunces were not pardurable ner dured not longe. for in comyng vnto them there. The kynge pluto caste his eyen a side and sawe there the quene of that marches that beheld the feste. And by her / her doughter that made a Chapelet of flowres. The moder was named Sera And the doughter was callid Proserpyne and was maried vnto a noble man named Orpheus that sat beside her and played on the harpe / This proserpyne was passyng mervaillous fayr. Anone as pluto had seen her he desired and coueyted her And aduertised his folke secretly of her / And after cam nyhe and by her And felte hym self so surmounted in coueytise of her beaulte. that he sette handes on her And leyde her on his

back and bare her a way::.
WHan Orpheus and Sera sawe proserpine so rauisshid they escried pietously  anguisshous+ly vpon pluto / with this crye the cecyliens lefte their feste and ran after pluto in grete nombre men  wo+men hoping to haue rescowed proserpine / but whan cer+berus and his complices sawe the murmure / they drewe out their swerdes  shewid their armes and smote vp|on them that approchid them and sleyng them largely / recuyellid and wente vnto the porte maulgre the cecy|liens  orpheus / they guyded pluto in to his shippe and after they entrid / and than disancrid caried a way proserpine / The cecyliens were than dispourueid of ar+mes / they coude not withstand the rauisshement of pro+serpine / At the departyng fro the porte was made the moste aspre doill  sorowe that coude be / Proserpyne wepte sore on that on side  pietously / and cryed right hyhe and lowde / Sera on that other side with the cecy|liens made no skarcete of teeres / and certes orpheus fay+lid not to furnysshe his teeres with parfound sighes / for he loued proserpine / And she loued hym also / At the departyng their hertes were put in a hard  greuous distresse / so harde anguyssh that proserpine fill doun a swone / and orpheus was so rauisshid with anger / that he retorned in to his palais whan he had loste the sight of proserpine / And helde hym cloos in hys chambre with out speche two dayes:.
AT the end of two dayes sera cam to visite orpheus that wold nether ete ne drynke / and sayd to hym that she knewe wel~ the rauisshour of her doughteer /  that hit was pluto ^e kyng of melose /  that he dweld

ma partie of thessaylle in a lowe and basse Cite that was callid helle for as moche as this yle. Kynge plu+to and his complices dide so moche harme and euyll. that they were compared and lykened vnto deuylles and their Cite was named Helle. Whan Orpheus vn+derstode that proserpyne was in helle he toke a lityll hope in hym self and ete  dranke. and made a vowe that he wold neuer reste in place vnto the tyme that he had ben in helle for to see proserpine. After that he had eten he sente for his maronners And bad hem to make redy a shipp. whan the shypp was garnysshid of all that hit behouyd. after the leue and congie taken of the quene sera. In habite disguysed he entrid allone in to his shipp with his harpe. And maad his mariners to saile forth on the see. in suche wise that they arryued at oon of the poortes of thessayll. Orpheus wente there a lande.  after comanded his maryners that they shold abide hym in the same place. vnto a certayn tyme that he named. After he departed and wente fro contre to contre so longe for to spede his mater / that he came to the yate of helle whiche Cerberus kepte. And there he began to plaie on his harpe right sweth  melodiously.
WHan Cerberus herde the sowne of the harpe. he lyfte vp his hede on hyghe. and cam out of the gate. for to knowe who was he that pleyed so melodiously And by the sonne of the harpe he fond Orpheus. And thynkynge that pluto wold gladly here hym. for to reioye proserpyne that allewey wepte he maad hym entre in to the Cyte. And brought hym before the kynge. Orpheus than began to playe agayn

on his harpe / whan the kynge pluto had herd hym / he toke therin grete pleasir / and so dide all they that were ther by hym / Than pluto sente for to seke proserpyne / whan she was come  herde hym playe with his harpe by his plaie she knewe wel~ that hit was her husbond she was sore abasshid / and yf she had sore wepte to fore / she wepte moche more after / Pluto was sory for the sorowe that proserpine made / and sayd to or|pheus / that yf he coude so playe with his harpe that the lady shold sesse of her wepyng / that he wold gyue hym that he wold axe of hym Orpheus promysid and made hym seure that he wold doo hit / And pluto sware to hym that he wold holde  kepe his promesse yf he so dide / And than orpheus setted entuned his harpe and playd dyuerce songes /  so swetely / that the Infer|nal~ cerberus  many fill a slepe / and also proserpine by the mene of certayn tokenes and signes that orpheus maad with his eyen / made her to cesse of her wepyng:
WHan pluto sawe proserpine so cessing her we+pyng he was passing Ioyous / he awoke than cerberus  the other that slepte / After he spack to orpheus and sayd to hym that he had so well har|ped that no man coude do better / And that he wold that he shold demande som thynge / And he wold gyue hit hym with out ony faute. Orpheus heeryng the wor+des of pluto / had a grete debate in hym self for to knowe what thynge he myght beste demande / In the ende he sayd to hym / Syre I am orpheus the husbond of this ladye / that for her loue I haue enterprysed to come hether in thys aduenture / I praye and requyre yow

that ye will gyue and rendre her agayn to me. that I may brynge her agayn vnto her moder that dyeth for sorowe / whan pluto had herd the requeste that orphe|us had made / he was passing angry / and also esmaied of the hardynesse that orpheus had don. how be hit / he answerd to hym. Orpheus ye haue demanded of me proserpyne / she is the lady that I moost loue of all the world / Neuertheles for to accomplissh the promesse that I haue maad to yow / I gyue her vnto yow by con+dicyon that ye brynge her out of this Cyte with oute lokyng or beholdyng after or behynde yow And yf hit happen that ye ones loke behynd yow ye shall lose her Of this answer orpheus was contente. And hym se|med ^t his wyf was as good as recoured or wonne he and proserpyne passid ouer that nyght in good hope / whan the morn was comen / pluto delyuerid pro+serpyne vnto orpheus by the condicion afore reherced orpheus and proserpyne toke leue of kynge pluto and thanked hym / syn they wente on their waie / but he had not goon half way to the gate. whan orpheus pryuely loked behinde hym. for to see yf ony man folowed hym And than he fonde at his heles Cerberus that toke pro+serpyne away fro hym And yelded and delyuerid her agayn vnto the kynge :..
ORpheus seeyng that by his vnhappynes had lost his wif / began to curse the day that he was born. And cam after and folowed proserpyne and began agayn to harpe and to offre grete yestes for to recoure her agayn / but hit was said to hym for con|clusion that he shold neuer haue her agayn. And also that yf he had vsyd the feet of Armes as he had the

strenges of the harpe / he shold by armes haue dyed / with this conclusion orpheus departed fro hell full of sorowe  anguyssh. and retorned in to secylle vnto the quene sera tellyng to her his auenture. The quene a cer|taynd that her doughter was in hell / as she that was aduertised that in thesayll shold be halowed the feste of the weddyng of pirothus / and that ther were many knyghtes of grete name / she wente to the see / and cam so apoynt to thessalonycque that the feste yet endured In approching the cyte. on an after none as pirothus and theseus were in the feldes / they mette her / Her exersite was grete / Theseus  pirothus salewed her / And she salewed greted them agayn / / and after axed them thestate of the feste of the weddyng / They told and re|counted her all. After she demanded of them yf ther were there no knyghtes of grete name and hyhe enterpryses whan they vnderstode that she enqueryd so ferre / they wold wete what she was and demanded her name I am sayd thys lady seres of cecyll / Than spake theseus and said madame ye be well come / ffor what occasion demande ye yf in the feste ben ony knyghtes of entreprise I can well saie to yow that ther be truly / but not with|stondyng that I so aduertyse yow / I pray yow and also requyre that ye telle and aduertyse vnto vs the cause why ye haue so demaunded :.
Syre said the lady syn hit pleasith yow tenquere of myn estate so ferre / knowe ye for certayn that I haue maad to yow my demaunde for as moche as pluto the kynge of helle hath rauysshyd my doughter Proserpyne by whyche I am hurte

vnto the deth. And so I wold fayn fynde som knyght that by his courtosie wold emploie hym for to gete her agayn And yelde her to me. And for to assaylle the cursid tyrau~t. whiche I pray the goddes may be damp+ned and confounded pardurably for his demerites wherfore I pray yow yf ye knowe ony that to me be propice that hit plese yow for charite for to adresse me vnto hym. Madame Answerd Theseus be ye no more besy to fynde suche a knyght as ye seke. ffor in the fa|uour of all ladies I shal~ be your knight in this werke And promyse yow vpon myn honour / / that I shall transporte me in to helle. And the kynge pluto shall neuer haue peas with me vnto the tyme that he hath restored your doughter :
WHan pirothus herde thenterprise of these he be+gan to breke his wordes and said to hym. My broder what thynke ye to doo. whan ye enter|pryse for to goo in to helle. ye knowe not the termes ner the situacion of that place. helle stondeth behynde the In+ner see betwene montaignes and roches so highe that the Citezeyns that dwelle ther in ben in contynuell vm+bre and shadowe. And the Entre is so stronge that hit is Inpossible to come with in the Cyte. but yf the por|ter consente. for here to fore tyme many haue goon the|der that ben there lefte and bleuen / ther goth no man theder that euer cometh agayn. hit is right an helle And eche man nameth hit helle as well for the situacion therof in so derke and tenebrous a place / as for the In|humanyte and terrybilite of the habitans and Indwel+lars. that allway wacche and wayte to do euyll and desplaysir to alle the world / Theseus answerd vnto

pirothus and sayd / ther is no thynge Inpossible vnto a vailliant herte / The kyng pluto is cruell and stronge his folke and peple tyrannyse / His cyte standeth in a contre enuyronned with mortall parelles / Notwith|stondyng certes the dowtance and fere of these thinges shall neuer rebowte ne withdrawe my corage / but that I shall do my deuoyr to achyeue this emprynse / And shall dye in the payne / or shall haue reproche / shew|yng to all maner knyghtes / that a man to kepe his ho|nour and worshippe ought not to doubte ony paryll what that euer hit bee / :.
WHan pyrothus had herd the noble answer of theseus / he allowed hit gretely and said to hym that his wordes were to hym right agreable  so acceptable / that he wold hold hym companye in thys aduenture / The quene Seres thanked the two-knyghtes / they brought her into the Cyte and in to the palays / She was there resseyued and feested as hit apperteyned / thauenture of her doughter was told / And thenterpryse of the two kynghtes / By the re|porte of this aduenture and of thenterprise that theseus and pyrothus had maad / Alle the ffeeste was trow|blyd a gayn on a newe / Amonge alle other ypodame consyderyng that her husbond that was so newely maryed vnto her wold goo in this paryllous voyage of helle / / her herte began to gyue oute wepyng of teeres / And myghte gyue no soulas ne comfort vnto her eyen what shall I saye the ffeste ended in grete sorowe / - Iason and hercules wold gladly haue goon with the|seus  pirothus /  spake therof to them / but they wolde

not suffre hem / Than departed hercules and entrid in to a shippe as he wold haue goon in to his contrey. Eche man in lyke wyse departed. And also theseus and pi|rothus toke theyr way for to goo vnto helle / /  than aboute their departing wherof hercules was aduertised hercules made for to conduyte his shippe vnto the mar|ches of hell / And ther descended a lande allone. Con|cludyng in hym self that he wold goo after pirothus and theseus his loyall and true felawe. And betoke to philotes the charge for to brynge lyncus vnto thebes And for to put hym there in prison vnto his retornyng and comyng agayn. after he departed / And philotes shipped in the see. where he had a dolorous auenture. as hit shall be said here after / but at this tyme I muste ta|rye of that mater / And shall recounte of hercules how he wente in to hell ::.


How hercules fonde pirothus ded at the yates of hell And Theseus in daunger and how hercules vayn+quysshid Cerberus. And how he conquerd proser+pyne vpon pluto :..
IN this paas hit ought be sayd that whan the|seus and pirothus were departed fro thessalo+nyque for to goo and assaie yf they myght re|coure the fayr proserpyne they did so moche that by their diligence in shorte tyme they aryued in the valeye where was proserpyne / In the valeye full of synnes and cursidnesse. Pirothus that knewe the contre fond the straite way that wente to the cyte / and entrid first therin / this way was so strayte that ther myght no man but oon allone goon neyther on the right syde ney|ther on the lyfte side / the roches were so highe. that no

man myght goo on nether syde / / whan they had pas|sed this waye they fonde a rooche entaillid and cutte in to steyers or grees maad and hewyd out with chy|selles / And than they sawe benethe lowe Helle as a cyte stronge enuyronned with waters that fyll doun Inpetueusly and ferd full fro the roches and maad a terryble noyse and rooryng / ffor they fyll from right hyhe in to a lowe swalowe or abysme in the erthe / This Cyte was all enclosid with montaygnes / ffor to speke properly hit was a right helle / And hit had no more but oon entre and oon yate / ffor than to come doun to the yate pirothus and theseus descended doun by the degrees made in the roche / Than in the descendyng sodaynly they sawe sprynge fro the gate a grete geant oute of mesure / that had an heed meruayllously mys|schapen / fyers blacke and owggly / He had his nose hyhe and wyde / hys Chyn longe / his teth grete as hors teth / His eyen grete lyke vnto an oxe / His eeres hangyng lyke as an hound / His sholdres large and brood. Hys bely swollyn and grete bolned. his legges and his Thyes were passyng strongly boned and myghty. Thys terryble geant was Cerberus. wherof is touched and rehersed aboue. The poettes named hym the hound with thre heedes. Concideryng his right greuous and vnhappy lyuyng whiche is replyed and lyckende vnto thre synguler vyces. That is to wete to pryde. to auaryce. And to luxurye or lecherye. by pryde he gloryfied hym self and enhaunced hym aboue all the men of the worlde for hys force and strengthe ffor he was so stronge that no man myght wystande hym: By Auaryce and Couetyse he had an apetyte

Insacyable for to gadre to gyder tresours. And toke and bare away all that he myghte haue or coude fynde By luxurye ther was noman lyuyng of more fowle lyff than he was. ffor he had neuer doon other thyng in alle his lif than for to fowle and rauisshe women and maydens. ladyes  damoyselles And so by good right the poettes named hym an hownd with thre hee+des. For he was fowle as an hound that lyueth in mul+tiplicaco~n of synnes and dooth his felicyte / O greuous felicyte / whan theseus and pirothus had espyed this enemye cerberus come vnto them alle armed makyng the whele in marchyng prowdly vnto them. Pirothus said to theseus. My broder behold what enemye this is / he that putteth hym in suche parillis for the loue of ladyes setteth but lityll of his lyf / vs behoueth now to lyue or dye. late vs now achieue Ioyously our em|prise To thende that ye thynke not that I had leuyr dye than to haue reproche I shall be the firste that shall be|gynne the bataylle. theseus had no space ne leyzer to answer / ffor Cerberus cam to them and ascryed hem sayng. what seeken these felaws in hell / we come said theseus for to seche proserpme. whom pluto hath taken away fro the quene Sera. we shall neuer retorne in to our contrey. vnto the tyme we brynge her with vs Truly answerd Cerberus whan ye shall retorne in to your contre / ye shall rendre  yelde agayn proserpyne but I shall deffende yow the retourn. And this day I shall presente vnto proserpme my glayue died in your blood. And here ye shall be buryed. ye shall neuer see proserpme. ner come more nerrer than ye be now / with these wordes he enhaunsed his glayue And gaf so

grete a strook to theseus vpon his shelde that he bare away therof an half quarter :.
WHan pirothus sawe his felawe smeten he toke his glayue and smote cerberus on that oon syde Theseus smote hym on that other side / and they gaf hym two right grete strokes so grete that they made cerberus to be esmeuyd so sore that he began the bataill so dismesurably that he all to frusshid and brake their sheldes  their harnoys / and also made his glayue to be died with their noble blood as he had afore said / The bataill was hard mortall at the begynnyng / theseus and pirothus resseyuyd many woundes / by aspre stro+kes / their armes were all to hewen  broken / The ba|tayll endured longe / And pirothus dide right well in auaunsyng hym self / / but cerberus smote vpon hym so dismesurably / that after many woundes gyuen to hym he all to braste hys helme and cleuyd his heed in two peces vnto the stomake :.
Than theseus sawe his felawe dye / he enhaunced his glayue by grete anger and smote cerberus so fermli that he made hym auale  goo a back two paas. cerberus wold auenge hym of this strook  smote vpon theseus a strook by so grete force. that yf the noble knyght had not torned a back cerberus had born  smy+ten hym vnto the erthe. This strook of cerberus fill vpon the erthe  entrid therin / and theseus smote agayn vpon his enemye whiche had the herte so grete / that he began to rore as an olde lyon / And smote theseus so fiersly with his swerd that he all to brakke his shelde / and all to ffrusshyd his helme / that he was all astonyed of the strook / But allewey theseus abood in his place

and than cerberus shold haue brought hym vnto vtte|rance folowyng the euyl~ auenture of pirothus. yf that fortune had not brought theder hercules whyche cam so apoynt to the rescousse that theseus knewe not how to saue hym. At this poynt than that theseus was so astonyed / hercules that was departyd fro the see / as sayd is cam vnto the steyres that were cutte and made in the rooche. And beholdyng theseus all couerd with blood And pirothus ded. he began to descende doun cry|eng to theseus that he shold not be aferd ner take no drede / whan cerberus sawe ande herd hercules he began to rebruyre and rore and assaylled theseus asprely for to be quyte of hym. Theseus myght no more / how well that he was recomforted with the voys of hercules he began to renne now here  now there to fore cerberus:..
SO moche than hasted hercules for to goo doun the steyres or degrees In entryng the place as hastely as he myght he escryed to cerberus and said to hym. Tyrant cruell late the kynght renne and come to me / Thou hast put to deth vpon the erthe my good frende pirothus. wherof I am sory certayn. And yf I may I shall take vengeance on the for hym Cerbe|rus heeryng the sentence of hercules Ran no more after theseus. but taryed and behelde hercules with afyers looke and answerd to hym / so weneth he to auenge his shame that so beleueth / I haue deuoured thy ffe|law vnto the deth And but yf thou excede hym in res|tier of armes and in bodily strenght an honderd fold double hit is folye to the to come hether / ffor I am Cer|berus the porter of helle that of recorde of my name all

the world tremblith. thus endyng his answer / hercules was at the fote of the roche. he had his clobbe vpon his sholdre / cerberus cam agaynst hym / they smote eche other rudely / and thus they began a right hard batayll / And than theseus that was passyng wery satte at oon side by out of the way And rested hym in dreyng  clensing his woundes of the blood that had comen out of them:.
HErcules behelde than on that oon syde  seeyng theseus purgyng  clensyng his parfond and grete woundes / he began to employe the excesse of his strength and myght by suche meruayll / that of a strook that he gaf hym vpon his helme vpon the right side that he maad hym to bowe and lowte vnder his clobbe and to knele to the ground with his lyfte knee and at the second strook in poursuyng hym hastely he made his swerd to flee out of hys handes and that he made hym to falle on his armes to the ground /   with the thyrde strooke as cerberus wende to haue releuyd hym and goten his swerd / hercules smote hym vpon the body that he made hys hede to hurtle agayn a grete stone that was ther by / after that he sprange vpon hym and bonde his legges with the strength and force of his handes / maulgre the geant / / he tare of the helme of his hede and wold haue slayn hym / but theseus praid hym that he wold not put hym to deth there / And that he wold brynge hym in to thessalonycque for to dye by the sentence of the quene ypodame :.
CErberus was not than putte to deth at the re|queste of theseus / Notwythstandyng hercules bond his handes behynde his backe / and after he

maad hym aryse and toke hym by the berd and made hym goon vp an hyghe on the roche And there he leyde hym doun And boond his feete his handes  his necke to geder in suche wise that he myght not ner durst not remeue / whan he had dooon soo / he wente doun and en|trid in to the yate of helle and leuyng there theseus / he wente so ferre that he fonde the palais of kynge pluto and that he cam in to the same halle where pluto was with proserpme. Alle they that were there meruaylid of hym whan they sawe hym entryd. ffor they knewe nothynge of the ouercomyng of cerberus. as they that lefte all the charge and kepyng of their cyte with cer|berus / with out to haue ony doubte or suspecion / And also they were so ferre from the gate / that they myght not here of the bataile. ner knewe no thing what was befalle to their porter / Than whan hercules had founde pluto and proserpme. he had grete Ioye and knewe be tokens  enseygnes of them there beyng that hit was he he adressid hym to pluto and said. Pluto by thy ma+lyce Secille is now alle full of wepyng of teeres for the rauysshyng of this lady. whiche hast not willed to yelde and rendre agayn to her husbond Orpheus I wote neuer what pleasir thou haste therin. but I shall saie to the / that thou shalt receyue grete displaisir in fo|lowyng the euyll auenture of Cerberus whom I haue vaynquysshid and ouercome ::.
WHyth this worde hercules lyfte vp his clobbe and gaf suche a strook to pluto that he ouer|threwe hym to the erthe / that he ne meued ne|ther hande ne foot. whan he had so beten pluto wenyng that he had be ded. he assailid all them that were there

that made grete murmure  put them all to deth lightly wyth his clobbe in the presence of proserpme whiche tremblid for fere / Than he conforted proserpme  sayd to her / that he was come vnto that place for to deliuere her / and for to brynge her agayn to her moder / and that she shold sewe and folowe hym herdely / Proserpme assured her  was conforted with the wordes of her+cules and folowyd hym :.
HErcules opend the halle  wente out and pro+serpme with hym / After he addressid hym vnto the yate of the palays / And hit happend hym that he fond there a right grete companye of Citezeyns that were aduertised of this affraie and they ran vpon hym dismesurably escrieng hym to deth / whan hercules sawe that / he said to proserpme that she shold drawe her a parte / After that he enhaunsed and lyfte vp his clobbe / And began to medle with his enemyes ryght vertuesly and by so highe prowesse that he couerid al~ thentre of the palais with these myserable tirantes that he slewe smote doun  all fortrusshid them And putte to deth more than foure honderd / ffinably he wrought soo that the other fledde  gaf hit ouer / and than whan he sawe his euill willars ded disparced he toke pro+serpme by the hand  ladde her out of ^e gate of the cyte.
THeseus that abode  taried at this gate as said is / was gretly reioysed whan he sawe hercules come agayn with proserpme he aroos  wait agayn them / and salewed the lady / And presented to hercules a chayne of ademont yron / that he had found at the yate and many prisonners bounden that cerberus had bounden with all / hercules vnbond the prisoners 

toke the Chayne and bonde Creberus wyth all / And whan he had buryed pirothus he departed from thys hell And toke his waie with proserpme. theseus and cerberus. And with oute grete aduenture for to specifie maad so his Iourneyes that he arryued in thessalony|que And delyuerid proserpme to the quene Sera / and to ypodane he presented cerberus. rehersyng to her and the ladyes how he had slayn pirothus. ypodane deme+ned so grete sorowe for the deth of pyrothus that for to recounte and telle / hit is not possible. All they of thes+saylle semblably maad grete mornyng and sorowe and sore bewailed their lord / what shall I saie for to contreuenge his deth / ypodane did do bynde cerberus to a stake in the theatre of the Cyte. And there yonge and olde noyed and pyned hym thre dayes longe contynu+elly / drawyng hym by the berde and cracchyng hym in the visage and after slewe hym Inhumaynly and hor+ribly. And than whan hercules and theseus. sera and proserpme had taried there a certayn space of tyme in comfortyng ypodane. they toke leue to gyder And her+cules wente acompanyed of theseus toward the cyte of thebes / but of hym I will now tarie and shall come to speke of the auentures of lyncus ::.


How Andromadas deliuerid lincus of his enemy|es And how he slewe in bataill the kynge Creon and toke the cyte of thebes .:.
WHan philotes had receyuyd in to his garde and kepyng lyncus And hercules was goon to the socours of Theseus and pirothus as afore is said. the maronners toke their shippe and wente to

the see / And saylled all that day with oute fyndyng of ony aduenture / But on the morn by tyme in the mor+nyng / ffortune that alleway torneth with oute ony res+tyng brought to them a grete shyppe that drewe hys cours vnto the same place that they cam fro / Of thys shyppe or galleye was capitayn and chief Androma|das kynge of Calcide / This andromadas was cosyn vnto lyncus / whan he had espyed the shyppe where lincus was Inne / he maad to vyre hys galeye a bord And said that he wold knowe what peple were ther|in / In approchyng the shippe of thebes / lyncus behelde the galeye of andromadas and knewe hit by then|signes and tokenes that hit bare / In this knowleche andromadas spack and demanded of the maronners to whom the shippe belongeth / Anone as lincus sawe and herde andromadas / he brake thanswere of the maronners / And escryed to hym all on highe / Andro+madas lo here thy frende lyncus. yf thou gyue me no socours and helpe me thou mayste lose a grete frende in me. ffor I am a prysonner / And hercules hath sente me in to Thebes ::..
ANdromadas heeryng lyncus had grete anger ffor he louyd well lyncus. And escryed them that brought hym and sayd to hym that they were all comen vnto theyr deth. And also that they were vnder his warde. Philotes and hys folke were garnysshid with theyr armes and harnoys and made hem all redy for to defende hem self. And wyth lytyll langage they of Calcyde assayllyd phylotes. And philotes and his folke employed them at their defence

The batayll was grete and hard. but the malehe and myshappe tourned in suche wise vpon the felawes of philotes that they were alle slayn and dede Andro+madas had two. C. men in his companie. all robeurs and theues of the see / These theues and robeurs smote hard and fiersly vpon philotes and all to hewe his ar+mes. worchynge and gyuyng to hym many woundes and he buried many of them in the see. but the stronge resistence prouffited them but lityll. ffor in the ende he was taken and bounde. and lyncus was delyuerd and vnbounden of the bondes of hercules ::.
LIncus had grete Ioye of his deliuerance. he than+ked his good frende andromadas. After this he tolde hym how he was take. and how hercu+les had discipate and destroyed the centaures. And a+monge other he named many of his frendes that were ded / wherof Andromadas had so grete yre and suche desplaisir that he sware incontynent that he wold auen+ge hit. And that as hercules had slayn his frendes in like wise he wold destroye his cosyns and kynnesmen / lin+cus toke grete plesir to vnderstonde the oth of andro|madas whyche wold venge the deth of his kynnes|men. he sayd to hym that hercules was goon in to helle And after demanded hym how he wold auenge hym vpon the frendes of hercules. And there vpon they were longe thynkyng. In the ende whan they had longe take auys. Andromadas concluded that he wold goo as|sayle the Cyte of thebes / and yf he myght gete hit by assault he wold doo slee the kynge Creon and all them of his blood ::.
Wyth this conclusion cam theder alle the galeyes of andromadas whiche folowed in whom he had eyghte thousand fightyng men / Andro+madas maad hem to torne toward thebes / And also hastely as he myghte he entrid in to the royame In was+tyng and destroyng the contrey by fyre and by swerd so terribly that the tydynges cam vnto the kyng Creon whan the kyng Creon knewe the comyng of the kyng andromadas / And that with oute deffiance he maad hym warre / He sowned to armes and assembled a grete puyssance / And knowyng that Andromadas was comen in to a certayn place / he yssued oute of the|bes all armed / and brought hys peple vpon his ene+myes / that had grete Ioye of theyr comynge / And than they sette hem in ordenance agayn them in suche wyse that they cam to smytyng of strookes / the Cryes and noyse was grete on bothe sydes / Glayues. swerdes. dartes. guysarmes. arowes and polhaxes were put forth and sette awerke / Many nobles were beten doun and ded / Lyncus and Andromadas wrought mor|tally / the kynge Creon and Amphitrion faylled not / there was blood largely shedde on that oon side and on that other / And the bataylle was so felonnous and aspre than: that in lytyll whyle after Andromadas and hys peuple gate and wan vpon them of thebes And constraynd them to recuyell and for to goo a back wherof the kynge Creon had ryght grete sorowe. And wenyng for to haue putte hys men agayn in araye / Putte hym self in to the grettest prees of the bataylle wher he wrought mortally / And made so grete slaugh+ter and betyng doun of hys enemyes / that lyncus and

Andromadas herd the affraye / And so than they cam theder  as lincus saw the kinge Creon doo meruailles of armes. he gaf hym thre strokes with his swerd oon after an other / And wyth the fourthe strook he all to brake his helme from his hede and slewe hym. wherof they of thebes were so affrayed. and dispayred. that they were put in descomfiture. and fledde / whiche fle|yng Amphitrion myght not remedie. how be hit that he was stronge and of grete corage .:.
OF this euyll aduenture thebes was right haste|ly aduertysed. Megera was goon vp. vpon oon of the hyghe toures of the palais /  sawe and behelde the bataylle / from that place she sawe them of thebes slayn with oute remedie. and also torne their backes. the tokene of the betyng doun of the kynge her fader And the recougnossances of the slaughter of other maad her to ascrye and sayd / ffortune fortune what meschyef / where is hercules. Alas where hast thou brought hym / Alas that he is not here for to de|fende the metes of his natiuyte and for to kepe his wif full of annoye And for to put his hand and sholdres for to bere the grete fetes  dedes of this batayll. whan she had sayd this. she fylle a swonne And so laye a grete while. Neuertheles the kynge Andromadas and lincus folowed hastely them of thebes that they entrid the Cite with them. And for as moche as the thebans were with out heed and put out of araye / And that amphitrion had so many woundes vpon hym that alle his membres faylled at this werke. The vnhappy lyn|cus and Adromadas toke the Cyte / and slewe alle them that myght bere armes / Reseruyd Amphytrion

whom they fonde not in the hete. After they wente vp in to the palays and ther they fonde megera  amphitrion in grete desolaco~n with many ladyes and damoyselles:
AS sone than as lincus had espied megera / she was so fair  plaisant that he becam amorous of her / and cam to her  said / lady wepe nomore hercules the bastard sone of Iupiter is goon in to hell  ther he is ded / ye haue ben wyf of a man goten in auoul|trye / from hens forth ye shal~ be felawe  wyf of a man legitisme  born in lawful~ mariage / ffor I shall wedde yow. And shall doo you more good  pleasir than euer ye had. Megra answerd fals traitre wenest thou that I be so folisshe as to gyfe fayth  beleue to the wordes of the homycide of my fader  to the enemy of my lorde hercules know thou that I am his wyf And that I shal neuer haue other husbond but hym. he is no bastard / but sone of my lord amphitrion / and the moste noble man that is in all the world / Lady answerd lincus I am kyng of this cyte / ye be now at my comandement / will ye or will ye not / I shall do my will of you / but I shall put hit in respyte  in my souffrance till to morn / After these wordes lincus sente megera in to a tour / and made her to be kepte ther / After he sente philotes in to a lowe pryson / And amphitrion in to a nother pryson / And fyndyng there in seruage  myserye pryant the sone of kynge laomedon / he had pytye of hym and sente hym agayn to Troyes where he was after receyued wyth grete Ioye of the Troyans ..


How hercules entrid in to Thebes in vnknowen ha|byte / And how he put to deth the geant lyncus and his complices and his wyf megera ::.
BI the glayue of lyncus than and of androma|das Thebes was trowblid dolorously. Lyn|cus exercised there many tyrannyes and wic|kednesses In thys Infortune Andromadas departed and wente to doo his thynges. leuyng there lincus with foure honderd men of warre for to kepe the cyte and to hold hit in his obeyssance. Thus was taken the venge|ance of the centaures. In the tyme of this vengeance. the quene Iuno cam in to thebes and had grete Ioye whan she fonde hit in desolacion and full of wedowes and orphelins. and in the enemyes handes of hercules / than were grete the teeres and lamentacions of megera Am+phitrion was nyghe her that vnderstood all her dolean+ces and comforted her / Lincus cam many tymes vnto her in to the prisonn And requyred her swetely to haue her loue. And in the most fayrest maner / Alleway his swete and faire wordes auailed not. for he fond her constant and ferme. and alleway kepyng in rigour her chastete. And gaf hym many vertuous answers wherof foloweth oon. whiche was the laste / Lincus thou hast now the hande stronge. and hast brused the|bes. ffortune and yll happe haue gyuen vnto the. the ty+rannye. wherof thou hast enryched thy self with vy|ces thou hast furthermore the puyssance for to comette in me murdre / but thy power ne thy synnes ben not so stronge ne of myght~t for to make my vertu to bowe ne to folde. Megera alleway bewayled hercules. She bewayled hym so moche on a day that she becam alle rauysshed and in a traunce And that same day hercu|les that was departed from thessalonyque a good whyle to fore made so his Iourneyes that he entryd in

to the roiame of thebes accompanied with many noble+men / And entryng in to these marches he fonde the con|tre all destroyed / And he had not goon ferre / whan hyt was told hym how lincus was lord of thebes / And how he had slayn in bataill the kynge Creon and how he had enprisoned megera :.
WHn hercules had receyuid these tidinges. he was enplenysshid with grete anger / and said that he wold auenge hym yf he myght / Than he cladde hym aboue his armours with a mantel  disgysed hym self as moche as he myght / whan he had so don. he lefte there his felawes. And entrid hym self in to thebe vn|knowen and passid thurgh the gate  bare hym so wel~ that the porters lete hym passe forth / and in like wyse entrid in to the palais / At the entre of the palais a soul+diour cam to hercules  demanded hym what he soughte ther / hercules caste a way his mantell a ferre and toke hys swerd that was stronge / And wyth oute ony worde he gaf so grete a strook to the souldyour that was not armed. that he clefte his heed fro the hyghest parte doun to the ground. Many other souldiours that were there by seeyng the strook / Cryed and affrayed ran to their axes and clubbes / And some were of them that auaunced hem self for to take hercules / but her|cules smote of theyr heedes and bete hem doun. And than began to ryse a grete bruyt  so grete a noyse that lincus herd hit / And wenyng that hit had ben his por|ters that affrayed. he cam rennyng doun all vnarmed for to make pees / Assone as hercules aperceyuyd and sawe hym comyng out of the halle / he drewe vnto hym

with his swerd haunced in his hand Cryeng hercules hercules. and smote hym so that he cutte of the right ar|me and with the strook he fyll doun to ground. And after he smote vpon oon and other that had no helmes on her heedes ne haubers on her backes. and than they knewe that hit was hercules / he slewe them so largely that of the blood that ran doun was made a right grete russhyng as hit had ben a ryuer :.
AMonge these thynges the damoyselles of me|gera yssued out of the palays And wente in to the stretes Cryeng with hye and clere wy that hercules was comen agayn and that he had slayn lincus / by these cries all the Cite was meuid. the good men olde and yonge the wedowes wyues and may|dens ran vnto armes by grete corage. and assailled all aboutes the men of lincus. there was a terrible batayll gaderd to geder of the women ayenst their enemyes / In a lityll while all the Cyte was trowblid whan her|cules had put to deth all them that he fonde in the cloos of the palays reseruyd lyncus whyche he put in the garde and kepyng of the quene Iuno and of many da+moyselles that cam vnto hym. he sprange vpon the stre|tes And shewid his swerd and smote doun ryght on all sides in skarmowshyng so mortally the men of lyn+cus all a boute where he myght fynde hem. that by the helpe of them of thebes he made hem all to passe the tren+chyng and cuttyng of his swerd. And than was the|bes all reiosed And hercules retourned into the palais vnto the place where the ladies kepte lyncus. Than her+cules sente for to breke vp the dore of the chambre whr megera was in. ffor as moche as they coude not fynde

the keyes / for they that kepte her were ded Megera than ful~ of gladnesse cam vnto her lord / hercules aroos vp to her and wold haue enbraced her  kyste her / but ncus that thought on no thynge but for to do euyll / by the secrete Introducco~n of Iuno torned hym fro hyt / say+yng hercules late be my concubine I haue take my flessh+ly desires with her / she is of myn acqueyntance And the moste luxirio lady that euer I was acquented with all
WHan megera herd the right grete Iniurye and wronge that the trayttre chargid her with / she fill bacward for angre furyo with oute saing of ony word. hercules was all full of angre  hoot and full of grete yre / wenyng that lincus had said trouth / he smote of the heed of linc. And with the same swerd that he had slayn the trayttre / he put to deth megera whiche was with chylde / how be hit the cronycques o spayne telle that hercules slewe not his wyf / but that he put her in to a religion that he ordeined in thebes in the temple of dyane / In renounsyng her companye. and that thys was the first religyon that euer was in thebes. These thinges accomplisshed in that oon manere or in that other / hercules toke out of pryson Amphitrion and philotes. and departed from thens all anoyed and sore gruyd at that tyme and longe after that he spack not. And wente his way at all auenture accompanyed only of theseus and philotes wyth grete. bewaylynge of them of thebes / whyche than after hys departyng crowned vpon them Layus the sone of kynge Agenor of Assirie for as moche as he had wedded the doughter of kynge Creon named Iocasta ::::.



How hercules put to deth the kynge laomedon And destroyed Troye the seconde tyme.
HErcules theseus and philotes departed from thebes and wente in to many dyuerce landes se+chyng their aduentures. And passyng by Licie where hercules was maad kynge / on a day they cam in to myrodonne vnto the palays of kynge Eson where Iason was. whiche had than enprised for to saile to the yle of Colcos / And maad his thynges redy / Whan hercules had be fested of Iason and of duc pelleus and that he knewe of thenterpryse that Iason wold goo  conquere the flees of gold / he vowed and promysed that he wold accompanye hym. And yf fortune wold be wyth hym he wolde aduenture to brynge his em|pryse vnto an ende / what shall I make longe processe Iason and hercules made redy a right gode shippe / and wente to the See And renewed not her vitayll tyll they cam to the porte of Troyes. But yet they renewid not hem at this poort / ffor the kynge Laomedon was than in troye whiche had fortefied meruayllosly the Cyte agayn. And knowyng that ther was descended at his porte a shipp full of grekes / he sente doun a a man that comanded them rudeli that they shold departe thens and that he was enemye vnto the grekes / Iason as Capitayn of the Armee answerd courtosli the messan+ger of kynge laomedon. and prayed hym that he might haue vitayll for his monoye / the messanger answerd hym that he shold none haue there but yf they gate hit with the swerd / than hercules myght no lenger tarie but sware to the troiane that yf he myght retorne from the viage that he had enprised / that he shold yet ones

agayn destroye Troyes and that he shold not leue oon stone vpon another / wyth this conclusion hercules and Iason departed fro troyes / And by fortune they were brought to the poort of Lennos / wherof was a wo|man lady and quene named ysiphyle / whiche waxe amerous of Iason / as hyt is conteyned in the historye of Iason / In this poort of lennos hercules was aduer+tysed that there by was a kynge named Phyneus whiche suffrid hym to be gouerned of an auaricyous woman / Phyneus had ben maryed to a nother wo|man to fore / and had by her two sones. These two sones were vnrightfully by theyr stepmoder put in ex|yle / ffor to saye veray trouthe this seconde wyf / was corrumpid wyth auaryce / that she tooke fro the kyng his rychesse and helde gretter astate than he / Whan than hercules had knowleche herof / he wente and spack to the kynge phyneus and to the quene / And shewid vnto them theyr vyces in so good manyer and facion / that the two children were repelled fro their exyle / and that the kynge helde his astate royall. Than retorned hercules in to lennos And toke the see wyth Iason and wente in to the yle of Colcos. where Iason by the ler|nyng and Industrie of meda conquered the sheep with the flees of gold whiche he bare with hym in to grece / Than hercules recomaunded strongly Iason amonge hys parents and frendes / And tolde hem of the ryght grete vnkyndenes of the kynge laomedon. And how that he had sworn for to destroye troyes for the ruyde|nes that the kynge laomedon had doon vnto them / They swore alle to gyder wyth hercules the destruccyon of Troyes and concluded the day of their departement

and after maad redy their shippis and alle that was necessarie for them / And than hercules held so well his hand in their exercyte. that at the day concluded a|monge them. they entred in to the see / And did so moche that they descended at the porte of troyes with so grete an Oost that laomedon durst not deffende hem the porte
IAson was at that tyme in a fer strange contre. Hercu|les had with hym many noble men And amonge all other ther were with hym the kynge thelamomax the duc Nestor. Castor. pollux. theseus and many kynges and dukes / At the descente of this porte / whiche was of stronge entree. hercules that nothynge doubted his enemyes / made to sowne and blowe vp trompes and tabours / and made so grete noys and bruyt / that the walles of troyes and of the pallays redounded therof and that laomedon seeyng out at oon of his wyndowes the Oost of his enemyes. was right a grete while in a thought whether he myght goo to batayll agayn them or non / hit happend hym that as he was thus pensyf that he behelde toward the market place he sawe there more than thretty thousand Armed men. whiche en|flamed his herte in suche wise that he wente and did hym do arme And all his thoughtis and penses put aparte cam to his peple. whom he warned and desired them to do her parte and deuoyr / And after hym self trustyng in fortune / yssued out in to the felde in batayll arenged by good ordenaunce / And how well he suppo+sed that hercules was in the Armee descended at the porte. whom he doubtid. he marched vnto his enemies whyche Ioyed of his comyng / And than began the

troyance and the grekes a right hote skarmusshe / with so grete occysion  manslaughter / that at the Ioynyng ther was many a man ded  hurte / hercules ne failed not to smyte and trowble his enemyes / he caste his eyen on high and sawe the banyer roiall of troies. he fought and smote doun on the right syde and on the lyfte syde And wyth hys clubbe he smote doun desmesurably that he cam to the banyer / And fyndyng there laome|don that dide there mervaylles of armes vpon the gre|kes / he smote hym wyth his clubbe often tymes vpon his helme in suche wyse that he myght not saue hym And that he enbarryd his clubbe with in his heed and brayn / that with the strook he slewe hym amonge plen+te of grekes lyyng ded on the sand endyng there the ende of hys lyf / After he smote vpon them that bare the banyer and slowe them / And alle to rente the ba|nyer / And than were the troyans alle discomforted and cryed / Late vs fle. late vs fle / And wyth this crye that was Impetuous they began to recuyelle and goo back vnto the cyte / Wenyng to saue them self / But the grekes conueyed them wyth the poyntes of theyr swerdes and cuttynges of theyr sharpe glayues so mortally / that in sleyng and kyllyng the moste paart lyke as the tempest had ronne among them / They toke the Cyte so trowblyd wyth the deth of the kynge la|omedon that there was none or right lytyll defence amonge them / In entryng in to the yate of Troyes / Thelamon was the fyrste man / And hercules was the seconde / And than hercules fonde well that he dide ryght hyghe Cheualryes / Pryant was not at that tyme in troyes / But he was goon in to the Oryente

by the comandeme~t of kyng laomedon after his retourn fro thebes / What shall I saye. ffortune hauyng caste doun the kynge Laomedon as sayd is by the stronge hand of hercules / Aboue that / she put in troyes hercules and his peple whiche broughte hem alle to the hew|yng of her swerde / they entrid in to ylion and pillyd hit / and after did do Crye huok vpon all the tresours of troyes. In like wise they toke Exiona the doughter of the kynge. whom hercules gaf vnto thelamon requy+ryng hym to take her for as moche as he was the firste that entrid the Cyte / And whan they had taken alle that they fonde good in troye. ffor fynable vengeance hercules bete doun the tours and edyfices / and put the fyre therin in suche wyse. that there abode not a stone vpon an nother ::.


How hercules and Affer assaillyd by batayll the geant Antheon and how they vaynquysshid hym in batayll the first tyme :::::.
AFter this generall destruccion of troye / whan the grekes were departed and hercules had lefte hem / The grekes retorned in to grece with grete glorye. And hercules wente by the see sechyng his aduentures accompanyed of theseus and philotes And hit happend hym. that he arryued at the porte of Alexandre / he fonde in this porte a right grete arme / whan the Capitayn of tharmee sawe hym come to an|cre / he knewe by the enseyngnes of hercules / that hit was hercules. And that he had herde hym recomanded aboue alle maner men what som euer they were / And so than he cam vnto hym all full of Ioye / and sayd to hym / Lorde of noblesse / and tresour of vertu. amonge

the peple moste myghty / and amonge the kynges moste resplendant in all gloryous vertue / I salewe yow / and you requyre that I may be your seruant  frende / And this sayng he was on his knees to fore hercules and in signe of humylite he kyssed the erthe / whan hercules sawe the salutaco~n  the manyer of the doynge of this man / he toke hym by the hande / And liftyng hym vp fro the ground salewed hym / and after demaunded of hym his name / and to whom that armee belonged that he sawe ther / he answerd hym that he was named Affer sone of madyam the sone of habraham / and that in that armee was none other capytayn ne chief but hym self and that the egipciens had ordeynd hym duc  ledar of this Ooste / for to goo in to libye for to destroye the con|tre in vengeance of the euyll and harmes that the tyrant busire that was of libye had doon to them in suche wise as he well knewe :.
WHan hercules had receyuyd the name and the affaires of affer / he toke hym for his frende. and said to hym that he wolde accompanye hym to conquerre lybye / Affer thanked hym and brought hym in to a ryght ryche shyppe where he feested hym as moche as to hym was possible / They had not longe abyden there / but they wente vnto the see wyth grete gladnesse / ffor the egypcyens were so Ioyous and so gladde to haue hercules with hem / that they thought and beleuyd veryly that there myghte none myshappe ne euyll come to them / Hercules fonde in the sayd shippe of Affer / the wyf and also the doughter of Affer Thys doughter had to name Echee. She was oon the moste fayre damoysell of alle the worlde and

yonge and fresshe / By the dayly sight of her / hercules becam amerous of her And requyred her to be his wyf Echee answerd that of her self she myghte not acorde to his demande / but she sayde. yf fortune gyue me so grete a grace that I myghte be your wyf / Ischold haue more cause to thanke the goddes  than ony wyf liuyng hercules was right well content with the damoysell and by her introduccion callyd Affer / and requyred hym that he wolde gyue to hym his doughter to be hys wif Affer thanked hercules of that he vouchidsauf to demande his doughter he that was the most exellent of noblis / and said to hym that he shold take her and doo with her his wyll  pleasir / / hercules espowsyd and weddid echee. by the consente of affer / and laie to gider payyng the due dette of maryage in suche wyse that echee conceyuyd of the seed of hercules / / what shall I make longe processe / hercules  affer sayllid so longe that they fonde the porte of libye. where now standeth cartage / and there they arryued and toke land. In a nyght whiche was clere / and after they entrid hasteli in to the contrey. and beseged the Cyte of libye wyth oute resistence or gaynsayng ::.
IN this Cyte was than a grete geant named Antheon grete aboue mesure of other geantes. the moste stronge and the most conqueryng that was in all the parties of europe and libye / Cirene. Trypolyn. Montaigne and all the yles enhabited in this contres vnto the yles fortu+nate / this kynge than aduertysed of the comyng of the egipcyens was passyng angry and sware that neuer none of them shold retorne agayn in to egipte / Assone than as he might he dide do his men arme them  yssued

out of the Cyte with a grete companye of libyens / And had so grete haste to renne vpon the egypciens that he sette no ordenance amonge hys peple wherof he toke grete harme / ffor whan he cam to the batayll he fonde that hercules had renged hys peple and sette hem in two bataylles / of whyche he lad and conduysed the fyrst bataylle / Hit happend so that they of the sayd felawshyp of hercules by force of shotte mayntenyd hem self so vayllyantly and wyth strokes that they brought to deth more than fyften honderd libiens. whan the shotte fayllid Antheon sprange in to the grettest prees as the moste vaylliant And supposyd well to haue scarmeshyd his enemyes / but anone as hercules sawe hym come. he scasid his clubbe and put hym forth afore / And gaf hym so grete a strook that he made his hede to bowe on the lyfte side / Antheon had hys swerd lyfte vp for to haue smyten hercules whan he resseyuyd the strook that hercules gaf hym by whiche his strook was broken / Neuertheles he sayd betwene his teth that he wold auenge hym / he lifte vp his swerd again and smote hercules so dysmesurably that wyth the strook he brake his shelde / Than knewe hercules that the geant was a man of grete strength / this notwyth|standing he smote hym the seconde tyme with his clubbe And thus hercules and Antheon gaf eche other grete strokes that ther cam betwene hem the two parties. liby+ens  egipcyens / there was grete noyse of clynknge of swerdes and sownyng of the sheldes and helmes that were broken / and hawberks that were dismaillid shel+des quarterd and glayues broken / ther was the blood largely shedd on both partyes / hercules  antheon were

departyd by force of the prees / Antheon by grete yre smote with oute cessyng vpon the fiers egipcyens / her+cules forfrusshed the helmes largely with his Clubbe and maad of the libyens all his pleasir / and brought so many to deth with his clubbe / that in lityll space he passid thurgh oute the puyssance of kynge antheon many tymes / and that in his waye he couerid the erthe and the waie that he held all with dede libyens / This firste scarmusshe was stronge and domaigiable to an|theon. ffor agayn oon egipcyen that he slewe with his glayue / hercules maad dye with his clubbe ten libyens Aboute hercules was no thynge but blood / hercules made the montaygnes redounde of the Cryes / the renges to tremble. the libyens to flee and goo a back /  wynne lityll gayne / what shall I saye more also longe as the day endured he held the bataill in vigueur / and aboute the euen as affer and theseus cam to the medlee. he enuer+tued hym self in suche facion ayenst antheon. that he made hym flee alle charged with horions and strokes and than in like wise fledde alle the libyens::.


How hercules toke the kynge Athlas. and how he began to studie the scyence of astronomye and the seuen sciences lyberall ::.
WHhan hercules sawe the Lybyens torne in to flighte / he dide do sowne the retrayte for as mo|che as hit was late / and wyth grete glorye re+torned in to the place that he had chosen for to holde his siege / his wyf Echee cam agaynst hym with open armes and beclipped and kyssed hym / she halpe to vn+arme hym  brought hym fressh water for to refresshe his visage / And ther was maad right good chiere of

all the egipciens / At thopposite of this right good chiere the libyens were in their Cyte and made grete sorowe / ffor they had well loste thretty thousand men. Soue|rainly Antheon demened symple chiere for he had god cause. ffor hercules had so beten hym with hys clubbe thta he myghte not susteyne hym self / but wente with grete payne to bedd. And with sorowe sente for hys medicynes and surgiens. whiche cam and visited hym and fonde hym all to brosid And said to hym that hit wold be well a moneth or they coude hele hym. Anthe|on consideryng his caas sente and desired of the egypci|ens trewes for a moneth. Offryng to them for to sende hem dayly certayn nombre of bestiall And a right grete quantyte of vetayll / Hercules agreed and graunted hym this trewes be cause of the vetayll / Than he made oute his mandementes and  vnto all the kynges and prynces that were his triburaries / And also vnto his neyghebours prayyng them that they wold come and socoure hym with all their men of armes the most hasty wyse that they myght / This trewes so made her|cules began to remembre than / that to fore tyme he had herd philotes speke of a kynge that regned there by na+med Athlas / And that he was the most wise man and connyngest of all the world / And furthermore that he dwelte in a castell standyng on the toppe of a ryght hye montaygne named Athlas after the name of the same kynge In this remembrance hercules beyng couey+tous of the scyence of Athlas callid philotes and said to hym / that he wold goo in to the royame of kynge athlas / And that his entente was to seke there hys aduenture / Philotes answerd and said that he coude

well lede and brynge hym in to that Royame ffor he knewe the contre / Than hercules callid affer  theseus and chargid them that they shold allweye make good wacche / And after toke leue of them and of his wyf sayng that he wold hastely retorne / this doon he and thre maryners wyth philotes wente vnto the see In a galeye subtyle and lyght / and sayled and rowed in to the see medyterane / they had good wynde and redy and fortune was good to them / In lityll whyle they cam vnto the strayt of gybaltar / And than philotes shewid vnto hercules the montaigne  Castell where as Athlas was abidyng::.
Whan hercules sawe the montaigne and the castel~ he wente and toke lande Ioyously / after he toke his Clobbe and comanded philotes and his maryners for to abide hym there / after that he went toward the montaigne. and hit happend that he mette with a man that descended doun fro the hyll / and he adressid hym toward the said man for to here some tidynges / and demanded hym fro whens he cam / he said I come from the castell that ye maye see yonder a hye / whyder go ye sayd hercules. vnto the cyte of marcely answerd the stranger / the kynge Athlas to whom I am seruant. hath sente me theder for to publysshe hys comandement vnto the Cytezeyns that wythin sixe dayes they be garnysshid with their harnoys  armes for to accompanye hym to goo vnto the warre of the grete kynge of Libye. whiche hath required Instantli to haue his socours / wherfore yf ye will serue hym in this armee.  be his soldyour / goo vp  ye shall fynde hym in his castell studyyng the scyence of astronomye

The seruant of kyng Athlas with thise wordes wente forth on his waye. and hercules wente vp in to the mon+taigne  cam to the gate of the castell / where he fonde four knyghtes that demanded hym what he wold haue hercules answerd that his will was for to speke to the kynge for certayn maters that touched hym / The foure knyghtes not thynkyng but good brought hercules within a grete halle where in were all the men of kyng athlas assayng them with swerdes and axes for as moche as they had herd saye that they shold go to the warre / And they were all armed ::.
WHan these knyghtes had brought theder hercu|les / they gaf knowlege vnto the kynge that a strange geant axid after hym And wold not telle hem the cause why / Than Athlas wente doun and fonde hercules armed wyth his skyn of the lyon / And axid hym what he was / Than he answerd said I am hercules that haue conquerd philotes and the gardyn with the sheep of thy doughters / I am come nowe hether for to conquere the with thy scyences. So behoueth the that thou do to me obeyssance / And gyue ouer to helpe the grete Antheon myn enemye and that thou come with me / And yf thou wolte not so do / Arme the hastely and deffende the wyth armes of that I demande the / ffor yf thou wilt not assente therto by loue / I shall make the accorde hit by force / Athlas was strongly discouragid / whan he knewe by the mowthe of hercules that it was he that had late conquerd philotes  had slayn his ge|ant his felaw. taken his sheep / and also newly had as|saillid by warre Antheon to whom he had promisid to gyue socours /  also considerd ^t he wold that he sholde

yelde hym to hym / the herte began in hym to swelle for anger and pryde. And by grete felonnye sayd to hym O thou presumptuous hercules how art thou so hardy to come allone to fore me. thou that I may not loue knowe thou that I haue had many a displeasir by thyn oultrage / ffor philotes was my right grete frende. And now thou art come to renewe this dysplaysance and wylt that I shold yelde me vnto the. That is not myn Intencion ::..
AThlas with thise wordes wente in to a cham+bre ther faste by and comanded that euery man shold arme hym. as they dyde / hercules had all+wey his eye vpon hym. to the ende that he shold not es|cape hym. whan he was armed he cam ayenst hercules and escryed hym to the deth / after gaf hym a strook with his glayue fiersly. with the Crye and with the strook all they of the fortresse assaylid hercules / Than hercules put hym self to deffense myghtly by the rigour of his Clobbe / And with .xij. strokes he slewe .xij. of his enemyes / After he hurted wounded many other and sparyd longe the blood of Athlas. but in the ende for as moche as athlas gaf grete strokes to hercules / Hercules smote hym vpon the helme withoute enploy|yng of all his strength / and gaf hym a wounde in the hede that alle astonyed he bare hym to the erthe. from than forth on they of the fortresse durst no more assaile hercules / ner they aduentured hem not for to rescowe ne to releue Athlas. but fledde thens out of the castell / and hercules abode there allone with athlas and the dede bo+dies. So in the ende whan hercules sawe that they had gyuen hit ouer / he toke Athlas and maad hym to Crye

hym mercy After he wente in to his studie  toke all his bookes whiche he ladid vpon a chamell and after re|torned vnto athlas  constraynd hym to folowe hym. And whan hercules had don in the castell all his plaisir he departed acompanyed with athlas  with his boo|kes And brought hym doun vnto the see syde to the place where philotes abode hym :
WHan philotes sawe hercules come with athlas and his bokes / he had grete Ioye /  made know leche  aqueyntance with athlas whiche was so sorowful~ that he myght not speke / and than they en+trid in to her galeye  wente vnto the see / Athlas was sorowfull  woo begon of the wounde that he had in the heed / hercules requyred hym Instantly that he wold teche hym his scyence / Athlas wold in no wise do hit in the begynnyng of his sorowe / but whan he had conuer|sid taried with hercules / what for the bounte that he sawe in hym as for the Introducco~n of philotes / whiche affermed that hercules was the moste noble  vertuous man tat euer had ben / he began to teche hym all his sci+ences / wherein he lerned and prouffited by quyk and sharp engyne in suche wise that he comprised all / And that afterward he becam the beste philosopher and the most parfyt astronomyen of all the world / Thus stu|dyyng than hercules retourned with grete hoour in to the oofte of Affer / And fonde at his comyng that hys wyf had brought forth a fair sone / whiche the egypcy+ens had crowned kynge of egypte where he regned af+terward and was callid dedoum :.
THan Affer sawe Athlas and knewe how her+cules had vaynquysshid and conquerd hym

he meruayllid moche of his prowesse whiche was so grete / and of his wysedom that attayned to so hye thynges / hercules put alle his engyne  studye to conne+scyence. / In the menewhile a litill and a lityll the tyme passid / and Antheon assamblid a right grete Ooste / and was alle helyd of his woundes / And than the triews fayllid and exspyred. wherof the egypciens had grete Ioye. ffor yet they hoped to haue victorye of her enemyes. And the libyens hoped to auenge them of the shame that hercules had made hem resscyue / whan than the triews were exspyred the day folowyng her|cules maad redy his batayllis of that oon syde / And antheon ordeynyd his on that other syde / Antheon made thre batayllis. the fyrst of .xij. thousand fightyng men the seconde of .xx. thousand / and the thirde batayll of .xxx. thousand. he ordeyned hym self kynge and chief of the first batayll / In the seconde he ordeyned the kyng of ghetulye. and in the thirde the kynge of Cothulye. And than whan he had right well sette them in arraye and renged them in a mornyng he made to marche Io|yously ayenst his enemyes / and demandyd no thyng but their comyng on. and to see the oure whan that her+cules wold charge on hem :.


How hercules assemblid his batayll ayenst Anthe+on kynge of the libyens. the whiche he put to flyght  slewe the kynge of Cothulie:.
HErcules had made of his folke two bataylles wherof he conduyted and ledde the first / Affer and theseus conduytyd and guyded that other whan than he sawe the libyens marche whiche made the grettest bruyt and noyse of the world / he wente

forth afore and hys companye folowed / Than began the trompettes to sowne  tabours to make grete uoise the crye was grete / they began sharpely the batayll wherof hercules  antheon made the assaye by a swifte cours And with sharp swerdes smote so sore to geder / that Antheon brake his glayue. And the yron of the glayue of hercules persyd the sheld of Antheon and his armes on his right side by whiche he had a wound whereoute sprange the blood. Antheon wende to haue dyede for sorowe whan he felte the strook. and sawe that his glayue had but lytyll doon to hercules / he toke than his swerd. and hercules toke his also And smote eche other so hard that hercules bare antheon vnto the erthe with oon strook / And had slayn hym. ne had the libyens haue ben whiche ran vpon hercules on all sides And they delyuerid to hym oon so grete assault that he wyste not to whom he myghte attende. Than hercules enployed his swerd vpon the lybyens / The egypciens assemblid them aigrely vpon their enemyes / Antheon releuyd hym self all ashamed of his falle. Applied all his puyssance and strength for to auenge hym not vp|on hercules but vpon them of his partye / Thus Antheon smote on that oon syde and hercules on that other / An|theon foughte by grete fyerste and angre. And hercules by prowesse. The fiersnes of Antheon was grete. but the prowesse of hercules was so excessiuely grete that the lybyens fledde hym as the deth / And where they sawe hym they tremblyd for grete feer / At this bataill to fore the swerd of hercules alle blody. Than the grete rowtes of the lybyens were right sore affrayed And kepte none araye / he smote of heedes and leyde

hem doun to the erthe / his folke that were disroyed by antheon he gadrid to geder agayn. he made suche werke that the libyens had the worse and that antheon sente hastely to the kynge of Cothulye that he shold come to his helpe ::.
THe kynge of Cothulye that at the sendyng of antheon detid / wenyng to come to the medlee But whan Affer and theseus sawe hym meue they wente ayenst hym. and lettyd hym of his waye And there began the stour so grete and so mortall that theseus and Affer slewe the kynge of Cothulye bete doun his banyers / his recongnoissances and his cotuly|ens / And smote so sore the yron vpon their bodies that they wente aback and were constrayned to crye after helpe / the kyng of ghetulie seeyng this euyll aduenture cam vnto the rescousse and fonde the Cothulyens alle disconfited. At his comyng the Cryes. the noyse. the tempeste / the strokes began to renewe / many vaillance and many a prowesse were shewyd there / Many shewyd there theyr vertu  strength and many were slayn there / Theseus dide there meruailles. but allwey the ghetulyens held hem to gider and fought ayenst the+seus by the space of thre houres / and loft but fewe of their peple vnto the tyme that hercules brought them of the bataill of kyng Antheon to disconfiture / and made them to flee to saue hem self with the ghetulyens / that than discoraged hem self in suche wyse that after they had seen the batayll of kynge antheon disrenged and broken they myght not lifte vp their armes to dyffend them but were slayn a lityll and a lityll / And fynably they were brought to so strayte metes and boundes

that they wiste neuer where to saue hem. And than they fledd out of the place / sparklid by the feldes  cham|payns. with out ledars conduyteurs and capitaynes / And than hercules put hym forth in the prees all afore amonge them that fledde firste of the libyens that he cam to the gate of the cyte with hem / And there he began to smyte so dismesurably that he put to deth the libiens fle+yng theder and the porters  them that wold resiste hym Also he made the egypciens to entre in to the toun / And Antheon seeyng fortune ayenst hym in alle poyntes fledde not in to his palays ne accompanyed as a kynge but at large in to the feldes in the conduyte of foure moo+res only that after brought hym in to Moryane:.


How hercules fought agayn. ayenst kynge Antheon and putte hym vnto the deth :.
By this manyere hercules and the egypcyens en|tryd in to lybye and subiuged hyt by force of armes / And Antheon was fledde in to mau|ritayne. where he assemblid newe folk hastely / They of lybye putte hem alle in the mercy of hercules / whan hercules had thus dauntyd them of lybye. And theyr neyhbours sechyng Antheon. he made Affer kynge And named hyt after hym Affryque. And sayd that he fought not for hys synguler prouffit and couetyse / but for lyberalite and for to enhaunce vertue / O moste vaillyant and noble hercules. there was neuer man born amonge the paynems more large. more noble ne more vertuous / he wold not be kynge of all the world He was lyberall and enployed hys conquestes right well and wysely. and also gaf his yeftes aduysedly

whan he had maad Affer kynge / he enquyred what lawes they helde and establisshid amonge hem the sacre+ment of maryage / ffor at that tyme the women were there all comune /  whan hit happend that the women had children. they gaf hem to ^e men after their phisono+myes / and thus telleth Aristotell in his politycques Aboue this sacrement hercules ordeyned vnto the affri+quans that they shold hold the lawes of grece / and by right meure and rype conduyt maad the affrycquans lyue raysonably and vertuously / and aboue all other thynges he made hem haue the ordre of maryage in grete reuerence / whan hercules had ordeynd all this / tidynges cam to hym that Antheon was come agayn to Chasse hym with many moryans that folowed hym. than he retorned vpon antheon and vpon the moryans / and there smote hem doun with his clubbe so mortally that he maad hit reed with their blood and slewe hem all and putte hem to flyght so cruelly that antheon abode allone ayenst hercules and fought ayenst hym body to body by grete strength and gaf hym many strokes hard to bere / But hercules gaf to hym so many and so largely that the geant wyste neuer how to saue hym / and wende to haue fledde / but hercules ^t ran also swif+tely as an hors ranne after-hym. and enbraced hym in his armes with alle his myght / and lyfte hym vp in the ayer and bare hym vnto the ooste of the maurita|nyes / and whan he cam nyghe hem / he caste hym doun despitously to the erthe that all to brused and forfrus+hed abode there dede antheon / and his deth torned vnto the moores so grete abasshement that they lost all their strength  puyssance / and were slayn by grete excesse

with oute remedye / they loste there the kynge Antheon the kyng of moritane. the kyng of tingye  many other kynges  the honour of the bataill. and in the ende they fledde / in whiche flighte was taken  subiuged to the seignourye of Affricque the cyte of mauritaine:.


How hercules and Theseus fought to geder ayenst the two damoyselles of Sythye :.
IN remembrance of this victorye / hercules dide do make in the felde the statue or ymage of a man slepyng in the place where he had putte to deth antheon And ther vn|der he dide do burye the body of antheon / And anone as the ymage whyche was made of the boon of an elle+phant was sette vp there / the neck of the ymage began to sowne like as hit had ben a man slepyng wherfore the mores had afterward the sepulcre in grete reuerence And worshipid the ydole. After this statue thus accom+plisshid by hercules / he wente by tyngie  ampulesie  by many other contrees and querd all the contrey that now is callid Affricque. and gaf all to affer / and affer retorned in to libye. and there he fonde Echee his wyf ded by a greuous sekenes / he toke and made sorow so grete that hit was meruaill. Than for to forgete this so|row. he toke leue of kynge affer and the egyciens. and had supposid to haue departid thens. but as he was in ta+kyng leue. a damoisell strangely arayed cam vnto hym and said / lord of libye the quen of fithie ladyes of e|gipte of capadoce and of asye haue sente me vnto yow / whiche ladies haue late conquerd the said contrees in ta+king vengeance of ^e Infortune of their husbondes now late ded: And abandonnynd their contrey by cause of the grete oultrage that vexoses kyng of egipte made in fithee

And for as moche as ye be of the lygnage of the egyp|cyens / they sende to yow that ye submette yow vnto theyr obeyssance for to do wyth yow that. that shall plese hem / or elles that ye come ayenst hem in batayl~l or elles for to eschewe theffusyon of blood they late yow wete that they haue good right to subiugue yow and that yf there be amonge yow two kynghtes that agayn two of them wolle doo armes at vtterance / they shall delyuere to yow two ladyes in place couenable by condicion / that yf the ladyes vaynquyssh and ouer+come yow / ye shall be holden as vaynquysshid / and be at theyr comandement / And yf your men ouercome the ladyes / they shall be reputed as ouercomen. and shall be sugettis vnto yow :.
HErcules heeryng this mandement  message of the ladyes Answerd vnto the messanger / Damoysell syn that the ladyes of fithee ben so cheuaulerenses that they haue conquerid the grete roya|mes of egypte of capadoce and of asye / they ben sore for to doubte / Neuerthelasse for to eschewe theffusion of blood  for to deffende the affrycans fro their seruage ye shall retorne vnto them and saye / that the batayll of the two knyghtes ayenst two ladies is acorded and agreed vnto them for to be don to morn by the condicion that ye haue sayd. Than hercules affer and many other swore and promysid to hold thyse thynges / and dyde grete honour and reuerence vnto the damoysell::
THe damoisell hauyng don her message as said is / retorned vnto the ladyes / whiche were en|tred a grete way in Affrycque /  tolde to them word for word the answer of hercules. The ouerest

or maistresse of all these ladies was named Synope And had two susters so experte and stronge in armes that they dredde no knyght of the world / that oon was named menalipe  that other ypolite / Anone as these ladies had receyuid thise tidynges of the affrycans they had grete Ioye / And holdyng oppynyon that affrycque was wonne by the strength of ypolite and menalipe / whiche dide meruailles in armes / they ordeind that they shold fight with the two knyghttes. And so for to doo thay made redy ypolite and menalipe. whiche were on the morn redy vpon the feldes:.
AT the oure that was ordeyned / hercules  theseus sittyng on two stronge horses with grete siewte of affricans. rood into the place that the ladies had chosen for to doo armes / There were the two ladies abidyng in a fayre place armed well mounted on good stedes And by them were the ladies in grete nombre / Also sone than as hercules  theseus had aspyed the two damoy|selles. they made them that folowed to stand  come no nere / And sente vnto the damyselles to wete what they wold doo / The damoyselles answerd that they abode the two knyghtes  that they were redy to doo armes agayn them vnder the condicions of their querele / And yf they were come they shold come forthe..
HErcules and theseus wyth thys answere toke their speres / and spored their horses and made signe vnto the damoiselles / and they garnysshid of sheldes  of speres ran agayn them so cheuauloursly that hyt semed that they ne helde of heuen ne of erthe And that at the copyng of theyr sharp speres the stro|kes were so huge  grete on bothe sydes that ypolyte

and theseus bare eche other vnto the erthe / and in lyke wyse dide menalipe and hercules / the affrycans mer|uaillid moche to see the two prynces so born doun / and yet the ladyes of Sythea meruaylled moche more of the damoyselles ::.
WHan the knyghtes of the oon syde and the da|moyselles of that other fonde them self lyyng oon the erthe / Shame and vergoyne smote hem vnto their hertes Neuertheles eche of them releuyd hem lightly and by grete corage toke their swerdes. and ap+prochid eche other / and chargyng and smytyng that oon vpon that other so radely that the armes of the la|dyes and of the knyghtes felte the strookes / ypolyte poursiewed her man theseus / And menalype helde her vnto hercules / The strookes of ypolite were grete and dide grete gryef vnto theseus / theseus enforced hym self strongly to auenge hym. and myght not well come to his purpose / hercules put vnder and ouercome mena|lype lightly with his swerd and put her in his mercy but ypolyte mayntenyd her force so myghtely ayenst theseus / that she had put hym to vtterance ne had hercu+les had ben that sayd to hym / Broder what shall this bee / where is the prowesse of theseus. shal~ that be daun+ted by the chyualerye of a damoysell / yf hit be so. cer|taynly all men shall haue shame of your dishonoure:.
Thyse wordes began to quycquen and to wake agayn the blood of theseus that was afore a slepe / and lyghte the courage in suche wyse that he recouerd a newe force and strengthe / and put hym forth and began to smyte by suche prowesse that he maad the damoysell recreante / and toke fro here / her

swerd / And surmounted her / wherof the ladyes were right doleant  sorouful~ and in especiall the quene Si+nophe / whiche than sente to hercules her armes in token that she was vaynquisshid / prayng hym. that he wold yelde ayen  rendre the two damoyselles / And hercules toke the armes of the quene. and sente to her menalipe and made the pees with her for the affrycans by condy+cion that she shold gyue ypolite in mariage to theseus whiche was amerous of ypolite / So than the wed|dyng was made in affryque with grete honour  wor|ship / And than the ladyes heeryng telle the meruaillous feetes and dedes of hercules. preiid hym alle / And helde hem happy and ewrous to be vaynquysshid of hym:.


How hercules began to wexe amerous of deyanyra And how achelous  hercules had bataill that oon a|yenst that other / and how achelous was vainquisshid.
AFter the conqueste of these ladies. Theseus toke leue of hercules and of affer and retorned in to his contre for to brynge home his lady / And her+cules wente to the see for to goo in to calcedonye whiche lyeth in thoposite of Achaye and of Archade for to see a fayr lady by exellente beawte / that he had herd gretly recomanded by a calcedonien that was in his companye he dide so moche what by see and by lande / that he cam in to calcedoyne / The kynge of that place had to name Oeneus and had two doughters that oon named Dey+anyra / And that other Gorge / Deyanyra was the fayrest. And that was she that hercules cam for to see. whan Oeneus had vnderstandyng  knowleche that hercules cam in to hys contrey. he had grete Ioye / And wente ayenst hym  resseyued hym in enbrasing so

honourably as was to hym possible / In entryng in to hys pallays the quene and hys two doughters gorge and dyanyra wellcomyd hercules / Incontynent as her+cules caste his eyen vpon dyanira that was the moste fayrest thynge that euer he sawe / And that by on desire right depe was enrachyned and roted in the most hole place of his herte / he felte hym self rauysshyd meruayl|lously. This desire entrid in to hercules all full of rayes of loue and entryd in to his herte also sodeynly as the rayes of the sonne passe thurgh the glasse ::.
DEyanira had so moche beaute  was so well accomplisshid / and so relused  shoon amonge the ladyes that to her / myght be maad no com|paryson / not allonly in beaulte / but with ^t in wysedom and bounte. She was the most precious tresour of cal+cedonye / and ther cam many ladyes and damoyselles and other / hys neyghbours were all amerous of her / and soueraynly the kyng Achelous that was strong and puyssant / This kynge had grete seygnourye and marchyd on the royame of calcedonye / whan than her|cules had ben there a space in passyng the tyme Ioyous+ly and in beholdyng the conduyt of deyanira / hyt hap|pend on a day that the messanger of kynge Achelous cam to Oeneus and said to hym. that achelous deman+ded of hym yf he wold gyue hym his doughter / and yf he wold not gyue her to hym at thys tyme / he wold moleste and greue his contre  wold make hym warre Of this mandement Oeneus was strongly troublid and answerd the messanger that on the morn he wold gyue hym an answer / All that day oeneus was pen|syf and symple and abode allone / and for to passe his

melancolie he cam to hercules / whan hercules sawe hym so pensyf / he coniured hym in suche wyse that he shold telle hym the cause of his pensifnes / whiche told hym and said. Lord hercules syn hit pleseth yow to knowe of myn anoyance and greef / I shall anon telle yow the cause / Ther is here by a kynge my neyghebour na+med Achelous grete and fiers and prowd / whyche by many tymes hath requyred of me to haue to his wyf deyanira my doughter / I haue not ben in will to accorde the maryage / ffor as moche as I knowe this kynge a man of ryght euyll lyf. And for this cause I haue had many menaces of hym. And also this day his messan+ger is yet comen agayn to me and hath sayd to me that yf I gyue hym not my doughter at this tyme. that he will make me warre / Certes hercules yf ye see me pensyf / Hyt cometh to me by this occasion. ffor I haue not yet gyuen hym hys answer / But I muste gyue hit hym to morn / Neuerthelesse I haue concluded in my self that I wyll not gyue vnto hym my doughter / And than whan I see veryly that by the reffuse of my doughter hyt muste nedes bee that the warre be open betwene the forsayd kynge Achelous and me I knowe well that I am dysplesyd. ffor warre is the eternall exyl|lement of the contre / Perdycion and waaste of the peple and of goodes .
SIre sayd hercules hyt is force vnto a man that he take and bere alle that fortune wyll. As ye saye warre is not encresyng of peple but dymunycion allewaye by that hole hyt behoueth to passe / Hyt is expedyent that a man reioyse hys ryght. Ryght con|forteth the courage of a man. And also the corage of a

man conforted bryngeth hym ofte tymes to gloryous victorye / A beste rurall disgarnysshyd of raysonable engyne fighteth for his hole and neste with his clawes with his feet teeth and wyth his becke / what shall a man sensible and endowed with entendement  rayson doo yf ony assault and namely in his owen land and terrytorye come / Nature wyll and enseygneth that where corperall force faylleth / vygour and vertue of courage werken / and that they fyghte for their contrey Take courage than in yowr right / and late saye your entente vnto your enemyes ye haue receyuyd me wor|shipfully / and in my receyuyng thise tydynges ben come I shall helpe yow yf hit be nede / and I suppose yf ache+lous assaylle yow he shall repente hym::.
By thyse wordes the kynge Oeneus conforted hym self gretly / the day drewe ouer / On the morn oeneus called the messanger of achelous and said to hym. that he come no more to demande his doughter / and that he was not auysed to gyne her to his mayster /  furthermore yf he meuyd warre ayenst hym for this cause. he had Intenco~n to defende hym vnto the deth of the last man of all hys peple. The messan|ger retorned with these wordes and told hem to ache|lous and all that he fonde. Achelous was euyll con+tent with kynge oeneus /  as he that was ouer moche smyten with the loue of deyanira. began to assemble his men of armes in Intencion to make warre on kynge oe+neus. and to take fro hym his doughter / hercules was than in calcedonye and ofte tymes he was with deyani+ra in gracious deuyses. he fonde her so well adressid in all honeste manyers. that all day he was the most

parte with her And in the nyghte he dide not but dreme and thynke on her / how be hit he said no thynge to her that touched his amerous desires / willyng fyrst to shewe there his power in armes / hit happend on a day he opend a wyndowe that was on the gardyn of deiamra And castyng his eyen a doun he sawe deyanira that sat vpon a grene place acompanyed of many ladyes and damoyselles / Than he sette all his entendement to con|templare thexcessiue beaulte of her / After he desired her / And in coueytyng  desiryng he said. O deianyra that haue not the prerogacion to knowe the hertes and the thoughtes of the men / yf I shold saie to yow the tenthe parte of the loue  desires that I haue in yow / ye mighte not beleue hit / I haue goon many a contre. and seen many a royame. and many a tresour I haue desired  many a thynge. But of all for to come to myn aboue / I was ne+uer in so grete thought as I am for to gete your grace:.
THe same oure that hercules spack by hym self / Deyanyra was not ydell. She that had hercu+les in her mynde and remembrance in her herte than beyng ryche wyth the poyntes of loue sowen by|twene variacions of hope and despayr / was esprysed in alle her vaynes wyth the heete of fyre that brenneth amerous hertes / the fire brennyng was stronge  right hard to quenche the right percyng spacle / she leyde her doun vpon the grasse / And began to saye in her engyne / Alas hercules what shal~ deianira doo she may not come and attaine vnto your loue / I was wonte not longe syn not dayne to behold the men /  than said. ^t neuer prince ne kynge shold haue my loue / now I am all of another

nature / and ne desyre other thynge but that I myght be your wyf / I had supposed to haue remayned and con|tynued a stable virgine / and only disdaineuse of ^e men agayn the requestes and amonycions of the ladyes / These ben now well other tydynges / with thyse wor|des she cesed a litil~ and began to thynke on many other thynges / At this poynt as she thought on hercules. and hercules on her Tidinges cam theder that Achelous cam theder for tassiege the Cyte by lande and by see / and that he was right nyghe by / ffor these tidynges aroos in the pallays a ryght grete murmure / that cam to the ceres of hercules and of deyanyra. their spyrites were trauersyd in suche facion that hercules lefte to beholde deyanyra / and the damoysell lefte to thynke on hercu+les. and bothe two wente vnto the kynge oeneus:.
ANone as hercules cam vnto the kyng / and that the kynge sawe hym. he wente ayenst hym and said to hym that his enemyes were right nyhe the Cyte / hercules answerd Ioyously / that hyt beho|ueth to goo feste hem. and that he doo putte hys peple in armes / at the answere of hercules the kynge dyde do|sowne to armes / and with the sowne all calcedonye was meuyd and eche man adoubed hym. hercues and his grekes were redy in a lityll space / The calcedonyens assemblid by grete companyes in the palais / whan they were assemblid the kynge and hercules brought them in to the ffelde / and hercules put hem in ordenaunce / that doon he dide hem marche / and so exployted the calcedo|nyens  grekes on an after dyner / that they cam  fond their enemyes and approchyd them so nyhe that ther was nothyng to doo but to smyte and laye on / hercules

had maad two bataylles / oon and the fyrste of his pe+ple / and that other of the calcedonyens whan they cam to the poynte to mete. Hercules wente to the calcedo|nyens and in the presence of the kynge sayd to them / lo here ye may see your enemyes that sette lytill by yow ffor they ben come in to your lordshypp to assaill yow I pray yow that the grete oultrage of them abate ne+mynusshe youre corages / ye oughte here to haue the fy|erste of a lyon the puyssance of an ellephant and appe|tyte of a gryffon for to delyuere yow wyth oute ende fro the enemyte of kyng Achelous. in keping your con+tre. your domynaco~n. your honour / your tresours. your wyues. your chyldren. and that more is your lyues Bee ye than enuyous to do well / be ye aglouted wyth desyre of vengeance / be ye coueytous to gete worshyp and glorye / yf ye esuertue not your self at this tyme / ye may not haue but mendicyte or seruytude or deth / ffor your enemyes shall doo vnto yow all the euyll of the world / yf they haue victorie ouer yow. Thise wordes wroughte in the hertes of the calcedonyens and gaf to them corage merueylously / And all full of oon ryght good will desired the medles / whan hercules had achie+uyd his exortaco~n he wente to the bataill / for hit was at the point to fighte. Than were ther grete cryes on that oon side  on that other / Tabours. trompettes. clarions. hornes  busynes began to sowne. knyghtes began to meue at thentree of the bataill. hercules and the grekes shotte  drewe largely vpon their enemyes / And made achelous all abasshid for as moche as he hoped not to haue found so grete resistence with the calcedonyens Than they casted her eyen vpon the banyer of hercules / 

seeyng the grete lyon that was paynted therm / they be|gan to ymagyne that there myght be hercules of whom was spoken thurgh oute all the world for his vertues and his strengthe::.
WHan they were thus ymagenyng the shotte failled with grete occision of them of the party of Achelous / whan the shotte was so faylled hercules toke his swerd / and fourroied amonge them of Achaye. that were in the first fronte of the batayll of achelous / and there maad an hoole so grete that the calcedonyens and yconyens wan vpon them at the first Ioynyng / and mae that other partye to recule and go a backe. wherof achelous had grete sorowe / and he toke to hym .xx. knyghtes whiche were chosen and cam and reng  ith them there. where hercules defra+yed and brake the batayll of achayens / There he ap|prouuyd his corage Amorous this stronge geant. and his cheualerye so vayllyantly that the grekes entryng taryed and abode / and also hercules. ffor they dyed their swerdes and the erthe with their blood. and bete doun many yconyens. And there was the stryff so grete that men myght see nothynge ellys but heedes and ar|mes fflee in to the ffelde. hercules smote no strook but hit coste to achelous the deth of a man. Achelous in like wyse strook for strook smote doun oon of his enemyes The residue of their folke dide the best they cowde / uow before now behynde. and yet myght neuer thachayens confounde and put aback theyr aduersaryes howe be hit they were allwey fowre agaynst oon and thy cho+nyens also myght not preuaill vpon the achayens fo as moche as they were in grete nombre. And they had

alleway fressh peple and newe / In this maner the two puissances fought to geder more than foure oures / loue wrought sore there in hercules  in achelous. bothe two made their swerdes to florisshe couerid with blood / they mette ofte tymes and smote eche other / but neuer durst achelous abide to fore the swerd of hercules for the or|rible strookes that he sawe hercules gyue / but he putted hym in the prees as sone as he had smyten hym or had greuyd hym:.
IN this bataill hercules dide wondres  meruailles. Oe+neus toke a grete playsir to behold hym. And thachay|ens had therin displaisir / ffor they that seyghe hym were no more assewrid to escape the deth / than he that feleth the swerd in his nekke in the hand of a tyrant. There res+syuid no man a strook of hym but he abood in the place he made so grete slaughter that no man can well write In the ende kynge oeneus with all his calcedoniens cam to the bataill / In his comyng the achaiens reseyuid losse vpon losse  parill vpon parill. The kyng oeneus made many of his enemyes to dye / hercules shewid his puys|sance more and more / By his well doyng he putte tha+chayens alle oute of araye. and after in to flyghte / And the losse of the felde torned gretly vnto the dom|mage of kynge Achelous. ffor hercules chassed hym hountously in to hys shyppy and maad hym to lese twelue thousand Achayens ..


How hercules put to vtterance the kyng Achelous And how he espowsed deyanyra :.
AFter this vitorye whan hercules sawe that the kynge Achelous sauyd hym self by the see / He called the kynge oeneus and sayd to hym that

he wold poursiewe his enemye / and that he wold de|lyuere the world of hym. and after toke two honderd of his chosen men. and toke leue of the kynge oeneus and wente to the see / folowyng after Achelous reco|mandyng hym to gorge and to deyanira. In this nyght oeneus after the departyng of hercules retorned in to cal+cedonye / and tolde his wyf and his doughters the hyhe prowes that hercules had doon in the batayll / and how he had chaced his enemyes / and how he was goon af|ter with two honderd men. The ladyes gorge and dey+anyra were right Ioyous of the victorye / but hit anoy+ed hem sore that hercules wyth so lytyll a companye poursyeued achelous / and aboue alle other deyanyra was gretly anoyed and greuyd of thempryse of hercu+les so sore that she wente in to her chambre and was constrayned to wepe and not to haue Ioye in hert |to the retorne of hercules / ffor to retorne vnto the pur|poos of hercules / whan he was put vnto the poursiewt of achelous as said is he entrid in to his royame. and siewed hym so nyhe that he was constraynd to wyth|drawe hym in a ryght stronge castell standyng by the see / hercules aseged achelous in this castell / whan ache+lous sawe that hercules poursiewed hym with so lityl~ companye as wyth two honderd men only / he callid hys frendes and hys conduytours / and amonge other thynges told hem that hit was shame to them to suffre to be asseged wyth so lytyll nombre of peple. They answerd that he had sayd trouthe / And concluded that the same oure they wold yssue out and reyse and breke the syege / and forthwith they sowned to armes wyth shorte counceyll / hyt was not longe after that

they yssued out of the castell / hercules aspyed hem and knewe that they cam to the bataylle / he sette hys men in araye / After he wente allone to fore vnto his enemyes as he that dowted of no thynge / whan Achelous sawe hym come he began to make a grete sighe / And escryed his peple vpon hym / sayyng that hit was he with the clubbe that had chassed hym out of calcedonye / and pro+mysed grete yeftes vnto them that beste furnysshid hym with strokes / but whan his folk knewe that hit was hercules / they made curtoisie eche to other for to go afore And tremblyng as the leef on the tree they durst not a|bide the weight of the clubbe / but withoute smytyng of ony strook torned their backes  fledde vnto the castell.
AChelous Seeyng the poure conduyte of hys folke And the drede and feer that they had of hercules / wende he shold haue deyd for so|rowe / wente and entryd agayn wyth them in to the castell. And hercules retorned wyth his peple lawgh|yng of the poure guydyng of his enemyes / Hercules began than to thynke on deyanyra. And Achelous be|gan to ymagyne how he myghte adommage the calce|donyens. he had there oon of hys captayns that sayd vnto hym. Syre ye knowe well that your strength may not compare vnto the strength of your enemyes / we ben ten agaynste oon but that may no thynge helpe vs. ffor allonly the clubbe of the myghty geant that is wyth them is ynowh for to burye vs alle and also for to destroye your royame. Consydere ye than syn hit is so that open puissance and playn descouerte strength at eye may not be vsed at this tyme. hyt is expedyent

to ymagyne some subtylte for to greue the calcedony|ens / and hyt is myn adnys that there shall be maad a grete flamyng light in the see suche as I shall well de|uyse / that by that moyen they that haue beseged vs may ben deceyuyd lightly. This flamyng light muste be by nyght / and hit shall be grete and Inpetuous we shall make hit secretly / anone as oure enemyes shall see hit they shall lepe oute of their tentes. and they shall goo vnto the see for to see that meruaille / parauenture with oute ony armes / ffor they drede ne fere vs not. And than we shall spryng on them and shall fynde them disgar|nysshid and vnpurueyed of theyr armes. and conse|quently hyt may ensiewe that of them alle we shall make a notable delyuerance :.
WHan Achelous herd this counceyll / hyt semed to hym good / and wolde that hit were put in effecte in suche wyse as he had deuysed. The de+uyser dide do make an honderd torches. whiche were achyeuyd in fyften dayes / Duryng thyse fyften dayes hercules assaylled many tymes the castell. where ache+lous was in / but he myght neuer do no thynge therto ffor the fortresse stode vpon the see and in a strong con+tree /  myght not be goten by assault / And achelous myght haue no socours fro no parte / ffor betwene this castell and Achaye was a grete contrey / whan the fyf+ten dayes were passid and the torches were maad / on a night whan hit was paisible of wynd  of storme They that conduyted the torches yssued out of the cas+tell four of them vnto the hauen wher as was left but oon lityl~ boot whiche was a ground. and had not in longe tyme afore be put to the see / And yf ye demande

where the shippes were become that Achelous brought to this poort / I saye yow that hercules had do take them and sente hem in to the see / to thentent that Achelous shold not ascape hym ner take away the shippys by nyght / The Achayens than comen to this lityll boot ly|yng on the ground. dide so moche that they brought hit a flote on the see also secretly as they coude. and entrid therin with all / that to them was necessarye / And the kynge Achelous putte hym self in a busshement with a thousand of his men In a place nyghe where as hym se|med that the calcedonyens wold goo out for to see the lyght that shold be made. Than whan they that were in ^e se knewe that hit was tyme to lighte their torches they sette them a fire / And sette them round a boute the masre where in were made as many hooles as were tor+ches / And so as they had ymagyned they dyde / Anone the knyghtes that kepte the wacche of the Oost of her+cules sawe hit. And all sore a meruaylled of this light awooke hercules and his felawes. and shewed them the light and clerte :.
ANone as hercules sawe the resplendissour of the torches / he wold knowe what hit was / And than he approched the ryue of the see  his felawship with hym. / he had not ben longe there / whan the kynge Achelous dide do lyghte an honderd torches that he had pourueyed. and after he sprange out of his enbusshement wyth his thousand men / and ran vpon hercules and assailled hym  all his men fiersly / But whan hercules sawe them discouere / he sette his peple in ordenance the beste wise he might. by the light of the ster+res / and receyuid his enemies frely wherof began a right

dolorous bataill / ffor that oon smote on that other right felonsly / and ther were many wounded and deed / the scarmousshe was grete / Achelous wende to escar|mousshe / but he was scarmousshid hym self vnto thef+fusion of hys blood / ffor hercules amonge alle other smote hym on the helme / that he foundrid  gaf hym a wounde on his heed that the blood russhed out / and more ouer he toke hym. and delyuerid hym to twelue of his men to kepe / ther were grete Cryes and grete ha+bondance of strokes of swerdes / Than were the torches quenched and put out by the Inpetuosyte of the smy+tyng on the achayens whyche desired strongly for to rescowe their kynge / they abandoned their lyues in the heet / But whan their torches were quenchid lityll  a lityll they began to coole them and wythdrewe them for they sawe not a drope / whan they were wyth|drawen / hercules assemblid his folke and said to them that he wold goo assaye yf he myghte take the castell in this trowble / And that they shold folowe hym har+dily and fiersly / and anone after he sawe his enemyes retorne vnto the castell / he ran after and retayned hem And putte hym self in the thikkest of them. and smyting wyth his clubbe on the right syde and on the lifte syde that he made a right large place and way / and by thi waye he ladde hys peple vnto the yate of the castell / where he entrid with them that fledde / and there maad so grete occysion of his enemyes that wyth lityll resis|tence that same nyght he putte to deth twelfe hnderd
and the other fledde in to the cyte of patrace fro whens they were / In this batayll and in the batayll that had ben in calcedonye / Alle the men of achaye were slayn / 

Reseruyd aboute a foure honderd whiche saued them by fleeyng / ffor Achelous had taken all his men with hym / His contre and hys cyte of patrace was all dest|royed / whan hercules had taken the castell After he wente in to the contre and in to the cyte of patrace / And entryng in all places with oute ony resistence / he trans|lated this roiame in to the hand of kyng Oeneus / And he abood not longe after that he had subdned this roy|ame but he departed retorned in to calcedome as hasteli as he myght for to see deyanira / And there he was recey+uyd with so grete glorye. Ioye  tryumphe that noman can reherce ne write. The poetes escryue  write this con+quest that hercules made vpon achelous / ffaynyng that Achelous fought first in guyse of a man. and that than he was vaynquysshyd / After he chaungyd hym self in guyse of a serpent / this is to vnderstande in subtyllesse and in malyce as he dide in assaillyng hercules by night ffinably he fought in the guyse of a booll / And that her+cules brak his oon horne / That is to vnderstand that at the laste Achelous was fiers as a booll / ffor he deyde well nyhe for pryde and sorowe that he was taken / And that hercules brake hys horne / that is to vnder|stande that he brak his royame and destroyed hit:.


How Nessus rauysshid deyanira fro hercules whan he passid wyth her ouer the ryuer / And howe hercules slewe Nessus with an Arowe.
GRete was the ffeste than. that the kynge Oene+us maad for the victoryes that hercules had a|chyeuyd vpon kynge Achelous / for he doub+ted hym passyng sore Hercules at hys comyng presen|ted to hym Achelous and his royame and said to hym

that he shold haue hit with oute ony reffuse / The kyng oeneus sente kynge achelous in exyle / And helde hym self gretly bounden and beholden to hercules whom he honoured meruaillously / than hercules toke to his herte agayn the ryght amorows regardes. and also in like+wyse dide deyanyra. she had souerayn Ioye to see hercu+les / and desired none other thynge but for to see hym / what shall I make longe processe / whan hercules had ben there a space / he requyred kynge Oeneus that he wold gyf hym his doughtre to wyue / Oeneus wyth right good will agreed and acorded to hym / and deya+nyra consented with better wyll / The weddyng was solempnysed pompsly and solempnly. and wente to bedde and laye to geder / And sone after whan hercu+les sawe that his fader in lawe had his roiame in peas he toke leue of the kynge oeneus and departed fro cal|cedonie with deyanira and his peple for to goo by lande in to his royame of yconye / hercules had allwey in his Iourney deyanyra by hym. he louyd her sore and had grete solas in her beaute / and yf he had not studied with athlas / he coude not haue absteyned hym for to beholde her beaute / In passyng the tyme plesauntly in the ma|nyer that folke do that ben newe maryed. hercules Iour+neyed so ferre that he cam to a quarter of thessaylle / where as the ryuer of hebenus renneth / and arryued on this ryuer / whiche was depe and brood rennyng In|petuously. and had nether brigge ne plancke to passe ouer / But there was a centaure named Nessus that practyqued there his lyf by the mene of a lityll boot In the whiche he sad the peple ouer the ryuer :.
WHan hercules had founde this passager Nessus

he cam to hym and demaunded hym how he and hys folke myght passe the Ryuer / Nessus that knewe her+cules syn the tyme that he had vaynquysshyd his fe|lawis at the weddyng of pyrothus Answerd to hym that he myght not passe the ryuer but by his lityll boot And yf he wold passe / / he wold wyth a good will do hym the pleasir to sette hym ouer / Hercules thanked nessus / And for as moche as he sawe that the boote was but lityll And that the tyme was disposed to rayne / he wold that deyanyra and her damoyselles shold passe fyrst / Deyanyra and her maydens entryd in to the boote / whan they were therin / Nessus rowed And in the rowyng he behelde deyanyra / And he sawe her so moche that her beawte deceyuid hym. ffor as sone as he was come ouer on that other syde /  he toke deyany+ra / and sayd that she shold be his wyf / / And than in the rauysshyng of her he toke her on hys sholders and bare her a way / wherfore deyanyra  her damoyselles made grete cryes / And hercules seeyng that the olde ge+ant bare away deyanira. whiche he wold resiste to his power / bende his bowe and shotte an arowe vpon the geant with so grete myght and connyng / that he smote hym on the ryght syde vnto the herte. And gaf hym the dethes wounde: Thee bowe of hercules was so grete and stronge that no man coude bende hyt but hym self / how be hyt that nessus by hys wounde that hercules gaf hym began to fele thappchyng of the deth  to suffre sharp anguissh / allway he ran a grete while after vnto a valeye. where he ouerthrewe. and considering that his lyf had no rescows / he enploied ^e ende of his lyf to yma+gine how he might do displaisir to hercules /  remembrid

that he had terryble poysen vpon hym  mortall / And sayd to deyanyra by grete malyce / Lady the loue of yow hath caused me to resseyue the deth / whyche me displeseth not so sore / as doth that cruel~ hercules shall reioysse yow / whyche are worthy to haue a worthy man / hercules is no trewe husbonde / but the vntrewest to his wyf that euer was / and for as moche as I haue synguler pyte of yow / and that your beaulte constray|neth me to do yow pleasyr / I shall gyue yow here a pre+cious thynge / and hauyng suche vertu / that yf ye boyll hit with oon of the shertes of hercules with the blood that renneth out of my wounde / and yf than ye gyue the sherte to hercules and that he were hit / he shall ne+uer after loue other woman ner lady but yow::.
And with thise wordes the geant toke the poison and temprid hyt wyth his blood and wonde hit in a lynnyn cloth and gaf hyt to deyanyra / The folish deyanyra adioustyng credence to the geant toke the poyson / the geant charged her that no man shold towche hit bare / sayng that than hit shold lose his vertu after the towchyng. and with that he gaf vp his goste and dyed pytously / And deyanyra ascapyd fro his handes. pourposyng that she wold kepe that poyson secrtly at alauenture for to helpe her self / yf hit were nede / In the mene whyle that these thynges befell betwene deyanyra and the geant / hercules was not at hertes ease for deyanyra / he was in grete dystresse whan he sawe nessus here away his wyf / Assone as he had smyten hym on the right side with his arowe as said is / he vnclothed and despoilled hym self / and caste his gowne his harnoys and his clobbe ouer the water

by grete strength And after he sterte in to the water / and swamme ouer vnto that other side / And than as he dide on his arayment agayn / Deyanira acompanyed with her damoyselles that folowed her cam agayn to the ry|uer garnysshid with the cursid poyson / whan hercules sawe deyanira retorne / he ymagyned anone that he had slayn the geant / And wente ayenst her and demanded where the traytre was / Deyanira answerd not at the fyrst to thys demande / but sayd to hym / Alas my lord in what parill haue I ben. what oppression what destruc+cion of Ioye hath destrayned myn herte / The traches of myn armes where yet is seen the prynte of the handes of the geant shewe in what displaisir I haue been. The cur+sed glouton geant bare me vnto the depthe of a depe va|leye. where the deth procedyng of the strook of your arowe made hym to falle doun. And he wold neuer late me goo vnto the laste syghe of deth. Certes I haue suffrid a grete Ieoparde / but thankyng be to the goddes / syn I haue found yow agayn. And knowe ye veryly that I am auenged of myn enemye. whom I haue seen depe miserably / wherof I am all reioyed glad agayn:.


How hercules fought agaynst the serpent of palu of lerne and slewe hym :.
Deyanira  hercules kyssid eche other by right grete loue / After hercules wente in to the place where the geant laye ded. and for as moche as he fond hym priued of his lyf / he lete hym lye there to the bestes  to the birdes and toke his arowe ^t laie by hym And thys was the arowe that Achilles was slayn with after in ^e temple of phebus in troie for ^e loue of po+lixene / Than hercules  deiamra cam agayn to the ryuer  / 

hercules sette ouer his men and wente fro that place in to the Cyte of lerne / The kynge of thys Cyte dide grete honour to hercules and receyuyd hym as honourably as he myght and cowde / Amonge dyuerce deuyses her+cules demaunded hym of hys tydynges / the kynge an|swerd and sayd that he knewe none other / but that in a grete palus there dwellyd and abood a monstre half man and half serpent that wasted and destroyed all his royame by comun murdre / ffor he said that all the men women and Chyldren that thys monstre can fynde he sleeth hem with his tayll that is enuenymed and with his hande armed / he deuoureth and destroy|eth them with his teth / and ther escapeth none And so hit behoueth that thys contre be deserte / ffor the labou|reurs ne marchans dare not go by the contre lasse acom+panyed than two honderd men / And yf they be lasse the monstre assaylleth them and destroyeth them lyke as he hath doon many other ::.
HErcules was passyng glad and Ioyous of these tidynges and sayd to the kynge. Syre I haue labourd yet hederto for the comyn wele of many royames / yet haue I the wyll to perseuere and to do the werkes of vertu / knowe ye than syn that I am here arryued / that I shall do somwhat for the wele of this contre / lyke as I haue doon for many other / and I haue entencion for to putte me in deuoyr to morn on the waye toward the monstre / and for to abyde thauen|ture for to vaynquysshe hym or to be vaynquysshid of hym / This monstre was called ydre for as moche as he dwellyd in the waters / Whan deyanyra herde then|treprise of hercules that he wold go allone abandonne

hym self in so grete parill she began to wepe  make so grete sorowe / that no man myghte pease her / ner make her stynte her wepyng / hercules conforted her the beste wyse he coude / Athlas  philotes conforted her in lyke+wise. and shewed to her the right hyhe and glorious dedes of hercules / ffor to gyue her hope in hys aduenture All that myght not helpe ner auaylle / she louyd hercu|les with all her herte wyth all her myght  puyssance She required hym with her eyen charged full of teeres that he wold absteyne hym fro so hyhe an enterpryse / saying ^t hit was no wisedom a man to expose hym self to so euydent terryble daungers / And that the goddes had sente the monstre in to the contre for to corryge and chastyce the peple / Alleway how be hyt that hercules was sore ardau~t in the loue of her / yet her teres that she wepte ne her prayers ne her remonstrances myght not cause hercules to breke his pourpose for to achyeue his aduenture / But on the morn erly adoubyd hym. And departyd fro lerne and toke his way toward the pa+lus where as was the monstre:.
THys palus was longe and thre myle in compaas as the croniques of spayne reherce And all enuyro+ned with fontaynes that sprang out of the hyhe mon|taygnes / In myddis of this palus was a grete lake or ponde / wherin dwellyd the ydre on drye lande / whan than hercules was come to this palus / The ydre ^t neuer slepte wyth bothe eyen and that had alewey the nekke stracchid on hihe  the eeres open. had anone aspied hym and sodainl cam ayenst hym rennyng by a grete radeure / hercules abode whan he aspyed the meruaillous monstre

and had grete playsir to see hym / he was ten foote of heyghte / and as longe a taylle / he was fowle  couerd with heer / he had the body armed /  in his right hande helde a naked glayue / and in the lyfte hand he bare a shelde / hercules thus beholdyng hym suffryd hym to come to hym. Than the monstre spack to hym and sayd Poure geant whyder goste thou / behold this glayue sharp on bothe sydes cuttyng / yet was ther neuer man that herde me speke / but he dyed by the poynt of thys glayue / ffor as moche as I am the moste wyse creature that euer nature maad / and that I am acustomed to make a questyon to suche men as I fynde / and them des+troye yf they can not answer therto. and for as moche as I ne fynde in my royame / but peple as bestes  / with oute entendement / I haue therfore destroyed their blood and so shall I do thyn yf thou anste not assoylle a so|phyme that I shal~ make to the. O thou man serpentyne sayd hercules / thyn eloquence. thy prudence. thy cruell glayue foule and pollute of infinytes homycides make me no thyng abaisshed ne discorage me / I seke the and am comen hether for to destroye the. And I shall not assoylle oonly oon of thy sophymes / but as many as thou canst thynke / and wole well that thou knowe that yf by force of thy sophymes and fallacious argu|mentes thou make me Innocent / I shall doo vnto the lyke as thou woldest do to me / and yf hit happe that thy scyence may not ouercome me / yet woll I well that thou defende the with armes. and that thou kepe thy lyf as well as thou canst ::.
Wyth these wordes the monstre maad vnto hercules seuen sofymes oon after an other so fallacio and

fo subtyll / that whan hercules had gyuen solucion to oon / the monstre replyed by seuen argumentes / Allway hercules that was full of philosophie and expert in all scyence. Answerd so solempnly to all his fallacious argumentes that he surmou~ted hym / And for this cause the poetes fayne that this ydre had seuen heedes as hyt appereth in the first tragedye of seneca / / and sayen that whan hercules had smiten of oon of his heedes. that seuen other heedes cam agayn in the same place / / In the ende than for to poursiewe this matere whan hercules had so des+puted ayenst the serpent that he yelded hym to hercules in suche wyse as he wist not what to saye / than hercu+les sayd to hym: Serpent Inhumayn we haue fough+ten longe ynowh wyth the tonge / Take thy glayue I may no lenger wythholde my hand for smytyng vpon the And assaye yf thou art as subtyll in armes as thou arte subtyll in langage. Poure fooll said the serpente whiche was full of pryde / knowest not thou that by my partie serpentyne I haue enfected all this contr / and I shall this day drynke thy blood and deuoure thy bo|dy wherfore make good wacche / and kepe the well:
WIth oute more wordes hercules enhaunsed hys glayue for to haue smyten hys aduersarye. but he coude not so sore haste hym but the serpent gaf hym fyrste two strokes oon wyth hys glayne and that other wyth his tayll / wherwyth he had almoste smyten hym doun to the ground / Alleway hercules a|bode standing / And with his swerd that he had enhaun+ced he smote the monstre vpon ^e helme by suche strenght that he all to frusshed the helme  made hym a wounde

in his heed of this strook that the serpente felte he was full of furour and with his glayue smote hercules the second tyme vpon the helme with so grete myght that the sparklis  the fyre flewe out / And the helme was broken / Hercules that neuer to fore had receyuyd so grete a stro ok / escryed hym that he wold auenge hit / And smote hym rightyrously / their strokes were grete and mortell / they smote eche other longe / and they were bothe two of grete corage / But whan fortune had ynowh cherisshid hem bothe / she torned ayenst the serpent so certainly / that after many strokes hercu|les smote his trenchyng swerd wyth in the helme in to his heed and bare hym doun dede vnto the erthe.
HErcules had grete ioye whan he sawe the mon+stre put to vttrance / he wente for to fecche the kinge of lerne / deyanira /  his folke /  brought hem for to see this monstre / whan he had shewid hem the monstre / he made a grete fyre / and lyghte hit / and made sacrefyse vnto the goddes. And by the fyre he con+sumed the monstre ydre / werfore there were gyuen to hym grete and right hyghe lonynges  thankynges. And was brought in to the cyte of lerne wyth grete glorye of ladyes  of damoyselles whiche conueyed hym vnto the kynges palays syngyng melodyously. Deyanyra than Ioyed gretly in the tryumphant victo+rie of her noble husbonde. whan hercules had abiden there a whyle / he departed  wente to athenes where theseus receyuid hym gloriously. Than hercules and Athlas helde skole in athenes / for as moche as they of athenes were quyk of engyne and of witte / and gaf hem all to lerne science  there they were a grete while

Introdusyng  enformyng them of Athenes in phylo|sophie  in astronomye. And singulerly In astronomye hercules prouffited in suche wyse / that the estudyents sayd that he susteyned  bare the heuen on his sholders O noble and vertuous man / whan he had vaqued there and studied so longe that his doctryne had gyuen light vnto the athenyenses / he departid fro thens with grete bemenyng and brought his wyf vnto the cyte of lycye And than he was so gretly renomed / that fro all the royames of grece there cam daily to hym noble men and other / for to prouffite in vertue. in noblesse / in honour in armes. in phylosophie. in astronomye and in alle other perfeccion :.


How hercules wente in to spaigne  how he fought in the see ayenst kyng Gerion  vaynquisshid hym and how he toke the cyte of megeda and entrid therin:.
IN the tyme that hercules flourysshed in vertue And that his name was born from royame to royame by gloryous renomee / as rehercen the cronyques of spaygne. There was a kynge of the cyte of megeda that standeth vpon the ryuer of Gawdyane whyche began to make hys name to haue grete bruyt by so many malefices and tyrannyes that no man coude telle the thyrde parte. Thys tyrant had to name Ge|ryon / He was kynge of Andolosye / and Destrema|dure and also of the montaygnes of galyce and of por+tyngale / The poetes faygnen of thys tyrant that he had thre heedes / ffor as moche as he had two brethern grete geantes the whiche were all of oon nature and of oon complexion. And that they were so vnyed to geder

that alle that / that oon wolde / that other wolde / And they were neuer in discord. Geryon was the worste of hem alle / he dide do make a temple in the cyte of me|gida / and ordeyned there / that alle they that were no|ble sholde haue her ymage and sepulture / and that men shold make there the remembrances of alle the men of name / that he shold slee / to the ende that ther shold be a memorye of them in tyme comyng / what shall I saie of his dedes / he and his brethern tyrannysed not all only vpon the estrangers / but also vpon his neyghbours. And had pyte on noman In suche wise that they gate hem an euyll name. And that the affricquans whom they persecuted more than ony other / wente for to com+playne to hercules by the comandement of affer / as to the souerayn destroyar of tyrantes and of monstres / And prayde  requyred hym gretly / that he wolde de|lyuere hem of this trybulacion.
WHan hercules vnderstood the complaynte of the affricans / and was aduertysed of the ty|rannyes that geryon and his brethern made / he enterprysed for to go in esperye / and promysed to the affrycans that they shold haue right shortly tydynges of hym And after axed them of the astate of kynge affer / And whan they had told alle that they knewe they retorned wyht grete Ioye in to theyr contrey. Her+cules fro than forth on disposed hym for to goo in to esperye wherfore his wif deyanira made grete sorowe The renomee of this vyage was anone spredde in alle the contre. In shorte tyme ther cam moo men of armes in to lycye for to serue hercules than he sente fore / he was so good large and wyse. And also so vayllyant and

so free that he gaf allway all his conquestes / wherfore euery man wold folowe hym And good cause why / ffor no man folowed hym ne seruyd hym / but that he rewarded and amendid hym in all hyghe maner and facion. whan than his excersite was redy / he toke leue of his wyf deyanira / And departed oute of the royame of licye. Many a teer was maad at his departyng as well of deyanyra as of hys escolyers that lerned of hym / Theseus and hispan. Athlas and phylotes were with hym. Duryng this vyag  he studyed ofte tymes wyth Athlas / And was neuer ydle / with oute ony aduenture that ought to be remembrid / he aryued in Af|fryque / where he fonde affe / whyche receyuyd hym worshipfully / fro Affrycque hercules passid by the strayt of gybaltar / And wente in to gades. that now we calle gallyce And peplid the contre. for as moche as he fonde there good lande / and delyueryd this peple for to gonerne vnto a noble man named phylistenes This philistenes as bochace reherceth in the genelagie of goddes was sone of phenys kynge of phenyce / And this phenys was sone of kynge Agenor sone of kynge belus / Philistenes than regned in galyce. and was after named the preest of hercules / for as moche as whan her+cules had vaynquysshid the tyrants of esperye. he foun+ded there a temple whyche he helde after in grete reue|rence / Alleway as hercules peupled and enhabited this land / he dide do make pylers or colompnes hyghe and meruayllonsly grete. And sette them vpon the see / And vpon euery pilar or columpne he did do make an ymage of hard stoon in the semblance and likenes of a knyght lyke vnto hercules alle clad wyth the skyn of a lyon

And there was oon of the ymages that helde a table wherin was wreton wyth letters of gold / Passe no further for to seke lande / ne goo for to conquere further ony Royames in the weste / ffor thou shall fynde no more lande :
TThe noble hercules wente than in to the contre / where as stondeth now the Cyte of Seuyle whiche was not than founded / And fonde by hys scyence that there shold be founded a cyte of grete renome / wherfore in memorye therof he edefyed in that place a pilar of hard stones / and thervpon sette an yma+ge holding in his hand wreton that said / that ther shold be maad oon of the grettest cytees of the world / Thys lande of galyse apperteyned to geryon / But than whan hercules had maad this pilar aboue sayd and sette hyt where as now stendeth Seuyle / he had grete will for to begynne to bylde the Cyte / ffor the contrey was pas|syng good and comodious / But Athlas by the scyence of Astron omye councellid hym contrarye / shewyng hym by certayne signes that hit was destyne that ano|ther shold make the Cyte / And therfore nyghe the py|lar / he dide do make a columpne of whyte marble / vpon whiche stode the ymage of hercules grete and riche / that helde oon hand ayenst the Oryent wherin was wreton here hath ben hercules / And with the other hand he she|wid the writyng that. that other ymage helde:.
THese thynges accomplisshid hercules departed fro thens / And lefte to enhabyte and kepe the contre eyghte honderd men of his of the Contrey of sithye that were stronge and experte in armes / And wyth good wylle abood there for the bounte of the

contre. Than wente hercules by the ryuage of the see in to the laste and furthermest partye of Europe And say+lid so ferre that he entrid in to the Ryuer of guadiana where as the terant gerion dwelde and abode in the cyte of megida / The same tyme that hercules entrid in to the ryuere. Geryon wente vp in to the toppe of an hyghe tour where he myght see all aboute the contre for to see yf ony persone cam. vpon whom he myghte excersite his tyrannye. He had not ben longe there whan he behelde vpon the ryuer and sawe the armee of hercules. And seeyng this armee / he had grete Ioye. ffor hym semed well that in all haste he shold subdue and ouercome hem. With oute other delay he assemblid his complyces and sowned to armes / In a lityll while all his men were redy and garnysshid with their armes cam vnto hym for to knowe what he wolde / Gerion was than all armed. and redy for to go  entre in to the batayll He declared to his peple his entenco~n. after he entrid in to his galeyes as hastely as he myght / and wente fro me+gida en approchyng the grekes / Thus rowyng forth hit happend hym that he mette a litill boot / And fro as ferre as he sawe hit come / he wente ayenst hit  arested hit. In this boot were no moo but two maryners  hyspan Gerion than callid hispan  demanded hym whyder he wente  what he was / Certes sire answerd hispan I am a greek / and haue entenco~n to go vnto ^e kyng gerion / that is now in his cyte of megida for to accomplissh a es|sage that I am charged with / Messanger said the kyng yf ye seke gerion / ye nede for to go no further forth. ffor I am he to whome ye speke vnto. Syre answerd his|pan syn ^t ye be he to whom my message apperteyneth / I

lete yow haue knowleche and were / in the name of the vertuous hercules that he is enemye of your vices / And for to correcte your grete and right abhomynable tres|paces and synnes / he is descended in to your domynaco~n Messanger answerd geryon / how is hercules so pre+sumptuous as for to come vpon me for to entende to cor+recte my vices / he wote lytyll with whom he hath to doo / Goo to hym and telle hym / that he shall not so late fynde me / but that hit shall be to soone for his helthe / And that I shall feste hym in suche wyse er he escape me / as I haue ben accustomed to feste strangers:.
Hyspan departed wyth these wordes. and retor|ned vnto hercules also hastely as he myght / and tolde to hym word for word that geryon had sayd to hym / and more ouer he said that he shold mete with hym right soone all prest and redy for to begynne the batayll / whan hyspan had furnysshid his message The galeyes of kynge geryon apperid and were seen fro ferre / Hercules and the grekes had grete Ioye and began a right grete shoutyng in sownyng trompettes. busines and tabours / Geryon and his folke seeyng  heeryng their enemyes / semblably they began to shoute and to make a meruaylous bruyt / The Ayer was than smyten with a right grete and a Ioyous noyse / In this bruyt  in this noyse. The two Oostes approched eche other / At the approchyng were not spared dartes ne rounde stones ne arowes. They of esperye had abondance of dartes whiche they vsed and caste hem on the grekes as hit had ben rayne / The cryes redoublid on that oon syde and on that other / ther were many ded and hurte. They were all men of warre. eche man bare hym vailliantly

And amonge alle other hercules hauyng alleway the bowe in hand slewe as many of hys enemyes as he shotte arowes. The shotte dured longe / Whan hit fail|led they fought hand on hand Tho began the bataill ey+gre and hard / Gerion shewid hym self a man. boystous and well experte in armes  put to deth many grekes but ayenst oon that he slewe hercules slewe ten of the esperyens :.
AT the Ioynyng that the galeyes made ther were many hurte  strokes gyuen / hercules toke his clubbe. and in smytyng one of the galeyes / that wende to haue hurthd borded hys. he smote with so grete force. that he made hit to foundre and that the wa+tre cam In sodaynly that the most part of them that were in that galeye were drowned perisshid with oute strook smytyng. After this hercules came to an ther ga+leye. and there dide he meruaylles of armes Alle they that he raught with his clubbe were ded or sore hurte / Some he smote the braynes out of the heed. And other he brack legges  armes. hyt semed the thondre with hym / he dide so moche that eche man fledde fro hym. and there was no man that withstode hym ner durst abyde hym: Whan he sawe this he putte hym furth to serche the grete affrayes / He leep fro galeye to galeye / And made so grete occisions. that his peple by his good en|sample habounded in valour of corage  of puyssance / And the esperyens dymynusshed lassed And also they had so moche domage. that all thyng wente aga|ynst them And than gerion consideryng. that he myght not but lose and that fortune was enemye vnto hym He sowned the retrayte / And so lefte the batayll.



Howe gerion assayled hercules the second tyme to fore megida. and how hercules slewe his brethern and vaynquysshid his bataylles / And constraynd geryon to flee :
THan hercules sawe hys enemyes attende to withdwrawe hem / he sowned the retrayte also for as moche as hit was nyghe euen And also for as moche as he had enclosed the galeyes of geryon in suche wyse as they myghte not retorne to his Cyte with oute passing by hym / whan the two oostes were withdrawen. Geryon in the derkest of alle the nyght shipped and wente in to the see / And wente to the cyte of valeryte wherof oon of hys brethern was kynge / And put hym there in saeftei in entencion to make the grettest armee that he cowde for to come vpon hercules Hercules after the retrayte he ankred his galeyes vpon the ryuer of gaudiana / And passed there that nyght / On the morn whan he sawe that gerion and hys folk were fledd  were not vpon the see with in kennyng he rowed vp vnto the Cyte of megida. There he toke lande and assayllid fiersly the cyte / Thassault was aygre and sharpe / And deffended hem well the megy|dains / but they were so disgarnysshid of men of warre that they myght not holde hit / but opend the toun to the grekes and yelded hem all in the will of hercules. Thus was hercules lord and maistre of the pryncipall cyte that gerion had / he entrid in to hit and the grekes with hym. There had they good dayes / the Cyte was well garnysshid wyth vytayll Syn they departed out of grece. they fonde nowhere so good fortune / What shall I saie / hercules helde hym there a space of tyme serching

in what place he might fynde gerion / During this tyme he wente vnto the temple. for to thanke the goddes / In this temple were many sepultures garnysshid of right meruayllous historyes. Amonge alle other ther was oon passyng riche / ffor the remembrance of gerion was there. as of a kynge of fyn gold and was enuyroned with .xxx. kynges whos heedes were smyten of. Her+cules abode at this sepulture and demanded of the cyte|zeyns wherof seruyd the statues and ymages so ryche A Cytezeyn said to hym that there were the sepultures of the noble men of their royame. And that the kyng ge+rion had brought vp that custome to make these sepul|cres. for to haue remembrance of them that were vaylli+ant in armes. fforthermore said that same man as sone as in thys contre a man putte ony noble man to deth / Than he doth do make a remembrance of that dede man on hys sepulture: And for as moche as kynge geryon in hys tyme hath slayn thretty kynges. he hath do make thys sepulture that ye see in entencion to be buryed here in the ende of hys dayes / Whan hercules had herd this that the Cytezeyn sayde / he answerd that he helde hym self happy. that he had so escaped the swerd of suche a tyrant. that had putte so many kynges to deth / And maad hys Orysou~s and hys prayers vnto the goddes After thys he retorned to the palays / And there cam vnto hym the messanger of kynge geryon / that by the Auctoryte and power of his Maystre comanded hym to wyde the cyte and the royame. or ellis to make good wacche / Hercules answerd that he was entrid in to the royame and also in to the Cyte wyth strength of Armes. And that he wold not goo oute therof

vnto the tyme that oon had taken from hym his swerd and armes by force of Armes / or vnto the tyme that he had put all the contre in his obeyssance.
THe messanger retorned fro megida with this answer vnto gerion. And tolde hym that hercu|les had answerd to hym / Geryon was wyth his two brethern / they toke the wordes of hercules in|paciently / And sware that they wold auenge hem / ffor to make short werke they wente to the see with a right grete excersite of men of armes they rowed and sayl|led with all the strength they myght vnto megida / the wynde and fortune suffrid them in fewe daies to come and arryue at the porte of megida / And hercules that was aduertysed of their comyng suffrid them to take lande / And lete hem reste that day that they cam there / they were well fyfty thousand men / That tyme that they cam a lande hit was late / Whan they sawe that the grekes made no defence at their landing / they said oon to an other that they durste not come  assaylle hem / And wenyng all to haue wonne of auantage / And thervp|on concluded that on the morn they wolde assaylle the cyte right erly Vpon this conclusion gerion and his bre+thern pouruered them of thynges apperteynyng to the assault / And manassed gretly hercules and the grekes for to sle them villaynsly / Hercules  his grekes were than in megida thynkyng on theyr thynges / not only in the entenco~n for to deffende them fro their enemyee / but for to yssue oute the next day folowyng and for to as+saylle hem by bataill as sone as the nyght were passed Than a lityll to fore the sonnerysyng on the morn / her|cules made two batailles / In the first he put a thousand

fightyng men And enterprised to conduyte hem. In the seconde he put the residue of his armee And made these capitayne of them After this whan he had right well renged his peple and sette hem in right good ordence He amonested hem to do well her deuoyr / And had en|tencion to saye hem certayn thynges. but he myght not furnysshe hem / ffor that same tyme gerion  his brethern and their folk made their Approchis to assaille the cyte And maad so grete a bruyt and noyse that all aboute hit redounded .
WHan hercules herd this bruyt / he dide do opene the yate. for to beholde  see what newe thynge was there. And at ^e yssue out he sawe his ene|mies that hasted hem to come vnto the murraill  wallis with ladders  other habillemes propyce  neessarie to make an assaulte / Than he began to lawhe in hym self And badd his men to folowe hym /  he wente alway forth for to begynne the scarmusshe And assone as the porter had open the yates / Hercules marched vnto the hesperiens bringyng his clubbe with him. Gerion sawe hercules come fro ferre / / he knewe hym by his skyn of the lyon  by his clubbe / And shewid hym to his brethern. that sore meruailled of hym be cause he cam allone vpon hem. so here is oure mortall aduersarie said gerion. he is full of ouer moche pride / and lityll setteth by vs. Late vs assaylle hym all thre  destroye hym hit is tyme / alle the gold of the world shall not saue hym / Hercules wyth these wordes cam so nyghe the thre geantes / that he myght well speke vnto them: And escryed them and said / ye euill tyrantes. leye doun your engyns apper+teynyng to assault / hit is now no time to assaill ^e cyte

but hit behoueth yow to dispose yow to entre in to ba|tayll / The bataill is redy / begynne at me and I at yow And late vs fighte to geder tyll moo come / / wyth thys wordes he enhaunsed his clubbe. and discharged the stroke so sore vpon oon of the thre brethern that caste his shelde to fore the strook / that all astonyed he bare hym to the erthe / Whan gerion and his other brother sawe her broder so born doun and beten / they smote with their glayues vpon hercules by grete maltalent And so en|ployed her strength that they brake parte of his armes with these two strokes of the glayues hercules recey|uyd more than an honderd dartes vpon his body / how be hit the glayues ne the dartes were not so hard tem+prid that they myghte perce. entre ne hurte the armes of hercules / Ne hercules lefte not to werke wyth hys clubbe / but he lyfte hit vp on heghte at that tyme And enployed hit vpon the second broder of gerion so acer|taynly that comyng doun fro the coppr of the helme / he all to frusshid and brusid hym. and smote hym down to the ground right as an hard and grete roche had falle on his heed .
GErion was all affrayed for to see so grete a strook / with a wood. yrous and fiers herte he ascryed vpon hercules And gaf hym so grete a strook vpon his helme with his swerde. that he maad the fire sprynge out / but the helme was so hard that the swerd might not entre / Than was hercules enuyroned with his enemyes / he was smyten in many a place vp|on his body / the hisperiens desired sore to see her swerdes and glayues reed with the blood of hercules / but hercu+les put hym to defence / Ioyous of that he myght enploye

his strength vpon them And whan he proued hym thu vpon oon and other / And wold suffre none come nere / than his Arme and Clubbe myght areche / And that his enemyes more and more cam aboute hym. Maon that was neuewe of vlixes yssued out of megida with the thousand men of the batayll of hercules / And se|yng so grete a peple aboute hercules and were adcerte|ned that he fought there. He and his peple adressid them thederward in bryngyng so grete a bruyt and set|tyng on so vaylliantly. that in brekyng doun all a fore them. cam  fonde hercules that he had slayn moo than sixe honderd of his enemyes / And that he marched vp on non other thynge. They that bare ladders and other engyns were constrained to caste hem doun to ^e ground and to goo to the bataille. the batayll was there felon+nous and hard / And there were knyghtes ynow he slayn. Gerion prouyd hym self terribly. his broder that was first beten. after that he was born out of the prees cam vnto the felde agayn. And in his comyng he maad a grete place amonge the grekes. he was stronge and puyssant / And bare a right heuy guysarme that the cuttyng was thre grete foot longe. He dide meruaylles with this guysarme. And bete doun so many of the gre+kes. that the noyse aroose gretly aboute hym And thys noyse flewe to the eeres of hercules. Than lefte hercules them that he fought with. And drewe vnto the noyse that proceded by cause of the geant / Assone as he sawe the geant / that dyde wyth the grekes as he wolde / He was not well contente with that guysarme. And he enhaunsed his clubbe  smote the geant vpon the sholdre enployng his strength in suche manyere / that ^e sholdre 

the syde he all to brake  bare hym doun to the ground not fully ded. but in worse estate than ded / for he might not releue hym. And muste nedes dye vnder the feet of the men of armes right myserably:.
AT this tyme Theseus and hispane with the resi+due of the grekes cam vnto the bataill right Io+yously / they fonde their enemies with oute araie and withoute conduyte / they fourroyed amonges them playnly / they slewe so many that alle the place was conuerte / Hispan and theseus clefte the heedes of many knyghes vnto the teth / they were right expert in the feet of armes / At their comyng they maad their enemyes to recule / And wan vpon them with so good fortune / that by their cause and well doyng / Gerion loste moo than thertty thousand men. In short tyme the batayll was suche a boute hercules / that hys enemyes wyste neuer where to saue them. And that gerion aduertysed of the deth of the second broder / / torned the back and flewe vnto the see / blowyng his horne / / whan the hisperyens herde the horne / anone they entended sodaynly to putte hem to flight / they that might saue them self sauid them with oute delaye Hercules theseus and hispan wyth a boute twelue honderd grekys folowyd them swyftly they entrid in to some of their shippes. and poursiewed gerion. but they had not maryners so redy as the other had / wherfore they were a lityll taryed / how be hit as ferre as they myght see hercules poursiewid hem only with his twelue honderd men.


How hercules poursiewyd geryon. And how he wente and vaynquysshid hym. and put hym to the deth at the poort of the Corongne.
THus ffinysshid the batayll for this day to the grete domage  dishonour of gerion And all to the honour and prouffit of hercules. Malion abode in megida by thordenance of hercules for to kepe the grekes that abood there and for to take the despoill of their enemyes / Hercules on that other side saillid and rowed after gerion. Gerion perceyuyd hym and was sore a ferd fledd all that euer he myght / The flight dured thre daies / Gerion had good maryners / they kepte hem soueraynly fro the abordyng on the shippe of hercu+les / And they sayllid by the see medeterrane fro ryuage to ryuage / fro flood to flood. now afore  now behinde But the ende was suche that on the fourthe day. they were constrayned to abyde hercules at the bataill vp|on the see. or descende to lande at the Couronge in galyce For to flee alway the deth wherof they were in doubte they lefte the see and toke the lande at a porte ymage|nyng that they shold well deffende hem ayenst hercules ffor they were ten ayenst oon. Anone as they had take land at the poort of the Curongne / they toke  renged hem aboute the poort for to defende the ryuage / whiche was stronge for to take / And than gerion warned his men sayyng / lo nowe is here the oure or the day that we muste dye or ouercome oure enemyes. ffortune hath don to vs the worste she can. She was wonte to make alle estrangers to tremble to fore oure glayues. Now she maketh vs to tremble to fore a right litill nombre of peple / Alas what shame is this / Trewly the shame is grete  we ought to haue right grete repreef so to doo / syn we be in this poynt ther is no way but for to auenge this shame / yf we auenge vs at this tyme / we shall recouure

our worship and honour / In our feet heth right good hoope. for fortune hath brought vs in to a right good poort / and me semeth that she wole reyse vs a gayn  make vs vayncuers of our aduersaries / late vs now defende the poort. Auenge we our blood. auenge we our sorowe. auenge we our domage / hit muste nedes be doon :.
IN the mene while that gerion encoraged thus his folke. Hercules and his felawship ro~wed so nyghe the poort. that they were come to stro+kes smytyng. The hisperiens caste vpon hercules than round stones. dartes with sharp yrons on the ende. spe+res and glayues. Agaynst thys the grekes toke theyr sheldes and couerd them and put hem in deuoyr for to wynne the poort. But the castyng of the hisperyens was so mortall. that hit constrayned their enemyes to abyde and not to aproche the poort. They had at this poort grete habondance of stones. The hisperiens kepte well the entree more than thre oures that the grekes coude fynde no way ne facion to remedye hit / At the ende of thre oures hercules right sorofull to see his men taryed so / he thoughte that he wold entre in to a lityll boot. and auenture hym self allone to wynne the poort Than he that doubted no strook of ony mortall man en+trid in to the lityll boot. And stered hit hymself wyth helpe of the wynde that he had at hys auantage and pullid vp the sayll / And puttyng all in aduenture / as faste as he myght he brought the boot vnto the poort where he cam by his hardynesse / but this was at suche tyme as he receyuyd moo than a thousand strokes with stones / And that his sayll that stode ouer ende by force

of the wynde / was smyten full of hooles and the cordes broken the maste ouerthrowen.  the boot well nyghe fyld with stones / Notwithstandyng all these thynges hercules blemysshid not at all fro his entreprise / he pas|sed by all the strokes of his enemyes. He dide so mo|che that he toke lande And that he put hym amonge the hisperiens. and there he began to smyte with his clubbe on the right syde and on the lyfte syde endlonge  ouer|thwart in suche habondance of prowesse that alle the place was reed of their blood  of their braynes / These and hispan and fifty of the grekes best armed by the example of hercules toke a light boot and aduentured hem self to wynne the poort / Hercules was right at the mouth of the poort / he sawe theseus come And for to make hym haue passage he ran hether  theder / And dide so grete hurte to the hisperiens / that with oute grete daunger / they toke lande and sprange out of the boote. Than was thassault boot and boyllyng. Geryon cam to the descente of theseus and well thre honderd of his men that folowed hym / Alle they smote and leyde vp|on the grekes. of the fyfty they slewe ten. Whan these and hispan sawe that their hertes began to swelle / They encoraged hem self And persid thassamble of geryon: Ayenst oon man that was slayn of theyres they slewe fifty of the hesperiens And theer they vsed so her pro|wesses / that they dide there the grettest meruaylles of the world by armes:.
GEryon deyde for sorowe of that he myght not come to hys aboue of the grekes He and hys men were Aygre as tygres enfamysshid. The grekes were ryght ferme and stronge as olyphantes / 

Their strokes were grete they ne doubted deth ne swerd
but put all in aduenture / The bataill was stronge / the grekes resseyuyd many a wound / Alleway theseus  hispan by their meruayllous prowesses sauyd them fro the deth / And maad hem passe by the grete prees where as was hercules. Hercules that lefte not to smyte / had grete gladnesse in hym self whan he sawe theseus and hispan and their fourty felawis / their comyng coste to gerion the deth of a thousand men and more. ffor hercu+les for to encorage his men and for to be to hem an en|sample of well doing / he adiousted to his dedes strength vpon strength and prowesse vpon prowesse confoun|dyng his enemyes so dredfully and terribly / drawyng hem toward the see. that they that sawe hym  wold well that they had ben in their moders wombes / And that in fleyng they were in haste destressid they bete eche other in the see / And so they slewe eche other them self Than was gerion smyten to the herte with grete yre med+lid with Inpacience / he put hym self in the prees / And smote not only vpon hercules / but vpon the felawis of theseus / he smote the firste vpon the helme that he clefte his hede vnto the teth. After he assaylled another and bare hym to the erthe so astonyed that he wyste neur where he was / Consequently he deliuerid there a right grete assault sodaynly to the grekes. that he dyed hys swerd with their blood. and that the grekes were con+strayned to make a right grete crye for to haue socours:
AT thys poynte the grekes that were lefte in the galeyes / entrid in to the poort  toke lande light+ly / Whan than hercules and his folke herd the crye that his men made / he ran theder to the rescousse / and

made aboute hem a newe noyse grete and anguysshous Gerion knewe anone that the noyse cam be cause of her|cules. ffor he sawe hym come and smyte in the thikkest of the prees / ffor to saue hym self than he toke his folk and fested hem in encoragyng and had there so grete pa+yne / that for oon strook that hercules gaf hym with his clubbe by auenture / he was constrayned to departe fro the prees. and to withdrawe hym a parte with them that were wery / for to take his breth: Gerion brought to his extremyte. caste his eyen vpon the medle  fygh|tyng  sawe the grekes mounte vpon the porte And ex+pose them vnto the batayll / After he sawe how they brought many of his men to vttrance. and ^t he myght not resiste hit / All his losses cam to fore hys eyen. And than he began to syghe and sayd with a dolorous herte alas what is the mutabilite of fortune. and what shal~ be the ende of my daies / flateresse fortune what hast thou thought / All the honours that thou hast gyuen vnto me here to fore / redou~de now to my shame. whan thou hast sente  parted to me so many goodes / Wherfore hast thou sente to me hercules this is the enemye of all my glorye now all quenchid /  fro a shynyng name hath brought me vnto a name all full of derknes At leste yf thou hast gyuen hym suffisance / late hym not come after me by his horrible dedes all my vaynes be remplisshid with feures. myn herte murdrith in es boilling of yre / O what grete vn+happ syn hit muste nedes be that I be Infortunat / I shall verily dye of the clubbe that I haue seen my brethern dye of / or I shall take vengeance / Gerion alle out of hys witte with these wordes putte hym in the prees cryyng geryon. geryon. for to make his men to corage hem self

Thus cryyng and sekyng hercules he put to deth many grekes / he was all furious his glayue was died with the blood of his enemyes / In the ende he cam vnto hercu+les And with his swerd so dyed he smote hym sore. hercules was all wery. ffor with oute cessing he had holde the batayll by the space of foure owres And had receyuid vpon his armes so many strokes that no man cowde telle. This notwithstanding he fledde not at all gerion but cam to hym Ioyously And fought agaynst hym wyth so grete force that alle they that sawe hyt meruaylled / And that after many strokes smyten of ge+rion and of hercules / Hercules smote hym oon strook so grete that he all to frusshed gerion and smote oute the brayn of his heed and smote the helme vpon his shol|ders that he fyll doun ded amonge the ded men in suche wise arayed that he abood there ded:.


How Hercules founded the Cyte of the Coro~igne vpon the tombe of gerion:.
SVche was the ende of the vnhappy lyf of gerion the tyrant / he deyde in like wyse as the two bre+thern dide by the clubbe of hercules / whan the hisperyens sawe hym brought to that sorowe as for to taste the bitter morsell of deth / alle lefte their armes Alle they escried sorofully the deth of gerion. And fill all in desperance / that oon lete hym to be slayn and that other fledde by desertes by montaignes by ryuage of the see And torned alle in disconfyture / whan hercules had espied hem so disrayed / he thanked the goddes / And be+gan for to poursiewe hys enemyes / The poursuyte du|red vnto the euen. The grekes fyld the feldes the mon|taignes / And the ryuage of the see wyth the blood of

them that fledde / Whan the nyght was come hercules  the grekes withdrewe hem in to their galeyes And ete and dranke suche as they had and made Ioyous chere The hurte men were remembrid and conforted them in their victorye / the werye men forgate the labour that they had doon. They rested hem after their trauayll. and passed the nyght ouer / Whan hit was day on the morn hercules yssued out of his galeye / And beholdyng the porte. hym semed that a cyte shold stande well there And sayd that he wold make oon there / And conclu|ded to begynne hit / He sente vnto all places where he wiste that ony peple were there aboutes. And gaf to eche man in knowleche that he was in will to make a cyte there And that the first persone that wold come for to put hand therto shold haue the domynaco~n This thynge was knowen in all galyce / Many cam theder. but a woman named coroigne was the fyrst that cam And therfore hercules gaf vnto her the domynaco~n and made to begynne the cyte  named hit coroigne / In reme~+brance fo the victorye that he had there / vpon the body of gerion he founded a tour / And by his arte composed and made a lampe brennyng contynually day  nyght wyth oute puttyng of ony thyng therto. Whiche bren+nyd afterward by the space of thre honderd yere / more ouer vpon the somette or toppe of the tour / he maad an ymage of copre lokyng in to the see and gaf hym in his hand a myrrour hauyng suche vertue. that yf hit hap|pend that ony men of warre were on the see in enten|cion to do ony harme to the Cyte / sodaynly their Oost and theyr comynge shold appere in thys said myrrour And that dured vnto the tyme of Nabugodonosor

that was aduertysed of the properte of the myrrour / fyllyd hys galeyes wyth whyte thynges and grene bowes and leeues / that hyt semed a wode and that in the myrrour ne apered none other thynge but a wood Wherfore the Coroignyens not knowyng but that her myrrour shewyd to hem garnysshid not them wyth men of armes. like as they had ben accustomed to doo whan their enemyes cam / And thus Nabugodonosor toke the cyte in a morenyng and destroyed the myrrour and the lampe / Whan than this tour was maad. hercu|les made than to come theder all the maydens of the con+tre And dide hem do make a solempne feste in the remem|brance of the deth of gerion / And after he departed fro+thens. and wente vnto megida where were presentyd to hym an honderd oxen the fayrest of the world.


How hercules assaylled the kynge Cacus and had
bataill ayenst hym. and ouercam hym / And how cacus began to tyrannyse in Italye :.
AFter this conqueste as hercules entended to pe|ple  enhabite this newe contrey / tydynges cam to hym. that in the cyte of Cartagene / A kynge and geant regned named Cacus whiche was pas|syng euyll and full of tyrannye / and had slayn by his cursidnes the kynges of Aragon and of Nauerre. their wyues  their children And possessid her seignouryes and also helde in subieccion alle the contrey in to ytaly: Hercules receyuyd right Ioyously these tydynges / and sayd that by the playsir of the goddes he shall assaye yf he may take vengeance of the deth of the kynges of arragon and of nauare / Than he disposed hym vnto this werkes. and hauyng an appetite to correcte the kynge

cacus / as sone as his excersite myght be redy. he wente vnto the royame of castylle. Where as was the kynge cacus in the cyte of cartagene. that stood beside a mon|taigne named monchaio. And passid by many roiames that dide hym obeyssance. for his vertuous renomee: but whan he cam to approche cartagene. the kynge ca|cus cam agaynst hym with desobeysance. and in armes ffor he had ben aduertysed of his comyng: And as he entred in to the frontiers. he sente vnto hym oon of his knyghtes that sayd to hym these wordes that folowe Hercules open tyrant that haste the herte gretter than thy body And that thou woldest assaille the heuenes for to conquere: yf the goddes had gyuen the wynges for to flee as the byrddes haue: yf thou seke pees and loue vnto the kynge cacus thy semblable in complexion and fortune. I salewe the in his name / and yf thou come otherwyse vnto hym as his enemye / I the deffye in hys name. And in no wyse be thou so hardy to entre in to his contrey. And yf thou entre. knowe thou that thou shalt fynde in cacus and in the castyllyens oon so hard an encountre that of the euyll aduenture shall no man of thy companye be quyte .
A Nyght answed hercules what som euer ye be ye shewe not that ye haue the herte of noblesse / ffor hit is foule to alle men. and in especyall to a noble man to myssaye or speke euyll of another man: ye haue callyd me an open and a tyrant publicque And also ye haue compared me vnto the tyrant cacus / I answer yow to thys Artycle. that I am no tyrant / But a destroyer of tyrantes / And therfore ye shall retorne agayn vnto Cacus And sygnefye to hym that

I haue Intencion for to shewe what hate we haue vnto tyrantes / And that in fewe dayes he may proue vpon vs the hard encountre / wherof I haue now receyuid the menaces / With this answer the castylian departed fro the presence of hercules. and retorned vnto the kynge cacus / And tolde hym worde for worde what hercules had sayd to hym / Whan Cacus had herde alle thys / he was all abaisshid / Notwithstandyng that he was a stronge geant and a puyssant / and that he had neuer founden a man strenger than he was hym self / ffor the renome of hercules was than so grete by the vnyuersel~ world / that the moste stronge the moste assewryd in armes and moste happy / doubtyd hym and tremblyd heryng speke of his dedes / how be hit cacus toke corage in hym self / And in musyng the abaisshement In the pre+sence of his nobles he said / Blessid be these next hasty dayes that nature and fortune shall brynge to vs / for to make the proef of our force and strength So beho|ueth that Castyle and secylle shewe thexcesse of their armes for to deffende the kyng cacus fro the clawes of his enemyes / And hit is of necessite semblably that the kynge cacus for his peple desploye and putte forth the abisme of his strength Now forth on my brethern and frendes we ben comen to the wa~rre. The grekes come vpon castile with oute ony quarele / late vs goo agaynst hem and fighte for our contre / the birdes fyght that oon ayenst that other for her nestes. and the dombe bestes for her cauernes Nature entroduceth hem so for to doo / yf we haue the same nature. the tyme is come that we oughte so to doo :.
WHan the castelians and the aragonnoys that were

there herd cacus so speke they preysid gretly his corage And answerd all by oon wys / that they were redy to assaylle their enemyes. With this answer the kynge cacus dide dislogge his Oost that he had there on the fel+des / And wente forth ayenst hercules the straytest way that he cowde / The kynge cacus than putte on the way desiryng sore to fynde hercules. Hercules on that other side cam than ayenst cacus / they wente so longe that oon ayenst that other. that sone after they sawe eche other nyghe a place where hercules founded after a Cyte whi+che was named Terracene. Assone as they sawe eche other they began to make grete Ioye And to make show+tes  cries / After they renged hem in ordenance of bataill and marched that oon ayenst that other / hootly and sharply. that they fillid the ayer sodaynly with shotte of arowes caste of stones and of dartes. At the begyn|nyng of this bataylle the castelyens bare hem valiantly And there were mony of theyr partye slayn. moo by hardynes than for drede. ffor they put hem to fer forth And they doubted not ^e shotte of the grekes / that shotte on hem so sore and so thykke that all the ground was made reed of their blood. And that the casteliens whiche were so ferre goon and sore chauffid muste nede resorte back agayn to theyr felawis. Whan the kynge Cacus sawe his folke so sore bestad  so hard. that they recu|led fro the shotte of the grekes / he had grete sorowe in his herte And wist neuer where to entende for to entre|tene  holde his bataill / Some fledde / and other reculid and wente aback And other fill doun to the erthe ded or sore hurte / The batayll dured longe in thys poynt allway to the sorowe of kynge cacus / but in the ende

the shotte of the grekes faylled / And the Castelyens with cacus recouerid newe strength in this manyer / that they cam to fyghte hand of hand with swerdes / And that they shedde and spradde largely the blood of them of tyre and of anone whiche were in the firste fronte of the batayll of hercules
THe noyse aroose grete there / ther were many sheldes broken and many skynnes of lyous cutte in peces. There as cacus approchid hyt se|med that the tempest was / he was grete. stronge and fiers and oultragious in smytyng / eche of his strokes was the deth of a greke / In the ende. he dide so moche that the cryes of them that were a boute hym mountyd so hyghe in the ayer / that the casteliens had well wende to haue wonne all. And began to make Ioye for their good fortune in escryyng the grekes to the deth. But euen in like wyse as a right clere day is otherwhile tro+blid by an auenturous black clowde / semblably by the allonli comyng of hercules that cam than to the rescousse All her Ioye was troblid and torned in to mortall losse. ffor the mortall arme of hercules enuertued than so terribly that he bete doun the casteliens like as a mow+ar with a sithe bete doun the grasse in a medowe / whan cacus sawe hercules so foundre and bete doun his men All the blood in hym changed. Than his blood so me|uyd and as a coragious man presentid hym self to fore the fronte of hercules And smote hym with his glayne so sore and harde that he clefte his shelde in two partis The casteliens seeyng the shelde of hercules flee by peces thought anon that cacus had slayn and put to deth her+cules / and than made a crye for Ioye / but hit dured not

longe / ffor hercules lyfte vp his armes with his clubbe And smote cacus vpon the comble of his helme by suche strength / that hit semed to cacus that he sawe an hon|derd thousand candellis. or that he had be smyten doun with the gretteste roche of spayne. This notwithstan|dyng cacus abood standyng in his place / and escryed hercules vnto the deth /  smote hym with all his myght At this assaillyng the castelyens hopyng in the fortune of cacus: all they assaillid hercules / Hercules was gon so ferre amonge his enemyes. that he was allone from all his companye / Whan he herd that cacus escryed hym to deth And sawe that the casteliens assayllid hym and cam to hym fro all sides. He had his herte all fyld with solas / and abandonned the durete  hardnes of his skyn of the lyon to the swerdes of them all / withoute reuen|gyng hym saue only ayenst cacus. Thus began the ba|tayll betwene hercules  cacus. their strokes were grete and ferdfull with oute mesure. Cacus foughte in the spryrite of a tyrant chauffid. and desyred sore to ouer|come hercules for to tyrannyse  tryumphe aboue hym / Hercules fought in a vertuous herte founded and nou|risshid in vertu / and as enemye of vyces / he assayllid this vicyous kynge / Bothe two were grete  fyers and stronge of grete corages / But certes whan they had both tasted ynowh eche other / atte longe the strokes of her|cules were so grete and so peysant. that the sholdres of cacus ne hys heed myght not bere ne had the puys|sance to susteyne them So the ende was suche that af|ter their batayll had dured two oures. Cacus lefte hym for he myght no more suffre hym but fledde and wente his waye .
WHan hercules sawe that cacus fledde / he dayg|ned not to folowe after / This notwythstan|dyng for to haue the victorye of this Iourney he began to hewe on the castelians. aragonnoys and suche other as he might fynde / for he lefte no man a lyue to fore hym yonge ne olde. feble ne stronge. Hyspan  the other of his side made her feetes of armes to floryssh and shyne. The batayll was sharp than / the grekes dowblid and redoublid their strokes and slewe many of their enemyes / In the ende whan cacus had take hys breth. he put hym agayn in to medlee at oon side where his folk fledd and maad hem to tarye. smytyng and betyng the grekes more terribly than he had doon to fore wherof the cryes aroos so highe there that hercules than fightyng on an other syde herd the crye And than he ran theder at alle auenture And anone as he espyed cacus he wente a fore hym and brake the prees and smote doun so sore / that cacus knewe hercules / but he durst not abide hym. but fledde agayn with euyll happe And than the grekes maad a crye and a Ioyous noyse. that alle the castelians fledde. some here  some there to the grete hurte and losse of cacus / ffor of all his peple. ther left no moo but fifty whiche sauyd hem self vpon ^e mount of Monchayo whiche stood ther by. But that was with grete effusion of blood of them of castile. that wend to haue mounted vp wyth the other / that semed that there had ben a grete sprynge of blood. that the cauernes in the valeye were remplenesshid wyth blood / how be hit cacus for to flee well / sauyd hymself and fyfty of his men vpon the montaigne as the cronicles of spaigne reherce / whan he was aboue  in sewr place / he retorned

and sawe doun to the foot of the hyll / He sawe there so many castelyans. that with oute nombre were ded or in danger for to dye / he had grete sorowe than at his herte not for pyte / but for dispyte And for the dau~ger that he sawe redy where by he muste passe. Anone after he sawe fro ferre in the champaigne and eche quarter and place there all couert of them of his party  of their blood. Also he sawe them that fledde taken  brought to the pestelence of the other / These termes consideryd. the desolaco~n of his domynaco~n and the punyco~n of hys tyrannye was to hym all euydent  he tought than that hercules shold lightly conquere all the contrey. ffor they obeyed hym by tyrannye and not by naturell loue / this notwithstandyng. he despaired not. how well that he sawe alle the puyssance of his men destroyed by the clubbe of hercules And knewe that he myght no more regne in that contrey / for all was ded in the bataill / but than he retorned vnto his scyence And thus as sorow|full as he was he entrid in to a hows that he had there But first he co~mysed twelue of his men to kepe the pas+sage of this mounte whiche was also strayte  narow that there myght goo vp but oon man at ones
WHan than hercules and his men had putte to deth alle their enemyes / Hercules wold assaylle the roche. And began to mounte and goo vpon the degrees or steyres / but than sodaynly they that kepte the paas / caste vpon hym grete stones / In so grete habon dance that of force he was constrayned to descende / Whan hercules sawe that he muste withdrawe hym / he obeyed fortune / but notwithstandyng he made there a|vowe ^t he wold neuer departe fro the foot of the roche

vnto the tyme that he had constrayned cacus to descende and come doun by famyne or other wise / This auowe made. hercules cam vnto the foot of the hille / where the ocision and slaughter had ben And made the place to be made clene and purgid of the ded bodyes and of the blood of them that there laye ded / After he dide do make his tente of bowes and leeues And his bedd of fressh grasse And comanded that eche man shold logge there At that tyme the nyght cam and the day faillid. The grekes were wery of that that they had all day labou+red in armes And wold fayn haue reste. and maad good chiere of that they had. And after that they had ordeyned and sette their wacche. as well for to kepe the oost as for to kepe the roche. that cacus come not doun / they leyde hem doun vpon the grasse in suche wyse as they were acustomed whan they were in warre / and so slepte and passid that nyght:.
IN the morn hercules deted his oste in tweyne And sente hispan with oon of them in to arra|gon and nauarre / And he abode there with the other / Hispan in the name of hercules was Ioyously receyuyd of the nauarroys  of the aragonnoys / And they made to hym all obeyssance. knowlechyng hercu+les to be their lord and the moste vertuous prynce that was in the weste / whan hispan had all subdued as sayd is he retorned vnto hercules / Hercules laye yet styll to fore monchayo And there helde cacus in suche subieccion that he myht not yssue / Cacus and his folk were than in grete myschief of vytayll And they wist not what to ete ne to drynke / they deferryd as longe as they myghte / hopyng that hercules shold anoye hym to

be there so longe / But in the ende whan their vytaill fay+led / and they sawe that they muste nedes aventure hem self to come doun / Cacus by his scyence made certayn secrete thynges to go doun in to their stomakes And af|ter put therto the fyre and taught all the other to do soo And than sodaynly as they felte the fyre yssue oute of their mowthes and the fumee  smoke in suche habon|dance that hit semed alle on a lyght fyre / Than by the counceyll of cacus. they aduentured hem self to descende a doun in rennyng  castyng fyre and fumee so Impetu|ousement / that hercules and the grekes wende that hyt had ben an orage of lyghtnyng of the heuen And had brente the montaigne So they made hym place / ffor hit was a thyng for to make men asore basshid / And thus they escaped the daunger of hercules at that tyme. ffor duryng all that day the roche was full of smoke and fumee that cacus had made / And the smoke was so materyell. that hit semed tenebres or derkenes.
WHan cacus and his folk were thus escaped and passid the oost of hercules and of the grekes / Hercules was than the moste wyse Clerk that was in the world. And that all his passetemps he en|ployed in studye he toke his bookes And began to prac|tyse howe and by what rayson he was descended from the roche / he redde and torned many leeves / But alle thynge well considerid he fonde not that this fumee cam of naturell thynge / Wherof he had grete meruayll / Than he sente for Athlas that allway was loggyd behynde the ooste for to be solytayre. Whan Athlas was come he shewid hym the smoke and fumee that yet dured /

Than he tolde of the lyghtnyng that was passid by the oost / And demanded hym his oppynyon / Athlas knewe incontynent the fumee / and answerd to hercules / Cer+tes my sone thou arte more sharpe in scyence than I. for myn age may not atteyne to so hyghe thynges as thy yongthe / How be hyt for as moche as I knowe the growyng of this thynge longe tyme paste. I shall telle the / that I shall saie / thou shall fynde trewe as I suppose Thou shalt vnderstande that thys fumee is a thynge artefysiall and maad by the crafte of wlcan that was fader of cacus / Whiche was an exellent maystre in this scyence / And was the Inventour therof. He maad certayn montaignes in cecylle to brenne and shall alle|way contynuelly brenne vnto the ende of the world. Cacus whiche can the arte and crafte of his fader / hath maad this fumee: And for to escape fro thy handes. he is descended wyth hys felawshp in the forme of a lyghtnyng or tempest / And thus thy strength is decey|uyd by his scyence.
WHan hercules vnderstood this that Athlas had said to hym. He was gretly es meruailled of the scyence of cacus / and myght not beleue hit / Than for to knowe the trouthe / he toke his clubbe / And wente vp thurgh the smoke or fumee. vnto the toppe of the roche. Sekyng cacus / but he fonde there nether beste ne man: Than he retorned vnto Athlas. And lawgh|yng confessid to hym that he hadd sayd trouth. And sayd that he wold make no poursiewt after hym / for as moche as he was so gentylmanly escaped / This day they pad ouer in spekyng and comynyng of Cacus and of hys fader wlcan / The day folowyng whan

the smoke and fumee was goon and vanysshd away Hercules began to beholde the Contre / And sawe that hit was comodious and ffertyle. And to the ende that there shold euer be remembrance and memorye of hym He founded there a cyte / whiche he named Teracone / for as moche as he gaf thys contrey to the sone of the kynge of Ancone / And there he made hym dwelle with his peple and with them of Tyre. Hercules after this foundacion wente to the Cyte of Salamanque / and for as moche as hit was well enhabited and peupled He wold make there a solempnell estudye. And dide do make there in the erthe a grete rounde hooll in maner of an estudye And he sette there in the vii scyences lybe+rall with many other bookes. After he made them of the contre to come theder for to studye / but they were so rude and dulle. that their wyttes coude not compryse ony connyng of scyence / And than for as moche as hercu|les wold departe on his voyage. And wold also that this studye were mayntened. He dide do make an yma|ge or statue of gold vnto his semblance and lykenes. Whyche he dide do sette vp on heyght in the myddes of his studye vpon a pyller. And made so by hys crafte and Arte / that all they that cam to fore this ymage for to haue declaracion of ony scyence. To alle pourposes And of alle scyences the ymage answerd and enseyg|ned and taught the scoliers and estudients / in suche wise as hit had ben hercules in his propre personne / The renomee of this Studye was grete in alle the Contree And this estudye dured after vnto the tyme that saynt Iaques convertyd Spayne vnto the Crysten fayth.

Fro salamanque hercules departed and wente in to cateloygne / And fou~ded there the cyte of Barseloyne / whiche is a right good cyte / And fynably whan he had accomplisshid all these thynges. He sente Athlas home agayn in to hys contrey / but he helde by hym alle hys wryters. ffor he louyd bookes aboue all the Rychesse of the world. After he wold gyue leue vnto philotes for to retorne vnto his contrey. But philotes refused his congie and leue And sayd to hym that he wold serue hym alle his lyf / And that he reputed his felycyte more grete to be in his seruyse / than for to gouerne the contre that fortune had putte in his hand. Hercules after this callid hispan and sayd to hym. Hispan I knowe thy wytte and thy vaylliance. I haue founde the alleway wyse and trewe. Thou arte a man of auctoryte  well knowen in thyse marches. I make and constitute the kynge ouer all this contrey / And gyue vnto the none o|ther charge but to loue vertue and to ensiewe honour  worshippe / Whan Hispan herde the gyfte that hercules made to hym He fyll doun at his feet. and thankid hym And after excused hym of so grete worshipp / But her|cules sayd to hym that he wold that hit shold be soo / And delyuerid to hym certayn nombre of peple of hys felawshyp for to scrue hym. After he maad hym to de|parte wyth grete syghys and sorowe / And Hispan wente than by all the contrees ^t hercules had conquerd there vpon geryon and vpon cacus. And fro than forth|on the contrey was named Spaigne after hys name Wherof I wole now tarye of this conqueste of spaigne / And shall come to speke of the armes that hercules dide in lombardye and of the deth of Cacus.



How Hercules fought ayenst the enleuen geantes of Cremone And how he vaynquysshid them.
THere ben now the kynges. the Empereurs. the sowdans and the Prynces that men may speke of the vertuous liberalite of them. semblable or lyke vnto that of hercules / The men at this day fyght oon ayenst another And make conquestes ynowhe / but they attrybue them vnto their synguler proffit. They resemble not vnto hercules /  that neuer fought but for the comyn wele of the world / O noble Hercules / ffor to folowe and poursiewe my mater. Whan he maad hispan kynge of all the regyon of hisperye / that now is named espaygne. He sente for his Oxen his kyen and Calues And after departed fro barselone and toke his waye vnto Lombardye. He wente so longe on hys Iourney that he cam nyghe vnto the cyte of Cremone / Whiche is but a daye Iourney fro Melane. Ther were than in this Cyte .xi. geantes grete out of mesure / These xi. geantes were all brethern And fones of Neleo the sone of Saturne / And they callid hem self alle kynges of this Cyte. They helde all estate royall / how be hyt their renomes were but smale and lytyll / And for that cause they were theuys and robbid their neyghebours And made hem allday warre. Whan than they knewe that hercules approchid theyr Cyte Anone they assem|blyd their counceyll to geder / And demau~ded that oon / that other / yf they shold suffre hercules for to entre in to theyr Cyte / Alle were of oon oppynyon that they shold not Resseyve hym / And that they wold sende vnto hym oon of them whiche was named Nestor that

he shold not entre in to cremone / but yf he first had va|ynqusshid in btayll the xi brethern / Nestor at the comandement of the geantes departed fro Cremone  wente vnto hercules. whom he fonde with his lytyll armee but thre myle fro cremone. Than he spake to her|cules  sayd to hym Syre I haue ten brethern kynges of cremone / that haue sente me vnto the for as moche as they be aduertysed that thou entrest in to their domyna+cion And charge the by me. that they will gyue vnto the no passage of cremone. but yf thou first ouercome them oon after an other in batayll / And therfore chese whether thou wilt haue the batayll or ellis to retorne agayn and leue this viage / I aduertyse the that they be alle geantes more grete and more puyssant than I am / Syre knyght answerd hercules I haue taken my way for to passe by cremone / Late the geantes knowe that hercules hath Intencion to speke to them more ner / as he that dredeth not ne fereth their accustomed tyrannyes / whiche I muste delyuere the world of by feet of armes And for as moche as to the ende that they presume not that I haue ony doubte or drede of them in ony ma|nerlye shall saye to them that I wyll not fighte wyth them ten. oon after another / but alle attones to gyder and yow with hem / yf ye will accompanye yow with hem. And for to do so they shall fynde me redy to morn erly by the morow:.
HErcules with these wordes made his peple to abyde and reste there for that nyght / And Ne|stor retorned to his brethern and sayd to them / My brethern I haue spoken to hercules and haue expo|sed to hym your comandement / he hath answerd to me

of a right hyghe and playn corage that he woll fygte with vs to morn Not oon after another / but with vs all attones / And for to speke playnly of hym He hath the semblante of a man to be vertuous in Armes and garnysshid with prowesse he is a prynce mewre  of grete conduyte / Dispose yow well hit behoueth to fur|nyssh hym the batayll. Certes the batayll shall be pery+lous. ffor he is myghtely membrid and as grete as oon of vs / but me thynketh that he may not compare ne pre|uaylle ayenst vs .xi. / and that he may not escape fro our forces / but that we shall persshe hym wyth our glayues what so~m euer force or strength is in hym. The geantes so heeryng hym preyse hercules. had grete mer|uayll of hym And myght not beleue nestor of that / that he had reported that he wold fighte with alle to geder attones. ffor there was none of them all. but he thought hym self stronge ynowhe for hercules. Than they axed of Nestor. And demaunded hym yf he were sewer to haue well vnderstand that / that hercules sayd vnto hym that he wold fyght ayenst hem alle attones / Nes|tor answerd ye / And that he had herde hym saye hit in his propre persone. Wyth this answere they conclu|ded that on the morn they shold Arme them alle / And that they wold goo to the felde for to fyghte ayenst her+cules yf he cam agaynst hem. Oon of the geantes sayd than vnto his brethern. To morn shall be the day of our glorye and worshypp / We shall vaynquysshe. the vaynquysshour of the Monstres: Late vs make good chiere / Broder answerd Nestor ther in is no doubte but that we shall ouercome and brynge to vtte|rance hym ^t ye speke of / but so moche shall our glorye

be the lasse that we shall be .xi. ayenst oon. well said that other yf in fightyng ayenst vs .xi. we shall haue the lasse honour / late vs euery man fight for hym self. Broder answerd nestor yf ye had seen and herde hym as I haue / ye shold not be so hardy as ye shewe semblant / he is all anoder man than ye wene / Kepe yow at the offre that he hath maad at the lefte hit is better to haue the moste prouffit  lasse honour in suche a caas / In these deuyses they passed all that day / After they wente to reste / Whan the oure was come on the morn erly / they aroos and adoubed them the beste wise they coude. After they sente oon of their men vnto hercu+les for to wete yf he wold saye ony thyng / But as|sone as the messanger yssued out of the gate. the first thynge that he sawe. was a geant armed meruayl|lously. the messanger abode than  auysed hym a lityll After he had auysed hym he wente vnto the geant ar+med. And axid hym what he was / I am hercules said the geant / what wole ye saie or haue / said the messan|ger / I wyll saye said hercules that the geantes of Cre|mone haue no cause for to lette me the passage of their cyte And for as moche as they dide me to wete yester|daye that yf I wold haue passage / hit behoued me to vaynquissh them oon after another in the felde by bataill I am comen hether in hope to wynne the paas. And ne demande other thynge but for to see them in armes for to fight with them all to gider attones to thende to haue sooner doon. Wherfore I pray yow to goo to them / and signefie to hem my comyng. And that they haste them:.
THhe messanger with these wordes retorned vnto the geantes And tolde them what he had founde

whan the geantes knewe that hercules was all redy in the felde they all toke their glayues  their habillemens of warre / And departed fro the cyte / Adressyng them a+yenst hercules. Hercules was than allone in the place. The men  women of cremone wente vpon the wallis and towres for to see the batayll And philotes with other noble men of the grekes were vpon an hyll ferre ynowh fro the place where hercules was abidyng the geantes Certes hit was a fair fight to see the comyng of the .xi. geantes. they were all well apoynt and well garnysshid of helmes enryched with gold and stones They were grete  stronge all of oon mesure. they were berded and had fiers contenances they cam on  marchid sharply. And by aspre corage whan they cam nyghe to hercules vpon half a bowe shotte / they escryed hym all to deth. and made a crye so grete that the walles of the cyte reounded After they ran ayenst the assewrid prynce lyke as they had ben yons Hercules heeryng these cryes and seeyng their course on foot fermly he abode them lyf+tyng vp his clubbe ouer his heed / Whan hit cam to thas|samble. hit semed well that the geantes shold haue all to frusshid hym with their glayues. ffor they smote vp|on hym so desmesurably that their tronchons  the peces flewe in to the ayer / Their strokes were grete / hercules suffred hem  beheld what power they had But whan they had made their assayes vpon hym / hercules made his assaye vpon hem And with his clubbe smote oon of the geantes vpon his helme. that he all to frusshid not only his helme but also his heed ^t he fill doun sodayn|ly ded / Whan the other ten geantes sawe that her bro+der was so ded of oon strook. they had grete sorowe

and their blood was strongly meuyd. Natu~re amo|nested them to take vengeance. They dide that in hem was / And assayllid eygrely on all sides hercules. And thus began the batayll betwene hercules  the geantes Hercules ne dredde not / strook of glayue / of spere. ne of polaxe. his skyn of the lyon was hard and stronge his strengthe was stable / his clubbe bare all And so hit was nede / grete were the strokes that they gaf eche other. The geantes dide all their myght. and gaf stro|kes ynowhe to hercules. but they coude neuer perce the skyn of the lyon hit was so hard / But yet was his clubbe more harder / The geantes meruailled of the con+stance and puyssance of hercules. Assone as hercules lyfte vp his clubbe for to smyte on them. hys enemyes that were subtyll lepe a side. and other while brake his strookes / how be hit he dide so moche that in lasse than an oure he slewe foure of them and the other seuen fought afterward by suche vigour / that the more he smote hem with his clubbe / the more mortall he fonde hem and fiers :.
THe batayll was terryble and harde. ffor the geantes were stronge and well had vsed the mestier of armes And grete payn had they to saue them. and to auenge the blood of their brethern and for to haue worship of the batayll. And they said that they were Infortunat whan they myght not ouer come oon man allone. ne mate hym. In fightyng they helped conforted eche other and they had alle good corage / But what prouffited them the grete nombre of brethern. and what auailled hem their coragious stro|kes whan they were approchyng their deth / Hercules

was alway hercules. He reioyssd hym in the flote of his enemyes / He conforted hym self in fortune / ffortune helped hym he dide meruaylles on all sydes. Well coude he fighte / /  well defended he hym All that he dide was well doon. Alle that the other dide and brassid was nought worth. Notwithstandyng they were myghty and hardy / But the lukke  good happe of hercules was not to be broken. ne his clubbe coude not be destroyed. But he tryumphed  more was his puyssance to sus|teyne the furcurs of his aduersaries. than their myght was to charge hym with their strokes. O meruaill strength  myght of a man His puyssance was not of a man but of an ellephant His skyn of the lyon semed that hit had ben tempred with quyk and harde stele / his body semed more constant ayenst the cuttyng glayues of all his euyll willars / than is an andued or a stedy a+yenst the strokes of many hamers or marteaul / There was no strook of his enemye that hym greuyd / he toke grete playsir in the batayll seeyng hym self amonge so many geantes. He was gretly reioyssed And ther was no thynge hym greuyng but the declynyng of the day / whiche began to faylle / At this oure whan the sonne withhelde her rayes and torned in to the weste / hercules wold make an ende and spede his batayll / The geantes began to cesse for to smyte. ffor fro the mornyng vnto the euenyng they had foughte wyth oute ony cessyng. And hercules envertued hym self in suche wyse that smytyng vpon oon and other beyng aboute hym hard and sharply. Wherof hyt befell so that of some he en|foundred and frusshid helmes and heedes And of the other he brake the Armes and Sydes meruayllously

and gaf so many grete strokes that fynably he bete doun /  all to frusshed hem all / reseruid nestor whiche fledde away whan he sawe the disconfiture / and therm dide he wisely. ffor alle his brethern were there slayn by the hande of hercules .
THan they of Cremone sawe their lordes ded / they had sone maad an ende of their wepyng and sorowe. for they had ben to hem hard and troblous At the ende of this bataill they assemblid to counceyll / whan they sawe that hercules had wonne the batayll. And concluded to geder / that they wold yelde hem to hercules and put them in his mercy / With this conclusion they yssued out of the gates in grete nom+bre. And cam vnto hercules whiche was thoo vayn|queur of his enemyes / ffirst they kneled to fore hym doun to the ground. Secondly they prayd and requy+red of hym mercy: And thirdly they abandonned to hym their yte and their goodes / and sayd to hym that they wold hold hym for lord duryng their lyf / hercules that was pietous and gentyll vnto them that were meke and humelid them self / receyuyd the Cremonyens in to his grace and maad hem to ryse and stande vp. And after sente for them of his ooste / whan they were come he brought hem in to cremone. where grete Ioye was maad vnto them. ffor they were glad of the deth of the geantes. And there ne was man. woman. ne childe / that ne thanked the goddes:.
By this manyer was hercules kynge of cremone and enriched with newe tytle of victorye / The first nyght that he entrid in to this cyte he restid hym  his peple: And also were they well refresshid

and right well fested and seruyd of vitayll / On the morn he dide do brynge in to the cyte the bodyes of the geantes that were ded And dide do burie them worship|fully / And syn founded vpon them a right grete tour  hyghe: And vpon the tour he sette .xi. ymages or sta|tues of metall after the faco~n of the geantes that he had slayn in remembrance of his victorye:.
AFter the edifficaco~n of this tour / Hercules lefte in Cremone folk for to gouerne them And depar+ted thens for to goo further forth in to the con|tre / He studyed alway and was neuer ydle / he studied so moche that he coude make the fyre arteficiall as well as cacus / and fonde the remedies ayenst the same What by armes as by his scyence he gate a right grete loos  pyyng in ytalye. He wente in to many places And ouerall where he cam or wente / me dide hym honour and reuerence. What shall I make longe processe / with oute grete auenture. he wente so ferre that he cam vnto a cyte standyng nyghe the mounte Auentyn. where reg|ned a kynge named Euander / whiche receyuyd hym solempnly. Hit is to wete that whan Cacus fledd fro monchay as sayd is vnto this mounte. He cam in to ytake all displaisant to haue lost his seignourie Than he gaf leue to dete fro hym to all his seruantes and all despaired allone he wente to the mounte Auentyn in an euenyng / Where he as constrained to withdrawe hym theder for he doubted moche hercules. Whan he was comen aboue on this hyll / he fonde there a grete caue And there he wente in with oute soper And than he began to be dis+conforted gretly  bitterly and said Alas now am I exi|led banysshid out of all my seignouries  lordshipp is

Now haue I no socours ne comforte of persone / I dare not name me kynge. where I was wonte by my name make kynges to tremble. Alas all is torned and reuer+sid I haue no thyng to ete / ner wote not where to logge but yf hit be with the bestes. O poure kynge. where is ony man so vnhappy as I / I am so Infortunat and vn+happy. that I dare not be seen ne beknowen. with these wordes he leyde hym doun vpon the bare ground. and leyde a stoon vnder his heed. And with right grete pa+yne fill a slepe whiche dured not longe for his vay|nes were strongly meuyd. his herte was not quyete And his body was right euyll susteyned. Anone than he awoke and wente out of the caue for to loke yf hit were nyhe day. for the nyyht anoyed hym and was hym to longe / But whan he was comen in to the ayer he sawe no day appere. ne sterres ne mone shyne. but he fonde hit alle derke and tenebres thikke and grete And sawe all the region of the ayer couerid with clow+des / wherof he was gretly anoyed and greuyd. Than he wente in to the caue agayn not in to the deppest but at the mouth therof / And there sorofull and pensif a bood with oute ony more slepyng tyll hit was daye.
WHan the day apperid cacus yssued agayn out of the caue. and wente vp vnto the toppe of the hyll. and began to beholde and see the contre aboute / The contre semed to hym good and fayr for to lyue there. After grete pensifnes and many though|tes / he concluded in hym self that he wold abyde there vnto the tyme that his Infortune cessed. and wold lyue there of proyes / rauayn and thefte / After he be|thought hym. that he wold goo to the kynge pryeus of

calidonie / whiche was his cosyn. and for to haue com|panye to lede his wyf with that he had chosen / he wold axe and demande in mariage oon of his doughters / With this conclusion he departed fro the mounte auentyn and toke the waye vnto calidonie he wente so longe that he cam theder / Some saye that calidonie is the contre that we calle nowe Calabre. Whan cacus was come to cali|dome the kynge Prycus resseyued hym as hit appertey|ned to a kynge / for as moche as he knewe hym  was of his lignage / And after demanded hym of his tidynges Cacus began to syghe. Whan he sawe that he muste telle his myshappe. And than tolde hym  recounted fro the begynnyng to thende how hercules had taken from hym his royames And how he had ben besieged /  how he was escaped / And for as moche as I dar not abide in myn owen contrey / I am comen hether vnto yow for re|fuge and to telle  counte my sorowes / And I haue en|tencion to holde me on the mount auentyn in a Cauerne that is there vnto tyme that myn enemye hercules shall departe fro myn herytage And I will kepe me there so secrete that no man in the world shall haue knowleche therof / to thende that hercules knowe hyt not / ffor as moche as he hath me in grete hate / and he hath more gretter happe  fortune in armes than I haue / And yf he knewe that I were in ony place I am certayn that he wold come theder for to destroye me. This considerid I haue chosen this cauerne for to hyde me as I haue sayd. But for so moche as I haue more sorowe in felyng. than my taste requyreth hyt is so that the eyen of a man beyng in grete troble. Reioyssen in the vysage and syght of a wo|man: ffor the woman is the gladnes  comfort of a man

I requyre yow and praye yow that ye will gyue me to wyf oon of your doughters / And yf hit plese yow so to doo / certes ye shall do to me a grete plaisir and the moste case that I may haue for this presente tyme. The kynge prycus answerd and said Cacus ye ben comen and extrayt of hyghe gentylnes. and haue grete lord|ship and seignourye in hisperye / yf fortune were agayn yow this day. your hyenes ought not therfore be vn|knowen / At this day I haue foure doughters. of whom that oon is named yolee. Take whome hit pleseth you reseruid yolee: ffor I will not yet marye her / And yf ye haue ony will to make ony armee ayenst hercules. telle hit me playnly and I shall socoure yow as a trewe ffrende. Cacus was right well content with the ans|wer of the kynge / and thanked hym sayyng that he|wold make none armee for this season. but he wold passe his tyme in the caue like as he had purposid and concluded. Than the thre doughters of kynge prycus were sente fore. and cacus chesse oon of them whiche he wedded and after laye with her / and abode there two dayes / At thende of two dayes / he wold departe and toke leue of the kynge. The kynge wold haue de|lyuerid to hym ten knyghtes  ten squyers for to haue conueyed hym. but he reffused hem and wold none / Than he wold haue deliuerid to hym certayn ladies and damoyselles / but of all them he toke none. saue the two susters of his wyf. Whiche wold by force goo wyth hym / Thus than he departed fro Calidoine. accompa|nyed wyth thre susters / he was all way sorofull and pensif / And fro than forth on thus beyng in Inpacyens of his vnhapp. and castyng oute of royallte / he began to

renne out. And bathed his Axe in the blood of the men women and Children that he mette and putte hem alle to deth .
CAcus began to exercyse the werkes of furour and of tyrannye / in goyng vnto the mounte auentyn. Anone as he was come he entred in to the caue the beste wise he coude with his wyues. And the moste secretly And of this place he made a neste of thefte and a pytte of synnys / ffor the first nyght / that he had logged hys wyues / he wente hym in to the village that stood there fast by. And behelde the fayrest howse. Wherin he en|tred by a wyndowe that was open. And slewe alle them that was therin: and after toke all the goodes as moche as he myghte bere vpon his sholdres and bare hem in to the caue / where as were his wyues.


How Cacus stale away the Oxen  kyen longyng to hercules / And how hercules fought with hym ther|fore and slewe hym:.
IN the morn cacus fonde a right grete stone of marble / / whiche he toke and bare hit vnto his caue / And made therwith his dore. The moste parte of the tyme Cacus helde hym in hys caue / And wente neuer out but whan he wold do harme or euyll. When he wente into the feldes as sayd is. he slewe all them that he mette: He robbed euery man / he defow|lid women / he brent howses and townes And shortly maad and dyde so moche harme in Italy / that they that passyd in the contre supposid to be behated of the goddes. And coude not knowe wherof ne fro when cam thyse persecusions that Cacus maad vnto them.

ffor to retorne than to oure purpose of hercules he cam vnto the Cyte of kynge Euander in the tyme that cacus bedewed ytalye with blood of men. And fyllid hys caue of contynuelle stolen goodes. After the comyng of hercules and of his men of armes / his beefs or Oxen were brought in to the cyte be cause the kynge euander shold seen hem. The kynge toke grete plaisir to beholde and see hem: for they were hyghe and passyng fayre After that the kynge had seen hem / hercules demanded hym / whether he myght sende for to pasture them for that nyght / / In trouth sire sayd euander / yf ye will be|leue my counceyll ye shall lete them abyde in this cyte And not to sende hem in to the feldes / Wherfore sayd hercules. Euander answerd and said for as moche as whan we sende oute our bestes / We knowe not where they become. They ben stolen and dryuen awaye And we can not knowe who ben the robbours / oure seruan+tes ben murdrid / the howses ben brent. the peple that shold laboure in the felde ben slayn. the women and maydens ben villonyed and put to shame. And we can not remedye hit. ffor we can not haue knowleche of the Actours ne doars therof. wherfore some men saye and wole mayntene. that they ben the goddes that thus punysshe vs for oure synnes. wherfore I pray you late your bestes abide in this cyte to thende that they ben not robbed. yre sayd hercules ye recounte and telle to me a grete meruayll. I beleue well that tho thinges that ye saye ben veritable. But this notwithstandyng syn that the goddes haue saued hem vnto this day. they shall kepe them yet yf hit plese them. ffor yf they will haue them also well they will take them in the cyte

as in the feldes And yf ther be a robbeur or theef in the contre that will take hem away / I suppose I shall fynde hym And shall make ytalye quyte of hym: With these wordes hercules sente his bestes in to the pasture / and there lefte hem wyth oute ony kepars / the day passid ouer the nyght cam / In this nyght cacus yssued oute of his caue / And wente in to the Contrey for to pylle and robbe yf he myght fynde ony proye. Thus as he that is vnhappy secheth euyll / In the ende he is paid attones for his trespaces. The vnhappy aventure broughte hym in to the medowe. where as pastured the oxen and kyen of hercules / hit was nyghe the morenyng / he had with hym his thre wyues / Assone as he sawe the bestes by the lyght of the mone that shone cleer / he knewe hem Anone he was all abasshid. and his blood changed in his visage / and not wyth oute cause. ffor sodaynly alle his sorowes began to ryse in hym and cam to the quyknes of the herte. that he coude not speke. His wy|uys seeyng that he spake no word / And that he beheld the bestes / As all awondred. cam to hym And demanded hym whaat he had / Alas answerd Cacus syn hyt is so that ye muste nedes knowe / I telle yow for certaynte that alle the sorowe of the world aryseth in my stomacke: and environneth myn herte. ffor I see here the Oxen of the Tryumphe of myn Enemye Her|cules And in beholdyng them. so renewe in me the losses that I haue had by hym. and the honeurs  worshippis that he hath maad me for to lese / And also the royames that he hath taken away fro me / And the grete myserye that I am now in / He muste nedes be here by in some place. Cursyd be hys comynge: ffor I wote neuer

what to doo but in signe of vengeance I shall slee his oxen and his kyen.
WHan the thre susters had herd that Cacus so sorowed. they counceyllid hym that he shold not slee the bestes. Sayng that yf he slewe hem. hercules shold lese no thyng. for he shold ete them hit were better sayd his wyf that ye take and lede away as many as ye may And brynge them in to our caue. ffor fy ye do soo. hercules shall haue domage and displaysir / And ye shall haue plaisir and prouffit / Ca+cus beleuyd thatthis wyf sayd to hym. yet he loked in the medowe all aboutes yf ony man had ben there to kepe them. but he fonde no man ne woman. And than he cam to the bestes. And toke eighte of the beste that he coude chese foure oxen and foure kyen After he bonde them to geder with a corde by the taylles / And put the corde aboute his nekke / and drewe hem so in that ma|nyer vnto his caue / how well that the bestes resisted strongly to goo backward in that manyere / Cacus brought in this many ere reculyng  goyng backward all tho bestes that he staall / to thende ^t no man shold folowe hym by the traches of the feet of the bestes:.
WHan he had putte in his caue the bestes of hercu|les as said is. he shette the doore so well / that a man shold neuer haue knowen ne parcey|uyd that there had ben ony dore. Than wenyng that he had ben sewer he layd hym doun and slepte /  Anone after the sonne rysing. and that hit was day / hercules that desired moche to here tydynges of his bestes arose vp / and dide so moche that the kyng Euander brought hym vnto the place where as his oxen and kyen were

Whan they were comen in to the medowe / hercules fonde that hym lacked foure oxen  as many kyen. wherfore he was sore troblid. And for to knowe yf the goddes had taken them. or ony theuys had stolen them. He co|manded that they shold aspye alle aboute the medowe / And see yf the traches or thempryntes of the feet of the bestes myght be seen or knowen. At his comandeme~t oon and other began to seche / Some there were that behelde toward the mounte auentyn. And fonde the paas and foot of the oxen. but them thoughte that by that paas that the bestes were descended fro the mount for to come in to the medowe / Whan alle they had sought longe / And sawe that they fonde no thynge they maad their reporte vnto hercules and said to hym. that they cowde not perceyue on no syde where these oxen were yssued out / And that on no syde they coude fynde none ensignes ne tokenes of bestes goyng out of the pasture / But right well sayd oon I haue founde the paas  feet of certayn oxen and kyen that ben descended from this mountaigne in to this medowe / Whan hercules herde saie that fro the montaigne were comen oxen in to the medowe. He cal|led euander / And demanded hym what peple dwellid on the montaigne: Euander sayd to hym that ther on ne dwellid man ne beste. And that the montaygne was Inhabited / Hercules wold goo to see the paas / and wente theder / And hym thoughte well that theder myght haue passid eyghte grete bestes in that nyght / For the traces of the feet were grete and newe / Than hee wold wete where they were become / But he fonde well that the foot of the bestes toke theyr ende there as they pastured / He was than ryght sore esmeruayllid

for as moche as there were no strange bestes. And be+gan to thenke / whan he had a lityll thoughte he behelde the mounte. he said hit muste nedes bee that the goddes haue rauysshed my oxen / or ellis that ther is a theef in this montaigne. that is come and hath stolen hem / And hath ledde hem away reculyng backward. But for as moche as I haue lasse suspecion to the goddes than vp|on the theef / I shall neuer departe from hens vnto the tyme that I haue serched this montaigne from oon side to an other. ffor my herte Iugeth me that the bestes ben here :.
WIth this conclusion hercules dide do take diuerse calues that were there and maad hem to faste tyll none. This whyle duryng he sente for his harnoys and armes by philotes. and adoubed  made hym redy to fighte / Anone after mydday as the calues began to crye and blete for honger he dide than them to be brought aboute the montaygne. Than as they pas|sid by the place where the caue was and cryed. hyt happend that the kyen that were in the caue herde them / And answerd cryyng so lowde that the sowne passid by the hooks of the caue. and cam to the ceres of the cal+ues and also of hercules and of other / whan hercules herde the crye of his kyen. He abood there. his calues began to crye agayn. But his kyen cryed no more. for cacus by the force of their cryes was awaked. And as he that allway doubted for to be accused roose vp and cutte the throtes of the kyen. The calues than naturelly knowyng their moders cryed sore lowde and brayed as they that desired the mylk for to lyue by / how be hit they coude not so lowde crye / that her moders answerd

them. herof meruaylled moche hercules. Than he appro|chid the mounte and wente vnto the place where hym semed that he had herde the kyen. And was there well thre owres seechyng yf he coude fynde ony hoole or caue or reduyte / But how be hit that he passid many tymes the entree of the caue / he coude neuer perceyue hit Some sayd that the bruyt and brayyng that they had herde of the kyen. Was comen of Illusion / The other sayd that hercules loste his labour and payne And prayd hym to leue to seke ony more / for they thoughte it not recouera|ble. In the ende whan hercules had herd oon and other and sawe that he myght not come to the ende of his de|sire. In a grete anger he toke in both Armes a grete tree that grewe there / And shoke hit thre tymes with so grete force / that at the thirde tyme he ouerthrewe hit rote and alle in suche wyse that the roote that cam oute of the erthe maad a right grete large hoole so parfounde and depe / / that the botom of the caue was sen playnly:.
WHan hercules sawe the grete hoole that the root of the tree had maad. He was ryght Ioyous and glad / and sayd. Trewly hit is here that the grete theef dwellith / I muste see yf he be here and what marchantes enhabite in this place / In sayyng these wor+des hercules bowed doun hys heed and beheld on the oon side of the caue where he sawe cacus. Assone as he sawe the theef He knew hym anone / wherof he was more Ioyous than he was to fere and escryed hym / Ca+cus I see thee / Thou haste to fore this tyme troblyd the Royames of hesperye by Innumerable delyctes and grete synnes that thou madeste openly and apperte. This was the cause of the pardicion of thy seignourye / 

Now thou tro~blest the ytaliens by tyrannyes hyd  vnknowen / I knowe thy lyf / Thou mayste not denye hit ne forsake hit / Hit behoueth that thou dye therfore And that I make the ytalyens franke and free of thyn horrible  odious theftes. O cursid man yf thy Crow+nes. thy diademes. thy septres. thy bruytes / thy ryall men myghte not socoure the / why than and wherfore arte thou wrappid in synnes And amendest the not ne correcte the for the pugnycion that thou hast suffred / but yet in the stede and place that thou sholdest dispose th to that / that apperteyneth to a kynge  a pryuce / thou haste ben a theef / In stede to do Iustyce thou haste ben a murdrer / and a putter in of fyre to brenne villages and howses And where thou sholdest haue kept and sauyd women. thou hast defowled them and don hem vilon|nye. O kaytyf kynge / with oute coniuryng or pynyng of the / certes I see well that thou art he that the ytaly+ens knowe not that thou hast persecuted hem. Thy ma+lyce hath ben grete and thy subtylte / whan vnto thys day thou were neuer accused. And hast doon a grete thynge. But hit is not so grete / ner hast not so hidde the but thou arte right nyghe perill ffor thou shalt yelde to me agayn my oxen. And ffinably thou shalt put me to deth / or thou shalt deye by my hand. And thou shalt not escape by rennyng ne by thy subtyll fyres.
WHan Cacus vnderstode this sentence / he was strongly affrayed. neuerthelesse he lyfte vp his hede And seeyng that he was founde by hercu|les the man of the world that he moste hatid / he sayd to hym / Alas hercules man all corrumped with coue|tyse. what cursid fortune hath made the to drawe oute

the tree wherof the parfonde and depe rootes hath disco|uerid the reposayll of kynge Cacus late regnyng / But now pryued fro regnyng  bannysshid fro all worldly prosperite. Suffiseth not to the / that I may haue the chierte of my naturell goodes. Whan thou hast taken alle away fro me. And that hit is force that I lyue of robberye and proye / Wherof the culpe and synne ought to redonde vpon the / Why suffrest thou not me to lyue  drawe forth the residue of my poure lyf / amonge the stones amonge the rokkes. and amonge the wor|mes of the erthe. Considere now what thou haste do to this kynge / And seke hym no more. thou haste hurted and greuyd hym ynowhe / Hercules answerd / Cacus yf thou were in the abysmes of wrecckidnes and myse|ryes. thy demerytes wole accuse the / And I am ryght sory and dolant to see a kyng in so hountous and sha|mefull estate. But whan thou canste not Aourne thy dayes passid ne these presente with one only good dede What remedye / thou hast dayly exercysed tyrannye as well in prosperyte as in aduersite. I wote well that thou art the newe persecutour of the ytaliens / And that thy hand is all fowll of their blood. I seke the not / ne the ytalyens can saye no thyng of the. And for as moche as they complayne not of the. to their preiudyce. This tree hath spoken for them. And by hys rootes he hath discouuerd thyn enbusshe: So behoueth hyt that thou chese. wheder thou wilt come and fyght with me here in the Ayer / at large. or ellis that I come and assaylle the there with Inne: ffor yf hit be to me possible I shall delyuere the world of thy tyrannyes 
By this answer cacus knewe that ther was no respite in his feet / Than he supposid to saue hym as he had doon afore tyme And maad by his crafte so grete a smoke and fumee / that hit semed come oute of the hoole that the tree had maad / that hit had ben a right pytte of helle. And this fumee was larded with flames brennyng as meruayll. ffor this fumee hercules abandonned neuer cacus / but leep in to the caue in the myddell of the flames and fumee as he that was maistre of this crafte / and was anone pourueyed of remedyes that therto apperteyned / And wente hym playnly and assaylled Cacus in suche wyse as he felte no fumee ne enpesshement. And than he gaf hym so grete a strook vpon the helme with his clubbe / that he maad hym to hurtle his heed ayenst oon of the wal+lis of the caue. Cacus with the resseyuyng of this stro+oke. lete the fumee disgorge out of his stomack. Se|eyng that by that manyer he coude not escape. And toke his right grete axe that stode by hym for to deffende hym with / Hercules suffrid hym to take his axe. Cacus smote vpon hym ffor the caue was not large. they fou|ght longe therm. vnto the rescous of cacus cam the thre susters that made grete sorowe And casted stones vpon hercules in grete habondance And wepte bitterly. These thre damoyselles louyd sore well cacus. Hercules  cacus fought more than a longe oure wyth oute cessing At the ende of the oure. they were bothe so sore chau+ffid that they muste reste them Than cacus toke in hym a grete pryde. ffor he was stronge of body And hym se+med whan he restid that hercules was not so stronge as he had ben afore tymes. And that he myght neuer

vaynquysshe hym / for as moche as he had not ouer|come hym at the begynnyng / By this presumpsion he demanded of hercules yf he wold achieue the batayll wyth oute the caue / Hercules answerd that he was contente. With this answer cacus toke away the stone that shette the caue and wente oute. And in goyng oute after hym. hercules espied hys kyen that were ded in a Corner / And his oxen that were bounden by the mosels vnto a piler / he was sory whan he sawe hys kyen in that poynt. Neuertheles he passid forth and poursiewed cacus / that racchid oute his armes And maad hym redy / And sayd to hym. thou cursid theef thou haste doon to me grete displaysir to haue slayn my kyen / ye cursid theef thou thy self answerd cacus / yet haste thou doon to me more displaysir / to haue slayn my men and taken away my Royames. thou art only cul+pable of the euyll that I haue doon and of the deth of thy kyen / I wold hit plesyd the goddes that I had the as well in my mercy. as I had them. be thou sewer that thou sholdest neuer take away Royame fro no ma~n And now late vs achieue oure batayll: At these wor|des Hercules and Cacus smote eche other right sore and by grete felonnye / their strokes cleuyd to their har|noys and sowned. At this sownyng the kynge euan|der  the grekes cam to the bataill for to see hit. whiche they maad to fore thentre of the Caue: Where as we the thre susters passyng desolate: Cacus enforced hym wyth alle his puyssance. ffor he sawe hit was tyme thoo or neuer to shewe and put forth all that he myght He handled his axe right myghtly And well was hym nede so to doo. He was harde  boystous. he gaf many

a strook to hercules. And hym semed otherwhile that he sholde confounde hym vnto the depe abysme of the erthe / But hercules on his syde faylled not yf he had stronge partye ayenst hym. He was also stronge at avenant and more stronge certayn than was good for the helthe of cacus / he smote neuer cacus but he torned the eyen in his heed. or made hym to stoupe or knele on that oon side or that other or goo aback shamefully / This batayll by longe duryng anoyed the beholdars they sought eche other and tasted harde on bothe sides Fynably they dide so moche that hit was nede to reste them And that all their bodies swette all aboutes / than hercules sawe that yet was not the pryse gyuen / And that the nyght approched he had grete shame in hym+self / that he had hold so longe batayll. Than he began to seche cacus so nyghe / and redowblid his strokes by suche vigour vpon cacus so fiersly. that at laste he bare hym doun to the ground all astouyed And made hym to lese his axe And syn toke of his helme. The thre sus+ters fledde than in to a foreste named Octa all full of teeris and of cryes. Many grekes wold haue gon af|ter. But hercules made hem to retorne. After he callid the kynge Euander and his folk and said to the kyng Syre lo here is he that was wonte to tro~ble the ytaly|ens. by secrete murdres / conuerte theftes /  vnknowen defowlyng of women. gyue no more suspecion to the goddes / Lo here is the menyster and doar of thise trespa+ces / I haue entencion to punysshe hym. Not only after his deserte. but vnto the deth:.
EVander answerd to hercules and sayd / Prynce exellent  worthy aboue ally worthy excessiuely

And the moste beste accomplisshid of all men flourys|shyng in armes. What reuerence is to the due / that is not only humayne reuerence / But that reuerence that is of dyuyne nature / I beleue assewridly that thou art a godde / or the sone of a godde / or ellis a man deyfyed. Thou in especiall haste seen more in a momente. than all the eyen in generall of all the ytalyens haue seen. not only in one yere. but in an honderd yere. O the sone of noble men and the stock of reluysing and shynyng of glo+ryous feetes  dedes / how may we thanke the and gyue the lawde for the deserte of this grete werke / Thou by bryght and shynyng labour hast discombred vs of der|kenes and haste gyuen vs lyght of clerenes. thou haste more achieuyd than the grete tourbes and all the assem+blees and men of armes of ytalyens sholde haue conne doo. And haste gooten more tryumphe in chastysyng of this geant passing terryble. than we the conne gyue re|ward. Truly yf thou be not a godde. Thou haste of the goddes their synguler grace / I promyse to the in remem|brance of this labour / to do ediffie a solempne temple in my cyte where thou shalt haue an awter / And vpon the awter shall be thy representacion of fyn gold. And the representaco~n of this tyrant / in shewyng how thou hast vaynquysshid hym to thende that our heyres and succes|sours in tyme comyng may haue therof knowleche:.
DVryng these wordes Cacus releuyd hym that was astonyed of the strook that he had receyud And wende to haue fledd. But hercules ranne after  retayned hym And enbraced hym in his armes so harde ^t he myght not meue And brought hym agayn And bare hym vnto a depe pytte that was in the cae

where he had caste in all ordures and filthe / hercules cam vnto this fowle pytte that the grekes had founden And planted cacus there Inne. his heed dounward from on hye vnto the ordure benethe / Than the ytaliens cam aboute the pitte and caste so many stones vpon hym that he deyde there myserably. Suche was the ende of the poure kynge Cacus. he deyde in an hooll full of or|dure and of styngkynge filthe. Whan the kynge Euan+der sawe that he was ded by the consente of hercules he dide hym be drawen oute of the pytte. And dide hym be born in to his cyte. where as hercules was receyuyd so tryumphantly that no man can reherce. The feste was grete that nyght in the palays of kynge euander / And passid hit with grete Ioye / On the morn the kyng euan+der made to sette forth the body in the comyn regard and sight of all the peple. And afterward ordeyned cer|tayn folke therto propice and necessarye to do carye  shewe this myserable corps or body in alle the cytees where he had doon harme. And for to counte and re+herce to them his lyf: What shall I make longe reher|sayll / Whan the body was shewed in the cyte of kyng euander They that had the gouernance therof bare hit in to dyuerce places. And all way they preifid hercules / In the nouelte of this victorye the kynge Euander maad to begynne the temple that he had promysed to hercules And requyred hercules that he wold abide there in that contrey vnto the tyme / that his temple shold be full maad and performed / hercules behelde that the kyng euander dide do laboure in his temple with all diligence and agreed to his requeste / for as moche as hym semed that the temple shold be shortly maad / And some

bookes saye that longe tyme afore the god Mars had promysed to hercules that there shold be a temple made vnto hym and for that cause he was come in to ytalye / for to wete yf his destynee shold happe or no And whan the ytaliens herd recounte the birthe of hercules / they be|leuyd better that he was the sone of god Iupiter than of Amphitryon:.


How the quene of laurence enamoured on hercules / And how the kynge Prycus cam in to ytalye with a grete ooste and sende to defye hercules.
THe gloryous ffectes of hercules were gretly re|comanded in ytalye / as well for that he had vaynquysshid the geantes of Cremone as for the deth of cacus / So grete was his renomee that du|ryng the edificacion of his temple / all maner peple cam theder for to see hym. And made to hym dyuyne honoure Namyng hym the sone of god Iupiter / the kynges  the lordes cam to hym for to gyue hym yeftes and ryche pre|sentes. Amonge alle other the quene of Laurence cam theder fro her cyte with many Chares and charyottis Chargid and laden with many Iewellis and presentid them to hercules: Hercules resseyuyd in to his grace this quene and her presentes And thankid her gretly / This quene had to name Facua. And was wyf of the kynge. Fanus sone of the kynge pricus the sone of S|turne. She was yonge fressh. tendre and replete of lustynes. She had not seen kynge fanus her husbond in foure yere. ffor he was goon in to a ferre Contre And was not in alle this tyme come agayn / So hit happend syn that she fyrste began to take hede and beholde hercules and auyse hym well / she began to desire his conuersacon

And she began to loue hym so sore  acertaynly / that she coude not torne her eyen ner her thought vpon none other thynge but vpon hercules / In the beholdyng and seeyng hym. she said in her herte / that he was the moste welfaryng man and vpright with oute comparison that euer she sawe. and that of right me shold gyue hym laude and preysing / sayyng more ouer that her se|med that alle her herte was enuolupid with the fyre of his loue / many pensees  thoughtis fill than in her en+tendement. Now awakyd and quykenyd with a Io+yous spryrite And efte sone all pensyf / she passid the first day that she cam in this maner with hercules / whan she was withdrawen for to reste / she leyde her doun on a bedde all clothid And there she began to ymagyne the beaulte of hercules by so ardante desires / that she coude not abstayne her fro wepyng And sore wisshid after hym. wherof the ende was suche. that after many an ymagynacion aboute the gray morenyng / she began to saie vnto her self / O ffortune what man / what prince what kynge hast thou brought in to this contrey / Tis is not a kynge like other / This is an ymage singuler  lyke as the goddes had made hym by nature to excede and tryumphe aboue all her other subtill werkis and labours. Alle glorye shyneth in hym not only by hys proygne prowesse. but by his symple and sacrid per|feccion corporell / to whiche may be made no comparison O clere ymage amonge the nobles / who is she that se|eyng his eyen / that of oon only fight shall not haue her herte thurgh pershid / who is she that shall not coueyte and desire his grace / The moste erorcus of alle happy Well fortuned shall she bee that may gete his good

will / she is humble. fayr / playsant and lawhyng / he is a Tresour / O dere tresour Lyke as the gold passith all other maner metallis semblably he passith all other werkis of nature in all prosperitees. how than shall I not loue hym. As longe as I shall lyue his name shall remayne wreton in my memorye And his beaulte shall not be forgoten. but remayne for a souenance eternell.
GRete were than the preysinges that facua sayd of hercules She forgate anone the kynge fanus and put hym all in oubliance for the loue of her|cules / She was there a certayn space of tyme. and al|way thoughte on hercules. Hercules that thoughte no thyng on her made vnto her no semblant ne signe of loue How be hit he deuysid ofte tyme with her And with the wyf of the kynge euander named Carmente / the more he deuysid with hem the more was facua in grete payne by theschauffing of loue / Some tyme she loste her manyere and contena~nce. But certayn she coueryd hit and hid hit so well that no man toke hede of hyt. Than whan she had ben there eyghte dayes in berynge suche greuous payne / and she sawe that hercules coude not see the loue that she had to hym. ffor to come to the ende of her desyre / she cam on a day to hercules. And humbly requyred hym. that he wold come and take the pacyence of her hows for to passe the tyme. Whilis the kynge Euander performed hys temple / Hercules acor+ded and agreed vnto her requeste / wherof she had right grete Ioye in her self. They than disposyd them for to goo vnto Laurence / they toke leue than of the kynge euandr and of the quene / And toke theyr way / Thus

than gooyng hercules was alway by the syde of facua they deuysed of many thynges by the waye. And all|way facua had her amorous eyen fixed on the regard of hercules / that at laste hercules began to take hede / and sayd to her all softe. Lady ye do me grete worship to brynge me in to your hous. Alas syre answerd facua I do to yow no thyng but payne. how well I haue not the power to feste yow and make yow chier as I fayn wold. Lady sayd hercules the good chiere that ye do to me. is to me agreable / that fro hens forth ye bynde myn herte for to will fulfill your will in suche wyse that ther is no thyng that ye will / but I shall accom|plisshe hit at your comandement after my power. as to the moste beste accomplisshid lady that is in the occi|dent / Facua with these wordes began to smyle and answerd Syre I haue nothyng doon for yow. and ye are not so beholden to me as ye saie. how be hit I thanke yow for your good word And therof I hold me right ewrous and happy. that the moste ewrous man of all men daygneth to accompanye oon so pour a lady as I am. Lady answerd hercules I shall not take that to my prouffit that I am the moste ewrous of men. ffor ther ben many better addressid than I am. But certes the more ye speke the more ye make me your subgette. And syn ye do to me so grete honour I requyre yow as moche as I may that I may be your knyght And that ye take power ouer me to comande me to do your will and plaisir / Syre said facua wole ye that hit be soo. lady answerd hercules alas ye / I shall not comande yow sayd facua / but I shall gyue yow ouer me as moche of seygnourye and lordshippe as hit shall plese

yow to take. Hercules with that same word wold fayn haue kyssed the lady And had doon hit ne had ben the worshipp of her / whiche he wold kepe. They had ynowhe of other deuyses / Fro that day forth hercules entended to plese the lady more than he had don to fore And shortly he acquentid so with her and she with hym. that they laye to geder secretly. And he begate on her a sone that afterward was named latyne / Whiche was afterward of grete gouernement.
DVryng these thynges / Whilis that hercules and facua had this good tyme in laurence. Tydynges cam that the kynge fanus was comyng / facua that than began firste to Ioye in the loue of hercules / was passyng sory and heuy. whan she herde these tydynges. ffor she had strongly fyxed her herte in hercules. So|daynly the teris mounted vp in to her eyen. And all be|wepte she cam in to a chambre where as hercules was She toke hym aparte and said to hym. Alas my loue I trowe I shall dye for sorowe. Lady sayd hercules wherfore: for so moche sayd she as my husbond the kynge fanus cometh home / Hit is foure yere a goo syn I herd of hym I had supposid he had ben ded: but he is not His herbegeours  fourriers ben comen to fore and saye that he shall soope herein thys day / Alas what euyll aventure is this / we muste nedes now departe. And oure comynycacion shall faille. with this worde the lady en|braced hercules  fill doun a swowne in his lappe / Her+cules toke her vp  comforted her the beste wie he coude And sayd to her that syn hit is so that she was ma|ryed / that hit was reson that she abode stylle wyth her husbond / What someuer hercules sayd vnto the lady

she coude not kepe her from wepyng ne bewayling her loue / their bewaylingis were grete. In ^e ende she wente in to her chambre And dryed her eyen and brake her a+noyous corage as moche as she coude / In arayyng and apparayllyng her in suche wise as she had ben Ioyous and glad of the comyng of her husbond. that cam sone after and entrid in to his cyte with grete bruyt.
HErcules and facua wente agaynst the kynge fa|nus. Whan the kynge fanus sawe hercules / he dide to hym as moche honour and worshipp as he coude doo / ffor as moche as he had herd saie and was aduer+tysed of the armes that he had doo ayenst the geantes of cremone. and ayenst cacus. And thankyd hym for so moche as he was come in to his cyte / ffor conclusion hercules abode there foure dayes after that fanus was comen home / on the fyfthe day he consydered that he myght no more enIoye in his loue / And that he dide no+thynge there but lose his tyme / he toke leue of the kyng fanus and of the quene facua. And retorned vnto the hows of the kynge Euander / where he helde hym and abode vnto the tyme that his temple was maad and accomplisshid. Aboute the consommacion of this tem|ple An herould of Calidoine cam vnto hercules and sig+nefied to hym that the kynge prycus cam agaynst hym with a grete puyssance of men of armes. for to auenge the blood of cacus his cosyn. And Inposed to hercules that he had with oute cause  cruelly put to deth one so noble a kynge as cacus was / And yet sayd to hym more that yf he wolde susteyne the contrarye. that on the morn erly. he shold fynde the kynge prycus in the same place where the blood of kyng cacus was shedde

And there by mortall batayll by puyssane ayenst pu|yssance he wold preue hit trewe that he sayd.
WHan hercules had well herde / that the kynge pricus had signefyed to hym / He had his herte all full of Ioye. And answerd to the herauld that the deth that he had made cacus to deye was a werke of Iustyce. And that vpon that quarell / he wold fur|nyssh by batayll the kynge pricus at the oure and place that he had sayd / After this answer thus made Hercu|les gaf vnto the herauld his gowne that he ware / And dide hym to be fested right well sayng ^t he had brought hym tydynges of plaisance / Whan the herauld had had good chiere and well festyd as hercules had comanded He retorned vnto the kynge prycus And tolde hym that hercules had answerd to hym. and that he shold haue on the morn the batayll. The kynge pricus that supposid to haue all wonne by auantage for he had in his Oost moo than thretty thousand men. thanked the goddes of these tydynges. And cam  loggid hym the same nyght nyghe vnto the mounte Auentyn / vpon the Ryuer of tybre / He maad hym redy for to doo his batayll. And semblably dyde hercules / eche man on his syde thought on hys werkes. The nyght passid ouer / And than on the morn as sone as hyt began to dawe the kynge prycus and hercules began to sowne theyr grete abours And wyth that sowne theyr men put them in Armes to a poynt. And after rengid them in bataylle: And so they cam bothe partyes as well that one as that other in the same place where the blood of kynge cacus hadd ben shedd :.



How hercules fought ayenst the kynge prycus in batayll and how he fledde in to his cyte. where hercu|les allone slewe hym and many moo with hym.
ABoute fyue of the clock in the morenyng / Her|cules and pricus assemblid at the batayll / fro as fer as pricus sawe hercules he made a mer|uayllous crye / With this crye all the calidoniens began to renne ayenst hercules and maad so grete bruyt / that hit semed that there was not peple ynowhe in all the world for them. But certayn lyke as a small rayne abatyth or leyth doun a grete wynde / In lyke wise her+cules allone layd doun their ouer grete booste and bruyt ffor assone as he sawe his enemyes renne ayenst hym aboute a quarter of a myle / he departed fro his bataill that was well sette in ordynance. And after that he had comanded his folk that they shold not haste for no thynge / He began to renne ayenst the calidoniens so swyftely not lyke an hors / but lyke an herte that no man myght ouertake. The kynge euander was all a|basshid for to see in hercules so grete legierte  swifte|nes / Pricus and the calidonies whan they sawe hym meue from the oost. they had supposed that hit had ben an hors or some other beste / In the ende whan hercules was come nyghe to them by the space of a bowe shote / they knewe that hit was hercules. where of they were sore abasshid of his comyng. Pricus escryed his men vpon hym / They shotte arowes and casted dartes and speres vpon hercules ayenst all the partyes of his body neuerthelasse they coude neuer persshe ne entre in to the skyn of the lyon / ne he neuer rested till he had parfur|nysshid his course And put hym amonge his enemyes

so myghtely that confoundyng all to fore hym lyke as a tempeste or thonder / he wente in to the myddes of the oost there as was the chief banyere of the kynge prycus.
HErcules abood and restid there. and began to smyte and leye on vpon that one side  that other And to dye his swerd with the blood of the ca|lidoniens / his swerd was so hevy that noman myght susteyne hit Hit forfrusshid all that hit arought. Hit maad the place reed / where as the blood of cacus was shedd / of blode vpon blode and of ded men vpon ded. Than was not the shame  deth of kynge cacus vengid. but augmentid vpon the personnes of his frendes in ha|bondance of slaughter and of occision. The crye aroose gretly aboute hercules / he brake and all to rente the ba|nyers and the recognyssances of the calidoniens and of her conductours / ther was there none so hardy but he withdrewe. And ther was there none so well assw|ryd but he was aferd tremblid / All the beste and har|diest fledde a fore hym. Than he made as he wold with his enemyes. Theseus Euander and other cam than vnto the bataylle. At the recountre ther was many a spere bro+ken many an hawber and many an helme broken and many a knyght smyten in peces. The calidoniens were in grete nombre / And ther were many of them stronge and myghty / The bataylle was ryght stronge and myghty and fyers / The kynge Pricus put hym surth a fore vpon the grekes / And wrought wyth his hand right cheuauserously: And hercules and theseus dide worthyly and digne of memorye / they ranne fro renge to renge / And they disrengyd theyr enemyes / They hardyed and encoraged theyr men. And shewyd to

them how they shold doo. their feetes and dedes were so grete that hit is Inpossible to recounte and telle. And that in lityll tyme they put their enemyes in dispayr / What shall I saye all the discomfiture was in the caly+doniens / ffor by force of armes they abode vpon the felde the moste parte. And than whan the kyng pricus sawe that his peple myghte no more fyghte. And that he loste on all sides And that fortune was ayenst hym in all poyntes. After that he had sore labourid and that he had nede of reste / he withdrwe hym out of the prees And sowned the retrayte / And with the sowne alle the calidoniens tornyd the back and fledde after the kynge prycus:.
WHan hercules sawe that the calidonyens with|drewe them. He maad in semblable wise hys grekes to withdrawe them. Not for ony nede that they had / but for to shewe to their enemyes that they wold well that they reste them. In this wise the bataill cessed wenyng to hercules that the calidoniens shold reassemble on the morn whan they had restid hem They withdrewe hem some here and some there. the day passid the nyght cam on / Than the kynge prycus assemblad his folk And shewid vnto them their losse And the strength and myght of the grekes and in espe|ciall of hercules / After he said to them. that they might no thynge conquere vpon them. And that they coude no wyselier doo than to withdrawe hem and to retorne in to their contrey. The calidonyens that dredd hercules more than the deth or tempest or thonder of the heuen had grete Ioye whan they vnderstode the will of kyng pricus / And answerd all with one acorde that they

were redy to put them on the waye / With this answer they were concluded that they shold leue their tentes their cartes and Armours. for to goo lightly and more secretly / After this they toke their way after their con|clusion. paas by paas they wente their waye with oute makynge bruyt or noyse / And dide so moche this nyght that on the morn they were ferre fro hercules After thys on the morne whan hercules had espied that they were fledde. He and his men poursiewid after swyftly / how be hit they coude not ouertake them / ffor to spede the ma+tere. the kynge pricus retorned in to calidonie / Hercules poursiewid hym in to his Cyte whiche was stronge of wallis And assiegid hym. Duryng this siege ther was neuer calidonien that durst come out Hercules ofte tyme assaultid the cyte. but he loste his tyme / ffinably whan he sawe that he coude gete ne wynne vpon his ene+myes He callid his grekes and sayd to them. That man that ne aduentureth wynneth no thynge / We soiourne here with oute doyng ony thynge digne of memorye / Oure enemyes comen not out vpon vs / but yf we fecche hem we shall neuer haue ende. Sortly we muste alle wynne or lese / Wherfore I am aduysed that I shall dis+guyse me / And that I will go vnto the gate And late the porters vnderstand that I haue an erand vnto the kynge / And here vpon yf I may entre / I will goo vnto the kyng / and I shall so doo yf hit be to me possible that he shal~ neuer assault me more in bataill. And yf hit hap+pen that I may so doo as I haue deuysed to yow / I will ^t ye assaill ^e cyte assone as I shall be with Inn  to thende that the calidoniens may haue to do with yow as wel as with me / And that I haue hem not all ationes vpon me.
THeseus and Euander vnderstode well what that hercules wold doo / they answerd that they were redy to obeye all his comandementis And that they wold assaulte the Cyte after his say|yng / Than hercules arayed hym like as he had ben an enbassatour. Theseus and the grekes dysposid them for to make the assault / Whan all was redy hercules departed and cam  knokkyd on the gate of calidonie / The porters loked out at a litill wyndowe to see who knokkyd there / and seeyng that there was but oon man in a longe gowne / they opend to hym the gate  axid hym what he wold haue / hercules answerd that he sought the kynge / and what wold ye with hym sayd oon of the porters / certes sayd hercules I wold fayn speke vnto his persone / And sayyng these wor|des the porters sawe that hercules was armed vnder his gowne / and than at fewe wordes they escryed vp on hym. and tasted hym before and behynde sayyng that he was a traytre and that he was comen to espye the cyte / Whan hercules sawe hym so scasid of the por|tiers / He was there he wold be and had grete Ioye Whiche he couerd vnder symple contenance / and made at the begynnyng semblant that he wold haue fledde a way and escaped / But he employed so lityll of hys strength. that the portiers brought hym vnto the kyng pricus / Whiche satte in the halle wyth his doughters  his prynces. And maad to hym the presente. Sayyng Syre lo here is a trayttre. that is entrid in to your cy+te for to espye your puyssance / We haue taken hym. he said that he wold speke vnto your persone / how well he is armed vnder this mantell as ye may see. hit is a

ryght euyll tokene. ffor a man desiryng to speke to a kynge. shold in no wyse be armed pryuely ner a couert / 
WHan the kyng vnderstode thaccusaco~n of the por+tiers. Whilis they spake he behelde hercules / and knewe hym. He was so sore aferd that he wist not what to saye. Hercules than esvertued hym self And putte hym self out of the holdyng of the portiers. castyng them doun to the ground so harde  so greuously that they neuer after myght releue hem self / Whan the calidoniens that were in the halle sawe hym so euyll en|trete the portiers they escryed hercules vnto the deth and assaillid hym on all sides. His gowne was than anone rente of In comyng on he receyuyd many a strook / And allway he defendid hym without disployng of his puys+sance and of his strengthe / as he that aweyted the ty|dynges of the assaulte that was nyghe / The affraye was grete in the halle and in the cyte on alle parties / the calidoniens ranne vnto the palais for to assayll hercules The kynge pricus adoubed hym and cam with other vn+to this affraye / Than was hercules assayllid fiersly. But certes this assaulte coste dere ynowh vnto the kyng ffor to his bien venue hercules approchid vnto the taber|nacle / that stode vpon foure grete barres of yron. wher|of he toke that one And bete doun the tabernacle / After he lyfte vp hys Arme wyth the barre / And smote the kyng pricus so dismesurably vpon the coppe of his helme that not withstandyng hys stronge harnoys and ar+mures: He alle to frusshid hym doun to the erthe. And smote hym so sore frusshid and brusid that he fyll doun+ded betwene his two portiers.
AT this tyme the Crye aroose grete amonge the calidoniens. Not alonly there but also in the cyte ffor he that made the wacche sowned to armes for as moche as the grekes assaillid hastely the wallis Calidonie was than terribly troblid. The calidonyens wiste not where to entende / whether to hercules or to the assault. All was full of heedes armed as well in the palais as vpon the wallis. After this that hercules had slayn the kynge pricus. he began to smyte vpon his enemyes. his strokes were grete At eche strook he slewe two or thre / shortly he bare hym there so knighly that in lityll while he couerid all the pament of the pa+lais with ded bodies of the calidoniens / lyyng oon vp on an other / with oute that ony man myght adomage his armoure / The calidonyens were of grete corage /  had grete shame of that / they myght not ouercome her+cules. that allone had doon vpon them so grete an em|pryse. They assaillid hym by grete appetyte And caste vpon hym dartes and sharp glayues. His armes and his sholdres bare all / And he dide so grete thynges with his barre And gaf so grete strokes that none of hem myght resiste his strength. The pour calidonyes cam the|der by grete corage  desire for to venge the deth of their kynge / Hercules put so many to deth. that he wiste no|wher to sette his foot but vpon calidonyens. Tofore the gate of the palais was a pyteous noyse of wepyngs and of cryes that women and children maad / In the ende whan the calidonyens knewe and perceyuyd the vertue and strength of hercules and that they labouryd in ayn / they cessid to assaill hym and fledde / Than her+cules yssued out of ^e palais with his barre all couerd

with blood: Assone as the calidonyens sawe hym they escryed vpon hym passyng anguyss hously / they assay|lyd hym on an newe / they caste stones and dartes vpon hym. they shotte Arowes on hym habondantly / as they that were pourueyed and awayted on his passage / In this assault hercules hadd moche to suffre. Alleway in receyuyng moo strokes than can be nombred He pas|sid the wacche that awayted for to haue slayn hym. And restid neuer tyll he cam vnto the gate..
THe calidoniens ranne than after hym as men with oute drede of deth. And strongly swollen with pryde and yre / began on an newe to smyte vpon his sholdres and vpon his back. Whan hercules sawe that / he torned his fface vnto his euyll willars And smote vpon hem wyth his barre on the right syde and on the lyfte syde so radely / that he dyed his barre with newe blood / and maulgre his enemye he bete hem doun and all to frusshid hem to fore hym. He made hem to recule and goo aback more than fourty paas. And after cam to the gate And the calidonyens siewed hym agayn. but er they cam vpon hym he alle to brack and brussid and to frusshid the lokkys and the wekettis and dores of the gate that the grekes assayllyd wyth alle theyr puyssance. and bete doun the draw brygge / After he callyd the assayllans and they cam vnto hym And wyth lityll resistence they entryd the cyte / whiche was at that tyme wyth grete occysion of the calydony|ens that wold not yelde hem ne putte hem to mercy vn|to the tyme that they sawe theyr stretes and howses full of ded bodyes .



How hercules was anamoured on yole the dough|ter of kynge pricus / and how he requyred her of loue and how she acorded vnto hym:.
BI this maner was the kynge pricus slayn and his Cyte taken by hercules after the tucion and slaughter / Whan the calidonyens had humelied them. hercules  theseus wente vnto the palays / And they came theder so a poynt / that they fonde the dough|ters of kynge pricus with their ladyes and damoy|selles sechyne the kyng amonge the ded bodyes / There were so many ded bodyes that they coude not fynde ne knowe hym ^t they soughte. Hercules at his comyng be+gan to beholde one  other / And soueraynly among all other he caste hys eyen vpon yole the doughter of the kynge / ffor as moche as she was excellently resplen|dissant in beaulte that in all the world was none like vnto her / Whan he had a lytyll seen her by a secrete comandement of loue He drewe hym vnto her / wenyng for to haue conforted her / Anone as the right desolate damoysell sawe hercules approchyng vnto her / she tremblid for drede and fledde vnto her chambre. The ladyes  the damoyselles folowid her And amonge them so dide hercules. What shall I saye. he entrid in to the chambre where she was And satte doun by hr  she wende for to haue rysen for to haue goon out of the way but he helde her by her clothis and said vnto her / Lady ye may not flee my companye / yole spake than  sayd O myserable tyrant what sekeste thou me now for to troble me more. Thou hast slayn my fader / late that suffise the. Madame answerd hercules yf the kynge pricus be dede. hit is reson ^t he be not moche bewaylid

ne bewept. ffor he wenyng for to auenge the deth of the tyrant cacus. cam not longe syn for to assayll me in yta+lye. Sayyng that I had vnrightfully  with out cause slayn hym / In susteynyng the contrarye I fought with hym vpon this quarell. the batayll was not ended ne put to vttrance at that tyme: ffor he withdrewe hym with his peple and cam in to this cyte. and I haue pour|siewid hym hastely / how well I coude not ouertake hym. Whan I sawe that / I leyde my siege aboute this cyte He wold not come to achyeue the batayll duryng my siege / I haue this day willid to haue an ende. ffortune hath ben on my side and hath put yow in my puyssance Certes hit muste nedes be that with oute ony remede ye be my lady and my loue. ffor in seeyng your synguler be|aulte. Loue hath constrayned me to be yours / Than I pray yow as afectuously as I may or can / that ye cesse your sorowe and that ye receyue me as your frende and loue. the more ye wepe the lasse ye gete  wynne Contynuell teeris or wepynges ne pardurable sighes may neuer reyse your fader agayn.
THe fayr yole with these wordes was so oppres+sid of hoot  contrarye ymagynacions that her herte failled her / Hit was a pietous thynge to beholde / her frende hercules wold haue taken her vp and susteyned betwene hys armes. But a wyse lady that had alleway gouerned her / cam to hym and sayd to hym knelyng on her knees / Syre I pray yow in the name of alle the goddes. that ye wyll cesse to speke to this poure damoyselle for this tyme: She hath thys day loste her fader / Hyt muste nedes bee that nature acquyte her / ye may do wyth her your owen playsyr / 

late her a lityll abyde in her malyncolye / Alle shall be well yf hit plese the goddes as well for yow as for her / At the requeste of the ladye Hercules was content to late her goo for that tyme / he recomanded yole vnto the goddes and wente vnto theseus for to passe hys tyme. But to the ende that yole shold not goo away ne / escape / he ordeyned twelue grekes to kepe her and comanded vpon payne of deth that they shold suffre no woman yssue out of the chambre with oute wetyng whether they wente. In this night hercules dide the dede bodyes to be had oute of the palais and the place to be made clene. And also he ordeyned that the body of the kynge pricus shold be putte in sepulture. Whan thyse thynges were accomplisshid / hercules  theseus with their men of armes made good chiere of suche as they there fonde / And yole was neuer oute of the remem|brance of hercules / yole certaynly at this tyme was so disconforted that hit can not be recountid. The lady that had her in gouernance traueyllid ryght sore for to com+forte and chyere her / Than whan hercules had lefte her in the chambre as sayd is And she had many wordes to her / and amonge all other she said to her My dough+ter ye wepe to moche. Ha madame said yole. how may I lasse doo / whan shall I haue cause to wepe and to wayle yf I haue none now. My fader is ded. I haue loste hym that moste louyd me of all the world / I may lese no more ne no gretter thynge. Ought not than my herte to be angry and sorowfull. My doughter sayd the lady I knowe well that ye haue the moste appa|rant occacion of sorowe that ony woman may haue. But whan hyt muste nedes be that ye passe by thys

Infortune what proffiten yow youre greuous we|pynges. Ther may no thynge procede of them but aug|mentacion of melancolye / And hurtyng  appayryng of your preysid beaulte / ye be now fallen in the hande of this prynce. This is a man worthy and noble aboue all other / he loueth yow / ye ought to thanke the goddes and to gyue hem prcisyngis of this grace. ffor this is to yow an ewre and an happe in your myshappe yf ye will beleue me. ye shold putte all thys suffrance. Better it is to suffre one euyll than two. Me thynketh ye oughte considere your estate. And yf ye considere hit well ye shold payne yow for to forgete hit: Madame said yole / Alas and how may that bee. that I shold haue loue. or affinyte or hauntyse vnto hym that hath doon to me so moche harme / He hath uot taken only fro me a knyght ne an vnclene cosyn / but myn owen propre fa|der Late none speke to me more therof. He is and shall be my mortall enemye as longe as I lyue. and as longe as he shall lyue he shall haue no morr of me for prayer promesse ne for manace..
MI doughter sayd the lady make ye not your self bonde / where as ye be free. The faytes and dedes of loue ben subtyll and sodayne: Loue is alle|way in his secrete trone. that can do none other thynge / but humelye and meke the harde hertes. And bowe the stronge: So hard ne so stronge an herte is not amonge the humayne Creatures. But that hit is right sone humelyed and meked whan that hit is his plaisir Ther is no tour so hyghe. but hyt may be beten doun by subtyll myne / Nether is no wynde so grete ne so

rygorous but hit attemperid / ther is no nyght so derke but that hit is furmounted wyth the day. ye hate her|cules now. yf ye haue a while hauntid hym and haue had comynycaco~n with hym. parauenture ye shall loue hym better / than euer ye louyd your fader your moder or ony other of your lignage / And that I may proue by my self. ffor I had my husbond in so grete hate first er we assemblid / that I wold fayn haue seen hym dye a shamefull deth. Sodaynly whan we had begon to conuerse oon with another / I louyd hym so certaynly that yf he had not ben with me day and nyght / I had wente I shold haue deyed for sorowe and anoye / My doughter suche ben the toures of loue. ofte tymes me seyth / that after grete hate cometh grete loue. The glorye of hercules is so clere / that your herte ought to be enlu|myned / the conqueste that he hath made in this Cyte shall be for yow a synguler preparacion of all good / wold ye attayne to a more gretter wele / than for to be felawe or loue of hym that is the dompter of kynges the most best well faryng man. and the moste tryum|phant in armes. ffor to hym is no thyng Inpossible / he hath conquerid the moste parte of ^e vnyuersall world O my doughter reioysse yow in fortune. Shette not the dore to prosite that cometh to yow / hit is to be bele+uyd that the desolacion of this cyte hath ben deuysed and ordeyned by the parlament of the goddes. in fa|ueur of yow. that ar the parement and none like vnto yow of all the doughters of the kynges for to gyue you in mariage vnto this man.
BI these wordes the fayre yole had her stomack en|terprised of large ymaginacions. She rose vp

fro that parte. And entrid in to her gardero be / / where as was the presentacion of the goddesse dyane / Whan she was comen theder / / she knelid doun in grete humy|lyte to fore the ymage. And in haboundyng of syghes  wepyng as sore as she had doon ony tyme of the day to fore she sayd: Goddesse of virgynes what shall doo thy right symple Ancylle and hand mayde. Alas enlu|myne my hope. beholde myn affliccion. poyse myn vn|happ. Sende thyn eyen in to the secrete of myn herte / and see the sorowe that I bere. And in the faveur of virgyns kepe my body and preserue from the hande of hym that wold that I shold be his wyf. After that he hath en|gendrid in me the Rote of mortall hate. whiche is not possible to be anullyd as nature Iugith in me. for hyt is not possyble that I may loue myn enemye. Conse|quently and it is trouth that the hate that I haue ayenst this tyrant hercules shall be pardurable .
IN tyse prayers and lamentacions yolle abode vnto the perfoundeur of the nyght. cursyng her|cules sayyng that she hadd leuer to deye than to haue ony loue in hym. Thus desdaynyng the loue of her|cules. with oute mete or drynke she passid the nyght. The day folowyng hercules retorned vnto her / And on a newe prayd her that she wold be his wyf / Say|yng wyth oute respyte that she muste nedes agre thereto She was right sore displaysan~t of thys requeste and excused her in many facions that were to longe to re|herce at this tyme / But at the ende of the prayers and requestes of hercules / Loue nspyred in suche wyse the damoyselle / that she vnderstode well that hercules

was yssued of the Rote of noble fader  moder / that she acorded to doo his plaisir. What shall I more saye yole comynicqued than with hercules as his wyf they laye to geder  acqueyntid eche with other / Loue than enroted in their hertes. her two wyllis were lockyd and put in one will / Hercules forgate deyanyra And yole forgate the deth of her fader / And so moche she en|amoured on hercules. that she myght reste in no place but that she muste be allway hym. O meruay|lous thynge. the rancour  the hate that yole had yester|day vnto hercules. is now sodaynly torned in to loue Infallible. ffor to spede the mater duryng yet the fyrste dayes of the loue of hercules and yole. At the prayer of yole / hercules gaf her susters in mariage to certayn knigh+tes of the grekes / and lefte them there to gouerne ^e contre and the royame of calidonie / After he deted from thens and brought his oxen and his kyen wyth hym. And sente ageyn the kynge Euander in to his domynacion / Thankyng hym of hys companye. and of the honour that he had doon to hym.
EWander had gladli conueyed hercules in to grece But hercules wold in no wyse that he shold haue the trauayll. At laste than euander wyth grete thankyngs of hercules and of his armee departid And hercules with his excersite wente vnto the see / He forgate not behynde hym the fayr yole / he louyd her soueraynly. All day he was with her / And she plesyd hym as moche as she myght / doubtyng more to lese his loue than she dredde the deth: As they than thus wente by the see mayntenyng to their power the amerous lyf / Hercules rencountrid on a day / nyghe by an hauen and

a good cyte / a galeye of marchauntes / Hercules made the galeye to tarye and after callyd the patrone. And axid of hym of what contre he was  fro whens he cam Certes syre answerd the patrone of the galeye / I depar+ted late fro the porte of trace that is here by / I see well that ye be estranger and that ye knowe not the peryll that ye be Inne. Wherfore I haue pyte of yowe and of youre companye And therfore I aduertyse yow  praye yow that at ^e next hauen ye shall fynde that in no wyse ye tarye there / for no thynge that may befall yow / ffor also truly as ye be here. yf ye goo theder ye shall take harme / ffor ther is a kyng a tyrant the moste cruell that is in all the world named Diomedes that holdeth vnder hym ten thousand theuys. And that he makyth warre aenst all them that he may fynde and hath a custome that he putteth men to raunson suche as hit plesith hym And yf they that he putteth to suche myserye / paye their raunson. he lateth hem go quyte. And wyth that money and substance he nourysshith his theuys and his horses. And yf they may not furnysshe theyr raunson He hym self smyteth hem in to morsellis and gyueth hem to his horses for to ete and deuoure / But there is one thynge good for yowe. ffor thys mornyng he is goon to the Chasse for to hunte in a foreste whiche is a foure myle from trace. And with hym ther ben an honderd of the strongest theuys that he hath. And this knowe I ve|rytably for I haue seen hem departe not passyng thre oures a goo :


How hercules foughte ayenst Dyomedes in the fo|rest of trace and how he maad his hors to ete hym.
HErcules heeryng the wordes that the patrone of the galeye sayd to hym and rehercyng the lyf of diomedes. / was passyng Ioyous in hys herte / more than he had syn the deth of the theef cacus. he had in hym that vertue / that where he myght knowe monstre or tyrant or ony men enpesshyng the comyn wele / thether he wente And suche tyrans he destroyed And to thende that men shold not saye that he dyde suche werkes for couetyse. he wold neuer holde ne re+teyne to his propre vse no thynge of their goodes / But all that he conquerid in suche wyse he gaue hit vnto noble men And presid no thyng but vertue / He wold not make his seignourye to growe ne to amasse and take to hym self royame vpon royame. He was con|tnte of that / that nature had gyuen hym. And allway he wold laboure for the comyn wele / O noble herte / O right wel~ adressid corage / O tresuertuous paynem ther was none like to hym of all them / that were afore hym ne after hym. ffor to holde on and entretieue my mater / Whan the patrone had aduertised hym as afore is sayd. that the tyrant dyomedes was goon an hun|tyng in to the foreste. with his honderd theuys. He dide so moche that the patrone shewyd hym the sytuacion of the foreste And by what way and maner he myght sonnest come theder / After this he gaf leue to the patrone to goo his way. That done he callid his maryners / and made them to seche the place. After he assemblid the gre+kes and tolde them that he wold that they shold abide hym there. And that he hym self wyth oute delaye wold goo in to the foreste. that the patrone had enseig+ned hym to seke diomedes Sayyng ^t he wold neuer

retorne in to grece vnto the tyme that he had delyuerid the contrey of this tyrant / yole began than to wepe / whan she herde thentrepryse of hercules and prayd hym tenderly wepyng. that he wold leue and departe hym of the aventure in so grete paryll / Hercules toke no rewarde ne hede to her prayers. He delyuerid to philotes his bowe and his clubbe. And entrid in to a lytill galeye subtyll and lyghte / Whiche he conduyted by the helpe of phy|lotes ryght nyhe the place where he wold bee / And toke lande a two bowe shotte fer fro the foreste. And in settyng foot a lande / he herde the bruyt and noyse of the Chasse. He had therof grete Ioye / And sayd that he was well adressid / He toke his clubbe / and lefte his bowe with philotes. After he entryd in to the foreste / He had not ferre rengid in the foreste. Whan he fonde diomedes  his honderd theuys. Dyomedes was the firste that fro ferre espyed hercules / he knewe that he was an estrau~ger / And escryed hym and sayd. Geant what is that thou sechest in this foreste. Hercules ans|werd what art thou. Diomedes said I am the kynge of trace / thou art entrid in to my domynaco~n with oute my leue / hit displeseth me / thou must be my prysonner / wher fore yelde the to me / Hercules said than. kynge syn thou arte diomedes the kynge of trace. thou art sauns faulte  the tyrant that I seke. And therfore I am not of thenten|cion to yelde me with oute strook smytyng / And also to an euyll theef / knowe thou that I shall defende me with this clubbe. with whyche I haue ben accustomed to de|stroye the monstres / And am in hope this daye to make thy horses ete and deuoure thy body lyke as thou haste taught and vsid them to ete thy prysonners:.
WHan diomedes herd the answer of hercules / he toke a ryght grete axe that oon of hys theuys bare after hym. And he lyft hit vp escryyng hercules vnto the deth and dischargid so hard. that yf hereules had not torned the strook with his clubbe / he had ben in grete peryll: Diomedes was of the gretenes and stature of hercules. And had largely strenght and puyssnce / Whan hercules had receyuyd the strook / he enhaunced his clubbe and faillid not to smyte diome|des. ffor he gaf hym suche a strook vpon the stomack and so heuy. that he torned hym vp so doun from his horse. and laye all astonyed in the felde / Than his hon|derd theuys meuyd them and assayllid hercules on all sides. Some of them there were that redressid diome|des and sette hym agayn vpon his horse / the other late flee vpon hercules largely arowes  dartes And some brake their glayues vpon hym. Alle thise thynges en|payred no thynge the armes of hercules. His hawbere nd his helme were of fyn steell forged and temprid hard. The frode there amonge them lyke a montaygne / Whan he had suffrid the fyrst enuaye and assault of the theuys. for to shewe to them to whom they fought He meuyd vpon them  smote doun right on all sydes by suche vertue. that sodaynly he maad the peces of them flee in to the wode And smote them doun of their horses. Diomedes was at that tyme reysid. and with grete fureur and maletalent / with many of his compli+ces cam vnto the rescows of his theuys that hercules go+uernyd as he wold. And whis that some assayllid hym be for / he cam behynde  smote hym with his axe vpon his helme / the strook was grete the fyre sprange

oute. Diomedes had well wende to haue murdrid her|cules / / how well hercules meuyd not for the strook but a lytill bowed his heed. After this than he lyfte vp his clubbe and smote amonge the theuys. And maulgre them all in lasse than an oure he had so holden the yren to theyr backes / that of the honderd he slewe syxty / And the other alle to brussyd and frusshyd and putte hem to flyght with diomedes / But hercules rennyng more swyftely than an hors amonge all other he pouriewid diomedes so nyghe / that he raught hym by the legge and pullyd hym doun of his horse And caste hym donn ayenst a tre vnto the erthe. After he toke hym by the body. and by vyue force bare hym vnto the place where the batayll had ben. There he dyshelmyd hym and vnar|med wyth lytyll resistence. For dyomedes was than all to brussyd. And myght not helpe hym self / And whan he had hym thus at his wyll / He bonde hym by the feet and by the handes / After thys he assemblid to geder twenty horses of the theuys / that ranne sparkd in the wood / and cam to diomedes  said to hym. O thou cursid enemye that all thy tyme haste enployed in tyran|nye: And didest neuer oon good dede. But all thy dayes hast lynyd in multeplyyng of synnes  vices / And that thou hast troublid the peple by thefte and proyes irrepa|rable / And that thou hast nourysshid thy horses wyth mannys flessh / And by this cruelte thou haddest supposid to haue made me to dye / Certes I shall do Iustice vpon the And shall doo to thyn euyll persone. like as thou wol|dest haue doon to myne. Than hercules leyde the tyrant in the myddes of the horses / whiche had grete honger / And they anone deuowred hym / for they louyd mannys flessh

And thus whan hercules had put the tyrant to deth / he toke his armes in syngne of victorye. and retorned vn|to philotes that abode hym.
PHilotes had grete Ioye whan he sawe hercules retorne. he enquyred of hym how he had doon and how he had born hym And hercules hidde ne concelid no thynge from hym. What shall I saye with grete Ioye and gladnes. they retorned vnto the grekes And dide do disancre their shippes And saillyd for to aryue at the porte or hauen of trace. Than wold hercules do hit be knowen / hit was late And trace was full of the deth of the kynge diomedes / This notwith|standyng. hercules toke to philotes the Armes of dyo|medes And sente hym in to the cyte for to somone them that gouerned hit / and for to yelde hit in to his handes Philotes wente in to the palais of trace And made to be assemblid them that than were pryncipall in the cy+te. Whan they were assemblid philotes dide than open to them his charge and message. and somoned the tra|cyens / / that they shold put their cyte in the handes of her+cules / Sayng that hercules was he that had putte to deth diomedes for his euyll lyuyng. and for the loue of the comyn wele. And that the cyte cowde do no better / but to resseyue hym at his comyng. ffor he wold not pylle hyt. but he wold onely reduy schit to good po|lycye / Whan he had doon this so~macion. to the ende that they shold beleue hym / he discouerd and shewid vnto them the armes of diomedes.
WHan the tracyens had herd philotes / and sawe the armes of diomedes Some of the complices and semblable of the vocaco~n of diomedes and

theuys / / were full of grete fureur And wold haue taken the armes fro philotes. The other that were wyse and notable men. and that many yeres had desired the ende of their kynge. seeyng his armes knewe assuridly that dyomedes was ded. And full of Ioye answerd to philotes. ffor as moche as hercules is a kynge of grete renomee and wysedom. And that he had done a werke of grete meryte in the deth of diomedes / that they wold receyue hym with good herte in to the cyte / Wyth oure plente of langage / the tracyens wente vnto the gate and opend hit / Philotes retorned than vnto hercules / And tolde to hym thyse tydynges. Hercules and the grekes wente oute of theyr galeyes. and entrid in to trace by space of tyme. The tracyens brought hem vnto the pa|lays where were yet many theuys. Hercules putte alle the theuys to deth. not in the same nyght / but duryng the space of ten dayes that he soiournyd there / He sette the cyte in good nature of polycye. He delyueryd hyt from the euyll theuys. He maad Iuges by elecco~n at the play|sir of the peuple / And than whan he had done alle these thynges / He departyd fro trace with grete thankynges as well of the olde as of the yonge. He mounted vpon the see. And after by succession of tyme with out ony aventure to speke of. he dide so moche that he cam vnto hys royame of Lycye in to his palais where he was re|ceyuyd with grete Ioye of the Inhabitau~s and also of the neyghbours. And there he abode with the fayr yole whome he louyd aboue all temporell goodys..


How deyanira was full of sorowe for as moche as hercules louyd yole .
THeseus than after the retorne of hercules seeyng that he wold abide there And that ther was no memorye / that in all the world was ony monstre ne tyrant. toke leue of his felawe hercules / of yole of philotes and of other / And wente to Athenes and to thebes. Semblably the grekes toke leue. and euery man retorned in to his contre. and to his howse recountynge and tellyng in all the places where they wente the grete auentures  ^e gloryo werkes of hercu+les. Than the renomee that renneth and fleeth by roy|ames  empyres as lightly as the wynde / Also lightly cam hit and flewe vnto ycome where as deyanyra so|iourned / And was sayd to deyanira that hercules was retorned fro spaigne. With grete glorye and tryumphe And that he was descendid in lycye. Dame deianyra for this renomee was glad. and also subget of a grete and synguler playsir / and concluded that she wold go vnto hym. How well she was abasshid of that he had not signyfied to her his comyng. and that he had not sente for her / Sore pensyf and dowtyng that she shold be fallen oute of the grace of hercules. She made redy her excersite And in right noble astate she departid fro ycome on a day for to goo in to lycye. In processe of tyme she cam nyghe vnto lycye. Than she taried there for to attyre and araye her the beste and moste fayrest wyse she cowde or myght / And callid her squyer na|med lycas. and comanded hym that he shold goo in to lycye. and signefye to hercules her comyng. At the co|mandement of deyanyra. Lycas wente in to the cyte And happend hym right at the gate he encountrid and mette a man of his knowleche a squyer of hercules / 

Lycas and the squyer grette and salned eche other / Af|ter this lycas axed of the squyer and demanded hym where the kynge was. and yf he were in his palays / ye veryly sayd the squyer / / he is there I wote well and passith the tyme with his lady yole the most beste adres+sid. and oute of mesure moste resplendissaunt lady that is in all the world as grete as hit is. Eche man alow|eth her. And preyseth a thousand tyme more than deya|nyra / Hercules hath her in so moche grace. that conty|nuelly they ben to geder / And what som euer the lady doth. hyt is agreable vnto hercules / And ther is no man that can saye or telle the grete loue that they haue to gyder
Lycas heeryng these tydynges of the squyer. toke leue of hym / and maad semblau~t to haue late falle or lefte behynde hym some of hys ba|gues or Iewels / For as moche as he was of aduyse / ymagynyng in hym self. that hit was not good that he signefyed to hercules the comyng of deyanyra / vnto the tyme that he had aduertysed her of hys astate. Pensyf and symple than he cam to deyanira. where as she was attyryng her self precyously and sayd to her Madame what doo ye here / Wherfore answerd deyanyra. ther|fore sayd lycas. Why is ther ony thynge sayd deyanira what tydynges. Lycas answerd harde tydynges: I haue herde saye and telle of hercules thynges ull of suche hardynesse. that certes hyt is ryght greuous to me to saye them vnto yow. How be hyt syn that ye be come thus ferre / And that ye muste nedes knowe and vnderstand them. I telle and saye to yow certaynly that your lorde hercules is in hys palays right Ioyously

And that he hath with hym a lady. fayre by excellence Whom he loueth aboue all thyngis for her beaute whi|che is so hyghe and grete that eche man meruaylleth / and that she is the moste souerayne in beaute / that euer was seen with mannes eye. Beholde and auyse yow what ye will doo er ye goo ony forther / this day hit is force to abyde and take counceyll and aduyse.
Off the heryng of these tidynges Deyanira was passyng angry and was all bespradd with a right grete sorow in all her vaynes / She be|gan to quake and tremble. Her fayr heer that was a|dressid on her heed. she all to drewe hit with her han|des in so fell maner / that she disatyred her / and smote her self with her fyste so grete a strook vpon her breste / that she fyll doun backward in a swowne. The ladies and the damoyselles that accompanyed her / shryked and cryed dolorously /  were sore meuyd in her blood By space of tyme deyanyra cam to her self agayn / alle pale and destaynte and thynkynge on the sorowe that engendrid in her / And also on the sorowe that was co+myng to her / she spake and sayd with a feble  lowe wys. Poure deyanyra what shalt thou do. or whyther shalt thou goo. Thou that fyndest thy self recuylid and put a back fro the loue of thy lord hercules. Alas alas is hit possible that the renoueleme~t of a lady may take away my husbond / the herte late Ioyned vnto deya|nyra / shall hit be disioyned by the findyng of a woman of folye / shall she make the separacion. by myauyse hit may not bee. ffor hercules is noble of herte  loueth vertue And yf he abandonne and gyue me ouer / he shal~

do ayenst verte and noblesse / I haue affiance in hym that he shall be trewe to me. Madame say  lycas ye faylle no thynge to saye that hercules is noble and full of vertue. ffor he hath employed all his tyme in vertu|ous thynges. how be hit. he is a man. And hath taken in loue thys newe woman for her beawte / Ne affie yow so moche in his vertue. that your affiance begyle and deceyue yow / ye know well that fortune ne en|tertieneth longe prynces or pryncesses on the toppe aboue of her whele / ther is none yet so hyghe. but that he ne maketh hem somtyme lye benethe amonge them that suffre. Beholde and see well what ye haue to doo / yf ye go vnto hercules And he receyue yow not. as he hath ben accustomed / that shall be to yow a tytle of dispayre Men saye that he loueth soueraynly this new lady / Hyt is aparau~t that he shall sette but lytyll stoor of youre comynge / And yf ye goo the lady shall be euyll content / She hath the bruyt. And euery man is fayn to do her playsir. ther shall be no man so hardy to wel|come yow. for the loue of her / goo not theder thanne / the paryll is to grete / I counceyll yow for the better that ye retorne in to y come / And that ye put this thynges in to your suffrance / / In attendyng and abydyng that the fyre and the bruyt of this lady passe / ffor where as her|cules is alle other / than the most parte of the men be / so shall he leue this lady a lytyll and a lytyll .
DEyanira consideryng that licas counceyllyd her truly / beleuyd well thys counceyll / And ryght sore wepyng she retorned in to y come / Whan she was in the howsse of ycome / Than she pryuyd

her of alle worldly playsir / and helde her solitaryly with oute goyng to festes or to playes. Thus abidyng in this solitude / her greuous annoye grewe more  more by so ample anoyance that she was constrayned to make Infynyte bewayllyngis and sighes. The contynu+ell confort of her ladyes myght gyue to her no solace The Innumerable deuyses that they made vnto her eeres for to make her passe ^e tyme. myght neuer take away hercules out of her mynde She vsid and lyuyd many dayes this lyf. Hauyng alleway her eere open for to knowe yf hercules sente for her / In the ende whan she had suffrid ynowhe and sawe that no thyng cam / and that neyther man ne woman was comyng to brynge her tydynges fro the persone of hercules. She made a lettre whiche she delyuerid to lycas for to bere vnto her+cules And chargid hym to delyuere hit to no persone but to the propre hand of hym that she sente hit vnto / Lycas toke the lettre and wente vnto lycye. And two myle nyghe ^e cyte / he encountrid hercules in a crosseway Hercules cam from Archade where he had newly slayn a wylde boor so grete / that ther was neuer none seen lyke to hym. Whan than lycas sawe hercules. he made to hym reuerence And presentyd his lettre to hym in sa+lewyng hym from deyanyra. Hercules waxe reed and changed colour whan he herde speke of deyanyra. He receyuyd the lettre amyable / and redde hit and fonde therin conteyned as here folowetth:.
HErcules my lord the man of the world that I moste desire / I yow supplye that ye haue recoman+ded your trew seruante and Indigne deyanyra

Alas hercules alas / Where is become the loue of the tyme paste / / ye haue now soiourned many dayes in lycye And ye haue lete me haue no knowleche therof / Cer|tes that is to me a right dolorouse Auoye to suffre and bere. For I desire not to be deyfyed ne mounte in the ce|lestyall manoyrs wyth the sonne / wyth the mone ne with the sterrys / But with oute rompure or brekyng of free herte I desire your solempne comynycacion / / I may fro hens forth no more fayne / Hit is sayd to me that ye haue another wyf than me / Alas hercules haue I made ony faulte ayenst your reuerence. Wherfore gyue ye me ouer and abandou~ne me / How may ye do soo / Men name yow the man vertuous / ye abandou~e me and for|sake me / That is ayenst vertue / how well ye doo hyt / I haue seen the tyme that ye were my husbond In enbra|syng vs to gyder and kyssyng / ye shewyd than to me semblaunce of solas and of Ioye. Now late ye her that ye louyd as a poure femelette / Alas where ben the wit|tenesses of our maryage / Where be the eternall serements and othes that we made that oon to that other / The men ben deef and blynde. but the goddes here and see. wher|fore I praye yow that ye considere that ye ought to con|sydere. And that ye holde youre glorye more derer than ye doo for the loue of youre newe aqueyntyd that ma|keth yow to erre ayenste vertue wherof ye haue so grete a Renomee / And I pray yow ryght hertely to sende to me youre playsir :.
WHan hercules hadd redde from the begynnyng to the ende the lettre of deyanira. As he yet behelde and sawe hyt / yole cam vpon hym wyth a thre

honderd damoyselles for to feste and make chiere to hercules. Hercules than closid the lettre and retorned in to lycye holdyng yole by the hande. how be hyt whan he was in his palais / he forgate not deyanira. but fonde maner for to goo in to his studye And there wrote a lettre / And whan hit was achieuyd he toke hit to ly|cas for to presente hit to deyanira. Lycas toke the lettre and retorned home agayn to deyanira. ffirst he tolde her the tydynges and of the state of yole. After he delyue|rid to her the lettre / conteynyng that he recomandid hym vnto her / And that he had none other wyf but her And that he prayd her that she sholde not gyue her to none euyll thynkynge. but leue in hope and in pacyence / as a wyse lady and noble oughte and is bounde to doo for her honour  worshippe / This lettre lityll or nought conforted deyanira. she was strongly attaynte of Ia|lousye / Her sorowe redowblid and grewe In this re|doublyng she wrote yet a nother lettre whiche she sente to hercules and conteyned these wordes that folowe.
HErcules alas and what auaylleth me to be the wyf of so noble a husbonde as ye be / your no|blesse is to me more dampnable than prouffi|table. O fortune I was wonte to resioye. ffor alle daye / I herde none other thynges but loanges and prey+synges of yowr prowesses and right gloryouse dedes and feetes wherof the worlde was enlumyned and shoon. now I muste be angry  take displaisir in your werkes that ben fowle and full of vyces. Alle grece murmureth vpon yow And the peple saie that ye were wonte to be the vaynquysshour of alle thynges. and

wno ye ben vaynquysshid of the folyssh loue of yole Alas hercules and how shall I be departid from yow / and be holden the chambryere of the caytyf yole. She is your kaytyf. ffor ye haue slayn her fader / and haue taken her in the pryse of Calidonie / how be hit she hath the place of your lawfull wyf  Alas haue I be said wel~ maryed for to be named the fayre doughter of Iupiter kynge of the heuen  of the erthe. Now shall I no more be callid so / Hyt is not alleway happy to monte vnto the moste hyghe astate / ffor fro as moche as I haue mounted in heyghte and was your felawe / fro so ferre I fele me falle in to the more grete peryll / O hercules yf for my beaute ye toke me to your wyf / I may well curse that beaute. ffor that is cause of the greuous shame / that is to me alle euydente. ffor to prenostyque myn harme and euyll future and that is to come can not your astro|nomyens see that / I wold I knewe that / I wote well your beaute and my beaute haue brought my herte in to the strayt prysone of sorowe with oute ende. And I may not counte them but for enemyes / Whan by them all sorowes comen to me / The ladyes haue Ioye in the preemynence of theyr husbondes: But I haue maleure and myshappe. I ne see but displaysir in my maryage / O hercules I thynke alle daye on yow / that ye goo in grete paryls of Armes and of fyers bestes and temp|estes of the see: And in the falsenesse of the world Myn herte tremblyth and hath ryght grete feer of that I ought to haue beleue and hoope of welthe / Alle that I remembre in my mynde and thynke on the daye I|dreme on the nyghte / And than me thynketh veryly that I see the cuttyng sharpp swerdes entre in me and

the heedes of the sperys. and after me thynketh I see yssue out of the caues of the forestes and desertes / lyons and wilde monstres that ete my flessh. Syn the begyn+nyng of oure alyance vnto this day I haue had alle the dayes and nyghtes suche paynes for yow. and borne and suffrid them. But alas alle these thynges are but lityll in comparacion of the payne. that I now suffre and endure / ffor as moche as ye mayntene strange wo+men and a woman of all folye / May she be callid the moder of your children / of whome ^e sparklis of fowle renomee shall abyde of yow. Of this tache or vyce is my payne redowblid. hit percid my sowle / I am troblid of the dishonour of your ample hyenes. The peple saye that ye ar made a woman. and lyue after the gyse and maner of a woman. And spynne on the rocke: where ye were wonte to estrangle lyons with your handes ye leue the hantysse of armes / and to be knowen in ferre contrees and royames in shewyng your vertue lyke as ye were wonte to doo. for the onely hauntyse of the cay+tyf yole that holdeth and abuseth yow: O cursid haun+tyse and foule abusion Sspeke to me hercules. yf the right hyghe and myghty men that thou hast vaynquys+shyd  as diomedes of trace. Antheon of lybye. Busire of egypte. Geryon of spaigne. And cacus the grete theef sawe the thus holden to do nought / for the beaute of a doughter that sone shall passe. What shold they saye / Certes they shold not repute them worthy to be vayn+quysshid of the And shold shewe  poynte the with their fynger / as a man shamed and maad woman ly|uyng in the lappe of a woman / O how is yole stronge / Whan her handes that ben not worthy ne dygne to threde

an nedle. hath taken thy clubbe. and brandisshyd thy swerd wher with thou haste putte in fere alle the erthe / Alas hercules haue not ye souenance that in your chylde|hode syyng in your cradell ye slewe the two serpentes / ye beyng a chyld were a man And now whan ye haue ben a man. ye are becomen a woman or a chyld / This is the werke of a woman to holde hym alleway wyth a woman / / or hit is the fayte of a childe / for to enamoure hym self on a woman of folye / the trouthe muste be said ye began better than ye ende / your laste dedes answer not to the fyrste / your labours shall neuer be dygne ne wor+thy of preysyng ne of loos. For all the loange and prey|synge is in the ende. Who that begynneth a werke wher of the begynnyng is fayre. and the ende fowle / all is loste / Certes hercules whan I beholde the gloryous begyn+nyng that vertue maad in yow. And see that ye now be vicyous. Alle my strength faylleth and myn armys falle doun as a woman in aspasme or a swowne and wyth out spyryte. And hit may not seme to me trewe that tho armes that bare awaye by force the sheepe fro the gardyn langyng to the doughters of athlas may fall in to so grete a fawte. as for to enbrace and beclyppe flesshly an other wyf than his owne: Thys not with|standyng I am acertayned for trowth. that ye holde not kaytyf yole as a kaytyf / but as your owne wyf: not in pryson: But at her playsir in Chambre parced And in bedde courteyned and hangyd. not disguysed and se|cretly as many holde her concubynes: But penly and wyth visage open shewyng her righte gloryous to the peple / And she may so doo lafully / ffor she haldeth yow

prysonner and caytyf / And she hath put the gorreau aboute your nekke by her ytalyan subtyll Iogelynges and Iapes / wherof I haue grete shame in my self / But as for the amendement / I discoulpe me  can not better hit. but praye to the goddes that they will pourueye for remedye.


How deyanira sente to hercules a sherte enuenymed And how hercules brente hym self in the fyre of hys sa+crefyse / And how deyanyra slewe her self whan she knewe that hercules was ded by the cause of her ygno+rance .
WHan hercules had redde this lettre / he vnderstode well what hyt conteyned And was smyten with remors of conscience / By this remors he vnderstode that vertue was fowlid in hym. He was than all peusyf And so moche pryuyd from plesance that none durste come to hym in a grete while  space Saue onely they that brought to hym mete  drynke Neyther yole durste not go to hym. Lycas that had brought this bettre was there awaytyng  attendyng the answere longe. No man coude knowe wherof pro+ceded the solitude of hercules ne the cause why he with+drewe hym fro the peple. In the ende whan hercules had ben longe pensif. and had thought vpon all his affai|res and that he had to doo ffor to withdrawe hym and to eslonge hym fro yole he departid fro his chambre on a day sayng that he wold goo and make sacrefyce to the god appollo vpon the mounte named oethea / And comanded and defended vpon payn of deth that no man shold folowe hym resruyd philotes. Of auenture as he yssued oute of hys palays accompanyed only of

philotes for to goo vpon the mounte / / he mette lycas / Ly+cas maad to hym reuerence. and demanded hym / yf hit plesid hym ony thynge to sende to deyanira / Hercules answerd to lycas that he wold go make his sacrefyse to the god Appollo. And that at his retourne and co|myng agayn he wold goo vnto her or ellis he wold sende vnto her 
WIth this word hercules and philotes passyd forth and wente on their pilgremage. And ly+cas retorned vnto deyanira. and tolde to her the Ioyous tydynges that he had receyuyd of hercules / And also what lyf that hercules had ledde syn the day and the oure that he had presentyd to hym her lettre / Deya|nyra all conforted of these good tydynges wente in to her chambre and thanked the goddes  fortune Anone after she began to thynke on her astate. And thus thyn|kynge she remembrid her on the poyson / that Nessus had gyuen her in the Artycle of his deth. And how she had shytte hit in one of her coffres. And furthwyth in|contynent she opend the coffre and toke the cursid poy|son and one of the shertes of hercules / And as she that ymagyned by the vertue of the poyson to drawe agayn to her the loue of hercules lyke as Nessus had sayd vnto her. She maad the sherte to be boyllyd with the poyson. And gaf the charge therof to one of her women Whan the sherte was boyllyd ynowh the woman toke of the vassayle and sette hit to kele. After she toke oute the sherte appertly And wronge hit. But she coude not so sone haue wronge hyt but the fyre sprange in her han|des so anguysshously. that as she caste hit vpon a perche to drye / she fyll doun ded:.
IN processe of tyme deyanyra desyryng to haue the sherte / and seeyng that the woman that had charge therof. brought hit not / she wente in to the chambre where the sherte had be boillid And fonde the woman ded / wherof she had grete meruayll. Ne|uerthelesse she passid the deth lightly. And by oon of her damoyselles she made take the sherte that henge on the perche and was drye. and comanded her that she shold folde hit and wynde hit in a kerchief / At the co|mandement of deyanyra the damoysell folded and en|uoluped the sherte. But so doyng she was seruyd of the poyson in suche wyse that she loste her speche and deyde anone after / This notwithstandyng deyanira that thought on no thynge but for to come to her Intencion toke the sherte and delyuerid hit to lycas And char|gid hym that he sholde bere hit to hercules. prayng hym in her name that he wold were hit. Lycas that was redy to accomplissh the will of his maystresse toke the charge of the dolorous sherte And departid fro thens and wente vnto the montaigne where as hercules was And there he fonde hym in a foreste where as was the temple of diane / Hercules had no man with hym but philotes / whiche made redy for hym a grete fyre for to sacrefye an herte that hercules had taken rennyng at a course. Lycas than fyndyng hercules in the temple / He knelid doun lowe to hym  sayd. Syre here is a sherte that your Ancylle and seruant deyanira sendeth vnto yow / She recomandeth her humbly vnto your good grace / and prayeth yow that ye wole receyue thys pre|sente in gre / as fro your wyf. Hercules was Ioyous of these wordes And anone vnclothyd hym. for to doo on

this cursid sherte. Sayng that veryly she was hys wyf / And that he wold for her sake were this sherte In doyng on this sherte he felte a right grete dolour and payne in his body / This notwithstandyng he dide on his other clothes aboue as he that thought none euyll / Whan he was clothyd And the sherte was chauffid his payne and sorowe grewe more and more Than he began to thynke. and knewe anone that his maledye cam of his sherte / And felyng the prykkyng of the ve|nyme / with oute longe taryyng he toke of his robe And suppoid to haue take of his sherte fro hys back. And to hae rente hit and diffete hit. But he was not strong ynowh for to do soo. For the sherte helde so sore and cleuyd so faste and terrybly to hys flessh and was so fastyd to his skyn. by the vigour of the aspre poyson In suche wyse that he tare oute his flessh and bare a way certayn peces therof whan he wold haue taken of hys sherte .
HErcules knewe than. that he was hurte and woundyd to the deth / the deth began to fyghte ayenst hym. He began to resiste by drawyng of / of his sherte from his body by pieces of his flessh  of his blood all myght not auaylle / He all to rene  dis|chired his back his thyes. his bodye vnto his entraylles and guttis / his armes his sholdres vnto the boones / His dolour and payne grewe and enlargid to the vtterance / Thus as he retorned by the force of his grete dolorous payne / He behelde lycas and another felawe that he had broughte wyth hym. that were alle abasshid of this adventure / Than he wente to them and sayd vnto ly+cas / Thou cursyd and vnhappy man / Wat thynge

hath meuyd the to come hether vnder the pryuy habitude of deyanyra to brynge me in to the chaunce of fortune What wenyst thou. that thou hast doon. Thou haste ser|uyd me with a sherte entoxicat of mortall venyme / who hath Introduced the to do this. thou muste nedes receyue thy deserte / And sayng thyse wordes hercules caughte by the heed poure licas. that wiste neuer what to saye and threwe hym ayenst a roche so fyersly that he to frusshid all to brake his boones. and so slewe hym. The felawe of lycas fledde and hyd hym in a busshe / Philotes was so affrayed that he wiste not what to doo At the oure that hercules was in this poynt moche peple cam in to the temple. The entrailles of her+cules broyllid. His blood boyllyd in all his vaynes the poyson percid vnto his herte. his synewis shronke and withdrewe them. Whan he felte hym in this myse+rye And that the deth hasted hym by terryble batayll as he that coude not take away the repugnance of hys vertuouse force stryuyng ayenst the malyce of venyme He began to renne ouer hyll and ouer valey vp and doun in the foreste. and pullyd vp the grete trees and ouerthrewe them. After he began to rente of hys sherte with the flessh than soden and bruylid / Whan he had longe ladde this lyf. he retorned vnto the temple / alle a certayned of the deth. and lyfte vp his handes and his eyen vnto the heuen and sayd / Alas Alas muste hit be that fortune lawghe at me for this myserable des+styne comyng of the acusacion of wood Ialousie and sorcerye of that woman that in the world I helde and reputyd moste wyse  moste vertuouse. O deyanyra dis+naturall woman / with oute wytte. wyth oute shame

and with oute honour / wyth an herte of a tyrant alle affamed of Ialousie / how haste thou myghte contryue ayenst me this furour and trayson envenymed false fe|menyn wille disnaturall oute of rewle  oute of ordre Thou haddest neuer so moche honour and worshippe as thou now hast deseruyd blame / not onely for the allone. but for all the women that ben or shall be euer in the world / ffor yf hit happen that the kynges or pryn|ces acquente them with ladyes or damoselles for the hu+mayne multepliance. they shall neuer haue credence ne affiance in their propre wyues / O deyanira what haste thou doon. The women presente and they that ben in the wombes of the wombes of theyr moders / alle shall cracche them in the face and shall curse the with oute ende. ffor the reproche by the tornyng vpon them is Infynyte And the men shall haue drede for to be seruyd of the sherte .
ALas deyanyra what shall Calcedome now doo that gloryfied her in thy glorye. And putte and setted the in the fronte of theyr honour as a Charbou~cle for the parcement of her precyous thynges / In stede to sette the in the fronte / they shall caste the vnder feet / And in stede to haue glorye of the. they shall haue shame / herof they may not faylle / For by Imi|tye and dyuerse engyns And by conspyred and swollen cruelte / thou haste conspyred my deth / And haste des|loyed and vnbounden one not recourable Infortune / for the and me / and for our frendes and kynnesmen. O deyanyra ryghte remauldyt vnhappy and moste cr|sid serpente / to malicyous and reprochabe murdryer

Thy false Ialousye hath more power to extermyne my lyf than haue had all the monstres of the worlde / By thyn offence and by thy machynacion hyd  couerte Wherefro I coude not kepe me. I muste dye and passe oute of this world. Syn hit so is I thanke fortune / And axe of the goddis no vengeance of the. But certes to the ende that hit be not said / that the vaynquysshour of men. be not vaynquysshid by a woman. I shall not passe the bitter passage of deth by thy mortall sorceries full of abhomynaco~n. But by the fyre that is nette and clere. and the moste excellent of the elementes.
THese dolorouse and sorowfull wordes accom+plisshyd. Hercules toke his clubbe and caste hit in the fyre that was made redy for to make his sacrefyce / After he gaf to philotes his bowe and his arowes. And syn he prayd hym that he wold reco|mande hym to yole and to his frendes / And than feling that his lyf had no more for to soiourne. He toke leue of philotes And than as all brente  soden he leyde hym doun in the fyre. lyftyng his handes and his eyen vnto the heuen And there consommed the cours of his glory|ous lyf. Whan philotes sawe the ende of his maistre her+cules. He brente his body in to asshen And kepte thise asshes in Intencion to bere them to the temple that the kynge euander had do make. After he departid fro thens and retorned in to lycye gretly disconforted And with grete sours of teeris he recounted to yole and to his fren+des the pietous deth of hercules No man coude recounte the grete sorowe that yole maad / And they of licye as well the estudyents as the rurall peple. All the world

fyll in teeris in sighes and in bewayllyngis for his deth So moche habounded yole in teeris and wepyngis: that her herte was drowned And departid her sowle from the body the bytter water of her wepyng / Eche bodye cursid and spake shame of deyanyra / Fynably deyanyra advertysid by the felawe of lycas of the mys|chyef that was comen by the sherte / She fyll in des|payer and maad many pytouse bewayllynges / And amonge all other she sayd / What haue I doo alas / Alas what haue I doo. The moste solempne man of men shy|nyng amonge the clerkes / He that traversid the stronge marches the fondementes terrestre / that bodyly conuer|sid amonge the men / And spirytuelly amonge the sonne the mone and the therris And that susteyned the circom+ference of the heuenes is ded. by my cause and by my coulpe And with oute my culpe / He is ded by my culpe ffor I haue sende to hym the sherte that hath gyue to hym the bytte of deth / But this is with oute my culpe. for I knewe no thyng of the poyson / O mortall poyson / By me is he pryved of his lyffe. of whome I louyd the lyf as moche as I dide myn owne. He that bodyly dwellid amonge the men here in erthe And spyrituelly aboue with the sonne the mone and celestiall secretis. He that was fontayne of scyence / by whom the Athenyens arrowsid and bedewyd their wittes and engyns. He that made the monstres of the see to tremble in their abismes and swalowis. and destroyed the monstres of helle. He con+fonded the monstres of the erthe. the tyrantes he correc|tid. the orguyllous and prowde he humelyed meked The humble and meke he enhauncyd and exaltyd. He that maad no tresour but of vertue. He that alle

the nacions of the world subiuged and subdued with his clubbe / And he that yf he had wolde by ambicion of seygnourye myght haue atteyned to be kynge of the est / of the west. of the sowth and of the north / of the sees and of the montaynes. of all thise he myght haue named hym kynge and lord by good right. yf he had wold. Alas alas what am I born in an vnhappy tyme Whan so hyhe and so myghty a prynce is ded by my symplesse He was the glorye of the men. Ther was neuer to hym none lyke. ne neuer shall be / ought I to lyue after hym Nay certes that shall I neuer doo. ffor to the ende that amonge the ladyes I be not shewid ne poyntyd with the fynger / And that I falle not in to strange hande for to be punysshid of as moche as I haue of coulpe and blame in this deth / I shall doo the venge|ance to my self / And with that she toke a knyf. and sayng I fele my self and knowe that I am Innocente of the deth of my lord hercules. And with the poynte of the knyf she ended her dispayred lyf / Wherof philotes was all abasshid / and so were all they of grece / that longe bewepte and bewaylid hercules: and hys deth And they of athenes bewayllid hym strongly some for his scyence and other for his vertues wher of I wyll now tarye. Besechyng her that is cause of this trans|laco~n out of frenshe in to this symple and rude englissh / that is to wete my right redoubtyd lady Margrete by the grace of god suster of my souerayn lord the kynge of englond and of ffrance  Duchesse of bourgoyne and of Brabynt  that she wole resseyue my Rude labour in thanke and in gree:.
THus endeth the seconde book of the recule of the his|toryes of Troyes / Whiche bookes were late trans|lated in to frenshe out of latyn / by the labour of the vene+rable persone raoul le feure preest as a fore is said / And by me Indigne and vnworthy translated in to this rude englissh / by the comandement of my said redoubtid lady duches of Bourgone: And for as moche as I suppose the said two bokes ben not had to fore this tyme in oure englissh langage / therfore I had the better will to accom+plisshe this said werke / whiche werke was begonne in Brugis /  contynued in gaunt And finysshid in Coleyn In the tyme of ^e troublous world / and of the grete deuy+sions beyng and reygnyng as well in the royames of englond and fraunce as in all other places vnyuersally thurgh the world that is to wete the yere of our lord a|thousand four honderd lxxi. And as for the thirde book whiche treteth of the generall  last destrucco~n of Troye Hit nedeth not to translate hit in to englissh ffor as mo|che as that worshifull  religyo man dan Iohn lidgate monke of Burye dide translate hit but late / after whos werke I fere to take vpon me that am not worthy to bere his penner  ynke horne after hym. to medle me in that werke. But yet for as moche as I am bounde to con|templare my sayd ladyes good grace and also that his werke is in ryme / And as ferre as I knowe hit is not had in prose in our tonge / And also paraventure / he translated after some other Auctor than this is / And yet for as moche as dyuerce men ben of dyuerce desyres. Some to rede in Ryme and metre. and some in prose And also be cause that I haue now good leyzer beyng in Coleyn And haue none other thynge to doo at this tyme

In eschewyng of ydlenes moder of all vices. I haue de|libered in my self for the contemplacion of my sayd re+doubtid lady to take this laboure in hand by ^e suffrance and helpe of almyghty god / whome I mekely supplye to gyue me grace to accomplysshe hit to the playsir of her that is causer therof and that she resseyue hit in gre of me her faithfull trewe  moste humble seruant .

Thus endeth the seconde book.




In these two bokes precedente. we haue by the helpe of god tretyd of the two first destruccyons of Troye with the noble faytes and dedes of the stronge and puissant Hercules. that made and dyde so many mer|vayllis that the engyne humayn of alle men oughte to meruaylle. And also how he slewe the kynge Laome+don bete doun and put his cyte of troye to ruyne Now in the thirde and laste book god to fo. we shall saie how the sayd cyte was by Priamus sone of the said kynge laomedon reediffied and repayred more stronge and more puyssante than euer hit was before. And afterward how for the rauysshement of dame hela|yne wyf of kynge Menelaus of grece. the sayd cyte was totally destroyed Priamus hector and alle his sones slayn with noblesse wyth out nombre. as hit shall appere in the proces of the chapitres..

How the kynge Priant reediffied the cyte of troye more stronge than euer hit was afore  of his sones and doughters. And how after many counceyllis he sente Anthenor and Polydamas in to grece for to re|mande his suster eione. that Aya mayntenyd..
FOR to entre than in to the matere. ye haue herd here to fore at the seconde destruccion of Troye how hercules had taken prysonner Priamus ^e sone of kynge Laomedon. And had put hym in prison. how be hit dares of frigie sayth ^t his fader had sente hym to meue warre in a strange

contrey where he had ben right longe / wherfore he was not at that disconfiture: This pryamus had espowsid and weddyd a moche noble lady doughter of Egyp|seus kynge of Trace / of whom he had fyue sones and thre doughters of grete beaute. The fyrste of the sones was named Hector the moste worthy  beste knyght of the world the second sone was named Parys and to surname Alixandre / the whiche was the fayrest knyght of the world. and the beste shoter and drawer of a bowe. The thyrde was callyd deyphebus ryght hardy and discrete / The fourthe was named Helenus a man of grete scyence And knewe all the Artes lybe|rall. The fifh  the laste was callid Troyllus that was one of the beste knyghtes  aspre that was in his tyme.
UIrgile recounteth that he had two other sonnes by hys wyf / of whom that one was named polidorus / This poliderus was sente by kynge pryamus with a grete foyson of gold / vnto a kynge his frende for to haue ayde ayenst the grekes / But this kyng sceyng that the kynge pryamus was at myschief ayenst the grekes / And also he beyng meuyd with couetise / slew polidorus / And buryed hym man ysle of the see. That other sone was named gaminedes / Whom Iupiter rauys|shid and maad hym hys botyller / In the stede of hebe the doughter of Iuno whome he putte oute of that sayd office. The eldest of the doughters of kynge pryamus was named Cheusa whiche was wyf vnto Eneas. And this Encas was sone of Anchises and of venus of munidie / The seconde doughter was named Cassan|dra / And was a right noble vyrgyne / Aourned and lerned with scyences. And knewe thynges that were

for to come. And the thirde was named Polixena that was the fayrest doughter And the beste fourmed that was knowen in alle the world. yet aboue thise chyldren here to fore rehercid. Kyng Pryant had thret+ty bastard sones by dyuerce women. that were valy+ant knyghtes noble and hardy.
WHan than kyng pryant was in a strange con|trey occupied in the fete of warre the quene and her children were with hym The tidynges cam to hym that the kyng Laomedon his fader was slayn his Cyte destroyed. hys noble men put to deth their doughters brought in seruitude. and also his suster Ex+iona. Of thise tidynges he had grete sorowe. And wepte largely and made many lamentacions. And anon incontynent he lefte his fiege and finysshid hys warre. and retourned hastely vnto troyes. And whan he fonde hyt so destroyed / he began to make the most sorow of the world and that dured longe. And af|ter he had councell to make agayn the cyte / than he be|gan to reedyffye the cyte so grete and so stronge. that he oughte neuer to doubte his enemyes. And dide do close hit with right hye wallis and with grete tow|res of marble. the Cite was so grete that the circuyte was thre iourneyes. and at ^e time in all ^e world was none so grete ne none so fayr ne so gentilly passed.
IN this Cyte were sixe pryncipall gates. of whome that one was named dardane. the seconde tymbria. the thirde helyas. the fourthe chetas. the fifthe troyenne and the sixthe antenorides. These gates were right grete

and fayre / and of stronge deffence. And ther were in the cyte ryche palayces with oute nombre the fayrest that euer were. And the fayrest houses / ryche and well compassed. Also ther were in many parties of the cyte. dyuerse fayr places and playsau~t for the Cy|tezeyns to esbatre and playe. In this cyte were men of alle Craftes / And marchauntes that wente and cam fro alle the partyes of the world / In the myddell of the cyte ranne a grete Ryuer named Paucus whiche bare shyppis and dide grete prouffit and solace vnto the habitau~s. Whan this cyte was thus made The kyng pryant dide do come alle the peple and habytau~s of the contre ther aboutes. And maad them dwelle in the cyte And there come so many / that ther was neuer cyte better ourned wyth peple and with noble men and Cyte|zeyns than hit was. There were founden many games and playes / as the Chesse playe the tables and the dyse and other dyuerse games. In the moste apparau~t place of the cyte vpon a roche / the kynge pryant dide do make hys ryche palays that was named ylyon / that was one of the rycheste palays and stronge that euer was in the world. And hyt was of heyght fyue honderd paas wyth oute the heyghte of the towres / wherof was grete plente and so hyghe that hit semed to them that sawe hem fro ferre that they rought vnto the heuene And in thys ryche palays the kynge pryant dyde doo make the Rychest halle that was at that tyme in alle the world / wythinne whiche was hys ryche Trone And the table wher vpon he ete and helde hys astate amonge hys lordes and barons And alle that longed therto was of gold and of syluer of precyous stones

and of yuorye / In this halle at oon corner was an awter of gold and precyous stones. Whiche was con+secrate in the name and worshyp of Iupiter their god to whiche awter wente men vp twenty degrees or stappes. And vpon the awter was the ymage of Iu|piter of ffyfteen foote of heyght. Alle besette and ara|yed with precyous stones. For in that god Iupiter was alle the esperance and truste of the kynge Pry+ant for to holde his regne longe and in prosperyte :
WHan he sawe that he had so fayre a Cyte so stronge and so well peplid and with that so ryche of all goodes. he began to take disple+sir of the wronges that the grekes had don vnto hym And thoughte longe how he myghte auenge hym Than he assemblid on a certayn day alle his barons and helde a ryche Court. At this courte Hector his eldest sone was not / ffor he was in the partyes of Panno|nye on the affayres and certayn werkes of his fader ffor as moche as pannonye was subgette vnto kyng pryant / Whan the kyng Pryant sawe alle his folke assemblid and gadred to fore hym / he began to speke sayng in this maniere wise / O my men and trewe frendes that ben parteners of the grete iniuryes to me don by the grekes for so lytyl a cause or trespas as ye knowe how the grekes by theyr orguyell ben comen in to this contre / and haue slayn cruelly your parentis and frendes and also the myne. And how they haue taken and ladde a waye  holde in seruytude Exyone my suster / that is so fayer  noble And yet they hold her as a comyn woman ye knowe wel how they haue

beten doun And destroyed thys cyte ouerthrowen the wallys the palays and howses vnto the fondementis And borne away the grete Rychessis wherof the cyte was full. And for thyse thynges me semeth that hit shold be well rayson that by the helpe of the goddes that resyste the orguyllous and prowd that we alle to gyder by a comyn accorde shold take vengeance of thise Iniuryes / ye knowe what Cyte we haue. And how hyt is peuplid wyth good men of Armes and fyghtars / and garnysshid of all goodes and rychesses Also ye knowe well the Allyau~ces that we haue with many ryght grete lordes / that with good wyll. wyll helpe vs yf hit be nede / wherfore me semeth that hyt shold be good for vs to auenge vs of this shame / But allewaye for as moche as the auentures of the warres ben ryght doubteuses and daungerous / and that no man knoweth what may come therof / how well that the Iniurye be grete And that they holde my suster in so grete dishonoure / yet wole I not begynne the warre. But firste yf ye thynke good / I shall sende of the moste sage and prudent men that I haue / to praye and requyre them that they rendre and yelde agayn my suster exione And I shall be contente to pardone alle the other In|iuryes :.
Whan the kynge had thus fynysshid his wordes Alle the assystents allowed and preysyd hys aduyse and semed to them good. And than the kynge pryant callid one of his prynces named Anthe|nor. And prayd hym swetely that he wold empryse this legaco~n in to grece / And Anthenor answerd to hym humbly / that he was all redy to doo his good playsir / 

than was a shippe made redy And all that belonged  was conuenyent to brynge Anthenor in to grece: he en|trid in to ^e shippe  his meyne.  saillid so longe / ^t they arryued at the porte of the ssaylle / where as was than of auenture the kynge Peleus. that receyuyd Ioyously ynowh anthenor / And demanded hym wherfore he was come in to tho parties Anthenor answerd to hym in this manere / Syre said he I am a messanger of the kynge Pryant that hath senteme to yow. and hath co|manded me to saye to yow and other / that he is well remembrid of the grete Iniuryes that ye and other haue don to hym / that for so lityl cause or occasion. haue slayn his fader / destroyed his cyte and his peple some ded and some ladd in seruytude. And yet that worse is to hold his suster fowlly in concubynage by hym that holdeth her. And yet at leste he ought to haue wedded her / And for as moche as ye be a man of so grete witte and dyscresion / the kyng my lorde prayeth yow and warneth. that from hens forth ye sesse the rage and the grete sklaundres that may come for this cause that all good men ought to eschewe to theyr power. And that his suster only be delyueryd agayn to hym / And he shall pardone the ouerplus / And shall holden hit as thyng that neuer had happend ::..
WHan the kynge Peleus had herde Anthenor so speke. he Chauffyd hym anone in grete anger and yre. And began to blame the kynge Pry|ant and saye that his witte was to lighte. And after menaced Anthenor /  comanded hym that he shold goo anone out of his land. for yf he taryed longe there / he

wold do slee hym by grete tormente. Anthenor taryed not longe after / but entrid in to hys shyppe wyth oute takyng leue. of the kynge Peleus. And sayllyd so+ferre by the see / that he arryuyd at Salamyne where the kynge Thelamon soiourned. Than Anthenor wente vnto hym / and exposid to hym the cause of his comyng in this manyer. Syre sayd he the kynge Pryant re|quyreth effectueusly your noblesse / that his suster exio|ne whome ye holde in your seruyce so fowlly that ye wold restore vnto hym. For hyt is not syttyng ne tor|neth vnto yow no glorye ne worshippe to trete so the doughter and suster of a kynge and that is yssued of a more noble ligne than ye bee. And in caas that ye will restore to hym hys suster. He shall holde alle thynges as not doon as well the domaiges as the dishonours that by yow and other haue ben doon to hym.
WHan the kynge Thelamon had herde Anthenor so speke / He began to wexe passyng angry And answerd to hym right fiersly sayng. My frende sayd he what some euer thou be / I haue moche meruaylle of the symplenes of thy kynge / to whome I haue none Amytye / neyther he to me. And therfore I oughte not obtempre to hys prayer ne requeste. Thy kynge oughte to knowe that I and other haue ben there for to venge an Iniurye / that hys fader Laomedon dide late to some of oure frendes. And for as moche as I than entryd firste in to the cyte of troyes with grete tra|uayll and effusion of my blood. Exione of whom thou spekest whyche is ryght fayre was gyuen vnto me for the guerdoun of my victorye / for to doo wyth her my

will / And for as moche as she is so well to my play sir as she that is of grete beawte and remplisshid with all scyences / hit is not to me so light a thinge to rendre and delyuere agayn thyng that is so fayre and aue|nau~t. whiche I haue conquerid wyth so grete payne and daunger / but thou shalt saye to thy kynge that he may neuer recouere her but by the poynte of the swerd And as for me I repute the for a fooll that euer wol|dest enpryse this legacion wherein lyeth thy grete perill for thou arte comen amonge peple that strongly hate the and thy semblables / therfore go thy waye hastely out of this contre. ffor yf thou abyde more here I shall make the dye by cruell deth ::.
WHan Anthenor herd Thelamon so speke / he en+tryd ryght hastely in to his shippe. And saylyd so ferre that he arryuyd in Achaye where the kynge Castor and the kynge Polux his broder soiour+ned / he descended lightly from his shippe and exposed to them his legacyon lyke as he had made to the other / And the kynge Castor answerd to hym in rete yr and sayd to hym thus. ffrende who that thow ate I wyll that thou knowe / that we wene not to haue Iniuryed the kyng Pryant wyth out cause / as hit is so that the kynge Laomedon his fader began the folye wherfore he was slayn. ffor he wronged fyrst cer|tayn of the moste nobles of grece / / And therfore we desyre more the euyll wyll of thy kynge Pryau~t than hys good loue or pees. And certes hit semeth well that he had not the in chierte whan he sente the hether to do this message in thys contre wherfore I rede see

well to that thou abyde not here longe / or yf thou goo not ncontynent thou shalte dye vylaynsly. Tan Anthenor parted with oute leue / and entryd in to his shyppe. And saillyd tyll he cam to pyllon where the duc Nestor soiourned wyth a grete companye of no|ble men. Anthenor wente vnto hym and sayd that he was messanger of kynge Pryant. And sayd and accountyd to hym his legacion in suche wise as he had sayd to the other before / And yf the other were angry This Nestor angryd hym self more ayenst Anthenor and sayd to hym / Ha. ha. ylle varlet / who maad the so hardy for to saye suche thynges to fore me. Cer|tes yf hyt were not / that my noblesse refrayned me / I shold anone do arasche thy tonge oute of thy hede And in despyte of thy kynge I shold by force of horse do alle to drawe thy membres one from an other. Goo thy way hastely out of my syght. or by my goddes I shall doo to be doon alle that I haue sayd .
THan Anthenor was alle abasshid of the hor|ryble wordes of du Nestor And doubtyng the furour of hys tyrannye. retorned vnto the see / and put hym on his repayre to troye ward: And he had not ben longe on the see. whan a grete tempeste aroose And the ayer began to wexe derke and to rayne and to thonder right meruayllously. And to make grete wyndes contrarye / and to wexe thykke myste horryble And hys shyppe was born on the wawes one tyme hyghe and a nother tyme lowe in grete peryll. And there was not a man in the sayd shyppe / that ne supp|sid to dye And that ne maad specyall promesses and

vowes to her goddes And in thise parillis were they thre dayes / and on the fourthe day the tempeste cessid And the ayer wexe all clere and becam paysyble. than they conforted hem self. and sayllid so ferre that they cam to the porte of Troyes / And wente hem strayte to their temples. to yeue thankynges to their goddes of that they had escaped so many paryllis as they had ben Inne. And after Anthenor wente wyth a grete companye of noble men to fore the kynge Pryant / And whan all the barons were assemblid And alle the sones of the kynge present. Than Anthenor tolde alle by ordre. that he had founden in grece. lyke as hit is conteyned here to fore. Of thise tydynges was kynge Pryant sore troubd and sory of the obpro|brye and repreuys that they had doon to his messanger in grece. And than he had no more hope ne truste to re|couure hys suster ::..


How the kynge pryant assemblid all his barons for to knowe whome he myght sende in to grece for to gete agayn his suster exione. And how hector answerd and of his good counceyll / And how Parys exposed to hys fader the vysion and the promesse of the god|desse Venus ::..
WHan the kynge priau~t was thus adcertayned of the hate of the grekes.  by no fayr mene he coude recouere his suster / he was meuyd with grete yre / and thoughte that he wold sende a grete Nauye in to grece for to hurte and domage the grekes / / Alas kynge pryant telle me what mysauenture is this that hath gyuen to the so grete hardynes of corage. for to caste

oute thy self of thy welthe and reste / and why maiste not refrayne the fyrste meuynges of thy corage / how well that hyt was not in thy puyssance / yet thou oughtest to haue take good counceyll and meure / And to haue in thy mynde that men saye comunely / Some man weneth to avenge hys sorowe / And he encre|syth hit. Hyt had ben more sewre thynge to the / to haue remembrid the prouerbe that sayth / that he that sytteth well / late hym not meue. or ellis. he that is well at his es late hym kepe hym there in. Alle thynge may be suffryd. sau welthe / a man that goth vpon playn ground hath no thynge to stomble at. In thys maner than aforesayd kynge pryant thought longe. And after he assemblid on a day all hys noble men in his palays of ylyon: And sayd vnto them / ye knowe how by your councell Anthenor was sente in to grece for to recouere my suster exione. And that by fayre manyere / ye knowe also how he is retorned / And what wronges and obprobres he hath founde: And me semeth that the grekes make lytyll counte of the In|iuryes that they haue doon to vs / At the leste yf they by their wordes repente hem not / but yet they menasse vs more strongly than euer they dide. God forbede that euer hyt shold come vnto vs / lyke as they menasse vs. But I pray the goddes to gyue vs puyssance venge vs after theyr trespaas / And as for me / Me semeth that we be more puyssau~t and stronge than they ar / And also we haue the moste sewreste Cyte And the best garnysshid of the world / And also we haue of grete lordes ryght grete plente alyed to vs for to helpe and ayde vs at our nede. And me semeth for conclusion

that we haue well the puyssance for to domage and hurte our enemyes in many maners / And vs to de|fende from them. And so shold hit be good for to be|gynne to shewe to them. what puyssance we haue to greue them with alle / yf ye thynke hit good we shal~ sende our men secretli that shal do to them grete domage er that they shall be redy for to defende them. And for that ye oughte alle to employe yow to take vengence of thise Iniuryes / and that ye haue no doubte for ony thynge. in as moche as they had fyrste victorye / ffor hit happeth ofte tymes that the vaynquers ben vayn|quysshid of them that were vaynquysshid :.
THan all they that were present alowed the aduyse of the kynge. and offryd euery man by hym self to employe them to the same with all theyr power / wherof the kynge Priant had grete Ioy And after that he had thanked hem / he lete euery man departe and go home to theyr owne howses / reseruyd onely his sones legytisme and the bastardis whome he helde in hys palays. And sayd to them the com|playnte of the grekes wyth wepyng teres in this ma|nere. My sones ye haue well in your memorye the deth of your grantfader / the seruytude of your Aunte Exione. that me holdeth by your lyuyng in manere of a comyn woman / And ye be so puyssant me se|meth that rayson shold enseygne yow. for to employe yow to auenge this grete Iniurye and shame. And yf thys meue yow not therto / yet ye ought to do hyt to satysfye my wyll and pleasyr / ffor I dye for sorowe and anguyssh to whiche ye ought and ben bounde

for to remedye to your power that haue do yow so well be nourysshyd and brought furth. And thou hector my ryght dere sone / that art the oldeste of thy bretherin the moste wyse and the moste stronge: I praye the fyrst that thou empryse to putte in execucion thys my wyll. And that thou be duc and prynce of thy bre|therin in thys werke. And alle the other shall obeye gladly vnto the. And in lyke wyse shall doo alle they of this royame for the grete prowesse that they knowe in the. And knowe that from this day forth I dispoylle me of alle thys werke and putte hyt vpon the that arte the moste stronge and aspre to mayntene the bataylles And I am Auncyent and olde / And may not forth on helpe my self so well as I was wonte to doo .
TO these wordes answerd Hector right sobrely and swetely sayng my fader / and my ryght dere and souerayn lord. Ther is none of alle your sones / but that hit semeth to hym thyng humayne to desyre vengeance of thyse Iniuryes. And also to vs that ben of hyghe noblesse a lytyll Iniurye ought to be grete / as hit is so that the qualyte of the persone gro|weth and mynnyssheth so oughte the qualyte of the Iniurye / And yf we desyre and haue appetite to take vengeance of our Iniuryes / we forsake not ne leue the nature humayne. ffor in lyke wyse do and vsen the dombe bestes in the same manyere / and nature en|seigneth and gyueth hem therto. My ryght dere lord and fader ther is none of alle your sones that oughte more to desyre the vengeance of the Iniurye  deth of our Ayel or granfader than I. that am the oldeste / But

y will yf hit plese yow that ye considere in this empryse not onely the begynnyng / but also the myddell and the ende / to what thyng we may come here after / ffor otherwhyle lityll prouffyten some thynges well be|gonne that come vnto an euyll ende. Than me thynketh that hit is moche more alowable to a man to absteine hym for to begynne thinges wherof the endes ben daun+gerous / And wherof may come more euyll than good ffor the thynge is not sayd ewrous or happy vnto the tyme that hit come vnto a good ende I saye not thyse thynges for ony euyll or cowardyse. But onely to the ende that ye begynne not a thyng. And specyally that thynge that ye haue on your herte to put hit light|ly in ewre. But that ye fyrst be well counceyllyd / ye knowe well that alle Affricque and Europe ben sub+gettys vnto the grekes. How ben they garnysshid of knyghtes worthy. hardy / and ryche ryght meruayl|lously. Cretes at this day the force and strenhth of vs here. is not to be compared vnto them in force ne in vayllyance. Wherfore yf we begynne the warre ayenst them. we myght lyghtly come to a mescheuous and shamefull ende / we that ben in so grete reste and ease amongs our silf. what wole we seke for to trou+ble oure prosperyte and welfare. Exyone is not of so hyghe pryse. that hit behoueth alle vs to put vs in peryll and doubte of deth for her She hath ben now longe tyme there. where she is yet. hit were better that she parforme forth her tyme that y trowe hath but lityl~ tyme to lyue. than we sholde put vs alle in suche peryllys And mekely y beseche yow not to suppose in no maner / that y saye these thynges for cowardyse

But I doubte the tournes of fortune / And that vnder the shadowe of thys thynge she not bete ne destroye youre grete seignourye / And that we ne begynne thynge that we ought to leue for to eschewe more grete mys|chyef :.
WHan Hector had maad an ende of hys ans|swer. Parys was no thynge well contente therwyth. He stode vp on hys feet and sayd in thys wyse. My ryght dere lord I beseche yow to here me saye to what ende ye may come yf ye begynne the warre agaynst the grekes / How be not we gar|nysshid of so many and noble Chyualrye as they ben. Certes that bee we / whyche in alle the world is none that may disconfyte. And therfore begynne ye hardely that empryse that ye haue thoughte / And sende of your shyppis and of your peple to renne in grece / And to take the peple and domage the contre. And yf hyt plese yow to sende me / I shall doo hit wyth a good wyll  and herte: For I am certayne that yf ye sende me / that I shall doo grete domage vnto the grekes. And I shall take some noble lady of grece and brynge her with me in to this Royame. And by the comutacion of her / ye may recouere your suster exione / And yf ye wyll vn|derstand and knowe how I am certayn of this thynge I shall saye hit to yow how the goddes haue promysid hit to me. Hit happend to me late sayd parys in the tyme that by your comandement I was in the lasse ynde at the begynnyng of the So~mer / And that vpon a fryday. I wente me to hunte in a foreste ryght erly And so that morenynge I fonde no thynge that tor|ned me to ony playsyr / And than after myddaye

y fonde a grete herte that y put to the chasse so swyfte+ly that y lefte alle my felawshyp behynde and folo|wed the herte in to the moste deserte place of alle the foreste / whyche foreste was named yda. And so longe y folowed hym that y cam vnto a place ^t was passyng obscure and derke. And than y sawe nomore the herte that y chassyd. y felte me sore wery and my horse also that myght no further go and swette on all sides. y lyghte a doun to the grounde. and teyde my horse to a tree And leyde me doun vpon the grasse and layde vnder my heed my bow torquoys in the stede of a pe|lowe. and anone y fylle a slepe. Than cam to me in a visyon the god Mercurye. and in his compayne thre goddesses That is to wete Venus Pallas and Iuno he lefte the goddesses a lityl fro me. and after he ap|proched and sayd to me in this wise Parys y haue brought here thise thre goddesses vnto the. for a grete strif or tenchon that is fallen betwene them / They haue all chosen the to be juge and determyne after thy will Theyr tenchon or stryf is suche / that they ete that other daye to geder in a place. and than sodaynly was caste amonge hem an apple of so meruayllous fourme of fayrenes and beaulte that neuer was seen non suche a forne amongs them. And ther was wreton aboute thys forsayd apple in grekysh langage be hit gyuen to the fayreste. And so anon eche of them wold haue hit for ony thynge in the world Sayng eche her self to be most fayre: and fayrer than the other And so they myght not accorde. Wherfore they ben submysed to thy jugement. And eche of hem promytteth the sertayn+ly a yefte for thy reward ^t thou shalt haue withoute

faylle for the Iugement of the Apple / yf thou Iuge that Iuno be the fayreste / she shall make the the moste noble man of the world in magnyficence / yf thou Iuge for pallas she shall make the the moste wysest man of all the world in all scyences / yf thou Iuge that venus be the fayreste she shall gyue vnto the the moste noble lady of grece. Whan I herde Mercuryus thus speke to me / I sayd to hym / that I cowde not yeue trewe Iuge|ment / but yf I sawe hem alle naked to fore me for to see the better the facions of their bodyes / for to yeue a trewe Iugement. And than Incontynent / mercurius dide them do vnclothe all naked. and than I behelde hem longe: And me thoughte alle thre passyng fayre. But yet me semed that Venus exceded the beaulte of the other / And therfore I Iuged that the Apple appertey|ned to her / And than venus gretly reioyssid of my Iu|gement confermed to me the promesse that mercurye had maad to me in the fauour of her / And after I a|woke anone / Vene ye than my right dere fader that the goddes faylle of thynge that they promysse / nay veryly So than I saye yow this to the ende that ye sende me in to grece. And that ye may haue Ioye of that I shall doo there .
AFter Parys spacke Deyphbus in thys ma|nyere. My ryght dere lorde yf in alle the wer|kys that men shold begynne / men shold auyse in all the particularytres and synguler thynges that myght happe or falle / ther shold neuer enterpryse ner no feet be doon ner maad by hardynes / yf the labourers

shold leue to ere and sowe the lande. for the seed that the birdes recuyelle and gadre. they shold neuer laboure And for so moche ryght dere fader late make redy for to sende in to grece of your shippis ye may not beleue bet+ter counceyll than that councel that Paris hath gyuen to yow ffor yf he brynge ony noble lady. ye may light+ly for to yelde her agayn. haue agayn your suster exione for whome we all suffre vilonye ynowhe. After this spake helenus the fourthe sone of kyng Pryant that said thus. ha. ha. right puissant kynge and right soue+rayn domynatour vpon vs your humble subgettes.  obeyssant sones. beware that coueytise of vengance put not yow in suche daunger as lyeth herein. ye know well how y knowe and can the scyence to knowe the thynges future and to come. as ye haue prouyd many tymes with oute fyndyng fawte. the goddes forbede that hit neuer come that parys be sente in to grece. ffor knowe ye for certayn that yf he goo to make ony as|sault / ye shall see this noble and worshipfull Cyte destroyed by the grekes The troyans slayn and we alle that ben your Chyldren. And therfore deporte yow of these thynges. whereof the ende shall be so|rowe and grete execucion of ryght byttre deth. And that ye youre self and your wyf and we. we that ben youre sones may not escape. For trewly yf paris goo in to grece alle thyse euyllis shall come therof..
WHan the kyng herde Helenus thus speke he was all abasshid and began to countrepeyse and thynke And helde his peas and spake

not of a grete whyle And so dyde alle the other / Than arose vp on his feet Troylus the yongest sone of kynge pryant And began to speke in this manyere / O noble men and hardy / how be ye abasshid for the wordes of this Coward preste here / is hit not the custome of pre|stes for to drede the bataylles by pusillanymyte / And for to loue the delyces and to fatte and encrasse hem  fylle their belyes with good wynes and wyth good metys / Who is he ^t beleuyth that ony man may knowe the thynges to come / but yf the goddes shewe hit hem by reuelacion. Hyt is but folye for to tarye vpon thys or to beleue suche thynges / yf helenus be a ferd late hym goo in to the temple And synge the dyuyne seruyce. And late the other take vengeance of their Iniuryes by force of armes. O ryght dere fader and lord wherfore art thou so troublid for these wordes / sende thy shippis in to grece and thy knyghtes wyse and hardy / that may rendre to the grekes theyr Iniuryes that they haue doon to vs / Alle they that herde troylus thus speke / they a|lowed hym sayng that he had well spoken / And thus they fynysshid their parlament and wente to dyner.
AFter dyner the kynge pryant callid Parys and Deyphebus / And comanded them expresly that they shold goo vnto the partyes of Panonye hastely to fecche and assemble knyghtes wyse and hardye for to take with hem in to grece. And than that same day parys and deyphebus departid from the cyte of Troye for to accomplisshe the wyll of theyr fader

The day folowyng the kynge assemblid to counceyll. Alle the cytezeyns of the cyte of troye and sayde to them O my frendes and trewe bourgoys / ye knowe alle no|toriely / how the grekes by theyr pryde haue don to vs grete wronges. And Innumerable domayges as hit is well knowen in alle the world / And ye knowe also how they holde exione my suster in seruitude / wherfore I lyue in grete sorowe /  also ye be remembryd how I haue sente Anthenour in to grece that hath nothing doon / wher+fore my sorowe is dowblid. And for as moche as by yron ben cured the woundes Insanable / I haue purposid to sende parys my sone with men of Armes  puissance in to grece. For to enuahye and assaylle oure enemyes by strengthe And for to doo to them grete domayges / and for to assaye yf they might take ony noble lady of grece And her to sende in to this cyte And that by the commu|tacion of her / I myght gete agayn my suster exione And for so moche as I will not begynne this thinge / but that hit may come to your knowleche firste. I praye yow that ye saye to me your aduys For with oute yow I wyll not procede further therin For as moche as hit toucheth yow alle as well as me.
WHan the kynge had thus finysshid his wordes and that eche man helde hym stille a grete while Than stode vp a knyght named pantheus. That was the sone of deufrobe the philosopher And sayde. O right noble kynge as I am your trewe seruant and vassale / I will expose to yow my corage of this werke also treuly as a vassale and subgette oweth to coun|ceyll his lorde / ye haue had well in knowleche deufrobe the grete philosophre my fader That liuyd hole  sounde

more than nyne skore and ten yere / And was so wyse in philosophye that he knewe the science of thynges to come here after / he saide to me many tymes and affermed for trouthe / That yf parys your sone wente in to grece for to take ony noble lady by vyolence / That this noble cyte shold be destroyed and brente in to asshes by the grekes and that ye and alle yowris shold be slayn cruelly / And therfore ryght sage and wyse kynge plese hit your noblesse to here my worde and beleue that the wyse men haue sayd / And also in that thynge that ye may not lese to leue / And wherof grete sorowe may ensiewe yf ye perseuere / wherfore wyll ye put an enbus+shement vpon your reste / And to put your tranquyllite vnder the dangereuses auentures of fortune / Leue this and departe yow yf hit plese yow fro this folye / And parfyne and ende your lyf in reste ewreusly / And suffre not parys to goo in to grece in Armes And yf ye wolle algate Sende ye another than parys / At these wordes of pantheus sourded and aroose grete murmures of the heerers / Some reprouyd the prophecyes of deufrobe the philosopher / And some helde hit for mocquerye and fable / And they were of the grettest nombre / in so moche that by the consente of the more pare / Pa|rys was comysed for to go in to grece wyth men of Armes / And the parlament fynysshid eche man wente hym home in to his hous and to his place.
WHan this conclusion was comen to the knowleche of cassandra the doughter of kynge pryant / she be|gan to make so grete sorowe / As she had be folyssh or oute of her mynde. And began to crye an hyghe sayng.

Ha. ha. right noble cyte of troye / what fayerye hath meuyd the to be brought to suche paryllis / for whiche thou shalt in shorte tyme be beten doun And thyne hyghe tourys ben demolisshid and destroyed vnto the ground Ha ha quene hecuba for what synne hast thou deseruyd the deth of thy children whiche shall be cruell and hor|rible / wherfore destournest not thou paris fro goyng in to grece / whiche shall be cause of this euyll auenture. And whan she had so cryed / she wente to her fader the kynge. And with wepyng drowned in terys prayd hym. That he sholde deporte hym and leue his empryse. And that she wiste by her scyence the grete euyllis and harmes that were comyng by this cause / But neuer for the dissuacions of hector. Ne the monyssions ne war|nynges of cassandra the kyng wold not change his purpoos ne for helenus his sone ne for pantheus .


How parys and deyphebus / Eneas Anthenor and Polidamas were sente in to grece And how they rauys+shyd helayne oute of the temple of venus with many prysonne and richesses and brought them to Troye where parys espowsed the sayd helayne.
AT thentre of the moneth of maye / whan the erthe is attyred and aourned with diuerse flowres. Parys and deyphebus retorned fro panonye and brought with hem thre thousand knyghtes / ght hardy and wyse / Than they made redy two and tenty grete shippes and chargid and leyde in them alle that was conuenyent for them Than the kynge pryant callid Eneas Anthenor and polidamas that was the sone of Anthenor / And prayd hem and comanded that they shold go in to grece with parys and deyphebus / And

They offryd hem self to goo wyth good wylle / And whan they were alle redy and assemblid for to goo in to theyr shyppis / The kynge pryant spake to them in this manereshit behoueth not to replicque many wordes For ye knowe well ynowhe for what cause I sende yow in to grece / And how well that I haue cause for to avenge me of the wronges that the grekes haue don to vs / Alle|way the pryncypall cause is to recouere my suster exione that lyueth in so grete fylthe and miserye / And for to do so ye owe to employe yow / Wherfore I pray yow and admoneste yow that ye putte alle your payne and dily|gence that I may recouere my suster / And be ye certayn yf ye haue mester or nede of socours / I shall socoure yow wyth so grete a strengthe that the grekes shall not mowe suffre / And I wyll that in this voyage ye holde Parys my sone Duc and conduytour of this bataylle. And after hym deyphebus / And to doo by the counceyll of Eneas and Anthenor.
AFter these wordes Parys and alle the other toke leue of the kynge and entryd in to theyr shyppis And drewe vp saylles / And recoman|ded hem in the conduyte of Iupiter and of venus / And saylled so ferre by the hyghe see / That they arryued in the parties of grece in consteyyng the contre / that hit hap|pend hem on a day that they mette a shippe in the whiche was one of the grettest kynges of grece named Mene|laus that wente vnto the cyte of pyre vnto the duc Nes|tor that had sente for hym This Menelaus was broder of kynge Agamenon and was maryed vnto the quene helayne / That was the fayrest ladye in the world that men knewe of in her tyme And she was suster

of kynge castor and polus that dwellyd than to geder in the cyte of samestare And nourysshyng with hem her mone theyr nyece doughter of the sayd helayne / Mene|laus made a lityll discouere his shippe And to torne out of the ryght waye / And so that one knewe not that other And the Troians sayllyd so ferre that they arry|ued in the yle of cythare in grece And there they Ancred theyr shippys and wente a lande / In this yle was a tem+ple of venus passing Auncient and of grete beaulte full of alle richesses / For as moche as the habitantes also of the contrey had theyr deuocion specially vnto venus the goddesse And sollempnysed her festes eche yere / and she gaf to them answers of theyr demandes Than whan the troians were arryued they halowed the moste prin+cipall feste of venus And for this cause were assemblid men and women of the contre ther aboute / That made grete feest .
WHan parys knewe this seest / He toke his beste clothis  dyde hem on and also the beste faryng and klenliest men that he had. And wente hym in to the temple and entryd therin by fayre and swete manere and made his oblacion of gold and seluer with grete largesse Than was parys strongly beholden on alle sides of them that were there for his beaulte For he was one the fayrest knyght of ^e world and was so richely and so queynly clothed and habyllyd that hit gaf grete playsir vnto alle them that beheld hym. And euery man desired to knowe what he was and whens he cam. And they demanded of the troians that tolde hem / that hit was parys sone of kynge Pryant of Troye / That was comen in to grece by the comandement of his fader.

For to requyre amyably that they wolde rendre and yelde agayn Exione his suster that they had gyuen to kynge Thelamon / So ferre wente the tidyngis of the comynge of these troians and of theyr beaulte and hyghe apparayll that the quene helayne herd speke therof And than after the custome of women / She had grete desire to knowe by experyence yf hit were trouthe that she herde speke of / And disposid her to go vnto the temple vnder the colour of deuocion for to accomplissh her desire. O how grete folye is hit vnto honeste women to wylle goo often tymes vnto the festes and esbatemens of yong peple / That lityll or nought do there / But muse and deuyse how they may come to theyr desires. And recche not what meshyef may folowe in body and in sowle. The shyppe shold neuer peryssh yf hit abode alleway in the porte / And were not sente oute in to paryllys of the see / Hit is a good thynge and a precyous Iewell of a good woman that holdeth her honestly in her hows. O how grete domage cam vnto the grekes and to the Troians of this that helayne wente so lyghtly to see the Troians / That ought not so to do and specyally in the absence of her husbonde / But as hit is the cus|tome of women to wyll brynge theyr desire to the ende. Helayne Incontynent dyde do make redy horse and alle that was convenyent for to goo vnto the temple. And she dyde hem to vnderstande that she wente for deuocion / For this temple was not ferre fro the place that she dwellyd / Whan alle was Redy And she clothyd in habyte Ryall / She rood with her companye vnto the ysle of Cythare / And entrid in to a vessell that brought her nyghe to the temple.

where she was receyuyd with grete worship of them of the contrey as theyr lady / she entrid in to the temple right stately. And made there her deuocion and her oblacion with grete largesse .
WHan parys knewe that the quene helayne that was wyf of kynge Menelaus one of the moste noble kynges of grece was comen vnto this tem|ple / He arayed hym in the moste gentilmanliest wyse that he coude and his companye And wente in to the tem+ple. For he had longe tyme before herd speke of her grete beaulte. And than as he was comen and sawe her / He was gretly esprised with her loue And began strongly to beholde her. And to desire to see the facion of her body That was so fayr and well shapen in alle thinges / and in suche wise that hit semed properly to them that sawe her / That nature had made her to be beholden a beseyn. For in her was no thing but that hit seruyd to encrece alle the beaulte ^t myght befounden in a woman / wher|fore parys might not forbere to beholde her / sayng in hym self that he had neuer seen ne herde speke of ony so fayre and so well fourmed And as he behelde her / In like wyse helayne behelde hym also many tymes and ofte. and her semed that he was more fayrer a grete dele than had ben reported to her. And well sayd in her self that she sawe neuer man of so grete beaulte / Ne that plesid her so well to beholde And so she lefte alle her deuocion and alle other thoughtes And gaf no fors ne raught of no thing than / saue only for to beholde parys. Whan pa|rys knewe and sawe this he had grete Ioye / and behelde her swetely more and more and she hym / By whiche sighte they shewyd ynowhe of theyr desires / that one to

that other / And thoughte gretly by what occasion they myght speke to gyder / And so longe they behelde eche other that by semblaunt / Helayne made a token or signe to parys that he approchid to her / And anone parys satte doun beside her / whilis that the peple playde in the temple And spack to her wyth a softe wys ryght swe|tely and she to hym / And exposid eche to other how they were surprysid of the loue of that one and of that other / And how they myght come to the ende after her desire / And whan they had spoken ynowgh of theyr hote loue / Parys toke leue of her And yssued out of the tem|ple / He and his felawshipp / And helayne sente after hym her eyen also fer as she myghte.
WHan Parys was comen to his shippe / he callyd to hym the moste noble and grettest of his com|panye / And sayd to hem in this manyere / My frendes ye knowe well wherfore the kynge my fader hath sente vs in to grece / That is to wete for to recouure Exione his suster. And yf we may not recouure her that we shold do domage vnto ^e grekes / we may not recouure Exione For she is in ouer stronge an hand And also hit shold be to ouer grete daunger and domage / syn it is so that the kynge Thelamon that holdeth her and loueth her strongly / is more puyssant than we and is in his owen propre heritage / We ben no thynge so puyssant for to take in grece ony noble cyte / the contre is so full of peple and of many vayllyant folk Than me semeth good that the fayr yefft and notable that the goddes hath sente vnto vs / we reffuse not / we see in this yle comen to the feste the moste grettest Cytezeyns / and the temple reple|nysshid wyth the moste noble women of this prouynce

And also the quene helayne / that is lady of this contre and wyf of kynge menelaus / This temple is also full of alle richesses / yf we myght take them a liue that ben in the temple and brynge them prysoners with vs and take the goodes that ther ben of gold and of siluer / we shall haue conquerd a grete gayne. And other richesses that we shold go fecche in other places / yf ye seme good I am of the oppynyon / that now this nyght we shall entre in to the temple alle armed / And that we shall take men and women and alle that we shall finde and brynge in to our shippes and principally helayne / For yf we maye brynge her in to troye / The kynge pryant may lightly I nowh haue agayn his suster Exione for her. Therfore aduyse yow hastely what is beste to be don. whilis that hit is in poynte And er they escape vs / some of them blamed this thinge And some allowed hit / and finably they concluded after many councellys that they shold do as parys had deuysed.
HOw hit happend that the nyght was come / and the mone was nyghe goon doun The troians ar|med them the moste secrete wise that they cowde And lefte some of them for to kepe theyr shippys / And the other wente preuyly vnto the temple. And entryd therin so armed as they were And with lityll deffence toke alle them that they fonde in the temple and alle the rychesses that were therin. And parys with his owen hande toke helayne and them of theyr companye And broughte in to theyr shippes alle the beste and put hit in sure garde / And after retorned to the proye / Tho began the noyse passing grete with in the temple of the pryson+ners / And of the some that had leuer suffre to be slayn.

than for to be take prysonners / the noyse was herd ferre In suche wyse that they of the castell that stode therby herde hit / And Incontynent they aroose and armed hem and cam to assaylle the troians as vayllyant as they were / Tho began the medle ryght fyers and mortalle. But the troians that were foure ayenst one slewe many of them And the other fledde and Reentryd in to theyr castell / And than the troians toke as moche as they coude fynde of good / And bare hit vnto theyr shippis. And entryd in to them / And drewe vp theyr sayllys And sayllyd so longe that on the seuenth day they cam and Arryuyd at the porte of troye theyr shippes full of good prisonners and of good Rychesses And they abood at the porte of thenedon that was but thre myle fro Troye / And there were they receyuyd wyth grete Ioye / And than parys sente a propre messanger vnto his fader the kynge pryant to lete hym haue knowleche of his comynge and of alle that / that he had doon in grece Of these tidynges the kynge was gretly reyoyssyd and comanded in alle the cyte to make feste solempnly for these tidynges .
WHilys that helayne was with the other prisonners in the shippe of parys she made grete sorowe / And essid not to wepe ne to bewayle with grete sighes her husbonde her brethern her doughter her contre and her fren+des And was in so grete sorowe / that she lefte to ete and drynke / And parys conforted her the moste swetely ^t he coude / but she might not suffre to forbere wepyng /  than parys said to her in this manyere / How lady wherfore demene ye this sorowe daye  nyght with out reste / what man or woman is that might longe endure  suffre this.

Ne wene not ye that this sorowe hurteth your helthe. yes verayly lady / ye make to moche therof / wherfore fro hens forth I pray yow to leue And take reste / for in this royame ye shall lakke no thinge / And no more shalle tho prysonners that ye wylle haue recomanded. And ye shall be the moste renomed lady of this royame and the moste ryche And your meyne that ben here shall faulte of no thing / To these wordes answerd helayne to parys in this manyer / I knowe well sayd she that will I or will I not I muste nedes doo as ye wil~ syn that I am your prysonner And yf ony good be done to me and to the prysonners / I hope the goddes shall thanke and re+warde them that so doo / Ha. A. sayd parys ne doubte you not / For men shall do to them all that shall plese yow to comande / And than he toke her by the hand and brought her in to a more secrete place and sayd to her. Madame wene ye for as moche as hit had plesid to the goddes for to suffre yow to be brought by me in to this prouynce that ye be loste And that ye shall not be more ryche and more honoured than ye haue ben And that the royame of troye be not more ryche Than the royame of Achaye / yes veryly that hit is / wene ye that I will ma|yntene yow dishonestly Certes nay / but shal~ take yow to my wyf. And so shall ye be more honoured than ye haue ben with your husbond and more preysid / For your husbonde is not yssued out of so noble a howse as I am ne so vayllyant. Nor he louyd yow neuer so well as I shall doo / Therfore cesse ye fro hensforth to make suche sorowe / And beleue me of this that I haue sayd to yow / Ha. a. sayd she who can abstayne her fro ma+king of sorow beyng in the estate that I am in Alas this

was happend me neuer to fore / But syn hit may be none otherwyse / Sore anoyed and greuyd / I shall do that that thynge that ye me requyre / For as moche as I haue no puyssance to resyste hit Thus was helayne reconfor|tyd a lityll And parys dyde do playse her wyth all his power .
WHan the morn cam be tyme he dyde do clothe her and Araye her the moste honourably that he myght And made her to sytte vp on a palefroye rychely arayed and aourned / And so dyde he the other prysonners eche after his degre / And after he wente to horsback hymself and Deyphebus his broder / Eneas. Anthenor and Polydamas wyth grete companye of noble men / And accompanyed the quene helayne / And departed fro thenadon / And wente to troyes ward. And ther cam ayenst hem wythoute the toun the kynge Pryant wyth grete companye of noble men / And recey|uyd his children and his frendes wyth grete Ioye / And after cam to helayne / And bowed ryght swetely to her And dyde to her grete Ioye and worshipp / And whan they cam nyghe the cyte they fonde grete foyson of peple. That made grete feste of theyr comyng in many manyers of Instrumentis of musycque / And in suche Ioye cam vnto the pallays of kynge Pryant / And he hym self lighte a doun and helpe helayne doun of her palefroye And lad her by the hande vnto wythin the halle / And there they made ryght grete Ioye alle the nyght thurgh oute alle the cyte for these tidynges / And than whan hyt cam vnto the morn Parys by the agrement and consente of his fader toke helayne to hys wyf And wedded her in the temple of Pallas. And therfore

And therfore the feste was lengthyd thurgh oute all the cyte And the Ioye that endured yet after eyghte da|yes hooll .
WHan Cassandra knewe for trouthe that parys her broder had wedded helayne / she began to ma+ke grete sorowe to Crye  braye as a woman oute of her witte And sayde thus O vnhappy troians wherfore reioysse ye yow of the weddyng of parys. Wherof so many euyllys shall come and folowe. And wherfore see not ye the deth of yourself And of your so|nes that shall be slayn to fore your yen And the hus+bondes to fore theyr wyuys with grete sorow / Ha. A noble cyte of Troyes how thou shalt be destroyed and put to nought / Ha. a vnhappy moders / what sorowe shall ye see / whan ye shall see your lityll children taken and dismembryd to fore yow / Ha. a hecuba kaytyf and vnhappy where shalt thou take the water that thou shalt wepe for the deth of thy children Ha. a peple blind  folissh / why sende not ye Incentynent helayne home agayn / And yelde her vnto her righte husbond to fore that the swerdes of your enemyes come and slee yow with grete sorowe / wene ye that this prynce the husbond of helayne wole dwelle at home with oute gre+uous vengence / Certes that shall be your dolorouse fyn and ende / ha. a vnhappy helayne / thou shalt do vs moche sorowe As cassandra said and cryed thus with hyghe wys and with grete sorowe The kynge pryant knewe ht And did her to be taken prysonner And sende to her and did do praye her that she shold cesse / but she wolde not / And than he comanded that she shold be fast shette in prison and in yrons / where she was kept many dayes 
O what pyte was hyt / That the Troyans beleuyd not this warnyng and Amonycion / For yf they had beleuyd hyt / They had eschewid the right grete euyllis that cam after vnto them / That shall be told in fa|blys to them that wole here hem vnto the ende of the world .


How menelaus was sore troblid for the Rauys+shyng of helayne his wyf / And how Castor and Polux brethern of her poursuyeden Parys in the see. And of theyr deth / And also of the condicion and manere of the lordes as well Grekis as Troians.
AS these thynges were doon as sayd is / Me|nelaus that soiourned at pyre wyth the duc Nestor herde telle the trouthe of the pryse and takyng of his wyf and of his peple wherof he was sore angry and moche abasshyd / And was so dolau~t and sorowfull that he fylle to the ground a swowne / And than whan he was come to hym self agayn / He began sore to complayne hym and de|mene the grettest sorowe of the world / And aboue alle other thynges he was moste sory for hys wyf. And bewayllyd her beawlte and her solace / And myght by no waye be conforted / Whan the duc Nestor herd saye therof he cam to hym hastely and conforted hym the moste beste wyse he cowde / For he louyd hym wyth grete loue / But Menelaus cowde not leue hys sorowe / But toke hys waye vnto hys contre / And the duc Nestor conveyed hym wyth a grete compayne of noble men.
He sente vnto the kyng Agamenon his broder that he shold come speke with hym And also he sende to castor and polux the brethern of helayne that they shold come also to hym / And anone as they had herd the message they cam vnto hym / Whan Agamenon sawe his broder demene suche sorowe and heuynesse / he sayd to hym A my broder wherfore demenest thou suche sorowe / sup|pose that the cause be Iuste / Allewaye a wyse man ought not to shewe suche semblant outeward. For in shewing suche sorow outeward hit causeth his frendes to be sorowfull / And his enemyes to be Ioyous / And therfore fayne thy sorowe  kele thy corage / And make semblant / as thou raughtest no thing of this that is be|falle. For by wepyng ne by demenyng of sorowe / thou mayst neuer come to honour ne vengence But alonely by the force of the naked swerd thou shalt awake thy co|rage / and so shalt thou take vengance of the harmes that ben don to the. Thou knowest what puyssance we haue and what helpars and Aydeurs we shall fynde for to venge vs For this Iniurye toucheth all the kynges and prynces of grece. And assone as we shall requyre them of helpe Ther shall not be one but that he shall helpe vs with all his power And than we shall goo with grete puyssance to fore troye / and we shall slee oure enemyes And doo what we wille. and shall destroye the Cyte And yf hit happen ^t we may take parys / that is actour of these hurtis and yllys / whe shall do hange hym and make hym dye an euyll deth. Cesse than thy sorowe. And late vs do to beknowen to alle the kynges  prin|ces of grece this Iniurye / And requyre them that they will helpe vs for to take vengance / Than was menela

Reconforted wyth the wordes of his broder / And anone they sente her lettres vnto alle the barons of grece And at theyr sendyng they cam alle / Fyrst Achylles. Patroclus Dyomedes / And many other / And assone as they knewe wherfore they were sente fore / They sayde that they wold go to Troyes wyth alle theyr strength for to auenge this shame and recouere helayne So they chasse than Agamenon chyef and prynce of theyr ooste / as he that was wyse and prudente / And of good counceyll.
HOw hyt happend that the kynge Castor And the kynge Polux that weren brethren of the quene helayne / As sone as they herd saye / That her suster was Rauysshid / They entryd in to theyr shippys / And wente after the Troians wyth grete companye of men of Armes / For to see yf they myght recouere her / On the thyrde daye that they were on the see / Ther roose so a grete torment in the see / And ther wyth cam so grete a Rayne. And thonder. That theyr shippes were caste by the wawes one here another there. The mastes broken theyr saylles rente / And fynably they were alle perysshid and drowned / That neuer after was none seen of them / And the payenems saye that these two brethern were translated with the goddes in to the heuen or zodyacque And retorned in to the signe of two Iumentis / For as moche as they were brethern germayn / And thus endeth theyr lyues by the occasion of the pryse of her suster / Some poetes faynen that these brethren ben translatyd in to two sterrys That is the north sterre and the south sterre whiche ben named after them Castor and Pollux.
IN this place declareth dares in his book the facions of the grekes that were to fore troye of the moste notable of them as he that sawe hem and behelde hem many tymes duryng the triews that was often ty|mes betwene bothe parties duryng the siege to fore the cyte / And he begynneth to speke of helayne and sayth that she was so fayr. That in the world no man coude fynde no fayrer woman ne better fourmed of alle mem|bres Agamenon was longe and whyte of body / strong of membres and well fourmed / louyng labour / discrete. hardy And passing well bespoken Menelaus was of mene stature hardy in Armes and corageous / Achilles was of right grete beaulte / blonke heeris  cryspe gray eyen and grete / of Amyable sighte / large brestes  brode sholdres grete Armes / his raynes hyghe ynowh / an hyghe man of grete stature / and had no parcyll ne like to hym amonge alle the grekes / desiryng to fighte / large in yeftes And outerageous in dispense Tantal / was grete of body and right strong / veritable. humble. fleyng noy|ses yf they were not Iuste and trewe Ayax of grete sta|ture / grete and large in the sholdres grete Armes. And alleway was well clothyd and richely. And was of no grete empryse. And spack lightly. Thelamon ayax was a moche fayr knyght. He had black heeris. And herd gladly songe And he sauge hym self gladly well. He was of grete prowesse. And a good man of warre And with oute pompe Vlixes was the moste fayr man among all the grekes / But he was deceyuable And sub+tyll. And sayd his thynges Ioyously. He was a right grete lyar And was so well bespoken that he had none felawe ne like to hym Dyomedes was grete And had a

brode breste and meruayllous stronge / of a fiers regard and sight / false in his promesses / worthy in Armes / desi|rous of victorye dredde and redoubted / For he was gretly Iniuryons to his seruantes Luxuryous wherfore he suffryd many paynes / The duc Nestor was grete of membrys and longe / and well bespoken / discrete and prouffitable / And gaf alleway good counceyll / Anone and sone he was strongly angry / And anone peasid agayn He was the moste trewe frend in the world Pro+theselaus was fayr and of fayr stature right noble and light in Armes Neptolonyus was grete / black heer and grete eyen / but Ioyous  well chieryd his wynbrowes Ioyned / stameryng in his wordes / but he was wyse in the lawe. Palamydes sone of kynge Naulus was of ryght fayr shapp and lene / hardy and amyable / a good man and large. Polydaryus was passing grete fatte and swollen Hardy orguyllous and proude / withoute trouthe. Mathaon was of mene stature powde  hardy And that lityll slepte by nyght Brysayda doughter of Calcas was passing fayr of mene stature / white and medlid with reed and well made / swete  pytouse and whome many men louyd for her beawte. For the loue of her cam the kynge of perse in to the Ayde of the grekis vnto the siege to fore Troye.
OF them that were within Troye / The same Dares sayth fyrste of kynge Pryant that he was longe gresle and fayr / And had a lowe wys / ryght hardy. And that gladly eete erly in the morenyng a man wyth oute drede / And that hated flaterers / He was verytable and good Iustycyer And gladly he herde synge  sownes of musycque.

And strongly louyd his knyghtes and enrichid them. Of alle his sones ther was none so hardy as was hec|tor the oldest sone of kyng pryant / This was he that passid in his tyme alle other knyghtes in puyssance / and was a lityll besgue he was grete / And had harde mem|bres and myght souffre moche payne And was moche heery and crispe / and lisped Ther yssued neuer oute of troye so stronge a man ne so worthy Ne ther yssued ne+uer oute of his mouthe a vyllaynous worde. He was neuer wery of fightyng in bataylle. Ther was neuer knyght better belouyd / of his peple than he was Parys was a passing fayr knyght and strong soft heerid and trewe swyft and swete of speche tote mowthed / well drawyng a bowe / wyse and hardy in batayll and well assewryd and couetous of lordship / Deyphebus and helenus were passing like of facion in suche wyse that a man myghte not well knowe that oon fro that other. And they resamblid passing well the kynge pryant theyr fade Deyphebus was wyse and hardy marmes And helenus was a moche wyse clerk. Troylus was grete and of grete corage well attempryd and sore belo+uyd of yonge maydens In force and gladnesse he resam|blid moche to hector And was the seconde after hym of prowesse And ther was not in alle the Royame a more strong ne more hardy yong man / Eneas had a grete body discrete meruayllously in his werkis well bespoken and attempryd in his wordes. Full of good counceyll and of science connyng He had his visage Ioyouse / and the eyen clere and graye. And was the richest man of troye after the kyng pryant in townes and castellys. Anthenor was long and lene And spacke moche / But

he was discrete and of grete Industrye / And whom the kynge pryant louyd gretly And that gladly playd amonge his felawship / And was a ryght wyse man. Polydamas his sone was a goodly yong man and a fayr / Hardy and of good maners / longe and lene lyke his fader / brown and was stronge in puyssance of Armes / And of well Attempryd wordes / The kynge Menon was grete and a goodly knyght large sholdres grete Armes hard in the breste and of grete prowesse / And that brought many knyghtes vnto Troye / The quene hecuba was a rude woman and se|med better a man than a woman / She was a noble woman passinge sage bonayre / And honeste and louyng the werkes of charyte / Andrometha the wyfe of hector was a passing fayr woman and whyte and that had fayr eyen and fayr heer / She was amonge alle other women ryght honeste and attempryd in her werkes / Cassandra was of fayr stature and clere. Round mouthed. wyse. shynyng eyen / She louyd vir|gynyte / And knewe moche of thynges to come by astro|nomye and other sciences / Polyxena was a moche fayr doughter and tendre / And was the verray Raye of beawte / In whome nature fayllyd nothynge Saue only that she made her mortall / And she was the fayrest mayde that was in her tyme. And the beste four|med. Many moo were wythin the towne and wyth|oute. Duryng the siege. But thise were the pryncypall and grettest of name. And therfore Dares declareth the facion of them And reherceth not of the other.


How the kynges Dukes erles and Borons of grece

assemblid alle with theyr nauye to forethe cyte of Athe+nes for to come to Troye / And how many shippis eche man brought vnto the helpe of the kynge Menelaus.
WHan hit cam in to the ende of feuerer That ^e wyn+ter was passid the kinges and the princes of all the prouynces of grece assemblid them to gyder at the porte of athenes for to go to troye / hit is not in the mynde of ony man syn the begynnyng of the world that so many shippes and knyghtes were assemblid as were at that tyme. For first Agamenon that was chyef and prynce of alle the oost of the grekes / brought fro his roy+ame of michames an honderd shippys full of Armed knyghtes. The kynge menelaus his broder brought fro his royame of sparte .lx. shippis Archelaus and prothe+nor fro the royame of boecye fifty shippis The duc Asca+lapus and the erle helmins fro the prouynce of orcono|mye thretty shippis / The kynge Epistrophus / And the kynge sedius fro the royame of o cyden thretty shippis. The kynge thelamon of salamyne fifty shippis. And in his companye were the duc thentr duc Amphymacus the erle polixeme and the erle thephus And other many noble men. The Auncient duc Nestor fro his prouynce of pillon fifty shippis. The kynge thoas of tholye fifty shippis The kynge doxunois fifty shippis The kynge the|lamon chyleus sixe and thritty shippes / Polibetes and Amphymacus fro his prouynce of calydone two and thretty shippis / The kynge ydumeus and the kynge me|reon of Crete four score and two shyppis / The kynge Vlixes of trace two and fyfty shippis / The duc tyne|lus fro his cyte of frygis twelue shippis Prothocathus

and prothesalus the dukes of philaca brought wyth hem two and fyfty shippis / Collesis brought four and twenty shippis fro the royame of cresome And brought kynge Machaon And the kynge ollydrys his sone thre and thretty shyppes / Achilles brought fro his no|ble cyte of phaces two and twenty shippes / The kynge Thelaphus brought fro Rodes two  twenty shippes Eruphylus fro orchomene two and fyfty shyppis The duc Anthypus and the duc Amphymacus of rusticane threttene shyppis The kynge Polibetes of Rythee And the duc Lopms his broder in lawe that had wedded his suster .lxij. shippis The kynge Dyomedes of Arges four score and two shippis And had in his companye Thelamus and Euryalus The kynge Poliphebus nyne shippis The kynge Fureus thretten shippes / The kynge prothoylus of chemenense two and fyfty shippes / The kynge Carpenor of Carpadye .lij. shippis / The kynge Theorius of breysse four and twenty shippes The some of kynges and dukes that were comen theder were sixty and nyne / And ther assemblyd at the porte of Athenes twelfe honderd and four and twenty shippis / wyth|oute comprysyng the shippis of duc palamydes the sone of kynge Naulus That cam after on / Wyth his astate as shall be sayd after .


How the Grekes sente Achilles vnto Delphos to the god Appollo for to knowe he ende of theyr warre And how they fonde Calcas sente fro the Troians that wente wyth hem to Athenes.
WHan the kynge and the prynces weren thus assem+blid at the porte of Athenes The kynge Agamenon

that was chief of alle the ooste and taught alleway to co~duyte this ooste meurely / assemblid vnto the counceyll on a playne withoute the cyte alle ^e noble men of theyr ooste And whan they were all assemblid aboute hym in sieges that he had doo make / He sayd to them in this ma+nere O ye noble men that by one wylle and volente ben here assemblid in this oost with so grete puyssance / ye knowe well that it is not  the mynde of ony man that sawe euer so many noble men assemblid / For tachieue ony werke / ne so many yong knyghtes and deliuere in armes for tassaylle theyr enemyes / is not he than well oute of his mynde that presumeth to reyse hym self ayenst vs and to begynne warre. verayly I doubte not but one of an honderd that is in this co~panye is suffysant ynowh to bringe this werke to an ende / for whiche we been alle assembled. Hit is well knowen to eche of yow the grete Iniuries and the grete domagies that the troians haue don to vs / wherfore we haue Iuste cause to take ven|gance by force of Armes To the ende that fro henforth they ne other ne empryse vpon vs in ony manere / For yf we sholde suffre suche Iniuryes by dissimulacion / they myghte yet greue vs more than they haue don. And hit is not the custome of the noble men of grece / for to late passe suche wronges in dissimulacion / and therfore hit shold be to vs grete vilonye that been so many and that haue assemblid so grete strengthe for to dissimule in this qua|relle / and yet that more is ther is no nacion in the world but that ne dredeth oure puyssance saue only thyse o|lsshe peple of Troye that by euyll counceyll haue me|ud them ayenst vs and also haue enterprysid vpon vs.

As dide fyrst the kynge Laomedon that Iniuryed some of oure peple by lityll occasion / wherfore he receyuyd deth for his reward / And his Cyte was destroyed. And his peple slayn / And some brought in seruytude where they ben yet / Certes hit is not so dyfficyle and hard to vs that ben more puyssante to take vengeance on the Troians / Than hit was to foure prynces of lasse puyssance / That cam to theyr aboue of them / For so moche than as the Troians knowe veryly that we ben assemblyd for to goo vpon them / And that they ben strongly garnysshid of men of Armes ayenst our comyng and of alle suche as behoueth them for to def|fende them wyth / Than semed me good yf hit playse yow / that er we departe fro this porte here / we sende in to the ysle of delphe our specyall messangers for to haue answer of our god Appolyn of this that we will doo and empryse.
THan was ther none but he allowed approued the wordes of Agamenon And cheese Incontynent Achilles and patroclus for to goo in to this ysle to heere the answere of Appolyn / And anon they departed and wente And cam sone theder / For the sayd yle ys as hit were in the myddes of the yles of ciclades / where locana enffanta Appolyn and dyane be And ther was a ryche temple in the whiche the godde of ^e payenems was wor+shippid / And gaf answere to the peple of suche thynge as they demanded of hym / This yle was fyrst callyd delos / That is as moche to saye in greke as manifestacion For as moche as in this yle the paynems sawe fyrst the sonne and the mone after the deluuye And therfore they supposyd that they had ben born there of theyr moder

For appollo is the sonne / and diane is the mone / In theyr langage / some calle this yle ortygye / for as moche as the byrdes ^t men calle ortiges / in englissh they ben quayles were first seen there. The paynems gaf to Appollo dy|uerce names after the dyuerce operacions of the sonne. In this temple was a grete ymage composid and made alle of fyn golde In the worshippe of god Appolyne / and how well that the ymage was deef and dombe / yet all|waye ydolatrye regned in suche wyse that tyme in the world. That the deuyll put hym in the ymage and gaf answers to the paynems of that thingis that they deman+ded of hym And this dide the deuyll for to abuse the fo|lissh peple / that at that tyme beleuyd that this ymage was verray god .
UPon this parte the Auctor declareth fro whens cam firste ydolatrye / We fynde in historia ecclisias+tica / That whan herodes was deceyuyd by the thre kynges that retorned not agayn to hym. But wor|shippid our lord Ihesu criste as is conteyned in the gos|pell And after departid by an other waye  / That he|rodes purposid to haue slayn the child Ihesus / and ther|fore the gloryouse virgyne our lady saynte marie his mo+der And Ioseph bare hym in to Egypte And as sone as our lord entryd in egypte / Alle the ydoles of egypte fyll doun to the erthe alle to broken and brusyd after the pro+phesie of ysaye that sayd thus / Ascendet dominus in nu|bem leuem et ingredietur egyptum  mouebuntur simula+cra egipti / En demonstrant and shewyng that at the co|myng of our saueour Ihesus criste. Alle ydolatrye sholde haue an ende. And Amonge the Iewes. ysmaell was the first that made ydole / And that was of erthe.

And promotheus made the fyrste amonge the paynems and taughte other the maner how to make hem / But the ryght begynnyng of ydolatrye cam of belus kynge of Assirye ^t was fader of kynge Nynus / the whiche belus whan he was dede / his sone Nynus dyde burye hym in a ryche sepulture / And dyde do make an ymage of fyn golde to the semblaunt and lykenes of his fader for to haue consolacion and memorye of hym / And worshippid hym as his god / And compellyd his folk to worshippe hym / And anone an euyll spyryte entryd wythin the ymage and gaf to the peple answers of theyr demandes / And thus by the ensample of hym. The payenems made other in the worshippe of theyr frendes And worshippid them And thus proceded they in ydolatrye And ther were none but that they had her goddes propice that gaf to them theyr answer of theyr demandes by the engyne of the enemye that so deceyued them and broughte to dampnacion by the enuye that he had and yet hath vpon the lygne humayn that god made for to fullfylle the sieges of paradys / Fro whens he was caste oute for his pryde in this Ayer and derkenes. And after the day of Iugement to abyde in helle pardu|rably in the companye of dampned men.
WHan Achilles and Patroclus were arryued in this yle of delphe / They wente by grete deuo|cion in to the temple of Appolyn and there made theyr oblacions by grete largesse / And demanded of hym answere of theyr affayres and werkes / Than Appolyn answerd wyth a lowe wys Achilles retorne to the grekes that haue sente the hether and saye to hem.

That it is to come and shal~ / happen for certayn that they shall go sauely to Troye / And there they shall make many bataylles / But in the tenthe yere they shall haue victorye and destroye the cyte / And they shall slee the kynge Pryant his wyffe and his chyldren / And the moste grete of the contrey. And ther shall none escape saue they onely whome they wylle saue / Of this for|sayd answere was Achilles passing Ioyouse / and hit happend whilis they were yet in this temple / That a bysshoppe of Troye named Chalchas sone of a man named thistram that was a passing wyse man / The whiche entryd in to this temple. And he was sente also fro the kynge Pryant for to haue answere of Appolin for them of Troye. As he than had made his oblacions and demandes for them of Troye / Appol|lyne Answerd to hym Calchas Calchas beware that thou retorne not a gayn to Troye / But go thou wyth Achilles vnto the grekes / And departe neuer fro them for the grekes shall haue victorye of the tro+ians by the agreement of the goddes / And thou shalt be to them ryght necessarye in counseyll and in doc|trine Anone as Calchas knewe Achilles that was in the temple He approchid to hym and made acqueyn|tance to hym / And accompanyed to gyder by fayth and oth Told eche to other what the ydole had sayd to them / wherof Achilles had grete Ioye. And made right grete chiere and feste to Calchas And toke hym wyth hym / And syllyd so longe that they arryued at the porte of Atthenes sauely / and whan they were yssued out of her shippes Achilles toke calchas by the hande and presentid hym to the kynge Agamenon and

to other And tolde to them the trouthe of the answere of Appollo / How they shold haue victorye of the troians and how Appollyn bad hym that he shold not retorne agayn to troye but holde hym wyth the grekes duryng the warre / Of these tydynges were the grekes gretly reioyssed / And made solempne feste and receyuyd cal|chas in to theyr companye by fayth and by othe and they promysid hym to rewarde hym well and do hym good .


How the grekes wyth a grete Naueye / wente and saylled toward Troye / And how they arryueden at the porte of thenedon thre myle fro Troye / whiche they conqueryd and bete doun to the erthe.
AFter this feste that the grekes had made for the good answers of Appolyn Calcas wente hym in a morenyng in the companye of achilles and of Patrolus vnto the tente of Agamenon / where alle the moste nobles of the ooste were assemblid / And he salewed them right courtoysly sayng / O noble kynges and prynces that ben here assemblyd for vengeance of the grete Iniuryes to yow doon by the Troyans / wher|fore tarye ye now here After that the goddes haue yeuen theyr answere / Wene ye not that the kynge Pryant hath his espyes amonge yow / And that whilys ye soiourne he garnysshith not his contre and cyte with vytayll wyth horses And wyth other necessaryes / Is hit not a grete parte of the somer passed / And ye haue yet no thynge enterprysid vpon your enemyes Be ware that ye ben not vnkynde  / Ingrate of the answere of the goddes / And ^t by your negligence they change not their answere in to the contrarye / ther fore tarye ye no lenger.

But shippe yow and your hors and goo ye to the see. And cesse not vnto the tyme that the promessis of the goddes be accomplisshyd / And whan Calchas had thus spoken / eche man sayde that he had well sayd and spoken / And than Agamenon sente vnto alle the ooste and comanded with a trompette that euery man shold make hym redy to remeue / And anone they en+tryd in to theyr shippis / And disancryd and drewe vp theyr sayllys / And wente alle vnto the see / And they had not longe sayllid not passing a myle fro at|thenes / / But the Ayer that was to fore clere and fayr / began to wexe troblous and thykke / And be|gan a ryght grete tempeste in the see of wynde of Rayne and of thounder in so moche that ther was none so hardy but he hadd fere and wende to haue deyde / For theyr shippes were caste by the see that one here  that other there / And supposid none other for certayn but to haue ben drowned / Than sayd cal+chas to them that were with hym. That the cause of this tempeste was. For as moche as dyane her god|desse was wroth and angry vpon them be cause they departyd fro Atthenes and had made to her no sacri+fyce / And for to appese this wrath / hit behoueth that the kynge Agamenon sacrefye to her with his owen hand Effygenye his doughter a yong virgyne and tendre of age / And that otherwyse the tempeste shold neuer cesse / And for to spede this sacrefyse / he coun+seyllyd to torne the nauye and to applye hit to the yle of Andylle where the temple of the goddesse dyane was .:.
WHan the kynge agamenon vnderstode this thynge He was alle marrid and passyng sorowfull in his corage / For he louyd his doughter effi|geme by grete loue And on the other side he was prayed and requyred of alle the other kynges and prynces of grece / That he wold gyue none enpesshement to this that was so grete an enpryse / For to wythstande the sacrefyse / wherfore he was vaynquysshid by the sayd prynces and for the loue of his contrey / He toke his sayd doughter effygenye / And in the presence of many grete kynges and prynces sacrefyed her vnto the god|desse deane And anone the tempest cessyd And the ayer becam nette and clere / And the see well attempryd and in tranquyllyte and pees / And than he wente agayn in to his shippe and alle the other in lyke wyse / Drewe vp theyr sayllys and sayllyd to fore the wynde so ferre that they arryued at a porte of the Royame of Troyes Nyghe vnto a castell named sarabana / Dares ne put|teth determynatly / wherof that kynge agamenon made his sacrefyce to dyane / But ouyde in the twelf the book of methaphormose sayth that hit was effygenye his doughter as a boue his sayd / And whan they of the castell sawe the grete Nauye at their porte They armed them and cam vnto the porte wenyng to deffende theyr londe agayn the Grekes / And assaylled them that tho were descended a lande / That were yet wery of the trauayll of the see / But the grekes yssued anone oute of theyr shyppys grete plente alle Armed that slewe them and chassyd them vnto theyr castell And slewe them fleeyng / And entryd in to the castell wyth them And there put them alle to deth and toke the Proye.

And after bete doun the castell vnto the erthe / And than Reentryd in to theyr shippis agayn / And sayl|lyd so ferre that they arryued at the porte of thene|don / And there than they ankryd theyr shippis .
AT this porte was a passing stronge castell  well peupled and full of grete Rychessys and was thre myle fro troyes / whan they of the castell sawe the grekes / they ran to Armes / and garnysshid theyr castell wyth good fyghtars / And the other yssued out and cam vnto the porte where they fonde the grekes that were than yssued out of theyr shippes alle armed and grete plente / And toke all that they cowde fynde Thus began the batayll be+twene them right fyers and mortall / And there were ynowhe slayn and dede of bothe parties. And many moo of the grekes than of the troians / But assone as the grete strengthe of the grekes were descended. The troians myght no lenger suffre ne abide but put hem to flyghte somme to the castell. And the other fledde vnto troye. Than the grekes put hem  beleyde the castell round aboute. And assayllyd hit on alle sydes / And they within deffended hit passing well vpon the wallis And slewe many by shotte and by engyns. But the grekes dressyd theyr engyns alle a+boute the castell / And sette theyr ladders vnto the wallys. And wente vp on alle sydes. And they wythin defended hem vaylliantly / And made hem falle doun in theyr dyches some dede and some hurte. But the grekes that were so grete in nombre sente alle|waye newe folke to thassault wherof they within were so wery / that they reculed and wente aback

fro theyr deffences / And than the Grekes entryd by force in to the castell / And there slewe alle them that they fonde / wyth oute sparyng of man or woman. And toke and pylled alle that they fonde that was good / And after bete doun the castell and the howse vnto the erthe / And putte in the fyre and brente all vp And after they reentryd in to theyr shippis Ioyous of the gayne that they had goten in the castell.


How the grekes sente Dyomedes and Vlixes vnto the kynge Pryant for to haue agayn helayne and the pri+sonners / And of the answere that they hadd.
WHan the Grekes had demolysshid and beten doun thus the castell and ediffyces of thenedon and of Sarabana / And that they refresshid them in the medowe of Thenedon / Than Agamenon that had the charge of alle the ooste / And to conduyte hit well as a good captayn ought to doo / Comanded that alle the butyn and gayne of these two castellys shold be brought forth And so hit was doon anone as he had comanded And as a wyse kynge distrybued the gayn to eche man after his deserte and qualyte / And after dide do crye in alle the ooste / that alle the noble men of the ooste shold assemble them on the playn of thenedon to fore the kynge Agamenon / And whan they were alle comen / The kynge Agamenon spack and sayd in this manere / My frendes and felawis that ben here now assemblid for so Iuste a cause as eche of yow knoweth And in so grete puyssance that it is and shall be tydyn|ges therof in alle the world / Alleway how stronge that the puyssance be / That hit plese the goddes that hit bee wyth oute pryde and felonnye / For hit is so

that of the synne of pryde growealle other vyces / And that the goddes resiste and wythstonde the orguyllous and prowde peple / And therfore we oughte to put away pryde fro oure werkes. And in especiall in this werke here now. And vse the ryght waye / of Iustice. To the ende that no man may reprehende vs ne blame. ye knowe well that we ben comen thus ferre for to take vengeance of the Iniuryes and wronges that the kynge Pryant hath don to vs And we haue don to hym now grete hurte and domayge. ye may well knowe for trouthe / That they haue assemblid in the cyte of troye grete power for to deffende them ayenst vs / And also the Cyte is passing grete and stronge / And ye knowe well that they ben vpon theyr propre hery|tagye That is a thynge that dowblith theyr force and strength / For ye may take ensample of the crowe that otherwhyle deffendeth well her neste agayn the fawcion / I ne saye not these thynges for ony doubte that I haue / But that we shall haue victorye / And that we ne shall destroye theyr cyte how well that hit is stronge / But onely for oure worshippe / to the ende that we be Recomanded to haue conduyted this werke by grete discrecion and with oute pryde / For often tymes by ouer lyght and to hasty enterpryse. a thyng of a grete poyse and with oute mewre coun+ceyll may come to a myschieuous ende / ye knowe well that it is not longe agoo / that the kynge Pryant dide do Requyre vs by his specyall messangers that we sholde Rendre to hym his suster exione / And that by our orguyell and pryde we wolde not delyuere her a+gayn And yf we had deliueryd and sente her home

agayn These euylly had neuer happend in the yle of Cythare as they now been / And the quene helayne that is of the moste noble of grece had neuer be ra|uysshyd ne ladde awaye / And also we had not enterprysed the payne ne the laboure / Where we now ben in And ther is none of vs that knoweth what shall happen to hym good or euyll / And ther|fore yf ye seme good that we myghte Retorne in to our contrey with oute suffrynge of more payne with oure honoure and worshippe / We shall sende vnto the kynge Pryant oure specyall messangers / And bidde hym to sende and renvoye to vs helayne freely And that he restore to vs the domayges that Parys hath doon in the yle of Cythare / For yf he wyll so doo / Oure retorne shall be honourable / And we may no more Axe of hym by ryght / And yf he ref|fuse thys / We shall haue two thynges that shall fyghte for vs / Iustyce And oure trewe quaryll And oure puyssance excusid / And whan men shall here of oure offres / They shall gyue the wronge and blame to the Troians And to vs the loose and prey+syng / And we shall ben excused of alle the domay|ges that we shall doon to them after thyse offres. Therfore auyse yow amonge your self what thynge ye wyll doo.
THan were there some felonnes that blamed this counceylle / And some alowed hit / And fynably they concluded to do soo as Agame|non had sayd / Than they Cheese for theyr messan|gers / Dyomedes and Vliyes for to goo to Troye. And make theyr legacion / whiche toke theyr horses.

And wente Incontynent theder And cam to troye aboute mydday And they wente strayt to the pallays of kynge Pryant And toke theyr horses to kepe at the gate And after wente vp in to the halle. And in goyng vp they meruayllyd hem gretly of the ryche werke that they sawe in alle the pallays. And specially of a tree that they sawe in a playn the whiche was made by arte mathematycque meruayllously. composed and of grete beaulte / For the tronchon or stock benethe was no gretter but of the gretenes of a spere / And was passing longe and hyghe. And aboue had braunches of gold and of siluer and leeuys that spradde ouer the pallais And saue a lityll hit coueryd alle / And the fruyte of the same tree was of dyuerse precyous stones that gaf grete lyght and bryghtnes And gaf grete solace to them that behelde hit. They wente so fer forth that they cam in to the grete halle where the kynge Pryant was accompanyed with noble men / And than wyth oute salewyng the kynge ne the other / Vlixes sayd to hym in this manyere.
KInge Pryant meruaylle the nothyng that we haue not salewid the for as moche as thou arte oure enemye mortell / The kynge Agamenon to whome we ben messangers sendeth and comandeth the by vs that thou renuoye and sende to hym the quene he|layne / whome thou haste don to be rauysshid and beta+ken fro her husbonde. And that thou restore alle the do+mages that parys thy sone hath done in grece / And yf thou so doo / I trowe thou shalt doo as a wyse man.

And yf thou doo not beholde what euyllys may come to the and to thyne / For thou shalt dye an euyll deth and alle thy men. And this noble Cyte shall be destro+yed / Whan the kynge Pryant herde Vlixes thus speke He answerd In contynent to Vlixes wyth oute de|mandyng counceylle / I meruaylle me gretly of thy wordes that requyrest of me that thynge / That a man vaynquysshid and myght not deffende hym self no more / Wyth grete payne wolde accorde to the.. I beleue not that the grekes haue suche puyssance to doo that thynge that thou haste sayd to me They re|quyre of me reparacion / And I oughte to demande of them / haue not they slayn my fader and my brethern And ladde away my suster in seruytude / Whome they daigne not to marye honourably / But to holde her and mayntene as a comyn woman / And for to haue her agayn I haue sente to them Anthenor. And wold haue pardoned them of the surplus. But ye knowe the vilonnyes and menaces that they dyde to my messanger And therfore I ought not to here ony thynge that ye saye to me / But had leuer dye vylaynsly than to agree your requeste / And late Agamenon knowe that I desire neuer to haue peas ne loue wyth the Grekes that haue doon to me so many dysplaysirs / And yf hit were not that ye ben messangers I shold make yow dye an euyll deth / Therfore go ye your way anone / For I may not see yow wyth oute displaysir in myn herte / Than began dyomedes to lawghe for despyte  sayd thus. Ha kynge yf with oute displaysir mayste not see vs that ben but tweyne / Than thou shalt not be wythoute

displaysir alle the dayes of thy lyf For thou shalt see fro hensforth to fore thyn eyen grete puissance of grekes The whiche shall come to fore thy cyte. And shall not cesse for tassaylle hit contynuelly. Ayenst whome thou mayste not longe deffende the But that thou and thyne finably shall receyue bytter deth. Therfore thou sholdest take counceyll in thy werkes yf thou were well auysed
THan were there many troians that wolde haue Ronne vpon the grekes And drewe theyr swer+des for to haue slayn them But the kynge pryant destourned hem. And sayd to hem that they sholde late two fooles saye theyr folye / And that hit was the na|ture of a fole to shewe folye / And to a wyse man to suffre hit / Ha. A. syre sayd Eneas what is that. that ye saye / men shold shewe to a foole his folye / And truly yf ht were not in your presence this felawe that hath spoken so folyly to fore yow. shold receyue his deth by my hande. Hit pperteyneth not to hym to saye to yow suche venymous wordes ne menaces And ther|fore I auyse hym that he go his way anone. yf he cesse not to speke folyly / Dyomedes that of no thyng was abasshyd answerd to Eneas and sayd / what some euer thou be thou shewest well by thy wordes that thou arte right yll auysed and hoot in thy wordes. And I desire that I may ones fynde the in a place coue|nable that I may rewarde the for the wordes that thou hast sayd of me / I see well that the kynge is well ewrous  happy to haue suche a counceller as thou arte that counceyllest hym to do vylonnye / Than Vlixes

brack the wordes of Dyomedes ryght wysely and prayd hym to holde his peas / And after saide to kynge Pryant we haue vnderstand alle that thou haste sayd And we shall goo and reporte hit vnto our prynces. And Incontynent they wente and toke theyr horses And Retorned vnto theyr ooste / where they fonde alle the nobles assemblyd to fore the kynge Agamenon And sayde to them the answere of kynge Pryant. Wherof they had grete meruaylle And deuysed longe to gyder For to conduyte well theyr werkes syn they were ad certayned of the warre of the Troians.


How Agamenon assemblyd to counceyll the gre+kes for to haue vitaylles and how they sente Achil+les and Thelephus vnto the royame of Mse where they slewe the kynge Tentram in bataylle And how Telephus was made kynge And of the kynges that cam in the Ayde and helpe of kynge Pryant.
AFter these thynges Agamenon callid his folk to counceyll in the playne of theneden / And sayd to them Amonge alle other thynges hit behoueth vs necessaryly to be auysed how duryng the siege to fore Troye our Ooste shall be socouryd of vytayll And therfore yf ye seme good we shall sende vnto the Royame of Messe for to haue fro thens vitaylles contynuelly. For hit is a contre right fertyle  comodyous And they that shall goo theder shall take sewerte of them of the contre / That they shall not fayll to sende vitaill to the ooste as longe as we shall be in this contrey This counceyll plesid moche to the grekes / And they chese Incontynent.

Achilles and Thelephus the sone of hercules for to fur|nysshe this message And for to goo theder with a grete companye of men of Armes / In that prouynce regned a kynge that had to name theutram and had longe regned in pees / For his contre was peplid of good and hardy knyghtes. Whan Achilles  thelephus with thre thou|sand knyghtes fiers and hardy were arryued in the yle of messe they yssued oute of theyr shippes And descen|ded on the lande / Ther cam than ayenst them the kynge theutram with a grete companye of men of fote and on horse back / Than began the bataylle right fiersly and at the assamble ther were many knyghtes slayn on bothe sides And how well that the grekes were lasse in nom|bre than the other were They deffended hem well / But theyr defence had not auayllyd them ne had ben the grete prowesse of Achilles that dide right meruayllys with his body. As he that was the most stronge and moste vayllyant of the grekes For whome he araug wente therfore. And ther myghte no man endure to fo hym. Whan than Achilles had espyed the kynge theutram in the myddes of his peple that dide grete domage to his folke / he thressid in to ^e grettest prees of his enemyes / and bete doun to fore hym all that he fonde vnto that he cam to kynge theutram. And he gaf hym so many strokes that he all to hewe his helme / And smote hym doun to the ground  And had slayn hym in contynent ne had thelephus hae ben / whiche put hym betwene and prayde Achilles humbly that he wold not slee hym Ner do  harme than he had / And the kynge hym self cryed to Achilles mercy / Than sayd Achilles to thelephus What meueth ^e of pyte ayenst oure enemye

mortall / that is come to assaylle vs by so grete felonnye hit is rayson that he falle in to the pytte that he had made redy for vs Ha. A. Syre sayd thelephus / This kynge was ryght famylier with my fader hercules / And also dyde to me on a tyme grete honour in this londe And ther+fore I may not suffre to see hym slayn to fore myn eyen. Well than sayd Achylles / take hym than And do wyth hym what thou wilte Than was the bataylle fynysshid And the grekes cessid / And the kynge Thentram was born in to his pallays as dede. For Achilles had so brus|syd hym and all to frusshid hym And the kynge prayd Achilles and thelephus / that they wold goo wyth hym The whiche wente / And were receyuyd wyth `grete Ioye and honour.
HIt was not longe after / that the kynge thentram that was wounded to the deth of the woundes that Achilles had gyuen hym / sente for Achilles and thelephus / and than said to hem My frendes I may not longe lyue / And than after sayd to thelephus / My frende I may no lenger lyue / And I haue no lawfull Eyres of my body / to whom I may leue this Royame that I haue goten wyth grete labour / And had loste longe syn ne had ben the moste worthy of alle worthy thy fader hercules / Whyche waranted and was a shelde to me ayenst alle them that wolde haue taken hit fro me / And so dyde of fayt to them that wold haue taken hit / whan thy fader by his grete prowesse slewe hem and enchassed hem oute / And syn I haue kepte hit paysybly no thynge by my meryte /  the vertue of thy fader / And syn hyt is soo that thy fader hath conqueryd thys Royame for me that haue none eyres.

Hit is well right and rayson that thou be herytier of thy fader And for so moche as this is my laste worde / I leue to the this royame  all myn other goodes where some euer they bee And make the myn herityer And praye the that thou do burye me honourably as hit apperteyneth to a kynge. And as sone as he had finysshid these wordes he deyde / And than thelephus and the nobles of the con|trey dide do burye hym honourably / And leyde hym in a moche ryche sepulture / wher vpon was wreton this Epithaphye / Here lieth the kyng thentram Whom Achil+les slewe The whiche lefte his royame to Thelephus. This thelephus that afore was but a duc / was made kynge of messe And all the nobles of the contre dide hym homage And all the peple promysed to hym fayth and seruyse / Than Achilles dide do charge his shippes wyth vytaill And ordeynd that Thelephus shold abide in his newe royame / whiche he dide sore anoyed And he pra|yd hym And also comanded in the name of the grekis that he shold do diligence to sende vnto the ooste of the grekis often tymes vitayllis / and he promysid hym that he so doo wolde wythoute ony fawte And than Achyl+les toke leue of hym and retorned in to his shippes / And sayllyd so longe that he and his felawship arryued at the poort of thenedon sauely where they fonde the ooste yet soiournyng. And anone as he was descended. He wente strayt vnto the tente of kynge agamenon where alle the prynces and kynges were assemblid / he was re+ceyuyd wyth grete Ioye / as he that alle the ooste loued moche for his grete strengthe and prowesse / Than Achilles tolde to them how he arryued at Messe and of the batayll / and how that thelephus was made kynge

And how he had promysid to furnysshe the ooste of vi|taylles / Of these tidynges the grekes had grete Ioye and alowed and preysid moche the vaylliance of Achilles. And after theyr parlament eche man wente vnto his pauyllon / Than was Achilles receyuyd with grete Ioye of his myrondynes that moche louyd hym.
IN this place here the auctour nameth what kynges and prynces cam to the helpe  ayde of kynge pryant to troye not of alle but of the moste notable. Fyrst cam vnto their ayde / the kynge pandorus the kynge Galior  the kynge Adrastus with thre thousand knyghtes armed. Fro the prouynce of tholoson cam foure kynges wyth fyue thou|sand knyghtes armed the kynge carras the kynge ama|sius the kynge Nestor that was a moche stronge man. And the kynge Amphymacus Fro the royame of licye cam the kynge Glauton wyth thre thousand knyghtes. And his sone Sarpedon that was one of the strengest knyghtis of the world and cosyn of kynge pryant. Fro the royame of lichaon cam the kynge ensemus with thre thousand knyghtes ryght expert in armes / Fro the ro|yame of larysse cam two kynges wyth fyften honderd knyghtes the kynge imstor that was a moche grete man And the kynge capidus / Fro the royame of thaborye cam the kynge remus with thre thousand knyghtes / and in his companye cam foure dukes  seuen erles that were feyd with kynge pryant They bare in their armes the co+lour of asure with oute other signe / and therby was the kynge remus  his peple knowen in the bataylle. Fro the royame of trachie cam the kynge pilex  the duc al|chamas with .xi. honderd knyghtis. Fro the royame of pauonye cam the kynge pessemus and the duc stupex

his cosyn wyth thre thousand knyghtes right expert to Iouste and to shote wyth the bowe / This is a moche wylde contre of forestes and montaygnes / And where is but lityll peple / And ynowhe of wylde bestes and of byrdes. Fro the prouynce of boecye cam thre dukes with twelue honderd knyghtes the duc Ansermms / the duc fortunus And the duc sammus. Fro the royame of bur+tyn where as growe good espices cam two kynges bre|thern with a thousand knyghtes / the kynge botes And the kynge episteus. Fro the regne of paphagore that is at the sonne rysyng in the eeste / full of alle richesses / cam the right riche kynge philemeus with thre thousand kngyh+tes all her sheldes of the hydes of fysshis all couerd with gold and precyous stones And this kynge was as grete as a geant Fro the regne of Ethiope cam the kynge per+seus / and the kynge of thiction with hym / that was right hardy and wyse with thre thousand kngyhtes that had in her companye many a duc and many an erle / and also was wyth hem simagon the sone of kynge thiction. Fro the royame of cheres cam the kynge theleus and Archilo+gus his sone that was of the affinyte of kynge Pryant and brought a thousand knyghtes Fro the yle of Ar|greste cam two kynges of whom I haue not the names wyth .xii. honderd knyghtes / Fro the regne of Eliane that is beyonde the royame of Amasonne cam an Auncy+ent kynge ryght wyse and discrete named Epistropus and brought a thousand knyghtes and a meruayllous beste ^t was callyd sagittayre that behynde the myddes was an hors  to fore a man / This beste was heery lyke an hors and had his eyen reed as a coole / and shotte right well with abowe This beste made ^e grekes sore aferd

And slewe many of hem wyth his bowe / Thus were in nombre alle the knyghtes that cam in Ayde of kynge Pryant two and thertty thousand wyth oute them of the royame of Uroye and of ynde the myneur / And hit is not founde by wrytyng that syn the creacion of the world that so many noble knyghtes were assemblid in one place And that meuyd the quarelle for so lityll occa+sion / O how the kynges and prynces oughte to take hede and be well auysed for to meue the warre Also ferre as they myght amende hit by other waye.


OF the comyng of duc Palamydes And how the gre|kes departed fro the porte of thenadon by the counceyll of dyomedes and cam and toke lande before the stronge Cyte of Troye And how the troians receyuyd them by batayll right vigorously.
THe Grekes were not yet partyd fro Thenedon. whan palamides the sone of kynge Naulus cam and arriued at this porte of thenedon with thretty shippis full of knyghtes Armed Alle noble  hardy men And of his comyng the grekes had grete Ioye / And had murmured a fore be cause he taryed so longe / wherof he excusid hym by sekenes that he had had / This palamides was holden in grete worshippe amonge the grekes and was the seconde after kynge Agamenon / puyssant and discrete in Armes and moche riche / And at his comyng he was anone chosyn to be counceyllour of the Ooste. And thus were the grekes many a day  many a nyght at the porte of thenedon often tymes assemblid to coun|ceyll for to aduyse the beste manere to assege the Cyte of troye / and finably after many oppynyons / they helde hem to the counceyll of dyomedes that was this / now said he

Alle ye kynges prynces and barons that ben here assem|blid / we ought alle to haue grete shame and vilonye. Whan hit is a yere goon syn we descended here in this londe / And haue not yet ben to fore troye verayly in this we haue gyuen to oure enemyes grete auantage / syn hit is soo that this tyme duryng they ben pourueyed of grete aydes and alle her cyte strongly fortefyed and renforced of wallys and bulwerkis that they haue good leyzer to make / And verrayly them semeth that we ben not so hardy as to come vnto them And therfore the more that we delaye vs to goo theder / the more encreseth oure shame and domage / and I trowe yf we had goon theder whan we cam first in to this contre / we shold haue more esely descended and taken lande / than we shall doo now. For they ben better garnysshid now than they were at that tyme / of alle suche thyng as they behoeffyd for to def|fende hem with / / And therfore I counceylle yow that to morn be tymes we putte vs on the waye in good orde|nance / And late vs sette the siege fermly and as hastely as we may We oughte well to knowe that we shall not so doo wyth oute grete bataylle Where fore hit beho+ueth eche man to employe hymself and to putte behynde alle fere and drede. For by none other waye we may not exployte in this werke / ne better ne more honourably by myn aduys .
THe counceyll of dyomedes plesid to alle the ba|rons of the ooste / and also on the morn erly they reentryd in to theyr shippis And sayllyd strayt vnto the poort of Troye and brought theyr shippes by good ordenance one after another / In the first fronte they putte an honderd shippis right well garnysshid of

knyghtes and banyers that wauyd in the wynde / And after them they putte an other honderd And after alle the other by ordre / And they had not ferre sayllyd but that they sawe the noble cyte of troye / And approchid ther+to as hastely as they myghte / Whan the troians sawe the grekes approche the Cyte / They Ran to Armes / And mounted vpon theyr horses alle armed / And wente forth wyth oute ordenance vnto the porte / Than whan the grekes sawe the Troians come in so grete nombre for to deffende theyr porte / Ther was none so hardy but he was a ferde / but for as moche as they coude not descende a land but by force of Armes. They armed hem Incon|tynent / And contended to descende and take lande by force .
OF the fyrst honderd shippis was chief and cap|tayn / the kynge prothesalaus of philarde That dyde grete payne and diligence to brynge his shippis wythin the porte. But the wynde that was stronge blewe hem in to the porte so strongly ayenst the Ryuage that many of them brake and brussyd and many Grekes were drownyd / And they that myght take lande toke hit / And were anone slayn by the Troians wyth grete torment and in so grete nombre / That the grounde was reed of theyr blood Hyt is not in the mynde of ony man that euer ony nauye wan land wyth so grete myschef as dyde the nauye of the grekes / After this first honderd shippes the other cam and arryued that folowed hem / And they that were wyth in were garnysshyd of grete arblasters / where with they shotte and slewe many of the Troians and constrayned them to go a back.

And than toke the grekes lande And so couryd the firste that foughte at grete myschief Than began the bataylle mortall / The kynge protheselaus that was descended wyth the firste / dyde right meruaylles wyth his body and slewe that day of the troians wyth oute nombre. And yf he allone had not ben Alle the grekes that were descended a lande had ben slayn But what myght his def+fence helpe / whan seuen thousand grekes faughte ayenst an honderd thousand troians. And I saye yow that for the grete danger wher in they felte hem self / They solde theyr lyues dere / abidyng the socours of kynge Archela and the kynge prothenor / That anon arryued / And wolde the troians or not They descended and toke londe And socourid theyr peple vayllyantly and began agayn cruell bataylle .
AFter arryued the duc nestor and his folk that threstid in amonge her enemyes right fiersly / ther was many a spere broken and many an arowe shotte / knyghtes fyll doun dede on bothe sides the crye was so grete that hit was meruayllous to heere / there they slewe many troians Archelaus and prothenor. After arryuyd the kynge ascalus and the kynge Agalus wyth theyr shippis and descended a lande and assayllid the troians by grete fiersnes and by force made hem to re+cule and go a back / And than cam to the bataylle grete foyson of newe troians / Than began the bataylle more grete than hit had ben of alle the daye to fore in so moche that the grekes were reculed by force vnto theyr shippis And than arryuyd Vlixes wyth a grete companye of knyghtes that threstyd anone in to the bataylle And the grekes recoueryd lande at theyr comyng And assayllyd

on the troians There made vlixes grete effusion of blood of his enemyes / And anone his ensigne was knowen amonge them / And whan the kynge philomenus sawe that Vlixes slewe so theyr peple he adressid hym vnto hym / And bete hym doun of his horse a lityll wounded. And vlixes smote hym agayn so harde that he gaf hym a grete wounde vpon his throte / And cutte a two his ory|gynall vayne / And smote hym as half dede / And the tro|ians ran and toke hym fro the grekes / And bare hym vpon his shelde in to the cyte / And ne had be this aduen|ture of this kynge The grekes had ben disconfited / But the troians entended strongly to saue hym / And than arryued the kynge thoas and the kynge Agamenon The kynge Menelaus and the kynge Thelamon ayax wyth all theyr power and descended a lande and medlid hem in the batayll / And brack theyr speres vpon the troians. And bete doun many some dede and some hurte / At this Ioynyng were many troians slayn.
WHan the kynge prothesalus departid fro~ the ba|taylle where he had ben syn the begynnyng For to take breth And whan he cam to the porte He fonde alle his men nyghe by dede / For whome he wepte for pytye / And toke agayn his corage for to auenge the deth of his men / And wente agayn to the bataylle. And in his grete yre slewe many Troians and woun|ded hem and smote doun many of them of theyr horses. Than cam to the bataylle of the partye of the troians the kynge perses wyth grete companye of knyghtes / At the comyng of the ethyopyens began the bataylle mortall. And had many grekes slayn  by force made hem to goo back And had with oute fayll disconfited them / ne had

the worthy palamydes sone descended a lande / For at his comyng the grekes were recomforted And also pala+mydes made right meruayllys wyth his hand / And ad|dressid hym ayenst sagamon the broder of kynge menon and neuewe of the kynge of perse / that sore greuyd the grekes And he smote hym so sore wyth his spere that he pershid hym thurgh oute the body / And smote hym ded doun to the erthe And after he smote in to the grete presse And bete doun alle that he mette / And eche man that knewe hym made hym waye / And than roose a Crye vpon the troians that they myght not suffre the strengthe of palamydes And were reculed by force And had ben alle desconfited / But the moste worthy of alle worthy hector whan he herd the crye vpon his peple / he yssued oute of the cyte wyth grete companye of knyghtes and entryd in to the bataylle Armed in ryche armes / And bare in his shelde of golde a lione of gowles / his strengthe was anone knowen / amonge the grekes / And encoun|tryd and mette in his comyng the kynge prothesalaus that had not of alle the day cessid to sle troians And he smote hym wyth his swerd by so grete myght vpon his helme / That he clefte hym vnto the nombryll notwyth|standyng his Armour / And fyll doun dede to the erthe. And after hector threstid in to the grettest prees / and as many grekes as he araught wyth his swerde he slewe Than eche man fledde fro hym makyng hym waye And demaunded the grekes one of another / what was he that so greuyd hem And anon they knewe that hit was hec|tor the moste stronge man of the world and than was there none so hardy that durst abyde his strook.
THan hit happend that hector wente oute a lityll for

to refresshe hym And than the grekes reprised corage vp on the troians / And this happend that day eyghte or ten tymes / Hit was aboute the oure of euensonge what tyme hector departid fro the batayll / And reentrid in to the cyte / For the Grekes were wyth all disconfited And than arryued the right stronge Achilles wyth his myrondones and entryd anon in to the batayll well wyth thre thousand good knyghtes / That were wyth hym And than were the troians on alle sydes beten doun and slayn For ayenst Achilles endured no man but he were beten doun to the erthe or sore hurte.
THan were arryued all the nauye of the grekes / and the knyghtes go on a lande  medlid with the other in the batayll / wherfore the troians had moche to suffre in so ferre that they muste nedes flee in to theyr Cyte and Achilles and the other slewe them fleeyng there was a grete crye of the hurte men Ther was achilles alle dyed wyth the blood of the troians that he had slayn / And there was grete occision at the entre in to the cyte / There sawe the faders her children slayn to fore her eyen And the occysion and slaughter had ben more grete / Ne yf Troylus Parys and Deyphebus with a grete compa|nye fyerse and newe ne had comen oute and yssued of the Cyte that resisted the Grekes and made thoccision to cesse / And also the nyght was nyghe / And eche man wyth drewe hym in to his place / The Troians shytted her Cyte and dyde make good wacche / And Achilles wyth the grekis Retorned to theyr tentes wyth grete glorye / That were not yet dressyd / But the kynge Agamenon dyde do dresse hem Incontynent And made eche man to take place couenable after his astate.

And they that had no tentes ne pauyllons loggyd them vnder the leues the beste wyse they coude them and theyr horses And after ankryd theyr shippis as well as they myght and toke oute of them alle that was necessarye to them Thus made the grekes theyr siege this nyght and sette hit to fore the cyte of troye And made meruayllous grete fyres in the ooste that made hit as light as hit had be day / So were they logged nyghe to gyder and made ryght good wacche / how well that they had none as|saultes this nyght / And they had alle the nyght trom|pettis and menestrellys grete plente That agamenon or|deyned for to conforte ^e ooste And they restid this nyght alle Armed the beste wyse they coude / This was the fyrst bataylle of the grekes and of the troians at theyr comyng .


Of the seconde bataylle to fore troye in the whiche were many kynges and grete barons slayn by the wor+thy hector / And how the troians had ben victoryous of theyr enemyes ne had ben the prayer of thelamon Ayax cosyn of hector .
ANd whan the nyght was passid / hector that had the charge of alle them of the cyte ordeyned right erly his batailles in a grete playn that was in the cyte And putte in the fyrst bataylle two thousand good knyghtes whiche he betoke to lede and conduyte to tweyn of his kynnysmen That is to wete to Glaucon the sone of the kynge of keye and to afiamolor his bas|tard broder / And assigned to them the kynge thesus of Trahie and Archilogus his broder that was wyse and vayliant / and made hem to yssue out by the gate named dadane that stode ayenst the Oost of the grekes / In the

seconde batayll he put thre thousand good knyghtes  stronge whom he toke to conduyte to the kynge exampi|tus of frigie  to the kynge Alcanus that were knyghtes of grete strengthe / and recomanded them to the garde of the goddes /  made them yssue out after the other in good ordenance / The thirde batayll he be toke to Troyllus his broder for to co~duyte with thre thousand knightes wise and hardy / and said to hym at the departyng My right dere broder the leysse of my herte putteth me in doubte of thy gret hardynes wherfore I pray the that thou gouerne the wysely in the batayll in suche wyse that thou enter|pryse not suche thynges as thou maiste not achieue / and ^t thou put not thy body in dau~ger of deth by ouer moche wenyng / wherby thou myghtest gyue Ioye to thyn ene|myes  owres / Go thy waye in the name of the goddes ^t the conduyte  kepe fro paryll and encombrance / Ha. a Syre broder answerd Troylus hit nedeth yow not to doubte of me. For I shall doo ^t in me is / right as ye haue comanded / and than he wente forth with his companye after the other And bare in his shelde thre lyons of golde.
HEctor put in ^e fourthe bataill thre thousand knygh+tes  seuen honderd / whom he toke to conduyte to kynge huppon of larisse / This kynge huppon was moste stronge of all the troians next hector / and had in his com+panye a vailliant knyght a bastard broder of hector wise  hardy named dymacus The .v. bataill hector deliuerid to conduyte to ^e kynge of cisayne with all his folk / that were meruayllous stronge  grete as geantis / And the same kyng bare in his shelde all asure with out ony diffe+rence / And hector co~misid in this batayll polidamas his bastard broder with this kyng / and yssued after ^e other

The sixte bataylle ledde the kynge precemessus / that had his peple well Induced to shote and drawe the boowe And wente wyth oute Armes to bataylle mounted vpon good light horses And hector comysid deyphebus his broder to conduyte them and yssued after the other / With this bataylle adiousted hector alle the cheuallerye of the Royame of Agreste vnder the conduyte of kynge Esdras and of kynge philon This kynge philon had a meruayllous chare alle of yuorye of gold and of siluer and of precyous stones / This chare conduyted two stronge knyghtes / wyth thyse two kynges hector put epitagoren his bastard broder / And they yssued after the other The seuenth batayll ladde Eneas And a noble admyrall named enfrene And they wente after ^e other The eyghte bataylle ladde the kynge of perse named per|ses / And Parys was chief and captayne / And hector prayd parys his broder that he shold not assemble vnto the grekes vnto the tyme that he cam hym self / And that he wolde folowe hym anone / The nyneth batayll and the laste ladde hector hym self And ten of his bastarde bre+thern after hym And alle the beste knyghtes of the Cyte chosen / were in this bataylle to the nombre of fyue thousand .
THan whan hector was rychely aryed / And Armed with good harnoys and scewre / he mou~+ted vpon his horse named galathe / that was one of the moste grete and strengest horse of the world And so Armed and mounted he rood vnto the kynge his fa|der And sayd to hym ryght dere fader reteyne with yow a thousand and fyue honderd knyghtis and alle the men of foote of this cyte / And holde yow wythoute to

fore the syght of the grekes And meue yow not But yf I sende yow worde / to the ende yf we haue necessite / that ye be oure reffuge / And I shall sende yow alle way amonge my messangers that shall saye to yow the state of the bataylle / And take ye good heede and garde that oure enemyes take not our cyte by cautele or trayson. And the kynge answerd to hym / My sone I shall doo alle as thou haste to me sayd / For next after the Ayde and helpe of the goddes / Thou arte alle my hope and truste / And haue no fayth but in the vertue of thyn Armes and in the grete discrescion of thy wytte And I praye to the goddes ryght humbly that they wylle kepe the hoole and sounde and preserue the fro encombrance.
AFter these wordes hector wente hym forth after the other / This hector was moche coragyous. stronge. and victoryous in batayll / and a right wyse conduytour of men of Armes / His shelde was alle of gold / And in the myddell a lyon of gowles And how well that he was the laste that yssued out of his hous or of the cyte / yet passid he allewaye alle the ba|taylles and cam and putte hym self afore in the fyrst ba|taylle / The women that were in the cyte / And alle the other wente vpon the wallys for to beholde the batay|les / Thre were the doughters of the kynge wyth the qune helyne that had grete doubte And dyuerce yma|gynacyons in her self.
WHylis that hector had ordeyned his bataylles. The kynge Agamenon was not ydle / but or|deyned ryght erly of his peple sixe and twenty bataylles / He putte in the fyrst bataylle Patroclus wyth hys peple and wyth the folk of Achylles.

Whiche was not that day in the batayll / for his woun+des that he had and dyde do hele hem in his tente This pa+troclus was a moche noble due and ryche and louyd so moche Achylles that they were bothe of one Alyance In the seconde bataylle was the kynge men on And the kynge ydumeus with thre thousand knyghtes And ther was with hem the due of Atthenes wyth alle his peple The thirde bataylle ledde the kynge Achalaphus / And his sone phimenus wyth her peple / The fourth bataylle ladde the kynge Archelaus / And the kynge prothenor his broder  with them was securidam the right stronge knyght with all the peple of boecye / The fyfthe batayll ladde the kynge menelaus wyth alle his peple of sperte. The sixthe bataylle ladde the kynge Epistropus and the kynge celidus wyth alle her peple / The seuenth batayll ladde Thelamon ayax wyth alle his peple of salamyne And he had foure erlis with hym / that is to wete thesus Amphymacus Dorius  Polidarius / The eyghte ledde the kynge Thoas / The nynthe ledde Ayax aleus / The tenthe ladde the kynge philotus / The enleuenth the kyng ydumeus and the kynge meron / The twelfth the duc nestor / The thrittenth lad the kynge exiones / The four|tnth the kyng Vlixes / The fyftenth the kyng humerus In the sixtenth were the folke of prothesclaus moche desiryng to auenge the deth of theyr lord / The seuententh ladde the kynge polidarius And the kynge Machaon The eyghtenth the kynge of Rodes / The nynetenth the yng sampitus And the kynge lidorus / The twentythe the kynge gerpulus / The one and twentythe the kyng philotetes of larisse / The two and twentyth dyomedes The thre and twentythe the kynge Oeneus of Cypres.

The foure and twentythe the kynge Prothalus / The fyfe and twentythe the kynge carpenor / The sixe and twentythe and the last bataylle ladd the kynge Aga|menon Emperour of alle the ooste.
WHan alle the bataylles were ordeyned on that one side and on that other / And was no thyng to do but tassemble Than auauncyd hym hector alle ther fyrst And patroclus cam ayenst hym as moche as his horse myghte renne / And smote hym so strongly wyth his spere in his shelde that he perchid hit thurgh out / but more harme dyde he not / Than hector assayllid patroclus wyth his swerde / And gaf hym so grete a strook vpon his heed that he clefte hit in two peces / And Patroclus fyll doun dede to the ground / Whan hector sawe hym ded he coueyted his Armes / For they were ryght queynte and ryche / And a lightid doun of his horse for to take them / But the kynge Menon cam vpon hym wyth thre thousand good knyghtes for to deffende the kynge Patroclus ayenst hector / And sayd to hym thus / Ha. A wolf Rauysshyng and Insacyable. Certes the behoueth to seke thy praye in some other place for here geteste thou none / And than they assayllyd hym on alle sides / And wolde haue taken fro hym ga+lathee his hors / But hector by his prowesse remounted wolde they or not and wende to haue vengid hym on kynge Menon / But the kynge Glancion and the kynge Thesus and Archilogus his sone cam wyth thre thou|sand fightars / And than hector leyd on and bete doun alle afore hym / And the fyrst that he mette he gaf so grete a stroke that he slewe hym and after hym many mo he bete doun and slewe.
THus began the bataylle on bothe sides And hec|tor cam agayn to the body of Patroclus for to haue his Armes / But the kyng ydumeus of crete cam ayenst hym with two thousand fyghtars / And the kynge menon that had allway his eye to hector letted hym and was so in the waye / that hector myght not haue his Armes that he sore desired And suffryd grete payne for as moche as he was on foote / but he enforced hym wyth alle his corage / And began to slee man and hors And to smyte of heedes legges feet and Armes And slewe fyften of the strengest that assayllyd hym. In this mene while the kyng menon toke the body of patroclus to fore hym and bare hit vnto his tente / as the grekes con+tended to greue hector and to take away his horse Ther was amonge them a right stronge knyght named creon de la plerre / that greuyd hym moste / Than one of the ser|uauntis of hector adressid hym agayn this Creon / And gaf hym so grete a stroke wyth his spere / that he smote hym doun dede to the erthe / And after he smote doun an|other And escryed to the troians right lowde that they shold come and socoure hector / wyth this cry cam first securabor one of the bastard brethern of hector / and thres+tid in to the grettest prees so ferre that he cam vpon them that most greuyd hector that had slayn moo than thretty of them And dide so moche that by force he made the gre+kes to recule And than was hector remounted vpon his horse And threstid in amonge them by grete fierste and slewe grete plente of them for ^e desplaysir that he might not haue the Armes of patroclus / Than he recountryd none but he slewe hym / or bete hym doun hurte And eche man made hym waye and dredde hym .
THan cam to the bataylle Menesteus the duc of Atthenes and cam  Ioyned hym to the bataylle where as Troyllus was that dyde meruaylles and had with hym the kynge Sampitus / The kynge Machaon And the kynge Alcanus / Tho began fyerse bataylles Menesteus adressid hym ayenst Troyllus. And there faught ayenst hym with so grete force / that he bete hym doun of his horse in the grete prees of the folke And Menesteus contended wyth alle his strength in so moche that he toke hym / And lad hym toward theyr tentes wyth grete companye of knyghtes / Than imseres of Troye escryed to the troians that troyllus was pry|sonner / And that they shold be dishonoured yf they suffred hym to be ledd away / Than the kynge Alcanus toke his spere that was right stronge / And adressid hym vnto hem that helde troyllus / And smote the first doun dede to the erthe / and smote another  sore wounded hym / and dide so moche by the ayde of his men that troyl+lus was rescowed And sette agayn vpon his hors And also by the helpe of kynge Sampitus that cam on with alle his peple / And gaf so grete a strook to menesteus ouerthwart / That yf he had not be well armed he had ben slayn / And than escryed Menesteus to his peple and so began amonge them a mortall bataylle / And there were many slayn on that one side and on that other / Amonge these thynges Menesteus that was sory that he had loste his prysonner / Recountryd mise|res / By whome he had loste hym And anone he knewe hym / he adressid hym to hym and bete hym doun And the same tyme smote doun another knyght / Tham cam to the batayll hupon  hiripisus with two thousand fightars

And ayenst them cam menelaus and prothenor wyth theyr folke And there began a mortall medle .
ANone after cam polidamas the sone of anthenor Wyth a grete companye And threstid in on that other side amonge his enemyes / After cam the kynge Remus fro troye wyth thre thousand fightars And ayenst them cam menelaus wyth alle his peple / the saide menelaus adressid hym ayenst kynge Remus / and Iusted to gyder / And smote eche other to the ground. Than adressid hym polidamas and remus agaynst the neuewe of helayne a yong man twenty yere olde / And re+mus gaf hym so grete a strook wyth his spere that he smote hym doun dede to the erthe / wheerof menelaus had grete sorowe / for he louyd hym moche And in his grete yre he gaf so grete a stroke to Remus wyth his swerde That he smote hym doun as dede And whan the kynge re+mus was so beten doun / his men had wende that he had ben dede  wold haue fledde ne had ben polidamas that retayned hem wyth grete payne And dide so moche that they toke theyr kynge so hrte as he was And bare hym home in saefte Than ^e kynge celidus that was the moste fayr kynge of the world adressid hym to polidamas and smote hym wyth his spere But he coude not remeue hym polidamas gaf hym so grete a stroke wyth his swerde that he smote hym doun dede to the erthe / Amonge these thyngis hector wente and cam fowlyng and sle|yng his enemyes And made waye to fore hym in sleyng of knyghtes and betyng doun so ferre that he cam vpon them of salamyne that the kynge thelamon conduyted that slewe many of the troians and bete doun by his pro+wesse / Than the kynge thenter gaf so grete a stroke

with his spere to hector / that he made hym a depe wounde And than hector in his grete yre encountrid an admyrall of the grekes and slewe hym cruelly with his swerd. Than was hector closid with his enemyes on all parties There was of the grekes the kynge thesus And he sayd to hector and warned hym that he shold go oute of the bataylle / And sayd that hit were domage for alle the world to lese suche a knyght And hector thankid hym right courtoisly.
IN this while Menelaus and thelamon assayl|lid polidamas And thelamon that adressid hym first smote hym with his spere / and after gaf hym many strokes in so moche that they brake the laas of his helme and toke hym / And had lad hym. away ne had hector haue be whiche was not ferre / that smote amonge them that helde hym and slewe and hurte many of them and dide so moche by his vaylliance ^t he slewe thretty of them And the other fledde / and lefte polidamas with hym Than ther putte hem to gyder the kynge Epistropus The kynge menelaus and the kynge thelamon with alle her peple And smote in amonge the Troians by so grete fierste that they made hem go a back maulgre them / Not|wythstandyng the grete prowesse of hector that was wyth the other that dyde meruayllys in his sone / and than was his good hors galathe slayn vnder hym / and than he deffended hym a foote so meruaillously that ther was none so hardy of the grekes ^t durste approche hym whan his krethern knewe ^e right grete dau~ger ^t he was in / they ran all to that parte / tho was thelamon sore hurte And dinadorus one of the bastard brethern of hector gaf so grete a stroke to polixenus a noble man that he slewe

hym and bete hym doun of a grete and a strong hors wher+vpon he satte / And toke the stede to hector that mounted vpon hym in contynent there were meruaylles of Armes done by the bastardis Than cam on deyphebus wyth alle his ooste where in he had grete foyson of Archers that hurted and slewe grete foyson of grekes / And deyphe|bus made and gaf to kynge thenter a grete wounde in the visage / Tho began the batayll also mortall as hit had ben malle the day There was thesus assayllyd of quyn|telynus one of the bastard brethern of hector and of kynge moderus and was taken and lad away / But hector delyueryd hym alle quyte for the courtosye that he had done to hym a lytyll to fore.
THan cam to the bataylle of the partye of the gre|kes / The kynge tho as And the kynge phylota But the kynge Thoas adressid hym ayenst cassi+lanus one of the bastard brethern of hector  gaf hym so grete a stroke that he slewe hym doun to the erthe seeyng hector / whiche than smote so Angerly amonge the gre|kes / That anone he slewe many / And put hem alle to flight / Than cam to the bataylle nestor wyth sixe thou|sand knyghtes / And the kynge Esdras and the kynge Phylon that dide grete meruaylles of Armes cam ayenst hem / At this assemble ther were many knyghtes slayn. and beten doun of that one partye and of that other / The kynge Philon that dide right meruaylles in armes was enclosid wyth the grekes on alle sides And had be slayn yf Iecomas and the kynge esdras his fader ne had deliue|ryd hym fro theyr handes / Hector and his broder dyde meruaylles with polidamas / and had put all the grekes to fght / but menelaus  thelamon resisted them strongly

Than cam Eneas to the bataylle with alle his oost / And putte hym Inne wyth hector and the other And by force put the grekes to playn flight / wherof ayax had moche grete sorowe / And also as he behelde behynde hym he sawe the banyers that cam to the batayll that had not yet haue ben there / And there was alle the floure of the cheualerye of grece Than prayd hthem that fledde / that they wolde abide and recomence and begynne newe ba|taylle Ayax and Eneas entrecountred so harde that they fylle bothe to the erthe / And than cam philotras wyth thre thousand knyghtes  made the troians goo backe. and smote hector with his spere but he might not remeue hym / and hector gaf hym so grete a stroke with his swerde That he bete hym sore hurte / Than cam to the batayll the kynge humerus / and the kynge Vlixes wyth alle theyr peple and the kyng hamelius / and they had well in their ooste ten thousand knyghtes / the whiche dide ^e troians moche sorowe that were moche wery / to theyr socours cam parys to the batayll /  in his comyng smote so harde the kynge of frigie that was cosyn to vlixes that he slewe hym  bete hym doun / wherof the grekes had moche so|rowe / And vlixes supposid to haue smyten parys wyth his spere / but he smote his horse  slewe hym / and parys fyll to the erthe / Than Troyllus gaf to vlixes so grete a stroke that he wounded hym in the visage and made the blood sprynge oute lyke s the wyn Kenneth out of a tonne . And vlixes hurted hym agayn / and truly the troians had than fledde / ne had ben the grete prowesse of hector and of his brethern / For hector ne cessid to put hym self in the grettest prees here and there / And eche man that knewe hym made hym waye.
WHan he sawe that his peple myght not suffre the grete strengthe of the grekes / he wythdrew  on a side / And tolde them what Iniuryes the grekes had don to hem / And what they wolde do yf they cam to theyr aboue / And than amonested and warned hem to do well / And after brought hem by avaleye on the right side for to assaylle theyr enemy|es / There was grete occision of the grekes / Ther was the kynge thoas assayllid of the bastard brethern of hector / For to auenge the deth of cassibelanus theyr broder that he had slayn They bete hym doun of his horse And rasyd of his helme fro his hede And had slayn hym incontynent / yf the duc of Atthenes had not come on that threstid in amonge hem and gaf so grete a stroke to one of the bastardis quyntylynus that he fyll doun to the ground sore hurte And parys smote the duc wyth an arowe in the side / And made hym a grete wounde / But the duc that was sore hurte sette not therby but magre them alle he deliueryd the kynge thoas fro theyr handes / Than hector dyde grete payne to put the grekes vnto flighte / And than the kynge Humerus shotte an Arowe vnto hector And hurted hym in the visage / And hector ran vpon hym by so grete yre that he smote hym so sore vpon the hede that he clefte hit vnto the teeth and he fyll doun dede Than with blowyng of an horn cam more than seuen thousand grekis for tassaylle hector that defended hym ayenst them meruayllously After this he wente a litill to his fader and toke thre thousand knyghtes freshe and fiers and brought hem to the bataylle / And at theyr comyng he made grete occision of the grekes .
Ayax and hector Iusted to geder and fought eche wyth other / Menelaus slewe at this Ioynyng an admyrall of troye Celidones slewe moles of oreb the neuewe of kynge thoas Mandon smote oute an eye of kynge cedonyus Sadellus slewe an admyrall of the grekes / Thelamon bete margareton and sore woun|ded hym. Famuell bete the kynge prothenor to the erthe The kynge of gaull Iusted ayenst menesteus But menes+teus hurte hym on the nose with his swerde Than deanor seeyng his broder hurte / adressid hym to menesteus and smote hym doun to the erthe And than ran vpon hym thre brethern that wold haue slayn hym or taken hym / but he deffended hym vaylliantly And anone he was socourid by the kynge thenter / but hector than assailled hem bothe And with oute faulte they had not escaped hym / ne had ayax the stronge knyght haue comen to ^e rescows / with a thousand knyghtes that he had in his companye / Tho cam on the kynge of perse with fyue thousand knyghtes that parys ladde And so dide alle the other troians and made the grekes recule and goo back by force / Dares writeth in his book that hector slewe a thousand knygh+tes only in this assaulte.
AMonge alle other thynges Hector encountryd the kyng menon to fore a tente  said to hym / ha. a euyl traytre the oure is comen ^t thou shalt receyue thy reward for that thou restournest me to take the armes of patro|clus / and than he smote hym so grete a strook that he fyll doun to the ground / And after hector alightid doun and smote of his heed / and wolde haue taken his armes from hym / But menesteus letted hym and smote vpon hector ouerthwart by suche force ^t he gaf hym a grete wounde

And wente his way with oute more taryyng doubtyng the fureur of hector Than hector wente oute of the stowre And dyde do bynde his wounde that hit bledde no more And after wente in agayn in to the stoure / And slewe in his comyng many grekes / And dares sayth that after he had bounden his wounde / he slewe the same daye a thou|sand knyghtes And ther was none that had corage to auenge hym ayenste hym or deffende / But he putte hem alle to flight / And the troians entryd in to theyr tentes and pyllid and robbed them / and toke all the beste that they cowde fynde .
IN this day had the troians had vittorye of alle the grekes yf fortune that is dyuerse had wylle consentyd / For they myght haue slayn hem alle And eschewyd the grete euyllys that after cam to them. Certes hit is not wysedom whan ony man fyndeth his enemye in grete perylle and fortune / to offre his power to deliuere hym therof / For hit happeth ofte tymes / that he shall neuer recouere to haue his enemye in the same caas / but that fortune torne her backe Thus hit happend this day to the vnhappy hector / that was at the aboue of his enemyes and myght haue slayn hem alle yf he had wolde / for they soughte no thynge but for to flee / whan by grete mysaventure cam afore hym in an encountre thela+mon Ayax that was sone of kynge thelamon and exione And was cosyn germayn of hector and of his brethern whiche was wyse  vayllyant / whiche adressid hym ayenst hector  deliueryd to hym a grete assault And hec+tor to hym as they that were valyant bothe two / and as they were fightyng they spak to geder And therby hector knewe that he was his cosyn germaine sone of his aunte

And than hector for curtoisye enbraced hym in his armes and made hym grete chiere And offryd to hym to do all his playsir yf he desired ony thynge of hym / And prayd hym that he wolde come to troye with hym for to see his lignage of hys moder syde / But the sayd Thelamon that entended no thynge but to his auantage sayde that he wolde not goo at thys tyme / But prayd to hector sayng / that yf he louyd hym so moche as he sayde / that he wolde for his sake and at his Instance do cesse the bataill for that day / and that the troians shold leue the grekes in pees / The vnhappy hector accorded to hym his requeste. And blewe an horn  made alle his peple to withdrawe in to the cyte Than had the troians begonne to putte fyre in the shippes of the grekes and had alle brente hem / Ne had hector callyd them fro thens / wherof the troians were sory of the rapeell This was the cause wherfore the troians lost to haue the victorye / to the whiche they myght neuer after atteyne ne come for fortune was to them contrarye And therfore virgile sayth / Non est mise+ricordia in bello That is to saye ther is no mercy in bataill A man ought not to take misericorde / But take the victo|rye who may gete hit.


Of the first triews of two monethis demanded by the grekes / And of the thirde batayll betwene them in the whiche hector bare achilles to the grounde twyes  after slewe the kyng prothenor  smote hym with one stroke in two parties.
THan hit cam on ^e morn betymes / the troians armed them for to goo  assayll the grekes But the grekes sente by tymes to kynge pryant / And demanded triews for two monethes / and he agreed to them ^e said triews

And than were the dede bodyes gaderid as well of that on partye as of that other And some were buryed and some brente Achilles was than sorowfull for the deth of patroclus That he coude not in no wyse be confortyd He made his body to be buryed in a moche riche sepul|ture and so dyde they of the other as of the kynge prothe+slaus and other kynges and prynes that were slayn. And they that were hurte and wounded / they dide do be helid duryng the trews / Pryant the kynge dide do burye his bastard sone cassibelanus ryght honourably in the temple of venus And toke grete sorow for his deth / and so dyde alle the other .
WHan cassandra herde the doell and sorow that the troians made for ^e deth of theyr frendes / she escried and sayd O meshau~t troians make sorow for your self For in lyke wise shall hit happen  come to yow as it is to your frendes / that shall be the deth / Alas why ne seche ye pees of ^e grekes / to fore er these euyllys come to yow and er this noble cyte be destroied / alas why ne yelde you not agayn helayne / that the kynge my fader dyde do ra|uysshe by force / wherfore ye shall alle be destroyed Amonge al~ these thinges / palamides murmured strongli of the seignourye of Agamenon / sayng that he was not worthy to haue so grete domynacion aboue alle the other And that he hym self was more worthy to haue the seig|nourye of ^e ooste than agamenon / and that he had not the ge and consente of the princes / but onely of thre or foure and than at ^t tyme ther was no thyng further proceded
WHan the trews were faylled / The kynge Aga+menon that had the Charge of alle the ooste or|deyned ryght erly hys bataylles / And gaf

the fyrst to Achylles / And the seconde to Dyomedes. The thirde to Menelaus The fourth to Menesteus the duc of Athenes And in alle the other he ordeyned good captayns and conduytours / Hector ordeyned his ba|tayllys in lyke wyse / And sette in the fyrst Troyllus. And in alle the other he sette good captayns and hardy And made alle the batayllis to yssue out / And he sette hym self in the fronte to fore / And whan Achylles sawe hym he ran ayenst hym / And hector ayenste hym That they smote eche other to the erthe ryght sore. Hector remounted fyrst and lefte achylles lyynge on the erthe / And smote in amonge the other in the moste grettest prees And he raught no knyght but he slewe hym or bete hym doun / And wente tourgh oute the ba|taylle all made reed of the blood of them that he had slayn / whan Achilles was remountid he threstid in amonge the Troians in the grettest prees and slewe many and he wente so ferre that he encountrid hector agayn / And he ran to hym / And hector to hym / But Achilles was born doun to grounde / And hector wolde haue taken his hors / But he myght not for the grete so|cours that achilles had / Whan he was remounted he assaylled hector with his swerd  gaf so grete strokes to hector / That nyhe he had beten hym / But hector gaf to hym so grete a stroke vpon the helme That he enfoundrid hym  made ^e blood sprynge out of his heed / Thus was the bataill mortall of the two knyghtes / and yf they had not ben departid that one or that other had be slayn / but theyr peple departid them / Than cam dyomedes to the ba|tayll and troillus on that other syde / Whiche smote eche other to the erthe / But dyomedes remounted fyrste.

And assayllyd troylus that was on foote that deffen|ded hym vayllyantly / and slewe the hors of dyomedes But theyr men remounted them bothe / two / by force And began agayn to medle / And dyomedes had ta|ken and ladde away troyllus / / yf the troians hadd not put hem in paryll of deth for to rescowe hym. And many of them were slayn / Than cam to the ba+taylle menelaus of the grekes side / And parys on the other side And than in goyng and comyng hector ces+sid not to slee and to bete doun knyghtes Than ther was a newe knyght named bretes that assayllyd hym fiersly / but hector by ryght grete yre smote hym vpon the helme so grete a stroke that he clefte his heed vnto the nombryll and he fyll doun dede / seeyng that The kynge archylogus his cosyn / And hector wold haue taken his hors / But the kynge Archylogus def+fended hym as moche as he myghte / And than hec|tor ran vpon hym and smote hym so harde that he smote his body in two peces notwythstandyng his harnoys / The kynge prothenor adressid hym to hec|tor that than toke no garde ne hede / And smote hym doun to the erthe / And hector Remounted anone vpon his horse And gaf to kynge prothenor so grete a stroke with all his myght that he clefte his bodye in to two halues / seeyng Achilles that was his pare~t or cosyn / that had so grete sorowe / that he and the kynge Archelaus contended to auenge his deth / But the troians cam vpon with so grete strength that the grekes muste nedes flee And the troians folowed hem. vnto their tentes And than the nyght cam on that made hem to departe And the troians retorned in to their cyte.



How the grekes helde parlament how they myght slee the worthy Hector / And how they retourned to the fourthe bataylle / In the whiche Parys and Mene+laus encountryd / And the kynge thoas was brought prysoner to troye.
AFter this bataylle whan the nyght was come. alle the kynges prynces and barons of the gre|kes assemblid at the tente of kynge Agamenon. And there helde they theyr parlament how they myghte slee hector / And they sayde well that as longe as he were a lyue and cam to batayll ayenst them They myght neuer vaynquysshe the troians / But he sholde to them doo grete domaige / And for to brynge this thynge to the ende / They requyred Achilles that he wold take hit vpon hym as well for his strenght as for his wisedom. And achylles enterprysed gladly / As he that wite that hector desired more his deth / Than the deth of ony other / And also hector was he / by whom he myght sonnest lose his lyf / After this counceyll they wente to reste tyll on the morn be tymes that they armed hem. And hector was than yssued oute of the cyte wyth his bataylles well and diligently ordeyned / And was hym self to fore alle other in the fyrste bataylle / And after hym Eneas And than parys And than deyphebus And after hym Troyllus / And after hym the other folowyng eche in his ordre / Than Ioyned alle the tro+ians to geder / And were more than an honderd thou|sande fyghtyng men / Tho began the bataylle horryble and mortall / Parys wyth them of perce that were good knyghtes slewe with shotte many grekis and hurted them Hector encountrid the kynge Agamenon

And bete hym and wounded hym sore And than achil|les assayllyd hector And gaf to hym so many strokes that he brake his helme / Than Eneas  Troyllus cam to the rescows of hector / And dyom cam vpon that adressid hym to Eneas and bete hym / And sayd to hym in mocquerye / Ha. A. good counceller that ga|uyst counceyll to thy kynge to offende and greue me. knowe thou for trouthe that yf thou come ofte in to these bataylles and that I may mete with the / that thou shalt not escape with oute deth.
AMonge these thynges hector assaylled achilles And gaf to hym so many strokes that he all to russhid and brke his helme / And wende to haue taken hym But the sone of guideus ran vpon hector And gaf hym so grete a strok wyth his swerd / That he hurted hym sore / And hector in his yre recountryd dyo|medes / And gaf hym so grete a stroke that he bete hym doun to the grounde / Than Troyllus alightyd and des|cended doun for to fyghe with dyomedes a foote / but dyomedes deffended hym so vayllyantly that hit was meuaylle / And beside them fought to gyder hector  Achilles / Than cam to the medlee all the kynges and prynces of grece wyth grete companye of men of Ar|mes / And fro the partye of the troians cam alle the barons that were comen to theyr ayde / There began meruayllously the bataylle / The kynge Agamenon And the kynge pandelus fought to geder / The kyng Menlaus recountrid parys / And they knewe eche other well / And Menelaus smote hym so harde wyth his spere / That he made hym a grete wounde and smote hym doun / wherof Parys was alle a

shamed / Vlixes bete the kynge Arastous And toke his horse that was good and sente hit to his tente. Polimytes ayllyd huppon the auncyent and slewe hym  and the kynge Archilogus fought to geder / Polidamas bete Palamydes and wounded hym sore / And after mocqued hym by reproche / The kynge Scelenus / And the kynge Carras encountrid to geder and Carras was sore beten and wounded Philemenus bete Anthenor / Philoteas and the kynge Remus fought to geder / the kynge Thesus and the kynge Eryalus fought to geder and bothe were sore hurte And the bastardes of kynge Pryant dyde mer|uaylles and slewe many Grekes And hurte many kynges / The kynge Thelamon and the kynge sarpedon Iusted so sore that one ayenste that other that they fylle bothe sore hurte and alle astonyed of the ang|wysshe that they had / The kynge Thoas and achilles that were cosyns assaylleden hector / And gaf hym many strokes And drewe of his helme fro his hede  hurted hym in many places And hector gaf to hym so grete a strook with his swerd ^t he cutte of half his nose.
TO the rescows of hector cam his bastard brethern that slewe many of the grekes  toke the kynge Thoas  wounded  bete the kynge Agamenon in suche wise that he was born to his tentes as dede / and the kyng thoas was ladde prisonner to troye / Menelaus conten|ded to greue parys / And parys shotte to hym an arowe enuenymed / and wounded hym in suche wise ^t he was born in to his tente / and as sone as menelaus had bou~den his wounde he cam agayn to ^e batayll for to greue parys yf he had fou~den hym / and he fonde hym  assayllid hym

But eneas put hym self betwene hem bothe / For as moche as Parys was vnarmed for to auente hym / and so eneas lad hym in to the cyte to the ende that menelaus shold not slee hym / Than hector assayllyd menelaus. And wende to haue taken hym / But ther cam to the res|cows grete plente of chyualrye of the grekes wherfore hector myght not come to his entente And than he threstid in and smote amonge the other And dide so moche with helpe of his folke that the grekes fledde / And than the nyght cam on that made the batayll to cesse.


How Pryant wolde that the kynge thoas that was prisoner shold haue ben hanged And how they retorned to the fyfthe bataylle / In the whiche hector slewe wih his hand thre kynges And how dyomedes slewe the sa|gittarye .
WHan hit cam on the morn be tymes the kynge pry+ant wold not that they shold fight that day but sente for his counceyll / That is to wete hector. parys Troylus and deyphebus / Eneas Anthenor and polidamas / And sayd to them / ye knowe how we holde prisoner the kynge thoas / That wyth oute cause that we haue deseruyd is come for to destroye vs / And therfore me thynketh good / That we make hym dye an euyll deth / What saye ye therto / Ha sire sayde eneas. The god forbede that your noblesse shold do suche a vilonye / Syn hit is so that the kynge Thoas is one of the most noble kynges of grece And that it myght happe that the grekes myght take one of oures / To whome they myght doo in semblable wyse / / wherof ye myght take the grettest sorowe of the world / So than hit is better as me thynketh that ye kepe ryght well

the kynge thoas wyth oute mysdoynge to hym / that yf by fortune one of oures were taken / we myghte make a change and take that one for that other / This coun|ceyll semed good to hector / But the kynge pryant sayd to them yet / yf ye do thus / hit shall seme to the grekes that we doubte vs and that we dare not put theyr folk to deth Notwithstandyng I shall doo by your counceyll This counceyll fynysshid Eneas toke Troyllus and Anthenor and wente to see helayne / whome they fonde in the grete halle of ylion wyth the quene hecuba / And many other noble ladyes where she made grete sorowe And they supposid than to haue conforted her / And so dyde the quene hecuba that sayde to her that she shold take no thoughte ne sorowe / And that they of the cyte shold well deffende them.
AMonge these thynges the grekes complayned hem sore of the deth of theyr frendes that the tro|ians slewe thus / And helde hem self chyldren that they had put hem in suche dau~ger / Wherof they had well passid and ben deliueryd yf they had had good counceyll / And yet hit happend that same nyght. That ther cam so grete a wynde and so grete a rayne that her tentes ware alle torned vp so doun to the er+the And semed that the world shold haue ended by the grete storme Wherof her sorowe doublid Whan hit cam in the morenyng Whan the tempeste was pas+syd they armed hem alle thurgh oute the ooste And wente hem ayenst the troians / / that tho were yssued to batayll Achilles adressid hym first to huppon that was grete as a geant and was kynge of larrysse.

And he smote hym so sore wyth a spere in the breste / that he slewe hym  bare hym doun to the erthe / hector slewe in his comyng the kynge Athomeus / Dyomedes slewe the kynge Antipus / Than the kynge epistropus and the kynge cedus assaylleden hector / And Epistropus Iusted ayenst hector And brak his spere vpon hym And said to hym many vilayns wordes / / wherof hector was angry And in his grete yre gaf hym so grete a strook ^t he slewe hym / And after sayd to hym that he sholde goo  saye his vilaynous wordes to them that were dede suche as he was wonte to saye to lyuyng men / Than was cedeus pas+syng sorowfull of the deth of his broder And amonestid a thousand knyghtis that he had for to slee hector. And they assayllyd hym anone  bete hym of his hors / And than they cryed to kynge cedeus for to sle hector. And whan hector apperceyuyd ^t / he gaf hym so grete a strook That he cutte of his arme wherof he fyll for the ang|wyssh that he felte / and anone hector slewe hym Eneas slewe in his medlee the kynge Amphymacus And ther wente to gyder alle the most puyssant of grekes and as+saylled the troians and slewe many of them And they wente by so grete force ^t they put the troians in a chasse in the whiche achilles slewe the kynge philis / Wherof hector had grete sorowe / and in his yre he slewe ^e kynge Dalpmee and the kynge doreus And thus by the puys|sance of hector The troians recouerd the felde and slewe many grekes .
THan yssued oute of troye the kynge epistropus with thre thousand knyghtes / and they foureyed and threstyd amonge the grekes That reculed in theyr comyng / / for as moche as he brought wyth hym a

sagittarye the same that afore is made mencion of / This sagittarye was not armed But he bare a stronge bowe and a turquoys that was full of arowes / and shotte strongly / Whan the knyghtes of the grekes sawe this meruayllous beste / They had no wyll to goo forth. And they that were afore began to wythholde hem. And wente aback Amonge these thynges hector slewe Polixenes the noble due that fought sore ayenst hym. And by the strenghte of the Troians and the horrour of the sagittarye the grekes were reculyd vnto theyr tentes / Hyt happend that Dyomedes to fore one of the tentes was assayllyd of the sagittarye / And had this beste to fore hym and the Troians on his back. And so behoued hym there to shewe his puyssance The sagittarye had tho shotte an arowe to hym And dyome|des that was not well assewryd auaunfid hym nyghe vnto hym / And gaf hym so grete a stroke wyth his swerde the whiche was not armed that he slewe hym. And at that tyme hit was paste myddaye / And than the grekes recoueryd the felde / And made the Troians to flee / And than entrecountryd Hector and Achylles And wyth force of theyr speres they faught bothe two And fylle bothe to the erthe / And as achilles was fyrst remounted / He supposid to haue ladde awaye galathe the good horse of hector But hector escryed to hys folke that they sholde not suffre hym to lede hym awaye Than they ran vpon Achilles and dyde so moche that they rescowed galathe  rendryd hym to hector that was right glad of hym At this medle was anthenor taken  sente to their tentes notwit~|standyng that polidamas his sone dyde meruaylles

of Armes for to resscowe hym / but he myght not / And thus they faught to grete domage of that one partye and of that other vnto that the nyght departed hem.


Of the trewes that were betwene hem / After the whiche began bataylle agayn fro morn to euyn wyth grete domage of that one partye and of that other / But the troyans loste more than the grekes.
IN the morn betymes the grekes sente diomedes and vlixes vnto the kynge Pryant for to haue tryews for thre monthes The kynge Pryant as+semblid his counceyll vpon this thynge / And eche man agreed saue hector That sayde that the grekes fayned to wylle burye theyr dede bodyes / by cawtele / And them lackyd vytaylle / And therfore requyred they tryews To the ende that duryng this tyme that they pourueye them of vytayll / And we dayly waste owres wherof we may sone haue scarcete / how be hit he wolde not abide onely by his entente ayenst tho ppynyon of so many wyse men And agreed with the other And the triews were accorded for thre monethes / This triewes duryng the kynge tho as was deliueryd in the stede of Anthenor that they held prisoner / whom they sente to the troians. Calcas that by the comandement of Appolyn had lefte the troians had a passing fayr doughter and wyse na|med breseyda / Chaucer in his booke that he made of Tro+ylus named her creseyda. For whiche doughter he prayd to kynge Agamenon and to the other prynces / that they wolde requyre the kynge pryant to sende breseyda to hym They prayde ynow to kynge pryant at the Instance of cal+cas / But the troians blamed sore calcas and callid hym euyll and fals traytre / And worthy to dye / that had

lefte hys owne lande and his naturell lord for to goo in to the companye of his mortall enemyes / Alleway at the petycion of the grekes the kynge pryant sente bre+seyda to her fader.
THe triews duryng hector wente hym on a day vnto the tentes of the Grekes / And Achylles behelde hym gladly for as moche as he had ne|uer seen hym vnarme / And at the requeste of Achylles. Hector wente in to hys tente / And as they spack totgeder of many thynge / Achylles sayde to hector / I haue grete playsir to see the vnarmed for as moche as I had neuer seen the to fore / But yet I shall haue more play|sir / Whan the day shall come that thou shalt dye of my hande / Whyche thynge I moste desire / For I knowe the to be moche stronge And I haue often tymes prouyd hit vnto the effusion of my blood / Wherof I haue grete Anger / And yet haue I more grete sorowe for as moche as thou slewest Patroclus hym that I moste louyd of the world / Than thou mayste beleue for certayn that be fore thys yere be past his deth shall be auengyd vp|on the / By my hande / And also I wote well that thou desirest to slee me / Hector answerd and sayde Achil|les yf I desire thy deth meruaylle the nothynge therof. For as moche as thou deseruest to be myn enemye mor|tall / Thou art come in to our lande for to destroye me and myne / I wyll well that thou knowe that thy wordes fere me nothynge at all / But yet I haue hope that wyth in two yere yf I lyue / And my swerde faylle me not / That thou shalt dye of myn handes / Not thou allonely but alle the moste grettest of the Grekes: For amonge yow ye haue enterprysid a grete folye

And hit may none otherwyse come to yow therby but deth / and I am assewrid that thou shalt dye of my hande Er I shall dye by thyne And yf thou wene that thou be so stronge that thou maiste defende the ayenste me / make hit so that alle the barons of thyn ooste promyse and accorde that we fighte body ayenst body And yf hit hap+pen that thou vaynquysshe me / that my frendes and I shall be bannysshid oute of this royame and we shalle leue hit vnto the grekes / And therof I shall leue good plegge And herein thou mayste prouffite to many other That may Renne in grete danger yf they haunte the ba|tayll / And yf hit happen that I vaynquysshe the / make that alle they of this ooste departe hens And suffre vs to lyue in pees / Achilles achauffid hym sore with these wordes And offryd hym to doo this batayll and gaf to hector his gayge / whiche hector toke and resseyuyd gladly .
WHan Agamenon knewe of this haytye and bar+gayn / He wente hym hastely vnto the tente of Achylles with a grete companye of noble men. Whiche wolde in no wise accorde ne agree to this batayll Sayng that they wold not submytte hem so many no|ble men vnder the strenghte of one man And the troians sayden in lyke wyse / Saue only the kynge pryant that wolde gladly agreed for the grete strenghte that he felte in his sone hector Thus was the champe broken / And hector departed  wente agayn to troye fro the grekes.
WHan Troylus knewe certaynly that breseyda shold be sente to her fader he made grete sorowe For she was his souerain lady of loue / And in semblable wyse breseyda louyd strongly Troylus.

And she made also the grettest sorowe of the world for to leue her souerayn lord in loue / Ther was neuer seen so moche sorowe made betwene two louers at their depar|tyng / who that lyste to here of alle theyr loue / late hym rede the booke of troyllus that chawcer made / wherin he shall fynde the storye hooll / whiche were to longe to wryte here / But fynably breseyda was ledde vnto the grekes whome they receyued honourably Amonge them was diomedes that anone was enflamed with the loue of breseyda / whan he sawe her so fayr And in ridyng by her side / he shewid to her alle his corage And made to her many promesses and specially desired her loue And than whan she knewe the corage of diomedes / she excused her sayng that she wolde not agree to hym ne reffuse hym at that tyme. For her herte was not disposed at that tyme to answere otherwyse Of this answere Dyomedes had grete Ioye. For as moche as he was not reffusid vtterly And he accompanyed her vnto the tente of her fader. And halpe her doun of her hors / And toke fro her one of her glouys that she helde in her handes And she souffryd hym swetely / Calcas resceyuyd her wyth grete Ioye And whan they were in pryuete betwene hem bothe. Breseyda saide to her fader these and semblable wordes
A A. A. my fader how is thy wytte fayllyd that were wonte to be so wyse and the moste honou+red and belouyd in the cyte of troye And gouer|nest alle that was wyth Inne And haddest so many richesses and possessions / And haste ben trayttre thou that oughtest to haue kepte thy Rychesses and def|fended thy contree vnto the deth / But thou louest

better to lyue in pouerte and in exyle amonge the mor+tall enemyes of thy contree. O how shall thys torne to the grete vylonnye: Certes thou shalt neuer gete so moche honour / as thou haste goten vylonnye. And thou shalt not only be blamed in thy lyf / but thou shalt also after thy deth and be dampned in helle. And me semeth yet hit had ben better to haue dwellyd oute of the peple vpon some yle of the see / than to dwelle here in this dishonoure and vylonnye. Wenest thou that the grekes holde the for trewe  faithfull / that arte openly false  vntrewe to thy peple. Certes hit was not only the god Appollo that thus abusid the / but hyt was a companye of deuyllys. And as she thus spack to her fader / she wepte strongly for the displaysyr that she hadde .
HA. a. my doughter sayd calcas than / wen~est thou it is a sewre thynge to despyte the answer of the goddes / and specyally in that thyngeth at towcheth my helthe. I knowe certaynly by their ans|wers that this warre shall not dure longe / that the cyte ne shall be destroyed. And the nobles also and the bur+geyses. And therfore hit is better for vs to be here sauf / than to be slayn wyth them. And than fynysshid they their parlament. The comyng of breseyda plesid moche to alle the grekes. And they cam theder and fested her And demaunded of her tydynges of Troye and of the kynge Pryant / and of them that were wyth Inne. And she sayd vnto hem as moche as she knewe cur|toysly. Than alle the grettest that were there promy|syd her to kepe her and holde her as dere as her dough|ter. And than eche man wente in to hys owne Tente

And ther was none of hem but that gaf to her a Iewell at the departyng / and than hit plesid her well to abide and dwelle wyth the grekes / and forgate anone the noble cyte of troye / and the loue of the noble troyllus / O how sone is the purpos of a woman chaungid and torned / certes more sonner than a man can saie or thinke Now late had breseyda blamed her fader of the vyce of trayson / whiche she her self excersised in forgetyng her contre and her trewe frende troyllus .


How the grekes  troians began the sixthe bataylle that dured by the space of thretty dayes in whiche were many kynges and prynces ded of that one syde and of that other / And how diomedes smote doun troillus of his horse and sente hit to breseyda his loue that receyuyd hit gladly .
AFter the thre monethis of triews passid / on the morn be tymes the troians apparayllid them to bataill / And whan hector had ordeyned all his batayllis / he yssued out fyrste and toke wyth hym fyf+tene thousand fyghtyng men. And troyllus folowed hym wyth ten thousand knyghtes. After hym cam pa|ris with thre thousand fyghtyng men and good archers and well horsed. After cam deyphebus with thre thou|sand fyghtars. After hym cam Eneas and the other alle in ordre so many that there were thys daye of the partye of the troians more than an honderd thousand good fyghtyng men and hardy / Of the partye of the grekes cam alle ther fyrste Menelaus wyth seuen thou|sand knyghtes. and after hym Dyomedes wyth as many / And than Achilles that lad also seuen thousand the kyng pampitus with a grete multitude of knyghtes

And the other after lyke as they were ordeyned. The kynge Philis aduaunced hym alther fyrste. And hec|tor cam ayenst hym so stronge that he slewe hym with his spere. Than ther roos a grete crye of his deth amonge the grekes. And the occysion and slaughter began so grete that hyt was an horryble syght to see as well of that one syde as of that other / The kynge Pampitus slewe many troians for to venge the deth of his vncle and assayllyd hector / but hector gaf hym so grete a strooke wyth hys swerd that he sleewe hym also. And for to avenge his deth the grekes slewe many of the troians / Achilles slewe many noble men / Amonge the whyche he slewe the duc biraon. and cuforbe that was a moche noble man. Hector was this day sore hurte in the visage / and bledde grete plente of blood. and wyste not who had doon hyt. And therfore the troians reculed vnto the walles. And whan hector behelde and sawe vpon the wallis the quene hecuba hys moder and his susters / He had grete shame. And by grete yre assayllid the kynge menon cosyn of Achil|les / and gaf hym so many strokes wyth his swerd vpon hys helme that he slewe hym seeyng Achilles / that wende for to haue enraged and toke a stronge spere. and ranne ayenst hector and brake hys spere vpon hym / but he coude not remeue hym. And hector gaf hym wyth hys swerd so grete a strooke that he maad hym to tomble vnder hys horse. And sayd to hym Achilles Achilles thou contendest to approche to me / Knowe that thou approchest thy deth. And as Achilles wold haue answerd to hector / Troyllus cam vpon betwene them wyth a grete nombre of knyghtes

and putte hym in the myddes of them / And there were slayn more than fyue honderd knyghtes of grece / and were put back by force / And menelaus cam to the res|cows wyth thre thousand fyghtyng men. And of the partye of the troians cam the kynge Ademon that Ius|ted ayenst menelaus / and smote hym and hurted hym in the vysage. And he and troylus toke hym and had lad hym away / yf dyomedes had not come the sonner with a grete companye of knyghtes / And fought with troillous at his comyng and smote hym doun and toke hys horse / and sente hit to breseyda. And dyde do saye to her by his seruant / that hyt was troyllus horse her loue / that he had beten hym by his prowesse / and pra|yd her fro than forth on that she wold holde hym for her loue and frende .
BReseyda had grete Ioye of these tydynges / and sayd to the seruau~t that he shold saye vnto his lord / that she myght not hate hym that wyth so good herte louyd her / Whan Diomedes knewe the answer / he was right Ioyous / and threstid in amonge his enemyes. But the troians that were stronger than they / maad the grekes to goo a back and recule vnto their tentes and had slayn hem all yf the kynge aga+menon had not socowred hem with right grete strength Than began the batayll horryble and mortall / And the grekes recoueryd the felde. And rebowted and put the Troians aback vnto theyr dyches. Than cam pa|lidamas to the rescows wyth a grete nombre and mul|titude of knyghtes and dyde fayre appertyses of warre Than Dyomedes adressid hym to hym / But he was beten of palydamas that toke the horse of dyomedes

and toke hit to troyllus that fought a fote / And he mounted anone ther vpon / Than cam Achilles ayenst troyllus whom troyllus receyuyd gladly / and bete doun Achilles / whiche remountyd lyghtly. and assaillid troyllus with his swerd And troyllus defended hym right vaylliantly. Than cam on hector And had at this stowre slayn more than a thousand knyghtes. but the grekes defended Achilles / that were so oppressid that vnnethe they myght defende hym no more / And he had ben slayn or taken / yf the kynge thelamon and the duc of Atthenes had not socourid hym. And they sette hym agayn on his hors with grete payne /  than the nyght cam on that departed them. They fougght thus thretty dayes contynuelly to the grete domage of bothe partyes And ther were slayn sixe of the bastard sones of the kynge pryant. And hector was hurte in the visage. And therfore the kynge pryant demau~ded trews of the grekes for sixe monethis. And they were agreed and accorded to hym .


How the grekes and the troians began the seuenth batayll / that dured twelue dayes And after began the eyghte batayll moche domageous for the troians. ffor hector was slayn by achilles And were rebowted in to their cyte by force of their grete domage.
DVryng the sixe monthes of the triews afor|said hector dide hym to be heled of his woundes And playd in the noble halle of ylyon that was / as the hystorye sayth the moste Ryall halle and fayre that was in alle the world. Thus duryng the trewes the kynge pryant dyde do burye hys sixe bastard sones eche in a sepulture by hym self ryght honourably.

Amonge all other thynges Diomedes suffred grete my sease for the loue of brescida / and myght not ete ne reste for thynkyng on her / And requyred her many tymes of her loue. And she answerd hym right wysely gyuyng hym hope wyth oute certaynte of ony poynte / by the whyche dyomedes was enflamed of alle poyntes in her loue / Whan the sixe monthes were passid they be+gan to fyghte by the space of twelue dayes contynuelly fro the mornyng vnto the euenyng. And there were many slayn of that one syde and of that other / And than cam a grete mortalite amonge the grekes in the oost of the grete hete that tho was / And therfore the kyng Aga+menon requyred tryews / whyche was agreed and accorded to hym .
WHan the triews was passid the nyght to fore Andrometha the wyf of hector that hadd two fayr sones by hym wherof that one had to name lamedon / and that other Astromatas. This Andro|metha sawe that nyght a meruayllous vysion. And her semed yf hector wente that day folowyng to the ba|taylle he shold be slayn. And she that had grete fere and drede of her husbond Wepyng sayd to hym pra|yng hym that he wold not goo to the batayll that day Wherof hector blamed his wyf sayng that me shold not beleue ne gyue fayth to dremes / / and wold not abyde ner tarye therfore / Whan hyt was in the more|nyng Andrometha wente vnto the kynge pryant and to the quene and tolde to them the veryte of her vysion. and prayd to them wyth alle her herte that they wold doo so moche to hector that he shold not that day go to the bataylle .
HIt happend that day was fayre and cleer And the troians Armed them And Troyllus yssued fyrste in to the batayll / After hym Eneas / Af+ter Parys Deyphebus Polidamas and the kynge sar|pedon the kynge Epistropus the kynge Croys / and the kynge Philomenus / And after alle the prynces that were comen in the ayde of the troians / eche man in good ordenance / And the kyng pryant sente to hec|tor that he shold kepe hym well that day fro goyng to batayll. Wherfore hector was angry and sayd to his wyf many wordes reprochable / as he that knewe well that this defence cam by her requeste / how be hyt notwithstandyng the deffence he armed hym. And whan Andromeda sawe hym armed she toke her ly|tyll chyldren and fyll doun to the feet of her husbond and prayd hym humbly / that he wold take of his Ar|mes / but he wold not doo hyt. And than she sayd to hym / at the leste yf ye wyll not haue mercy on me / so haue pytie of your lytyll children that I  they dye not a bitter deth. or that we shall be ledde in seruytude  bon|dage in to strange contreyes / With this poynt cam vpon them the quene hecuba  the quene helayne and ^e susters of hector / And they knelid doun to fore his feet and pra|yd hym wyth wepyng teerys / that he wold doo of his harnoys and vnarme hym and come wyth them in to the halle. But neuer wold he doo hit for her prayers. but descended from the palays thus Armed as he was And toke hys horse and wold haue goon to bataylle. But at the Requeste of Andromeda the kynge pry|ant cam rennyng anone / and toke hym by the brydell and sayd to hym so many thynges of one and other

that he maad hym to retorne / but in no wyse he wold not vnarme hym.
Amonge all these thynges the batayll was mor|tall of the grekes and of the troians / Diome|des and troyllus Iusted to geder / And at the as|semble they greuyd eche other / and wyth oute faylle eche of them had slayn other yf menelaus had not come and departid them. Than the kynge myseres of frygye bete menelaus and had taken hym whan eneas cam and distrowblid them. And wold haue slayn hym / But the sayd troyllus delyueryd hem and slewe many gre|kes. Than cam the kynge thelamon with thre thousand fyghtyng men / And stid in hys comyng ayenst poli|damas / / and put hym to the worse and vnhorsid hym. But troyllus socourid hym and made hym to remounte on his hors. After cam parys and achilles on the other side / that smote amonge the troians by so grete force|wyth the helpe of hys peple that he putte hem to the flyght vnto the cyte / And in this chasse achilles slewe margareton one of the bastardes of kynge pryant.
WHan hector knewe that Achylles had slayn margareton / he had grete sorowe And dyde a|none do lase on hys helme / and wente hym to the batayll that hys fader knewe not of. And in hys comyng he slewe two noble dukes grekes the duc Co|ryphus / and the duc bastidus. And he threstid in to the grettest prees of the grekes / and slewe as many as he coude areche And the grekes fledde afore hym that ther was none so hardy ^t durst abide his strokes / And thus the troians retorned and slewe the grekes on all sides

Than the grekes toke polidamas  had lad hym away ne had hector haue ben / whiche delyuerid hym  slewe many grekes. Than an Admyrall of grece named Leo|cides assayllid hector / and hector slewe hymanone.
WHan Achilles sawe that hector slewe thus the nobles of grece and so many other that it was meruayll to beholde / he thought that yf hector were not slayn that the grekes shold neuer haue victo|rye / and also for as moche as he had slayn many kynges  prynces. He ranne vpon hym meruayllously and a noble duc of grece with hym named Polyceus / and was come for the loue of Achilles / the whyche had promysyd to gyue to hym hys suster in maryage / But hector slewe the same duc anone seeyng Achilles Than Achilles wenyng to avenge the deth of policeus assayllyd hector by grete yre. But hector caste to hym a darte so fiersly / and made hym a wounde in his thye And than Achilles yssued out of the batayll and dide do bynde hys wounde and toke a grete spere in purpose to slee hector yf he myght mete hym. Amonge all these thynges hector had taken a moche noble baron of grece moche queyntly and rychely armed / And for to lede hym oute of the ooste at his ease / had caste his shelde behynde hym at his backe / And had lefte his breste dis|couerte and as he was in thys poynte and toke none hede of Achylles that cam pryuely vnto hym and putte thys spere wyth in his body / And Hector fyll doun dede / to the ground: Whan the kynge Menon sawe hector dede / He assayllyd Achylles by grete yre. and bete hym doun to the ground and hurte hym strongly.

And his men bare hym in to his tente vpon hys shelde. Than for the deth of hector were alle the troians discon|fyte / and reentryd in to theyr cyte beryng the body of hector wyth grete sorowe and lamentacion.


Of the ryche sepulture of hector and of the grete la|mentacions and wepynges that the troians maad for his deth / / and how palamydes was chosen duc and governour of the oost of the grekes:.
WHan hector was ded / and his body born in to the cyte / ther is no tonge that coude expresse the sorowe that was maad in the cyte generally of men  women And that ther was none but he had lever to haue loste his owen sone than hym / And they sayd all that from thens forth they had loste alle her hope and truste of deffence / And thus they demened ryght longe their sorowe / The noble kynges and pryn|ces bare the body vnto the palais of ylyon. Than whan the kynge pryant sawe hym he fyll doun a swowne vpon the body and was as ded for sorowe that vn|nethe they coude take hym awaye by force. There deme|ned grete sorowe all his brethern / what myght men saye of the sorowe that his moder the quene made / and after hys susters. O what sorowe maad hys wyf / Certes there can no man expresse alle the lamentacions that there were maad / And for as moche as the body myght not longe endure wyth oute corrupcion. The kynge pryant toke counceyll of many wyse maysters How they myght kepe the body of hector wyth oute corrupcion and wyth oute sepulture / And than he dyde do make by their counceyll a ryche sepulture vpon foure

pylers of gold lyfte vp an heyghte vpon the whyche was maad a moche ryche tabernacle of gold and of precyous stones. And on the foure corners of the tabernacle were foure ymages of gold that had sem|blau~ce of Angellis. And aboue the tabernacle ther was a grete ymage of gold that was maad after the semblance of hector And had the vysage torned tow|ard the grekes and helde a naked swrde and semed that he manaced the grekes. And ther was in the myddes of the tabernacle a place wyde. where the maysters set|ted and putte the body of hector in flesshe and in bones y cladde in his beste garementes and robes. And stood right vp on his feet / and myght endure so a longe tyme in that wyse with oute corupco~n by certayn scyence that the maystres had sette on the sommet or toppe of the hede of hector / that is to wete a vessell / that had an hole in the bottom / Whiche vessell was alle ffull of fyn banie And that stylled and dropped in to a place aboue on his heed / and so spradde doun in to alle the membres of the bodye / as well wyth Iu~ as with oute / and they fyllyd often tymes the vessell wyth bame. And thus the body myght not enpayre for the grete vertue of this bame. And alle the peple that wold see hector they sawe hym veryly in lyke wyse as he had ben on lyue. To thys sepulture the same maysters maad a lampe of fyn gold brennyng contynuelly wyth oute gooyng oute or quenchyng. And after they maad a closure / to the ende that no man sholde approche ne goo vnto thys tabernacle wyth oute lycence or leue. And in this temple the kynge pryant ordeyned and sette grete plente of prestes for to praye to the godde with oute sessyng

for hys sone hector / And gaf to them good rentes.
AMonge these thynges the kynge agamenon as|semblid all the kynges  most nobles of his ofte And said to hem in this manere / My frendes all ye kynges prynces  barons / We oughte to rendre and yelde thankynges to the goddes humbly  with deuoute herte / that our right hard enemye hector haue suffred to be slayn by the hande of Achilles / ffor as longe as he was on lyue we had neuer esperance to haue comen at the aboue of oure enemyes / what may the troians fro hens forth hope  truste / but onely their destrucco~n / And we may in shorte tyme hope ^e victorye vpon them / And for as moche as achilles is strongly hurte and may not goo to batayll / yf ye thynke good whylis that he may be heled  the other also that ben hurte / of whome we haue many / and also for to burye the ded bodyes / we shall sende to kynge pryant for to haue triews for two monethis. The counceyll semed good to hem. And they sente anone to the kynge pryant for tryews / and he ac|corded them for two monethis.
DVryng this triews palamydes murmured ayen of the seygnourye of agamenon. And as they were on a day all to gyder / and palamides spack of thys mater / / the kynge agamenon answerd to hym as sage in the presence of alle the other / and sayd to hym / Palamydes wenest thou that I haue grete Ioye of the seygnourye that was gyuen to me at the begyn|nyng and haue occupyed to thys present tyme / how well that hyt was not at my requeste and that I haue none avayll ne prouffit therby / but I haue grete charge and breke many slepes / to thende that by my neclygence

our ooste goo not to declyne ner disworshypp~e / And certes hit had well suffisid to me to haue ben vnder the governau~ce of an other. And I fere no man that may accuse me / that for ony euyll wyll or necligence I haue fayllid in ony thynge. And yf thou gauyst not thy consente to myn eleccion / thou darst not esmaye the therof / ffor thou were not yet at that tyme comen with the other. but hit was two yere after er thou cam. And therfore yf we shold haue abyden thy comyng we had ben yet at the poort of atthenes. And for as moche as thou shalt not wene that I haue Ioye of this office and am desiryng to haue this honour / I am contente that an|other be chosen and am redy to consente with the moste wys / Whan agamenon had thus spoken / ther was no further proceded ^t day in this matere. And than at euen Agamenon dide do crye in all the oost ^t eche man shold be on the morn betymes to fore his tente at ^e parlament.
WHan hit cam on the morenyng that they were all assemblid / Agamenon sayd to them. My brethern  frendes I haue had vnto thys tyme the charge of this werke with grete trauayll for to con|duyte hit well / In suche wise that by ^e suffrance of the goddes I haue brought hit to honour vnto thys tyme. And for as moche as hit is leeffful ^t an vnyuersite ans|were not alway to one maister / But that euery man en|ploye hym to the beste / to his power / for so moche than as I haue conduyted this oost longe tyme / I wyll that we chese another that may conduyte hyt dyscretely. Whan Agamenon had fynysshid his wordes / His sa|yng plesid to euery man / and they chee palamydes to be their duc  gouernour / And than he wente vnto his tente

Achilles that laye seke of his woundes was angry of the deposyng of Agamenon and sayd to fore alle them that wold here hyt / that Palamydes was no thyng lyke vnto agamenon in wytte and in discrecion. And that me ought not to change hym for palamydes / But for as moche as alle the peple had consentid / he abode therby also .


How the kynge pryant yssued to batayll for to a|uenge vpon the grekes the deth of his sone hector / and of the prowessis that he dide / and of the annyversarye of the sayd hector in whyche Achilles was esprysed with the loue of polixena the doughter of kynge pryant in suche wyse that he myght not dure ne reste.
WHan the two monthis of the triews were paste the kynge pryant desiryng to avenge the deth of his sone hector / Ordeyned with his owen per|sone his bataylles / and sette in eche batayll good con|duytours / and he hym self wente and ledde with hym fyve and twenty thousand of good knyghtes chosen of the beste / And dares sayth in his book that ther yssued out of troye that day an honderd and fyfty thousand men / Deiphebus was the formeste  than parys  after hym cam the kyng pryant / and troyllus / Eneas menon and polidamas. And wente hem vnto the tentes of the grekes / Palamydes had ordeyned his bataylles / than began the batayll grete and mortall / The kyng pryant smote doun palamides in his comyng / and after smote in to the grettest prees of the grekes  slewe many of them and bete hem doun / and dyde so moche in armes in that day that wyth grete payne a man sholde beleue hyt / 

that a man so Auncyent and olde myght doo that he dyde that day. The kynge sarpedon of tro~ye assaylled kynge Neptolonyus / that was a passyng stronge knyght. And kynge sarpedon was born to the erthe that defended hym vailliantly and gaf so grete a stroke vnto kynge neptolonyus that he maad hym a grete wounde in his thye. Than cam to the batayll the kynge of parce that remounted the kynge sarpedn wyth the ayde of his folke. Menelaus and the duc of atthenes assaylleden the kynge of perce and enclosed hym and his peple amonge hem / and slewe the kynge of perce / and maad the troians to recule by force / There dyde meruaylles of Armes the kynge Sarpedon.
THe kynge pryant and his bastard sonnes that than folowed hym cessid not to slee the grekes And ther was none that day that dide so moche in Armes as dyde the kynge pryant / For his sorowe and his yre maad hys strengthe to growe. Than the grekes auysed hem to take the way by whiche the tro|ians shold retorne vnto their cyte / They wente theder in grete nombre / And than whan the troians reculeden for to goo into that place / they fonde hem self in the myd+dell of their enemyes / tho began mortall batayll / And ther cam vpon them the kyng pryant with a grete nom|bre of fyghtyng men by one wynge / And parys cam a trauerse wyth grete foysson of good fyghtars And he had grete foysson of Archers that slewe many of the grekes and hurted hem / And they dyde so well / hat by force the grekes muste recule to theyr tentes.

And the troians reentrid in to their cyte / And the kyng pryant had the loos and pryse of this batayll. He sente to the grekes to demande triews / and they agreed and acorded to hym / but we fynde not how longe this triews endured .
AMonge these thynges the kynge pryant dyde do carye by land the body of the kynge of perse for to be buryed in hys contre / Tho was the we|pyng and sorowe grete in troye. And in especyall of parys that louyd hym strongly / Duryng thys triews the Annyversarye of hector approchid where me shold moorne fyftene dayes in grete sorowe. And after shold me halowe the grete feste funerall / as hit was that tyme the guyse and custome for kynges and prynces. And than duryng the tryews / the grekes wente and cam in to the cyte sauely / And so dide the troians vnto the ten|tes of the grekes: Than achilles had grete desire to goo to troye to see the cyte and the feste of the annyversarye of hector / whome he had slayn / And so he wente alle vnarmed vnto the temple of appolyn where as was the sepulture of hector / and he fonde there grete foyson of men and women that were noble and wepte and maad grete sorowe to fore the sepulture whiche a man myght see on all sides alle hool in like wyse as he was fyrst by the vertue of the bame / there was the quene hcuba / and polixena her doughter that was passyng foyre with a grete companye of noble ladyes / that had alle theyr heer spartled and hangyng aboute their shol|dres / And demened ryght meruayllous sorowe / And how well that Polyxena maad so grete sorowe.

yet she loste no thynge of her beawte / but semed ande shewid her self so fayre in alle her membres and so well colowred that nature formed neuer none more fayrer .
WHan Achilles had well aduysed and seen po|lixena / He sayd in hym self that he had neuer seen so fayre a woman ne better fourmed ne made / Wyth that she was one of the moste noble wo|men fo the worlde / than was Achilles shoten with the darte of loue / that stack hym to the herte so meruayl|lously / that he coude not cesse to beholde her / And the more he behelde her / the more he desired her / He was so asottyd on her / that he thought on none other thynge. but abode in the temple vnto the euenyng as longe as the quene was there. And whan she wente oute he con+ueyed his eye vpon polixena as ferre as he myght see her / And thys was the cause and the begynnyng of hys meschief / In thys sorowe Achilles retorned vnto his tente / And whan he was leyde to slepe / that nyght ther cam many thynges in his mynde and in his thoughte And knewe than the dau~ger where polixena had putte hym Inne. And thought in hym self that the moste stronge men of the world coude not ner had not mowe vaynquysshe hym. And the only regarde and syghte of a frayll mayde had vaynquisshid and ouercome hym And hym semed that ther is no medecyne of the world myght hele hym saue she / But he sayd my prayer / my strengthe / ne my rychesse may no thynge meue her to haue pyte on me / I wote neuer what devyll hath putte me in thys daunger to loue her that hateth me so sore / with mortall hate / And by right good cause / 

ffor I am comen hether for to sle her kyu~ne and cosyu~s and now late haue slayn her noble brother hector / Cer+tes I see no remedye / syn she is the moste noble and fayreste of the world. And than he torned hym to the walle and fyll in wepyng and drowned hym self in teres / and of necessite he muste thynke how he myght come to the loue of polixene / And so he coueryd and hydde his corage as well as he myghte.


How Achylles sente his secrete messanger vnto he|cuba the quene of troye for to requyre her doughter polix+ena and of the answer / and how for the loue of her the said achilles assemblid the cost of the grekes / and cou~|ceyllid hem to departe / and haue pees with the troians / 
THe nyght folowyng as achilles was leyde on his bedde  myght not slepe / he thought that he wold sende be tymes hys messanger vnto the quene hecuba for to knowe yf he myght fyne wyth her that she wold gyue to hym her doughter polixena to wyve / And he wold do so moche for her / that he wold make the grekes to reyse theyr syege and goo agayn in to theyr contrees hastely. And the pees shold be maad be|twene them. Alle thus as he thought in the nyght / he put in execucion and sente his trewe messanger vnto the quene for to requyre her doughter. And sayde to her the promyses that his lord had comanded hym / whan the quene had vnderstande the wordes of the messanger she answerd hym discretly / how well that she hated achilles more than ony man of the world: sayng frend as moche as is in me I am redy for to doo that thyng that thy mayster requyreth of me. So saye vnto hym

that I may not doo this thynge allone by my self. But I shall speke to my lorde and to parys my sone. And thou shalt come the thirde day agayn / and I shall saye to the thyn answere.
WHan the messanger herde the quene so speke / he retorned vnto his lord and said to hym all that he had founde / And thus began Achylles to haue hope to come to his entente. The quene hecuba wente her anone vnto the kynge pryant her husbond where as paris was / and tolde to them all that Achil|les had sente to her / And than the kynge henge doun his heed and was so a longe whyle wyth oute sayng of ony worde. And after said to his wyf. O how is hyt as me thynketh herde thynge to resceyue in to frendship and Amytye / hym that hath don to me so grete offence that hath taken away the lyght of myn eyen in sleyng my dere sone hector: And hath therin gyuen hope to the grekes to haue the victorye / But alleway for to es|chiewe the moste grete peryll / To thende that myn other sones lose not theyr lyf and that I may haue reste in myn olde dayes / I me consente with yow that he haue that he requyreth. Alleway forseen that he doo fyrste that thynge that he hath promysid wyth oute ony decepcion / Parys agreed to this thynge lyghtly / for as moche as in the promesses of Achilles was no thynge spoken of the quene Helayne :.
AT the thirde daye after / Achilles sente agayn hys messanger vnto the quene / And as sone as he cam to fore her / she sayd to hym. I haue spoken to my husbonde and also to my sone Parys of the requeste

and also of the promesse of thy lorde / and they be con|tente that hys requeste be agreed to hym. But that he doo fyrst that thynge / that he hath promysed. And so thou mayst saye to hym that he may come to the chief  ende of his desire / and that he conduyte wysely and se|cretly thys thynge as moche as in hym is: The messan|ger toke leue of the quene / and cam anone to hys may|ster / and counted to hym alle that the quene had sayd to hym. Than began Achilles strongly to thynke how he myghte performe this that he had promysed to the kynge Pryaut. And that hyt was a greuous thynge to doo / And that hit was not alle in hys puyssance. But hit is a propre vyce vnto the folissh lovers to pro+myse thynge that is hard to brynge aboute and dyffi|cyle / for to come to the effecte of their loues / In lyke wyse gloryfyed hym Achilles that for hys merytes or for gyuyng hys ayde to the grekes he wold make them to leue theyr syege / And than Achilles by the counceyll of palamydes assemblid all the kynges and noble men of the oost In parlament  sayd to them in this manere.
MI frendes that be here assemblid for to brynge this warre to the ende / thenke ye not otherwhile on your self. How by grete legyerte /  lyghtnes and folye and for to recouere the wif of menelaus we haue lefte oure contrees and landes / oure wyves and oure chyldren. And ben comen in to thys stronge lande / Where we haue dyspendyd the owrys folyly / and putte oure bodyes in daunger of deth and in grete In|fynyte laboure / And syn we haue ben comen hether ther ben ryght many kynges and prynces ded / And I my self haue shedde moche of my blood ^t neuer shold

haue happend yf we had not begonne this folye he laye is nothyng of so grete prys that ther behoueth to dye for her so many noble men / ther ben ynowhe in the world of as noble and as fayr women as she is / of whome me|nelaus myght haue one or two yf he wolde / And hit is not a light thynge to ouercome the troians / as they that haue a stronge cyte and well garnysshid of good figh|tars on horse backe and a foote / and hit ought to suffise to vs that we haue now slayn hector and many other of theyr nobles by the whiche we myghte now retorne wyth oure honoure and worshippe And yf we leue he|layne / haue not we exione / to whome helayne may not compare in noblesse.
THan meuyd them the duc of Atthenes And the kynge thoas / And contraryed strongly to the wordes of Achilles / And so dyde alle the other and sayd / That he sayde neyther fayr ne well / wherof Achilles had grete sorowe / And comanded to his my|rondones that they shold not arme them no more ayenst the troians And that they shold not gyue no counceyll ne Ayde vnto the grekes / Amonge these thynges vyta|ylles began to faylle amonge the grekes / and they had grete famyne / Than assemblid palamydes alle the moste nobles of the oost to counceyll And by theyr counceyll was the kynge Agamenon sente vnto the cyte of messe to the kynge thelephus / That charged and laded his shippes with vitayll and cam sauely agayn in to the ooste of the grekes / where he was receyuyd wyth grete Ioye. Amonge these thynges palamydes dyde theyr shippes do be reparyed to the ende that they myght be more redy yf they had nede .



Of the deth of deyphebus the son of kynge Pryant And how parys slewe palamydes / and how ^e troians rebouted the grekes in to theyr tentes  sette fyre on theyr shippis And how for alle these thynges Achilles wold not goo to batayll for the loue of polixene.
WHan the triews were passid they began to fighte as they had ben acustomed / deyphebus assayllid in his domyng the kynge Cressus of grece / And he adressid hym to hym gladly and Iusted that one ayenst that other / But deyphebus bete the kynge cressus dede doun to the ground / Wherof the grekes were sore trowblid and put hem to flight / But palamydes and Dyomedes cam wyth fyue and twenty thousand fygh|tyng men that resisted the Troians / wyth them was the noble kynge Thelamon ayax / that adressid hym ayen efronyus one of the bastard sones of the kynge Pryant / And smote hym so hard that he bete hym doun dede to the ground seeyng Deyphebus / that in his grete furour ran vpon Thelamon and bete hym and sore hurte hym / whan Palamydes sawe that stroke He toke a grete spere and adressid hym to deyphebus / And smote hym so harde in the breste that the spere entryd in to his body and the spere brake and the trouchon a bood in the body of deyphebus / Whan parys sawe his broder hurte to the deth he toke hym  ladde hym vnto by the gate of the cyte And toke hym to his men to kepe And as deyphebus opend his eyen  sawe parys his broder. He said to hym / broder shalt thou late me descende in to helle with out auengyng of my deth / I pray the as I may that er this trouchon betaken oute of my body / that thou

do so moche by thy hande that thou slee hym that hath slayn me / Parys promysid hym that he wold do his po|wer And retorned hym in to the bataylle ryght angry for his broder / And sayd in hym self that he desired no lenger to lyue but tyll he had auengyd the deth of his broder / And sought palamydes alle abowtes / And fonde hym that he foughte agaynst the kynge sarpedon that had assayllyd for to sle hym and palamydes def|fended hym vayllyantly / And in his grete fureur gaf so grete a strooke wyth his swerde to the kynge sarpedon that he cutte of his sholdre fro the body / And anone kynge sarpedon fyll doun dede.
PArys seeyng the grete domage that palamydes dyde to them / And also with his prowesse had putte the troians to flight / and cessid not to slee and smyte doun allway / he bende his stronge bowe And auysed well palamydes at leyzer And shotte to hym an arowe enuenymed / And smote hym in the throte / And cutte a two the maistre vayne / and palamydes fyll doun dede to the erthe. For whos deth the grekes made moche sorowe  lefte the batayll / and wente vnto theyr tentes And there helde a stale ayenst the troians and deffended them strongly / Than descended the troians a fote and en+tryd in to some of theyr tentes and toke alle that they fonde that good was / Than Parys and troyllus wente by a side waye vnto the porte / and dyde do putte fyre in to her shippis and brente so grete plente that men mighte see the flame ferre / To the rescowse of the shippis cam the kynge thelamon with a grete companye of fightars / and began the batayll horrible that there was grete occision and slaughter on bothe sides / And verayly the shippis

had ben alle brente / Ne had ben the prowesse of kynge thelamon ^t dide meruaylles with his body / And what some euer he dyde ther were more than fyue honderd shippes brente / There was grete occision of the grekes. And many were hurte / There was Ebes the sone of the kynge of trace sore hurte wyth a spere and bare the tronchon in his body / And in that poynte he wente to the tente of Achylles / where he restid hym that day And had reffused to goo to the bataylle for the loue that he had to polixene / Ebes reprochid strongly Achylles that he suffryd so destroye the peple of his contre and to dye vyllaynsly / And that he myght well helpe hem yf he wolde / And as sone as he had fynysshid his wor|des One toke oute the tronchon of his body And anone he fyll doun dede in the presence of Achilles.
ANon after cam fro the batayll oon of ^e varlettis or seruauntes of Achilles / And Achilles de|maunded hym tydynges. of the ooste / Ha. A Syre sayd he hit is this day myshappid to oure folk. For the grete multitude of troians that ben comen vpon them / And they haue slayn alle that they cowde mete wyth / And I trowe ther is not lefte oon at home of the men of troye / But that euery man is come to the bataylle / And therfore yf hit plese yow now whilis that the troians ben wery to come to the bataylle ye shall gete to yow perpetuell memorye of worshyppe and of glorye / For by your prowesse ye shall in lytyll space haue alle vaynquysshid hem / And they shall not dare deffende hem ayenst yow they ben so wery / Neuer wolde achylles for the wordes of his varlet ne for the deth of Ebes / / chaunge his corage.

But dissimyled alle that he had seen and herde for the grete loue that he had to polixene.
AMonge these thynges the bataylle was ryght sharpe And endured vnto the nyght to the grete domage of the grekes / And the nyght departed them / yet was not deyphebus dede / but he drewe toward his ende / And whan Parys and Troyllus sawe hym in that sorowe / They began to crye and make grete so|rowe / And than Deyphebus opend a lytyll his eyen and demanded of parys wyth a feble voys yf he were dede that had slayn hym / And Parys sayd to hym ye. Than deyphebus dyde do drawe oute the hede of the spere wyth the tronchon / And anone deyde / Wherfore the troians made grete sorowe / hit is no nede to holde longe parlament of the sorowe that the kynge Pryant his fader made ne his wyf and his susters / For hit was to moche and also for the deth of the kynge Sarpedon Of that other partye the grekes made grete sorowe for the deth of palamydes And made his body to be buryed worshypfully / And as they that myght not be longe wyth oute an heed and gouernour by the counceyll of duc nestor and of other / Agamenon was remysed in his dignyte as he was to fore.
THe day folowyng the troians erly in the more|nyng yssued oute of the cyte in good ordenance. And the grekes cam ayenst hem / tho began the ba+tayll mortall / And there was grete slaughter on bothe sides / But hit rayned so moche that day / that the grekes wythdrewe hem to theyr tentes / And the troians folo|wed after them / But the rayne was so grete that they muste nedes leue the bataylle and retorne in to theyr cyte.

On the morn betymes they began to fighte / And slewe that day many barons of the grekes and fought to the euen And so they faughte the space of seuen dayes con|tynuelly / where was grete occision of that one and of that other / And for as moche as the grekes myght not suffre the stenche of the dede bodyes / They demaunded triews for two monethis / whiche were accorded to hem by kynge pryant.
DVryng these triews the kynge agamenon sente the duc Nestor Vlixes  Dyomedes to speke to Achilles for to praye hym and amoneste hym to come to the ooste for to deffende hem ayenst the troians that slewe hem ouer meruayllously / whan they were come vnto hym / He resseyuyd hem wyth grete Ioye. And than Vlixes sayd to hym / Syre Achilles / ne was hit not by your entencion and also owres alle of this ooste to leue oure contre / And come renne vpon kynge Pryant and destroye hym and his by force of armes / And bete doun his cyte / Fro whens cometh this newe corage / After so many hurtes and domages as we haue resseyuyd in this lande by the troians that haue slayn so many kynges and prynces pylled and robbed oure tentes and brente oure shippes / And we were now in hope to haue vaynquysshid hem / After that ye by your force and valeur haue slayn hector that was the rray tutor of ^e troians and also now that deyphebus i dede The troians ben therwyth put vnder foote And than af|ter this that ye haue goten with so grete trauayll so grete worshippe and so good renome / wyll ye now lese alle attones and suffre your peple to be slayn cruelly that ye haue so longe deffended with the effusion of your blood.

Plese hit to yow fro hensforth to entretene  kepe your good renome / And defende your peple / That wyth oute yow may not longe defende hem ayenst your enemyes / to the ende that we may come to the victorye by your pro|wesse / By the whiche we hope to attayne and come.
SIre Vlixes sayd than Achilles / yf we be come in to this lande for tho causes that ye haue decla|red we maye saye that grete folye was amonge vs / that for the wyf of one of vs / that is to wete of syre Menelaus so many kynges and so hyghe princes be but in paryll of deth / had hit not ben moche more wysdom for the noble palamydes to haue abyden in peas in his con+tree / Than for to be slayn here / And other kynges and prynces in lyke wyse / Certes as the most grete partye of the worlde of noble men ben here now assemblid / yf they dye here / As many ben all redy dede / Hit muste nedes folowe that the contrees shall be Replenysshid and go|uerned by villayns / Hector that was so noble and so worthy / is he not dede / In lyke wyse I may dye lightly that am not so stronge as he was. And therfore how moche as ye requyre me to goo to bataylle / so moche payne and laboure lese ye For I haue no more entencion to putte me more in danger / And loue better to lese my renomee than my lyf. For in ^e ende ther is no prowesse But hit be forgoten Nestor and dyomedes contendeden ynowh to drawe Achilles to their quarellis But they myght neuer enduce hym to theyr porpose Ne the wor|des of Agamenon neyther And than he sayd to hem that they shold make pees with the troians to fore that they were alle slayn .
THan Retorned these thre prynces vnto Agamenon

and sayde to hym alle that they had founde in Achilles. And Agamenon dyde hit to be knowen to the prynces of the ooste / Whom he had assemblid for this cause / And demanded of them theyr auyse / Than stode vp menelaus. Sayng that hit shold be to vs now grete vylonnye to seke pees wyth the troians syn that hector  deyphebus ben dede / and slayn / and that for theyr deth The troians repute them as vaynquysshid / and that wyth out Achil+les they sholde well mayntene the warre agaynst the tro+ians / To that answerd vlixes  nestor And sayde / that hit was not meruayll though menelaus desired ^e warre for affeccion to recouere his wyf / And that troye was not so disgarnysshid but that they had a newe hector. That was troyllus / that was a lityll lasse stronge and worthy than hector And ther was also another deyphe|bus / and that was parys / whom we oughte to dowte as moche as the other And therfore they cou~ceyllid ^e pees And to retorne hom agayn to grece Than escryed ^e false traytour Calcas / whiche was traytour to the troians. And said ha. a. noble men what thinke ye to doo ayenst the coma~dement of the goddes / haue not they promisid to yow ^e victorie /  will ye now leue hit Certes ^t shold be grete folye Take agayn corage to you /  fighte ye agaynst the troians more stronglye than ye haue doon to fore And cesse not tyll ye haue the victorie that the goddes haue pro+misid to yow And than with the wordes of the said cal+cas / the grekes toke herte to hem / sayng veryly that they wold mayntene the warre ayenst the troians / whether achilles helpe hem or not  that for him they wold not leue


Of many bataylles that were made on that one side  of ^t other to their bothe grete domage /  of certayn triew

And of the deth of the noble Troyllus that Achylle slewe ayenst his promys / And drewe hym at his horse tayll thurgh the oost And how Achilles slewe ^e kynge Menon .
WHan the triews of two monethis were passid. They began to fyghte in bataylle right sharpely. There dyde troyllus meruaylles of Armes for to venge the deth of his broder / Dares saith in his book that he slewe that day a thousand knyghtes And the grekes fledde to fore hym / And the bataylle endured to the nyght that departed hem / The day folowyng the four|tenth bataylle began harde and sharpe / There dide dyome+des meruaylles of Armes / And slewe many troians and hurte hem / And adressid hym ayenst troyllus one tyme that smote hym so harde that he smote hym doun to the erthe And was sore hurte / And reprochid hym of the loue of breseyda / Than the grekes ran with grete strength and toke dyomedes vp  bare hym vpon his shelde vnto his tente / Menelaus that sawe Dyomedes so beten. Adressid hym ayenst Troyllus / But troyllus that had yet his spere hole smote hym so harde that he bete hym doun to the erthe sore hurte And was born in to his tente by his men vpon his shelde / Than Agamenon assemblid alle his strengthe / And threstid in amonge the Troians and slewe many / But troyllus cam ayenst hym and smote hym doun of his hors / but he was anon remounted by the helpe of his folk.
THus finysshid the bataylle that day And Aga+menon sente for to haue triews for sixe monethis Whiche were agreed and Accorded by kynge Pryant / How be hit that hit semed to some of his

counceyll ^t he shold not accorded them so longe / amonge these thinges breseyda ayenst the will of her fader wente for to see diomedes that laye sore hurte in his tente And she knewe well that troyllus that was her loue had so hurte hym / Than retorned in her corage many purposes And in the ende she sawe that she might neuer recouere / troyllus / and therfore as sone as diomedes were hole she wolde gyue to hym her loue wyth oute lenger taryyng.
AMonge these thinges the kynge Agamenon tra~s+ported hym vnto the tente of Achilles in the com|panye of duc Nestor / And Achilles receyuyd hem wyth grete Ioye / And than agamenon prayd hym that he wolde come forthon to the bataylle And suffre no more their peple thus to be slayn But achilles wold neuer molefye his corage for his wordes / How well for as moche as he louyd agamenon he agreed and con+sentid that his men shold go to batayll with oute hym. Wherof agamenon and nestor cowde hym grete thanke. And thanked hym ynowhe / And after retorned in to theyr tentes.
Whan the triews were passid agamenon ordeyned his peple to ^e batayll and achilles sente to hym his mirondones habilled ensigned with a reed signe for to be knowen Tho began the batayll harde and sharpe to the grete domage of bothe parties There troylus bete doun the duc of atthenes  slewe many of the miro~do+nes  hurte / and fought thus tyll ^e nyght departed them On the morn be tymes began ^e batayll sharpe  mortall The kynge philomen  polidamas toke the kynge thoas  had lad hym away / ne had ^e miro~dones haue rescowed hym / Than troylus smote in among hem  slewe many 

hurted hem / But they deliueryd to hym a grete assault and slewe his horse and wolde haue taken hym / Whan Parys and his bastard brethern smote in amonge hem and brake them / And remysed Troyllus on his horse. Than was ther there a fiers medlee / there slew ^e myrun+dones emargeron one of the bastardis of kynge Pryant of Troyes / wherof troyllus had grete sorowe And by the Ayde of his peple smote in amonge hem and slewe and hurte many / But they deffended hem vayllyantly and helde hem to gyder And troyllus cessid not to greue hem and to entre amonge hem often tymes / Tho cam to the bataylle Agamenon Menelaus Thelamon Vlixes and Dyomedes wyth alle her peple And began an harde medlee ther the grekes dyde the troians suffre moche payne / But troyllus socouryd hem vayllyantly / And put hym self alleway where as moste nede was and slewe and bete doun all that he fonde and dide so moche by his prowesse that the grekes fledde vnto theyr tentes And thelamon deffended hem vayllyantly / And made hem to recouere the felde by his prowesse / This was the sixtenth bataylle in the whiche dyed many knyghtes of bothe sides / Troyllus cessid not to greue the myrundones And ther was none so puyssant ne so stronge that myght dure agaynst hym / And dide so moche that he remysed the grekes to flighte / And toke an honderd no|ble men that he brought in to the cyte.
WHan the bataylle was fynysshid / ayenst the euen / the myrundones retorned vnto the tente of Achilles / And ther was founden many of them hurte / And ther were an honderd of hem dede / wherof Achilles had moche sorowe / And hit was nyght he

wente to bedde / And there he had many thoughtes / and purposid ones to go to the bataylle for to auenge the deth of his men And another tyme he thoughte on the beawte of polixene / And thoughte that yf he wente / he shuld lese her loue for alleway / And that the kynge Pryant and his wyf shold holde hym a deceyuour / For he had promysid them / that he sholde helpe no more the grekes. And how well he sayd in hym self / that he had sente his men in to theyr ayde / And in this thought a chilles was many dayes And in so moche that the day cam that the seuententh batayll began moche horryble / that dured by seuen dayes contynuelly where in were many Grekes sayn / wherfore Agamenon requyred triews / But the Troians agreed no lenger the triews but tyll they had buryed theyr dede bodyes / And whan the dayes were passid / The eyghtenth batayll began ryght aspre and fiers / Menelaus and Parys Iusted to gyder And bete well eche other / Polidamas and Vlixes faught to gyder a grete whyle / Menesteus bete doun eneas wyth Iustynge / The kynge Phylomenus bete Agamenon. And had sore hurte hym / yf Thelamon had not come on that smote to ground Phylomenus sore wounded Archylogus the sone of duc Nestor / assayllyd one of the bastardis of kynge Pryant named brum / And smote hym so harde wyth his spere / That he bare hym doun to the ground  slewe hym / Wherof the troians had grete sorowe / And aboue alle other troyllus was angry / that smote in amonge the grekes that he had put hem to flight ne had the mirondanes haue ben that resis|ted hym / And therfore troyllus smote in amonge them And slewe so many and bete doun / and dyde so moche

moche that he made the grekes to rebonte hem Into theyr tentes And descended a fote and entryd in to the tentes and slewe hem on alle sides / And there was so grete a crye / that the sowne cam to Achilles that rested hym in his tente / And demanded of one of his seruantes that was ther / what hit was / And he sayd to hym that the troians had vaynquysshid the grekes and slewe them with in theyr tentes / whiche myghte no more deffende them / And wene ye to be sewre here. Nay ye shall see anone more than fourty thousand troians that shall slee yow vnarmed / And at this tyme they haue slayn the most parte of your myrundones / And they cesse not to slee them And ther shall not abide one a lyue / But yf they be socouryd.
At these wordes Achilles quoke for yre / And sette behynde hym the loue of polixene / And dyde do Arme hym hastely and mounted on his hors and ran out all araged as a lyon And smote in amonge the troians and pershid hem slewe and hurte them in suche wyse that anone his swerde was knowen and the blood Ran in the felde alle aboute as he wente. Whan troyllus knewe that Achilles faught with his swerde he adressid hym to hym and gaf hym so grete a strooke that he made hym a grete wounde and a depe. That he muste nedes cesse many dayes of comyng to ba|taylle / Troyllus was hurte also of the hand of achilles But no thynge so sore / And bothe fyll doun to the ground / And the bataylle dured vnto the nyght. And on the morn they began agayn  endured vnto the euen / And thus they faught Sixe dayes conty|nuelly / Wherfore ther were many slayn on eyther

partye / The kynge pryant had grete sorowe of this that Achilles ayenst his promyse was come in to the batayll And wende that he had made hym to vnderstand thynge that was not / but rather for to deceyue hym than other|wyse And reprochid his wyf to beleue so lightly hym And polixene sorowed than ynowhe. For she was ple+sid than to haue had Achilles to her husbond.
AChilles amonge other thynges / dyde do hele his woundes / duryng sixe monethes of triews that they had goten / whiche woundes troyllus had gyuen hym / And he porposid to auenge hym / And that troyllus shold dye villaynsly by his hande / After these thynges the nynetenth batayll began wyth grete occision And afore that Achilles entryd in to the bataylle he assemblid his myrondones / And prayd hem that they wolde entende to none other thynge but to enclose tro|yllus and to holde hym wyth oute sleynge tyll he cam And that he wolde not be fer fro hem / And they pro|mysid hym that they so do wolde / And he smote in to the bataylle / And of that other syde cam troyllus that began to slee and bete doun / alle them that he raughte. And dyde so moche that aboute mydday he put the grekes to flight / Than the myrondones that were well two thousand fyghtyng men and had not forgete the comandement of theyr lord / threstid in amonge the tro|ians and recouerid the felde / And as they helde hem to geder  sought no man but troyllus / they fonde hym ^t he foughte strongly  was enclosid on all parties / but he slewe  wounded many. And as he was all allone amonge hem and had no man to socoure hym / they slewe

his horse / And hurte hym in many places / And araced of his heed his helme / And his coyffe of yron / And he deffended hym the beste wyse he cowde / Than cam on Achilles whan he sawe troyllus alle naked / And ran vpon hym in a rage / And smote of his heed And caste hit vnder the feet of the horse / And toke the body and bonde hit to the taylle of his horse And so drewe hit after hym thurgh oute the ooste / O what vylonnye was hit to drawe so the sone of so noble a kynge / that was so wor+thy and so hardy / Certes yf ony noblesse had ben in Achilles / he wold not haue done this vylonye.
WHan parys knewe that Achilles had thus vy|laynsly slayn Troyllus he had grete sorowe and so had Eneas and polidamas / And dyde grete payne to recouere his body / But they myght not for the grete multytude of grekis that resisted hem / On the other parte the kynge Menon deyde for sorowe for the deth of Troyllus / And assayllyd Achylles / And sayd to hym in Reproche / Ha. A euyll trayttre what cruelte hath meuyd the to bynde to the taylle of thy horse The sone of so noble a prynce as the kynge Pryantis. And to drawe hym as he were the moste vylayne of the worlde / Certes thou shalt abyd hit / And ran vpon hym And smote hym so harde wyth his spere in his breste. That he made hym a grete wounde / And after gaf hym so many strokes wyth his swerde that he bete hym doun to the ground / And than was the body of Troyllus Recoueryd wyth grete payne / The folke of Achylles Releuyd theyr lord and sette hym agayn on his horse. And as sone as his strength cam to hym agayn / he cam

agayn in to the stoure / And recountryd the kynge Me|non / And assayllyd hym strongly / And the kynge Menon defended hym vayllyantly and hurted Achil+les in many places / But there cam so moche peple on that one side and of that other that they were departed Than cam the nyght on that departed them  made them to cesse / And they faught thus the space of seuen dayes.
AT the seuenth day whan Achilles was heled of his woundes / Desiryng to auenge hym of the kynge Menon / sayd to his folke / that yf they myght recountre hym they shold holde hym in cloos lyke as they dyde troyllus / Than began the bataylle right Aspre / Achilles and Menon faught to gyde and by grete felonye bete doun eche other a foote / Than the my|rundones enclosid hym and toke hym by force that had no man to socoure hym / Than achilles seeyng the kynge menon in this dau~ger he ran vpon hym and slewe hym wyth grete martyre / But menon gaf hym to fore many grete woundes / wherof he laye longe after / Amonge these thynges menelaus and menesteus with grete com|panye of kynges and prynces and many fightyng men threstyd in to the stoure and put many troians to flight The whiche entred in to theyr cyte with grete myschief for as moche as the grekes chassed hem so nyghe that they slewe and hurted many of them.


How parys by the ennortement of hecuba his moder slewe achilles in the temple of appollo  the sone of due Nestor / And how parys and apax slewe eche other in bataylle.
FOr the deth of troyllus the kynge pryant his wyf  his children and all the habitantes of the cyte made

grete sorowe meruayllously / And they sayde alle. That syn they had lost hector. deyphebus and Troyllus that they had from thens forthon no more hope of theyr lyf than of theyr deth / The kynge Pryant demanded tryews / And hit was a greed and Accorded by the grekes / Duryng the whiche they dyde burye honoura|bly the body of Troyllus and the body of kynge Me|non / The quene myght not be appeasid ner conforted for the deth of her chyldren / and toughte in many maner wyses how she myght be auengyd on Achylles that thus had slayn her sones by cruelle tyrannye And fyna|bly she called parys sore wepyng  said to hym secretly these wordes / Ryght dere sone thou knowest how this traytte Achilles hath slayn by trayson forseen thy bre|thern my children / That were wyth the the so lace of my lyf / And for as moche as he hath so slayn hem by tray|son / me semeth good and also Iuste and right that he be slayn by trayson. And I shall telle the how hit shall be doon / The vnhappy man hath many tymes requyred me to haue to his wyf my doughter polixene And I haue gyuen to hym good esperane I haue purposed to sende to hym my feall messanger / And bidde hym come speke to me in the temple of Appolyn / And I wyll right dere sone that thou be there in awayte with a good companye of knygh+tes / And than whan he shall be comen that ye renne vpon hym  slee hym that he escape not wyth his lyf / Parys answerd that he wolde do this thynge in suche wyse as she had deuysed / And ther vpon he assemblyd twenty good knyghtes in whome he affyed hym moche / And wente hem forth in to the temple of Appolyn.
Assone as achilles herde ^e messanger speke that cam

from the quene hecuba / the foole beyng euyll counceyllid toke wyth hym the sone of duc nestor and wente bothe vnto the temple of Appolyn And as sone as they were comen / Parys and his knyghtes ran vpon hym / And Parys caste at hym thre dartes wherwyth he hurte hym sore / Achilles drewe oute his swerde that had no more Armour / and wrapped his Arme with his man|tell / and smote in amonge the knyghtes right fiersly and slewe seuen of them / But fynably the sone of duc nestor Archilogus and Achilles were bothe slayn with in the temple / And anone parys comanded ^t his body shold be caste oute to the houndes and to the byrdes / But at the request of helenus / they were put in a place to fore the temple for to be kepte / And the Troians had than grete Ioye / and saide forthon they had no charge of the grekes ne sette nought by hem / Whan agamenon knewe therof he sente vnto kynge Pryant for to haue the bodyes for to burye hem / The kynge Pryant made them to be deliuerid and were born to their tentes Tho aroose a grete sorowe amonge the grekes And sayd that they hadde alle loste. The duc Nestor myght not be comforted for the deth of his sone And they made for Achilles a noble sepulture. And by the consentement of kynge Pryant was leyde with in the cyte at thentre of the gate of tymbre.
AFter these thynges the kynge agamenon assemblid to his counceyll all the nobles of the coste / and she|wid to them / how for the deth of achilles the moste parte of them were disconforted and distalentid of the warre and therfore demanded them yf hit were good to leue ^e warre or to entertene  hold hit / Than was there among them dyuerse opynyons The some alowed the warre.

And the other blamed hit And finably they concluded alle to geder with one acorde to mayntene the warre / say+yng yf Achilles were fayllyd / yet for that sholde not faylle the promesses of the goddes. Than stode vp Ayax among them And said yf Achylles were dede / late sende for his sone whom the kynge Nycomedes his beell sire~ norisshith and techith the feet of Armes / For I trowe that wyth oute hym we may haue no victorye of the tro|ians. His counceyll semed good And by the agrement and will of euery man / Menelaus was chosen for to goo feche Neptolonyus sone of Achylles that was na|med other wyse Pyrrus.
AMonge these thynges whan the tryews were faylled the .xvi. day of Iuyn whan the dayes ben at the lengest of alle the yere. The troians be|gan the twentyth bataylle ayenst the grekes that was ryght sharpe and harde / this day wente Ayax by grete folye to bataylle wyth oute Armes and bare nothynge but his swerde / The troians that had loste theyr beste de|fendours were not than so hardy as they were wonte to be But for to saue theyr lyues they foughte myghtyly Parys wyth alle the peple of perse that were the beste archers slewe many grekes / And the kynge phylome|nus foughte strongly and they of paphaghone cam on that slewe many grekes and by fore made them to Re+cule / Menesteus Iusted agaynst polidamas / And bete hym ryght fiersly / And ran vpon hym wyth his swerde And had taken or slayn hym ne had the kynge phylo|menus deliueryd hym fro his handes / Ayax made this day meruaylles of Armes thus vnarmed as he was. And slewe many troians / And was not yet hurte In

the ende he smote in amonge them of perse that Parys ladde and slewe many of them and made hem to torne to flight / Whan parys sawe his peple thus slayn / He shotte to ayax an arowe enuenymed and raught hym betwene the racke and the sides And ayax anone felte that he was hurte to the deth And he thought he wolde not dye / tyll he had auengid hym on hym that had slayn hym And dyde so moche that he fonde parys / and sayd to hym / thou haste slayn me wyth thyn arowe / But to fore that I dye I shall slee the / And also by the and for thy cause ben many noble men slayn / And than gaf hym so grete a strook that he cutte a two his visage so depe that he fyll doun dede / to the erthe And ayax fyll doun after hym The troians toke the body of parys with wepyng teres / and bare hit vnto the cyte and they were folowed vnto the gates / The next nyght folowyng. Agamenon made the ooste to aproche ner to the cyte And there pyght her tentes And the troians kepte their wallys day and nyght / Than had the troians no more esperance ne hope of theyr lyues / whan they sawe that alle the sones of kynge pryant were dede And ther is no tonge that can expresse the lamentacions that the kynge pryant made and his wyf and his doughters / And the quene helayne for ^e deth of parys / And aboue alle other helayne made the moste grettest sorowe The kynge dyde do burye parys in a right riche sepulture And sette him in the temple of Iuno honourably .


 How the quene panthasile cam from Amazonne with a thousand maydens to the socoure of troye / And how she bare her vayllyantly / And slewe many grekis / And after was she slayn by pyrrus the sone of Achilles.
THan two monethis duryng hoole / the yates of troye were not opend. and the troians dide no thynge but goo in the cyte and lamented and sorowed. And the kynge Agamenon sente ofte tymes vnto the kynge pryant that he shold sende his men to batayll. But the kynge pryant doubtyng his destrucco~n wold not do hit for as moche as he abood the socours of the quene of Amasone / that was than on the way for to come vnto the socours of kynge pryant / Ama|zou~e is a prouynce / where ne dwellyd than but wo|men with oute men. And they were enduced to warre and to fyght. They had nyghe their contre an ysle where the men dwellid. And they were accustomed thre tymes in the yere to go thether / In Appryll. maye and Iuyn vnto the men for to haue theyr companye / And after they retorned in to amazonne / And they that were en|sayanted  were with chylde / yf they bare sones / they gaf hem sowke certayn tyme / and after sente hem to the faders / And yf hit was a doughter / they helde hit by them And dide do brenne of the right pappe for to bere ^e better the spere / and taught her the feet of armes. Of this pro+uynce than was lady  quene a moche noble virgyne / and a strong fightar that had to name panthasilee / And she louyd moche hector for his good reno~mee / Whan she knewe that ^e grekes had assaillid troyes with so grete strength / she wente theder for to socour hit with a thou|sand vyrgynes for the loue of hector / And whan she was comen  knewe that he was ded she made grete so|rowe / and praid to the kyng pryant that he wold late her yssue out to the bataill ayenst the grekes / and ^t she myht shewe to hem how her maydens coude bere armes.
AT the prayer of panthasilee on the morn by ty|mes was the gate opend And yssued oute the kynge philemen with all them of paphaghone Eneas  polidamas with all their peple / the quene pan+thasile wyth all her maydens / The grekes were anone redy and began the batayll harde  sharpe / menesteus adressid hym to panthasile / and she to hym and anon she smote menesteus to the ground and toke hys horse and gaf hym to one of her maydens. Than cam dyome|des ayenst her / and she receyuyd hym gladly. and smote hym so strongly that he was torned vp so doun fro his hors / And she toke fro dyomedes his shelde fro hys necke / and delyueryd hit to one of her maydens / whan thelamon sawe that she dide suche appertyses of armes He adressid hym ayenst her / and she ayenst hym. And thelamon was born doun to the ground / and had ladde hym in to the cyte / but that diomedes cam to his rescows with grete deffence And than she escryed her maydens. that smote in amonge the grekes / by suche sierte and yre that she  they torned hem in to flight / And they chassed hem sleyng  betyng hem vnto their tentes / and had slayn hem all yf diomedes had not so gretly resisted hem / that mayntened the stowr vnto the nyght ^t departed them And the quene panthasilee retorned in to the cyte wyth grete glorye / where the kyng pryant resceyuyd her with grete Ioye / and gaf her many fayr Iewellis  ryche / And hym semed well that she shold avenge hym of his so|rowes / They fought thus many tymes after / and so longe that menelaus retorned fro the kynge nycomedes And brought in to the ooste neptolonyus the sone of achilles otherwyse named Pyrrus.
THys Pirrus was receyuyd with grete glorye of alle the baron~s of the ooste and aboue alle other / the myrundon~es were passyng Ioyous and helde hym for their lord. Than was desyueryd to pirrus all the conduyte of the men of armes / And they made hym knyght by the hande of the noble thelamon that prayd to the goddes to gyue hym strength  corage in gyrdyng of his swerd / and that they wold gyue hym: vyctorye and honour for to avenge the deth of his fader / And two other prynces sette on the sporres of golde. And the kynge Agamenon gaf to hym alle the armes of Achilles his fader / and all hys other baghes and Iewellis. And for this newe knyght and feste of the Chyualerye the grekes maad many dayes grete gladnesse and Ioye .
AFter these thynges cam the day of fyghtyng  the bataylles were redy on that one side and on that other / Tho began the batayll ryght hard. Pirrus that wad armed with the propre armes of his fader recountrid polidamas in his comyng  had slayn hym wyth the grete strokes of his swerd that he gaf to hym. But the kynge philemenis cam vpon  delyueryd hym / And than pirrus smote fro his hors philemems / and had lad hym away / ne had they of paphaghone rescow|ed hym with grete trauayll / Amonge these thynges the quene pantasilee entred in to the bataill with her may|dens and smote in amonge the myrundou~es / and slewe many of them. There cam vpon the kynge thelamon that smote to the ground the quene pantasilee / and she gaf hym so grete a strook with her swerd ^t she bete hym doun to ^e erthe in like wise / And than her maydens releuyd her

and sette her agayn on her horse / and she smote in among the myrondones / that helde the kynge phylomems in grete dangier / and many she slewe and hurted of hem Whan Pyrrus sawe that his men were so euyll entre|tyd. He escryed to hem and sayd that they oughte to haue grete shame that suffryd hem to be vaynquysshid by women. And than he lefte the kynge phylemems. for to deffende his men ayenst the mayde / Than adressid the quene panthasilee nyghe to pyrrus / and reproched hym of that his fader had slayn hector by trayson / and that all the world ought to renne vpon hym / Pyrrus that had so grete sorowe at thyse wordes adressid hym ayenst her / And anone she bare hym doun to the erthe And than anone he releuyd hym  assayllid panthasile with hys swerd / And she hym by grete strength / And than was pyrrus remounted by the ayde of hys myron dou~es / Than cam to the batayll Agamenon. Dyomedes menelaus  menesteus ^e duc of Atthenes with all their peple / And so dyde all the other prynces and barons.
AMonge these thynges the kynge phylomems was delyuered of the myrondones and gaf grete thankyngys vnto the quene panthasilee / and sayd / had not she haue ben / he had ben slayn. Than cam to the batayll alle the troians / Tho began the showre sharpe and mortall / There recountrid Pirrus Glacon the sone of Anthenor and broder of Polidamas of an other moder / And gaf hym so grete a stroke that he slewe hym and fylle doun ded to the erthe / Than adres|sid panthasilee vnto pyrrus / and he to her / And bete doun eche other to the erthe / But they remou~tyd anone

And began the medle to geder agayn. Than cam vpon so moche peple of bothe partyes that they were depar+tyd. Polidamas for to avenge the deth of his brother slewe that day many grekes and hurte them. And dide so moche in armes he and panthasilee that they put the grekes to flyght. Than cam to the rescows pirrus / dio|medes and thelamon / and maad them that fledde to abyde and susteyne the stour / And so they dide vnto the nyght / that eche man wente in to hys place / They faught thus euery day a moneth longe in whiche tyme were slayn more than ten thousand fyghtyng men of bothe partyes / And panthasilee loste many of her may+dens / And whan they had restyd a moneth / they began the batayll ryght sharpe.
AT this assamble cam one ayenst an other of pir|rus and panthasilee / and brake theyr speres with oute fallyng / but pyrrus was sore hurte And the tronchon of her spere abode wyth in his body / wherfore the crye arose gretly amonge the grekes / And ran vpon panthasilee with grete strengthe / / and brake ^e lase of her helme And than pirrus ^t in his grete furour toke none hede to his wounde ne sette not therby that he had the tronchon in his body / but assayllid strongly panthasilee / that had tho her helme broken: And she wende to haue smyten hym / but pirrus araught her first And gaf her so grete a stroke wyth hys swerde / that he cutte her Arme of by the body / wherof the sayd panthasilee fyll doun dede / to the erthe. And pirrus that was not yet content / smote ^e body  cuttid in two peces And anon after for the grete effusion of blood that ran fro his wounde / he fyll doun as ded amonge his peple

And they toke hym vp and leyde vpon his shelde and bare hym in to hys tente / Than the maydens of pan|thasilee / for to avenge the deth of their quene smote in a+monge the myrondou~es by grete fureur / And slewe many and hurte but hit prouffited but lytill to the tro|ians / as they that were but afewe ayenste a grete mul|titude of grekes. And so ther were slayn of them of troye that day in the batayll more than ten thousand men. And the other withdrewe hem in to the cyte for to saue hem self. And shette  closid faste their gates / And had no more entencion to yssu oute to batayll ayenst theyr enemyes .


How Anthenor and Eneas spack to geder amonge them for to delyuere the cyte vnto the grekes by trayson. And dyde hit vnder symylacion of peas / and how the kyng pryant agayn said hem with som of his bastardis by grete and rude wordes.
THe troians had moche grete sorowe whan they sawe hem in this myschef ffor they had no more hope to haue ony more socours from ony place / And they contended to no thynge but to kepe well their cyte / and to garnyssh hem well wyth vytayll / ffor they fered ne dredde hem nought of ony assault / Amonge these thynges the grekes wold haue caste to the dogges the body of Panthasilee / for as moche as she hadd slayn so many noble men of grece / But Pyrrus agayn sayd hyt for the honour and worshyppe of nobesse. And fynably they concluded that they caste hit in a stagne that was nyghe the cyte / Anchyses wyth hys sone eneas / and Anthenor with his sone polidamas wente to counceill to gyder for to aduyse them / how they myght

haue theyr lyues sauyd ayenst the grekes / and theyr goodes / And rather than fayle hereof they wold betraye the cyte: Than they concluded that they shold speke to kynge pryant. And counseylle hym to take a peas and a poyntement wyth the grekes / In restoryng of helayne to her husbond and the do~mage that parys dide in the yle of cetharys. O yf the kynge pryant had ben so happy to haue doon this and had plesid the grekes at the begynnyng he had sauyd his lyf and hys wyues. And the lyf of all hys children. and had sauyd all the cyte and cytezeyns. And had eschewid all the mys|chyeuys that cam to them afterward / Therfore saie men in a prouerbe / that the concordes or peas sone taken ben good. ffor hit is an hard thynge for to repease suche maner domages to hym ^t hath avauntage of the warre ffor wyth grete payne wold the grekes haue ben con|tent that were tho at their aboue wyth these offres / for as moche as they had suffred so many hurtes and do|mages tofore troye / ffor them semed well that they were at the poynt for to destroye the cyte and all the In+habytau~tes / But whan the forsayd named traytours spake not of this mater / but to thende that vnder the co|lour of peas they myght betraye the cyte / / yf other wyse they myght not saue theyr lyues.
THan they wente hem to fore the kynge pryant And Amphymacus one of his bastard sones And spake there of thys purpose tofore many noble men of the cyte / And ano~n as the kynge pryant hadd herde hem speke of purchasyng of peas wyth the grekes. He thought that they sayd thys thynge by grete felonye And began to syghe / and said to them that

he wold be aduysed and take counceyll fyrse. And than they sayd to hym thus / yf thou wote here oure counceyll vpon thys thynge / take hede what we shall saye / And yf hit plese the not / vse the counceyll of other The kynge sayd that he wold well here theyr coun|ceyll / and wold wete what semed hem good And sayd to them / what semeth yow good. Than spack anthenor sayng / Kynge ye may not dissymyle but that ye and yowres ben envoluped wyth youre enemyes / And ben here by your cyte desyryng your deth and dest|ruccion / and ye may not yssue out. And they ben moo than fyfty kynges that desire no thynge but to destroye this cyte  yow and all them that dwelle therin / And ye may no more resiste them / and ye dar no more open your gates / and thus we late vs than be enclosid here in Me ought of two euyll thynges chese the lasse ylle / And therfore for to haue peas wyth the grekes yf ye seme good / We shall rendre Helayne to menelaus her husbond syn that parys is ded. And also restorre the do~mage that parys dyde to them in grece rather than we shold suffre oure self to be put to the deth .
AT these wordes arose vp Amphymacus one of the bastard sones of kynge pryant / And re|prouyd strongly the wordes of anthenor / and sayd to hym / What truste and hope may my lorde my fader and we haue in the / syn that thou oughtest to haue ferme corage vnto hym and thys cyte / And we see the thus recreaunt that oughtest to lyue and dye wyth vs / And thou counceyllet now to make peas wyth the grekes to oure grete dishonoure and shame.

Trewly to fore that the kynge shall do that / ther shall dye twenty thousand men / that thynge that thou coun|ceyllest the kynge cometh of trayson / Many other In|iuryous wordes sayd Amphymacus to Anthenor. And Eneas began to refrayne hym sayng / ye knowe well that we may not from hens forth goo to batayll ayenst the grekes. And we dare no more open oure ga|tes / Wherfore hit behoueth vs to fynde manyer to haue peas wyth hem. Than the kynge pryant with grete yre sayd to Anthenor and to Eneas. Haue ye not shame in your self for to speke so to me / ye do me dye for so|rowe / ffor all that I haue doon yet hetherto / I haue do~n hyt by your counceyll / Anthenor whan thou retornest fro grece where I had sente the for to requyre exyone my suster / counceyllest thou not me that I shold sende parys in to grece for to endomage the grekes / and I had neuer taken vpon me for to haue meuyd warre ayenst them / ne hadd thy false counceyll haue ben. whyche meuyd me to sende thether / And thou Eneas alas whan I sente the wyth parys in to grece: Were not thou pryn|cypall of the counceyll that parys shold rauysshe He|layne and brynge her in to this royame: And thou heel pest therto wyth thy persone. And yf thou woldest haue ben contrarye therto and haue lettyd hit. Helayne had neuer seen the walles of troye. And now after thys that they haue slayn all my Chyldren and haue doon so moche domage and hurte: ye counceyll me a|yenst honour to make peas wyth the grekes that haue me so cruelly destroyed. Certes your counceyll fynys|shith my lyf with grete sorowe and dishonour .
OF these wordes was Eenas strongly angry and wrothe / And answerd to the kynge wor|des sharpe and poyna~nt ynowhe / And depar|ted he and anthenor from the kynge evyll contente. And whan they were goon the kynge began to wepe as he that dredde that they shold delyuere the cyte in the handes of the grekes / whyche shold slee hym Incon|tynent. Than he thoughte that he wold doo hem dye fyrste / And callyd to hym Amphymacus and sayd to hym. Ryght dere sone I am thy fader / We ought to sup|porte eche other / vnto the deth / I knowe certaynly that Anthenor and Eneas contenden for to slee vs by the grekes and to delyuere them this cyte / And therfore hyt shold not be ylle doon to make them falle in to the pytte that they haue maad redy / to fore er they doo ony suche evyll / And I shall telle the in what manere / to morne at even they shall come to counceyll. thou shalt be enbusshyd here wyth Inne / and shalt haue wyth the good knyghtes / and whan they shall be comen / thou shalt renne vpon hem and slee hem. Amphymacus ans|werd vnto hym and sayd that he wold so doo wyth a good wylle / And how well ther were no moo at thys counceyll but the kynge and hys sone / yet ther is no thynge so secrete but otherwhile it is knowen. Ene|as knewe well the trouthe of thys thynge / And hyt was not knowen by whome he knewe hyt. And anone he and Anthenor and some other of theyr con|plices spack furth of the trayson of the cyte / And there they swore eche to other / And than they sayd yf they wente more to counceyll to the kynge / that they wold goo wyth grete companye of men of armes / ffor eneas

was of the moste noble of troye and moste ryche nexte the kynge / and beste of lynage. And myght wel compare to the kynge. And anthenor was also ryche and puyssant of frendes in the cyte. And theyr trayson was suche that they wold delyuere the cyte in the han|des of their enemyes / But that they and alle they of their lignage sholde haue theyr lyues and theyr goodes sauyd and herof they toke good sewerte of the grekes / 
AMonge these thynges the kynge pryant sente for anthenor and eneas to come to counceyll for to performe that thynge that he had purpo|sid. But they cam with agrete companye of men of ar|mes. And therfore the kynge sente to Amphymacus that he shold leue hys empryse: The daye folowyng the kynge sente for alle the troians to counceyll. And whan they were assemblid to fore hym: Eneas stode vp and amonested all them to make peas with the gre|kes / to whom all the other accorded saue the kynge / and than said to hym eneas / Syre kynge werfore consentest not thou with the other / for will thou or will thou not We shall trete for the peas / and shall make hyt magre the / Whan the kynge sawe that his contradicco~n myght no thynge auaylle / He had leuer consente hym with the other / than for to be the cause of his destrucco~n. And than said he to eneas / late hit be made as ye shall thynke that hit may be most expedient to the peas. and I shall holde hit agreable. Than by ^e counceyll of them all / Anthenor was chosen for to goo to the grekes and trete for the peas. And than the troians toke braunches of palme in syngne of peas. And wente vpon the walles of the cyte and shewid the sygne vnto the grekes the wihche

shewyd well that they wolde entende to the peas. And than was Anthenor aualed fro the wallis and late doun / and was presented to the kynge agamenon. And the kynge agamenon co~mysid all the werke to the kynge of Crete. dyomedes. and vlixes / And that all thoo thynges that these thre kynges shold besoyne with anthenor / Alle the grekes promysid to holde hyt agre|able / and sware hyt vpon theyr lawe .
WHan they were all foure assembled / Anthenor replenesshid wyth barate promysed to them to delyuere the cyte by trayson / for to doo with hit their wylle and playsir / Saue that they wold assure to hym and eneas and to theyr kynnysmen and paren|tele / and all them that they wold chese / And that ene+as shold haue all his possessions with oute ony lose. These thre kynges of grece swore to anthenor that ths they wold doo and holde / Than sayd one to that other that this thynge muste be scerete / vnto the tyme hyt be brought aboute / / And to thende for to kepe this trayson more secrete. Anthenor prayd to the grekes / that they wold delyuere to hym the kynge cassilus that was a moche auncyent man for to goo wyth hym to troye to thentente that he myght be the better beleuyd / and that he knewe the wyll of the troians / that is to wete yf they wold haue peas with the grekes / And also for to saye to them the wyll and desire of the grekes / And than demanded anthenor the body of panthasile / whiche the grekes agreed to hym gladly.
AFter these thynges Anthenor and the kynge Cassilyus entryd in to the cyte / And dyde hyt to be knowen to the kyng their comynge / On the

morn be tymes / the kynge pryant assemblid alle the troians for to here the answer of Anthenor / the whiche sayd to the kynge otherwyse than he had founden / ma|kyng a longe sermone for to couere wyth hys felonnye where he spack longe of the puyssance of the grekes  of theyr trouthe in theyr promesses / And how they had holden the tryews that they had maad lyyng to fore the Cyte. And had ben faythfully gouerned with oute brekyng of them. And after spake he of the ffe|blenes of the troians and of the grete daungers that they were Inne. And in thys concluded that forthon hit were prouffitable to seke peas and that they come therto. And sayd hyt coude not be / but yf they gaf a grete quantyte of gold and syluer vnto the grekes for to restore to them the grete domages and losses that they hadd in the warre / And after auysed the kynge and the other eche in hym self / for to employe hym in thys thynge wyth oute ony sparynge / And for as moche sayd Anthenor as I can not knowe at thys tyme alle theyr wylle / I wolde that ye wold late Eneas goo wyth me vnto them for to knowe better theyr wylle and to thende that they beleuyd vs better / Every man alowed the wordes of Anthenor. And than wente he and Eneas vnto the grekes / and wyth hem the kynge Cassilyus.
WHan the counceyll was fynysshyd and alle doon / the kynge Pryant entryd in to hys cham|bre and began to wepe right strongly as he that apperceyuyd well the trayson / And playned sore the deth of hys son~es and also the grete domage that he bare / And yet that worste is that he muste bye hys

peas of them that haue doon to hym all this do~mage and hurte / and to gyue to them alle the tresour that he had in longe tyme gadryd to gyder / / And to become poure in his olde auncyent dayes / And yet he is not sewre of his lyf / and muste nedes do the wyll of them that shall betraye hym. On that other syde whan helayne knewe that Anthenor shold goo to the grekes / she prayd hym right effectuously that he wold make her peas ayenst menelaus her husbond and that he wold haue pyte on her / And he promysid to her that he wold doo his power
WHan Eneas and Anthenor were comen in to the ooste of the grekes they treted of theyr tray|son / / wyth the thre kynges that the grekes hadd co~mysyd / / and there they maad the peas for helayne and toke good sewerte / After theyr parlament the gre|kes ordeyned that Dyomedes and Vlixes shold goo with them to troye / And they wente with them. Ther was grete Ioye whan they herde of theyr comyng in to theyr cyte / wenyng to the troians to haue had the peas that they had so moche desyred. On the morn erly by the comandement of the kynge pryant alle the troians were assembled at hys palays / And than spake vlix|es that sayd that the grekes demanded two thynges That is to wete restytucion of theyr do~mages / /  grete quantyte of gold and syluer / And also they demanded that Amphymacus shold be bannysshid for ever oute of the cyte of troye / wyth oute ony truste euer to come in agayn / Thys purchasyd Anthenor for Amphyma|cus for as moche as he had contraryed hym afore.

O how hit is grete paryll to speke lyghtly in tyme of parturbacion and sedicion. Than as they were alle as|semblid in parlament / they herde sodeynly a meruay|lous crye / and than dyomedes and vlixes hadd grete drede that the peple wold haue slayn them. And the other said that they wold take these two kynges in the stede of Amphymacus to the ende that he shold not be bannysshid. And alleway ther coude no man knowe n wete from whens this noyse cam ne wherfore / And therfore they departid and euery man wente in to hys place :.
THan Anthenor drewe a parte dyomedes and vlixes for to speke of their felonnye / Than sayd to hym vlixes wherfore taryest thou so longe  delayest to doo that thou hast promysed. Anthenor ans|werd and sayd the goddes knowe that Eneas and I attende to none other thynge / but to doo that we haue promysid to yow. But ther is a meruayllous thynge that enpessheth vs / and I shall saye yow / what hit is Certayn whan the kynge ylyon fou~ded fyrst the palays of ylion in this cyte / he establisshid in the name of pallas a grete temple in this cyte. And whan hit was all redy and made saue the tour a meruayllous thynge descendid fro the heuen. And that stack in the walle of the temple wyth in the grete Aroter / And hyt hath ben there tyll thys tyme / And none may bere hit away saue they that kepe hyt / The matere is of tree or of woode / but ther is no man that knoweth of what woode ne how hit is so maad But the goddesse Pallas that sente hyt theder gaf nto thys thynge a grete vertue / that is this That  this sayd thynge shall be with Inne

the temple or wythin the cyte wythin the wallis / the troians may not lese theyr cyte ne the kynges ne the ey|res / And this is the thynge that holdeth the troians in sewerte / And therfore they may the better kepe hyt / and this thyng hath to name palladyum / for as moche as the goddesse pallas sente hit / Than sayd dyomedes yf this thynge be of suche vertue as thou sayst / we lose oure payne. Than sayd Anthenor that they ought no thynge to esmaye them / for he and eneas attended for to fulfylle the promesse / ffor I haue but late spoken to the preest that kepeth hit / to thende that he delyuer hyt by stelthe. And I haue verray truste that he shall delyuere hit to me for a grete so~me of gold that I haue promysid hym. And assone as I shall haue hyt / I shall sende hit to yow oute of the cyte / and than we shall performe that thynge that we haue promysid to yow. And er ye goo hens for to couere and hyde oure werke I shall goo vnto the kynge pryant and shall do hym to vnderstande that I haue spoke longe to yow for to knowe what quantyte of gold ye demande / and hyt was so doon as anthenor had purposid.


How the trayttre Anthenor bought of the preest the palladyum / and gaf hyt to Vlixes and of the horse of brasse that was by the grekes brought to the temple of Pallas beyng full of men of armes / And how the cyte of Troye was taken and brente And the kynge pyant slayn ..
WHan Dyomedes and vlixes were retorned in to their oost. Anthenor wente hym vnto the kynge

pryant and said to hym that he shold assemble all his folk to counceyll. And whan they were alle comen. Anthenor sayd to hem that for to come to ^e peas of the grekes they muste nedes paye twenty thousand mar of gold and of good poys / and as moche of syluer / And also an honderd thousand quarters of whete. And this muste be maad redy with in certayn terme. And than whan they haue this / they shall sette sewrte to holde the peas wyth out ony frawde or malengyne. There it was ordeyned how this some shold beleueyed and whylis they were besy ther abowtes. Anthenor wente to the preest ^t kepte the palladyum / the whiche preest had to name Thoant / and bare to hym a grete quantite of gold. And there were they two at counceill Anthenor sayd to hym that he shold take this some of gold. wherof he shold be ryche all hys lyf / and that he shold gyue to hym the palladyum / and that noman shold knowe therof / ffor I haue sayd he grete fere and as moche drede as thou. that ony man shold knowe therof. And I shall sende hit to vlixes / and he shall bere the blame vpon hym. and euery man shall saye that vlixes shall haue stolen hyt / and we shall be quyte therof bothe two .
THoant the preest resisted longe to the wordes of Anthenor / but in the ende for couetyse of the grete some of gold that anthenor gaf to hym. He consentyd that he shold take the palladyum and bere hyt away. Than Anthenor toke hyt anone and sente hyt vnto vlixes / the same nyght / And after the wys ranne amonge the peple that vlixes by his subtilite had taken and born awaye the palladyum out of troye

O what trayson was thys of a preest / that louyd bet|ter for covetyse to betraye his cyte / than to leue the gold that was gyuen hym. Certes hyt is afoule vyce in a preest the synne of couetyse / But fewe haue ben to fore thys tyme / and fewe ben yet but yf they ben attaynte therwyth / wherof hyt is grete pyte / syn hyt is so that auaryce is moder of all vyces / Whilis that the troians gadryd to gyder their gold and syluer and put hyt in the temple of mynerve to kepe vnto the tyme that hyt was alle assemblid. Hit playsid them to offre  make sacrefyse to theyr god Appolyn / And whan they hadd slayn many bestes for their sacrefyce and had put them vpon the Awter / And hadd sette fyre on them for to brenne them / Hit happend that ther cam there two mer|uayllis / the fyrste was that the fyre wold not alyghte ne brenne / for they began to make the fyre more than ten tymes / And alway hyt quenchid and myght neuer brenne the sacrefyce. The seconde myracle or meruaylle was whan they had appoynted the entraylles of the bestes for theyr sacrefyce / A grete Eygle descended fro the ayer cryyng gretly and toke wyth his feet the said entraylles and bare hem in to the shyppes of the grekes.
OF these two thinges were the troians sore abas+shid esmayed / And said that the goddes were wroth wyth hem. And than they demanded of cassandra / what these thinges signefied / and she sayd to them / that the god appolyn was wroth with hem for theffusion of the blood of Achylles that was shedde wherwith his temple was defowlid violid / this is ^e firste / /  ye muste go fecche fyre at the sepulture of achilles

And lighte your sacrefyce ther with / and than hit shal~ quenche no more / And they dide so / and the sacrefyce brente cleer / And for the second myracle. she sayd to hem that for certayn the trayson was maad of the cyte wyth the grekes. Whan the grekes herde speke of these myracles. they demau~ded of Calcas what hyt signe|fyed. And he sayd to hem that the tradicion of the cyte shold come shortly. Amonge these thynges Calcas and Crisis the preest councellyd the grekes / that they shold make a grete hors of brasse. And that muste be as grete as myght holde with in hit a thousand knygh|tes armed. And they sayd to them that hyt was the playsir of the goddes. This hors made a passyng wyse mayster as Apius was. Whos name was synon / and he maad hyt so subtylly that wyth oute forth no man coude parceyue ne see entree ne yssue. But wythin hyt apperyd to them that were closid ther in for to yssue whan they wold .
WHan the hors was full maad. and the thou|sand knyghtes therin by the counseyll of Cry|sis / they prayed the kynge pryant that he wold suffre thys hors entre in to the cyte: and that hit myght be sette in the temple of Pallas / for as moche as they sayd that they had maad hyt in the hanour of Pallas for a vowe that they had maad for restytucion of the Palladyum that they hadd doon be taken oute of the same temple .
AMonge these thynges the prynces that were yet in troye / Whan they sawe that the kynge had so fowle and shamefully trayted with the grekes

they wente oute of troye and toke theyr men with them And the kyng philemenus ladde no moo with hym but two honderd and fyfty men and sixty maydens of ama|zone that were lefte of a thousand that cam wyth the quene panthasile And caryed the bodye of her with hem And rood so moche that they cam vnto theyr contre. Than cam the day that the grekes shold swete the peas faynedly vpon the playn felde vpon the sayntuaryes. The kynge pryant yssued out of the cyte and his peple And sware there eche partye to holde the peas fermly fro than forthon / And dyomedes swore fyrste for the grekes / / after whan they had broken the peas that they had treatid with Anthenor of that thyng that they made after / And therfore they mayntene that they were not forsworne by that colour / / And therfore me sayth in a proverbe / he that swerith by cawtele or malicyously / he by malice forswerith hym self / After diomedes sware in lyke wyse all the kynges and prynces of grece. And than the kynge pryant and the troians swore in good fayth as they that knewe no thynge of the grete trayson And after theyr othes thus maad / The kynge pryant delyueryd helayne to menelaus her husbond / and pra|yd hym and other kynges and prynces of grece that they wold pardon~e helayne wyth oute suffryng to be doon to her ony Iniurye or hurte / And they promysid hym faynedly that they wold do to her no wronge.
THan prayd the grekes that they myghte sette the hors of brasse wyth in the temple of pallas / ffor the restytucion of palladyum / to thende that the goddesse Pallas myght be to them aggreable In their

retourne. And as the kynge pryant answerd not ther|to. Eneas and Anthenor sayd to hym that hit shold be well doon / And that hit shold be honour to the cy|te / / how be hyt the kynge pryant accorded hyt wyth euyll wyll / Than the grekes receyuyd the gold and siluer  the whete / that was promysid to them. And sente hyt and putte hit in to their shyppis / After these thynges they wente all in maner of procession and in deuocyon wyth theyr prestis. And began with strength of cordes to drawe the horse of brasse vnto tofore the ga|te of the cyte / And for as moche as by the gate hyt myght not entre in to the cyte / hit was so grete / ther|fore they brake the walle of the cyte in lengthe and heyght in suche wyse as hyt entryd with in the town And the troians receyuyd hyt wyth grete Ioye. But the custome of fortune is suche that grete ioye endeth in tristres and in sorowe: The troians maad Ioye of this hors / / wherin was closid theyr deth. and knewe no|thynge of hyt: In this hors was a subtill man named synon that bare the keyes of the horse for to opene hyt. Whan the troians were aslepe and restyd hem in the nyght. And assone as they yssued out of the horse / they gaf a token of fyre to them that were in the feldes to the ende that they shold come in to the cyte for to putte hyt alle to destruccion.
THe same day the grekes fayneden to goo vn|to Thenadon: And sayd that they wolde res|seyve Helayne and sette her in saefte / be cause that the peple shold not renne vpon her for the grete evyllys and hurtes that were fallen for her. And thus they departyd from the porte of troyes wyth

her saylles drawen vp / and cam to fore the sonne go|yng doun to thenedon. Than had the troians grete oye whan they sawe the grekes departe / And they sowped that euenyng wyth grete gladnes / And the grekes as sone as they were come to thenedon / they armed them in the euenyng / and wente hem stylly and pryuely toward troye / / whan the troians had well sowped they wente to bedde for to slepe / than synon opend the hors and wente oute and lyghte his fyre and shewyd hit to them that were with oute / And anone with oute delaye / they that were in a wayte entryd in to the cyte by the gate that was broken for to brynge in the hors of brasse. And the thousand knyghtes yssued out / and where they fonde ^e troians they slewe hem in their how+sis / where they slepte as they that thought on no thinge.
THus entrid the grekes in to the cyte And slewe men and women and chyldren wyth oute spa|ryng of ony and toke all that they fonde in their howses / And slewe so many that er hyt was daye they had slayn moo than twenty thousand / they pyl|led and robbed the temples / the crye aroose moche hor|ryble of them that they slewe / Whan the kynge pryant herde the crye / he knewe anone that eneas and anthenor had betrayed hym he aroose anone hastely and wente hym in to hys temple of Appolyn that was wythin hys palays / as he that had no more esperance ne hope of hys lyf / And knelid to foe the hyghe awter. Cas|sandra fledde on that other syde as one that had ben oute of her witte in to the temple of mynerue / wepyng and demenyng grete sorowe. And the other noble women abood styll in the palays in wepynges and in teeris.
Than hyt cam on the morn the grekes by the con|duyte of Eneas and of Anthenor that were open traytours vnto theyr Cyte and also to theyr kynge and lord. cam and entrid in to the palays of ylyon where they fonde no deffence and put to deth all them that they fonde. Than pyrrus entryd in to the temple of Appolyne and fonde there the kynge pryant abidyng his deth / Than he ran vpon hym with a nakyd swerd seeyng Eneas and Anthenor that guyded hym He slewe there the kynge pryant tofore the hyghe aw+ter / whiche was all bebledd of his blood. The quene hecuba and polixene fledde and wyste neuer whyder to goo / and happend that she mette with Eneas. And than sayd hecuba to hym in a grete fureur Ha A felon trayttre / fro whens is comen to the so grete cruelte / that thou hast brought with the / them that haue slayn the kynge pryant / that hath doon to the so moche good and hath sette the in magnyfycence: and also hast be|trayed the contre where thou were born / and the Cyte that thou oughtest to kepe At the left late hit suffise the And refrayne the now of thy corage: and haue pyte of thys vnhappy polixene / to thende that amonge so many euyllis as thou haste done: thou mayst haue grace to haue doon one good dede as for to saue her fro deth er the grekes slee her / Eneas meuyd with pyte resseyuyd polixene in hys garde and putte her in a secrete place.
AMonge these thynges the kynge thelamon sette in the temple of mynerue in kepyng Andrometha the wyf of hector and Cassandra whom he fonde there

ylyon / And putte the fyre in the cyte on all partyes and brente all the noble cyte. Reseruyd only the howses of the trayttres whiche were kepte and reseruyd / Whan the cyte of troye was all brente / the kynge agamenon assemblid all the moste noble of grece in the temple of mynerue / And whan they were alle assemblid / He requyred them of two thynges / One was that they shold holde her fayth and throuthe to the trayttres. And that other was that they shold take aduyse by good manere for to departe the proye of the cyte / The answere was suche of the grekes that they wold hold her fayth to the trayttres as for the fyrst poynte / and as to the second / euery man shold brynge all the proye in comyn / And there to departe to eche man after hys meryte and deserte / Than spake Thelamon and sayd that me shold brenne Helayne / / for whome so moche hurte and euyll was comen / / and that so many wor|thy kynges and prynces had deyd fore. And ther was a grete murmure here vpon / that with grete payne Aga|menon vlixes  menelaus myght saue her / But vlixes with his fayre langage said to hem so moche of dyuerce thynges / that they were contente that helayne shold haue no harme / And than agamenon dide so moche to all the other that for his reward the doughter of kynge pryant cassandra was deliuerid to hym / Whilis that the grekes helde yet her parlament / cam to them Eneas  Anthenor And aduertysed hem how helenus had alway blamed the troians of thempryse that they made ayenst the gre|kes / And counceyllid them to put the body of Achilles in sepulture whiche they wold haue gyuen to the houn|des / and praid hem therfore that they wold saue his lyf

And hit was accorded and agreed to them. And than andrometha and helenus prayd for the two sonnes of hector / whiche were sauyd how well that pyrrus was ther agaynst and debated hit a lityll / but in the ende he agreed hyt: and so the Children were respited.
AFter this fureur they ordeyned that all the no|ble women that were escaped fro deth / shold goo whyder they wold freely / or dwelle styll there yf hit plesid them / And after these thynges doon / they purposid them to departe from troye. But the grete tem+peste began to aryse that tyme that endured a moneth hole to fore they myght goo to the see / Than demanded the grekes of calcas the cause of this enpesshement that dured so longe: And he answerd that the puyssanes Infernals were not yet oppesid of theffusion of the blood of Achilles / that was shedde in the temple of Appollyn for the loue of polixene. And for tappese the goddes / hit behoveth to sacrefye polixene for whom achilles deyde.
THan pyrrus enquyred dyligently where polix|ene was becomen / that was cause of the deth of his fader / ffor ther was no tydynge whether she was alyue or ded. Agamenon demanded of Anthe|nor. whiche said to hym that he knewe not where she was / Wherof he lyed not. And yet for to make an ende of all hys euyllis / he enquyred so moche that polixene was founden in pryson in an olde auncient towr where as she was putte Inne: And than he wente theder / And drewe her oute by force by her armes: And pre|sented her vnto the kynge Agamenon. Whyche anone sente her to pyrrus / the whiche sente her to the sepulcre

of Achilles for to be slayn / And as they ledde her / ther ne was kynge ne prynce but that he had grete sorowe for to see so fayr a figure of a woman to be loste / And withoute that she had deseruyd hyt / And had delyuerid her fro the hande of pyrrus / / yf calcas had not ben / that sayd alleway that the tempeste shold not cesse vnto the tyme that she were ded.
WHan the fayre Polixene was to fore the sepul|ture of Achilles / / she excusid her moche humbly of the deth of Achilles / and said that she was moche wroth and sory of his deth / And that the kyn|ges and prynces of grece suffryd her to dye ayenst Ius|tyce and wyth oute culpe or trespaas / how well that she had leuer haue the deth / than to lyve with them that had taken away and slayn all her frendes / And whan she had fynysshid her wordes / Pyrrus smote her wyth his swerd / seeyng the quene her moder / and slewe her cruelly. And cutte her all in peces / and caste hem alle aboute ^e sepulture of his fader / Whan hecuba the quene sawe thus her fayre doughter slayn / she fyll doun a|swowne / And after wente oute of her wytte and be|cam madde. And began to renne vacabonde and all ara|ged And assaylled wyth her teth and with her nay|les all that she myght come by / and casted stones and hurte many of the grekes / Than they toke her by force and ladde her in to an yle And there they stoned her to deth / And thus the quene hecuba ended and fynysshyd her lyf / And the grekes maad for her a noble sepulture / And putte her body therm. And her sepulcre appereth yet in the same yle vnto thys day .



Of the dissencion that meuyd because of the palla|dyum betwene the kyng thelamon  vlixes. And how eneas and Anthenor were exylled out of troye. And how the grekes retorned and of their adventures.
WHhylis that the grekes soiourned yet at troye And myght not departe for the grete tempeste / after that they had destroyed all the cyte / and taken all that they fonde that was good. The kynge thelamon made his quarell to fore the kyng Agamenon for the palladyum that Vlixes had / He that had not so well deseruyd hit as he hadd / that had so many ty|mes socowryd the oost with vytayll / and also had de|fendid hyt by his grete prowesse / where the oost of the grekes had ben in da~nger to haue ben loste ne had he ben / And sayd that he had slayn the kynge polmestor / to whome the kynge pryant had put polidorus hys sone And after had slayn the same polidorus / and hadd
brought a grete tresour that he fonde vnto the oost of the grekes. And also he had slayn the kynge of frygye. and brought his goodes in to the ooste. And aleggyd than that he had goten many royames to the seygnourye of grece / and other many vayllyances that he had doon to the honour of the grekes: And sayd more over that vlixes had in hym no prowesse ne vaillyance / but onely subtylte / and fayre spekyng for to deceyue men / / And by hym haue we goten to vs grete villonnye / that where we myght haue vaynquysshid the troians by Armes / Now we haue vaynquysshid hem by dysceyte and barate .
TO these wordes answerd vlixes / and sayd that

by  vayllyance and by his wytte the troians  vaynquysshid / And yf he hadd not ben / / the troians were yet in astate and in glorye in the cyte. And after sayd to Thelamon / Certes the palladyum was neuer nquerid by your prowesse / but by my wytte / And the grekes wyste neuer what hit was ne of what ver|tue hit is / / whan I dyde hem to knowe therof fyrste by the dylygence that I dyde therto / and whan I knewe that the cyte of troye myght not be taken as longe as hyt was in the same / I wente secretly in to the cyte / and dyde so moche that hyt was delyueryd vnto me. and after we toke the cyte / To this answerd Thela|mon Iniuryously / And Vlixes to hym in lyke wyse in so moche that they becam enemyes mortall eche to other. And Thelamon manacyd Vlyxes to the deth openly / And allewaye after that this mater was well discuted / Agamenon and menelaus Iugyd that the palladyum shold abyde wyth vlixes / And so~me sayd that they maad this Iugement for as moche as vlyxes by hys fayre spekyng had sauyd fro deth helayne / that Thelamon and other wold haue hadd ded / And of thys Iugement they myght not be contente / the moste grettest parte of the ooste sayd that Thelamon oughte better to haue the palladyum than vlixes / And therfore Thelamon sayd to Agamenon and menelaus many Iniuryous wordes. And sayd vnto hem that he wold be theyr mortall enemye fro than forth on / For thys sayd cause Agamenon. Menelaus and Vlixes helde hem alle thre nyghe to gyder / And hadd allewaye after wyth them grete nombre and multytude of knyghtes

Than hit happed that on the morn erly / that thelamon was founde slayn in his bedde / / and had woun in many places of his body / Werof roos a grete Crye in the ooste and maad grete sorowe / And gaf alle the blame vnto thre kynges to fore rehercyd / Pyrrus that louyd strongly the kynge thelamon sayd many Iniu|ryous wordes to vlixes and to the other / Than vlyxes doubted hym. And the next nyght folowyng he and his men entryd in to their shippes all secretly and wente to the see for to retourne homward and lefte wyth dy|omedes hys frende the palladyum: Pyrrus dyde doo brenne the body of thelamon and put the asshes in a ryche vessell of gold for to bere wyth hym in to hys contrey for to burye hyt honourably. The hate was grete betwene pyrrus and the kynge agamenon and hys broder / But Anthenor maad the peas / And after on a day gaf a dyner vnto alle the nobles of grece. And dyde do serue hem wyth many metes and gaf to them fayre yeftes .
AMonge these thynges the Grekes reprochyd Ens that he hadd falsyd hys othe / in that / that he had hyded polixene / And for this cause they banysshi hym oute of troye for euer / And whan Eneas sawe that he myght not abyde there he prayd hem moche that they wold accorde and agree that he myght haue the two and twenty shipp is that parys had with hym in to grece / and they agreed to hym his requeste And gaf to hym foure monethes space for to repayre them and garnysshe them of all that they lacked / Anthe+nor departed after from troye wyth hys good wylle / 

and ladd with hym grete nombre of troians / But the histye telleth not whether he wold goo / Eneas ha|ted than strongly Anthenor for so moche as by hym he was banysshyd oute of troye / / And was in grete so|rowe because Anthenor was not as well banysshid as he / And for this cause Eneas assemblid all the tro|ians / And sayd to them my frendes and my brethern. syn that fortune hath put vs in the state where we ben Inne / we may not lyue with oute heed and gouernour And yf ye wyll do by my counceyll ye shall chese An|thenor / / and make hym your kynge / ffor he is wyse ynowhe for to governe yow. Thys counceyll semed good to the troians / And sente after Anthenor that retorned anone vnto them. And assone as he was come Eneas assemblid grete nombre of peple / for to renne vpon hym / as he that was most myhhty in troye / Than the troians prayed hym that he wold cesse / / syn that the warre was fynysshid / And that he wold not begynne hyt agayn / How sayd Eneas shold we spare one so felou~e a trayttre / that by hys grete felonnye hath causid to dye polixene the fayre doughter of kynge pryant. And by hym I am bannysshid oute of troye that shold haue counceyllid and holpen yow / And nowe I muste nedes leve yow. Eneas sayd so moche to the troians / that they bannysshid Anthenor for euer oute of troye And constrayned hym anone to goo his way out of the towne .
ANthenor entryd in to the see wyth a grete com|panye of troians / And sayllyd so ferre that he fylle amonge men of warre and pyrates of the see / that ranne vpon hym and slewe many of hys

men and hurte And robbed and pyllid of his shyppis And in the ende Anthenor escapyd from them. and sail+lid so ferre that he arryuyd in a prouynce / named Ger|bandye / wherof the kynge Tetides was lord and kyng a Iuste man and a debonayre. In thys lande aryved Anthenor with a fewe shyppis and rested on the syde of a grete yle / that was nyghe vnto the porte / he sawe the contre fayre and puyssant of woodes and of lande and of fou~taynes / And there he edyffied a Cyte to hym and to his peple / and fortefyed hit wyth wallis and good towrys / And whan the troians knewe therof many wente theder and dwellid there with An|thenor / And the cyte grewe strongly and was full of peple / And anthenor governyd hym so wysely in this lande / that he was well in the grace of the kynge tety|des / And was the seconde after the kynge in hys roy|ame And named his cyte Cortirem erralum.
CAssandra that was lefte at troye had grete sorowe for the grete myschyefs that were fal|len to her frendes / And cessid not to wepe and waylle / And whan she had demeuyd longe her sorowe The grekes demanded her of theyr estate in theyr retour|nyng home / of whyche she sayd to them / that they shold suffre many paynes and grete paryllis er they were come in to theyr contre / And after she sayd to agamenon that they of his owne hows shold slee hym So hyt happyd to hym after and to all the other lyke as cassandra had deuysyd to them and sayd. Of the kynge thelamon were lefte two son~es. of two quenes

the eldest was named hermycides of the quene glausta And that other of the quene thymyssa had to name Anchisatus / These two children norysshid the kynge Theuter as longe tyll they were grete to bere armes.
AMonge these thynges Agamenon and mene|laus demanded congye for to retorne in to theyr landes / And the moste grete of the ooste gaf hem leue sore anoyed / ffor as moche as they had ben taken as suspecte of the deth of thelamon with vlixes / whiche was stolen away lyke a theef / wherfore he shewyd well / that he was culpable of the deth. Thus these two brethern putte hem to the see / for to retorne home thus in thentree of the wynter / whan the see is moste dangerouse / And anone after the other grekes entryd in to the see as fooles and euyll aduysed for the doubtes of the see / And had her shippes alle charged and laden wyth the rychesses / wherof they hadd despoylled the ryche Cyte and royame of troye. And for the grete desyre that they hadd for to ben at home in theyr contre They began to retorne thus as in the myddes of the wyn+ter / And sette aparte alle dangers and paryllis / whiche fyll vnto them gretly / And whan they hadd sayllyd foure dayes and foure nyghtes / on the fyfthe daye they were in the see of egee / Aboute the houre of none cam a grete tempeste. And supprysed them sodaynly wyth grete rayne and thonder / wyth wynde and with grete wawes of the see that casted her shyppes here and there in the see / And many brake theyr mastes and alle to rente theyr saylles / And whan the nyght cam whyche

was longe and derke / the shyppes lefte eche other / in saillyng to fore the wynde some in one place and some in an other / And many were brente with lyghtnyng and thonder ^t fyll vpon hem / And many were drow|ned
and sonken into the see. And they that were therm were ded drowned / and the grete rychesses of troye loste / Oyleus ayax that had .xxxii. shippes in this com|panye / had all his shyppes brente and perisshid / And he hym self by the forse of his armes and legges alle naked swymyng cam and arryued a lande all swollen of the water that he had dronken / And laye a grete while vpon the gravell / more hopyng the deth than the lyf / And anone after cam other in lyke wyse that were so sauyd with swymmyng / whiche were disconfortid in her maleheurte and vnhappynes. This myschief cam to this ayax for as moche as he drewe cassandra out of the temple of mynerue / And hyt happeth often tyme / that many be punysshid for the synne and trespace of one man .


How the kynge naulus and cetus his sonne dide doo perysshe in the see many shippes of the grekes in theyr re|tourne for the deth of his sone palamydes and of the deth of kynge Agamenon / and of thexyle of dyomedes and of hys Rapeell by egee his wyf .
IN thys tyme ther was a kynge in grece named Naulus that was moche Ryche  puyssau~t and hys Royame stode vpon the syde of the see of grece toward the South / In the whyche see were grete Roches and hyghe and many montaygnes and hylles of Sande whyche were ryght peryllous.

This kynge was fader of palamides / that was slayn to fore troye. And had yet a sone named Cetus. Ther was no~n in grece so ryche ne so puissant a kyng / Now were ther some euyll peple there that coude not be in ease with out greuyng  anoyng of other / whiche made the said kynge Naulus to vnderstand  to his sone kynge cetus / that palamides was not slayn in batayll so as the wys ran / but he was slayn couertly by vlixes and diomedes / Agamenon  menelaus had made  contryued a false lettre / where in was conteyned that palamydes wold haue betrayd the ooste of the grekes / whylis he was emperour of the oost / for a grete quantyte of gold And they made this lettre to be put by the side of a knyght that was slayn. And than vlixes tretyd in suche wyse wyth one of the secretayres of palamydes / for a grete so~me of money suche as the lettres conteyned. And this secretarye by thynduccion of vlixes put this some of mo|ney vnder ^e heed of palamides whilis he slepte / And as sone as the secretarie had said to vlixes that he had doon Than vlixes slewe this secretarye pryuely / And forth with dide so moche that this lettre cam in to the handes of the grekes / that redde hit / and were all abasshid whan they sawe in wryting ^e trayson / and that the some tey+ned in the same leye vnder his heed / They wente anone in to his tente / and fonde the trouthe of this thinge / And wold haue ronne vpon palamides / But he offred hym hymself to deffende hit ayenst whom ^t euer wold proue hit. And so ther was none that durst fight ayenst hym Than Vlixes dide so moche by hys fayre langage that this thynge was repeasid. And semed that hyt was beste that palamydes shold abyde in his dignyte.
AFter this thynge thus repeasid. Vlixes and dio+medes on a day dide palamydes to vnderstand that they knewe a pytte / where in was moche tresour. And that they wold that he had his parte / and that they shold goo the nyght folowyng / whan the nyght was come they wente all thre allone with oute more companye. And there offryd palamydes for to goo doun in to the pytte fyrste / and they sayd that they wold folowe. And assone as he was wythin / the o|ther two caste stones vpon hym so many that they slew hym / and after retorned to their tentes pryuely. This thynge sayd these enuyous men to kynge naulus and to Cetus of the deth of palamydes / And all was false / Than the kyng and his sone began strongly to thynke how they myght avenge hem of the grekes / they knewe well that the grekes were in her retourne in the herte of the wynter / And that they muste passe by his royame. And than the kyng naulus dide do crye in all his royame that men shold make grete fyres euery nyght vpon the montaignes that stode by the see side / And this dide he to thende / that whan the grekes shold see the fyre by nyght that they shold come theder / wenyng to fynde good ha|ue~n. And yf they cam they shold fynde harde rockkes  montaignes of sande / And so they shold not escape with oute deth / Hit was thus doon as naulus had deuy|sed. And ther were well two honderd shippis of the gre+kes broken ayenst the rokkes. And all they that were therin were drowned / Whan the other shippis ^t folow|ed them herde the noyse of ^e shippis that so were broken and the crye of them that were drowned / they torned on that other borde  made to see ward sauyd hem self

Of them that escaped were Agamenon. Menelaus. diomedes  so~me other that shall be named here after.
CEtus that otherwyse was callid Pellus had grete sorowe whan he knewe that Agamenon was escaped / And than he thoughte longe / how he myght avenge hym whan he shold be come home  descended in his owen lande / He dyde do wryte a lettre to Clytemestra the wyf of agamenon. And this lettre conteyned that for certayn Agamenon her husbond had espowsyd one of the doughters of kynge pryant / and that he louyd her strongly / and brought her with hym in to his contre for to make her quene. And to put oute clitemestra or to doo slee her / / And therfore cetus aduer|tysed her to thende that she myght pourveye for her self. Clytemestra anone beleuyd these lettres / and thanked cetus ynowhe / and thought that she wold avenge her of her husboond. This Clitemestra in the absence of her husbond louyd a man named Egystus by whome she hadd a doughter named Erygona / She loved more her loue gystus / than euer she dyde her husbond how well he was comen of lowe blood / But hyt is the custome of a woman that doth a mysse to take one to her of lasse value than her husbond is. She had tretyd with egistus that the fyrst nyght that agamenon shold lye with her / he shold renne vpon hym  slee hym. This thinge was doon in like wise as she had purposid / And Agamenon was slayn and put in the erthe / And anone after Clitemestra toke to husbond her loue Egystus kynge of mychames.
AGamenon thus slayn had a sone of thys clyte|mestra that was named horestes a yonge chylde

whiche that calcybus his parent toke in kepyng And toke hym from his moder / to thende that she shold not slee hym. And after sente hym to the kynge of Crete ydumeus that was hys vncle. And he had grete Ioye of hym and his wyf tharasis also that loved hym as moche as Clitemestra her doughter that hadd no moo children but her / and was a fayr yonge mayde / Thus as Cetus had wryton to Clitemestra the wyf of Aga|menon / In lyke wise he wrote to the wyf of dyomedes named Egee / and was doughter of the kyng polymy|tes of Arsymens / and suster of assandrus that retor|ned fro troye wyth dyomedes his broder in lawe / So hit happed in theyr retournyng that they descended in the lande of kynge Thelepus / whyche was euyll contente And wente ayenst hem wyth a grete companye of men of Armes and assayllid them. And they deffended hem strongly / and assandrus slewe many of the knyghtes of thelepus wherof he hadd grete sorowe and was angry. And toke a grete spere  adressid hym ayenst assandrus by so grete force / that he smote doun to the erth and slewe hym. Dyomedes for to avenge the deth of his broder in lawe slewe many knyghtes of thelepus. And recoueryd the body of assandrus with grete payne and bare hyt in to his shippe .
THus deyde assandrus / but hit was not reported thus to Egee hys suster / But hit was sayd to her that dyomydes her husbond had doon slee hym for to haue all the seygnourye of archimens wherof assandrus had that one half ayenst his suster egee / Of thyse tydynges  of them that cetus had wreton / Egee was moche wroth  angry with diomedes her husbond

And procured so moche ayenst her peple / / that they promysed her that they wold not resseyue no more dy|omedes for her lord. And thus whan dyomedes retor|ned. His wyf ne hys folke wold not resseyue hym but banysshid hym oute of the contre of Archymens for euer / Than hit happyd hym that he arryued in sala|myne / where the kynge theuter broder of the kynge thelamon was / And thys kynge had herde saye that dyomedes was culpable of the deth of his broder / / with vlixes / and than comanded that dyomdes shold be ta|ken. But dyomedes herde hereof And fledde thens / The kynge demephon and the kynge Athamas / whan they were arryued in theyr landes / were banysshid by sem|blable manere / Than they arryued in the lande of duc nestor / whiche resseyuyd hem wyth grete Ioye / These two kynges purposid to goo in to theyr landes wyth men of armes / and take vengeance on their peple / But the duc nestor blamed hem therof / And counceillid them that they shold sende fyrst to them for to amoneste and warne hem for to resseyue them for theyr lordes / And promyse to them grete fraunchyses and lybertees / And thus they dyde as nestor councellyd to them / And hyt was not longe after but theyr peple resseyuyd hem as a fore is sayd .
WHan Eneas was a biden at troye for to repayre hys shyppis / He suffryd many assault of hys neyghbours that wold haue taken to proye alle the remena~nt of the troians. And for as moche as he myghte not abyde there lenger than hys terme that was assigned vnto hym by the grekes / He assem|blid the troians. And counceyllid them that they shold

sende and fecche dyomedes to be their kynge / and sayd to hem that he wold come gladly for as moche as he was putte out of his contrey And he was wyse and hardy for to deffende them. They sente for to seche dyo|medes / and fonde hym. And he cam gladly and wyth a good wyll / and fonde the troians half assiegid of her neyghbours. And yet was Eneas there presente And appoynted hem to the batayll ayenst their enemyes And fought many dayes In the whiche diomedes dide many prowesses and slewe many of theyr enemyes and many toke and many he henge as theuys. At the fyfthe bataill dyde so moche of prowesse that he cam to the aboue of his enemyes. and were alle vaynquys|hid / wherfore ther was neuer after / none of heer neygh|bours ner none there aboute them / that durste assaylle the troians. And so they dwellid after in peas.
AMonge these thynges the Nauye of Eneas was redy / and than he entryd therm and An|chyses his fader / And toke the see / with many troians for to goo. whyther the goddes wold consente that they shold dwelle  abyde. And they fonde many peryllous aventures in the see / In the ende they sayllid in to the see of hellesponte / and sayllyd so ferre that they aryved in ytalye and in toscanne. Of hys aven|tures and how he arryuyd at Cartage / and after in ytalye / they that wyll see hyt / late hem rede virgyle in eneydos / and there they shall fynde hyt. Whan Egee the wyf of dyomedes knewe that the troians had res|seyuyd dyomedes / and that he hadd desconfyted her enemyes. She doubted that dyomedes wold take ven|geance on her / Than she counceyllid her wyth her peple

And by their counceyll she sente for to fecche hym / And he cam wyth a good wyll / and was resseyuyd wyth grete Ioye / And so in lyke wyse the other that hadd exyled theyr lordes at their retourn fro troye callid hem home agayn. And euery man retorned in to hys seyg|nourye of them that escaped fro the paryllis of the see.


How Horrostes sone of kyng Agamenon toke cru|ell vengeance of the deth of hys fader / And how the kynge vlixes after many dyuerse adventures retorned to his seygnourye and royame.
WHan Horrestes the sone of kynge Agamenon that was / had foure  twenty yere of age / The kynge ydumeus that had nourysshid hym made hym knyghte and maad a grete feste of the newe chy|ualerye of horrestes. And than horrestes prayd hym that he wold helpe hym wyth his peple to take vengeance of the deth of his fader / and to recouere his lande / The kynge ydumeus delyuerd to hym a thousand knyghtes wyse and hardy / And horrestes assemblid an other thousand in many places / And after toke his way vn|to mychames / And in goyng thederward passid by the cyte of trasem / wherof the kynge forensis was lord that halpe hym wyth thre honderd knyghtes / for as moche as he hated egystus / by cause that he sayd egys|tus had trouth plight hys doughter / / whyche had lefte her for the loue of Clytemestra / and so he wente with horrestes for to make warre to egistus / And than whan they sette forth on theyr way hyt was at thentre of the moneth of May / Whan they cam to fore Mycha|mes / They that were wyth Inne the cyte wold not yelde hit vnto hym. Than he sette siege round aboute hit

Horestes had an answer of the goddes that he hym self shold take vengeance of his moder by hys handes / not|wythstandyng she was closid in the cyte / Egisteus was not than there / but he was goon for to feche so|cours and for to assamble knyghtes for to deffende his cyte ayenst the comyng of horestes hys enemye / At the Instygacion and counceyll of Clitemestra hys wyf. And anone as horestes knewe therof. He sette grete nombre of knyghtes in a wayte for to take hym at his retournyng / And than he maad the cyte to be assayllid often tymes / And for as moche as hit was not well garnysshid / Horestes toke hit wyth assault the .xv. daye of his siege / And co~mysyd hys peple to kepe the yates / to thende that none shold yssue out ne entre / And after wente hym to the palays ryall / and made to take his moder and sette her in swre pryson / and toke and dyde to be taken alle them that he felte culpable of the deth of his fader / and that had be rebell ayenst hym / And that same day Egistus retournyd wyth hys socours. And fyll in the handes of the peple of horestes ^t slewe all his peple and ke hym a lyue and brought hym to horestes / his handes bounden behynde hym at his backe.
IN the morn Horestes dide his moder Clitemestra be brought to fore hym all naked her handes boun|den / And assone as he sawe her / he ran vpon her with his naked swerd / and cutte of her two pappes / and after slewe her with his handes / and maad her to be drawen to the feldes for the houndes to ete and deuowre and to the byrdes. After he dyde do dispoylle egistus and do drawe hym thurgh the cyte. And after dide do hange

hym on a forke. And in lyke wyse he dyde to alle them that were culpable of the deth of hys fader / Thus ven+gid horrestes the deth of the good kynge Agamenon his fader :.
MEnelaus after the grete paryllis of the see / ary|ued in Crete / And wyth hym dame helayne hys wyf / Whan he knewe of the deth of hys broder / And of the vengeance that the sayd horrestes had taken. He was euyll contente wyth his nevewe that had taken so cruell vengeance on his moder / There came to menelaus the grettest lordes of grece for to see helayne / for whom the grekes had suffrid so many hur+tes and do~mages / And from Crete menelaus wente and aryued at the poort of michames / And sayd to horrestes that he was not worthy to be kynge and lord for as moche as he hadd taken so cruell vengeance on his moder / And for to avenge thys tyrannye / Mene|laus assemblid all the nobles of grece at Atthenes / to thende that horestes shold be declarid as pryuyd of his seygnourye for the cruelte that he had doon ayenst hys moder / Horestes excusid hym therof / / sayng that / that he had doon the goddes had comanded hym. Than avau~|ced hym the due of atthenes / and offryd for horestes that yf ther were ony man that wold proue that hores|tes had not done well / that he wold deffende hym / There was none that wold preue hit. And therfore was hor+restes assaylled and restablisshyd in hys seygnourye And bare heuy herte to his vncle menelaus for this cause But the kynge ydumeus cam to mychames and maad the peas betwene hem bothe / And than horestes toke her|mone the doughter of menelaus  of helayne to his wyf

Erigone the doughter of Egistus and of Clytemestra had so grete sorowe whan she sawe horestes in so grete seygnourye that she henge and strangled her self.
AMonge these thynges Vlixes cam in to Crete wyth two marchau~tes shippes that he had hy|red / ffor he had loste all his shippes / and alle that was with Inne them by pyrates and robburs of the see that had robbyd hym. And after that he was so robbed hyt myshappid hym that he arryued in the lande of kynge thelamon / And there was taken and loste the resydue of his goodes / And they of the contre had hanged hym / but by the Industrye and subtylte of his wytte he escaped right poure / After that he aryuyd in the lande of kynge naulus whiche hated hym for the deth of his sone palamydes / alleway he dide so moche by his connyng  witte / that he escaped moche pourly And so he cam  aryued in Crete / The kynge ydumeus resseyuyd hym Ioyously ynowh / / but he was moche es+mayed that he sawe hym so poure / And demau~ded hym of his aduentures what they were syn he departed fro troye / Than vlixes tolde hym all a longe many daun|gers and meruaylles. And how he had loste his men  his grete rychesse that he brought fro troye / The kyng ydumeus had pyte on vlixes / And honoured hym moche as longe as he wold abide there with hym / And whan he departed he gaf to hym two shippes full of all suche thynge as they behoved for to goo with alle in to hys contrey / And gaf to hym other goodes ynowhe / And prayd hym that he wold goo by the royame of alcy+nous that was in hys waye / And that he wold see hym gladly .
THus departed vlixes fro crete / And wente hym to kyng Alcynous wiche resseyuyd hym wyth grete Ioye. And herde hym gladly speke / There herde vlixes tydynges of Penolope his wyf how many notable men had requyred her / But she wold neuer entende to man / she was so moche chaste. And how certayn sones helde partye of his lande ayenst the will of his wyf / There cam to vlixes thelamotus hys sone and acertayned hym of all thinges ^t were trewe / And for that cause vlixes prayd to alcynous that he wold accompanye hym vnto his royame / with a grete nombre of knyghtes / And alcinous agreed to hym gladly / They sayllid so longe that on a nyght they aryued in his con|tre / and entryd in to the cyte / and in the howses of hys enemyes / and slewe them all. And on the morn by day Vlixes thus accompanied entrid in to his palays / And there was resseyuyd as kynge  lord wyth grete Ioye. And aboue all other Penolope his wyf had grete Ioye as she that had so longe desired hym / His peple cam fro all sydes and ranne for to see hym that was her lord gyuyng to hym grete and ryche yeftes. And thus was vlixes moche honouryd and exalted in hys royame And than he treted so moche with Alcinous that he gaf his doughter naufica in maryage to thelamotus his sone / And after the grete solempnyte of the weddyng. Alcy+nous wente hym in to hys contre. And vlyxes abood in his royame in grete peas.


Of the feetes of pyrrus syn hys retournyng fro troye And how horrestes the sone of Agamenon slewe hym in delphos for the rauysshyng of Hermone hys wyf And of moo aduentures .
PIrrus that was the sone of Achilles and of dy|adamie the doughter of kynge Lychomedes of hys moder syde. This kynge lichomedes was sone of kynge Achastus that lyued yet at that tyme. And this kynge Achastus that was moche olde and auncyent. hated strongly pyrrus / But the historye tel|leth not wherfore ne for what cause this hate cam. This kynge Achastus had put the kynge Peleus oute of his royame of thesaylle / and had sente hym in exyle. And sette espyes in many places for to slee pyrrus in his re+tourne fro troyes / Pirrus in his comyng fro troye pas|sid many paryllis in the see / And caste in to the see of the beste Iewellis he hadde / And after he arryuyd at molose / Where he descended and dide repayre his shippis And as he there soiourned he knewe how the kynge achastus had sente the kynge peleus his grauntfader in exyle / / and was fader of Achilles / And how he had sette his espyes for to slee hym. Hereof he had grete so|rowe  was moche wroth. The kynge peleus wyste not where to holde hym for the doubte that he had of the two son~es of Achastus of whom that one was named philistenes / and that other menelapus for fere yf they fonde hym they wold sle hym. Than he avisid hym of an olde auncyent ediffice that was half a myle fro the cyte of Thessaylle / betwene the see and the cyte / And there was an olde closure of wallis and of rockes aboute / And ther was no moo howses as ther hadd ben in tyme paste / But there was Celiers vnder the erthe / wher in men myght entre secretly by an hole that apperyd but lytyll for the busshes and thornes that were there .
IN this place dwellid the kynge Peleus in aby+dyng the retornyng of his nevewe pyrrus from troye / that myght avenge hym of his enemyes And wente ofte tyme vpon the ryuage of the see / for to see yf hys nevewe myght come / Whan the shyppis of pyrrus were repayred / he toke hys way toward thessaylle / for to auenge hym of kyng Achastus / And for to doo this thynge more wysely he sente to thessayll two of hys secretaryes that one named Cryspus And that other Adrastus that were wyse and subtyll / vnto an hyghe and myghty man of the Cyte named Assan|drus / that was at that tyme a trewe frende to hym and to kynge Peleus for to haue hys aduyse / / they wente theder / And whan they had herde speke Assandrus / they retorned vnto pyrrus / and tolde to hym what they had founden. And anone pyrrus maad to drawe vp theyr saylles / and saylled toward thessaylle / But a grete tempeste arose in the see that dured thre dayes / and on the fourth day they arryued at the poort of sepehadem that was but half a myle from thessaylle nyghe vnto the caue where Peleus helde hym / Than pyrrus descen|ded a lande for to reste hym of the trauayll that he hadd on the see / And to take the ayer of the lande / And of aduenture he wente strayte to the caue where as pe|leus was / And by the thornes and busshes that hy|ded from hym the hoole / he fyll ther Inne and fonde there hys belefader peleus / And than anone Peleus knewe hys nevewe / ffor as moche as he resemblyd ryght well vnto his fader Achylles / And he beclipte hym aboute the necke and kyssed hym / And exposyd vnto hym alle hys malehurte and grete vnhappynesse

wherof pyrrus had grete sorowe. Than they wente vp and wente to hys shyppes / There cam tydynges that Philistenes and Menalipus the sones of kyng Achas|tus were comen for to hunte in the foreste that was fast by / Than pyrrus vnclothid hym / and dyde on an olde roobe all to broken and to rente / And toke his swerd and sayd to his peple that they shold abyde hym there / And he allone wold goo in to the foreste. And he had not ferre goon / but that he encountrid the two brethern that demanded of hym what he was / and fro whens he cam / and whyder he wold goo. He sayd to them that he was of grece. and was retorned fro troye in a shyppe with other / And wold haue goon agayn in to his contre / But the tempeste of the see had so trauaillid them that ther wer well fyve honderd personnes alle ded / And that ther was no man escaped but he allone by grete adventure. And hadd dronken moche water of the see and so haue loste all that I had. And I muste now goo begge fro dore to dore tyll I come in to my contre And yf ye haue brought in to thys foreste ony thynge to ete / I praye yow that ye wyll gyue me therof / Than the two brethern sayd to hym that he shold abyde with them .
Whylis they spake thus to gyder / A grete herte pas+syd to fore them / And Menalapus put hym to the chasse / And lefte hys broder wyth pyr|rus allone / Than hyt happyd that Phylistenes alyght doun of hys horse for to reste hym / And assone as he was descended / Pyrrus ranne vpon hym wyth hys naked swerd in his hande and slewe hym / and after

whan menalipus was retorned Pyrrus assayllid hym and slewe hym / Thus slewe pyrrus his two vncles that were brethern of thetys the moder of Achilles hys fader / and than as he retorned he encountrid Chinaras that was of the houshold of kyng Achastus / at whom pirrus demanded where was the kynge achastus / And he answerd to hym that he was there faste by and not ferre fro thens / And assone as he had so sayd pyrrus slewe hym. And after wente agayn to hys shyppis. And cladde hym with precyouse robes / And retorned agayn vnto the foreste / And mette wyth the kynge achastus / that demanded of hym what he was / I am sayd he one of the sones of kynge pryant of troye that am prisonner to pyrrus / Where is pirrus said the kyng And he ensigned hym toward the see / And as the kyng torned hym to see thederward / Pyrrus drewe oute his swerd and wold haue slayn hym / but thetys was present and escryed hym and knewe hym sayng. Ha ryght dere neuewe what wolte thou doo / wylte thou sle my fader / And thou haste slayn my two brethern thyne vncles / And she thus sayng helde hym by the arme where with he helde hys swerde / And than pyr|rus answerd to her the kynge Achastus thy fader hath exylid the kynge peleus thyn husbond / where in hath he trespaste and offended the / yf he wole pardoune to peleus hys maletalent and euyll wylle / I wyll par|dou~e hym myn / The kynge Achastus was well content And peleus cam to fore hym / And the peas was made betwene hem / And whan they were retorned to geder wyth good loue / The kynge Achastus sayd to them / I am so auncyent  feble that I may no more helpe my self

And therfore I wyll discharge me of the charge and governement of thys royame / And now I haue loste them that shold haue governed hyt after me / and for as moche as Pirrus my right dere nevewe is the nexte eyer I sease hym now therin. And peleus sayd I gyue hym the ryght and tytle that I haue therin. And am in wyll that pyrrus be kynge: Than comanded the kynge achastus to all the barons of thesaylle that they shold make ho~mage to pyrrus as to their kyng / and they had therof grete Ioye and dyde hit gladly / And thus was Pyrrus crowned kynge of thessaylle. And was ta|ken as the most redoubtyd kynge of thessaylle and of grece / ydumeus the kynge of Crete deyde anone after And lefte two sones after hym. Merion and Loarca / But loarca deyde sone after hym / and merion was made kynge. Thelamotus had a sone of Naufica hys wyf whiche was named Deyphebus
AMonge these thynges the kyng achastus dide do burye his two sones in thesayll by the agrement of pirrus / Hit happend whan that pirrus was thus enhaunsid in highe seygnourye / that he becam amo|rouse of herimone the doughter of helayne that was wyf of horestes / He dide so moche that he rauysshid her by force / and brought her in to thesayll / and toke her to his wyf. Horestes was passing sorouful of this thyng and durste not assaylle pirrus in his royame and said yf he myght lyue / he wold avenge hym in tyme and in place / Now hyt happyd that pyrrus wente in to the yle of delphe for to thanke his god Appolyn of thys that he hadd taken vengeance of the deth of hys fader Achylles: And lefte in hys pallays Andrometha

the wyf that was of hector / / that had a lityll sone of the said hector named Laomedon / And lefte the same An|drometha wyth chyld of his werkes / wherof Heri|mone was euyll contente / And sente to menelaus her fader that pyrrus had alle lefte her / for the loue of An|drometha / And that he shold come theder and leue for no thynge whilis that pyrrus was oute / for to sle an|drometha / and her sone Laomedon / Menelaus wente anone to thessaylle for to doo this thynge that his dough+ter requyred hym. And ran vpon Andrometha whiche toke her sone betwene her armes / And ran in to the cyte requyryng helpe of the peple ayenste Menelaus that wold slee her and her chyld.
THe peple Armed them anone and ran vpon menelaus / And dyde so moche that menelaus muste retorne in to his contrey / wyth oute doyng of ony thynge there / Whan horestes knewe that pyrrus was in the yle of delphe / He wente theder and assayl|lid pyrrus and slewe hym wyth his owen hande / And maad hym to be buryed there / And anone after hores|tes recoueryd hys wyf / and brought her in to hys roy|ame / Whan pyrrus was ded / Peleus and Thetis toke andrometha that was wyth chyld of pyrrus / And laomedon her lytyll sone. And sente hem in to the cyte of Molose. There was Andrometha delyueryd of a fayre sone / whiche she named Achilleydes / the whiche whan he was grete / crowned his broder laomeden kyng of the royame of Thesaill / And wold for ^e loue of hym that all the troians that were there shold be frau~chised Here sai the historye that the suster of ^e kynge menon

that achilles slewe to fore troye / and whom the kyng pryant dyde do burye byside troyllus his sone / the sayd suster cam to troye / moche rychely arayed. And dyde do open the sepulcre of her broder and toke out the bones chat she fonde. And assone as she had hem and helde hem she vanysshyd sodaynly away / / that neuer man wyste where she became ne the bones that she had taken And they said that sawe thys that she was a goddesse or doughter of a goddesse.


How thelagonus sone of vlixes and of the quene Cyrces cam for to fynde hys fader vlixes / and how he slewe hym not wetyng who he was. And of the avy|sion that cam to the sayd vlixes in his slepyng.
AS Vlixes slepte on a nyght in his bedde / He had a meruayllous vysion and hym semed that he sawe an ymage of meruayllo fourme / and the fayrest that euer was seen. And desyred sore for to towche this ymage / and wold haue enbraced her / But the ymage wold not suffre hym / but wythdrewe her afterward. And after she approchid and deman|ded of hym / / what wylt thou. And he answerd to her I wyll that we be conioyned to geder / and that I may knowe the flesshly. O said the ymage that thy requeste is harde and bytter / / ffor oure conionccion shall be vn|happy. ffor one of vs two shall deye. Hym semed fur|ther that this ymage helde a spere and that aboue on the heed had a pensell all maad wyth fysshis moche sub+tylly. After he sawe that the ymage wld goo. And sayd to hym at her departyng. This signe signefieth the ylle and destruccion that shall be of vs two.
WHan Vlixes was awaked / he had meruayll of thys dreme / And thoughte sore what hyt myght signefye / He sente after his deuyns and saages of hys royame and demanded them wat hys vysion myght signefie / and whan they had a lytyll ta|ken hede therof / they said that his owen sone shold slee hym / Vlixes that had grete drede  feer of his sone / made hym to be taken and kepte sewerly. And after he chese a place only and ferre fro peple / where he dwellyd wyth some of his trewe frendes. And dyde do fortefye this place / with hyghe towres  closid hit with water round a bowte. And ther myght no man entre but by a drawe bryge and a wyket / And made that to be kepte that no man shold entre but they that he had brought wyth hym / Now hit happend to vlixes whan he retor|ned fro troye / that fortune brought hym in to an yle where Circes dwellid / whiche there was lady / the whyche knewe as moche of enchantements as ony woman of the world. And by her arte helde vlixes by her nyghe a yere. And vlixes gate on her a sone whiche she named thelagonus / And thus in the tyme that vlixes dwellid in this place that was so stronge / Thelagonus his sone knewe not yet who was his fader / And whan he was of cage for to bere armes / He demanded often tymes of hys moder / who was hys fader and yf he were alyue and where he dwellyd. And so longe he prayd her / that she sayd to hym that vlixes was hys fader / and tolde to hym where he dwellyd .
WHan thelagonus was ryght Ioyous / And desired strongly to see his fader / he toke leue of his moder

And wente so many Iourneyes that he cam to achaye And whan he knewe where Vlixes dwellid he wente theder And whan he was comen on a monday in the morenyng to the brygge where they stode that kepte hyt diligently / / he prayd hem that they wold late hym passe for to see vlixes. And they wold not agree to hym in no manere / And as he prayd hem / they putte hym a back felonsly and rudely / wherof he was ryght angry and so wroth that he ran vpon one of them / and gaf hym so grete a strook wyth his fyste vpon the canell of the necke / that he fyll doun ded / And assayllyd the other and caste hem doun of the brygge / And they began for to crye moche lowde / and whan they of ^e castell herde the noyse / they ran to armes and cam to assaylle thela|gonus / He avauncyd hym to one of them / and toke his swerd from hym / he dide so moche in a lytyll while that he slewe fyftene of them / but they hurte hym in ma+ny places / and as the crye grewe more and more / Vlix+es aroose vp doubtyng that hyt was thelamotus hys sone / and that was yssued oute of pryson and cam where as the noyse was with a darte in his hande whi+che he caste ayenst thelagonus whan he sawe hys men slayn / and hurted hym a lityll / whom he knewe not.
THelagonus that had receyuyd the darte. caste hyt ayenst vlixes whom he knewe not / And smote so sore betwene the sydes that he hurted hym vnto the deth / and fyll to the erthe . And as he spack wyth grete payne he demaunded of thelagonus what he was. ffor as moche as than hys vysion cam to hys mynde. And Thelagonus demaunded on that

other syde / / who was he that spack so to hym / And they answerd hym that hyt was vlixes. Than began Thelagonus to make the grettest sorowe of the world Sayng alas caytyf / I was come to see my fader / / and for to lyue with hym in Ioye /  I haue slayn hym / And as sone as he had sayd soo / he fyll doun a swowne. And whan hys herte cam to hym agayn / / he began to rente his gowne / / and to bete hys vysage wyth hys fystes. And fylle in wepyng and approchid to hys fader and said to hym / that he was the vnhappy thela|gonus his sone and of the quene Circes. And prayd to the goddes that they wold suffre hym to dye wyth his fader .
WHan vlixes knewe that hit was hys sone / He reconforted hym self / / and sente anone to fecche thelamotus his other sone / And he cam Incon|tynent whyche wold haue slayn thelagonus / for to auenge the deth of hys fader / / but vlixes repeasid hym. And sayd to hym that he was his broder / And prayd hem that they wold loue eche other / After this vlixes was brought in to Achaye. where he lyuyd thre dayes only. And his sones buryed hym honourably. Thela|motus helde the royame of achaye after his fader. And helde wyth hym Thelagonus nyghe by a yere and an half / And made hym knyght in grete honour / and wold that he shold dwelle wyth hym. But for as moche as his moder wrote to hym often tymes that he shold retorne in to his contre. He dide so moche that he depar|ted wyth grete honour / ffor hys broder dyde hym to haue alle that hym behoued on the way / and gaf hym many ryche yeftes. And departyd that one from that

other with wepyng teeres / And thus Thelagonus re+torned in to the yle of aulides vnto Circes his moder / that had moche grete Ioye of his comyng. And hit was not longe after that cyrces hys moder deyde: And thelago+nus was maad kynge of thys yle / wher In he lyved sixty yere in grete prosperyte and after deyde / Thelamo|tus regned in Achaye sixty and ten yere / and augmented and encresid his seygnourye strongly. And whan vlix|es was slayn he was foure score  thryttene yere olde.
IN this partye Dares fynysshid hys book of the syege of troye / And speketh no more of theyr aduentures. And all this that is to fore said wrote dictes the greke in hys booke / And in all this that is conteyned a fore wreton / their two bookes were founde accordyng for the moste partye / And Dares putte in the ende of hys booke / that the siege endured ten yere ten monethis and twelue dayes / And the so~me of the grekes that were slayn at the siege to fore troye / was eyghte honderd  sixe thousand fyghtyng men. And the so~me of the tro|ians that defended hem ayenst ^e grekes that were slayn was sixe honderd and sixe and fyfty thousand of figh|tyng men / and he saith furthermore that whan Eneas departed from troye by excyle / he ladde wyth hym two honderd shippes / and that anthenor ladde wyth hym fyue honderd troians / and Eneas ladde the remenant wyth hym .
AFter thys recyteth Dares in hys booke in the laste ende / by whome the moste noble kynges and prynces of that one partye and also of that other were slayn / And sayth that Hector the prynce of the chyvalerye of the world slewe wyth

hys hande by good and loyall fayte eyghtene kynges. by hys only prowesse wyth oute malengyne / That is to wete the kynge Archylogus. The kynge Prothese|laus. The kynge Patroclus. The kynge Menon. The kyng Prothenor. The kynge Archymenus. The kyng Polemon. The kyng Epistropus. The kyng Ecedyus The kynge Doccius. The kynge Polixenus. The kyng phybus. The kynge Anthypus. The kynge Lenutus / The kynge polibetes. The kynge humerus. The kynge Fumus. And the kynge Exampitus / / Parys slewe palamydes the Emperour of the ooste of the grekes / the kynge Achilles. And the kynge Ayax / Ayax and pa|rys slewe eche other / Eneas slewe the kyng Amphy|macus. and the kynge Nercus / Achylles slewe the kynge Cupemu. the kynge yponeus. the kynge ple+beus. the kynge Austerus. the kynge Lymonyus. the kynge Euforbius. the kynge Menon / and the kynge Neptolonyus. And also he slewe Hector that toke none hede of hym / and Troyllus that his myrondones had enclosid vnarmed / Pyrrus the sone of the same achylles slewe the quene Panthasilee / And also he slewe the noble kynge pryant / whom he fonde vnar|med and wyth oute deffence as a cruell tyrant / He slewe the fayre mayde polixene and the beste manerd of the world / Dyomedes slewe the kynge Antypus. the kynge Escorpus / the kynge prothenor / and the kynge Obtyneus .
THus ende I this book whyche I haue transla|ted after myn Auctor as nyghe as god hath gy|uen me connyng to whom be gyuen the laude  preysyng / And for as moche as in the wrytyng of the same my penne is worn / myn hande wery  not stedfast myn eyen dimed with ouermoche lokyng on the whit paper / and my corage not so prone and redy to laboure as hit hath ben / and that age crepeth on me dayly and febleth all the bodye / and also be cause I haue promysid to dyuerce gentilmen and to my frendes to adresse to hem as hastely as I myght this sayd book / Therfore I haue practysed lerned at my grete charge and dispense to ordeyne this said book in prynte after the maner  forme as ye may here see / and is not wreton with penne and ynke as other bokes ben / to thende that euery man may haue them attones / ffor all the bookes of this storye na|med the recule of the historyes of troyes thus enpryntid as ye here see were begonne in oon day / and also fynys|shid in oon day / whiche book I haue presented to my sayd redoubtid lady as a fore is sayd. And she hath well acceptid hit / and largely rewarded me / / wherfore I beseche almyghty god to rewarde her euerlastyng blisse after this lyf. Prayng her said grace and all them that shall rede this book not to desdaigne the symple and rude werke. nether to replye agaynst the sayyng of the ma|ters towchyd in this book / thauwh hyt acorde not vn|to the translaco~n of other whiche haue wreton hit / ffor dyuerce men haue made dyuerce bookes / / whiche in all poyntes acorde not as Dictes. Dares. and Homerus ffor dictes  homerus as grekes sayn and wryten fauo|rably for the grekes / and gyue to them more worship

than to the troians / And Dares wryteth otherwyse than they doo / And also as for the propre names / hit is no wonder that they acorde not / ffor so~me oon name in thyse dayes haue dyuerce equyuocacions after the con+trees that they dwlle in / but alle acorde in conclusion the generall destruccion of that noble cyte of Troye / And the deth of so many noble prynces as kynges dukes Er+les barons. knyghtes and comyn peple and the ruyne irreperable of that Cyte that neuer syn was reedefyed whiche may be ensample to all men duryng the world how dredefull and Ieopardous it is to begynne a warre and what hormes. losses. and deth foloweth. Terfore thapostle saith all that is wreton is wreton to our doc|tryne / whyche doctryne for the comyn wele I beseche god maye be taken in suche place and tyme as shall be moste nedefull in encrecyng of peas loue and charyte whyche graunte vs he that suffryd for the same to be crucyfied on the rood tree / And saye we alle Amen for charyte..



Pergama flere volo. fata danais data solo
Solo capta dolo. capta redacta solo
Causa mali talis. meretrix fuit exicialis
Femina letalis. femina plena malis
Si fueris lota. si vita sequens bona tota
Si eris ignota. non eris abs nota
Passa prius paridem. idis modo thesia pridem
Es factura fidem. ne redeas in idem
Rumor de veteri. faciet ventura timeri
Cras poterunt fieri. turpia sicut heri
Scena quid euadis. morti qui cetera tradis
Cur tu non cladis. concia clade cadis
Femina digna mori. reamatur amore priori
Reddita victori. deliciis thori







