




A
BRIEFE AND
ACCVRATE TREA|TISE,
CONCERNING,
The taking of the fume of TOBACCO,
which very many, in these dayes,
doe too too licentiously
vse.
In which, the immoderate, irregular, and
vnseasonable vse thereof is reprehended,
and the true nature and best manner of v|sing
it, perspicuously demon|strated.
By TOBIAS VENNER, Doctor of Physicke in Bath,
in the Spring and Fall, and at other times, in the Bo|rough
of North Petherton neare to the ancient Hauen
towne of Bridge-water in Somersetshire.


AT LONDOON,
Printed by W. I. for Richard Moore, and are to be
solde at his Shop in S. Dunstons Church|yard
in Fleet-street. 1621.




ILLVSTRISSIMIS
VEREQVE GENEROSIS
VIRIS, DOMINO FRANCISCO
HELE, ET DOMINO FRAN|CISCO
ROGERS,
MILITIBVS.
Hoc de Tobacci fumo opusculum,
In Deuoti animi testimonium, offert,
dedicat, consecrat
Tobias Vennerus,
Medic. Doctor.





it,The nature of Tobacco. it is hot and drie in the third degree, and hath
a deleteriall, or venemous qualitie, as I suppose: for
it being any way taken into the body, it tortureth
 disturbeth the same with violent eiections both
vpward and downeward, astonisheth the spirites,
stupifieth and benummeth the senses and all the
members. This noysome facultie of Tobacco pro|ceedeth
not from the temperature of it, but from
the very essence of its substance. As for the stupifi|ing
or benumming qualitie thereof, it is best per|ceiued
vpon the taking of the fume at the mouth:
for thereupon followeth a drunken-like lightnesse
of the head, and especially if it be much taken at
once, a benumming sleepinesse of the limmes and
senses. Wherefore Tobacco, though it be in taste,
biting, and in temperature, hote, hath notwith|standing
a benumming qualitie; which, because it
cannot depend of an extreame colde qualitie, the
hearbe being very euidently hot, it followeth, that
it is hot and benumming, not benumming by rea|son
of its temperature, but through the propertie
of its substance. There is in the iuyce of this hearb
an excellent digesting, mundifying, and consolida|ting
facultie; by meanes whereof, it is of ineffable
force for the speedy curing of any wound or cut in
the flesh, or soares, vlcers, scabbes, c. for which
it is worthy of very great esteeme, and not much
for any other propertie to be magnified and respe|cted
(as I conceiue.) And thus much briefly con|cerning
the nature of Tobacco.
Before I passe to deliuer mine opinion concern|ing
the vse and faculties of the fume,An obiection of our vulgar Tobacconists. I must cleare

an obiection of our vulgar Tobacconists, which I
seeme to heare them make against the noysome
qualities that I haue auerred to be in Tobacco, say|ing;
that vpon the taking thereof they find no tor|tures
and violent eiections, or stupifyings of their
members and senses. To whom I may answer,Solution. that
the immoderate vse of Tobacco hath made them
Insensiles, without sense. But let it be admitted,
that vpon taking of the fume, they find not those
malignant effects; yet it convinceth not my asser|tion,
because that by long vse and custome, it be|commeth
familiar to their bodies. And thus much
by the way to our licentious Tobacconists, who
spend and consume, not onely their time, but also
their health, wealth, and wittes, in taking of this
loathsome and vnsauourie fume. Now I come to
speake of the smoakie fume and faculties thereof,
which is taken through a pipe, for that purpose,
into the mouth, and thrust foorth againe at the
nostrills, and is of some also sucked into the sto|macke
and breast, against all diseases, especially such
as are gotten by cold, or that proceed from a cold
and moist cause.
The Indians,Sleep and vaine dreames, two effects of To|bacco for which the Indians vsed it. from whom we receiued this man|ner
of taking Tobacco, were (at the first) onelie
wont to take it at such times, as they felt their bo|dies
wearied with much labour and exercise, or
would presage of things to come: for the fume
procuring first a drunken-like lightnes of the head,
and thereupon sleepe, with sundry phantalmes or
visions, was the cause that vpon their awaking they
found themselues (through their sleepe) greatly

eased, and refreshed, and could, by reason of the
somnorine visions which this fume doth greatly
occasion, presage (as they fondly conceiued) the
euent of any busines, or matter of importance, that
they desired to know, or were delighted in.
First they took the dried leaues of Tobacco, and
cast them on the coales, then they receiued the
smoake of them at their mouth and nose with a
kane, and continued the taking thereof so long, till
that they fell into a drunken traunce and sleepe,
wherein they continued as dead three or foure
houres, according to the quantity of smoake that
they had taken. The fume hauing done his worke,
they awakened out of their sleepe, and found them|selues
eased and lightened, in such sort, as that they
were able to returne to their labour or exercises, as
lustily as before: and this they did alwayes when
they found themselues wearied, or were (as I haue
said) desirous to fore-know, what might be the
successe of their businesse, by meanes of the vaine
dreames and visious, which this fume suggesteth.
But this custome of taking the fume, hath so far
bewitched them (as also it hath and daily doth ma|ny
of our people) as that they also often-times,
take it for wantonnesse and delight, wherein they
haue so great a pleasure, as that they desire nothing
more then to make themselues drunken and drow|sie
with Tobacco. And thus much for the origi|nall
of the fume. I will now leaue the Americans,
and come to our Europeans, who (well-neare) vse
the fume of Tobacco with as much excesse as they
doe.

Many of our people, and that of all sorts, doe
greatly affect the taking of Tobacco; but few of
them respect whether it be profitable to their bo|dies:
for most take it, rather for custome and de|light,
to entertaine and passe away the time, then
for any such necessitie or vtilitie that they haue of
it: whereby it commeth to passe, that some iudge
very hardely of Tobaccoes fume, and vtterly dis|claime
the vse thereof. In consideration whereof, I
was moued to publish this Treatise, shewing there|in
the faculties and right vse of the fume of some
(as I know) greatly desired, and withall, taxing
the ignorance, or rather petulancie of many, that
in these daies doe take it without any respect had
of the time, age, or constitution. A worke (I hope)
no lesse pleasing, then profitable.
For mine owne part, I confesse, that though I
am in no wise delighted with the fume of Tobac|co,
partly for the malignitie of its nature, but e|specially,
because of the detestable sauour or smacke
that it leauerh behinde vpon the taking of it: yet I
doe not altogether condemne the vse thereof (for
I sometimes in case of necessitie, as when I am af|flicted
with rheumes, take it my selfe, especially
prepared, as I will heereafter shew) but rather ap|prooue
it as necessarie and profitable for the rheu|maticke,
and such as are by temperature, colde, so
as it be taken in congruent maner, that is, both mo|derately
and seasonsbly, as shall be heereafter she|wed,
for it helpeth the braine that is ouer cold and
moist,The vertues o Tobaccoes fume. reducing it by its heating and drying facul|tie
vnto a temperuture: it taketh away rheumes

and windinesse of the head, and is profitable for
all colde effects of the braine and sinews, by resol|uing
and consuming the crude and windie super|fluities
of those partes: it doth (for the time) ex|pell
melancholie, and excite lumpish spirites: it
helpeth paines of the teeth, swellings of the
gummes, and aches of the ioynts: it preuenteth
putrefaction of humours, by drying vp the cru|dities
of the body, and is very profitable vpon ta|king
of colde, and for all colde and moist effects of
the stomake, breast and lungs. It is a speedie re|medie
vpon a surfet,Imbibitus, that is, taken down. by making a sodaine evacu|ation
both vpward and downeward of such things
as are contained in the stomacke, and by the like
reason it doth, in an instant, remooue windie tor|ments
of the stomacke, and bowel's, that proceed
of crude humours, and helpeth the fittes of the
mother: in a word, it is (being rightly vsed) auaile|able
against all colde and moist distemperatures.
But to such as are not of a colde and moist constitu|tion,
nor affected with rheumes, it is not, though
it be onely retayned in the mouth, and powred
foorth at the nostrills, but by way of precaution,
and that with good aduisement to be permitted, as
I will by and by shew, and the reason is, because
this fume which is hote and drie in the third de|gree,
ascending to the braine, doth not onlie great|ly
heate and distemper it, but also the animall spi|rits,
wherevpon oftentimes the senses are confoun|ded,
and the vnderstanding perverted.
As touching the taking of the fume downe
into the stomacke and lungs,This custome of taking the fume downe I vtterly disclaime as

pernicious,into the sto|macke  lungs very pernicious except it be done by way of Physicke,
one or another of the aforesaide affects, impensiue|ly
requiring it, both by reason that it is of a verie
turbulent and sickely operation, and also, because
it being excessiuely hot, ouer heateth, and dry|eth
the liuer, marreth the concoction of the meats,
and deturbeth them vndigested from the stomack,
if it be taken before they are concocted. Moreo|uer,
the lungs which are the flbell of the heart,
being by nature (in regarde of their great vse and
continuall motion, of soft and spongie substance,
are by the immoderate heate and sircitie of this
fume, quickely dried and coarctated, and conse|quently
become vnapt for motion, to the great
offence of the heart, and ruine at length of the
whole body. Hence it may appeare, in how great
an errour they persist, that vsually, or for euerie
light occasion, imbibe or take downe this fume.
Now that which hath been spoken concern|ing
the vse of this fume, is not so precisely to be
taken, as that it is at no time lawfull or conveni|ent
for such as are not by nature rheumaticke, or
colde by constitution to vse it: for it is sometimes
allowable for euery one, except for him that hath
a drie distemperature of the braine, to take this
fume by way of prevention. For example sake, if
anie one hauing not a drie constitution of the
braine, shall trauell, or take a iourney in mistie,
stormie, and raynie weather, especially in the
winter season, I say, that it is expedient for him,
although hee bee not rheumaticke, or of a colde

temperature to take three or foure draughts of this
fume so soone as hee shall be entred into his house
or Inne, for the preventing of rheumes, or other
harmes that may chaunce to him by meanes of the
grossenesse or impuritie of the aire.
But mee thinkes I heare many that are not by
nature rheumaticke,An obiection of our vulgar Tobacconists. nor of a colde temperature
of body, louers of this fume, or that I may more
rightly speake, abusers, and luxuriating in this kind
of euill, for cloking of their vicious custome, to ob|iect
against me after this manner. We find by dai|ly
experience, that the fume of Tobacco doth
draw from vs very many rheumaticke humours:
wherefore the vse thereof is not onely allowable
and good for the rheumaticke, and such as are of
cold temperature. I doe deny the argument; and
also reiect their experience:Solution. for their lewd and pre|posterous
custome in taking this fume is conveni|ent
for no constitution or state of body: for, one
while they take the fume, another they drinke, and
so continue by turne, vntill they fall asleepe, vomit,
or be drunke: wherefore it is no maruell that vp|pon
the vse of the fume they excrete very many
rheumaticke superfluities, seeing that by this their
preposterous and vnreasonable mingle-mangle of
smoake and drinke, farre more crudities and su|perfluities
are bred, then can by vertue of the fume
be consumed or excreted, as it is to be seene in
them that are giuen to Tobacco,  the Pot, whom
you may see to haue tumide and smokie faces, with
turgide and flatulent bellies.

Heere also some, I know, which are delighted
with the drinking downe of this fume, that I may
so speake,Another ob|iection. will obiect against that which hath bin
spoken against that manner of taking it, namely,
that vppon the taking of it downe after meate,
they finde no perturbation or offence, but rather,
very great commoditie, by furthering the conco|ction.
I must tell them, that in this they are grose|ly
deceiued: First, because their daily custome of
imbibing the fume taketh away the sense of pertur|bation;
for by vse and custome, any thing (though
contrary) is made familiar vnto Nature, as I be|fore
haue touched: Secondly, they are no lesse de|ceiued,
thinking by imbibing the fume, that the
concoction is furthered, beeing not able to di|stinguish
betweene concoction and distribution:
for it is the worst thing, and most pernicious to
the bodie, to occasion the distribution of the
meates before they are concocted in the stomacke;
which they doe, that imbibe or drinke downe
the fume after meate. And verily, the cause of
this their errour, is some emptinesse of the sto|macke,
or prouocation to stoole, which they
feele vppon the receiuing of the fume, not con|sidering,
that this their emptinesse and ill distri|bution
of the meates, and consequently, prouo|cation
to stoole, proceede from the purgatiue fa|cultie
of the fume. Wherefore I would haue them
to vnderstand, that though they seeme to be well
for the time, eyther by reason of their youth, or
of a strong constitution of bodie, that this pre|posterous

taking of the fume, will vppon the so|daine,
ruine the state of their bodie, by spoyling
the stomacke, destroying the concoction, and fil|ling
the whole body with crude and noysome su|pities.
.
I shall againe vrge to shunne these dis|coities,
and maintaine another custome no
lesse pernicious, that they will take the fume a|bout
three or foure houres after meate, when the
concoction is effected, for deturbing or driuing
downe the reliques of the meates, and crudities
that shall be in the stomacke, I would haue them
to know, that the hurt will be farre greater then
the profite: for besides that, in this they peruert
the operation of Nature, they greatly also annoy
the lungs, disturbe and infringe the spirits, cor|rupt
the breath, and destroy the languifying fa|cultie
of the liuer. I maruell verily at the madnesse
of these men. For, what is there in the fume that
should so greatly occasion delight? Not the smell,
because it is vnpleasant, much lesse the savour, for
it is stincking and fuliginous.
Besides these idle affectors of Tobacco, there
are also some who are graue and seemingly wise
and iudicious, that take it moderately, and most
commonly at fixed times; but with its proper ad|iunct,
which (as they doe suppose) is a cuppe of
Sacke, and this they thinke to be no bad physicke;
nay, they so relie vppon this sacred medicine, as
the most of them become detractors both of phy|sicke
and Physicians, for which cause they shall

not passe without my taxe. As for Sacke, it is
without all controversie, very helpefull, comforta|ble
and agreeable to mans nature, as I haue she|wed
in my Booke which is entituled, Via recta ad
vitam long am, of this yeares Impression: Tobacco
is not so, but rather oftentimes hurtfull, especial|ly
if it be no iudiciously vsed. But, whether Sacke
be good to be taken vpon Tobacco, I will hereafter
(notwithstanding these detractors, for the good of
others) demonstrate.
As for these Cynicke detractors (for such you
shall finde most of them to be)There is also no other rea|son why very many of our people, in their sicke|nesse, expose their bodies to be corrupted, I can|not say cured, to ignorant vsurping Poicaries, and other base illiterated Emperickes, who are (contrary to the Lawes) euery where permitted to exercise Physicke, to the dishonour of God, disgrace to the Facultie, hurt of our People, and shame of our Nation, I must tell them,
that this their absurditie
proceedeth from their ig|norance
of the great and
admirable mysteries of
the noble Art of Physick;
or for that they are slaues
to their purses, and ther|fore
seeke not in their necessities, physicke-helpes,
and counsaile from such as are learned in that fa|cultie;
or else, it is because they deeme all expense
lost, besides that which adornes the backe, or ob|lectate
the pallate and throat. And so I leaue these
to their physicke, and the common Tobacconists
to their sleeping betweene the Pot and the Pipe,
and come now againe to shew the right vse of To|bacco.
Although it be apparent, by that which hath
beene hitherto deliuered, that the taking of To|bacco
is onely convenient for colde and moist bo|dies,

that the often and daily vse thereof is onelie
allowable for them that haue their stomake, breast,
braine and sinewie parts exceedingly colde, and
stuffed with crude and rheumaticke humours, and
also that it is sometimes tollerable for others, by
way of prevention; yet the knowledge of these
things, without the true vse and application of the
fume, as namely, when to vse it, how often, in
what manner and measure, and what to obserue
after the taking of it, is of small purpose: for it may
(being taken without respect had of these circum|stances)
prooue more hurtfull, then beneficiall vn|to
him that taketh it. Wherefore I wish him that
desireth to haue the true vse of Tobacco, to receiue
from me, and carefully obserue ten precepts in the
vse thereof.
The first is,Ten precepts to be obserued in the vse of Tobacco. that it be most commonly taken
mornings fasting, after a little stirring of the body,
and also sometimes about halfe an houre before
dinner and supper, but especially at the time of
going to bed, in whom the condition of the bo|die,
as a colde and moist constitution; and some ac|cidences,
as rheumes, catarrhes, heauinesse of the
head, and cruditie of the stomacke; or circumstan|ces,
as a moist, foggie, and waterish season, shall
for the preservation of the health, require the vse
thereof.
2 The second is, that the taking thereof be
chiefly obserued after trauelling in misty foggy
and rainy weather, because it preventeth catarhes,

and rheumes, and taketh away all hurts that are
wont, by rcason of the humiditie and 
of the aire, to happen to the head and other parts.
For the taking thereof at such time, is convenient
for every state of body, except where there is a
drie constitution of the braine, as hath beene for|merly
shewed.
3 The third is, that it be taken with moderati|on,
not (at the most) exceeding the quantitie of a
pipe full at a time; for euerie thing which is super|fluous,
is very aduerse to Nature, and nothing more
then Tobacco.
4 The fourth is, that at meales betweene the
eating, it be at no hand taken, as many very foo|lishly
doe, because it vtterly interrupteth and mar|rerh
the concoction.
5 The fift is, that it be not taken within foure
or five houres after meale, except a peculiar state
of the body shall necessarily require the taking
thereof presently vppon the meale, and that one|lie
in two respects: The first is, for the imbecillitie
of the natiue and digestiue heate in some, which
may not be a little comforted by the translation of
the heate of this fume, mediantibus nervis, from
the braine to the stomacke: The second is, for the
consuming of vapours, and preventing of their
hurts, which in others are (by reason of an ill dis|position
of the stomacke) immoderately woont to
ascend after meale: for by meanes of the fume de|tained
in the mouth and cavities of the braine,
those superfluous vapours are in part consumed,

the braine, which by nature is ouer colde, and
moist, heated and dried, and consequently, not
so soone annoyed by the vapours which do ascend
vnto it.
6 The sixt is, that you drinke not betweene the
taking of the fumes, as our smoakie Tobacconists
are wont, because thereby the operations of the
fume are hindered, and more superfluities com|monly
bred, then can by the efficacie of it be con|sumed.
7 The seuenth is, that you eate not, nor drinke
any thing within a quarter of an houre after the ta|king
of the fume, but allowing that space for the
operation of it, you may then wash your mouth
with Beere or Wine, to take away the fuligiuous
sauour of the fume, and also drinke a draught of
Sacke, if the stomacke shall be colde, or abound
with crude and flatulent humours, and so goe to
your meale, if it shall be the time of your repast.
For, to wash your mouth, or drinke presently vp|pon
the taking of the fume, doth much hinder the
operation of it: or, in steade of washing your
mouth, you may presently, vpon the taking of the
fume, rubbe your tongue, pallate, and gummes,
(which I alwayes holde fit to be observed) with a
drie napkin, and if it be also heated, the better, e|specially
in colde and rheumaticke seasons, and af|terwards
chew in your mouth something of an a|romaticall
savour, as cloues, or the rootes of Ga|lingall,
or the floures of Rosemarie, and Sage when
they may be had, c. or the conserues of them: for

these, and such like, doe not onely take away the
fuliginous and stinking savour of the fume, but al|so
giue comfort to the braine and spirits. And vp|pon
the doing heereof, if it be not before meales,
it is specially good to swallow downe abot the
quantitie of a prune or two of the conserue of red
Roses. Tabulae Dianisi, which you may haue from
the Apothecaries, are also very good to be eaten
vppon the taking of Tobacco, the mouth beeing
first washed as aforesaid, for they correct the euill
savour and smell of the fume, make the breath
sweete, and also resolve windinesse of the stomacke.
I commonly vse, vpon the taking of Tobacco, to
swallow downe a spoonefull of a pectorall and ce|phalicke
syrupe made for the purpose, which doth
foorthwith remooue the offensiue savour of the
fume, and is withall, very profitable vnto the sto|macke,
breast, and head,  thereupon also, a quan|titie
of the conserue of red Roses, especially at the
time of going to bed.
8 The eight is, that in drawing of the fume,
you suffer it not externally to affect the eies: for it
is vnto them, by reason of its smokie drying, and
fuliginous nature, very offensiue.
9 The ninth is, that you warily draw the fume
out of the pipe, not sucking it into your wind-pipe
and throate with a sodaine or strong attraction; for
then it will exasperate the winde-pipe, and much
offend and disquiet the mouth of the stomacke.
10 The tenth and last is, that you go not abroad
into the aire, presently vppon the taking of the

fume, but rather refraine there-from the space of
halfe an houre or more, especially if the season be
colde, or moist, because the poares of the body be|ing
open, by meanes of the strong working of the
fume, euen to the vttermost and superficiarie parts
of the body, ineffable hurts may happen, by the
sodaine accesse of the aire. Hence you may obserue
how idle and foolish they are, that can not trauell
without a Tobacco pipe at their mouth; but such
(I must tell you) are no base Tobacchians: for this
manner of taking the fume, they suppose to be ge|nerous:
Let these fume-gallants enioy their vanity,
and for their better grace, it were good they were
also attended with chimney-sweeping Lackeys.
Now from that which hath beene said, you may
collect a two-folde manner of taking of Tobacco,
which ought to be altered and obserued, according
as occasion and the particular state of him that ta|keth
it, shall require. The first is, a detaining of the
fume onelie in the mouth, and thrusting of it forth
againe at the nostrils, for heating and drying of the
braine, and for dissoluing and dissipating of colde
humours and superfluous vapours that reside in it.
The other is a receiuing of it into the stomacke and
lungs,The fume of Tobacco ought not to be taken downe vpon e|uerie light oc|casion. for consuming  deturbing of crudities and
windinesse, that shall offend in those parts. But I
aduise, that the fume be sodainly taken downe, and
then neither, but some great necessitie or extremi|tie
vrging it, both because it offendeth the bodie
with its violent operation, and also for that it may,
by reason of its exiccating nature, be very hurtfull

to the lungs, liuer, and melt, as I will by and by
shew. Wherefore my counsell is, that some safer
remedy (if time shal permit) be vsed for consuming
and deturbing of the flatulent crudities of the sto|macke
and bowells.
Whosoeuer therefore thou be that desirest to
know whether the fume of Tobacco may be profi|table
or hurtfull to thy body; thou oughtest first to
consider, whether it be convenient for thy head:
for if thy braine be ouer cold and moist, or abound
with superfluous matter, then the detaining of the
fume onely in the mouth, and forcing it out at the
nostrills, may be profitable vnto thee: for by this
meanes the fume ascending to the braine, doth not
onely by its heating, attracting and exiccating fa|cultie
euacuate and consume the superfluities in it,
but also, in some measure, reduceth the same to its
natiue temperament.
But heere by the way it is to be noted,Such as are af|fected with a drie distempe+rature of the braine, must verie warily (when they are annoyed with rheumes) vse Tobaccoes fume. that it
may sometimes happen, that some may haue their
heads accidentally stuffed with rheumatike matter,
although the braine it selfe bee not in its natiue
temperature excessiuely colde and moist, but is ra|ther
affected with a drie distemperature. Wherfore
I aduuise such, to take the fume with very great
caution  moderation, as at one time not to exceed
the quantity of sixe or seuen draughts at the most,
lest it should cause greater hurt to the braine and
spirits, by encreasing the drie distemperature of
the braine, and incensing the spirits, then commo|dity
in discussing and consuming the colde and
waterish humours, wherewith the braine was acci|dentally

oppressed, which in some I haue obserued
to come to passe, that haue without measure and
iudgement vsed this fume.
Secondly, you must diligently consider whether
the fume of Tobacco bee convenient for the sto|macke,
lungs, and liuer. For, if crude and windie
humours abound in the stomacke and bowells tho|row
a colde imbecillitie of the liuer; or if a colde
distemperature, and thinne, crude, and flatulent
humours dominiere in the lungs, then the imbi|bing
also or taking downe of the fume into those
parts, may, so the stomacke be emptie of meates,
be sometimes tollerable, yea profitable, especial|ly
for strong bodies, in case of extreamitie, and
when no better remedie, at the instant, can be had:
for by its heating, exiccating, and purging facul|tie,
it somewhat correcteth the distemperature,
consumeth winde, and foorthwith expurgeth the
offensiue humours. But by reason of its turbulent
and sickely operation, I cannot commend the often
vse thereof, nor at any time approue it to them that
are of a weake and valetudinarie state of body.
Heere two cautions doe offer themselues to bee
observed concerning the imbibing,Two cautions to be obserued in taking the fume of To|bacco downe. or taking
downe the fume: the one, in respect of the lungs,
the other, in respect of the lungs and liuer too.
For if the lungs be obstructed of a thicke and clam|mie
humour, or subiect to such obstruction, then
the taking downe of the fume is very pernicious,
because it doth by reason of its heate and siccitie,
more harden and condense the humour, by means
whereof, it is altogether vnfit to be excreted. From

hence it is manifest, with how great prudence,Cautio practica cau|tion
and providence, wee are to vse heating and
drying remedies in affections of the lungs. In like
manner also the taking downe of the fume, is ve|ry
pernicious to them that are affected with a drie
distemperature of the liuer, or lungs, although the
stomacke and intestines shal sometimes be annoyed
with crude and flateous humours, because it will
cause greater hurt by encreasing the distempera|ture
of those parts, then commodity in discussing
and purging foorth the crudities of the stomacke
and bowells: and therefore (in mine opinion) it
is farre better, in such case, altogether to abstaine
from taking downe the fume, and to vse a more
safe and easier remedy.
The like caution must also be observed in re|spect
of the melt that is obstructed,Tobacco most pernicious to dr|like boies. or subiect to
obstruction, especially in them that are of a drie
melancholike temperature, because the fume, by
reason of its heate and siccitie, doth not onelie
greatly distemper them, but also causeth their
bloud to growe more melancholike, and to bee a|dusted,
and the melancholie humour that resideth
in the spleene, as in its proper receptacle, to bee
indurated from whence diuers calamitous miseries
doe commonly arise. Wherefore I aduise all such
as are of a melancholericke constitution, vtterly to
shunne the taking of Tobacco.
But, that Tobaccoes fume may more effectually
performe all the aforesaid commodities, and with
lesse detriment, I aduise that the rules of Tobacco
be macerated or steeped two or three daies in sacke

aboundantly edulcated or sweetned with sugar,The prepara|tio~ of Tobacco.
wherein Nutmegs, Cloues, Saffron, the rootes of
Sassafras, Calamus aromaticus, and of Galingale,
Lignum aloes, knaps of Stickadoue, the Floures of
Rosemarie, Sage, and Lavender-spike, together
with their knaps, Fennell seedes, and the excellent
graines called Cubebe haue beene infused foure
and twenty houres, and afterwards strained from
the licour with a strong expression. All these things
must be bruised a little, sauing the Saffron, but the
rootes and Lignum aloes more then the rest, or sli|ced
very thinne, and for the quantities of them,
and of the wine, it must be according to the quan|titie
of Tobacco that you will infuse, wherein you
can commit no errour, so you take not aboue halfe
a dram of Saffron to a quarte of Wine: when the
Tobacco shall be infused as aforesaid, take it out
of the licour, and reserue it for your vse. If any shall
also sprinckle it with a few droppes of oyle of An|nise
or Fennell seedes, or rather, of Cloues, I will
not gainesay it. For the fume, by reason of an A|romaticall
savour, which it acquireth by meanes of
this artificiall preparation, is more agreeable to the
spirits,  doth, besides the aforesaid commodities,
which it more excellently performeth, farre lesse
offend with its benumming qualitie, ill smell, and
fuliginous savour.
Now,The discom|modities of Tobacco, being immoderately and vntimely receiued. that I may impose an end to this busines,
I will summarily rehearse the hurts that Tobacco
inferreth, if it be vsed contrary to the order and way
I haue set downe. It drieth the braine, dimmeth
the sight, vitiateth the smell, hurteth the stomacke,

destroyeth the concoction, disturbeth the humors,
and spirities, induceth a trembling of the limbes,
corrupteth the breath, exiccateth the winde-pipe,
lungs, and liuer, annoyeth the melt, scorcheth the
heart, and causeth the bloud to be adusted: More|ouer,
it eliquateth the pingui-substance of the kid|nies,
and absumeth the geniture. In a word, it o|uerthroweth
the spirites, perverteth the vnderstan|ding,
and confoundeth the senses with a sodayne
astonishment and stupidity of the whole body. All
which hurts I affirme, that the immoderate and in|tempestiue
vse of Tobacco doth effect, both by rea|son
of its temperament, but especially through the
property of its substance: wherefore the vse of it is
onely tollerable by way of physicke, not for plea|sure,
or an idle custome.
To conclude therefore, I wish them that desire
to haue mentem sanam in corpore sano, altogether to
abandon insanam praeposterumque Tobacci vsum.
This is all which seemed good vnto me to be writ|ten
of Tobaccoes fume, partly for shewing the
right manner of vsing it, but especially for reproo|uing
the too too licentious liberall, and intempe|stiue
taking of it, which very many, in these
dayes) do to their owne ruine lewdly,
and for want of better employ|ment,
foolishly
affect.
FINIS.




