




THE ENGLISH SPANISH PILGRIME.
OR, A NEVV DISCOVERIE OF SPANISH POPERY, AND IESVITICALL STRATAGEMS.
VVith the estate of the English Penti|oners and Fugitiues vnder the King of Spaines Dominions, and else where at this present.
Also laying open the new Order of the Iesui|trices and preaching Nunnes.
Composed by Iames Wadsworth Gentleman, newly conuerted into his true mothers bosome, the Church of England, with the motiues why he left the Sea of Rome; a late Pentioner to his Maiesty of Spaine, and no|minated his Captaine in Flanders: Sonne to M^r. Iames Wadsworth, Bachelor of Diuinity, some|time of Emanuell Colledge in the Vniuersity of Cambridge, who was peruerted in the yeere 1604. and late Tutor to Donia Maria Infanta of Spaine.
Published by speciall License.
Printed at London by T. C. for Michael Sparke, dwelling at the blue Bible in Greene-Arbor, 1629.




To his friend M^r. Iames Wadsworth and his Booke.

_GOe happy ofspringe of a pregnant braine,
Sinnes Commentary, a perspectiue for Spaine,
Through which her maskt delusions appeare
Naked, as if they had bin practis'd here.
If any Iesuite damne the Authors quill,
That writes 'gainst her from whom he learnt his skill,
Or wonder how that Citie odious proues,
Which bred him, and his Fathers memory loues:
Know this, that Asa was not plagu'd, 'cause he
Depriu'd his mother for idolatrie.
Good Parents patterns are, if bad, forbeare
To imitate, and make their faults thy feare.
Should I relate the dangers he endur'd
After his soule a liberty procur'd;
I should but wrong his Booke, by making those
Which reade such horrid lines afraid of 's prose.
When th' Ile of Ree, and Martins lucklesse Fort
Our trouble and their triumphs did report:
Him Callis dungeon kept, as if his fate
Should pay the rash inuasion of a State.
Yet not their catchpole Popery, nor all
Their Macheuils could worke his funerall:
That hand which first conuerted him hath brought,
Him safe, and their discouerd at heisme wrought.

Thomas Mottershed. of C. C.




To the most Noble and thrice Honorable William Earle of Pembroke, Lord Steward of his Maiesties houshold, and Chancellour of the Vniuersity of OXFORD.
_MY Lord, though vnknowne vnto your Lordshippe, but by a relation made vnto your Honour of my tra|uels and obseruations beyond the seas, your Lordshippe vouchsafed to grant mee your Letters of fauour to the Vniuersity of Oxford for the furthering of mee in the printing a booke entituled, The Eng|lish Spanish Pilgrime: and now hauing ac|complisht the same, I should thinke my selfe most happy, if it would please your Lordship to pro|tect and fauour these rude lines, not looking vp|on the meane vnderstanding of the Authour, but the good will and affection wherewith I haue written them; to wit, for the honour of God, and good of my Countrey: wherein I doe especially dis|couer diuerse subtilties and policies, of the Eng|lish

Iesuites, Fryers, Monkes and other Semi|nary Priests beyond the seas, as likewise our English fugitiues vnder the King of Spaines Dominions, and the wrong I receiued in tur|ning to mine owne true Religion. I doe therefore most humbly beseech your Honor that you would be pleased to take this booke vnder your protecti|on for the furthering of my 'cause, and repres|sing of my aduersaries, and I shall euer pray for the much increase of your Lordships health and Honour. The booke I dare not say deserues your fauour, it being a greater token of Nobility in you to Patronize with your greatnesse that which is meane in it selfe, then onely to bee fauo|rable, where merit may challenge liberality; yet in it selfe the worke is religiously disposed to the discouering of truth, and that all which are any whit inclined to the Sea of Rome, may see the vaile vnmaskt wherwith they were hoodwinkt. I detaine your Honour no longer, but with a lit|tle digression from you to that God, whom I humbly implore to preserue your Lordship the yeeres of my desire, which is as vnlimited as your Nobility.
Your Honours most humble and deuoted seruant, Iames Wadsworth.





THE ENGLISH SPANISH PILGRIME.

CHAP. I.

The life of the English Espanoliz'd trauailer, perse|cuted by disastrous time and fortune; his voyares, passages, and encounters with that most Antichri|stian fy the Iesuites, by whom his Father was se|duced, the yeere 1604. and afterwards in 1609. his Mother was entrapped by no other snares, and was transported into Flanders, with her Sonne the Pilgrime, who scarcely had seene fiue yeares to an end, from thence into Spaine 1610. where hee passed eight yeares in the Royall Towne Ma|drid and in Siuill.

_IN the yeere 1604. in the County of Suffolke I was borne, in the Reigne of our late Royall Soueraigne, whose eminency of vertues procu|red the wonder of all other Nations, and the

glory of ours. My Father was a Student in Emanuell Colledge in Cambridge, where the Vni|uersitie, and his owne merits inuested him with a degree of Bachelor of Diuinity; and his Maie|sty preferr'd him to be a double benefic't man in Cotton, and great Thorne, in the County afore|said, and Chaplaine and Ordinary to the Bishop of Norwich; and after that, his Maiesty sent him with his first Ambassador Legier S^r. Charles Cornewallis into Spaine as his Chaplaine, and ioynt Commissioner, where at his first arriuall, the Iesuites held with him a subtle dispute a|bout the Antiquity and the Vniuersality of the Church of Rome, which they make their preface to all seducements, his grand opposers being Ioseph Creswell, H. Walpole, two the most expert polititians of our Nation, that then maintained the state of the triple crowne; whose vnderstan|ding neuerthelesse would not proue captiue, either to their subtilest Arguments, or most alluring promises. The Embassador seeing how wisely he quitted himselfe, sent Letters to his Maiesty, informing him how learnedly hee was accompanied. The King as he was a liberall Me|canas to the learned, especially to those that were of the Clergy, sent him his Royall grant of the next falling place of Eminency in his King|domes, as an encouragement to his further ser|uices. Meane while the Iesuites perceiuing how little they preuailed, vsed other illusions stronger then their Arguments, euen strange ap|paritions of miracles; amongst others, the mira|cle

which they pretend to bee true to haue hap|nedVide Lewis Owen in the publque Li|brary of Oxon. p. 59. to the eldest sonne of the Lord Wotton at his death, in the City Vallodalid where a Crucifix framed him this articulate sound: Now forsakeItem vide Be|dell. cap. 5. p. 83. your heresie, or else you are damn'd, wherevpon the young Lord and my Father became Proselites to their iugling Religion, the report whereof not long after became a loadstone also to the old Lord Wotton his Father, with many others to draw them to popish Idolatry. And so my Fa|ther leauing the Embassadors house priuatly; and discarding wife and children and fortunes in England, was conducted forthwith by the means of Father Creswell to the vniuersity of Salamanca, whereat the next day after his arriuall, hee was carried to the Bishops then inquisitors house, where hee was admitted with no little ioy to their Church, where he prostrating himselfe on the ground, and the inquisitor putting (as their custome is) his right foote on his head, said with a loud voyce, here I crush the head of heresie: the which ceremony and others ended, after a months abode in the said Vniuersity, he passed with Creswell to the Court of Madrid, where the King informed by Creswell what had happened, was exceeding ioyfull, and gaue charge to his chiefe Secretary of State Don Iuan Idiaques, that he should giue him whilest he liued a faire annu|all pension out of his owne priuate purse; but here Creswels policy is seene, which was to coun|sell him not to take aboue fifty Duckats month|ly, for feare if he should take more, the Here|tiques

of England (for so his tongue stil'd them) should haply say, he changed his ayre for pro|fit, not conscience: and that hauing left greater meanes in England, 'twould proue a singular ex|ample to draw many soules after him, sith 'twas cleare it was not gaine was his marke. Gentle Reader, take notice here of Iesuiticall strata|gems; recount a while the griefe and sorrow of my Mother his wife, my Brethren and Kindred; when as they hoped daily hee would proue the honour of their linage, their expectation on a sudden was terminated in sighes and lamen|tings. But it's necessarie I declare how my mo|ther likewise not long after was allured by my Father thus reuolted: and hauing withstood for fiue yeeres space all his letters and inticements, with those also of the Iesuites and Priests (But where the husband goes first, the wife common|ly followes after, it being the weakenesse of that sexe) was at length seduced by one Kelly a Ie|suite, who comming for that end with letters from her husband, mislead her away, hauing brought her to sell all she had, carried her forth|with into Flanders with her foure children, Hugh the eldest, since dead in Madrid, Katharine who died a Nunne in Lisbone, Mary who now liueth a Nun in a Monastery called Camber by Bruxels, and Iames this Author, your English Spanish Pil|grime. These with their mother liued and ex|pected their Fathers pleasure, and there hauing beene ordered to take shipping for Spaine, em|barqued her selfe at Dunkerke for S^t. Lucas in

Spaine, in a shippe called the Hound of Dunkerke, a shippe very famous for it's feates in warre; there were also twelue other shippes in their company, whereof ten suffered wracke in a tempestuous storme; this Hound with two others escaping, whose Masts were cut downe, and had not the tempest surceast on a sudden, they might haue fared as the rest. Thus through a Million of dangers we arriued the Spanish coasts, where her husband with ioyfull imbracements most louingly welcomed her and her children. I now forthwith was brought to a schoole in Siuill to learne to write, and read the Spanish tongue, and hauing attained here to my prefixed end, was presently after catechised in the Romane faith at Madrid, where, and at Siuill I continued about eight yeeres, from whence through the counsell of the Iesuites, my Father sent mee to S^t. Omers, where I was ensnared to the discipline of the place after their accustomed manner.



CHAP. II.

This second Chapter containes his voyage from Ma|drid to St. Omers, and how the shippe which wasted him thither, was by the way surprized, and pillaged by the Rochellers, who tooke away their Sailes, and all other tacklings necessary, as for the shippe, so likewise for their further sustenance, committing them to the mercilesse mercy of the waues: But the prouidence of God conducted them to a safe hauen.

_IN the yeere 1618. I tooke farewell of the royall Towne Madrid, my Fa|ther and Mother and other friends, and after their benediction, I was for S^t. Sebastans, accompanied with one M^r. Pickford, his Maiesties of Spaines pensioner in the Castle at Antwerpe, who was to be my conductor to the foresaid S^t. Omers in the Prouince of Artois, seuen leagues from Callis. At S^t. Sebastians which is 100. leagues from Madrid, wee chanced on a French shippe of an 100. Tunne, bound for Callis, wherein being imbarked with the first fauorable winde, we hoysed vp sailes and lanching into the maine, we steerd our course towards the English Channell, whether we hardly arriued being pur|sued with an exceeding fierce storme, euen to the hazard of our liues, our ship leaking much, and beating it selfe against the windes and bil|lowes of the turbulent Sea. This past, the ship

redrest as well as time and place could afford, we still made forward; and in our passage one of our Marriners deseryed a farre off a great ves|sell making after vs, and chasing vs narrowly, which strooke the Master and passengers with no little affrightments, and not without cause; for presently we perceiued him to bee a man of warre of Rochell, and made all haste possible to gaine the winde of him, and so avoyde him: but all was in vaine, the man of warre being lighter and lesse burthened, our shippe being old and deeply laden with the commodities of iron and wooll; all which being thought on, wee fell into diuerse opinions, as whether it were the best to prepare to fight it out, or strike Sailes and submit. Don Gondamours Nephew who was with vs in our shippe, and was then bound for Flan|ders, appointed there by his Catholike Maiestie Captaine of a troupe of horse, aduertised vs to yeeld, supposing thereby wee might saue our liues. But of all M^r. Pickford as an old beaten souldier, challenged to himselfe the priuiledge of the monitour, to whom all assented ioyntly, that they were ready to submit themselues to his counsell: Hee then being Captaine and Ma|ster of the shippe, commanded to bee brought before him all the prouision and best victuals of the shippe, and cheered vp the company there|with, telling them thus; that they ought to make merry with that that God had sent them, sith doubtfull it was whether euer they should meet together any more. Thus hauing made a good

refection, he commanded them to betake them|selues heartily to their deuotions, and put them|selues in defence, saying better it was to dye a thousand deaths, then to fall into the Rochellers hands; they (the passengers) being most of them retainers to his Catholike Maiestie, and hauing thus encouraged vs, immediately the man of warre came vpon vs, and fetching vs vp, gaue vs a broade side with his Ordnance; where vpon the Marriners (contrary to their promise) stroke Saile and submitted. They presently aboarding vs, tooke each of vs apart to make vs confesse what monyes we had, and what other commo|dities, threatning withall that if wee concealed ought from them, they would forthwith pistoll vs; such was their rapine and auarice, that no haste and expedition to surrender all could con|tent, but some were bastinado'd, others buffet|ted, and kicked, without respect of person or age; amongst the rest I bare my part, for being taken aside by a Scullion boy of the shippe, was stripped starke naked, and hauing made a purse of my bootes, he pulling off one, heard a merry jengling for himselfe, whereupon forced mee to silence with the danger of my life for feare hee should loose the pillaging of the other; for it was catch as catch may, and therefore disrobed me of the other boote, hoping no lesse booty, with the greatest dexterity that euer shooe-ma|ker vsed. This being done, our Sailes were plucked downe, and we committed to the mercy of the waues, where we suffered three dayes fa|mine

and cold, and longer wee might, had not those sencelesse creatures, the winde and the waues beene so kinde as to shew vs the way to Galisia, where wee met with a Barke which was then for S^t. Sebastians, where being arriued, eue|ry one of vs began to shift for himselfe. I aduen|tured on the courtesie of M^r. Peter Wiche, Mer|chant, and now Embassadour for his Maiesty of England, at the famous Citie of Constantinople. who clad both my backe and my purse after a competent manner. This past, my foresaid Guar|dian M^r. Pickford deliuered mee vp vnto two Franciscan Flemmish Fryers, which were then bound for their covent at S^t. Omers, their gene|rall chapter being then ended at Salamanca, with whom I was imbarked for Amsterdam in Hol|land, but by the violence of the Seas, wee were forced into S^t. Georges channell betwixt Ireland and Wales, where the tempest being so great, and our prouision so small, we were constrained to enter into Mylford hauen, where the foresaid Fryers being wearied with the tossing of the sea, resolued to make the shortest cut they could to S^t. Omers: Landing therefore at Pembroke Towne, and hauing beene enquired of by Sir Thomas Button Vice Admirall of those Seas, and the Maior of the said Towne, and an oath being administred vnto them whether they were Ie|suites, Priests, Monkes, or Fryers or of any such order and Romane function, swore flatly the con|trary, and so got a Pasport of the said Maior,

and so they parted for Bristole: and I pardi de|manding of them on the way how they could take such an oath with a safe conscience, they answered, they did it with a mentall reseruati|on, that is, they were not English Priests of an Hereticall function, and so we passed from Bri|stole, from thence to London, where I was not per|mitted to speake with my friends because for|sooth Heretiques vpon paine of damnation; be|cause I was young and not sufficiently founded in the Romane Catholike faith, and able to de|fend the points of my Religion, So thence without stay wee hasted to Zeland, and from thence to S^t. Omers, where they deliuered mee vp to the Colledge of the English Iesuites.



CHAP. III.

This third Chapter containes his education at St. Omers for foure yeeres, with the description of the Colledge and Gouernement there, besides di|uerse subtilties and tricks of the English Iesuites in their discipline, which is rather barbarous then ciuill.

_THis Colledge was founded about some 40 yeeres since, by the order and furtherance of Father Parsons that famous Iesuite, who sent Father Placke to S. Omers with sufficient monyes for theThi Father Placke is yet liuing, and conemned by the rest in his old age, not able for fur|ther seruice. foundation, hauing before obtained of his Ca|tholike Maiesty a pension of 2000. Duccats per annum, for the maintenance of the Students there.
At which Colledge (as I aboue said) accom|panied with two other Fryers, I arriued, who af|ter they had beene well refectioned by the Re|ctor, thay tooke their leaue of them and the rest of the paternities, and returned into their owne Couents: I remained behinde, and for the first night was by the Rector and the other Fathers well entertained at supper, making vp the time our stomacks would spare vs, with the discourse of my present journey from Spaine, which yet that they might more at large be enformed of, they lengthned the meale to my narration, vntill bed time broke vp both. No sooner had the

morning, and my selfe opened our eyes but the Rector and Father Creswell sent for mee, where they begun a remonstration of their rules, and orders and obseruations, somewhat shorter then their entertainment. First that they might take none blind-fold, they opened me with a generall confession of all my sinnes; then closed vp all a|gaine by the Sacrament, and after this least there might be any relique of the world left vpon me, they made mee disinvest my selfe of such pro|phane garments I had, and the superfluities of haire, but one they kept, the other they threwe away; then was I reinuested with a Doublet of white Canuas, Breeches and stockings that had not troubled the Weauer with ouer much paines, Cassocke  stockings of the same blacke and graue, the band precise and short, with a hat that might almost shaddow all, and shooes cor|respondent. Thus accoutred, the Rector deli|uered me to another Student, to whom he gaue the charge of shewing mee the Colledge, and committing mee to Father Thunder to appoint me a Study and a Chamber in the Dormitory, which was speedily done, and the next morning I was promoted to the first forme called the Fi|gures, there had I giuen mee a schedule which contained the duties  obseruances of the house, which are as followes.
First and aboue all, entire obseruance and du|ty to bee performed to the Rector as our Vice-God, next to the Vice-Rector as his minister, next to the Praefects which are ouer-seers of the

Schooles. The first of these was Father Robert Drury, who had his Sermon knockt out of his head with his braines at Blacke Fryers; The o|ther, Father Thunder, who appoints Chambers and Studies, makes them render account of their studies, keepes houres of study and recreation, and exercises many of his claps vpon their bree|ches. The third is Father Darcy Praefect of the Sodalitium Beatae Mariae, and the refectory. Then to all the rest of the Fathers in the house, as Fa|ther Iohn Flood, * hee who is their Champion toAnd likewise ghostly Father to the Stu|dents. answer and write against the Protestants in Eng|land. And Father Baker, bursar of the Colledge, who keepes the bagge and prouides necessaries. Besides, especiall respect is due to the fiue Ma|sters of the Schooles, to Father Adrian or Tush, which the Students call him from his owne mouth, to Father Lacy, the Reader of Poetry, and Master of the Syntax. Father Henry Bentley, and Father Iohn Compton of Grammer, and Fa|ther Iohn Crater of the Figures, and Father Wilson ouerseer of the Print-house; and besides, dutie is to be giuen to the Porter, who is the Lord Mountagues brother, who hath not as yet beene higher promoted; to the Bursar, Brewer, Taylor, Butler, Baker, Apothecary, Shooe-maker, Ma|ster of the Infirmary, who ouer lookes the sicke, the Clearke and Cooke which are all Lay bro|thers; which why they should be thus honoured with Cap in hand I know no reason, vnlesse they meane to pay them with respect of boyes for the disrespect they giue them themselues; yet

this may seeme sufficient for those, all which ex|cept Father G. Kempe, and Brother Browne were nither borne nor bred to deserue higher, being such as either misfortunes, debts or misdeeds had in ship-wracke cast vpon coast, where onely per|petuall seruitude was their liberty,  misfortune their only fortune. Thus much for the obedience the Students are bound to bestow vpon Father Ie|suites,  Lay Brothers. Let vs now descend to the Students: their chiefest quality is noble blood for the most part, to make such a Proselite the Fathers compasse sea and land, perswading them thatNobilis non mascitur sed fit. such a calling addes to their Nobility. Of others lesse eminent by birth, it is required they should at least equall, if not transcend in eminency of parts  wits, which in time would purchase better portions then men more nobly descended would haue affoorded from inheritance. The number of the first ordinarily neither amounts aboue or vnder an 100. of the other 20. The obsruation of the distribution of the day is thus: Eury mor|ning the fist houre summons them vp, the first halfe is bestowed in making vp themselues and their beds, the place where they slpt is called a Dormitory, which containes three long Galleries topping the house: each of these is furnished with some 50. beds, distanced onely by a partition of boards; the next halfe houre the Chappell doth challenge their attendance, the Masse their deuotion, whosoeuer is absent shalbe sure to haue the vnwelcome presence of Father Thunder. At six they go all to study in a large Hall

vnder the first Gallery, where according to order each takes his seate, where they study one houre, and in the midst walkes Father Thunder, and see they all keepe silence and bee diligent at their bookes; all are bound to bee there without bud|ging at seuen, which is their houre of breakefast, they go downe two by two with their bookes vn|der their armes, and first those in Rhetoricke vnto the refectory, where euery one hath for his part a peece of bread and butter, and beere as pleaseth him. The losse of this breakefast is their punish|ment whose names had beene giuen vp to the Prefect for hauing spoke English the day before, but within a quarter of an houre, each boy quits the Refectory, and repaires to the schooles; from seuen and halfe, vntill nine and better they are ex|ercised in repeating and shewing what compo|sures they had made, after which time the Prefects and Masters leaue the schooles, and the Students of the three vnder schooles, go vp to those of the vpper, which read to them Greeke till tenne, at which houre euery one betakes him to his study vntill eleuen, as in the morning before, then to dinner. After they haue raunged themselues a while, the Rector  Fathers enter, the elder saies Grace himselfe, or ordaines another, which being done, he placeth himselfe at the vpper end of the Table, the others in their order. All this while the Students mouthes are shut, not from eating, but speaking, bestowing their eares vpon six other of their companions disputing three against three in two pewes one ouerthwart the other, of such

things which may rather helpe digestion to the Fathers, then benefit their owne vnderstandings, as whether their paternities had better eate flesh or fish, drinke wine or beere; and this dispute be|gins and ends with their dinner: At the Fathers meale both Ceres and Bacchus vouchsafe their company to sit, and that liberally too; their meat is what their delicacies can desire, that their Pro|curator caters for: the Abbey of Watton two leagues distant, furnishing them with that fatnesse it was wont to affoord the Monkes as you may read in Owen.See Lewi  Owen.
Now let vs come to the Collegiates or Stu|dents, and their diet: First they are serued in by seuen of their owne rancke weekely and in course, and according to seniority each man hath first brought him a messe of broth which is the anti|past: afterwards halfe a pound of beefe which they call their portion, after an apple, or peece of cheese for their post past, bread and beere as they call for it. When they haue ended the meale, the Rector enioynes silence to the disputants,  then rising from the table himselfe, stands and sayes Grace, which said the Seudents first go out one by one, each making his reuerance hat in hand to the Rector; next after, himselfe goes forth to heare them play their musicke, which is in a great Hall ouer the Refectory, thence vntill one of the clocke they recreate themselues in the Garden, thence each man to his study which is vntill two, then againe to the schooles, so vntill foure and a halfe (as in the morning) at their Greeke and La|tine

exercises then againe to their studies vn|till six which is supper time, and in the same manner spent as dinner, sauing that six others go into the pewes, and after some short disputati|ons, one of one side reades the Latine Marty|rologe, and another after him the English, which containes the Legend of our English Martyrs, and Traitours together, sometimes two in one day.
The Students heare out the relation with ad|miring and Cap in hand to the memory of Champion, Garnet, Thomas Becket, and Moore. Af|ter this vntill seuen and a halfe, musicke vntill eight, they recreate themselues together, thence to their studies againe vntill halfe an houre bee past, so to their Letanies, and to prouide them|selues to bed, but before they doe it for the most part they demand on their knees all the Prefects benedictions, otherwise they take not them|selues blest; then while they are disrobing themselues, one amongst them reades some mi|racle or new booke vntill sleepe close vp all, and Father Thunders noyse awake them in the mor|ning. Discipline is here enough were it well be|stowed; thus passe they their dayes and yeeres, saue Tuesdayes and Thursdayes when on the af|ter noones they are licenced to the recreation of the open fields; On this wise; dinner ended wee march forth of the Colledge by two and two, Father Thunder himselfe carrying vp the reare vntill wee are distant about a mile from the Towne, where wee walke, or play at ball or

bowles or other such games, till the clocke and our stomackes strike supper time, whence repai|ring to the Colledge, rost mutton is our prouisi|on being not ordinary. Now let vs touch Sab|bath affaires vnto which on Saturday on the af|ter noone from foure till six, and after supper till eight all the Students confesse themselues to their ghostly Fathers aboue named: on Sunday morning at six of the clocke they hye to their studies, where they read sacred letters vntill seuen, from thence to the Chappell, and Con|gregation of our Lady, which is kept in one of the schooles, Father Darcy aforesaid being Pre|fect of that place, where sitting in a chaire, hee exhorts all to the honour of the Virgin Mary, declaring to them her great power and mira|cles; all the schooles are not admitted here vn|to, but those onely whom the Prefect and his 12. Consultors approue of, which 12. Consultors are ordinarily termed his white boyes. The pri|uiledge of this sodality is that they haue graces, rosaries, and beades, Indulgences, Meddals and hallowed graines from his holinesse. In vertue whereof as the Prefect tels them being once ad|mitted into the same society, they may obtaine pardon of all their sinnes past, and at the houre of their death, saying or but thinking on the name of Iesus, Mary, Ioseph, they are actually pardoned and freed from the paines of Purgato|ry, which otherwise had they not beene of this society they should haue endured.
With one of the aforesaid graines saying one

Aue Marie they may by the vertue of each deli|uer a soule from Purgatory. Besides on the day any that are in this sodality establisht, their sins are remitted, swearing sidelity, and stiling them|selues the Virgins slaues: On this manner each Sunday betwixt seuen and eight they spend their time and they all go to Masse, and receiue the Communion, thence to breakefast, after to the Study, whereas before they busie themselues in reading diuine stories till dinner; anon after dinner to their Church where they sing Ves|pers and Letanies to our Lady for Englands con|uersion, hauing written on their Church and Colledge doores in great golden letters, Iesu, Iesu, converte Angliam, fiat fiat. These are onely the outsides of their profession: But now will I rippe vp the very bowels of these treacherous glosing Fathers: First those schollers who are Nobly descended and of rich parentage, they striue to allure by their honied words, and flatte|ring imbracings, indowing them with pictures, beads, meddals, Agnus dei, which they haue from Rome: Also that their baites may take ef|fect, they licence them to participate of all those wines and juncates prouided for their owne pallates, and if white boyes of a come|ly feature they bestow on them (though ill de|seruing) the preheminence of the schooles. And with these is the Prefect of musicke most recre|ated, reading to them Ouid, Hor. Catull. and Pro|pertius. As for the Interrogatory and confession of their ghostly Fathers, I referre you to Peter

de molin, which is intituled Novaute du papisme, where you may at large read those abhomina|ble abuses committed in their Interrogatories. Againe, a second baite is laid for those more graue then the former; for instance, a Gentle|man of Yorkeshire by name M^r Henry Fairefax, sonne to S^r. Thomas Fairefax, who not yeelding to their inchanting allurements, one night being a sleepe in his bed, two Iesuites clad in gorgeous white as they had beene Angels, approaching hisThis they did in imitation of the two An|gels that whipt S.Ierome. bed side with two good disciplines in their hands, the ends of some stucke with wyery prickes, hauing vncouered him, they did after so sauage a manner raze his skinne, that he became for a while sencelesse, speaking vnto him in La|tine that they were Angels sent from the Virgin to chastise him for some offences by him com|mitted, viz. for resisting the power, and reuiling the proceedings of his superiours, exhorting him to that Order by vertue of the testimony giuen by the Virgin of the holy Order of the Ie|suites, which said, they departed, and left the rest so farre astonished that they knew not whether they had beene Angels or diuels: the day daw|ning, he found his lineaments of such a purple die, that they kept their hue a month after: But somewhat to allay the fury of his torment, Fa|ther Thunder, and Father Gibbins perswaded him it was some diuine correction to the intent hee should take on him their habit; whereupon gi|uing credit to them, at 17 yeeres of age hee was admitted into their society, about foure yeeres

after Father Thunder blushed not to acquaint this Gentleman with the truth of it, and that it was onely done for his good, tract of time ha|uing now sufficiently digested his misery, and being by this time inur'd in their Orders, that howsoeuer (he so well approued of their de|meanours) bee resolued to continue his abode with them.
The second example is that Father Francis Wallis alias Clearke, now Minister of the Col|ledge desired to allure to their Order, one M^r. William Abinton a Student in their house, onely sonne to M^r. Iohn Abinton, in whose house the Traytor Garnet was apprehended for two rea|sons: First because hee was ingenious and well learned: secondly, because his Father had lost the greatest part of his meanes in behalfe of the aforesaid apprehension, the Iesuites also hauing made largesses of promises to requite the said losse in ample manner, could no otherwise doe for him but so. The course Wallis tooke was this, one morning seeing him passe by his win|dow went after him, calling him by his name, and saying vnto him that a little before hee hadThis Gentle|man liues now in England at hi  Fathers house in Hol|borne,  hath affirmed to me duesetimes the same: Be|sides I was in his company when it hap|ned. heard a diuine reuelation from S^t. Ignatius Loio|la, that the first Student hee saw going by his doore, he should declare vnto him he had cho|sen him to be one of his Apostles, and that with|out delay he must be for his orders; All which the young Gentleman hauing attentiuely heard, he doubted not of the truth of the vision, but be|fore he would bee entered a Iesuite, hee craued

the space of a moneth to take farewell of his friends in England, which conditionally was granted, with a promise of a speedy returne: but he no sooner had arriued his owne Country shores, but he vtterly disclaimed their superstiti|ous reueales.
The third example is M^r. Herbert Crafts, some|times of the Vniuersity of Oxford, sonne to Sir Herbert Crafts, who trauailing to S^t. Omers to vi|sit his Father who liued in the Towne, was by him and Father Iohn Flood, brought to the Ro|mane obedience, and though his Father was a good Catholike, yet he counselled him neuer to turne Iesuite. Yet for all that, they found out a way to draw him vnto them, which was a sub|tle and a craftie one indeed, viz. to entice him toSee the Spa|ring discoue|ry. pag. 12. take the spirituall exercise which he refused not being a matter of honour amongst the Catho|likes to enter into; the order they obserue in ta|king of it is this: in 15 dayes space hee is ap|pointed a chamber solitary, and sequestered from the rest, for this said space hee is to speake with none saue his ghostly Father, who directs him in the distribution of each day, one houre is to examine his conscience of what sinnes hee hath committed in times past, another time to say his prayers, and office of the Virgin Mary; another for the hearing of Masse, and saying of his Rosarie, but the principall to which the ghostly Father doth apply himselfe, is to giue that person certaine meditations made by Ignatius Loyola which are as follow. First, that

meditation of the creation of the world: se|condly,1 the creation of mankinde, and how much2 man is obliged and bound vnto God for his cre|ation:2 thirdly, what a man ought to do for those apparent benefits which we receiue from his li|berall hands: fourthly, that there is no way more4 certaine vnto saluation, then that of a Monasti|call and solitary life: fiftly, the explanation of5 this question, what this solitary or Monasticall life is, which they answer, that it is to liue in a Monastery or Desart: sixtly, that all religious6 Orders at their first course and originall were holy, and sacred institutions, but by the corrup|tion of time they haue lost their ancient purity: seuenthly, what a man is to doe for the surety of7 his saluation, seeing that (as it is their abhomi|nable maxime, with a kinde of a negatiue limi|tation) that any wandring from their Collegiate society, (which they terme their Paradice) into the world, can hardly attaine to the hope of sal|uation:8 eightly, that that man which desireth the saluation of his owne soule, must renounce all the doctrine of the reformed Churches, and cleaue onely to their holy society; and that for two reasons: the first, that as all Orders at their1 first beginnings did obserue their injunctions punctually, but through their corruption and dissention for priority lost that efficacy which they had at their Foundation; so they suppose their Iesuiticall society being newly instituted, hath not had the time to be corrupted (their o|ther societies of the Dominicans and Francis|cans

being by their priuate dissensions much tain|ted.. ibid. p. 25. Secondly, that considering that their Grand Ignatian Saint being highly preferred to the Al|mighties fauour by the holy Ghost, and euen pa|ralelling him with our Sauiour in that power of casting out Diuels, (if not rather procuring offer|tories by this fained power) thought that if otherIdem docuit Franciscus vid. testimonium Gregorij 9. in fine testamenti Francisci. Orders had beene more strict then theirs, hee had neuer founded his or this society.
And furthermore, they pretend that S^t. Ignatius receiued by diuine reuelation, that none of his Order should euer bee damned for 200 yeeres terme, and this they beleeue as an Article of their Creed. In conclusion of all, they exhibit vnto him the meditation of death, and contemplation of the paines of hell, so by these meanes they wonne the Gentleman to their Order against the will of his Father. In this very exercise I my selfe was initiated for some 15 dayes space, but it was Gods pleasure to giue mee more vnderstan|ding then to bee led away with the rest. Besides these they haue yet farther plots to bring their young Students in beliefe that they are well seene in Chyromancy, and can tell them their fortunes, and what are these thinke you? either they must be Iesuites, or looke for a disastrous end. Of these fal|sifying trickes I my selfe was an eye witnesse. Now let mee descend to their most barbarous proceedings, which are indeed numberlesse, but for auoyding prolixity, I will recount here a few: Some few yeeres since, there was one M^r. Edward Hastings at Hurlston, an ingenious young Gentle|man,

whom when they could not draw vnto them by the meanes aforesaid, they exercised on him such Tyrannicall discipline, that the least fault he did they Stoically interpreted to bee e|quall to the greatest, and punisht him according|ly; this most cruell handling of him being in|tolerable, he writ to his friends and informed them thereof, most earnestly intreating them to send for him. *But their letters were interceptedThere is no way to go out of this Col|ledge, or to write or re|ceiue any let|ter, saue with consent of the Rector, for they are kept as in prison vnder locke and key. by the Rectors hands, and answered by him a gaine, that he was wilde and head strong, and that it would proue his vtter ruine if euer hee came into England, which he perceiuing, he re|solued with himselfe to leape ouer the Colledge wall, but being taken in the instant, Father Thun|der clapt his buttocks till hee left him halfe dead, to make him an example, then sent him a|way with foure shillings in his purse to conduct him for England: so likewise they vsed * SirThis Sir Wil|liam Browne died at S. Omers. William Brownes sonne, and thus also they dealt with one M^r. Henry Taylor, sithence Secretary to Count Gondamor, who hauing well felt the fore|said Fathers claps, was thence sent to Rome with a mission, and then also quickly weary of the same kinde of discipline, wrought meanes to depart from thence too, but they gaue him but forty shillings to conuey him to England, who tooke S^t. Omers in his way to visit his mother there liuing, where then Father Blunt being resi|dent, the Prouinciall of the English Iesuites, and and she remembring him of the seruices that her late husband D^r. Taylor D^r. of the Law had done

for their Society, in protecting in his Chamber that Iesuite Father Gerat, a complotter of the Gunpowder Treason, and then interpreter to the Spanish Embassador in England, in consideration whereof, the Prouinciall Blunt gaue him a letter of fauour to Gondamor the then Embassador in England, where the letter was writ in this tenure, I intreate your Excellency to doe for this strag|ling sheepe who hath beene bred with vs, but re|fusing to take any more religious functions hath forsaken our Colledge; which Count Gondamor hauing read, made little account of the Gentle|man, but notwithstanding reflecting vpon his fa|thers deserts, gaue him house roome and dyet, and afterwards perceiuing his dexterity of wit, made choise of him for his Secretaty, and now since the death of his Master, he is retainer to his Catholike Maiestie. These past, in the yeere 1622. Father Baldwin was elected Rector of the Colledge of S^t. Omers, who had lately suffered imprisonment in the Tower of London for seuen yeeres space, for suspition of high Treason, was in the yeere 1619. by Gondamors intercession set free: this man insisting on the same steps with his predecessors, became the first English Rector of that Colledge, and the second yeere after, there was sent to this Colledge, a young Gen|tleman Estenelaus Browne by name, sonne and heire to M^r. Anthony Browne, brother to the Vi|count Mountague: this Gentleman after two yeeres abode there, wearied by their tyranny|call discipline, and desirous to get his necke

from their yoake, counterfeited a letter from his Father to the Rector of the said Colledge, and deliuered it to one Higham a booke seller, whoSometimes the boy of W W. booke binder in London. liued in the Towne, and vsed often to the Col|ledge, who deliuered it to the Poste which comes weekely from London to S. Omers, to that end he should giue it to the Rector, which done, and the Rector vnclosing the letter, taking it to be his fathers owne writing, wherein he intrea|ted to send his sonne ouer into England, and fur|nish him with all necessaries besides, which the Rector failed not to do vpon hope of his speedy returne; but he hauing priuately disclosed vnto one of his fellowes what his purpose and inten|tions were, was betrayed by his babbling, and well punisht for a lyer; whereupon the Rector informed his Father what prancks he had plaid, and that if euer hee should bee in England hee much doubted he would turne Protestant; here|upon his Father sent word backe, that he should detaine him there, protesting that hee was sorry to be father to so vntoward a sonne; and thus perforce they detaine this young Gentleman to this houre; and such like courses they take with all that would leaue them; and if any escape them, and be after promoted to any place of ho|nour, they traduce him and brand him with all titles of ignominy, and to this end they haue their Agents in all places of consequence to put in against them as witnesse these that follow. Sir Edward Bainham, Sir Griffin Markham, the Arch|bishop of Rhemes, and Father Barnes a Bene|dictine,

and others whom in my seuenth Chap|ter I shall speake of at large.
Now let vs come to the Iesuites themselues what loue and vnity they mutually entertaine amongst them, and to their three seuerall pro|fessions: the first and chiefe of them are meere Machiauillians, who doe nothing but imploy themselues in matters of State, and insinuate themselues into the secrets of great ones, and giuing true intelligence to none, saue to the Pope and his Catholike Maiesty, whose sworne vassals they are; these obseruing no Collegiate discipline are dispenced withall by his Holines, as if they did God greater seruice in thus im|ploying themselues, then following Collegiate courses. As for their religion, they make it a cloake for their wickednes, being most of them Athiests or very bad Christians; these are they that obserue these ten Commandements which follow.

1 To seeke riches and wealth:
2 To gouerne the world.
3 To reforme the Clergy.
4 To be still jocund and merry.
5 To drinke white and red wine.
6 To correct Texts of Scripture.
7 To receiue all Tithes.
8 To make a slaue of their ghostly child.
9 To keepe their owne and liue on another mans purse.
10 To gouerne their neighbours wife.

These ten Commandements they diuide into two parts, all for me, and nothing for thee: the charity they mainetaine each among other is none at all, for they labour with enuy; as for ex|ample, Father Parsons died at Rome, through griefe for not being made Cardinall, Creswels faction preuailing against him, and Creswell him|selfe notwithstanding his seruices done to the Sea of Rome and State of Spaine, was by new vpstart Iesuites, exauthorized and ejected from his place, which was Prefect of the English Mis|sionAs you may read in Speede his Chronicle. which is now by dispensation from the Pope conuerted into a Prouinciall-ship, which was giuen to Father Blunt, who was lately in England, and wretched Creswell dyed about a yeere after at Gaunt in Flanders, well striken with yeeres, but farre more with discontent, on the 20 of March 1622. And their malitious pro|jects haue cast out Father Fosser from being their Agent in the Spanish Court 1627. who for a Ie|suite, which is rare, was an honest meaning man, and a very good fellow, and haue subborned in his place Father North a grand Matchiuillian, and thus they haue vsed diuerse others, as old Father Flacke, Father Strange, Father Gibbins. The second sort of Iesuites are those who preach, confesse, and teach youth, and enuy each other for the number of their schollers  ghost|ly children; they are besides in no small emula|tion about their owne worth and learning, rea|ding for the most part to their white boyes loose and lasciuious Poems. A third sort of Iesuites

there are, not vnfitly termed simple ones; these are wonderfull austere in their life, of a scru|pulous conscience, and brought vp to colour the courses and the Actions of the more cunning and politicke ones: of this rancke some foure yeeres since was one Master S. of whom the Ie|suites got some 12000. pound sterling, but since he hath seene their jugling and cheating, hath left them, and returned to his true religion and Country; of this rancke also there yet liues Vi|count Mountagues brother, now Porter of the Colledge at S^t. Omers, of whom they haue got no lesse then 10000. pound sterling, of whom they report, that after his death his body shall worke miracles for the austerenesse of his life; of the same condition is S^r. Gerard Kemps bro|ther, who is a Caterer to the Colledge, out of whose purse they haue pickt 2 or 3 thousands. These three seuerall ranckes and Orders afore|said are growne to a faction, about the Iesuitri|ces or wandring Nuns, some allowing, some dis|liking them vtterly. This Order of Nuns be|gan some 12 yeeres since, by the meanes of Mi|stresse Mary Ward, and Mistresse Twitty, two English Gentlewomen, who obserue the Ignatian habit, and goe clad very like to the Iesuites, in this onely differing from other Nunnes: They walke abroad in the world, and preach the Gos|pell to their sex in England and elsewhere: The first that induced this Order of Nunnes, was Fa|ther Gerard, then Rector of the English Colledge at Leige, Father Flacke and Father Moore assisting

him therein, but others oppugned them, as Fa|ther Singleton, Benefield, and Flood, refusing to giue them their Ite praedicate, but rather adjud|ging them to a retired and monasticall life, whereupon there hath risen no small variance a|mongst them; but in the meane space this fore|said Mistresse Ward is become mother Generall of no lesse then 200 English damsels, being most of them Ladies and Knights daughters, who liue in their Colledges at S^t. Omers, Leige, and Colen, and from thence are for England to conuert their Country: it fell out that not long after theirWho were the fairest of all the rest, as Mistrisse Vaus, Stanly, Portescue. mother Generall went to Rome, with seuen or eight others to establish their Order with his Holinesse, which though hee confirmed not so fully; yet he gaue her a toleration, which being obtained, she procured another Colledge also to be erected in Rome, where shee hath vnder her gouernement about 100. Italian Maids; But from Rome the last yeere shee went to Vienna, where she hath likewise procured to be erected another Monastery, the Emperesse her selfe pro|tecting her; but now she is daily expected in England, to take account of her she-Apostles la|bours; in a word to conclude, these Iesuites en|deauour to demollish all Orders and places of eminency aboue them; all which I obseruing, laboured with all possible meanes to get out of their clutches, and though I had promised them to turne Iesuite, yet had I leaue to goe to Siuill

with their Mission and from thence to Madrid to take leaue of my Parents, and so to re|turne againe to them, and thus in 1622. I depar|ted S^t. Omers for Spaine, with the Mission consisting of 12. of vs, whose true names were, Clifford, Gerard, Appleby, Con|niers, Hausby, Robinson, Euely, Naile, Atkins, Midleton, Farmer, and my selfe.



CHAP. IIII.

This fourth Chapter containes his departure from St. Omers, and voyage into Spaine, where on the Seas he with those eleuen in his company were ta|ken by a States-man of warre, hauing beene in fight with them rom seuen in the morning, till three in the afternoone, after by the Captaine of the said man of warre, whose name was Iacob. May, were boarded vpon a shippe of Hamburge, which they met with on the Seas bound for Spaine, in the which shippe after tenne dayes sayle, they were ta|ken againe by a little Gally belonging to the Port of Sally in Barbay.

_IN the yeere 1622. August the first, we departed from S^t. Omers for Callis in France, where we were imbarked in a shippe belonging to Dunkerke, which was then newly loaded for S^t. Lucas in Spaine, hauing taken a false certification from the go|uernor of Callis, that the ship and goods belon|ged thereunto.
This ship was of an 100. Tunne burden, car|rying 12 peece of Ordnance, 40. men besides passengers, one Chirurgion, and two Trumpe|ters. And we departed with seuen other ships in the company, and hauing sayled to the Pro|montory called Fines Terrae, vpon the coast of Galisia we descryed a shippe comming from the coast of Portugall, which tooke his course aside of vs, at last wee perceiuing he discerned our

French colours, wee forthwith made towards him, who put out the States colours, but we sup|posing him to bee a Pyrate of Argier, Sally, or Rochell, it would not be amisse to aboard him be|ing so neere the coast of Spaine, not doubting within a few houres to take him, to the which end the Admirall with the other fine being all French, joyned himselfe to the Vice Admirall being the strongest of the company, they were conceited, it were best to let him goe; but the Vice Admirall desirous to contest with them prepared himselfe for to fight, launching forth his boate, charging his Artillery, Muskets, and Murthering pieces, laying his traines of powder, nailing vp his decks, crossing the hatches with Cables, and hanging his gripling chaine on the maine Mast; which done, the Captaine of the Vice-Admirall Iaques Banburge by name, began to encourage his Marriners, telling how easie it was for seuen to take one, not thinking the sup|posed Pyrate to haue had aboue 30 men, and 10 peece of Ordinance, whereupon the rest gathe|ring together, resolued that the Admirall should make the first onset, and the Vice-Admirall the second, and the rest in their order; but the Hol|lander discerning vs to be French made no haste to escape vs, and hauing gotten the winde made towards vs with a desire to get some prouision of vs for his money and we towards him, which seeing, hee hung out a flagge of truce, but our Admirall saluted him with two peeces of Ordi|nance, our Vice-Admirall with foure, and the

rest in their order came on, which hee valiantly withstood, putting forth on each side some 14. brass ces of ordnance, not hauing before out aboue 4 or 5, his burden being some 200. Tunne, with an hundred and fifty men, and fiue Trumpeters, who turning about gaue vs two broade sides with his Ordnance, shooting three or foure of our ships through, and through out. Our Admirall and the other French ships seeing themselues deceiued, and that he was no Pyrate but a States man of warre, fled, leauing our Vice Admirall engaged in the sight. The Vice Admi|rall seeing how the case stood, said vnto vs 12. that we were now to dye with honour, or sur|uiue with infamy, and because wee were young and vnexpert in sea fight, to encourage the bet|ter made vs to drinke each one of vs a good draught of Aqua vitae with Gunpowder; This done, he enioyned his Marriners to play on them with small shot, but they replying so stoutly, made our Marriners quickly quit the hatches and fly to their Ordnances vnderneath as their best defence, whereupon we kil'd the Master of their ship, which their Captaine perceiuing dis|charged more eagerly, and with the shot tooke off the sterne of our shippe, which our Captaine perceiuing grew desperate, euen sometimes minded to blowe vp the shippe, in 12 shootes more they strooke downe our maine Mast, and kil'd our Chirurgion who newly was come vp from vnder the lowermost deckes, and saying these words si deus nobiscum quis contra nos, was

slaine on a sudden with a common bullet, and hauing one hand on my shoulder, pulled mee downe along with him, his blood streng out vpon me.
And thus after seuen houres fight they aboar|ded vs, with fire and sword massacring all those that came first to their hands, and after they had cleered the decks they desisted.
Then examining all that suruiued, amongst the rest they found vs 12 to bee English youths and passengers, and kindly entertained vs. Next day they meeting with a shippe of Hamburge bound for Spaine, loaded with boards and beere, commended vs to him to conuey us to the fore|said S^t. Lucas in Spaine, surrendring vp all our furniture which wee brought in the Dunkerks shippe, which shippe they carryed with them to Holland, being laden with very rich commodi|ties to the value of 7000. pounds, and so than|king them for their affection to the English Na|tion we left them, and continued our course for Spaine, and comming to the Cape of S. Vincent, we deseryed comming towards vs a little Gally, which we tooke to bee a Fisherman, and being destitute of victuals and prouision, we got vp the maine Mast and made signes vnto them for suc|cour, hoping in an houre to haue gone with them on shoare at the Fort of S. Vincent.
But our supposed Fishermen came sooner then welcome, for hauing first coasted vs round about, and perceiuing our vessell though great, yet of little defence (as in truth it was, all the

Marriners being meere Anabaptists) came di|rectly vpon vs, and wee getting on the hatches ready to leape into them; perceiued our Fi|shermen turned to a Gally of 18 oares on each side, hauing in him besides about 100. Moores, Moriscoes, and other runnagates, who comming within shot let fly at vs two peeces of Ordnan|ces, and making a great shout altogether in signe of ioy they had gotten a prize.
And we seeing ourseues quite lost, strooke saile and submitted, they entring our shippe, tooke vs out into them, and sent our shippe with our Pilot and twelue Moores into Sally.



CHAP. V.

The fift Chapter declareth how he was sold with the rest in Sally, and the great misery they endured vntill they were ransomed, and how the Merchant was poysoned by the Moores for redeeming them, and after his death how the Iesuites cheated his sole daughter and heire of the monyes which from vs was due vnto her, for those her Father disbursed in our ransome.

_AFter we were taken by the the Moores (as aforesaide) wee were bound hand and foote, and cast into the Prow or forecastle of their Gally, where wee lay foure dayes space, not permitted somuch as to stirre from the place.
After these foure dayes past, and the seas growne calme, they vntyed our hands and feete, brought vs from the Prow to the board of the Gally to helpe them in rowing, putting foure and foure to an oare, but I being vnable to keepe stroake with the rest, was well beaten,  bound againe, and cast backe to the Prow, the rest do|ing their deuoire, where kept close till night, then I enioyed their company.
At midnight, two Moores come downe vnto vs,  secretly selecting two of the youngest and fairest amongst vs, abused their bodies with in|satiable lust, and on the next morning they strip|ping themselue starke naked, and powring out

water one vpon the others head, supposed by this washing they were cleansed from their new acted sinne.
Another night the Moores making merry vp|on the decks, and halfe drunke with their drinke which they call Opium, our Marriners of Ham|burge, and some Portugall Captiues which were with vs perceiuing such oportunity, we encou|raged each other to rise vp against them, their weapons being below with vs, and one of the Portugals hands vntyed; whereupon we agreed, and this Portugall beginning to vntie the rest, was apprehended in the Act by the Captaine of the Gally, who comming downe in a fury, said that he knew what wee intended, and that hee could discouer in his sleepe, more treachery then wee could inuent being awake And well might he do so hauing the helpe of their Priest with him who was a witch (as most of them are) and then putting the plotters to death, he fette|red vs more strongly with irons.
And so coasting the coasts of Spaine, still ex|pecting some other booties, but finding none, entered the straites of Gibralter towards Argier, but the winde turning contrary, wee were con|strained to repaire vnto Sally. And the day be|fore our arriuall there, being destitute of vi|ctuals, the Priest called their Alfaqui, conjured the fish of the sea to draw neere to the Gally, so that they tooke them vp with their hands, as many as sustained vs till wee arriued at Sally, where we were carried to the Castle, and there

crammed like Capons, that we might grow fat|ter and better for sale, and being brought to the market, were shared amongst them and sold.
And thus we were diuided to seuerall masters, taking farewell one of another with teares in our eyes, neuer thinking to meete any more: the price which was giuen for each of vs was 25. pound more or lesse, our masters being Moris|coes, which dwelt at the Castle.
The Hamburges likewise were sold in like manner, but in this respect were in farre worse estate, because they were sold to Moores in that Countrey,  therefore had lesse hopes of future redemption: But amongst the rest of our com|pany I deemed my selfe the happiest, because I fell to the Captaine of the shippe, whose name was Alligallan a Morisco, who had beene banished with a 100000. more from Spaine, by Philip the third, vpon suspition of treason. These Moris|coes came into Spaine with Iacob Almansor, other|wise called Vliaor Caliph, who conquered Spaine and brought them in with him, where they resi|ded 500. yeeres, vntill the last extirpation as now said.
This Morisco carried me to his house, where fettering one of my legs with an iron chaine, and clothing me with a canuas suite, laid these in|junctions vpon me: first he gaue me charge of his stable, and then to grind at his hand mill, and to draw water at the Fountaine, with many o|thers of the like nature.
The victuals he gaue me were Bereugenaes,

Cabbage, and Goats flesh; As for my lodging itThis Bereuge|naes is like our Turnips. was in a dungeon in the market place, where they vse commonly to lodge their slaues, who repaire there euery night about eight of the clocke, their masters manicling their hands be|fore for feare they should make an insurrection, the number of them being about 800. being Spaniards, Frenchmen, English, Italians, Portugals, and Flemmish, our beds were nothing but rotten straw laid on the ground, and our couerlets pee|ces of old sailes full of millions of lice and fleas, so that we could take no rest, being constrained to put backe to backe and rub out the paine; a|bout fiue of the clocke in the morning the doore being opened we repaired to our masters houses, and so to our wonted worke.
And it chanced on a time that I hauing not performed my ordinary taske, was beaten by my master so cruelly, that for a long time after I lost the vse of my left arme, which he percei|uing said, at most it was but the losse of a Chri|stian dogge. Another time going to fetch water from the Fountaine, I chanced to make water a|gainst the Church wall, which a Moore seeing, presently made toward me, and asked whether it was the custome of my Countrey to doe so or no, if it was, it was not the custome of theirs, and thereupon beat mee till hee left mee halfe dead. A while after this, my Master perceiuing me to bee sicke and feeble, and not able to per|forme any seruice, gaue me leaue to see a French Merchant, by name Iehan de la Goretta, to see if I

could perswade him to redeeme me; this Mer|chant traded from thence to Siuill, and Cales, and vsed to traffique for slaues and other commodi|ties, to whom when I had opened my case, hee promised to do for me what possibly hee could, and hauing taken my name in writing, he pre|sently told me he knew one of my name, whom (as it fell out) was my Vnckle, who was then the English Consull for the Merchants at S. Lucas, and thereupon hauing examined mee, and fin|ding me to tell the truth, offered to my master 50. crownes for my ransome, but my master vt|terly refused it, then the Merchant rose higher, and gaue him the summe of sixscore crownes and vpwards, and so I was ransomed and set at li|berty.
Now I began (hauing a Moore in my compa|ny for my conductor) to enquire after my com|panions, whom I found in the Castle, and in se|uerall priuate houses, whom they scarce euer suffered to come abroad, especially the fairest and youngest, whose bodies they abused with their Sodomy. I hauing with much difficulty obtained to see them, tooke my leaue of them and went to the Merchant, acquainting him how I had beene with my companions, and intrea|ting if hee could possibly hee would ransome them, who made great demurre for the present, not knowing them, and besides they being so many in number, that their ransome would a|mount to a farre greater summe of money then he could well disburse, whereupon I perswaded

him that it would bee an exceeding charitable deed, and no lesse auailable vnto him, their Fa|thers and friends being men of great fashion in England.
So then at last the Merchant partly resolued to redeeme them, went to visit them, but most of their masters would not part with them vp|on any termes, which the Merchant perceiuing, betooke himselfe to the Gouernor of the Ca|stle who was his very great friend, and presen|ting him with a diamond ring of 600. crownes price, procuring the Gouernor to buy them for himselfe, who did it, and gaue for them, some 30. pound, some 40. pound a peece.
Which done, hee deliuered them vp to the Merchant, which the Moores their said masters vnderstanding, came in great rage and tooke them out of the Merchants house where wee were altogether expecting to be imbarked the next winde for Spaine, but one of their masters saying I was the occasion they were like to loose their slaues, drew his Cemiter vpon me to kill me, but I betooke my selfe to my heeles, and tooke sanctuary in the Gouernors house, whom when I had informed how the case stood, came out with his guard and protected me, and tooke my companions from their masters againe, and put vs all in a house neere his owne, with a guard of 12 musketiers to defend vs till such time as the Merchants shippe was ready for Spaine.
Hereupon the Moores their masters were fur|ther inraged, and hauing complotted together,

said they would haue them to be gelded, and to be sent for Eunuches as a present to the King of Marruecos to attend vpon his 300. wiues, so they went to the Gouernor and declared this their minde vnto him, the Gouernor was much per|plexed, not daring to deny any thing which was for his King.
Whereupon the Gouernor not knowing any other way to preuaile, intreated them that they would not do so, and that vpon a greater occasi|on they should command him greater matters, and so with perswasions and good words he ob|tained his will, and we being freed from all dan|ger, and the Merchant ready to depart for Spaine, one of the aforesaid Moores presented him with a poysoned tart, to the end he dying there|with, they might recouer all their slaues. But as it pleased God this poyson wrought not with him for a day and a halfe, for after dinner hee tooke his leaue of the Gouernor being as yet found, and the Gouernor brought him on ship|board, taking vs 12. along with him, where de|parting, we all gaue him most humble and hear|ty thankes, as the sole instrument of our most happy deliuery. And thence hauing hoysed vp sayles we went on our voyage, and scarcely ha|uing sayled the space of halfe an houre, the Mer|chant began to waxe wonderfull sicke, and to raue, and withall to complaine of the dart, which the master of the shippe seeing, turned his course to Mammora, a towne now belonging to Spaine, eight leagues from Salley, where anchoring that night, we expected the morning tyde to enter

the Port, the morning tyde being come wee car|ryed our Merchant on shoare, and I being about to lay him on a bed, he presently expired in mine armes, not making any will or disposing of his goods: Next day he was buried with all honour the Gouernour of the Towne and Souldiers could exhibit, we 12. carrying torches before his corps to the Church, sang the requiem and dirges of the dead, and the Priest celebrated masse for his soule.
Which Ceremonies ended wee returned to our ships, and being ready to depart with the next morning tyde, there drew towards Mammo|ra, the Moore whom they call the Saint of Salley, with 30000. other Alarabes, and assaulted it with such fury and shouting, as if heauen and earth were come together, then making their onset were valiantly repulsed, the towne being assisted with 150 Marriners, and Passengers out of our shippe and pinnaces, but especially by two French Gunners who neuer let fly in vaine, the Spanish Gunners missing for the most part.
Thus a great part of the Moores being slaine, the rest fled with their S^t. backe againe to Salley.
And we two dayes after departing the towne, continued our course for Cales, but drawing neere the City of Alarache, we were chased by three men of warre of Argier, so that wee were forced to take shelter vnder the Castle of Alara|che, where I and another of my companions got on shoare, vnwilling to venture any further in the ship, but finding there a lighter boate of the Gouernors ready for Cales, wee embarkt our

selues therein, being accompanied with one Captaine and a Dominican Fryer, and when we were neere Cales the Fryer began to tell the Captaine of the best Curtesans in the towne, but in the midst of his story he perceiued a Tur|kish Barke making towards vs, which broke off his discourse, and droue him to mumble ouer his mouldy beades, and say his Breuiary, and of|fice to the Virgin Mary. But hauing gotten on the Spanish shoare, told what was behinde of his former discourse.
Here I departing with my other companion, went to S^t. Lucas which was three leagues off to my Vnckles house, where I was receiued and en|tertained with no little joy; where also ten daies after, the rest of our company arriued, with whom being furnished for my journey accom|panied them to their Colledge in Siuill, whence taking my leaue I left them, being not willing to tast any more of their discipline, and wishing them withall to take order to satisfie the Mer|chants daughter, hauing already done it for me.
The Rector made answer for them to me, that he would take that to his charge.
And so I went to the Court of Madrid to visit my Parents and friends who knew not what was become of me, where being entertained with no small joy, I opened to my Father the misery I had suffered and acquainted him with the Iesu|ites practises at S. Omers, and the reasons where|fore I left them; this my Father hearing, grew into dislike with the Iesuites, but especially when he vnderstood that the Rector of the Col|ledge

at Siuill had cheated the Merchants daugh|ter whose father lost his life in ransoming their schollers, which cheat was contriued on this manner. The Iesuites of Siuill hauing beene in|formed that the Merchant disbursed not ready money for their ransome, but was to pay it at his returne, now (he not returning) they affirmed that they thought in conscience they were out of debt for the matter, neuer considering that the Merchant had left his warehouse fraught with the value of 10000. crownes behind, which their deceit his daughter now seeing sued them in the law, but the Iesuites so possessed the Iud|ges that they ouerthrew her in the cause, so that now she was left destitute of Father and goods, the foresaid Moores  Iesuites being trebly paid.
Now the Iesuites wrote to England to their friends for their ransomes, which being speedily sent, they enjoyed themselues.
Moreouer they made a Tragicall-Comedy of our voyage, whereby they got much money and honour, whereupon all people admired Gods prouidence, and our deliuery out of such mani|fest dangers, which the Iesuites ascribed only to their protector S. Ignatius we being their schol|lers, and thereupon they collected no small summes of money, which they pretended was to pay for our ransoming.All are there liuing, sing onely Conniers who dyed vp|on his arriuall at Siuill tho|row the mise|ry he endured.
And now they keepe these schollers in the Colledge studying vntill such time which is a|bout 2 yeeres hence, when they shalbe ordained Priests and Iesuites to bee sent to conuert their Country.



CHAP. VI.

This sixt Chapter containes diuerse remarkable things touching the Iesuites and Monkes, and also the death of his Father in Madrid, where after his voyage hee liued two yeeres, vntill his Catholike Maiesty nominated him his Captaine for Flan|ders.

_IN the yeere 1623. I arriued at Ma|drid as aforesaid, where I resided with my Parents liuing in peace and tranquillity, vntill such times as there came to Madrid, that magnanimious and vertuous Prince Charles Prince of Wales, now King of great Britaine, whose voyage procured the wonder of the world, the like being neuer heard or read of; but leauing the description thereof to more skilfull pennes then mine owne, I returne to my intended subiect. First then the Iesuites perceiuing what finall accounts I made of returning vnto them, gaue me ouer for a cast|away, and sought by all meanes they could to disgrace me to my parents and friends, but I be|ing afore acquainted with their dealings, kept me out of their clutches. Now the Earle of Car|lile the Lord Hayes by name, arriued at Madrid, tooke me from my Father and made me his in|terpreter for the time of his abode in Spaine, and after his departure I past my time to and fro in diuerse English Gentlemens company, still ex|pecting

the conclusion of the match betweene England and Spaine, and hoping thereby to bee admitted into the seruice of Donna Maria the Infanta whom my Father had tutoured in the English tongue, and had also the promise of all courtesies shee could possibly do him, and thus passing my time, I fell into acquaintance with M^r. Francis Browne sonne  heire to the Vicount Mountague, and M^r. Henry Barty, the now Lord of Lindseys brother, one M^r. Anthony Inglefield the foresaid M^r. Brownes cosen germane and Earle of Bristols Page. This M^r. Browne had a Benedictine Monke to his Tutor whose name was Fryer Ben|net, alias Smith, who through the aduice of ano|ther Benedictine Monke one Father Boniface, tooke him out of the Earle of Bristols house, and put him to a Priests house in Madrid to bee tutour'd and brought vp in learning, telling him that it was very absurd that such a Gentlemans sonne as he was should be Page, and that especi|ally in Spaine.
But their intent was to make him one of their owne order, and so get his meanes away from him, for they enioyned the Priest to looke to him very narrowly, and not suffer him to go a|broad, without either going himself, or else sen|ding a faithfull companion along with him, and that vpon Sundayes and Holidayes hee should bring him along with him to his cosens house to dinner, where I meeting afterwards with him, and growing intimate with him and his cosen, they complained to mee what seuerity the

Monks exercised vpon them, but especially vp|on M^r. Inglefield, inticing him daily to take their habit vpon him, saying, that there was not such an order to be found in the whole world besides, and that he should bee admitted into the com|pany of any Duke or Prince, and moreouer rec|koning vp how many Popes had beene of their Order and the like. As for M^r, Browne they kept him in so close, that he rather liued the life of a Monke then a Courtier, for they made him eue|ry day to meditate vpon death, and the danger of liuing in the world, thinking thereby to draw him to their Order, at least to be well affected thereunto. Likewise they made him say the of|fice of our Lady, and their grand Priests breuia|ry, and so at length they got such a hand ouer him, that they made him oft times go on foote whilst they rode about juncketting in his coach; but now leauing the Monkes awhile, let vs come to the Iesuites and Austen Fryers.
First how the Iesuites went about to seduce to them one M^r. Henry Challoner, sonne to Sir Tho|mas Challoner, late Tutor to Prince Henry: this young Gentleman not contenting himselfe with the bare knowledge of Arts, and liberall scien|ces at home, but desiring likewise to bee more really and experimentally informed by visiting forreigne parts, imbarkt himselfe at Douer for S. Lucas in Spaine where being arriued tooke his way by Siuill to Madrid, and at Siuill he went to the Colledge of English Iesuites to see the discipline and gouernment thereof, and the Ie|suites

seeing him to bee but tender of yeeres, made full account to draw him to their Orders by their flattering words and inticements, tel|ling him as yet he was in a great errour, that it were his best course to admit of the Romane Ca|tholick faith without which there is no saluati|on; but he demeaned himselfe so discreetly that they could not possible worke him ouer with all their enticements. Hereupon seeing they could not preuaile by their arguments and inticements the kept him in their Colledge perforce, where considering in what straite he now was, contri|ued the meanes of his liberty after this manner: he told them that hee had a brother a neere re|tainer to his Highnesse of Wales, who had sent for him to preferre him to his seruice, which the Iesuites hearing dismised him speedily, for feare they should incurre some great displeasure. And so taking his leaue he tooke his journey for Ma|drid, where by the way hee met with a certaine Austin Fryer, which was then trauailing for Ma|drid, whose company hee enioyed to the fore|said Madrid, but on the way the Fryer well ob|seruing the comelynesse and ingenious lookes grew forthwith inamoured with him, insomuch that he desired to be his bed fellow, and in con|dition thereof he promised him a nights lodging with his sister, who for her beauty was then pa|ralel'd but by very few in all Spaine, but this young Genrleman not giuing way to his re|quests, as exceeding the bounds of reason and modesty, left the Fryer much perplexed in his

vnnaturall desires; when they came to Madrid, the Fryer went to his Couent, and this young Gentleman to the Court, where hee was enter|tained by his Highnesse, who gaue charge to his Secretary that he should want for nothing, tel|ling him that his Father had beene a second Fa|ther to his brother whose god-sonne hee was; thus passing his time at the Court vnder the Princes protection and care, was here also as be|fore at the Siuill Colledge assaulted by one Fa|ther Foster, but he put him off as the rest. A little after he returning into England with his High|nesse, now my Father continued in his tutorship of the Infant vntill he fell sicke and dyed, No|uember the last, 1623. the chiefe occasion of his death being this: the Iesuites and their depen|dants seeing that he consulted not with them as in times past, for finding himselfe wonderfully mistaken in them and their religion, said it was high time for him to looke to his owne soule, and yet he doubted not if it pleased God but hee would saue one. Whereupon the Iesuites en|deauoring by all possible meanes to exauthorize him vnder hand, informing the Infanta that his disease the cough of the lungs might proue in|fectious to her person; vpon this shee sent her Physitians to visit him, and they finding it other|wise, she continued him in her seruice.
But a little after hee being aduertised by his friends of the Iesuites plots and information a|gainst him, and seeing also the same himselfe, went home, and after the eight dayes space with

sickenesse and discontent hee dyed, leauing his place to one Father Boniface, in whose Church he was buried, his body being accompanied by the Earle Gondamor and other Nobles of the Court, and all the seruants of the Infanta, with many other English Gentlemen, as M^r. Barty, M^r. Browne, S^r. Edward Bainham, M^r. Inglefield and o|thers; the dirges and requiems and other ceremo|nies ended, my brother and I went to kisse the Infantas and Don Oliuares his hands, who most graciously receiued vs, and procured vs our Fa|thers pension.
This past, I liued at Madrid at my mothers house 7 or 8 monthes, in which I continued my former friendship with M Browne, and M. Ingle|field, but especially with M. Inglefield, who told me againe how vehemently hee was vrged and importun'd to turne Monke, whereupon I di|swaded him from it, which Father Boniface smel|ling out, gaue order to his tutor to refraine my company, which M. Inglefield took so grieuously, that on the sunday following when his tutor was saying Masse at the high altar, got from him, and came to me where I entertained him with all respect and courtesie. But Father Boniface vnder|standing where hee was, came to him, and per|swaded him to returne to his tutor, but seeing he could not preuaile by perswasions, thought to do it by threates; but all in vaine, for the young Gentleman was resolued rather to dye then to turne Monke, which Father Boniface seeing re|turned to his Couent as wise as he came.
A little while after, he counselled M^r. Bennet the aforesaid M^r. Brownes tutor, to conuey him to Rome, which he did, and intreated S^r. Griffin Markam, and S^r. William Stanley who then liued at the Court, and with whom I daily kept com|pany, to perswade me to follow the warres, sup|posing thereby in my absence to regaine Master Inglefield with their perswasions: I presently gaue eare, and hauing got audience of his Maie|sty, I intreated him for a commission and patent for a land company in Flanders, which his Maie|sty forthwith granted me, and withall gaue mee 200 crownes for my viaticum: so taking leaue of my mother and friends, I tooke my journey for Flanders, but in the meane space, M. Inglefield receiued a letter from his Father, in which hee enioyned him to returne to the Vniuersity of Doway in the Prouince of Artoais, where his yonger brother was a Student, which foresaid Vniuersity was but foure leagues out of my way, and so we resolued to trauaile together, and a day before we departed, Father Francis Fosser came to visit vs, and inuited vs to accompany him the next day to Vallidolid, it being but two leagues out of the way to Flanders, at whose re|quest M. Inglefield and my selfe resolued to goe with him, but especially for the great desire, wee had to see the English Colledge there; where|upon the next day wee departed to Vallidolid, where after three dayes journey we arriued, and were inuited forthwith after our arriuals by the Rector and other Fathers of the Colledge to

lodge with them, whose request we accepted of, staying with them that night at supper, and bed|time being come, they lodged M. Inglefield at one end of the Colledge and my selfe at the o|ther, telling vs it was not a custome among them for two to lye together, whereupon I betooke my selfe to my rest, and hee to his: And I being in bed, the Sub-Rector and two of his schollers went to his Chamber, and after some conference had with him, they brought him certaine junc|kets  sweete meates with the best wine in the towne, telling him that if hee would be pleased to stay with them in their Colledge, he should haue all the respect and honour which a Gentle|man of his quality may challenge. Furthermore they shewed him the sepulcher and monument of his great Vnckle S. Francis Inglefield, some|times priuy Counsellor,  Master of the Wards to Queene Mary, and King Philip, who had also beene buried in their Colledge, and had beene as they say one of their chiefe Benefactors, and for his sake they were bound to giue him re|spect, and the best counsell they could: but hee replyed that he must with all hast make for Do|way, sith his father had sent for him to come thi|ther: on the next morning as soone as I rose I went to his Chamber, where he told me of all occurences and passages with the Iesuites the night past, which hauing done wee resolued to depart after dinner, but the Rector, and Father Fosser,  Father ward the Sup-Rector, very ear|nestly besought vs to stay with them two dayes

longer, because they had a Lay brother Iohn Hill alias Wood by name, who was ther for Flanders, and would be for our company if we would stay so long for him, which we did. This Hill had beene sometimes a Pyrate, and Captaine of a shippe belonging to Sir Francis Mannering, who comming for England, Hill with drew himselfe, and fled to Ligorne in Italy, where giuing all that he had got by Pyracy to the Pope, and the gene|rall of the Iesuites for the remission of his sins, at last turned Iesuite himselfe whilst we expe|cted the company of the said Hill, the Iesuites continued their banquetting and collations in M. Inglefields Chamber, but seeing at last how little they preuailed in their purposes dimist vs, Hill going along with vs, whom wee found to bee a crafty companion, and one who with his subtle artifice and skill laboured to entice M^r. Inglefield to S^t. Omers, which the better to effect, he sowed dissension betwixt vs as wee trauailed to S^t. Sebastians, where hee went to the Iesuites * Residency and we to an Inne in the towne, butThis residency the Iesuites got by chea|ting the Priest of the towne about 6. yeeres since. the day following this brother Hill came to our lodging, and in my absence inuited him to dine with him at the Residency, with whom he went, and after dinner the Iesuites perswaded him to leaue my company, Hill hauing informed them how I had affronted him in the way, and besides that the way I resolued to take was very dange|rous and chargeable, sith I was to go by land, and through many desarts in France, and the lands of Burdeaux; which arguments had so farre forth

preuailed with him, that had I not by a despe|rate search and enquiry by chance found him out, he had beene gone by sea to S^t. Omers, with Hill, but when I met with him and askt him his resolution, hee told me he would goe by sea, vrging me with the aforesaid reasons of the Ie|suites, which I hauing forthwith confuted and cleered my selfe, wee instantly resolued to take post horses, and continue in our journey by land, and on the very same day we rode to S. Iohn Lu|cy in France, and Hill followed vs, chusing rather to loose all the prouision hee had prouided for sea, then to leaue M. Inglefields company: so po|sting on through the desart of Burdeaux, finding my selfe cleere from the danger of the inquisiti|on, and falling into words with Brother Hill, they gaue occasion of blowes, at last after halfe an houres fighting, being by M. Inglefield parted, who inclined to my side, the which brother Hill perceiuing lost his labour in that he intended, reconciled him vnto me, and that night in token of an humble reconciliation, supplyed the place of an Oastler in pulling of my bootes, so arri|uing at Burdeaux, being weary with riding Post, we agreed with the messenger to trauell with him to Paris, giuing him euery man fiue pound apeece (the journey being 300. miles) to defray our charges, whence comming within foure leagues of Orleance, some jests passing betweene M. Inglefield and a Frenchman, Hill perswaded M. Inglefield who did not vnderstand the French tongue, that hee was abused by the Frenchman,

which gaue him occasion to strike him ouer the face, whereupon the Frenchmen which were in company assaulted vs,  had it not been for a Ro|cheleer we had been slaine, who related vnto him that he was misinformed by Brother Hill, which they considering, drybasted brother Hill and left vs. Afterwards comming to Orleance, Hill complained to the Iesuites in the French Col|ledge of the seeming abuse offered vnto him, vp|on which they pretending to bee Christs fol|lowers, perswaded him that if he tooke a blow on the right eare, hee should turne the left also, where seeing himselfe so slighted in his com|plaint, railed extreamely against them, not dee|ming them worthy to be couered with the robs of their disorderly Orders, and thinking them to be a disgrace to all others of that society. From thence continuing our iourney till wee came to Paris, calling him there to an account of the mo|ney which wee deliuered vnto him being our purse-bearer, found his reckoning short by 7. pound, which he pretending to haue lost, gaue vs reason to discard him; wee trauailing by our selues from Paris to Doway, at which place lea|uing M^r. Inglefield with his brother, and DoctorWhich dis|course began by reason of their intempe|rate drinking of Muscadine, which was the incendiary of some quarrels the day be|fore. Kellison President of the English Colledge, I re|solued from thence to Brussels, and so to Bredah, but being inuited by M. Francis Fowler the night before I departed to the Caterers house, I found at supper, the L. S. sonne, M. P. S. and M. T. A. and M. W P. where supper ended, M. P. floting in his cups, began a* discourse concerning the casual|ties

we are subiect vnto in this world, preferring the Order of a Franciscan before others. To who~ I answered that on condition hee would turne Fryer, I would turne Monke, I being seconded by M. S. and M. Fowler, which their jest at last tur|ned to earnest, whereupon M. P. disrobing him|selfe of all his rich apparrell, gaue them to his Hoste Edmunds, who being potshotten and per|ceiuing the Moone to shine bright through the windowes, said with a loud voyce, that the holy Ghost was descended, and opening his armes to receiue it fell downe backward and broke his pate, from thence being carryed to his bed, wee continued drinking to our new vocations till the day peept out, at which time reeling to the Franciscan Monastery entered himselfe into their Order, they neuer examining the cause of this suddaine vocation, being glad of such a prize, shaued his crowne and inuested him in their ornaments, M. S. and M. Fowler going to the Monkes were admitted with the like ioy at the same instant. But I taking my leaue of them at the monastery doore, said that I for my part was onely in jest with them. But this being noy|sed about the Vniuersity, it came to Doctor Kel|lisons eare, vnder whose charge these new Fryers were, who sent for me, and said he much admi|red that such a thing should happen in my com|pany, and if that they had intended religion they might haue beene secular Priests in his Col|ledge, it being for them more profitable and ho|norable: I answered that I thought it impossible

to gouerne the wils of other men, and supposed my selfe happy in keeping my selfe from the like shauing. Vpon this answer the Doctor deman|ded of me in what case they were when they en|tered themselues, to whom I said they might thanke their god Bacchus more then any thing else for their new orders, which he hearing tooke his leaue of me and went to the Franciscans, ac|companied with M. Bredley a Priest M. Parkers cozen. So I leauing the Vniuersity went to Brux|els, and from thence to Bradah: but Bradley being denyed enterance by the Fryer, who said it was against their Orders for any one to speake with any of their Nouices, * leapt ouer the GardenFor so they terme all the first yeere. wall,  got vnder his Cozens window, calling  saying vnto him, Cozen, Cozen, consider I pray that you haue taken a religious Order without knowledge of mother, brother, or kindred, and that your vocation is not good, being vndertaken in a hot braine His Cozen hearing this  being counselled by the Fryers, he opened his window and said, discedito  me Satan. Six dayes after be|ing in a better temper, perceiuing his owne fol|ly, desired to depart from thence, which hee did with great difficulty, for hee was perswaded by the Fryer, that if euer hee departed from them, being entered, he lost the saluation of his soule. To whom he answered that hee intended this journey for England to receiue his portion; and taking leaue of his friends to returne againe. Vp|on which promise they suffered him to depart. Thence comming into England, was receiued of

his friends, and not suffered to returne, onely sent a summe of money to maintaine their Couent. The Fryers perceiuing that he should neuer re|turne, preached against his Cozen B. and other Priests for diswading him from his returne. But concerning M. S. and M. Fowler, who were ente|red into the Benedictine monastery, whose ex|ample encouraged M. Alex. Wy, and M. Edward More to follow them. But the Monks being more subtile then the Fryers, vsed these men with all the courtesy they could, that they might induce their Order. After these kindnesses they bare a more rough hand ouer them, and amongst the rest Doctor Radisend their President, vpon slight occasion enioyned these Gentlemen to pennance, which was, that they should prostrate themselues at the inward Chappell doore whilst the rest of the Monks came in and sang Vespers. Whereupon some of the brauer sort to shew their authority, would tread somewhat hard vp|on them, and their long lying on the ground, with their hard pressing, caused them to let flye backward, insomuch that the sent compelled the Fryers to depart the Chappell. A while after these Gentlemen perceiuing their hard vsage, departed their monastery, resoluing for England, although they had promised (desiring to bee freed from their bondage) to make aspeedy re|turne, which they neuer performed to this houre.



CHAP. VII.

This Chapter containeth the state and demeanour of the English Fugitiues vnder the King of Spaine his Dominions and else where, with a Catalogue of the Colledges and Monasteries belonging to our English Iesuites, Monkes, and Seminary Priests beyond the Seas.

_BVt gentle Reader, giue me leaue a little to digresse, and reckon vp vnto you the state of our English Fugitiues in the Court of Spaine, and first and formost S. Anthony Shurley, who stiles himselfe Earle of the sacred Romane Empire, and hath from his Catholike Maiesty a pension of 2000. duckets per annum, all which in respect of his prodigality is as much as nothing. This S. Anthony Shurley is a great plotter and proiector in matters of State, and vndertakes by sea-stratagems to inuade and ruinate his natiue Countrey, a just treatise of whose passages would take vp a whole volume.
Next vnto him there is one Sir Edward Bain|ham, who was a grand complotter of the Gun|powder treason, and an agent for all the rest to Flanders, Rome, and Spaine, at which place hee liued for foure or fiue yeeres in great reputation and esteeme. In Spaine he grew familiar with Creswell, but the Gunpowder treason taking no effect, they forthwith fell to difference, and ha|uing spent 12000 pounds sterling which he car|ryed

out of England with him, he fell into great misery wherein he liues to this day, and (because his plot failed) he is neither countenanced by his Catholike Maiesty, nor by the Iesuites who se|duced him. I being in his company at Madrid, and telling him of Creswels death, he made an|swer that hee hoped he was in the deepest pit of hell, hauing beene the occasion of his ruine, with many others.
Likewise there is one M. Iohn Persall, who is a meere formalist, and hath for his pension of his Catholike Maiesty 20 crownes a month; but were it not for Don Duarte brother to the Duke of Braganza, who relieues him now and then, he might starue with hunger notwithstanding his pension.
There is also one M. William Sadler, who hathThese pensi|ons are but onely as a baite to allure others: for they are sel|dome or ne|uer paid. 40 crownes monthly pension from his Catho|like Maiesty, who neuerthelesse were it not for his wiues sake he might keepe lent all the yeere long, for she with her daughter brings him gold and siluer without going to the Indies. Moreouer there is one M. Henry Butler, which teacheth his Catholike Maiesty to play on the Violl, a man very fantasticall, but one who hath his pension truely payd him for his fingers sake. Also there is one M. Burton who liues by his wits. Also there is one mistresse Mary Monpersons who liues by trading.
Againe, there is one M. Anthony Pinto, some|times a seruant to Creswell, who seeing how ill the English Fugitiues were treated, discarded

the name of an English man, and now pas|seth for a Spaniard, and thereby liueth farre better then the rest, being one no lesse subtile then his master: thus much for the English secu|lar Fugitiues of note at Madrid.
But now let vs come to the Clearkes and re|ligious men. First, to the English Iesuites whose Agent and Procurator generall is Father North, one for policy, very subtile and dangerous. This North was created D. D. in Paris, and was some|times Vice-President of the Colledge of Doway, and afterwards turned Iesuite. Agent and Pro|curator generall for the English Monks, is one Father Boniface, a very crafty fox, and a Smiths sonne in Redding, hee is so ambitious and haugh|ty, that he will not acknowledge his parentage, but giues out he is some great Gentlemans Son. As for the secular Priests they haue one Missen|den for their Procurator generall, a simple fel|low, but wonderfully malitious. Now touching those of the Scottish Nation which reside in the Court of Spaine, there is none of account but Colonell Simple, who betrayed a towne in Hol|land to the Spaniards some 30 yeeres since, and receiued 25000 crownes for requitall of his treachery, and now liuing in Spaine, hath lately begun a foundation of a Scottish Seminary, the Prefect or Rector whereof, he intendeth to make his base sonne Hugh Simple, whom he hath trai|ned vp in the Spanish Iesuites Seminaries, one who may proue as treacherous a companion as euer was his father. For his Maiesty now of Eng|land,

being in the Court of Spaine, hee gaue vp diuerse petitions  aduertisements to the King and Counsell of Spaine that they should not con|clude any match with England, vnlesse there should be erected in each Vniuersity vnder our King his Dominions a Colledge of Iesuites for the trayning vp of youth in the Romane faith and doctrine, and to shew himselfe the more zea|lous, printed these said aduertisements with his name subscribed, and deliuered them to his friends of the Court. As for the Irish Fugitiues, there are more of them then of any other, the streete wherein they lodge is by the Spaniards termed the lowsie streete, and as for their quali|ty, saue these that follow: First, he that pretends to be Bishop of Aramath, and Dublin, then the Earle of Beere-hauen, with two or three more of the King his Pages, all the rest are meere chea|ters and vagabonds. The said Bishop and Earle are Agents for Tyron and Terconwell, who liue in Flanders in the Archdutchesses Court, and from them to other Papists in Ireland, they daily importune his Catholike Maiesty  his Coun|sell to inuade the said Kingdome with an army, not doubting but it shall bee deliuered vp into his hands, from which their sollicitation they could not forbeare euen when our King was in Spaine. And thus much for the English, Scottish, and Irish Fugitiues which are at this present re|sident in the Court of Spaine. Now for the Col|ledges  Seminaries of the Iesuites, Monks, and Fryers, and other Seminary Priests, I remit the

Reader to Lewis Owen his running Register in the publike Library at Oxford, of which he may at large see which I will here but name; as the Colledge at Vallidolid, and that at Siuill, and the Residence at Madrid, and another at S^t. Lucas, another at Lisbon, of which a secular Priest, one Numan by name is the head, who is now in suite with the Iesuites about the propriety thereof, but especially because there is one Don Pedro Co|tinio a Portugall Gentleman, who was once go|uernor of Baia in Brasill, who by reason of his great corruption and vnlawfull gifts he receiued there at his returne from Spaine, fearing least he should bee examined by his Maiesty how hee came by these great riches, he had to bring the world into a good conceite of him professed that he would build a Colledge for the educati|on of 100 English youths, which after they had beene trained vp there, might returne to their Countrey and conuert many to the Romane obe|dience, of which Colledge hee promised the said Numan to be head, and likewise hee made the same promise to the English Iesuites, that one of them should bee head, if his Holinesse would approue thereof, and hereupon engaged them so deepe in the Law, that 20 yeares try|all will scarce end their controuersie, hee in the meane time derideth both parties, hauing no in|tention at all to performe what hee hath pro|mised.
But neuerthelesse one Haruy a secular Priest, Numans Agent here in England for the getting

ouer of youth, perswadeth the Catholikes and their Bishop of Chalcedon, that without doubt Father Numan will ouerthrow the Iesuites. As for any Scottish Colledge or Seminary there is none, sauing that which Colonell Simple is be|ginning in Madrid. As for the Irish they haue three, one in Salamanca, another in Siuill, and a third in Lisbon. As for English Nunneries, there is only one which is at Lisbone, whereof you may read more at large in Robinson, and thus much for Spaine.
As for English Fugitiues in Italy, there are ve|ry few. At Millaine there resideth Sir Thomas Stukeley, who hath 100 crownes a month pensi|on from the King of Spaine. This Stukeley is a grand traytor, and enemy to his Countrey, and were it not for the Duke of Feria, who entertai|neth him at his owne table, he might long since haue rode backe to Madrid on an Asse as hee came.
Likewise there is one Webb, a retainer to the King of Spaine, who liueth wonderfull poorely. As for the City of Florence, there liueth Sir Ro|bert Dudley, who styleth himselfe Duke of Nor|thumberland, who left England because hee could not be suffered to enioy a second wife, his first wife then suruiuing. This Dudley now enioyeth his second wife by a dispensation from his Ho|linesse, and is in great esteeme with the Duke of Florence, in regard of his Art in contriuing and fabricating of ships, and Gallyes; and hath ob|tained of the Emperour to bee declared Duke

of Northumberland, who hath giuen him the title already, and the land when he can catch it.
Now let vs come to Rome, where of all places of Italy we haue but one English Colledge, (be|sides the residence of the English Iesuitrices, who spoke Latine to his Holinesse, to the end that he should confirme their Order, and their sufficien|cy (though women) for preaching the Gospell to all Nations, euen to Turkes and Infidels, men|tioned in my third Chapter,) whereof Father Fitz Herbert is the Rector, who had beene be|fore a pensiuner, and spye to the King of Spaine in France, and his seruice being past, and his pen|sion failing him, out of pure necessity he and his man were constrained to turne Iesuites, or else starue. And hee being a worthy scholler and a great polititian, was very welcome to that Or|der. But to come from Italy to Flanders, our Eng|lish Fugitiues liuing there, are as follow: Sir Wil|liam Stanley, who betrayed Deuentre a towne in Holland to the Spaniards, this Knight laments now his misfortunes, and sayes he hath out-liued his friends, and in the yeere 1624. hee was con|strained to goe to Spaine in his old age, hauing now seene 95 yeeres, and there to goe Cap in hand to all the priuy Counsellors, to craue his pension which had not beene paid him in six yeeres before. And after he had spent 3 monthes in petitioning them, they granted him 10000. crownes, and the title of an Earle to sell, or be|stow on whom he pleased; and thus he returned to Flanders leauing his money in the handes of a

Spanish Iesuite Father Antonio Vasques by name, who promised to returne it for him by a bill of Exchange, but neuer did it to this day. Where|upon seeing himselfe thus cozened in his old age, turned Carthusian at Austend, and gaue the Carthusians there his Plate, and that little mo|ney which he had, where I haue heard him often complaine of the Iesuites, and say he was hear|tily sorry to finde them such knaues, and that if his Maiesty of great Britaine would grant him pardon, and leaue to liue the rest of his daies in Eancashire with beefe and bagge-pudding, hee should deeme himselfe one of the happiest in the world; but this could neuer bee obtained of his aforesaid Maiesty hee hauing beene so great and notorious a traytour.
Likewise there is one Neuill, who stiles him|selfe Earle of Westmerland, but his Earledome many times will scarce furnish him with a din|ner,This Neuils first wife is yet liuing in London. and were it not for his * second wife who playeth the shee Physitian in the Archdutches Court, hee might be put oft times to narrower shifts, notwithstanding his 100 crownes pension a month.
There is also one Sir Thomas Leige, who not|withstanding his 40 crownes pension a month in the Castle of Antwerpe, for a man of his fashi|on his wife and children liue in a very meane estate.
Amongst all these Sir Griffin Markham hath gone the best way to raise his fortunes; hauing got into fauour with the Duke of Nuburge who

giues him the surest pension of all. This Sir Grif|fin Markham at his first arriuall at Bruxels being kept vnder by the Iesuites, was driuen to such an exigency that he was constrained to plucke out the inlaid siluer of the hilts of his sword, to buy flower to make an hasty pudding for his dinner. There also is one M. Ward, who notwithstanding the pension of 40 crownes monthly, liues in great want. Mr. Young likewise hauing like al|lowance, and sharing in the same misery. Besides M^r. Parsons, brother to the grand Iesuite of that name now dead, is in no better condition.
There is also one Gabriel Coltford, a notable spye and traytor, both to his King and Country, who with his companion Clifford, is more noxi|ous to our Kingdome then 100 others, who is of indifferent estate, but of a minde farre aboue.
There is also one M Versteagan, who did not his wife keepe vp his credit might be yokt with the rest.
And now we are come to the regiment which the L. V. and S. E. P. conueyed for the Arch|duchesse seruice. This L. V. after his arriuall, sent a cozen of his, one Captaine B. into Spaine, ho|ping of some great reward answerable to his expectation, which was a chaine of gold from his Catholike Maiesty, valued at 400 crownes, which my L. refused hauing beene at 5000. pound charge in that seruice. Three of his Cap|taines which were Sir R. H. Sir E. E. and C. T. C. S. a little before had a like recompence, they being cassierd, and the souldiers mixt with

other companies, who hauing disburst in the conduct of the Souldiers 3000 crownes, not 1000 returned to them againe. Whereupon my L. V. vpon distaste herein left the seruice be|ing minded for England, leauing Sir E. P. Colo|nell in his roome, who after the siege of Bredah being ended, was alike rejected,  his regiment being reformed into one company, was giuen to Captaine Rhisby, once Sergeiant Maior to the same regiment. And a while after, Sir E. P. and most of the Captaines were purposed for Eng|land; as Sir W. T. Captaine B. Captaine B. Cap|taine L. Captaine V. Captaine L. Captaine M. and Captaine W. with their Auditor C. all these are returned to England with the ruine of their states and fortunes; and those that continued tooke their pay of reformed Captaines, which were Bennington, Gage, Shawe, and Sir E. E. the Scottish regiment which was vnder the conduct of the E. of A. was likewise reformed, whereup|on Sir * W. E. Sergeiant Maior to the said regi|ment,A great per|son, who if he had beene im|ployed at his returne would haue pooued the glory of this Nation. vpon discontent thereof, departed and came for England. Sir I. H. Captaine B. and Cap|taine H. following him, the remainder of the re|giment reformed into one company, and giuen to Sir Iames Creeton, there being behind Cap|taine Lucy, and Captaine Mannington, with di|uerse other Scottish Captaines. And the said E. of A. hauing had a promise of his Catholike Maiesty to bee one of the most Noble Order of the Golden fleece, in expectation thereof, and o|ther honors, continued there vntill the yeere

1628. but seeing how his pension and hopes failed him, he returned for England.
There remaine also at Bruxels one Lerde Lit|tleton, who notwithstanding his fathers seruices to the Pope, and his 40. crownes a month pensi|on, is in the same predicament with the rest.
Now for the Irish, as Tyron and Terconnell, they haue some pittance allowed them, and especial|ly Tyron; who hath a regiment of three thou|sand Irish vnder him; wherewith he projecteth with supply from Spaine, to inuade and surprize Ireland. And thus farre of our secular Fugitiues.
Now take a Catalogue of the Monasteries, Seminaries, and Nunneries in Flanders: First, at Bruxels, there is a Nunnery of English Nunnes, of the Order of S. Benedict, the Abbatisse where|of is the now Lord Northumberland his sister, and hath vnder her tuition some 60 English Damsels. The ghostly Fathers that are ouerseers of this monastery, are two English Iesuites, Father Gardi|ner, and Father Walgraue alias Flower, who are likewise Agents for the Iesuites in England, and intelligencers for the Archduchesse.
There is besides another Nunnery of the third Order of S^t. Francis, which is gouerned by one Father Bell a Fryer of the same Order: and ano|ther at Cambray of the Order of S^t. Benedict, which is gouerned by two Monks of the same Order, as Father Leander, Father Rudessend. Ano|ther at Louaine and Gaunt, which are likewise go|uerned by the Iesuites, another at Graueling of poore Clares, gouerned by the Iesuites, as also are

the Residencies of the Iesuites, that are at S^t. Omers, Leige, and Colen.
There is also a monastery of the English poore Terresians at Antwerpe, gouerned by one Doctor Wright a secular Priest, all which foresaid Nun|neries of them containe at least 40. or 50. Dam|sels which are most of them Gentlemens daugh|ters of very great fashion in England, and the rest some Chambermaids which hauing beene by the Iesuites well rigd of their maidenhead, and something old, are sent ouer to these or such like places to do penance for their sins in a Nunnery, where it is much doubted that they continue neuerthelesse in their old courses,  intice like|wise the young Dames to the same.
For not many yeeres since, one Ward a secular Priest, and Chaplaine to the English Nunnery at Bruxels, falling in League with some of them, got from them about three or foure hundered pounds worth of iewels and diamonds, which the Iesuites smelling out, turned him out of his place; telling him that he had vsed juggling and dishonest meanes to come by that which he had gotten from the Monastery: And in the yeere 1625. there arose the like difference betweene D^r. Clement, Deane of S. Trigoules at Bruxels, and Vicar generall of the armies of his Catholike Maiesty, and Father Iames Harford Chaplaine to a Company. Doctor Clement accused Father Harford of dishonesty with another mans wife, and Harford accused him for being dishonest with his owne Neece, and for a glutton and vn|charitable

man, saying hee had seene him dis|gorge his stomacke of whole Capons legges at once; whereupon Father Ramyres Canon of S^t. Trigonles, one guilty in the same kinde, reconci|led them for feare of further scandall.
But to come from their Nunneries to their Colledges, as first to S. Omers, which I haue fully decyphered in my third Chapter: next that at Doway, whereof D^r. Kellison is President: next that Monastery of Benedictine Monks, of which Father Rudessend is the President, with whom Sir Herbert Crafts leads a Monasticall life. There is also a Monastery of English Franciscan Fryers, besides two more Colledges, the one consisting of Irish, the other of Scottish men. To these the Iesuites haue a Colledge at Watton, not farre di|stant from S. Omers, which they call their No|uiship for the nurturing of their young Iesuites, Father Benefield being Rector thereof. Another they haue seated in Gaunt, which is intituled Casa professa. Another vnder the Prince of Leige, that was founded with those monyes which were got from M^r. S. whereof in the second Chapter. The discipline they vse in this Colledge to their Nouices, is in teaching. Philosophy and Diuini|ty, Father Sherley being their Rector. As for your Monks, they haue besides these, three mo|nasteries; one in Paris in the Suburbs of S. Ger|mane, whereof Father Bernard alias Berington is Prior; this was he that imprisoned Barnes that famous Monke, who was comming for England, who is likewise the greatest intelligencer to the

Spanish Embassador against our State. The other two Monasteries are scituated one at S. Mallowes in Brittany, and the other at Nausey in Lorane. Concerning your secular Priests, they haue one Colledge in Paris, by the name of Arras Col|ledge.
As for your English Fugitiues, it is with them as followeth. First, at Rhemes liues D^r. Gifford Pri|mate of France, and Archbishop of Rhemes, the Duke of Gwies reseruing all the reuenewes thereof for his owne Kitchin, deducting onely to the Archbishop 2000 pound annually. At Pa|ris liues D^r. Bradshaw, D^r. Mailer, and M. Fosser, a secular Gentleman; who at the Queenes com|ming to England was aduocate to her Maiesty in the behalfe of the Catholikes in this Land; but he hauing vnderstood, that intelligence was gi|uen to the Archbishops Grace of Canterbury concerning his carriage, hee retired to France with all expedition, where failing of these large promises formerly made to him, liues in misery and extreame pouerty.
By this may be discerned the number of our English Fugitiues, with their Colledges, Nun|neries, and Monasteries beyond the seas, which yeerely draw out of our Land 100. at least of young Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, who al|though they pretend conscience, and want of charity here, the occasion of their departure, yet none (I dare say) in the world, they being gone ouer, more enuious and hard hearted then they themselues each to other. As your priuate Gen|tlemen

Fugitiues hunt after aduancement by dis|paraging others of their owne rancke; your Priests disparage the Iesuites; the Iesuites the Priests; the Priests againe the Monkes; the Monks the Fryers, and the Iesuites all. Insomuch that if you visit any of them, your entertaine|ment shall be scarce any thing, saue their vpbrai|dings, and exclamations against one anothers monasteries and priuate persons: so that it would be no small paines for a man, so long to trauaile amongst them, vntill hee might finde three persons to speake well each of other: this being a fault so common amongst them, that they are noted among all Nations whatso|euer with whom they conuerse. Others there are whose most earnest expectation and heartiest de|sire is, the ruine and vtter destruction of their owne natiue Country, which is the issue of their departure, and accordingly God doth prosper them, laying on them the like punishment he in|flicted on the Iewes, by dispersing of them through many Nations, and giuing them vp to dissension among themselues, and liuing in great want and misery.



CHAP. VIII.

This eight Chapter containes the cause why hee left the seruice of his Catholike Maiesty and came for England, and returned to the bosome of his true mother the Church of England, and the iniuries and aduentures he suffered in France, till he arri|ued the English shoares.

_FIrst, though a child and hauing not as yet attained the yeeres of discretion, I was still (as all men are by a naturall inclina|tion) well affected towards my natiue soyle; which the Iesuites collecting from me, pressed me, and declared daily to me how much I was obliged vnto God for deliuering me out of the bondage of errour and heresie in my very infan|cy, and diswaded mee withall from conuersing with any of my natiue Countrey which were not of the Church of Rome, vpon paine of being anathematiz'd, and rejected out of the same ho|ly Catholike Church. And when they heard of the decease of my grand-father and other kin|dred, they charged me not to wish a requiem to their soules because they were heretickes, and so consequently are damned in hell, and comman|ded me to pray to the Virgin Mary, and all the Saints in heauen for the rest of my suruiuing friends, that they might at length become Pro|selites to the Romane faith and obedience.
When I came to be 18 yeeres of age or there

aboutes, I vndertooke in secret to read and per|use the sacred scriptures, and being curious to know the grounds of the differences betweene the Protestants  our selues, as of those: of the Popes supremacy, the reall presence of Christ in the holy Eucharist, the Indulgences, pardons, and profits of Purgatory, with the Popes autho|rity to depose and set vp Kings, I began likewise to enquire into, and examine the liues and cour|ses of our Iesuites and Priests, and moreouer I superuised the letter of D^r. Hall and M^r. Bedell, which I found in my Fathers study, and after I had conserred one thing with another, I found more resemblance and probability of the truth in the Protestants religion then in our owne. Be|sides this, I neuer found any pregnant proofe they had out of the Scriptures, that the Pope was the onely head of the Church militant, or any good authentique argument for Purgatory, Indulgences, holy graines, Meddals, and the like; as for the reall presence, I could neuer obtaine fully of my selfe to beleeue it. And as for the Popes Bull, for which each person from seuen yeeres of age and vpwards giues 12 pence to his Catholike Maiesty, by vertue whereof hee may eate * grossura, with egges, milke, butter, cheese,This grossura, is the same with that wee call grosse meat. and the like, on Saturdayes and such like dayes; I perceiued it to bee a meere policy and tricke of the King to fill his coffers, the Pope giuing him way, and partly sharing with him. Now touching their miracles they pretend to be dai|ly done in Spaine, Flanders, Italy, and other parts,

(though inquisitiue there abouts) yet I neuer could see any. And as for the holy Crucifix which is in the Suburbs of the City Burgus, which they shew to great personages, as if it were Christ himselfe, telling them that his haire and nailes do grow miraculously, which they cut and paire monthly,  giue to Noblemen as holy reliques, I iudge it a thing incredible,  thereby all their pretended miracles to be but meere Im|postures.King Charles by the Infan|tas intreaty visited this Nunne when he was in Spaine. As likewise the grand miracle of * Her|mana Luisa the Nunne of Carrion, who for twen|ty yeeres space hath liued by the bare receipt of the hoste, which to belieue I thinke argues a ve|ry sottish credulity, and infinite other miracles and reliques which they haue, I haue found to be meere cheats and cosenages. As also their Mas|ses for the dead, and deliuering of soules out of Purgatory, by saying Masses for them on a pri|uiledged altar. Nay some of them make spels of their reliques, as Peter Godsrey, that famous PriestRead at large hereof in the French a|greall history. of Marsels in France did, who was burnt not ma|ny yeeres since for bewitching the principall La|dies of that Prouince; for insteed of an Agnus dei, and other reliques, hee gaue them inchant|ments, whereby they might fall in great loue with him. Moreouer I examined the cause why the Pope should beatisie Garnet, and Campian,Father Bently  Father Fren the one minister of the Col|ledge,  the other one of the masters of the schoole. with others, vnder the pretext of religion, and could finde no reason but for the contrary, seeing the Iesuites confessed to my selfe, that the Le|gend of miracles of their Saints is for the most part false, but it was made for a good intention,

and herein that it is lawfull and meritorious to lye and write such things to that end the com|mon people might with greater zeale serue God and his Saints, and that otherwise there would be no meanes to gouerne them, and espe|cially to draw the women to good order, being by nature more facile and credulous, and for the most part addicted to nouelties and miraculous euents.
Likewise it is their Doctrine, that it is a meri|torious deed to kill or depo e any King or prince excommunicated by the Sea of Rome.
Likewise, the discontent of my Father after his death, and his Letters to his Brother in Eng|land gaue me to vnderstand, that the Romane Faith was not the surest way to Saluation.
Likewise, these most abhominable dealings that are vsed at the Election of their Popes, be|ing chosen for the most part by fauour and mo|neys, their Predecessors being extinguished by Poyson and villainous meanes, and for which ef|fect the King of Spaine hath Ambassadors con|tinually employed at Rome, which Ambassadors doe conferre great largesses of annuall pensions to enflame them to nominate him Pope whomOmnia voena|lia Romae. he pleaseth. The like doth the King of France by his Ambassadors, but the Spanish Indian Oyle for the most part greaseth home to the purpose. For when the Spaniards saw the King of France to enuade the Valtoline, the yeere 1624, that the Pope tooke his part as one of his creation, they began to cast out Libels, and set them vpon the

Pasquill of Rome, threatning the Pope with a suddaine end if he did not recant, which he did, for feare that the Spanish Venome might not operate in his Stomacke.
Likewise, the detention of the Kingdome of Naples from the Pope confirmed me that the Spaniards were, and are little better then Atheists, onely making vse of the Pope for their owne particular ambition and ends, as to confirme and establish him in vnlawful Monarchies, and vnder colour of Religion to make Subiects become Slaues.
Moreouer, Charles the Fifth sacking Rome, and with his Army besieging the Pope in his Castle of S. Angelo, was to this particular end, to con|firme him Emperor, and to colour and maintain all his vnlawfull vsurpations.
Likewise, it confirmed me in the Protestants Religion, to see how in Flanders and other parts, the Iesuites, Fryers, and others, before they enter their Colledges, Monasteries, and other Religi|ous Houses, to be Probationers only for a weeke or a moneth, their Friends, Parents, or others giue them a good summe of money to spend in Ale-Houses, Tauernes, and other prophane Houses, for to take their fare-well of the world. Of this I was an eye witnesse both at Antwerpe and Doway.
Likewise it confirmed me in the said Religion to see Protestants with whom I conuersed to be so modest, religious, and honest, quite contrarie to the report of the Iesuites which make them

worse then Diuels. All which I hauing well considered with my selfe, and also obseruing the cozenages and impostures of the Iesuits, Priests and Monkes in S. Omers, Doway, Flanders, Spaine, France, and else-where, my Father being dead, and I at my owne disposall, I came for England, where intending to declare my selfe a Protestant, was aduertised by some great Personages of au|thoritie in this Kingdome, to keepe my resolu|tion to my selfe for a while, whereby I might discouer the plots and stratagems of our aduer|saries, and so doe my Countrey farre greater seruice. Whereupon I straight made my repaire to the Court of the Archduchesse, where being suspected as a Spy, and in great hazard of my life by the negligence of some who had imploy|ed me, I had forth-with beene imprisoned had not Earle Gondamor interceded for me, who ne|uer could be perswaded that euer I would turne Protestant, being so long confirmed in the Romish Religion. But I would not let any occasion ouer|slip me, but taking the best opportunitie the time would then alot me, I directed my course for England, where after a quarter of a yeeres abode, I was sent ouer to France, hauing there my residencie at Paris, where I gaue intelligence to some great Parsonages of this Kingdome, andAt this verie time one Smith nephew to the B B. of Calcedon staid two monethes in Paris to kill me. sending Letters by my Man for England, he being bribed by some of our Land (whose names I will here spare) they were intercepted and deliuered to a Sorbon Doctor, Doctor Matler by name, whom the Letters partly concerned. * This be|came

an occasion of great afflictions vnto me, for being by him discouered, my Pension from Spaine was debarred me, and forth-with the Ie|suites and Priests banded themselues against me, and caused my Oast to deliuer me vp to Prison for some moneys I owed him, where I suffered for sixe moneths space, and perceiuing no order taken for my deliuerance thence from England, and being also sollicited  importuned by Letters from my Mother and other Friends out of Spaine, and visited daily by one F^r Latham,Of this their visitation M. Gorstellow my fellow-priso|ner was an eye-witnesse. D^r Mailer, and at length by Francis Fosser who came from my Mother in Spaine, who perswaded me to returne vnto Spaine, and recant, and if I would not be for Spaine, he would haue me for Naples, Millaine, or Scicily, where my former Pen|sion should be continued vnto me, and his Ca|tholike Maiestie would grant me a Company as before he did in Flanders, and would confirme vnto me my Patent of Infranchisement, so that I should enioy all priuiledge that any Gentleman did there borne, which Letters and visitations I entertained vntill my Mother had paid my debts with my owne Pension, and being freed out of Prison, I shewed them a faire paire of heeles, and instead of going towards Spaine or Italy, I bended my course towards England, taking my iourney towards Roan and Deepe in Normandy, being accompanied with Mr Thomas Gorstelow, Fellow of Corpus Christi in Oxford, and finding no Shipping either at Roan or Deepe, we bent our course for Callis, taking our iourney by a Towne

called Arks or Arka, two Leagues distant from Deepe, where lodging at an Inne in the further|most part in the Towne, at midnight the Oasts Nephew and other Souldiers whom we had courteously entertained at supper, being Billited in the same lodging with vs, and then bound forAt this verie time newes came that the Duke had in|uadd the Ile of Ree. Denmarke, who smelling vs out to be English, made vs rise out of our beds, telling vs, that their Captaine sent them to take vs as Spyes sent to betray the Kingdome, and vnder this pretence about ten or twelue of them apprehended vs with Staues or Pistols, carrying vs to a desolate Bridge betwixt our lodging and the Castle, and robbed vs of our money, as for me they threw me ouer a Bridge into the water, where I hardly escaped drowning; for after I hauing once sunke vnder the water, I got vp, and caught hold of a Willow twig, by which I saued my selfe and got on shoare as wet as a drowned Rat, and sorely bruised with their knockes, I went early in the morning into Arks, complaining how hardly I had beene vsed, but to no purpose, for I found none to pittie me, and laying my selfe downe vnder  Tailors stall in the Market-place, I began to lament my misfortune, where hauing scarcely layne for the space of two houres, I descryed M^r Thomas Gorstellow set out in a faire white can|uas sute, adorned with no lesse then a thousand patches, when he had espied me, he drew to|wards me, and asked me how he looked in his new habit, without shirt or cloake, in an old greasie hat, with stockings correspondent, to

whom I answered, that he looked like a Piche|ron, and withall I told him how I saued my selfe from drowning by laying hold on a willow twig, who made answer vnto me, that he thought I had either vndergone the mercie of the Sword or the water, and I thought the like misfortune had befell him, and questioning him about his escape, he declared vnto me, how he had exhor|ted the Souldiers, and the aforesaid Oast his Ne|phew, from murthering of him, shewing them how grand an offence it was to spill Christian blood, and that they should take all his cloathes if they mistrusted he had hid any mony in them, in the end he preuailed so farre forth with them, as to saue his life, but they stript him starke na|ked, and carryed him into a Wood, leauing him onely an old hat, and withall pricking him for|ward with their Swords into the said Wood, where they left him all night wandring, in the morning not farre from the Wood he lighted vpon a Farmers House, and hauing declared his case there, the Farmers Daughter especially tooke great compassion on him, saying without doubt he was a Gentleman of a good House, which appeared by the cleannesse of his skin and comely feature, and good carryage, and in|treated her Father to bestow on him his old canuas sute, which he did, and afterwards he went with him to the Towne called Arka, to complaine to the Gouernor, where we met as is abouesaid, and we two going together to the

Gouernor accompanied with our old Farmer, were answered by him, that he wisht to God we were the last English men liuing, and that if we were worthy to be layd by the heeles, he would doe it, which when we heard, we departed verie mute, not knowing whether to betake our selus, yet this good old Farmer vouchsafed to bring vs out of the Towne, telling vs, he was ignorant of the warres betwixt England and France, and in the Streetes told euerie one he met, if it had not beene for him (pointing to my companion) he had beene as naked as when he came out of his mothers wombe. And amongst others, we met with a Sergeant of a Companie, who hearing how we had beene robbed by his Souldiers, dis|couered them by a hat they gaue my companion, and commanded vs to follow him to his Cap|taines lodging, which we did wondrous vnwil|lingly, fearing least we should haue beene layd by the heeles. But when we came before him, hauing heard vs, he sent for his Souldiers, and finding the truth, caused them to restore to my companion and me our cloathes, but our money and papers there was no hope to recouer, which much troubled my companion, who had lost a Note-booke of great importance. The Captaine then told vs, that the English Nation was verie vn|welcome to the French, and yet we were in great hazard of our liues, but he hauing beene a Tra|uailor, was not vnacquainted with the extrea|mities of a Stranger, and so told vs if we plea|sed

to goe along with him, he would conuey vs ouer to Denmarke, from whence we might easily retire to our owne Countrey. For which we gaue him thankes, and resolued to goe with him: but before wee tooke our iourney, hee inuited vs to dinner at his owne Table, and dinner ended we departed with him towards S^t Valery, but being on foot my selfe, soone tyred, my Feet and Legges being sore brui|sed at my fall from the Bridge into the wa|ter, and being not able to continue, I was forced to leaue my companion, and so giuing vnto him my Sword at our parting, I tooke my rest vnder a Hedge, but hee kept on his Iourney to S^t Valery, and so to Denmarke, where hee serued as a common Souldier for the space of foure monethes, suffering great miserie and want till he returned to England. And I returned after I had recouered my selfe to Deepe, where I met with a Shallop bound for Callis, where after much intreatie, they tooke mee in for Gods sake, the next night wee arriued at Callis about mid-night, there wee lodged in the Suburbs which they call the Corgene, at one Roberts his House, at the Signe of the Boote, where hauing scarcely rested halfe an howres space, I fell in with a Master of an English Barke newly come from Douer, who had wharft ouer a hun|dred French which had beene taken vpon

the Sea by the English, of whom I desired passage for Douer, which he offered most willingly, and money if I needed; whereupon hauing so good an opportunity offered, I began to be merry, drin|king and discoursing with the said Master of the present newes and occurrences, but such was my fate, that it pleased God to lay vpon me great af|flictions and miseries, which are as followeth. There were in the house 5 or 6 Papists, who were likewise the same time bound for England, which knew me, but being disguised, some in the habit of Merchants, others of swaggering trauailers, I could hardly discry them, but they after they had well viewed mee, began to consult among them|selues what they had best doe, for said they, if I went for England in the same ship, without doubt I should descry them, and besides that I intended no good for the Catholikes in England, hauing forgone my pension and seruice to the King of Spaine,  aboue all forsaken my Mother, Vnckle, Brothers, and Sisters, and so resolued to accuse me vpon pretence of being a Spye to the Duke of Buckingham, and that I was by him sent to betray the Kingdome, which resolued, they begunne to doubt whether it were I or no, and therefore the tide seruing, began to embarke themselues, and I with them, where being together, I called two of them to minde, the one was named George Gage, who had halfe his nose eaten away with a Cn|ker, and sometimes had beene my schoole fellow at Saint Omers Colledge, whom I had likewise

knowne in the English Colledge at Doway, from whence hee then came, and brought with him aThis booke was written in Latin by Hermannus Hugo. booke intituled the siege of Bredah, translated out of Latine into English by his brother Captaine Gage and himselfe, which was dedicated to the Duke of Buckingham. Another of them whom I knew, was one Edward Browne, who came from Amiens, and was Steward to master Shelton that liues there; of the other foure as I was afterwards informed, three were Iesuites, and the other a Monke, whom when I knew I began to bee per|plext, but too late, for Gage hauing heard my voice, said to the rest, certainly it is Wadsworth: then they staid the Barke, and tooke their Hoste Robert with them, and went to the Captaine of the Ports, informing him that I was an Arch-spye against their State and the like; whereupon hee came presently vnto me, and committed mee to the custody of foure souldiers armed with Hould|beards to be kept vntill the morning without al|leadging any other cause, but that I was an English man and had not the Gouerners pasport to shew. In the morning at the opening of the gates, they carryed me to the Sergeant Maior of the towne, by name Buchero, who examining me what I was, had answer I was an English man, and that I went to see some friends I had in England; then he car|ried mee to his house where leauing me lockt vp in a Chamber for the space of an houre, came to me againe, and brought me to the Gouernors house, who refused to examine me, but comman|ded the Sergeant Maior to carry me to the towne

prison: At entrance into the prison he told mee that I should doe well to confesse the truth vnto them and reueale my imployments, and that hee well knew I was Buckinghams Spye for England, for which end I had receiued great summes of money to giue intelligence and betray their king|dome, to which I answered, I neuer had any thing to doe with the said Duke, but he told me I lyed, and that I was accused by Angels, (meaning the Iesuites) and commanded me to bee put in a cage, which was a kinde of dungeon on the top of the prison, neere the which stood the racke, and threatned mee therewith if I confessed not the truth, but I alwayes answered him that I was ig|norant of what he questioned me, so he left mee alone for the present, lockt vnder seuen doores, where I remained for the space of three dayes without meate or drinke; at the end whereof they brought me a dish of tripes with a peece of bread and water, and afterwards I was freed from the Cage in the day time and had the liberty of the dungeon, they gaue mee a purse besides with a long cord to bee put out at a hole to beg almes of passengers, not hauing any victuals giuen me, but what I bought with the money I got for Gods sake, which God knowes was very little: And like|wise I had not liberty to goe out of the roome to do what nature requires. My bed was straw, which in ten months had beene changed but thrice, without any couert at all. As for my shirt I neuer had any variety; as for my haire it grew wild and sauage-like; and for my companions they were

millions of lice and fleas, and in this wofull plight I continued well nigh ten months, the aforesaid Gage with his companions being the cause there|of. And to augment my misery, Father Baldwin, with the rest of the English Iesuites in S. Omers, not onely sent but came themselues to Callis to perswade the Gouernor for my continuall re|straint from liberty while my vitall spirits should continue within me. Not much vnlike did D^r. Kellison from Doway, and the Iesuites of England, who wrote letters to Callis, intreating the Go|uernor to keepe me fast. And that they might rest the more assured of my detention, they made one Hudson an English man who there liues their chiefe Agent against me, whom onely for his wiues sake the Sergieant Maior of Callis, by name Buchero entertained.
At length I perceiuing that my life was the marke that they shot at, they hauing not long be|fore through a mistake determined to haue hang'd me as one who had stole horses, had not the truth beene discouered by one Carpenter the King of France his Aduocate generall, and one of the po|litest wits in the Kingdome for the Law, whose happe it was at that time to haue beene in prison with mee, whereupon duely weighing with my selfe the euents of my trauails, I seriously resolued (the Lord assisting mee) patiently to vndergoe what euer should by those blood-suckers bee in|flicted vpon mee, raking it as a punishment iustly due vnto me for my sinnes, and it pleased God to second my resolutions, for presently after there

came my Lord Mountioy, who had bene taken prisoner at the Isle of Ree, and after his release, comming for Callis and bound for England, I ha|uing formerly beene acquainted with him in Spaine, and espying him going by the prison gate, I called vnto him and acquainted him with my misery; he hauing heard it, and aforetime knowne me, he presently sollicited the Gouernor for my liberty, which hee obtained: It was no sooner granted, but by the Sergeant Maior, at Hudsons wife her intreaty, it was againe hindered, who at euery word she spoke, charged me with high trea|son against their State. Colonell Gray a little af|ter came likewise that way, and interceeded in like manner for me but could not preuaile. M^r. Walter Mountague did the same; the Gouernor of Pont|sell, who was my Lord Mountioy his Conductor for England, did also at his returne make strong in|tercession for me, but all in vaine. The King of Denmarke his youngest sonne came by Callis at that time, and trauailing for Holland, did supplicate earnestly for mee, the Gouernor excusing him|selfe to him, made answer, that it was not he, but the King that detained me. There was also S^r. Ed|mund Vernam, and M^r. Haukins the Kings chiefe Agent did their best, but none could preuaile to set me at liberty, onely they relieued mee with some good pieces of money, which the jailour for the most part got from me, threatning to keepe me more priuate if he had not the better halfe of that I had, and finding the sweetnesse thereof, there passed not one but he priuately for his owne

lucre acquainted them with my misery. At length there came a Gentleman of Freezland, by name Scipio Intima, who had beene my fellow prisoner in Paris, this young Gentleman was of a proper and comely feature, and of such carriage and nimble wit as a man might possibly meete with|all; I seeing him passe by my grate and knowing him, called to him out of the grate, and acquain|ted him with my vniust detention, who presently wrought so effectually with the Gouernors wife and daughters, whom he certified of my innocen|cy and misery, insomuch that they tooke great pity vpon me, and acquainted the Warden of the Capuchins, who then was with them therewith; and he vpon their relation came forthwith to visit me, and commiserated my estate likewise, and go|ing to the Gouernor told him thereof, who vrged great matters against me, and said that I was reus laesae Maiestatis; but his wife and daughters se|conding this his earnest solliciting, and this young Gentleman swearing and protesting my great in|nocency, did so farre preuaile with the Gouernor, that he gaue way that I might haue an equall try|al by Law, which before I could not obtaine, and gaue leaue that the Kings Aduocate who was in prison with me, might be my Councellor. All which being granted, my Aduocate begunne to write the occasion of my vnlawfull detention, with a petition which hee sent to the High Court of Parliament at Paris, where the Court of Parlia|ment commanded all my aduersaries and accusers to be personally cited before them, and to bring

in their allegations and accusations against me. My Aduocate did likewise challenge the Law of the Kingdome, which is, that no malefactor can be kept in prison aboue three months, but hee must haue either the sentence of life or death to passe on him, vnlesse it be for treason against the Kings proper person; I hauing continued eight months in prison contrary to the foresaid Law, vrged like|wise that saying, quis enim innocens esse poterit si accusari solummodo sufficiat, All this was so well set sorth by my said Aduocate, that there was none to proue any thing against mee, so that the High Court of Parliament pronounced me innocent, and condemned the Sergieant Maior of Callis, and the rest of my aduersaries, to the reparation of honor, dammage, and interest, and forthwith I was restored to my former liberty. Thus giuing hearty thankes to Almighty God for this his gra|cious deliuerance, and freeing me at such time as I least imagined, out of the hands of these infernall monsters, and blood-suckers, the Iesuites and their faction.
And presently comming for Douer I imbraced my natiue soyle with full resolution neuer to de|part out of it, beseeching God to blesse me, and to make me (though vnworthy) a member of this his holy Church, whereunto through so many perse|cuting afflictions and miseries I haue at length ar|riued.
Gentle Reader, here thou hast had a view of the trauailes, miseries, and obseruations of the English Spanish Pilgrime, wherein I vowe to God I haue

not written any thing but what for the most part I haue beene an eye witnesse of: if the times had beene more fauourable vnto mee, I would haue much enlarged this my discourse, the which I purpose by Gods assistance to dispatch so soone as I can finde a conuenient time and oportunity. So beseeching the Almighty to keepe in true faith, concord and vnity, this our King|dome of great Brittaine, France and Ireland, I rest.

FINIS.




Errata.
Pag 3. line 9. read his, for my. p 7. l. 16, r. Wayche, for Wiche. p. 17, l. 11, r. Campion p. 24 l. 32, r. alias, for at. p. 25, l. 20. r. George, for William p. 29. l. 9. r Foster, for Fosser.  l. 23. r. Northon, for North p 31, in the margent, r. also the Lady Willoby. p. 40, l. 32. r. Verengenas. p. 42. l. 2. r Cadix. p. 45, l. 14, r. Alarbos. p. 53. l. 10, r. Duke. for Don. p 54, l 18, r. Flanders, of Artois.  l. 24. r. Valodolid. p 55, l. 30, r. Foster. p. 56, l. 6, r. Henry, for Francis. p. 57, l. 10, r. Luz, for Lucy. p 60, l. 9, r. Bradley. p. 61, l. 14, r Rudisend. p. 64, l. 7, r. Northon. p. 64, l. 25, r. Lier in Planders, for Holland p. 65, l. 16, r. Armath  l. 20, r. Therconill. p. 73, l. 30, r. with Harford, guilty in the same kind was Sir T. M. who was bastonado'd in the Strand. p. 83, l 28, r. Gostellow p. 84, l. 12, r. and, for or.






