




THE LAST BATTELL OF THE SOVLE IN DEATH, Diuided into eight co~ferences.
1. Volume.
Whereby are showne the diuerse Skirmishes that are betweene the Soule of Man on his Death-bedde, and the Enemies of our Saluation.
Carefullie digested for the comfort of theSicke: By M^r. ZACHARIE BOYD Preacher of Gods Word at Glasgow
IOB. 14. Vers. 14. All the dayes of mine appointed tyme will I  my changing come.
I liue to die that I may die to liue.
Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heires of ANDRO HART 1629




C. R.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms


DONECPAXREDDITATERRIS
blazon or coat of arms




TO THE MOST SACRED AND Mightie Monarch CHARLES, King of Great BRITAINE, FRANCE  IRELAND, Defender of the FAITH.
MOST DREAD SOVE|RAIGNE, It was wisely said by the Royall Preacher, The me|morie of the Iust is blessed:Prov. 1. 7 But the name of the wicked shall rot: To haue a good name both in this life and after Death is a blessing promised vnto

the Righteous: But as for the vngod lie their names become mouldie and rot|ten: Qui injuste  omtur just damnantur.
This consideration should rouse v all men to the doing of that which is good but chieflie KINGS and PRINCES whose liues are to bee seene in Chronicles by all ages, which come after: While other mens names within a little space are bu|ried in obliuion, the Chronicles the Re|gisters of times cry vnto the World, Read and consider vvhat sort of men such and such haue beene.
Of Saul it is writter, that his sinne of rebellion in sparing Agag was 1 Sam. 15, 23. as the sinne of Witch-craft,  that his stub|bornnesse was as idolatrie: His enuie against Dauid,  his consulting 1 Sam. 28 7 with the Witch at Endor shall bee manifest to all Ages to come: Dauids 1 Sam, 13 14. Vertues and his Vices 2 Sam 11 8. are penned: Solomons 1 Kin. 3. 9 vvisedome  his 1 Kin 11 9 folies, 1 Kin 12 14. Re|hoboms contemning of the olde coun|sellers 1 Kin. 16 2 A habs and 2 Kin. 16 31 A haz his wic|kednesse 2 Kin. 23 . Iosiah and 2 hr. 20, 3 Iehoshaphats goodnesse shall bee to bee seene and reade so long as this world shall last.
Note Oh, that Kings would consider how in a short life they may soone plot the euill which sh staine heir good name to the worlds end.
Note Manie may Flatter a Prince while hee liueth: But so soone as hee is gone, Trueth which while hee liued was warded, then commeth out and plainelie declareth to the world whether hee was a wise man or a foole.
Note There is no sinne so secret, but GodIoh. 1. 47. in his owne time shall bring it to light: If King CHARLES rule well, and bee truelie godlie like Nathanael without guile, An hundreth yeares after this Great BRITAINE shall blesse the Name of King CHARLES, yea, and that till God end Time in Eternitie.
* The seuen Stars of the CharlesWaine are not so glorious as shall bee the seuen Letters of CHARLES in GODSReuel 17. 18. Booke which is the Booke of Life.
Though your Maiesties Bodie after Death lye rotten in the Graue, yet shall your Royall Name as if it were perfumed  enbalmed, haue a most sweete sauour like these Garments wherein Iacob got his Fa|thersGen. 27, 27, blessing the smell whereof was as the smel of a field which y^e Lord had blessed.
Seeing there is nothing more powerfull to moue a man to liue well, than to re|member that hee must die, and after comeGrego. Mors ipsa cum vene|rit vinci tur si prius quam ve|niat sem|per timea|tur. for to reckon with his God: For this cause haue I penned this Treatise of Sicknesse bringing vnto death where your Maiestie may see the most fearfull Skirmishes, which are betweene the faithfull Soule  the ene|mies of our Saluation: For this cause haue I called it, THE LAST BAT|TELL OF THE SOVLE. Loe,Iob. 5. 27 this wee haue searched, so it is, heare it, and know it for your good.
Let it please your Maiestie to looke vpon these my Workes with a fauourable eye and to take them into your Royall Pro|tection: They were brought foorth in the Land of Your Birth, euen in your olde SCOTLAND, Whereof your Maiestie is now the hundreth and ninth King.
The particular place where this Booke was penned is your owne GLAS|GOWE, a Citie once greatlie beloued of great King IAMES your Maiesties Father of blessed memorie: * A Citie that looketh for the like fauour from your Royall MAIESTIE.
My chiefest spirituall desire is, that this may bee comfortable to sicke Soules: My first temporall wish is that your Maiestie would daine it with a blink of your Fauour: Let it obtaine your Royall Approbation, which shall bee to it as a Passe-port, which neither Pride nor Enuie shall bee able with Reason to reiect: If anie man be con|tentious, I heere appell vnto Caesar.
Let mee bee so bolde as heere to aske a Petition from your Maiestie, which gran|ted, I will atcount a sufficient recompence to all my Labours.
This is it, That it would please your Religious Maiestie to take a specall care that the prophanation of the Lords blessed and hallowed day bee remoued from this Land: It is come to such a custome and that chieflie betweene Edinburgh and Glasgow, that by no meanes the Church is able to refine it, except that by your Royall authoritie their Market dayes bee changed: Note The abuse is so great that if your godlie Maiestie knew it, yee could not in|dure it: The keeping of this Precept is the onelie one which hath a memento before it, and yet it is most forgotten: It is the verie Key of Religion.
Let it please your Maiestie to consi|der what good Nehemiah did for the re|formation of such an abuse.
I contended, said hee, with the No|blesNeh. 13. 17 of Iudah, and saide vnto them, What euill thing is this that yee doe, and prophane the Sabbath day? Didvers. 18 not your Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this euill vpon vs,  vpo~ this Citie? Yet yee bring more wrath vpo~ Israel by prophaning the Sabbath.
See what Nehemiah did.
It came to passe that when thevers, 19. gates of Ierusalem beganne to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should bee shut, and charged that they should not bee ope|ned till after the Sabbath, And some of my Seruants set I at the gates, that there should no burden bee brought invers. 20. on the Sabbath day: So the Merchands and sellers of all kinde of ware, lodged without Ierusalem once or twise: Thenvers. 21. I testified against them, and said vnto them, Why lodge yee about the wall: If yee doe so againe I will lay hands on you.
What wrought that?
From that time foorth came they

no more on the Sabbath: Afer he had done this good worke, hee looked vp to God by prayer saying, Remember mee,verse. 22 O my God concerning this also, and spare mee, according to the greatnesse of thy mercie.
I pray God that your Maiestie may reforme this great abuse with that good Nehemiah: Note If this yee doe, I am assu|red that Your God shall remember You concerning it, and that hee shall spare You according to the greatnesse of his mer|cie.
One thing I desire earnestlie that your Maiestie once at least in the day would carefullie consider these weightie wordes of DAVID spoken vnto SOLOMON: Thinke that King IAMES hath said them to King CHARLES: These1 Chr. 28. 9 Sicut po|tentes po tenter tr menta pa|tientur, sic  ju|sti pr|mijs fruen|tur plenius si recte ex|ercue rint potestate~. bee the words,
* And Thou CHARLES my Son know Thou the GOD of thy Fa|ther, and serue him with a perfect heart, and with a willing minde, for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and vn|derstandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: If Thou seeke Him he will bee found of Thee, but if Thou for|sake

Him hee will cast Thee off for euer.
Now I intreat the Lord so to ingraffe these words into your Royall Heart, that the practise thereof may appeare in the out|ward swaying of your Scepter.
Note Let this little Manuell of the Last Battell of the Soule bee like a Page at your Maiesties Chamber-doore with his morning memento mori: Yee Kings are Gods because God hath so called you: I hauepsal. 28. 6. called you goddes, said God, but yee shall die like men: Crownes haue their compasse and Thrones haue their Tombes: Prince, People, great and small, all must goe to Golgotha for to make their beddes in that place which Iob calleth the SlimieIob. 21. 33 valley The French prouerbe is true.
La mort mord les Rois aussi. bien que les conducteurs des charrois.
So most humblie intreating the most high to grant to your Maiestie to reigne both well and long ouer vs, I remiane
Your Majesties most humble most obedient Seruant and Subject both borne  sworne
M. Zacharie Boyd. Preacher of Gods word at Glasgow



Ad Carolum Regem.
Maxime magnorum longo sate sanguine Regum.
Accipe nunc tenues quos fert tua Scotia fructus:
Et si arbusta juvant fragiles ne temne myricas.


Another.

This Life O Prince is like an raging Sea,
Where froathy mounts are heaued vp on hie:
Our painted Ioys in blinks that are ful warme
Are like Raine-bowes forerunners of a storme:
All flesh with griefe is prickt within without.
Crownes carie cares and compasse them about.
Your State is great, your place is high: What then?
God calls you gods, but ye shall die like men.

Your Majesties most hum|ble and most obedient Sub|ject  Seruant, M. Z. B.




TEMPVS
emblem




A LA RYNE,
MADAME,
DIEV par lagrace duquel les Rois reignent, vous a est fa|vorable: Il vous a fait naistre de plus Grand pere qui ait on|ques reign en la FRANCE voire de ce Grand HENRY vn vray fouldre de guerre: Il vous aussi a fait estre la belle fille de plus sage Prince qui ait onques reign en la Grand BRETA|GNE, lequel ponuoit bien estre nom|m IA QVES LE SAGE.
Le Roy nostre Sire estant fils de plus SAGE,  vous estant la fille d'vn PRINCE si courageux, nous faites espe|rer que quand il plaira a dieu de vous donner des enfans, ils seront  sages valeureux: Ce que la nature ne peut pas, dieu le face par sa grace.
Receuez d'vn bon oeil MADAME ceBonne la mort qui donne la vie. petit oeuure: Vous y avz LADER|NIERE BATAILLE de l'ame con|tre tous les enemis de nostre salut: vous y verrez comment il se faut porter en telles rencontres: pensez a ces choses es iours de vostre ieunesse: C'est le Con|seil d'vn ROY Aye Souuenance, dit il,Eccles. 12. 3. de ton Createur es iours de ta ieunesse, auant que les iours mauuais vienent,  que les ans arriuent des quels tu dies, i n'y pren point plaisir: Ls ROYS  ROYNES Sont mortels comme lesIsa. 40, 6. autres: La voix dit Crie  on a respondu que crieray ie? Toute chair est comme l'herbe  toute sagrace est comme la fleurvers. 7. d'vn champ: L'herbe est sechee,  la fleur est cheute d'autant que le vent de l'E|ternel a souffl dessus: Solomon qui cog|noissoit les femn es mieux q aucun autre, nous monstre que ce n'est pasProu. 31. 30 la plus belle qui Soit digne de louange: La grace trompe dit il,  la beautBeaut sans bont est comme vin e s|ent. S'esuanouit: mais la femme qui craint l'Eternel ce sera celle qui Sera louee: Cest'est la fille du ROY toute pleine de gloire en dedans: Dieu de sa grace vousPsal. 45. 14 face telle. Ie supplie treshumblement

vostre Maiest vouloir prendre en bon ne part ce petit oeuure; lequel ie vous dedie comme vn tesmoignage d'vn coeur affection enuers vostre Maiest: Cependant ie prie le Tout puissant qu il vous augmente de iour en iour ses graces spirituelles,  vous face la mere des enfans qui soyent Roys apres vous tant que le soleil durera. C'est celuy qui de+ meurera toute sa vie
MADAME.
Vostre tres-humble,  tres-obeissant Ser|uiteur  Subiect.
M. Zacharie Boyd.
A Glasgovele 6. de May. 1629.



A LA ROYNE.
Fille de France de Royale race,
Perle de prix dieu vous face grace:
DIEV le vuelle que ceste nation
Sans fin vous loue en benediction:
Portezl' absence  de pere  mere,
Car pour eux mariage prospere
Voux produira bonne succession
* Si vous reuerez La RELIGION.
M. Z. B.



To the READER.
AFter sixteene yeares abse~ce into France where it pleased God to mak me a preacher of his word the space of foure yeares: It pleased the same LORD to visite his Church there with bloodie warres, whereby manie Churches and mine al|so were discipated by this occasion it was the Lords will to bring me backe to my natiue Countrie.
In that troublous time I remained a space a priuate man at Edinburgh with Doctor Sibbald the glory  honour of al the Physicians of our Land: But againe within a short space I was sought out by that most worthie Man our Scots Onesiphorus euen Sir William Scot of Eli: Hee sought mee out diligentlie and found mee: The Lord giue mercie vnto his House, for hee most louing lie re|freshed

mee, and was not ashamed of mine affliction: The Lord grant vn|to2 Tim. 1. 8 him that hee may finde mercie of the Lord in that day.
After my remouing from him vnto this Citie, it pleased the Lord to vi|site mee with sore sicknesse, yea, so that in September Anno. 1626. I wasphi. 2. 27. like Epaphroditus sicke nigh vnto death: For when I arose out of that I euer I found in my studie my winding sheete among my Bookes: This gaue mee oc|casion painefullie to search  describe vnto the world this Last Battell of theAugust. Nescis qu hora  et mors: Smper vigila vt quod nescis quando ve|niet, para|tum te in|veniat quum ve nerit: Ad hoc forte nescis quando veniet, vt semper pa|rats sis. Soule: I pray God to make it profita|ble for thine vse, if thou reape ae comfort thereby, I intreate thee to pray for mee, that the lord would grant vnto mee that I may finde mer|cie of the Lord in that day.
As for escapes in printing they are marked at the end of the Booke: Ex|cuse them in thy fauour because I re|maine farre from the resse.



Vox morientis ad animam suam.
O anima mea egredere; quid dubitas? Egredere; quid times? His multis an|nis Christo Domino servisti,  ad huc mortem timebis?
O anima insignita Dei imagine, de|corata similitudine, desponsata in fide, dotata in spiritu, redempta sanguine, deputata cum Angelis, capax beati|tudinis, haeres bonitatis, rationis par|ticeps, quid tibi cum carne, qua haud aliud vilius sterquilinium invenisti?


Augustin.
Vita haec misera est, mors incerta; si subito obrepat quo hinc exibimus? Et ubi nobis discenda sunt quae hic ne|gleximus? Annon potius hujus negli|gentiae supplicia luenda sunt?




TEMPVS
emblem




IN OPVS CVM VI|ventibus tum Morienti|bus vtilissimum A. D. ZACHARIA BODIO Glasguensis Ecclesiae Pastore adornatum.
AD LECTOREM. Epigramma.
FOElix qui sancte potuit traducere vitam,
Et tandem extremum Sanct obijsse diem
Haec duo qui didicisse cupis, tibi pandit vtrumque
Hic Liber, hunc animo volue revolue tuo.


Ad Authorem Libri. distichon ejusdem.
Qui calamo qui voce doces, vitaque perenn
Vivore, in aeternum vivito ZACHARIA.
IOHANNES BELVS Glasguensis Ecclesiae Pastor  Academiae RECTOR.



AD VIRVM PIETATE Et eruditione praestantem D. ZACHARIAM BODIVM GLASGVENSIS Ecclesiae Pasto|rem de praeparatione ad mor|tem, postquam ex deplo|rato morbo convaluisset Scribentem.
ERGO te nuper mortis de faucibus atrae
Ereptum nobis reddidit Omnipotens:
Vt Doctus moriendi artem expertusque doceres,
Qua datur aetheream transitus adpatriam:
Qui bene vivendi toties praecepta dedisti
Doctrinae reserans horrea plena sacrae.
Foelix Zacharia Doctor; Sanctisima cuius
Vox pariter, Scripta,  consona vita docent
IOHANNES STRANGIVS S. S. Theologiae. D.  Accademiae Glasguensis Praefectus.



IN DIVINA INTEGER|rimi viri D. ZACHARIAE BODII Ecclesiastae non  multis meditamen|ta. cum  desperat valetudine ad pristinam salutem reva|lurat.

FRustra veternum sollicitas meum
Bodi Thaliae ad munta; barbitos
Obmutet, exurdante nostras
Voce Scholae strper Camoenas.


Iam colligendas sarcinulas monet
Quae vulsit aurem Mors modo pallida:
Laureta Cyrrhae, Musicasque
Thespiadum fugito choreas.


Tu perge Homeri carminis alite
Laudande qu te mens ammi vocat,
Qui baccare,  lauro revinctos
Castalio lavis amne crines.


Fatalis ex quo crud Hecates manu
Attonsa pene est caesaries tibi
Fato superstes reditusque
Incolumis, renovas duellum.



De morte partam appendis adoream,
Vtque Hydra secto corpore fortior
Crevit, revxti ter triumpho
Clarior,  spolijs opimis.


Qualis Caystri fluminis accola
Morti propinquus dulciter incinit.
Melos supremum, talis ista
Naenia, qu superos remulces.


Macte indole ist, macte faventi,
Excude fructus uberis ingen.
O aureum vere libellum
Melle sacro,  sale temperatum.

Hoc amoris erg scri|bebat Io. Rayus ludi publici litterarii M|derator Edinburgi





THE LAST BATTELL of the Soule in death, diuided into eight seuerall Conferences.

The first dayes conference. Of carnall and worldlie temptations

The sicke man.
MY Bodie is sicke, my Soule is wounded: Gods wrath is fearefull; it burneth to theDeut. 32. v. 22. bottome of Hell The heate thereof already maketh my Soule to sweate: I can find no Skrine or Sconce to set betweene mee and this fire: Oh, in all appearance I shall short|lieee dissolued, for to be brought before that great Tribunall: Note Alas,

what terrours are these, Sinne, Sick|nesse, Death, the Graue, and an vn|prepared Soule? I tremble all like Belshazzar: Mine heart is entan|gledDan. 5. 9. with feares: my knees shiuer, and smite one against another: Mine heart is pricked, while I remember mine euill spent life: Note While I had time to doe good, I was of the fro|zen Generation: Nowe Gods glowmes like Boanarges, Sonnes of Thunder, armed with fierie furie, make heart and Soule to melt, and to fall downe in droppes within my bowles: Oh, for a drop of wa|ter for to coole the boyling heate o mine heart: Is there no man heere that can affoord me a word of com|fort, for to vphold mine heart into this heauie houre?


A spirituall Friend.
Sir, I thinke it expedient that ye send for your Pastour, the man of God, that beareth the keyes of he Kingdome of heauen: It may bee that

the good God shall put some words of comfort into his mouth whereby your wearied Soule shall bee refre|shed* while the chosen Servants of God speake his words to the fainte heart, the Lord putteth foorth a power to enable them to doe all that wherfore they are spoken: So soone as S. Peter had spoken to the lamed man, his feete and ancle bones recei|uedAct 3 7. strength: Though miracles cease now, yet this shall bee true, so long as the world standeth The effectuall feruent prayer of a rightcous man a|uailethIam. 5. 16 much: Will it please you Sir that I goe for to fetch him?


The sicke Man.
Hee shall bee welcome vnto mee: But alas, while I might I fre|quented him too little: Note I haunted rather the co~panie of these that de|lighted mee with sportes and jests, whereof now I haue no comfort: Note Because I thought I could repent heereafter, I did that whereof I may

now repent, and whereof indeed, as I feare, I shall repent but too late  This now puts my Soule into the dumps: now al my foolish laughters are turned into mourning, for I feare exceedinglie to die, I tremble and tosse within this bed, GOD alone knoweth what shall bee the end of this lingring tryall: Goe Sir, I pray you, and desire the man of God to come and visite a bruised reede, andIsa. 42. 3. a smoaking flaxe.


A spirituall Friend.
I goe for him presentlie: I hope before hee leaue you, yee shall find this tempest of temptations to grow|calme: Note In the meane-time till hee come, I pray you to remember that all your paines are but a crosse sent before to crucifie the loue of the world: In your greatest distresse, striue to bee a Disciple of Iesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith, whoHeb. 12. 12. for the joye that was set before him, endured the crosse: Bee not discoura|ged

in your greatest smarts Note For re|proofesProv. 6. 13 of instruction are the way of life: In your greatest feare remember the joy that is set before you.


The Pastour.
Sir, hauing knowne of your dis|ease by your godlie friend I am come to see you, and to impart vnto you some spirituall comforts Note While the Soule is sore troubled, thereis danger in delay: A bruised Spiritis like a bone out of joynt, the longer it be let alone, the hardlier it is set. If I had knowne of your sicke|nesse sooner, I would haue visited you ere now.


The Sicke Man.
I rejoyce Sir to see you, my Soule euer loued you: But alas, not as I should haue done: If God should but at this time spare my life, with the helpe of my God yee should see mee at once a farre changed man.


The Pastour.
Come Death come Life, God

maketh all thinges to worke to the best of these that loue him.
Gods corrections are good dire|ctions: Note With one crosse hee can worke two cures, first a correction for by-past corruption, and after a direction for times to come: If God should not scourge vs betimes the reigning of the flesh should proue the ruine of the Spirit: Note This was the vtter ouerthrow of the Sonnes of Eli, God would not correct them, because the Lord would stay the~.
As for that which ye speake con|cerning1 Sam. 2. 25 the changing  amending of your life, your resolution is good: But seeing the houre of death is vn|certaine, it is good that yee bee pre|sentlie prepared: Death commeth vpon ma~ with stealing steps: Let no man put far off the day of his death There is great danger, that any man sooth himselfe with the vaine hope of this mortall life: No man can tell how soone hee shall be arraigned to

compeare before Gods Barre: None said a Pagane is assured to liue vntill the morrow.

Note Nemo tam diuos habuit faventes,Senec.
Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri.

Note It is good therefore daylie and hourelie to bee vpon our Watch-Tower, preparing our selues for death, which shall either be the end of all our miserie, or the beginning of our euerlasting woe, delay to pre|pare for death, is a strong threed in the Deuils net. A man will not die the sooner that he prepare himselfe to die: If a man bee prepared to die, and yet die not, hoc sibi ponat in lucro, that preparation is great aduantage vnto him: But if hee die, hee hath done that which hee should haue done: Note What a dangerous venture is this to a man to delay to prepare himselfe to die, because it may bee that yet hee may liue? But may it not also bee that hee die? It is a dan|gerous thing to perrell our Saluati|on

vpon a may be, which may as well no bee: It is fearefull to bee hanged ouer Hell with the euill twined threed of a life that must end, none can tell, how, where, nor when. No man is exeemed from this necessitie.
Note The post Pale Horse wherevponRevel. 6 8 Death is mounted, caries his Rider thorow all Nations, Cities, and Houses; pulling out of their beds Princes, Prelats, and priuate men without any respect of persons: thus are their hopes cropped in their fai|rest flower: It is good therefore that wee euer bee vpon our gard: God offereth grace to day: To day ifHeb. 3. 15 yee heare his voyce: But who pro|miseth to morrow? well is him that feareth alwayes.


The sicke Man.
O the terrours of Death and of the Graue! mine heart quaketh while I remember of these last strug|glings that are in death: It was not without reason that the Pagans cal|led

it terribilium terribilissimu~, of all fearefull things, the most fearefull.


The Pastour.
Note If men knew what Christ hath made of Death, the liuing would not be so afraid with the feare ther|of, Isaiah saith, that hee hath put it into his Stomacke, hee hath swallo|wedIsa. 25. . it vp in victorie: A wife man will not swallow ouer that which hee is not able to digest: Christ hath swal|lowed Death and hath digested it perfectlie: Note Nowe Death after Christs digestion, hath lost all its poyson, and is turned into a sleepe: The name thereof is changed, for to tell vs of the change of its nature: Dead Lazarus in Christs language is called sleeping Lazarus, LazarusIoh. 11. 11 Our Friend sleepeth, said Christ, spea|king of his death: Hee that liueth andIoh. 11. 26 beleeueth in mee, said Christ, shall ne|uer die: Death is not death to the Friends of Christ, but a sleepe to their bodie,  a translation of their

Soule from a prison to a Palace:Note As by the grace of God, it is made an Exodus of miserie, so is it a Genesis of a better life, the corruption of one thing beeing the generation of ano|ther:Note What is this, that men should so feare Death, which is the end of the foule  co~bersome way of our Pilgrimage? Note Hath not God made death like a Chariote to a wearied man, for to carie him to his euerla|sting rest? This was seene in a visible figure, when Elijah in a firie Chariot2 King. 2. 11 went vp by a whirle wind vnto heauen.


The sicke Man.
All that is true Sir: But yee know that death is fearefull to all flesh: So soone as it commeth, it maketh a Soule lyable to yeeld an acou~t for all the actions of the by-past life:Note The bodie and the Soule are of olde ac|quaintance, and haue not wil to part one fro~ the other: I cannot expresse what a worsling I finde within mee; there is such a working feare about

mine heart, that I tremble to thinke vpon it: This maketh my words to wade in teares, mine heart is cut with sobs of sorrow: O death, the enemie of Life, is there no comfort against thee? Is there no Balme in Gilead? Of force then must I die?


The Pastour.
The woman of Tekoah said verie well, Wee must all needes die, and are2 Sam. 14. 14. as water spilt on the ground, which can not bee gathered: Death is an vnauoi|dable passage, there is none entrie vnto Heauen, but by it. I will striue to let you see before that yee enter in at the doores of Death, that your Soule hath no such cause to be afraide: Indeed I confesse, that death to these that know not Christ, is in|deede a most fearefull thing accor|ding to this Sathan said, Skinne forIob. 2 4. skinne, and all that a man hath he will giue it for his life: Note See how a Natu|rall man would bee content that his skinne were pulled off him, if it

could bee a ransone for to saue his life: Such is the feare of death, that for to bee free of it, a man would giue his skinne: Note Agag called it a1 Sam. 15 32. bitter thing: Surelie, said he, The bit|ternesse of death is past: Note The wilde Gourdes shred into the Prophetes pottage, for bitternesse, were called Death: So soone as they had tasted them, all cryed, Death is into the2 King. 4 40. pot: The bitter torments of Hell2 Cor. 1. 10 are called, so great a Death: Dauid speaking of the pangs of death, cal|leth them waues: The waues of death co~passed me: See how death is com|pared2 Sam. 22 5. to a raging Sea, with rolling waues: To this Dauid subjoynes, The snares of death preuented mee:vers. 6. Death indeed is fearfull, armed with waues  snares: Note We in our weak|nesse make it also fearfull, painting it with bare bones, with a skul, girning with its teeth, and with its sting, like a flooked Dart, for to pierce tho|row the heart of man.
Note It is true that death is bitter in it selfe, but hee that made sweetnesse toIudg. 14. 14. come out of the strong, and meate to come out of the eater, can bring both meate and sweetnesse out of death for the Christian Soule, though no thing bee stronger than death, the greatest eater of the world. One saith well, that there is in death but one bitter morsell to swallow.
The cheefe course that wee haue to tak for to win to an happie death, is that aboue all thinges, wee striue to make our acquaintance with Christ, the Lord of life: Note Till a man know Christ, who hath disar|med Death by taking away its sting and its dart, hee will tremble at its buzze: Note A Bee that wa~teth the sting, will afray a Childe with its buzze, but the man of vnderstanding is not afraide for a sound. Note I am assured that the excessiue feare of Death in a wicked man, is a most powerfull meanes for to make him die before

his day, that is sooner than by course of Nature hee should haue died: Though a mans day bee set, yet God vseth meanes, Death is a di|stresse2 Sam. 14. 14 vnto the wicked.
Let him the~ that would die in peaceLuk. 2. 29 make his peace with his God: Note No man ca~ be willing to die, before his Conscience bee at quiet, till God and his Soule haue shaken hands,  beene friended: Note A man that is at feed with his God, will say to death Gods messenger, as Ahab saide to Gods Prophet, Hast thou found mee1 King. 21 20 mine enemie. But as for the godlie ma~ whose Soule is prepared to meete with his God, he will say to Death, welcome Friend, take my Soule by the hand, and draw it out of this prison, Oh, but it is wearied. O, but it longeth to be free from these bonds of mortalitie, combersome clogges of claye. Note Hee that is assu|red to goe to Christ, cannot die vn|willinglie, what careth hee to die

an houre, for to liue for euer? Note I willNazian. in vita Basil. neuer feare Death, saide a Father, which can doe no more than restore me to him that made mee Note To change a life that is mortall, for an that is eter|nall, is an vnspeakable profite.


The sicke Man.
But alas: By what way may I come vnto that Life?


The Pastour.
I am the way, said Christ, NoneIoh. 14. 6. commeth to the Father but by mee: Note This way is thorow the valey of death: In this valey yee neede not to feare, if Christ bee with you. In the valey of the shadow of death,Psal. 23. 4. said Dauid, I will feare none euill: his reason was this, that God was with him: For thou art with mee.


The sicke Man.
I finde my selfe Sir exceedingPsal. 17. weake, and that I drawe neere the doores of Death: I take great delight to heare you: I requeast you to con|tinue your comforts: I intreate you

to call to remembrance these spe|ciall comforts yee haue had, either by your owne experience, or by reading, or by Meditation: I am assured that yee haue some laide vp in store for your selfe, against the houre of temptation: Let me heare I pray you, what yee thinke best to be said to a man in his greatest feares.


The Pastour.
First of all, that yee may bee ca|pable of comforts, striue to bee pa|tient in your trouble: Acknowledge in this sicknesse the great mercie of your God: In this affliction hee hath giuen to you, the wish and choise of Dauids chastisement: You are not fallen into the hands of men, whose compassions are cruell, but in the hands of God, your Father, whose bowels are full of mercifull remembrance: Note Though a Mother should forget her Childe, wee are printed vpon his Palmes: It is true,Isa. 49. 15 that no afflictio~ for the present seemesHeb. 12. 18

joyous: Note Yet afterward the bitter seed of sorrow, bringeth foorth the sweet  quiet fruit of righteousnes.
If yee would bee armed against the feare of Death, my counsell is, that aboue all things in the tempest of your temptations, yee haue re|course vnto the bloodie wounds of Christ, wherein as in the holes of the Rocke, your Soule like a Doue may find a place of refuge:Note His wounds well may I call, The secret of the mostPsal. 91. 1 High: He who lodgeth there, is vn|der the shadow of the Almightie:Note An afflicted Soule is like a Bee in a tem|pest, tossed to and fro: Frae once the Bee hath winne to its Hyue-hole, it entereth into rest: The poore Soule of a man for a space will be wonder|fullie tossed with tempests, and long will it wrestle: But so soone as it can once win in at the holes of Christs wounds, then it enters into Rest: Note Out of these wounds, as out of its Castle and fortresse, it will boast the

Deuill, Death, the Flesh, and the World: In these woundes is the Soules strongest Tower, the secret place of the most High, where none enemie of mans Saluation shall bee able to reach vnto it for to hurt it: Let your chiefest care bee to creepe in into these wounds.
Note Againe, after that yee haue sha|ken hands with Christ, and made him your friend, consider well what hee hath made of Death: Christ hath made it a friend of a foe: Is not Death now a sleepe? Christs friends sleepe: Sleepe as yee know is ourIoh. 11. 11 great friend: Hee must bee a great friend without whose friendship we can not liue: As wee can not liue without Sleepe, neither can we liue without Death: Except that wee die on Earth we can not liue in Hea|uen: Thou foole said S. Paul, That1 Cor. 15 3 which thou sowest is not quickened, ex|cept it die: Note The whole course of a Christian is contained within the

compasse of these wordes, I liue to die, that I may die to liue: If man will not resolue to liue for to die, hee shall not die to liue: Note The course of a Christian is from a good life to an happie death, and from thence to life yea, to life eternall: Well is the man that runneth not without this compasse.


The sicke Man.
But alas, O my God, take mee notPsal. 102. 24. away in the midst of my dayes: Alas, Sir, must I die so soone?


The Pastour.
Note The Apostle saith, That we die1 Cor, 15 31. daylie. Tunc quoque cum crescimus vita decrescit. It is certaine, that so soone as wee beginne to liue, wee al|so beginne to die: What are all the dayes of our life, but a progresse vn|to Death, which is the putting off of2 et 1. 14 our Tabernacle?Note What is this body, but a mire of mortalitie? Homini|quid vita? cylindrus: What is mans life, but a rolling thing.



The sicke Man.
But will the Lord take mee away in the midst of my dayes? Hath not God promised to the godlie man that his dayes shall bee long in the land? Long life is a thing whereof God hath made promise vnto these who~ hee loueth.


The Pastour.
I answere, that such a promise is vnder two conditions: First of Gods glorie, secondlie of mans well: Note If God loue a man dearlie, hee will whiles take him away in his youth, that hee may haue him neere to him selfe: Moreouer God seeth that which no man can fore-see, viz. the euill to come. The righteous saithIsa. 57. 1. Isaiah is taken away from the euill to come: God hath indeede promised many dayes to the righteous man: But if God shorten them, and take him away sooner, what wrong hath he done vnto him?Note If a Lord should giue to one of his seruants some cot|tage

house of clay, with some little piece of ground for Colewort or Cabbage for to liue vpon, saying, This will I giue thee for thy life|time: But if afterward this Lord should say, Fetch mee my good fer|uant out of his clattie Cottage, and bring him to my Palace, that he may eate at mine owne Table for euer: Tell me, if by the change that serua~t hath lost: Would that seruant think yee, say, No Lord, I will not come to thy Table, for thou hast promised mee this Cottage-house for my life|time? Note What Lord in the Land was euer troubled with such an an|swere?
And yet indeede it is so, that God doeth with his faithfull seruantes, when they die into the midst of their dayes: Note When men are departed from this life, it is the Lord that hath sent his messenger Death for to fetch their Soules from their bodies, which Scripture calleth TabernaclesIo. . 19.

of clay, vnto his heauenlie Mansions, there for to banquet eternallie at his Table with Abraham, Isaac, andMatth. 8. 11 Iacob.
Now tell mee, O man, what haue yee lost, for to goe from the Earth to the Heauens? Is there any thing in this world of such worth, that should make you desire to liue, for to stay from your God but an houre?


The sicke Man.
That which yee say Sir, is verie true: But how few are these who in this world can gladlie condescend to depart out of this life? The life is sweete.


The Pastour.
I confesse indeede that euery one hath not attained vnto this high de|gree of grace, as to say with S. Paul, I desire to bee dissolued, c. Yet all thePhilip  23. godlie will subscribe to this that all the faithfull are happie who are dis|solued: Note Though euerie man can

not wish to die yet euerie man of God will say, That Death is better than life, Death is a salue which healeth vs of all our sores: Is not Death Gods messenger, sent for to pull the troubled Soule out of this sinfull world, as Gods Angel pulledGen. 19. 16 Lot out of Sdom? Is not our life heere a warfare? Note Are we not here as Daniel was in the Dungeon a|mong Lions? Are not vvee hereDn. 6. 16 11 with Ieremie sticking fast into theIer. 38. 6. myrie clay? Are not wee heere with Israel, into the House of bon|dageExod. 20 2. ouerburdened vvith sinne as they vvere vvith bricke? Are we notRom. 7. 24 heere with S. Paul, vnder the bodie of Death? And with Ioseph in thePsal. 105. 18 stockes, not of tree, but of sinne?
If it were well tolde a man what is heere, and what hee may looke for in the life to come, if hee had but a graine of grace, as great as of Mu|stard seede, hee should easilie dis|cerne vvhereof to make choise: Is

not our life heere a wind, and a va|pourIam. 4. 14. of vanitie? But which is most of all to be considered: Is there not heere a necessitie of sinning laide v|pon all the liuing? Who should not bee glad to bee fredde and ridde of these sinfull bondes? Note Is not this life continuallie sicke of the filthie flooxe of sinne, a most lothsome dis|ease? When wee seeke our daylie bread, wee must immediatelie sub|joyne,Matth. 6. 11 forgiue vs our sinnes: First, as wee see heere, wee must begge our bread, and then pardon. Note What then are wee heere, but daylie beg|gers for the bellie? The King must begge his bread from God: In the Heauens there shall bee no begging, but thanking of God for his bene|fites: Who should for all that he can beg on Earth, desire for to liue out of Heauen but one houre?Note Are we not all heere vnder a corruptible burden, a burden of corruption, vnder which the Soule is pressed

as a Cart full of sheaues? SoAmos. 2, 11 long as wee are heere, our Soules are laden with sinnes: Note A Soule burdened with such baggage runs on wheeles, as it were downe an hill all post haste, except that God stay it, it shall neuer cease, till it arriue in Hell, where God shall breake it in sunder by the tempest of his wrath.


The sicke Man.
But Death is the wages of sinne,Rom. 6. 23 who shall not feare?


The Pastour.
Note Indeed Death is such of the owne nature: But God in great mercie hath made death to the godlie like the Raine-bow, which being natural|lieGen. 9. 13 a signe of present raine, by Gods Couenant becommeth a perpetuall signe of faire weather to come after that raine:Note As throgh Death Christ wrought our Life, so must wee bee killed for to bee made aliue: The glorious Resurrection must bee through dust and corruption: Our

paines must goe before our plea|sures,Psal 16. 11 and lashes before our laugh|ters: After that, in come pleasures for euermore.
If wee had the faith of God, wee should not much feare the smart of death which by Christ is made tran|situs ad vitam, a passage vnto Life: Note Let vs once passe thorow this Ior|dan, and behold, wee are in an in|stant in Canaan.


The sicke Man.
All that is true Sir: No man can controle you: yet naturallie all loue Life: The Life is sweete.


The Pastour.
How sweete is it? I pray you: Is not our whole Life trouble and wearinesse? Note What is our sleeping, our resting, our eating, our drin|king, but a seruitude to the flesh? Who should not desire to bee rid from such seruile necessities? who for to bee free of such bondage, should not renounce his deare selfe,

and all the loue of this irk some life? To bee with Christ, is it not our best? Yea, is it not our rest? what shame is it for Christians to dote so after this present life, who should haue lear|ned to long after the life to come?
Note Christ came downe, that wee might goe vp: If wee desire not to goe vp, wee know not wherefore hee came downe: Hee came downe to bee a Seruant, wee goe vp to bee Lords: Hee came downe to bee hungrie, wee goe vp to a perpetuall Feast: Hee came downe to bee ba|nished, where hee had not wherevp|onLuk. 658 to lay his head, we goe vp to dwell in Palaces of pleasures, into euerla|stingLuk. 16. 9. Tabernacles: Note In a word, hee came downe to distresse, to sorrow, to paine, to miserie, to fight against our enemies, Deuils, Death, and temptations, yea, hee discended vnto Hell we goe vp to Ioy, to Honour, to Light, to Life, to Libertie, to our Father, to our Friends, to our Sa|uiour

and Comforter. What shall I say more? Euen to vnspeaka|ble Glorie in Paradise with God  his Angels: Note What a folie is this, that a man should desire to bee de|priued of such Comforts for a puffeIsa. 2, 22. of breath? Bee glad Sir, to quite the ranke Onions of Egypt, for that heauenlie Manna Sweete like WafersGen. 15. 31 made with honey.


The sicke Man.
If a man could bee fullie perswa|ded of that which ye say, I think that hardlie could hee with-hold him|selfe from putting hands into him|selfe, that so hee might change for the better: If all that be, why should any desire to stay from God but an houre? If I may desire to bee dissol|ued, why may I not dissolue my self. The working out of a lawfull desire cannot bee vnlawfull.


The Pastour.
No man liuing Sir, may abso|lutelie desire to be dissolued, but vn|der

condition, that it bee for the glorie of God, and the Saluation of his owne Soule: Note For two re|spects a man may desire to be dissol|ued: First, for to bee deliuered from the bondage of sinne, which the Apostle calleth, A bodie of death:Rom. 7. 24 Secondlie, for an earnest desire to bee with his God, a man may desire to bee dissolued. But for no reason must a man dissolue himselfe, that were selfe murther: Note If we may not kill our Neighbour who~ we should loue as our selues, neither must wee kill our selues, who are the rule and square of neighbourlie loue: Note Man in this world is as a set Watch, hee must not remoue, till it please him by whom hee was set, to command him to come: Note Though lawfullie wee may desire death, that we may bee deliuered from the bodie of death, which is sinne; for to bee with Christ, which is meekle betterPhilip. 1. 23 for vs, yet wee must not cry for

death for some triflles of worldlie troubles, as Ionah did for the lossingIona 4. 8. of his leafes: Our desire of Death should bee chieflie grounded vpon a desire to bee with Christ, and to bee fredde from the spirituall bon|dage of our sins: well is him that can sincerly say from his heart, Miserable man that I am, who shall deliuer meeRom. 7. 24 from this bodie of death? Note That Soule is happie, whose desire is vpon that which is meakle better for it: To bee with Christ, in Scripture stile is called meakle better: What say yePhilip. 1. 23 now Sir, doeth not your heart grone vnder this burden of sinfull death? Doeth not your Soule long to bee out of this bodie, for to bee with him, where it shall bee meakle better for you?


The sicke Man.
I take vp the matter better than I did: I see by your reasons, that there is no reason wherefore a man should desire to die, but for to bee

with his Christ, and to be deliuered from the bodie of bondage, which is a death: But alas.


The Pastour.
I see you yet Sir, into a plunge, I heard that word, Alas: Wherefore say yee Alas? Yee looke yet as one who desireth to liue: My wordes are not gifted with perswasion; yee seeme to be afraide at that word, dis|solued: What aileth you? There bee doubtlesse some thing within that troubleth you.


The sicke Man.
I am sorie to goe out of this world, wherevnto I am chained by diuerse respects: In the cutting off of my dayes, I will mourne with sicke He|zekiah in the words of his doole: IIsa. 38, 10. am depriued of the residue of my yeares, c.


The Pastour.
I see Sir, that yee are taking vp the Lamentations of Hezekiah: I will striue to make answere to eue|rie

sentence apart: Yee are depriued, saye yee, of the residue of your yeeres: Note Hee is not depriued that hath changed for the better: Note The residue of your few yeeres shall bee turned into eternitie: Note Hee who seeth many yeeres, seeth many miseries, and which is worse, con|tracteth many sinnes, the cause of all our woe: Moreouer, what is a resi|due of life? Death is not farre, when it is farthest.


The sicke Man.
But if I die, I shall not see the LordIsa. 38. 1 euen the Lord in the land of the liuing.


The Pastour.
This is your ignorance: What can man see of the Lord, in the land of the liuing? Note What can a sinner see of that great IEHOVAH here? What is to bee seene on Earth, but the Backe-parts of IEHOVAH? In|to the Heauens wherevnto yee now approach yee shall see that great and glorious IEHOVAH, face to face.

What are all men on Earth, but a number of wormes crawling and creeping vpon a clat or clod of clay?
But againe what is this that ye call the land of the liuing? What is all the Land yee see, but a dead lump of earth, where the most part of men are dead in their sins? Doe not the best part die daylie, vnto Sin, which death is our best life, and yet ladenRom. 7. 24 with a bodie of death? Note Can ye now call this earth the Land of the liuing? Call me not Nahomi pleasant, said Na|homi,Ruth. 1. 2 but call me Marah that is bitter, for the Almightie hath dealt verie bit|terlie with mee: So may the Earth say, Call mee not the Land of the li|uing: No, rather call mee a dunge|on of death, a place for the burying of the dead a place where all must2 Sam. 14. 14 needs die, and bee as water spilt vpon the ground, which cannot bee gathered vp againe.


The sicke Man.
But alas, if I die, I shall behold

men no more with the inhabitants of the world.


The Pastour.
This heere is your griefe, that death will strik you with a blindnes, so that yee shall not bee able to see any more the faces of these whom yee loue best into this world, as of Wife, Children, and of Friends of your old acquaintance: This is your dlour the~, that ye shall see them no more: Note Let such thoughts Sir, moue these to mourne, who know not Death better than that Pagan, who speaking of a slaine man said,
In eternam clauduntur Lu|mina noctem.Virgil.
That is, Death closeth mans eyes for euermore: This is most false Note A true Christian knoweth, that though both his eyes should sinke owne into his head, or droppe out like blobbes or droppes of water, yet that with these same eyes runne into water, hee and none othr for him

shall see his Redeemer: Though afterIob. 19. 26 27. my skin, said Iob wormes destroy this bodie, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my selfe, and mine eyes shall behold; and not another. Note Lay this comfort to your heart: Though your eyes were eaten out with the wormes, if you die in the faith of Iesus, yee shall see God and none other for you, and that with these same eyes yee now looke vnto mee Note If yee bee perswaded that yee shall see your God, in the Heauens, in whose face is fulnesse ofPsal. 16. 11 Ioye, yee haue little cause of doole that yee shall no more behold man with the inhabitants of the world: What are all the creatures of thi World, but things that dwell in dst?Isa 26. 18. The Sainctes and Angels that dwell into these vpper Chambers whose feete are aboue ou head are so fa in glorie, aboue all the glorie of the world, as the Heauens are aboue the Earth: Note As Zebah and Zalmunah

said of Gideons brethren, so may we say of all these that dwell there, e|uerie one of them is like the SonneIudg. 8. 18 of a King: What are all the Crea|tures below, but beggerlie things?


The sicke Man.
But alas, if I die, mine age is de|partedIsa. 38. 12. and remoued from me as a Shep|heards tent.


The Pastour.
What is your doole? It is all then, that yee must quite your shepheards tent. Note Now poore man, What haue yee lost? Yee shall change a poore shepheards tent for the most pleasant Palace of your God, a life mortall, for a life that is eternall: Note A man brought from age of yeeres vnto eternitie, is like Dauid, a shep|heard brought from the Ewes, for to bee made a King: What regretPsal. 78. 71 should a man haue, for to change a little Lodge for a London? Note What is this life. but a daylie dyeing?


The sicke Man.

But alas, I haue cut off like a weauerIsa. 38. 12. my life: Hee will cut mee off with pin|ning sicknesse, from day euen to night hee will make an end of mee.


The Pastour.
Take heede Sir what yee say: Your meaning is, that by your sins yee haue abridged and cutte short your dayes, or that yee haue pro|uocked God by your sinnes, to take away your Life from you: Note If it be so, that like a weauer yee haue cut your dayes by your sinnes; breake off now these sinnes by repentance: If by your sinnes yee haue cut like a weauer the threeds of this mortall life, beginne now by repentance to spinne the webbe of a new life, some threeds of life eternall: Let now the rotten thrummes of the vices of your life fall downe to the ground:
Note While yee haue time, weaue into your life graces thorow graces, as warpe and woft: Weaue on still, till from grace yee worke in into the

eternitie of glorie.


The sicke Man.
But alas, Hee will cut mee offIsa. 38. 12. with pynning sicknesse: I feare great|lie that the paines of Death put mee out of all patience.


The Pastour.
Take courage Sir: The paine shall not bee so great as yee feare: God will lay no more on you, than yee shall bee able to beare: He shall weigh all your paines in his merci|full Ballance, before that hee laye them vpon you: Hee knoweth that your strength is not like the strength of a Whale, hee breaketh not the brui|sedIsa. 42. 3 eede Note God is so bent vnto mer|cie, that while he scourgeth sinners for their faults, hee is said to bring to passe, his strange worke and hisIsa. 28. 21 strange act.


The sicke Man.
But I feare his cutting: Gods cuts are verie sensible: I feare to bee cut off with pyning sicknesse.



The Pastour.
Feare not God is cunning in his cut|ting Note Hee will not cut into the quicke like an ignorant Surgeon The mercifull God taketh no plea|sure to cut you off with pyning sick|nesse but hee will cut off your cor|ruptions with such paines: In such paines should bee pleasure; Note The bluenesse of the wound purgeth awayProu. 0. 30 euill Pleasant should be that paine which is Gods Raser for cutting off mans ptions Away with the pleases of this otten flesh Note Such in the beginning though lawfull, re burning and bloodie pleasures: vnlawfull end into hellish torments, feare not pyning sicknesse.


The sicke Man.
But alas, from day euen to night heIsa. 38. 12. will make an end of mee.


The Pastour.
I know Sir, that the night is wearisome, and that sicknesse some what light in the day, waxeth heauy

in the night: From day to night, the sicknesse increaseth: The re|meede is this, bee strong in God, whose strength is made perfect in2 Cor. 12. 9. weaknesse: Note If dolours increase in the night, heere is a comfort, The night time is a most fitte time for prayer: The time of silence is most conuenient for speaking vnto God: Note The night time is a speciall time whereof God hath made choise, for in it to speake secretlie vnto men: It was in the night that Eliphaz saw the vision and heard the voyce ofIob. 4. 13 14. 15. 16. instruction: In thoughts, said hee, From the visions of the night, wh deepe sleepe falleth on men, feare came vpon mee and trembling, which made all my bones to shake: Then a Spirit passed before my face, the haire of my flesh stood vp it stood still, but I could not discerne the forme thereof: An Image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voyce, c.
See how in e visions of the

night, while there was silence, Eli|phaz heard the voyce of God: Note Let no sicke man be afraid for the night, it is the time of silence, the chiefe time of co~ference with God: Note Whe~ Creatures are most silent, then is a time for man to speake to God, and for God to speake to man: The din of the day marreth our meditatio~s.


The sicke Man.
But alas, from day to night he will make an end of mee.Isa. 38. 12


The Pastour.
It is better that hee make an end of you, than that any other should doe it: If hee make an end of you, pray earnestlie for a good end: If the end be well, all is well: Your complaint is that, from day to night hee will make an end of you: Note Bee thankefull to God for his mercie to|ward you, in that he hath giuen you so long a time to repent as from day to night: Note Hee might haue made you sinke downe thorow the EarthNumb. 16. 32. vnto hell in a moment with Dathan

and Abiram: Hee might haue burnt you with fire from Heauen in a thunder clappe with Corah: Hee might haue drowned you into the Sea with Pharaoh: Hee mightExod. 4 21 haue slaine you vnder a Tower, with these eighteene at Siloe: HeeLuk. 13. 4 might haue sent a winde for to smite the foure corners of your house, while yee had beene at a banket with Iobs Children: WhatIob. 1. 19. if the goodnesse of God had deser|ted you, and taken his free Spirit fro~Psal. 81. 12. you? What if hee should doe so to the best of vs? Certainelie we should either make away our selu with Saule by the sword, or with Iu|das1 Sam. 31 4 and Ahitophel by the cord, oMatth. 27. 3 with Zirie by the fire. Many o|thers2 Sam. 17 23 haue in an instant beene snat|ched away in the verie sweae of their sinnes.
First then, I say, That is a grea mercie of God vnto man, that God himselfe maketh an end of him, and

not suffereth him to fall into the hands of his mercielesse creatures.
Secondlie, in that, from day to night hee delayeth, it is a mercyfull patience: Take heede Sir, what I say: Count this a great mercie of your God, though yee should die this night, thanke God for his pa|tience, that it was from day to night, before that hee would make an end of you: Note It is a great bene|fite of God, to get but so much time wherein wee may once cry, Lord, haue mercie vpon mee Note. No man can sufficientlie esteeme the high price of a dayes laiser vnto night: Heere is the patience and the long suffering of God.
Now Sir consider, and weigh well what hath beene said: Is it not now your desire, that yee bee dissol|ued? Are yee not as yet resolued? It would seeme, that there bee some thing that yet troubleth you: As for the wordes of Hezekiahs chattering,

which hath beene the wordes of your mourning, I hope that in some measure ye haue beene cleared with some contentment.


The sicke Man.
I confesse Sir, that yee haue per|tinentlie made answere to all these difficulties: But, alas, what shall I say?


The Pastour.
What aileth you? Bee plaine with mee, I pray you Sir, thinke no shame to tell mee what is into your minde: Note If the Patient couer his sore from the Surgeon, the greater will his danger bee: It is an hard matter when the Patient playeth false with the Physition: Lay open your wounds, if yee would haue salue fitte for your sores.


The sicke Man.
I think shame Sir to tell you what aileth mee, yet seeing I haue neede both of instruction  of comfort, I will be no stranger vnto you, Note whom

I know to bee a man of God, that is not curious for to ripe vp secret sores for your owne curiositie, but rather for to cure them: I vvill not conceale the matter from you: It is this: I haue filled my Barnes, and I desire to enjoye the fruites thereof: There is no man, but hee would desire after great paines, o rape some fruites of his labours: I vvish that Death would excuse mee for some yeares: This is my griefe, for I must bee plaine with you, mine heart cannot well accord to forsake such comforts.


The Pastour.
That Sir is but a worldlie tempta|tion: What are Barnes of corne on Earth in comparison of Gods most pleasant Palace in Heauen, vvhere|in are pleasures for euermore? Note FyePsal. 16. 11 vpon Barnes, a nest for Myce and Rattons: Would yee desire to liue for to enjoye the leauinges of vn|beastes? They beginne, and as it

vvere sit at the first messe: Thus af|ter that the Fowles of the Aire haue gotten their share, and the Rattons haue gotten their fill, poore man as it vvere commeth after all, and sitteth downe at the latter meate. Note But vvhat are all these thinges, though man should enjoye them all his alone? What can hee get of them all but a bellie full of meate? Note What is the Bellie to that spirituall Birth-right and blessing that is laide vp into the Heauens? What is the Bellie, but a thing ordained for de|struction with all that is in it? Meats for the Bellie, and the Bellie for the1 Cor. 6. 13. meates, But God shall destroy both it and them. Cast out of your heart the care of your Bellie: Note The Bellie in the Heart maketh a man a mon|ster: Let this bee your chiefe, care, that shortlie your Soule may sitte downe at Gods Table with Abra|ham, Isaac, and Iacob in Gods King|dome: What grieueth you now S



The sicke Man.
God hath blessed mee, my Mo|neyes are increased; and now my life is but comming to the best.


The Pastour.
Note The richest life is not euer the best life; aboundance of Moneyes is no sure token of Gods mercies: If it had beene otherwise, Christ had neuer cast the Bagge vnto Iudas.Ioh. 12. 6
That churlish Carle in the Go|spel, that would not let LazarusLuk. 16. 20 dyne with his dogges, how soone was his Purple pulled from him, and hee made a begger into Hell, see|king a droppe of water from him, whose scabs his dogges had licked on Earth? Nabel like a foole is fea|sting1 Sam. 25 36. to day, and tomorrow he shall become sicke, and die with an heartvers. 37 like a stone within him: What fatter then shall hee be of his Feast? Note Be|ware Sir, to marrie your mind with your Money, lest yee bee thereby diuorced from Christ: S. Augustin

said wiselie,
Matrimonium inter aurum  arcam est inter Deum  ani|mam Divortium.
A marriage betweene our Minde and our Money, is a diuorcement betweene the Soule and Christ its Spouse.
Note It is good for vs, lest that wee should loue this world too well, that like a curst Step-mother it misuse vs, and rather strike vs, than stroake vs, as it doeth with these worldlie brats, who neither liue, nor loue a Life but this. What thinke yee now Sir of this world?


The sicke Man.
I desire yet that God would grant mee some space to liue, that I might make some better prouision for my little Children: I wish that I might liue till they were better prouided, within a few dayes if God would spare mee, I hope that I should make a conquest.
Note Fye vpon that conquest that ma|keth a man to desire to tarie from God but one houre: Solomon afterEccles. 2. 18. all his conquests said, that hee hated all his labour: I said hee, hated all my labour, which I had taken vnder the Sunne: The reason is subjoyned by himselfe, Because I should leaue itvers. 19. vnto the man that should bee after mee: And who knoweth whether hee shall bee a wise man or a foole? Yea, hee pro|ued a foole indeed, by forsaking the1 King. 12 13 counsell of the old wise, for to follow the folie of his young fooles: Note What folie is this I play you, for a man to desire to liue, for to conquise spa|ringlie for one that will spend it all lauishlie, crying among the drun|kards, Fill the pynt againe? Note Many children will at one cast of the dyce, cast more from them into a night, than their fathers were able to win into a yeare: Note What is great riches to the most part of Heires, but fuell to their follie? Note Is it not common|lie

seene, that after the Father hath pined himselfe with scraiping toge|therHabuk. 2. 6 this thick clay and pelfie dung, in co~meth a forelorne deboched Heire with his drunke~ musick, singing Veri vades, Wee haue spent more than ourPhilip. 3. 8 fathers haue winne. A little with GODS blessing is much worth: Note Hardlie can men conquise much with a good Conscience: From thence is the prophan prouerbe, Well is the Heire whose fathers soule is in Hell: The glose is this, hardlie can the father inrich his children, but by lossing his own Soule: What a woefull bargaine is this? Neither doeth it euer come to passe, that the euill conquist come to the hands of them for whom it was appointed: Note After that the Worldling by hook  by crooke hath taken with the an|gle, and hath catcht with the net,  gathered in his dragge, all that is a|bout him: At last it commeth to passe, that after he hath well ladned

his Boate, and is come neere the ha|uen, there commeth a blast of judge|ment which ouer-turneth all into a moment: Note Thus in the highest of his hopes in sight of the Shore, lad|ned and fraughted with the fruite of all his labours of his lyes, his guile, and deceite, he goeth downe to the bottome of the depths, so that none is able to rescue him: Thus after that, first he hath made shipwrack of his conscience, he also maketh ship|warcke of all his goods, and so is he depriued of his imagined profite: Note What though his shippe should come in? What though all should prosper for a while? Note Let Micah steale his mothers siluer and turne it into gods, and get a Priest,  blesse himselfe, when hee hath done, thin|king that all shall prosper now: ButDanites. ere it belong some of the race of theGen. 49. 17 Adder by the way, shall come and tak away his gods: And if hee run out to follow for his owne, they shall

either scorne him with what ailethIudg. 18. 23 thee? or shall boast him to keepe si|lence, saying, Let not thy voyce beevers. 25. heard among vs, lest angrie fellowes runne vpon thee, and thou losse thy life with the liues of thine house-hold.
Note Let no man blesse himselfe with Micah because hee hath gods at home: Note Though men by manie meanes may become rich, and think that they shall leaue great wealth vnto their children, God can by as many meanes disapoint them, as by blood, by shipwracke, by fire, by water, by warre, by banqueroupts, by plea, and by piracie, c. He who to day was swaggering in his Silkes and swimming in his wealth spea|king of nothing but of thousands, within a little space behold him a|gaine, and loe, all is changed: The poore man he goeth and no man re|gardeth him, he is hungrie, nacked and colde, but not so colde as the charitie of these that may helpe him:

These who were wont to eate at his table, desire no more to see him: The thoughts of olde obligations are to them lik letters of Caption for to en|force the~ to giue some what to their olde distressed friend: But cold are such comforts: Heere, beholde Sir, as in a glasse, what vanitie into these transitorie things, which men think to make permanent to their posteri|tie: Note But let a man be rich till he die; After that he hath spoiled others to make himselfe wealthie, shall his children bee his Heires? No, not: The wealth of the sinner is laide vpProv. 13. 22. for the Iust: See how God maketh a Worlding to be as it were a drudge or a packe horse for to gather with the sweate of his browes, that wher|with the righteous man may bee sustained: Note As hee made the Rauens to flee and fetch flesh for the nou|rishing1 King. 17 16 of his Seruant Elijah: Note Some tims also it wil befal otherwise, that thewe alth of the sinner shall be laid

vp for one worse than himselfe, that all the world may see, and beholde, what vanitie there is in such carking care: Note O, wil some say, if hee that is dead saw such a man in his house, Master of all his labours, What would hee now thinke? Note Thus God in a manner making deboched bare men like leane Kine prey vpon theGen. 41. 3 wicked, who while they liued, woldIudg. 9. 9. not with the Oliue leaue their fatnes for to be Kings in Heaue~, letteth the world see what folie it is to put their trust in such transitorie trashes.
What say yee now Sir? Are yee now free of such earthlie temptati|ons?


The sicke Man.
I am miserablie vexed with this world: Worldlie things, doe what I can, runne euer into my minde, and trouble mee with carking cares.


The Pastour.
Note So long as a mans heart is clog|ged with this clay, hee hath no po|wer

to stirre hand or foote to hea|uen-ward: There is both gall and guile in earthlie mindednesse: Well is him, whose Soule can sore farre aboue this Region of corruption, for to minde aboue all things the thingsCol. 3. 1. that are aboue.


The sicke Man.
My minde alas, is like Martha, bu|siedLuk. 10. 41 about manie things, or rather bu|ried in manie things.


The Pastour.
But Christ said, One thing is ne|cessarie: Note Hee that said it, is that which hee said; euen that, One ne|cessarie thing. Note Wee may passe to life eternall without any other thing: But there is such a necessitie in Christ, that without him wee can doe nothing: Without mee, said hee, yee can doe nothing: Christ is thatLuk. 10. 41 Best part, Maries choise: Well is that Soule, that maketh him its part: He is onely that which shall neuer bee taken from vs But what worldlie

thing is that, that as yet troubleth you?


The sicke Man.
Mine heart Sir, is ouer-burdened with the weight of manie cares con|cerning this Life.


The Pastour.
Note Our Sauiour hath set downe a particular Precept concerning that, Take heede, said hee, to your selues,Luk. 21. 34. least at any time your heartes bee ouer|charged with surfetting and drunken|nesse, and cares of this life: Note Such cares may snow downe white haires vpon our hairie scalpe: But it is onelie the godlie care, the care of the Life to come, that worketh Re|pentance neuer to bee repented of: But come to the pa~rticulars.


The sicke Man.
I haue latelie bought some heri|tage, my seruants are plowing it, before I die I would wish once to reape the fruites thereof.


The Pastour.
To bee worldlie minded is death:
Note The command is gone foorth', none can plead ignorance: Loue not the world, nor the things of the world:Ioh. 2. 16. Well is him that so liueth heere,Luk. 20. 35 that he may be counted worthie to enjoy that world: Note It is no time now Sir to thinke of ploughes, yee must now leaue all, for to follow Christ,1 King. 19 21. like Elisha, who left his plowing for to follow his new vocation: Take now a kisse of your dearest friendes, and follow this great Elijah, the Lord Iesus, the Chariot of all his chosen, and the Horse-men of his Israel.


The sicke Man.
My Lands are laboured, the Haruest draweth neere, there is a plentifull croppe vpon the ground, Cornes and wheat, and all abound.


The Pastour.
There is no solide comfort in Wheat or in Corne, but onelie in Gods countenance: Note I compare all worldlie things to the Tallow of

a Candle, and spirituall thinges to the flamme thereof: If the Candle bee right set, that the flamme bee vpmost, the Candle will shin cleare|lie, and giue light: But if yee turne the Candle, and holde the flamme downe, it shall at once drowne in its owne tallow: Euen so if the Soule of man bee well set, that spirituall thoughts bee vpmost, and worldlie co~siderations sanctified, which haue beene melted  strained from their drosse be vnder, that Soule will shine in holie life before men: But if the flamme of the Spirit bee turned downe, it will drowne vnder the droppes of such earthlie tallowe: By this at last, all our light dyeth out like a Candle, so that our hearts that were once enlightned, become lik a dampish dungeon.
Note I confesse, so long as wee are here the fire of the Spirit within the best of vs, is like ignis in materia, fire in an earthlie matter, from whence

commeth euer some filthie reeke: But when once wee shall bee aboue all places, wherevnto no reeke can reach, this spirituall flamme abstra|cted from all earthlie matter, shall shine most clearlie into the presence of God for euer. Are yee not yet Sir resolued? Is not your desire now to bee dissolued?


The sicke Man.
The world is yet still in my mind: I haue take~ much paines into it,  am now but beginning for to get some ease: I haue builded an house, glad|lie would I dwell some space into it: Mine heart is sore, yea, it bleeds for to leaue this Lodging, and neuer to come to it againe: I had trim|med it for my pleasure, and now behold, shall I bee disappointed?


The Pastour.
There is no great matter of griefe Sir, when a man changeth for the better: Note What are all the sieled Pala|ces of Princes on earth, but like the

house of a Spider? How soone areIob. 8. 14. they all sweept away with the be|some of vengeance, when God is an|grie? What are all our dwellinges on earth, but Dungeons in a dung|hill? Let not your heart Sir bee on your house: It is now time to mind the things that are aboue: Eye vpon clay and stones: Note What are all the royall Palaces of the world to these statelie houses aboue, whereof the floore or pauement glisters with thousands of Starres, as with as ma|nie golden nailes, o twinkling Dya|onds: There the Sun  y^e Moone the two great Iewels of Heauen, shall bee vnder your feete, which are now aboue our heade. What is within, no mortall tongue can tell: S. Paul saw there some-thing, but2 Cor. 12 4 hee neuer reuealed it, neither was it lawfull for him to declare what he had seene: Note This one thing wee may know, seeing the out-side of Heauen is so beautifull, how plea|sant

must it bee within? Heauen is like the Kinges Daughter, whose whole beautie is within: There is pro|fite,Psal. 45. 13 pleasure, health, wealth, ho|nour, happinesse, beautie  blesse: In a word, there bee thinges that eye neuer saw, neither eare heard, yea, which neuer could enter into the heart of man.


The sicke Man.
But alas, must I then forsake all my wealth, and so leaue all my trea|sures behind mee


The Pastour.
Note Such treasures are but traitours, though they bee counted gods: God said to Magistrats, I haue calledPsal. 82. 6 you gods: But hee neuer called gold god: To call gold god, is Ashdo|dien language: Gods of gold must be forsaken, for to goe to the God of Glorie: Note What are all these world|lie thinges whereon naturall men so doe gaze? What are they, but idoles lying vanities? To ouercome

the loue of such lyers, is the triumph of Trueth:Note If Gods Arke be with|in our heart, such Dagons will fall downe: Turne therefore your eyes from such clay, and minde the things that are aboue: Manie gather richesCol. 3. 1. as hee that earneth wages to put it intoHab. 1 6. a bottomlesse bagge: Note The first lesson of Christianitie is selfe denyall.


The Sicke Man.
How is it then Sir, that a man must goe through this world for to come to Heauen?


The Pastour.
Note Euen as the Israelites desired to goe through the Land, of Sihon the King of the Amorites, for to come to Canaan the figure of Heauen Let mee goe through thy Land, saidNumb. 21 21, Israel, Wee will not turne aside into the fieldes, nor into the vineyards, nei|ther drinke of the waters of the wells wee will goe by the Kings high way, vn|till wee be past thy Countrey. Note It is so that wee must passe through this

world, for to come to that heauenlie Canaan, we must not turne asid into the faire fields of pleasure, nor drink our selues drunke in its vineyards: But wee must follow directlie the rule of Gods Law the King of Hea|uens high way, that so we may enter into Canaan. What say ye Sir? Is it not time to bee resolued?


The sicke Man.
Mine heart is pined within mee: It is like to breake for sorrow, when I looke to my little Children, Who shortlie shalbe fatherlesse: Alas hard shall their estate be, when I shall bee away, who will take care of them?


The Pastour.
That which Christ said to Peter,Matth. 14 31 may bee said to you, O man of little Faith, why hast thou doubted? Hath not God promised to shew mercie vnto thousands of these that loue him? Note If the King of this Land should now come himselfe to your bed-stocke and say Iames, or Iohn,

heere I giue to you mine hand be|for God and good witnesse, that I shall bee a Father to your Children after you, and shall so prouide for them, that they shall want nothing that may doe them good: If yee heard such a man make such promi|ses, I thinke that yee should not bee in paine for the estat of your childre~: And yet what is a King but a man? But so it is, that all men are lyares,Psal. 116. 11. or may lie: But God who can notHeb. 6. 18 lie, hath giuen his Hand and his trueth to the faithfull man, yea, hath oblished himselfe by an oath, and hath taken Heauen and Earth to bee witnesse, that hee shall neuer for|sake the godlie man nor his seede, his promise is to thousands: If yeeExod. 20, 6 beleeue God to bee true, relye v|pon his promise: Let not the care of Children trouble you any more, prepare your selfe for God, and let Death bee welcome: Put your house to an order in time: Discharge

your selfe of all worldlie burdens: denude your hands and your heart of all temporall affaires, that your Soule haue nothing to doe, but to waite vpon your God: Note It is not time to bee combered with the world, while the whole heart should bee taken vp with heauenlie medi|tations: It is now high time to thinke earnestlie vpon that life, wherevnto yee are going by Death: It would seeme Sir that yee are not contentas yet for to remoue: What can this be that troubleth you shuld not your heart rejoyce to goe vnto your God?


The sicke Man.
I finde contrarie draughts with|in mee: Your wordes indeede Sir beginne to worke vpon mine heart, and to draw vp my Soule toward the pleasures that are aboue: Note But againe I finde the desires of this life like weightie paisses drawing mee downe to the ground againe: This

is my regret: Alas, must I then leaue this world, and the light there|of, and neuer see it againe any more? Shall I beholde man no moreIsa. 38. 11 with the inhabitants of the worlde? Shall I neuer see after this into the Land of the liuing any of all these whom I haue loued so well?


The Pastour.
Note Sir, it shall bee your farre best to suffer the loue of Christ swallow vp the loue and all other considera|tions of worldlie thinges, as Moses his serpent swallowed vp the serpentsExod. 7. 12 of the Magicians: Note What euer see|meth pleasant into this world vnto the naturall eye, it is but by juggling of the senses: If we haue the grace of God, this grace shall be indeede like as a foure nooked Clauer, is in the opinion of some, viz a most power|full meanes against the juggling of the sight: If wee could seeke this grace, it would let vs see the vanitie of such thinges which beguile the

naturall senses: Note The eye of a mans Soule is betimes like the eye of a man come out of a bilious feuer, all things seeme to him to bee yellow, because of the bile which haue per|uerted his sight: Note Sathan can forge temptations like glasse, of whatsoe|uer colour hee pleaseth, wheretho|row all things seeme to bee of the colour of his temptations: Thorow one glasse a mans owne spouse will seeme to be filthie: Thorow a|nother a bordel-whore will seeme to bee pleasant: Thorow one the world will seeme to bee glorious, thorow another the brightest hea|uens will seeme to bee but cloudes: Thorow one, fables will seeme to be Scripture, thorow another, Scrip|tures will seeme to bee but fables Thorow one if a man feast as Christ did, hee will seeme to bee a gluttn,Luk. 7 34 thorow another if hee feast with the Baptist, hee will seeme to bee a de|uill:vers. 33. The chiefe gripe of your temp|tation

is in this, that if ye were once dead, yee shall beholde man no more with the inhabitants of the world: Yee are far beguiled into the sight of the wold, wherewith yee are so raui|shed: Note Change your Spectacles, and all that is below shall seeme to bee of another colour: Note If your Soule could once sore vp towardes Heauen, the loue of the Earth and earthlie things would fall from you, as did the Mantle of Elias, when he2 King. 2. 3 was rapt and rauished vp vnto glorie.


The sicke Man.
Note But ye know Sir, that it is verie hard not to bee sore grieued to goe out of this world, Non amplius vi|sur us neque videndus, neither for to see anie more, nor yet to bee seene: Note Who without teares can say his adewes to all his joys, pleasures, and contentments that are here? Whe~ I once shalbe caried out of my house, yee shall see mee no more: Hence|foorth

yee and I will speake no more together: I departing from you, must goe to the place of silence, a|mong stinke  wormes: Who can|without displeasure say to all world|lie joyes, farewell?


The Pastour.
It is best that ye turne your backe vnto such naughtie things, as Heze|kiah turned his backe to the stocke, and his face to the wall, that hee might conferre with his God: It is great folie to bee so fond vpon such transitorie trashes: What is so plea|sant in this world that should allure vs to it? Are not all thinges incon|stant heere below? Note There is no|thing that standeth at a stay, but ei|ther it is comming in or going out like the Tyde: Note There is no crea|ture but while it beginneth to waxe it also beginneth to waine: A child of the age of a day hath lesse time to liue at Eauen, than hee had in the morning: Since hee came out of

the bellie, from the morning vnto eauen hee hath made a dayes jour|ney in the way to his graue: In ipso ortu vergimus ad occasum: Our ari|sing vp is but a course to our fall: Note The degrees of a mans life, are as as manie stepp vnto his death: All that wee see below is in a continuall whirling from a beginning to an end: The course of all the Creatures below is in a trance of transitorie trashes: Note I can but teach you with vvords as Iohn baptized with water:Luk. 3. 16. It is onelie the Lord vvho can per|swade.


The sicke Man.
I take delight to heare you, I pray God to perswade mee: Continue I pray you into that discourse con|cerning the vanitie and inconstan|cie of vvoldly things, ripe them vp, and open them wider, that I may see them within the bowels.


The Pastour.
The vvisest among men preached,

Vanitie of vanities, and all is vanitie:Eccles. 1. 2 All things are vaine, and all things cry vnto vs that wee are vaine, So vaine a thing is man: Note The Trees, the Herbes, the Flowrishes, the Fruites, the Fishes, the Beastes, the Spring, the Summer, the Haruest, the Win|ter, the Aire, the Water, the Earth, the Heauens, are all appointed teachers by God, to tell man of his changing: Note Their line is gone outPsal. 19. 4. through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world: All that haue eyes  eares may heare,  read their doctrine, that heere is nothing per|manent: Note One creature calleth to another, Let vs leaue this World: See wee not how vvee melt away by droppes, for to bee dryed into dust: Moses saith, that wee spend ourPsal. 90. 9. yeares as a tale that is tolde; a strange speach for to declare the vanitie of lo~g life so much desired: while a tale is in telling, it seemeth to bee some|thing, but when a tale is once told,

these that haue heard it will in end say, That it is but a tale: So long as mans life is lasting, it is like a tale that is in telling: But so soone as Death the end of all commeth, it is but like a tale that is tolde: Thus as yee see all mans life in Scripture language, is called but a tale:Note All the times of our life past, present, and to come, are turned at last into a fuimus, wee haue beene: Wee that liue now, let vs remember our case, Ecce tempus nunc futurum quo dicen nos fuisse, The time shall bee short|lie that man shall say of vs that wee haue beene: And thereafter a time shall come that none shall know that euer wee had a beeing: Note Our life is like a sparkle fleeing out of the fire, which dyeth out into the flight, it failleth before it falleth.


The sicke Man.
These bee wordes of great po|wer, I finde now some working thereof within mine heart: I pray you continue.



The Pastour.
Wee haue none abiding heere, Note We all both yong  old post swift|lie away to the graue, the last bed wherein euerie man must sleepe, we are long of comming to: But how soone are wee pulled downe? Our strength saith Moses, is soone cut off,Psal. 90. 10 and wee flee away: Note Wee are like the Yee which thaweth sooner than it froze: Note This is the Law of all flesh, Prince, People, Poore and Rich, all must goe to Golgotha: The Preacher saith plainlie, There is no discharge inEccle. 8. 18 that warre.
Note Though a man in the morning bee proude like a Peacocke, with lif|ted vp feathers, if Death come be|fore the night come, hee must lay downe his head among dead mens Skuls: What a thing is this, that within an hundreth yeares not one of vs all that are heere shall bee left aliue, no not in this great Citie, wherein wee liue? Note Are wee not

all as water spilt vpon the ground,1 Sam. 14 14 which can not bee gathered vp againe What memorie is now of these tha are past? And what shall bee said o vs, when wee are gone? It is o farre best then to follow our God and to turne our backe vpon all suc lying vanities.


The sicke Man.
I requeast you Sir, not to be wea|ried: Proceede I pray you into tha purpose, that I may learne what va|nitie is into this life, which is so much desired.


The Pastour.
Note Mans life into this world is but a Pilgrimage and a race not of great length; for man that is borne of a w|man,2 Tim. 4. 7Iob. 14. 1. hath but a short time to liue: Note Ia|cobs answere to King Pharaohs que|stion concerning his age, was fewGen. 47. 1 and euill haue my dayes beene? Note What is man saith one but Vermis crasti moriturus? a worme that will die to morrow: Note Dauid putteth the length

of his dayes betweene his little fin|ger  his thumbe: My life said he, isPsal. 39. 5 like a span long: some get but an inch, consider well I pray you Sir, seeing it is so, what is it then of your life, which is but of the length of a span what thogh it were an ell of length? Note Is not Methusalah with his many hundreth yeeres as well in dust, as as hee that liued but a day: Note Other haue giuen place to vs, and we must also giue place to others: To mee to day, to thee tomorrow: There is no lodging for immortalitie vp|on the Earth


The sicke Man.
My Soule rejoyceth to heare you Sir, proceede I pray you.


The Pastour.
Wee haue no great cause to desire to sojourne on earth: Note What are we heere on earth but like poore beggers shute downe to the lowest chambers of the world? This lowCabul, that is dirtie. contrie may well be called Cabul, as Hiram, by disdaine called the dir|tie

cities of Solomon: Be glad no Sir for to leaue this earth, a dirti dwelling: Note Step vp the Staire eueGen. 28. 17 the Ladder of Iaacob, that yee may mount vp to your God, for to see what hee is doing aboue: Well is you who shall heare shortlie the mu|sicke of Angels into that Palace whose pauement is the roofe of al mortall dwellings: O if yee kne what is there! Fye on our ignorance Note The Childre~ of God in this worl are like Lords children, sent out to bee fostered into little Cottages o clay, when they are sent for by sick|nesse and death; their Fathers mes|sengers they weepe to come home to their Fathers Palace, because they know not these many pleasant Man|sions that bee in their Fathers house But after that they haue once trye what it is to bee in Heauen with their God, they shall wonder  their childishnesse: Note Be not Sir l these fort of men that cannot abid

to heare speake of Death, but euen sicken at the name thereof, or waxe wroth at the speaker, as Ahab, fu|med1 King. 22 8 at the Prophet, because hee spake not good thinges vnto him.


The sicke Man.
Hezekiah spake more wiselie, while hee was threatned by the Prophet, Good, said hee, is the word of the Lord:2 King. 20 19. I pray you to continue your pur|pose concerning death: Note It is good that wee remember our latter end.


The Pastour.
Note Indeed Sir the thoghts of Death are helpefull and healthfull to the Soules of men, to bee corrections for their corruptions: Such thoughts keepe euer God in our sight: They are like a strainer, wher|through the thoughts, wordes and workes of men are purified: Hardlie can a man thinke of a shot life, and thinke euill, as hardlie can hee deame of a long life,  thinke well: Note All the sinnes of Gods Church in

Icremes dayes vvere imputed vntoLam. 1. 9 this, that shee remembred not her end: Note Wee for the most part deceiue our selues vvith the opinion of long life, and so did they vvho are dead alreadie: O how gracious vvould one day bee to these novv, who vvhile they liued, did scorne at these vvordes, Redeeme the Time! ButEphes. 5. 16 their maket time is now past: Gods Faire vvas ended before they could vnderstand vvhat it vvas to buy with|out money: Well is the man vvho,Isa. 55. 1. vvhile he hath time, so liueth to dye, that hee may dye to liue: If our life be good, our death cannot be euill: Note To the godlie man death is a com|fort, as beeing a medecine for all his diseases; a cure for all his cares,Reuel. 14 13 a rest from his labours: But in this is his greatest joye that by it the filthie flooxe of sinne is dryed vp into an instant: * By it also the prison doore is opened that the Soule like a Doue may flie vp to its

God: The consideration of suchEccles. 7. 3. things made Solomon to preach, The day of death is better, than the day that one is borne: Hee spake the trueth, for the one is the beginning, the o|ther is the ending of all our woe and miserie.
Now Sir, before that I proceede any further, I pray you to tell mee what yee thinke now of this world. In this as I remember was your last temptation grounded, that going out of this world, yee should no more see nor bee seene: Note I haue let you see as in a glasse, what vanitie is in it, yea, that all is but vanitie of vanities, the verie abstract of an ab|stract, or for to speak so, vanitie fined and quintessenced out of vanitie, which I may call the spirit or quin|tessence of vanitie. Now Sir tell me what ye thinke of this world, wher|in gods must die like men? No world|liePsal. . 7. thing below in the day of neede will bee able to keepe touch vnto vs.



The sicke Man.
Fye, fye on my faultes, and my folie: Note I foolishlie once thought that I should feather a nest into this world, that should neuer bee pulled downe: Mine heart hath beene so bent toward this vanitie that I haue neither moued foote nor finger to|ward eternall Life.
Note It is true that I haue beene nou|rished and brought vp into this world like a Child into a rurall cot|tage Note I like a Child thought that there was no better: Ionah wasIona. 4. 7. angrie for to quite his Gourd: Note The greatest pleasures that are heere bee|ing well weighed, are but like the shadow of that Gourd, euanishing and worme-eaten pleasures: All such comforts are but slender, they faile man in his greatest neede.


The Pastour.
Note Though worldlie pleasures be sweete for a space to these whose portion is into this Life, yet as

Abner said of the deuouring Sword to Ioab, It will bee bitternesse in the2 Sam. 2. 26. latter end: In all the gourdes of worldlie pleasures are wormes of paine, which shall make them to wither.


The sicke Man.
That is most certaine: Note well is him that hath turned his backe to all such lying vanities: So long as a man is in nature, not reformed by grace, hee is but a stranger from hea|uen: The loue of the world in his heart like a moth, cats out all liking of Heauen. Note I haue beene too long alas, sucking the breastes of this Nourse, whereout of I haue drawen nothing but the swill of wicked|nesse: Blessed bee my God, who hath sent this affliction for to waine my Soule from the loue of all things below: I beginne now to incline for to returne to my Fathers house in Heauen, where, as I heare, it shall bee much better for mee. Oh, for|lorne Sonne that I am who haue

wandered so farre from my Father!


The Pastour.
I thanke God, Sir, for these good motions, flesh and blood cannot teach such lessons: But one word I haue obserued into your speach, yee haue said, that ye beginne to incline to goe home to your Father: Are ye not as yet fullie resolued? Desire yee not indeede presently to be dis|solued? Note Is it not your greatest de|sire to flitte fom this bodie which is but a Booth, a Shoppe, or TabernacleIob 4. 19. of clay? Note Is not your Soule wea|ried to sojourne into such a reekie Lodge? Is not your heart panting after God, lke an Hart, panting after the water brookes? He are yee not your Soule crying withinPsal. 42. 3. you, O when shall I come and appeare before God? Note A small feeble incli|nation to goe to God is not suffici|ent, ye must now come to a stedfast resolution: He who is not resolued, is not readie for to be dissolued: Ta

courage, bee not dashed into this danger, declare your mind freely, be not nice, there bee none heere but friendes.


The sicke Man.
I am so pyned with sicknesse, that hardlie can I make answere: Note Oh but I am pressed with an heaui hand: I feare much my last houre: My Soule is sore troubled.


The Pastour.
Learne of Christ in his trouble: Now, said hee, is my Soule troubled,Ioh, 12. 27 and what shall I say? Father, deliue mee from this houre: But for this causevers. 28. came I into this houre: Father glorifie thy Name: As hee did, so doe yee: Note Hee fearing the houre was earnest with God in prayer for to bee de|liuered from it; and yet most hum|blie submitted himselfe vnto his Fa|thers will: So doe yee: If ye feare greatlie that houre, pray feruentlie, that God deliuer you from it and yet notwithstanding, let God haue

all his will of you: His will shall eur bee your well.


The Sicke Man.
But alas, my paines are grea: Note my breach is like the sea: Gods rod vpon mee is torne with stripes, and worne to the stomps: In my torments I both feare and feele his wrath: If hee loued mee, would he scourge mee with such scorpions?


The Pastour.
Whom God loueth hee chasteneth, and scourgeth euerie Sonne whom heeHeb. 12. 6. receiueth: By this yee see plainelie that hee will receiue none to him|selfe, but those whom hee is min|ded to scourge: Note This scourging whereof yee complaine, is Gods loue-token, telling you that hee is minded for to receiue you: Woe o the Childe whom the Father will not correct: God commandeth lo|uing Fathers to chastise their chil|dren till they cry: His command is also, that they bee not hindered for

their cryes: Chasten thy Sonne, saidProu 19. 18. God, while there is hope, and let not thy Soule spare for his crying: So long as there is life, there is hope: While God chasteneth you, it is a token that there is hope: Note Woe to that man, whom GOD disdaineth to strike: It is a sore word when a Fa|ther or a Master saith to a Childe I despaire of him, there is none hope, I giue him ouer,  will strik him no more: It was a fearefull vvord that God said to the rebellious Israelites, I will not visite your Daughters whenHose. 4. 14 they are harlotes, nor your Spouses when they are whoores: That is, I will cor|rect them no more, but let them runne head-long to their owne de|struction: Woe to him vvhom God vvill not correct: Note Certe tunc ma|gis irascitur Deus cum non irascitur, God is most angrie, when hee see|meth least to bee angrie: The wic|ked are most fearefullie plagued, when God spareth them most: Let

not therefore your sore paines dis|courage you, but rather comfort you, as beeing a speciall token that God will receiue your Soule Note What reckes what this Carion suffer, if so be that God receiue the Soule? Shall I not drinke of my Fathers Cup? saidIoh. 18. 11 Christ: * To drinke of a Kings cup it vvould bee thought an honour. See then vvhat honour is in the af|fliction of the godlie, thereby they drinke of the King of Heauens cup: This is also a token of our friend|ship vvith Christ, vvhen wee drinke vvith him of one cuppe: Men will not drinke of one cuppe with their enemies. Rejoyce then Sir, to drink vvith Christ in your Fathers cuppe Note Though this cuppe bee bitter at the brimme, the bottome will haue a pleasant farewell.
Thinke vvell vpon this Sir, and possesse your soule in patience de|spare neuer of Gods mercie, though hee seeme to bee angrie, depend

vpon him, trust into him, though hee should slay you: Note In confi|dence of hs Loue rest and sleepe in his bosome, hang on him, saue his honour by trusting in him: If this yee doe, I assure you, that yee shall dye sweetlie, resting into his armes.


The sicke Man.
I finde Sir my paines greatlie to increase.


The Pastour.
Bee of good comfort: Note If your paines increase, God will increase your patience with your paines, he is mercyfull, and will surelie streng|then you in the weakest houre: Gods strength is made perfect in weak|nesse:2 Cor. 12. 9. In the meane time, bee figh|ting out the good fight manfullie: Note Hold vp your hands with Moses against Amaleke: Pray feruentlie to your God, that hee would cast intoExod. 17. 11 your memorie all the good thinges that euer yee heard or reade, where|with your Soule as with a rempart

may bee guarded against the houre of temptations: Pray oft-ten with Christ, Father deliuer mee from thisIoh. 12. 27 houre: What say yee Sir? It ap|peareth that there bee some thing into your mind yet that vexeth you.


The sicke Man.
This Soule of mine is verie loath to depart from this bodie: Note They be of olde acquaintance, haplie long shall it be before they meete againe, Friendes cannot bee but sorie while they shedde.


The Pastour.
That is naturall to all: But grace in the Godlie must rule Na|ture: Note Wee must gladlie leaue all for to goe liue with Christ, we must deny our selues for to confesse him: we must desire to be dissolued, for to bee with him; hee who loueth any thing better than him, shall not bee found worthie of him: Your Soule, say ye, is sorie to goe from the body: Note What are our bodies for the

present, but prisons of clay? Let them goe to clay, till the day of the Resurrection come, when those painefull prisons shall bee turned in|to pleasant Palaces: Note What reckes of an inch of time heere on Earth in respect of eternitie in Heauen? Should a mans heart so itch after an inch of Earth, that hee would de|sire to tarrie from Heauen but an houre?
The Soule must turne its backe vpon the bodie, for to turne its face vnto the God of Glorie: This is but a childish temptation: Note It is for women  children to weepe, at the taking of adewes, chiefelie while these that depart are going to a bet|ter condition of life.
Because the day draweth towards Euening, it is now time for mee to remoue: I hope God willing to come againe the Morrow, and to visite you, that I may minister vnto you some Spirituall comforts: In

the meane time, seeing your minde hath bene so perplexed with carnall temptations, concerning Life, La~ds, Children, and Riches: Cause read vnto you this night in mine absence the Book of Ecclesiastes, from the be|ginning vnto the end, where ye shall see as in a glasse, the vanitie of all these things, wherewith your Soule now is most enamoured. If ye haue time, cause also reade vnto you Iob 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
Before I goe Sir it shall bee best that I recommend you vnto God by prayer.


The first Prayer for the sicke Man.
O LORD, in whose hands is the gift of the Spirit of groanes, inspire our heartes at this time, that with an heauenlie disposition wee may fall downe before thee vp|on

the knees of our Soules, quicken our dead and drowsie heartes to the performance of this duetie of calling vpon thy Name: Thou is not close handed to these that seeke thee in sinceritie, wee are ashamed, O LORD, euen wee all who are heere before thee on the Earth thy Foote-stoole, wee are ashamed for to face the Heauens, the Throne of thy Majestie: Our heartes are so fullie fraughted with all sortes of sins, which like most filthie streames flow from the first fountaine, or ra|ther puddle of our originall sinne, which wee haue from the Loynes of Adam: Wee are all infected with this spirituall Leprosie; there is no|thing that can wash vs and make vs cleane, saue onelie the Iordan of the blood of Iesus; Besprinkle our con|sciences, O LORD, with the vertue of that Blood, which cryeth for better things, than the blood of Abel: Seale vp thy Loue in our

heartes by the blood of the Sealed man, whom Thou the Father did seale and appoint to bring Life eter|nallIoh. 6. 27. to the world: In him thou art well pleased: In his Name, and for his Loue wee begge thy fauour: He himselfe hath tolde vs, that what wee shall aske thee in his Name, we shall receiue it: O Father of mer|cies, remember the promise of thy Sonne.
In confidence of his Command wee take the boldnesse at this time particularlie to put vp our prayers vnto thee, for this thy diseased Ser|uant tossd to and fo with diuerse temptations: Sathan the enemie of his Saluation, the feare of Death, the loue of the world and of world|lie things haue set themselues in Bat|tell-array, like armies betweene his Soule and the entrie of Heauen.
They haue maliciouslie ensnared his heart, and taken his affections captiues with the immoderate loue

of perishing thinges: Oh, how hath hee beene bewitched with the see|ming sweetenesse of such vanities!
O Thou LORD IESVS, the LORD of Life, encourage him so with thy liuelie Spirit, that he may be bold, couragiously to face Death and the Graue: Put these interroga|tions in his mouth, O Death, where1 Cor. 15. 55 is thy Sting? O Graue, where is thy victorie? Cause thy Spirit whisper in his eare, that thou hast put out the life of Death: Cast into his re|memberance the words wherewith Thou boasted Death, and the Graue, O Death, I will be thy plagues,Hose. 13. 14 O Graue, I will bee thy destruction.
Let his Soule knowe that the Graue is a Bed of rest, for all theseIsa. 57. 2. that die in the LORD, wherein they rest from their labours, beeing at ease in peace, without any toile or turmoile: Worke in his heart a de|sire to be dissolued, for to bee fred from the sinfull bonds of mortality,

for to goe dwell where hee shall ne|uer anger the Lord againe: Let the Loue of Christ waine his heart from the desire of anie abiding heere.
O deare IESVS, who was both buffeted, slaine, and buried for to saue man, set the print and stampe of thy mercie vpon this Soule. Se|uer all his thoughts from all that is earthlie, whether it bee Life, Lands, Children, Houses, or whatsoeuer other thing may allure him for to sojourne heere in a strange Land, wherein wee are all strangers from God, whom wee cannot see heere but behind: Vntye his heart from the loue of this his natiue soile: Purge him of this out-bearing hu|mour.
O LORD, flesh and blood will neuer teach a man to renounce his deare selte, and such other carnall things, wherewith hee is in phan|tasie: The earthlie minde is so lum|pish, that it wearieth to thinke of

thee, and of the pleasures of thy Palace: A carnall hearte is euer rouing and wandering heere about this worlds businesse: Martha is a mother of many Children, who trouble themselues about many thinges: But few are these that with Marie can fold their heart for to sit downe at the feete of IESVS for to make choise of that best part, which should neuer bee taken from them: Thou to who~ nothing is impossible, draw this Soule vnto thee, make the bent of his affection to bee vpon thee.
O great IEHOVAH, thou hast heard and seene how carnall temp|tations haue teared the Soule of thy Seruant this day in the bedde of his languishing: Immoderat cares for thinges below haue depriued him of all rest and joyes which he should haue in thee: Wee must confesse to thee, and from his heart hee ac|knowledgeth to bee true, that his

minde hath beene too bent vpon such perishing shadowes, which can not bee gripped: Such trashes of no worth haue taken too much roome into his heart.
Hee who is not content to quite all for to come to thee, is not wor|thie of thee.
But, LORD; if mans Saluation were grounded vpon the sand of his owne worthinesse, such a building could not stand against the winds  floodes of temptations: But his Saluation shall neuer bee branled because it is builded vpon the euer|lasting and most sure Rocke the foun|dation of thy Church.
O LORD, wee faile all in many things: If hitherto this thy Seruant hath not as hee should, minded th thinges which are aboue, but lod|ged in their place, the desire of thinges below, now in thy grea mercie inlighten his mistie mind, and bee mercifull to him in th

thing: Make the flesh now to cede and giue place vnto the Spirit: Let the heauens come in with the pled|ges of thy Loue, which no mortall armes can fadome: Come with thy Spirituall and diuine motions and fill therewith the chambers of his heart where earthlie thoughts had their abode: Make his Soule to in|uite thy Spirit, to come in, Saying with Laban, Come in thou blessed ofGen. 24. 31 the Lord, wherefore standest thou with|out?
O deare IESVS, direct so all his thoughts, that hee wearie himselfe no more with the desire of that which sooner or later heee must or|goe: Why should thornie cares for dust and clay choake the good mo|tions of thy Spirit? Let no such care cumber him any more for foo|lish fding commoditie: Dissolue this glew by which his heart is tyed to the ground: In thy Light let him see Light, whereby hee may per|ceiue

how fraile  fickle are all such transitorie trashes, which beeing too much loued, both coole our zeale and clogge our affections, so that they can in no wise soare vp to|ward thee.
O blessed Sauiour, in whom is the very pith  sweetest marrow of Gods mercies, make thy seruants heere to loue thee aboue all things, in heauen or earth: Make his heart to say, Whom haue I in Heauen but thee? Make him to loue thee for thy selfe, and not for thine onelie, which is but an hyred Loue: Put in thine owne hand at the hole of the doore of his heart, and let some droppes of the Mirrhe of thy mercie this night fall vpon the handle of the Barre that his Soule beeing affected therewith may runne out of the Chamber of sleepe for to seeke him, who loueth his Soule, euen his blessed Sauiour, the LORD IESVS.
Bee mercifull to all thine afflicted

members in the Church militant, fighting vnder the bloodie Banner of the LORD IESVS CHRIST: The Church is thy Spouse keep her as the Apple of thine eye, make all her members with one minde and one mouth, to glorifie thy Name.
Blesse our gracious Soueraigne, the Kings Majestie with thy best blessings: Adorne him with spiri|tuall Graces and giftes, wherewith hee may please thee in his whole carriage, both Ecclesiastice and Ci|uill: Make Iustice and Iudgement the habitation of his Throne; make Mercie and Trueth goe before his Face: Blesse His Royall Match, make thy mercie to bee shed abroad in Her Heart: Cloth Her with the Royall apparell of Christs Righte|ousnesse: Let readinesse to heare the Preaching of the Word bee Her Eare-ring, and good Workes in Her Hand like golden Rings vpon Her Fingers: Write vpon the Tables of

Her Heart the Loue of true Godli|nesse.
The LORD bee mercifull to the Common-wealth of this Land pro|tect It from the rage of forraine E|nemies: Let neuer thy protection depart from this Land: Let it bee like that Bed of Solomon, ThreescoreCant. 3. 7.  8 stronge men are round about it, of the valiant men of Israel: They all handle the Sword, and are expert in warre euerie one hath his sword vpon his thigh for the feare by night.
The LORD be gracious vnto vs all, who~ are heere vpon our kneees be|fore Thee: What wee haue said to Thee on earth, LORD heare Thou in Heauen,: Let this afflicted Soule haue a proofe of thine own Trueth, that the effectuall prayer of the Righ|teousIam. 5. 16. auaileth much, LORD hea vs for the sake of him who is righ|teousnes it selfe, in whose most per|fect Prayer we close vp allour sutes, saying, Our Father which art, c.
The Peace, Grace, and Mercie of our GOD, bee with you Sir for euer: I hope that by Gods Grace I shall see you earlie in the Morning.

The sicke Man.
The LORD render to you accor|ding to his gracious promise made to all these that serue him in sinceri|tie: A great blessing requireth great thankes: I neuer deserued such kind|nesse at your hands: The lesse deser|uing bee in mee, the more deeplie doe I hold my selfe bound vn|to your loue: I pray you Sir be as good as your word, come againe earelie in the Morning: The Spirit of IESVS goe with you.





THE SECOND DAYES Conference. Of spirituall temptations.

The Pastour.
_GOD saue you Sir: How haue yee rested this Night? Haue yee found any working of Gods Spirit with|in you, since our last conference? Is your minde so at quiet now, that yee may boldlie say, with Simeon, Now let thy seruant depart in peace?Luk. 2. 29.


The sicke Man.
Note Alas, Sir, Satans temptations are like that Serpent of Lerne called Hydra, which had fiftie heades,

whereof one beeing cut off, two sprang vp in the place thereof: I take that serpent to haue beene but a fa|ble: But that which I say may bee written for an Historie: Many heads of temptations haue yee cut off with the sword of Gods word: But now I think that for euerie head cut off, two are sprung vp in the place thereof: Note All my temptat|ons hitherto haue beene but vpon the skin like the scratch of a pinne, wrinkles but not woundes: All my troubles hitherto hath beene but matters of trifles, viz. Feare for my Life, feare for my Children, feare for the Graue of this our muddie mortalitie, and for other such trifles and trashes, vnworthie for to trou|ble a couragious Spirit: The Spirit of a couragious man, said Solomon,Prov. 18. 14. will beare his infirmitie: But the woun|ded spirit who can beare it? Note well is the child of God in his orest sicknes for while his bodie is sicke, his Soule

is sound: His God in great loue will make all his bed in his sicknesse, andPsal. 41, 3 strengthen him into the bed of lan|guishing: Note Hee whom God loueth is armed with Faith and patience, all his troubles are but outward scrap|pings vpon the skinne: The temp|tations wherewith I am lashed are spirituall woundings for my sinnes, which neuer troubled mee before: I heard oft-ten of such troubles, but I neuer knew before this time what such things did meane: Thinke ye Sir that the Spirit of a godlie man can bee thus wise troubled? I heare Dauid crying in his mourning, There is no soundnesse in my flesh, nei|therPsal. 38. 3. is there anie rest in my bones: But what reckes of flesh and bones, if the Spirit were free?


The Pastour.
The most godlie that euer liued, haue suffered spirituall woundes: Christ the Captaine of our Saluation,Heb. 2. 10 said, That his Soule was sadde euenMar. 14. 34.

vnto the death: Note Iob cryed, that hs Spirit was drunken vp with the poyson of Gods arrowes, The ar|rowes of the Almightie, said hee, areIob. 6. 4. within me, the poyson whereof drinketh vp my Spirit: See how that holie man of God complaineth that his Spirit was like a drinke drunken vp by the poyson of Gods arrowes. Note By this yee see that spirituall wounds are al|loted to the dearest of Gods Elect, so that they are not exeemed from inward blowes: Note Trouble of Con|science is the disease of the inno|centest Soule.


The sicke Man.
That satisfieth mee not: Note As for Christ, the blowes which hee suffered in his Soule, were blowes of satisfaction for the sinnes of o|thers: As for Iob these blowes were blowes of probation  of tryall, for to let the world see that he was not an hypocrite that serued GOD for rewardes, as Sathan did alledge: But

it is not so with me, who am a bond slaue of corruption: I suffer for my2 Pet. 2. sinnes, which are euer before mee: The fainer I would forget them, they flow the faster into my remem|berance: Note The voyce of my Con|science followeth mee with hue  with cry. Though God hath spa|red thee long, thou hast not beene bettered, looke now for vengeance after so long delayes: I can make no answere, I can not denie, but God hath spared mee long: In this is my greatest feare: Note The higher a stroake bee fetcht, the longer it is in comming: But the higher it bee lif|ted, the heauier it will fall.


The Pastour.
I answere to that which yee said first, viz. that Christs sufferings are no comfort to you, because they are blowes of satisfaction: Note The affli|ctions of Christ were of diuerse vses first of all, for to make payment to Gods Iustice for our sinnes: Second|lie, he suffered, that by his own ex|perience

of sense hee beeing expert what it is to suffer, might assure vs that hee is both a mercifull and a faithfull high Priest, For in that heeHeb. 2. 13 himselfe hath suffered beeing tempted,Non ig|nara ma|li miseris succurre|re disco. he is able to succour the~ that are temp|ted: Thus the Apostle declareth plainelie afterward, Wee haue not, said hee, an high Priest which cannotHeb. 4. 15 bee touched with the feeling of our infir|mities: But was in all pointes tempted like as wee are, yet without sin: Note This experience which he had of our mi|serie, is called his learning, ThoughHeb. 5. 8 hee were a Sonne, yet learned hee obe|dience, by the things which he suffered: Hee also suffered, for to bee an ex|ample vnto vs.


The sicke Man.
I vnderstand not well these words that Christ learned obedience by his sufferings.


The Pastour.
NoteThe words indeed seeme obscure: The most Learned think that Christ

is said to haue learned obedience by his sufferings, because while he suf|fered hee felt indeed how difficile a thing it is talem obedientiam Deo prae|stare,Piscator. Caluin. to yeeld such obedience vnto God: others say, that by his suffrings hee joyned to his diuine knowledge y^e practise of his passions: that which he had before only in contemplatio~ is now also knowne vnto him by suffering that which he knew: Note O|thers say. That hee learned obedience by his sufferings, that is, Re ipsa exper|tus est quid sit patrem habere cut p|rendumBeza. sit, Hee knew by Expe|rience what it was, to haue a Father to whom obedience was due: Thus Christ while hee learned obedience by his sufferinges, hath teached all the faithfull to suffer patientlie.
As for that which yee said con|cerning Iob, that his afflictions were only blowes of probation  of try|all; yee deceiue your selfe, theyLam. 3. 39 were also for his sins: Whenfore is the liuing man sorrowfull? said Ieremie,

The answere is peremptorie, man suffereth for his sinnes.


The sicke Man.
Note That seemeth not euer to bee true: While Christs Disciples saw a man that was blind from his birth, they asked Christ saying, Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, thatIoh. 9. 2. hee was borne blind? Iesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his Parents, but that the workes of God should bee made manifest in him: Oh, that I were that borne blind, that I were not afflicted for my sinnes, but that the works of Gods mercy might bee manifested in mee!


The Pastour.
Note These words of Christ are not to bee taken so strictlie as though God would lay any affliction vpon a man in whom is no sinne: This could not stand with the Iustice of God: If Adam  his Children had neuer sinned, not one of them could haue beene stricken either with

blindnesse, or deafenesse: Note This blind man then was not afflicted for his sins only, or especially, or as if he had bene a greater sinner tha~ others, but chieflie this disease came vnto him, that the workes of Gods power and mercie might bee made mani|fest by his cure: Note So Dauid was sore afflicted for his adulterie and mur|ther, but chieflie for to stoppe the mouthes of these enemies of God, whom hee by his scandle made to blaspheme: Note God as yee see may afflict you for your sinnes, and yet not chieflie for them; but for to take a tryall of your patience, or for to make others feare to sin when they shall perceiue by you, how great paines a godlie Soule will suffer be|fore that it can bee well reconciled vnto God againe.


The sicke Man.
I confesse Sir that ye speake with the tongue of the Learned: Note But for all that I finde such temptations

tumbling within mee, that I mayIerm. 12. 5 compare them to the swelling of Ior|dan: My sinnes, alas, hudge in great|nesse, stand vp like mountaines be|tweene mee and my God: They are so high that they hide Heauen from my Soule: What shall I doe Sir? If euer yee helped mee, helpe mee now with your comforts.


The Pastour.
Note Though these mountaines be high, yet yee must clime the mount with Moses, if ye would see Canaan: So long as Moses was in the valey, he could not see the typ of Heauen: We must all clime vp the Hill: Wee cannot see Christ before wee bee lifted from the Earth: Wee are all but men of little stature like Zacheus:Luk. 19. 3. Wee must therefore vp the tree with him, and vp the mount with Moses, before wee can see either Christ o Canaan that place of promise: Ye are sorie for your sinnes: But sanat con|fessio morbi: A sinne well confessed

is healed: But what sinnes be these Sir whose toppes reach so high that they hide the Sunne from you?


The sicke Man.
Alas, for the sinnes of my Youth; my Riot and my Drunkennesse, myRom. 13. 13. Chambering  my wantonnes, my strif and enuy: Fye on my Fornications, and Adulteries, my lying and decei|uing Hypocrisie: Note So I had a lampe of profession, I cared not for oyle in it, my chiefe care hath euer beene for the outward shell of my duetie, but neuer for the Kernell: Gods graces in mee haue beene like a pure liquor in a fustie vessell.


The Pastour.
I am glad to heare of these buffets of your Conscience, such griefe is from grace: I know what shall bee the euent, euen Repentance ne|uer to bee repented of: But say on


The sicke Man.
Note This is my greatest griefe that I sinned into the light with Absolom2 Sam. 16. 22

euen in the cleare Sunne shine of the Gospel: Now may I well be ran|ked with these who counted it plea|sure to riot in the day time: It were2 Pet. 2. 3 more easie for mee to number the sand than my sinnes.


The Pastour.
Note There is no sinne either of o|mission or commission, in the light or in darknesse, that can hinder God to bee mercifull to a sinner, if the sinner can repent: God who is in|finit in mercie can forgiue the riots of the day, sinnes of knowledge as well as night sinnes; which are sins of ignorance: Note There is one sinne of ignorance which shall neuer bee forgiuen, euen to despaire of Gods mercie: What ignorance is this, that any Creature should thinke it selfe more sinfull, than God can bee mercifull? Note To make our sinnes to ouerreach his compassions, were to make the Center to containe the Circumference: If your sinnes bee

in number like the sand, Gods mer|cies are without number: Note The greatest number that mans braine can inuent either by telling, or by ciphering in comparison of that which is infinite, is not so much as a droppe of a Bucket compared to the great Ocean.


The sicke Man.
Note I haue alas, beene an impudent sinner, who with my sinnes haue buffeted my God on euerie side: It were now righteous with God that hee should buffet me with his judge|ments: I slept in sinne, and could not bee wakened: While Christs Cocke crowed, my Soule lay fast a|slepe: Yea, while hee crowed a|gaine, I had past the third deny all: And though I was forewarned, I had none hoe in euill doing: While God was in my mouth, he was farre from mine heart: O that bloodie scarlet scrole of so manie iniqui|ties.



The Pastour.
Note As yee reason with your selfe, and with mee, so let it please you to reason but a little with your God: Come now, said the Lord  let vs rea|son together: Though your sinnes beeIsa. 1. 18. as scarlet, they shall bee as white as snow; though they bee red like crimsin, they shall bee as woll: Note There is no sin so red though it were double dyed, but the vertue of Christs Blood can cause it cast its colour.


The sicke Man.
Note I haue no Faith to applie anie salue to my sore: I heare your ex|plication of Gods mercies: But there is none application within mee: What better will a man bee that yee set much meate downe before him on the Table, if hee cannot eate it?


The Pastour.
Note Manie haue sit downe at Table hauing their appetit so bound vp at the first, that they abhorred to see meate,  yet litle  litle haue beene

broght on first to taste,  thereafter to eate a little, last of all, one piece bringeth on another, till they reco|uer their appetit: This is but a dis|ease in your Soule, which maketh it abhorre all comforts, as it is said of these that are bodilie sicke in the Psalme, Their soule abhorreth allPsal. 107. 18 manner of meate, and they draw neare the doores of death: What was their remeedie? Earnest prayer to God: Then they cryed vnto the Lord in their trouble, and hee deliuered them from their distresses: Mans extremitie is Gods opportunitie. Bee of good comfort Sir, haue the Faith of God within you: Bee earnest in prayer, and God shall deliuer you from all your feares.


The sicke Man.
Oh, that I had Faith: Oh, that I could pray! I finde my griefes to growe: I spake neuer in earnest till now: All other temptations before were but for carnall thinges: They

were all but sport, in comparison of this of my sins where with my Soule is pressed and borne downe: Note I take this to bee the forebrunt of endlesse plagues and paines prepared for the damned: I abhorre my selfe, fye on mee: What am I, but a dead Sardian,Revel. 3. 1 15. or which is worse, a lukewarme Lao|dicean neither colde nor hote, a fitte prouocation of vomite to my God: It is a vvonder if by this death he vomite mee not out of his Church, for to cast mee into Hell: Now what pleasure can I haue of all my sinnes, where of I am ashamed? Note All the joyes of my bygone life beeing joyned together, counteruaile not the least part of my present paine.
Alas, Sir, how can I gladly draw neare the doores of death, while there bee such impedimentes be|tweene mee and the doores of Hea|uen.


The Pastour.
I loue these lamentations: Note It is

good that a Soule be sensible of sin: Woe to that Soule that is past all feeling: Blessed bee God, that hath wakened you out of the slumber of your sinnes: Note Gods wrath euer fol|loweth drowsie consciences, for to giue them vp to the spirit of slum|ber, or to sporting spirites, that make men to sport themselues with their own2 Pet. 2. 13 deceiuings: Note It is good that in our af|flictions, we consider well the cause; for Affliction commeth not out of theIob. 5. 6. dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground: leremie in this is plaine,Lam. 3. 39 Man suffereth for his sins: Note It is your part to make a carefull search for the capitall sinne, which as yee thinke may chieflie be the cause of so great a wrath: Till Achan was found IsraelIos. 7. 16. could not sta~d before their enemies: But say on Sir, let mee heare you to Amen.


The sicke Man.
God hath set all my sinnes in or|der before mee: I see nothing but a

burning wrath, which Scripture cal|leth,Heb. 12. 29. a consuming fire: Note Mine euill thoughts which I euer thought to bee free, stand now vp in battell ar|ray against mee O Lord, why hastIsa. 63. 17 thou made vs to erre from thy wayes, and hardened our heart from thy feare? I haue no comfort within my Soule: Note I heare a clamour within my con|science crying vnto mee, What part or interest can thou looke for in the Kingdome of him whom thou hast so highlie dishonoured? How can thou be of that number that belon|geth to the election of grace? I find my conscience raging within me lik a swelling sea, except some calme of mercie come, my Soule shalbe swal|lowed vp with some fearefull surge: Alas, Sir, what is your counsell: All that is within mee is into an vp|roare, despare is working within the bowels of my bellie.


The Pastour.
Note These secret throwings in the

bellie are but Gods secret reproues, tokens of his Loue: Note Such secret checkes are like the rebukes of a Fa|ther, taking his Child apart to some quiet chamber for to admonish him: This is Gods customable doing with his owne Children, if by their open and scandalous sinnes, they haue not moued y^e enemies of God to blaspheme, hee will take them to the secret chamber of their heart,  there apart as it were, after that hee hath barred the doore, and put all out, hee will tell them what they haue done: Note Ioseph would not tell before the Egyptians how his Bre|thren had solde him: But while hee reuealed himselfe to his Brethren, hee commanded all others to goe foorth: Cause euerie man, said hee,Gen. 45. 1. to goe out from mee, and there stood no man with him, while hee made him|selfe knowne to his Brethren: Note God would not reproue Iob before Elihu Elphaz his vncharitable friends,

but a part out of the while winde:Iob. 38. 1. After that hee had rebuked and scooled his Seruant Iob in the secret whirle of the winde, and hade made him to acknowledge his faultes, hee came to his friendes and told themIob. 41. 7. that his wrath was kindled against them: Note After that Peter had thrie most shamefullie denyed his Master Christ, who heard him so perjured|lie lye, would not reproue him o|penlie before the wicked, but one|lie turned his eye with a looke to|wards him: With that secret looke which no man perceiued but Peter himselfe, hee gaue him such a secret checke and nippe of reproofe, thatLuk. 22. 62. incontinent hee went out, and weeped bitterlie: * Yee shall find at last Sir, all these temptations that trouble you within, are but God, taking you apart, and telling you with Io|seph, what yee haue done: God is now in the whirle winde working secretlie with you as with Iob, till ye

bee humble in dust and ashes: Note All this bitternesse which ye finde with|in, is but from a Loue-looke of Christ, that yee may bee saued by weeping bitterlie for your sinnes: Note Bee of good comfort Sir, all these troubles within are but God out of loue whispering some reproofs into your eare for some bygone faultes.


The sicke man.
I wish that it were so: Note But O, what a stir is this within my Soule? I thinke those wordes of God in Ie|rimie to bee directlie said vnto mee, Thine owne wickednesse shall correctIerm. 2. 19 thee, and thy backslidinges shall re|proue thee, know therefore, and see that it is an euill thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my feare is not in thee.


The Pastour.
Note While the dregge and mudde of a melancholious minde is stirred vp from the bottome with grieuous temptations, the sinner must spare

to judge, till the Soule bee settled: Let that muddie minde of yours first bee settled, and yee shall shortly see that matters are not as they seeme to bee: When Christ said toMatth. 16. 23 Peter, Get thee behinde mee Sathan, it was a speach of glouminesse: But O the sweete gloumes of Iesus more sweete than the worlds smiles: Let that righteous reproue mee, and it shallPsal. 141. 5. bee as oyle which shall not breake mine head: Note God may seeme to be an|grie at his Darlings, but yet in great loue hee hath locked vp their Sal|uation, and made it sure in his vn|changable decree.


The sicke Man.
Mine heart is pricked with paines and grieued with griefe: This is the mischiefe, I see none out-gate, my Soule is enuironed with temptati|ons.


The Pastour.
The wordes of S. Peter are com|fortable, The Lord knoweth how to2 Pet. 2. 9

deliuer the godlie out of temptations: Note If your temptations bee great, heere is matter of joye, yee haue a God who knoweth how to deliuer you. There is no temptatio~ so dead|ly but God knoweth how to cure it: Note A touch of the garment of Christs righteousnesse will anone dry vp that flooxe of blood.


The sicke Man.
I am so tossed, that I am not able to touch it: Note I am like a shippe in a tempest, seeking its Hauen, but cannot come by it; whiles I am bl|wen to this side and whiles to that side: Thus beeing driuen hither  thither as with contrarie Tydes, mine heart quaketh, and my con|science is in a qualme.


The Pastour.
Christ, who in the dayes of his flesh rebuked the windes, will calmeMatth. 3. 16. such qualmes, that your conscience may bee at rest: * Though the rol|ling sea rage, so that it make the Ma|riners

to reele to and froe,  stagger like drunken men, yet when they cry vnto the Lord, Hee maketh thePsal. 107.  29. stormes a calme so that the waues ther|of are still: Hee who can still the waues of waters, can calme the most stirring surgesse of temptations: Note It is written of the Mariners, that while in the temptest all their cun|ning is gone, their last refuge is to their prayers, Then they cryed vnto the Lord in their trouble, and hee de|liuereth them from their distresses: If your distresse Sir, bee like the tem|pest which cannot bee with stood by care or cunning, runne to your God by prayer, confesse fullie and freelie your sinnes: Suffer no star|ting holes or hollownesse in your heart: But worke it to sinceritie, vse all meanes for to bee friendes with your God: Seeke earnestlie from God, for the sake of his Chirst, the peace of Conscience.



The sicke Man.
So I doe: Note But alas, while I seeke peace, I heare from God as it were that voyce of Iehu to Iohoram horse-man saying to my Soule, What hast thou to doe with peace? get2 Kin. 9. 18 thee behinde me: What wonder that God bee angrie with mee, who was neuer carefull to please him? Note My Soule like a Night-Owle hath hated Light, and loued darknesse: Such is the weight of my transgression that I am like to finke thorow the sward of Gods wrath: Note This chec|keth mee sore, that while I sin|ned, I stroue to ouermaster my con|science arraigning mee for my wic|kednesse: When I thinke of this,  thinke shame to face the Sunne and the Moone.


The Pastour.
Note The more yee bee ashamed of your sinnes, the lesse yee neede to feare euerlasting shame: The Pha|riseeLuk. 18. 11 thought no shame of him selfe,

but bragged of his worth, the Publi|can could not face the Heauens for shame: Your part shall be with the Publican, who returned justified vn|to his house: Hee who condem|neth himselfe, shall goe home to Heauen with the justice of his God. Cry vnto the Lord in your trouble.


The sicke Man.
I am not able to speake, the force of temptations is like to shiuer me in pieces: All that is within mee is in a fearefull vproare: Note O how fear|full is the racke and gibbet of an euill conscience: The blacke scrole of my sinnes which of before seemed to bee enroled, is now vnfolded  laid open, wherein euerie letter see|meth huge, great like a mountaine: Euery day is a death vnto me, all my counts are out of order, there is not a string in mine heart in a right tune: What are sinners, but stubble? Gods sentence is, Burne them: Note Alas, that while I sinned, I weighed not

the following woe: I haue brewed my griefe, and now I must drinke in sorrow.


The Pastour.
Note One thing I perceiue Sir, that your griefe must haue vent, till yee haue disburdened your selfe with teares and complaints, yee can not admit anie comfort.


The sicke Man.
There is no doloure lik to my do|loure: The arrowes of the Lords wrath are within mee, whereof my Spirit drinketh the poyson.


The Pastour.
Note These arrowes are not arrowes of wrath, but of vvarning, like the ar|rowes of Ionathan, shot for to driue Dauid fro~ the furie of Saul: Note Heare the Spirit crying with Ionathan, Are1 Sam. 20. 37 they not beyond thee? Gods arrowes are flowen ouer you, are they not beyond you? There is no danger.


The sicke Man.
Note My sinnes which once see|med

little like mots, begin now to swell, and to become thicker than mountaines: I haue no peace with|in: In my Soule is kindled an vn|quenchable fire, in it is the fewell of euerlasting burnings: Note Often haue I posted off my sinnes in the lumpe vvith a slubbert generall con|fession: Now resteth nothing with|in mee but feare distrust  qualms of Conscience.


The Pastour.
Bee strong in God Sir: Hope in his mercie, belieue in him, though he should stay you: Note If yee will notIsa. 7. 9. belieue, saith Isaiah, surelie yee shall not bee established: While the wo|man of Canaan vvas making request to Christ for her Daughter, shee found Christ at the first to bee verie harsh and sowre, in calling her a Dogge: But that little blast beeing once blowne out for the humbling of her Soule, she heard incontinent these words of comfort, O woman,

great is thy Faith: Bee it vnto theeMatth. 15 28. euen as thou wilt: Note Gods face may seeme grimne for a space, but there is but a moment in his wrath: though he should slay you, yet must yee trust in him: In your hurt yee must hope for his helpe.


The sicke Man.
Note My strongest hope is but a stin|ging feare: My greatest confidence is but trembling of conscience: Note It seemeth to mee, that there is one knocking at the doore of mine heart and crying in a voyce, Is Faith heere? Is loue within? Is one cal|led the feare of God into this place? Is the Spouse of Christ in this heart? Alas, what can I say, hauing such an ouglie Soule within mee? Can Christ the Spouse of the Church loue such a Soule as mine, which is like a bleare or squint eyed Leah? can the dark night beguile him, that hee should take such a loathsome Leah for a beautifull Rachel?
Note If Death now ouertake mee, I looke for fire and faggot, the fuell of euerlasting burninges: Oh, my Faith fainteth, and mine hope ho|uereth: What say yee Sir? Doeth not your heart pittie to see mee in such a plunge? Note Yet for all this I must justifie God: All this is righ|teouslie come vpon mee, though his wrath should so settle vpon mee, that thereby my bones should bee crushed like these eighteene who were slaine vnder the tower of Siloe,Luk. 13. 4 to God should belong righteous|nesse, but to mee open shame andDan. 9. 8. confusion of face.


The Pastour.
Note Shame of face for sinne is the beginning of grace in a sinner; waite vpon the Lord a little, and hee shall make his mercie to appeare like a morning light, at the breake of day all the night shadowes of tempta|tions shall flee away, and Christ the Sunne of Righteousnesse, shall arise andMal. 4. 2.

shine vpon your Soule with his bles|sed beames: This shall make your Soule like a Bird on a bush well|comming the morning with a song for joye that the night is past.


The Sicke Man.
Note Sathan alas, hath so hood-win|ked my Soule with my sinnes, that I cannot get a sight of mercie, the sense of my sinnes giueth mine heart many a cold pull: I feare to die in despaire: What say yee Sir? Doeth not your heart pittie mee?


The Pastour.
The Lord pittie you,  giue me an heart to pray for you: The Lord put the wordes into my mouth, that may comfort your comfortlesse Soule in this Iingring tryall: Haue patience in your paine, sinne is like a rotten tooth, the deeper roote it hath in the jawes, the more paine|full it is in the drawing. Continue Sir to discouer your sore; if the boile of such corruption bee ripe, I

shall launce it, that such filthie mat|ter may bee cleansed away: I pray God so to direct mee, that I may proue a Surgeon cunning in this cure; if there bee any thing as yet that troubleth you, conceale it not, if ye think that my comforts may be helpfull vnto you: Note Many are more ashamed to confesse a faulte, than to commit a sinne. What is this that grieueth you now Sir?


The sicke Man.
The wrath of God affrayeth me; Note His anger is like a Lyon, which can not bee tamed: My sinne is past, but punishme~t is to come: Note Terrors cry out of the fire, Thy pleasures now are ended, now thou must suf|fer paines: From the toppe of the pinacle of all thy preferments, come down to the dungeon of darknes, be|cause thou hast fallen downe before the god of this world, goe downe, goe2 Cor 14. 4 downe to him, whom thou on earth hast worshipped: These bee the ter|rours

of God, standing in battell ar|ray against mee, which make mee to fling all comfortes from mee: My Soule is possessed with a slauish feare.
Note Indeed I must confesse, that I am much beholden vnto God, for so large a time of repentance: But alas. I haue neglected it, yea, and obstinatlie haue kicked against my Maker: Note So now I finde by doole|full sense, that I remaine into the guilt; my Soule is so sicke with this that I cannot tell: Note All comfortes are vnto it like a dead potion into the stomacke which hath no vertue to worke: God thinketh mee not wor|thie of comfort: For while I was in prosperitie, I was so couered ouerIsa. 29. 10 with the spirit of slumber, that I would not be warned nor wakened by the voyce of Gods Trumpeters, soun|ding judgements, as sonnes of thun|der, Note Because I misregarded Boanar|ges the Sons of Thunder, God will

not daine mee with a Barnabas, a Sonne of consolation. Now be|hold Sir, what grieueth mee, what say yee for my comfort?


The Pastour.
Note I rejoyce from mine heart not in your griefe, but in that yee are so grieued for your sinnes: God in mercie by such sorrow doeth whet vp your desires after him: Note The Child by a knocke  a fall knoweth his owne weaknesse, and perceiueth the need of his Nourse: I rejoyce to see you humbled with the sense of your sins vnder the hand of God, I am comforted to see you humbled, let this humilitie bee a comfort to your selfe: It is good to be of a hum|ble and contrit Spirit: To whom willIsa. 66. 2. I looke? said the Lord, euen to him that is of a contrit Spirit, and trem|bleth at my word: Note The more a man be humbled he is neerer to be justified: The Publica~ a litle before he was justified, was knocking vpon his

breast, and crying to God for mer|cie to him a miserable man: Note The more humble a man bee, hee is theLuk. 18. 13 farther from the dint and danger of Gods judgements.


The sicke Man.
By your discourse Sir, it would seeme that a cast downe Soule with its owne vnworthinesse, is in lesse danger of judgement, than these who are high lifted vp in their owne conceit.


The Pastour.
It is most certaine: Note The humble  y^e proud are like these seeds that were sowne in Egypt, when the plague of haile came, the Flaxe and the BarleyExod. 9. 31 were smitten, saith the Scripture, for the Barley was in the eare, and the Flaxe was bolled: But the Wheat andvers. 32. the Rye were not smitten, for they were not grown vp: The wicked in time of wrath are lik Flaxe Barley, because they are lifted vp, they are smit|ten, they are in the eare, yea, and

bolled in their pride, and therefore cannot escape: But as for the hum|bled heart of the godlie man, it is lik the Wheat and Rye, the best corne: It is not smitten because it is not growne vp, but lyeth humble be|fore the Lord: Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni: Humilia|tion maketh the Lyon to spare his aduersarie: God is pleased and pa|cified so soone as hee seeth a man humbled in heart: Ahah had killed1 King. 21 19.  after also had taken possession Note Yet so soone as hee humbled himselfe in Sacke, though all his humilitie was but outward, the Lord looked vpon him, and would haue Elijah to see it also, Seest thou, said the Lordvers. 29. to his Prophet, how Ahah hath hum|bled himselfe before mee: Because hee humbleth himselfe before mee, I will not bring this euill in his dayes.
Blesse God Sir, for your hum|bled heart, yet relye neuer vpon any grace that is within your selfe, let

Gods meere mercie alone bee your strength and your stay: Note The least opinion of our owne worth is a frost which nippeth Repentance in the blossome.


The sicke Man.
Thinke ye Sir, that before a man win to Heauen, that hee must bee racked and riuen as I am with feare|full temptations?


The Pastour.
Note Before the most part of the E|lect can enjoy these joyes that are a|boue, they are not onelie racked with paine, but also as it were racked thorow hell: There must first bee an hell in the conscience with the sense of our sinnes, wee must haue a sight of wrath, before wee enter in|to Gods Rest: Note Heauen is not winne with a wish: Christ saith, that it suffereth violence, and that the vio|lentMatth. 11. 12. take it by force: Thorow manie tribulations and afflictions wee must enter into it: The Crowne is after a course of crosses.



The sicke Man.
I am haled away with the strong streame of temptations: I cannot thinke, that if God loued mee, hee would suffer mee to bee thus way tread vnder foote like dust, with such fearefull temptations: O how feare|full is the crosse vpon the Conscience!


The Pastour.
These whom GOD loueth best, hee chasteneth: Note The louing Mother will runne vpon her dearest Daughter with her feete, if shee per|ceiue her to bee giuen to folie: God treadeth not vpon his owne, but for profite: Note The Godlie are like Saf|fron or Camomile, which grow the better the more they bee troden downe: Grace must gripe Nature till it gaspe.


The sicke Man.
Mine heart is strained and squised with griefe: O the heauie weight of my sinnes, which hang so fast on! Note I am like a tyred horse that faine

would bee rid of his burden.


The Pastour.
To bee tyred of sinne, is a token that yee shall bee shortlie deliuered: Note Hee who is tyred with sin, is tyred, not to bee a drudge of sin: Note Sinne is not heauie to the Wicked, be|cause it is in them as water in its owne element, though it bee of weight, yet it weigheth not: Well is the wearied Soule, it hath Christs promise of ease: But woe to themMatth. 11. 28 who with Laodicea, haue neede of no thing: For the most part, men are drowned in drowsinesse: Securitie is farre more dangerous than despaire: As was sung of Saul and of Dauid, so may bee heere, Despaire hath slaine her thousand, but Securitie her ten thousand: Manie are not wakened till they bee so wakened, that their judgement and senses are lost.
It is a fearefull curse for a man to blesse himselfe, while hee should mourne for his sinnes: Such as blesse themselues, while the Lord pro|nounceth

the wordes of the curse, The Lord will not bee mercifull to thatDeut. 29. 20 man: Note Securitie hath shaken hands with Hell and Death: But well is him who feareth alwayes: Note Hee is greatest in Gods sight, who is least in his owne eyes.


The sicke Man.
But alas, Sir, my conscience speaketh home, that I haue beene a stranger from my God: O but I am wearied, how shall I bee deliue|red from this burden of bondage?


The Pastour.
These who are ladened and wea|ried, may heare Christ in his Go|spel crying vnto them, Come vnto meMatth. 11. 29. Goe to him who cryeth so louingly, Come: Striue aboue all things, to get a sight of your Sauiour, by the eye of Faith: Vrge vpon your heart a deepe meditation of his mercie, his merits are able to cure our maladies.


The sicke Man.
Note There is such a mist betweene me and the Messias, that it is not pos|sible

for me to see him. Oh, that my eyes were cleared with Gods Eye|salue, that I might clearelie be holdReuel. 3. 10 him!


The Pastour.
Note The great desire ye haue to see him is a sort of sight: Note All men see not Christ alike: All goe not vp to the mount with Peter, Iames, and Iohn:Matt. 17. 1. All see not God face to face with Mo|ses:Exod. 33, 11. All men lay not their head in Christs bosome, with his best belouedIoh. 13. 23 Disciple; Be not discouraged: thogh ye cannot winne so neare to Christ, as ye would: Note If ye cannot winne to him for to embrace him, as SimeonLuk. 2. 8, did striue to touch the border of his garme~t behind with y^e finger of faithLuk. 8. 44 and it shall stay the bloody fluxe of your Sinnes: Note Ye sigh for a sight of Christ * A sigh for a sight of him, is a sight of him indeed: Note He who wold be found of these that sought him not will bee much more found of these that seeke him, and sigh for him: Bee

of good heart: Note Though for a space your spirituall day be mistie, yet at last your drumly sky shal be cleared: Note Christ is not euer absent, while hee is not seene: The Sunne as we see will be couered with a cloud,  the Moone will bee vnder wake, but incontinent thereafter, the cloudes beeing ouer-blowen, wee enjoye their brightnesse and their beames: What shall bee able to separate a Christian from the Loue of his Christ? Note What then shall be able to mak a Christian soule despaire? Shall Damnation? No, For Christ Gods Luk. 2. 30. Saluatio~ is ours: Shall Hell? No, For our Christ hath Reuel. 3. 7. the keyes both of Heauen  of Hell: Shall the World? No, For Christ hath Ioh. 16. 33. ouercome the World: Shall the Law? No, For our Christ hath Matth. 3 15. fulfilled the Law. Shall Death? No, For our Christ Ioh. 14. 6. is the Way and the Life: Shall the Fathers wrath? No, For Isa. 63. 3. Hee hath troden the wine-presse of his wrath for you,

and for all repenting sinners: Note All Scripture pointeth at him, saying, Isa. 30. 21. This is the way, walk ye in it: Run Sir to him,  he shall deliuer you from all your sinnes, and from all your feares: Striue to curbe your owne corruptions which are so broodie within you.


The sicke Man.
I cannot alas, bee quite of my sinnes: I striue to runne away from them, but the faster they follow mee, like curre Dogges that are so accustomed to follow their Master they will not bee boasted home a|gaine: Where euer I goe with my thoughts aboue or below, my sinnes follow hard after mee: Note Though I threaten them, thogh I boast them, yea, betimes intreate them to de|part, their answere is, Wee are thy vvorkes, wee will goe with thee. This putteth my Soule out of peace and order, and thrusteth mee away fromDeut. 13. 10. the Lord; my God: I haue beene long

seeking and sighing for comforts: But as yet I can espye none appearance.


The Pastour.
Comforts sought sought, and sighed for, are not aye seene at the first: Note Elijahs seruant went vp the hill Carmell eight seuerall times to espye some appearance of raine: The first seuen times hee could see nothing,  at the eight hee saw but a little cloud of comfort: Behold said hee, there ariseth a little cloud out of1 Kin. 1. 44. the sea, like a mans hand: A little af|ter that, the heauens were blake withvers. 45. cloudes and winde, and there was a great raine.
Note Hold your face Sir a little space with Elijah betweene your knees, and1 Kin. 18. 42. cast your selfe downe vpon the Earth, as hee did, that is, fall downe in all humilitie of Soule before your God in prayer: That done, send vp your prayer the spirituall spye vnto the top of the hill: Note Send it againe and a|gaine, euer till it espye some little

cloud of comfort: If your Soule take paines in prayer till ye perceiue but an hand breadth of mercie, at last Gods comfortes shall raine downe in great aboundance vpon your wearied Spirit: What shall I say, if yee will not bee informed yee can|not bee reformed.


The sicke Man.
Indeede that is a pleasant and fit comparison, worthie to bee prin|ted with a Note on the margent: It hath beene well adapted by you Oh, that it could bee as well applyed by mee: Oh, that the Lord, whose loue expelleth feare, would streng|then my weake Faith with an hand|breath, of his mercie: O for such a little cloud of comfort, it would lifHeb. 12. 12 vp mine hands which hang downe, and strengthen my weake knees: But in steede of such a comfortable cloude, I see nothing but cloudes of wath, readie to fall and become a deludge of vengeance: from my birth, I must

not dissemble, I haue dallied with my God, and haue dispised the gra|tious day of his visitations: Note And now all my comforts resemble to the Eagle, that taketh her to her wings, and flyeth aloft high into the Skye, from my sinfull reach: O feare! O horrour! O the multitude of my transgressions! how shall I be quiet?


The Pastour.
The best way to be quite of sin, y^t it reigne not in vs, is to bend vp our hearts to Christ, who is Emmanuel,Isa. 7. 14. God with vs: Thogh all be worthie to bee damned, yet there is no con|damnationRom. 8. 1 to these that are in Christ: Note Hee is that heaue-offering, which wee must euer hold and heaue vp like a buckler betweene Gods wrath and our sinfull Soules: In what case finde yee your Conscience to bee for the present?


The sicke Man.
One deepe calleth to another deepe

at the noyse of Gods water SpoutsPsal. 42. 7 My sorrow is like the Sea, it ebbeth and it floweth: As I haue swimmed thorow one deepe temptation, I fall into another that is deeper: My braine is turned with a whirling giddinesse.


The Pastour.
Note There is no such deepnesse ei|ther in our sinnes or in our troubles, but the mercie of God in Christ shall bee able to ouer-reach it by in|numerable fathomes: S. Paul said, that hee was assured, that neither high nor depth shall bee able to separate vs from the loue of God.
Note Though affliction raine downe v|pon vs like water falling from spouts, they may well wash vs, but shall not bee able to drowne vs: Note A godlie man should not be afraide for a spo full of bitter waters: Note Though th waters of the sea roare  be troubled Though the Mountaines shake with the swelling thereof, yea, though

the surges thereof should boast the cloudes, heere is the faithfull mansPsal. 46. 4. comfort, There is a riuer the streames whereof shall make glad the Citie of God: Note Thogh the Mediterranean Sea, yea, the great Ocean with its surges, should boast Gods Ierusalem, a little riuer or brooke, a Kidron of Gods grace sending out streames of com|fortes like the waters of Siloe shall make glad the Citie of God.


The sicke Man.
Note But how shall I passe throw to Canaan, behold, before mee what floodes of iniquities ouerflowingIer.  their bankes as in the swelling of Ior|dan: Such fearefull floodes ru betweene me and Heauen  place appointed for my 


The our
Note  oake with the garment  Christes righteousnesse will diuide the floodes of Belial, as Elisha diui|ded the Iordan by striking it with the mantle of Elijah, that hee might2 King. 2. 14.

safelie passe thorow: Note Christes merits are like the Arke, which made the Iordan to goe backe, for to makeIoh. 3. 16 a way for Israel vnto Canaan: Note Our heartes like the Priestes, must stand hard by the side of this Arke, till all our affections the Lords Armies be come thorow the swelling Iordan ofIer. 12. 5. grieuous afflictions.


The sicke Man.
While I beholde my selfe, I ab|horre my selfe: Note The eye of my God seeth mee, and what am I, but like a bemired Dogge trodde by Sa|than into the puddle of perdition? Alas, when good motions came in|to e heart, I crosed them with my lustes Now cursed be my lusts.
I am so filth hat I abhorre my selfe, my sinnes are so , that no|thing is able to make them 


The Pastour.
Know yee Sir what God said of olde in Isaiah? Come now, and let vssa. 1. 18. reason together, though your sins be as

scarlet, they shall bee as white as snow, though they be red lk crimsin, they shall bee as vvoole: If yee could but rea|son a little with God, ye should find this to be true: There is no sinne, which Christes blood is not able to purge: Note What euer your sinne be, if yee can repent, he can forgiue: Note Christ can doe anie thing butthis hee cannot saue him that will not re|pent: Seeing yee know him to bee infinite in mercie haue all your re|course to him; Note Take once a proofe of his mercie: Humble your selfe at his feete, and see whether or not there bee mercie with him that hee may bee feared.
Note The seruants of Benhadad kno|wing that the Kings of Israel were mercifull Kings: Put sack-clot vpon1 Kin. 20. 31. their loynes,  ropes vpon their heads, for to seeke mans mercie, which al|so they found: Note Shall man finde mer into the narrow bowels of a man, and  hee bound the holie

One of Israel? Note Christ who is not onelie true, but Trueth it selfe hath said, Whatsoeuer yee shall askeIoh. 14 12. in my Name, that vvill I doe: Note Hee who is true may lye, but Trueth can not lye.


The sicke Man.
That is trueth: While I consider your comfortes for the distressed Soule, Note I thinke that all your pur|pose pointeth chieflie at Christ, as though hee alone were the ground of Grace: Let mee heare I pray you more at large, what Christ is vnto vs.


The Pastour.
Hee is Emmanuell, God with vs,Matth. 1. 2 God with man, God in Man, God-Man: In Him God and Man, are but one Person: Our life is hid with ChristCol. 3. 3. in God: Note Because wee did eate of the forbidden Fruite, Hee was hanged vpon a cursed tree: Hee hath borne vs such a loue as is vn|speakeable: Note What tongue  forme wordes sufficie or to ex|presse

the least part of the same?
By the conduite pype of his Hu|manitie Grace for Grace hath beene conueighed to our graceles Soules, who can expresse his Loue, hee lo|ueth vs to the end, and of his Loue there is none end.
Note This I will say, That hee hath borne to man such a loue, that hath made all mankind like a Banquerupt, so farre vnable to pay the principle, that though man should loue his Sauiour withall his might and his minde, yet should hee not pay so much as the interest of so great a loue: No, though hee should giue his bodie to bee brunt for the ho|nour of his Name: No, though he should for his sak haue his name if it were possible, scraiped out of the Booke of Life: Note Though all our Soules should suffer for his ho|nour the euerlasting paines of the damned, all these paines were not to bee counted the interest of his

paines for vs: Note It is more that a Prince get a deadlie hurt in a Battell, tha~ that a thousand common Soul|diers were slaine: Note It is more that the Prince of Heauen suffered vpon the crosse but an houre, than that a thousand worlds had beene cast in|to a thousand hells, for to bee tor|mented for euer Note There is no pro|portion in suffering betweene the creature  him who was both God and Man into one person.
Note O then, what can be the interest of that principall loue, that moued God to die for man? Note Let this bee like a Bell ringing for to waken your drowsie Soule: Let your Soule like Iohn leane vpon the blessed bosome of Iesus: Haue euer your eye vpon this Mercie-seat.


The sicke Man.
Is it onelie then in Christ, Sir, that Saluation is to bee found? All Scripture would yee say, doeth lea|uell at him.



The Pastour.
The Scripture is plaine: There isAct. 4. 12 none other Name giuen vnder heauen among men, whereby wee must bee sa|ued Hee is full of the bowels of loue; Hee is that onelie Sauiour, pointed out by both the Testaments: Note Like as the two Cherubims, though seuered one from another, yet loo|ked one towards another, and both vpon the Mercie seate: Euen so the Olde and New Testament looke one towards another,  yet point at one  the same Christ, the marrow and kernell of mans Saluation Note All Religion is in this, that wee know Christ: This is mans Saluation, to know Christ and him crucified: Note By1 Cor. 2. 2 his Blood the Bill and Bond of the Law, is crost and cancelled: Note Hee is that Carkasse wherevnto all faithfull Soules like Eagles must resort: HeeMatth. 24 28 is our refuge against the dint of Gods wrath: The Spouse could not come vp from the wildernesse, but

by leaning vpon her beloued, Christ.Cant. 8, 5
Note As the Propitiatorie couered the Tables of the Law, that were in the Arke, so Christ couered our sinnes against these Tables: Note As the cloud couered the Israelites from the fight of Pharaoh hotelie following after them, so Christs righteousnesse like a cloud couered vs from the judge|ments of God his fierie wrath pur|suing vs.
Note Let men couer themselues ne|uer so carefullie, still some part of them shall peepe bare, vntill Christ come with the couering of his righ|teousnesse.
Note If by the temptations of Sathan your Soule hath beene ruffled or gal|led vpon the sore: The best balme that euer dropped from the pen of Gods Spirit vpon the leaues of his Sacred Booke, is the Historie of Christs Bloodie passion: There wee may see the dearest mercies that e|uer moued the relenting bowels of

Gods tenderest compassions.
Note Behold the Sacred Blood of that vnspotted Lambe, which saued the Soules of those that spilt it.
Note If yee bee pined with Corrasius of terrour, in him are Cordials of compassions, the onelie salue for the sores of the Soule Note Though ye were couered with scarlet abominations,Isa. 1. 18. heere is vertue whereby yee shall be made whiter than the snow: Note Did hee not pray for them, yea, did hee not saue them, who by bitter railing, discharged vpon him the vt|most of their gall?


The sicke man.
Such men at last were pricked inAct. 2. 37 their heartes they truelie repented: Note Their sighes and sobs were sup|ported  sinewed with the strength of Grace: Such men became godly indeede: But I did neuer passe the pitch of formall pietie: I euer desired more to seeme godlie, than so to be: I haue beene betimes sore shaken

with awfull terrours: Note But I neuer yet could say, that the softening blood of Iesus did melt my marble heart.
Note What euer had I, but some light of reason  glimmerings of generall grace, which cannot soare so high, as to conuoy the soule to the doores of Heauen? Note The word of sauing grace implanteth it selfe into the heart of the godlie man: Hee onelie is fur|nished with a resolute  vnswayed vprightnesse.
Note Alas, alas, alas, mine heart is thro|wen with a sore wringing: There is a large haruest for Hell, many called but few chosen.


The Pastour.
What shall I say? Note Mans thoughts are framed into a sinfull mould Note The sillie sonnes of Adam are wonder|fullie tossed with the contrarie Tyd of Satans temptations: Some he be|numeth with the sweetnes of Sec|ritie, others hee troubleth with the tartennesse of terrours: Note O but Sa|thans

Balow is sweete to the Soule in the craddle of Securitie! But O how dreadfull shall hee bee when hee appearing grieslie and fierce vnto the Soule, shall waken it with a cry and a glowre saying, Damned soule come out to fire,  faggot, come out to vnqueancheable brimstone beames, come out to weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Note A man after this manner wa|kened in conscience, is like a man wakened out of his sleepe on a sud|den: At the first hee is in such a maze, that till hee bee better wake|ned he cannot well vnderstand what is said to him: All his thoughts are into an hurlie burlie: Then his out|ward rebellions, and his inward re|pynings, with all his abominations seeme to fall downe vpon him like cloudes of blood: Note There bee no comforts that can settle his feares, till the Spirite of grace appeare vn|to him in the calme.
Looke vp with your eye Sir, and seeke a blinke of the face of Iesus: Hee onelie is the Prince and Pryce of our Peace, our joye, and our li|bertie: If the Sonne make vs free, weeIoh. 8. 36. shall bee free indeede: Wrestle with him, vse violence in an holie bold|nesse: vis Deo grata.
In him are the lasting treasures of mercie and immortalitie: Note Hee it is onelie who can make this biting Conscience to bee toothlesse, he one|lie can command this raging sea: I know Sir, that your sorrowes are sore, and my Soule pittieth you, for I see you in the verie pangs and ter|rours of the new birth: I perceiue your Soule gasping for grace, as the drie and thirstie ground for droppes of raine.


The sicke Man.
O the boisterous blastes of temp|tations, able to make the tallest and deepest rooted Cedars to stagger, yea, the Sirion to skippe like an V|nicorne:

What shall I doe?


The Pastour.
Seeing Christ alone is our pro|tection and perfection, let all your courage bee in him: Note In him yee must bee valiant, for none but the valiant can by violence enter into the Kingdome of God: If a man know Christ well, hee shall not be discou|raged though hee were cast into a raging sea of temptations: Note Though a ma~ were cast into a gulfe of twenty fathome deepe, if hee can keepe his head aloft, he cannot be drowned: Note So as long as Christ our Head is a|boue, wee his members may well bee dowked, but wee cannot bee drowned: All Christian comforts runne vpon him like the title of a Booke, wherein is contained the substance of the whole.
If Christ Sir bee yours, yee can|not perish: Hee who is rooted in him, can neuer bee rooted out.



The sicke Man.
But how can Christ bee mine, seeing I am but a bagge of corrupti|on  a bodie of Death? What hath mine heart beene, but like a vipers bellie, filled with a deadly brood? Miserable man that I am, will Christ euer daine to looke vpon such a vile wretch as I am, who hath turned my Christian libertie in a fleshlie li|cence.


The Pastour.
These who are least into their own eyes, are in greatest account with him: Note When yee heare of the wan|dring sheepe brought home, and ofMatth. 18. 13 the lost groat found, and of the for|lorneLuk. 15. 8 Sonne returned to his Father:Luk. 15, 18. Ye should cast your figure  say, Of whom is this written but of mee? for whom is it written but for mee?
Note If yee sticke fast by him, no perrell shall make an haire of yourMatth. 19. 30. head to perish: Bee of good comfort, for your life is hid with Christ in God.Colos. 3. 3



The sicke Man.
I am so vile, that hardlie darre I presume to think that Christ would die for such a filthie rotten creature as I am, who from the sole of tbeIsa. 1. 6. foote to the crowne of the head, is filled with botches, boiles, and putrifying sores: Note When I behold my selfe in|to the glasse of Gods Law, I abhor the monstrous face of my Soule: Note I am one of those in whom Satan hath parbreaked, and spewed the spawne of all sorts of sinne: Of all sin|ners, I am the first: Note For I haue not sinned of ignorance, but of knowledge, against the light of my mind, against the voyce of my God, against the workings of his Spirit,  against the cryes of mine owne Conscience: This is my greatest feare, that I haue done despite vnto the Spirit of Grace.Heb. 0. 29 This striketh widest wounds into my Soule, and maketh all the bowels of my bellie to wamble. O fye, fye, what a filthinesse is within this heart of





mine: Note The small moats moue not thicker in the Sunne, than sinnes of all sortes haue reeled to and froe in this wicked heart of mine, which is nothing, but a nest of Spiders, and a cage of corruptions.
Note O what a shamefull discouerie should this bee, if mine heart were as well seene as my face! If all the monsters of my meditations were set in open view, if the eyes of men could spie out what thoughts haue beene within my breast since I was borne: If all the men of Africke a place most fertile of Monsters, were taken to bee witnesse, they would plainlie declare that the Earth can|not bring foorth such Monsters as are bredde into the heart of man.
Note O the great mercie of God, who to the ende that man may liue with man, hath hidde the heart of man from men! O my God, though thou hast sieled the eyes of man, that hee cannot see within my breast,

thine eyes, which see our thoughts a far off, perceiue most clearlie all my bygone abominations. To Thee alone belongeth the discouerie of a closed heart: Would I bee dashed if the eye of a sinner tooke mee at an euill turne, and shall I not bee asha|med when I remember how the eye of my God hath followed me in all mine euill wayes?
Alas, my deare Pastour, yee speake much to mee of Christ and of his death, but what portion can such a vile stinking creature as I, haue with Christ? I haue delayed all to the after-noone, and now my Sun is readie for to set: The blacke night of darknes is posting vpon my soule.
My Soule refuseth all sortes of comforts: I thinke that it shall die in the verie grippes of such bloodie temptations: Behold, and consider if there bee anie sorrow like vnto my sorrow.



The Pastour.
Note I know Sir, that no sort of men are sooner or sorer touched for their sinnes, than are the best children of God: Sathan is most busie to blow at the coale of their corruptions.
Note And againe, there bee no sort of men more readie to appropriate to themselues the comforts of God, than they to whom they least be|long.
But yet Sir, seeing yee are sicke in Soule, yee must not refuse spiri|tuall Physicke: Christ is the onelie comfort against the guilt of sinne: Note His blood is the onelie trayacle a|gainst the poyson of this pest: Note But can any comfort auaile to him that will not receiue it? As meate set v|pon the Table cannot nourish, ex|cept that it bee put into the mouth, and from thence bee sent downe to the stomacke: So, neither can the wordes of comfort feede the heart, Nitraijciantur in viscera nostrae animaeBernard.

 transeant in affectiones nostras, ex|cept that they enter into the bowels of our Soule, and passe thorow vn|to our affections: Your Spirit is so knappish and way-ward, that it will not admit the most solide comforts: The marke of Christs Lambes is an eare-marke: My sheepe heare my voyce.Ioh. 10. 27.


The sicke Man.
But thinke yee Sir, that I can bee one of Gods, who haue beene so great a sinner? My Soule is sicke to the death with surfets of sinne: Can Gods Spirit abide where there is so great corruption? Note Can two Guestes of so contrarie nature, dwell toge|ther in one man?


The Pastour.
They may indeede, though they cannot agree: Note Grace and corrup|tions may be into the heart of a ma~, as Israel was with the Iebusites, Hi|uites, and Perezites, into Canaan: But as Israel wasted these Nations by litle  litle, so the Spirit of God

with grace by little and litle rooteth out, wasteth, and foileth these na|tions of sinne that are within vs: But not all at once. Note Lest wee should grow idle, and roust for want of such spirituall exercise.
Note The heart of a godlie man is like the house of Abraham, where Isaac and Ismael lodge together: Though for a space they tarie toge|ther, at death the olde scorning Is|mael shall bee cast out: Hee shall not inherite the promise with Isaac the laughing man.
Note If Sir yee finde a wresling with|in your heart, some newe working, which once yee did not perceiue, it is a token that grace is conceiued in your soule: Note After that a woma~ hath conceiued, she wil find some times a working about the heart, prouoking to vomite: It is so with y^e heart of a re|generat ma~, so soone as grace is con|ceiued into it, it wil ouercast til it cast and vomite out many filthy corrup|tions:

Note Though Iacob be little and weake  at the first seeme not to be a peregall vnto the rugh man, who is full of strength, yet at last hee shall catch him by the heele, and ouerturne him in a moment: Waite but a litle, and yee shall bee vtterlie out of the reach of all the powers of Hell.


The sicke Man.
I tremble all with feare, that the Lord cast mee off and banish out of the Land of the liuing this filthie fe|stered Soule.


The Pastour.
God is more mercifull, than man can conceiue him to bee: Can a mo|therIsa. 49. 15 forget her Childe? that shee haue no compassion? saith the Lord: Note A louing Father will bee loth to cast his Childe out of doores in a deadly disease: If these who are euill can giueMatth. 7. 11 good things vnto their Children, how much more will that Father who is goodnesse it selfe, giue the holie Spi|rit with all other good thinges to

these who will seeke then? cry to God in prayer.


The sicke Man.
Note Alas, the sorrow of mine heart lameth the liberty of my tongue, my wordes cannot expresse the groanes of my griefe.


The Pastour.
Though yee bee not able to vtter words, sigh with your hearte vnto God: Note God heard Moses his sighs, like cryes: Why cryest thou to mee?Exod. 14. 15 said God to the sighing man: Note A sigh out of a soft melting heart, is a po|werfull prayer before God.


The sicke Man.
I am both sinfull and senslesse: Though I haue sinned most hai|nouslie, yet I finde no melting in mine heart: Note All the teares of my repentance within mee are become like a frozen moisture: I cannot so much as wring out one drop there|of: Note Oh, that they were so melted, that they might rush out at the flood|gates

of mine eyes, that thereof I might with the sinfull woman make a bath for the feete of my Lord! OhLuk. 7. 44 that mine heart were formed into a|nother mould! Note Oh that I could in his presence drench my Soule in a showre of teares! O how precious is the sense of a reuealed and a recon|cealed God! Note I find my selfe so ycie and colde, yea, so benummed and blockish, as though I were voide of all sense of grace: What can this bee?


The Pastour.
Note He who findeth himselfe benum|med is not altogether senslesse: Note In such a man there must bee some stir|ring of the pulse of a spirituall life: A dead man knoweth not that hee is dead, no more doeth a dead soule: A seared conscience feeleth not defer|tions: Note That man hath the begin|ning of grace, who can say from his heart, I haue no grace in my selfe, but onelie to finde that I haue no grace.





Note This wee must all know, that the best of Gods Sainctes will bee troubled with temporall desertions, as Ionah was, while hee was wrapt with waues and with weedes in the bottome of the sea: Out of this bellie of hell they will cry to God, Why hast thou made vs to erre from thy wayes?Isa. 63. 17 and hardned our heart from thy feare? Note Most godlie Soules may swarfe in sinne, but they cannot die in their sins: Note A spirituall man may be do|ked in a sea of sin or sorrow, but can neuer be drowned: At last God shallIona. 2. 6. make him sing with Ionah, Yet hast thou brought vp my life from corrupti|ons, O Lord, my God: Note The spiri|tuall life and light which God hath once put into the Soule of man, can neuer be totallie extinguished: Gods graces and his giftes are without repen|tance:Ro. 11. 29. Iudas from horrour may rin to the halter, but Peter cannot perish.


The Sicke Man.
Thinke yee then Sir, that a man

cannot fall from the grace of God, if once hee hath beene receiued in Grace? Note may not Grace like some plants for a space take roote, and thereafter wither? May not God begin a good worke into a man, and after leaue it imperfect?


The Pastour.
Note Gods working in the godlie is not like the doing of him that be|ginneth to build an house before heeLuk. 14. 29 count his cost, but is not able to fi|nish it: I am confident of this veriePhilip. 1. 6 thing, said S. Paul, that hee which hath begunne a good worke in you, will performe it vntill the day of Iesus Christ: Note Gods spirituall gifts and graces which are without repentance, come neuer within the compasse of Gods Reuocation. * 1 Sam. 10 24 God will make Saul a King, and againe 1 Sam. 15 11 repent that euer hee was crowned, and thereafter will put him fro~ his king|dome: Hee will lend out a Mat. 25. 28. Talent and after take it backe againe: Note Hee will giue to man a tongue, and there|after

make him dumbe: Hee willLuk. 1. 20. giue Health, Wealth, Riches, andIob. 1. 21. after take all backe againe: The Lord hath giuen and the Note Lord hath taken, may be said of al things except of his spirituall and speciall graces: These hee giueth once, but neuer taketh them backe againe: Note Sinne indeed will waken and diminish the sense and feeling of their operation, but can neuer take them quite away. Note Grace in a godlie Soule will beeIsa. 42. 3. betimes like flaxe smoking without a flamme, or like embers vnder an heape of ashes: Though all seeme to bee dead out, yet there is some lit|tle secret spunke within which shall neuer bee quenched: Note New sinnes I confesse are verie dangerous, they will wonderfullie impaire the sense of mercie into faithfull Soules, yea, so that to their judgement the Spi|rit of God will seeme altogether to haue forsaken them, Note But yet into their most desperate-like-cry there

is a My of Faith in their prayer, My God, my God, why hast thou forsakenMath. 27 46 mee?
Note Grace in a godlie Soule will be like sappe into an Oake or Elme in the frostie dayes of December, hidde close within the barke: Note While Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse re|mouethMalach 4. 2. his hote beames from the faithfull Soule, the Soule drouppeth like an Herbe into a winter day.
Note Grace like sappe runneth in to the heart and there lurketh for a spake: Note But againe, so soone as this Sunne beginneth to returne with the heat health of his countenance in a new Spring-time, then will appeare againe first bude, then blossomes, then flourishes, and after fruites: That which was hid of before, is inconti|nent perceiued: Note As seede now cast into the ground seemeth to bee a dead thing, and yet hath life in it, so is Gods grace aliue and quicke|ning when it seemeth farre other|wise:

Note In a sowne a man liueth, though hee seeme to bee dead.
Note The life of God in a man can neuer altogether bee choaked with sinne: Our miserie is not able to o|uer-reach his mercie.
Note A sparkle of fire should be more able to burne vp the sea, than mans sinnes for to dry vp the blood of his mercie: Note Where grace is begunne a man may fall, but hee can neuer fall away.
Note If Sir, ye haue found once the life of God within your Soule, yee haue receiued a sure pledge pawne of immortalitie, say to your Soule, And now my Soule returne vnto thyPsal. 116. 7 rest.


The sicke Man.
There is no rest within mee: I am alas, as a man vpon a raging Sea, tumbled and tossed with such feare|full temptations, which make all the bowels of my bellie to wamble.



The Pastour.
Sea sicknesse Sir, is sore while it lasteth: Note But many seeke this sicknesse for to cure them of a worse: Take courage; God hath imbarked you into this temptation, for to cause you caste out some corruptions which lye  lurke about your heart. Note Bee content to tarie a little space vpon the Firth, till the filth of you stomacke bee cleane purged away: Assure your selfe that all this sore sicknesse shall worke your health in the latter end, which shall cause your to sing, For his mercie endureth for e|uer.Psal 57. 1. In the shadow of Gods wings mak your refuge, vntill these calami|ties passe ouer.


The sicke Man.
I am euer in great doubt of my selfe.


The Pastour.
Note Though ye doubt of your selfe, yee must not doubt of Gods kind|nesse and compassions: Note If e doubt that God can bee mercifull to your

sinnes, yee deny your Creede where|in yee see forgiuennesse of sinne to bee an expresse Article of Faith.
Note Though for some space yee be troubled with doubts, at last ye shall knowe by his Spirite within that Christ was no more willing to suf|fer for sinners, than hee shall proue both willing and able to saue you: Gods custome is to choose the har|dest way for the best end, partlie for to proue his power, partlie for to try our trust.


The sicke Man.
I wish it be so: But for the present I finde a feare within mee which maketh my Soule to tremble: Note I euer thinke that hardlie can it bee that the Spirit of God would dwell into mine heart, which is a very cage of corruption: Note If the men of God, when they see bordels, abhor them, and goe by them, shall not the Spi|rit of God much more passe by mee, yea,  abhor me, who of mine heart

haue made a most filthy stew: Note More|ouer, Satan is busie with his Bellowes blowing at the juniper coales of Gods wrath, that against mee may be kin|dled a consuming fire.
Note The frowne of a Prince may bee the fauour of God: But when God frowneth, who shall shew fauour? Note O what a cry is in the dumbe choppe of the conscience!


The Pastour.
As I perceiue ye are in the storme of temptations: Note As the shippe in a tempest goeth with a low saile, So is it good and most sure in the tempest of temptations to take downe the top sailes of our owne worth.
Note But yet Sir, in your humilitie beware to disprise and set at nought the graces of God that are within you: Vertue standeth in the midst: Note As the Publican would not brage vainlie with the Pharisee, that he was not like other men, so neither would hee desperatlie say with Cain, MineGen. 4. 13

iniquitie is greater, than that it may be forgiuen.


The sicke Man.
Note Alas, Sir yee know not what weight hangeth vpon mine heart: ye are not priuie vnto my secret sinnes which I thinke shame to vtter: O these gnawings of my wormish Con|science: hardlie can yee imagine what filthie thoughts haue beene into my heart, since I came into this world: Hitherto they haue all beene hidde from mine eyes: Note But now I thinke that I see all my sinnes set in order be|forePsal. 50. 21 mee: My Soule is poisoned with the stinke of such corruptions I abhorre my selfe, and what won|der that God abhorre mee?


The Pastour.
Note The more a man abhorreth him|selfe, God who is milde  mercifull, loueth him the better: It is good for a man to stinke in his owne nose: Note A wicked man may bee well com|pared to the Latin Cimex French Pu|naise

Tree, Lice that stinke most vile|lie, and yet feele not the stinke of their own breath: Laodicea thought her selfe happie, and yet God said, that he wold spew her out of his mouth.Reuel. 3. 16
Gods thoughtes are not mans thoughts: Yee complaine Sir, of the filthines of your bygone thoughts, it is well done: But heere is your com|fort,Zach. 13, 1 Now is that fountaine of God in Zachrie opened to the house of Dauid for sin and for vncleannesse: Note Though through sin yee were lepper in soule as Naman was in bodie, the Iordan2 Kin. 5. 1. of Christs Blood is able to mak you cleane: Note The precept is not of hard practise, Wash and bee cleane, belieue2 Kin. 5. 10. and bee saued.
Note If yee would haue the Spirit of God to take a Chamber into your heart, keepe your hearte cleane: Gods house must be a cleane house, it must often bee sweept: Note If the dust or dirt of sinne defile the paue|ment thereof, it must first bee wate|red

with the teares of repentance: Note The stoure  dust must be laid with holie water,  then wee must sweepe out all filthinesse with the besome of godlie reuenge. This doing Sir, God shall delight to dwell in you.
Note If Sathan blow at the juniperPsal. 120. 4. coales of your sinnes kindled with sparkles of fierie wrath, runne with the Bucket of Faith to the Blood of Iesus which is onelie able for to quenche that flamme.


The sicke Man.
My cheekes are watered with teares trickling downe both day and night: * my moist eyes are soked in this salt brimie water: O but they are comfortlesse teares.


The Pastour.
Note God at last shall make them com|fortable like the bowle full of dewe,Iugde. 6. 38. which Gideon wra~g out of his Fleece, Gods signe of Israels Saluation: Haue patience a little Sir, and your wate|rie eyes shall receiue the other drye~

signe of the fleece, all your teares shall bee dryed and wyped away, so that yee shall neuer weepe any more: The houre is fast comming, that God shall wipe away your teares, theReuel. 21. 4. waters of your weeping after that there shall bee no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor paine.
Seeke the Lord while hee may be found, and call vpon him while hee is nigh: To him alone in Iesus must yee haue all your recourse, on him alone must yee relye.


The sicke Man.
I wote not where to goe: I can neither sitte, stand, nor lye: Mine heart alas, is hardened, yea, hard like the heart of the Leuiathan, whichIob. 41. 24. is hard like a piece of the nether mil|stone: I thinke that such hardnesse is from the deceitfulnesse of sinne.Heb. 3. 13


The Pastour.
Note It is a sort of softnesse when we feele our owne hardnesse: He who hath begun such softning will bring

his own work to perfectio~ in his ap|pointed houre: Note The seedes of grace are like Corne, they are not ripe the first day they are sowen, but ripen by degrees: From this is that saying, Grace requyreth space, or in space com|meth Grace.
A reprobate sense is not so neare at anie time, as when it is least suspe|cted and most neglected: Say in all patience with the Prophet Micah, I will beare the indignation of the Lord,Mic. 7. 9. because I haue sinned against him: He will turne againe, he will haue com|passion vpon you: Hee will subdue your iniquities,  cast them in the depths of the sea.
Holde vp your heart toward the Father of Lights, the giuer of euerie good gift: Let your foule flee vp to the Throne of his Grace.


The sicke Man.
My Soule is not fit for fleeing to the Heauens: Note It is lik a pulled foule that wanteth the feathers: It may

well nod with its head, and make a mint with the stumpts of its wings, but can by no meanes hoise it selfe from the Earth. All my comforts are clipped from me: Sinnes heauy like milstones, are hung about my necke: Oh, that I were cast into the sea with my sinnes, there to be bu|ried for euer farre, if it were possible, from the presence of my God: Since yee came to mee mine heart was not in such a plounge of mi|serie as it is now: There is nothing within me but wrath and woe, war|ring against my Saluation: Gods heauie hand hath distressed mine heart wonderfullie.
Note My Soule is so besieged with temptations that it may well be cal|led, Magor missabib, feare round a|bout:Ier. 20. 3. This I feare that my name bee crossed out of the Booke of Life.Reuel. 3. 5.


The Pastour.
I remember of a wise counsel which a learned Diuine gaue to a man sore

assaulted vpon his death-bed with the temptations of the deuil: Note When thou art tempted of Sata~, said he,  seest no way to escape, eue~ the~ plainly close vpLuther. thine eyes, and answere nothing to his temptations: But commend thy cause to God: This said hee, is a principall point of wisedome, that we must follow in the houre of death: That is, That we daine not to giue Sathan an answere but say with Michael, The Lord re|buke thee Sathan. If thy flesh tremble and feare to enter into another life, and if it doubt of saluation, if thou yeeld to these things, thou hurtest thy selfe, ther|fore close thine eyes as before and say with S. Stephen, Lord Iesus receiue my Spirit, and then certainelie Christ will come vnto thee with all his Angels and bee the guider of thy way.
Note At the entrie of the red Sea, when Israel enuironed on both sides with mountaines, hauing the sea before and the Egyptians behind, could see no meanes of escape: Then MosesExod. 14. 14. said to Israel, The Lord shall fight for

you and yee shall hold your peace: That is, ye shall seale vp your thoughtes in silence, and let God bee doing So doe yee, bee silent for a space, daine not Sathans temptations with an answere, feare not, stand still, and see the Saluation of the LORD: Note As Moses said of the Egyptians, so will I say of all your temptationsExod. 14. 13 within a short space, The Egyptians whom yee haue seene to day, yee shall see them againe no more for euer.


The sicke Man.
Oh, that with Iob I could lay mineIob. 40. 4. hand vpon my mouth, and with IacobGen. 49. 18 waite for Gods saluation: But alas, I am laden with iniquitie: Sathan be|siegethIsa. 1. 4. mee so that I cannot keepe silence: Sathan hath laide downe a bloodie libell before mee where|vnto hee vrgeth mee to make an|swere.


The Pastour.
If yee must needes make answere, learne that notable speach of BernardBernard. on his death bed: * About an houre

before his death, hee beeing as hee thought, presented before the great Tribunall of his Iudge, where hee found himselfe seuirelie charged with the accusation of Sathan, for|sooke himselfe for to relye vpon Christ alone: I freely confesse said he that as thou affirmest, I am most vnworthie, and that by no worthi|nesse of mine can I merite eternall life; Note yet I am assured that my Lord Christ hath a double right to hea|uens glorie, one by heritage, and a|nother by conquest: The first is suf|ficient for himselfe, the other is for mee, ex cujus donojure illud mihi ven|dicans, non confundor, which by right of gift I claime and chalenge and shall not bee confounded: Vpon this Rocke yee must cast the anchor of your soule: The Lord is able to doe vnto vs aboue all that wee can aske or thinke.
Take courage Sir: Note Let Sathan make out his processe; your deare

and louing Brother is both your Iudge and your Aduocat.


The sicke Man.
Oh that I could take that counsell and keepe silence, waiting till the Captaine of Saluation bring mee tho|rowHeb. 2. 10 this red sea of bloodie tempta|tions: Oh that I could lay hold vpon that right of heauen, which Christ hath conquered: But alas, I can find no ground or warrant in mine heart that such a conquest can belong to mee, for I know that in mee dwelleth no good things.Rom. 7. 18


The Pastour.
Note The greatest foe the faith of the godlie hath and the chiefest cause of their trembling  troubled heart, is that often they seeke in themselues grounds  warra~ts of Gods fauour, as though the Lord could not loue them vnlesse there bee in them such vertues as in euerie point should be: Note Because they want perfectio~, they thinke they haue nothing: By this

meanes Sathan shaketh sillie Soules to and fro like Reedes with the winds of distrust: Make the right vse of such temptations, let them drawe you from your selfe, for to rely one|lie vpon the mercie of your Lord: Note Bee earnest to finde Gods marke in your Soule, euen Sanctification the Saluation mark whereof the mar|row is Christs satisfaction: From this marke, presse toward the marke, forPhilip. 3. 14 the price of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus.


The sicke Man.
Faine would I haue grace so to doe: But out vpon mee, I haue taken such surfet of sinnes, that I find my selfe voide of all grace: Note O death, death, death, doolefull is that sepa|ration of a Soule dead in sin from theIphes. 2 1. bodie dead for sinne.
I am so defiled and deformed that while I remember judgement, it maketh mee all to shake and to shi|uer: Fye on mee a gracelesse crea|ture

wallowing in a myre of mise|rie: Oh, but for a dramme of Gods grace! Oh, for the greatnesse of the pickle of mustarde seede there|of!


The Pastour.
He that desireth grace is not alto|ther gracelesse: It is Gods goodnesse that hath giuen you this small and weake desire of grace, in this Gods good hand is vpon you: Hee who gi|ueth grace to desire grace, shall giue also grace for grace: God often gi|ueth to a man aboue his hopes, IPsal. 21. 4. sought but life, saide Dauid, yet the Lord gaue him to bee a King: God who in sicknesse giueth you the de|sire of grace, shall before yee die giue you grace for grace, a grace which at last shall make you to sing: I sought but grace, yet God hath giuen mee glo|rie: Note If yee feele and feare his wrath, seek the more earnestlie for his mer|cie: Note This was that good counsell which Zephaniah gaue to Israel be|fore

the decree of wrath come out Seeke righteousnesse, seeke meeknesse,Zepha. 2. 3 it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger: Christes cry is, Seeke,Matth. 7. 7 Aske, Knocke.
Note Seeing God desireth to be asked hee longeth to giue; seeing hee de|sireth vs to seeke him, hee desireth to bee found; seeing hee desireth vs to knocke, his desire is to open: Note God is more rich and liberall, than wee are poore, His hand is wider for to giue giftes, than our heart can bee for to receiue: Note Hee who will not belieue that God can bee mercifull to him, is twise in the wrong to God After that hee hath broken the law of his Iustice by offending, hee is not content except that hee wrong his mercie by distrust: Note Gods delight is to bee with the Children of men on earth, as also to haue them with himselfe in heauen.
Now Sir, beeing assured of th loue, embrace this Lord with all 

armes of your affections: Note Seeke earnestlie the Spirit of Grace, for hee is powred on thirstie grounds: I will powre water, said the Lord, v|ponIsa. 44. 3. him that is thirstie, and floods vpon the dry ground.


The sicke Man.
Oh, but for one droppe of that water: Oh, that my Soule were wa|tered with the dropping bowels of his mercie: Note In the meane time my bones with sorrow are dryed vp like an hearth: The terrours of the Al|mightie sticke within mine heart, and my Spirit sucketh out the ven|nome thereof: I thinke that I am in the verie gorge pipe of hell: If this wrath continue doubtlesse it shall bee my bane.


The Pastour
Note Gods wrath is fearefull I con|fesse, but God will not bee long wroth with his Children I will not,Isa. 57. 17 said the Lord, contend for euer, nei|ther will I bee alwayes wroth: For the

Spirit should faile before mee, and the Soules which I haue made: Note So soone as man beginneth to be wearied of hisIsa. 63. 9. sins, God beginneth to be wearied of his wrath, yea which is strange, In all our afflictions he is afflicted. There is but a moment in his wrath, but his mercie endureth for euer.
Note There is such a mercie in God, that in comparison thereof all the mercies of men are but scrofe and scumme, a myte of his mercie, shall re|moue the mountaines of your mise|rie, in Christ is a mine of mercie.


The sicke Man.
I know that it is so: But I as yet haue no sense of such a mercie Note While I seeke and cry for helpe, God either answereth not at all, or when hee maketh answere, it is like that which Elisha said to Ioram, see|king2 King. 3. 13. comfort vpon extremitie, What haue I to doe with thee, get thee to t Prophets of thy father and mother, a desire them to helpe thee, get thee 

thy pleasures and profits, and prefer|ments, which in forsaking mee, thou didst so eagerlie pursue: This ma|keth all the wounds of my remorse to blead afresh.


The Pastour.
Note As Samuel tooke the voyce of God to bee the voyce of Eli, so ma|nie1 Sam. 3. 5. take the voyce of a temptation to bee the voyce of God: Wee must try the Spirits: Sathan is craftie: Note He1 Ioh. 4 1. can winde himselfe wonderfullie into the heart of men, some times by sleepie securitie, some time by fear|full despaire: Note While hee entiseth vnto sinne, he maketh God to speak nothing but mercie to a sinner.
Thou may sinne, will hee say, and repent againe: Note But while hee ac|cuseth for sin, hee maketh all Gods words to bee words of wrath, that the sinner may be swallowed vp with dispaire. *Tak heed Sir, who it is that answereth to your cry: Though God should draw you thorow Hell,

bee yee still assured of Heauen: His wrath is but for a moment, but hisIsa. 54. 8. mercie endureth for euer.
Note Settle your heart in the secret of God, lest it bee carried away withPsal. 91. 1. euerie light wind and gale of temp|tation: Seeke out of your selfe in Christ the grounds and warrands of your Saluation.


The sicke man.
I feare greatlie to be ouer-blowen, and that I make shipwracke of the1 Tim. 1. 19 faith vpon most fearfull bankes and dangers, such a boisterous gale did  neuer feele.


The Pastour.
While temptations are most ter|rible to our feeling, they are often least dangerous: Note Shallow feas are full of broken waters, while deeper though more terrible are of a softer swelling, carrying the burden more safelie aboue. Tak courage the most godlie heart must encounter with manie thorters: The Lord humbleth

the hearts of his Sainctes, lest that in a vaine conceit of their owne worth they should ouer-weene themselues: Note Thinke well vpon that which I say, a red-warre in the SouleIudg. 18. 7 is better than a sleepie laish Securi|tie: Away with Labans mirth, hisGen. 31. 27 songs and his Tabrets.
Flat opposition is not so dangerous as a couered agreement: Take to heart this my counsell, Though the LordIsa. 45. 15. should say you, yet put your trust into him: God is not euer gotten at the first: verilie, said Isaiah, thou art a God that hiddest thy selfe, O God, of Israel, the Sauiour.


The sicke Man.
I vnderstand not what such hid|ding meaneth: O the fearefull Tri|bunall of God, whose eyes of fire seeReuel. 1. 14 all the wayes of man: In his Ballance hee pondereth all his goinges: GodsProu. 5. 21 mercie I know is a good staffe to stay vpon, but it is farre from mine heart and hand. I am not like these sin|ners

which but trip and stumble, and rise againe after a snapper, my fall i with my full weight; the milstons o his wrath are hung about my necke which beare my Soule downe to the bottome of Hell, I finde now theDeut. 32. 22 trueth of that saying of the wise His owne iniquities shall take the wic|kedProa. 5: 22 himselfe, and hee shall bee holden with the cords of his sinnes.


The Pastour.
What shall I say? as truelie said the wise, By sorrow of the heart thProu. 15. 13. spirit is broken: Seeing yee are ac|quaint with the speaches of the wise remember that counsell of the wise Trust in the Lord with all thine heartProu. 3. 5. and leane not to thine own vnderstan|ding. I pray you to be plaine with me, What is this that maketh you li a reede shaken with the wind, whereinMatth. 11. 7. lyeth the strength of your tempta|tions?


The sicke Man.
I will not conceale the matter

from you: This is it, mine own heart absolueth me not: Note while I put mine hand into mine owne bosome, Oh, how liprous pull I it out againe? My Conscience giueth mee a terrible twetch: * Incessantlie it cryeth out guiltie against mee: What shall I say then, to that of the Apostle, If1 Ioh. 3. 20 our heart condemne vs, God is greater than our heart? Is not this the true sense of these wordes, If our owne heart condemne vs, much more will God condemne vs, who is more mightie than our heart? Note In this I finde my selfe amidst the thickest throng of fearefull temptations, wrapped in the wrath of God: Note This temptation is like a fresh post-horse for to carrie mee to damnation, it is of Sathans saddling.


The Pastour.
* Indeede Sir, the judgement of a mans conscience is a liuelie image of the judgement of God: It is certaine, that whom the conscience

condemneth into this world, him shall God condemne in the world to come: And againe, whom the con|science shall absolue into this world, him shal God absolue into the world to come. Note The Conscience is Gods Iudge within: But this ye must know y^t it is not time for a Iudge to giue out sentence while his wits are troubled, or while he is in a moode or passion Note A wise Iudge will not bee sudden, but will take time to consider well the cause before hee pronounce.
Note A Conscience that is troubled should not sit downe in judgement Note As one appealed from drunke King Philip to sober King Philip, so must a sinner appeale from his Con|science in a qualme, to his Consci|ence in a calme.
Note Moreouer, euerie voyce that is within a man, is not the voyce of his Conscience, but of some temptati|on shrouded vnder the coat of the Conscience, like Iacob cloathed withGen. 27. 15. Esus garment: While Ionah was

but in the bellie of a fish, his heart cryed, that hee was in the bellie ofIon. 2. 2. hell: Sathan hath a deceiuing Pro|spect or dioptre for sinne: At the one end sin and judgement appeare to bee farre off, little like Midges: But while the instrument is turned, these midges appeare like moun|taines: Sinne in the doing is like Zoar a little one, but in repenting it is like Nineueh hudge and great: ItIon. 4. 11 seemeth before the doore of mercie like a Camell at a needels eye.


The sicke Man.
But thinke yee Sir, that the Con|science of a man which God hath sette within him as an Iudge, as a Watch, and a Witnesse, yea, as a thou|sand witnesses, can faile at any time.


The Pastour.
It is certaine, that while the Con|sciences of men are well wakened, and not troubled with terrours of temptations, they are into y^e breastes of men, verilie Gods voyce declaring

to the Soule what God hath con|cerning it, ratified into the Heauen: But yee know that manie a mans Conscience will bee mightilie trou|bled:Note Sometimes it will bee darke|ned with Ignorance, so that as Sam|uel tooke Eliab for Dauid, it will al|so take him to bee appointed to bee a King whom the Lord hath reje|cted:Note Some times it will not know what ailleth the Soule, no more than Elisha knew what ailed the Shuna|mite,2 King. 4. 27 while shee fell downe at his feete: Note Some times it will be fast asleepe like Ionah, while hee snortedIon. 1. 5. in the hatches.
Note I compare the Consciences of the godlie and of the wicked to men in a dreame: One man that is lyen downe in his bed, hungrie without his supper, will dreame that hee is at a feast making good cheare: But while hee awaketh, his Soule is emptie, his dishes flee away with his dreame: Note It is so that it fareth with

a wicked man, whose Conscience is in a dreame: Hee will imagine that assuredlie there is nothing but Heauen for him: Note Hee will thinke with the hungrie dreamer that hee is readie presentlie to sit downe at ta|ble, euen at that Table with Abra|ham,Matth. 8. 1 Isaac, and Iacob in the King|dome of God: Now while hee is euen at the sitting downe, which is at the houre of his death, his Conscience wakeneth, and hee is found emptie: Thus all his dishes fleth away with his dreame.
Note Againe, another man shall dreame of fearefull thinges, viz. that hee is in the midst of his ene|mies readie to bee slaine: If any be waking in the bedde with him, hee will heare him into his sleepe sigh|ing and sobbing with a sore mone: But so soone as hee is wakened, he findeth himselfe in suretie lying v|pon a bed of downe:Note It is euen so that it will often fare with a godlie

man, whose Conscience is in a dreame: Note His heart will bee burde|ned with griefe as with a night mare: Hee will imagine that God is be|come his enemie, and that assured|lie he will cast him into hell:Note Now while hee thinketh that hee is euen at the fall, and while for feare there|of in his sleepe hee is making his mone: God in mercie wakeneth him softlie, and loe, hee is lying into the armes of his God: Note At last it fareth with the godlie  the wic|ked as it fareth with Pharaohs ButlerGen. 41. 13 and his Baker after their dreames, the one was restored to his office, but the other was hanged.


The Sicke Man.
Note I wish at God that my Con|science were in such a Dreame, and that all my troubles were but some spirituall night Mare, a disease that is cured by wakening the Soule that sleepeth: Note I know that the spiri|tuall senses of the Soule may bee

some times couered with a vaile of grosse dulnesse: But I cannot suspect or surmise that this can be a dreame: Behold, I speake, I heare, I see, I sa|uour: Howe then can this bee a dreame.


The Pastour.
Note He who dreameth, will thinke all that: He will think that he speaketh, that hee heareth, seeth, and walketh, and runneth  leapeth ouer brinkes or ditches, vvhile indeede he is snor|ting vpon his bed: Note Yea, in his dreame he will think that his dreame cannot bee a dreame, but that surely hee is broad awake: This cannot bee a dreame, hee will thinke euen while as hee dreameth.
I know Sir, that your bodie is surelie awake, and not dreaming: But in all appearance your Soule is in a slumber: The Lord waken you softlie in his mercie.


The sicke Man.
Note If I dreame, the Lord vvaken

mee soone out of this dreadfull dreame: I am filled with a world of woes, euerie thought is as it were a thorne thrust into mine heart: Note My feares are like the feuers, they goe by fits:Note A litle since I thought that my blood was calmed, and that I had some respit: Of my sinnes I had but a shallow sense, but now behold, a new fit of greater force, vvhich ma|keth all the powers of my Soule to shiuer: Note All my sinnes are in Gods quarrell, vp in armes against me: Gods vvrath followeth mee with a full faile, and chargeth mee a fresh with bloodie blowes. * While I was but breeding this feuer, I was but chai|ned with vvorldlie enchantments: All my trouble vvas but for Bairnes, Lands, Children, Houses, and other perishing pleasures, triffling troubles, vvhich I could not for a long space resolue to forsake.
Note But now is paine in stead of pleasure, a sowre and bitter sauce, pre|pared

for Adams sweete Apple, feare, shame, and remorse:Note What recks to vvant pleasure, if so be there were no paine: I vvould not giue a flee for the vvorld, and all the pleasures or profite that therein is, if I could once bee reconciled to my God: Note Mine heart is like an Anuile wherevpon the Lord striketh most fiercelie with the hammer of his wrath: Note There is not a power of my Soule, which is not loaden with blowes: Note All my distresses hitherto haue beene but light skirmishes, now I am come to the maine Battell: My Soule is hunted to and fro like a Partridge on the mountaines: Who is on my side? Who?


The Pastour.
The Lord is vvith you, though ye perceiue him not: Note This is incident to the faithfull, not euer to knovv vvhen God is with them: Note Gideon was a man renouned for his Faith he vvas one of the Catologue of

the faithfull,  yet while the AngelIudg. 6. 12 said vnto him, The Lord is with thee thou mightie ma~ of valour, hee answe|red,vers. 13. Oh, my Lord if the Lord be with vs, why then is all this befallen vs?
Note See hovv the man of God knew not that God vvas vvith him.
Note Take courage Sir, seeing the skirmishes are past, and that yee are come to the maine Battell, God shall bee your maine helpe: Come out a|gainst all your enemies, as Dauid1 Sam. 17. 45 came out against Goliah, in the Name of the God of Battels, and Lord of Armies:Note There is no Corslet of proofe against a stone cast out of a sling in the Name of the great IEHOVAH: Resist the Deuill and hee shall flee fromIam. 4. 7 you.


The sicke Man.
Gods vvrath hath heate the fierie Fornace on seuen times more tha~ it was of before: I am so dashed with y^e sense of my sins,  so pierced with stinging feares, y^t thereby all the po|wers

of my Soule are shaken: Note Hi|thereto I haue beene crossed with care, for my life, and for my Chil|dren: What care I now for my dearest Children? Would to God that I might giue my first borne forMicah. 6. 7 my transgression, and the fruite of my wombe for the sinnes of my Soule.
Note Behold, heere a poore distres|sed and distracted sinner, who kno|weth not to what ha~d to turne him: All the enemies of my Saluation pursue mee with hue and with cry: The great God of Iustice hath set vp a Gibbet into my Soule. All the ter|rours of the Lord muster against me: Note I am galled and goared with sinfull feares, as Egypt was plagued with Flies Frogges: Mine heart is filled with dismaiednesse, my bellie trem|bleth,  rottennesse is entered into my bones:Note While I had time to repent I willinglie wallowed into the myre of sinne, wherin now I necessarilie stick: Note Feare driueth, Hope draweth, I am

tossed like a Tenice ball: O the strait|nesse of that account, which I am shortlie to bee called vnto! O that terrible Tribunall! O these chaines of darknesse, in which sinners shall be reserued vnto Gods last Sessions: Note Who can stand in such a tempest, where the creature hath a combat with God and with his wrath, hand to hand? I am stricken with such a|mazednesse, that I know not where to finde any true refreshmentNote This maketh death to mee as a King of feare:Note All the sinnes that euer I did commit, seeme to mee malicious blowes which I haue set vpon the face of my GOD Hardlie can I thinke that such a Cain or cursed Cham as I, ca~ euer enter into Canaan Thinke ye not this to be true? I find this to bee trueth: There is no peace saith my God to the wicked.Isa. 57. 21


The Pastour.
Note These bee but temptations of Sathan, who is seeking for to fiftLuk. 22. 31 you as wheate: Pray Christ that hee

would pray for you, that your faith faile not Note There is full power in Christ for to locke vp the jawes of that roaring Lyon: Hee at last shall discouer vnto you those Gun-pow|der plots.


The sicke Man.
I know that there is sufficient power in Christ for to saue mee, but I doubt of his will:Note If Christ were minded to saue mee, would hee not giue mee an assurance to bee saued? This temptation passeth through the barke to the bone.


The Pastour.
Our assurance is not perfect into this life: Note Wee are all heere like a Shippe tossed with contrarie Tydes into a raging Sea.
Note As the weather beaten Barke is driuen with many contrarie courses before shee can winne her Hauen so hath the Soule, manie toes and froes, before it pierce to the Skes for to enter into Heauen: Note God giueth to no man heere all good

things at once, but some wee re|ceiue in hand, and some in hope: Note This hope is the Christian Soules plight anchor in the swelling Seas of temptations: While all that is pre|sent is full of trouble, Hope fetcheth comfortes from the times to come: Note While it is foule, wee hope it shall bee faire: While wee are sicke, wee hope for health: While we prouid for our Children, wee hope they shall doe well: While men write Bookes, they hope they shall doe good: Note While the Mariner saileth thorow the raging waues, hee ho|peth to come home againe, hee ho|peth for vantage: Note While the So|wer, casteth his seede from him, hee weepeth, but Hope comforteth him, that hee shall receiue againe a plen|tifull increase. Note The hope of y^e plea|sant Spring is a comfort in the colde Winter Note The hope of the Day is the long Nights comfort: Note Deaths speciall comfort, is in hope that we

shall all meete againe: Well then, Sir, seeing it is so, the comfortes which wee haue not receiued as yet in hand, receiue them in Hope, waite vpon God, and vvaite vpon him still: Note While all your senses are silent, Hope shall come with Helpe, assuring you that at last yee shall pre|uaile: Note Let the deuill doe his worst to dismay you, sticke yee fast by this Hope which shall neuer faile you: yea, though God himselfe should seeme to bee your enemie, yet say to him with Iob, Though thou should slay mee, yet will I trust in thee.


The sicke Man.
That Sir, is of verie hard practise: For if the Lord of Life put out the life, who shall put it in againe? mine Hope is small, if it be not lost: I feare to feele shortly that which shal be without either end or ease: Note All sorts of temptations come haile shot vpon mee: Note I am laide open to all the blowes of Gods wrath: I am lik a

wind-waued tree loose at the roots: Note Mine heart quaketh, my Soule pan|teth; my conscience is in a qualme: What can such torments bee but ve|rie Postes and fore-runners of euerla|sting paines? Note What can they bee but the verie smoke of Gods wrath comming before a fire that shall burne to the bottome of Hell? Note TheDeut. 32. 22 feare of this clogeth so my Consci|ence that I cannot thinke but such terrours bee the verie earnest of eter|nall woe: This maketh my liuer to rolle in my bodie: O that mercie might bee Bartered for Money.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir, such terrours are such of their owne nature, euen the smoke of a kindled wrath, neuer to bee quenched. Note But vnto the god|lie, their nature is changed by grace: Such tremblings, and shakings, such thunders, and earth quakes, feares and fires, are but the preparations of the Soule for to meete with its God

into the still and calme voyce.
Note After this maner as ye know the Lord came vnto his Seruant Elijah: Before he came to him, he prepared his way by three fearefull Messen|gers, First, by a winde which rent the1 King. 19 1. mountaines and brake in pieces the Rockes; Secondlie, by an Earth|quake, which made all to shake vn|der him; Thirdlie by a fire: Note All these came before for to terrifie the man of God, that by that meanes hee might be the better prepared to meete with his God in the calme. Note Before Christ would shew himselfe to the world, hee sent two austere Messengers before him, First, Moses with a fierie Law, and last the Baptist like a Carpenter with a sharpened Axe in his hand for to hewe downe euerie fruitlesse tree that marred the ground: Note After them came the meekenesse of the Lambe of God, crying, Come vnto mee all yee that areMatth. 11 28 wearied and laden, and I will ease you.

God will not be mercifull to proud selfe-sufficient men.
Note Take Sir these blastes of temp|tations to be but the Lords wind of preparation: Note These heart-quackes are but earth quakes: Note All your o|ther fierie temptations are but fire from Heauen, Posts from GOD in haste for to giue you warning of his comming: Note By such warnings the Lord will waken you, lest with the wicked in the slumber of securi|tie, ye should sleepe still in your sins, or with scorners should smooth them ouer, and jest them away, as thogh the sins of men shuld neuer be sentenced, nor their life examined: Note Bee of good comfort Sir, your sharpest temptations which Sathan hath whet vpon the whet-stone of his malice, by Gods grace shall bee to you like the Baptistes Axe for to hewe downe all superfluities of wickednesse within you:Note It is good that God snedde the vnfruitfull and

rotten branches of our life, that in our hearts a way may bee preparedPsal. 24. 7 for the King of glorie.
Note Yee must also know Sir, that such troubles and tempests, are but a preface of Gods presence, as, Hear|kenPsal. 81. 8. and take head Israel, was sette before the Law: Suffer therefore patientlie the Lords rebukes: LetPsal. 141. 5 the righteous smite mee, said Dauid, and it shall bee a kindnesse, and let him reproue mee, and it shall bee an excel|lent oyle, which shall not breake mine head: Note These feares Sir, that trou|ble you, are nothing but Gods re|proofes: * Take them as a kindnesse, yea,  as an excellent oyle, which shall neither breake head nor heart for your hurt: Note The nature of oyle is not to break but rather to heale that which is alreadie broken: God by such trubles inte~deth to refine you: Haue patience but a little in your griefes: Yet a little while, and they shall bee no more: Note The night is darkest

while the dawning is nearest: Note while the feuer it at the hight, the cooling sweate is at the doore of the poares: Note While the Mountaines are on both hands, and Pharaoh behind, and the Sea before, then let Israel stand still,Exod. 14. 13 and see the Saluation of the Lord: Note These Egyptia~ temptations, are but for to chasse you to Canaan with hard bondage, from a Land whereExod. 8. 26 it is counted an abomination to offer Sacrifice vnto God: Note So soone as the rod of God shall strike vpon that Sea, it shall make way, and yee shall safelie passe thorow: The Lord shall fight for you, and yee shallExod. 14. 14 holde your peace: And what then? The Egyptians whom yee haue seene to day, yee shall see them againe no more for euer: God will afflict his owne,Isa. 28. 28 but not destroy them: Bread Corne is bruised, but God will not breake it, with the wheeles of his cart.


The sicke Man.
I haue looked for such comforts,

but alas, they are long in comming: In the meane while, my Soule is all agast, I taste nothing but gall and worme-wood, mine heart is filled with sorrow:Note My breach is lik y^e sea, all my worldlie sweetnesse is turned into wormes of Conscience: My teares trickle downe both day and night, and yet God delayeth to send mee comfort: My God shake off the sinnes which hang so fast on.


The Pastour.
Haue patience Sir, but a little, and comfort shall come: Note Before yee reape your fruites yee must first till and sow the ground: Note The seede time is a sorrowfull time: Man so|wethPsal. 126. 6. his seede in teares: Note But againe while hee remembereth that except he sow, he shall not reape,  that as hee soweth, so shall hee reape, hee casteth from him his seede liberallie downe vpon the ground, smilling with his watered cheekes of sorrow in hope of a plentifull increase.
Note Thinke it not strange Sir, that in this seede-time of grace yee sow in teares: Comfort your selfe in this that joye shall arise out of your sor|row: Note While yee sow in teares, think not your labour lost: Note Out of your greatest sorrow shall spring your truest joy: As at the rising of Christ our Lord was a Earth quake, so at our regeneration which is the first re|surrection, there is an heart-quake: Be not discouraged, though the hand of God bee heauie vpon you, his stripes will worke to your well:Note As an Horse or a Mule beeing once well lashed with a whippe doth euer after feare, if hee heare but y^e Bell which is tyed to the whip: So men, if he hath bene once well scoured  scourged with Gods rod, he will so tremble at the sound thereof, that he will feare to anger the Lord againe: It is good that God mingle the tartnesse and terrours of the Law with the sweete|nesse of the Gospel.



The sicke Man.
I am so confounded with shame that I cannot face the Heauens: Fye vpon my filthinesse, my course is backward from my God.


The Pastour.
It is an euill token when for sinne there is no shame in the sinner: This Scripture calleth a Whoores forehead:Ier. 3. 3 Note In this Lot his elder Daughter be|wrayed her selfe, and shew that she was not touched for her sinne of In|cest: For after shee had committed vilanie with her father, she as it were shameleslie bragged of it, by calling her sonne Moab, that is, Of my father,Gen. 19.  37. that his name might cry to the world, The father of this child begat him vpon his owne daughter:Note Shame euer followeth sinne, if men be not ashamed of sinne, which is Repen|tance, God shall shame them for sin, which is Vengeance: As for your backward course, a few steps backe|ward, will mak you aduance further in your leaping.



The sicke Man.
I feare exceedinglie: I feare to losse both Soule and Saluation.


The Pastour.
Let Faith moderate your feare: Note When Iacob thought that hee had lossed Ioseph, and was in great feare, for Benjamin, euen then found hee both Ioseph Benjamin: Look often vnto God and yee shall finde him with Dauid to bee the light of yourPsal. 43. 5 countenance.


The sicke Man.
God hath opened the floud-gates of his wrath against my Soule: O the deepenesse of my troubles!


The Pastour.
Note The Soule in deepest troublesGen. 7. 13 is like Noahs Arke on the waters, the higher it was tossed, the nearer it ap|proached to the heauens: Note Little Boats of little burden are but for shallow waters: But great shippes of greater lod are sent vnto the depths: Note The deepnes of your temptations,

Sir, declare that God hath loden you with many graces: Note Brauest Cap|taines are put to the Front and fore|brunt of the choake: Note Best Christi|ans are battered with most bitter temptations: God who suffereth them to be tempted, knoweth what they can doe, and therefore to en|courage others by their example, he putteth them to a proofe, for to let the world see, what his grace can worke in weakenesse, at last yee shallPsal. 66. 2. say, Wee went thorow fire and water, but thou hast brought vs to a wealthie place: What say yee Sir? Beginneth not your heart to rejoyce? Be glad, Sir.  say to God with the Psalmist, All my springs shall bee of thee.


The sicke Man.
I haue little minde of springs, the Apostle said wiselie, Is any man mir|rie?Iam. 5. 13. let him sing: Mine Harpe and Heart both are out of tune: ThePsal. 137. 2 Harpe of my joye is hung vpon the villowes: Note My fingers can guide

no more this wirbling instrument: Note All the joye of my light, and the light of my joye is quenched with vnspeakable griefe, as with a dampe.
Note Mine heart is like a moth eaten cloth, all rent with temptations and eaten out with the worme of Consci|ence, like that worme which did eate away the pleasures of Ionah: By itsIona. 4. 7. byte all my joye is fallen downe like that Gourd: All the good that euer was within mee is boulted out, Sa|than hath sifted mee: I thinke pre|sentlie that I am at the verie mouth of Hell, readie to fall downe to the bottome thereof.


The Pastour.
Note The way to Heauen is neare by the gates of hell: The way toPsal. 16. 11 pleasures for euermore, is paued with paines: Dauid first cryed to God, de profundis, out of the depthes, said he,Psal. 130. 1. haue I called to thee: But afterward hee praised him in excelsis, with the highest Organs of laude, euen with

loud Cymbals, yea, high soundingPsal. 150. 5. Cymbals.
Note It was vvell said by one, Quo acerbior miseria eo acceptior misericor|dia, the sowrer the miserie, the swee|ter the mercie: Let the hope of that sweete mercie which is to come, sweeten the tartenesse of your pre|sent terrours: Note Hee who can bring light out of darknes, and who brought water out of the fierie flint, can mak the sweetnesse of his grace spring out of the gall of bitternesse: Woe to him whom God vvill not correct:Hos. 4. 17 This was a sore word Ephraim is joy|ned to idoles, let him alone: Pray God that hee neuer let you so alone: Blesse God for this chastisement: Though for a space yee bee in the fearefull depths of temptations Let nothing mak you to despaire, Christ the most solide Rocke of your Salua|tion shall turne all such surges into froth.
Note While Ionah was in the bellieIona. 2. 2.

of hell, and all the billowes of Gods wrath passing ouer him, yet vvould he not despaire into that hell, but beeing tumbled vp  downe there, hee trembled in his belieuing, and belieued in his trembling: Note Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight: ThereIona 2. 4. was his trembling: Yet I will looke againe toward thine holie Temple: There was his belieuing: And the Lord spake to the Fish, and it vo|mitedvers. 10. out Ionah vpon the dry land; these were the fruites of his Faith.
Note Learne Sir of Ionah, not to de|spaire, were it in the bellie of hell: Though for a space ye as it were goe downe with that Prophet to the bot|tomesIona. 2. 6. of the mountaines, the time shall come that yee shall sing to God, yet hast thou brought vp my life from cor|ruption, O Lord my God: Note God for a space for the sinnes of his chosen, for his glorie, for his praise, for proofe for example, and manie o|ther reasons may bee ecclipsed from

shining to the sillie sinfull Soules of his Turtles: Note But there is none ob|scuritie that shall be able for euer to restraine from them y^e Celestiall in|fluence of his blessed beams of com|fort: In a litle wrath I hid my face fromIsa. 54. 8. thee for a moment, but with euerlasting kindnes will I haue mercie on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.


The sicke Man.
But alas, mine heart is aleadie wounded with vncurable wounds.


The Pastour.
In Christ is your remeede Note If yee bee wounded, there is health inMala. 4. 2 his winges for the healing of your wounds: Though for a space such wounds bee sore in your feeling, yet fret not: Note Yee would gladlie suffer all that and more, if yee knew how many stripes Heauen were worth: Though Christ tarie, yet he will not tarie. He is more sensible to our sores than we can imagine: Note Belieue him while hee speaketh: These bee his

words of sense, Hee that toucheth you, toucheth the Apple of mine eye.
Note Be of good heart Sir, Christ shall bee the Iudge of our sinnes, who was judged for our sinnes: He to whom all judgement is deliuered, was deliue|red for vs vnto death: Yee say, that your heart is wounded, let this bee a salue for your sore, a broken heart is the verie heart of repentance neuer to bee repented of: Note The heart which was neuer wounded for sinne, is deadlie wounded with sinne: Note The heart which was neuer wounded for sin, hath neuer known the vertue of Christes woundes, the onelie re|meede of sinne: Be of good courage in this good fight, like the Church2 Tim. 4. 8 who for her valour in spirituall war|fare, is compared to the troopes of horses in the Chariots of Pharaoh.Cant. 1. 9
Now seeing the day groweth to an end, after that in my prayer I haue recommended you to Gods prote|ction and direction, I will leaue you vntill morrow. Let vs pray.



A Prayer for the sicke Man, tossed with spirituall temptations.
_O LORD, how terrible art thou, when thou art angrie at thy crea|tures? Who can standHeb. 12. 19 before thee, a co~suming fire. When thou is prouocked, the Earth shaketh and trembleth, the foundations of the hilles are moued: When thy wrath is kindled, smokePsal. 18. 8. commeth out of thy nostrils, and out of thy mouth commeth a deuouring fire, whereby coales are kindled.
O the terrour of these euerlastingIob. 42. 10 burnings! Who darre approach vn|to thee? Who shall bee so bolde as to stand before thee, seeing there is none so fierce that darre stirre vp the Leuiathan, one of thy Vassals, whose

scales are his pride, whose eyes are lik the eye lids of the morning,  who by his neesinges maketh a light to shine,  kindleth coals by his breath
O GOD, most gracious, make thy North winde to awake, and blowCant. 4. 16 vpon him for the cooling of his con|science parched with fierie tempta|tions: Change thine angrie counte|nance toward this sillie cast-downe Soule, sore tossed and troubled with spirituall tempest: O heare our ear|nest sute and bee not deafe towards vs: O let the bright beames of thy mercie disperse and breake thorow the cloudie glominesse of thy wrath Let the cleare skie of thy fauour ap|peare vnto this darkened spirit, that in a holie boldnesse, hee may come vnto the Throne of thy grace.
Thou hast said, Lord, Anger is not with mee: Thy word plainelie af|firmeth that there is but a moment in thy wrath: In wrath thy custome is to remember mercie: Forget not so

good a custome. O remember here a sinner, vexed with thy wrath: Breake not this bruised reede, neitherIsa. 42. 3. quench this smoking flaxe, but kindle vp the lurking sparkle: Make thy strength perfect in his weakenesse,2 Cor. 12. make thy Mandrakes to giue a smell,Can. 7. 13 that his Soule may bee refreshed with the sauour of life vnto life.
Take from him all hardnesse of heart: Suffer not his Conscience to bee seared with sinne, neither too sen|sible of sinne, lest that hee losse his patience: Giue him a soft and a yeel|ding heart for to admitte the com|forts of thy Spirit: O take out of his breast the hard marble and flintie heart of Nature, and put in the place thereof a fleshie and melting heart, with a tender  feeling Spirit Open his eyes with thine eye-salue, that hee may see thy mercie thorow the crosse-barred gates of so fearefull temptations: As the weight of thy wrath hath made his Conscience to

bleede, so let the might of thy mercie like Balme, cue  couer the wounds of thy wrath: O GOD of pittie pittie this poore Soule weeping in secrete at thy feete: Pittie this Spirite which is filled with hea|uinesse: Sore sorrow, O LORD, is entered through all the powers of his Soule, euen to the diuiding ofHeb. 4. 12 the joynts, and the marrow of his bones: Put these wordes of comfort in his minde and mouth, that thou retai|nestMica. 7. 18 not thine anger for euer, because thou delightest in mercie.
O sanctifie the force of all his paineful temptations, that they may worke to his well, let him know that thou hast an hand in all his troubles:Psal, 141. 5 Let him say, Let the righteous smite mee and it shall bee a benefite: Yea, though thou should slay mee, yet will I trust in thee.
Good GOD, giue him not ouer to the raging euill of his owne cor|ruptions: Suffer not his Spirit to bee ouerwhelmed with the burden

of temptations, but with the temp|tation giue him an out-gate: Make the Spiknard of thy mercie send out a sweete smell, whereby his fainting heart may bee comforted. Giue him victorie ouer all the enemies of hisIosh. 10. 10 saluation: As Ioshuah made his men of warre to set their feete vpon the neckes of their enemies, and tread them vnder foote; euen so, LORD, make this thy weake seruant to sette his feete vpon the neckes of these sinnes, which like Kings haue swe|ed their sinfull Scepter in his heart: Thou vvho made a Cake of BarleyIudg 7. 13 bread to tumble vpon the tents of Midian,  ouer turne them, thou can easilie worke great vvorkes by weak meanes: It is thy custome to make thy strength perfect in weakenesse: Let this poore sicke Patient heere haue the proofe of the practise of thy custome: Let his Soule like a Doue enter in at the cliftes of the Rock, let it creepe in by the wounds of Christ vnto his blessed bowels,

there to bee warmed with Gods most feruent loue.
Whether shall hee goe? LORD, to whom shall hee make his mone, but to thee? Whom hath he in hea|uen but thee? O LORD, now the day is farre spent and the wearisome night approacheth: Before wee goe let vs obtaine our sute, that thou would make thy vvrath to relent a little: Let not our prayers bee pow|red out in vaine, wee will not admit a refusall,  therefore set vs not off till another time, abandon not this troubled Soule.
Thou who hast said vnto manProu. 3. 2. Say not vnto thy neighbour, Goe and come againe, and to morrow I will giue thee, if thou now haue it: O LORD, practise thine owne precept, wee are heere come not for to buy but to begge thy mercie for thy distres|sed Seruant: Thou cannot denye but thou hast mercie, for this is euer true, Mercie is with thee: Seeing

then, LORD, now thou hast it, wee vrge thee with thine owne di|rections, say not, Goe and come againe to morrow, I will giue thee. By such a delay thou should but enhance his griefe: Alas, LORD, what rest shall his wearied Soule get all this night, if thou delay and drift him vntill morrow?
O come, come, and powre into his heart the comfortable bowels of thy compassions: Powre into his Soule the powers of thy Spirit, wher|by hee may bee reuiued, and goe softlie, the rest of his time in the bit|ternesseIsa. 38. 5 of his Soule. Refresh his par|ched Conscience with the dew of thy grace: Deare Father, for Christs sake, let not hardnesse of heart creepe any more vpon him: Receiue him softlie into thine Armes this night, and cause his spirit to rest into thy bosome: Whether hee sleepe or hee wake, make all his thoughts to run vpon thee: In the darknesse of the

night make thy loue like light to breake in vpon his Conscience, asProu. 4. 18 the shining light that shineth more and more vnto the perfect day: Seeing Satan the lord of the night, the prince of darknesse, is most combersome in the night, we intreat thee, that thou would shield and preserue him by thy mercifull and powerfull prote|ction: Make his Soule to stand vpon a continuall watch, that it may bee readie with a well furnished Lampe for the comming of his Lord: Make the day of thy mercie to breake, and all the shadowes of temptations to flee away: O Father, heare  helpe, for the sake of the dearest blood of thy Sonne, the alone purger of the Soule and the chiefe softner of har|dened heartes bee thou a Sanctuarie vnto this troubled Soule: Create v|pon him a cloud and smoke by day, andIsa. 4. 5. the shining of a flaming fire by night, joyne the direction of thy fire with the protection of thy cloud: O giue

now thy blessing vnto this halting man: Souple and loosen his stiffe and stupefied joyntes, that beeing drawne by thee, hee may runne af|ter thee: Fence and garde his soule by thy grace, till thou bring him vn|to glorie: O Iesus, pray thou for him, whom Sathan hath sought to winnow, let him bee found as good corne vpon thy barne floore, vnto the praise of thy heauenly glory of thy diuine grace
Blesse thy beloued Church vni|uersall, purge her from all Shifmes  diuisions which breed great thoughts of heart: Decke and decore her with puritie vnitie. y^e two most precious spirituall jewels of thy Spouse, make her fertile like a broodie Vine.
Direct our gracious Soueraigne in all his ways, Guide him by thy Counsell,Psal. 73, 24 and afterward bring him vnto glorie: Blesse his Royal Match, the Queenes Majestie, make her a Nuse mother in Israel, a blessed Mother of blessed

Children: Blesse all y^e Estates of thi Land; blesse thy Ministerie, adorn their breastes with thy Vrin and thy Thummim thy light of doctrine and perfection of life. Blesse vs all who are heere humbled before thy face this night, while our bodies shall goe to bed for to rest, grant that our Soules may goe rest in the armes of thee our most louing GOD and Fa|ther: To thee with thy Sonne and the Spirit of Grace wee giue all praise and glorie for euer. Amen. Cause read vnto you this night wh ye awak Psal. 6 Ps. 49. Ps. 102 ps. 130 The grace of God and the peace o his Spirit bee with you.

The sicke Man.
The Lord direct you Sir in all your wayes: I looke ye shall returne the morrow earelie: Thinke vpon that where we left at last: I look that yee shall cleare that matter more a large at our next meeting: My God bee with you.





THE THIRD DAYES Conference. Of spirituall temptations.

The Pastour.
THE Lord blesse you Sir, ac|cording to yourd sire I am come againe to visite you in your bedde of languishing.


The sicke Man.
I was looking for you, for since yee left mee yesternight I may say with Iacob Sleepe departed from mineGen. 31. 40 eyes: My conscience all this night hath beene like a boiling pot: Note O but weake man is borne to manie sorrowes! his dayes are few and e|uill: The best of them is builabour andPsal. 90. 10 sorrow: But let vs now begin where wee left.



The Pastour.
Our last conference, as yee may remember, was concerning Christ, in whose wings, I said, was health for healing of your woundes: Note I de|clared vnto you, that he is so tender|lie touched with the feeling of our sores, that hee hath declared that these that touch vs, touch the apple ofZach. 2. 8. his eye: Hath this beene the matter of your nights meditation?


The sicke man.
That which ye haue said of Christ, Sir is true; There is indeed health in his wings, and helpe in his hands: But alas, Christ will not bee helpe|full but to these that are of a strong Faith: My Faith is both faint and fectlesse, nothing but a smoke of Faith.


The Pastour.
Note Christ hath said plainlie, thatIsa. 42. 3 hee will not quench the smoking flaxe S. Peter was not a man of strong Faith, when in his voyage to Christ

vpon the sea, hee beganne to sinke: Said not Christ vnto him, Thou manMatth. 14. 31 of little Faith, why hast thou doubted?
Note The Lord reproued him for the weakenesse of his Faith, but neuer coost him off for the littlenesse there|of.


The sicke Man.
That was another matter, Christ was with his ApostleNote There was vertue into that hand, wherewith he gripped the sinking man, as was ver|tueMar. 6. 56 in his garment, while the hemme thereof was but touched: Such a weake Faith as mine, cannot reach vp so farre as to touch him into the Heauens.


The Pastour.
Though your faith bee weake,  that Christ also be bodily absent, yet be not for that disquieted, his God|head is present: Note Hee himselfe hath said, concerning his bodily pre|sence, that it was expedient for vsIoh. 16. 7. that hee should goe away: As for the

weaknes of your Fath, pray God to strengthen it: Note Faith though it bee little yet it is of great force, a graineLuk. 17. 6 of it will cast a mountaine into y^e sea


The Sicke Man.
Let mee see I pray you Sir, anie particular example of a weake Faith sauing anie man.


The Pastour.
Of this in Scripture wee haue a cloud of witnesses: I shall let you see two, one in substance y^e other in type or figure: Note That of Peter in the New-Testame~t is substantiall: Christ called him a man of little Faith, andMatth. 14. 32 yet by that Faith, though little, hee was saued: Note The other is in the old Testament, in the type and figure: When the Israelites were bitten with the fierie Serpents, their onely refuge and remeede was to looke vp to the brasen Serpent: This was theNumb. 21 9 verie type of a Soule stung with sinne, beholding Christ with the eye of Faith: Note Of these who behelde

that Serpent of brasse, some were bleared, and other some had weake eyes: But the weaknesse of their sight could not hinder the cure: Note Nay, the old man with his dimmed eyes beholding as through a mist that type of Christ, was as soundlie cu|red, as hee whose eyes were in their greatest vigour: Note The meate taken with a paralitique and trembling hand, will not refuse nourishment to the bodie, no more than if it were taken with a stable hand: Obserue Sir, what I say, Note Faith is the eye of y^e soule wherof the Israelites eyes were but a figure, Christ is the trueth of the brasen Serpent: Note Though this eye bee dimmer in some, yet if it see, the Soule shall bee saued: Faith is the hand of the Soule, Christ is the foode: Note Though this Faith trem|ble, Christ trembleth not: Note The palsie is not into the foode: Bee of good courage Sir, feare not this trembling feare, the worke of Salua|tion

cannot bee wrought out, but with feare and trembling: Note WhenPhilip. 2. 2 the worke shall bee ended, all trem|bling shall cease, and Faith shall bee stable, then the Soule shall be made free from all palsie paine.


The sicke Man.
Oh, that I were but sicke of such a palsie paine! Oh, that I were assured to haue anie graine of true Faith! Alas, I am vndone: Note This wretched heart of mine is so wrung with wrath, that there remaineth not within it so much as a droppe of grace: All my spirituall moisture is spent, all the faculties of my Soule are so racked, that my tongue can|not vtter my griefe and smart: Note Is there no Balme in Gilead for a sor|row beaten sinner? Oh, through excessiue paine my Liuer is rolled within mee: If I finde no remeede, my Soule shall shortlie bleade to death, my paines exceed, my sorrow is extreme, thorow the tortours

thereof my Soule is compelled to roare: Oh, Lord, turne thy wrath in mercie, and thy Iustice seat in a Throne of grace, and pardon the sins which more and more ripen thy wrath against mee: Mine heart is rent and harrowed with griefe, what salue can I finde fit for such sinfull sores? The more I thrust griefe out, the more it throngeth in.


The Pastour.
The soueraigne salue for such sores, is to get a sight of Christ, who bare all our sinnes vpon his battered backe, which was torne with merci|lesse strippes: Christ in that plight is the most fit object for the eye of a troubled Soule: Note There is no salue for the sore of sin, but y^e sight of him who is the trueth of that brasen Ser|pent,Numb. 21. 9. the object of the faithfull eye: Note This remeede among all o|thers is like the master Bee, the best of all the hyue: * Though yee bee like Zacheus a man of little stature,Luk 19. 3

so that yee cannot see Christ ouer the multitude of your sins, yet run before, climbe the tree of the Crosse, and behold him: Note No, rather be|hold him now vpon the Crosse fixed vpon a mount high aboue, that all may see him, euen vpon mount Cal|uarie:Luk. 23. 32 Behold him there treading death vnder his feete: * Though there be a mount of dead mens scules; there is no dead scule so high, but Christ may bee seene aboue it: Note Christ is euer nearest in the hotest skirmish: He is the sea  the seate of mercie: If yee can seeke, yee shall finde no scant of mercie into him, ye shall wonder at his loue when yee shall relish his kindnesse.
Note To Christ then, yea, to Christ alone must ye runne and forsake all, as the Mariner, while all his cunningPsal. 107 27 is gone, runneth to God in the tem|pest: Note In him is Balme for all woun|ded spirits, there is no gash so deepe, but his blood can cure it: As all

riuers lead to the sea, so should all comfortes guide vs vnto Christ: Note While hee was in the dayes ofHeb. 5. 7. his flesh there was no miserie that could with-hold sinners from him, neither lamenesse, nor blindnesse, nor deafe|nesse, nor deuils, could stay any from him, nor stay him to doe them good, hee healed them all: Note Neuer a man came backe from him, saying I haue sought to this God in vaine, I came to him, but he could not helpe me: Or as the father of the lunaticke, said, IMatth. 17. 16. brought him to thy Disciples, and they could not cure him: Note To him may all heart broken sinners say with the Prophet, My flesh and mine heartPsal. 73. 26 faileth, but thou art the strength of mine heart and my portion: Note Flesh and friends, health and wealth, and all will faile vs, but Iesus will neuer faile vs: Note Mans extremitie is his opportu|nitie By him alone the Soule of man hath light, libertie, and life: All o|ther helpes and hopes are but vaine:

Note As no water could wash  cleanse2 Kin. 5. 10 the leprosie but one lie Iordan, so no|thing can wash away the leprosie ofIoh. 1. 28 sinne but the Blood of Christ, the Lambe of God, which is a spirituall Iordan for washing of leper Soules: Note In a word in all our stormy troubles Christ Iesus is a firme Rocke of refuge which repelleth and turneth into froth, all the waues of most te~pesttu|ous temptations: Note By his Blood alone our Soules are both healed  hallowed, vpon the right of your redemption, sute the remission of your sinnes: Bee not abashed, hee who hath Christ, needeth not to feare.


The sicke Man.
If I were one of Christs, would he leaue mee thus wise comfortlesse Note He is the Sunne of Righteousnesse, inMal. 4. 2. whose beames as in a spring time I was wont to rejoyce: But now hee is gone downe: Note My Soule is be|nighted, and I am affrighted with grudginges of despaire. Oh, that

mine eyes of flint were melted into teares! O smite my flintie heart with the rod of thy mercie, that it may make teares the water of repentance to gush out at the Conduite pypes of my mourning eyes: O what a pal|pable darknesse!


The Pastour.
Comfort your selfe with hope, waiting till that Sunne arise againe vpon your Soule: Note Suppose a man created vpon the earth as Adam was at the first, if hee should see the Sunne set, hee would bee afraide at that first darknesse, thinking that the Sunne were gone downe, neuer for to returne: But knowing by ex|perience y^t hee is ordained by God, a Ruler for to rule the day by inter|courseGen. 1. 16. of the night, while hee seeth him set, hee is content, because hee looketh for his rising againe: If the yeare were euer Winter which ma|keth all things to die and wither, wee would all die for sorrow * But now

in the deepest snowes and most hoa|rie frosts, wee haue some sparkle of joye kindled by the hope of the ap|proaching Spring.
As is in these naturall things, so it is in spirituall: Note Christ the Sunne of Righteousnes will seeme to the SouleMalc. 4. 2. to set vnder the night cloude of some fearefull temptation: In such a case the sinner will thinke that hee shall neuer see God againe: Note But for all that, after some houres of darknesse, appeareth Roseis aurora quadrigis, Christ that Day spring from on high,Luk 1. 17. which the Soule like a Bird on a bush welcometh with a morning spring: After deepest discomforts come dea|rest comforts
Haue patience Sir a little, till the night of your temptation bee past After a litle open the window,  ye shall se the Skie of day, then againe beholde that Sunne, which seemed to bee lost arising with his blessed beames, with a louing and life giuing

countenance: Bee not discouraged, though Christ absent himselfe, it shall bee but for a space, vntill theCan. 4. 6. day breake, and the shadowes flee away, Note All his absence from the godlie, is but like that which hee saide to his Disciples, Yet a little while, and yee shall not see mee, and againe, a little whie and yee shall see mee: Note It is of his helpe, as of Habbakkuks vision, Though it tarie waite for it, be|causeHab. 2. 3. it will surelie come, it will not ta|rie: Bee stout and couragious, the bitterest of your temptations are but the sweete gloumes of a Father.


The sicke Man.
I am pricked with the poisonous rarowes of Satans spyte: I doubt if God would bee so rough to one of his owne Children as hee is to mee: Note Fathers strike with the rod, but I am scourged with Scorpions, wherwith y^e Lord is now auenging the quarrell of his couenant: Oh, thatLeuit. 26. 25 euer I came to this wretched passe.



The Pastour.
Yee are impatient: * There is nothing in all your affliction, butPsal. 141. 5. the smiting of the righteous, which yee should account a kindnesse: Such smiting is but smiling, in effect a loue token, Whom I loue I chasten, Gods corrections are balme which shall not breake your head.


The sicke Man.
I am both bruised  broken, my paines surpasse my power, Satan with his snares and fetters hath confined me to a wretched slauerie, my soule is out of temper: Trembling of heartDeut. 28. 65 Deut. 32. 25. and sorrow of minde: And terrours from the Chamber assault mee on all sides: O but the passage to glorie is rough and boisterous. Behold how I sweate for paine, as one rosted with a fearefull flamme.


The Pastour.
In that heate is a comfort: The style of the godlie is to bee called Brands pluckt out of the fire: Is 

this a brand taken out of the fire?Zach. 3. 2. saide the LORD, in Zacharie: This manifesteth that a godlie man for a space may bee scorched vpon kindled coales, but God incontinent rescueth him, as a man will catch quicklie at that which he would not haue burnt: God will neuer leaue his own to the full rage of a stinging Conscience: Let all men haue pati|ence while God worketh: Note If for sinnes hee punisheth his deadliest enemies, why should hee not also for sinne correct his dearest Chil|dren? If man vncontrolled may singPsal. 101, . of mercie  of judgement for to keepe his house in order, shall not God haue his will to sing what song hee pleaseth vnto his owne creature Note Let the cracking Law-musicke of Sinai bee ended and then God shall rejoyce your heart with the sweete melodie of the Gospel: Note If while God in this your trouble in a maner is mourning vnto you, yee lament

for your sinnes, hee shall in the end make you to dance at the piping of his Gospel: Note From Sinai he shall bring you vnto Sion, where all your paines shall bee turned into pleasures.


The sicke Man.
All pleasures are farre from mee for the present: A world of pleasures are deare bought with one pang of Conscience: Gods wrath hath seazed vpon mee for to dragge my Soule downe to the bottome of hell: It runneth euer into my minde that I am guiltie of the sinne against the holie Ghost: This I take to bee the marke, that such as once ae guiltie of that sinne, cannot bee renued againeHeb. 6. 6. by repentance, this marke seemeth to bee in mee, for as yet for all the ho|lie wordes I haue heard out of your mouth, I find no renouation, though Gods goodnesse by you hath ledde me to repentance, I haue not beene moued: But after mine hardnesse and impenitent heart I haue treasured 

vnto my selfe wrath against the day ofRom. 2 5. wrath: This spoileth mee of out|ward peace and inward joye: What can this bee but y^e sin against the ho|lie Ghost, which shall neither bee for|giuen in this world nor in the world to come? I pray you Sir, to let me know what a fearefull sinne that is which Scripture saith, Shall neuer bee for|giuen: Let mee heare of its nameMar. 3. 28 and nature.


The Pastour.
This sinne Sir, of all sinnes is the most fearfull, as being a sin of highest natue: In Scripture it is called Blasphemie against the holie Ghost: Be|causeMatth. 12. 31 there is no pardon for it, it is called, A sinne vnto death: Christ1 Ioh. 5. 16 himselfe declared this plainelie ve|rilie said hee, I say vnto you, all sinnesMar. 3. 18. shall bee forgiuen to the sonnes of men, and blasphemies, wherewith soeuer they shall blaspheme, but hee that shall blaspheme against the holie Ghost hathvers. 29 neuer forgiuenesse.



The sicke Man.
These words seeme strange that all sinnes shall be forgiuen to the sinnes of men and also blasphemies where|with soeuer they shall blaspheme, whether against y^e Father or the Son, but that there is no forgiuenesse for blasphemie against the holie Ghost: By that speach it would seeme that there bee blasphemies against God, which are not against the holy Ghost: By that also it would seeme that the holie Ghost is greater than the Father or the Sonne, for what euer blasphemie is vttered against them it may bee forgiuen, but as for that where with the holie Ghost is wronged, it is an inexpiable staine of it, there can be had no remission: Be|fore yee proceede, cleare mee of this difficultie.


The Pastour.
The like of these wordes are alsoMatth. 12. 31 in S. Matthewes Gospel, All manner of sinnes and of blasphemie said Christ,

shall bee forgiuen vnto men, but the blasphemie against the holie Ghost shall not bee forgiuen vnto men: To this is subjoyned in the verse following, Whosoeuer speaketh a word againe the Sonne of man, it shall bee forgiuenvers. 32 him, but whosoeuer speaketh against the holie Ghost, it shall neuer bee for|giuen him.
By this at the first blinke it would seeme indeede that it were not so dangerous to offend the Father, or the Sonne, as the holie Ghost.
Wherefore, yee must consider that this sin which is called, the sin against the holie Ghost, is no lesse a|gainst the Father, and against the Son than it is against the holie Ghost.
Note But it is called the sinne against the holie Ghost, because it is a most high rebellion, and stiffe standing out against the peculiar worke of the Spirite, which is to inlighten the minde, and bow the will and affe|ctions, that man by repentance may

bee brought home againe vnto his God.
Note As the Creation is ascribed to the Father, and Redemption vnto the Sonne, so is illumination and conuersion of Soules  to the holie Ghost, though all these eternallOpera trinitatis ad extra sunt com|munia. actions of Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification bee common to all the three Persons of the Trinitie.
Vnderstand then, that the reason wherefore this sinne is called, the sin against the holie Ghost; it is because it is against that energie efficatios working of conuersion, common to all the three Persons, but parti|cularlie ascribed to the holie Ghost, as our Creation is to the Father, and our Redemption to the Sonne.
Note When man stiflie and stubburn|lie sinneth against the remeede of sin, how can that sinne bee remeeded? It must of necessitie bee a sinne re|remeedilesse. A sinne past all remeede is a desperate disease.



The sicke Man.
Let mee I pray you heare more clearelie what this sinne is.


The Pastour.
It is an vniuersall apostasie from a knowne Trueth with an eager, |nest  malicious persecuting of the same, by both secret and open hosti|litie.


The sicke Man.
I know that manie of the learned call that sinne an vniuersall apostasie from the Trueth, but I neuer could well vnderstand that.
The Pharisees are esteemed to haue beene guiltie of that sin, yet I cannot read that they had made an vniuersall apostasie from the trueth of doctrine: Christ said, that they sat in Moses chaire, which did signifieMatth. 23. 2 that they had kept some thing of Moses his Doctrine, though mise|rablie mixed with the leauen of their traditions.Mar. 8. 15
Thus as ye see their apostasie was

not vniuersall: * Saul did not alto|ther renounce the religion of Israel1 Sam. 10. 11 1 Sam. 22. 18. though after hee had beene among the Prophets, hee killed the Priestes.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir, that doubt is not without great difficultie:: Note Mine opinion concerning that, is that who out of malice and despite re|nounceth and persecuteth any fun|damentall point of religion, which he hath before knowne and appro|uen, is by consequence guiltie of that vniuersall Apostasie: Note My reason is fou~ded vpon the Apostles rule, Whosoeuer shall keepe the wholeIam. 2. 10 Law, and yet offend in one point, hee is guiltie of all: Note That is, who euer he bee that maketh no conscience of one sinne, maketh conscience of no sinne: If for the feare of God you darre not murther, how darre thou then, if thou feare God, committe adulterie? or how darre thou steale or lye.
Note Euen so he out of malice  de|spite, renounceth any maine ground of the Trueth, which hee hath once knowne and professed, and after that contemptiouslie with a lifted vp hand persecuteth the same, hee in my judgement hath drawne vpon himselfe the guiltinesse of an vni|uersall Apostasie.
Note If by this vniuersall Apostasie were onelie vnderstood an actuall, publick  totall renouncing of God  of all Religion, with railing and raging, such sinners should not bee (as in|deede they are) most difficile to bee knowne.


The sicke Man.
I perceiue by the definition of that sinne, that it is not common to all the Reprobates.


The Pastour.
No not: But onelie to these who haue beene inlightened with some knowledge of the doctrine of truth,  after begin maliciouslie to perse|cute the same.



The sicke Man.
But thinke ye that any man would bee so beastlie as to persecute a kno|wne Trueth: I cannot thinke that the Pharisees who are said to haue beene guiltie of that sinne, did euer know Christ to be come from God, for had they knowne him, they had not1 Cor. 2. 8 crucified the Lord, the Lord of glorie.


The Pastour.
Indeede these words are true of many, but not of those doctours which made Christ to pronounce so manie woes against them: Note They and their complices knew what hee was, and wherefrae hee came: YeeIoh. 7. 28. both know mee, said Christ to them, and yee know whence I am.


The sicke Man.
Mercifull God, how could they then pursue him with such spight  bitternesse? I thinke that by that knowledge as by a bit their most head-strong corruption should haue beene snaffled and curbed.


The Pastour.

Note Man doeth not despight to the Spirit of grace at y^e first, but by little and little like clay before the Sunne: his heart is hadened by the deceit|fulnesse of sinne.
First, a man will know the Trueth, and will loue it with some sort of feruour for a space, after a little this loue beginneth to lessen and grow cold, while at last it is turned into hatred: man beeing fallen in loue with lyes, which fill his bowels with a boiling hatred of the Trueth: From thence commeth a persecution and a finall desertion, a just recompence of re|ward2 Thess. 2. 10 due to all these that will not receiue and keepe the loue of the Trueth, that they might bee saued
Note If the poore Pagan for abusingRom. . 25 his naturall ite, by changing the trueth of God into a lye by Gods justRom. 1. 28 judgement, was giuen ouer to a repro|bate mind; what wonder if they whoHeb. 1. 6. hauing once beene inlightned fall away, bee neuer possiblie reneued againe vnto repe~tance, seeing they crucifie to

themselues the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame? Such men goe about presumptuouslie to grind the face of all godlinesse.


The sicke Man.
I see then that in the sinne against the holie Ghost, there must first bee a knowledge of Gods Trueth, and then a wilfull rebellion against it with a lifted vp banner.


The Pastour.
The Apostle is plaine: If we, saithHeb. 10. 26 hee, sinne wilfullie after that we haue receiued the knowledge of the Trueth,vers. 27. there remaineth no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a certaine fearefull looking for of judgement,  fierie indignation.
Note The poison of that sinne is in y^e word, wilfullie after a preceeding knowledge: While Peter denyed his Master it was not wilfullie, but for feare of his lif: Soule persecuted most bitterlie, beyond measure, said hee, I persecuted the Church of God,Galat. 1. 13 and wasted it, but God had mercie

on him, for it was in his ignorance.1 Tim. 1. 13.
Note These two great men rode so neare vnto that vnpardonable sinne, that betweene Peter and it was no|thing but wilfullie, and betweene Paul and it was nothing but igno|rantlie.1 Tim. 1. 13


The sicke Man.
Knew yee euer in Scripture or out of Scripture any that fell into that sinne.


The Pastour.
Note In the Old Testament Saul fell into it, and therefore the Lord dis|charged Samuel to mourne for him:1 Sam. 16. 1. * In the New Testament Iudas was guiltie thereof, and therefore Christ would not pray for him: While heeIoh. 17. 12 prayed his holie Father to keepe through his owne Name the other Apostles, he would not speak a word for the lost son of perdition: In that hee practised his precept, There is a1 Ioh. 5. 16 sinne vnto death, I doe not say, that hee shall pray for it.



The sicke Man.
Is this sinne so great that Gods mercie cannot bee able to ouer|come it.


The Pastour.
Some thinke that it is called, irre|missible, because that it is forgiuen with exceeding great difficultie: But certainelie there is no remission for it: Note The cause is this, God will not bee mocked with men, neither will he suffer his Iustice to perish for the saluation of anie, for seeing hee that despised Moses Law, died withoutHeb. 10. 28 mercie vnder two or three witnesses: Of how much sore punishment supposevers. 29. yee, shall hee bee thought worthie, who hath troden vnder foote the Sonne of God, and hath counted the Blood of the Couenant wherewith he was sanctified, an vnholie thing, and hath done de|spite vnto the spirit of grace?


The sicke Man.
I desire to know how men fall in|to such a desperati niquitie.



The Pastour.
Note Such men hauing receiued some generall graces of God in a reason|able great measure, first vnconscio|nablie beginne to neglect them, suf|fering these sparkles of goodnesse to die out, after that they haue shaken out of their mouth, the Bridle of restraining grace while it is cast loose, lying vpon their maine, they plod on from one sinne to another, till shame bee past the shedde of their haire, so y^t they bee passed all feeling.
Note The Spirit being often grieued and the heart made hard with a cu|stome of sinne, whereby as with a canker the noble buds of the Spirite are fretted and blasted at last the Lord in his justice rolleth vp y^e sinner,  wrappeth him into a reprobate sense.
Note Thus men by neglecting the inward secret checkes of the Spirit, and by harbouring priuie inward r|pinings, boiling lustes, murmurings, grudgings, and vnthankfulnesse, the

craftie empoysoners of grace, as at last come to this point, that all the good things they seemed to haue are most licentiouslie dissolued into a publck prophanitie, whereby they vpbraid the Spirit of grace to his face, and that with base and scarrell jests, yea, and often with most filthie belghes of blasphemie.
That once done, all their grace clearelie melteth away like snailes, lik the fat of Lambes, or lik the win|ter yce which once beeing thawed floweth away, and is seene no more: All such thinges bee fore-runners posting before the prince of sinnes, euen the sinne against the holie Ghost, which is among all sinnesLuk. 11. 15 like Beclzebub among the deuils.
Note Obserue againe, I pray you, how the vnquencheable fire of this vnpardonable sin is kindled: While man suffereth diuers sins to lye dis|persed in his heart at their naturall libertie, without controlement, Sa|than

most craftilie by some cunning slight as by an hollow burning glasse, so concentrats and vnites them together like fierie beames that they set on, fire the whole bodie of mans corruption, whereby as by a pouder plot the Soule is blowne vp in blaspheming, euen vp vnto the veryEphes. 2. 2 bosome of the prince of the aire. Well is the man who from his youth is1 Thess. 5. 22 sensible of all appearance of euill.
Let vs then take heede, and con|sider how this sinne againe the Spi|rit of grace creepeth in sensiblie v|pon the heart of man, ordinarly this sinne followeth a long custome in sinning, as the head vncurable Scirrhus in the leuer, affected with the dropsie, cummeth after many sur|fites. Thus according to that olde saying, though a created testimonie.
Sero medecina paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Note O happie they who curbe their corruption in time before they get edge and vigour.



The sicke Man.
While a man is in this life may it not bee knowne if hee bee guiltie of this sinne.


The Pastour.
Verie hardlie: for as Agrippa wasAct. 26. 28 almost perswaded to bee a Christian, and yet neuer came from almost vnto altogether, so will a man almost fall into this sinne, and yet bee rescued, as a man will bee for a space in the hight of a feuer, that ye will neither know whether he be dead or quick: Many haue bene reuiued at the put|ting on of their winding-sheete: Note Euen so it will be in the sicknesse drawing vnto this sinne, which is a sin vnto death: Some will seeme to bee dead in it as a man into an Apo|plexie,  yet it will be sene that they will arise and repent: Of this asser|tion I take Manasses for a warrand, for after that hee had knowne the trueth  had persecuted the known Trueth, making the streetes of Ieru|salem2 Kin. 21. 16

to runne blood, yet saith the Scripture, while hee was taken a|mong the thornes, and bound with fetters, and carried to Babylon, In his2 Chron. 33. 12. affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himselfe greatlie before the God of his fathers.
Note A mans flesh whether on his cheeke or hand cutted to atacke be|ing taken in time while the flesh and blood are yet warme, will againe sticke to and receiue the life almost lost: If such be the force of Nature, how much more powerfull are the workings of grace, except the~ that a man after knowledge be as Paul wasAct. 26. 11 in his ignorance exceedinglie mad in the persecuting Trueth, I darre not define his sinne to bee past remeede.


The sicke Man.
Indeed Sir, these be verie cleare si|militudes which illustrat our pur|pose wonderfullie.
But seeing as yee thinke, no man can certainelie know the particular

man, that is now guiltie of this sin, how is it y^t we are forbidden to pray for such a man: If any man, saith S.1 Ioh. 5. 16 Iohn, see his brother sin a sin which is not vnto death, hee shall pray for him, but there is a sin vnto death: I doe not say, that he pray for it, so soone as such a ma~ dyeth, without remeed he must in all post haste gallop from the land of the liuing vnto the abhorred regi|on of euerlasting death. To what end serueth this inhabitation, if no man can know assuredlie who is guiltie of this sinne?


The Pastour.
Note The opinion of the most learned, is that in the time of S. Iohn, the gift of discretion was giuen vnto the Church, whereby both sooner and surer they might discouer the damnable sin: Note As for vs wee can hardlie well perceiue it, but by finall impenitencie and most fearefull dis|paire, whereby such miserable Apo|stats who haue reuolted from the Trueth, declare at last with Iulian,

that the God of Galilee hath fullie and fearefully ouercome them: Till that appeare, let vs beware to judge rashlie, seeing Peter speaking to Si|mon Magus, seemeth to set beforeAct. 8. 2. him a certaine possibilitie to be saued; a perhaps, that the thought of his heart might bee forgiuen him.


The sicke Man.
Now it appeareth by all your discourse, that the sinne against the holie Ghost is a reuolting from the Trueth, with a most wilfull perse|cuting: I thanke God, my Soule is free of that.
But tell mee I pray you, may not a man bee free of that most hainous sinne, and yet be damned? It would appeare that many Reprobates are free of that sinne.


The Pastour.
It is most certaine, for it is onely the sinne of these who haue knowne the Trueth of Gods word, and hath made a fearefull reuolt from it with

a persecuting hatred against the same: Many who haue liued in a true profession, haue denyed God in their life: There bee but too ma|nie whose hollow heartes are coue|red with outwardnesse like a potte|shard ouer laid with siluer drosse.Prov. 26. 23.


The sicke Man.
Alas, that putteth my Soule in terrible feare, for this is my consci|ence in a qualme, I haue professed with great shew, and that without substance: I haue beene one of Sa|tans reuellers, hauing a smilling coun|tenance but a bleeding Conscience: Gods judgementes haue stayed till my sinnes was rype: Note When the fire is kindled, woe to the stubble: There is no place now for to escape: In Heauen, in Earth, and in the Sea, Gods hand will finde mee out: Fye now on all my greatest pleasures, the Darlings of account: Though I haue not sinned that sinne against the ho|lie Ghost, which God cannot forgiue,

I am guiltie of sinnes which God will neuer forgiue: O these eyes of fire, ten thousand times brighter than the Sunne, what sinne is able to escape them? what glistring gol|den shewes of outwardnesse, shall mak you to dazle,  ye euerlasting eyes?


The Pastour
Man had great neede to bee ware that his tongue walke not without a bit: There is no sinne, but God can forgiue it, if the sinner could repent, the Sea of his mercie is bottomles: As for that that God will or will not it is too great presumption for ma~ to define: Note Yee continuallie flit from one temptation to another, where|on yee feede like a Flee happing from scab to scab: Yee often seeme desirous to shift the comforts of the Spirit for to goe seeke a knot in a rush, a difficultie where none is. Bee earnest in prayer, sigh to God, for the assistance of his Spirit, that yee may bee capable of comfortes

which y^e Tempter most enuyeth vnto you: Note When the sillie Soule would fainest heare the words of spirituall peace, then cryeth he red-warre, stir|ring vp temptations like the fowles that cumbered Abraham when heeGen. 15. 11 should offer sacrifice: Take heede to your selfe Sir: Note The Serpent now is more craftie than when hee poin|ted Adam to another tree, for to depriue him of the Tree of life: Re|signeGen. 3. 24. vp your selfe in all holie obe|dience to the wil of your God: I can neuer perswade you to tak heede to that which I say: Note Betweene a good tongue, and a bored holy eare, is an happie harmonie, such musicke is me|lodious, but a deafe eare maketh a dumbe tongue: Beware of the Spi|rit of giddinesse, which maketh the Soule to runne round as it were in a Circle of needlesse doubts.


The sicke Man.
I intreat you Sir, for patience,1 Sam. 1. 15 for I am one of a sorrowfull spirit, as

Hannah said to Eli, a fierie wrath lurketh in my breast, which maketh mine heart to grone: Pittie mee Sir, I pray you, for now I am come to the arraignment, and am called to the barre like a Crane or a Swallow, soIsa. 38. 14 doe I chatter: The voyce of the Preacher did often glide by my faults: But now Gods Spirit spea|keth home, and setteth all my sinnes inPsal. 50. 2. order before mee: Now must I end my yeares in the bitternes of my Soule:Isa. 38. 15 Note Well may I say with that godlie Matron, Call mee not Nahomi, that isRuth. 1. 2 pleasant: But call mee Marah, that is bitter, for the Almightie hath dealt verie bitter lie with mee.


The Pastour.
Note That which is most bitter is often most holesome: Gods course with the godlie is from the bitter to the Sweete: Note When Israel in their pro|gresse had remoued from Mara,Numb. 33. 9 they came to Elim, from a place of bitternesse they came to refreshing

fountaines of waters, and to pleasant palme trees: Note All this worlde is but a Mara, a place of bitternesse: Note Let vs haue patience but for a space, till wee ariue in Elim vp into the Heauens, where wee shall dwell among most pleasant palmes, and drinke of the holesome springes of the well of Life, euen pleasures forPsal. 16. 11 euermore: The Amen, the faithfull and true witnes hath promised.


The sicke Man.
My troubles are farre from such pleasures: I feare that such troubles bee but the fore-runners of a greater tempest: This maketh all the bowels of my bellie to wamble.


The Pastour.
Note Nay, by the contrarie take them as I haue alreadie said to bee messen|gers posting before the calme: Note It is good as yee knowe to see euerie season like it selfe: Note The Christian life in this world must bee like the Winter season, subject to frosts and to

snowes for killing of weedes and of wormes: Note If the earth and mens bodies bee not nipped with cold, great are the euil which ensue:Note The earth becommeth barren, and mans bodie become sickelie and subject to many diseases: Note It is euen so with the Soule, if it remaine not heere in a wintrous estate, laide open to the tempests  nipping colds of tempta|tions profitable for to mellowe and to rot the fellow ground of the heart, there is no great appearance of anie good spirituall haruest: Note But if the winter tempests of afflictions come whereby the weeds and wormes of the conscience are killed, then may we looke for a pleantifull haruest ofHeb. 12. 11 the quiet fruite of righteousnesse: God in mercie shall step with his merci|full feete thorow the fieldes of our heart, and his steps shall drop fainesse:Psal. 65. 11 Note Let such hopes comfort you in this wearisome winter of your af|flictions: Note All Gods gloumes are

but like winter cloudes, or like the louring of the Skye, faire weather will bee nixt, let such tempests fall but in there owne season: Happie is hee whose heart with such boistrous blastes is not swaide awry.


The Sicke Man.
O what a longsome winter is this, wherein I can not once see the SunMal. 4. 2. of righteousnesse, neither feele the heat of his beames, the comforter that should relieue my Soule is farreLam. 1. 16 from mee.


The Pastour.
Let not that discourage you Sir, heare what Christ himselfe the bot|tomelesse fountaine of all comforts,Ioh. 16. 22 saith, I goe away for a while, and yee shall bee sorrowfull, but I will come a|gaine, and your joye shall none bee able to take away: If yee finde Christ to bee absent, comfort your selfe with the hope of his returne: Note His ab|sence is but for a little: Note While the day is at the shortest, and the Sunne

farthest from vs in the dead of win|ter, we are comforted with this that the day at once will grow longer, and that the Sunne will returne to vs by the degrees, by which hee went away:Note Your day now, Sir, is at the shortest, tarrie but a little  ye shall shortlie perceiue a Spring Ianuar of joy, after this dead Dece~ber of distres|ses: Note The more wintrous the Season of the life hath beene, looke for the fairer Summer of pleasures for euer|more.Psal. 16. 11 Haue patience a little: The Euening of your sorrowes is almost past, the day is at the breaking, your reward is a bright morning starre ofReul. 2. 28. joy: Note At the dawning of these joyes your night cloudie and darkest do|lors shal decease:Note God with some ray or beame of his reconcealed face, shall lighten you the way to heauens glorie.
Note This sinfull life of man is like a surgefull sea, tossed with many blasts and billowes. Whiles the floodes

and waues of wrath, so catch a man till all the bowels of his bellie begin to wamble, all that is within him will be in a strange stir while he is as it wereIona. 2. 2. with Ionah, downe in the bellie of hell, at the rootes of the mountaines, hauing for his best garland the weeds wrapt about his head, in such a pit|tifull plight, hee will bee tempted to say to God with Ionah, I am castIona. 2. 4. out of thy sight, so darkened will the eye of his Conscience bee.
But if so bee that in the jawes of his anguish with Ionah, hee can say to his God in his deepest plunge, yet I will look againe toward thine holie Temple (which I may call the god|lie mans Pole, the directer of the Christian course) hee shall be saued: If while his Soule fainteth within him, hee can with the weake eye of Faith behold that Pole of peace, and with the Mariners in the Psalme, cry vnto the Lordin his trouble, thePsal. 107. 28 Lord shall deliuer him out of his

distresses: He who by speaking vnto the Fish, made it to vomite out the prisoner, by a word of his mercy shall hale him out of such seas of sorrows,  shall softlie  swiftly bring him tho|row the swelling surges to the hauen of peace, rest and quietnesse, euen of pleasures for euermore: Waite on a little, and your God shall storePsas. 16. 11 you with spirituall comforts.


The sicke Man.
But Oh, for the present, I am in the extremitie of anguish, which any created nature can possiblie endure.
Note My sillie Soule is lashed with a se|uere whip of double cordes knottie at the end: Gods custome is to ha~dle his own nicelie and softlie like glasses for feare of crackes: But I am crushed vnder the milstones of his wrath, which are readie euerie houre to set|tle downe vpon my Soule, for to sinke it from the brimme to the bot tome of hell.
O the length and breadth of that

flying roll and volume of wrath, that is comming vpon mee for to curseZach. 5. 3. mee with the Theefe and the swearer.
There is such a freting canker in|to sinne, that in my judgement, if it could reach vnto the verie starres, it should mak them to roust by stai|ning their brightnesse and polish co|lour: I thinke that if sinne could at|taine therevnto it should rotte these faire celestiall bodies.
In my judgement it should strike the Sunne and Moone the two eyes of the world with a catarict suffusion or with a sort of gutta serena, so that the world should goe blind. Note All this woe is most justlie befallen mee, be|cause while Gods long suffering in|uited me to repentance, by delaying the day of my death, I turned his grace into wantonnesse, while I was threatned by his Iustice, I strained  racked his mercy beyond his truth and promise: I wonder not now that Gods judgements make me to reele

to and fro, and stager like a drunken man: But heere is my griefe, and most piercing paine: I cannot think that GOD would suffer any of his owne Children to bee chaissed with such bloodie bickerings and not in|continent runne to his helpe: Can aIsa. 49. 15 mother forget her Childe? though shee should, God cannot forget these that are his: Gods wrath con|tinueth still against mee, my sinnes are mounted vp to his eares with a noyse, and hee hath taken notice: Be|hold, and consider, if there bee anie sorrow like vnto my sorrow.


The Pastour.
These bee the paines of new birth: Note In such spirituall trauailing the Soule will bee in a wonderfull di|stresse, like Rachel of whom it is writ|tenGen. 35. 17 that in trauailing, She was in hard labour: The hardest labour of the first birth is soft beeing compared to the labours of the second: No sor|row in the flesh is able fullie to ex|presse

it: Note I see a shadow of such sorrowes in that mourning of Hada|drimmom in the valley of Megiddon.
This is a mourning joyned with fasting, making man and wife for a space to shed beds, that the man may mourne in one place and the wife in another. The familie of the house ofZach. 12. 12 Dauid apart, and their wiues apart: The familie of the house of Nathan a|part, and their wiues apart: The fami|lie of the house of Leui apart, and their wiues apart: The familie of Shimei a|part,vers. 13. and their wiues apart: All the families that remainc, euerie familievers. 14. apart, and their wiues apart.
Note All this mourning is wrought in mans heart by a Spirit which Za|charieZach. 12, 10 calleth, the Spirit of grace: Be|hold,  see Sir, what it is of this your great griefe: It is a sure token that the Spirit of Grace hath beene pow|red vpon your Soule: Too too ma|nie vndera smilling countenance haue a smarting Conscience, while the wie|ked

laugh their heart is sorrowfull-Rejoyce in such a tribulation, after this short seede-time of sorrow, if yee can haue patience, ye shall reape the quiet fruite of righteonsnesse, after theHeb. 12. 11 darke cloudie night of sorrow, the day will dawne: Note At the breaking of the Skye a starre of comfort shall arise which shall neuer sette vnder a night cloud of waterie teares.
Man naturalli is so impatient, that he cannot waite in a stayed tem|per, till the Lord hath ended his work.


The sicke Man.
I vnderstand not such working: Note I euer heard preached that God was mercifull to his owne, and that hee did proportion euen at an haires breadth, their tryals and trou|bles to their spirituall temper, neuer surcharging any aboue their force, in their greatest darknes his custome is to lighten them the way to relieue with some ray or beame of a father|lie fauour: But mine heart is alto|gether

soacked and sacked with sor|row: Mine heart is nothing but a gulfe of griefe.


The Pastour.
The hand of our God is wonder|fullie in his workes: as for vs, wee cannot worke vpon a Creature but by the helpe of another: Note As for God, while hee worketh, it often befalleth that either there is nothing or that which would seeme to bee contrarie to his working.
Note In the Creation hee brought some thing out of nothing, from no|beeing hee brought a beeing: Hee would not make some-thing of some thing, but made all of nothing: God would not builde vpon another foundation: Note Once hee destroyed the world with raine, now saith the Lord, I shall neuer doe it againe: But how shal a man know it? euen by his Raine-bow, a certaine signe of raine Note Behold, how in the Heauens hee setteth his raine armour for a signe

of peace to the world declaring that he will no more shoote downe a de|ludge for to drowne the Children of men: Note Before that God would send downe fire vpon the sacrifice of Elias for the tryall of the true God, hee appointed the ditch about it, first to bee filled with water: God is Kin. 18. 33. best known in the contrarie meanes: So Christ would open the blinde eyes by spittle and clay, which natu|rallie are more fitte to put out the sight than put it in: By the heauing vp of Moses weake hands, helped vp by others: God made choise to ouerthrow Hamalek rather then by the sword of Ioshuah: By the bluenes ofProv. 20. 30 the wound he purgeth away euill: Christ by death ouercame Death and pur|chased life: In wrath hee remem|breth mercie, where mercie would seeme to bee forgotten: Hee first killeth y^t after hee may make aliue: His strength is made perfect in weak|nesse:2 Cor. 12. 9. Out of the seede of teares hee

bringeth an haruest of joye, applie all this to your selfe: Note Before that God make a new Creation in you, hee will let you see first that there is nothing in your selfe whereof to make it: Note Though God for a space hath opened the Windowes of his wrath and powred downe vpon you deluges of troubles and as yet seemeth to bend his Bow for a new shot: If hee were of minde to shoote hee would not shew his Bow: Be|hold, and see a signe of peace, a Bow without a string: Note Though it were bended, as a token of warre by Gods merci, it betokeneth peace: While the ditch about the sacrifice of the her is fullest of water viz when all is swimming with aboundance of teares, God then shall bee most readie to answere by fire.
Note Bee of good courage Sir, let Christs morter lye style vpon your eyes vntill his worke bee finished, that yee may recouer your sight

Note Though clay blind-foldeth, his spittle inlighteneth.


The sicke Man.
I am but a lumppe of clay shutte vp vnder vnbeliefe: I cannot practise your precepts: I haue a will to doe so: But I finde stronger powers within mee leading this Will into Captiuitie: What can this bee? can both good and euill tarie together in one heart that is Gods?


The Pastour.
That is most certaine, Note There is both fish and drosse in Gods net, both corne chaffe in his barne both Wheat darnall in his field, both Sheepe Goates in his folde: To will is presentRom. 7. 18 with mee, said Paul, But how to per|forme that which is good I finde not.


The sicke Man.
Note While I behold such floods of temptations my braine is so trou|bled with dizinesse that all seeme to goe round: My Soule is like a Land lying frin the sea, which is beaten

with billowes and with waues on all sides, mine head is giddie while I beholde the strict streame of such tumbling waues.


The Pastour.
Note The temptations and troubles of this world may well be compared to a Riuer that runneth with a quick streame: Note If while yee ride thorow ye euer look downe vpon the streame your head will waxe dizie indeede, so that yee shalbe in danger of a fall: But those who know what it is, euer behold the yonder brinke fixing their eyes vpon that which moueth not Note It is so that wee should doe while wee passe thorow the swift running streames of temptations, wee must not fixe our eyes vpon the streame which runneth but vpon yonder im|mouable shore of eternitie, where wee minde to land after that wee haue waden thorow the combersome foord of this life: In hope against hope relye vpon Gods mercie:

Challenge your interest therein tho|row Christs bloodie merites.


The sicke Man.
Note While I desire to doe so the arrowes of fearful temptations come vpo~ me with poisoned points: I heare a voyce within me crying, What hast thou to doe with the shore of eterni|tie? thou who hast wearied thy selfe in the way of wickednesse, and hast spended thy whole life into blacke dismall dayes, by making others to mourne in blacke, thou shalt neuer weare the white garments of Christs righteousnesse, neither in grace nor glorie: Oh, that mine heart were in a true spirituall temper! Oh, that it were seasoned and softned with the dew of Grace! Oh, where shall I hide mee, vntill these calamities beePsal. 57. 1. ouerpast?


The Pastour.
Note Your Soule Sir, within you is like a man in a shippe tossed with a tempest as the Disciples on the Sea,

fearing to drowne, cryed to Christ, Master, saue vs, for wee perish SoMatth. 8. doe ye; though for a space he seeme to sleepe, carelesse of your saluation, hee shall shew himselfe broad awake at your cry: Behold, hee that keepeth Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleepe:Psal. 121. 4 Note My counsell is that yee wrap and infold your sillie Soule in his bloody merites, as in a close warme garment that shall keepe you safe and sure a|gainst the wind and weather of all temptations: Note I like your feares better than the securitie of these who thinking that they sleepe in a sound skin, care not whither judge|ments blast or mercie blesse: If the Hypocrite content man, hee careth not for God: All his best thinges are but forme and outwardnesse, hee hath a forme of knowledge, he also hath a forme of godlinesse: Note In this forme hee sleepeth, not troubled with any checke or counter-blast of Conscience Waite ye vpon Christ.



The sicke Man.
Note Christ hath forgotten mee If hee had minde of mee, would hee suffer my Soule thus to bee eaten a|way with the bloodie gangrene of an euill Conscience? happie are thePsal. 73. 5. wicked, for they are not plagued like other men.


The Pastour.
Nay, vnhappie are the wicked vvhat euer their estate bee: while they studie to vvorldly joye encom|passing themselues with carnall con|tentments it is for nothing but that as the deuils desired, they shouldMatth. 8. 29. not bee tormented before the time: In such false joyes they are ledde hood|winkt to destruction: While God suffereth his owne for a space to bee afflicted, it is no token of forgetful|nesse, nor yet of vncomfortable strictnesse: Did hee not suffer his owne Sonne to suffer, till hee cryed, My God, my God, why hast thou for|sakenMar. 15. 34. mee? God in great mercie to

vs hath set out his owne Sonne as a patrene of patience, for to let all the godlie see, that seeing he hath torne with bloody whipes the backe and shoulders of his onelie Son, that no man should tak exception to drinke in the same Cup, as also that no man should despaire or take in euill part to bee chastened of the Lord: But1 Cor. 11. 32 when wee are judged, saith the Apo|stle, wee are chastened of the Lord, that wee should not bee condemned with the world: Note Many will suffer legs and armes to bee cut from them into a feaster, for to saue the rest: What reck what the body suffer if so be the Soule bee saued? what euer affli|ction ye suffer in bodie or mind, it is for the saluatio~ of your sillie Soule, by such pangues, your God will pre|uent y^e paines of hell: Note In your grea|test griefes, God is but practising his owne precept of sauing Soules by feare, vvhereby they are pulled out ofIud. 5. 23. the fire: The Sorrowes of the godlie

end in joye: But as for the wicked they are like the Sea, whiles tossed,Isa. 50. 20. whiles tumbled, but euer inwardlie disquieted.


The sicke Man.
Is this then the estate of the god|lie heere to be betimes crossed with most fearefull temptations, where|by as vvith an Ocean sea they will seeme to bee ouer-vvhelmed?


The Pastour.
It is certaine, for many are the trou|blesPsal. 34,  of the righteous: Note Christ deerest here are lik Lillies among the thornes:Can. 2. 2. Note This life are the Winter of their af|fliction: Note They are a groning gena|ration, Turtles crouding with sighes and grones vvhich their tongues cannot expresse, vvhile Abraham be|gan to sleepe, loe an horrour of greatGen. 15. 12 darknesse fell vpon him.


The sicke Man.
But in such anguish of heart will they not haue some bosome com|forts? salt Sea vvater strained tho|row

the earth beco~meth sweete: At the greatest sense of vvrath will they not aye haue some hope of mercy though for a space they haue swim|med downe the current of the times shifting their sailes to the turning of euerie wind.


The Pastour.
They will bee in great distresse: Note Their Soule vvill be shaken like a sea full of surges, tossed with con|trarie Tydes: Note As for their comfort it vvill be lik the smoke of flaxe with|out a flamme: Note In their deepest temptations they vvill haue some bosome secret graces into the heart as cmbers vnder an heape of ashes: Some times in all outward appearance they vvill bee so douked that they vvill seeme to be drowned: Note While they are all vnder the vvater vvith Ionah, as it vvere at the rootes of theIona. 2. 6. mountaines they vvill thinke, and so also vvill others thinke, that they are in the bellie of hell: Note This is their

estate, vvhile for a space they are borne downe vvith the vveight of vvrath and vvith the burden of their sinnes, they are as it vvere many fa|thome deepe vnder the vvater: But so soone as it pleaseth God for to remoue that weight, incontinent they come vp to the brimme of the vvater, because there is breath and life vvithin them.
Note So long as there is life in a man, hee may vvell at the first plunge goe downe to the bottome of a Poole, but incontinent hee mounteth vp againe, because there is a Spirit and breath vvithin him. But if hee bee once deade, hee sinketh downe like Leade vnto the ground: Note It is euen so vvith the vvicked and the godlie, the wicked are dead in the vvaters of affliction and therefore vvith Pha|raoh and his armie they sinke downe like Lead into the mightie waters: ButExod. 15. 10 as for the godlie, though heauie vveights of sin for a space hang fast

on, yet because the Spirit of God, a Spirit of life and of breath is vvith|in them, they may vvell at one plunge or other douke downe, be|cause of the vveight of their corrup|tions, but incontinent they come vp againe: Note By vertue of the Spirit as by Corke they are caried aboue,  so at last swimme thorow all the waues of their troubles and tempta|tions, till they come to the shallow, where they may set their feete vpon a Rocke, euen the Rocke Christ.
Note When Ionah was cast into the Sea, who euer thought that hee should come out againe? yet heare: how the drouked man sang at last, Yet hast thou brought vp my life fromIona. 2. 6. corruption, my Lord my God: So litle was his hope once, that hee said, beeing in the bellie of hell, The earthVers. 2. with her barres was about me for euer
What hope of change can weeIona. 2. 6. haue of that which we call, For euer? * See what little hope that Prophet

had for a certaine space, before that God would bring his life from cor|ruption: Note What out-gate could the poore man see into such a darke dungeon into the bellie of the Fish, downe at the rootes of the moun|taines into the bottome of y^e deepe?
Note That which the sillie man could not see, God saw: Hee whom the Shippe could not saue, was saued in the bellie of hell: He who could saue Ionah, in the water, could saue his seruant Sadrach and his fellowes in she fire: Note While these three poore men were bound in their coats, theirDan. 3. 21 hosen and their hattes, and cast in|to that fearfull Furnace, there came in One that afraide them all, a fourth man. euen the Sonne of God, which by an absolute soueraignetie loosed y^e other three, so that they all foure in the Kings sight walked vp  down together without any hurt: Note All the miracles of the olde Testament were but types and figures of Gods

mercie and spirituall blessings vnder the New: Note The passage of the Isr|aelites from Egypt to Canaan, was a type of our walking in this world vnto that Canaan that is aboue:Note The Egyptians behind, the Sea before, the Mauniaines on euerie side were but types of our spirituall enemies: Some like Egyptians behind, are chaissing vs, some like Mountaines on euerie side hedge vs in to keepe vs from escape: Some before like a Sea are before vs, betweene vs and Ca|naan: Christ is a cloudy Pillar whichExod. 13. 21. in the day time is darknesse,  com|meth betweene vs and the rage of the Egyptians of this world, so that for mist they cannot see vs: Note In the darke night of our tribulations hee goeth before vs in a pillar of fire, for to be a light vnto our steps:Note At last, after we haue passed by many moun|taines of miseries, and are come to the red sea of temptations, euen to the last temptations on our death

bed, where all our sins red like scarletIsa. 1. 18. stand like a red sea betweene vs and the place of promise, God by the rod of his mercifull power, giueth that sea, such a blow that all its billowes make roome to let his people passe thorow: Note Then all mourning isExod. 15. 1. turned into musicke: Moses singeth with the men  Miian with thevers. 20. women: Nothing is heard there but songs  sounding Timbrels: Ma|nie a ore sigh had they before they came to this Song: Note Many a pitti|full looke gaue they backe to Pha|raoh, breathing out rage behind them, they qaked lik an Haire that heareth the barke of the Dog, brea|thing to bee at it: But while at last they saw the~selues bounded with an enemy that boasted them with drow|ning, then God in their greatest feares sent a powerfull deliuerance: Note Behold, here as in a Cart y^e draughts of the Christian mans journey vnto Heauen: Read into it, That thorow

manie tribulations wee must enter intoAct. 14. 21 the Kingdome of Heauen, euen thorow burning Riuers of Brimstone.


The sicke Man.
But alas, they come thorow all their troubles  were at last deliue|red: But I see none appearance that God will doe the like to mee: I haue beene prodigall of the peace of my Conscience, my sinnes dou|bled doe daylie ripen Gods wrath against mee: In all liklie-hood Gods decree is gone out, that I should po|rish: * My Faith faileth mee, Hope is flowne away: Oh, for that peace in belieuing.Rom. 15. 13


The Pastour.
As by bitter Succorie the burning blood is cooled and refreshed, so by such bitter bloodie blowes, the pride of life is subdued  hemmed within a compasse: Note By such toturing and tormenting feares: The good Lord is working for your well that there|by hee may driue you from all selfe|conceatenesse

 partiall ouervaluing of your own worth: Note It is Gods cu|stome by such means to doublem as zeale, to blow at the smoaking flaxe;Isa. 42. 3. till the weak reeking sparkle of grace bee kindled into a bright burning flam. By such troubles and tempta|tions the good Lord keepeth your Soule in watchfulnesse: Note Many in this world sleepe soundlie in their sinnes, beeing fullie stuft and swel|led therewith, and for all that neuer waken, till they be wakened in y^e re of Hell: Note Others who are troubled with some inward checkes, runne to Tauerns for to drowne their sor|row for sinne, by powring in of strong drinke: Others thinke to smoke it out by the eeke of Ta|bacca: Some runne to the dine of the vvorld among loud laughters.
Note As the Israelite in Tophe sounded their Drummes, that they should not beare the squeeles of their Infants burning in the fire, so

so go some about by y^e noise of sports  worldlie joyes to deafen so their Soules, that they should not heare the shrighes of their troubled Con|science:Note But all such comforts and companiourie are like that red wine, giuing colour in the cuppe, and mouingProv. 33. 31. it selfe aright: But what is the end of all? Note Such things may seeme to coole  refresh for a space, lik as when a burnt finger is dipped into cold water, vvhere one qualitie encircu|loth another: But shortlie after that little aniperistasis is past, in come doubled dolours with all the anwels of the principall summe, at last all such drunke comforts bite like a Serpent,Prov. 33. 32. and sting like a Cockatrice, as doeth the drunkards best claret wine.
Note Well is that Soule which God in mercie exerciseth daylie either vvith one crosse or other, not suffe|ring it to be rocked and lulled with Sathans balowes in the cradle of Se|curitie.
Rejoyce then in tribulation, put all your trust in God, yea, though hee should slay you, inwarpe your selfe in the Mantle of his mercies: Relye vpon him with vvho~ nothing is im|posible: He vvho can make the great Camell passe thorow the needleMar. 10. 25 eye, can open the narrow gate, and let your Soule enter into his Rest.
Note Learne of the Father of the faithfull to belieue in hope against hope:Rom. 4. 18 God thinketh himselfe most glori|fied vvhen men belieue in him, while there is least outward appea|rance: His delight is to allure in theHos. 2. 18. wildernesse, vvhere is least appea|rance: Forget neuer that couragi|ous words of Iob, Though he should slay mee, yet will I trust in him: Note Not to haue Faith, except vvee feele and see, is to be faithlesse vvith ThomasIoh. 20. 25 vvhile hee said, that hee vvould not belieue till hee vvas assured by the tvvo vvitnesses of his senses, viz. Sight and Feeling: Note Christ out of

pittie granted to him contentment of enle, but with a sore  a nipping checke, Because thou hast seene mee,vers. 29. thou hast belieued, blessed are they that haue not seene, and yet belieued: If yee would bee blessed, be|lieue before yee either feele or see: Hee who brought meate out of the deourer and light out of darknesse, can inlighten your mistie minde.


The sicke Man.
What then would yee me to doe Sir, while within and without I can perceiue no token of comfort, none appearance of fauour? seeing hee hath hid his countenance from my Soule, what thinke yee best that I should doe?


The Pastour.
Note Doe as Isaiah did, I will, said he, waite vpon the Lord, that hideth hisIsa. 8. 17. face from the house of Iakob, and I will looke for him: God is like a MotherIsa. 49. 15 that cannot forget her Child: Note She may hide her selfe a little, and let it

get a knocke, that it may feare and learne to beware of greater dangers: Note Though God gloume in outward countenance at the faultes of his Children, yet in his heart are euer thoughts of peace and of mercie.
Of this Dauid produced twoPsal. 72. 11 witnesses, Once I heard, saide hee, yea, twise, that mercie belongeth to God: Note Once in all appearance hee heard this read or preached by the Prophets, and another time by the Spirit the inward teacher of the Soule: Note Behold how the Spirit and the Word, once yea, twise, both out|wardlie and inwardlie haue testified that mercie is with God, yea, as a thing which most properlie belongeth vn|to him: In your more sober moode and cold blood, yee shall confesse this to bee true: Note God for a space will seeme to bee vncouth: Hee, as Nao|mie bade Ruth returne home with her Sister rpah, will bidde a sinner goe seeke his comforts in his bypat

pleasures: But if with Ruth hee see him stedfastlie minded he will incon|tinent leaue off such speaking.


The sicke Man.
I know that God is full of mercie; Of this the Deuils did neuer doubt: Note Within the compasse of his compas|sions is mercie for a thousand worlds, but what is that to mee? How shall I come by it?


The Pastour.
The Scripture is plaine, Aske, saidMat. 7. 7. Christ, and yee shall receiue, seeke and yee shall finde: Sticke to him with a truely Christia~  vnshake~ resolutio~.
What euer yee shall seeke from the Father in my Name, said Christ, hee will giue it vnto you: If yee be|leeue Christ to bee true, practise his precept: Note Take once but a proofe of his promise seeke in the Name of Iesus whatsoeuer thing may doe you good, and see whether or not God shall proue faithf in his promise: * Before that a man will

distrust another, hee will first at least bee beguiled once: Note Vpon Christs words then with freedome of Spirit, Aske, seeke, and knocke, and see whe|ther or not your Soule shall bee an|swered with these three viz, receiuing finding, and opening: Note There is a wor|thie historie in the Gospel which pointeth at this that we should doe what Christ Commandeth, though there be litle appeara~ce of any good successe: After that Christ had tea|ched the people out of Peters ship, the Sermon beeing ended, the Lord said, vnto Simon, Launch out into theLuk. 5. 4. 5. deepe, and let downe your nettes for a draught, Simon answered, said vnto him, Master we haue toiled all the night and haue token nothing, neuerthelesse at thy word I will let down the net: What ensued vpon his obedience? they inclosed such a multitude of fishes y^t for the weight thereof their nette brake, the aboundance was so great that they beckned to their partners

which were into another ship, that they shuld come to helpe them: And they came and filled both the shippes, sovers. 7. that they beganne to sinke: Note Let your wearied Soule learne of Peter to obey Christ, though they had toi|led all the night and had taken no|thing, and had lost all hope of any taking, yet at Christs word they let downe the net.
Note Christ in his Miracle would not cause the fish to leape into their Shippe, but hee would haue them to launch and labour, yea, and seeke helpe of others: Note Moreouer, be|fore Christ did this, they had toiled all the night before, without anie profit: Note Christ came not to abrogat the Law by feeding idle men, but hee came to fulfill the Law, and to giue a blessing to these that did eate their bread in the sweate of their face:Gen. 2. 19 Note Trust first in God, Sir, and at his word launch in the deepe: Note La|bour in the sweat of your face, seeke,

aske, knocke, and bee assured to findeReuel. 3.  14. and receiue, for yea, and Amen hath spoken it: Note Though your sinnes bee great, if yee belieue his word, hee hath giuen both his word and his oath to forgiue, two immutableHeb. 6. 18. things wherein it is imposible that God should lie. O the vnlimited  bound|lesse bowels of his mercie.


The sicke Man.
I haue alreadie rapped at the doore of grace, but I haue gotten none answere: Note God will not cast vp his gates to let in such a rotten racall as I am: The dinne of temptations within mee is like the rumbling of a Linne, wherein waters rush with a oise: I by my sinnes haue growne so heauie vpon the Lord that I presse him as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues: While I pray, Christ letteth not on him that hee either heareth or seeth mee.


The Pastour.
Though at y^e first prayer ye receiue

not, yet cry againe,  againe: Note The poore receiue not almes at your doore at the first cry, and therefore they cry againe, and againe, till their almes come: Note That Cananitish wo|man that came from the costes from Tire and Sidon for to seeke helpe of Christ for her Daughter troubled with a deuill, was not heard at her first prayer, shee receiued none an|swere at all, at the seco~d she receiued a verie hard answere, viz, That hee was sent vnto others, than to the like of her, viz. Vnto the lost sheepe of theMatth. 15. 23. 24. house of Israel. At the third prayer shee receiued the hardest answere of all, viz. That shee and her Daugh|tervers. 27 were but dogs, to whom the Chil|drens bread, did not belong: What did shee then? Note Shee tooke the buffet for the bit: Wee are but dogs, said shee, why then, let vs eate the crumbes: At that worde Christ could refuse her no more, but gaue her all her will, O Woman, said hee,

great is thy Faith, bee it vnto thee euenvers. 28. as thou wilt: Note Though while yee cry, Christ make none answere, yet cry againe: If hee call you a dogge, cry for a crumbe: Note Often his com|forts are folded in his Iudgements: S. Paul prayed thise before God gaue to him an answere: While the angel of the Deuill did buffet him,2 Cor. 12. 7 hee cryed for helpe once  againe, after the third time God made an|swere that his grace should bee suffici|entvers. 9. for him: Iacob got not his bles|sing at the first sute, no not, at last it came to worsling, and weeping, and wresting, he wept  made supplicatio~,Hos. 12. 4 and then the Lord blessed him: Did not Christ himselfe in his great ago|nie pray, and after one prayer, pray againe for the remouing of the pain|full cuppe? Note If yee haue prayedMtin. 26 42 pray yet againe, were it in the same prayer, as Christ did, of whom it is said That againe he went away  pra|yedMar. 14. 39  spak the same words: God may

let his owne cry, and cry aga ne, but hee will not let them cry ill they be confounded: At last when his time is come, hee will arise to their helpe: Note Hee can not sit the importunate cryes of wearied spirites: Note Be|cause of the importunitie of the seeker that neighbour in the Gospel could not get his friend refused, the one friende came to the other friendes doore, but for the lend of three loaues tor to set downe before another friende, who was in his journey, came late vnto his house: A friendLuk. 11. 9 of mine, said he, in his journey is come to mee, and I haue nothing to set before him: From within the other answe|red, that hee should not trouble him, because the doore was shute, and his Children were with him in|to the bed: I say vnto you, said Christ, Though hee will not rise, and giue himvers. 8, because hee is his friend, yet because of his importunitie hee willrise and giue him as many as hee needeth.
The spirituall vse of this is subjoy|ned vnto the verse following, Aske and it shall bee giuen you, seeke and yee shall finde, c. Note Because of the earnest sute of the poore Widow, the euill Iudge who neither feared God, nor respected man, was forced to doe her justice: Note These thinges are writen for our learning, not to take a refusell from our God in any thing that may bee good for our Soule, mans importunitie in seeking, is Gods opportunitie in giuing.


The Sicke Man.
These things cannot bee written for mee: What doeth Christ care for mee? haue not I treade vnder the filthie feete of mine affections that precious Blood? Haue not I counted that Blood f the Couenant asHeb. 10. 29 an vnholie thing? My Spirit is in a feare that it hath done dispight vnto the Spirit of grace: Note This is the chiefe gash and wound of my Soule, this is a gangrene, which eateth out

mine heart, the temptation is come from the barke to the bone.


The Pastour.
Note If yee were guiltie of that sinne, yee would not bee so grieued for it: Note These who doe despight vnto the Spirit of grace, mourne not for that siane as it is an hainous offence a|gainst God, but as it procureth the wages of euerlasting woe: Note In such a man the feare of judgement is greater than the hatred of sinne: Iudas could say, Oh, I haue sinned in betraying theMatth. 27 4 innocent Blood: The feare of judge|ment,  not the loue of Christ made him bewaile his treason: The sinne against the holie Ghost is not so great, but God could forgiue it, if the sinner could repent: Note The bosome of Gods mercy is not so streightned that it cannot receiue a sinner be|cause of the hudge greatnesse of his sinnes: There was no disease which Christ could not cure in the dayes of his flesh: But because of the vnbe|liefe

of men, in some partes hee could not doe manie miracles: Note Obserue a strange word, spoken of God by God himselfe, Hee could not doe? Note Vnbeliefe in a manner putteth the Almightie in a sort of weakenesse, so that hee cannot doe: Note As there was no sicknesse but Christ could care it, if men could belieue, so there is no sinne, but God can forgiue it, if man can repent: Note If any sinne vnpar do|ned lye still,  beare vpon the Soule of man, it is because of his vnbeliefe: * Bee earnest with God, that hee would increase your Faith: Note Be of good courage, Sir, thogh many be thePsal. 34. 19 troubles of the righteous yet heere is his comfort, the end of that man isPsal. 37. 37. peace: Your Soule is trauelling in the paines of the new birth: Let the Spirit of Christ be doing, till he end the worke of your Saluation within you: Note There is sweete in his gloumes, and loue in his looke, euen while hee seemeth to bee angrie: Note Hee who

with a silent looke, first pricked, and then healed the heart of Peter, shall at last after your troubles wipe away your teares, and yee shall weepe no more: Note The looke of our Lord is a working looke: Note Our beholding is but by reception of spaces, but Christs looking is by emission of graces, which like streames of heate and light come from the Sunne, the worldes eye, with a most powerfull influence.
Bee of good courage, Sir, be not dismayed in your afflictions:Note Such is the courage of Christes Spouse that shee calleth all her troubles butCant. 1. 6. a looke of the Sunne, a litle black bleink wherewith the outward skin is one|lie made duskie:Note Christs will is that wee suffer heere such fleabitings, that wee may know what hee hath suffered for vs in sauing vs from eter|nall woe. Fixe your Faith in his merites, which are the onelie Oyle that maketh all thinges easie, euen a most precious restoratiue for a lan|guishing and sorrow beaten Soule.
Be wise and ware, by your doub|ting to confine the boundlesse mercies of your God, belieue and bee saued, this is the trueth of the Gospel.


The sicke Man.
But the Law of God is of a great stricknesse; it bindeth all the senses and all the thoughts and imagina|tions of the heart to a perfect obe|dience vnder y^e paine of Maranatha: This thought straineth hard mine heart, and wringeth it together in|to a narrow roome with a predomi|nant power.


The Pastour.
Note Indeede Sir, the Law of God, striketh vpon all that is in man, and oblisheth most strict to a perfect and sincere obedience, for not only dis|chargeth it actuall Murther, Adul|terie, Theft, and such like, but also the counsels, and plots, and desires to practise such villanies: Note Yea, not onelie such plots, which are forbid|den in the Commandement, which

forbiddeth the euill action, but also the least desire of ill, though detasted and abhorred with speede: Note The tenth Command which is last, re|quireth such a puritie into the heart of man, that it will not onelie haue it to be cleane of grosse euill thoghts fedde and petted with yeelding and consent, but also it requireth that it bee free of the least impression of anie euill thought: Note The Soule of man is like a Cristall looking Glasse: If a man but blow vpon it with his breath, at once it is darkned with a duskie skumme, wherewith it is dim|med that till it be sweept, the image of a mans face will not appeare into it: Note So it is of sin and of our Soule, the least affection or inclination to sinne is like a dimme skumme vpon the face of the Soule, caused by the stinking breath of the deuill: What is a filthie temptation? but afflatus illius impuri Spiritus, a breathing of that vncleane Spirit? Thus as yee

see God indeede requireth a great puritie to bee in his creature, for the hammering downe of the pride of flesh, puft vp with vaine and ouer|weening conceits: Note His Law requi|reth that his Children bee so cleane that there bee not so much as the breath of euill vpon them for to dar|ken or mak dimme the polish of their cristall colour.
Note But heere is our comfort, there is an hand in the heauen that is able to sweepe away all our sinnes what|soeuer, and make our Soule were it neuer so roustie, to become cleare like gold new come out of the for|nace:Psal. 68. 13 Though yee haue lyen among the pottes yet shall ye be as the winges of a Doue couered with siluer, and her fea|thers with yellow gold. Let not the rigour of the Law affraight you: Christ is hee who hath fulfilled the Law: Note Hee hath nailed that hand writing vpon his Crosse, and so hath made vs free of its rigour: Sinne

reigneth not in a godlie heart, but so long as man is heere, sinne hath in him some poysonous and pesti|lent* Note rootes: If wee doe not what wee can to imploy his graces faith|fullie, for to render his Talents with some profit, hee shall say vnto vs,Matth. 25. 23. faithfull seruant come  enter into thy Masters joye: Bee of good heart, after that Gods anger like the Moone is come to its hight, it shall beginne to waine as it beganne to waxe: After a full flood shall come a low ebbe.


The sicke Man.
What then thinke yee best that I doe while I am enuironed with so many troubles and temptations?


The Pastour.
Note Your best is to runne euer vnto Christ in whom alone is vertue for to cure your filthie fluxe: Let no|thing hinder ou in the way till yee bee at him: Note By his blood he shall present you harmelesse and guiltles before Gods Tribunall: Though

swarmes of temptations wherein is Beelzebub the master flee buze about you, bee not astonished: Note Hold on your course, till yee come to him: Thogh many troubles lye into your way, gird vp your loynes and run with courage through this snakie field, ha|uing your feet shod with the preparatio~Ephes. 6. 15. of the Gospel of peace: Let griefe bee a whet stone vnto grace.


The sicke Man.
Note If I should now run to Christ, thinke ye that I would be welcome to him, after that I haue sported so long, and solaced my selfe in secu|ritie, in the soft and greene way of fa|ding pleasures: Note While his precious word was preached, I like the craftiePsal. 58. 4. Adder closed mine eares, as from the voyce of a charme: But thinke yee that hee can loue mee, who is one so vnworthie to be loued, a lazie drou|sie drooping drone, altogether car|lesse in the worke of my saluation.



The Pastour.
There is a great misconceit of God in most mens hearts Note Some there bee who with amplifying conceats, make the way to Heauen broader than the Scripture, like the Pharisees broad Philacteries or shaking rib|bands:Matth. 23. 5. Others againe, as Balaams Asse thrusted his master to the wall inNumb. 22. 25 a roume way, with lesse reason than the Asse, they thrust aside vpon the walles of doubts or despaire, as though Gods mercies were so narrow that no possibilitie were for to passe tho|row: By this meanes they fasten v|pon God, an impossibilitie to for|giue: But to come to the point, your question is, if I think that God can loue you, who is so vnworthie to bee loued
I thinke it verilie, and I am per|swaded: Note God, I confesse, cannot loue sinne in man, but hee may loue man in sinne: Note God inuiteth not these whom hee loueth not: Come

vnto mee, saith hee, all yee that areMatth. 11. 28 wearied: Note Your wearinesse cryeth vnto you, that which was said to the blind man, Bee of good comfort,Ma. 10. 49 arise, the Master calleth thee, an hum|ble confession in the mouth, is the speach of contrition in the heart: God hath sworne that hee liketh not a sinners death. Hee is more glad to finde vs for to helpe vs, than we can rejoyce to find him for to be helped by him: Note Who can thinke but hee is glad to finde vs, that tooke such paines to seeke vs, that not car|ing for the vnwholesome and noy|some night aire, came to our doore hauing his head full of dewe, and hisCant. 5. 2. lockes full of the droppes of the night? which is more, such was his loue and liking of vs, that for to saue our life hee would die a cursed death: The last wordes of your complaint are that yee are one who is vnworthie to bee loued.
* I had rather heare a sinner cal|ling

himselfe wretched and vnwor|thie with the Publican, than boastingLuk. 18. 13 of his worthinesse with the Pharisee: Note The swelled hydropie words of than|kesgiuing that we are not lik other me~, are a sure toking of a deadlie  incu|rable disease: Man naturallie goeth about to lessen  impaire his faultes, yea, ofte~ rather than he will cry guil|tie hee will fasten his follie by conse|quent vpon his Maker: Adam said, The woman which thou gauest me,Gn. 3. 12 gaue me of the tree,  made me to eate: Note Many are caried down the muddie streame of ouerweening their owne worth. Our greatest worthinesse is in the sense of our own vnworthinesse, and in the seeking of Christs worthi|nesse: Note That man is worthie before God, who findeth himselfe vnable to doe that which is worthie, and vn|willing to doe that which is vnwor|thie: Note The verie strife and battell betweene grace and nature in there|generat, is a victorie in Gods eyes:

A broken imperfectio~, if it be sincere without guile, is put vp in his mer|ciful count book, for a perfectio~ indeed, such is the mercie of God, while we mislike our selues: Note These were the wisest words of Agur, in Gods ac|count,Prou. 30. 2 when hee said, I am more foo|lsh than any man: S. Paul was ne|uer more dearelie beloued of God, as when hee hating himselfe called himselfe the first of sinners: Note Cast your eyes off your selfe, and looke vnto God your strength  your stay:Prou. 8, 10 The Name of the Lord is a strong towre the righteous runneth into it,  is safe.


The sicke Man.
O that I could practise your pre|cepts! O that my God would in|spire mee with such a blessed and liuelie vigour of his Spirite, that might quicken my Soule to euerla|sting life! O that it would please my God, stronglie to refresh mee with the comfort of his counte|nance! But alas, out of this most

filthy puddle of my heart arise such filthie vapours which so ouer-cloud the Sunne of righteousnesse, that I amMal. 4. 2. not able to behold his face: while he did shine vpon mee, his most bright and vnspotted beames were fullie darkened: Note The more the heate of his word did beate vpon mee, the more my conuersation became stin|king and loathsome like a carion cast out before the Sunne, this I cannot denie, at the rememberance there|of I finde my selfe charged afresh v|pon the Conscience with terrours and vexations: O the dead slubber of securitie, wherein I haue sleept vnto this houre! my custome euer was to post ouer my sinnes, in the lump with a generall slumbert con|fession.
There is nothing within me but matter of feare, I feele my faith fain|ting, I feare my sinnes, I feare the wrath of God, I feare the force of Sathan, the king of feare: Note I may be

well bee called that which Ieremie called Pashur, viz. Magor-missabib,Ier. 20 3. that is, Feare round about, yea, I not onelie feare, but I feele a feare|full wrath: Note My stubburnesse and stonie heart hath brought vpon my Soule Gods brasen hands: Note Now is hee doing to mee that which of olde hee threatned against these that were like mee, If yee walke stubborn|lieLiuit. 26. 27 against mee, I will walke stubborn|lie with you: In my youth I was guided by the guise of times, my de|light was to goe with the droue, now I am lost, beeing cold dead frozen in the dregges of my vncleannesse.


The Pastour.
The force of temptation wring|eth such words out of you, as thogh yee had none hope at all: Note Your Soule Sir, is like the Moone into an ecclipse: Note There bee darknesse and changing of collours for a time, be|cause your sinnes like an earth come betweene you and the beames of

Christ, the Sunne of righteousnesse: Note I haue seene the Moone in her ec|clipse for a space as though shee had not beene at all into the heauens, but as shee darkened by little and little, so after the greatest darknesse was past, the light returned by degrees.
Despaire not Sir, of an infinite mercie, let not your heart be wasted with wearinesse: Though the earth of your sinnes which in comparison of Gods mercie is but a point, ouer|shadow the Soule for a space, while it is in this low region, the time shall come that God shall mount your Soule aboue the circle of the Starres wherevnto the shadow of such an earth is not able to attaine: Note Thogh God for a space walke stubbornlie with you, hee is not stubborn: Whe~ yee shall beginne to walke humblieMicah. 6. 8 with your God, God shall walke no more stubbornlie with you, but shall deliuer you from all your feares:

Build your selfe vpon your holie Faith.Iud. v. 20


The sicke Man.
I may well say with Iob, My strokeIob. 13. 2. is heauier than my groning: Where|on can my Faith lay hold? Note God is armed with wrath, and Sathan is armed with despight: Note I see no|thing for the present but blowes and bloody battels, most dreadfull feares teare in pieces mine heart strings,  sucke out the inmost of mine heart blood.


The Pastour.
Though there be many aduersa|ries, yet Christ is with you: Note Make all your boast of him who is the Captaine of your Saluation: Hee hathHeb. 2. 20 winne the field, he hath tread vnder foote principalities and powers, and hath ledde Captiuitie captiue: Note HeeEph. 4. 8. whose Faith is founded vpon him, shall neuer bee confounded: Note His fresh bleeding wounds are cuer fil|led with compassions: * Though God by our sinnes bee moued to

shew some wrath, heere is our great comfort, There is no condemnationRom. 8. 1. to these that are in Christ: Belieue yee not the Scriptures? I know yee be|lieue: If Christ bee with vs, who shall bee against vs? Note These who thinke that their sinnes ouer-reach Gods mercie, make the Centre to compasse about the Circumference: Though hee should receiue a world of sinners in the bosome of his mer|cie, it will not for that bee the more streightned: O the vnspeakeable compasse of Gods compassions.


The sicke Man.
I doubt not of the infinite com|passe of his mercie, but whether or not he will shew that mercie to such sinners as I am, this often troubleth my darkned and droopping Soule.


The Pastour.
Note To shew mercie to most mise rable persons, is most familiar to Gods Nature: * Hee neuer execu|teth judgement till we egge him and

inforce him vnto: Note For this cause, where he punisheth, hee is said, To. 28. 2 doc his worke, his strange worke, and to bring to passe his act, his strange act: Hee hath sworne by his life, that he taketh no delight in our death: Note Our God is not rigorous against these that would faine doe well: No not, but lik as a father that pittieth his chil|dren,Psal. 103. 13. 14. so the Lord pittieth them that feare him, for hee knoweth our frame, hee remembreth that wee are but dust: Note Our God will not exact strictlie a perfection in the life of his Chil|dren: Note If wee haue an affection to doe well, though wee cannot affect it, hee will accept it: Note A godlie Father hath said well concerning this, Deus magis delectatur affectu quam effectu, that is God is more pleased with the affection of a man than with the effect it selfe: Note Christ thought more of the poore womans mites, than of rich mens millions, andLuk. 21. 2. that all because of her good affe|ction:

Well is the Soule in whose bosome it lodgeth.


The sicke Man.
Note But the good affection must euer bee followed with some effect: * Mine heart hath beene nothing but a filthie puddle, a false Fox hole: The more I dig into this dung hill I am the more confounded: O what a jewell is a good Conscience coered vp into the heart of a Christian! It is like a precious pearle in a Ring: I am ashamed to come into Gods pre|sence while I looke vpon my sinnes.


The Pastour.
Shall the sicke man bee ashamed to lay out his sores to a secret and wise Surgeon: Note It is good to think shame of sinne before wee doe it, for to abstaine from it: It is also good to think shame of it after it is done, for to repent vs of it: But wee must neuer thinke shame to confesse it: Note This is the craft of Sathan, hee ta keth away shame from man at the

commission of sinne, and restoreth it againe to man at the confession of sinne. Note That which hee hath once taken away from a man by forged cauillation like Zacheus, he though in a worse sense, refloreth him foure|fold: Note A wicked man after that he hath sinned, hath fourefold more shame to confesse his sinne before a Congregation, which indeed, should bee his honour; tha hee had at the committing of sinne the onelie cause of shame: Note If hee had beene as ashamed to commit sin priuilie, as hee is ashamed to confesse it publicklie, he had neuer taken plea|sure into sinne.
Note Men of widest Consciences whose hearts are suft and engrossed with wickednes, will often I confesse seeme shame fst before men: Note In the presence of a carnall eye, they will straine the gate like e Maidens, which cannot eate at Table where they are seene, their throat is so nar|row,

that hardlie can any meate passe ouer, quasi vero: O but in se|cret greatest gluttons, deuouring blacke bread embrued with yester|dayes broth.
Note Shee that but pitissat sippes be|fore the Sober can skip at the scols with her Commers, till shee bee sicke with healths.
Euen so it is of such sinners, most modest they are  shamefast while they are seene: The gnate of a light vaine word they cannot digest if men haue heard it, but in the meane time in the polluted thoughts of their prophane hearts, they are filthyIud. v. 8. dreamers,  if secret occasion serue; without shame of God they will swallow Camels, making no bones: Note Though their sinne bee neuer so huge in greatnesse, euen Adulterie, the wracke of most famous Families, if they can straine and passe it with a close conueyance, their heart will say of it as Lot said of Bela, Is it not aGen. 19. 20

little one? Note Well is that Soule which while it is tempted to sinne, hath euer an eye vpon its God, saying with Ioseph, Now behold, my God seeth mee, and hee is a witnesse of this my doing: How then can I doe thisGen. 39 9. great wickednesse and sin against God?
As for that yee say now that yee are ashamed to come before God, while yee looke vpon your sinnes: It is good sir that ye think shame to come into Gods presence, because of your sinne, but thinke not shame in Gods presence to confesse your sin: Note Sin whether secret or confes|sed is euill, but the confession of sin is euer good, Gods word is true, If wee confesse our sinnes, hee is faithfullIoh. . . and just to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousnesse: Note Trust in God, Sir, relye vpon his mercifull bowels, who out of his great compassions hath said, I haueIob. 33. 24 receiued a ransome: God loueth those that are feelinglie affected,  wakened

out of the slumber of Conscience.


The sicke Man.
But thinke yee verilie that God will bee mercifull to mee? whose Soule hath beene but a soile for weedes.


The Pastour.
Note I thinke that yee your selfe should thinke none otherwise: A good man, saith Solomon, is mercifullProu. 12. 10 to his beast: Note It is a beastlie thing for a man, to thinke that God will not bee more mercifull to his Soule, than any man can bee to his beast: Note God was more offended at Cain for de|spairingGen. 4. 13 of his mercie, than for kil|ling of his brother: Note Iudas kindledMatth. 27. . more Gods wrath for the desperate hanging of himselfe than for the be|traying of his Lord that was hanged by his treason: Note Hee who offered his mouth to receiue a kisse fromMatth. 26. 49 that Treatour, had neuer refused him mercie, if hee had sought it with a repenting heart: Because

prophane Ahab had but a shew or King. 21. 27. outward scroofe of repentance, ha|uing Sackcloth neerest his skinne, the Lord spaired him all his dayes, to let men see what he will doe to true repentance, seeing hee is so gracious vnto that which is but an outward likenesse thereof.
Note There is no sinne that offendeth God more highlie as distrust: Note Here is the great injurie of doubt or de|spaire, it maketh the sinne of a little Grashopper to ouer-reach the infinite mercie of the most High, as though man a little clat of clay, could bee more sinfull, than that infinite Ma|jestie can bee mercifull: Happie is that Soule which God hath singled out in time for to make it loath its best loued pleasures: God delighteth to take vp a seat in a bruissed heart, sorrow beaten for displeasing of its God.
Take a good heart, Sir, yee haue to doe with a God, whose Name and

Nature is mercie, a God whose mer|ciePsal. 10. 4. is great aboue the Heauens, yea, and ouer all his workes: Note That whichPsal. 145. 9 ouer reacheth all Gods workes, may easilie ouertoppe all your sins  ini|quities: Note God will haue man with his narrow bowels of mercie to for|giue his brother seuen times in a day, if hee shall returne seuen times in a day,Luk. 17. 4 saying, It repenteth mee: Note If God re|quireth such mercie of man whose bowels in y^e widest are not of a span breadth, what shall hee doe, whose compassions are rouled together in|to bowels broader than the Sea, yea, wider than the heauens? If ye can repent Sir, God can forgiue: When man ceaseth to spurne, God begin|neth to spare.


The sicke Man.
I take God to witnesse, that I am sorie for my sinnes, and so ashamed that with the Publicane I cannot liftLuk. 18. 13 vp mine eyes to the heauens: Note I would be content to kisse the ground

a thousand times for to get but one kisse of the feete of him, who is the on lie helpe of the conscience, and the health of the countenance: I finde myselfe deepe to the Chine in a gulfe of miserie: Tell mee truelie Sir, I pray you: Thinkeyee that if with a mourning heart I confesse my sinnes to God, that hee will haue pittie of me? I am sore perplexed, the deepe thoughts of mine owne guiltinesse strike men with such a set silence that I am not able to vtter my griefe: My feare is that I bee of the familie of hell, an haire of horrour and vtter woe. Be free with mee, I pray you, Thinkeyee tht such an hord of mi|serie as mine can euer meete with his mercie.


The Pastour.
Note It is great ignorance Sir, to thinke that anie miserie of man can ouer reach the infinite power of his pitie, and boundlesse compasse of his compassions: It were more easie to

turne the Sunne from his course, than God from shewing mercie to repenting sinners, both his Name and Nature is mercie: See wee not out of what myres of miserie Gods mercie hath deliuered repen|ting sinners: Note In Scripture wee may read long Catologes of pardo|ning sinnes: Consider well I pray you, thinke deepelie vpon the mer|cies of your God: Note Look well what hee hath done to others: Could the adulterie of 2 Sam. 11 4. Dauid, the incest of Gen. 19. 33 Lot, the drunkennesse of Gen. 9. 21 Noah, the murther of Gen. 34. 25. Simeon Leui, the persecutions of Act. 8. 3. Paul, the perjurie of Matth. 26 74. Peter, or any other like sinne hinder God to be mercifull to the so soone as they repented? * Where|fore wereall these pardons printed into God; Booke, but for to tell all ages that no man were hee neuer so sinfull should despaire of the mercieEzek. 33: 11. of his God: As I liue, saith the Lord, take no delight into the death of sinners

but rather that they should repent and liue: These bee his owne words: If words beare no weight behold effects, God hath so loued the world,Ioh. 3. 16. that hee hath giuen his onelie Sonne, that whosoeuer belieueth in him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life: Note This is not a verball loue when a man giueth his best beloued for to die for another: Note God hath not spared his onelie Sonne, that by his satisfying sufferings, his Iustice beeing payed, hee might shew mer|cie to man his poore vnworthie creature, not onelie the Father hath loued the world, but also the Sonne out of vnspeakable loue was as de|sirous to die for man, as the Father was to send him: This out of his owne mouth hee declared that no loue could ouer-reach his loue, NoIoh. 15. 13. man, said hee, hath greater loue than this, than when a man layeth downe his life for his friend: Note The highest of mans loue is to die for his friend:

Note But Christs loue was greater, hee died for vs euen when wee were his enemies: Note In another point, behold the loue, of Christ scarselie, saith the Apostle for a righteous ma~ wil one die,Rom. 5. 7. . yet per aduenture for a good man some would euen dare to die: But God com|mendeth his loue towardes vs, in that, while wee were yet sinners, Christ died for vs: Note Who shall doubt of this loue which the Lord hath registred on earth with the dearest blood of his onelie begotten Sonne? Note There is such a loue in the Father, and such a loue in the Sonne, and such a loue in the holie Ghost toward the Sal|uation of man, that all the heauens are filled with loue of our well, so that at the conuersion of one sinnerLuk. 15. 7. on earth, there is more joy among the Saints and Angels, than for fourescore and ninteene righteous who neede not repentance.
* If Sir, yee would haue the hea|uens to rejoyce, cast your selfe into

the armes of your God, with these words, Lord, doe with mee what thou wilt, though thou shuld slay me, yet will I true in thee: If yee would see the picture of Gods mercy, ye must draw aside the curtaine of all carnall sur|mises.


The sicke Man.
Oh, that I might cast my Soule into his Armes! But how can I doe this? The Lord hath turned his backe on mee, shall I cast my selfeHeb. 1. 29. into a consuming fire? At the first sight of his angry face my Soule will die for feare.


The Pastour.
Men often are deceiued: So soone as Manoah had seene the Angel, heeIudg 13. 22 said, to his wife, Wee shall surelie die, because wee haue seene God: But his wife answered more wiselie, If the Lord were pleased to kill vs, heevers. 22. would not haue receiued a sacrifice from vs: As shee said to him, so say I to you, If the Lord were pleased to kill you, hee would not haue giuen

his Sonne in a Sacrifice for you: * I is a greater loue token, that God hath giuen his Sonne in a Sacrifice for you, than that hee should receiue any sacrifice from you
It is the Apostles argument that since God hath giuen vnto vs his owne Sonne, hee will not refuse vs any other thing that may doe vs good, Christ alone is the sinners re|fuge, hee is a Rocke of comfort which cannot bee shaken, a Rocke which commandeth all seas of sor|rows the pole of our peace. Be earnest in prayer with God, cry till he heae.


The sicke Man.
I am wearied with crying to God,Psal. 22. 2. my prayers may be called, The voyce of my roaring: But what shall I say? I cry, but there is none that maketh answere, God hath couered him|selfe with a cloude, that my prayers should not passe thorow, hee hath stopped his eares that my prayer should not bee heard This is a most fearefull blast and blow in his bloo

die battell.


The Pastour.
Deceiue not your selfe, often our prayer framed and followed by the Spirit of grace is heard, though the fense of grant bee not yet brought to vs: God for causes will let a time goe betweene, seeking and finding:Dan. 9. 23. After this the Angel spake vnto Da|niel. At the beginning of thy prayer God heard thee, and now I am come to tell thee: Note See how a space will in|terceede betweene Gods hearing of mans prayer, and mans knowledge that God hath heard him. Though yee as yet know not whither God hath heard you or not, yee must not infer that God hath not heard you at all: Note Waite on a little with Da|niel, till God thinke it time to send you a Messe~ger for to tell you that he hath heard you, yea, that hee heard you at the beginning of your prayer: till ths Messenger come, depend whollie vpon Christs good will: Let all your trust bee in him, who is

your most faithfull Aduocate for to plead your cause: Note Hee will bee a Guide to all these that seeke him: and a light to all these that see him, and life to all these that loue him: Though a Mother should forget herIsa. 4. 15 Childe, the Lord will not forget his owne, whom hee hath printed vpon the palmes of his hands: Many Mo|thers thinke it enough to beare and bring foorth their Children, that done, they send them out a foste|ring vnto others: Note But Christ not onelie is as a Mother beareth and bringeth vs foorth by the second birth, but also feedeth and fostereth vs vpon his owne breasts as a louingOsea. 1. 3 Nurse, I haue, said he, caried Ephraim as a Nurse in mine armes: Note Bee of good comfort Sir, let the joye of Christ rellish all your sorrowes, hee was the man of griefe, that he mightIsa. 53. 3. bring joye to the world, he was bea|ten with stripes, that of his stripes hee might make physicke for sicke

Soules, by his stripes wee haue health: Note In a word his flesh was pierced and bored that in these holes there might bee a Citie of refuge for sinfull Soules, pursued with the tempest of Gods wrath, the auenger: Note Woe to him that maketh an idole of his own sufficiencie, as the Thunder chieflie beateth the highest steeple heades so doeth the fire of Gods wrath strike at the hight and top of proudest spirites.


The Sicke Man.
By the most part of your speach Sir, I thinke that your chiefe com|fortes against Death and all other troubles, are grounded vpon Christs Blood and his wounds


The Pastour.
That which I say Sir is true: Note When as all things will forsake vs  fall fro~ vs, Christ will sticke  stand fast by vs, that I speak truelie, I darre be an|swereable for it in the presence of my God: Note As yee must one day

make a reckoning to God, of that which yee heare, so must I that selfe same day giue an account of that which I teach: My Sermons must be read before him that sent mee to preach, for he will know how I haue fedde his Lambes: * If I build vponNote Christ the fundamentall Stone, the perles and precious Stones of Christes1 Cor. 3. 21 passions, I shall get a reward: But if I builde vpon him Stubble, Hay, orvers. 14 Wood: Because I holde fast the foun|dation, he will saue my Soule, when hee shall trye my Doctrine with the fire and light of his word: But be|cause I builded vpon him the com|bustible light Stubble and Hay of hu|mane words, of wordlie eloquence, I shall bee saued verie hardlie, as by the fire of great affliction: Note For this cause knowing the great danger, I wish that all my comforts to you and all others bee onelie of Christ, who is both our suretie and our Sa|uiour: Note Hee in loue swallowed the

bitter pill of death, the cure of all our diseases: After that, for our cause his face had beene couered for our blasphemous, spittle  his backe batte|red with bruises, hee continued in his loue, and for our cause would bee hanged vpon that stinking lll Mount Caluarie, suffering a death which God had blasted with a curse.
Note I will tell you plainlie, Sir, that there is no meditation so comfor|table to a wearied Soule, as that which is concerning the bleeding wounds of Iesus, the vanquisher of hell: Note His wounds are as many win|dowes wherethrow wee may see the vnspeakeable aboundance of our Lords loue.
Note Let men runne from East to West, from South to North, they shall finde no place of auoydance from the fieie wrath, but onelie in|to these his woundes, which well may bee called, The refuge or San|ctuarie of a troubled Soule. Heere is

libertie for a Soule that is enfolded into the snares of Gods judgements: Note Heere is a hiding place against the euill day: Heere is the hole of the Rock the window of the Arke whereExod. 33. 22. Gen. 8. 9. poore Soules like Doues, that can finde no footing, may enter in: * Heere is a Citie of refuge for chaissed sinners: The people that dwellIsa 33. 24 therein shall bee forgiuen their ini|quitie: There bee wide boundes within the compasse of his compassi|ons. Seeing Christ is such an One, runne and hie you as fast as yee can vnto this Rocke of refuge: Note Hee who shall bee founded thereon, shall neuer be confounded: Note Take vp all the matter in a word, the righteous|nesse of Christ Iesus purchased vn|to vs by his Blood, is the onelie cure and couer of our sinnes: Note All other things are but like fig-leaues too short and thinne a couer, like these cutted coats of Dauids seruants, which co|uered2 Sam. 10. 4. not their buttockes.
Note How darreanie rotten stinking

attainted flesh attempt to attribute anie worth vnto it selfe, in the at|chieuement of that Pearle  peere|lesse work of mans Saluatio~, wherof Christ Iesus is y^e only Author actor.
Manie who would seeme in this world to carie away the Garland of godlinesse, are hanged in this snare: Away with such a pang of pride and eleuation of Spirit.


The sicke Man.
I see now Sir, that Christ is one|lie the Salue which is able to heale the sores of the Soule, the blisters and bitinges of our Conscience: I see that his Blood is the onelie li|quour of that Fountaine of Dauid for sinne and vncleannesse: Note But IEzech. 33. 1. am so defiled with wilfull wallo|wing in the puddle of sinne, that hardlie thinke I that euer hee will daine to looke vpon such a bemired Dogge as I am, who haue followed the swing and the sway of the most filthie: Of mee it is written, Let him that is filthie bee filthie still.



The Pastour.
Let not that discourage you: * Yee cannot bee ignorant in what estate he found his Church: At the first before hee maried her, he found her in her first birth, a cast away, a bloodie brood, a misshapen creature, with a long Nauell vncut, vnsalted;Ezek. 16. 5 and not swadled, lying in the open field to the lothing of her person in the day shee was borne: Yet all that made not him to loth her: Note But after that by two co~mands of life, he had bid|den her, Liue liue, whereby she gotvers. 6. strength, hee decked her, and sware vnto her, and entered into coue|nant with her and shee became His: Behold and wonder at the loue of our Lord, the Spouse of our Soules: Note All our filthie and bloodie defor|mities could not scarre him from the loue of our Soules: If any bee defiled with sinne and vncleannesse, let them come to him, who will not refuse to wash them: Hee is the

onelie lauer of the Church: Note There is nothing pure, but that which he hath purged: It is he alone who hath repaired all our ruines: Listen vnto his voyce, crying to all sorrow beate~ sinners, Come vnto mee.
Thinke often vpon this, Sir, if ye desire comfortes in your distresse: Note The great worke of mans redemp|tion finished by the Blood  death of God, is a worke worthie of con|tinuall wondering: As for the work of the Creation, it cost the Lord but his Will and his Word: Note But the worke of mans redemption was a costlie worke, it was chargeable to God, it cost him the best thing that hee could giue, euen the lif of his Loue, our Lord: Note O what a mercie! O what a liuelie Loue! The medita|tion of this worke should worke in our heart a louing compulsion and a compelling loue: Note The thought of this made S. Paul to say, The loue2 Cor. 5. 14 of Christ constraineth mee: Note What

shall a Christian man feare, hauing Christ his Brother to bee both his Aduocat and his Iudge, his Sure|tie and his Sauiour? Note Was not his blessed Bodie displayed abroad vp|on the Crosse, with his armes spred, a crying jesture, a jesture crying with a voyce, Come vnto mee all ye that areMatth. 11. 28 leadened and wearied? Note Oh, that we were sicke for the loue of him, who died for y^e loue of vs! Note Oh y^t we were wounded with loue, vvhen vvee re|member his precious wounds, from which gushed out the streames of our Saluation: Note Flee Sir, to the holes of this Rocke, flee to the bores of his woundes, runne not with Adam vnto the shrubbes for to hide your selfe from God, heere is your hiding place in the Lords deepest wounds: Note Hee is the fortresse of your Faith, our strength and our stay, the onelie helpe and ground of all our hopes, our warrantable justice: Hee onelie is the bodie of all spirituall comfort

all other things were they neuer so specious, are but shew and resem|blance: Shroud your selfe vnder his protection, and throw no more your selfe vpon temptations, whereby ye may bee disabled from manfullie fighting out the good fight, followed with a Crowne, filled with massines of glorie.


The sicke Man.
Now well is me that euer I heard tell of Christ: Blessed bee the day the Sonne of God was borne: But alas, where are the holes of that Rocke, where my wearied Soule may enter in?


The Pastour.
Lift vp your lumpish thoughtes, seek first to the naile holes in his feet beginne humblie, creepe in into these lowest wounds, and there for a space settle your abode, kisse his sa|cred Feete, wash them with the true teares of repentance, wype them with the haires of your head,

from thence looke vp, and come to the naile holes of his Hands: Note Bee busie there like a Bee, sucke out of them the Honey of Heauen, from thence goe to the Speare hole in his side: Note Let your Soule sit downe there, and croud like a Doue, euer till Christ let it in into the hole of the Rock, the place of its euerlasting rest: Note If once the faithfull Soule Christs Turtle win in into the fortresse of his woundes, from thence it will boast all the enemies of its Saluation: Fro~ thence wil it cry to the flesh, crouch: There it careth not for the Serpents hissing, nor for the Cockatrices denne,Isa. 11. 8. nor for the Graues gaping, nor for Deathes dungeon, nor for the Popes Purgatorie, his pardons, his dirges, and his Trentals, which bring fatte morsels to Baals Priestes: Christ is mine, will hee say, Hee is to mee ad|uantage both in death and life: Note AsGen. 8. 9. the Doue found no footing till shee came to the Arke, so the Soule can find no rest, till it come to Christ: I

euer totters, til it leane vpo~ his Loue. Happie is y^e Soule y^t is secured with y^e seale  secret impression of Gods fauour.


The sicke Man.
If I had faith, to belieue, all wold be wel: I acknowledg y^t there is suffici|ent helpe in Iesus, but such a helpe is only for these that are stro~g in faith, my faith is both faint  fecklesse.


The Pastour.
Christ hath said plainelie, that he wil not que~ch the smoking flax: S. Peter wasIsa. 42. 3. not a man of strong faith, whe~ he be|gan to sink down into the Sea: SaidMatth. 14. 31 not Christ vnto him, Thou man of lit|tle Faith why hast thou doubted? Note Hee reproued him for the weaknes ther|of, but cast him not off for the little|nes thereof.


The sicke Man.
That was another matter: Christ was with him, Christ took him by y^e ha~d: * Ther was vertue in y^e grip of Christs hand, as was in the hem of his garmentLuk. . 44 while it was touched: Such a weake Faith as mine cannot mount vp so high as that it may reach vnto Christ into the heauens.



The Pastour.
Though your faith bee weake, and Christ also bee absent in bodie, yet bee not for that disquieted: he is present in his God-head: As for the weaknesse of your faith, pray God to strengthen and increase your faith: Note Faith though little, is of great force, a graine of it is ableMatth. 17. 20 to remoue Mountaines, and cast them into the Sea.
I pray your Sir, to intreat God for a fixed heart, for as I perceiue, endlesse are the mazes of Sathans circular temptations, which vnavoi|dablie, if they bee not barred out by grace, wind themselues into mans heart with a slie and craftie in|sinuation.


The sicke Man.
O man of little faith that I am, if I had Faith, I would belieue that I had it, if I had Faith, I am perswa|ded that I should haue Peace: BeingRom. 5. 1. justified by Faith, wee haue Peace to|wardes

God: That Peace I seeke, and cannot finde: These troubles wherewith I am tossed plainly argue that my Faith is failed.


The Pastour.
I answere, that who euer are justi|fied by Faith, they also haue peace toward God, though such a Peace bee not euer felt: That which a man feeleth not, is not euer absent: Note A man in a trance knoweth not that he liueth, and yet hee is not altogether depriued of life: The tree seemeth to be dead in time of Snow and frost, and yet it hath life, and sappe at the roote: These then that are justified by Faith, haue Peace, but their peace is not euer sensible, but often is di|sturbed with fearefull temptations.


The sicke Man.
I desire to know of you what is that yee properlie call the peace of Conscience.


The Pastour.
I take the qualmes of Conscience

chieflie to proceede from a sense of Gods wrath kindled for some sins of commission or omission: Note Sa|than also with his billowes bloweth at this fire, yea, often while God is pacified, he assaulteth the sillie Soule with false feares and counterfeit ala|rums.
Note Nowe when by the vertue of Christs intercession the fire of Gods wrath is quenched, the Conscience of man beginneth to settle and growe calme, and in stead of accusing vs any further, it beginneth to excuse and acquite vs before the Tribunall of our God: Note Vpon this doeth ensue a pleasant calmenes, quietnesse and rest, in the Soule of a sinner.
Though this Peace bee sore en|uied and often troubled by Sathans railing and aging, yet the Soule ha|uing peace with God, is at last after a litle space made free of all its fear,  is made sensible of that truce  a|tonement, euen of that Peace which passeth all vnderstanding.Philip. 4. 7



The sicke Man.
I would earnestlie learne of you how a man whose Conscience is troubled, may recouer that Peace which once hee had.


The Pastour.
The best methode I know, is that a man ripe first vp his Conscience, and spy what mot of sinne is fallen into his Conscience, which is the eye of the Soule: Note The eye beeing hurt will water  powre out teares, so must the Conscience bee sore grieued for offending of God: Se|condlie, out of this griefe it must sigh before the Lord in feruant pra|yer, first, for forgiuenesse chieflie of that sinne, which lyeth heauiest vp|on the heart: Thirdlie and last of all, the Soule must sute earnestly for the restoring of that joye.
After this manner Dauid did pro|ceede in that penetentiall Psalme: First of all, he was exceedinglie grie|ued, which griefe did burst out in

wordes watered with teares, HauePsal. 5. 1 mercie, vpon mee, O God, according to thy louing kindnesse, c. Thus after hee had cryed for to bee washen,  purged with Hysope, hee cryed thatvers. 7. God would restore vnto him the joysvers, 12. of his Saluation: Aboue all thinges let such a person bee often groaning to God in prayer, for to catch some blinke of Gods reconcealed face in Iesus his bloodie woundes: Note That blood of sprinkling is the onelie Salue for the sores of the Soule. To all this let not these helpes bee ne|glected, viz. that such troubled Soules make vse of good Bookes, by whose helpe their deuotion may bee roused vp, for to remember the dayes of olde: Note My chiefe coun|sell is that such persons fixe stedfast|lie the eye of their Faith vpon Iesus bleeding on the Crosse, wherevpon hee payed our ransome, and trium|phed ouer all the enemies of our Sal|uation: This is the trueth whereof

Israel had the typ in the brasen Ser|pent, which healed al the be holders: My counsell also is, that such trou|bled persons frequent the Sermons of powerfull Preachers, and seeke conference with them, whom God hath stamped with a powerfull gift of Teaching and integritie of life, men who haue had great experience in the wayes of God, and who haue smarted themselues at other times by such fearefull nipping checks, men who are not ignorant of the Deuils deuices.
It is said of Christ himselfe, the Orient and Day-spring, That in allLuk. . 78. Heb. 2. 17 things it behoued him to bee made like vnto his Brethren, that hee might bee a mercifull and faithfull high Priest in things pertaining to God, to make recon|ciliation for the sinnes of the people: Forvers. 18. in that he himselfe hath suffered, being tempted, hee is able to succour them that are tempted. See how it behoued Christ himselfe for to suffer tempta|tion,

that hee might bee able to suc|cour vs in our temptations.
While the troubled sinner is in doing all these dueties, he must care|fullie watch ouer all his wayes, that by no sin either in thought, word, or deede hee grieue the Spirit of God againe: For a new sinne thrust vpon the hearte, will make all the closed woundes of the Conscience to gap and to bleed afresh: A Soule that is become relaps shall finde God har|der, to bee intreated, than of before, not without much adoe shall it get peace, that after by any knowne sin it hath quarrelled againe the Spirit of comfort.
But indeede, hee or shee whose Conscience hath beene once well lashed with Gods whip, and battered with his blowes, had rather run throw a fire, than anger the Lord againe: At the first appearance of a tempta|tion they will start for feare, and with a sigh will cry to God with a

trembling voyce, O my God, how should I thinke this wickednesse, let bee to doe it? Who knoweth the po|wer of thy wrath? According to thyPsal. 90. 11 feare so is thine anger.
Note Too too many in this Nation affect this sicknesse of Conscience, as beeing onelie the disease of the ho|liest: This they will vtter as ye would thinke with bleeding groanes before men; while indeede they are but scorning the world sporting wantons, laughing vnder a painted maske of miserie: Their teares are praeficarum la|chrymae, teares without trouble, wa|ter sold for the wind of mans praise: They are spots in the Church, which make the wayes of God to bee euill spoken of, such open a wide doore vnto Atheisme.


The sicke Man.
Fye vpon hypocrisie, God will not bee scorned, there is nothing so secret but at last it shall bee made manifest: I am assured, that who for

to cach mens applauses, faine a mourning for their sinnes, the Lord shall suffer them to fall either in some scandalous sinne, or other fearefull inconuenient, whereby they shalbe forced in earnest to mourne to their shame: In my judgment there is no such bitter and comfortlesse mour|ning as is that of these for their ma|nifested sinnes, who once did most faine deepe groanes for catching of applauses.


The Pastour.
To such may well bee applyed that of the Prophet, Thine owne wic|kednesseIer. 2. 19. shall correct thee,  thy back|slydings shall reproue thee, know there|fore and see, that it is an euill thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my feare is not in thee, saith the Lord God of Hostes.
Let no man sport in secret sinnes, were it in a thought, for that whichEccles. 10. 20. hath wings will declare the matter.



The sicke Man.
I haue often beene seeking out the reason wherefore the wicked in the world for the most part, know not what trouble of Conscience mea|neth: What thinke yee?


The Pastour
Their heauen is on earth: Dauid seeing their peace and prosperitie, did beare them at enuie, yea, so that his feete were almost gone: They are not in trouble, said hee in trouble likePsal. 73. 5. other men, neither are they plagued like other men, c. Euen at their death he could perceiue no bands of any ve|hement paines, after that the whole space of their life, they had enjoyed morethan their heart could wish:
Note How euer it bee that they pro|sper in this world, yet certainlie if a man will goe and seeke God in his Sanctuarie, there hee shall tell himvers. 18. that hee hath sette them in slipperie places, and that when hee awaketh,vers. 20. hee shall despise their image: There

is a hell for them after the heauen of this earth.


The sicke Man.
I would gladlie bee instructed of you, that I might discerne betweene the true solide Peace of conscience which the godlie enjoye, and that senslesse benummednes of the wic|ked, wherein they beeing deceiued, cry, Peace, peace, euen while God is1 Thess. 5. 3. putting the fierie lunt vnto the mosine of their sudden destruction. Let mee heare of the peace both of the one and other. I thinke all men should studie to marke the difference.


The Pastour.
The Reprobates who haue their portion in this life, will seeme in|deede to haue that true Peace of Conscience, because nothing with|in troubleth them: Note Their peace indeede is nothing but a dead be|num nednesse of spirit, their Con|science beeing Seared, is not capable of feeling.
I shall giue you two speciall marks whereby yee shall discerne a true Peace and quietnesse of Conscience from the dead benummednes which the wicked haue.
First, a Conscience which hath Gods Peace is awfull of sinne, wit|tinglie and willinglie for a world it would not despite the Spirite of grace: Note But the wicked who is in a false peace, flitteth from sinns to sinne, as a Flie from scab to scab, laying all his burden securelie vpon the broad shoulders of Gods mercie.
Secondlie, the seared dead Con|science of the wicked hath but a part of that which is called Peace: Their heartes will bee senslesse of all euill, they will haue no warre within, no sorrow is there: Note But as they haue no spirituall sorrow for their sinnes committed, neither haue they anie spirituall joye for the sense of their sinnes remitted.
Heere then know the true Peace

of God in the Conscience: Note The vnspeakable griefe for sinne is asswa|ged, the fearefull qualmes are cal|med, the raging and roaring tem|pests are allayed, the swelling seas are fallen and ebbed, God is come in the calme, not onelie for to wype away the teares of sorrow fro~ their eyes but also for to fill their mouthes with laughters of joye: Note So not onely are they voyd at last of the sense of most terrible horrors, but they are sensible of a joye which will make them to daunce with Dauid before the Arke, yea, to laude the Lord at a Stake, a|midst tarrie poudered flames of fire. This is that continuall feaste which cheareth the godlie Soule amidst the bloodie bickerings of Sathan, and burning persecutions of mercilesse missacrours.
Let all men try their Peace at this Touchstone, if not onely they finde their former paines lessened, but al|so a joye in GOD, whereby their

Soule is feasted with such content|me~t, that for all y^e gold of Ophir they wold not losse it, their estat is doubt|lesse happie: Note Who euer hee be that findeth this, hee may sing to GOD, Glorie be to God in the highest heauens, peace on earth, and toward my Soule good will.


The sicke Man.
Blessed be God who hath inligh|tened your eyes for the spying out of that remarkable difference be|tweene the true and false peace of mens Conscience: Ineuer heard it so clearelie discussed.
Note O but Sathan is euer busie to mar this Peace of the godly, who wil not war  wage battel vnder his co|lours. I haue seen these who are now godlie before their conuersion to be verie vaine, light, and wanton sin|ners, while they thus did runne ryote in sinne with the wicked world, I haue seene them most mirrie and so|lacious companie, I often won|dered

to see them dance and sing, roare reuell: I could see no bands of sorrowes in their life: They neuer complained of Satans malice against them.
Note But so soone as once they be|ganne to loue the Preaching of the Worde, and to loath the car|nall pleasures which once they loued, I haue seene them againe so courbed downe with griefe and mainelie crossed, as though it had no more beene they: Sathan letteth them nor rest, neither night nor day.


The Pastour.
In that is no wonder, Sathan will bee verie loath to trouble his owne: So soone as hee hath lulled them asleepe into the credle of securitie, he will bee verie carefull that none wa|ken them: Out of a counterfeit loue hee will adjure the watch-men, by the Roes and by the Hindes, that theyCan. 2. 7. waken not his beloued, till he please: Note Hee will say of him, as Christes

Disciples said of Lazarus, but in a|nother sense, If hee sleepe, hee shall doeIoh. 11. 12 well See how carefull Sathan is for the rest of his owne, lest that be|ing wakned, they runne away from him: Note This Christ himselfe in the dayes of his flesh made cleare by a similitude, When said hee, a strong man armed keepeth his Palace, his goods are in peace.
Note So long as Sathan like a strong armed man keepeth the palace of a wicked mans heart his alone, so that none bee welcome but hee, hee will let that man bee, lest that by trou|bling and disquieting his peace, hee grow sorie and mislike his ser|uice: But if once hee perceiue the Soule to shrinke, seeking an oc|cation to bee quite of him, hee will put all the powers of hell in armes and vproare, and will driue furiouslie2 King. 9. 20 lik Iehu for to regaine it againe, into his kingdome: Note While a Theefe or a murtherer is in the stockes fast

in fetters, the Iaylor will bee merrie, and will sing besides him, as though hee were his friend, but if the most secret houre of the night hee heare him knocking off his bolts, and per|ceiue him to haue escaped, hee will waken all the citie, and pursew him with hue and with cryes: Note Sathan is like the Iaylor, a peaceable spirit so long as the Soule is fast in his fetters and clogged with his bolts in a deepe dungeon: Note But if once hee per|ceiue that the Spirit of Iesus hath, as the Angel did to Peter in the prison, smot him on the side and raised him vp, making all his chaines to fall from him, and that the man ariseth vp quicklie, and girdeth himselfe, and bindeth on his Sandales, and casteth his garment about him as Pe|ter did, for to runne and follow his God, it is a wonder how that cruell Spirit will roare and rage like a BeareProu. 17. 12 bereeued of her whelpes: If hee gette a grippe of the poore man, hee will

cause him roare with gasping groans, till God come with an helping hand.


The sicke Man.
Indeede Sir, yee by your both plaine and learned discourse haue dispelled y^e mist of many difficulties.
The last difficultie wherein my Soule did sticke as yee may remem|ber, was concerning my Faith, which I concluded not to bee, be|cause I had no peace of Conscience, This did marre and deface all my comforts: My ground was from the Apostle, whose wordes are, That beeing justified by Faith, we haue peaceRom. 5. 1 toward God: I haue heard you de|clare that a man may haue Faith  yet for some space not to bee sensi|ble of that peace.
O my God, let thy mercie be close|lie applyed to my Soule, strengthen my Faith, that I may grippe and ap|prehend it with a sure and euerla|sting hold: Oh that my soule might lye downe in that peace that passeth

all vnderstanding: I am sore trou|bled with a weake and wauering heart, which is yet tossed, and swayed to and fro with doubts and difficulties lik a feather in the wind.
Alas, Sir, I complaine of the weakenesse of my Faith: That Faith must be stro~g, which is able to draw downe Saluation from the heauens, and batter downe strong holds and ouerthrow principalities and po|wers, and conqueare, and subdue, tame, represse, and repell our stron|gest corruptions.
Let mee see I pray you any parti|ticulare example of a weake Faith, wherby any at any time haue beene saued by the Light of Gods word dispell this mist of ignorance: Make mee free of this shrewd temptation.


The Pastour.
That of Peter in the New-Testa|mentMatth. 14. 31 is remarkable: Christ himselfe called him, A man of little Faith, and yet who doubteth of his Saluation?

The other example in the Old-Testa|ment was in type and figure, when the Israelites were biten with the fie|rie Serpents, their onelie remeed wasNumb. 21 9. to looke vp to the brasen Serpent: All this was a type and figure of a Soule wounded with sinne, looking vp vnto Christ with the eye of Faith: Note Now it is certaine, that some in Israel were bleared, and some of a weaker sight than others, but the weaknesse of their sight could not hinder the cure, nay, the olde man with his dimmed eyes beholding as thorow a mist that type of Christ was as soone and soundlie cured, as hee whose eyes were in their greatest vigour: Note The meate taken with a paralitick  trembling hand will not refuse nourishment to the bodie, no more than if it were taken with a strong and stable arme: Note Faith is the eye of the Soule whereof the Israe|lites eyes were but a figure: Christ is the trueth of the brasen Serpent:

Note Though this eye bee dimmer into some, yet if it see, that sight is Saluation: Faith is the hand of the Soule, Christ is the foode Though this Faith tremble, Christ trembleth not, the palsie is not in the foode.
Bee of good courage, Sir, feare not this trembling feare, the work of Saluation cannot bee wrought, but with feare and trembling: Though yePsal. 6. 5. feare, yet despaire not, there is me|cie with God in a vnspeakable mea|sure: Note In one Psalme it is said, againe and againe, vnto sixe and twentie times, that his mercie endureth forPsal. 136. euer.
This mercie I confesse, is whiles concealed from the godlie, for ends best knowne vnto their heauenly Father: Note Who is he that often shall not spie at diuerse times his minde to bee dulled or ouer-cast with some cloud of Milancholie: Note While this humour domineeres, Sathan maketh choise of it, for therein to set a seate

for grimme and grieuous tempta|tions. Note While he perceiueth the bo|die to bee troubled and distempered hee quicklie afresh representeth vnto the veiw of our Soule the greatest  most greiuous sins of our vnregene|ration, and that into their fullest and foulest shape: By this meanes deepe gashes and wide gappes are made in mens Conscience.
Bee strong in God, Sir, saue his honour, by putting your trust in him: Note Shall Gods word cry to man, sixe and twentie times, that hee is a mercifull God;  shall man doubt of such a mercie? If such mercies were but for some dayes, nners might thinke that in some dismall dayes of the yeare mercy by no meanes could bee found? But behold, the musicall twne of Gods mercie, is vpon an e|uerlasting Note for his mercie endurethPsal. 13. for euer.
Hee who doubteth of Gods fa|uour after so manie testimonies may

prouoke the Lord against himselfe: Note Moses by his doubting at Meri|bah, made the Lords wrath to waxe hote against him: While hee should haue spoken to the Rocke he scourgedNumb. 20 8. the Rocke more with these wordes of doubt, shal we cause water come foorthvers. 10. than he did with the Rod: That Rock was Christ: Moses while by doub|ting hee scourged the Rocke, hee scourged Christ, for that Rocke was1 Cor. 10. 4. Christ: Who would euer haue thought that Moses with his Law Rod would haue scourged Christ the substance both of Law and Gospel?
Who euer hee bee that doubteth thinking that God either cannot, nor will not bee mercifull vnto him, so farre as in him is hee scourgeth the Lord Iesus, as these who by their euill life are said to crucifie to themseluesHeb. 6. 6. the Sonne of God afresh, and to put him to an open shame.
Beleeue  be saued: God is both mild and mercifull: Is not his Com|mand

directeth vnto man that hee shew mercie with chearefulnesse? Is heRom. 12. 8 not called the Father of mercies? Is it2 Cor. 1. 3 not written, that hee is a God rich inEphes. 2. 4 mercie? O these bleeding bowels of compassions What said hee at last, while hee saw the great affliction of Ephraim? How, said hee shall I giueHos. 11. 8. thee vp, Ephraim? How shall I deliuer the Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Ze|boim? After these foure, How, how, how, how, Mercie in a manner did turne about hs heart with such a force, that hee cryed out, Mine heart is turned within mee, my repentinges are kindled together: If mercie be not in his diuine breast, where shall it be found?


The sicke Man.
All that yee haue said, Sir, con|cerning the mercy of God in Christ belongeth on lie to repenting sinners, who haue bewailed the errours of their life, but not to such a varni|shed

hypocrit as I am, who haue re|mained fast rooted in the rottenesse of must filthie corruptions, which I had neuer care to curbe or controle.
My secret sinnes like a consuming canker, haue freted out the verie heart of Grace: Note From my Youth I haue wandered from the way of happinesse, and haue beene like an idle Begger in the way readie to goe which way so euer the staffe fell.
My greatest feare now is, that I haue too long delayed the day of my repentance, what know I if God will forgiue a man so grieuous sinnes not repented of, till hee come to his death-bed? Note Hardlie can I think that in so short a time a man can bind vp friendshippe with his God, with whom hee hath beene at feede his whole life time.
O mercifull God, melt my marble heart: Put into my breast the pre|cious pearle of Faith: O that with vnspeakable groanes of griefe for

my By past euill spent life, I might redeeme the time which I haue so la|uishlie mispent: Oh, that the moi|sture of my body were all melted in|to teares, if therby I culd be perswa|ded y^t my sillie Soule were alreadie vtterly out of the reach of all the po|wers of Hell: I haue too long most vainelie sported my selfe in Mesech, and ruffled in the tents of Kedar: Note If I had not so long delayed to returne to my God, my Soule alrea|die in hope should be feasting vpon the joyes of eternitie.


The Pastour.
Note Indeede Sir, it is a verie dange|rous thing for to delay repentance to the last gaspe, or to one Gods mer|cie, as many doe, who neuer lay downe the weapons of rebellion, till they can sinne no more.
Oh, that men would vnderstand their danger! Note Are not our ene|mies both strong and neare? Hanni|bal ad portas, the Deuill is at the

doore: Note But such is the madnesse of many, were their Soules neuer so soiled with sinne, that if once they can get out but these few wordes, God bee mercifull to mee, they thinke that they shall be in heauen before their feete bee colde: Such men thinke that in death it is easie to consure the Deuill with a word.
It is but folie to put Saluation v|pon such hap-hazard as many doe: Note But yet yee must know that hee that made the Time, will not bee sub|ject vnto Time, the King of Time is Eternall: GOD is eternall, and hath all Times at his command: Note There is no Time that can hinder him to bee mercifull to a sinner, at whatso|euer time he shal repent: Note For this cause Christ for to let the world see that hee can forgiue when a sinner can repent, hee took from the Crosse the Soule of a condemned Theefe, and after that hee had absolued it, hee carried it to Paradise: God hathLuk. 23. 43.

said, That at whatsoeuer time a sinner shall repent, that hee will put away his wickednesse out of his rememberance.
Fra once hee hath said the word hee cannot take his word againe: He is constant in all his wayes, and ther|fore neuer saith and vnsaith one thing: Hath he said,  shall hee not doeNumb. 23 19. it: Note If yee can but waite a little ye shall finde all the fiercenesse of his fure to bee turned into the fulnesse of his fauour: * Hee who shall seeke him earnestlie, shall not receiue an emp|tie answere: There is mercie in hea|uen, for an hell of conscience vpon earth: Cast all your cares aside, cast your selfe into the armes of your God: Cast thy burden vpon the Lord,Psal. 55. 22 and hee shall sustaine thee: Be strong in the Faith of God: In hope belieueRom. 4. 18 against hope, though for a space your Spirit bee distempered, yet still relye vpon the mercie of your God: Goe not off this, that the Blood of Iesus

was shed for you,  that Christ hath payed your ransome: What euer Sa|than by his temptations suggest vnto you, belieue him not: Take my counsell I pray you, Sir, that I speak the trueth, heere I darre take it vpon my Soules Saluation.


The sicke Man.
I thank God from mine heart, that euer I heard you, your words are ful of comfort: O how indebted am I to y^e mercy of my God, who hath vn|locked the bowels of his loue towards me At our first meeting I found my selfe inuolued with much miserie and mischief but since I haue heard you, I finde, I blesse God, some stirring of God, Spirit within mine heart, mine heart before this time hath beene lik that Altar at Athens, wherin was in|grauen in great Letters, TO THE VNKNOVVNE GOD: I heard of|tenAct 17. 23 of God, but I neuer knew him truelie vntill now: This is the infan|cie of my regeneration: I haue beene

too long a stranger from so good a God: My Soule now rejoyceth after many toes and froes: Note I finde mine heart loosed from the cartropes of my sinnes, and linked vnto my Sauiour with stronger chaines than of before: There bee better motions within, than euer I did feele before this houre.
O thou who is Loue, let my Soule1 Ioh, 4. 8 bee possest of a sound and constant loue to thy most mercifull Majestie: Bring my Soule from the shadow ofMatth. 4. 16 death to the light of thy counte|nance, O Lord, my strength and myPsal. 19. 14 Redeemer.
O Lord of Hostes, giue me strengthIsa. 1. 9. and courage to fight out this Chri|stian1 Pet. 5. 4 fight, whereof the victorie is glorious, and the reward a Crowne of immortalitie: Inspire mine heart with the life of Grace: Note If thy care had not hitherto preserued my Spirit, my Soule had long since bene drow|ned in a sea of sin and sorrow: There

haue bene such lecks, into mine heart that except the Lord in time had pumped it with repentance, my Soule long since had made ship-wracke of1 Tim. 1. 19 Faith.
O how much am I beholden to my God, who hath taken longer day with mee, than within any others, from whom before they were proui|ded, hee hath demanded his due: Bles|sed bee my God, who hath made mee free from the frenzie of Spirite, by appearing vnto mee in a greater calme: The feeling of his wrath past, I hope shall be a sauce for to sharpen my blunted loue towardes him in all times to come, with vndaunted con|stancie.
I perceiue nowe that the day is darkened, and that the night appro|cheth: Oh, that I might co~tinue con|ference with you, but least I should wearie you, from the best of my bo|wels my deare Pastour I bidde you farewell.
I looke to morrow for a new con|ference, for with many difficulties mine heart is yet troubled and tossed: I requeast you before yee goe, to helpe mee with your prayers.


The Pastour.
I blesse God, who hath begunne to intermingle the sweete honey of some comfortes with the bitter gall of painefull temptations: Note GOD who hath begunne to make you his his Prentice in Grace, shall an one mak you a free man in Glorie: Note As Mini|sters must first sit at Gamaleels feete for to learne, before they sit in Moses chaire for to teach, so must Christians first bee humbled with temptations on earth, before they bee honoured with exaltations into the Heauens.
Note Well is the man that is truelie humbled by GOD, and made a foole in his owne eyes; for hee which thinketh himselfe wise, is a foole, ipso facto: Note All naturall wisedome without Spirituall humilitie is like

ouernights Manna which did no good, but mould and fust: God by diuers temptations, first carnall and after spirituall, hath besieged the cor|ruptions of your nature, and hath battered downe the strong holds and fortified Castles of your imaginati|ons and reasoning the high thinges which exalt themselues against the knowledge of GOD: Before hee leaue you, hee shall bring into Cap|tiuitie2 Cor. 10. 5 euerie thought of your heart to the obedience of Christ: According to your desire wee shall bend our knees to GOD in prayer, that yee may spell his loue out of such a Fa|therlie correction, and learne in time to stay your selfe vpon his kindnesse and good will.



A Prayer for the sicke Man.
_O LORD, of Mercie, whose bowels are turned within thee, when thou beholdest the griefe of the godlie; Bee heere present for the reliefe of this thy poore distressed Seruant: His eyes are stedfastlie fixed vpon Thee, asPsal. 123. 2 the eyes of the hand maide are fixed v|pon the hands of her Mistresse.
Behold, LORD, and heare his amazed broken heart, braying afterPsal. 42. 1 thee as an Hart panting after the Ri|uers of waters: Pitie this sillie Soule which is like the drye ground gaping for droppes of Raine.
Oh, LORD, his strength is dyed vp like a Pot shard, his tongue clea|ueth vnto his jawes, and thou hast brought him into the dust of death:

Let the sweetest comfortes of thy bleeding bowels bee powred into his broken heart: Make the joyfull Light of thy countenance breake foorth vpon his drooping and clou|die Conscience: O strengthen his sillie Soule in this heauie houre: Pa|cifie the pangs of his remorse, that hee may laye holde vpon the merits and mercies of thy Sonne IESVS.
Come gracious GOD, with thy strength for his succour: Sathan a most bitter enemie, hath besieged his Soule with most fearefull temp|tations. There is no mischiefe which could bee deuised, but hee hath m|stered it and set it in battell arraye a|gainst him: While hee had health and youth, this enemie was the chiefe entiser of him vnto sinne, by bearing him in hand, that it was an easie thing after many sinfull plea|sures, enjoyed to returne vnto God, whose fauour and kindnesse might bee procured by and by without anie labour.
But now, Father, while he seeth his day declining  the Sun of his life neare its setting, of an Entiser hee is become an Accuser, striuing by all meanes to cause him make shipwrack vpon the bankes of despare: Night and day hee vexeth and teareth his Soule by whispering into his eare most impudent lyes against thy Trueth, viz. That hee is so miserable, that thou art not able to be mercifull vn|to him: He suggesteth most craftily that it is in vaine for him to sue to thee for thy grace, that there is none hope of mercie left for such a sinner, that there is none accesse vnto the Throne of Grace, for the prayers ofHeb. 4. 16. such a miserable wretch; and that it is no purpose for him to pray.
But what? LORD, thou who art Trueth it selfe, wilt thou suffer this father of lyes to trouble still thy Ser|uant?Ioh. 8. 44 Wilt thou heareanie longer thine infinite mercie thus reproached and reuiled, as though thou were not

able to padon the faultes of thine owne poore creature? What is that to say but that God shall cease to be that God whose mercie is aboue all his workes?
O LORD, most mercifull, can the sinfull scarlet rednesse, and the Crimsin colour of mans corruptions bee o dyed that it cannot bee wa|shen away with the Blood of thy Lambe? O seale vp the sense of thy loue in his heart, make thy Spirit to whisper in his eare, that mercie is with thee, that thou may bee both feared and loued.
Shall anie thing. LORD, with|hold the heart broken sinner fromHeb. 4. 16. the Throne of Grace? Is not this the voyce of thy Spirit, Come vntoMatth. 11. 28. mee all ye that are wearied and ladened with sinned? Is not thy promise writ|ten in thy Booke, that thou wilt ease them?
O most louing Father, euen in despite of Sathan, and his most de|spitfull

suggestions, make his Soule bolde and confident, that it may aduenture it selfe to the mercifull Throne of thy Grace: Cleare and cleanse his eyes from the Spirituall goare of sin, that with Simeon he mayLuk. 2. 30. 31 see thy Saluation, which thou hast pre|pared before the face of all people.
O deare IESVS, deliuer his Dar|ling from the power of the Dogge: Incline thine eares and heare the grieuous groanes of this poore pri|soner: Make him a prisoner of hope: Turne thee now about and refresh his wearied heart with a blinke of thy mercie: Shew him the light of thy Countenance, and hee shall bee saued: Enlarge his heart, that thy Graces finding a spacious roome; may plentifully harbour in his soule.
Alas, LORD, what shall we say? if thou shalt say to him, I haue no de|light in thee: Behold, heere hee is, doe to him as shall seeme good in thine owne eyes.
Thou hast not forgotten, neither can thou forgette, but that thy de|light is in mercie: Where sinne doeth abound, shall not there thy Grace abound much more? Thou, LORD, hast often bathed this sillie Soule in most bitter brimie teares: Thou hast hid thy selfe from it, and it hath beene troubled: Now amid the vexations of so many temptati|ons, blinke vpon him with a recon|cealed face.
O GOD of Battels, in this Bar|tell of the Soule send downe thy strength for to guarde him against the assaultes of Satan, who pursueth him so eagerly with most sharpe and fearefull afaultes, like a Dogge hun|ting after a sillie straggling sheepe. Though for a space thou suffer him to bee buffeted with a messenger of Sathan, yet let him know that thy Grace shall bee sufficient for him: Let2 . 12. 7. thy right hand hold him vp, and let thy gentlenesse make him great: Re|new

his heart with the power of thy Spirit,  reinuest him with the image of thine holinesse, which once hee lost in Adam: Cast his Spirit againe in thine owne moud.
At last, LORD, put Sathan to silence, let thine owne Spirit speake vnto this Sicke in his inward partes: Say vnto his Soule, I am thy Salua|tion: Make thy good Spirit of com|fort to whisper in his eare, that thou at well pleased, and that thou hast receiued a ransome: Such wordes of mercie will bee a blessed Balme, wherby thou shalt heale this sorrow beaten Soule, stung with a checke and smart for his sinnes.
Though. LORD, hee hath but some poore beginnings of Grace in a time wee confesse when thy graces in him should haue beene ripe; for that glorie which is now shortly to bee reuealed vnto him; yet not|withstanding, let it please thee of thy meere mercie to pittie and |don:

Remember thy mercies of old which were neuer wont to break the bruised reede, nor to quench the smoa|kingIsa. 42. 3. flaxe: If thy great mercie be not his strength and stay, he must needs bee ouercome: For whom hath heePsal. 73. 25 in Heauen but thee? Or who is on earth whom hee can desire besides thee?
O Thou, whom his Soule loueth, tell him where thou makest thy flock to rest at Noone in the greatest heateCant. 1. 7 of affliction: Seeing he seeketh after thee onelie, let him bee refreshed with thy comforts; for why should he turne aside by the flockes of thy compa|nions?
Consider well wee pray thee, LORD, how bene he hath vexed and d squieted with many fearfull temp|tations: now at last come with thine helping hand, come and abate the force and furie of all his enemies, whether within or without, subdue their raging and reigning power, that when the houre of his departing

shall come, hee may with Simeon de|part in peace: Stand, LORD, fast by him, forsake him not in this pe|relous time: Let thy Spirit guide and leade him in the Land of righ|teousnesse: Let thy grace be vnto him a Sunne by day  a Moone by night: Take all impedimentes out of the way, bridle  so curbe all his vnru|lie affections, that they may fold vn|der thine obedience: Suppresse all his carcing  heart deuiding cares, whyp out of his heart all treacherous temptations: Embalme his hearte with the sweetnesse of thy new fresh graces: Settle in his Soule, that god|lie sorrow which cause Repentance neuer to bee repented of.
This sillie Soule, LORD, hath beene fearefullie tossed to and froe with the waues of thy wrath: Let it please thee to command a calme: Settle thou his heart, and stablish it with thy free Spirit.Psal. 51. 12
Mercifull GOD, thou knoweth

how Sathan hath sought to sift andLuk. 22. 31. to winnow him; but of thy mercie thou shalt neuer suffer his Faith to faile: Build vpon the Rocke which cannot bee shaken: Through thy fa|uour giue him peace in belieuing, and joye in the holy Ghost, that by the grace and power of thy Spi|rit hee may finish his course with comfort.
Let in now be made manifest that his life hath beene hid with Christ in God: Thou who hast numbered hisCol. 3. 3. haires, obserue his griefe  his groans, pittie the crouding of thy Turtle-Doue: Tak thou to heart the anguish of his Spirit.
Behold, LORD, how hee re|nounceth himselfe, desparing of his owne worth: Giue him grace to flee to thy promises, that as in the fearefull and perelous path of this valy of death, he looketh for nothing but hell torments and paine for his owne sake, so he may assuredlie look

for heauens glorie, euen pleasures forPsal. 16. 11 euermore, and that for thy promise sake, for thy Names sake for thy Christs sake in whom thy Soule is best pleased: Mak the bones which thou hast bru|sed to rejoyce: Leaue him neuer to himselfe, LORD, till thou hast made thy graces now blooming in his heart, to become type for thy glorie.
LORD, blesse thy beloued Church which is hated of the world, Shee is now pricked with persecutions as a Lillie among the thornes: Let thisCant. 2. 2 comfort Her in all Her distresses that thou shalt neuer forsake Her: But that thorow many tribulations thou shall bring Her vnto Glorie: Lord, pitie  pardon the vnthankful Church of this Land: Bind Her vn|to Thee by the vnion of Faith, and fasten euerie one of our heartes to a|nother by the bond of loue; left at last by our misdemeanour, thou bee forced to roote vs out of thy good Land as a fruitlesse Nation.
GOD bee gracious to our dread SOVERAIGNE the Kings Ma|jestie, gard His Royall Person from the rage of His enemies. Infatuate their plots: Mak giddy their braines, discouer their enterprises: mak Him the Man of thy right Hand: Anoint His Head with the blessed drops of the Oyle of thy Grace  gladnesse: Make Him an humble Homager to IE|SVS, who hath written on His thigh the King of kings: LORD giue Him Grace according to His PlacePsal. 45 10
Say vnto His Queene, Hearken, O Daughter,  co~sider  incline thy eare: Mak her to forget her own people,  Fathers House: In stead of Her old acquaintance, giue her Children, whom thou mayest make Princes on the Earth: Aboue all thinges we in|treate Thee to discharge vpon Her Soule the beames and brightnesse of sauing Knowledge.
Blesse all the Nobilitie of this Land: Make them truelie NobleAct. 711.

like the men of Berea, who were couragious for the Trueth.
Make euerie one of vs faithfull in our place  calling: keep our Soules euer waking  waiting for thycom|ming: Preserue vs from slumber of Conscience,  deadnesse of heart, that liuing according to thy law, we may be in this wicked world godlie pro|fessours, like burning  shining Lampes for to shew light vnto others.
We all heere, O gracious Father, relying vpon thy promised readines to helpe thy little Ones, and to listen to their cryes, haue powred out our Soules in thy presence, wee intreate The from the sinceritie of our in|ward partes, that of thy Fatherlie in|dulgence, it would please Thee to vouchsaf a fauourable audie~ce both to these and to all other our most humble and godlie desires, and that for IESVS thy deare Sonnes sake. To whom with Thee and the Spirit of Grace bee all glorie and honour, world without end. AMEN.
Cause read vnto you this Night, Psalme 38. Psal. 39. Psal 40 Psal. 41. Psal. 42. Psal. 130. Isa. 38. Isa. 53. Iohn 16.
Let the end of euerie day remem|ber you of the ende of your life: Thogh euerie day of ourage shouldIoshu. 10 12 be as long as that day of Ioshuah, whe~ at his word the Sunne stood still in Gibeon, yet it would be night at last.
The Lord teach vs to number ourPsal. 90. 12 dayes, that wee may apply our hearts to wisedome, and to well doing.
The grace of Iesus and the peace of his Spirit rest with you, and com|fort you in all the groanes of your griefe: The Lord turne your smo|king flax into a burning fire of zeale: The God of all mercie and compas|sion refresh your weake and woun|ded heart with the softest ole of his sauing grace: Nothing Sir is vn|possible to your God, who of a brui. sed Reede can make a pillar of Brasse, which the prince of the powers of

darknesse shall not be able to shake: I intreat the Lord to giue you such Grace that may leade you vnto the face and presence of your GOD: Bee more and more earnest with your GOD, that hee would in|spire your heart with Life, Spirite, and motion, that thereby yee may bee made fitte for that blessed asso|ciatio~ with Sainctes and Angels, far from the crossing checkes of Con|science.




THE FOVRTH DAYES Conference.

The Pastour.
ACcording to your desire, Sir, I am come againe this morning for to visite you, and for also to reape the fruites of yesterdayes conference.
This is the sweete fruits of a god|lieProu. 14. 32 life, It hath, saith Solomon, hope in the end: I pray God to blesse you with such an hope, whereby in hope against hope, yee may cleaue fast vn|toRom. 4. 18 your God, finde yee the storme of your temptations alayed? hath the Spirit of God giuen edge and vi|gour to these comfortes which yee heard yesterday? Haue yee put

on a Christian courage with a reso|lute and contented patience to abid the blessed will of your God?


The sicke Man.
Well is the man and blessed, yea, thrise blessed is hee whose transgres|sionsPsal. 32, 1 is forgiuen, whose sinne is coue|red, for hee is free from that sting of Conscience that will for euer torment the Soule of the vngodlie.
All this night I haue beene sore cumbered with manie spirituall temptations as yee haue heard: My Soule for a space hath beene won|derfully perplexed: The spirit of ma~ alas, is but too ingenious to debar it selfe from glorie: Note It is a wonder how this shuld be in such a glorious Noonetyde of the Gospel hitherto, Glorie bee to God, yee haue com|forted mee much; ye haue handled my sores with the soft and smooth hand of a most wise and charitable discretion, wiselie haue yee singled out comfortes most expedient for

the cure of my Soule: Now seeing by your former discourse I haue rea|ped comfort, let mee bee so bold as to intreate you to declare breaflie how a man may know by the wor|kings of the Spirit within, whether he be a Reprobate or one of Gods cho|sen Ones:Note It is no time for me now to bee beguiled: Men which looke to die, haue neede to looke well what they doe.
I desire earnestlie to be instructed touching the diuerse workinges of the Spirit into the wicked and the godlie: My chiefe desire is to make my Saluation sure.


The Pastour,
I shall doe what I can to giue you contentment in that point. The matter indeede is not without diffi|cultie: But yet the Lord God will doeAmos. 3. 7 nothing which hee will not reueale vn|to his seruants the Prophets, so farre as is needfull for his glorie  the well of his People: Mine helpe is in the

Name of the Lord, that made HeauenPsal. 124. 8 and Earth.
The Spirit of God in man hath two sortes of operations: One generall another speciall: As for the generall common to all men, by the Spirit the wicked will say, Iesus is the Lord, I know Iesus. said the Deuill to theAct. 19. 15 sonnes of Sceuah: * By this Spirite also the wicked will refraine from outward scandals yea, they may preach, yea, prophecie with Saul, Ca|japhas, and Iudas, so that they will1 Sam. 10 11 bee wondered at, like Soul among the Prophets, or lik Simo~ magus, to whomAct. 8. 10. the world for a space gaue heede from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God: Manie hauing but this superficiall gliste|ring of grace applaud and content themselues thinking that they are wise, while they indeede are fooles.
By this Spirit also they will taste the good gift of God but an one they spite it out againe: * Meate tasted in the

mouth onelie, and not let downe to bee digested in the stomacke, is vn|profitable for nourishment.
Note By this same Spirit also they will bee inlightened, so that they will loue the deare Sainctes of God, and will reuerence them as King HerodMatth. 14. 3 did Iohn: Note But heere is their stay, they haue euer an Herodias, which they will not forsake: Some one reigning sinne or other like pestilent canker cleaueth fast vnto them and beareth rule into their mortall bodies: Either one sinne or other, secret or publicke must be their Darling:Note And this againe, like a mother, sinne must haue a dancing daughter, called, Ha|tered of reproue, whose chiefest sute is, that the preacher, were he an Iohn, either want the head, or else bee si|lenced.
This is the verie border of the wic|ked ma~s progresse with all his might and maine in the way to glorie: Fur|ther I cannot see that hee can winne

but onelie to a taste in the mouth of the goodnesse of Gods giftes and to a certaine or rather incertaine, liking of that which is good, which at last shall losse the head with the Baptiste, before hee losse his pleasures with Herod: Thus as ye see manie are de|ceiued with the false flashes of an euil grounded assurance, that they are in the readie and right way to Heauen, when as indeede they are but fag|gots prepared for euer lasting burnings.


The sicke Man.
There bee one passage in Scrip|ture which hath often affrighted my Soule, in it I see a Reprobate to ma such a progresse in the way to Hea|ren, that hardlie can I thinke that euer I did match him: Note The Apo|stle saith, 1. That hee will bee inligh|tened.Heb. 6. 4. 2. That hee will taste of the heaue~lie gift. 3. That he will be made partaker of the holie Ghost. 4. That hee will taste the good word of GOD. 5. That he will taste the powers of the

world to come: And yet for all that hee shall fall away, so that hee can not bee renewed by Repentance, and so shall die a Reprobate, and last after death, shall bee caried with the wic|ked into the same streame, till he fall downe into the gulfe and poole of per|dition.
I intreat you Sir, to giue mee some light for the clearing of these wordes, for often haue they trou|bled my Soule, and dryuine it deepe into the dumps, * At the first view of these wordes it would seeme that a man may get seisin of Heauen, and yet thereafter bee dissised by some sinnes and iniquities and depriued of all hope of eternitie.


The Pastour.
The Lord inlighten my mislie minde that I may cleare these your doubts to your well and content|ment.
I confesse that at the first sight of these words I my selfe was amazed;

so y^t I did wonder how all that could bee: Indeede at the first view as ye say, it would seeme that a man may get seisin of Heauen and yet there|after bee dissised by one sinne or o|ther, whereby all his former vertes shall losse their grace: Note But let a man lift vp his heart to God in prayer, and thereafter consider well the words and weigh them in the Bal|lance of the Sanctuarie, hee shall easi|lie perceiue that a Reprobate may bee endewed with all these giftes, and after all bee debarred from en|tering into glorie.
In the words ye haue obserued fiue difficulties, vnto which God wil|ling I shall make answere seuerallie. First of all, it is said that the Reprobate who is but a Bellie blind, will bee in|lightened: For to sta~d vnder this, yee must first co~sider that into that place of Scripture the Apostle speaketh of Apostats, that is, of men that haue for|saken the true Religion, which once

they did professe, for to become pro|fessors of lyes, me~ who haue reuolted from the Trueth after that the win|dowes of their Soule were shute close, for to barreout the Light and that willinglie and of set purpose.
Note First then it is said, That they were inlightned, that is, once they knew the Trueth: For knowledge is light: Note But because that hauing light, they wan|ted loue, God sent them strong delu|sions to belieue lyes: Note S. Paul speaking of these that had but the light of na|ture, the twilight of reason, said, That they were inlightened in such a sort that thereby they knew God. But because that when they knew God, theyRom. 1. 21 glorified him not as God, neither were thankefull, but became vaine in their imaginations, how grieuous was their punishment? Note A little after, both their sinne and their punishment is more plainely ser downe: Euen, sai~th hee, as they did not like to retaine Godvers. 28. in their knowledge, God gaue them

ouer in a Reprobate minde: Note That is, hee put out and quenshed that lit|tle light of Nature which once theyMatth. 16. 28 had, as hee tooke the Talent from the idle man that rolled it vp into a nap|kin: Note The greater that light bee within a ma~ if it be abused, the grea|ter is the punishment which is for to ensue: But to come to that Light wherewith a Reprobate brought vp in the Church may be inlightened: Note The Light of knowledge within a man who hath not the loue of the Trueth, is but like the light of a blazing Comet, which shortlie dyeth out, and filleth the world with a pestiferous stinke: Note An Apostate on earth is lik a Comet in the heauens, a star but in appearance: Such men with all their apparent eminences of zeale and dazeling shewes bee but bla|zing starres, such as the Dragon is said to sweepe downe with his taile. * S. Iude calleth them wanderingIud. v. 13. starres, they keepe not their Station,
Note They are Planets in their motion and Comets in their substance, not fixed in the heauens, but kindled meteores in the aire which seeme to bee in the heauens, and therefore they losse at last their light, so that as S. Iude saith, To them is reserued blacknesse of darknesse: Such may haue the spirit of illumination, for the good of others, without the Spirit of Sanctification for the good of their own Soules. Note Though they haue some light of knowledge, yet in loue and life they walke by the darke side of the cloude with the Egyptians: Note There is Loue and Light in the life of all true Israelites, whose course is by the light side of the fierie Pillar: Note The wicked for the most parte are with the Sodomites, either stricken with Gen. 19. 11 blindnesse, or if they see, they see as these Syrians saw that came to ap|prehend2 Kin. 6. 19 Elishah at Dothan, they saw indeede, but their judgement was so troubled, that though they saw, yet they could not perceiue, till out

of Dothan they were entered into Samariah, the citie of their enemies: Note That was the figure whereof this is the substance, Heare yee indeede, butIsa. 6. 9. vnderstand not, and see yee indeede, but perceiue not: O how the eyes of the Soule of man are dimmed with the mistie vapours of vanitie; thorow which it is hard euen for the godlie often to see anie glimmerings of grace.
But to the purpose obserue well what I say: Note The godlie and the wicked will both be inlightned: But the godlie is inlightned like a starre fixed into the heauens, whose light is firme and constant. But the wic|ked inlightned is but lik a blazing Co|met, which for a space will haue a greater glaunce, than a true starre in|to the eyes of the ignorants: Note But the learned Philosopher knoweth it to bee nothing but a bundle of filthie matter kindled into the Aire, which shall shortlie bee quenched: Note Thus as ye see the wicked like a Comet will bee kindled with some strange fire,

hee will bee so inlightened, that he will giue light vnto others for a space with his hoarie beames: Note But this Siella crinita, hoarie starre, be|cause hee is not fixed into the hea uens by faith, hee not beeing in the same Firmament with the Sunne ofMal. 4. 3. righteousnesse, within some fewe Moneths hee dyeth out, leauing no|thing behind him but the pestiferous smoke and stinke of an euill name, and of filthie scandales, a cause pest, where with many are infected: Note Thus as yee see many like a Comet or a Candle, will for a time blaze with beautiefull brightnesse, beeing full of godlie shewes, without any life of grace, but at last dye out with a fil|thie smell: The twilight of Nature is no light but darkenesse.
Note Let therefore euerie man trie his Light, by his loue: Note Though a man should know Christ neuer so well, if hee cannot say to him, as Pe|ter said, Lord, thou knowest that I loueIoh. 21. 17

Thee, the light of that man shall not continue, but soone or since with one sinne or other it shall be put out as with a dampe: Note Then many shall wonder what can bee worde of such a blazing professour, when they shall see all his rootlesse graces withered and wasted.
Now Sir, examine well your selfe: Note If yee finde a loue in your hearte with your light, a loue of God, not so much for his benefites as for him|selfe, who is most loue worthie, be not affrighted to heare that Reprobates may bee inlightened: Note All their graces at the best are rootlesse, glorious glances, foolish flashes euanishing in a moment.
Let mee yet a little illustrate the matter, that it may appeare how Re|probates are said to bee inlightened?
The Godlie  the Reprobates are both said to bee inlightened, but di|uerslie: the Godlie are inlightened like the Sun, but the wicked are like

the Moone: In the Sunne as all know the Light, is rooted and fixed, so that not onelie doeth it shew light vnto others, but also it hath light within it selfe: Note As for the Wicked, they are inlightened like the Moone, which sheweth light vnto others beeing darke within, like a Glasse which in the sight of the Sunne will glance with some beames, vnto others h|uing no light within it selfe: Note In this the wicked also are like the Moone, that while they are in pleni|lunio, in their fullest light, in y^e midst appeareth some blacke spottes: In the greatest light of the wicked, if men can looke vp, and behold, they shall perceiue often one grosse sinne or other, where the light haue no re|flexe, which is like the blacke spot of the Moone.
Thus as yee see all the light of the Wicked, is but in an out|ward reflexe, whileas they are darke within: But the Godlie are like Iohn

the Baptist, whom Christ called a burning and a shinning light: Not on|lieIoh. 5. 35 shine they outwardlie vnto others, but also they burne within themselues, like these Disciples, whose heartes while Christ spake, did burne withinLuk. 24. 32. them in going to Emaus, these were their words, Did not our hearts burne within vs, while hee talked with vs by the way?
Note The Wicked may well blaze without, but neuer burne within: God may so dispence, that like a burning Glasse they may make others to burne, while like the burning Glasse they remaine themselues cold, or at the best but lake warme: Now I thinke that all men may easi|lie perceiue how the wicked are said to bee inlightened.
Such men I confesse are hard to bee knowne at the first: Note A man at least for a month must be acquanted with the Moone before he can know that it is but a dark bodie, which hath

no light in it selfe, but borrowed and outward: A life-time is not often sufficient for to trye Hypocrites transformed, like Sathan, into An|gels2 Cor. 11. 14 of light: Such Moon-men beguile many with outward reflexes.
Though these which are outward|lie adorned with such colours, blesse themselues with Laodicea, as hauingReuel. 3. 14 neede of nothing, yet their sins by the hand of Gods Iustice are written in the Register of their Conscience, yea, deepelie ingrauen as with the penne of a Dyamond.
Thus Reprobates cannot now vn|derstand because their Conscience are seared sensles: they are in such a Slumber benummednes of Co~science, that they cannot consider nor make a sound search into the state of their Soules: Note Nay, though they could, they would not for feare, that there by they should bee enchained to me|lancholie, a marr mirth of all their carnall delights.
Note Of such I will say some-thing, (I pray God that it may chasse them to seeke sinceritie) Except that such who care onelie for colours  shews of godlinesse, for to be well thought of among men, except, say I, they turne to God with true sound and timelie Repentance, in my judge|ment hardlie shall they escape some fearefull and remarkable judgement, euen in this life: Cannot God ap|point them to bee his owne execu|tioners for to bee Burriors to them|selues? After that, in his wrath hee hath kept an assise in their Consci|ence, and hath made them with Iu|das to cry out guiltie against them selues, hee can make them hang vp themselues in the loupe of a corde, for to bee spectacles of his wrath be|fore the world: Hee can mak them poyson themselues, or powre out their life with their blood by sword or by knife: Note This judgement shall cry to the liuing, Thus shall it bee done with him who dallies with his God.
If hee escape that: Note Woe, woe, woe vnto him on his death-bed, where Sathan with hellish malice  bloody cruelty shall wou~d him with his empoysoned darts, which hee shall fasten deeplie in his Soule: Then with many a sore sigh shall hee cry, that he is enthralled in the snaires  fetters of the deuill: Some I know will win out of this world without any seene blot or blow for secret blos, they will die also with some formall  perfu~ctory appearance of repentance: Others will die in a quiet drousinesse and so poore like Nabal: Many aye see may die without any seene sign of Gods wrath: But in the day of the Lord, God shall pull that painted vizard off their face, for the disco|uering of all their abominations, and that before the face of all Sainctes and Angels, who shall wonder to see all the filthinesse which they in their life could so cunninglie colour and couer, with most painefull pain|ting:

Then mens applause and the worlds praise, which they did once vnder the colour of vnhallowed zeale moste eagerlie pursue, shall by no meanes auaile them; for the righ|teous Lord with a gloume of his ju|stice shall banish them to the loath|some dungeon of the bottemlesse pit.
Thus after they haue carried the matter smoothlie for a time by jugling dissimulation, at last all their abomi|nations are set in open view.


The sicke Man.
I finde my selfe satisfied concer|ning that doubt of the inlightening of the Wicked, who as I see are starke blind, grossie and palpablie ig|norant in the mysteries of Saluation. Now teach mee what this is, that he will taste of the heauenlie gift: How can vnsanctified mortalitie bee capa|ble of celestiall benefites?


The Pastour.
By the heauenlie gift I vnderstand the fauour of God and eternall life
Note The wicked man, whose portion is only in this life, will taste these things, that is betimes hee will finde a cer|taine sweetnesse in God: Note The most wicked man that is will at one time or other lift vp his eyes to God, yea; and thinke himselfe much beholden vnto God: But all this goodnesse is but lik the morning dew; it hath none abiding, a sound of feare is euer into the wicked mans eares: * As a manHos. 6. 4. may taste poyson and yet not bee the worse, because incontinent he spit|teth it out againe; so a wicked man may taste good things; and yet not be the better because that after he hath tasted them, hee letteth them not ouer his throat, but spitteth them out againe: Note That which hee hath tasted with the one eare, he spitteth out at the other care: Note The good words may flow a litle into his braine and rinne into his memorie, so that there of hee may prattle like a Paro|quet, but nothing goeth down to his

heart, which I may call the stomacke of the Soule: Note If a man should but taste food, were it neuer so fitte of it selfe for to feed he shuld not be able to liue thereby: It is euen so of the wicked spiritualy: They cannot liue by tasting of graces, where God hath not opened the heart as hee opened the heart of Lydea, there is nothingAct. 16 14 but a tasted grace: Let me yet cleare the matter.
Note The wicked will get a taste of heauen, as the godlie wll get a taste of hell: Note In this doing, I obserue a secret Iustice, and a secret mercie of God: It is a mercie for the godlie that they taste the bitternesse of wrath heere, that they may esteeme the more of heauens glorie heere after. Note The baser our estate be before we he exalted, we shal thinke the more of honour whe~ it commeth: What am I, said Dauid, being but a shepheard, that I should marrie a Kings Daugh|ter? Who am I? said hee, and what

is my life, or my fathers familie in Isr|ael,1 Sam. 18. 18 that I should bee Son in law to the KingNote If Dauid had beene a Kings Sonne, hee could haue well thought himselfe an equall match for a Kings Daughter: But while hee considered his owne base estate and the basenes of his fathers family, he thought him|selfe so ouermatcht, that hee won|dered at such honour, which made him say, Who am I? What am I, said2 Sam. 9 8 lamed Mephibosheth, that I a dad dogge should sitte at the Table of a King?Note The greater aduersitie a man bee come out of, the more sweete is his prosperitie when it co~meth:Note The tempestuous by past blasts of Winter commend the beau|tie of the Spring: * Bring me a man who is daylie accustomed to good cheare, to a Banquet, and little shall hee thinke of it, because such is his ordinarie fare: But, O if bread was not sweete to that hunger bitten for|lorne, when hee came home from his

husks!* I think that the godly in heaue~Luk. 15. 16. shall remember of the bitter taste of wrath they felt on earth, which shall so rauish them with joy of their cha~|ged estate, that no tongue shall bee able to expresse: Note But againe, heere is Iustice and wrath for the wicked: God in this life giueth vnto them a taste of his sweete thing: Some com|mon spirituall confections he putteth into their mouth, whereof they find some heauenlie relish; Note I am of this opinion, that while they shall be in hell, the remembrance of that sweete taste shall neuer goe out of their heart, which shall bee a most power|full meanes for the increasing of their smart:Note What a sting was this vnto the gltton in hell, when Abra|ham,Luk. 16. 25 said to him, Sonne remember that thou in thy life-time receiuedst thy good thinges? Note Yee may see heere that the wicked haue remembrance in hell of what good thinges they haue receiued on earth, which is an hell in hell.
Thus as ye see God in Iustice and and in wrath will let the Wicked heere on earth taste his good thinges, for the increase of their woe there|after: Note By the sweete taste they had of God on earth while they liued, they know now in Hell, which is a* Note part of their torment, what joye the godlie haue in Heauen: Note And againe the godly by that bitter taste of wrath which once they felt on earth, shall know, which shall won|derfullie increase their joye, what torments the wicked suffer in hell, from which the Lord in his vnspeak|able mercie hath made them free.
By this as yee perceiue both the godlie  the wicked taste here both of Hell  of Heauen: The godly taste of Hell, that Heauen, may be to them y^e sweeter: The wicked taste of Hea|uen y^t Hell may be to them y^e sower: God loueth not the wicked, but ha|teth them as hee hated Esau: Note For this cause, while hee giueth them a

taste of his good thinges, it is that while they shall bee in easlesse and endlesse torments, they may remem|ber how sweete a God they haue de|spised, and how sowre a Sathan they haue serued.
Note All these good things which are jointly in the wicked man, are but lik faire attyre vpon a leperous bodie, or like jewels about the necke of an han|ged man: Hee hath nothing but the dead portraiture of an Israelite in|deede.Ioh. 1. 47.
Note But in all this time while vnder the shewes of godlinesse, he is drin|king in iniquitie like water, a dreadfull sound is in his eares, for he knoweth that the day of darknesse is ready at hisIoh. 15. 16 hand: God at last in great wrath shall runne vpon him, euen on his necke, v|ponvers. 23. the thicke bosses of his buckler, be|cause he did couer his face with fat|nesse, and made collops of fatte on his flankes, not caring for the lean|nesse of his poore Soule: * Woe to

these who content with bare tasting of graces, in wrappe themselues i cloudes of hypocrisie.


The sicke Man.
My Soule Sir, rejoyceth to heare you speake: Note I perceiue now by your speach that the wicked will get a taste of spirituall good thinges into their mouth, but that from thence nothing commeth downe to their heart, because the passage is stopped.


The Pastour.
It is euen so: Note Quod non deglu|tiunt multo minus concoquunt, That which they cannot swallow downe, lesse can they disgest: Note The hearts of all men are naturallie fast shute for to hold out God. Christ foundCant. 5. 2 the doore of his Spouse barred, whe~ hee came, neither would shee open it, till the fauour of his Mirre hadvers. 5. wrought vpon her heart: At the best of mens hearts hee must often stand and knocke, againe, and againe: But as for the wicked mans hearte, it

hath no entrie for grace, not in all hisPsal. 10. 4. thoughts: The heart of a Reprobate is like a Pest-house, closed vp: LidiahsAct, 16. 14 heart was closed, till God opened it: Note Thus as ye see the wicked may for to speake so, get a mouthfull of Gods good thinges, which they will taste as it were roll vp and downe with their tongue lik a sweete morfell with some sort of pleasure: Note But at once they loth that which they loued, and spit out these heauenly confections: Thus doing they are said to doe de|spiteHeb. 10. 29.  vnto the Spirit of Grace. O but the hollow heart of man barboureth many close corruptions.


The sicke Man.
Now Sir, I pray you proceede: Let mee heare some thing concer|ning the third difficultie, which is that a Reprobate may be made par|taker of the holie Ghost: How can this bee? Note This seemeth to bee verie hard and knottie, that a man can be a Reprobate, a limbe of Sathan, and

one of the familie of hell, and yet  made partaker of the holie Ghost: Let mee vnderstand what is that to say.


The Pastour.
Note By the holie Ghost in Scripture are often vnderstood the giftes and graces of the holie Ghost: According to this it is said, that these of Sama|riah receiued the holie Ghost, afterAct. 8. 17 that Peter and Iohn had prayed for them, and laide hands vpon them, they receiued the holy Ghost, that is spiritual gifts: it was for to haue a po|wer to giue such gifts that Simon Ma|gusAct. 8. 18 offered money to the Apostles Note Whereas then it is said that Repro|bates are partakers of the holie Ghost, it is to bee vnderstood of such giftes that are common both to the God|lie and Wicked: The best temper of their religion, and the highest pitch of all their holinesse, is nothing but outwardnesse and formall Christia|nitie.



The sicke Man.
I Desire earnestlie to know what common giftes these bee that the holy Ghost will bestow vpon a Re|probate.


The Pastour.
A Reprobate may carrie the mat|ter smoothlie for a time: Note Hee may wonderfullie in wrappe himselfe in godlie glancing shewes, so that hee can not bee espyed for a space, by a jug|gling dissimulation he will euen bleare the eyes of the Prophetes which are Gods Seers: Note When hee is cloathed with a coats of formes, men will think that vnder such formes be y^e true sub|stance: While he hath that Rom. 2. 20  forme of knowledge, and that  forme of godlinesse,2 Tim. 3. 5 me~ who see not as God seeth, will tak him to be some great Diuine, while indeede all the graces hee hath are but formes and outwardnesse, without any life or roote of sound inward sanctifying grace: All such formes

in end proue starke nought.
Note A Reprobate may bee a teacher of Gods worde, a builder of Gods House like Noahs Carpenters, who builded the Arke, and yet drowned into the floode: Note Hee may blaze like a Comet with colourable preten|ces of pietie, and shew light vnto o|thers for a space, yea, so that with most glorious glances hee shall make mens eyes to dazle, and yet shall at last die out, leauing nothing behind but the smoke and stinke of an euill life like the snuffe of a Candle, when there is lothsome reeke without a flamme: Note An Hypocrite may be a ma~ of a milde  mercifull disposition, yea, zealous in appearance, without any sene blot or blemish: By his hypo|crisie hee may doe good to others. Men seeing him, will stand in awe to offend, thinking him to bee a sincere man: Note A Reprobate will bee like the man that beareth the Lanterne in the darke night, wherewith while hee

giueth light vnto others, he is least inlightened himselfe: Note While o|thers by that light will see the best and cleanest way, hee himselfe and Lanterne together will fal into a mire. Note Thus after that his light is quen|ched in some scandalous puddle, the followers know what a man he was:
A Reprobate may haue immunitie from grosse and in famous sinnes, he may bee a man of great giftes, won|dered at by many as was Simon Ma|gus,Act. 8. 9. to whom all gaue heede, from the least to the greatest saying, This man is the great power of God: Note A whole peoples applause is no sure token of Gods fauour.
Note As Sirion which is Hermon, was called by Moses Sion, so may a godly man both think  call an HypocriteDeut. 8. 48 a chosen vessell Note Of such a ma~ often may a Godly man say, as Elisha said of the Shunamite lying at his feete, The Lord hath hid it from mee, and hath not tolde mee: Note The godly and

wicked are sibber vnto other in out|ward shewes, than Sirion and Sio are sibbe in syllabes: Nay, in out|wardnesse and glorious glances, the vvicked beare the Bell, because their greatest care is cunninglie to ma|nage  eagerlie to catch such vaine applause.
Note The high stature and faire face of Eliab deceiued the Seer: Surelie,1 Sam. 16. 6 said hee, the Lords anointed is before him, and yet for all that the voyce come out from God, declaring that God had refused him.vers. 7
That which is like vnto another is not that wherevnto it is lik: There is but an H betweene Sibboleth and Shibboleth, and yet the losse of thatIudg. 12. 6 Letter cost the Ephramites their liues at the passage of Iordan. The vvant of that note of Aspiration made them to losse their breath with their life: Ma~ vnder a maske of mildnesse may de|ceiue men with faire vvords, as Ioa2 Sam. 20. vers. 9. did Amasa; but God well kno|weth

the Gallean accent, though Peter should denye with an oath.
The craft of Hypocrites is won|derfull: Note While they walke in a ploding course of glorious shewes, beeing fast nailed vnto outward for|malitie, they will wonderfullie bleare the eyes of men, so that they will out-steppe the best in low lou|ring and counterfeit cruching, who would not haue thought Ahab a true repenting man, while sicke in1 Kin. 21. 27 sacke hee went soflie with sacke cloth nearest his skinne? Mans eyes are easilie, easilie jugguled with soddered shewes: But God who seeth not as man1 Sam. 17 6 seeth, looketh on the heart: They that see such painted men, as they them|selues also, may thinke that they are alreadie possessed of the Kingdome of grace, and also intituled to the King|dome of glorie, while indeede they are but prophane men of seared Con|sciences, seeking for nothing but po|pular applases for the aduancement

either of their profite or preferment or reputation and worth: By some worldlie respect they euer are caried on the by, whereby they euer come short of sinceritie.
Note Woe vnto them euen when all men shall speake good of them: Note For a space they may well thinke in their owne fond conceit, that they are stored with all the riches of Gods graces, like Beggers in their sleepe dreaming that they are tumbling the~|selues amid great heapes of gold: O but when such awake they are not onlie emptie of their imagined good, but filled with sorrow for being de|priued of that which they had in their imagination, the greatest grou~d of their contentment: Thus all com|forts shalbe sweepe from them with the besome of vtter desolation.
O the deceitfulnesse of mans heart! Who can know it? said Iere|mie:Ier 17. 9. Note What eye can pierce and passe thorow all the wyles  windings

of this juggling sinne of Hypocrites, which hauing nothing but  a forme of godlinesse, which beare y^t world in hand that they are scalded burnt with the zeale of Gods House: The best things y^t are in such are nothing but ciuill outwardnesse clothed with colourable pretences of pietie, without any justifying faith in the heart, or renewing power in the Soule, wherin is the practise of pietie.
What shall I say more? a Repro|bate as yee see may bee both cour|tesse and kind, solatious in conuersa|tion, a man beloued of his neigh|bours, yea, such a man may driue out his dayes without any seene blot, or outward scandale: Hypocrisie may bee so small spunne, that no carnall eye can perceiue it
Such a man also may haue some troubles of Conscience, some secrete checkes of remorse for his by-gon folies, euen Iudas his , repen|ting or forethinking: But his Soule

was neuer acquainted with traueling and hard labour in the newe births which is borne with that  eue~ an vniuersall change of minde, will, and affections which is onelie pecu|liar to the godlie.
I will yet say more, a Reprobate while hee possesseth a true doctrine though but outwardlie, hee may aue the gift of prophecie with Saul Cajaphas yea, of miracles,  also of healings, of helpes in gouernaments and of diuersities of tongues: Note Be|hold, how a wicked man may bee a Preacher, and a Prophet, or among1 Sam. 10. 12 the Prophets, and a worker of mera|cles: Haue wee not cast out deuils inMatth. 7. 22. thy Name? shall many say to Christ at the day of judgement; to whom Christ shall answere, Departe fromvers. 32. mee for I know you not.
All these good things may a man haue, and yet bee a stranger from the life of God: * Though such outward thinges haue a glorious appearance

bee great in the eye of the world yet they are no sure token of Gods loue: Note Did not Christ call Iudas,Matth. 26 50. Friend? All the common giftes  graces of the wicked, are nothing but like the friendship that was be|tweene Christe and Iudas, whome Christ called friend, for to let him know that the greater was his sinne: Such for all their glistring shewes are strangers from the life of God, hol|den fast vnder the power of the first death, and yet none so much as they are puft vp with a conceit of imagi|narie perfection, so powerfull is the deuilish influence of pride: The greater Gods gifts shall-be into the wicked, y^t greater shal be their woe.


The sicke Man.
I hau heard, and am satisfied con|cerning y^t the vvicked may be made partaker of the holy Ghost: I pray you to discusse the fourth difficultie, which is, That  man may taste the good word of God, and yet bee a Re|probate.



The Pastour.
Hee vvill indeed Sir, taste the good word God, as I haue exponded that he will taste the heauenlie gift: Note Hee will taste the good word of God, That is, hee will vnderstand the word, he will take pleasure to read it, and to heare it preached, with some flashes of comfort, whereby hee will bee moued to harbour some good mea|nings and intentions, not onlie that, but also hee will doe many thinges asMar. 6. 20. Herod who heard Iohn gladlie, and did also many things: Note But such a ma~ hatheuer some herodias a darling sinne secret or knowne, vvhich hee vvould preferre to the head of Iohn the Baptiste: Note While hee is in the Church it may bee hee heare the vvord with some gladnesse, yea, and vveete his cheekes vvith teares at the preaching of Christs passion, but let hm goe from thence to his Banke|ting, a dancing of a daughter of this Herodias, viz. Some little tickling

joy of his Mistresse,  predomina~t sin vvill make him to forget all that was preached: A small requeast of some dauncing deuil vvill mak such a man, if hee bee of power, to lay the Prea|chersMar. 6. 28 head in a platier.
Note There bee many vvho vvhile they heare the Word preached in the Church, are like a Siffe or Riddle into the vvater, so long as they are in heaing, they seeme to bee full of Gods word, euen to the brim: But so soone as they are once departed, all that they heard runneth out, and they to their olde by as againe. The best thing that are in the wicked are to God, as vvho for a sacrifice should cut off a Dogs necke, or offer Swynes blood.


The sicke Man.
This is a strange matter, this world as I see, is like Sardis. Thou hast aReuel. 3. 4. few names in Sardis which haue not defiled their garments: The Godlie are as the shaking of the Oliue, Two

or three Berries in the toppe of the vp|per-mostEsa. 17. 6. bough. Christ called them vvell, The little Flocke. Great as ILuk. 12. 32. see is the deceitfulnesse of sinne: Note I thought when I saw a man or a wo|man, hearing the word with great at|tention, and vvhiles vvith teares, that these could not bee but the Lords chosen and dearest Ones: And yet I see that a man may heare the word with greate appearance of godlinesse, yea and thinke the Word most sweete for the time, yea, loue and reue|rence Gods Messengers, and yet for all that bee kept short of the state of Grace.


The Pastour.
All that is true, for Herod reue|renced Iohn for a space, and heard him gladlie: Simon magus belieuedAct. 8. 13. with a temporarie faith: And EsauHeb. 12. 17 though hee wept and sought the blessing with many teares, yet could finde no place in his heart vvhere he could lodge true Repentance.
Many are endewed with painted

Graces, which hauing but the face  not y^t heart of grace, are meere hypo|crisie: Euen vices masked with y^e ap|pearance of vertues: Such formal ho|lie persons come farre short of being in Christ Iesus, in whom all true goodnesse is most liuelie incorporate.


The sicke Man.
I haue heard you Sir, discusse ve|rie pertinentlie foure difficulties, the fift and last, and greatest is behind: Often haue I wondered what could bee the true sense  meaning there|of, the words are these, Hee will taste of the powers of the world to come? What can a Reprobate haue to doe with the world to come? I vnder|stand not well these words.


The Pastour.
Indeed Sir, they want not difficulty: Some of the Learned thinke with S. Chrysostome, That by the powers of the world to come are to bee vnder|stood, the powerfull working and mi|racles vnder the Gospel, which in re|spect

of the Lawe vvas called, The world to come, as if the dayes of the Gospel were the dayes of a new world, since Christ that Day spring from onLuk. 1. 78 high, and most glorious Sunne of Righteousnesse did appeare for to in|lightenMal. 4. 2. euerie man that commeth into this world: But in my judge|ment that bee more subtile, than so|lide: Note I had rather thinke that Re|probats are said to taste of the powers of the world to come when they finde some sort of sweetnesse in God with a kind of desire to bee out of this world, for to bee with God into the Heauens: Note Such a desire betimes will make their heartes flutter vp to|ward these heauenlie Mansions Note But such fluttering desires wanting the feathers of Faith, incontinent come short, and fall downe againe with a jumpe: Hee hath not a settled con|stancie nor well grounded resolu|tion. God at some times will let the Wicked see some glimpse of his glo|rie,

as it were a lightning that passeth most swiftlie avvay, vvhich for a lit|tle space in the darke night letteth a man see that vvhich is before him: But so soone as it is past, his eyes be|come more dazeled and darkened, tha~ they were of before: such powers are but painted powers: They are in|deede like the liuing powers as an I|mage is like a man, but they want the heart of godlinesse.
Thus according to my knowledge in a serious and impartiall search is all the vvicked mans progresse toward the kingdome of glorie. All the best graces that hee hath, are but glances of graces and dreames of glorie, euen extreme pouertie, glorious sinnes, beautifull abominations.
These be Gods limets, who hath said to him, as hee said to the proud vvaues, Hitherto shall yee come and no further: Note Such a man in his best estate and conceit is but an Hypo|crite lurking vnder the Canopie of a

counterfeit profession: His best e|state is both broken and bankerupt in spirituall thinges: Note For a space such a man may goe pleasantlie like a Shippe before the vvind; but at last downe commeth a blast of judg|ment, and sinketh him downe irre|couerablie into the bottome of hell.


The sicke Man.
I am glad to haue heard the solu|tions of these fiue difficulties, which often did trouble my minde.
By all your discourse I perceiue that the Reprobates at their best, feele but some generall good moti|ons, and that all their perswasions, that they shall at last come to heaue~, are nothing but imaginations, and vaine dreames of glorie: Note Many in mine opinion are deceiued in this world, who like these that dreame, thinke they awake, while they in|deede are fast asleepe: Many in this world as I see, thinke to bee saued, whose thoghts shal proue to be but dreames: Some obscure printes of vn|sound

joyes, though for a space they may be of good acceptance with the most godlie, and clappe their owne hands, as if they were in the passage to Paradise: They are in end disap|pointed, because they want true inward holinesse, without which no man shall see Gods face.


The Pastour.
It is most true Sir, fors men for the most part desire to bee flattered by others, so tak they delight to flat|ter themselues, feeding vpon fond fancies and phantasies, lik Hypochon|driackes, or braine sicke, who cannot bee perswaded, but that they are Kings, while indeede they are but Beggers.


The sicke Man.
This is a terrible disease: Note But to leaue the Reprobates, and come to the Elect, I desire now to know of you what bee that speciall spiri|tuall working, which is onelie pe|culiar to the Elect and chosen Ones of God: I vvish to heare of the pro|ceedings of Gods Spirite working in|to

the hearts of the godlie vnto their Saluation: The godlie I am assured are of a more noble and heauenlie tem|per full of the Spirit of Grace.


The Pastour.
Note In my judgement where the Spirit of God worketh to the Salua|tion of the Soule of a sinner, before it come to a full perswasion  hight of assurance, there is first a tempest of wrath against sinne going before the comming of God in his mercie, viz. A shaking wind, a trembling earth|quake, a burning fire, vvhich lik three grimme posts come running before to tell that God is comming into the calme.
Note Before that God shew his pre|sence into the still voyce, hee procee|deth by steps and degrees: First hee rebuketh the sinner of sinne, and wa|keneth his Conscience with some sight of his iniquities,  vvith some sense of that vvrath which sin hath deserued: From this ariseth a great

heauinesse into the heart, vvhich brea|keth forth both in speach  counte|nance, so that the vvorlde which know him of before, will vvonder at his change, as if he vvere a crea|ture cast into another mould Note Af|ter that God hath thus prepared the Soule of men with thundering tem|pests and tremblings with blasts and vvith burnings, and thereby hath made them more afraid of sin, than they were of before of sinne it selfe: At last he commeth vnto them into the calme of his mercie,  first giueth vnto them grace to flee all occasions of sinne, and after that, to hate the verie garment spotted with the flesh Note HeeIud. v. 23. vvho in despight can gnash his teeth against that vvherein once hee tooke pleasure to displease his God, is not a sholler of flesh and blood, not a natu|rall man that is content vvith ciuell outwardnesse. Note After that the Spi|rit hath vvrought a detestation and hatered of sinne into the heart, he put|teth

a cry into the heart for mercie, with sighes and sobbes which cannot bee expressed: Note Some times these sighes vvill breake out into such vvords that both speaker and hearer will vvonder vvherefrae they come.
Note After that, the Spirit in his mo|tions by a sweete and silent inspira|tion, goeth forward in his progresse into the heart by little  little, with Life, Light, Libertie, and peace of Con|science, euen that peace vvhich pas|seth all vnderstanding, and so can|not be expressed in humane words: Now am I come Sir, as yee heare, ad metam non loquendi, that I can say no more: Note It were but folie for mee to dyue so deepe in Gods vvor|kings, as for to take vnto mee to de|clare vnto you that vvhich passeth all vnderstanding: Note The new name into the white Stone, is knowne to Reuel. 2 17 none, but to these that haue recei|ued it: Though hee that hath this name know it himselfe, yet hee can|not

vttter it: It is like these wordes of Paradise which S. Paul called vn|speakable.2 Cor. 12. 4.
Now for to sum vp breaflie all that hath beene declared in a more large and ample discourse, I shall obserue three things which are onelie roo|ted in the godlie heart,  ae altoge|ther strangers from the Reprobates.
Note First where true grace is, there is a remorse and painefull griefe with many sore sighes, for all by gone slips: By this as by a Bitte or Bridle the Soule of the godlie man is kept from backesladings and scandalous stumbling relapses.
Secondlie, he hath a present quicke feeling of these sins, which of before hee counted but little and veniel: If it bee sinne hee will say no more, Is it not a little one? Note A ye for luc,Gen. 19 20 or for sport yea, a light idle worde will checke him at once in the Con|science, though hee were perswaded that it were neuer knowne to anie.

Last of all, by a long practise in well doing hee acquireth in his Soule an habituall tendernesse, whereby the former good motions are so confer|med and strengthened, that it is a pleasure to him to doe well: Off this ariseth the gracious and most sweete temper of the good Conscience which is to his Soule a perpetual feast: This is the Christians progresse in true godlinesse, which is neuer so calme in this world y^t it can be said to be without troubles, which maike the way vnto glorie: Thus much for the proofe of the point in hand.
Note Onelie this I desire you to ob|serue, that such spirituall workinges goe by degrees, like a Riuer that is waxing, like an Herbe that is growing, like a Day that is but dawning or like a Victorie but beginning: At last commeth nowe full Flood nowe is perfect grouth, nowe is Nooneday, now haue I foughte~ the good fight, 2 Tim. 4. 8 now I look for the crown of righteous

nesse: This being all finished, there|penting sinner entereth into glorie, the place of ful contentment, where the restlesse eyes of mans desire shall rest from peeping or prying any fur|ther for any greater felicitie.
Thus brieflie by waye of com|pend haue I declared vnto you: But all this is not so soone done as said: Btter bee the Battels of a Christian before hee can come to this rest: There be bloodie battels against the Deuill, bloodie battels against the World bitter and bloodie battels a|gainst the corruptions of his flesh: Many a stroke will hee giue vpon his breast with y^t Publican many astroke will hee giue vpon his thigh, cryingIer 31. 19. with Ephraim, ye, What haue I done? Note S. Paul was pricked with a thorne in the flesh, and buffeted by a deuill,2 Cor. 12. 7 before hee got the Crowne:Note Christ himselfe speaking of himselfe said, Ought not Christ to haue suffred all theseLuk. 24. 26 things, and so to enter into his glorie?
It is easie to heare this short dis|course of words: Note But what paines are into the second Birth: The paines of the first Birth are so piercing, that the verie paines of hel are compared vnto them: And yet I haue known women who by their owne confes|sion, haue trauelled more into the second birth than euer they did in the first: Note Manie would bee con|tent to dye for to bee borne againe: This flesh of ours is ill to die, yet it muste die, and bee mortified, at the birth of Ichabod where is the glorie? The first wordes that this new creature learneth to speake is,1 Sam. 4. 2 Where is the glorie? Note At the first it seeketh after Gods glorie, as the new borne Babe at the first seeketh after y^t dug with the tongue and the lips: * It is the best foode of a regenerate Soule to sette our Gods glorie, as it was our Sauiours meate to doe his Fathers will.
After all that, the Soule maketh

a procession in well doing, neuer stan|ding at a stand, but euer going for|ward, though some times more slowlie: The way to glorie is from grace to grace: Note Many foullie de|ceiue themselues, because that they forbeare one sinne or other, where|vnto at other times they haue beene most slauishlie addicted, they thinke themselues reformed men, and that if Death should come, incontinent the doores of Heaue~ shuld goe wide open to the walls, for to let in their soules with their formes of godlinesse2 Tim. 3 5 Such are so high in their owne con|ceit, that they thinke to bee after death cannonized Sainctes.
Of this sorte bee so many, that Scripture calleth them a gene|ration:Prou. 30. There is a generation that are pure in their owne conceit, and yet are not washed from their filthinesse.
In him vvho is truelie a childe of God, the strongest corruptions of the flesh must bee snaffled and cur|bed

by the Law of the Spirit: Note It is not enough to beate downe one sinne, or two, or many, as many will doe, but reserue aye some, one or other for which they must pray with Naaman, In this thing the Lord2 Kin. 5. 18 pardon thy seruant.
Note Let no man deceiue himselfe, there is no place in Heauen, but for him or her whose studie is applyed to an vniuersall sinceritie of all their wayes.
Let it be that Cain was not a Theefe: But did not God curse him for his murther? Let it bee that Iudas wasGen. 4. 11. free of many sinnes, yet because hee way a Theefe, and a Traitour andIoh, 12. 6. died so, hee was damned. Let it bee that the Pharisee was not an adulte|rerLuk. 18. . as hee bragged, yet his pride was the bane of his Saluation.
Note Hee that maketh not consci|ence of the least sinne, is guiltie of the greatest: According to this God himselfe saith, That who faileth in

one, faileth in all: If for God and for Conscience sake, a man abhorre the great sinnes of murther and adulte|rie, and such others of not orious rank for these same sakes he will abstaine from lesser sinnes, otherwayes it is but some worldlie respect, either for shame or losse, which like a re|straining grace, with-holdeth him from matching the same: Many will neither kill, nor committe adulterie, and yet will make no conscience to slander, or lye either in sport or ear|nest, or by hooke or crooke catch that which is not their owne. Who euer hee bee, who without controle|ment looseth the reines to such pe|tit sinnes, hath neuer as yet sette his foote forward in y^e way that leadeth to life: the Spirit of grace as yet hath made no residence into him: The Spirit he hath, is but a sporting Spi|rit deceiuing him vvith ies: The su|rest note of the Spirit of the grace is a sanctified studie,  endeuour to an

vniuersall sinceritie in all our wayes; of thought, worde, and dead, which vvill bee I confesse often with great vveaknesse and failing, for in manyIam. 3. 2. things wee offend all.
Now Sir, vvhat thinke yee of all that hath beene said? according to the knowledge that God hath giuen mee, I haue cleared your doubts: If my discourse hath done you good giue God the praise, yet vvould I knowe vvhat all these vvordes hath vvrought in your heart.


The sicke Man.
I blesse God for that vvhich I haue heard: Note By Gods Grace I haue catcht some hope of a better life: The desires of mine heart beginne to enter the confines of eternitie: I find the motions of the Spirit of Grace vvorking into my Soule the great vvorke of Saluation: I am now re|freshed vvith the sweete streames of spirituall comforts: I finde now my Soule lifted vp toward God, and I

finde the loue of this vvorld falling downe like the Mantle of Elijah: I2 Kin. 2. 13 think that I goe novv more sweetlie and swiftlie to my God, with a more holie and heauenlie desire, than euer I did heeretofore: Your comfortes Sir make mee to hyefaster: Note I take this to bee a nevv worke-man-shipe of grace: Note I hope shortlie to be at the vp shot of all my troubles: Note I finde vvithin mine heart some kindled joye, vvhich I take to bee the pawne of pleasures for euermore: The SpiritePsal. 16. 11 of God like a Doue hath brought vn|to my Soule a comfort like an OliueGen. 8. 11 leaue assuring mee in some vveake measure, that the floode of Gods vvrath is asswadged vpon my Soule: What shal I say? The best of Gods bles|sings are behind: Oh that now my Sa|uiour vvere into the cloudes: I had rather die, than I should liue for to anger the Lord againe: Alas, that mine heart hath beene so gleued to the ground like a shell-Snaile fastened on the wall.

Seeing Sir God hath wrought so well by you in this great worke of my conuersion; I intreat you to continue in some good purpose, that my minde may still bee kept bended vpon that which is good: Note If yee leaue off to teach mee, my minde will but wander in vanitie. O Lord, worke all my thoughts to holie and heauenlie meditations.


The Pastour.
Blessed bee God who hath giuen you such a resolute and conten|ted minde: See what yee desire me to speake chieflie of at this time.


The sicke Man.
Note Seeing I am shortlie for to leaue this world and to goe to the Hea|uens, for to take out of mine heart* Note the least roote of regret to quite this world: I pray you Sir, to say some|thing of the vanitie of this world, of the last Iudgement, and of the joyes of Heauen, where shortlie I hope to bee: Let mee heare how I shall losse

nothing in the change: Striue Sir, I pray to kindle and blow vp the dying fire of my deuotion, helpe mee to goe from strength to strength till I bee in Zion.


The Pastour.
The Lord put such wordes into my mouth, which may bee able to winne your Soule vp to Heauen, and to weane it from all worldlie pleasures.
First for to speak but a word in ge|nerall co~cerning this world. Note What is it but a peece of earth, made bar|ren with Gods curse, whose fruites without sweatie labours, are butGen 3. 8. thistles and thornes?
As for the vanitie of the world, seculum speculum, This world is a glasse wherin a drumlie eye may see its vanitie: Hee who was wisest in it, speaking of it, after that he was tyred with trying its pleasures, preached that it was but vanitie of vanities, aEccles. 1. 2 verie Idea, that is the abstract of va|nities,

which are the abstracts of things that are vaine: Note So accor|ding to Solomons Text all that wee account most substantiall, is but an abstract of an abstract, as if a man shuld dreame that he dreamed, which should bee the dreame of a dreame: Note This is like y^t vanitie which Habak kuke calleth verie vanitie, whereinHeb. 2. 13 are some few flashes of deceiueable comforts.
Thus as yee see the life of man in this world is nothing but a fardle of vanities, shadowes and dreames, a bundle of displeasing pleasures, vaine in inside and outside too: Note Our greatest pleasures here are but a mix|ture of miserie: They are soone marred like a mistuned song: Note The flees in the plague of flees were not so thicke in Egypt as vanities are in this world, for which the most parte of the world exchange the happinesse of their Soules: These who are most glorious in worldly pompe, are con|strained

to say at last with that King in Homer: * The great God hath im|prisoned mee with cares: O happie they who are free of such dangers, are secured in cottages of clay.
After that man hath beene vpon the top of his pompe, and is come to the vertical point of his pleasures after which hee hath hunted with great eagernesse of heart: Hee must come downe and bee curbed with paines of diuerse diseases, distressed till hee bee turned in to dust.
Note All his pleasures, profites, and prefermentes shall slide away like a shadow: They shall passe like a Poast passing by, like water lift vp with a sife, or sand with open fingers. As the shippe passeth ouer the waues, its trace, not beeing able to bee seene on the brim, or as the fowle moun|ting to the Skye, piercing the Aire, so that no mortall eye can perceiue any token of her passage, though the eare heare the noise of her wings,

so shall it bee of all earthlie things, when once the inch of this life being ended, our mortall Soule shall bee dislodged out of this clay, all earth|lie contentments then shall bee like a Bird, of whose flight no token can bee found after for a space by the shaking of her wings, shee hath par|ted the aire in a greater heminencie of going: In all our greatest pleasures bee lurking sorrowes like serpentes a|mong the grasse, which maketh way to a fairing man to steppe backe or start aside.
Oh, that wee were wise! What shall I say? In this transitorie life we are miserablie blind folded, because wee loue not the heauens, God let|teth vs dote vpon the earth: It is righteous with God so to doe: OfPsal. 117. 23. all this wee must say, This is the Lords doing, it is marueilous in our eyes: Oh, that wee could consider! in these last dayes of this world, there is come vpon the world a plague of vanitie,

like a plague of flees, whereof pride is Beelzebub the master flie, which buz|zeth in most men  womens heads commanding other legions of vani|ties full of fretting sorrows, or of false flattering pleasures wherewith the sillie Soule is fettered: Note The whole life of man is inclosed in Mesopota|mia betweene two riuers of teares, First wee mourne at our Birth, and last others mourne at our Burial: Nascimur flentes morimur gementes: Note The whole bounds of our life is inclosed betweene weeping and groa|ning:Note At the first sight of the light we weepe, and last at the closing of our eyes, wee gaspe out our life with a groane: What shall I say? So soone as wee are borne, wee are gone like a shadow when it declineth.Psal. 109. 23
Oh, that wee could consider that there is nothing heere which is not mixt with some spyce of vanitie. * If wee had eyes to see, wee would say, What is below in this Region

of corruption without corruption or contempt? Note Within vs, without vs, aboue, vs, about. vs, all is out of or|der: The powers of the heauens are shaken, the Aire about our heads is full of tempests  flashing meteors! the world is waxed old, and is come to its decrepite age: The last dayes are dayes of diseases, the compa|nions of olde age, all is wrong. The Church is sicke of Sects: The Sea is full of Pyrates,  the Land of Rob|bers, yea, and of sins and sicknes vn|knowne to former ages: The Godly are as sheepe among wolues.Matth. 10 16, Psal. 55. 6
O that I had winges like a Doue, for then vould I flee away and bee at rest
Note Heere is nothing but Mesech Kedar, where there is nothing butPsal. 102. 5 we for the godlie which dwell ther|in: Note Where shall a godlie man liue, or in what state shall hee liue? or how shall hee liue? but hee shall bee battered and besieged with much toyle and turmoyle? Note If hee bee

wealthie, hee shall bee enuied: If hee bee poore, hee shall bee despised: If he bee wise, hee shall bee accounted craftie: If hee bee simple, hee shall bee called foolish: Note All that is with|in vs, all that is without vs, yea, and in our selues are readie to betray vs,  to giue vs vp into the ha~ds of our enemies: Note The eyes beholde, that vanitie may come in: The eares hear|ken like open floode gates to lette in streames of vanities for to drowne the Soule: The false heart within, that keepeth the keyes of all the sen|ses, while the Soule is sleeping, brin|geth in vpon it like a Delilah, a num|berIudg. 16. 21. of cruell Philistims: Note Thus the strong men of Israel is made a jest and mocke vnto the vncircumcised that belong not to the couenant.
This whole world is but a world of vanitie? The wise man Solomon the mirrour of wisedome, and won|der of the world, was sent into this world as a spye: from God for the

well of man: Note By his wisedome his minde ran thorow the world like a Pilgrime from countrie to countrie, yea, like a Bee from herbe to herbe, for to taste them. Hee confidered all the trees from the Cedar to the Hys|sope,1 King. 4. 33 for to prye into, and pierce the pith and vertues of all things abroad, for to take thorow notice thereof: After that hee had thus wandered, beeing come home againe from his pilgrimage, the world flocked about him, to search what hee had heard and seene abroad, and what hee thought of the world, and of all the glorie thereof: Note What newes, Solo|mon? did the Worldings say, whose hearte is like a Ferret in the earth: What hast thou seene or heard? So|lomon contracteth all his Newes into a Line,
Vanitie of vanities, and all is vanitie.
All these thinges which are solo|ued, I haue looked into, would Solo|mon say, but I haue found nothing

but vanitie from the barke to the bone: Note In Trees is vanitie, in Herbes is vanitie, as well in the Cedar as in the Hyssope: In Siluer is vanitie, in Golde is vanitie, in Iewels is vani|tie, in Honour is vanitie, in Cloa|thing is vanitie, in Strength is vani|tie, in Wisedome is vanitie, in Beau|tie is vanitie: In a word, all is full of vanitie, yea, all is vanitie, yea, vani|tie of vanities: All the creatures saithRom. 8. 20 the Apostle, the spye of the New Testament, are subject to vanitie: Note For the sinne of man, all the Crea|tures haue lost that glorie and liber|tie, which once they had, and are become slaues vnder a base bondage, vnder which they grone as a woman in trauell: All earthlie comfortes which spring out of sinfull pleasures faile and fad like grasse.
* Alas, what is heere, that should moue a Soule to desire to sojourne heere, but a moment.
Note This world is a Tenise of temp|tations,

wherein the sillie Soule like a ball without any ceasing is tossed from wall to wall, as one waue of the Sea rusheth vpon another, beeing carried with a gale of winde, so do all sortes of sorrowes heere as in a moued sea swell, roll, and rage with most fearefull rushinges vpon man till hee bee turned into froth.
Note It is a wonder how the eyes of man should be so bleared, or rather juggled, that any thing below should make him to say as they  on Tabor, who knew not what theyLuk. 9. 33 said: It is good for vs to bee heere, and yet who is hee that is not dulled and darkened with the cloudes of folli
Is not this world a wildernesse the way's thereof are rough an crooked, Note Mans best thinges hee are like the Hartechoke, whereof the most parte is vnprofitable leaues Note Our joyes are joyned with sorrowe checker worke, white and blacke, lik Lillies among thornes.
Note Our hopes heere are vaine, the profite is false, the pleasures are pas|sing, the labours are losse, the pro|mises are but lyes: Note The whole state of this Prince of Creatures is heere but a banishment, heere and there he stumbleth, where he thoght best to stand, where hee purposed to take his rest, there hee findeth his ruine: No worldlie comforts are to bee trusted into, they are like the staffe of a broken reede, whereon if aIsa. 36 6. man leane, it will goe into his hand: Doe what hee can, some painefull splinter or other shall bee fastened in his flesh: Note There is nothing on Earth which can bee managed with such cunning, that it may bee with|out cumber: The proudest and Iof|tiest waues of mens designes, are easilie broken into foame: Note Gods fauour is the surest Sanctuarie, no|thing within the compasse of this created world, can yeelde to man solide comfort or contentment, no|thing

can possiblie fill the bound|lesse desire of his Soule: Note Such a diuine sparkle can neuer cease rising, til it bejoyned to that great SHADAI,Exod. 6. 3. GOD all sufficient, till the Soule bee at Him, it can neuer bee settled, but is euer tossed, whiles to the right hand and whiles to the left: Now it is rauished with joye, and in an in|stant againe it is surprised with amazement: Note What euer it enjoy|eth heere, it cannot bee content, but is euer foolishlie peeping and prying beyond all that which it hath affecting with a strong straine, grea|ter riches, high honours, and prefer|ments, which I may call, The guilted glorious miseries of mankind Woe, woe, woe dwell into that house where such things are not sanctified to their owners.
O that I could cunninglie rype vp with a Razour this worldes vanitie, that wee might see it within the bo|wels! O what depth of discomfort

should bee there seene, if wee had eyes to see: All the pregnancie of mans Spirit, all the most rich indue mentes of his minde, without the sanctifying Spirit of Iesus, become but an idole of selfe conceite: Note As for all other outward things, in the very turning of an hand, and closing of an eye, they often remoue insalutato hospite, not taking their good night: Inconstancie is the poison of our pleasures.
Though a man euen now were neuer so happie in his owne conceit, how soone may the Lord send a change? Note He can make the fruite of all his labours to be like an vntimely birth, for whome the Mother hath suffered many woes, and yet could neuer enjoye a sight there of aliue.
The greatest glorie of this world, is like Hills which seeme highest a farre off.
Note Men in their solie may sav as Dauid said in his prosperitie, I shallPsal. 62. 6.

neuer be moued: But, O folie! There is nothing permanent heere: Man is tossed vp and downe as the Locust, either with discountenance or disa|pointment, breaking into foame his projects vpon the rocks of disgrace. All is turned about with a continual change: There is no Time but it passeth, there is no Day but it dark|neth, there is no Fruite but it rot|teth, there is no Flower but it fad|deth, there is no Force but it faileth, there is no Strength but it weake|neth, there is no Beautie but it withe|reth, there is no Garment but it wea|reth, yea, the Heauens themseluesPsal. 102. 26 waxe olde, as doeth a garment Note Be|hold, how all that is aboue vs, be|neath vs, about vs, is full stuffed vvith vanitie: this at last shall world|lings know to bee true, when their laughter shall be madnesse in their owne eyes: It is a wonder how men are so blind in this glorious Noone tide of the Gospel.
Note All that is most esteemed in this world, the fooles Paradise, is chief|lie of those, 1. Strength, 2. Honour, 3. Riches, 4. Beautie, 5. Pleasure, 6. Wisedome, 7. Children, 8. Long life, of these things may no man say with Niobe.
Excessere metum mea jam bona.
I neede not feare to losse them.


The sicke Man.
I desire to heare you discusse the vanitie of these eight thinges seue|rallie, for which men straine the vt|most vaine of their wits, as if in this region of corruption such thinges were able to stretch themselues vnto eternitie.


The Pastour.
All such thinges are but broken staues of reede; not to be relyed vpon: Note To naturall eyes indeede such things are so glancing, that they like a starre new created in the Skye, will make them to gaze, yea, often it be|falleth that the prosperitie of such

things enjoyed by the wicked, will not onelie drawe the eyes of the Godly vpon them, but will bee eye|fore vnto them. I was enuious at thePsal. 79. 3. foolish, said Dauid, when I saw the pro|speritie of the wicked.
Let vs relish these eight thinges a little, and orderly try what is their worth.


1. STRENGTH.
As for Strength, if Samson the strongest now could speak out of his Graue, hee would teach the liuing that it is but a vaine thing.
Note What a vaine thing is this, which in the highest degree that euer was in man, might bee shauen from himIudg. 16. 19 with the lockes of his haire?
Let a Feuer but seaze vpon the strongest that euer breathed, before it leaue him, it shall teach him to know that all the force of flesh is vas nitie: Note Reuben who was called by his Father, The man of his might, andGen 49. 3. the beginning of his strength, and the

excellencie of power, is in the versevers. 4.  following, called, vnstable as water: The Philistims great man, y^e strength of Philistia, the terrour of Israel, was felled downe with a stone out of a Shepheards scrippe and slung.
There is no solide strength in flesh, but hee who is strong in God, of him shall bee said, as was saide ofGen. 49. 24. Ioseph, His bow abode in strength, and the armes of his hand were made strong by the hands of the Almightie GOD of Iacob.


2. HONOVR.
What is Honour, which men in the hight of Spirit desire with the strongest straine? Note What is it, but like a King in a play? when the play is done, the ornaments are take~ from him: To day man is a King, and to morrow a Carrion.
Note The greatest pompe of King Agrippa,  his of Queene Bernice, is caled in Scripture language, a meere phantasie, or euanishing shew: Hee

came downe with his Queene, saith S. Luke , that is, heAct. 25. 23 came downe with great phantasie.
As honours are changeable like a phantasie, so often change they men so that they become phantasticke: Honores mutant mores, Honours change manners, but oftest to the worse.
If men knewe the vanitie of this point, they would not so eagerlie hunt after that wherein there is no contentment.
Note After that Alexander had fished the whole world with his herrie wa|ter-net, what found he? but follie  euanishing shewes, wherof the most pleasant rellish was like the white of an Egge wherein is no sauour.
Note Kings which are the most honou|rable men of this world, are gods inPsal. 82. 7 name but not in Nature: I haue said, Yee are gods, but yee shall die like men-King Herods flatterers cryed that he was god, but Death belyed them,

crying that hee was but a man, aAct. 12. 22 god that could not resist the wormes, often that which is highlie esteemed a|mongLuk. 16. 15 men, is an abomination in the sight of God.
Note God liketh not euer best these to whom hee filleth a full cup of tem|porall felicitie: He whom God hath elected to bee a King in Heauen, is often hidde, like Soul among the stuffe,1 Sam. 10. 22. or like Corne among Chaffe.
Note I haue obserued in reading the Booke of God, that few Kings ei|ther of Iuda or of Israel receiued any great praise from Gods penne, which can neither faine nor flatter: Trueth will yeelde no ground, thogh it should meete a Tyrant in the face.
Note O fainting flatterer! who darre not preach but to pleasethy Prince, Who art thou, that thou should feareIsa. 51. 12 a mortall man, which shall bee made as grasse? By a wise, graue, godly re|proofe thou might haue saued his Soule, in whose blood thou hast em|brewed

thy selfe either by fearefull silence, or flattering eloquence.
Note O how dangerous is the high estate of Princes, vnto Princes them|selues: They are followed with such applause, that often they are made to forget what they are: I haue cal|ledPlas. 82. 6 you gods, is the flatterers Text, he cannot passe this point, his Glasse is run, and Time is spent before he can winne to the other part of the verse, But yee shall dye like men.
Let vs heare what God himselfe speaketh of the Monarchs of his owne people.
Except a verie few, there is not one, but hee is either branded with1 Kin. 11 6 this, And hee did euill in the sight of the Lord, or with this, And hee fol|lowed2 King. 13 2. the sins of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to sinne.
Note Honour will not abide with Kings, except that they abide with God: While Nebuchadnezar was boasting of his Buildinges, euen

while the word was in the Kings mouth,Dan. 4. 31 there fell a voyce from Heauen, saying, O King Nebuchadnezar; the kingdome is departed from thee. No King stan|deth so strong in his prosperitie, but God can shake him and lay him on his backe: Note King Dauid of this got an afterwit. In my prosperitie, said he,Psal. 30 6. I said, I shall neuer bee moued. But so soone as God beganne to hide his face, and hee beganne also to bee troubled.vers. 7.
* That is notable which IsaiahIsa. 14. 13. saith concerning the King of Baby|lon, who in his fond conceit did reach the hight of heaue~, as being at league with al contrary powers. Thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascendvers. 14. into Heauen, I will exalt my Throne a|boue the Starres of God: I will ascend aboue the hight of the Cloudes, I will be like the most High.
What saith God to that? It shall not bee so, O Lucifer. Sonne of the Morning, I shall take thee at the

trip, though thou should soare aboue the Skyes of heauen, yet thou shaltvers. 15. bee brought downe to hell, to the sides of the pit: They that see thee shall narrow lie looke vpon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble,  that did shake king: doms? Note This is the end of all flesh, ir|reuocablie concluded by the KING of Kings decree. Dust thou art, andGen. 3. 19. vnto dust shalt thou returne: Note The way of greatest Monarches, is from the Palace to the Pit: Were a manPsal. 30. 9 neuer so high in Honour, hee must say at last with King Dauid, I goe the1 King. 2. 2. way of all the Earth.
NoteIf Princes in their pompe could practise Memento mori, Selfe-con|ceit should not bee able to poppe in it selfe with pufts of pride, which make many to quarrel with the reprouers: Hee is like a Phenix, who beeing in Honour, can digest a reproofe, and finde it good with Hezekiah, who while hee was sore threatned, said,

Good is the word of the Lord: O how2 Kin. 10. 19 easilie doe faile flattering vvordes cogge in themselues, by slie and craf|tie juggling into the hearts of these that are in high places: Tell them y^t all goeth well, and that this vvorld shall last, and that in their prosperi|tie they shall neuer be moued, such Preachers will please: But if a Iere|miah come in with his woes, some Pashur shall not misse him vpon theIer. 20. 2. cheeke: Ahab could not abide to heare good Micaiah: Wherefore?1 Kin. 22. 8. I hate him, said hee, for hee doeth not prophecie good concerning mee: In this vvas all the distemper: But vviselie and godlie vvas it replyed by good Iohoshaphat, Let not the King say so.
Well is that King who in his ho|nour reputeth this his greatest Ho|nour, to honour him, from vvhose Grace he hath his Crowne: his praises shall not bee silent, vvhile hee shall lye in the place of silence, sleeping into slyme.
The Lord make the praise of our Gracious SOVERAIGNE to sound like that of Iosiah: And hee did that which is right in the sight of the Lord,2 King. 22 2. and walked in all his wayes and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left AMEN AMEN.
What shall I say more of the va|nitie of Honour and Preferment a|mong men? I am assured of this, that it is no sure token of Gods loue, for euen they that worke wickednesseMal. 3. 25. are set vp: Of these oftest is said, O they are made, euen while they are madde.
Note The most naughtie and most vnworthie, whose valorous acts and vertuous deads no man can record: haue often found a roome where they may drinke in a full cuppe of temporall happinesse, many will wonder to see them steppe with a graue and stayed ciuilitie: Haue not many seene such in Kings Courtes with great applouse runne vp with|out

any rubbe, as it were to the toppe of Tabor; where to many who knew them before in a base estate, they will seeme to bee transfigured.Luk. 9. 19
Note The Lyers and the Flatterers will gather about the Gallant, and were it not the feare more of Lyce than of God, while hee speaketh, they would cry, The voyce of GodAct. 12. 22 and not of man: While hee is thus wise in his greatest pride, princelie mounted, gallopping vpon the highest hills, imperiouslie dominea|ring,  reuelling in the world; down commeth a thunder-bolt with fierie flashes, of a diuine wrath; ouer-tur|ning and downe throwing horse  man from the steepest of all his Pre|ferments. Thus to all, at last he be|commeth a spectacle of amazement.
Note Take vp now our Minion with all his honours, which once hee did so eagerlie, hunt after. The fairest blos|somes of his glorie, are blasted as with mildew.
Beholde nowe, all his honours rolled in the dust, the higher he was mounted, the greater is his fall: who but Haman to day, thryuing in this world, and raising vp himselfe a Pa|ramour of a Prince? By his outward glisteing hee maketh mens eyes to dazle: Now he hath y^e wind at will, and saileth as he pleaseth with flaun|ting sailes amid his greatest jollitie: But tarrie a little, looke vp to the weather-cocke: The winde is turned,Le Mar|quis d' Ancre en soit tes|moin. the head is where the taile was: Ha|man is disgraced, his louers are A|postats, no man darre auouch him, his honours is taken from him: This is his Princes will, Caput obnubito ar|boriEst. 7. 8. infoelici suspendito: Couer his face Note And seeing hee was the chiefe of a knot of knaues, let him haue y^e highesEst. 7. 9. pin of fiftie cubits high: By thus hee becommeth a man of high degree.
Note Thus hee to whom once many were glad to hold the baso~ as to a dar|ling of account, proueth at last to bee

one of this worlds fooles, which care not what bee their end so that their way bee pleasant.
Note At last, after all such pleasures, profites, and prefermentes, the vn|godly man with great shame, with arou. 10. 7 rotten name, is grieued and gauld with sorrow: Though hee both chaffe and fiet, yet of necessitie must hee packe him to the abhorred Re|gions of Death.
This is no new thing vnder Hea|uen; and yet alas, how few are these that in their carriage can considder that hee that thinketh hee standeth,1 Cor. 10. 2. should take good heede, lest hee fall.
Note Prosperitie striketh most men blind on this eye, vntill the current thereof bee cutte or crossed with some disaster. Note While men are ex|alted, hardlie can they dreame of a change: Sathan is euer most bu|sie to stickle and stricke the bargaine betweene them  Death, and Hell, and all sorte of disgrace.
Let vs also say some thing of the Leuites which are the King of Hea|uens fauorites, and if it may be said, his best beloued Minions: Their Honour is great; if with the shining Vrin of sound and solide Doctrine, they joyne the Tummim of a good life, the Lord alloweth on them1 Tim. 5. 17 double Honour: But if either by a foule decay of Grace, they bee Loi|terers and will not Labour or labour in Doctrine, but not in life, their dou|ble Honour shall bee turned in double disgrace.
Note Of all Leuites the Lowne Le|uite is the greatest.
There is nothing but it may bee good for some-thing, but vnsauorie Salt is good for nothing: While otherLuk. 14. 34 most haynous sinners shall swimme like Corke on the brimme and vpper swarde of Hell, these that haue poy|soned these whom they should haue seasoned both with life and doctrine,Exod. 15. 10 shall lik Egyptian Lead sink downe to the lowest of the Gulfe.
Thus as ye see Honour in whom|soeuer, if it bee without true God|linesse; is lk a faire woman, wanting Discretion, whom wise Solomo~ com|parethProu. 11. 22 to a jewel of god in a Swynes snowte This all flesh will either sub|scriue or put their hand to the Pen in token of consent, except these that look vpon such outward things with the vnhallowed eye of pro|phannesse.
But to leaue all particulars: What is all the glorie of Nations? If all their glorie and excellencie whatso|euer, were put in one Scale of the Ballence and Vanitie in the other, Vanitie should weigh them downe: Note Dauid in his time put them in the weights together, after hee had well considered the matter, hee gaue out sentence, saying, Surelie men of low degree are vanitie  me~ of high degreePsal. 62. 9. are a lye, if they bee laid in the Ballance they are altogether lighter than Vanitie. See howe Vanitie is too heauie a

weight for men of low and high de|gree: If ye would mak euen weight, out of vanitie must bee sought that which Habakkuke calleth, verie va|nitie,Hab. 2. 13. euen Solomons vanitie of vani|ties:Eccles. 1. 2. Put in that lightest vanitie into the one Scale, and men of all degrees in the other, then shall the tongue of the Ballance stand euen.
What then shall wee say of the glorie of all Nations? Note It is well compared by the Prophet vnto the droppe of a Bucket, and to the small dustIsa. 40. 15 of the Ballance: To tell vs that no worldlie thing can be balast in Gods Ballance, no more than the lightest dust can bee of weight into a Scale of mans Ballance, which is most ea|silie blowne away with the least blast of breath.
Great is the vanitie of the grea|test: Note From the Throne the King himselfe must come downe by death for to goe sleepe in slyme. To Gods God hath said, Yee shall die like men.
Thus as yee see all earthlie Ho|nour, for which is so much strife  debate, all worldly pompe and glory which me~ so hungerlie hunt af|ter, is but like dust driuen away with a put of breath.
Note Let men in Honour bee in his best estate: Man in his best estate is altogether vanitie: The whole course of mans life is but a Myne of miserie, and a verie fardle of vanities: That thereof which is most stable, is but a flash and away. Note Let Gods vine trees keepe their wine, and his figges their sweetenesse, and his Oliues theirIudg. 9. 15 fatnesse, but let the Brambles catch crownes: This was the euent and issue of the Parliament of Trees at the crowning of their King.
Well is the man that may line and lurke: Who knoweth the weight of Crownes, the lodging of greatest Honours would neuer daine to desire them.



3. RICHES.
Now let vs come to Riches what are they? a swift vanitie, which with winges flie away like an Eagle.Prou. 25. 5
I compare the most parte of rich men vnto Spiders, which spend their verie bowels in weeuing a web where|with they may catch a flee.
Note What is all the glorie of Riches, but like a feast in print? all sortes of meat are there, all sorts of wine are also there but onelie words  lines: There is nothing there indeede that can either flake the hunger o quench the thist of the wearied man, no not after that hee hath laboured night and day, might and maine, to at|taine contentment.
Note This world is rich in prffers, but of petit performance: Man for a space like a Shippe before the wind are rich laden, may glide gladlie ouer the sea of this worldwith a full saile: Hee may get Ladies sailing, as wee say, and that in a wonderfull

quietnesse, but a little after such calme, Alcedonian dayes are past, euen while he is swimming in his wealth, blessing himselfe, as who but hee, vp getteth a tempest, and downe com|meth a blast, beholde, a little from the Shore in sight of the Hauen, in the hight of his hopes, and hee is tumbled head-long downe to the bottome of the Gulfe. Let this bee a lesson vn|to all, not to say with Dauid in his prosperitie I shall neuer bee moued:Psal. 0. 6. Shall this bee mans felicitie, which daylie is in reuerence of Winde, and Waue, Pyrats, and Perrels.
Certainlie it is none happinesse for man heere to haue this wicked world at will: It is Gods customeGen 17 39 to giue the fatnesse of the Earth to the men of this World Note These onlie be y^e things whereof they haue an as|signed liferent vvith that rich man in the Gospel, to whom Abraham af|terLuk. 16. 25 his death cryed downe, Remem|ber that in thy life-time thou receiuedst

thy good things: Note At Abrahams re|queast GOD refused not to make Ismael vvealthie in this world: Con|cerningGen 17. 20 Ismael, said the Lord, I haue heard thee: Loe, I haue blessed him and will make him fruitfull, and will multiplie him exceedinglie: Twelue Princes shall hee beget. The bitter teates of prophane Esau were com|forted with the fatnesse of the Earth;Gen. 27. 39  with the dew of heauen from aboue. Christ cast first the bagge vnto IudasIoh. 12. 6. and after gaue him a sop, for to lette the world know that neither moneyIoh. 13. 26 nor meate, are sure tokens of Gods fauour.
The wicked men of this vvorld are content with such thinges, be|cause their heauen is vpon earth, they haue their portion in this life.
As for the Godlie though with Iacob they haue but a staffe in theirGen 32. 10 hand for to goe out the vvay they will bee content if so bee that GOD will giue them bread to eate and clothesGen. 28 20 to put on.
* Alas, that vvee cannot consi|der that by such heaped vp treasuresRom. 2. 5. men often heape vp to themselues treasures of wrath against the day of1 Tim. 16 19 wrath: Happie they vvho lay vp in store for themselues a good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtaine eternall life.
If vvee could with a fixed and sanctified eye behold all these things for which men doe vnder goe such paines by afflicting their Soules, wee should easilie perceiue our earthli|nesse, vvhen vvee losse such things, which we loue (and who can keepe them?) it breaketh the verie heart of all our contentments.
What are all such thinges I pray you, euen while most pleasinglie and plausiblie they are enjoyed to the full in the most fertile plaines of plentie  pleasures of this vvorld
These vvhose cuppe doeth ouer|flow, in vvhose coffers are wadges of Gold, can best, if they vvould, de|clare

the vanitie of such transitorie things, they know vvith vvhat cum|ber they are conquered, and vvith vvhat care they are kept: Note Nay, man keepeth not them, but they keepe the minde of man in care.
Cura facit canos. Care changeth haire.
Note A peeuish worldling is a warded Wretch, entangled with golden fet|ters, his Palace is but a prison of car|king cares, in scraping together hee taketh pleasure into paine before his end hee cannot perceiue his follie Note But still he gads by Sea,  by Land, seeking vpon the Sea and vpon the Earth an heauenlie felicitie, till at last frustrate of all his hopes, hee fal|leth downe into the Graue with a jumppe.
Note Thus as yee see such is the trea|son of our Treasures: They come like deceitfull dreames, and passe a|vvay like vanishing shadowes: One lie things Spirituall haue a sure and lasting roote.
Note Alas, in that our heart is least wherein it should be most, and most in that wherin it should bee least: Fooles that vvee are, vvee all earne vvages to put into a bottomelesse bagHag. 1. 6. Such vvages are often giuen in kee|ping to most vvorthlesse men, as Iu|das got the bagge to keepe.Ioh, 12. 6.
Oh, that mens hearts vvere fixed on the lasting Treasues of immor|talitie: Oh, that vvee could learne in time this sound Diuinitie, that all that is vnder the circle of the Moone is but flatte vanitie and vexation of the Spirit of man, vvhich continual|lie vvanders vp and downe at ran|dome, seeking its felicitie in that where it is not to bee found.
Note Well is the man vvhose hearts desires are bounded and confined vvithin the secret compasse of content|ment.


4. BEAVTIE.
What is Beautie, but as one faith vvell, a colour and a temptation? The

colour fadeth,  the temptation na|reth: Note Behold, her who within these fourtie yeares seemed a perfection of Beautie, a rauisher of eyes; behold  now in her fourescore, vvith her vvrinkled cheekes, and her glasse eyes, and her rotten teeth, and her stinking breath: Note Behold, and say with a sigh, Fauour is deceitfull, andprou. 31. 30 Beautie is vanitie: But she that feareth the Lord shall bee praised.
Note There is nothing more fadding than flesh; and yet man will not con|sider; vvhile his eye is quicke,  his lips rudie, and his colour liuelie hee cannot think of changes, neither by age nor sicknesse, such a foolish con|ceite is bredde in the heart: Out of such a Beautifull sleepe hee cannot be vvakned, til God vvith a shout cause preach him to bee Grasse: The voyceIsa. 40. 6. said cry: The Prophet saide, What shall I cry? All flesh is grasse, and the goodnesse thereof as the flower of the fielde: The grasse withereth, the flower

faddeth, because the Spirit of the Lord blaweth vpon it: Surelie the people is grasse: By this the Lords publicke Oyas, all fleshlie beautie is cryed downe, as beeing but a beguiling co|lour, and a snairing temptation: Fye on men and vvomens follie care for colour is but vanitie: Heere is beau|tiePsal. 90. 17 vvithout fard: Let the beautie of the Lord our God bee vpon vs: Note All o|ther beauty is lik an Almanack whose vse is but for a yeare: It is but a baite for catching of vnstable Soules.


5. PLEASVRE.
As for all the Pleasures, vve reape in earthly things, I compare them to fruites eaten before they bee ripe, vvhich fist set the teeth on edge, and thereafter cause diuerse and deadlie diseases.
Note There is no pleasure heere with|out a Page of paine at its backe: Our vveedes and our flowers growe vp together, the best often is borne downe by the vvorst.
Note What I pray you are all the foolish pleasures of this world, but as wee ordinarlie call them passe times? Hath man so long a time to liue? Or is his journey from Earth to Heauen so easie or so short that hee may haue leasure for pleasures and passe times? Is mans short life so wealthie of time that it must be pas|sed into passe-times? Must wee not in end come to count  reckoning for our euill and well spent houres
Moreouer, what are the most parte of all earthlie delights? The most excellent are but noble miseries, the fairest are but farded lik the face2 King. 6. 30 of Iezebel, onely an out-side or out|ward scroofe of pleasure? What I pray you are all carnall delights, but the lymetwiges of the Deuill, where|with the sillie Soules of sinners are ensnared and entangled?
What shall I say more? Note All the pleasures that are below may well be compared to a smokie fire in a fostie

day whereof the smoke is more hurt|full than the fire is helpefull: All the joys which are heere, are but reekie pleasures purchased with teares, wher with the eyes of men are made blea|red:Prou. 14. 13 In laughing the heart will bee sorrowfull; and the end of that mirth is heauinesse: Worldlie pleasures but darkeneth the Reason,  deceiue the Senses: Voluptates carnales sunt puti|da  putrida, both stinking and rot|ten: Onelie the pleasures of Hea|uen are pure, perfect, and perpetuall: All other thinges slide away like water.


6. WISEDOME.
What is all the Wisedome of this World? Scripture saith, that it is but follie before God: Note It may well1 Cor. 3. 19 bee compared to the Letters which Vriah carried against himselfe: If it bee not sanctified, it is in the bosome1 Sam. 11 14.  message against the messenger.
Note Knowledge and pregnancie of Wit stored with all morall vertues,

without Gods feare are witnesse a|gainst the man himselfe, in whom they are: They will stand vp and testifie against him that hee vnder|stood his Masters will, and yet would not doe it: Note Woe to that backe in hell whose heart on earth was full engrossed of worldlie witte: Hee that knoweth his Masters will and doeth it not, shall bee beaten with manie strips: Away with that Soule whose vnderstanding is great swelled with knowledge, but lamed in its practicall powers, wherein is the working of the life of true Christianitie. Many in this world are much counted of their naturall it, but wherin I pray you doe most men spend their wits and breake their braines? Is it not to be great in this world? In the meane time they are so spirituallie brutish, that they care not what they bee, o where they be in the world to come
Note Such fooles are like Fishers that leaue mayne seas for to fish in shallow

puddle As I beganne this point so I end it, all naturall witte is branded with this, that it is but follie before1 Cor. 3. 19. God: Let your Soule disavow and disclaime it, that yee may bee wise in God: Gods wise man to world|lie wise, is but a sillie Gods Foole.


7. CHILDREN.
Note As for Children, their concep|tion is with sicknesse  ouer casting of heart: Their birth is with paines like the paines of hell: Their bui|all is with teares, after many a wea|risome night: Such pleasures are painefull pleasures: Apples of So dome are rotten vvithin.
Note But let vs suppone that, lik no|ble branches they liue and come to men, yea, to gray haires: They are our Heires, the end of all our paine|full drudgery  carefull conquests Note Though a man had conquered vnto them the whole vvorld, hee must looke vpon his conquest with a sigh, and say with the vvife Man

As for him that commeth after meeEccles. 2. 19 who knoweth whether hee shall bee a wise man or a foole, and yet he must bee master of all my labours: Man may conquise Lands to his Children, but Thrift, and Wisedome cannot bee bought: The most thriftie is often the father of the most for lorne.
What a vanitie is this? Note Certain|lie who vvould weigh well all the pleasures of Children with the paines past, and the feares for time to come, should find all the pleasures light like wole, light like Belshazzar:Dan. 5. 27 But his paines should be fou~d to be like Pharaoh  his Armie, that sankExod. 15. 10 downe like Leads in to the might it wa|ters: Note Such light pleasures are soone ouerswayed with leade~ paines: Note Too great pleasure in Children, is but a childish pleasure: The best of it is of ten laden shortly after with a lum|pish crosse, vvhich hath neede of a Si|mon for to beare vp the end of it forLuk. 23. 26 the helpe of the bearer.
Alas, the hearts of most men are too too much taken vp vvith that which may bee termed the sicknesse of Eli, or fathers follie, vvhich hard|lie1 Sam. 3. 13. can suffer controlement, or con|tradiction: They are so in loue with their Children, that though they by a leud life mak themselues vile, they vvil not restraine them Their minds are so giuen to them, that they are grieued to grieue them with fathers reproofes: But at last out-commeth the voyce of judgement, When I be|ginne1 Sam. 3. 12. I will also make amend.


8. LONG LIFE.
Last of al, if there be any thing that wold seeme to be desired, it shuld beIob. 2. 4. long lif all that a manhath he will giue it for his life: Note Though these be the vvords of a Lyar, yet most men will put their hand to the pen and sub|scribe the trueth thereof: Note All that most men haue, as Strength, Ho|nours, Riches Beautie, Pleasure*, Wisedome, Children, and all will

they giue for their Life: But vvhat is this life? were it neuer so long, but a season wherein poore men is tyred with toyles? What is it but a long martyr dome, and a stormie time of teares? What is this life? Let S. Iames answere, It is, said hee, but aIam. 4. 14. vapour. Nubicula est cito evanescit: Nascimur flentes morimur gementes: It beginneth with teares and endeth vvith groans: What is life? Let IobIob. 2. 22. answere, Mylife, saith hee, is wind. What is life? Let Isaiah answere, It is but a breath in our nostrile. WhatIsa. 2. 22. is life? Cry, said the Lord to Isaiah, What shall I cry? said Isaiah, Cry, All flesh is grasse. * What is life?Isa. 40. 6. A tale that is tolde, saith Moses:Psal. 90. 9. Note What is it? A flitting shaddow, a bubble in the vvater, a deceiueable dreame, the working of a weeuers Shttle which by winding heere and there vnwindeth it selfe to an end: Note Our life like the shadow on the Dyall insensiblie stealeth away.
See what it is of the vanitie of this life: Note It is begunne with weeping and maintained by sweatting, and at last endeth with a gaspe: Mors vlti|ma linea rerum: Thus mans life like the beautifull Apple of Sodome, so soone as it is toucht, is turned into dust.
What should moue a man to de|sire many dayes? Note While a man desireth many dayes, hee desireth that vvhich hee desireth not, viz. olde Age: What is olde Age, but manie dayes? Are not the old mansEccles. 12. 1 dayes called. The euill dayes, and the yeares of which he saith, I haue no plea|sure in them? What hath hee then? vvill ye say, if hee hath no pleasure? All sorts of paines olde Age sets on foote all the sortes of diseases. The Guts and the Grauels, and diuerse Defluxions, with many other mala|dies run vpon him and write a Ka|lender in his bones, vvherin his pain full itchings like Astronomers declare

to him vvhat weather it will bee to morrow.
Note Thus as ye see, manslife is but an irksome occupation  an houre of te|diousnesse,  to be short a verie com|pend of miserie, casie to bee vnder|stood without any commentarie of long discourse, if wee were schol|lers willing to learne.
Note May not men see how all that is below is sicke of the fluxe? for no|thing is permanent: Hee onely fit|teth sure, who can say with Dauid, Mine heart is fixed, O Lord.Psal. 108. 1
What shall I say more of this whole world? Note Let men thinke of it what they will, this is the con|stant trueth of an vncreated Testi|monie, this present euill world: It isGal. 1. 4. so euill that it is said to lye in wicked|nesse: The Lord neuer suffer out Soules to bee its Bed fellowes: such a Bed is a bloody bed, like that of Ieza|bel: Note A nest wherein is no rest, but terrour, of Conscience.
Before I end this point concer|ning

long life, let vs roll a space this short meditation in our minds.
What is in this world so worthie that it should bee so eagerlie desi|red? Continuallie while wee liue|wee are in feare of Death, for this cause seeke wee Physicke, Mirth, and Musicke, and all for to brre Death to the doore: And yet fooles that wee are, cerius out citius, soone or since wee must all draw neere to thePsal. 107. 18 doores of Death: There is no discharge in this warre.
Euerie man in this life hath his appointed time, wherein night and day he must waite till his aange come.Iob. 14. 14
Note Mens dayes are distributed vn|to them like houres seuemilie diui|ded vpon the Horologe: Some must liue but till One, another vnto Two, another vnto Three: The Palme tur|neth about  with its finger pointeth at the houre: So soone as mans ap|pointed houre is come, whether it bee the first, second, or third, there is no

more biding for him: Nec prece ni precio, neither by pryce not prayer can Death bee moued to spare him but an houre, no not. Note As the sound of the Clocke Bell ringing, his last houre passeth away with all speede, and turneth not againe, so must the poore man at Death with all haste packe him out of sight and no moe be seene vpon the land of the liuing.Isa. 38. 11
His houre beeing sounded, hee must with all haste remoue, that another might take place: One of whom none can surelie say, Hee shallEccles. 2. 19 bee a wise man or a foole.
Then all that the sillie man had painefullie prouided, must bee gi|uen to him whom the father often in his life beholding said with a sigh within himselfe, Beholde, him for whom is all this drudgerie; be|hold him for whom is all my toyle, and turmoyle, Who knoweth whetherEccles. 2. 19 hee shall bee a wise man or afoole? yet shall hee bee master of all my labours.
Now happie and thrise happie they whom GOD in mercie re|moueth in time from seeing heart|break of follie, and deboched man|ner of their godles posteritie: Scrip|ture accounteth this for a singulare benefite to the Righteous when he is remoued, that hee should not see theIsa. 57. . euill day to come



The sicke Man.
Alas, of our follies! While wee should seeke GOD and our Soules Saluation with the strongest straine and power of our Soule, by the cor|ruption of our Nature wee are caried on the by: We liue heere in a sinke of sinne: The older the world groweth, it groweth the worse: Euery Age in its foolish dotage, commeth in with the own guise, scorning former phancies with greater follies, yea, with foolish phrancies of which this predominant, that the wisedome of God, which in all times seemed follie to the wicked, did neuer seeme

such a follie as it doeth now, from the vpper brimme of sinne the world is come to the dregges: The image of the worlds vanitie is like that of Nebuchadnezars all gold and siluer in the vp most parts, but in this last  most corrupt age wee are come to the clay: Note If wee bee wise, we must seeke a new world in this olde world, for this will neuer grow a better. As the loue of Veniso~ wan Isaac to blesse one for another, so if we loue this world, with a blind loue, for a morsell of its Venison, wee will preferie it to Gods blessing: All the dayes of this wret|ched life, wee remaine in a fooles paradise. But I leaue this.
I desire your earnestlie Sir, that yee would let mee heare something more concerning olde Age, which is a thing that euery man desireth to come vnto, as if it were the best time of life.


The Pastour.
In this point appeareth the vanitie

of man  the weaknes of his wit: E|uery man would liue to be old, and yet no man desireth to bee olde: Let men say what they will, I speake of naturall men, all men desire to liue long, which is to bee olde, and yet they desire to remaine young: * Their wrinkles  their gray haires the com|panions of olde Age, the end of their desires are vn welcome vnto them: Note Then would they turne backe a|gaine, that with the Eagle theyPsal. 103. 5 might cast their Bill, whereby they might renew their youth: Note Heare old Nestor, who as Poets record, had liued three ages, a surfet of yeares: Heare him with his wish.
O miht praeteritos referat si Iupi|ter annos.
Like a foolish Pyla while hee is at the mouth of his Harberie, hee would raise vp the Sailes for to turne to the tempestuous sea againe: Note See howe the olde man if hee get but a faire Sunne blinke of a weekes health

after cloudes returning after the raine,Eccles 122. how hee will rejoyce, as though it shuld neuer be foule weather againe
Men may pyne themselues with desire of dayes: But doe what they can their life is like one that saileth, whether hee standeth or hee sitteth, whether hee watch or sleepe, hee is euer vpon his course.


The sicke Man.
Let it please you Sir, to continue in that discourse.


The Pastour.
Solomon in the last lecture of the Booke of his preaching letteth the young man see the vanitie of many yeares.
Note In that place is most clearelie set downe how olde Age the end of our appointed time is enwrappedIob. 14. 14 with a cloud of miseries, as beeing a time wherevnto like waues in a Sea, one trouble ariseth vpon the necke of another, the latter beeing euer worse than the former, till at last

fluctus decumanus, the last and the greatest waues of Death come and sweepe the man away: The imagi|narie sweetenesse of all earthly con|tentmentes, is closed and concluded with a bitter Farewell.
Note In that Lecture the Preacher bringeth in the old man like a Skellet whereat in the presence of all yong men hee pointeth out all his infir|mities, saying vnto the young Ones, Beholde, if such a life bee so much to bee desired.
First of all, hee pointeth at hisEccles. 12. 1 dayes calling them, The euill dayes, 2. Note Hee toucheth his yeares, cal|ling them, Yeares without pleasure: 3. Note He speaketh of the moyst, raw  rainie winter of his colde old Age, the dayes of sorrow, vvherein clouds returne after the raine: As one deflux|tion hath rained downe, another is arising like a cloude: 4. Hee poin|teth out all the imperfections of his bodie: When olde Age is come,

then the keepers of the house tremble,vers. 3. that is, the handes which kee|peth the bodie become sicke of the palsie, they tremble, so that they can not carry the cuppe to their heade:
Note Then the strong men bow themsel|ues, their legges are not able to beare them: Note Then the grinders cease, their teeth rotte and become mouldie, so that they can eate no bread: Note Then they waxe darke that looke out at the windowes, their eyes become blea|red and blind: Note Then the doores shall bee shut in the streetes, when thevers. 4. sound of the grinding is low, when the teeth the mouthes grinders are rot|ten, the lippes which are the doores of the streete of the mouth are shut, so that the old man cannot speak so distinctlie as of before: Note Then shall hee rise vp at the voyce of the Bird, olde men cannot sleepe, hee muste rise so soone as the Birds beginne to sing, or his sleepe is so vnfound, that the chirpe of a little Bird will wken

him: Note Then shall all the daughters of singing bee abased neither can an olde man sing himselfe for lacke of voyce, neither can hee heare o|thers sing for deafenesse, so both his wind pipes and his eares the daugh|ters of singing are abased: Note The~ shallvers. 5. he be afraide of the high thing, he dar climbe no more, hee is no more for Stares and vpper Chambers: * Then feare shall bee in the way, while they walke they tremble as one that is a|fraide to fall: Note Then the Almond tree shall flourish, their gray haires growe white like the flourishes and blossomes of an Almond: Note Then a Grasse Hopper shall bee a burden, they are so weake, that they can beare nothing, their knees are weak as water, so that they are a burden vnto themselues: See howe the weight of a grasse hopper which is lit|tle greater than a Bee, is a burden to the man of yeares: Note Then shall thevers. 6. siluer cord bee loosed, and the golden

bowle shall bee broken, his Sinewes shall become slacke, and his Gall shall breake: Note Then shall the pitcher bee broken at the well, the vaines shall draw no more blood out of the well of the Leuer: Note Then shall the wheele bee broken at the Cisterne, his Lightes become so otten and riuen, that he can no more draw any breath with his broken Bellowes: Note See howe Death stealeth vpon vs with insensi|ble degrees.
Note Behold, O young man the ana|tomie of thy selfe, when thou shal haue gotte~ thine hearts wil of years: Note Heere is thy portrature drawen be|fore hand: Painters can portray but according as they see; but tymes to come are present vnto God: Heere is thy portrature for the dayes of olde age that is to come: Note Beholde thy selfe in it before hand, a receptacle of maladies: See there thy balde head, and thy bleared eyes, and thy deafe eare, and thy wrinkled face,

and thy rotten teeth, and thy stin|king breath, hauing thy body bo|wed and crouched with thy third foote into thine hand: Note Of thee may bee put out a Riddle, What is it which hauing three feete, walketh with one foote into its hand, I shall as|soile it, It is an olde man going with a staffe: To this let mee subjoyne a|nother: What is it that hath his sto|macke into a Booste, and his eyes into his pocket? It is the same, viz. An olde man fedde with boost Confections, or cured with co~tinuall purgations, ha|uing his Spectacles his eyes of glasse, into a case: His dayes are dayes of drousinesse: All his pleasures are out of tune and temper. Note Beholde how this proude and loftie creature is so curbed, withered, and wrinkled, that it hath nothing but the vgelie shape of a creature.
Note Thus after as in a dote hee hath tottered some space about at last hee falleth downe to dust, and dust |nethEccle. 12. 7

to the earth as it was: That is pe|tere principium: Note Then all his deuises and his discourses, all his arguments and his syllogismes for Riches, Ho|nour, and preferment, inferre a con|clusion which is but petitio principij, a sort of argument scorned by the Learned, as beeing an argument de|claring the weaknes of y^e Disputer so after we haue spended our wits with our wordes, all our dispute at last is fou~d to be but vpo~ trashes  triffles, or as wee say, de lana caprina: At last all commeth to this, that wee are in end found to haue beene neither in moode nor figure, but onely jangling and cangling, and at last returning to that where once wee beganne.
Thus hee who in his youth step|ped statelie vpon the ground, who hauing the world at wish, was wont to brag it out with the brauest, with big  darring words, after that in his life he hath beene tossed with losses, cares, and crosses, hee lyeth down.

into his greene  growing bedde, that dust may returne to the earth as it was.
Note The Sunne at night seemeth to lye downe, in a bed of darknesse, but like a Gyant in the morning hee ari|seth with force of light: But man once dead shall not awake till the hea|uensIob, 14. 12. bee no more.
Note A man in his youth with a pro|phane seared Conscience may swal|low ouer Camels of pleasant  pro|fitableMa. 23. 24 sinnes without any paine, his heart beeing secured with a slumbe|ing and superficiall quiet: But so soone as the tyme of the rotten Age commeth, all the sweetenesse of the sinnes of his youth is turned in|to gall and worme-wood, the Con|science of his by past euill spent life doggeth behind him.
All the dregges and drosse of do|louis fall downe vpon this tyme: Then the mirth of youth is turned into mourning: This is the nature of

sinne, the joye thereof euer endeth into sorrow: Who doeth not see how the mirth of youthfull lusts pas|seth away with the faire blossomes of youth? after y^t commeth old age, life the time of the fall of the leafe, a time of deadlie diseases: After that man in his youth hath drunken at the brimme the clearest pleasures of sinne in his olde sicklie age, when hee hath greatest neede of comfort, then must hee drinke the doolefull and drumblie dregges of sorrow.
This is the course of mans pilgri|mage, in this valey of teares: Wee come weeping into this Worlde where vvee walke through troubles and temptations, vvhereof except that God bee more mercifull, the end shall bee bitternesse, brimstone fire.
Alas, for our benummed heart: Oh, that vvee were sensible of our owne miserie, and could weigh what it is to toile into this world, a wilder|nesse

of woe! What is heere that should tye our heart from the loue of Heauen? If vvee would speake with Scripture, wee would say, that a thousand yeares in Heauen are but like one day on earth, and againe, if vvee would speake with trueth, vve must say, that one day on Earth see|meth longer than a thousand yeeres in Heauen: Note Dolour and griefe pro|longeth that which is made short by joye and pleasure: Note An houre in a painefull prison is longer than a vveeke in a pleasant Palace: Note Let mee speake a Paradoxe: A Child of a day is of a thousand yeares of age,2 Pet. 3. 8 older than Methushelah: Why? A day on Earth is like a thousand yeares in Heauen for length: Fye, fye, on our foolish vanitie, that wee cannot consider: Note A Childe of a day may bee content with a day of life, and say, if hee could speake, I am full of dayes, yea, full of yeares and full of labour, I wish to be in heauen, wher

a thousand yeeres seeme not so long as a day, yea, where Eternitie it selfe shal neuer seeme to be too lo~g: Note Eye vpon too great desire of dayes, while wee liue on earth, as vvormes vvee creepe on it: In death we creepe in it.
Note Mans heart on earth, is like a tooth in the jaw, the deeper roote it hath, the more paine it causeth, when it is in drawing out with the Turkesse Note A heart fixed to the earth and nailed to the ground either with pleasure or profite or desire of yeeres cannot be rugged from thence with|out renting of its filme: Note If mans heart bee sette vpon long life, hee shall neuer want the disease of the feaze of disease, the messenger of Death: A feeble fitte of a feuer will put him in a maze of amazement: Note In a vvorde, doe the best hee can, all the dayes of his life are but labourPsal. 90. 10 and sorrow: Note The best man that liueth, so soone as hee beginneth to liue, must say with a sigh, All theIob. 14. 14

dayes of mine appointed time will I waite till my changing come: See I pray you, howe the life of man as with loose reines and a laide downe head is euer in a course like a swift Dro|medairie, posting to a change.
Note Beholde, Sir, howe foolish this world is, that gappeth so for many yeares, that all that men haueIob. 2. 4. euen to their skinne, they would giue it for their life: Note See and consider how the olde man is besieged with dolours and diseases on all sids, some set on his eyes, some on his eares, some on his teeth, some on his tongue, some on his legges, some on his lights, and some on his liuer: Note See how all sortes of diseases is like flesh fes prey vpon the old man, not leauing a free bit of him from the sole of his feete to the crowne of his head: See what a gostlie sight it is to beholde such ratling bones couered with a wrink|led skinne: Note Now after that hee hath coughed and spitted on a space

some few yeares, beeing a burden to himselfe, and a cumber vnto others, at last hee sickneth and taketh bed, and falleth into the hands of Death, which holdeth him with fearefull grippes: Note Then Death commeth with a colde sweate ouer-running all his bodie, looketh him grimme in the face: Note Then his jaw bones beginne to hang down, and his face to grow pale, and his cheekes wan: Then his eyes water, their stringes breake, his tongue faltereth, his breath shorteneth and smelleth of earth, his heart lifteth, his throate rattleth, his joynts stiffen: After that Death hath made a breach with the shotes of great artilerie whereby it hath beaten and broken downe all the noble partes of the bodie, Death commeth in like a strong man, and grippeth so the hearte of the poore man, that by diuerses gaspes hee ma|keth his heart-strings to leape asund: *That done, the ruinous house of man

falleth, and his Soule leapeth out with his gaspes, which in an instant must compeare before its Iudge, ei|therMatth. 25 34. 41. for to heare, Come, or Depart. Let your attention yet goe a little a long with mee.
See what it is of olde age:Note Con|sider how feeble it is, being a burden vnto it selfe, a time vnfitte for anie affaire: And yet most men in their youth swynishlie wallow in vnclean|nes, thinking, to keepe the old yeares for the amending of their life  for all other spirituall adoes, as repen|tance and returning vnto God, as if a man beeing for to goe a farre and foule journey, should lay the grea|test burden vpon the weakest horse:Prou. 12. 10 A good man regardeth his beast, how much more should hee regard him|selfe: Note What regard is heere, when a man in his youth rolleth his origi|nall sinne, like a snow-ball among ac|tuall sins, to such a huge greatnesse, that in his strongest youth hee is not

able to moue it, and yet delayeth, thinking that when hee is olde hee shall easilie remoue it and remeede it: The sinnes of youth draw vpon old age deadnesse of heart and dulnesse of zeale: It is good that man with a watchfull eye holde in perpetuall jealousie the cunning slightes and windings of the deceit of sinne in youth: And therefore, while it is youth time, while God calleth, while the wind serueth, while the Sea is calme, while the Shippe is sound, let vs sette foorth in time to saile toward the port of Saluation,  the harberie of Grace in Glorie: Note O vaine man, who in thy youth turneth the grace of thy God into wantonnesse, and thinketh to come home to God againe when thou is olde, what shall God doe with thy blind lame olde age? Is that a sacrifice for God? Offer it vnto thy Gouernour, saith Ma|lachie.Mal. 1. 8. If a blind or lame beast wil not please a man, what shall God doe with that which is more blind than a

beast. Note The King of Babilon com|mandedDan. 1. 4. Ashpenaz the master of his Eneuches to mak choise of Childre~ in whom was no blemish,  such as had a|bility in the~ to stand in the Kings Palace: What? shall the Deuill get the finest flower of our age, the strength of our dayes, and the abilitie of our Soule, and thereafter shall God, the King of Heauen, bee serued with the blind2 Sam. 5. 6 and the lame such as the verie Soule of Danid did hate? Note It is good afore hand to bee furnished with Graces, which may be as y^e staffe of our old age? *If we spe~d our stre~gth in our youth at the seruice of God, he shall neuer cast vs off in our olde age: Note But what shall I say? nothing will waken foolish Virgines while they sleepe,Matth. 25 11 till that shrill voyce bee heard, The Bridegrome is come: Note When it is no more time, me~ who co~tented them|selues with counterfeit shewes  de|ceiuing shadowes, arise, run,  seeke for Oyle, which they shall not be able to get, either for buying or begging.
Note By all this my discourse Sir, ye may perceiue that the long date of dayes bringeth men vnto dotage,  after dotage vnto dust from thence hee came.
Note Man of few yeares is foolish vn|to fourtie, a little after that folie hath left him, dotage succeedeth which vnderstandeth no Precepts.
In this Mappe of the olde mans miserie, yee may see whether or not man haue cause to bee greedie of many yeares.
Note Though the world were not vaine, yet yee see that man is but vanitie in the world: Let all men heere lay aside such doting vanities, that bring too doolefull miseries.
Let all flesh learne that: Note Nothing out of God can affoord sound joye and contentment: Note If a man want God, were hee an Emperour as high indeede, as the King of Babylon was in conceite, euen aboue the starsIsa. 14. 13. of God, his life shall bee crossed with

these thee shrude companions, viz. The griefe of thinges by past, the paines of things present, and the feare of after claps.


The sicke Man.
The thought of such thinges be|ginne to waine mine heart from the loue of all thinges worldlie: I pray you yet a little to continue in that purpose concerning the vanities of things below. Note The meditations therof lik sharpe  keene spurs should prick and stirre vs forword from the loue of this vnto the loue of these lasting things which are aboue.


The Pastour.
The sight of this worlde is like that vision of Ezechiel, wherein is often said, Turne thee yet againe, andEzk. 8 13 thou shalt see moe abominations, than all these: So say I Sir, Turne you yet againe heere, and yee shall see grea|ter vanities than either these of Strength or of Honour, or of Riches, or of Beautie, Pleasure, Wisedome,

or long Life: Beholde a vanitie, which is the cause of all these vani|ties, viz. Sinne and iniquitie where vnto we are all subject so long as we liue in this world the region of cor|ruption, where if a man stand on Gods side, he shall become the drun|kards song with Dauid, or a by-word with Iob among the chidren of Be|liel.
Note Looke thorow this world, and consider sin in all sortes of men,  sorrow following euer sinne at the heeles: In this place behold DauidPsal. 6 6. making his bedde to swimme with his teares for his adulterie: In that place againe, behold Peter weeping btterlie for his denyall: In this placeLuk. 22. 92 againe, behold Lot, vexing his righ|teous2 Pet. 2. 8. Soule from day to day, for the vn|lawfull deedes of the wicked: In that place behold S. Paul groaning vn|der a dead bodie of sinne, euen a bodie of death: No man is able toRom. 7. 24 hunt all the corners of mans corrup|tion:

From particular men let vs come to whole Churches, defiled with spots and blemishes: Note Heere is the Church of Ephesus, which hathReuel. 2. 4. left her first Loue. Note There is Smyrna where some of Gods best seruantes are cast into prison: Heere againevers. 10. is Pergamus defiled with the doctrinevers. 14. of Balaame, and of the Nicolaitanes: In Thyatira the whoore Iezabel sat as a Prophetesse teaching and seducingvers. 20 Gods seruants to committe fornication,  to eate things sacrificed vnto idoles:Reuel. 3. 1. Sardis had a name to liue, and yet wasvers. 15. dead: Laodicea was neither cold nor hote, so that God threatned to spewe her out of his mouth: Note Among all the seuen Churches onelie Philadel|phiaReuel. 3. 10 kept the word of his patience, and yet her life was not without feare tovers. 11 losse her Crowne: Behold, I come quicklie, said the Lord, hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy Crowne: Note But long since hauing neglected this precept, shee is be|reaued

of that comfort  Crowne: Note Where nowe are all these most flourishing Churches of Asia? where now are all these Churches of Grecia most glorious in Constantius dayes? Because they helde not fast that which they had, they haue all lost their Crowne: By deare Experience haue they learned what vanitie is.
Note Behold and see how this world is like a working sea, wherein sinne like a gall winde or strong Tyde car|rieth many tribulations and destru|ctions* Note from Countrie to Contrie Note All is made thereby subject vnto changes lik the Moone, Crownes haue their composse triumphs haue their tombes: All our sweetest thinges in end proue but honied poyson.
Thus all that yee see heere below is vnconstant: Note The greatest king|domes are turned about as with whirling wheeles: The Kinges vpon its spokes are marked vpon this ditt  Regnabo, regno, regnam; su  sine regno.
One Prince is lying vpon his backe, another hath a spok in his hand climing vp the Wheele: The third is vpon the top: The fourth is fallen, hauing his heeles vp  his head down: Note All the things of this world are di|uided into foure: Either they lye low, or they climbe, they stand, or they are fallen: The poore man is lying vpon his backe without any helpe or hope: Another is fall of climbing con|ceits: The third beeing there where all would bee euen vpon the toppe, the higher hee is mounted the grea|ter is his fall: Note He then falleth, that another may stand in his place: while hee againe is lifted vp hee must stand with feare and heare, Let him that1 Cor. 10 12. standeth take heede, lest hee fall: Note At last also to him the ha~dwritting com|meth foorth, that in Gods, ballance he is found wanting,  that therforeDan. 5. 27 his kingdome must bee taking from him: Then all the pleasures of his wine  of his whoores, then all his fea|sting,

his mirth, and his Musicke is turned into a trembling feuer, which maketh all his joyntes to shiuer, and his knees to smyte one against ano|ther: Beholde, and consider, how the glorie of Kings, the gods of thisPsal. 82. 6. world is brought to destruction.
Though their heads bee golden, their feete are but of clay like Nebuc|hadnezars image: Gods litle stone cutDan. 2. 34 out without hands, is able to bruise  grinde in powder, their Golde, Siluer, Brasse, Yron, and Clay, for the allaying of the pride of their pea|cocke feathers: Hee can let them see the blacknesse of their feete: None of them can stand before the winde of that voyce: Returne ye Childre~ of men.Psal. 90. 3
Though their honours which they doe broach with so bold a face were reared aboue the highest cloudes, and exalted aboue the starrie Skie yet must they descend at the Eue|ning of their life, and make their bed with the beggers in the dust.
Thus after they haue drunke vp the pleasures of this world as Behe|moth the Riuer of Iordan, they at lastIob. 40. 23. find all to be but vanitie and change: Note When their houre is come, they must quite all, and make resignation of all into the hands of a new succes|sion, for to goe dwell in the Land of darknesse and shadow of death: Note Who knewe the weight of their Crownes, they would neuer be so sicke for them, as King Ahab was1 Kin. 21 4 for Nabothes vine yarde.
If of any man may bee said, this is most true of him who is in highestIob, 14. 22 places, While his flesh is vpon him, hee shall haue paine, and his Soule within him shall mourne: After that for a space hee hath feasted with Belshaz|zar,Dan. 5. 2. and fatted himselfe against the day of slaughter with Wheat, Wine, and Oyle, at last shall hee know, but too late, that no Feast is continuall, but that of a good Conscience.
* Oh, that great men while their

minds with Dauid are beastlie, wouldPsal. 73. 22 with Dauid goe to the Sanctuarie of God, for to learne that if great men be not good men, though they were Kinges, they are sette in slipperie places.
Note Seeing Kings and Kingdomes are but vanitie, what is that on earth that is not vaine? There is nothing that can stretch to eternitie below.
Note In this world all men are stran|gers in their birth Pilgrimes, in their life,  at last lik combersome guests by death they are thrust out at doores: The language of Tabor was that It isLuk. 9 33. good for vs to bee heere: But the lang|uage of heaue~ proclaimed that Peter knew not what he said: Striue to keepe euer your heart loose from the earth:Reuel. 15. 1 The glassie sea, of this vvorld is ne|uer without tempests.
Note Hee that would haue his Soule wained from the loue of this world, let him remember but these sixe things: 1. What hee is in himselfe:

2. What is within him. 3. What is aboue him: 4. VVhat is beneath him. 5. What is before him: 6. What is behind him.
Note Man in himselfe is but dust and ashes, a cage of corruptio~: Thrise with one breath is he called, Earth, earth,Ier. 22. 29. earth! Earth by creation, sustenta|tion and corruption, saith Bernard: Within him is a blind minde, a per|uerse will, and most vile affections,Gen. 6. 5. yea, so that euerie imagination of the thoughts of his hearte are onelie euill continuallie: Aboue is a weightie ven|geance, hanging by a small twined threed of Gods patience: Below himMatth. 12 45 is a fierie fornace and the smoking brimstone gulfe of euerlasting bur|nings: Against him Sathan and sinne with their legions posting to and fro, so that when one departeth, it is but to fetch seuen others worse than him|selfe: Note Before him is nothing but miserie, volumnes of woes, and lamen|tations: Those bee his Day-booke:

Behind him pale Death followeth with stealing steppes: Note See vvhat a masse of miserie like an hudge armie besetteth and besiegeth the whole course of the life of man, till death at last come with the dead stroke, and separate the Soule from the lumpish heauinesse of clay: Then they that die in the Lord are blessed, yea, saith the Spirit, That they may restReuel. 14. 13 from their labours. But because the day is alreadie spent, yee shall now carefullie thinke vpon that which hath beene said.
It was a speciall propertie requi|red in Sacrifices fitte for God, that they could chewe the cude: I leaueLeuit. 11. 7 that which ye haue heard vnto your nights meditations. I pray God that by his Spirit he would conuoy into the substance of that which your eare hath receiued.
Before I leaue you, let vs all bend our knees vnto God in prayer, that it would please his Highnesse to

blinke downe vpon you with a re|concealed face: His boundlesse and bottomelesse mercies did neuer yet know how to breake a bruised reed, or quench a smoaking flaxe.
Let vs pray.


A Prayer for the sicke Man.
_O LORD the GOD of the Spirits of all flesh, the preseruer of men, in who~ is both power for to saue and to destroy: Thou art the true Teacher of Israel: Thou hast the keyes of Heauen, of Hell, and of the Graue: Come and cast the armes of thy mercie about this sorrow-beaten sinner: Re|joyce

him with the comforts of thy Spirit: Inspire him with holy mo|tions, and with the life of Grace, till hee bee made partaker of the diuine2 Pet. 1. 4 Nature. Thou hast alreadie made his heart to melt within him at the sight of his transgressions: Thou hast sette all his sinnes in order before him: This is out of thy great mercie, wherby thou wold not suffer him to freeze in the dregs of his corruptions: Now at last, LORD, after thou hast refined him in the fierie fornace of temptations, send him reliefe, re|fresh his Soule, and coole it with thy comfortes: Let thy Spirit come vnto him with glad tydinges, that all his sinnes are forgiuen him.
Oh, what sorrow of heart hath hee had since he hath felt the power of thy wrath! His poore two eyes haue beene like two fountaines of teares trickling downe both day and night The apple of his eye hath euer beene droping downe, the salt brimie and

bitter teares of sorrow: Oh, how bitter lie hath he wept since this bat|tell beganne? Hath hee not powred out his heart like water before thee, in bemoaning his transgrassions?
Now, LORD, for thy mercie sake make him free of all excessiue griefe: Beholde him with the tendrest eye of thy compassions: Ridde him of all gripping griefes of Conscience: Settle in his heart a godlie sorrow|which may cause repentance neuer to bee repented of: Bee pleased to|ward him: Turne thine angerie face from the bloodie colour of all his transgressions, and looke vpon the perfect and vnspotted righteousnes of thy Lambe, whose blood hath blanched the red Crimsin sinnes ofIsa. 1. 18. the world. No flesh, O LORD, is able to stand before thee, when thou art angrie, for what is man which is consumed before the moath? He dwel|leth into an house of clay, and hisIob. 4. 19. foundation is in the dust: When it

shall please thee, hee must lye downe into his growing bedde, and there say to corruption, Thou art my father,Iob. 17. 14 and to the worme, Thou art my mother and my sister. O, who shall stand when thou shall say, Returne yee Children of men.Psal. 90. 3.
O gracious GOD, pittie this creature that was once formed to thine owne image, which once lost, thou hast repaired with the Blood of thy Sonne: Stampe his heart vvith thy liuelie Image and coine it with thy countenance: In|sinuate thy selfe into his Soule, and compasse him with thy comfortes: Let thy poore Seruant heere who hath beene most fearefullie tossed and scorched with fierie temptati|ons, find a spiritual cooling  refresh|ing, in thy mercifull bowels: Tem|per so the Spirit of his minde, bowe his will, and incline his affections, that his chiefest delight may bee in thee: Couer his sillie Soule vnder

the shadow of thy Winges, vntill all these calamities bee ouerpast. Re|fresh this paunting Soule braying af|terPsal. 42. 1 thy water brookes. Giue him a newe hearte, put within him a new Spirite, take this stonie heart out of his breast and in the place there|of put an heart of flesh.
By thy word, O LORD, wee haue let him see what the vanitie of this world is, how vnconstant are all things below, and how they are tur|ned vpon a whirling wheele: O mak his heart consider that there is no|thing heere on earth that can bring solide contentment vnto the heart: What are the best of our dayes on earth, but labour and sorrow? Is not our life a vapour, a breath? arePsal. 90 9. not our dayes consumed as a tale that is tolde?
Make the consideration of such naughtie thinges below moue him so much the more to minde the thingsColl. 3. 1. that are aboue: Let him know y^t in the

surging waues of this worldlie Sea there is no permanent peace, so no crosse shall come vpon him vna|wares: Teach him by practise and experimentall feeling of thy Graces, that thy strength is made perfect in weakenesse: Let him feele that it is a fruite of thy lone, that thou suffe|reth him to be afflicted: Sanctifie his sorrowes,  make them to lead him vnto the face and presence of his GOD.
By the loathing of things earthlie, worke in his heart a loue  a liking of things heauenlie, an ardent desire of thy celestiall dainties: Let him know y^t so soone as he shall come to thee, that with thy face thou shall fill the desires of his Soule, for in thy face isPsal. 16. 11 fulnesse of joyes O thou to whom no|thing is impossible, lift vp his Soule toMatth. 19 16 affect that happines so that earnest|lie his Soule may desire to see that day when he shall be cloathed with the long white robe of Christes righ|teousnesse,

euen the innocencie of thy deare Sonne Iesus: Couer him Lord, couer him with the golden fleece of thy righteous Lambe: Par|sume him with the sweete sauour of Christes merites, thy mercies: Let the Blood of his Aduocate plade for his pardon: Naile all his sinnes to the Crosse of thy Sonne Iesus. Rid out of his heart all doubts and difficulties, draw his eyes from loo|king vpon himselfe, make thine own selfe the object of his sight in the mirrour of the Gospel, wherein as with open face hee may behold as in a2 Cor. 3. 18 glasse, the glorie of the Lord, and bee changed into the same image from glo|rie to glorie, euen as by the Spirit of the Lord.
Seeing a good man is mercifull toProu. 12. 10 his beast, how much more wilt thou bee, who are mercie it selfe?
Thou who art most plenteous in mercie, vnlocke wee intreat thee the treasures of thy mercies and affoard

vnto thy seruant such graces where|by hee may come to thy Glorie Send a Seraphin for to kindle hiIsa. 6. 6. zeale and affection toward thee Publish  proclaime vnto his Sou that thou art pacified, and that tho hast receiued a ransome.
These days by past, LORD, thou ha him trained vp with diuerse fearefu temptations, whereout of let it please thee now to giue him an out gate O put thy quickening Spirit within him, that by the force of thy life he dying vnto sin, may liue vnto The who art our life, and lengthening of our dayes: Thine eare hath heard the heauie groanes of his hearte, which haue made thine heart to bee turned within thee: O now let thy compassions bee so kindled together that hee may in all boldnesse come to the Throne of thy Grace, permit him such familiaritie with thee, whereby hee may cast his burden vp|on thee.Psal. 55. 22
Giue him, LORD, a full resoluti|on to submitte himselfe alwayes to thine appointments, that his heart neuer anie more repine nor grudge at thy proceedings: By the finger of thy Grace frame fullie his heart for the following of thy will.
Gracious Father rouse vp his Soule and raise vp the good motions of thy Spirit within him: Make him in mercie to growe in Grace, which may worke a deepe detestation of all bygone slippes, whether secret or knowne, with an eager and earnest striuing to bee renewed in the Spirit of his minde.
O thou whose bowels rumble lowd with compassions, pacifie and calme all the clamours of his Con|science: Thy mercie is most mag|nified when it relieueth the extre|mest miserie: Thy light is most pre|cious when it shineth into the depth of discomfort and darknesse: O pit|tie and pardon him, besprinkle him

with the Blood of vertue, that beeing purged from all carnall and spiritual vncleanneste, hee may grow vp vn|to full holinesse in thy feare, and so may end his life in thy fauour, the surest Sa~ctuarie of a troubled Soule
Pittie the distressed members of thy Church: Many a time haue theyPsal. 129. 1. 2. c. afflicted her from her youth: The plo|wers plowed vpon her backe, ma|king long furrowes, let them all bee comfounded and turned backe, that hate Zion: confound all hatchers of Hereies, let them bee as the grasse vpon the house tops, which withe|reth afore it groweth vp, where|with the Mower filleth not his hand, nor hee that bindeth sheaues his bo|some: Protect Her by thy cloud by day, direct Her by night by the pil|lar of fire, let neuer the bright star of thy Gospel goe downe, which poin|teth out vnto vs the Sauiour Salua|tion of our Soule O righteous LORD, thou hast juste cause against this

Church to make Her Sunne goe downe at noone, and darknesse to surprise vs in the cleare day, with a sudden and ineuitable sin prizall and destruction: () GOD, blesse vs with an holie vnion, and banish farre off the Deuill of diuision.
Blesse our gracious SOVERAIGNE the Kings Majestie: Mak him to joy in thy strength,  greatlie to rejoyce in thy Saluation: Direct His Heart  His mouth by thy Spiit,  giue him his hearts desire, and with-hold not the requeast of his lips: Giue to Him the courage of Dauid, and the wisdome of Solomon. Be fauourable to His Royall Match: Inflame Her Heart with the loue of thy deare Sonne Iesus: Let all Her desire be to know him crucified: Make Her an happie Mother of happie Children, euen a blessed Mother in Israel.
Blesse our Nobilitie, make them noble like the men of Berea so that they may haue courage for y^e Truth

And seeing, LORD, that as wee may see in this our deare Friende, man is like to vanitie, and that his dayes are as a shadow that passeth a|way: Take vs to thy schoole and teach vs to number our fewe and euill dayes, that wee may apply our hearts to wisedome  to wel doing.
Let it please thine Highnesse to grant vs these out sutes for the onely sake of Iesus, the Author and finisher of our faith, the verie Anchor of our Soule, the onelie stay and staffe of our hope, the ende and rest of all created desires, the true substance of ceremoniall shewes and shadowes.
To Him with Thee and thy Spi|rit of Grace, bee praise and thankes|giuing, glorie and dominion, now and euermore, AMEN.
If your sleepe in the night be inte|rupted cause read vnto you y^e Booke of Ecclesiastes, the strong enemie of all worldlie vanitie: Moses his psalme which is y^e ninty Psalme shalbe meete

for your meditations, cause reade also the 1 Peer chap. I.
The LORD sanctifie all your spi|rituall exercises, to the comfort of your wearied Soule: The GOD of all mercie blesse the little sparke of Grace enkindled by his Spirite in you, till it spread into a big flame: GOD with a little Dewe of newe Grace can so blsse  prosper ano|ther Grace alreadie giuen, that Hee will make it, though so little like a graine of mustard to growe towardes a tree.
Blesse GOD, who hath not suf|fered you to tread the fearefull and desperate path of these who from the beginning of their life vnto the end haue beene nothing but disturbers of peace, waues of the Sea foaming out their owne shame, and casting vp mire and dirt vpon the shore of their whole couersation.
The LORD edge the little measure of your weake Faith, with a longing

desire after fulnesse of perswasion: And season your heart with sauing Grace. The Lord make his most Sa|cred and powerfull Word so to en|ter into the secretes of your Soule that it may strike a dead stroke at the sweetest of your sinnes, that your sinnes being slaine, your Soule may liue, and haue a portion in Gods new Ierusalem, till yee come there, the LORD guard you with an inuincible troupe of his blessed Angels. The Loue of the Father, the Grace of the Sonne, with the Peace his Spirit bee with you for euer.





THE FIFT DAYES Conference. Of the last Iudgement.

The sicke Man.
OVanity of vanities, O vanity, of vanities, all is vainity: this whole night I haue dreamed of vanitie: I thinke that my Dreameproceedeth from vesterdays Conference, for Solomon saith, that aEccles. 5. 3. dreame co~meth through the multitude of businesse: Note Well is the man that is well occupyed in the day, for in the night such businesse maketh an im|pression into his Spirite: An euill doer in the day ca~not often dreame of good into the night: Note Happie

is the man that hath made the Lord the onelie leuell of his life: What houres can it now bee? I long for a sight of my louing and comfortable Pastour.


The Pastour.
Heere I am Sir, come againe for to see what progresse yee haue made into your Christian pilgrimage: Ye heard yesterday of the vanitie of all things that are below: I desire now to know how your heart hath beene affected since.


The sicke Man.
I haue Sir all this night deamed that this world is but vanitie, a lif|ting vp for a fall, a race vnto a ruine I see nowe that all the profites and pleasures thereof are but lik a rotten Nut, when men thinke to cracke the kernell they find nothing but worms with rottenesse  bitternesse which prouocke the eater to spit. O how the pure and cleane streames of di|uine grace are stained with y^e stirring

of y^e foule puddle of corrupt nature.
I am greatlie oblished to my God, who hath giuen to me such patience in my sicknesse, that I haue beene able to heare that heauenlie discours which ye had yesterday concerning earthlie things: This life as I per|ceiue is nothing but a toilesome task of cares, the best of our time is but labour  sorrow, our ease is a dis|ease, and wee rot in our rest: Mine heart is no more in this world He is but a foole, and so shall hee feele who euer hee bee that is too bent for the transitorie trashes thereof.
Note Heere is not our rest: Rest heere is not our best: As water by stan|ding becometh stinking, so the Spi|rit rotteth by carnall rest: The ease of the flesh is the disease of the Spirit: If wee bee without God in the world,Eccle. 2. 17 in our well we shall find but woe, in our wealth but want, in our loue butProv. 14. 13 lcke, in our mirth but mone: In laugh|ing the heart shall be sorrowfull, and

the end of that mirth shalbe heauiness Without God in greatest compan is greatest melancholie.
Hee whose eyes the god of thEphes 4. 4. world hath not blind-folded, may easilie perceiue that all that is heere is but vanitie which vexeth the spiri Note What follie is this to take pleasure in such perishing things, which can bring no comfort at the conclusion of all, when dust must returne to theEccle. 12. 7 earth as it was?
Oh, that wee were wise to consi|der that while wee are heere, we are compassed about with a bodie of sin, in a world of wickednesse: All sortes of euil in this world with eager pur|sute persecute the Soule of sinfull man, all the depthes of Sathan and policies of Hell concure into this worke.
Now Sir I intreat you seeing yee haue spoken so heauenlie of the earth, that it would please you to say some-what concerning the last

judgement  the jyes of Heauen.


The Pastour.
Such a matter is verie vnpleasant, yea, very fearefull to a naturall man: It is written that while as S. Paul rea|sonedAct. 24. 25 of Righteousnesse, Temperance, and Iudgement to come, Felix, who was but a naturall man, trembld all while hee heard him, and there|fore desired him to leaue off prea|ching any more, and to goe his way till a more fitte and conuenient time: Note Thogh the wicked tremble at this discourse, yet it is co~fortable  pro|fitable into y^e godly: Note I wish at God that I had that tongue of the Learned,Isa. 50. 4. that thereby I might produce these reasons of S. Paul which hee vttered while hee reasoned vpon this matter before Felix.
This Sir yee must first know that the day of Iudgement shall bee a great day a day of Law when all the Sonnes of Adam must compeare before the eyes of him who seeth our

thoughts a farre off, euen to the very depths of our heart.


The sicke Man.
First of all, I desire to heare of the time that Christ shall come into the Cloudes for to judge both quicke and dead.


The Pastour.
As for the particular time of that great and glorious comming of the Lord, no man can define whe~ it shall bee whether in the night or in the day, at mid-night or cock-crow: It was a time hid from Christ himselfe as man, while hee was heere in the dayes of his flesh, neither thought hee shame to tell it: His vvords and his counsell concerning that, are of great weight: But that day, said hee,Mar. . 32 and that houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels which are in heauen, nei|ther the Sonne, but the Father: Now what was his Counsell therevpon? Take heede, said hee, watch and pray,vers. 33. for yee know not when the time is: For

the Son of man is as a man taking a farvers. 34 journey, who left his house, and gaue authoritie to his seruantes, and to euerie man his work;  commanding the Por|tervers. 35. to watch: Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house commeth, at Euen or at mid-night, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning, lest comming suddenlie hee finde youvers. 36. sleeping: And what I say vnto you, I say vnto you all, watch. S. Peter saith,2 Pet. 3. 10 that hee shall come as a Theefe in the night.
Note By all this it euidentlie appea|reth that no man can designe the particular time of the comming of the Lord vnto Iudgement: No tongue can tell whether his com|ming shall bee in the night, or in the day, in the morning, or in the eue|ning, at the prayer, or at the prea|cing: * Watch yee therefore, saide Christ, and this he doubled againe, And what I say vnto you, that I say vnto you all, watch.



The sicke Man.
What can bee the cause where|fore God hath kept vp to himselfe the particular knowledge of that great day?


The Pastour.
Note God in great wisedome hath hidde from all flesh the time of his comming, as hee hath concealed from all men the houre and forme of their death, that all may striue to be readie at all times.


The sicke Man.
Though this Day bee not parti|cularlie knowne, thinke yee not but it is verie neere?


The Pastour.
S. Iames in his dayes saide, TheIam. 5. 8. comming of the Lord draweth neere.


The sicke Man.
But since hee said that, it is more than a thousand and fiue hundreth yeares, and yet all thinges remaine euen as they were, haue I heard some men say.



The Pastour.
Note These bee the words of them2 Pet. 3. 3 whom S. Peter calleth Scoffers: Knowing this first, saith hee, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, wal|king after their owne lustes: And saying where is the promise of his comming?vers. 4. for since the Fathers fell a sleepe, all things centine as they were from the beginning of the Creation: Note This is as much as if they had said, If there were a God indeede for to come to judgement, hee would not bee so slacke in his comming: But what saith S. Peter o that? The Lord is notvers. 9. slacke concerning his promise (as some me~ count slacknes) but is long suffering to vs ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Re|pentance.


The sicke Man.
I see now that no man can be cer|taine at what time Christ shall come, It is a secret which God hath kept vp from all the liuing into his owne bosome.



The Pastour.
Indeed Sir, it is such a secret tha may not bee searched: Christ after his Resurrection, said a wise wordAct. 3. 3. to his Apostles, It is not for you  knowe the times or the seasons which the Father hath put in his owne power: Note This is the wisedome of God, who hath concealed such things from the knowledge of all men as well lear|ned as vnleaned, as well Kinges as Subjects, that all flesh at all times be in readinesse when the Lord shall come to judgement: This made the Lord so carefullie to waine his Dis|ciples to watch.


The sicke Man.
The Lord graunt that wee may euer haue our loynes girded  ou Candles in our hands, waiting for theLuk. 12.. 35 comming of that Lord.


The Pastour.
That should be our daylie prayer Note This should teach vs not to lye downe to sleepe, like foolish Virgines,Matth. 25 3 without Oyle in our Lampes, le

before wee, waken the Bridegrome come vpon vs vnprouided,  enter in his Chamber, while we shall bee seeking that which we shal not find.


The sicke Man.
Now Sir, I pray you proceed and declare to mee howe the Lord shall come downe from Heauen for to judge this world wherein we dwell.


The Pastour.
He shall come downe not as King Agrippa  his Queene Bernice came down  with muchAct. 25. 13 phantasie or vaine shew, which is nothing indeede but a foolish phan|tasie: But, O the vnspeakable Glo|rie that shall bee seene at the com|ming of the Lord.


The sicke Man.
I requeast you earnestlie to con|tinue into that purpose, for it affe|cteth mine heart verie much.


The Pastour.
I reade in the Gospel that while Christ was sitting vpon y^e Mount of

Oliues, his Disciples came vnto him priuatelie, saying, Tell vs when shallMatth. 24 3 these things be? and what shall be the signe of thy comming, and the end of the world? Christs answere was, That they should take heede that no man deceiue them, because, saide hee, many shall come into my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall de|ceiue many.


The sicke Man.
But did hee not declare anie par|ticular signes or tokens that should appeare before his comming?


The Pastour.
The Lord hath declared that be|fore that great  terrible day come, The Sunne shall bee darkened, and theMatth. 24. 29 Moone shall not giue her light, and the Starres shall fall from heauen, and the powers of heauen shall bee shaken.


The sicke Man.
I wish to heare the exposition of these words, for they seeme to bee full of difficulties.



The Pastour.
Some think that these words are but an allegorie of the callamities that were to befall to the Church and to the whole world before the comming of Christ: Others of the Learned tak these words to be spoke~ properlie: And for to cleare their o|pinion to bee true, they alledge the words of S. Peter as a Commentarie vpon Christs wordes: The Heauens2 Pet. 3. 10 shall passe away, saith hee, with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with feruent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein shalbe burnt vp: And a little after hee subjoyneth, Looking for and hasting vnto the com|mingvers. 12. of the day of God, wherein the heauens beeing on fire shalbe dissolued, and the Elementes shall melt with fer|uent heate.


The sicke Man.
These bee wonderfull wordes of wonderfull workes, yee will bee so good as to make them me cleare.



The Pastour.
Note First it is said, That the heauens shl passe away praeteribunt, not that they shalbe turned to nothing, or shall o passe away y^t they shall bee no more, but they shall passe away in that they shall bee changed: Note According to this the Psalmist speaking of the hea|uensPsal. 102. 26. saith, That all of them waxe olde as doeth a garment: As a vesture shal thou change them, and they shall bee changed: Note Though in our life-time because it is so shorte, wee cannot sensiblie perceiue any decay in the heauenlie influences, yet it is cer|that taine the heauens are but cre|tures ordained for the seruice of ma~, creatures subject to faile, weare, and waxe olde bee.


The sicke Man.
What a change Sir, thinke yee that, that shall bee?


The Pastour.
It shall bee a change altogether for the better: All the Elementes

shall be melted as mettell into a fur|nace whereby it is refined: After that they are melted they shall bee ast into a new mould, for to receiue such a orme as it shall please the most High to giue vnto them.
Note I compare all these great crea|tures of the world, as the Heauens and foure Elements to an olde peece of money stamped so long since, that hardlie can it bee knowne whoe su|perscription is in it, all the Letters be|ing worne off with the vsing: Note It is euen so of the Heauens and of the Elements in these latter dayes: It is so lo~g since they were stamped, that the letters of Gods name vpon them are growne dim  are not so legible as they were wont to bee: But in that last day the Lord shall make the old Heauens and this olde Earth all to melt into a fire, and thereafter shall stampe them like a newe stricken Crowne: Then hee shall giue them such a temper that they shall neuer

waxe olde any more: Note Gods first impression on his creatures hath by sinne beene dimmeded and darke|ned, but this secunda cura, the se|cond coyning of these creatures shall be so durable that nothing shall be able to deface it: For God then shall bee All in all: Note Then Tempus edax rerum, Time that eateth all things, yea, all times, as yeeres, mo|neths, days, nights, houres, lik floods shall all runne in into the sea of eter|nitie, where they with all such vn|constant things shall bee swallowed vp in victorie.


The sicke Man.
What is that to say, That the Hea|uens shall passe away with a great noise What sort of noise shall that bee?


The Pastour.
Note The worde in the originall is , which the French hath ter|med auec vn bruit siflant de tempeste, that is the roaring of a tempest, which commeth with such a thudde, that it

casteth downe both Trees and Hou|ses, making all to shake, and also lifting vp dust and straes and all in the aire as with a whirle wind: Eras|mus termeth it, In morem procellae, like a Tempest: Note Such a Tempest was neuer heard since y^e world was founded: It shall bee a Tempest which shall shake the worlde of its foundation. Aboue and below all shall bee shaken with such a roaring and cracking tempest, that no mortall heart can conceiue: The Heauens, the Earth, the Waters, the Aire, the Sunne, the Moone, and Starres, shall bee so shaken with that tempest as though they were but pickles of dust, and caried with a while wind: My minde is in a maze to think vpon the greatnesse of that day: Note My pen while I haue beene writting of it, hath fallen out of my hand, so haue I beene rauished with admiration of that day: O what a day shall that be when all that euer God made shall

bee sette on fire? The Heauens being sette one fire, saith the Apostle, shall bee dissolued, and the Elements beeing set on fyre shal melt with feruant heate.Isa. 51. 6. Isaiah saith, That the Heauens shall vanish away like smoke: What fearfull tempest must that bee which shall put all the worlde into a burning flamme? All shall bee sette on fire, the Heauens aboue, the Earth be|neath, the waters also must be burnt and melted into that wonderfull furnace: By this fire all things must bee purged.


The sicke Man.
It would seeme by Scripture that those heauens which are now, shall bee altogether abolished: The Lord saith in Isaiah, Loe, I will create newIsa. 65. 17 Heaens and a new Earth, and the for|mer shall not ee remembered nor come into minde. To create a thing is pro|perlie to mak something of nothing: What then, hall the Heauens and Elements which are now bee red|cted to nothing?



The Pastour.
It is most certaine that they shall not bee put to nothing, but accor|ding to their earnest expectatio~ they shall bee deliuered at the last day from the bondage of corruption into theRom. 8. 21 glorious libertie of the Sonnes of God.
Note It is not Gods custome so to re|ward his old seruants, as to put them from their beeing, that so hee may bee quite of them: Note As for that which Isaiah saith, that he will create new Heauens and newe Earth, and that the former shall not be remem|bered, it is not to bee vnderstoode of the last day: The Lord by these wordes did onelie declare this to that people, that hee would so alter  change the state of his Church at the comming of the Messias, that it should seeme to dwell into another world.


The sicke Man.
I took euer that passage otherwise, but I hold that exposition best: But behold what S. Iohn saith concer|ning

the Heauens, the Earth,Reuel. 12. 1 and the Sea, I saw a new Heauen, and a new Earth, for the first Heauen, and the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. What is that to say?


The Pastour.
Note The first Heauen and the first Earth are said to haue passed away, not that their substa~ce was no more, but as one sayth well, because alia ejus videbatur facies, it was so chan|ged that men would thinke that it could not bee that cloudie Heauen and clattie Earth which was before: The Sea also was no more such as it was before.


The sicke Man.
But S. Iohn sath, That hee saw aReuel. 20. 11 white Throne and One sitting on it, from whose face the Heauen and the Earth fledde away, and there was found no more place for them: By this it would seeme that they shall bee al|together abolished.



The Pastour.
I answere y^t they shall not be abo|lished, but they are said to flee away from the face of God, as most lear|ned Diuines thinke, ad declarandum eorum terrorem  animum ad fugam paratum, for to declare their feare to compeare before the face of so great a Majestie, till they be forbished  scoured of the roust of their vanity wherevnto they haue beene made subject, they thinke shame of their vncleannesse before such eyes of puritie: Note It is said, That there was no place found for them not that they wanted a place, but because of such a Majestie, they did goe about to hide themselues: It is well said by a Learned interpreter vpon these words, Quorum locus non reperitur, illa latent  occulta manent, whose place is not found, they lurke and remaine hidde, not that they shall want a place, but because no man can find out by searching what shall

bee their place: By this is onelie de|clared that till the Heauens and E|lements bee reneued, they shall in a manner goe and hide themselues from before y^e face of that heauenlie Majestie, as a ragged man who thin|king shame to compeare among those who are richlie arrayed, with|draweth himselfe vnto some darke corner that hee should not be seene, till he be better arrayed: After that all shall bee made cleare and cleane by the fire, they shall appeare be|fore God in their appointed place.


The sicke Man.
Thinke yee that it shall bee a long time before that all can bee refined by that fire, as also before that the dead bee raised vp and gathered to|gether.


The Pastour.
* All this shall bee done in a mo|ment:1 Cor. 15. 51 In the twinkling of an eye the dead shall bee raised, and the liuing shall bee changed where euer they

bee found, whether grinding at theLuk. 17. 31 Mile, or walking in the fieldes or lying in their beddes, they must all com|peare either for to bee taken or to be forsaken, all other thinges shall bee speedilie dispatched.


The sicke Man.
O but he is a great God who by2 Pet. 3. 7. his word keepeth in store the Heauens and Earth which are nowe, reser|uing them vnto fyre against the day of Iudgement: Great must hee bee who shall kindle such a fire: Nowe after that this fire shall bee quenched, what shall bee done?


The Pastour.
After that by the fire the Lord hath cleansed all his creatures from their roust, and scoured them from all their drosse, hee shall forme them by his word the breath of his mouth: Note As a maker of Glasses, by the blast of his mouth formeth as hee plea|seth the soft melted liquour taken out of the fornace: Note But where|vnto





can we compare the most High in his most wonderfull workes? Note The~ the Heauens which of before hee had rolled vp like a scrole, shall bee vnfolded, and put out of their roll, and the Earth beeing purified and fined, shall bee made a Lodging for righteousnesse, according to his2 Pet. 3. 13 promise, saith S. Peter, Wee looke for new Heauens and new Earth, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse.


The sicke Man.
What is that to say, That righ|teousnesse dwelleth into the new Heauens and into the newe Earth? These words seeme to bee difficile.


The Pastour.
The opinions of men are diuerse concerning the sense thereof, some thinke y^t Righteousnesse shall dwell in y^t new Heauens  new Earth, vnder|standing by Righteousnesse, the righ|teousnesse of Christ: According to this S. Pauls greatest desire was that hee might bee found in Christ, Not,

said hee, hauing mine owne righteous|nessePhilip. 3. 9 which is of the Lawe, but that which is of the Faith of Christe, the Righteousnesse of God by Faith: Others by a Metommie vnderstand that righteousnesse dwelling on the new Earth, to bee taken or all faithfull and righteous men who shall be the Citizens of that new Heauen and of that new Earth: Note O if wee knewe the glorie of these new things! they would surelie rauish our heartes, so that wee would all cry, Come LordReuel. 12. 17 Iesus come: Note These new Heauens shall neuer be ouer-cast with clouds, there shall bee none ecclipsing of light any more: Note As for the new Earth, there shall be no more sweate of browes: All toiles and turmoiles shall cease: Sinne the cause of all our woe shall bee no more there: Note The most barbarous and barren parte that is now on earth, shall bee more pleasant than euer was Para|dise, for then God shall be All in all:

Note All the Earth shalbe lik that Holie of holies, but without a partition wallExod. 26. 33 In that Holie of holies in Canaan, none but one,  that but once in the yeare might enter: But in the new Hea|uens and newe Earth all the Faith|full shall haue their perpetuall resi|dence, where they shall follow the Lambe whither-so-euer it shall pleaseReuel. 14. 4 him to goe: There shall they for euer bee courting his countenance.
Note Fye that men will not liue well for a little space, that they may liue with the Lambe for euer, among these pleasures for euermore: FyePsal. 16. 11 that men for stinking pleasures should losse the comfort of these places wherein nothing but righte|ousnesse shall bee able to dwell.


The sicke Man.
Seeing the heauens and the earth shall bee made new, yee thinke that they shall change for the better.


The Pastour.
That is most certaine: They haue

in their owne kinde beene obedient seruantes vnto their God, and God shal also glorifie them with a kind of glorie which his Wisedome shall thinke fittest for them: The heauensPsal. 102. 1 like a garment are waxed olde at Gods seruice: Note God will not cast off his olde seruants, but after their seruice he will reward them:Note If their cloths bee worne at his seruice, hee will giue them a new coate: Note If their first powers bee shaken, he will put new powers into them againe: Note It was truelie said by the father of lyes,Iob. 1. 9, That none serue God for nought.
Note It shall not bee for nought that the Heauens by their motions, and the Earth by its birth haue declared the glorie of God omnipotent.


The sicke Man.
But is it possible that such crea|tures haue any knowledge while they serue God, that he will reward them at the last day, that therby they may bee incouraged at his seruice?



The Pastour.
Note They haue indeede a certaine secret instinct from GOD, which worketh in them a sort of longing for the last day, which shall bee the day of rewardes, the day of their de|liuerance: In this the Apostle isRom. 8. 19 plaine, For saith hee, the earnest ex|pectation of the creature waiteth for thevers. 20. manifestatio~ of the Sons of God: for the creature was made subject vnto vanitie, not willinglie, but by reason of him thatvers. 21. hath subjected the same in hope because the creature it selfe also shall bee deliue|red fro~ the bondage of corruption, into the glorious libertie of the Children of God.Note For this cause the whole crea|tion is said, To groane and to trauell together vntill now.vers. 22.


The sicke Man.
O the great secrets of God! I pray you Sir, to let me vnderstand these wordes by some breefe exposition First what is that which hee calleth the earnest expectation of the creature

which waiteth for the manifestation of the Sonnes of God? What creature is that? What expectation can that bee?


The Pastour.
By the creature are not vnder|stood these little creatures, as Frogs, Flees, Midges, Beastes, Fowles, Fishes: Note Such creatures haue none expectation of better things to come, for in the world to come there shall bee no vse for them: Note But by the the creature is to bee vnderstood the whole worlde, viz. The Heauens and all the Elements, as Earth, Fire, Water, Aire, which now are all so knit in loue, that euery one as it were taketh another into its bosome: Note Be|cause they are so fast coupled toge|ther and so neere to other that no|thing can come betweene them, for this cause as if they were all but one thing, they are called in the singular number, the creature
Note As for it expectation, it is called

by the Apostle , a stret|ched out of the hand: In which word the waiting of the world for the comming of the Lord, is set out like a woman standing vpon her tip-toes stretching out her head for to see if she can see her husba~d com|ming a farre, whom shee looketh  longeth for hourelie: Note See howe liuelie the Apostle declareth the secret instinct of the worldes desire for the comming of Christ Iesus: In a most powerfull word hee letteth vs see the Heauens and the Earth, and all the Elements, all as it were a man or a woman standing vpon their tip-toes, and holding vp their heads for to see if Iesus bee comming ac|cording to his promise.
All the Faithfull who are the Spouse of Christ groane within themRom. 8. 23 selues, sighing till they see their Sa|uiour in the Cloudes, so also this creature hath the owne groanes and sighs till Christ come for its deliue|rance:

Note And as the Churches de|sire, maketh Her to cry, Come LordReuel. ll 17 Iesus come, so in this creature there is a secret instinct and earnest expe|ctation which moueth it in the own language to cry for Christes com|ming.


The sicke man.
What vnderstandeth the Apostle while hee saith, That the creature was made subject to vaniue not willing|lie but by reason of him that hath sub|jected the same in hope? First how is it said, That it is made subject to vani|tie? Can the Heauens and the Earth bee saide to bee subject to va|nitie?


The Pastour.
The most Learned thinke that by this subjection of the creature to vanitie is to bee vnderstood, ejus fluxa  evanida conditio, that is a con|dition subject to change, corrupti|on wearing away, or waxing olde: As for the Earth, it is euident, as for

the Heauens, Scripture is plaine, They waxe olde as doeth a garment:Psal. 102. 26 Note This is the vanitie of these crea|tures: Heere is also another vanitie wherevnto they are subject, in that they are made seruants to these that will not serue God who~ they serue.
That the beautifull Sunne should furnish light to these that delight in Spirituall darknesse, it is a vanitie and a drudgerie wherevnto the Sun is subject: That the Earth should beae and bring foorth fruites for to feede the blacke mouthes that blas|pheme its Maker, is a great vanitie wherevnto it is made subject: Note The Sea groaneth vnder the Shippes of Pyrats and Robbers: Note See what an vproare was in that Element for Io|nahs rebellion: Note So long as he was in that Shippe, Gods scourged the winds with his worde of command: The windes scourged the Seas, the Seas scourged the Shippe wherein Gods Rebell did lye till hee was cast out: Note The Sea euer seethed with

the fire of Gods wrath, the waues euer tumbled vp and down breaking one vpon another with rushing and roaring, till it tooke order with the rebellious man, there was no resting for its waues.


The sicke Man.
But how is this that it is said, that the creature is subject to vanitie but not willinglie It would seeme by that, that they obey God but against their will.


The Pastour.
The Heauens, or Earth properlie haue neither a willing nor a nilling, but onelie a secret instinct, which is like a will: Note This secret instinct which God hath put into his crea|ture is that, Omnis natura conserva|trix suiest, euerie creature striueth to keepe  maintaine it selfe: Now while by God it is made subject to such changes, weakening and wea|ring, which is against the working of that instinct, it is said in Scripture

language to bee subject to vanitie, but not willinglie.
Neither for that must wee thinke that the creature in that rebelleth or repineth against God in any wise, as if it had a will striuing against Gods will, no not: Note But in some mea|sure it may bee saide to haue an in|stinct like that will of Christ at the drinking of the bitter Cuppe: Christs Naturall instinct was that the Cuppe should passe from him, and yet for all that his prayer was, Not my willMatth. 26. 42 but thy will bee done.
Note It is euen so in some manner of the instinct of the Heauens and of the Earth: They naturallie shrinke from bondage  abuse, as also they incline to keepe themselues fro~ cor|ruption and vanitie, neither for that is their will contrarie to Gods will: Hee who is called a seruant should not care for it: But yet if hee may bee made free, the Apostles directi|on2 Cor. 7. 21 is, That hee vse it rather: The sick

man may will life, and seeke cure for to preserue his life, though Gods will bee that hee die, if so bee that he submit vnto Gods will his whole desire, as Christ did, euen while hee desired the Cuppe to depart which hee knew to haue beene put into his hand for to drinke it: Note A will that is diuerse from Gods will if it bee subacted,  subjected vnto Gods wil, may bee free of sinne: Note So the Heauens and the Earth are subject vnto vanitie, but not willinglie, be|cause they incline to bee free of the bondage of mans corruption: But seeing it is their Lords will that they beare the burden, and bee subject to such changes, they become sub|ject, but withall they are euer groa|ning and longing for their redemp|tion: Note As a woman in trauell na|turallie desireth to be deliuered, and yet submitteth her selfe to Gods wil, as naturallie these creatures of God haue an instinct to bee deliuered

from the burden of their bondage: But seeing their instinct or desire to bee made free, is not so soone effe|ctuate, neither can bee, before the world end, the Lord their good and kinde Master for to encourage them vnder the burden of their bondage, lest they should faint, hath giuen vnto them another secret instinct, which the Apostle calleth their hope.Rom. 8. 20
For to cleare this to you in a word: Note There is in this world groaning vnder the corruption of the wicked, a certaine instinct like Hope. where|by it looketh for to bee made free from the bondage and burden of this corruption, as a woman in tra|uell is comforted with hope of deli|uerance: This is that whereat the Apostle pointeth, when hee saith, that God hath subjected the crea|ture in hopeRom. 8. 20


The sicke Man.
In my judgement vee speake per|tinentlie: In that difficultie I haue

full satisfaction: But what is this that is subjoyned vnto the verse fol|lowing? I vnderstand not the words well. They are these: Note The creature at last shall bee deliuered from the bon|dage of corruption into the glorious li|bertie of the Children of God: What is this libertie of the Sons of God? or how can the Heauens and the E|lements bee said to bee made parta|kers of that liberty which belongeth to the Children of God? I confesse mine ignorance heere, in this point I desire to bee instructed.


The Pastour.
This is the libertie, whereof they shall bee partakers with the Childre~ of GOD, they shall then haue all their will, they shall no more be sub|ject to that whereof they would de|sire to bee free: Note Not willing|lie shall bee no more in them in all their subjection: Note They shall bee no more slaues to serue sinners, but shall serue God and his Saintes





which is true libertie: Thus in so farre as they shall bee free of all that foresaid bondage, they are said to be deliuered into the glorious liberty of the Children of God: Note This shall bee a part of the libertie of Gods Sainctes in Heauen, not to bee subject to the wicked any more, not to wearie nor waxe olde, all this shall they haue commond with the creature: Note But O what a glorie shall the Children haue greater than all the creature shall receiue! Euen a farre more and exceeding weight of Glorie.2 Cor. 4. 17


The sicke Man.
I will not now inquire concerning that weightie glorie, I reserue it to afterward God-willing: One thing I desire to know, whether or not the Lord shall come downe before the World shall bee refined with fire, or if it shall bee after.


The Pastour.
In my judgement before that the Lord come down, y^e Heauens shalbe new, and the earth  all shalbe new:

As a Citie before the entrie of a King, prepareth all before hand, ma|keth the wayes cleane, and causeth sweepe off the streets the dung-hils, so all the steertes of the Heauens and of the Aire, and of the Earth muste bee made cleane before the comming of the Sonne of man: Note While in the dayes of his flesh hee entered into the Citie of Ierusalem in qualitie of a King, riding vpon an Asse-Colt, all the streetes were co|uered with cloathes  greene bran|ches of trees, so that the foote of his Asse scarclie culd touch the ground, all that was there range with theMatth. 21 9 sound of Hosanna, Hosanna: * Euen so in my judgement when that great Lord shall make his entrie into the world as a King from Heauen, the world shall all bee made new, it shall look with another face then it doth at this day: Note If our gracious Soue|raigne King CHARLES, (whom I pray the Lord to blesse with a pro|sperous reigne) were comming from

Londo~ for to enter into this Citie, we would all cloth our selues in comely apperall, we wold receiue him with* Note great applause, all shouting, GOD SAVE KING CHARLES. Would we doe this to a sinfull man WhoseIsa. 2. 22. breath is in his nostrils? What thinke yee then shall these creatures doe, whose neckes are yoked vnder the bondage of corruption euer till the Lord IAH our God come downePsal. 68. 4. riding vpon the Skie with sound of libertie for euermore?
Mine heart here faileth me while I thinke of that great applause and welcome to the world that Christ shall get when hee shall bowe the Heauens and come downe into the Aire: Shal he who in the days of his flesh, in the dayes of his disgrace, was so honoured at his Royall entrie in Ierusalem, not bee much more honoured at his Royall entrie into the worlde, which is groaning af|ter that houre of his comming, as a woman in trauell, earning after the

houre of her deliuerie: At his se|cond comming, all his wayes shalbe prepared, and the Hosanna Hosan|nahs of Ierusalem shall bee turned into Halleluiah Halleluiah: Note Before Christ came first to appeare amongLuk. 3. 4. men, hee sent a Messenger to pre|pare his ways: The voyce of One cry|ing in the wildernesse, Prepare yee thevers. 5. way of the Lord mak his paths straight: Euerie valley shall bee filled, and euery hill and mountaine shall bee made low, and the crooked shall bee made straight,  the rough ways shalbe made smooth. Note Seeing in his humilitie his wayes were prepared before his comming, there is greater appearance that be|fore hee come backe to this worlde againe with his millions, this new earth and all shall bee prepared.
Note It is a disgrace for a Citie to be cleansing streetes, while the King is alreadie within the portes: It is but rusticke manners to sweepe an house after that an honest man hath ente|red,

whereby the dust that is vnder his feete is carried vp to his hat and betweene his shoulders.


The sicke Man.
It is your opinion then that all shall bee cleansed with a fire before the Lord come downe.


The Pastour.
It is indeed: And it seemeth also to haue some ground into Scripture, for Christ while hee was declaring in the Gospel the things that should be fall before his comming, hauingMatth. 24 29 said, That the Sunne and Moone should bee darkened, and that Starres should fall from Heauen, which de|clared the change of this world: In the next verse hee declareth that af|ter that appeared the signe of the Sonnevers. 30. of man in Heauen.


The sicke Man.
According to your discourse it would seeme that before the com|ming of the Lord, at the renewing of this world, there shall be a strange

stirre among all the Creatures.


The Pastour.
That is most certaine, and that both aboue and belowe: S. Luke saith, That there shall bee signes in theLuk. 21. 25 Sunne, and in the Moone, and in the Starres, and vpon the Earth, Pressura gentiu~, distresse of Nations, with per|plexitie, the Sea and the waues roaring: Mens heartes failing them for feare,vers. 26. and for looking after these things which are comming on the Earth; for the po|wersvers. 27. of Heauen shalbe shaken: The~ shal they see the Sonne of Man comming in a cloud with power and geart glorie.


The sicke Man.
All these wordes bee wordes of great weight: It would please you to giue mee the intepretation there|of.


The Pastour.
In these words the Euangelist let|teth vs see howe this bigge olde world shalbe broken downe for to bee made new againe: Some of the

Learned expound these wordes by way of similitude taken from man the little world, while as hee is olde and failed, the humours of his body like elements are troubled and shaken together: His two eyes like the Sunne and Moone are darkened, and his other senses like the Starres fall downe and decay: His minde and his reason lik heauenlie powers are shaken, so at last man like an olde house all decayed, falleth downe in|to his dust: Note As this little worlde decayeth, so doeth this great world, wherein wee liue, all is failing about vs, aboue vs, till at last the verie voutes of heauen shall bee rent, , with a noyse and shall bee melted with fire, and as it were cast into calmes whereout of shall come a new world, which shall neuer any more waxe olde.


The sicke Man.
That is well said for the generall: I perceiue now that the Lord by his

infinite power shall spread the Hea|uens like paper or parhment, and that they shalbe melted like mettall: Let me now  these wordes of S. Luke as they are written into his Gospel First hee saith, Thi there shall bee sigues in the Sunne, and in the Moone, and in the Starres: What signes shall these be?


The Pastour.
Some of the Learned thinke that these signes shalbe  whereof God from these heauenlie bodies shall make a shew vnto then vpon the earth: Some thinke that this is spo|ken of great and strange clipes that shall go before that day. Some thinke that there shall bee such a great and glorious light that shall goe before Christes comming, that both Sunne and Moone shall bee dar|kened as the Starres in the morning are darke  at the rising of the Sun, so that they cannot any more bee seene, beeing obscured by a ater

light: Some by an allegorie referre these great ecclipses to great learned men, great lights in the Church ma|king defection and Apostasie from the Trueth.


The sicke Man.
But S. Matthew, sayeth That theMatth. 24 29 Starres shall fall from Heauen.


The Pastour.
These words also be diuerslie in|terpreted: Some by these fallen stars vnderstand glorious professours of the truth falling away by Apostasie, such Starres are these whom the Dragon is said to draw downe with his taile: These bee the words of S. Iohn, AndReue. 12. 3 there appeared another wonder in Hea|uen, and behold a great red Dragon And his taile drew the third part ofvers. 4. the starres of heauen and did cast them to the earth: Note By these starres as a learned man saith well, are vnder|stood these whose names in out|ward appearance were written in Heauen, lik the Angel of Sardis who

had a name to bee liuing, and yet wasReuel. 3. 1. dead: Note Wicked men for a space may blaze like Comets and seeme to bee starres fixed in their orbe and yet at last proue to bee nothing but a bundle of filthie matter, like these shote starres, that come not from Heauen but from the Aire, whereof the Deuill is the prince: Others areEphes.   of the opinion that this bee spoken of the starres of heauen, viz. That they shall fall downe.


The sicke Man.
But seeing one starre is so many times bigger than the whole Earth, as Philosophers esteeme, how can they fall? Or if they fall, whither shall they goe?


The Pastour.
One answereth verie well to that, that it is verie difficile to pronounce, but the day of the Lord shall reueale all: Note In my judgement by the fal|ling of the stars with other such like things, is vnderstood the decaying

and passing away of the Heauens which shall in that day as S. Peter2 Pet. 3. 10 testifieth, passe away with a noyse Note An house while it is olde, and rea|die to bee taken downe, will all bee full of cliftes and riftes, so that the olde yling that was once fast joy|ned together with nailes will begin to cling, and then to gape, the nailes also will become loose and hing out All signes and tokens of an hastie ruine: It shall bee euen so of that heauenlie house, when it is decayed and neare a fall, the stars which are like golden nailes into the yling of the world, are said to bee loosed and to fall downe, for to declare the fal|ling and ruine of the world: Some thinke that the Starres reallie shall fall downe like the leaues of a tree nipped with a winter frost: S. Iohn speaking of that strange change and perturbation that shalbe both aboue and below before that great day saith, That the starres of heauen shall

fall downe vnto the earth, euen as aReue. 6. 1 figge tree casteth he vntimelie figges, when shee is a shaken of a mightie wind
In these wordes wee see first the infinite power of that Majestie who shall shake the fixed starres out of their firmame~t, againe obserue that the starres are said to bee shaken like vntimlie and greene figges, and not like figges that as wee say are drop ripe, which droppe downe of wll without any violence Note By this it wold appeare that this world might stand lo~ger than it shall stand I think that if y^e Lord shuld suffer y^e heauens to turne about some hundreth thou|sands of yeares, that then the stars should fall downe to the earth, nor like greene figges, but like fruite that is ripe at the falling But the Lord as wee see will shake the starres, ere they bee ripe and that as some thinke for the Elects sake: For the Elects sake, said Christ, these dayesMatth. 24 22. shall bee shortened In the Greeke it

is , decurtabuntur which is to shorten or mutilat.
I know that the most Learned in|terpret these wordes of the calami|ties of the Iewes which God would not suffer to bee distressed for many yeares.


The sicke Man.
Mine hearte wonders at these words of the Reuelation concerning the starres which shall fall downe to the earth like vntimelie figges shaken with a mightie winde: I thinke your obseruation therevpon verie plea|sant.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir, the words are won|derfull, but the worke shalbe more wonderfull: Note For in all appearance2 Pet. 3. 12 the heauens beeing dissolued, that is, all shaken asunder and the stars shaken loose falling downe to the earth, and all the Elements beeing melted to|gether, in all appearance, Starres Sunne, and Moone, Clay, Wa|ter,

Fire, and Aire, shall become for aspace like a Chaos a confused lump or masse without forme as they wereGen. 1. 2. at the first, and that till the God of order hath refined and purified all by his refining fire. Some thinke o|therwise, but the day of the Lord shall reueale all.


The sicke Man.
That shall bee a terrible worke: Note Now let mee know what S. Luke vnderstandeth by these words That vpon the earth shall bee distresse of Nations with perplexitie.


The Pastour.
Note That is, men of all Nations shall bee so troubled at the sight of such thinges, that like a man in a straite they shall not wotte to what hand to turne them, euen as Dauid was whe~ he said, I am in a great strait,2 Sam. 24. 14 that is, perplexity: As for that which S. Luke saith of the Sea, viz. The sea and the waues roaring, by these words hee declareth that the sea shall be all

stirred to the bottome, so that the waters and all shall bee muddie an drumblie: Note The word Salum turened heere, , signifieth properlie mare turbatum, a raging troubled and tempestuous Sea.
All these things that shall appeare are called, Fore runners, sent before to tell all the Faithfull that when they shall see them, that they lift vp their heades and looke vp for to see their Redemption that is neere S Luk compareth the time of all these things that appeare before the Lords comming to the spring time, when trees begin to budde, When the budsLuk. 2. 30 shoote foorth, saith hee ye know that Summer is at hand: So likewise yeevers. 31. when yee see these thinges come to passe know that the Kingdome of God is nigh at hand.


The sicke Man.
All these fore-said things bee bu buds as I see forewarning vs of the Summer season wherein the Lord

shall come: But what is that which S. Matthew saith, that after all theseMatth. 24. 30. thinges shall appeare the SIGNE of the Sonne of man in Heauen What is that which hee calleth the SIGNE of the Sonne of man in Heauen? What SIGNE thinke yee that to bee, that shall bee seene in Heauen after that the world shall bee made new?


The Pastour.
The interpreters varie much in their opinions concerning this Signe what sort of Signe it should bee.
Some thinke that it shall bee the signe of the Crosse vpon which the Lord hang: This SIGNE as some think shalbe seene into the Aire be|fore the comming of the Lord: Such a signe as some write, was that which Constantine saw in the Aire while he was going to battell against the ene|mies of Christ: With this signe was heard a voyce vttered in these words IN HOC SIGNO VINHS.
Others thinke that by the SIGNE

of the Sonne of man, is to bee vn|derstood Christ Himselfe, who is cal|led, The Signe of the Sonne of man, as Circumcision in Scripture Lang|uage is called, The signe of the Cir|cumsion.Rom. 4. 11
Note I incline rather to thinke with Beza that, that signe shall bee some great Majestie and vnspeakable glo|rie aboue all compasse of compari|son glorious, which shall appeare, whereby the comming of that Lord shall bee knowne to all, not to bee the comming of a creature, but of Him who is Lord of all the crea|tures, hauing a name aboue all names:Philip, 2. 9 Note The Kings and Princes of the earth while they are among the multi|tudes of their Subjects by some gli|stering jewell will be discerned from all the rest, or by the great respect that is carried to their persons, by these that are about them: Note All sheaues fell down before Iosephs sheaues:Gen. 37. 7 So all creatures at his approach shall

fall downe before him: Note As beforeGen. 41. 43 Ioseph, in his progesse was a cry Abrech, how the knee, so at the com|ming of this Lord the Angels in a manner shall cry, Abrech: At his Name euerie knee in Heauen and Earth and vnder the Earth shal bow Note Before, behind, and aboue that Bodie of God both white and ruddieCant. 5. 10 the chiefest among ten thousand, shall bee such a glorie and throng of Ma|jestie as shall bee a certaine signe that it can bee none other but the Prince of Eternitie, hee being among his most bright and glorious Angels like a Sunne among the Starres: The wordes of the Earth cannot beare such a signification as may expresse the glorie of this Signe.
Note Mine hearte is without mee while I think vpon the glorie of that Lord, whom all cyes shall see that day with his golden Head and busCant. 5. 11 Lockes: Christ shall bee clothed in his triumphing apparell with such

a brightnesse, that the Moone shall be confounded and the Sunne ashamed, as these who beeing clothed in course rayment, are ashamed to be seene among these who are pasmen|ted with gold: Note In a word, at his presence all powers shall shake, and all creatures at his bcke shall obey.


The sicke Man.
After that, that Signe shall ap|peare: What thinke yee shall bee done?


The Pastour.
When Christ the desire of all Na|tionsHag. 2. 7. shall bee readie to come, HeeMatth. 24 31 shall send before him his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather his dispersed and despi|sed Elect from the foure winds, from one end of Heauen to the other S. Paul saith That the Trumpet shall1 Thess. 4 16 , and the dead shall arise: This shall not bee a brasen Trumpet, but a stiall, which shall found so shrill with a princelie noise that all the crea|tures

on Earth; in Heauen, and Hell, shall heare it.
Note S. Paul hath three notable say|inges concerning the sound that shall bee heard at Christs comming: First hee saith That hee shall descend1 Thess. 4 16 with a shoute, Secondlie With the voyce of the Archangel, Thirdlie, With the Trumpet of God.


The sicke Man.
The remembrance of that shout maketh mine eares to tingle and my heart stringes to tremble: What a shout thinke ye that, that shall bee?


The Pastour.
Some thinke that it shall bee a great noyse  dinne, such as is heard into hudge great assemblies: Note It may bee a shout of victorie or of praise: Note The Angels and millions of Sainctes, who sing his praise con|tinuallie, cannot keepe silence that day: They shalbe all about Christ that day shouting for the joy of that desired day: Note The worde shout in

the originall is , which pro|perlie signifieth that sounding voice which the Mariners vse to others, e|uerie one for to moue another to row: Others thinke it to be like a cry of Souldiers, qualis est militaris con|vasatio, while they trusse all their baggage for to remoue.


The sicke Man.
For what cause chieflie shall this shout bee? To whom shall it bee di|rected?


The Pastour.
It shall bee chieflie for the Glory of God: Note It shall bee directed to the dead, who are to bee raised vp by the power of God, and by the meanes of his Seruants the Angels, who at the raising vp of all creatures shall shout like Mariners, heauing vp that which is heauy by force of their armes.
Note What Archangel that shall be or what shall bee that voyce: One saith verie well, Dies Domini revela|bit,

The day of the Lord shall re|ueale it. The Lord prepare vs for it: O what a Glorie when Christ shall appeare with hands as gold ringsCant. 5. 14 set with the Berill; and with a bright Bellie ouer laid with Saphires.


The sicke Man.
Is it your judgement that Christ the Iudge of the World shall come downe from Heauen with a great Majestie?


The Pastour.
It is certaine, of the day of his comming againe may well bee said, that which was said of his first com|ming, This is the day which the LordPsal. 11. 24 hath made: In that day hee himselfe shall come downe in a Charet of a Cloude as hee ascended into a Cloude: All the Glorie of Heauen shall bee seene that day: The Father shall bee there in vnspeakable Glorie: The Holie Ghost shall bee there with vn|speakable Majestie: All the Saintes and Angels shall bee about Him like

burning Lampes and glistring Suns.


The sicke Man.
What passage of Scripture letteth vs see clearlie the Glorie of his com|ming to judgement?


The Pastour.
That passage of Daniel is verie formal  beheld, said hee, till theDn. 7. 9 Thrones were cost down, and the An|cient of dayes did ite, base Garn was white as snow, and the Haire of his Head lik the pure wool  Throne was like the , and his wheele as burning fire A fiee streame issued,vers. 10. and came foorih from before him, tha sand thousands ministred vnto him  ten thousand times  thousand stood before him: S. Iohn faith, that the number of them was ten thousandReuel. 5. 11 times ten thousand, and thousand  thousands: Note Let these brutish  phemers here by  way ak a  son, who say That if many be dam ned God shall ride with a thinne Court, words  to bee scourged with

a thousand hels: Away yee barking blasphemers, God hath no neede of you nor of your like: Note Hee who could of stones raise vp seede vntoMatth. 3. 9 Abraham, and make stones to cry, Hosanna, Hosanna, needeth not wa~t multitudes of these that will sing his praises: Note But hath he not An|gels in Heauen alreadie, who are in number tenne thousand times tenne thousand, and thousands of thou|sands: But though they were none but himselfe, is hee not that great SHADAI, God al sufficient who hathExod. 6. 3 neede of none, of whome all haue neede? If I were hungrie, said hee, I would not tell thee for the worlde isPsal. 50. 12 mine and the fulnesse thereof.


The sicke Man.
This would I learne of you, viz. If when the Trumpet of the resurre|ction shall blow, these that are then liuing shall die first.


The Pastour.
The Scripture saith, That they

shall bee changed: This change which1 Cor. 15. shall bee into the twinkling of an eye, shall stand vnto them in steade of death: In that is the word fulfilled, It is appointed to all men once to die.Heb. 9. 27


The sicke Man.
Thinke yee that these that then shalbe aliue, shall win first to Christ? It would seeme that they haue a fore start of these who are rotten in the Graue.


The Pastour.
The Scripture is plaine: This we say vnto you by the word of the Lord,1 Thess. 4. 15 that wee which are aliue, and remaine vnto the comming of the Lord, shall not preuent them which are asleepe.
Some gather vpon these wordes, that these who are dead shall pre|uent them who are aliue, and shalbe sooner at Christ than they, viz. That Adam and Eue shall bee with the first, and in the first ranke, and so that at that Conuention these who first were dead shall preuent them

that shall bee aliue: But that hath no sure ground in Scripture, for though it bee said, That these who shall bee aliue shall not preuent these which are asleepe, it will not follow that these which are asleepe shall preuent these which are aliue: The Apostle himselfe saith, That we shall1 Thess. 4. 16 all be caught vp together in the Clouds: As for who shall bee formost, Dies Domini revelabit, The day of the Lord shall declare it.


The sicke Man.
I see the~ that your opinion is that all flesh that day must arise and com|peare before God, and that none must be excepted. But how is it that the Godlie onelie by Christ are cal|led, The Children of the resurrection?Luk. 20. 3 By that it would appeare that none shall arise but y^e members of Christ?


The Pastour.
It is most certaine that all shall a|rise: All that are in the graue shallIoh. 5. 28. 29. heare his voyce, and shall come foorth

they that haue done good vnto the Re|surrection of life, and they that haue done euill vnto the resurrection of dam|nation. As for the Godlie, indeede properlie they are the Children of the Resurrection, because they shall arise willinglie out of their beddes, and because by the vertue of Christs Re|surrection they shall arise, hee being the Head and they the members, which must follow after that Head. As for the wicked they shalbe scour|ged out of their Graues, the force of wrath shall draw them out, that as Malefactors they may come  heare their doome pronounced against them.


The sicke Man.
I heare you say according to Gods worde that all that are in the graues shall heare his voyce, and shall come foorth: If that bee, where shall the little Children that died with|out Baptisme bee? The Romane Church teacheth that such goe to a

prison where they shall neuer see the face of God: Shall not their bodies come out of their Graues? If the Heauens and the Earth passe away, what part can they be in where they shall not see Gods face?


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir your reason refuteth that errour sufficientlie: For cer|tainelie their bodies must come out of their Graues: It is not possible but in that day they shall see Christ.
No~te Truelie to put such into an e|uerlasting prison for such a cause, were to blame the Lord himselfe of injustice: The Lord hath said, TheEzek. 18. 20 sonne shall not beare the iniquitie of the father: What if the father by negli|gence shall neglect to cause baptize his Childe? shall the Childe for his fathers negligence be clapped vp in|to euerlasting prison? If that were, should not the prouerbe bee true, The fathers haue eaten sower grappes,Ezek. 18. 2 and the Childrens teeth are set on edge.

It was well said by Bernard.
Non privatio Baptismi sed con|temptusBernard. damnat.
That is, not the want, but the contempt of Baptisme condemneth: If any condemnation bee, the Fa|ther who contemneth, and not the Childe who contemneth not, shall bee damned.
S. Ambros speaking of Valentinian,Orat fu|neb de obibitu Valent. who disceased before he culd come to him for to bee baptized, said,
Quem regeneraturus eram ami|si, sed ille non amisit gratia quam poposcit.
That is, I haue lost him whom I was for to regenerate, but hee hath not lossed the grace which he sought: Note None but baptizers of Bells will be against this trueth.


The sicke Man.
I am well satisfied in that point: I wonder much howe men should goe so farre astray: Where shall these bodies of little Children bee in the

day of the Resurrection if they shall not compeare before Christ the Iudge? I thinke this argument can hardlie bee answered vnto.
Another difficultie heere may be moued concerning Baptisme, which the Apostle taketh as an argument1 Cor. 15 29 to proue the Resurrection: What shall they doe, saith hee which are bap|tized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead? The wordes seeme verie dif|ficle.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir, they want not diffi|cultie. Some interprete the words for the dead, That is, Vice  loco mortuorum. The custome was a|mong the Christians as S. Ambros recordeth, that if any dyed without Baptisme, some of the liuing came to the bed where they were dead, or to their Graue, and there were bap|tized for them: Chrysostome and E|piphanius declare that this was a cu|stome

among the Marcionites, which they reproue as a vaine inuention
Others interprete these word of these who on their death-beds were baptized, that thereby all by-gone sinnes might bee purged away.
Others interprete, To be baptizedS. Chry|sost. for the dead, That is, in the faith of the Resurrection of the dead: For these who were to be baptized, first did rehearse the Creede, and when they came to the Resurrection of  dead, at these words they were bap|tized.
Others of the Learned take theLuther. wordes  about the dead The custome beeing of olde, thatBucanus. these who were baptized, were bap|tized about the Graues, where thePiscator. dead did lye, for to testifie that they did belieue the Resurrection from the dead.
Some by baptising heere vnder|stand that washing and ablution of

dead bodies: After this significati|on Cuppes are said  to beMa. 7. 4. baptized or washen: This washing of the dead bodies before their buriall, as some thinke, was common to the Iewes, who in hope of the Resurrection, did both them and make them cleane: This was also a custome among the Pagans to wash and anoint the dead bodies: Such were called Pollinctores
This also appeareth to haue beene done in the dayes of the Apostles by the Christians: In the Actes it is written of Tabitha, that being dead,Act. 9. 37. they washed her and layed her in an vpper Chamber: All these baptizings and washings, were in hope of the Resurrection As for the Pagans, they wrought the wroke as Peter on Tabor spake, not knowing what heeLuk. 9 33. Ioh. 18. 14, said, or as Cajaphas prophesied not vnderstanding the prophecie which hee preached: This by the moste Learned is approued.
Others interprete to bee baptized for dead, not for the dead, or about the Graues of these that are buried but for dead, say they, that is, as dead to sinne, for to destroy and mortifie sinne, which is the chiefe ende of Baptisme: This say they, is a maine argument for to proue the Resur|rection: For if there were no Resur|rection, to what purpose should men crucifie their sinnes?
Note Behold how these few words: To bee baptized for dead, hath trou|bled so manie braines: Where wee may learne the shallownesse of mans witte: God with that little Greeke  hath giuen all the Doctours of the Church a taske that may teach them humilitie, an Antidote for to cure our swelling knowledge.


The sicke Man.
That which ye say is trueth: Oh that men were wise in this point that they could consider the weak|nesse of their wits.
But to come to our purpose con|cerning the Resurrection: Manie a time haue I in my Spirit wondered at the greatnesse of that worke.


The Pastour.
It shall be a great worke indeede Note But if anie Saducean spirit would doubt of it, it must also doubt more of the creation: I take the creation to haue beene a greater worke: It is more to haue made our bodies of nothing, than to gather their dust to|gether which is now but dispersed: This was a Fathers argument.
Vtique idoneus est reficere quiTertul. facit: quare miramur? quare|non credimus? Deus est qui fe|cit: Considera authorem  tolle dubitationem.
That is, It is easie for God to mak ouer againe that which he hath once made, why marueill wee? yea, why belieue wee not? God hath made all: Consider the Maker, and doubt no more.



The sicke Man.
Let mee heare some-thing out of Scripture concerning this point.


The Pastour.
There bee many moste famous passages for the probation of that great worke, both out of the olde and New-Testament: I know, saidIob. 19. 25 Iob that my Redeemer liueth, and that hee shall stand at the latter day vpon the earth, and though after my skinne wormes destroy this bodie, yet in myvers. 31. flesh, shall I see God whom I shall see for my selfe and mine eyes shall beholde, and not another, though my reines bee consumed within mee.
Daniel is cleare in this: Many ofDan. 12: 2 them that sleepe in the dust of the earth shall awake: Some to euerlasting life, and some to shame and euerlasting con|tempt.
The Prophet Ezekiel by way of similitude setting the deliuerance of Israel, pointeth at the Resurrection,Ezek. 37. 12 Behold, O people, saith hee, I will o|pen

your Graues and cause you to come vp out of your graues.
Christ in the New-Testament made numbers of the Sainctes to come out of the dust of death: What they were, no man can tell their names, whether it was Moses, or Io|shua, Samuel, Dauid, Iosaphat, Iosiah or who, no tongue can tell: But this wee know, that after Christ arose by the power of his Resurrection, hee made manie to come out of theirMatth. 27 52 Graues: The graues were opened, and manie bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graues after his Re|surrection,vers. 53 and went into the holy Citie, and appeared vnto manie.


The sicke Man.
O but that was wonderfull! Think yee that after that, they did returne to their Graues?


The Pastour.
The most Learned esteeme that they neuer did returne back to dust, but that they waited on Christ vn|till

the day of his Ascention, in which day they did accompanie him vp to the Heauens, where with their Head Christ, they were receiued into Glo|rie, with the great applause of all An|gels and Sainctes, whose Spirits a|boue are desiring continuallie to see the day when Soule and bodie shall bee joyned for to bee glorified toge|ther for euer.


The sicke Man.
After that the dead are risen and the liuing changed, what thinke ye shall immediatelie follow before we meete with the Lord himselfe?


The Pastour.
In the judgment of some so soone as the dead shall bee raised and the liuing changed, before that we shall meete with Christ into the cloudes, there shall be a sore mourning both among the Godlie and the wicked, for the piercing of that Lord: Euery one of the Godlie in that day shallGen. 41. 9 say as the Butler said to Pharaoh I 

remember my faultes this day.
Such a mourning was neuer heard since the world was founded, as shall be heard that day for a space Christ himselfe hath declared this, saying, Then shall all the Tribes of the earthMatth. 24. 30 mourne, when they shall see the Sonne of man comming into the Cloudes: All shall bee agast at the first sight of thatIsa. 57. 15. High and loftie One, that inhabiteth Eternitie: S, Iohn saith, Behold, heeReue 1. 7. commeth with Cloudes, and euerie eye shall see him, and they also which pier|ced him: And all the Kinrides of the Earth shall waile because of him.
The Prophet Zacharie compareth this mourning to the mourning ofZath   Hadadrimmon in the valley of Me|giddon, for the death of good Iosiah.
Some thinke that onelie the wic|ked shall mourne in that day: In my judgement it is the most true opini|on: Others by reason of these fore|said passages, thinke that all both Godlie and vngodlie at the first sight

of Iesus, shall uaile with great la|mentations, while they shall behold him whom they haue pierced.
Note All at the sight of him who was pierced for and by our sinnes  plangent, that is, shall strik their brests with their hands, the signe of great doole.
After that the Lord hath suffered his to mourne for a space in his sight, Hee shall incontinent command them to come, and by vertue of his word they shall all as with winges flie vp into the Aire, there for to meete their Lord, Note The strength of their heart, the joye of their glorie, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they sette their mindes.
So soone as they shall come toReuel. 21. 4. him hee shall wipe all teares from their eyes: Note Then shall these mourning Mordecais put off the Sack-cloth of their doole, for to bee arrayed with the Kings royall apparell, the Reuel. 7. 9 White linnen of heauen, the glorious Liuer

of Christ Iesus: Note These hauing Reuel. 4. 4. celestiall Crownes vpon their heads, shall glaunce in glorie like shinning Matth. 13 43. Suns, that all that euer took breath may see Esth. 6. 9 how it shall bee done to them whom the King of Heauen will honour: Note When the Godlie shall see them|selues so powerfullie deliuered from so fearefull dangers, they shall cry to Christ as the Israelites said to Gideon Iudge. 8. 22 Reigne thou ouer vs, because thou hast deliuered vs: According to their de|sire hee shall reigne ouer them in all prosperitie: Then shall his Cant, 5. 11 curled Lockes bee fullie dryed of the Cant. 5. 2 Dew and doole droppes of the night of all afflictions.


The sicke Man.
When the Lord shall come to Iudgement, in what place thinke yee that hee shall sit downe as Iudge for to pronounce his sentence?


The Pastour.
It is thought by some that Christ and all his Angels shall come down

to the Earth, that the sentence may bee pronounced in the presence of the wicked, who for feare of di|stresse and destruction, like creeping wormes shall striue to hide themselues vnder Rockes and Mountaines, for to couer themselues from the face of the Lambe: Glad would they be forReue. 6. 16 to haue the cliftes of the rockes, and the secret place of the Graue for a Shelter in that day: Note That shall be a day of trouble and of treading downe,Isa. 22. 5. a day of perplexitie, and of crying to the mountaines: Then shall the Wicked in fearefull qualmes of griefe beeing haltered with horrours, wish that the Rockes and Mountaines would skippe like Rammes for to leape vponPsal. 114. 14. them, that thereby they might bee hid from the Lambe.
But from that Royall Presence there shall bee none escape: * The Angels of great power shall haile them away by force before his great Tribunall, where all the euill they haue com|mitted

and all the good they haue omitted, both publicke scandales and secret sinnes, shall bee ript vp and set in open view before all the world to their perpetuall infamie.
This is the trueth of Gods word: Iudge nothing before the time, saide S.1 Cor. 4. 5 Paul, vntill the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden thinges of darknesse, and will make manifest the counsell of the hearts.
Note O mercifull God! what is this? What can foolish man thinke in himselfe while hee concealeth his since Behold here it is written, that at that day God shall make manifest the coun|sell of the hearts: The world saith of|ten that Thought is free: Note But behold here how the verie euill thoughts of the wicked in that day shalbe spread out and laide in broad-band before the face of God, of Angels, and of men.
Note What an awand should this bee for to make vs watch better ouer

our most secret thoughts, seeing in that great day before so many fa|mous witnesses, GOD, Sainctes, and Angels, the most secret counsels of the heart shall bee made manifest?
Note O then, then, shall the blacke Mores hiddes and Leopardes spottes clearelie bee seene: Then shall all the hidde murthers and all the coun|sels therof be made manifest: Were hee a King, hee shall not bee able to couer himselfe: Then shall all the hidde Fornications and Adulteries, yea, the verie plots and counsels for such things, though not effectuate, all shall bee brought to light: O yee most vyle hearts, in that day ye shall bee vnboweled and anatamised before the eyes of all that euer breathed on earth.
Note What thinke yee, O sinners, who will not remember this? Will yee not thinke vpon this, that the day is fast comming, except that by speedie repentance yee preuent the

wrath, God shall discharge vpon you the thunder-bolts of his vengeance? Vengeance shall beate vpon your braines and breastes wherein your sinnes were bred.


The sicke Man.
Note Oh, that men were wise for to lay such meditations neerest their heart, alas, such thoghts in our hearts are often but rawe and euill digested Wee oftest misse the corne and choose the chaffe, such are the follies which are euer afloate in our braines.
But to come to the maine purpose which wee haue in hand, let me see what warrand these haue in Scrip|ture, who say, That Christ shall come downe to the Earth for to sit in his last Assise.


The Pastour.
They ground their Assertion vp|on the wordes of Iob, who saith, I knowe that my Redeemer liueth, andIob. 19. 25 that hee shall stand at the latter day vp|on the Earth: In the French version it is.
Il demeurera le dernier sur la|terre.
That is as our oversion hath, Hee shall stand the last vpon the earth.
By this it would appeare that Christ the Iudge shall come downe to the Earth, where hee shall haue a Iudgement seate for to Note doe Iustice vpon that Element where sinne did most abound.
Other learned Diuines thinke o|therwise, viz. That Christs Throne wherevpon he shall sit that day, shall bee erected in the Aire.


The sicke man.
Seeing some are of that opinion that Christ shall judge, hee beeing vpon the earth, what place thinke they that hee shall choose for to sit downe into?


The Pastour.
As for the particular place where that last Iudgement shall be giuen, some think that it shalbe into the ire ouer the valley of Iehoshaphat, neere

by the Mount of Oliues, which is not farre from Ierusalem: Their chiefe ground is, from that of Ioel: I will, said the Lord, gather all Nations inIoel. 3. 2. the Valley of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with them there: There will I sitte to judge the Heathen round about.
The opinion of some is that where Christ was crucified and put to open shame and railed vpon there shall he chiefly in that day make manifest his Glorie.
Note This great Iudge in all appea|rance shall judge the world in righ|teousnesse, and conuince the world of sinne and of righteousnesse, where hee himselfe was most vnrighteouslie jud|ged and condemned.
Many of the Learned Schoole men thinke that he shall come downAct. 1. 12. toward the mount of Oliues: Their ground is this, That Christ ascended from the mount of Oliues, and that there the Angels said vnto the men of Galilee that were gazing vp to|ward

heauen, that as they had seeneAct. 1. 11. him goe into heauen, so should hee come againe.
These bee probable conjectures: But in my judgment no man can as|suredlie tell in what particular place this great Iudge shall sitte downe for to pronounce his Iudgement: This is most certaine that hee shall come downe: Behold hee commeth, saith S.Iud. v. 14. Iude, with ten thousand of his Saintes, to execute judgement vpon all, and to conuince all that are vngodlie among them, of all their vngodlie deeds which they haue vngodly commited, and of all their hard speeches, which vngodlie sin|ners haue spoken against him.


The sicke Man.
After what forme thinke ye that Christ shal come downe from Hea|uen at doomes-day that great judi|ciall day?


The Pastour.
In the most glorious forme that is possible to him, with whom no|thing is impossible: That glorious

King shall bee accompanied with all the Armies of heauen.
Before him in die illo decritorio, in that judiciall day, shall bee heard a shout a voice of an Archangell: The most shrill Trumpet of heauen shall sound so high with a rebounding noise that the dead in their Graues shall awake and arise out of their beddes like sleeping men that are wakened in the morning with the sound of the Drumme, or fift houre Bell: At that sound all the dead must come out of their Graues, as men after sleepe arising out of their beddes: Note None then must lye still with the Sluggard, who turning himselfe on his bed as a doore on its hinges, saith,Prou. 24. 33 Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber, a lit|tle folding of the hands to sleepe: No, not: At the first shout, at the first voyce of the Archangell at the first blast of the Trumpet, all shall arise and compeare before the face of that Iudge in the day of that great general

Assemblie, whe~ God shal comfort his owne, and mak a speedie riddence of the wicked whom he shall denoure by the fyre of his jealousie: None shall bee able in that day to award his blo|wes: There shall bee such paines which no damned Soule shall bee able to auoide, or abide: But the Godlie most gladly like Eagles aboutMatth. 24 28 dead bodie shal flock about their Lord.


The sicke Man.
I heare by your discourse that the LORD shall come downe in great pompe and magnificence: After that hee is come downe into his Charet with his thousand thousands, what shall bee done next?


The Pastour.
Daniel saith, that the IudgementDan. 7. 10. shall bee set and the Bookes shall bee o|pened: After that Christ by his po|wer hath cast downe all the little thrones of Emperours and Kings, he himselfe shall sitte downe vpon a Throne of infinite Majestie: His Gar|ments

shall bee white as snow, and his Haire like pure wooll: This is said by Daniel, for to let vs see that the Iudge of the world shalbe vpright  spotlesse in his Iugdement: To this is subjoyned by the Prophet, That the judgement was set.


The sicke Man.
I vnderstand not well these last words What is that to say, That the Iudgement was set?


The Pastour.
Note It is in the Hebrew Dinaiethib: In the Latin Iudicio considonte, or as Arius Montanus hath turned it Iudi|cium sedit, that is The Iudgement sat downe, that is, as who would say, The Session sat downe.
Note By this Iudgement some of the Learned, vnderstand Christ and his Saints with him, as Assessours in that jurie all sitting, Christ for to judge,  they for to approue his Iudgement.
Note This then know, That when the Sonne of man shall come in his Glorie,Matth. 25 31

not with a scornefull Reede in his hand, but with a celestiall Scepter, hee shall separate the Godlie and the wicked one from another: His God head which in the dayes of his flesh did lurke, shall in that Session most ardentlie appeare with such a brightnes as shall make the eyes of deuils to dazle.
The Iudgement beeing thus or|derlie set, the Bookes shall bee opened.


The sicke Man.
What Bookes are these which shall bee opened?


The Pastour.
S. Iohn speaking of that last Ses|sionReue. 20. 12 day, saith, I saw the dead great and small standing before God, and the Bookes were opened, and the dead were judged out of these thinges that were written in the Bookes according to their workes.
Your desire is to knowe what Bookes these bee which shalbe ope|ned in that great Day: In my judge|ment there shall bee two Bookes o|pened

that day: Note The first is that golden Booke of the Godlie called,Reuel. 20. 12 The Booke of life, which in the Chap|ter following is called, The LambesReuel. 21. 27 Booke of life: These whose names are written in that Booke, are said in Isaiah, to be written among the liuingIsa. 4. 3. in Ierusalem. This is that Booke whereof Moses spake when hee said to God, If thou wilt not forgiue thisExod. 32. 32 people, blotte mee I pray thee out of the Booke which thou hast written: This may bee called, The predestination Booke, which is kept in Heauen: Ra|ther reoyce, said Christ to his Dis|ciples,Luk. 10. 20 that your names are written in Heauen.


The sicke Man.
Thinke yee Sir, that God hath anie matteriall Booke, wherein the names of his Saintes are written?


The Pastour.
No, not: Note But as one saith well Infallibilis Dei memoria  aeterna ad vitam electi, liber dicitur: That is, The infallible memorie of God, and

his eternall electio~ vnto life, is called a Booke: Wherefore that? Will ye say, because that which is written in our Booke is most surelie kept: If we haue a thing to day in our memorie, wee may forget it incontinent: But if it bee well written in our Booke, wee are sure of it: Note According to this God for to shew vnto his deare Ones how well hee remembereth them, hee saith, That hee hath writ|tenIsa. 49. 16. them vpon the palmes of his hands: This is that Booke of rememberance,Mal. 3. 6. whereof speaketh Malachie.
One of the Learned calleth well the Booke of Life Symbolum electio|nis, the signe or badge of our ele|ction: Note This is that which the Pro|phet Ezekiel calleth, The writting ofEzek. 13. 9 the house of Israel, and secret of the Lord.


The sicke Man.
But how is it said, That this Book shall bee opened?


The Pastour.

The Book of Life or of predestina|tion is said, to bee opened when it shall appeare to all the world, who they are who~ God hath predestinate: Note So long as the Godlie are heere, they are Gods secret Ones no more knowne to the world, than a man is able to read that which is within a closed Booke.
While it shalbe seene by all what they are, then that Booke is said, To bee opened: When these off-scou|rings of the world, the most despi|sed among men, shall bee seene vp|on Thrones shining like Matth. 13 43 Sunnes about their God, Mal. 4. 2 the Sunne of righ|teousnesse, then shall all the wicked read as in an open Booke, that these whom they once did despise, were truelie the Saintes of God.
Note The Booke of predestination is like that Booke of the Reuelation, which was so fast sealed that no man could open it, but the Lyon of the tribeReuel. 5. 5. of Iudah, without the force of a Lion,

such seales could not bee lifted vp.


The sicke Man.
I haue heard concerning the Book of the Godlie.
Now let me know what be these Bookes wherein were written all the workes of the wicked, according to which S. Iohn saith, that they shallReuel. 20. 12. bee judged: Note By this it would ap|peare that all the sinnes which they in their life did commit vnder the curtaine of darknesse shall then bee set in open view: O the deepe displea|sure of our God: Happie they who are highlie in his fauour: I would gladlie know what a blacke bible is that which is called, the Book of the wicked.


The Pastour.
Note When Christ the Ancient ofDan. 7. 9. dayes sitting vpon his Throne, readie for to judge the wicked, shall bee v|pon the touch of their tryall, the BooksReuel. 21. 27 of accounts shall bee laide open: The Book of the Godlie is but one Book called, The Booke of the Lambe, and

the Booke of Life But as for the wic|kedReuel. 120. 12 while the Scirpture speaketh of them, it speaketh of Bookes in y^e plu|rall number: The Bookes were opened,Reue. 20. 12 saith. S. Iohn, And the dead were judged out of these thinges that were written in the Bookes.
Note By these Bookes some vnder|stand the Law of God, and their own Conscience: Their bosome Booke like Vriahs Letters containing their own death: Let mee also add vnto these two a third Booke, eien the Booke of the Gospel.
First of all, the Lord shall open his Law Book vnto the wicked, where they shall see what they haue done, that God hath forbidden, and what they haue not done, that hee hath commanded: Note At the breach of eue|rie command they shall see curles of Woe, woe, woe, annexed like the reekie taile of a Comet which are nothing but the smoke of Gods wrath.
After that with sore sighing  griefe

of minde they haue read through all the Book of the Law,  haue clear|lie seene what filthie breaches they haue made, to them shall bee presen|ted the Booke of the Gospel, where|in they shall see that they haue sin|ned against the reemeede of sinne by re|fusing grace offered vnto them, and by treading vnder their vncleane feete the precious Blood of the Lambe, the price of their Redemption.
Note Thogh the wicked shall indeed be judged according to their workes, yet the maine cause of their con|demnation shall bee, because they would not belieue in the Son of God: For this cause the Gospel which is y^t Book of Faith, shalbe Gods chiefe Booke of Iudgement, according to this S. Paul plainelie saith, That in thatRom. 2. 16 day God shall judge the secrets of men by Iesus Christ according to my Gospel.
Note Nowe lest the wicked should thinke God anie wise to bee vnrigh teous while hee judgeth, the third

Booke, like Iosephs Cup where by heeGen. 41. 5 did diuine, shall bee produced, euen their bosome Booke, the Booke of their owne Conscience, the Booke of Nature and of Nations, which euerie one of them had in keeping within their brest, since they could discerne good by euill: Note What euer they haue spoken, wrought, or thought, there shall they finde it written, in most black Characters,  as it were subscribed with their owne hand, so that they shall not be able to haue a face for to deny, no more tha~ a man can denye his owne hand write.
Note The Letters of that Booke shall be printed with so great a Character that all the Godlie who shall bee Christs Assessours in that Iurie, for to passe their Verdict vpon them shall see easilie a farie off all the shame of the wicked, which was once closse couered vnder vanished colours of great godlinesse.
O in that day all their filthy thoghts

and craftie conueyances, and se|cret conspiracies, and hidde mur|thers, and adulteries, and all o|ther mischiefe, the vnhappie coc|kle darnell of their heartes, where|of they were secretlie guiltie, shall be sette in open view before GOD, An|gels, and men: All their faces shall be couered with the filthinesse of their menstruous clouts: All their sins both knowne and secret, shall God set in order before them, that all eyes ofPsal. 50. 21 men and Angels may beholde their abominations: O short sor sweete pleasures, with long euerlasting tailes of sorrow.
Note O but the Saintes of God shall wonder in that day to see so manie whom they while they liued iudged in Charitie to bee godlie and well set persons: O, say I, but they shall won|der to see them in bae bondage, a|mong the blacke band, hauing the Books of their Consciences blotted with so many Items of ille and wic|ked

thoughtes, which in this life could neuer be taken within the walk of humane justice: Note After the Items of their vile thoughts, shall appeare the Items of idle and wicked words: After all, shall bee seene the most fil|thie Items of their most vile  abo|minable works, which they thought had beene buried in eternall obliui|on: The dashing tempest of Gods wrath shall wash out all the varni|shed paintings of their hypocrisie
Mercifull GOD what shame in that day shall come with confusion vpon all the faces of the wicked When such secret sinnes as hid mur|thers, by Sword or by poyson, hid adul|teries, incest, stollen inches  false weights,  all other such iniquities whereof this world is full, and that vnder a faire colour and shewe of godlinesse, when all these hid sianes say I, shall bee singled out and shall come to light, the Godlie whome they once reputed precise fooles and

simple Fellowes, shall wonder at the sight thereof: Note Then shall they point at such persons, saying among themselues, Fye, fye, out vpon him, out vpon her, Ohshame: who could haue thought that euer hee had beene such a man, or that shee had beene such a wo|man? was this the life that these dapper  delicate persons did leade vnder the faire colour of such a glorious profession? Ah stinking hypocrites, formall Pha|risees with your sodered shewes, to whom poore poore Publicans seemed to bee no bodie, because while yee sinned, God kept silence yee thought that hee was al|together such a one as your selfe: ButPsal. 50. 2 now hee shall reproue you, and shall set all your sinnes in order before you: It shall bee clearlie proued vnto your faces  false hearts, that ye were but painted Tombes and whited walls: The Lord in his furie shall hurle you out of your place Hee in his rage shall push you all downe like a rotten and tottering wall Nothing shall bee able to dazele or de|ceiue

the eyes of your Iudge.


The sicke Man.
The Lord bee mercifull to my sillieA prayer Soule: The Lord cast all my sinnes be|hind thy backe, and burie them in the bottome of the Sea.
It is euident then as I see that all secret sinnes shall come to light in that day, and shall bee seene written with Letters great like mountaines for to be seen by the eyes of all these that euer tooke life, and that to the euerlasting shame and infamie of these who in the dayes of Gods pa|tience, turned his grace into wan|tonnesse.


The Pastour.
It is most certaine that there is no|thing which shall not bee seene that day: Note All the closse corruptions where with the wicked were stuft and swelled, shall bee sette in open view, all the wicked shall be known, yea, euerie mothers sonne of them, shalbe clearelie seene vnmasked and

vnwizored, yea, stript starke nacked of all their cloakes of craftinesse: What haue they thought or wrought, it shall bee sought and found: The Lord by the light beames of his eyes Sonnes of thunder, and of lightning, shal seeke and scearch thorow the secrets of all hearts, after that man|ner wherof Zephaniah hath written:Zepha 1. 12 At that time, saith the Lord, will I search Ierusalem with lamps, and visite the men that are frozen in their dreg and say in their heart, The Lord will neither doe good nor euill: Then shall bee seene who sported in Meshech and who ruffled in the tents of Kear contented themselues with painted and guilded graces.
After that the Lord hath found out with this light all their abominati|ons and hath set them in order before them, then shall hee cry, Ah, I willIsa. 1. 42. case mee of mine aduersaries That said, hee shall fling contempt vpon their faces. The wicked then shall bee

so pined with such pinches, yea, so a|stonished, as y^t no tong can expresse: They who while they had time to repent, would not shed a teare for to get Gods mercie, would then, when the Sun-shine of their glorie is past, be glad to please God, by powering out the dearest drops of their blood into teares, wherewith they might bath the feete of Iesus.
Note O the terrors of that day: That day shall bee moste fearefull, it shall bee like a day of Battell, wherein no|thing is to be heard but noise, squea|king  yellings, nothing to be seene but gaping of wounded men, and tumbling of garmentes into blood: al these who on earth were rotten at the heart shalbe ranked in the num|ber of that bashfull band.
O what vnspeakable feares and tremblinges shall then seaze vpon these wretched soules: In all partes they shall bee wounded: Three restlesse plagues, Sorrow, Shame, and

Feare shall continuallie nettle them, till an heaped treasure of wrath come rushing vpo~ them with breath of kindled Iuniper: Sathan shall con|tinuallie flsh in their face, fire whose flammes shall beefed with riuers of Brim stone kindled with an euerla|sting wrath: The great God with the Hammer of his vengeance shall strike thorow the rebellious loynes of their pride, and shall breake the yron sinews of their obstinacie: Note Then would they giue a world for an hole in hea|uen for to relish the least pleasures that be there: No tongue of man or Angel can fullie expresse the least part of these woes: Note Manie millions of their earthlie pleasures shall bee deare boght with one minute of such paines: Their best shall bee the |rie contrarie of that which they like best: For all shall goe to all: Reeling shalbe their rest, paines their plea|sures, mourning shall bee all their mirth, and their Bone musicke shall be

but gnashing of teeth, euen in the pre|sence of their Iudge before whom they shall stand lik abominable mon|sters, and spectacles of amazement: Note Thus as is well said in the Psalme, The way of the wicked hee turneth vpPsal. 1469 side downe: At the first dash he shall break in pieces the claspes  haspes of their foolish hopes, wherein once boldlie they did sinne, that grace might abound.


The sicke Man.
O how fearefull shall their con|dition bee, while like Tinder before the fyrereadie to bee consumed, they shall stand araigned before the Barre of Gods justice, with the volumes of their sinnes written in Letters great like mountaines, so that euery eye may read them.
Note The Lord as I think out of a so|wer, seuere,  imperious austeritie, shall behold that cursed band with glauncing eyes of vnuterable wrath, wherefrae shall come nothing but

wilde fyre, brim-stone, and gun-pow|der, for the euerlasting firing of their Conscience.
Note Not onelie shall the Lord be|hold their vilanies, but to all eyes that euer saw sight, hee shall anata|mize their guilefull heartes wherein all their most filthie plottes and de|uices shall bee seene vnto their euer|lasting shame and infamie: O what shame and confusion of face: O what feares and tremblings, shall seaze vp|on these who on earth for a point of their hose would bee at daggers dr wing with the greatest.
Then shall these who were bold to sinne in their life, despising God, and his threatnings: Then shall they shake and quake like a man whose neck is laide vpon the blocke waiting for nothing but the dead stok from the instrument of death: The  their comfort shall bee turned  confusion: Then shall they know howe foolishlie they conceiued an

imaginarie Hell, while pressed down vnder a sinnefull load, the wrath of God like a Mile-stone shall cruch them downe to the deepes of despaire, where one sorrow succeeding, shall foreuer presse at the heeles of another.


The Pastour.
O these vnspeakable terrours! It is most certaine that Belshazzar ne|uerDan. 5. 6. did speake, so while hee saw the hand writting on the wall, as the wic|ked these doolefull wights shall doe when they shall stand before God with the Bookes of the Law Gospel, and of Consciences, laide open be|fore them: Horrours shall bee hea|ped vpon them with terrours  tor|ments, wherof a created Nature can be capable: O then what gashing of teeth and volumes of woes! They shall bee so soacked in teares and facaked with sorrowe, that who shall see them, shall see the veie image of Death, and yet none shall pitie them: There shall they stand script starke ncked

before their ludge, ik criminals vpon the pannell, looking for nothing but present condemnation both of soul and bodie, which God shall make the eternall full of euerlasting flaes: The Soule and bodie combined mates in miserie, shall mourne for euermore.


The sicke Mn.
O Lord, season my Soule with the graces of thy Spirit, reuiue it with theA prayer spirituall vigour: Let mee liue the life of the righteous, and let mine end be like vnto theirs.Numb. 23. 10
I haue heard you Sir with great attention declare that when Christ shall sitte downe to judge, hee shall separate the wicked from the Godly as Goates from the Sheepe, and thatMatth. 25 33 the wicked with all the hoast of hell lapped vp in that same bundle ofLuk. 22. 30 condemnation shall sand at his left hand, and that the Godlie shall litte vpon Thronos at his right hand.
Nowe I desire to knowe of you what shall bee the case of the Godly

at the right hand before that the ludgement bee pronounced.


The Pastour.
It hath beene tolde you that the Wicked who on Earth made the world to tremble with their boiste|rous brags, shall at Gods Left hand bee standing in disgrace, discount,  discountenance with their Iudge: There shall they stand all trembling, hauing before them the Booke of the Lawe, where they shall see all their Sins, of Thoughts, Words,  Workes: While their guilted Con|sciences shalbe crying guiltie with|in them at the sight of the Lawe Booke of their transgressions, the Lord for to aggrauate their griefe, shal present before them the Book of y^e Gospel, wher they shall see how by vnbeliefe they haue sinned against the remeede of sinne: Note With these two shall bee joyned the Booke of their Consciences, ratifying vnto them that what is co~tained into the

other two Bookes, is an vndoubted trueth: At the reading of these bloo|die Bookes, as yee haue alreadie heard, their Consciences shall be or|tured with vnspeakable amazement  feare: Their Soules all agast, pricked  perplexed, shall yawne for a drop of comfort, which no creature a|boue or below shall bee able to af|foorde.
Now ye desire to know what shal be in that time the estat of the god|lie Christes right hand, before that the Iudgement bee pronounced.
It is certaine that they all in great Glorie, wearing the shining Crownes of immortalitie, shall sit vpon  beeing more bright, than the Sunn at the noone-day: In judgement they shall passe verdict on the wi|ked: They shall all in that summr processe sit as Christs assessours, for  judge the Angels, that is For to ap|proue Christs udgement pronoun|ced against the Deuils the euill |gels

 against all that cursed crue of the Reprobates, who in their life li|uing vnder maskes of mischiefe, bran|ded them with the nik-names of puri|tanisme, proud hypocrisie, glorious singularitie,  pha~astick precisenes who in a word, in hight of stomacke ruffling  swashing, did tread vpon Gods Turtles, accounting them the most vile off-scourings of the Earth.
O but the wicked who on earth were swelled with selfe conceit, shall wonder to see these to bee the As|sessours of their Iudge in highest fauour with God, whose life once they counted madnesse: O what a wonder shall it seeme to the worldlie wise, when they shal see these simple Ones, whose life they loathed, whom they counted fools on earth, al decked  adorned with rarest jewels, so high set vpon Thrones with the most glorious An|gels of God: O how shall they whom their life reposed in Amos. 6. 4 beddes of Yvo|rie, be amazed to behold Gods Matth. 10 42 lit|tle

ones so brightlie Matth. 13 43 shining like Suns with glistering Crownes  glorious Gar|lands possessing fullie Wealth, Ho|nour, Health, and Hearts desire, yea, pleasures vnparalleled by any that heart of flesh can wish.
Note The wicked beholding this, shall be swallowed vp with griefe and groanes, for then shall they remem|ber how on Earth they haue drow|ned the good motions of the Spirit in vaine ryots, prophanenesse, and revillings of good fellowship.
I say againe, that the wicked who once in their swaggering humour, ac|cursed gallentnes, were wont to braue it out with the best, with the great contempt of Christs little Ones shallMatth. 10. 42 wonder, and wonder againe at the sight of these whom God in that day shall honour: Note Are these they, shall they say, whom some times wee had in derision, and of whom we made a paa|ble of reproach? Are these the men and women whom wee in hight of stomacke

disdained to beholde? Behold, now wee see that they are indeede that which on earth they were called, euen Saintes, Gods most excellent ones.Psal. 16. 3.
Certainelie the glorious glaunces of these blessed and beautified bodies, sitting all in royall apparell shall strike the wicked in a wonderfull maze, while they shall behold such jewels of joye, they shall be striken into the dumbe dumppes of saddest melancholie: O the follie of such miserable mucke|wormes, who count it now an hea|uen to creepe and crawle in oyled and buttered paths of carnall prospe|ritie! But in short to proceede in this purpose orderlie.
When all things shalbe put to an order, the wicked beeing at the left, and the Godlie at the right hand, in my judgement there shall be a great silence, that the Iudge may haue au|dience: All men shall beestedfast|lie looking for to heare what GOD the LORD shall say: Then GodIsa. 28. 7.

shall lay judgement to the Lyne, and righteousnes to the Plummet: The~ shall the Lord rise vp as in mount Perazin, and shall bee wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that hee may doe his worke, his strange worke, and bring to passe his act, his strange act: O that cleare and bright shining Eye, which nothing in that day shall bee able to escape!


The sicke Man.
To whom thinke yee that Christ in that Iudgment shall first addresse his speach? Whether shall he speak first vnto the Godlie, who in a sacred violence did tak the Kingdome, or to y^ea Matth. 11 12. wicked, vvho in the dayes of their flesh did sleepe most softlie in the downes of securitie, caring for nothing, but their Purses and their Paunches?


The Pastour.
The Lord shall speake first vnto his owne, who are the chosen gene|ration,1 Pet. 1. 17 the royall Priest-hood, the holy Nation, the peculiar people: * To these sitting at his right hand, first shall

hee say with his Lillie lippes droppingCant. 5. 13 sweete Myrrhe: Come yee blessed of myMatth. 25 34 Father, inherite the Kingdome prepa|red for you from thee foundation of the world.
Note At the hearing of these words of their Lords most louing inuita|tion, all their senses shall open like floode gates for to receiue vnspeakable Ioyes.
What tongue can tell what joyReuel. 21. 9 the Lambes Bride with her purpleCant. 7. 5. Head and Doues Eyes, shall haue whe~ She shall see with what a BridegromeIoh. 3. 29. Shee shall bee matched that day.
After y^t the Lord hath comfortedMatth 25 33 his owne, hee shall turne him to the Goats, that bashfull band, trembling at his left hand: Note Before that hee open his mouth to speake, hee shall behold these bruite beastes made to Pet. 2. 12 bee taken and destroyed: With fierie lookes, with kindled eyes, sparkling furie, and rage, and flshes of lighte|ning, hee shall behold these deuils

droiles, doolefull creatures: In his countenance they shall reade the Characters of awefull terrours euen of the horrours of hell: At the first sight of that angrie Majestie, with brent browes and his sterne counte|nance, a Torrent of terrours shall violentlie rush vpon their Soules, da|shing them with a dazling astonish|ment. Then shall they wish in these flamming horrours vexing them to the quicke, that mountaines would fall aboue them for to hid them from such angrie eyes: The~ shal they know how foolish they were in their life|time to think that while they sinned, the Lord was but a stocke or a stone which could not perceiue them.
Note O that glauncing wrath, which like fire shall greaslie appeare in the eyes of that Iudge, tenne thousand times brighter than the Sunne The glaunces of that fierie furie shall so dazle the sigh of the Reprobate, yea, shall so dash them, that they shall

not bee able to abide his counte|nance No, not; though their eyes were of steale, or of yron, nothing then shall stand in the gappe against the irruptions of such a fierce and fierie vengeance.
Note While these prophane men li|ued on earth in a blazing prosperity they thought their mountaine so strong, that they could neuer bee moued: In their life-time they liued in gladnesse: At their end they de|ceased fairely in the eyes of y^e world: They seemed Saints, because that inPsal. 73. 4 their death were no bands: But O the terrours that abide them.
Note At the first sight of their Iudge a Torrent of terrours shall most vio|lentlie rush vpon their Soules stan|ding in an heauie dumpe  waiting on their dreadfull doome: While they liue heere, the stone of their heart is like an grauell stone, so bed|ded in the bladder, that it cannot be painefull: Little dreame the wicked

now that such fearefull and hellish horrours are preparing for them: But O their euerlasting woe is pre|sentlie in hatching and hammering: It is neerest to the birth while the wicked are most secure: Sudden de|struction is neerest, while the prea|ching of peace are doubled by cry|ing,1 Thess. 5. 3 Peace and saftie.
Note Happie is the man to whom the Lord doeth vouchsafe the grace in this world to waken out of y^e drousie slumber of sin, for to repe~t in time? Woe to these in whose hearts y^e long forebearance of Gods wrath hath wrought a more frozen coldnesse  presumptuous securitie, wherein be|ing lulled, they are carried in a most sweete and sound sleepe, to places where their eye-lids shall neuer bee refreshed with rest any more: O how shall they fling and cry, when they shall feele themselues stung  galled vpon thesore.
Note After that the Lord hath brow|beaten

them with the biggest lookes of his wrath, and hath terrified them with his piercing eyes of fire, and af|ter that he hath disclaimed all inte|rest that euer hee had into them,Cant. 2, 15 hee shall cause take these Foxes that spoiled his vines: That done, he shall vnsheath the flamming sword of hisGen. 3. 24 vengeance with these most fearefull wordes of excommunication, De|partMatth. 25. 41 from mee yee cursed into euerla|sting fyre prepared for the Deuill and his Angels In that fire like dry chip|pie burne-wood they shall burne, but in this they shall bee like Sala|manders, that they shall neuer bee consumed. By that moste feare|full blast of wrath the LORD shall chase them all away from before his face as the chaffe of the mountaines before the winde, and like a rolling thing before the whirle wind: Note The mightie Lord lowring with a darke and cloudie countenance, shall then in great furie lay about him with the

heauie hammer of his judgements, and that with full weight: With one stroke, without any iteration of strokes, from the best strength of a diuine Arme: Hee shall bring downe their hairie scalpes to the lowest dungeon of Death, euen to euerlasting burning brimstone beames, which no mercie shall be able to coole or quench: There shall they drinke in cuppes of wrath for euer.
Note If these miserables could bee put out of paine vpon the sudden, they should not be altogether com|fortlesse: But the mercilesse ven|geance of Gods wrath shall adde lea|sure and lingring to their dying life and liuing death, that sensiblie they may feel death in a life of vntollerable suffe|rings: No mercie, no pittie, no re|gard shall bee had vnto them, no, not but the Lords justice shall charge the edge of his flamming sword vpon the heads and heartes of these doolefull creatures of infamous ranke: These fearefull blowes of Iustice shall bee

without any mixture of mercie Note He who created them without any labour, shall destroy them without any losse: Snaires, fire, and brimstone in that day shall raine downe vpon the hairie scalpe of euerie one which in their life|time did goe on in their sins without e|morse: In this perplexitie  anguish besieged with judgements both felt  feared, shall they sla~d before their Iudge all trembling and waiting v|pon the sentence of that doolefull doome.


The sicke Man.
What shall become of the wicked after that the Lord hath dischairged them his presence any more, by commanding them to depart?


The Pastour.
Note So soone as the Lord hath pro|nounced these words of euerlasting|excommunication, they shall all in|continent goe downe to Hell in heapes, for to bee scorcht  parcht with the euerlasting burninges of a

deuouring wrath: They who haue bene intrapped in their sins, shall be entombent in Gods plagues. There shalbe no more abiding for them, in his presence: they shalbe chassed fro~ their God, vnto euerlasting exile in dungeons of Deuils and of darknes where they shall bee pestered with vnspeakable doole in floods of fire, wher|in they shall waile and yele for euer.
Gods most heauie vengeance likIudg. 7. 13 a Barley Loafe tumbling from aboue, shall thrust them downe and crush them altogether like the Tents of the Midianites: Sathan then with all the spight he can shall lay on load with milstones of miseries hung about their neckes: Hee shall drawe them down with chaines of curses to the dungeons of darknesse: Thus Hell with a gaping gulfe shall swallow them all at once: They shall goe downe most fearefullie with grap|pling Deuils with squeeles roaring voyces, which beeing heard by the

blessed (in whose eyes and sides they once were prickes and thornes) shall rouse vp their hearts wonderfully to rejoyce and sing with such an high tune that shall mak the whole world to resound with a rebou~ding noise.
Mine heart trembleth to thinke vpon these torments which the wic|ked shall suffer into the fierie Lake after their departing from before their Iudge: All wordes faile mee, I finde my conceptions too weak in thinking vpon that infinite wrath: Note O then these who enjoyed once all the pleasures which could bee pur|chased on Earth, shall want all the good which they can desire, and re|ceiue all the euill which they can de|serue: Note They shall for euer be dying in a life which shall neuer end, that they may dye continuallie, and that in vtter darknesse, where Sunne neuer shined, where Day shall neuer dawne: because that in the days of their flesh on earth they wold not so liue to die,

that they might die to liue, they shall for euer in the Hell dye to liue, that they may liuing to dye, a liuing death  a dying life a life  death of woes.
These miserable creatures shalbe so perplexed, that they shall both grieue to liue and feare to dye: They shall desire absolutelie neither death nor Life,  yet in a manner shall they wish for both, but all in vaine: The full bended Iustice of God shall giue no truce to their teares, nor place to their plaints. Vnto all these terrours of Gods wrath shalbe joyned, ano|ther feare, euen Sathan the king of feare, hee in most bitter spight shall besiege these trembling Soules with vnspekable terrours: Note For he shall stare them in y^e face with most grizlie formes and terrible representations: Hee in great furie shall hunt out v|pon them most fearefull gnawing wormes which shall feast on their Con|sciences. The thoughtes of such thinges should pierce, as I thinke

euen vnto the verie center of leared Consciences.
O but the assurance of happinesse in many is false and misgrounded: Obstinate sinners, whose hearts are hard paued with obstinate rebellion, think now y^t they shall neuer see that day, because God now keepeth silencePsal. 50. 21 they thinke that he is lik vnto them: But the slower Gods hand be in com|ming on, the fadder and orer shall his stroake bee: While the wicked most securelie snort in their sinnes, drea|ming of saftie and suretie, euen then their judgement lingreth not, and their damnation is not in a slumber: This2 Pet 2. 3 shall they know by sense and feeling when Gods most fierie jealousie shall breake foorth vpon them like the sor|rowes of a woman in trauell: No sor|row can be heere like vnto their sor|rowes: Fire chaines, rackes, and la|shing whips cannot expresse the shadow of one infernall tor tour: All the woes that euer were heard on earth are no|thing

to the least of these vnpittied plaints.


The sicke Man.
I haue one question for to pro|pound to you: It is concerning the order of Christes proceeding into Iudgement: What reason is there thinke ye that the Iudge in that day shall first absolue the godlie, by bid|ding them Come with his Fathers bls|sing, before y^t he speake a word vnto the wicked, whose hearts in their life|time for the most parte were sealed vp by the spirit of slumber.


The Pastour.
I finde two probable reasons, first because the great God of mercie is more bent to shew mercie toward his creatures, than to powre venge|ance vpon them, and that for to teach all Iudges to execute Iustice with Grauitie and griefe.
Beholde heere howe our God, while hee is euen come vnto the last periode, giueth vnto the wicked who

in their life with Whoorish fore-heads,Ier. 3. 3. out faced the Sunne, behold, I say, how hee giueth them a certaine re|spite and a delay from Hell in that space while hee is speaking vnto the Godlie: And yet the more slowlie hee striketh, the surer shall hee sette his blow, which shall shake euerie sinew of their bodie and each power of their Soule.
Note The other reason wherefore he speaketh first to the Godlie such words of comfort and of comming, is that the wicked who in the dayes of their vanitie combined sport with spight against him, may see how good a God hee shall bee to all these which haue serued him heere in Faith and trueth. Note O what shall the trembling Soules of these vvorldlre brates that would not serue Christ in their life thinke when they shall heare that Lord so sweetlie in so sweete heauenly  honey vvords, say vnto al his Saints his dearest Dar|lings,

whom they as out-casts despi|sedMatth. 21. 30 on Earth, Come yee blessed of my Father, come and be all Kings, with mee for euer more: Come from the awes of Death to the joyes of an euer blessed Life: Such wordes shall make the heartes of the Godlie to daunce and leape within them for joye; but shall make the heartes of the wicked to droope and to bleede for sorrow.
O what would Diues in the fyre boyling Lacke then giue for to bee in the place of Lazarus! Note Manie Kings of Princelie but prophane blood, which haue borne the Crowne and swayed the Scepter aboue the heades of many thousa~ds being drunke with ido|latric: Note Secret murther of their Pa|rents for to sit vpo~ their Throne, shal the~ spue and fall, but shall neuer rise againe: They all drenched in a poole of vvrath, shall wish in that day that they had vvept and vvypt the feete of Les with the haires of their head, yea that they had beene borne Beggers,

hauing the Faith and feare of Iesus. My heart trembleth to think how so many thousands who deemed  drea|med once to bee saued, shall with damned Deuils rush downe to the snakie poole of perdition, because like Swyne in their life they trampled vn|der feete the precious pearle of mercie, purchased by the Blood of Iesus.


The sicke Man.
After that y^e sentence shalbe pro|nounced, whether thinke yee that the wicked shall first goe to paine, or the Godlie vnto pleasure?


The Pastour.
It would seeme by the words of the Gospel, that the wicked that base brood of corruption, to whome Christ hath spoke~ last, shal first goe to torment: After y^t the doome is giuenMatth. 25. 46 out with a roaring thu~der, it is said,  these shal goe away to euerlasting punish|me~t, but the righteous vnto life eternal: After that the wicked are like chaffe chaissed away to brimstone beames,

the Armes of Christ and the Gates of Glorie shall sta~d wide open for to giue entrance to y^e righteous, who~ y^e Father Christ of Iesus shall receiue with most cordiall embracements vn|to their euerlasting comfort: Blessed are they who nowe cast their bread vpon the vvaters, looking neither for thankes nor recompence from men, for then they shall bee richlie re|warded by God.


The sicke Man.
What reason thinke yee can bee of that order? that before the God|lie goe to Glorie, the vvicked all in a rue shall bee hurled away to euer|lasting punishment, beeing thrust downe into the dominions of darknes, most fearfull spectacles of amazement? O how these so miie men shal then bee pensiue and perplexed.


The Pastour.
This would seeme to be the maine reason, viz. For thereby to kindle vp so much the more the loue of the

Godlie toward their God: The bit|ter bickering and fearefull squeeles of the Reprobate hurling downe to hell, beeing heard and seene by the Godlie, shall make the joyes of heauen to relish the sweeter vnto them.
Note If while a people were in a Church, the Church should fall downe and smother the one halfe, not doing any harme vnto y^e other, these who should escape, should by beholding the crushed and bloodie bones of others, much more be raui|shed with y^e joy of such a deliuerance than if y^e house had not fallen at all
Note When Dathan and Abiram with their companies sanke down to HellNumb 16. 32 in the sight of all Israel, what joye thinke ye had these whom the earth did beare aboue? Manie who neuer in their life gaue God thankes for that the sward of the earth hath borne them aboue, if they should see such a sight as of Dathan and of Abiram, they would regard the benefite the

more, and would giue God moe thankes for that one mercie, than for all by-gane fauours shewed vnto them since they beganne to vvalke vpon the ground: Wee thanke God little that the earth beareth vs aboue because wee see it not swallow vp sinners with a gaping gulfe: Note while men see the miserie of others it wa|kens into them the sense of Gods mercie toward them. Note O how glad shall the Godlie bee then, that they haue serued God, when they shall see the Deuil  his Darnell the wicked seede, cast into a fierie Lake! when these blessed soules shal see the hels ope~,  the black deuils flashing fire into the faces of the wicked,  hurling away these damned spirits with fearfull cryes  shrikes downe to the dunge|ons of distresse,  to most vile Vaults of darknesse entrinched among gna|wing wormes stinking Scorpions and hissing Serpents, then they who were wont to weepe for y^e sins of the wic|ked

in this life, shal haue no co~passion on them; but shall laugh to see them lashed, rejoycing in y^e justice of their God powred out vpon these, that in a selfe liking of their owne estate, despised the sweetenes of his mercie: O hap|pieZepha. 2. 2 they who gather themselues before the decree come foorth.
Note Behold, and consider what a change is this: These who mourned of before for their sinnes shall then solace themselues in their sorrowes: The shriks  squoakes of these dam|ned soules falling down to hel which shalbe to the wicked a song of judge|ment, shalbe to the Godlie in y^t day quite otherwise, euen a song of mer|cie full of mirth and of Musicke: O how sweete then shall mercie bee to the Godlie when they shall see what Gods fearefull vengeance shall work on the wicked, whom their life by an accursed Alchymie, turned the grace of their God into wantonnesse! O how rejoyced shall their heartes bee, when that great IEHOVAH shall

begin to sway with his Almightie Arme, that mace of yron for to dash these fore-lorne limmes with paine both of sense and of losse.
Then shall the Theefe wish that both his hands had beene maimed and mutilate: Then shall the vn|cleane person whose eyes are filled with adulterie and filthinesse, wish that he had beene borne blind: Then shall the Drunkard wish that he had beene borne without a mouth: Then shall the Blasphemer a man of bloody oathes wish that his tongue with a Turkesse had beene torne out of his throat: Note This also for a surplus shall bee joyned to their anguish, none shall bee for to wish them well, or for to condole their miserie.
Note The decree beeing once come foorth, and the doome of damnation beeing once pronounced with these wordes of command, Depart fromMatth. 25. 41 mee, c. All the vngodlie in scar|let abominations, who in their exces|siue

pride rousted on high as in Eagles nests shall in that day fall down with Deuils into that Dungeon and ward house of Hel, wher ther is no light but for to let these which are tormented see their miserie, no darknesse but that which may hid from their eyes all sortes of comfort: Then all their by-past burning pleasures shall bee quenched into the fire of Hell liked hote yro~ quenched into water with an extinguishing noise: Nothing shalbe then but shouting  gnashing of teeth, sighing, sobbing, and fear|full groanes, Isa. 9. 5. Fewell of fire, and gar|ments rolled in blood: All wicked Soules shall that daye bee drencht into an Occan of desperat displea|sure, and shall bee carried away with an invnding spaite of spitefull wrath.
O what joye shall bee kindled in|to the heartes of the Godlie, when on the one hand they shall behold the miseries of the Theiues, Drunk|ards,

Adulterers, Fornicators, and Blasphemers, who were wont wan|tonlie to stretch out their throates into high blastes of blasphemie,  whe~ on the other part they shall consider how God in mercie hath fastened them as nailes into a sure place,Isa. 22. 23 which cannot bee shaken! O what gladnesse of heart shall the Saintes haue, after that they haue seene the wicked tumbled downe into Hell, to see what companie they shall be in|to among Angels of light  loue with Christ himselfe, in whose face is ful|nesse of joye, at whose right hand arePsal 16. 1 pleasures for ouermore.
Note These pleasures vnspeakable, for the greatnesse of themselues, shal bee commended vnto the Godlie by two by-respects: First, by the con|sideration of that infinite woe and hellish virulencie, without anie mix|ture of mercie, whereinto they shall see the wicked to be plunged, wher|of they shall bee free: Secondlie,

by the rememberance of the miserie whereinto they liued, while they did dwell on earth, during the dayes of their vanitie, their estate chan|ged to the better, shall become the sweeter: Are they not these who are called Lillies among the thornes?Cant. 2. 2. doeth Scripture call them, TheseReuel. 7 14 that are come out of the great tribula|tions? Their by-past tribulations shall wonderfullie commend their pre|sent felicitie.
This wee see to be of great force by daylie experience The conside|rations first of other mens woes,  of the calamities wherewith at other times vvee haue beene perplexed, are like Hunger which like good sauce giueth rellish and taste to course things which at other times wee thinke to bee no dainties: To the hungrie Soule euerieProu. 7. 7 bitter thing is sweete: How sweete the~ shall the sweetnesse of Gods face be to the Godlie after all their terrours are past,  after they haue seene the

wicked these fearfull  mis-chap|pen brats tumbled down the steepe precipes of eternall destruction?
What pleasures I pray you shall these bee, when pleasures for euermore shall be joyned with the remembe|rance of all these tribulations wher|in wee were enwrapped while our feete stackefast in the myre? All these considerations joyned together with vnspeakable pleasures shall make the Reuel. 5.  Harpes of God soundReuel. 19 1. Halleluiah, Halleluiah for euer and euer: Such meditations ouerflow my Soule, dyuing in such depths.
Now Sir yee haue heard of the last thinges which shall bee done in this world, heere is the conclusion of the last judgement, The wicked as S. Matthew saith, shall goe away toMatth. 25. 46 euerlasting punishment, but the Righ|teous to Life eternall.


The sicke Man.
Note O but mine heart is sore moued within mee, while I thinke of that

deepe Gulfe whereinto all wretched Soules shall bee plunged: O yee who in the dayes of your vanitie drink vp the very Creame  flower of the earth, al your pleasures now, the~ must be gone: Oh that euer  anone we culd applie this vnto our hearts.
My soule is look one liking down from an high and steepie place: The meditations of these woes of the wicked, makal my senses to be trou|bled,  al my spirits to be confused|lie shuffled together: my heart with|in me is so tossed to  fro, that it is come like a squissed egge, whose yolke is mingled with its white: All my thoughtes are confounded as one that is into an hurlie burlie.
Good Lord, let thy visions bee vntoA prayer my Soule visions of peace. The blessed God preserue vs from all these woes: Lord, make vs all to cleaue to thee with full purpose of Soule.
Now to come to the purpose: In your discourse ye haue powerfullie

let mee see the wicked swallowed vp in a fearefull gulfe: Let mee heare now what becommeth of the godly.


The Pastour.
After that Christ hath giuen them his Blessing, saying vnto them, ComeMatth. 25 34 yee blessed of my Father, c. They all beeing crowned and clothed in royall apparell shall all in good or|der goe triumphantlie in Charets vp to the Heauen of heauens with such shoutes of triumph and of Ioye, of Loue, and of Laud, as was neuer heard since the world was founded.
Note Then shall that prophecie bee fulfilled, God is gone vp with a shout,Psal. 47. 5 the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet:vers. 6. Sing praises to God, sing praises: That shalbe the Lambes marriage day, a day that shall neuer bee darkened with a night, a Feast that shall neuer bee followed with a Fast.
Note The day of the bringing of a Queene to the King of the Land is a day of great joye: What pleasure

can bee had of Mirth or Musicke, shall not bee away that day.
But alas, what can the earth affoord, simile aut secundum, that is like vnto that joy, which shall fill  ouerflow all the hearts of the godly, whe~ Christ shal bring vp to the Heauens his Church,Cant. 4. 1 which is his Wife, his faire Loue, ha|uing Doues eyes within her Locks, being cloathed and crowned with the glorie of himselfe? what tong ca~ expresse? nay, what heart can conceiue what joy  glorie shalbe there where the Lambes Wife shall bee dected with her Hus|band Christ, who shall enliue Her with marchlesse joye and glorious immortalitie?
This is that great wonder which S. Iohn in his Reuelations, saw in HeauenRouel. 12. 1 viz. A woman cloathed with the Sun, and the Moone vnder her feete, and v|pon her head a crowne of twelue Stars: Behold,  consider the Lambes Bride all enuironed with Light, clothed with Christ her Sunne, and crowned

with glistring starres of glorie, heauen|lie jewels, diuine Dyamonds: Behold her making a foote-stoole of the Moone, the second great Light of Heauen: See how shee treadeth vnder her feete that most inconstant creature, for to declare that constancie of her loue toward her Lord, which shall last for euer, without anie change: O the beautie of that Bride whose cheekes shall bee comelie with rowes ofCant. 1. 10 Iewels, whose necke shall bee dected with the chaines of Christs merites.
Note The Angels themselues, behol|ding this Bride so royallie attyred, shall wonder at her beautie: When these Noble Spirits shall see and consider that great familiaritie that shalbe be|tweene Christ  his Spouse, they shallCant. 8. 5. wonder,  shall say one to another, Who is this that commeth up out of the wildernes, leaning vpo~ her wel-beloued
After that the Church the Lambs Wife, who on earth was betrothed byReuel. 19. 7 grace, shall in the Heauens bee ma|ried

by glorie, and conuoyed vnto his euer greene bed, all Eternitie shalbe in y^e Heauens lik a mariage day, decored  trimed with all sortes of Flowers,  of Fruits, of feastings,  of Musick, and of all contentment that can be conceiued, heard, seene, sauoured, or touched by a creature: There our wants shall bee turned into wishes: That which there shall bee least, shall bee many thousand degrees aboue all that anie mortall heart heere can desire.
Note All our senses shall be possessed and filled with pleasures, our mind shall bee enlightened: Our will shall bee contented: All our affections shall bee satisfied: Note The Angel in the Reuelation gaue a command vnto Iohn, to write in a Booke con|cerning the Lambes feast prepared for his Mariage in the day of the glad|nesse,Cant. 3. 11 of his heart, but not being able, neither hee to indite nor S. Iohn to write, all the dainties of that Feast he

desired him to write that all were blessed which were called vnto it: Write, said hee, Blessed are they whichReuel. 19. 9 are called vnto the Mariage Supper of the Lambe: Lest Iohn should haue doubted whether it was so indeed or not, the Angel subjoyneth, these are the true sayings of God. Note Let vs con|ceiue this much of these pleasures, that they cannot bee conceiued: All that wee can conceiue shall bee lesse by manie degrees than the least thing wee shall receiue: Note Then all our desires shalbe enlarged  made wider: Open thy mouth verie wide,Psal. 81. 10  I shal fill it vnto thee: God himselfe beeing All in all, all our desires1 Cor. 15. 28 shall bee fullie satisfied and though they shall bee alwayes satisfied, they shall neuer bee cloyed: All wordes heere are full of wants, for these bee things which passe all humane sight and search.


The sicke man.
The consideration of such things

enliueth my Soule,  looseth mine heart wonderfully fro~ the loue of all worldlie things, and draweth my heart with a feruent desire of a sight of that day: It is no wonder y^t the whole creationRom. 8, 22 groaneth and trauelleth in paine toge|ther vntill now: If wee had hearts to belieue, we should finde into our hearts an earnest expectation and a waiting for the manifestation of the Sonnes of God: Alas, that our deuo|tion should bee so rotten and vn|sound: Note If wee could gette but a glimpse of our God heere behinde, it should stirre vp all our desires to see his Face.


The Pastour.
That is most certaine: Note By this desire shall a man know whether he bee a spirituall man or a carnall: Hee that is but carnall neuer desireth to goe out of this world: It is good for vsLuk. 9. 33 to be heere will he say, as eter said on Tabor: But hee that hath receiued the Spirit will finde better motions in

his heart: Wee our selues, saith S. Paul, which haue the first fruites of the Spirit, euen wee our selues groane within our selues, waiting for the a|doption, to wite, the redemption of our bodie.


The sicke Man.
Alas, wee all are heere natu|rallie of a temporising temper, wee linger and delay to returne to our God.
O Lord of eternitie, be fauourable toA prayer vs that we may feare thee, let thy grace worke such groans in our hearts, that thereby we may know that wee haue cer|tainelie receiued the first fruites of theRom, 8. 27 Spirit: So long as wee are heere make the current of our affections to runne the way of thy Commandements.
There is a difficultie now come in my minde, whereof I gladlie de|sire to be cleared: It is concerning Christ himselfe, of him it is said, That hee shall deliuer vp the Kingdome

to God his Father, after hee hath sub|dued all his enemies.


The Pastour.
I remember well where these wordes are written: The Apostle speaking of the Resurrection of the1 Cor. 15. 24 last judgement, saith, Then commeth the end, when hee shall haue deliuered vp the Kingdome to God his Father, when hee shall haue put downe all rule, authoritie, and power: For hee mustvers. 25. reigne till hee haue put all his enemies vnder his feete, c. And when allvers. 28 things shall bee subdued vnto him, then shall the Sonne also himselfe bee sub|ject vnto him that put all thinges vnder him, that God may bee All in all.


The sicke Man.
These bee the wordes indeede of my difficultie: I pray you to make mee vnderstand them: What is that to say, That hee shall deliuer vp the Kingdome to his Father, and that af|ter he hath subdued all things, he him|selfe

must become subject to him, that put all things vnder him?
It would seeme that Christ our Lord shall lose by this meanes: For first it is said, That hee must deliuer vp the Kingdome, and rule no more: Seco~dlie, that he must become subject to God the Father: I desire you Sir to loose this knottie difficultie: Note These who plowe with Gods Hyfer may easilie finde out the darkest Riddles.Iudg. 14. 18.


The Pastour.
I shall loose these knots easilie: By that change the Lord shall bee no loser: Note As for that it is said, That he shall deliuer vp the Kingdome to his Father, after that hee hath put downe all rule, authoritie, and power: It is not to be vnderstood absolutely y^t Christ there after shall reigne no more, but y^t hee shall reigne no more after such a fashion as he did of before, viz. By figh|ting against his enemies, who then shalbe no more, neither by comfor|ting or protecting his friendes from

dangers, who then shalbe free from all danger.
It is certaine, that the Father reig|neth now by the Son, and that the Sonne shall reigne eternallie with the Father, but that shalbe in another manner after the last judgement, then hee doeth now: Note Now hee reig|neth like a Prince, fighting his Fathers Battels: Then shall hee reigne for euer, triumphing ouer all his enemies.
This is the interpretation of some learned writers: But in my judge|ment it declareth not plainlie what it is to giue vp the Kingdome to the Fa|ther.
I lik Beza his exposition best Note His words are these, Dicitur Christus reg|num Deo patri traditurus vltimo de|mum illo die quo profligatis omnibus ad unum hostibus, omnes quos a patre gu|bernandos accepit, illi veluti in manus tradet aeterna gloria coronandos.
That is, Christ is said to deliuer vp the Kingdome to his Father at the last

day, when hauing subdued all his ene|mies hee shall deliuer into his Fathers hand all these whom hee had receiued from the Father for to guide and go|uerne, for to bee by him crowned with euerlasting glorie.
By the Kingdome I vnderstand the godlie who are the Children of the Kingdome: Christ then is said, To deliuer vp the Kingdome to the Fa|ther, when hee deliuereth vnto him these whom the Father had giuen to him: Note All the Godlie haue beene giuen by the Father vnto Christ the Mediator: And Christ againe must bee countable to the Father for them: Holie Father, said hee, keepeIoh. 17. 11 through thine owne Name, those whom thou hast giuen mee: And againe,vers. 12. These that thou gauest mee I haue kept, and none of them is lost, but the Sonne of perdition. See heere how the Fa|ther is said, to giue, and Christ is said to haue kept these whom the Father hath giue~ him: Note while Christ maketh

his count  randereth them againe to his Father, hee is said to giue vp the Kingdome to his Father.
Note Neither must wee heere thinke that while the Father gaue this king|dome to the Sonne, hee wanted it himselfe, or that the Sonne when he shall giue vp the Kingdome to his Father, shall reigne no more: No,Ioh. 17. 10 not: All mine are thine, said Christ, and thine are mine: Note I confesse that there is no such giuing among men as can expresse sufficientlie how the Father is said to giue any thing vn|to the Sonne: And againe, there is no such giuing vp among men, as can clearelie declare how the Son is said, To giue vp the Kingdome vnto the Father: There bee no Mines nor Thines among men which can fullie expresse the Mine and the Thine of the Father and of the Sonne.


The sicke Man.
Indeede Sir yee speake well: Wee must all reuerence the high misteries

of God, not darring to abbridge his infinite wisedome within the bou~ds of a braine that is not of a span long: The wordes of Moses are words of great wisedome, The secret things areDan. 19. 29 for the Lord our God, but these that are reuealed are for vs, and our posteritie for euer. That then which is reuea|led is for vs, and that which is for vs in Scripture, it is our part to seeke it and to search it.
O Lord, guide mee by thy counsell,A prayer keepe my thoughts within compasse: Suffer not my Soule to turne awrie from thy trueth: Sequester mine heart from all vanitie, that I bee not curious in the knowledge of that which thou hast not alotted for mee, as are these whose heartes are filled with dreames and de|ceitfull dotages: Let my Soule neuer be sowred with such leauen as to presume to search that which thou desireth not to reueale
The seco~d difficultie I obserued in these words which ye haue recited

out of that Chap. to y^e Corinthians, is in these words, viz. That Christ must1 Cor. 15 25 reigne till hee hath put all his enemies vnder his feet: What is that to say?


The Pastour.
That is, Christ muste rule this world till God the Father hath sub|dued vnto his Sonne Christ, all the enemies of his glorie, and of mans Saluation, who from the hight of their sinnes shall bee brought down into the fiercest flamme and lowest pitte of perdition.


The sicke Man.
It would appeare by the words that Christ shall reigne no me af|ter that all shall bee subdued: See|ing it is said, That he must reigne till he hath put all his enemies vnder his feete, it would seeme that when that shall once bee done, Christ shall reigne no more.


The Pastour.
The word Till declareth not that Christ shall reigne no more after

that subduing, for example it is writ|ten21Sam. 6. 23 of Michal, that shee had no Chil|dren till the day of her death.
It is not therefore to bee thought that after death shee had any Chil|dren: The opinion of many great Diuines, is that Marie neuer maried Ioseph though shee had beene betro|thed vnto him, and yet it is saide,Matth. 1. 25 That Ioseph knew her not, till shee had brought foorth her first borne: So God said vnto Iaakob, I will not leaue theeGen. 28. 15 VIVTILL I haue done that which I haue spoken to thee of: Such formes of speaches are verie common: I will say to my friend at Euen, God bee with you, till wee meete againe: It is not that I desire God to bee with him no more so soone as wee shall meete againe.
Thus as ye see when it is said, that Christ must reigne Till hee hath put all his enemies vnder his feete, it will not import that, that once beeing done Christ shall reigne no more.

Gabriel said to his Mother, That of hisLuk. 1. 33 Kingdome there shall bee none end: Note If there bee any change, it shall onelie bee in the forme of his reig|ning and ruling: Now hee reigneth  ruleth by a Scepter of yron, and by the Scepter of his word preached: The one is for to conuert the most stub|borne hearts of the Elect, the otherPsal. 2. 9. for to dash the wicked in pieces lik a pot|ters vessell: Note All that forme of doing then shall cease, for as for the wicked they shall be committed fast to the low dungeons of Hell, for to bee vexed for euer with the infer|nall Burrios: Christ then and all his members shall bee quite of all their persecutions: As for the Godlie they shall bee made perfect: They shall neede no more the preaching of the word: The Law then shall not bee needfull, for all the Godlie shall bee a Law vnto themselues: The Gospel shall bee of no vse: It is a Doctrine of Faith: Then shall bee

abolished: Note When thinges absent are made present, Faith hath no more adoe.


The sicke Man.
That point is made cleare in|deede: But what is this to say, That Christ the Sonne shall reigne, Till the Father hath put all enemies vn|der his feete? It would appeare by these words, that Christ ouercom|meth his enemies by another force than his owne, seeing it is said, That* Note the Father is he who shall put all things vnder his feete.


The Pastour.
The most learned Diuines haue considered that the Apostle there speaketh not of Christ as hee is Fi|lius Dei eternus simpliciter, simplie the Sonne of God, but as hee is in the fome of a seruant, for that cause, as is well remarked by the best wits, none can affirme that in Christ is, Secundaria divinitas, a Diuinitie of a baser rancke.
* This wee must all know, that Christ the Sonne  the Father bee|ing but one GOD, worke with one, and the selfe same power: As God the Father and hee are one, so what power Christ man hath in subduing his enemies, it may bee said to bee from the Father, Because the Trinity is such a deepe mysterie, as no hu|mane Wit can search it thorow, so the actions of the three Persons are such, as no man can clearelie dis|cerne them: It is much for our shal|low-wits to know the borders of Gods ways: Note It is good in Gods mysteries spere ad sobrietatem, that our wise|dome bee sober and not drunke with a giddie curiosity, neither must wee daw to the other extremitie, as to flatter our selues in a sluggish dul|nesse, hauing no care to search the Scriptures with the men of Berea for to knowe that which itAct. 17. 11 hath pleased God to reueale to vs: Note It is good to seeke out carefullie,

though not curiouslie the know|ledge of Gods reuealed will so farre as can make for the comfort of our Soules.


The sicke Man.
Certainelie the knowledge of such things is verie needfull for the com|fort of these that are for to leaue this world: And therefore, I who loo not for long sojourning heere, desire to know the more earnestlie what good things the Lord hath prepared for his owne into that other world. The hope of Glorie is like a strong hold against the feare of Death. Note O that I were that which I would bee.
There is now resting only one diffi|cultie in the words of the Apostle, which I neuer as yet could well vn|derstand: It is said, That when all1 Cor. 25. 28 things shalbe subdued vnto the Father then shall the Sonne also himselfe bee subject vnto him, that put all thing vnder his feete: Is not the Sonne euen now subject vnto the Father

If not, how is it said, That hee shall bee then subject vnto him?


The Pastour.
Christ as God, is not at all subject vnto the Father, but, all the Godlie are subject both to Him and to the Father: But as man Christ, is with vs subject vnto the Father: Note Accor|ding to this a Father said well,
Christus in quantum Deus est,August. lib. de Trinit. 1 cap. 10 cum illo nos subjectos habet, in quantum sacerdos, nobiscum illi subjectus est.
That is, To Christ as God wee are subject as to the Father, but as Christ is our Priest, hee is with vs subject vnto the Father.
Moreouer it may bee saide, that after the last Iudgement Christ shall bee subject vnto the Father, because then all the Faithfull which are his Mysticall bodie, shall bee perfectlie subject to the Father, Christ the Head of the Church, since his in|carnation, hath in his owne Person

bene subject vnto y^e Father perfectly, and so is hee yet: But in his mysti|call members below there is a misera|ble rebellion of flesh against the Spirit:Gal. 5. 17. Note But when all shall bee gathered to|gether in one Bodie into Glorie, the~ shall Christ be perfectlie subject vn|to God both
Quoad naturam suam tum quoad corpus mysticum.
In his humane Nature and in his mysticall Bodie, which are the faith|full: When all the Elect with their Head Christ shall be perfectlie subject vnto God, then shall Christ bee ful|lie and finallie subject to the Father: This seemeth to bee the true mea|ning of the wordes: This is made cleare by the wordes following, viz. That this subjection shall bee that God may bee All in all.
Note But this wee must vnderstand, that this subjection of Christ and of his mysticall Bodie, is not anie dis|grace or disparagement to our Head

Christ or to vs: The trueth is, that it is a moste Princelie honour to bee the Prince of Heauens subject: Note It were better to bee the least subject of Heauen, than the greatest commander of Hell: The seruice of our God is greatest libertie: The more perfect this subjection be, the greater is our Glorie: Note The subjection of a crea|ture to God, is the verie Image of God in the creature: Gods Image in Adam was chieflie in his subjection to Gods will, which was defaced by his rebellion, which is the verie I|mage of the Deuill.


The sicke Man.
Wee are much beholden to our God, who in his great mercie hath reuealed vnto vs all these things into his word: His word may well bee called, A Lanterne vnto our steps,Psal 19. 8. a light which enlighteneth the eyes, burning clearer tha~ any Cresset-light warning from dangers.



The Pastour.
Indeede Gods word is a word of life and of light: It is a sauing word, the power of God to Saluation: ThisRom, 1. 16 power is onelie peculiar to the migh|tie operation of this word.
Note There bee in the creatures words and lines of words, for to de|clare vnto man that there is a God, that so man may be without excuse: Day vnto day vttereth speach, andPsal. 19. 2. night vnto night sheweth knowledge: Their Line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world: But all these wordes and lines are but lines of words concerning the creation: All that they can say, is but that there is a God, a mouer, a primum ens a first Be-ere, whereby all things haue their beeing: But in all these lines of words there is not one word of Christ the Redeemer: There is not a day where the Gospel shin|neth not, that can vtter any speach or shewe any knowledge of that

which concerneth mans Saluation, wrought with the bloodie sweate of God: There is not a word let bee a line in any worke of Nature, concerning the great mysterie of Godlinesse,1 Tim 3. 16 Christ manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit seene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and receiued vp into glorie.


The sicke Man.
O words worthie to bee writtenIer. 17. 1 with the point of a Dyamond: Seeing it is so, this should mak vs to esteeme so much the more of the glorious Gospel which is the power of God toRom. 1. 16 saluation of all beleeuers.


The Pastour.
The Gospel indeede is like a mst rich treasure digged into a fielde, forMatth. 13. 44 which a man that hath found it will goe and sell all that hee hath, that hee may buy that fielde for the treasures cause.
This Gospel is like a Sunne newly created in the heauens, which shineth

both day and night, both in life and death with most glistring  whole|some Beames, wherby the vnwhole|some cloudie night aire of iniquitie is rarified, scattered, and dispersed Note As the Sun in the heauens by its heate maketh al the earth in y^e Spring to grow greene, and the Cornes to come vp at the first with small green points, and after to shoote vp to the shot bled,  after that to come to the Seede, that at last beeing cut downe in a white ripenesse, it may be laye vp into Girnels: Euen so the Go|spel like a Sunne shining from the heauens, commeth after the colde frostie season of the dead Winter of our Nature, and by its Beames war|meth vs, and wakeneth vp the seede of grace sowen into our heartes by the good hand of God: After that, with its heate by little and little it ripeneth these sowne graces, at last while wee are ripe, and while the graces of God in vs are come to their

perfection, y^e Lord sendeth his serua~t Death to cut vs downe with a sickle:Luk. 16. 9 After y^t by Death we are cut downe, the Lord treasureth vs vp into euer|lasting Tabernacles, the Girnels of the Prince of Heauen, farre from the keene rasors of lying tongues. Now seeing the day is fr spent, here I shall pause, leauing that which hath bene said, to your nights meditations: By y^t grace of God I shal returne in the morning earelie: He that made Peter safelie toMatth. 14 29 walk vpon the swelling waues vphold you so, y^t ye sinke not at the rising of any boisterous blaste of temptation: Note Gods Children in this world are lik these three Children in the fierie fur|nace, though such fire seeme to beeDan. 3. 23. a consuming fyre, it shall not bee able so much as to sindge their apparell.vers. 27


The sicke Man.
But before yee goe Sir, according to your good former custume, by your deuote prayers, committe my Soule to the armes of my Sauiour: I euer feare that my false heart giue

mee the slippe: As God hath giuen you a diuine tong, so Lord, giue me a sanctified eare, the sweetest spiri|tuall musick and harmonie of Gods seruice: Oh, that with Peter I couldIohn. 21. 1 gird my coate, and swimme thorow all the swelling seas of temptations, y^t I might come vnto my Lord. Offer vp I pray you Sir, for mee the Chri|stian sacrifice of prayer: Resigne my Soule into his mercifull hands: Oh that I could with you homage mine heart vnto God in feruent supplica|tions! wee are not able as I see to stand a moment in the right way without Gods vnderpropping hand.
Alas, Sir, I finde in my prayers great distractions, which wonderful|lie blunt the edge of my deuotion while my mouth is speaking to God, my minde is speaking with follies and phansies: Note If a man speaking vnto a Prince, should nowe turne him vnto this man, and now to that man, would not that Prince at last commaund, him silence enjoyning

him with all speed to packe him out of his presence, as being a man who knoweth not what is matchable to such a Majestie: Many a time, alas, haue I at prayer babled out with my lippes many sauourles words, which haue wrought nothing but the sad|ding and grieuing of Gods Spirit.A prayer
O Lord, make this meditation of mine owne vnworthinesse, bee like a whet-stone to my prayers, that by helpe thereof I may pray better than euer I did before: Giue mee grace at all times, but speciallie in prayer to keepe watch and ward ouer my thoughts, that I neuer let loose the bridle vnto them as most foolishlie often I haue done, rushing my Soule ouer head and eares into the myres of earthlie mindednes: Now good Lord, make mee fresh and nimble in my Spi|rit for prayer: Oh, for that Spirit of spi|rituallRom. 8. 27 groans, which maketh inter|cession for the Sainctes, according to the will of God. I desire your helpe in prayer: The night is noysome, I lyeIob. 7. 4. downe, I say, when shall I arise, and the

night beginne I am full of tossing vnto the dawning of the day.


The Pastour.
I rejoyce with my Soule to heare you: I know no surer token of Gods Spirit within a man, than a bennes to prayer: Reprobates with Herod may gladlie heare Preachers: But they all in Scripture are branded with this blot, They call not vpon God Desire of conference with God, is a most sure token of friendship be|tweeneAmos. 3. 3 God and man: Can two walke together except they bee agreed? Can two speake together except they be friendes? Hypocrites I knowe willMatth. 6. 7 make long prayers, which are but lip labour, which our Lord calleth much babling: But their heartes in their prayers wander from God,  goe to worldly toyes, so that while they are speaking one thing with the mouth, their hearts are vpon another subject:Isa. 29. 13 Thus Scripture calleth, A drawing neere to God with the mouth, while

the heart is farre off: * God cannot bee scorned, but knoweth howeAct. 5. 2. much is behind, though Ananias would seeme to bring all.
Note Hee who can pray from his heart, by his prayer as with a pier|cing keye, is able to vnlocke the ce|lestiall treasures of God, where out of hee will draw comfortable cordials for distressed Soules, in their gasping agonies.
Let vs now bend our knees most humblie before our Maker, and wor|ship him both with heart  mouth, the most pleasant harmonie of a Chri|stian Soule.
The Lord set all our hearts right|lie on worke: For the heart of man in prayer is most bent to play reakes in wandering from God.



A Prayer for the sicke Man.
_O Great and Omnipoten GOD, whose Eyes are ten thousand time brighter than the Sunne at Noone Day: Our sinnes cannot bee hidde from The Faine would wee confesse them, but alas, for this hardnesse of hear Smite, O LORD, smite these our hearts of yron, soften them with the fire of thy Spirit, till my: sighs  sobs they melt within our boweles: O LORD, who shall not feare thee, to whom is giuen all power both in heauen and earth.
When we remember thy last Ses|sions which shall bee in that great  last judiciall day, it maketh all the

haires of our head to start vp: Wee are instructed by thy diuine Word1 Cor. 7. 31 that the fashion  figure of this world shall passe away, and that all ThronesDan. 7. 9. shall bee remoued, that that most Royall  glorious Throne may bee erected for the comming of the Son of man.
O LORD, in that great and terri|ble day all thinges must compeare naked before Thee: Then shalt thouHeb. 4. 13 bring to light the things which were hidde in darknesse, and shalt make ma|nifest the most secret counsels of mens hearts: From thy face nothing shall bee able to procure escape: Happie shall that Soule be on whom in that day thou shalt bleink with a reconcea|led face.
O gracious GOD, whose good|nesse is bottomlesse, and greatnesse immeasurable: Now speake home to the hearte of thy seruant heere, who in his fainting weaknesse hath desired me to powre out this prayer

for him: All his desires are toward thee, stampe vpon his Soule the I|mage of thy selfe: Giue him a pawne and a pledge of thy fauour, make him assured that in that day hee shall finde thee a fauourable Iudge, who shall cry on him among the rest of thy Children, Come yee vnto mee yee blessed of my Father, and receiueMatth. 25. 34 a Kingdome.
Let this consideration beare out in the stormie houre of the last as|saults: Set a strong Guarde and a narrow watch ouer his heart, lest he bee vnawares surprised by Sathans craftie plots: Let the Sconce of thy mercie fence off the partching heae of Sathans most fierie temptations kindled in a bone-fire: Furnish him now with such grace whereby hee may possesse his Soule in patience, loo|king for that blessed hope, and appea|ring of thy glorie in the cloudes.
It was long since written by thyIam. 5. 9. blessed Pen-men, That the Iudge stan|deth

before the doore, and that the end of all things draweth neere: Now seeing sin is come to such an hight, that thy Iustice cannot much longer forbeare, but that thou must come shortlie to put an end to this most corrupt world: LORD, cleanse quite away all our corruptio~s before thou come.
Grant that continuallie with y^e wiseMatth. 25. 4. Virgines wee may haue our Lampes of oyle trimmed for the comming of our Lord, the blessed Bridegroome ofIoh. 3. 29. our Soules: Graunt that in that day with gladnesse wee may lift vp ourLuk. 21. 28 heades, beeing assured of a gracious welcomming vnto our Masters joy.Matth. 25. 2
Keepe this euer fast in our me|morie as an aweband aboue our heades, for to keepe vs from sinne, that Christ the determined Iudge of y^e world shal come for to render to e|uery one according as he or she hath done in the days of their flesh: grant therefore that whether we sleepe or

we wak, the shrill Trumpet of Gods voyce may be as if it were euer soun|ding to our Soules, Arise for to com|peare in judgement.
O LORD, enlighten our mistie mindes, that with an vndazeled eye euerie one of vs may try and descry clearelie our owne estate in this world,
In a more speciall manner let it please thee to regard thy poore priso|ner heere in this bed of languishing, who~ Satan hath soght to sift that his Faith might faile: Waken his Soule softlie with a mercifull motion of thy Spirit of comfort: Let him not bee like these who in a dull, dead, and senslesse securitie not thinking on Death, chop in the earth before that euer they bee awares, neither suffer Sathan to quench his clearest comforts with y^e dampe of despare: By this heauie sickenesse which day|lie increaseth, thou is now Summo|ning thy seruant here to a perticular

and personall compearance before thy great Tribunall: Let him finde thy Royall seate to be a mercie seate: Proclaime vnto his Conscience in his inward partes, that thou wilt ne|uer enter into judgement with him: Assure his Soule that hee is one of thine, and that there is no condemna|tionRom. 8. 1 to these that are in Christ Iesus, who vnto all his faithfull is like aEzek. 11. 16. little Sanctuarie.
Let the graces of thy Spirite bee all night like a bundle of Myrrhe intoCant. 1. 23 his bosome: Seale vp in his heart this comfort, that hee who shall bee his Iudge, is hee, euen hee, who is now his Aduocat, interceeding at the1 Ioh. 2. 1. right hand of the Father for him: Giue him strength couragiouslie to fight out this bloodie Battell, that in the ende thou may set on his head that neuer fadding Crowne of righte|ousnesse2 Tim. 4. 8 Let Sathan be now chained vp that hee bee not able any more to set by the eares the corruptions of

his nature with the motions of thy grace.
He confesseth LORD, before thee that if presentlie thou should pro|nounce his doome, and suddenlie plunge him in the deepest Hels, that righteousnesse in so doing should be|longDan. 9. 7. to thee: This from his heart would hee acknowledge being wil|ling, that thy Name may bee glo|rified, to take to himselfe shame and confusion of face.
O LORD, whose bowels euer rumble with co~passions raine downe vpon thy serua~ts heart here a showre of grace, for it is parched and dryed with greiefe and sorrow: Pittie him for he abhorreth himselfe as a stained sinner stript of all good things, wor|thie to be crushed vnder y^e mountaines  milstones of thy vengeance, Neither dar he, neither will he plead against thee for his innocencie: Here hee is readie to subscribe all thy will were it with the best arteriall blood of his

heart: His confessio~ is, that thou art most just though from thy presence thou should banish him to the blacke lacke and woefull dungeon of darknesse, where is nothing but weeping andMatth. 8. 12 gnashing of teeth.
Out of a sore sense  aboundance of feeling, hee powreth out this most plentifull  sincere confession before thee: Behold, him here Lord, opening the bosome of his confes|sion and selfe condemnation before thee. O thou, whom his Soule loueth, tell him where thou feedest, and where thou makest thy flocke to rest at noone in the time of parching and most piercing heate of temptations: O coole this fainting Soule with thy blessed breath comming from the foure windes: Besprinkle it with the sauing and sacred Blood of Iesus.
Thou, LORD, who is the chiefe Pa|terne and examplar of all true Kind|nes, Pittie,  Loue: Let his groanes and supplications get entrie into

thine eares: Send downe the Lad|der of Iaacob, the ministring SpiritsHeb. 1, 14 for to waite vpon him, who is one of thy Redeemed ones, that when his Soule shall bee seuered from his bodie, they may carrie it into the blessed bosome of Abraham y^e father ofLuk. 16. 22 the Faithfull: Giue him a sound  a Sanctified heart, say vnto his Soule as thou said of olde concerning thy beloued Children, I will delight to doe him good: Take away the tres|passe of thy seruant, and saue him; for hee distrusting his owne worth, is now fledde to the hornes of thine Altar, euen to the crosse of Iesus, the Sanctuarie of troubled Soules.
As Elishah was first inuested with a single Spirit and thereafter with a doubled Spirit, so now in thy ten|der compassions double thy graces vpon him, which were but single of before: Let thy fauours falling downe vpon him, bee like the raine which falleth first in small droppes,

and after powreth downe in grea aboundance: O quicken and enliu|his Soule with a supernaturall vi gour and life of grace, that by no lowring tempest of temptation his holie Faith bee dashed out of coun|tenance: Let not his Hope bee like the Spiders webbe which is easilieIsa. 59. 5. sweept away with the least blast of winde: The weaker his bodie grow, increase so much the more his spiri|tuall strength: Verifie that Text in him, To him that hath shall bee giuen:Matth. 25. 29 Thou who giuest repentance to the sinner, giue pardon to the repenter: In the boisterous blasts of most fear|full temptations let his sillie Soule finde a shelter vnder the shadow of thy fauour: There is no succour but vn|der thy wings from the plagues of God, and curses of the Law: Thy Blood onelie is able to purge  pu|rifie him from the froth and filth of all his iniquities.
Seeing hee hath dealt vnpartialie

with himselfe, by condemning him|selfe, let thy mercie for the sake of thy Sonne his surtiship now absolue him, draw out the keen arrows of thy wrath which thou hast made to stick in his ribbes, the poyson whereof hathIob. 6. 4. drunken vp his Spirit: O how feare|full haue thy terrours set themselues in aray against him: Beginne Lord, and continue to slacke thy wrath Be with him now in thy great mercy, O LORD, and conuoye him by the graces of thy Spirit thorow the sna|kie field  wildernesse of this world wherein hee hath beene like a Pil|grime, or a Traueller passing from Towne to Towne, till hee come in|to his Inne, where he hopeth by thy mercie to bee exempt from all mix|ture of miserie: Hee is now in the heate of his journey: Let some coo|ling droppes of thy comforts bee send vnto him, for to coole and quench his drougth in the scorching heate of this spirituall skirmish: Thou

who made waters to rush out of the jaw bone, for the refreshing of Sam|sonIudg 15. 19 after his fight with y^e Philistimes, giue vnto this wearied soule a drink of that water whereof if a man drink hee shall neuer thirst any more.Ioh. 4. 14.
And now seeing in all appearance he is not for to remaine manie dayes vpon this Earth, make him to be still looking all the dayes of his appointedIoh. 14. 14. time till his changing come: grant that when it shall come, hee may change for the better, and that for the glo|rie of thy great Name, and for the euerlasting rest peace, and joye of his sillie sorrow beaten Soule: O crush the head and breake the heart of euerie sinne, that lurketh, within his breast, left they choke the Soule of this thy Turtle Doue: Bee no more sowre vnto him: If thou should ap|peare grieslie with a sterne countenance vnto sinners, how soone should they bee out-faced, if thou straitlie m|iniquitie, who shall stand? But O,

mercie is with thee: Let that merciePsal. 130. 4 that is with thee come to him, wher|by all his floating thoughts may bee made to sink  soake into the Blood of the Lambe, the softner and soupler of stiffe and hardened heartes: In the darkest houre of death bee thou the comfort and darlling delght of his heart: O Pastour of Israel, now put an end to all the cloudie and darke dayes of his distresse. Tak in this silly Soule, thy little Lambe within the compasse of thine heauenlie folde, till it winne there, refresh it with a baire in its journey, let no meanes bee deficient, til in it thou crowne thy graces with thy glorie.
LORD, blesse thy Church vni|uersall, the deare Spouse of Iesus, as they are all members of one Body, make them all to bee of one heart, that in an heauenlie harmonie, they may all thinke one thing: Stop the mouth of the red Dragon from spe|wing out the red bloodie floodes of

persecution against Her, if not, giue Her the winges of Faith whereby Shee may flee to the wildernesse for Her escape: O cloth her Priests withPsal. 132. 16 Saluation, that all her Saints may shout a lowd for joye: Giue them one mind and one mouth: But, alas, Icabod, where nowe is that glorie?
Preserue our gracious SOVERAIGNE with his Royall Match: Send down a princelie Spirit vpon him: Keepe them as the Apple of thine Eye: As thou hast bund their bodies into the bond of wed locke, so bind their Soules into the bandle of life: Make the Hea|uens to rejoyce at her Majesties con|uersion: Loue Her, LORD, as thou loued Lidea, by the opening of herAct. 16. 14 heart.
Make both Crowne and Court ser|uiceable to thee the greatest Maje|stie aboue.
Sanctifie all our Nobles, make them lik the men of Berea, couragiousAct. 17. 11 for the Trueth, Plants of renowne.
Guide vs all in the way of righteous|nesse, and weane vs from the loue of this Worlde: Prepare vs for the last Battell of the Soule: Suffer neuer Sathan with the mood of his temp|tations to trouble or distemper the cleare Riuers of thy comforts, wher|with thou refresheth thy beloued Ones: Suffer neuer that prince of darknesse to put out with his dampes the glorious Light of thy Gospel, which now most orientlie shineth among vs.
LORD, perfume all our vnwhor|thie prayers with the sweete smelling righteousnes of Iesus Christ our Lord  Master, in whose most blessed Name wee pray, as hee hath pleased him to teach vs, Our Father which art. c.
By Gods grace Sir, I shall returne the Morrow earelie: The Spirit of Iesus print into your heart the best comforts of his Treasures: Remem|ber Sir, that all our goodnesse is of him, for naturallie wee are hewen out of a sinfull rocke: All our guises are

but guile, till we bee cast into another mould by the Spirit of regeneration.
Striue more and more to bee con|stant and couragious till this bitterIsa. 9. 5. Battell bee ended: For euerie Battell of the Warriour is with confused noise, and garments rolled in Blood.
Now the night is fallen downe:Iob. 4. 13. while deepe sleepe falleth on me~, strin to bee acquainted with the TeacherPsal 16 7. of the reines in the night season: If the paine of your sicknes rob your eyes of sleepe, cause read vnto you this night Dan. 7. 1. Cor. 15. 1. Thess. 4.
The LORD pul off your Soule al theA prayer filthie menstruous cloutes of your cor|ruptions, and cloath you with the most rich  invaluable Robe of Christs righteousnesse: The Lord fill your heart with the inspirations of the Al|mightie: His Grace bee with you.





THE SIXT DAYES Conference. of Heauens Glorie.

The Pastour.
ACcording to my promise Sir, I am heere come againe for to see what it shall please God to doe with you at last, waite constantlie on your God: Note His mind is to doe you good in the latter end: I earnestlie now desire to know what the meditation of the last judgement hath wrought into your heart this night bygone.


The sicke Man.
Note Except that a man bee well oc|cupied in the day, his heart in the night will swarme with worthlesse  witlesse thoughts: Sathan the lord of

the night, is euer busie by secret foi|sting in of corruptions into mans thoughts, to justle out of his heart all holie and heauenlie meditations,
All this night it seemeth vnto me that I heard the shrill sound of the last Trumpet sounding most fearefullie the Alarum of the Resurrection at the second and sudden comming of our Lord: All Saintes and Angels see|med to bee present at that great Iu|bile.
I thought in my sleepe that I saw the Sonne of man enuironed with in|numberable Charets of fyre comming downe with vnspeakable pompe, Glorie and Majestie, I thought him more glistering than the Sun, while he sbineth in his greatest force: Mine eyes were dazeled with the brightnesse of his Beames: All thrones made roome vnto his Throne: Mine heart was neuer so rauished as it hath bene this last night by-past.
In the thoghts of mine heart in the

night, while deepe sleepe falleth on ma~,Iob. 4. 13. there came into my memorie some passages of Scripture concerning heauens glorie, wherof most gladlie I desire now to heare: The Apostle S. Paul speaketh of this with great2 Cor. 4. 16 power, Wee faint not, said hee, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day: There bee some other good words following, but my memorie faileth mee.


The Pastour.
I shall helpe you Sir in that mat|ter: The verse following is, For our2 Cor. 4. 17 light affliction which is but for a mo|ment, worketh for vs a farre more ex|ceeding and eternall weight of glorie.


The sicke Man.
These bee the words indeede, I finde great difficultie in these words, I pray you to make them cleare: What is that to say, Though the out|ward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.



The Pastour.
The interpretation of these words is, that the corruption and decaying of the outward man by diuerse cros|ses and calamities, Servit renovando homini interno, is a meanes for the renewing of the inward man, y^t we may grow in godlinesse: By the out|ward man is vnderstood the bodie: By the inward the Spirit  the mind: By the weakening of the bodie the Spirit is made strong.


The sicke Man.
But what say yee of these words, that our light affliction, which is but for a moment, is said, to worke for vs or to cause vnto vs an exceeding and e|ternall weight of glorie? Is that the merite and worth of affliction?


The Pastour.
The Romane Church expounds it so, y^t by such afflictions men merit euerlasting glory: Indeed the words in the original seeme much to fauour y^t exposition: The wordes are these,

 Cauficit parie opera|tur nobis, that is, Causeth or worketh that glorie.
Note But it is certaine, that affliction y^ is light,  for a moment both light  short, cannot be properlie a cause of an euerlasting and infinite ight of glorie: A moment cannot be the mo|ther of eternitie: That which is so light can neuer bring out an infinite weight: But God who is infinite in poer, maketh affliction a meanes for to bring vs vnt glorie as good works are via reg causa reg|di,Bernard the way to the Kingdome, but not the cause of reigning, so through the way of manie tribulations wee must enter into Gods Kingdome.
The Scripture is the best interpre|ter of it selfe: Abraham who was the Father of the Faithfull, was not justi|fied either by his doinges or his sufferings: If Abraham were justi|fiedRom. 2.  by workes, hee th whereof to glorie, but not before God.
Note Shame shall come vpon him who glorieth of that whereof hee may not glorie before God: I darre boldly glorie before God, of his mercie, and of my Lords merits, but to glo|rie of mans righteousnesse a mon|strousIsa. 64. 6. cloth, is an abomination before GOD: Note If sufferinges and cala|mities could efficientlie cause  me|rit that infinite weight of Glorie, how did S. Paul reckon, when heeRom, 8. 18 said, I reckon that the sufferings of th present time are not worthy to be co~pared with the glorie which shall bee reuealed in vs? This maketh the matter cleare that our light afflictions of a mo|ment cannot efficientlie and merito|riouslie purchase vnto vs an excee|ding and eternall weight of glorie: they are indeed good meanes wher|by our Soules are fitted and furthe|red in the way to Glorie.


The sicke Man.
I euer hold that the surest ground that a man be little in his own eyes

Sinfull flesh cannot bee too humble before God: Note That Religion which giueth greatest glorie vnto God,  ca|steth mans own worth most down, hath the clearest marke of trueth: Daniel pointeth at this while hee saith, O Lord, righteousnesse belon|gethDan. 9. 7. vnto thee, but vnto vs confusion of faces
I am now satisfied in the exposi|tion of these wordes, wherein I did euer finde much difficultie.
Now Sir, if your memorie ser|ueth you, can yee tell what is said, by the Apostle in the Chapter fol|lowing? I remember that some no|table thinges there be spoken of im|mortall Glorie.


The Pastour.
Indeede in the beginning of that Chapter there bee notable wordes, For wee know, saith the Apostle, that2 Cor. . 1. if the earthlie house of this Tabernacle were dissolued, wee haue a building of God, an house not made with sand, e|ternallvers. 

in the heauens: For in this wee groane earnestlie desiring to be clothi vpon with our house, which is from hea|uen.vers. 3. If so bee that beeing cloathed, wee shall not bee found naked For we thatvers. 4. are in this Tabernacle doe grone, being burdened, not that wee would bee v|cloathed, but cloathed vpon, that mor|talitie might bee swallowed vp of lifevers. 6. c. While wee are at home, in the bo|die, wee are absent from the Lord c. Wee are confident and willing rather tovers. 8. bee absent from the bodie, and to bee present with the Lord.


The sicke Man.
These indeede bee the words: I could neuer well vnderstand them, doubtles they be words full of com|forts, for these that are looking for a better Life: I pray you Sir, to giue mee the exposition thereof.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir they want not great difficultie, neither doeth that which I say make for the doctrine of papists

who affirme that the Scriptures are obscure, and therefore must not bee reade by the common people.
Note It is by reading that men pur|chase vnderstanding: The Doctors themselues before they read are ig|norant, neither was it euer heard that Scriptures was abused so much by the common people, as by these who are most Learned: Where heare wee that the Merchand, the Artifan or rurall men beginne Here|sies? Note Are not they forged in the vnsanctified braines of these in who are lodged the oppositions of science1 Tim: 6. 20 falsely so called: It is oftest seene that throgh Philosophie and vaine deceit:Col. 2. 8. The Soule of man are spoiled  not by ignorance of the simplest sort.
There is none obscuritie in Gods Word, that should debarre the peo|ple young or olde from the reading of it: Note The Letter which my God hath written vnto me, I may open it, and read it, and see what my Fathers

will is: The Spirite of God in S. Iohn, leading his ha~d, hath set down these wordes, I write vnto you, Fa|thers;1 Ioh. 2. 13 c. I write vnto young men, c. I write vnto you little Children c. Who hath power to forbid any man to read the Missiue Letter which his God hath written vnto him Moreouer, there is such a Light in Gods word, that will make a blind man to see: Note The light of the Sun will shew and discouer hid things in darknesse unto him who hath eyes but cannot make a blind man to s But the light of Gods word MeiraPsal 19. 8. Henam facit ut oculi videant, it ma|keth the eyes for to see: In that Psalme also it is said, That the Law of the Lord maketh wise the simple:Psal. 19. 7. It is a great ignorance for Papist Do|ctors to close  claspe their Bibles from the hands of the ignorant  simple ones, seeing by this word the simple are made wise, It is written to the e|uerlasting praise of the men of Berea

that after Paul had preached, they searched the Scriptures, for trying of his Doctrine: These be the words of their praise.
These were more noble than these inAct. 17, 1 Thessalonica, in that they receiued the word with all readinesse of minde, and searched the Scriptures daylie, whe|ther these thinges were so.
Note As for difficulties, we acknow|ledge that there bee many and great in Scripture, but as for that which is absolut  simpliciter absolutelie  simplie necessarie for our Saluation, it is clearelie set down in Scripture: if there be any difficulty in one place that which is there obscure will bee made cleare in some other parte of Scripture: This much by the way concerning the obscuritie of Scrip|ture.
Now to come to the wordes of S. Paul: In the first verse it is said, For wee know that if the earthlie house of this Tabernacle were dissolued, wee

haue a building of God, an house  made with hand, eternall in the .
Some after this manner expour these words after that this body like a Taber nele is take~ away from  Soule, the Soule shall bee in a be estate, euen in euerlasting Glorie  to the Heauens.
The French marginall note vpo~ this, is y^t that eternall house in the he  is the bodie after the resurrection Note So long as we are here in the sinfull bodie, the bodie is but like a Tuber|nacle, vnconstant; weake, fra But in the heauens, it shall be like  house that is constant; firme, strong: So corpus  gloriosa ejus conditio, the bodie and its glorious estate in th opinion of some is heere called  house, by that house then wee must vnderstand the glorie that is prepared for the Sainctes in he iuen, which for its constancie and commoditie  called an house: According to th

the Apostle in the seco~d verse saith, That wee groane earnestlie desiring to bee cloathed vpon with our house which is from heauen: That house from hea|uen, is that Glorie which is from heauen.
Others of the Learned interpret that worde Superindui to bee cloa|thed vpo~ vt siquis indtus est thoracPiscator.  superinduitur pallio: Puo autem sic. Explicanum ex versa 4 Sancti capiunt corpore clesti it  indui, vt no prius exvantur corpore mortalised su|perinduantur clesti S immortali hoc est  per  transtationem absorbiator  ab immortali|tate.
Thus would hee say, That the Sainctes beeing huing at the end of the world, desired not to cast their mortall bodies from them but de|sire them to bee changed and cloa|thed aboue with immortalitie Mor|talitie is one  which must be put off, that immortalitie may bee put on
Others thinke that there be men|tion heere made of a double cloa|thing: Alijs placet, saith Beza, pri|mamBeza. vestem dici Christi justitiam, al|teram vero illius justitiae praemium quo|rum sententiae nolim praejudicium af|ferre, the one they make to bee the righteousnesse of Christ, the other the glorie purchassed by that righ|teousnesse.
Note S. Ambrose speaking of these words, In this wee groane, c. If so bee that beeing cloathed, wee shall not bee found nacked, saith, Vt haec sit sen|tentia destruendum quidem hoc taber|naculumS. Amb. morte sed ita tamen ut non p|reat: Imo ut corruptibilitate deposita restituatur nobis immortalitate induen|dum. That is, The Tabernacle of this bodie shalbe dissolued by Death not so y^t it shal perish, but that all corrup|tion being taken away, it may put on incorruption, euen euerlasting glo|rie. For if the bodie did perish, then in that case the Soule should bee na|ked:

Now while wee are in the Ta|bernacle of the bodie, beeing bur|dened with sinne and corruption, wee grone, not desiring to bee vn|cloathed, that is altogether to want our bodie, but that putting off the corruptions of the bodie, wee may bee cloathed with immortalitie of life, which shall swallow vp morta|litie with all cumbers and inconue|nients whatsoeuer.
Note The Soule of man hath an ar|dent desire to bee clothed with im|mortality, but hath not will to want its bodie, without which it thinketh its selfe naked: according to this the Apostle saith, In this we groane earnest lie desiring to be cloathed vpon with our house, which is from Heauen, That is, With glorie and immortalitie fast  firme like an house: If so bee that beeing cloathed, wee shall not bee found naked. That is, Shall not want the cloathing and couering of our bo|dies.



The sicke Man.
My braine is so sore troubled y^t I can|not bend my Spirits so high for the vnderstanding of these things which are so far aboue my reach: Happie is hee who with Dauid is not exerci|sedPsal. 131. 1. in great matters which are too high for him.
Lord, inlighten my mistie minde,Aprayer and make mee to know thee and thy Son Iesus Christ, and him crucified: Lord also helpe mee in the knowledge of all that may increase the knowledge of him into my Soule.
I haue heard you Sir at large vp|on the last judgement, and all the proceedinges thereof: Yee haue also cleared some difficulties which this night did runne into my minde: Nowe lest vaine thoughts should draw mine heart aside vnto toyes, let t please you to turne your purpose concerning the joyes of Heauen.
Note While I did behold but the outid of Heauen, mine heart was euer ra|uished

at the sight of that Tapestrie, embroydred like most glorious Arrasse cloath: O what Glorie muste bee within where the Lord himselfe is with all his endenized Citizens of glo|rie: Let me heare you a little there|vpon: There by the grace of my God, I hope to bee within a little space, O what place of perfection and blisse my Soule longeth to dwel into that azured Palace. Let mee heare of its Glorie.


The Pastour.
Note The prince of PhilosophersAristot. lib. 1. de coelo. most subtile in Naturall Science, speaking of the heauens, said, That it was much to get any little know|ledge therof: All his knowledge cld reach no further but from motion to motion, till hee come to the fist Mouer, who by the force of his Almightie arme turneth about these relestiall bodies: Note But hee knew no more the great Mov , thn yee would know a man a  vpn

the toppe of an Hill displaying a Ensigne or Standart: While the Mouer were casting his Standart, yee might perceiue the motion of a Ban|ner, and by that motion yee might easilie judge that there bee a Mouer, and yet for all that be ignorant, not knowing the man who is the ca of all the motion, whether he were your foe or your friend.
Note The Pagans saw the motions of the heauens, as wee see the shaking of a tree moued by the winds: I see the Tree shaken and the Branches rushing one vpon another, I heare also the noyse, I also know that the Mouer is that which wee call the Wind: But whence this mouer com|methIoh. 3. 8. and whether it goeth, or what moueth it, no earthlie tongue can tell.
Note Pagans which haue not Gospel writte~ in quicke Letters by the dead knowledge of Nature, will come from ens to ens that is, from beeing

to being, till they come to ens entium him that is a Being, which causeth all beeings: From motions men in na|ture will come to motions, till they clime vp to Primus motor, the first Mouer: Note On him will they looke as a man in an high Feuer, to whome this man  that man will say, Know yee mee? know ye mee? The sight of the braine is so dazeled, that it is paine  much labour but to heare these three words, Knowe yee mee Note Braine sicke Nature can by no meanes know God, till the Feuer of nature bee cooled with Grace: Af|ter that the coole of Grace hath broght a sweate wherwith the Soule is purged from the rotten humours of iniquitie, then the Soule becom|meth like a man after a Feuer, come to himselfe againe: Note According to this it is said o the Forlorne, that heLuk. 15. 17 came to himselfe after that hee was cooled of his foolish Feuer. Till we come to our selues by Grace, wee

shall neuer be able to know the Lord by Nature: All that the most wise Pagans culd doe by the whole helpe of Nature was to come from beeing to him that is the cause of all beeing, and from motion to the first Moue: Note But who that Mouer was, the feuer|of Nature made their braine so gid|die that they could not discerne him.
Note When all the Clergie of Athe into that Famous Colledge of Gre, had sought out this God, to feele . . 27 , and finde him, they wandred  and downe in their imagination  Sodomites about Lots ,Gen. 19. 11 no beeing able to finde it: All their  knowledge which was but  , could no wie reach vn|o him: For this cause they set vp an  into their moste learned Citi with this intion written into great Letters TO THE  Act. . 23 
* Behold, where the true God

was vnknowne, euen in the Citie where Socrates, Plato and Aristotle the great lights of Nature had rea|ched publicklie The verticall point all their knowledge could I neuer reach vnto the borders, nay not vn|to the base of the Gospel: Note Behold and see where Science was to be sold in greatest aboundance, there was a profession of the ignorance of the true God written vpon their Altar in great Letters, for by the great|nesse of the Letters, to declare the grosse dulnesse of their ignorance.
Note Hee who knoweth not God, were hee neuer so learned, what can hee speake of Heauen  Note What should Heauen it selfe bee without the presence of God, but like a Ci|tie laide wast, or like an olde Dun|geon not inhabited, where Iim andIsa. 34. 14 Zijm resort?
Note As for vs blessed bee God, we know that there is a God into the Heauens, the sight of whose backeExod. 34. 33

partes made the face of Moses so to shine, that no eye vndazeled culd behold him: What a Majestie must this bee whose backe-partes printed such a light into the face of a man, that no man could behold the face of a sinner stamped with a second impression? This is he who as Scrip|ture teacheth dwelleth into an inac|cessable1 Tim. 6. 16 light, of which a learned Pa|gan hauing seene some light im|pression, not in the face of Moses but onelie into the face of Nature, said a great word,
Note Lumen est vmbra Dei, Deus est lumen luminis.Plato. po|lit.
All light which wee see is but a duskie shadow of God: Note But God, is the Light of light, a liuing Light the Life of light, the Sunne that shi|neth to the world aboue, and the Candle of Heauen: Christ the SunneMal. 4. 2. of righteousnesse in Heauen shall bee without any shadow of the Earth which is the cause of ou night: Hee

shalbe a Sun which shall shine con|tinuallie both round about and in all the partes of the Heauen, for thereReuel. 21. 25 shall bee no night there: For to come thither man should bee content toMatth 5. 29. pluck out his right eye, euen his swee|test bosome delights.


The sicke Man.
Mine hearte is wained from the loue of the base lump of this Earth.
I desire to heare some-thing more co~cerning these celestiall buildings, which Scripture calleth, euerlastingLuk. 16. 9. Tabernacles, the resting place of all created desires: Seeing there after Death wee must sojourne eternallie, let mee heae of the Glorie of these heauenlie Mansio~s prepared for Gods most precious jewels: Note O these bles|sed burnished vauts all beset with di|uineMal. 3. 16 Dyamonds: Let mee heare a description of that Palace.


The Pastour.
The matter is high, Our creeping wordes of Babel cannot reach to the

ancles of such loftie matters, are butIob. 8. 9. of yesterday, and know nothing: As I know I shall in my stammering tong and mussling speech doe what I can for to allure you to the loue there|of.
As for the structure, furniture and beautie of that Palace of our God, it is wonderfull: By no skill can any mortall hand chalk them out: There is that blessed Bridegroomes chamber garnished with an azured Curtaine which is embrodered and spangled with starres of light, as with golden studs, whose beautie no mortall tongue is able fullie to expresse: Note Well may wee say and sing of that Citie that which Dauid sang of its figure: Glorious thinges are spoken ofPsal. 87. 1. thee, O thou Citie of our God, nay, let mee rather say of the figured Citie, such glorious things are in thee, that they cannot bee spoken, O thou Citie of our God.
Note All the glories we see without

are but sparkles of these infinitlie bright blazing perfections, which are within, euen things which eye ne|uer sawe, eare neuer heard, and which cannot enter into the heart of man: One said verie well
Note Res verae sunt in mundo in|visibili, in mundo visibili vm|brae rerum.
That is, In Heauen the invisible world is the substance of thinges in|deede, but in this visible world on earth is nothing but shadowes of thinges, which are lesse than acci|dents.
Note The greatest glorie that wee see in the out-side of the Heauens is but a vaile that couereth the glorie that is within, as the Badgers skinnes co|uered the Arke of glorie and theExod. 26. 15 Tabernacle: Note But because wee are in this world as childre~ in y^e wombe, wee cannot conceiue what can bee without this world, wee haue made a great conception, if wee can con|ceiue

that it cannot bee conceiued, wee muse well of Heauen, if while wee muse we bee amazed, counting all joye, pleasure, profite, and prefer|mentPhilip. 3. 8 below to be both losse  doung in comparison of thinges that are a|boue which infinitlie goe beyond all created comprehensions: If these who goe downe to the deepes see thePsal 107. 23 wonders of the Lord, what wonders shall they see who are in the hights of eternitie? What rest can a man looke for till hee bee into the Hea|uens? Note There the blasts of winds, and tempests of tongs  terrours of Co~science are not: there the Church the Lords Lillie is no more amongCan. 2. 2. the thornes: There the heart of man is no more greiued nor ouer clouded with lowring Melancholie, all is in peace within: All is calme  cleare. Note There is day without night, hea|uens without cloudes, mirth with|out mourning joy without sorrow, and beautie without blemish.
Note All good thinges muste abound there, where God shall bee All in all: When wee shall bee there, our God shall enlighten our minde, and shall giue our will its will without controlement: Then shall no man say, I doe the euill that I would not,Rom, 7. 19 and doe not the good that I would doe: nay, but wee shall doe all the good wee would, beeing in no wie troubled with the euill wee wouldReuel. 14. 13. not: Then shall wee rest from all our labours, refreshed vnder the euer|lasting shadowes of Christ, that mostCant. 2. 3 pleasant Apple Tree, whose fruite is sweete to the taste: Nothing in a word shall bee inlaking that may rejoyce all the senses of our body without,  all the faculties of our Soules with|in: All the Godlie these blessed De|nizens of Heaue~ shall euer in a Quire sing the praises of the Lambe Halle|luiahReuel. 19.  Halleluiah vpon the loud Cym|bals, Harpes, Organes and Timbrels of God.
Note O Lord, one day in thy Court is bet|terPsal. 84. 10 than a thousand else where said the Psalmest, speaking but of y^e figure of heauen: Is it so of y^e figure of heaue~: what shall it be the~ to be in heauen it selfe? euen in these new heauens Let it be but the tenth better, according to that one day in Heauen, shall bee better by ten thousands times than y^e best day y^t euer man did see on earth
Note There is no serenitie below which is not ouer clouded with some dumpes of heauinesse, while the flesh is vpon the Soule it shalbe sorrowfull: Pure  sincere joys can|not dwel in the valley of teares in this muddie mortalitie: One day aboue is more bright and better than tenne thousand below: Is it so of one day in Heauen? Mercifull God, what shall it be the~ of these dayes without number, euen of that euerlasting of dayes, euen that eternal day of light, life, libertie, cleare without all g|mie clouds of sicknes  of sorrows Note O for a sight of the light of that

countenance a light of continuance which no mistie vapour shal for euer bee able to ecclips: O Day neuer to be darkened with a following light! O euer fresh pleasures which no sor|row shall bee able to fret, waste, or weare out! O Eternitie, Eternitie, neuer to haue an end! O that faire he|ritage! vnto all these that are there, The lines are fallen in pleasant places.Psal. 16. 6.
Note If wee had heartes to belieue, the thoughts of such Glories should waine our heartes from the milkie transitorie trashes below, which world|lings dreame to bee an heauen, not to bee changed with any such prea|ched pleasures: O when shall our Soules get them, with the Spouse to these high Mountaines of MyrrheCant. 4. 6 and hills of frankincense!
Note The consideration of this hap|pinesse made Ignatius a Scholer of S. Paul, to defie all the tormentesHiero in Catologo. that cruell Burrios could inuent for the tormenting of his bodie: Fire, Gallowes, beasts, said he, Crushing of my

bones, quartering of my members, brea|king of my bodie: Let all the torments of Satha~ seaze vpon me together, I care not for them, so that I may enjoye my Lord and his righteousnesse. O that all the thoughts of our heartes were made subordinate and contributarie to such spirituall and diuine desires.


The sicke Man.
O Lord, in the multitude of thy thoughts within mee, thy comforts de|light my Soule. Co~tinue your speach I pray you concerning the beautie of the Heauens within which is the Presence-Chamber of the great King.


The Pastour.
Note S. Iohn describes it with such wordes as men are able to vnder|stand or imagine: The vnderstan|ding of man concerning the beau|tie of a Place, reacheth no further, than to Gold, Glasse, Crystall, Pea|rles, and precious stones, which in|deed are nothing but like Coales, or drosse in comparison of these hea|uenlie bodies.
* Before that the man of God beganne to declare what hee had seene of Heauen, hee said that there came vnto him an Angel that carried him away to a great  high moun|taine,  shewed him the great Citie the holie Ierusalem a type and figurePsal. 87. 3. of Heauen: Glorious thinges are spo|ken of thee, O Citie of our God, euen of thee Ierusalem.
Because that Ierusalem was a type and figure of Heauen I shall first speake a little thereof.
As for the earthlie it was a Citie in Iudea builded as some thinke by Melchisedec: Otherwise it was cal|led, Salem, and Iebus or Iebusi: After that, it was called Aelia, from Aelius Hadrianus the Emperour, who buil|ded a part thereof, and enuironed Mount Caluarie, Christes Sepul|chre, and Golgotha with a wall.
This Citie had two parts, the vp|per part and the lower: The vpmost part thereof with the Temple was

builded vpon mount Moriah.2 Chr; 1
Note Because in this Citie the Lord had his residence and did shew him|selfe more familiarlie than into any other part of the world, it was called The perfection of beautie and joye of theLam. 2. 15 whole earth: It is written that in cir|cuite  compasse it was foure miles: In forme it was foure square, hauing twelue gates: Ioseph recordeth thatIoseph. 7 Booke chap. 3. it was Dauid that first called the Ci|tie Ierusalem: In the time of Abra|ham, said hee, it was called, Solyme: Some also say, that Homere called it Solyme, which in the Hebrew tong, saith Ioseph, signifieth a Fortresse.
Thus much concerning the earth|lie Ierusalem, which now is in bon|dage with her Children, the most cursed Citie in the world, since that desperate voyce of blasphemie was heard in it, His blood bee vpon vs andMah. 27. 1 vpon our Children.


The sicke Man.
That is a fearefull desolation.



The Pastour.
Great was that desolation: It is called, The abomination of desolation,Matth. 24 15 a desolation abominable, or foresig|nified by an abomination.


The sicke man.
I remember well of these words of that Gospel: This I remember that Christ did speake them with a Nota, Who so readeth let him vnderstand: Often while I did reade these words I found my selfe secretelie accu|sed of negligence, in that I tooke paines to vndersta~d the saying which Christ desired the Reader to vnder|stand, I pray you Sir let mee vnder|stand the words.


The Pastour.
The wordes are these, When yeeMatth. 24 15 therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Pro|phet, stand in the holie place, (who so readeth let him vnderstand) Thenvers. 16 let them which are in Iudea, flie into the mountaines.
The wordes of Daniel are these,Dan. 9. 6. And after threescore and two weekes, shall Messiah bee cutte off, but not for himselfe: And the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy thevers. 27. Citie, and the Sanctuarie, and the ende thereof shall bee with a floode, and vnto the end of the warre desolati|ons are determined: And hee shall confirme the Couenant with many for one weeke, and in the midst of the weeke hee shall cause the oblation and the sa|crifice to cease, and for the ouer spre|ding of abominations hee shall make i desolate, euen vntill the consummation, and that determined shall bee powred vpon the desolate. These bee the wordes of the Prophet, of which Christ said, Who so readeth, let him vnderstand.
Note The meaning is this: By this  abomination of de|solation, The most learned vndersta~d that Romane armie, which vnder Ve|spasian and Titus, fearefullie wasted

the land of Iudea,  sacked y^e Citie of Ierusalem: It was said, To stand in the holy place that is, in the holie Land of Iudea neare vnto Ierusalem the holie Citie: In these wordes Christ foretold of the ruine of that Citie, according to Daniel who of before had particularlie set downe the time: Thus as yee see the Ro|mane armie was called, The abomi|nation of desolation that is, Abomi|natio desolans seu vastans, abomina|blie destroying. This is more cleare in S. Luke, When yee shall see Ierusa|lem compassed with Armies, then knowLuk. 21. 20 that the desolation thereof is neare: When that destroying and abomi|nablie desolating Armie compassed that holie Citie, then did the abo|mination of desolation stand in the holie place: Note Some of the Learned interpret this abomination standing in the holie place, to bee that pro|fanation of the Temple, Collocata ibi Aquila,  multis patratis quae per

legem non licebant: vnde etiam mx sequutum est Templi  vrbis  geni excidium: By placing therein the Eagle the Romane Ensigne, and by doing diuerse other thinges forbid|den by the Law, wherevpon the de|solation of Temple, Citie, and of Nation did ensue.


The sicke Man.
I thinke now y^t I vndersta~d by you y^t which by reading hitherto I haue not vnderstood: What other thing could ensue, but an abomination of desolation where the Messiah was cut off? If for the blood of Cain ven|geance was to be taken on the mur|therer seuen-fold,  for the blood ofGen. 4. 15 Lmech, if his brags were true, seuen|tieGen. 4. 24. and seuen fold, what vengeance must bee taken vpon the shedders of the Blood of God? which not one|lie with the blood of Abel did cryGen. 4. 10 vnto God from the ground, but also from the heauens, wherein the Sun cloathed in doole  wrapped for a space

in his mourning weede would not looke vpon that creature wherevpon his Ma|ster was slaine?
But for to leaue this Ierusalem which is now abominablie desolate: Let me heare something of the spi|rituall Ierusalem.


The Pastour.
Note The spirituall Ierusalem is called, Ierusalem which is aboue  alsoGal 4. 26. the Citie of the liuing God, the heauen|lieHeb. 12. 22 Ierusalem, and also the holie Ieru|salem descending out of heauen fromReuel. 21. 10 God.


The sicke Man.
Thinke yee that in all these passa|ges of Scripture Ierusalem bee taken after one sense.


The Pastour.
I answere that the spirituall Citie Ierusalem in Scripture is taken two wayes, either for the Church below, wherein God as in a Citie calleth the Godly to immortalitie and happi|nesse: Or it is taken for the heauens

where the Godlie actuallie possesse that which they had heere but in hope. In the first sense the Church militant on earth is called IerusalemGal. 4. 26. aboue, and the heauenlie Ierusalem.Heb. 12. 22


The sicke Man.
Seeing by that Ierusalem is vnder|stood the Church heere below, wherfore is it called, Ierusalem aboue, and the heauenlie Ierusalem? I thoght euer that such a Ierusalem did signi|fie the heauens.


The Pastour.
Note It is called, Aboue and heauen|lie, because all the true Godlie the denizens thereof, minde the thinges that are aboue: Though their bodiesCol. 3. 1. bee heere, their heartes are into the Heauens. For our conuersation, as S. Paule saith, is in heauen. ForPhilip. 3. 20 this spirituall exaltation of heartes, the Church in the New-Testament is called The mountaine of the Lords house established in the top of the moun|taines exalted aboue the hill.
Note One speaking of this Ierusalem which S. Paul. called Ierusalem aboue,Gal. 4, 26. the mother of vs all, noteth quickelie these things.

In hoc quod dicitur sursum, ori|ginis altitudo.Hugo Card.
Quod Ierusalem, Pacis mul|titudo.
Quod mater, Foecunditatis amplitudo.
Quod nostrum omnium, Cha|ritatis latitudo.

It is called Aboue from the high|nesse of its Kinred ad pedegree.
It is called Ierusalem from aboun|dance of peace.
It is called Free from its great liberties.
It is called  Mother because of its fruitfulnesse.
It is called the Mother of vs all to teach vs charitie and loue.
Are wee not all the Children of the Church our Mother? Why then as Ioseph said to his brethren, See thatGen. 45. 24

yee fall not out by the way.


The sicke Man.
I haue often heard of Ierusalem; that most famous Citie of the Land of Iurie, but I could neuer well know wherfore it was so called Bethlehem, Bethel, Bethauen, are easilie known by their significations, viz. House of Bread, house of God,  house of wicked|nesse: But as for Ierusalem I vnder|stand not its signification.


The Pastour.
Note Learned men are of diuerse o|pinions concerning the name there|of: Some thinke that it bee so cal|led from Iebus, which was its name while the Iebusiens dwelt there: Hie|rom thinketh that it is so called from  a Greeke word, which signifieth holy, according to this in Scripture it is called, The holie Citie: others are ofMatth. 27 53 the opinion that Sem the sonne of Noah called it Salem, that is Peace, and that Abraham called it Iehouah Ieh, The Lord will prouide or see:Gen. 22 14

Thus at last Salem Iireh put toge|ther by Dauid; made Ierusale~, that is, Vision of Peac: while it was called Sa|lem,Heb. 7. 2. Melchizedech was King thereof called by the Apostle, King of Salem.


The sicke Man.
Let mee heare a little of the situa|tion of that Citie, and of that Land of Canaan.


The Pastour.
From Britaine it lyeth toward the South East: One calleth it Centrum  terrae vmbilicus, y^e Center  nauell of the Earth: In it were two mou~taines of great renown, mount Sion  mou~t Moria: Sion like an halfe Circle asAbricho mijas. writters record, did lye at the South side of Ierusalem: On it was builded the strongest Fortresse of the Citie: There before Dauid's tyme was the strong Hold of the Iebusites, so strong as they thoght, that blind  lame me~Sijah, ariditas. were able to keepe it against whom|soeuer: This Mountaine was higher than all the rest: Sion signifieth dry|nesse,

because the Hill was dry with|out any myre or dirt.
As for mount Moriah, this was the Hill wherevpon that Temple was builded: Then Solomon beganne t2 Chr. 3. 1 build the house of the Lord at Ierusalem in mount Moriah: The ground wherevpon that statelie House did stand, was that threshing floore of Ornan y^e Iebusite, which Dauid wold buy from him for the full price: The occasion was this; Dauid hauing caused number the people, the Lord was exceeding wroth, so that in re|uenge, hee sent out his Angel who killed with the sword of Pestilence threescore and ten thousand men: At last Dauid lifting vp his eyes, saw the Angel betweene the heauen and the earth, with a drawne sword, stretched out ouer Ierusalem; which hauing seene, hee and the Elders1 Chr. 21 16. of Israel cloathed in sackecloth, fell vpon their faces: At that tyme Or|nan with his foure Sons, while they

were threshing Wheate, saw also thevers. 20. Angel, and hid themselues: Dauidvers. 26. vpo~ that occasion bought the floore, and offered Sacrifices with prayer, and God answered him by fyre vpon the Altar of brunt offering, and so God was pacified: After Dauids death Solomon builded the Temple there: It signifieth the feare or doctrine of GOD,


The sicke Man.
Let mee heare a little of that glo|rious Temple.


The Pastour.
It was seuen yeares in building:1 Kin. 6. 2 The length thereof was threescore cu|bites, and the breadth thereof twentie cubites, and the hight thereof thritie cubites, all the stones were readie for the wall before they were brought thither: So that there was neither Ham|mer,vers. 7. nor Axe, nor any toole of yron heard in the House, while it was in building.
Those that write of this Temple

diuide it in three parts: First toward the West was Sanctum Sanctorum,1 Kin. 6 16 the Holie of holies, called also the Oracle. This by a vaile was diuided from all the rest: At the death of Christ this Vaile was rent from the top to the bottome: Before that no man might enter into it but the hig Priest,  that but once in the year, not without blood: There stood theHeb. 9. 4. Arke wherein was the Pot of Mannah, and Aarons Rod, and the Tables of the Couenant.


The sicke Man.
While I was a Scholler I heard that passage confronted with ano|ther, which declareth that neither the Mannah nor the Rod were in the Arke but onelie the Tables.


The Pastour.
Indeede it is written that theExod. 16. 34 Mannah was layed vp before the Testi|monie or Arke: In another place it is plainlie said, There was nothing in the Arke saue the two Tables of stone:1 Kin. 8. 9

So indeede in that passage of the E|pistle to the Hebrewes the Greeke word  signifieth juxta beside the Ake.
The second roome of the TempleHeb. 9. 2. is called by the Apostle, The first, That is the first part of the Tabern|cle: Not first in dignitie, but in regard of entrie, if it bee compared with the Holist or Oracle This part is called Sanctum Sanctuarium, See Pisc. in the Heb. 9. 2  Sancta, which word some of the Learned take to bee corrupt as also  for : In this mid|dle roome was the Candle sticke and the Table of the Shew-bread, and the Altar of incense The third parte of the Temple toward the East, was the Porch called Atrium: Heere stood the Brasen Altar wherevpon the burnt offerings were burnt sub dio, vnder the open aire, as some think on this altar was kept that fire which came downe from Heauen: Heere2 Chron. 7  stood also the Molten sea; set vpon twelue Oxen. c.



The sicke Man.
I haue heard concerning mount Sion and mount Moriah, and of the holie Temple with great content|ment: Now I intreat you to let meMatth. . . heare of the mount of Oliues, while Christ was nigh vnto the Mount, hee sent his Disciples into a Village for to bring him the Asse, whereon heevers. 5 rode thorow Ierusalem the day the little Children cryed, Hosanna, Hos|anna.


The Pastour.
Indeede this Mount is well re|nouned by Christes often resorting vnto it: While hee was sitting vpon the mount of Oliues, hee taught hisMatth. 24. 3 Disciples most diuinelie concerning the destruction of Ierusalem, and the signes preceeding, as also of the end of the world,  of the signes of his comming to Iudgement: It was v|pon the mount of Oliues that Christ told Peter that before the Cocke creMa. 14. 30 twise hee should deny him thrise: It was

to the mount of Oliues that he came out of Ierusalem, after his last Sup|per,Matth. 26. 30 for Matthew saith, That after they had sung an Hymne, they went out into the mount of Oliues: It was at the descent of the mount of Oliues that Christ said, That if men should holdeLuk. 19. 40 their peace the stones would cry ou his praise.
It was in Gethsemane a valley at the roote of the mount of OliuesMatth 26. 36 where Christ suffered the bloodie agonie: While hee there in a colde night did sweate blood, there the Disciples slept: With himselfe hee tooke a part Peter, Iames, and Iohn,Mark. 14. 33 34. to whom hee said, My Soule is excee|ding sorrowfull vnto death, tarrie yee heere and watch: There the Lord fell on the ground, praying, that if it were possible the houre might passe from him: all this befell to our Lord at the roote of the Mount of Oliues: At last from the mount of Oliues ourAct. 1., Lord ascended vnto Heauen.
As for the Mount it selfe, it is so called, because of y^e Oliue trees which grew there in great aboundance. S. Augustine calleth it, The mountain of vnction, because of its great ferti|litie: Others calleth it, the mountaine of health, because of diuerse Herbes good for Physicke, which growe there. Ierom writteth that vpon this mount the red Cow was burnt, whoseNumb. 19 2. ashes were prepared by the Priest for separation and purification.
This Mount was suate toward the East from Ierusalem, some thing more than a mile, between it  Ieru|salem runneth the Brooke Kidron.


The sicke Man.
Mine heart is sore wounded to heare of these places which hath bene so renouned by y^e pen of God.
I haue heard of Sion,  of Moria, and of the mount of Oliues: Now let mee heare of Hermon.


The Pastour.
The Hill Hermon is also made glo|rious

by Gods word, wherein men|tion is made thereof.
The heauens are thine, saith thePsal. 89. 11 vers. 12. Psalmest, the earth also is thine: The North and the South thou hast created them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoyce in thy Name: Dauid speaking of bro|therlie loue and of the communion of the Sainctes, compareth it to the oyle that ranne downe vpon the beard of Aaron: To this hee sub|joyneth, As the dew of Hermon, and as the dewe that descended vpon thePsal. 133. 3 mountaines of Zion: In the Song ofCant. 4. 8 Solomon mention is made of Shenir and Hermon.
This Hill hath three names, the Iewes call it Hermon, the AmoritesDeu. 3. 9. call it Shenir, and the Sydonians call it Sirion: Moses by the figure Syncope, tking out two Letters, calleth it Syon: From Aroer to Arnon, saith he,Deut. 4. 48 euen vnto mount Syon, which is Her|mon. This Mountaine is thought by some to bee higher than mount

Syon that is in Ierusalem: It is neare the Iordan, not farre from the moun|taines of Gilboa where King Saul was slaine.
Some will it to bee called Hermon from Heren res devota, a thing con|secrate to God or to an holie vse.


The sicke Man.
There is a passage in the Psalme concerning Hermon whereof I know not well the sense. O my God, saithPsal. 42. 6. the Psalmest, my Soule is cast downe within mee: Therefore will I remem|ber thee from the Land of Iordan, and of the Hermonites from the hill of Mis|sar, or the little hill.


The Pastour.
These wordes want not difficul|tie: In our poesie they are turned af|ter this manner,

And thus my Soule within mee, Lord, doeth faint to thinke vpon
The Land of Iordan, and record, the little hill Hermon.

In the French paraphrase it is after this manner,


Car t'ay de toy souuenance
Depuis oute le Iordain,
Et la froide demourance
De Hermon, pais hatain:
Et de Mizar antre mont, c.

In the French paraphrase made by Beza,  also in the English and French versions it is turned, the hill Missar which is some other hill lesse than Hermon as the Hebrew word doth import: In my judgement our paraphrase is not so correct as the French, for Hermon was not a little Hill as our meter calleth it, but as it is esteemed by the Learned was higher than mount Sion.
By the Land of the Hermonits the Learned vnderstand that hillie space of the countrey where is mount Hermon, and by Missar they vnder|stand some other parte where there be little hils towards the border of Israel; as Iunius expoundeth: ByIunius. these three places of the Psalme, viz. The Land of Iordan, Hermon, and

Missar, are vnderstood, saith hee, three diuerse Borders of the Land of Israel: The Riuer of Iordan borde|ring at the East, Hermon at the North towards vs, and Missar these other little hils bordering at the South.
In the Papists version these be the wordes of the Psalme,
Memor ero tui de terra Iordanis,  Hermonoim a monte modico, That is, Fro the little hill Hermonoim: whe|ther that bee mount Hermon or no,Bellar|min on the 42. Psalme. saith one of their most learned inte|preters non liquet, I cannot tell.
The most part of these that wri mount Hermon, thinke that there were two mountaines of this name: The one was beyond Iordan neere vnto Libanus towards the North|east, distant from it an hundrethOf Ieru|salem. twenty  two myles. The other was neere to mount Tabor towards the North From Ierusalem: It is from Ie|rusalem to it but about fourty myls: of this the Psalmist seemeth to speak

where hee saith, Tabor and Hermon shall rejoyce in thy Name.


The sicke Man.
It rejoyceth my Soule to heare the names of things which were said to rejoyce in God: Now speake of Tabor.


The Pastour.
Tabor is mons rotundus  sublimis,Hieron. a round and high mountaine, lying towards the North from Ierusalem about fiftie myles: It is esteemed to bee one of the chiefe Hils that are in all the Land of Candan, both for highnesse and fruitfulnesse: Some esteeme that it bee foure myles and more of hight: It is decored with all sorts of Herbes and Trees: S. Ierome speaking of it saith, Ex omni parte finitur aequaliter, it is an exceeding round Hill into the partes of Galilee. Of this Mount frequent mention is made in Scripture: In Ioshuah weeIoshu. 19. 2 see that it bordered the lotte of the Land of the tribe of Issahar whose

coast reached vnto Tabor: It wasIoshu. 19. 22 neere vnto Tabor where Deborah Iudg 4. 6. Barak ouerthrew the Armie of King Iabin with his Captaine Sisera: For Barak beeing vpon the Mount with his men of warre by the counsell of Deborah hee went downe from mounvers. 14. Tabor, and tenne thousand men after him: It was vpon this Mount that Zebah Zalmunna the Kings of the Midianites slew the brethren of Gi|deon:Iudg. 8. 18 What manner of men, said hee vnto them, were they whom yee slew a Tabor? It was at the plaine of Tabor Sam. 10. 3 where Saul after hee was anoynted by Samuel, met the three men going to Bethel with Kids, Loaues,  wine.
This Hill was so steepe and so strong, that Ieremie from thence took his comparison, saying, That Ne|buchadnezar King of Babylon should ouerthrow Pharaoh and his Armie, though they were as Tabor among theIer. 46. 1 mountaines.
It is the opinion of all, that vpon this

Mount Christe was transfiguredMatth. 17. 1. when Moses and Elias came downe and conerred with him touching his sufferings.


The sicke Man.
From Tabor proceede to CarmelIer. 46. 18 by the sea I finde within mee great heauinesse of heart, while I thinke vpon these places where God once did shew so many tokens of his loue:


The Pastour.
I finde also mine owne bowels moued with a mourning rotion: Oh, that that people had beene wise: O  their example may teach vs to feareRom. 11. 21 to offend so great a Majestie: If God hath not spared the naturall branches, wee should not bee high minded, but should feare: If wee continue not in his goodnesse, hee will also cut vs off. But to the purpose.
As for Carmel it is the name of a Citie in the tribe of Iuda Maon, Car|mel,Ioshu. 15. 55 and Ziph were Cites there.
It is also the name of that most

fertile mountaine which had a valey most fruitfull lying hard by it: For its fertilitie in Scripture language, all fertile places are called Carmel: The flourishing estate of ChristesIsa. 35. 2. Kingdome is called, The excellencie of Carmel. It is not farre from P|lemais, neere vnto the Sea, for which cause the Prophet Ieremie called itIer. 46. 81 Carmel by the Sea.
It was at mount Carmel where E|lias1 King. 18. 20 by his prayer made fire to come downe  consume his sacrifice with y^e water in the ditch, wherby he con|founded y^e Priests of Baal,  proued the Lord to bee God by fire: It was vpon the top of this mountaine where1 Kin. 18. 42 Elias cast himselfe downe vpon the Earth, putting his head betweene his knees when his seruant spyed the Cloud like a mans hand arising out of the Sea.


The sicke Man.
O but mine heart bleedeth to re|member of these holie places wher|in

is nothing now but desolation.


The Pastour.
We haue to pray with Moses, ThatPsal. 90. 17. the beautie of the Lord our God be vpon vs: All these beauties of Canaan are past and gone: That glorious Ieru|salem, is razed and sacked with all her pompe: Invndations of woes are vpon that Land which once did flow with Milke and Honey, the land hath spewed ou its habitants: All this should bee for to teach vs to minde these better things which are aboue: While that Land was at its best it could not containe the sha|dowes of these pleasures that are a|boue.

Melle fluit terra hoc promissa  lacte redundat.
Ast ea quo sursum est nectare  Ambrosia.

This haue I thus Englished.

With honey milk that holy Land, did richlie ouerflow:
But Nactar sweete and Ambrosie, aboue doe richlie grow.

While wee remember of that peo|plesRom. 11. 21 desolations, let vs bee instant with God, that hee would call them in: They haue stumbled not that they should fall, but that by their fall Salua|tion mght come to vs for to prouocke them to jealousie: If they abide not in vnbeliefe they shall be graffed in: Let vs be earnest in prayer for them: While they had court with God, they were careful for vs Gentiles: In their familiaritie with God, theyCan. . 1. spake of vs and for vs: Wee haue a little Sister, said they, What shall wee doe with her in the day shee shall be spoken for: The sincere Iewes euer groned for the fulfilling of NoaGen. 9, 27. prophecie, that God would perswad Iaphet to enter into the tents of Sem.
LORD of thy mercie bringA prayer back Sem that he may remaine with Iaphet in the Church of God, Amen.


The sicke Man.
I haue heard sufficientlie concer|ning the earthlie Ierusalem,  diuerse

parts of the holie Land,  that with griefe of heart, because in that Land where God once was well knowne, now the enemies of God dominire: The cry of Christs Blood is yet still against it, so that it hath spewed out the ancient inhabitants. Lord, make all Nations by its example learne to stand in awe to prouoke so great a Majestie.
Now let vs come to that Ieusa|lem which is aboue, the Palace of the great King, where God is seene of his Sainctes face to face: In what place of Scripture is mention made of it?


The Pastour.
In the two last Chapters of th Reuelation that heauenlie Ierusalem is described.


The sicke Man.
How can that bee, seeing it is said that Iohn saw that heauenlie Ie|rusalem descending out of heauen fromReuel. 21. 10. GOD.



The Pastou.
As Ierusalem Gods Church heereGal. 2. 6. below is calld Ierusalem which is a|boue, because her heart is in heauen with a great desire to bee there: So Ierusalem the triumphing Church a|boue may bee said, To descend out ofReuel. 21. 16 heauen, because of the great desire they haue to see vs all well heere be|low: Daylie they pray in Heauen for the Sainctes heere fighting on earth vnder the bloodie Banne of Christ Iesus: Note They pray fo them all in generall, which cannot bee without great affection descen|ding from the reflexe of their loue toward our God: If by some An|gel they heare the report of the con|uersion of sinners, there is great joyLuk. 15. 7 in Heauen: That good will and af|fection they beare vnto the Sainctes below, in Scripture language is cal|led a descending out of Heauen.Reuel. 21. 10


The sicke Man.
O but ae I thinke that Citie must be glorious!



The Pastour.
No glorie is comparable to that which is there: That Citie is cal|led an holie Citie: Holinesse is theMatth. 27 53 chiefest beautie that is: This was good Moses his prayer, Let the beau|tiePsal. 90. 17 of the Lord our God bee vpon vs, that is true holinesse.
Note This most excellent beautie of the heauens, is typified by the most bright glauncing of precious stones: Her light, saith S. Iohn was like vntoReuel. 21. 11 a stone most precious, euen like a Iasper stone cleare as Crystall, two creatures colour greene and cleare, most plea|sant for the sight of the eye.
By all this this Citie had twelue gates, and at the gates twelue Angels, whom I may well call Coelestes Iani|toes, the blessed doore keepers of Heauen.
The building of the wall was of Iasper, and the Citie was pure Goldvers. 1. like vnto cleare Glasse: Note The foun|dation stones which are laid in our

buildings are but of the commonest sort: But all the foundation stones of this Citie vnder whose Vaults wee so|journe here, are most precious, stones as Iasper, Saphir, Chaleedonie, Emerald,vers. 19 Sardonix, Sarduis, Crysolite, Berill,vers. 20. Topas, Iacinct, Amethyste: If such glorious stones bee the foundation stones, what glorie must bee aboue in the Palace top, where is the bus|king of Beautie?
As for the gates, The twelue gatesvers. 21. were twelue Pearles, euery seuerall ga was of one Pearle: Wonderfull gates of wonderfull Iewels, for who euer on Earth sawe a Pearle so great as an Apple? Note Behold and wonder how the greatest doore of Heauen should bee of one Pearle.
As for the streetes of the Citie they were pure gold as it were transpa|rentvers. 21 glasse: Note This Glasse one cal|leth it,
Aliquid auro nobilius quodAret. in Apocalip non est inrerum natura.
That is, Some thing more pre|cious  excellent than gold, which thing is not in this worlde to bee found.
O mercifull God, what stupiditie is this in man, that hee cannot so feruentlie loue this God, who hath builded for his Soule  bodie such a pleasa~t Palace where he shal sojourn for euer in most happy immortality! O mercifull God, what a deadnesse  dulnesse is this in our spirits, that we cannot but after many reasons  ar|guments be content to remoue fromIob. 4. 19 these our sinfull Tabernacles of clay for to goe dwell with our God in his golden Citie  Palace of siluer, whereReuel. 21. 21 the Lord for euer shall feast vs withCant. 8. 9 the joyes of his countenance among these purer Spirites, his excellent Ones the Angels of glorie!


The sicke Man.
It is certainelie a great blindnesse: Lord, put the eye salue of Grace to our carnall  naturalleyes, y^t our sightReuel. 3. 18

beeing cleared thereby wee may get some glimpse of these Palaces and Pleasures that are aboue: O Lord, hoise vp mine heart,  raise it out of the muck of this earth: mak the relish of Heauen to dash out of mine heart all earthlie desires.
It is marueilous how the Soule of man shuld be such a stranger to hea|uen: Note When I consider howe the Soule that diuine proportion, so no|blie furnished with powers of great eeuation, euen of most high con|templation, should so debae it selfe among myre and dirt, not hauing a face to behold the heauens, it put|teth mine heart into a wonderfull maze: What can a Soule find either in heauen or earth, except God alone which is able to satisfie the desires of its so wide Capacitie?
Note O the beautie of these celesti|all buildinges, all Gold and Azure But rather O the beautie of GOD himselfe in whose presence is the greatest glorie of that painted Pa|lace!

O the beautie of beauties of him whose mercifull presence shuld turne the hels of paine into heauens ofPsal. 16. 1 pleasures for euermore! O let the beau|tiePsal. 90. 17 of the Lord our God bee vpon vs: * O what a fickle follie is this for man to losse eternitie of happinesse for the minute of a miserable life, in world|lie pleasures wherein is more sen|sible paine; than joye that can bee enjoyed!
But to follow out our purpose intended concerning heauens glo|rie: I haue Sir alreadie heard of the beautie of that Citie, nowe let mee heare of its Boundes: None as I thinke shall bee there troubled for want of Elbow-roome.


The Pastour.
* O the vnspeakable bounds that bee there: S. Iohn saith that it was measured with a golden reede: TheReuel. 21. 15 measure thereof as the word of God testifieth, was Twelue thousand fur|longs,vers. 16. which is more than fifteene

hundreth myle: Numerus indefinitus pro definito.
A Citie greater in boundes, than who should joyne together in one that great Niniuie, Paris, Rome, Lon|don, Venise, Alexandria, Constan|tenople, and that great Alcaire, or Babylon a citie containing in circuite foure hundreth fourescore fur|longs: Nay, joyne all the Cities of the world together in one, and they shall in no way bee comparable vn|to this Citie of our God, as it is et downe in the Cart of the Reuelation.
Let a man behold the Cart of the world, and in it hee shall easilie couer with his hand all the bounds of Eu|rope: But behold how the Heauens in that Cart of God occupie more than fifteene hundreth myles.
What I pray you, is all this Earth in comparison of these heauenlie Mansions, but an hand-breadth in comparison of fifteene hundreth myles? Note What wonder seeing as

the most learned Philosophers haue obserued, the least fixed conspicuous starre which feemeth to bee but a golden naile fixed into this seiled house containeth the greatnes of the earth eighteene fold: Others of the grea|ter sort are esteemed to bee more than an hundreth sold greater than the whole earth.
It is most certaine that if the whole bodie of the earth were where a star is, it should not appeare so great as that little blacke spot that we see into the Moone: Nay, certainelie though an hundreth Earthes as great as all this were joyned in a cluster or in one masse, they should not there ap|peare so great as a little more in the Sun: for seeing a star which is of such a bignesse and such a brightnes, see|meth to bee but a sparkle; as much of earth as would come to the great|nesse of a starre, beeing corpus opa|cum, a bodie darke and duskish shuld not in any way bee able to bee an

object for our sight heere below.
Note Fye on foolish Atheimse that will not looke vp to the Heauens for to consider what an Arme it can bee which turneth about with a continuall whirling Bodies of such a quantitie.


The sicke man.
Oh, that wee could vndervalue our selues as wee should, to acknow|ledge our stupiditie: Note Hee is not a man indeede but a beas, that can not say and thinke with that wise A|gure,Prou. 30. 2 Surelie I am more brutish than any man, and haue not the vnderstan|ding of a man.


The Pastour.
Oh, that wee were wise, for wise|domeProu. . 11 is better than Rubies: Oh, that wee were wise, for the man that wan|drethProu. 1. 16 out of the way of vnderstanding, shall remaine in the congregation of the dead: Wee are such muddie world|lings that wee cannot thinke of that immortalitie of pure and refined plea|sures that are aboue.



The sicke Man.
But to the purpose: Is there not a Temple in Heauen wherein the Sainctes conueene for the seruice of their God?


The Pastour.
S. Iohn saith, That hee sawe noReuel. 21. 22 Temple therein, for the Lord God Al|mightie and the Lambe are the Temple of it.


The sicke Man.
I vnderstand not howe the Lord God can bee said to bee the TempleA Godlie Prayer. thereof. O Lord, sette bounds and li|mis to my curiositie: Let the loue of thy selfe haue the preheminence in swaying all my desires.
A Temple or Church properlie signifie a particular house appointed for Gods seruice: for so it is that such an house should not bee in heauen: But the Lord himselfe  shall bee to all the Sainctes in steede of such an house The Temple is a place pro|perlie for offering vp of sacrifices for

instruction of ignorants, for com|forting of these that are afflicted.
Note To declare vnto vs that there shall bee no neede of such thinges the Scripture teacheth that there shall bee no Temple, but that the Lord and the Lambe shall bee the Temple, that is, shall bee in steede of sacrifice, instruction, comfort, joye,  all other good things vnto his owne, so that hee shall bee All in all: No created Spirit is able to conceiue  wade thorow such mysteries.


The sicke Man.
The summe of your discourse, as I perceiue, is that though that Citie want a Temple, God himselfe by his presence shall bee in steede of all thinges which are helpefull vnto vs heere: But it would seeme by ano|ther place of the Reuelation, that in the Heauen there is a Temple: There was giuen mee a reede like vnto a rod, saith S. Iohn, and the Angel stood saying,Reuel. 11. 1. Rise and measure the Temple of God.



The Pastour.
Note By that Temple is to bee vnder|stood the Church of God on earth, as the most Learned esteeme.
Note They also thinke that this Ca|lamus mensorius measuring Reede. is the rule of holie Scriptures, wher|by Sectes,  Heresies are discerned from the trueth of Religion.
By this Temple heere I say, Wee must vnderstand the Church of Christ, according to this it is said to the Faithfull, Know yee not that yee1 Cor. 3. 16 are the Temple of God, and that the Spi|rit of God dwelleth in you? The hearts of all the faithful are a Temple which God hath consecrate vnto him|selfe for his Spirit to dwell in.


The sick Man.
O my God, keepe still mine heartA godlie Prayer. in an holie spirituall temper: Soften and season it with the dew of thy Grace: Inlighten the eyes of my mistie minde, that beeing made quicke and nimble, they may sharp|lie

discerne, and with a liuelie vi|gour apprehend their blessed object euen God himselfe, the Soueraigne felicitie of my Soule: O Lord of im|mortalitie, make heauenlie medita|tions only to lodge into mine heart which may bread therein thoughts of a more noble and spirituall tem|per then ordinarlie arise and are fo|stered in earthlie minded men 'who drinke vp iniquitie like water and feede vpon it as the horse Leech vpon cor|ruption.


The Pastour.
The Lord giue eare to your desires: Oh, that wee could consi|der how our drousie thoughts, and dull affections are so glued vnto the vvorld as though Eternitie of hap|pinesse were lodged vpon earth, and the short time of pleasures had its residence onelie in the Heauens: Such follies and fancies by the sub|tilitie of Sathan, are moulded into vnstable and vnhallowed braines.

There is a secret influence of folie from the corruption of our Nature, whereby except that Gods Grace stand in the gap and debarre it, all the wisedome of God shall seeme to bee but follie vnto the Soule of man.


The sicke Man.
The Lord giue vs wisedome in all things.
But to follow our purpose, seeing wee are now speaking of that hea|uenlie Ierusalem, I would gladlie heare you declare the differences that are betweene the heauenly and the earthly Ierusalem.


The Pastour.
There bee many notable diffe|rences worthie our obseruations:

1. Note The earthlie was builded into dust, and now it hath the salt of Gods curse sown vpon it: The other hath its foundation into the Heauens bles|sed for euer.
2. That which is below had not a gate for euerie Tribe neither were

all Israel free Denizens therein.
Note But as for the Citie aboue, The gates thereof, said Ezekiel, shall bee af|terEzek. 48. 31 the name of the Tribes of Israel: The name of the Citie from that day shall be IEHOVAH SHAMMAH,vers. 35. The Lord is there: S. Iohn saith, That hee saw this Citie enuironed with a wall both great and high with twelueReuel. 21. 12 gates, and at the gates twelue Angels, and names written thereon, which are names of the twelue Tribes of the Chil|dren of Israel.
3 That which was earthlie was abhorred by the Gentiles, and at last by them destroyed, and now by Turkes possessed and subdued: Note But as for Ierusalem aboue, The Nations of them which are saued, shall walke inReuel. 21. 24 the light of it,  the Kings of the earth doe bring their honour  glorie into it.
4 These of the earthlie Ierusalem could not see without the light of the Sunne by day, and of the Moone by night: It behoued them to haue

fire and Candles in the night time as in any other Citie: Note But to Ieru|salemIsa. 60. 19 aboue, God hath said, The Sun shall no more bee thy light by day, neither for brightnesse shall the Moone giue light vnto thee: But the Lord shall bee vnto thee an euerlasting light, and thy God thy Glorie: Thy Sunne shall novers. 20. more goe down neither shall thy Moone with-draw it selfe; for the Lord shall bee thine euerlasting Light.
5 In the earthly Ierusalem, often in place of Iustice was a seat of malice: Note But in the new Ierusalem euill judges shall haue no sitting, but the ThroneReuel. 22. 3. of God and of the Lambe shall bee in itPsal. 129. 4 an appointed seat, for the righteousIsa. 28. 17 Lord who shall lay judgment to the line and righteousnesse to the plummet.



The sicke Man.
O but my Soule is going to a plea|sant Palace: O thou my Soule re|joyce within mee, that God hath prepared such pleasures for thee: O how amible are thy Tabernacles, OPsal. 84. 1.

Lord of hostes: Mine heart is in hea|uen:Psal. 87. 3. Glorious things are spoken of the, O thou Citie of our God.


The Pastour.
It is certaine that mans heart can not conceiue the beautie of these buildings within: Note If the house of God on earth seemed so pleasant to King Dauid that hee counted this the one thing hee would seeke, that hee might dwell into it, what shall wee thinke or say concerning Gods Palace in the Heauens? One thing, said hee, haue I desired of the Lord, that I will seeke after that I may dwell in thePsal. 27. 4. house of the Lord all the dayes of my life, to behold the BEAVTIE of the Lord.
Lords mercie, what dulnesse and deadnesse of heart is this, that wee seeke not after the same? should not this be our one thing? euen our one|lie hearts desire to dwell with God aboue, for to behold that BEAVTIE of the Lord, these euer geene plea|sures

in his celestiall arbours.
Note There is nothing heere below which can bee sufficient for to ex|presse the image, nay, not the sha|dowe of these things that are aboue: In the most glorious creatures which are below, as Gold, Glasse, Crystall, Pearles, and precious Stones, we may see some thinges like shadowes of these glorious thinges aboue: But there is no creature heere which can carrie to our imagination the shadow let bee the image of the glorie that is vp into that Holie of holies: O but God is wonderfull in counsell and ex|cellentIsa. 28. 29 in working: But our Soules are so sleepie and sluggish that they cannot consider: Note The fancies and folies of the earth bring vs quite out of conceite with celestiall plea|sures: Alas, in the best of vs the seedes of grace lye buried vnder the thornes shamefullie ouertopped by them: The little dramme of good|nesse in our hearts is waighed down

with weightie talents of wickednes: a mighty streame of earthy thoghts and worldlie desires lik a Torrent ca|rieth our Soules down the hill from all heauenlie contemplations: The clawing flatterers of our worldly af|fections whisper vnto vs that it is good for vs to bee heere.


The sicke Man.
The Lord subdue the master sinneA prayer which like a Ring-leader and head of all wickednesse, maketh all our pu|rest conceptions of heauen to be come moodie and drumlie.
O Lord, let thy graces in mee beeA prayer presentlie vp in armes for to remoue all such earthlie mindednesse from mine heart, by the power of thy di|uine Armerouse vp this drousie soule, that it may seeke thee afresh by a re|newed act of Faith and Repentance: Make mine heart to detaste all earth|lie pleasures which are but rotten at the heart: Kindle in mine heart a loue of thy Palace aboue, stirre vp

all my desires with a foretaste of the pleasures that are there; that finding the comfortable relish thereof I may most willingly desire to be dissolued and to bee with Christ in the hea|uens for euer: O Lord, in stead of all meanes both outward  inward, supplie mee aboundantlie with the presence of thy Spirit: Waine my Soule from the loue of the earth, that thou may winne it to the loue of the Heauens.
O happie they who studie to pie|tie and puritie for no vncleane thing shall bee able to enter into these man|sions.
O Lord, let vs not bee like these whoA prayer after that they haue seemed to disgorge their stomackes most filthilie with the Dogge, swallow vp their owne vomit againe: O shelter mee and saue me from the vnsoundnesse and vn|settlednesse of a deceitfull heart, that I lash not out into the excesse of supperfluitie of wickednesse: now

while wee are speaking of the hea|uens, make all the loue of the earth hencefoorth to bee cryed downe in|to my Soule.


The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in Heauen: I am rejoyced that while we are spea|king of the heauens, the Spirite of grace furnisheth you with such hea|uenlie prayers which would hear|ten any man, to runne thorow hell to Heauen, except that hee bee of the number of these who thinke it but a tricke to goe to hell.


The sicke Man.
I pray you now Sir, to continue into that purpose concerning the glorie of Heauen, for it affecteth much my Soule: Your powerfull speach maketh my minde to stay in a feeling meditation vpon these beau|ties that are aboue.
Note If I heard not such good pur|pose, my mind would either feede vpon dull and fruitlesse melancholie,

or else should gade and runne ryot in reuellings and in a world of foolish and fond imaginations.
Note The thoughts of man cannot runne long without rubor interrup|tion in Spirituall things, except that God in mercie both support them outwardlie and sinew them inward|lie by the finger of his Spirit: The hearts of men are so light in their ga|ding that moste easilie are they moued to glide ouer the best things, and either swinishlie to wallow in|filthinesse, or furiouslie to follow these whose whole pregnancie of witte is spended vpon trifles: Thus mirrilie they passe away that tyme wherein they should redeeme the time that is past.
I wish that mine heart by your discourse were confined to celestiall meditations: Proceede now I pray you where yee left at last.


The Pastour.
My speach was that all the most

glorious creatures that wee can ei|ther see aboue or below are lesse tha~ shadowes, types or figures, of things that are within the Heauens.
Note In them as in a Glasse we see weak|lie the invisible things of God: As a man not beeing able to face the Sun beholdeth him in a Basen, full of wa|ter, and yet not without some daze|ling of his sight: That weakened light will mak his eyes to water, and teares to trickle downe: If the glory of one of Gods seruants be so gliste|ring in robes of light, that no man can behold him but into the glasse of ano|ther creature, and that also with great paine. It is certaine that God must put many moe creatures be|tweene himselfe and vs, that the glo|rie of his beames beeing weakened by diuerse reflexes from one creature to another, man with his weake tender eyes may looke vpon his light.
Note If a man cannot beholde the Sunne in the day, hee may in the

night behold his beames vpon the bodie of the Moone: If his sight yet cannot suffer that, hee may be|hold him in his second reflexe by beholding the Moone in a glasse: If as yet his sight dazle, there is a third and weaker reflexe: By another glasse thou may gette the reflexe of that glassen reflexe.
Note Certainlie there must bee ma|nie reflexes of Gods brightnes from one creature to another, before that his invisible things can bee seene by vs: What glorious beames of Gods face thinke yee be these which shine within that highest Heauen called, Coelum Empyrium, the fierie Heauen? not that there is fire, but because (as the most Learned thinke) it is purer than al the other heauens as much as the fire is purer than the other Elements: O what shining brightnesse of God is to be seene there where all is more glauncing and cleare, than that fire which Moses saw in the Bush.
Note Let vs come down from thence to behold the glorious Stars y^e twinck|ling eyes of Heauen, laughing vpon the godlie with their celestiall smyles: O these bright and peerelesse Pearles. Let vs from thence come downe to the two great Gouernours of the dayGen. 1. 16 and of the night from thence des|cend to the cleare pureaire so glaun|cing with the light of the Sunne as if it were all of Azure: Come downe yet, and vnder that are Aquae lim|pidae, the cleare waters, the mother of Pearles and of precious gold, for the weakest eye there is terra opaca that thicke dake, duskish, and lum|pish masse of earth which a bleare eyed Leah, may behold, for in it to see without watering eyes the invisible thinges of God, were it by looking vpon a Lillie, or a Rose or vpon a Snaile or a Snaike.
Note Behold the goodnesse of God, who hath sette his creatures by de|grees in distance from the place of

his inaccessible light that thereby the bleared eyes of men may get some glimpse of the shadowes of his in|visible thinges which are of truest worth.
Note But O, O, O, what a glorie and matchlesse fairenesse is there where God the King of Glorie is seene face to face O the glorie of the God-head: The knowledge of the least sparkle of that glorie is not attainable by any carnall capacitie.
Note Because of that brightnesse that was in Moses his face by the reflexe of that Light which hee had seene but in IEHOVAHS backe partes, it be|houedExod. 34. 33 him to couer his face with a Vaile when hee came for to speake vnto men: Was the skinne of the face of a sinner so inlightened with bright beames from the Back of God, that no man could behold it, nor looke toward it till it was couered with a Vaile? How many Vailes must God put betweene his face  ours,

lest we should be dazeled with his glo|rie? I take all the circles of y^e heauens, the Fire and Aire aboue vs to bee as many obscuring Vailes which the Lord hath cast betweene the Glorie of his face  the eyes of sinful man: Note And yet in the Sunne hee hath fastened such a sparkle of his glorie, that by his heate  his brightnes, he will cause man the king of creatures to bee ashamed to behold him: Hee will cause him flie vnto the sha|dowes, and goe with Gogle eyes of Glasse, for to saue his eyes of flesh from the reflexe of his beames thogh blunted vpon the darke and duskie element of the earth: See how mans sight is so weake that it cannot abide an earthlie blunted reflexe of that celestiall creature.
What shall I say more of the hea|uens which are so farre aboue vs? Note Let vs come downe and learne humilitie at the feete of creaturesAct. 22. 3. below as at the feete of a Gamal

euen in this elementare Region of cor|ruption: Note Behold there is such a whitenesse into the snow which is but frozen and congealed blacke water, that it will mak the dull sight of man so to dazle, that when hee is entered into his owne house, hee is not able to know the faces that are his owne, yea, many by such bright|nes, at last haue lost their sight: Let mee yet come to an obscurer bodie: The small printed Letters which wee read must be darkened with y^e black|nesse of inke; and yet because the whitenes of the Paper scattereth so the sight, it must bee gathered with the greenish colour of glassen Spe|ctacles.
Note Now I pray you, how should man behold that passing glory of his God, who cannot behold the whit|nesse of Paper but with borrowed eyes of Glasse?
Let men heare learne in his weak|nesse to bee humble, and to reue|rence

him that hath made so many creatures, which for brightnesse he is not able to behold: Note If poore man ca~not behold the apparrell of Gods creatures clothed with light, or with colours not seene without light: If such a little glaunce is able to dazle his sight, how should hee bee able to behold the King of creatures, euen the great Creator him selfe; whose backe partes are brighter than tenne thousand Sunnes.
Because of this great weaknesse caused into man by sinne, man is re|moued farre from the presence of this King, lest hee should bee de|stroyed by the brightnesse of his beames: Note If while the Sunne shi|neth with his beames darded direct|lie down, y^e creatures are so parched with heate below that they are con|strained to gaspe, what should be|come of vs, if Gods glorie should ap|peare at our verticall point without the interposition of many other

creatures betweene him and vs? If a little sparkle of his Glorie in the Sunne many thousand myles from vs, maketh a man to faint, sweate, and gaspe, what should become of vs, if God himselfe the consumingHeb. 12. 29 fyre should approach vnto vs? If the Sunne which seemeth to bee but of an hand-breadth hath such light and heate, what should it bee if all the heauens were inlightened like the Sunne? Though all the heauens were turned into a Sun, they should not be of such brightnesse as are the backe-parts of IEHOVAH: The SunExod. 33. 23 with all his light and heate may mak the face of man more obscure and duskie, but cannot inlighten it: But the backe partes of God, printed such light into the face of a man, that for brightnesse no man could behold it.
Note Mercifull God, what stupidi|tie is this in man, that hee will not consider what a Majestie this must bee, whose obscurest parts are more

bright than the Sunne, and who with all is not confined with natural dimen|sions, as with breadth or length, but is aboue the Heauens infinitlie with infinite bounds and brightnesse the least sparkle whereof is more bright than if the whole Heauens were wholie tarned into a shining Sunne.
Note If men knew the pleasures that are there, they wold not losse them for y^e painefull pleasures, or rather vnplea|sant paines of this sinfull life: Alas, that we are so carelesse of the attain|ment of such a weight of glorie: Alas, that wee gaze so greedilie vpon the painted and varnished vanishing glorie of things below which all perish with the vsing.
Note If men knew what relish is into these dainties that are aboue pre|pared for the Sainctes, they would not so glut themselues with the swinish uskes of earthlie thinges, but would reserue their lust, for that whereof there is no loathing: Fye on men

that for follie should losse such an inheritance that fadeth not away.1 Pet. 1. 4.
Note In this world wee haue Bethel the house of God, but aboue is Pe|niel the place of Gods face, wherein are pleasures for euermore: Below allPsal. 16. 1 pleasures ebbe and flow with discon|tent and comfort: But aboue is an euerlasting full sea of joyes which could neuer enter into the heart of man: Vnder the Law God was hid vnder a vaile: In the Gospel wee see him in a glasse: But in heauen2 Cor. 3. 18. we shall see him face to face, and that indeede euen as hee is.


The sicke Man.
Mine heart by these wordes is possest with a secret louelier auishment: Continue I pray you to declare what more beaucie is within that Pa|radise: Note Let me heare of these plea|sures, which the Sainctes there haue in the presence of their God, and what bee the order and chiefe orna|ments of that Palace, what bee the

attyre of these y^t follow the Lambe,  what be the forme of their feasting at table with Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob.


The Pastour.
Note Such things are transcendent to all the wits of Nature and to all crea|ted inuentions: It is good that wee beware to launch too farre into such a boundlesse and bottomelesse Ocean.
Note What is the compasse of mans braine little like a Nut-shell, that it should containe conceptions of that which is infinit? God who killed the Bethshemites for looking into his Arke, and reproued the Galileens1 Sam. 6. 19 gazing vp to the Heauens, will not allow men to pierce and prye cu|riouslieAct. 1. 11. into his misteries which sur|passe all created capacitie: Note Our grea|test wisedome shall bee to wonder at that which passeth the reach of all reason and reuelation: Note It may well content the most curious Soule to bee of Gods Court though it be not of his secret Counsell: Note In nothing

mans reason appeareth more reaso|nable, than to cease from reasoning in that which is aboue his reach.
The matter is heere so high that all words forsake mee as it were con|fessing that they are neither fit nor able to expresse such wonderfull mi|steries: Note As the heauens could not bee measured but with a Reede of gold, so cannot these heauenlie things bee declared but in the gol|den language of heauen which our sinfull mortalitie can neither speake nor vnderstand: Note It is dangerous for man to be curious to learne what God esteemeth not necessarie to teach: Man must not haue eares to listen where God hath not a tongue to speake, Gods silence should teach all men sobrietie in searching.
In that royall Palace of pleasures a|boue without doubt bee comfortes contentments, yea, and such, I am perswaded, as greater the Sunne and Moone the two eyes of Heauen neuer

saw: What say I greater? The image of such thinges could neuer enter into the heart of man.
Note In my judgement all the God|lie at the first sight of heauens glo|rie shall bee like men in a dreame: As it is written of Gods people, When the Lord brought againe the captiuitie of Zion, wee were like them that dreame: All such glorie, beautie, and plea|surePsal. 126. 1 shall bee things so excellent and beyond expectation that for a space they shall seeme to the Saincts incre|dible, for a space in my judgement the Godlie shall bee like these that dreame, wondering how so great a glorie can possiblie bee.
My minde is now dazeled with such high considerations.
O, O, O, these so vnspeakable beauties that are within that Holie of holies! O the order y^t is there! O the dainties that are on these Tables: OProu. 23. 2 the Table of that Ruler where all may take of all without, Putting a knife  their throat!

O the apparell of Gods serua~ts there: O these fairest flowers which shall decke their garlands of Majestie, O these peerelesse Pearles of price! O these louelie Iemmes! O these celesti|all crownes spangled with jewles more glistering than tarres! O yee Angels and Archangels! O yee all of that heaue~ly Queire: Cherubins, Seraphins, Princes, Powers, Thrones, Vertues and Dominions, all inflammed with most glorious diuine beames of light! O yee Noble followers of the Lambe all decked with glorie and garlands of immortalitie! O the amazing beauties of these celestiall Mansions! O ye blessed eternized Denizens who liue there into an eternall vnitie of loue, which no jarres, strife, or debate shall for euer be able to vntwine! O purest Spirits purged from all drossie mood of sinfull mortalitie! O Palace of pleasures wher|in Angels  Sainctes all around with celestiall Harpes make all to ring with Holie, Holie, Holie, Halleluiah, Halle|luiah,

Halleluiah! O yee purest ple|sures of perfection which no fretting canker of time shall bee able to out|weare, or to cancell the owlish eyes of my mind are not able to reach with|in the bounds of so bright an Hori|zon: The most I can conceiue is lesse than the least and lightest glory that shall bee there where Soules are so|laced without stresse or strife in im|mortalitie.
Note O glorie, glorie, glorie, without any veine of vanitie: Mine heart is rauished and is no more within me.
Note When the Queene of Shebah came to Ierusalem to see the glorie of Solomon, after that shee had con|sidered1 Kin. 10. 5 the meate of his Table, and the sitting of his seruants, and the atten|dance of his Ministers, and their app|rell,  his Cup bearers, it is said, That there remained no more spirit in her. All her spirits in a manner ran out of her by the holes of her senses, for to come  sit downe  wonder at the

glorie of the man: Thus wondering shee remained for a space, as if shee had beene amazed, till her stupified spirit returned into her againe: then shee began to speake, It was a true1 King. 1 6. report that I heard in mine owne Land of thine actes and of thy wisedome, howbeit I belieued not the wordes vntillvers. 7. I came, and mine eyes had seene it: And behold the halfe was not told mee: Thy wisedome  prosperitie exceede the fame which I haue heard: Happie arevers. 8. thy men, happie are these thy seruantes which stand continuallie before thee, and that heare thy wisedome.
Note Consider how the glorie of a man in its greatest not comparable to the glorie of a Lillie, drew the spi|rite so out of the Queene of Shebah,Luk. 12. 27 that for a space shee was not able to speake: Shee wondered at that which shee saw, but what shee had seene shee could not vtter in words, bu onelie said in generall, that shee had heard a true report which she could

not belieue vntill shee came, and her eyes had seene it: And nowe whe shee hath seene, shee declareth that the halfe had not beene tolde her.
Consider well I pray you: Note If the beholding of the glorie of an earthlie Prince so rauished the heart not of a rusticke that will easilie won|der at any thing, but of a Queene, yea, and so that no more spirit remai|ned in her, what should it bee if we should get but as through the gra one sight thorow the heauens of that great God of Solomon sitting v|pon his Throne?
Note If but for the quarter of an houre wee might see the meate of his Tabl, and the standing of his seruants  the attendance of his Ministers, Saincts  Angels casting downe their Crownes at his feete, if, I say, wee could see these things as they are this our Spi|rit shuld be caried toward him wit such a strong bent affection, tha  should not tarie within vs, but being

rauished should runne out of this body of clay for to goe abide with him that made it among pleasures per|fectlie abstracted from paine.
Note If God as hee is should appeare vnto vs were it neuer so little, the bonds of our bodies should not be able for to fetter so our Soules, but at the first sight of God they with a most flagrant desire should flutter out of sinfull clay, for to enjoye his most amiable presence, wherein are pleasures exempted from all hazard of surprysall.
Note That which I say giueth some light to these wordes which God said to Moses, No man can see my faceExod. 33. 22 and liue: As for the wicked I giue this interpretation, that the sight of Gods face shuld kil them as light kil|leth darknes, or as y^e day is the slaugh|ter of the night: But God who killeth not but quickeneth the killed of his owne chosen, if by them hee were seene in the face on earth they shuld

dye not a violent death, but they should die for loue to bee at him: At the first sight of his Face their Soules would not remaine any more in clay, but loathing their bodies, they should make haste for to flie toAct. 7 56, their God: So soone as Steuen saw the Heauens opened,  the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, his Soule tooke post to the heauens: Albeit the Burrios thought that they chai|sed it out with stroakes and with stones, yet it is certaine that fra once hee got that sight, his Soule was more desirous to bee out of his bo|die, for loue of Heauen, than the Soule of the most wicked man can bee desirous to abide still within for feare of Hell.
Note There is such an attractiue loue in Gods countenance, that if the Soule in flesh could once see it, the bodie should not bee able to keepe it any more within, no not for the space of a moment: As the load stone

draweth vnto it the yron by a secret and vnspeakable draught, so in the face of God there is such an attractiue force, that of neede force the godlie Soule at the first sight of it must flie vp vnto it: As the Sun by the force of his beames raised vp the vapours towardes heauen, euen so if God would but turne his face to anie Soule, with the least blinke thereof, hee should draw vp that Soule vnto himselfe like a vapour raised vp by the force of the Sunne. Note Consider how the sight but of his backe partes maketh many a well re|solued Christian to cry vp vnto him Cupio dissolvi, I desire to bee dissol|ued: What is that but the faithfull Soule haling like an Hawke for to flie from the mortall heart as from the hand of a stranger, for to come home to her Lord in eternitie? O thrise happie hee whose name is in the Booke, and whose Soule is in the bundle of life.
Note O the gaine that wee haue by the mercie of God in the fall of A|dam: In Paradise man might liue or die: On earth hee now liueth and must die: But in Heauen wee shall so liue, that wee can no more die: O blessed life of eternitie neuer to haue an end into that other world: Oh that wee could spend this life in a sacred violence in pursute of that celestiall crowne of immortalitie: Note Happie is hee who keepeth a nar|row watch ouer all the stirringes and imaginations of his heart in conside|ration of that day. Note Happie is hee who maketh all his joys  pleasures and all his best beloued thinges be|low to bee by standers waiting on the seruice of that one thing which onelie is necessarie.Luk. 10. 42


The sicke Man.
My Soule is so rauished with you speach that it flutters within mee  haleth to bee away from this mor|talitie for to goe dwell into these

heauenlie Mansions with the God of glorie: Our best thinges below in their verie quintessence are defiled with the moode of home bred corrup|tion: All haue neede to be renewed in the verie spirit of their minde. Let it please you Sir yet to continue in describing the beautie of Paradise.


The Pastour.
If man o Earth could belieue the beautie of the Heauens to be in any measure such as it is, hee would bee glad at his heart to forsake the moulding cottages of clay: Seeing the out-sid of heauen is so glorious what must bee the in side? Solomons Tem|ple was a type of Heauen: The fur|ther a man went in, he saw the grea|ter beautie: In the out most Cou was but an Altar of brasse, for the s|crificing of beastes: Into the inward Court stood an Altar of Gold for offe|ring of incense  of sweet persums But that which was in most, viz Sanctum Sanctorum the Holie of holies

was all full of Glorie: There God himselfe was heard in a voyce bee|tweene the Cherubins: There was the Ark called, 1 Sam. 4. 22 The Glorie, wherin were the Heb. 9. 4 Tables of Gods word, Aarons flourished Rod  the Manna: There was the Word for the instruction of the Soule: There were the Almond floorishes like a pleasant Spring for rejoycing of the eye: There also was Mannah for meate, the type of that euerlasting Soule feast in y^e Heauens Behold a compend of the three most pleasa~t seasons of the yeare: First, there was the seed of the word;  after that the Summer flowers of pleasure in the flowrishing Rod: And last there was y^e fruitfull haruish of Manna for meat: In a word in that Holie of holies the figure of Heauen was the Mercie|sea the speciall place of Gods resi|dence: But all the beautie of that Temple were not sufficient to ex|presse the shadowe of these that are aboue the starres.
Note S. Paul after that hee had beene rauished vp to the third heauens got a charge from God that hee should not tell what hee had heard or seene there: Onelie this hee declared af|ter that hee was come downe, that vp into Paradise hee had heard vn|speakable words which no tongue of2 Cor. 12. 4 flesh could bee able to pronounce: But though such words had beene speakable the Apostle declareth that it was not lawfull for a man to vtter them.
Note Alas, what can the earthlie low creeping wors of our highest eloquence expresse of these joyes that are a|boue the Heauen of heauens? Hee who with penne and inke would set out the greatnes of that glory which is to bee seene within that blessed Building, should bee as who would foolishlie tak paines to paint the Sun with a coale: In vaine shall a man prease to expresse that which cannot be spoke~ but into vnspeakable words

Words come shorter than thoghts, and thoughts come shorter infinitly than the thing it selfe.


The sicke Man.
I haue heard with great ioye of the vnspeakable glorie of God him|selfe,  of the beautie of his Prince|lie Palace: I desire now to heare some thing more at large concerning the estate of the Sainctes wherein they shall be when they shall dwell with God after the resurrection.


The Pastour.
It is most certaine that they shalbe there into a farre better estate than wee can imagine: Note For if Daid thought one day in Gods earthly hous better th a thousand else where, whatPsal. 84. 0 shall it bee when wee shall bee in Heauen, the Citie of our GOD, whereof God is the House and the Temple?
The Saincts shalbe in such glorie there, as that no earthlie tongue can tell: Note If in this world by be: hol|ding

in a glasse the glorie of the Lord,2 Cor. 3. 18. wee are changed into that same Image from glorie to glorie, what a change shalbee made when we shall see not Gods Image, not in a glasse, but him|selfe face to face? If the sight of his Image in the glasse of his Gospel hath such a working power as to change vs into the same Image heere on earth, what a change shall bee made of vs in the Heauens, when we shall see God euen as hee is? All the1 Ioh. 3. 2. godlie Gods warriours then shall liue in peace and rest: Note As their life on earth was a continuall battell, so shall their life in Heauen bee a per|petuall triumph: Then the winter of their affliction shall bee past: The stormes of their miserie shall blowe no more: Note On Earth joyes and sorrowes are combined together: In Hell is sorrow without any joye: In Heauen shall bee joye without anie sorrow: There they all in bleached coats of righteousnes shall blaze brigh|ter

than the Sunne: God beeing in them shall burne in them as hee did in the Bush: They shall burne but not bee consumed.
While S. Iohn was rauished in the Spirit, he behelde a great multitude which no man could number, all standing before the Lambes Throne cloathed in white robbes which had beene bleached from their blemish by the blood of the Lambe: Note hauing the testimonie of two Senses, he repor|teth what hee saw and heard: With his eyes hee saw them cloathed withReuel. 7. 9. white robes and Palmes in their hands: The one was their innocencie, the other was their victorie: With his eares hee heard the songs of their triumph. They cryed, said hee, with a loude voyce, Saluation to our God whichReuel. 7. 10 sitteth vpon the Throne: With them were Angels  Elders rou~d about the Throne, all falling down vpon their face, and singing, Blessing, and glo|rie,vers. 10. and wisedome and thankesgiuing,

and honour, and power, and might bee vnto our God for euer and euer: Then with vnco~querable comforts shall all Christes crouding Turtles bee loueinglie comforted: Note Then shall all their sighes bee turned into songs: Then joyes vnspeakable shall fill all their senses without any surfet: Euerie Sense shall receiue more than all mortal hearts can conceiue: Note But which is of all good things the swee|test relish, there shall bee such vn|spottednesse of life and loue among the Saincts as the heart of man here cannot conceiue: Euery one shall re|joyce of anothers wel as much as they shall doe of their own felicitie: The enuious man seeds-man of all strife  debate shall not be there: Note All selfe|loue which is of a niggardlie nature enuious of the good of others, shall be quite away,  in the place therof shall come such an heauenlie loue that shall make all the joyes of Hea|uen to be common: Note As was in the

primitiue Church so shall bee there, but in greater perfection, a commu|nitie of goods: One shall not say, This is mine or that is thine: But as wee shall bee all in Christ,  Christ in vs, so shall wee bee all one in ano|ther filled one with anothers joye: All state of strife then shalbe farre away.
In Ierusalem aboue an euerlasting peace is within her walls, and perpetuall prosperitie within her Palaces: All the godlie glistering like starres, shall re|joyce one into anothers light: Note Eue|rie one of them by twinkling and be|kning vnto other with celestiall smiles shall bend all their force for to giueMal. 4. . glorie to the Sunne of righteousnesse the fountaine of all their light.
Note All Soules there shall bee most wonderfullie beaufied with inter|nall, externall, and eternall happinesse: There God onelie shall speake peace vnto his people and vnto his Sainctes, who shall neuer returne againe to their folies.
Note Mans chiefe contentment in the heauens shalbe in loue, first with God, and then of one with another O these euerlasting streames of con|tentmentes which shall flowe into these blessed breastes sequestred for euer from all doole and distresse.


The sicke Man.
Lord, make all these thinges to liue freshlie in our memories: My Soule is inflammed with loue to heare of that loue which shall bee betweene God and his Saincts and among the Sainctes themselues: Your discourse Sir, with a plausible and pleasant insi|nuation windeth it selfe into the af|fections of mine heart: It hath al|readie winne mine heart to him to whome it most justlie belongeth: Blessed bee his Name for euer.
Seeing yee were speaking of that vnspeakable loue that shalbe between God and vs, and also among our selues, I pray you to say some thing more concerning that matter.



The Pastour.
I shall doe what I can brieflie: Note As for God, euery Soule shall loue him better than it selfe, because it shall then perfectlie know that God hath loued it more than euer it was able to loue it selfe. As for all the Saints, wee shall loue them equallie with our selues, as beeing all members of that mysticall Bodie: Note Then and not till then shall bee the perfect practise of that second great com|mand the summe of the second TableLuk. 10. 27 which is, to loue our neighbour as our selues: Note If the Soule of this natu|rall Bodie in the toyle of our pilgri|mage hath such a commande ouer our naturall affections, that it ma|keth vs to loue all the members, and euerie member to worke equallie well for the good of another: O mercifull God, what greater loue shall proceede from that Spirite of Loue, which shall bee in the Hea|uens, euen the Soule of that mysticall bodie of all the Elect?
Note Looke how much grace sur|passeth Nature, and Glorie surpasseth Grace, the Spirit of God which shall animate this bodie, shall so much more straitlie make the members thereof to liue in Loue: Note The holier the Soule bee within a man the greater loue  concord is betweene his members: But if the Soule be not holie, all the mem|bers will shortlie discord: The one Hand will cut off the other: The Hand will wound the Heart, or cut the throat; and the Mouth will bite the Fingers: But O, what loue shall bee then among the members, when our Sanctification shall bee made so perfect, that nothing more can bee added vnto it! O what loue, peace and concord shall bee there, where God who is loue like a more powerfull1 Ioh. 4. 8. and noble forme shall in an vnspeak|able manner informe all the mem|bers of that mysticall bodie! Wee all then shall accord to one thing: All our wils shall bee according to

Gods will: And eueie one of our wills with another shall bee like our two eyes whereof the one cannot so soone turne, but the other must follow after it for to behold the same object.
Note Wee cannot now comprehen this: For mans reason heere on earth is like a riuen vessell which can not containe the discourse of immor|talitie: Our mindes are so drossie  mpish that they cannot conceiue euerlasting matters.
Wee speake now of Loue: O but Loue now is litle among men: Note we may say of it in this last age as Lot saidGen. 19, 20 of Belh Is it not a little one? Though it bee little now, it shall bee great in these dayes: Then shall it defie all sickle and foolish changes.
Noet In this worlde belowe three graces dwell into the Soule of man like three sisters, viz. Faith, Hope and Charitie, two of them convye the godlie Soule vnto the doores

of Heauen, viz. Faith and Hope, but Charitie entereth in: The Lord openeth his Doore to Loue: Note FaithHeb. 11. 1 beeing a substance of things not seene, so soone as the Soule commeth to sight, it ceaseth to be, because there is no such substance there: Hope be|ing of things to come, so soone as the future is become present, it hath no more a doe: But Loue entereth in, and as fyre posteth vp to fyre, so Loue swiftlie flieth to God, for God is Loue,1 Ioh. 4. 8. and for to speake so, the verie ele|ment of Lou Till Loue bee at him it is like a thing out of its element the place of its ost there shall our soules feede on his Loue: In such a feeding they shall bee as if they were euer hungrie and as if they were euer sa|tisfied: Note As the heauens hunger is without any laking, so is its ful|nesse without any loathing: Note On Earth as it is said,
Voluptates commendat rarior vsus.
Single vse maketh pleasures the more agreeable: But in Heauen the more our Soules shal haue, the more they shall desire: The more they shall desire, the more they shall re|ceiue: So by an infinite multiplica|tion, joyes, and pleasures, and con|tentments shalbe heaped vpon god|lie Soules for euer, like fyre in fuell, which, suppone the fuell be infinite, can neuer die out but day lie increas|seth, as it were from a sparkle to a flame.
What shall I say more? There shall bee such a fulnesse of all good thinges, that no Soule shall bee able to receiue a greater desire of more: All shall bee content, all shall bee vnspeakablie glorious and made perfect: There shall be no blemish into our bo|dies, nor sinne in our Soules: Iaacob shall not halt, Mephibosheth shall goe straight, blind Isaac then shall see,  Leah shal no more be bleared y^e deafe shall heare,  the dumbe shall speak:

The lame man shall leape as an Hart,a. 35. 6. and the dumbe mans tongue shall sing: Then shall these words bee perfect|lieEzek. 28. 24. performed, There shalbe no more a pricking briar vnto the house of Israel or any grieuing thorne of all that are round about them.
Note Then shall our wearied Soules find aboue the highest circumference of Heauen, the Centre of our rest.
God then shall bee our Sanctua|rie in whom we shall haue joye and gladnesse without feare of ending: O folie, folie, folie! Why should we for such earthlie toyes losse such celestiall joyes? Note Hee that for so little pleasure losseth that which Christ hath bought with so great paines, as said a Father,
Stultum Christum reputat mer|catorem.S. Aug.
That is, Hee thinketh Christ to bee a foolish buyer, while indeed he him|selfe is a most foolish seller: Note When one day with prophane Esau he shall

bitterlie repent his bargane, then shall hee know what a pennie-worth hee hath of all his pleasures.


The sicke Man.
Alas, that men cannot consider O my God, master and mortifie all such corruptions within mine heart, that they be not able to lay my soule open to Sathans temptations.
But to proceede in our purpose, what thinke yee shall bee the chiefe exercise of Soules in Heauen?


The Pastour.
It shalbe to sing Psalmes of praise, and to follow the Lambe whether soeuer hee goeth, from East to West, or from South to North.


The sicke Man.
Note Alas, that for this pricke of earth men should doe that which shall debarre them from that Palace of pleasure: Our bodies as yee thinke shall not then bee wearied in follo|wing the Lambe, were it to goe ne|uer so farre.



The Pastour.
O not: Note Then shall our Soules bee refined from the drosse of sinne: Then shall wee bee free of all this lumpishnesse of clay caused by sinne, wherewith now wee are both cloyed and clogged: Note Our motion then shall bee swifter than the Sunne in his course: As with athought our hearts will compasse the Heauens so shall wee goe most swiftlie whe|ther wee desire: As by the motion of the Eye wee looke from East to West, or as the Sunne beames while he ariseth are suddenlie darted from the one end of Heauen to the other, so shall it be of our motion then, for we shall bee carried with the infinite power of God, which shall not be sub|ject to the Lawes of naturall motions below: As for example, here can be no motion without resistance: Note All motions whether from aboue or sio~ below or ouerthwartlie finde enemies by the way opponing themselues to

that which is moued, as Edom did to the Israelites, saying, Thou shaltNumb. 20 18. not passe by mee: The stronger the opposition bee, the motions are the slower: Man cannot wade thorow waters so swiftlie as runne thorow the aire vpon the earth, because the partie is stronger which is against him, all things goe so below, but aboue no bodies shall oppose themsel|ues to the Children of God: What euer bee aboue, all shall goe with them, they shall bee like shippes before the winde, carried with a migh|tie gale: There is nothing heere like vnto that that shall bee into that ce|lestiall Fabricke.
But not bee curious to diue into such deepes: Note This is certaine, that the Sainctes shall bee carried there with the force of an vnspeak|able power, and that without anie wearinesse: They shall runne, saithIsa. 40 31 the Prophet, and not bee wearie, they shall walke and not faint: What can

these want who beeing companionsPsal. 16. 11 of the blessed Angels, shall abide with him in whose face is fulnesse of delight: Note There all our pleasures shall bee so pure that no vncleane in|clination shall be able by any juggling feat of conueiance to cogge in it selfe in|to our heartes any more: O the foo|lishnesse of mans blind and bewitched heart, that for a moment of toylesome time should losse that Eternitie of joye.


The sicke Man.
Thinke yee that in Heauen wee shall bee of diuerse ages, Children, men, or olde men, as wee were here when wee deceased?


The Pastour.
It is hard to tell wee must not swerue from the wisedome of Gods word: Scripture heere is silent: But seeing Heauen is the place of perfe|ction, it is probable as some Diuins thinke, that in Heauen all shall bee in greatest perfection: Seeing say,

they, that infancie is imperfection and olde age is defection, none of two are conuenient for bodies that are perfectlie glorified: Note As the Sunne taketh the mid course of Heauen, so shall the god|lie, who shall shine like Sunnes, abide in the middest beeweene the Poles of all extremities, for there shalbe y^e per|fection of Vertue, Age, Stature, Beau|tie, and of all that shall concerne them: Note All shall bee content, for all shall drinke their filles out of the Riuer of the vnmixed pleasures  per|fections of God, which neither Man nor Deuill, the strength of Hell, or length of eternitie shall euer bee able to trouble or make drumlie.


The sicke Man.
There is one thing which earnest|lie I desire to know, viz. Whether or not wee who on earth haue liued to|gether, and loued one another, shall know each other into Heauen.


The Pastour.
It is thought that so shall be, and

that because of the presence of God, in whom is such a Light that by it wee shail see and know these whom wee neuer did see or know on earth.
Note When Christ was transfiguredLuk. 9. 28 vpon mount Tabor, down came Moses Elias who~ the Apostles had neuer seene of before: Though they had neuer seene them before that, yet by the light of Christes transfiguration they were so inlightned that they did perfectlie know what they were: If the sight of that figured light, gaue such a knowledge vnto sinners that they knew these whom they had neuer seene, what shall it bee when all obscure figures and also our sins which maketh all good thinges ob|scure, shall bee remoued; and God shall bee All in all.
Note But though we should all know one another: as I thinke indeede we shall all these carnall respectes which are heere as of Father, Mother Wife  Childre~, shall all fall from vs, lik the2 Kin. 2 13 mantle of Elias, before wee enter in|to

Heauen for to enjoye these Empy|rian pleasures which are so far aboue the fadome and reach of all changable mortalitie.
Note Wee thinke much now of such earthlie respectes which are indeede Coagulum hujus vitae, the verie cur|ding and joyning together of greatest naturall contentments.
But seeing all such things are but things of Child-hoode, they shall not enter into our thoughtes when wee shall bee perfect men into the Hea|uens, the presence-Chamber of our1 Cor. 13. 11 God: When I was a Childe, saide S. Paul, I spake as a Child, I vnderstood as a Child, I thought as a Childe: But when I became a man I put away chil|dish things.
So long as a man is into this world if hee be compared with that which hee shall bee, hee is but a Child, hee vnderstandeth as a childe, hee spea|keth as a Child, and hee thinketh as a Childe: All the dearest naturall re|spects

that are heere, are but childish things: Seeing they are so, when we shall come to Heauen where we shall bee perfect men, they all shall bee put away.
Note I will let you see this in a natural figure: In this world we haue that which wee call Child hoode, and that which we call the perfection of a man: Now tell me I pray you, should it be seemelie for a graue Senatour sitting before his Prnce, and confering vpon the most weightie matters of the Kingdome, to beginne and speak what he did with this Child and that Childe, with whom he was wont to ride vpon Reedes? Would hee beeing a wise man at such a time beginne to discourse how with these little com|panions hee builded vnder a bowre little houses into the sand, or how in their childish conuentions they made their litle feastes of Pieres Nuts, and Apples? Would a wise man thinke ye in the presence of his Prince

put off the time with such purpose No, not.
When the foolish Child is become a wise man, hee speaketh no more as a Childe, neither vnderstandeth hee as a Childe, neither thinketh he as a Childe: Such childish thinges in Heauen shall not so much as once come into his thought, for that were to thinke as a Childe: That which is now in part shall bee done away, at the comming of perfection, which shall bee in that Coronation day.
Note Because we are heere but chil|dren, wee cannot now vnderstand the wisedome of the words  thoughts that wee shall haue aboue: Langua|ges then shall cease: One shall not speake English, and another French, and another Spanish: That Babylo|nish confusion of tongues shall bee ta|ken away, and wee all shall speake the Language of the Lambe: Note God then shall speake no more vnto his people with stammering lippes andIsa. 28. 11.

with another tongue: Then shalbe no difference of contrie-men or estates, whether they were borne in Asia, Europe or Affrica: There shall it not bee looked to whether they were Kings or Subjects, Masters or Ser|uants, bond or free.Col. 3. 11
In the Heauens is neither Greeke nor Iewe, Circumcision, nor vncircum|cision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free: But Christ shall bee All in all: Note What can bee laking vnto man, where God shall bee vnto him All in all, yea, and the Soule of his Soule.
As the Soule is in the whole man,  whollie in euerie part, so shall the whole diuinity in y^e heauens informe the whole mysticall bodie, and bee in it whollie, and that into the least member thereof, God beeing All in all: Then, and not till then, we shallPsal. 36. 8 bee satisfied aboundantlie with the fat|nesse of Gods house, and drinke of the Riuers of his pleasures, yea and our Soules, shall feast themselues by all

our senses vpon vnmixed joyes free from the mudde and distemper of all displeasures: In a worde our heartes shall bee fastened to our God with such cords of loue which no thing aboue or below shall bee able to vntwine.
Heere is our journeyes end, heere is our resting place from our laboursReuel. 14. 13 and toilesome trauels: Heere is ab|sence of all euill, and presence of all that is good: Note Heere the Lambe is the Temple, and the Light and the Tree of Life that bringeth foorth fruite euerie moneth, euer new joyes without perishing of the olde, euer new pleasures without any loathing of y^e former, euer new light without any darkning euer new life without any dying euer new delightes, without any dolours, euer new Glorie with|out any grudge, euer new mirth with out any mudde of miserie: * Bodi|lie pleasures worke a great desire aye till they bee gotten: But spirituall

delights as a Father said,

Cum non habentur sunt in fastidio.Gregor.
Cum habentur sunt in desiderio.

Before they bee gotten they are loa|thed: But are they gotten? they are loued: Note So long as our Soules are led hoode-winkt in this our moody and mistie mortalitie, wee cannot thorowlie perceiue this.
O that wee had heartes to consi|der! O that wee could rightlie mindCol. 3. 1. the thinges that are aboue! Note O that our hearts were wained fro~ this our natiue soile, a place of hunger and cold, a place of nakednesse, sicknesse and sorrow, that wee might earnest|lie desire to bee into that holie Land, where wee shall feast on the Tree of Life, and drinke of that Crystall Ri|uer with pleasures for euermore! SoPsal: 16. 1 long as wee are in this our morta|litie wee must bee still looking till our change come, which being onceIob. 14. 14 made wee shall neuer change anie more: Note O then the sweetnesse of the

Crowne shall for euer allay the sowe|nesse of the Crosse.


The sicke Man.
Mine heart is wonderfullie raui|shed with such purpose: I finde my Soule silent within mee, that it may hearken and giue good heede to that which ye say: Blessed be he who createth the fruite of the lips: O Lord,Isa. 57. 19. come  let thy Spirite take house|roume into mine heart.
Now let vs come to our purpose againe: So farre as I can obserue your minde is that we all shall know one another in Heauen, but without regard to anie carnall consideration whether they were our Father o Mother, or our Sister?


The Pastour.
It is euen so: Noet For if any parti|cular respect should be had to any it should be of a man to his wife, or a wife to her husband, who must leaue both father  mother and cleaue vnto another for to become one flesh: Yet

so it is that in Heauen, there shalbe no more particular respect betweene them, than these whom they had neuer seene before: The Lord hath made this plaine: The Saducees who scorned the Resurrection, hauing told Christ y^t there had beene seuen bre|thren in Israel, which all had married one wife one after another, and that last of all, the woman died also: Now said they, In the ResurrectionLuk. 20. 33 whose wife of them shall shee bee?
Iesus answered, and saide, Thevers. 34. children of this world marie, and are giuen in marriage: But they that shallvers. 35. bee accounted worthie to obtaine that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marrie, nor are giuen in marriage: Neither can they die anievers. 36. more, for they are equall vnto the An|gels, and are the Children of God, bee|ing the Children of the Resurrection: Note Certainelie at that day none of these seuen brethren will claime any more acquaintance vnto that wo|man,

than vnto her whom they had neuer seene before that day.
Note What created thing can allure the eyes of y^e creature, where the Crea|torPsal. 73. 25 is visiblie seene as hee is? Whom haue I in Heauen but thee? said, the Psalmist: Note As the Sunne by his beames at his first rising darkneth all the glorious stars, of light so y^t they seeme to flie away from his presence quite out of the heauens: So shall the loue of God himslfe like a grea|ter Light darken and dazle all other desires whatsoeuer: No by-respects shall bee able to hinder vs to haue ou eye to the maine: Wee shall loath all thinges that we may feast on his fac wherein is fulnesse of joye.Psal. 16. 11


The sicke Man.
I desire Sir to know of you whe|ther or not there shall bee degrees of Glorie in the Heauens, or if all shall bee alike in honour.


The Pastour.
The most part are of that opinion

that there shall bee diuerse degrees: their opinion is founded vpon these1 Cor. 15. 41 words, There is one glorie of the Sun, and another of the Moone, and ano|ther glorie of the Starres: For one starvers. 42. differeth from another star in glory: So also is the Resurrection of the dead, it is sowen in corruption, it is raised in in|corruption: Note Some of the Learned who esteeme that there shall bee di|uerse degrees of glorie in Heauen, think that no such thing is intended in these wordes, but onelie as one Starre differeth from another in glo|rie, so shall the bodie after the Re|surrection differ farre in glorie from the estate wherein it was in this life: according to this it is said, It is sowen in corruption, it is raised in glorie, for to declare the different estate of the godly heere and heereafter.
Note For this assertion concerning degrees of glorie this seemeth to bee most cleare, which is said by Christ to his Apostles: Behold, saide Peter,

wee haue forsaken all and followed thee,Matth. 19. 27 What shall wee haue therefore? And Iesus said vnto them, Verilie I say vnto you, that yee which haue followed mee, in the regeneration when the Sonne of man shall sit on the Throne of his Glory yee shall also sit vpon twelue Thrones, judging the twelue Tribes of Israel.


The sicke Man.
Before yee proceede I pray you to cleare these words, That yee which haue followed mee in the regeneration when the Sonne of man shall sitte on his Throne, yee also shall sitte vpon twelue Thrones: I vnderstand not well what y^e word Regeneration signifieth there To follow Christ in the regeneration what can that bee?


The Pastour.
These wordes bee diuerslie read Some reade them this way, Yee who haue followed mee in the regeneration: Others reade them, after this mane joyning there-with the following words, In the regeneration when the

Sonne of man shall sitte on his Throne, yee also shall sitte: If the words be so joyned, Yee who haue followed mee in the regeneration, , the word Regeneration is taken as the most Learned esteeme for the pre|ching of the Gospel, which Christ brought into the world, whereby a new creation or regeneration of mens heartes and Soules hath beene made in the world: So to follow Christ in the Regeneration is to embrace his Gospel whereby we are regenerate.
Note But in the opinion of the most part  Regeneration heere is rather to be joyned with the words following after this manner, In the regeneration they shal sit vpon Thrones, according to that In regeneration, is as if he had said, In renovatione mun|di vel post renovationem mundi in al|ter seculo, That is, In the renewing or after the renewing of the World: Indeede regeneration here seemeth hieflie to signifie the Resurrection

and restoring of our bodies.


The sicke Man.
It would appeare by that saying of Christ in S. Matthew, that the A|postles shall sit vpon twelue Thrones in greater dignitie than anie others.


The Pastour.
It would seeme so to be: As for Moses, Enos, and Elias, and so many worthie Prophets most glorious in|strume~ts of Gods grace in this world it would seeme that their glorie there should bee greater than that of common persons: Manie of themDan. 12. 2 that sleepe in the dust of the earth shall awake: And they that bee wise shallvers. 3. shine as the brightnesse of the firma|ment, and they that turne many to righteousnesse, as the starres for euer and euer.


The sicke Man.
That  as much is said as well of all the Faithfull as of Prophets  Prea|chers: the~ shall the righteous shine forthMatth. 13 43 as the Sunne in the Kingdome of their

Father: Behold, how all the Righ|teous shall shine foorth as the Sunne: Likewise, Deborah in her song said Let them that loue the Lord, bee as theIudg. 5. 31 Sunne when hee goeth foorth in his might: By this it would seeme that seeing they all shall bee like Sunnes that their glorie shall bee equall.
Note Moreouer, let mee reason as I (when I was a Scholler) haue heard reason in the Schooles, wee are not saued by anie worth that is in our selues, but onelie by the righteousnes of Christ Iesus: Now for to be saued, a man by Faith must apply vnto his soule the whole righteousnes of Christ, for Christs righteousnesse diuided cannot saue: Seeing then I a poore Crafts-man or labourer b my Faith receiue the whole righteousnesse, I re|ceiue as much as Moses, or Elias, Peter, Iames, and Iohn,  so seeing that Righteousnesse is the onelie meritorie cause, I hauing it all by im|putation, muste also receiue the

glorie in as great a measure as they: For what can they haue, except that righteousnesse, which can deseiue at Gods had any thing that is Eternal? Though a man should giue his bo|die to bee burnt for the cause of Christ, hee doeth nothing but that which hee is oblished to doe: By this then it would seeme that seeing by the on lie righteousnes of Christ eternall happinesse is merited, and that all that haue Faith, must apply vnto themselues that whole righte|ousnesse without any diuision, that whosoeuer hath Faith to bee saued, shall receiue as great a degree of glo|rie as any of the Apostles: Other|wise if ye make difference, ye would seeme to attribute some part of hea|uens glorie to the worth of mans doings or suffrings.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir the mtter is full of difficulty, many things would seeme to make for that opinion: Particu|larlie

the Parable of the Talents, for to him that had gained but two Talents with his two, as well as to him who had gained fiue with his fiue, shalbe said, Intra in gaudium Domini, En|terMatth. 25. 23 into thy Masters joye: To all was said alike, Enter into joye: Not thou enter into the greatest joye with thy tenne Talents, and thou into a lower Chamber with thy foure Talents.
Note Indeede the arguments are both strong, for, and against both the o|pinions; yea, so strong that they made a verie learned man after rea|soning to and fro, to say,
Vtramque sententiam esse pro|babilem,Martyr.  habere argumen|ta ex Scripturis: Neutram ta|men ex Scripturis certo confir|mari posse.
That is, Both the opinions are pro|bable and haue argumentes out of Scriptures, but by no argument out of Scriptures can it bee certainelie prouen that there shall bee degrees

of glorie in a greater measure in some than in others. And there|fore, that learned man seeing the matter so vrged with most forcible arguments, leaueth it vndiscussed, as beeing a thing the knowledge whereof is not absolutelie necessare for Saluation: Note There bee manie deepes in Scriptures where the gros|sest Elephants must swimme: Things absolutelie necessarie for Saluati|on, are into the plaine shallow foords of the Gospel, where the litle Lambes of Christ may wade ouer for to en|ter into Canaan: So long as wee are heere, wee know but in part: Mul|ta sunt reservanda futurae scholae: Note There be many things here where|of wee must leaue off the searching out, till from these little Classicke Schooles below wee passe Master into Gods celestiall Vniuersitie aboue: Note It is great wisedome for man to learne heere, Sapere adsobrietatem, To bee sober in his search.



The sicke Man.
I thanke GOD for this well im|ployed time: Oh, that all my words had beene from my youth concer|ning such spirituall purposes: Alas, for euill spent yeares: Oh, that yong men would learne in time to spend well their golden houres: Note Happie is hee who weareth out the short time of this sinfull life at the sincere seruice of his God: My Soule now with the pinched forlorne is retur|ning home to the good fare of my Fathers house. Haue yee yet any more to say concerning the thinges that are aboue?


The Pastour.
If ye would haue a short descrip|tion of all these things, take it vp in these few words, Eye hath not seene,1 Cor. 2. 9 nor eare heard, neither haue entered in|to the heart of man the things which God hath prepared for them that loue him.
Note No man can so imagine of such

joye, pleasure, and contentment to bee there, but the thing it selfe shall bee manie stages aboue all humane imaginations: It shall bee our wise|dome to imagine that they cannot bee imagined.
Note When I thinke of that euerlasting and exceeding weight of glorie which Cor. 4. 7 passeth all vnderstanding, my medi|tation is dazeled, and my tongue is tacked, the one not beeing able to conceiue, nor the other to describe these thinges, which eye neuer saw, eare neuer heard, and which could neuer enter into the heart of man.
Note This is the godlie mans non vl|tra, his outmost bounds: There is no created capacitie on earth which can conceiue an euerlasting and excee|ding weight of glorie.
The greatnesse of this glorie put|teth mee to silence: Note Sight, and Sense, Feeling and Fruition shall one day teach vs that which now eye can not see, nor care heare, nor heart con|ceiue:

So soone as we shall see God as hee is, wee shall know him, and his1 Ich. 3. 2. glorie, as wee are knowne: Then shal we see with our eyes, that which now wee belieue with Faith, which is the substance of thinges hoped for,Heb. 11. 1  a demonstration or euidence of things not sene: So lo~g as we are here in this muddie mortalitie, we liue in a valey of teares, where wee are forced to hange downe our heades, and hangePsal. 137. 2 vp our Harpes, as beeing captiues in Babel: Aboue are the comfortes of Syon, where joyes afresh are infinit|lie redoubled.
Now Sir, according to your de|sire I haue spoken at large of this worldes vanitie, and also of the last judgement, and of Heauens glorie, and of Hells horrour: thinke ye that this discourse hath made any motion in your heart, for to make you striue with a stronger straine, to draw nee|rer vnto your God?



The sicke Man.
I thank God from mine heart that mine heart is in another temper and tune, than when yee came first vn|to mee: God by his Spirit in your words, as by a soft  sweete breath hath refreshed my Soule: By Faith my spirituall eye I see nowe Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse arising v|ponMal. 4. 2. mine heart with the brightnesse of his beames.
Mine heart now burneth within mee, and panteth with an vnutera|ble longing for a sight of the face of my God: Note Nowe, Lord, drawe the Curtaine that some glimpse of joye may yet more clearlie appeare for the recreating of my wearied Soule: O deare Redeemer, no tong can tell how much poore sinners are beholden vnto Thee, who with a strong Arme hast brought them out of a dry pitte wherein was not a dropZach. 9. 11 of comfort.
O that deepe and darke dungeon

of sinne that I haue beene into! O these blessed beames which my Soule fealeth comming from his countenance! O the Light of that Face which putteth more joye intoPsal. . 7. mine heart, than all the worlde can haue when their Wheat, Wine, and Oyle doe most abound.
Note O infinite weight of glorie! O pleasures euer to be spoken of though vn|speakeable! O joyes euer to bee thought of, though none heart bee able to con|ceiue them! O pleasures most pleasant to the eye, though eyes below cannot see them! O, O euerlasting mirth of Musicke! O yee celestiall Tunes, most worthie to bee heard, though eares of flesh cannot heare you! O Tree of LifeReuel. 22. 2. most sweete to the taste, though sinfull tongues may not taste of thee! O Crystall River proceeding out of the Throne of God and the Lambe, when shall my soule drinke of thee with a full Cuppe Note Mine heart like an Hart panteth  brayeth after these water brooks:
Oh, when shall I come and appeare be|forePsal. 42. 2. God O my God, keepe mine heartA prayer vnder some spirituall serise of these bles|sed delights, till perfectlie I enjoye thee into the armes of my Soule, with the contentment of all contentmentes, then which there can bee no greater.


The Pastour.
It is y^e Lord who with the Eye-SalueReuel. 3. 18 of his grace hath enlightened your minde: He hath taken out the mots of temptations which of before did mak the eyes of your Soule so to wa|ter till they become drumlie: Now Sir yee know full well what it is of God and his goodnesse in the Hea|uens, where faithfull Soules shall be fed with the bread of Angels and feasted with the daintiest delicates that are aboue.
Noet The wicked in this world are like blinde men which eate many moats and flees: They eate them because they cannot sec to discerne them: Note All the knowledge of the wicked is but 

carkase and carion of knowledge: To know God  his Son Christ  him crucified, is the verie marrow  ker|nell of true happinesse: Note A Soule whose eyes y^e Lord hath enlightned with grace, can no more rest off its God, than an element out of its own place: It may well bee detained  with-holden from its place by some stronger power, but no power can make it to rest, till it be there where God hath appointed it to rest.
Your Soule now Sir, is drawing neere vnto its Rest: The neerer  bee vnto it, let your motion towards it bee the swifter: Note In this, Grace is like Nature, swiftest at the end of the motion which tendeth vnto rest.
Vp still with your heart,  rejoyce in your God Note Happie are yee who now are flitting from this worlde wherein the sillie Soule as a Ball in a Tenice is tossed from wall to wall,  scourged with the Racket of diuerse

temptations, which by course one after another are readie to catch it at euerie rebound.
Note Let your Soule now altogether rejoyce in your Sauiour: That is the only joye which shal neuer be taken from vs: All other joyes are but li flying moats in the aire, toyle and toyes, toylesome toyes, For euen inProu. 14. 13. laughing the heart is sorrowfull, and the end of that mirth is heauinesse.


The sicke Man.
Blessed bee my Lord for euer: I finde now the beginning of these joyes, which passe all vnderstanding My Spirit hath receiued y^e earnest of immortalitie: Note I finde now my Soule in the kindlie temper of a spirituall constitution, which as I am fullie perswaded shall neuer bee troubled with anie moodie mixture of di|stempered mortalitie, if once this Battell were ended: O the blessed beames of that righteous Sun whichMal. 4. 2. shine so brightlie vpon my Soule

They shall neuer be intercepted by any earthlie interposition of sinfull shadows: Note Hence foorth nothing shall bee able for euer to et God  my Soule at oddes: O now nothing shall bee able to affright my Soule any more with dreadfull distempers! to God alone belongeth the glorie.
Well may I say, If the Lord had notPsal. 94. 17 helped mee, it had not failed but my Soule should haue beene put to silence.
Note I esteeme all the joyes which I feele to be a Cluster of Canaan which my faith lik a trustie Spy hath broght vnto mee, that thereby I may know the goodnesse of that Land: But be|cause I cannot tell what assaults my Soule may yet suffer, for I finde my former joyes a little ouerclouded: I pray you Sir to conceiue a prayer to God for mee, that the assurance of his pardons may more and more be sealed vp into mine heart that death bee not vnto mee as a king of feare, but rather as a passage and an entrie

to life eternall: Make earnest re|queast for mee, that I die not as the wicked, whose hope doeth perish with their breath, hauing their Soules goared with sinne the sting of1 Cor. 15. 56 Death.
O Lord, bring mee an Out. lawA prayer by Nature, within the bounds of thy Sheep-folde: Fill nowe my Soule with spirituall and heauenlie inspi|rations: I haue alas, the most parte of my life, beene like roustie yron, vnfitte for anie worke: It hath fared with mee as with the Eye which see|ing other thinges, seeth not it selfe nor the face wherein it is fixed: In knowing other things I haue remai|ned ignorant of my selfe, a great stranger at home into mine own bosome, from my youth, my Soule sicke of  spirituall dropsie did swell in a con|ceit of its owne excellencie: Now Lord, wound this pride of life with|in mine heart, wound it in the head and craze it in the braine: Separate

all iniquitie from mee that nothing wherewith thy Spirit may bee grie|ued, may harbour in mine heart: Vpon this earth there hath beene none hoe with my desires, which lik y^e sore crauing Horse-Leach culd say nothing but Giue, giue: Now, Lord, make my Soule to loath that which I haue too much loued, prepare my Soule, emptie it of all that is euill before it come before thy Face, wherein is fulnesse of joy for all SaintsPsal. 16. 1 and Angels which are aboue.
Now, Lord, after y^t thou hast clean|sed mee by the fierie tryall by bea|ting and battering mine hard heart, let the workman-ship of thine holie hands be to refine me more  more till I become perfectlie a newe crea|ture: O powre this heart into the calmes of thy compassions, that therein as in a mould it may receiue thy liuelie Image: Weede out of mine hearte all carnall and earthlie desires.



The Pastour.
I blesse the Lord, for such wor|king of his Spirit: According to your desire wee shall bend our knees to God in prayer: While wee are praying, lift vp your heart vnto God and pray with your Spirit: Set now all your affections in bensell before the Lord: Let vs all humble our selues heere before our Maker.


A Prayer for the sicke Man.
_O LORD, prepare our heartes to prayer: Let vs not be rash with our mouth, nor hastie with our heart to vtter any thing before Thee.
O glorious GOD, and all mer|cifull

Father, which art the true Phy|sicion both of Soule and bodie; we must humblie bend our knees before Thee intreating thee to be with thy seruant heere whom thou hast now laide into this bedde of languishing: Let not his sinnes whereof hee hath beene guiltie from his youth vp, prouok thy wrath any more against him: Knit them all in a bundle, and cast them all behind thy mercifull back, burie them al into the bottomlesse sea of thy compassions, that they neither bee able to accuse him any more in this worlde, nor yet to condemne him in the world to come.Isa. 1. 18.
Though his sinnes, LORD, were like Scarlet and Crimsin, there is vertue into the Blood of thy Lambe to make them white like woole, and whiter than the Snow For thy Sonnes sake remoue all his transgressions asPsal. 103.  12 farfro~ him as the East is from the west.
Hell, LORD,  Destruction are be|fore thee, how much more the hearts

of the Sonnes of men? Thine All seeing Eye, pryes most clearelie into the in-most closet of mans heart: Look with the Eye of thy compassions within the Doores of this wearied heart of thy Seruant: Looke in and proclaime mercie and pardon vnto his sillie Soule.
Let him know that neither Death nor Life shalbe able to separate him from thy Loue: O LORD, assist him and stand fast by him in this houre Desert him not in his greatest  last agonie: Let thy Spirit possesse him so fullie that there be none entrie or roume for Satans temptations: whe~ the Temper is bufiest let thy Spirite bee strongest: Arme him with all Pieces against the last conflict of this bloodie battell: Honour him with the Lawrels of victorie: Let thy strength be made perfect in his greatest weak nesse: Doe the turne by thine owne force, and take all the glorie to thy selfe.
By the vertue of thy Christ cru|cifie into him the olde Man and his vvorkes: Make him to die into him, that hee may liue to Thee, vvho toPhilip. 1. 21 all the Faithfull is aduantage both in life and death: Hee is now, LORD, walking betweene thy Mercie and thy Iustice through many-tempta|tions: Gouerne thou his steppes vvith such vvisedome, that the feare of Iustice may keepe him from pre|sumption, and the hope of mercie may preuent despaire: Increase his patience vvith his paine Sanctifie his Sickenesse, make it as Bellowes to thy graces, that thereby they may be kindled and blowne vp to a grea|ter flame.
Enamour him vvith the loue of thy goodnesse: Powre in the oyle of thy mercie into his bruissed hearte, which hath bene filled with mourn|full groanes.
And seeing now thou art calling him to repetitions, to see vvhat hee

hath profited in thy Schoole, cast into his rememberance all the good things that hitherto hee hath heard or meditate for to comfort this houre Bee strong in him now in this time of tryall: Applye vnto his wounds the Balme of Gilead: Hee is weake and therefore, O LORD, forbeae him in thy mercie.
O pittie this wounded man as did that Samaritane: Powre Oyle intoLuk. 10. 33 his wounds, bind them vp, and take him to thine Inne: For thy mercies sake remember him: Forthy Sonnes sake pittie him: For thy promise sake forget him not: Free his Soule f the maze of all worldlie cares: Inspite into him the life of grace with a most fresh vigout and feruent heate of zeale to thy Glorie: Hee, LORD in his most piercing paines knoweth not what to doe, but his eyes are on Thee: In thine handes is both Life and Death: Thou bringest to the Graue, and bringest backe againe.
In thy greate mercie, O LORD,Psal. 41. 3 make all his bedde in his sicknesse, make his bedde to be a Schoole vnto him, wherein hee may not onelie learne the hudgnesse of his owne miserie, but also the greatnes of thy mer|cie: Let neither Death fright him, nor the Graue grieue him: Let him knowe that Death is but a sleepe for the friendes of Christ, and the GraueIoh. 11. 11 a bedde for the resting of their wea|ried bones: Let not the weight ofIsa. 57. 2. mortalitie beare downe his Spirite fro~ minding the things which are aboueCol. 3. 1. Make him content to quite gladlie all earthlie pleasures and content|ments for to goe  dwell with Thee his GOD in immortalitie.
Let neither the sweetnesse of the Figge, nor the grapes of the Vine, nor the fatnesse of the O liue hinder his desire to reigne in heauen: Against the feare of death comfort him with hope of the glorious Resurrection: As|sure his Soule though his bodie goe

to bee eaten of the wormes, that hee in that bodie againe shall see his Redee|mer and none other for him: Furnish him with spirituall courage vnto the end: Giue him boldnesse to march without feare thorow the valey ofPsal, 23. 4. death for to come to Thee, yea to run were it thorow Hell for to come to Thee in Heauen.
Tell vnto his Soule that his paines dismay him not, seeing his trauell is to bring foorth eternall life Let thy Iustice seate trouble him no more, seeing Christ hath payed his debts: Let him not bee afraide to come be|fore the Face of his Iudge, seeing the Iudge himselfe is his Brother, who hath both cut  cancelled that hand-writ|ting of the Law, which no flesh was able to performe.
Pittie him, LORD, pittie him, for loe hee is nowe in thine handes looking pittifully vp to Thee for thy mercie: Some of thy setters are yet v|pon him, none can loose him but the

hands which haue bund him: Pittie good LORD, and pardon, set vnto this Soule the seale of thy pardons by the Spirit of adoption: Heale and sweetlie close vp the wounds of his Spirit by the vertue of thy most bles|sed Blood.
This is our confidence, that thou who hast stricken him is able to heale him, and will also doe it, if it bee for thy glorie and his well, if not, Lord, in judgement remember mercie.
If it bee his best that after some dayes sicknesse he depart out of this mortall life, let these paines which hee suffers nowe bee like Ionathans1 Sam. 20. 20 arrowes which were not shot for to urt but to giue warning.
Giue him grace that like an obe|dient Childe hee may as wll kisse thine hand while it beateth as while it blesseth.
If thy decree be come foorth that hee must remoue from this World, assure him of a better place where

pleasures are in greater number th the starres: Teach him by thy Spirit that by death hee shall change a mor|tall habitation, a dungeon of darknes  cage of corruptions for euerlasting T|bernacles, most heauenlie sacred M|sions where constant peace  vnmi joyes remaine: Weane his heart from the loue of all things that are vnder the Sunne: Let the beautie and glo|rie of the Heauens whereof hee hath heard at length this day, drawe the desires of his heart to abide into that Place of pleasures, where there is Light without Darknesse; Mirth with|out Sadnesse, Health without Sicknesse Wealth without want,  Beautie with|out blemish: For the sake, of thy deae Selfe, seale vp into his Soule the assu|rance of thy loue, that in all bol|nesse through the bleeding bowels of Christes compassions hee may come to the Throne of thy grace,  fro~ thence he may enter into glory
O LORD, the comfort, the joye,

and the glorie of Israel. Bee fauou|rable to thy distressed Sainctes dis|persed vpon the Earth: Thy Church here below is like a shippe on the sea: Though it floate aloft, it is fore tossed to and fo with wind and with waue: thou therin seemeth whiles to sleep: Now, LORD, at last awake, in these boisterous blastes: Master, Master, saue vs, for wee perish: Awake, O LORD, and rebuke the winds: Alas, O LORD, thou seemeth now to lowre in thy wrath, by driuing all our peti|tions from Thee with a darke and cloudie countenance, so that these that trust in Thee are cleane dashed out of countenance while they heare the scorninges of the aduersa|ries who nowe waste and hauocke thy Vine.
Arise, O LORD, as a man of war: Awake, as one out of sleepe, and like aPsal. 78. 65 mightie man that shouteth by reason of Wine: Smite thou all the enemies in the hinder partes, and put them to

a perpetuall reproach: Take the Cud|gell into thine hand and stricke a way these Dogges which follow Thee but for crustes: Let vs neuer bee colde or carelesse in the distresse of others, but for to assure vs that wee are all members of one Bodie, giue vs this pledge of mourning with these that mourne: Make vs all to bee grieued for the affliction of Ioseph.
Blesse our gracious SOVERAIGNEAmos. 6. 6 with the Spirit of Wisedome and of Grace, Rescue Him from all dan|gers both bodilie  ghostlie: Thogh Hee bee a Prince among men, yet Hee is thy Subject: Thou who by Grace hast made Him to reigne ouer thy people on earth, at the end of his appointed time when the dayes of His Reigne shall bee happilie fi|nished, exalt Him highlie in the hea|nens among thy Sainctes and An|gels: So long as Hee is heere, let Him know that it standeth Him fast in hand to bee an Hornager vnto Thee:

Direct him so in all His cariage that His whole life may bee to all His Sub|jects an holy patronage of good example: Let Him neuer retract nor repeale that vow which Hee made at His Corona|tion for to maintaine the puritie of thy Gospel, and for to bee a louing Father vnto thy people: Cloth his enemies withPsal. 132. 18 shame, but vpon Himselfe make His Crowne to flourish.
Blesse His Royall Match: Make Her to striue  stretch all the powers of Her Soule by prayer in searching the sincere knowledge of thy truth LORD, in Her carefull search make Her to say at last with the Spouse, I haue found him whom my Soule loueth,Psal. 1. 6 I will not let him goe: Thou, LORD, louest Trueth in the inward partes, and therefore, so sanctifie Her Hearte, that She may day lie thriue in the po|wer of Godlinesse: Though all out|ward meanes should faile Her, bee Thou to Her in stead of all meanes, aboundantlie supplying Her with

the power and presence of thy Spi|rit: Leuell, LORD Her Heart directlie to the loue of Christ  of him crucified, that by a true  liuelie Faith in him Shee may shine among the Sainctes in Heauen like one who in a great measure hath beene receiued in Grace on earth: Let thy Preastes beePsal. 132. 9 cloathed with righteousnesse.
Blesse all our Nobles, mak them truelie noble, not like Ephraim, whose righteousnesse was like the mor|ningHos. 6 1. dew: Let them neuer for feede or fauour slinke or shrinke back from the puritie of thy Gospel established in this Land: Giue vnto vs all cou|rage for the Trueth, that wee may bee bold to resist euen vnto the blood not beeing like these who at the first in an hote and hastie zeale promise faire with Peter, but anone at the first womanlie temptation start aside like deceitfull bowes: Suffer no sinne to goe current with vs without check: Let vs neuer follow the sway

of tymes, with sewed Cushions vn|der our Elbowes.
LORD, abide with vs this night: As thou hast drawne the night Cur|taine of darknesse vpon the face of the earth, so bee thou a pillar of the cloude betweene vs and our enemies: Hide our soules from Sathans temp|tations, as by the cloudie pillar thou hid the Israelites from the Egyptians: Make vs this night to sleepe softlie and soundlie in thine Armes, that our bodies beeing refreshed with sleepe, may bee the better enabled to morrow for to sette foorth thy Glorie in the work of our Vocation.
LORD, let these our weake prayers come vp before Thee like Pillars of smoke perfumed with theCan. 3. 6. liuelie sauoure of thy Son, To whom with Thee and the Spirit of Grace, bee endlesse Glorie and Dominion for euer.
Now Sir, wee haue recommen|ded you God, to who is stretching out

the Armes of his mercie, readie for to receiue your Soule, into the bosome of his Loue: Make you nowe readie for him, for in all appearance ye are not farre from the doores of death: BeePsal. 107. 18 vigilant in prayer, lest Satan yet put in his leauen into the Spirites dough, and so by sowring it, make it distast|full to the Lord: By a little droppe of filth the pure webbe of the Spirit will become a menstruous cloath.

The sicke Man.
The lost Sheepe is found: I giue you most heartie thankes for that feruent prayer: I pray God that it be heard in the Heauen, as Solomon pra|yed for these y^t prayed in the Temple which he had builded, saying, ThenKin. 8. 34 heare thou in Heauen: Lord, graunt that these comforts and contentments bee not deceiuable feelinges and fla|shings of joye: O Lord, let not the Spirit of Grace in this new birth re|coyle, as once Zarah in Thamars wombe.

Seeing God hath furnished me with a new spirituall strength. I wish that I culd imploy it well for y^e short space that I haue to liue among mortall wightes in this region of corruption.A prayer
O Lord, stirre all the streames of mine affections toward thy selfe: Wound, ward, weaken,  wasle all my delightfull and darling sinnes, that my whole joye may rest on Thee: command  confine all my thoghts to thy selfe, that by Faith my Soule may seaze and lay hold on the merits of Christ the celestiall Pearles of price: Disburthen my soule of euerie weight that hangeth so fast on; lest that thereby it should bee swayed away from Thee.
I finde mine hearte stirred with a feruent desire to powre out it selfe in prayer before God: I pray you all that sit by, to joyne your affecti|ons with mine into this worke.




The sicke mans Prayer for himselfe.
O LORD, the Father of mercies, and GOD of all Consolation, bee present in thy great mercie with mee thy vnworthie seruant, into this time of trouble, suffer mee earth and ashes to speake with thy mercie: In the mul|titude of thy compassions, blot out my transgressions: wash me throgh|lie from mine iniquitie, and cleanse mee from my sinnes, where by the seed of thy grace within mine heart hath beene choaked and starued.
Let the depth of thy mercy swallow vp the deepes of my miserie: Bridle my sinnes and spurre forward thy graces within mee: Set all mine affections on foote, that they may follow after Thee: Put a fairer flame into my smo|king slaxe, and more strength into

this bruisedreede, that the bones whichPsal. 51. 8 thou hast broken may reoyce.
O Lord, with thine eye salue cleanseReuel. 3. 18 and open the eyes of my poore Soule, that I beholding these things that are aboue, may gladlie desire to be dissolued for to be there with my Lord, and Sauiour: Lord, let thy Spirit carrie still a strong hand ouer me: Furnish mee with such measure of thy graces whereby I may patiently waite vpon thy will: Except that by a speciall fauour thou vphold mee, I shall neuer bee able to secure my feete in so slipperie ground: While I haue beene hearing most glorious speaches of the Heauens, the sha|dowes of earthlie things haue ecclip|sed my minde like a Moorie: O make such shadowes to flie away, that the horizon of my spirituall sight beeing cleared, I may in some measure see thy backe partes, whereby my Soule may bee enlightened like the face of Moses: Though often I haue beene

deafe at thy preachinges, bee not thou dumbe at my prayers: O Fa|ther of mercies, listen vnto the groanes of my drooping spirite assailed with diuerse temptations: Heare the sighes and crouding of thine owne Turtle Doue.
O LORD, leade mee into the Land of vprightnesse, and make thy grace to seat it selfe into mine heart Store my memorie with these good lessons which I haue heard preached in mine health: Let mee neuer o|uer-pryze anie good thing that is within my selfe: Though Iames and Iohn bragged that they were able toMatth. 21. 22 drinke of thy cuppe, scarce could they abide to see Thee drinke it: O Lord, make mee euer to vnder-value thy greatest worth, that thorow the va|ley of humilitte I may come to these euer lasting exaltations.
Come LORD, for loe thy ser|uant commeth: I am willing, Lord, helpe my vnwillingnesse: If it bee

thy will to loose me out of this sin|full prison, when I shall leaue this earth to earth, appoint thine Angels to carrie my Soule vnto Abrahams bosome, where I may sing with thy Saincts Halleluiah for euer: Come, Lord, now and seeke thy lost groate Fetch home vpo~ thy Shoulders this wandering Sheepe, and make all the Heauens to rejoyce: Despise not that which in the creation thou did|dest ennoble with thy liknesse: Giue mee a warrand and a token to bee ad|mitted within the Gates of thine euerla|sting Tabernacles: Till I come there make my Soule to burne still in holie feelings.
Lord, heare mee for the deare sake of thy Sonne to whom with Thee and the Spirit of grace (as it is most due) wee render all praise, glorie, and do|minion for euer, AMEN.

The Pastour.
Blessed be God, Sir, who maketh his Spirit to worke so powerfullie

within you: Wee are all greatlie re|freshed with your comforts: It hath beene a great joye to vs all to heare that most sweete  feruent prayer, full of the groanes of the Spirit of Iesus:
Note In you haue wee seene the trueth of that Text, The Spirit helpethRom, 8. 26 our infirmities, for wee know not what wee should pray for as wee ought: But the Spirite it selfe maketh intercession for vs with groanings which cannot bee vttered: I am assured that that same Spirite hath made intercession for you with groaninges in that prayer which now yee haue vttered.
And againe, while I consider in what weakenesse and faintnesse I found you at the first I wonder at such a vigour of Spirit which I pet|ceiue now to be into you: Note True|lie the word of God is most true God giueth power to the faint,  to themIsa. 40. 2. that haue no might hee increaseth strength: Euen the Youths shall faint and bee wearie, and the young men shall

vtterlie fall: But they that waite v|pon the Lord, renewe their strength: They shall mount vp with winges as Eagles.
Note Many in their afflictions either desparatelie rage, or weaklie wale: But God in great mercie hath at last filled you with true Christian cou|rage and comfort in your greatest smart: Hee hath listened to all your desires, beeing moued with that sacred Loue, which alwayes burneth in his bosome: Note His Grace like the Notherne Pole, hath giuen you aime and direction whether to bend your course.
Now the darkenesse of the night beginneth to ouer-cloud the earth: By Gods grace I shall returne in the Morning so soone as the birdes shall begin to chirpe at the spring of day.
Note Because while the spirit of man is idle, it weareth and wasteth it selfe away with barren and lumpish melan|cholie: While yee shall awake, cause

reade Scripture vnto you, and particularlie these places, Psalme 27. Psalme 84. Psalme 87. 1. Co|rinthians 15. 2. Corinthians 12. Re|uelation 21. Reuelation 22. His Grace bee you.





THE SEVENTH DAYES Conference.

The sicke Mans last wordes to his Pastour, Friendes, Wife, and Children.


The Pastour.
THE Lord blesse you Sir: According to my promise yester-night I am come a|gaine earlie: All this night mine heart hath earned to knowe of your estate: How haue yee passed this night?


The sicke Man.
O the mercie of my God towards mee, that hath moued you to take such paines for mee an vnworthie worme: By your most holy Sermons

yee haue furnished and supplied my minde with store of holie and hea|uenlie meditations: Ye haue beene both a Paul for to plant mee in the true Faith, and an Apollos for to water mee: Christ the Master buil|der by the Finger of his Spirit hath laide the foundation of his Temple within mine heart: Hee hath made choise of you, a skilefull Worke|man to aduance the worke, till in mercie at last hee shall roofe his gra|ces in mee with celestiall Glorie: By the word of God yee haue comfor|ted mee, that is onelie the word of comfort: Note Of all other words were they neuer so eloquent, I will say with a Father, In a thousand talents of worldlie wordes a man shall hardlie finde an hundreth pence of spirituall  heauenlie wisedome: This life is like the Haw thorne, more pricking than pleasant: Ye haue rauished my heart with desire of immortalitie aboue: I blesse God Sir that euer I saw you



The Pastour.
All these good things are to bee ascribed to the working of GODS Spirit: All the juice and sappe where|by the branches spring and liue, ensueth and riseth from the roote of the tree: We who are Pastours are but y^e Lords Spouts and Cocks of his Conduits, wher|by his graces are conuoyed vnto the heartes of our hearers: If the Spirit of God mak not a mans Saluation sure, hee will incessantlie reele from one doubt to another, from one temp|tation to another, like a drunken man from wall to wall.
It is good therefore that yee sum|mon your hearte and your glorie to giue praise vnto your God: Let not a thought of your heart absent it selfe from this point of seruice: God must not bee serued by halfes: As for mee: I am but the Lordes weak Instrument for your well: Giue God the glorie.




The sicke Man.
Blesse the Lord, O my Soule,  all thatPsal. 103. 1 is within mee, blesse his holie Name.
I desire now to come with Dauid to my last words.


A speach of the sicke Man. to his Pastour.
First of all, I addresse my speach to you my worthie Pastour: Gods mer|cie in you toward mee hath beene great, for yee haue soundlie vnfol|ded all the intricate difficulties wher|with my Soule hath beene feareful|lie entangled: Yee are one of these that may well say, Wee haue the mind1 Cor. 2. 16 of Christ: God by his Grace haue made you that one of a thousand: youIob. 33. 23 Iona. 1. 1. haue I found to bee like Ionah the sonne of Amittai, that is the sonne of trueth: Happie is that Preacher who is ledde in all trueth.
O the Majestie of that mes|sage: O the wisedome of these that gaine Soules vnto Christ: Wisedome hath said, That hee that winneth soulesProu. 11. 30

is wise: O but my Soule loueth you: Note My loue toward you assureth mee of Gods loue toward mee, for by this wee know that wee are translated1 Ioh. 3. 14 from death to life, because wee loue the Brethren.
I loue you Sir in the dearest blood I haue, for yee haue beene the good instrument of God for my conuersi|on: ye in all my troubles, while mine heart was toucht to the quicke and my Conscience ransackt to the bot|tome, haue beene to mee a Barnab as a sonne of consolations, where with as with splents, ye haue bound mine heart: God in great mercie hath giuen vnto you the tongue of theIsa. 50. 4. Learned, with lippes touched with a coale from his Altar for the relieuingIsa. 6. 6. of my wounded Conscience with words of comfort.
O but that is true, a whole some tongProu. 15. 4 is a tree of life: By the sword of the Word ye haue cut the twisted bonds of my greatest temptations wherein

my Soule lay fast fettered. Mine heart hath beene greatlie rejoyced to heare you resoluing al my doubts and difficulties: O howe beautifulIsa. 52. 7. are the feete of these that bring go tydings! Now I finde that of Solo|monEccles. 12.  to bee true, The word of the wi are as goads and as nailes fastened by the Masters of assemblies, which are giuen from one Shepheard: Christ that great Shepheard of the flocke  with your words, as with goades  nailes so fastened me to himselfe that Death it selfe shall not bee able to seuer vs: Note Yee haue wonderfullCant. 7. 8 restored my sicke Soule with flagon of the most sweete juice of the cluster of wine: Ye haue bound vp my bro ken joynts with the spirituall splen of diuine comforts.
Note O in what woefull plight, O in what seas of gall was I plunged when yee came first vnto mee! there was nothing sound into my Soule All was full of botches, boiles and pu|trifyingIsa. 1. 6.

sores: But yee like a cunning Surgeon in curing tumours haue broght the matter to an ead and at last with great skill ye haue launced the boiles of my corruptions, whereof nowe God in mercie hath made mee free. I tremble to remember these feare|full temptations wherewith yee found mee at the first beset and be|sieged: Note These were indeede such temptations as Bernard called.
Terribilia de fide, horribilia deBernard. divinitate.
Note Sathan hath assaulted mee both in a blacke shape and into an Angel of light: By your sweete comforts my Soule hath beene reuiued like that dead man that liued by touching2 Kin. 13. 21 the bones of Elisha: Yee haue fed my Soule with the doctrine of your breastes bigge as Towers: Yee haueCant. 8. 10 strengthened and sinewed my weake Soule with comfortable words wo|uen and wrought out of a feeling heart by the strength of holy medi|tations.
And now happie are yee who haue beene the instrument of my conuer|sion: I hope to bee one day one of these that shall stand at your backe,Isa. 8. 18. when yee shall say to your Master Christ, Behold, heere I am, and the children that God hath giuen mee.
Account me Sir one of these Ta|lents that yee haue gained with the Talent of your gift: Your wordes haue stricken home vnto mine heart with powerfull and particular ap|plications of comforts, whereby my disaffected Soule hath beene wooed and wone vnto the loue of my Sa|uiour Iesus: account me therefore a seale of your Ministerie: Ye know bet|ter than I what God hath promised to these that with a readie minde shal1. Pet, 5. 2 conuert a sinner from his euill ways, such (as God himselfe hath promi|sed) shall bee like the starres in the Firmament for euer: From yourDan. 12. 3 lips is come the sweetest balme that euer dropt from the penne of God vpon

the leaues of the Booke of life. Blessed bee my God, who by his good Spi|rit into your mouth hath breathed most sweete comfortes into my Soule: Note Woe to all Doctours of di|spaire: Blessed bee your lips where|inMal. 2. 7. God hath placed the preseruation of knowledge: Your tongue to mee hath beene like a siluer watch bell to rouse and waken vp the gifts of God within my Soule: God by his words in your mouth declaring vnto manIob. 33. 23 his righteousnesse, hath blowne vp hisIsa. 42. 3. Graces which were weake into mine heart like a smoking flaxe, or a sparkle of fire vnder greene wood: Blessed bee my God, who by your diuine in|structions hath made mee to bee ac|quainted with himselfe: Your com|forts hath beene cordials and lenitifes to the ranking and festered sores of my Soule: To God bee glorie, who hath made you moste cunning of that great Arte of sauing sinners.
O my deare Pastor, by the refreshing

Balme of your consolations ye haue infinitly indeered my soule, you to gsIob. 33. 23 one of a thousand: Note I am assured that God hath made you faithfull with Ieremie, for to take foorth the preciouIer. 15. 19 from the vile.
Nowe my God, with whom IA prayer thinke to bee shortlie, bee with you in your Ministerie,  make you his faithfull seruant vnto death, that ye may bee a worthie wooer for Christ, for to bring home manie straggling sinners vnto him the blessed Bride|groome of our Soules.
Farewell now my faithfull Pastour: My Soule now is glad to flitte from this house of clay: Note As for my bodie it must goe to the graue where for a space it shall bee confined but not confounded, for I looke assuredlie for the day of the Resurrection.
O Lord, seale vp in my ConscienceA prayer the discharge of all my sinnes, that I may gladlie lay downe this Tabernacle.





The Pastour.
Mine heart rejoyceth with an ex|ceeding great joy to reape such fruits of my labours: But this know, that what good yee haue by mee, it is not from mee, but from him that sent me: * It is God that giueth life  SouleRom. 1. 16 vnto the Word that is powerfull to Saluation.
Paul may plant and Apollos may1 Cor 3. 7 water, but it is God who giueth the in|crease: Note The best of all Preachers, are but like Iohn the Baptist, the voyceLuk. 3. 4. of a Cryer, who could not make all the crooked straight, nor the rough plaine.
If any good bee conuoyed vnto your Soule by mee, I am but the In|strument or Channell wherethorow the Spirit of Iesus hath made his Graces to flow vnto you: To Him alone belongeth the Glorie and the Thankes: Note It is not humane elo|quence which conuerceth Soules: One word quickened and enliued

with his Spirit, is more fruitfull than all the glorious eare-pleasing pompe of mans wordes, which like Agrippa and Bernice are full of phantasie: AllAct. 25. 2 the good that man can doe either by word or worke is like the honie in the combe gathered out of many flowers: But the euill is lik the Spid|ders webbe drawne out of our owne bowels.
The griefes of your heart Sir haue bene very great, but now ye are mer|cifullie comforted: Note Manie in this world plod on from sin to sin march|ing merrilie  feareleslie towards y^e plagues of Hell: But O, how much are yee beholden vnto your GOD, who in all your wearisome mazes hath supported and sinewed your Soule by his sauing Grace.
Because Sir there be here diuerse of your Friendes and other acquain|tance vnto whom it may be ye wold desire to speake, I giue place to them that now they may learne something

of you: Note The last words of a godlie man are verie forcible vnto the liuing: And therefore Sir, while ye haue breath, spend your short time vpon this, that by your good counsell yee may doe good to these that are for to liue after you: That once done commit your Soule to God as a faithful Creator:1 Pet. 4. 19 He himselfe hath said, I will not leaue thee, neither will I forsake thee.


A speach of the sicke Man. to his Friendes.
And now yee my trustie Friends whose age God hath crowned with ripenesse of judgement, I turne my selfe to you: But first of all, let mee speak vnto you my spiritual  speci|al Friend, who in my deepest plunge while I was fast sticking into the myrie clay, did vphold me with your com|forts: Note Your counsell to sende for my Pastour hath prouen a speciall salue for my sore: God by that man of whom yee spake hath now healed my Soule of all its harmes.

O blessed be that vnspeakable mercy of my God: Note Though Sathan had bereaued mee of my puritie he could not bereaue my God of his pittie: Note The Lord of light hath brought my Soule out of that long and loath|somePsal. 23. 4. night which is in the valley of the shadow of death, in comparison whereof the most palpable darknesse of Egypt might haue beene esteemed to bee day: O that pleasant Sunne|shine wherewith my Soule is nowe inlightned: O my God, breath moreA prayer  more into my Soule the life of grace.




The spirituall Friend.
Glorie bee to God for his won|derfullA prayer mercies towardes you: The Lord, now set your Soule on wing that swiftlie like an Eagle it may flie vp to its God: Note Many a sore assault haue yee suffered since I spake with you at the first Satan  his tempta|tions with the world  the corrup|tion of Nature had gathered them|selues against you like Gebal, Amon

and Amaleck against Israel: Of themPsal. 118. 12 may yee well say nowe, They com|passed mee about like Bees, they are quenched as the fyre of thornes To Sathan may yee now say, Thou hast thrust sore at mee that I might fall, but the Lord hath helped mee.
When I mette with you first yee were compassed with a chaine of ca|lamities, one linked into another: Note To mee yee appeared to bee han|ging ouer Hell by the slender twined threed of a lifelesse hope: Yee were plunged deeper downe than Iona was, when hee went downe to the bottome of the mountaines, where the weedes were wrapt about his head Now let your Soule say with Ionah,Iona, 2. 9. I will sacrifice vnto thee with the voyce of thankesgiuing, I will pay that that I haue vowed: Saluation is of the Lord.


The sicke Man.
Blesse the Lord, O my Soule, and allPsal. 103. 1 that is within mee blesse his holie Name: Blesse the Lord, O my Soule, and for|get

not all his benefites: Farewell my trustie Friend.
Now as for you mine other friends I turne my selfe to you: Note Hee that is conuerted with Peter should labourLuk. 22. 32 the conuersion of others: Hee whose weaknesse the Lord hath helped should strengthen his brethren.
It is nowe time to take our last good night Heere in your presence, I say, Farewell O world, wherein I haue liued which I haue too much loued: Learneye in time to set your affecti|ons vpon God: None of you can tell if God shall giue you such laiser to re|pent as he hath granted vntome: Note If yee forsake not in time the sweete pleasures of your sins, feare lest at last that that be found true which Abner said to Ioah Knowest thou not that it2 Sam. 2. 26 will bee bitternesse in the latter end.
Note There is no sinne so sweete to man in his life but before his death it shall bee dissweetned and turned into gall and wormewoode within

the bellie of the Conscience.
I speake by experience as one who hath knowne the terrours of the Lord: Note O my deare friendes looke ouer your shulder back to your bygone life, and consider how grieued yee shall bee for the sinnes of your plea|sures when yee shall bee warded into your death beddes, readie to com|peare before the great Iudge of the world: As yee see mee this day, so shall others see you ere it bee long: I haue often beene glad among you: Yee see now by mee what it is of all worldlie oye: Note With a little blast of sickenesse such comfort like chaffe are chassed away: Your time is fast comming: Your Glasse is running my sicknesse cryeth vnto you, Learne of the estate of this your oldeEccles. 11. 3 Friend, to make your selues readie for a|nother world: To mee to day to you to morrow: Where the tree falleth, there shall it lye: Whether the Glut|ton and the Begger are gone, thither

must wee all; that is, either to  hams bosome or to the Deuils Luk. 16. 22 Note The death of one is like a  charging all others to bee readie  flitte and remoue.
Happie, yea, thrise happie is that man who in these  and desperate dayes is not dulde with securitie: Blessd is hee who is for warned, striue to bee forewarned.
Blessed is that man who is eue vpon his watch, hauing his loine girded and his Candle in his handLuk 12. 35 waiting for y^e comming of his Lord. A dew my louing Friendes: Note Seeke in time the friendship of your God Striue to be worthie y^e stile of Abra|ham y^t was called, The friend of God.am. 2. 23.
O my deare Friends let mee now tell you what the Lord hath done to my Soule: Note Hee hath at last beene sensiblie gracious to my poore Soule, which Sathan hath long hunted vp  downe like a Patridge on the : The Deuill like a dogged

Doeg hath sought to sucke out the heart blood of this trembling Turtle: Blessed bee the Lord for euer who hath disappointed him.


The Pastour.
I feare Sir that long speach trou|ble you: Your affection carrieth you aboue your strength: Contract your speach in as few wordes as yee can: What counsell will yee giue to your Spouse heere? It is good that she heare your directions; for I see y^t Gods Spirit is mighty in you.


The sicke Man.
If anie naturall man were heere for to heare mee, hee might wil|linglie thinke that I were Verbosus, a man of manie wordes: Note But alas, that I haue spoke~ so few of this sort: From Morning vntill Euening my tongue in health like the penne of a readie writter was swift to speake of too manie things, whereof now I repent from the bottome of mine heart: If Nature bee so windie in

vaine pratling, should grace want wods in that which may be profita|ble to the hearers?
I care not what carnall men thinke for my manie words: Note I am shortlie for to compeare before him, before who~ mans improbatio~ or approba|tion is of little weight or worth: My strength so long as I can speake, shall bee spended into that which may doe good to these whom I shall leaue behind: Note I shall doe what I can both feelinglie and faithfullie to warne others to flie from the wrath toLuk. 3. 7. come.
Bee not offended I pray you Sir, if I bee free with you: The last mo|tions of Gods Spirit in this mortall life wold be verie charitablie thoght of: I pray you Sir to pardon mine hastie and cankered Nature, if I haue spokn anie thing amisse, whereat yee may take exception,




The Pastour.
The Lord blesse you Sir: Praised

bee his Name who hath touched your lips with a liue coale take~ with aIsa. 6. 6. tonges from off his Altar: The Lord is with you; speak so long or so little as yee please: Glad am I to heare the motions of that Spirit of Grace which is lodged into your heart.
Heere is your Spouse, Sir: Let her heare your last directions.


The sicke mans speach to his Spouse.
As for thee my Spouse, now short|lie thou art for to bee a Widow: I counsell thee that first of all thou marrie thy selfe to Christ, let him be thy spirituall Spouse.
* As for other marriage the word1 Cor. 7. 8. concerning widowes is plaine: It is good for them that they abide so: But if they cannot containe, let them marrie, for it is better to marrie than to burne: Note No marriage, as thou seest, is di|rectlie appointed for Widowes, but for these that cannot containe: O|therwise the Apostles wordes are

true: It is good for them that they abide so: Note If so be that thou marrie, plant not a Thorne where a Vine should grow: Dishonour not the fist bed, and preferre not purse or portion to the worth of the person: If GOD call thee to marriage, see that thou call GOD to thy marriage, if Christ bee at thy marriage, that is, if thou marrie in Christ, thy water shall bee turned into wine, which was Christes first miracle: Note The waterIoh. 2. 11 of wearinesse of trouble and of sor|row which thou hast drunke with mee, shall bee turned into wine of joye, gladnesse, peace, and prosperitie. But if thou marrie not in Christ, but make thy choice by thy sight, and not by sighes to God in prayer, then shall thy wine bee turned into water: God shall manifest a new miracle v|pon thee to the worse, that is, All the prosperitie, peace and contentment thou had with mee, shall bee chan|ged in miserie, pinch, and pouertie, 

manie a woe is mee: Then had thou neuer such cause to put on thy doole weeds at when thou shalt put it off.
Take good heede to thy selfe: Now is the last age of the world, this life is full of dangers: Sathan hath laide moe snaires on earth, than there bee starres in heauen.
Remember well this watch-word,Mat. 13. 33 Watch and pray, hauing euer thine eye vpon thy God: Keepe thy selfe from all apperance of euill: A fleeEccles. 10.  great of wickednesse will cause all thy perfume to stinke: Note Sinne is like a Riuer which at the source is but small: A scandell is like a scab that beginneth with itching, but endeth into blisters, boiles  putrifying sores Tak good heede to thy cariage  to thy, companie, euil co~pany vaine co~|municatio~,  rotten words, wil work vpo~ the conceptions of the mind, lik Iacobs pilled rods set in the gutters andGen. 30. 38 watering troughes before the flockes: The flockes which conceiued before

the rods brought foorth Cattell ring|stroaked,vers. 38. spekled and spotted: In euill companie at the hearing of vaine, idle or rotten words, what can the heart of man or woman conceiue but that which after it is brought foorth shall appeare both spekled and spotted? An euill thought is a sinne which besides its owne parti|cular sting, is able to trouble sore the Conscience by awaking the old sinnes of our vnregeneration.
Let my counsell bee acceptable vnto thee: Note Haunt neuer the man whose name is pitched with a blacke report: It is hard to touch pitch, and not to be defiled: It is not good for men were they neuer so good to be haunters of women: Christs Disci|ples wondered that hee spake vnto a wo|manIoh. 4. 27 apart, a great argument that Christ was neuer with that Sexe but in companie: It is no better for wo|men to haunt the companie of men: Fire and flaxe are easilie kindled, the

least sparkle of fire will kindle Tin|der: Note Good outward meanes are helpful to inward motions the mothers of our actions.
Some I know will say, that they feare none euill, and that they are cleane of all such pollutions: If it be so, it is a benefite of God: But yet learne the lesson.




Caute  casi.
None stand so well but they haue to take heede lest they fall: Note Were1 Cor. 20. 12 thou neuer so holie thou hast neede to say the Lords prayer, whereof Lead vs not into temptation, is a peti|tion: Enter neuer into that, where|into thou desireth not to bee ledde: None at the first dash be brought to the height of corruption: S. Peter1 Pet: 3. 2. willeth y^t womens chast conuersation bee coupled with feare: Feare alwayes if thou bee wise: Hee or shee that would auoide a sinne, must shune the occasion: Note The least shewes or ap|pearences of euil are these litle FoxesCant. 2. 15

that spoile the vines: How little lea|uen will sowre the whole lumpe? What is the best of all sinfull flesh, but like Gun-powder? a sparkle of temptation may kindle in a moment that which in our whole life time we shall not be able to quenh with many teares, no more tha~ Esau could recouer the blessing which after it was solde, hee sought with manie teares: That which we may be temp|ted to, wee may fall into. Let all flesh suspect its owne frailtie: Scorners may speake as they please, but daylie doolefull experience will subscribe the trueth of my words.
Note In this last age, alas, many god|lieSidera volentia. persons in appearance lik shooting starres fall downe in diuerse places with their blazing profession from Heauen vnto Earth, a most sure to|ken of a tempest to come: Note Too manie, alas, shame goodnesse by see|ming good, like Frogges infrokes Vice in the habite of Vertue. While

inwardlie the heart is rotten, nowe or then corruption must burst out into scab  scandel: Many with their faire profession are like Rowers in a Boat, who look one way but goe the cleane contrarie. For this cause I intreat thee to studie the substance of godlinesse, and not to bee like these whose chiefest care is spended vpon shewes: S. Paul speaking of the lifeColoss. 3. 3. of the Godlie, saith, That it is hidde with Christ in God: Note It is so hidde there that none shall bee able to find it for to steale it away, or to take it by force, but not so hidde but that it must also appeare in all the effects of godlinesse.
Note When God commanded Eze|kiel to peach vnto the drye bones, that they might liue, hee ordainedEzek. 37. 9 for him this Text, Thus saith the Lord God, come from the foure windes O breath, and breath vpon these slaine that they may liue For to apply this, where there is a life after slaughter,

I speake of a spirituall life, a life hid in God, thee must appeare foure effectes from the foure winds: From the East, the Orient of that life, there must bee an arising from sinne: From the West, there must bee a dying to sinne, euen a setting and going downe of wickednesse: From the South, must come the heat of zeale moisted with showers of teares of true repentance: At last from the North, must come a chill colde of trembling feare to offend God, whereby wee make an end or worke out the worke of our Salua|tion with feare and trembling: These bee the foure partes of godlinesse wherein all Christian Soules must bee carefullie exercised: In this is the substance of true godlinesse It is better to bee starke naught, than to double our sins by seeming good: It is easie to juggle the out|ward eye of flesh, but that inward Eye which seeth our thoughts a farre off, nothing shall escape: There is

not a Crowne of life for carnall liuers.
Hearken vnto mee mine heart: Bee busie in prayer, joyne fasting therevnto, lest that the high feeding of the flesh make the bodie to kicke against the Soule, which is too farre in loue with the bodie: Note Of a pam|pered bodie may the Soule often say, in some measure as Christ said of Iudas, He who hath eaten bread at myIoh. 13. 18 table hath lift his heele against me: Note All fleshlie pleasures are both vaine and vile: They are like blisters which be|ginne with itching, but end in swel|ling sores: Beware of such succred poyson.
Note My counsell is that often thou reade the holie Scriptures, and par|ticularlie the thirtie one Chapter of the Prouerbes where thrift and godli|nesse are joyned together: Bee care|full and painefull in thy manag: Think surely that Idlenesse is the mo|ther of all mischiefe: Seeke Gods grace both earnestlie and earelie: A

little with Gods blessing is a rich he|ritage: An handfull of meale and a1 Kin. 17 12 little oylein a cruse was sufficient for the Prophet and the Widow of Sarept till the famine was past: That blessed handfull was better, than the best prouided Barne or Girnell in the Land: Note The grace of God is an heritage of greatest and surest rent: Vnsanctified prosperitie is but a see|ming Sun-shine which vnauoidablie must perish: Blessed is the woman who with Marie in some measureLuk. 1. 28. is receiued in grace.
Tak good heed to thine heart watch well ouer thy thoughtes, though thoughts be called light, the sinne of thought is heauie: from the inward thoughts spring and sprout all out|ward mischiefes.
As for thine outward carriage meddle not in other mens matters: Note Curious searchers of the life of o|thers are often carelesse correcters of their owne: Manie neglecting the

hudge beame in their owne ye, must needs bee tampering with the little mots y^t are in others A slacked tongue and a slacke hand keepe other com|panie: An idle woman must bee a pratler, when the hand cannot pra|ctise, the tong must prattle: To such it is scorne to preach, that for euerie idle word wee must all bee answerable.
My deare Spouse I must tell thee all that I thinke concerning thy wel, for I desire thy Soule to bee knitte with mine into the bundle of life: Take good heede to thy selfe, these who in this world haue a name to lie, haue great neede to rule well their life: The nearer a bodie bee to a lighted Candle the greater is the shadow thereof, so the nearer the bodie of sinne bee to one that is inlightened, the greater is the Scandale thereof: Note Put the breadth of thy finger hard neere to the Candle,  it shall make a shadow greater, then all your bodie: but the farder it be remoued the lesse

it will appeare: Remember I pray thee how neare thou art to the Can|dle of a bright  glorious profession, a little Mot of euill will bee called a mountaine in thee, because thou was my wife, and because wee haue liued with good report: Note The wicked are most faine to take the Godlie but tripping in a lesser fault, of their infirmities they make buck|lers for the defence of their malici|ousnesse.
Ve my counsell for feare of scan|dale, and for to flee all appearance of euill, Hatte the verie garmentIud. v. 3. spotted with the flesh: Watch well ouer thy selfe both alone and in companie: Striue neuer to seeme to bee that, which thou art not indeede: Note Many haue much more than they shew; but moe shewe much more than they haue: The Religion of the greatest part for all their pretences, is but a smoke, a shadow, a blast, or a sound: Note Substance without appea|rance

is better than appearance with|out substance: Note The Soule which hath but a forme of godlinesse is most deformed in Gods sight: Or|dinarlie shee who is most farded is most filthie: Note Vices are most vile when they are shrouded and ouer-cast with a countenance of Vertue, a vizard of pietie maketh one a monster in Gods eyes: Note There is no such vil|lanie as that which is varnished ouer with colours of godlinesse. Sinners may cloake sinne and couer it for a space, but they cannot stand long, for wickednesse shalbe broken as a tree.
Let therefore thy Faith within, appeare in thy life without: Note All the Faithfull should be like the roule of that Booke which Ezekiel saw in a vision which was written withinEze. 2. 16. and without: If there bee no Letters of life written without, there is no liuing Faith within, but a dead ca|rion of Faith for Faith without worksam. 2. 20. is dead. For this cause flee the fog|gie

lithernesse of the flesh, and striue for the fruites of Faith: Note Aboue all be earnest in prayer the preseruer of honestie: Heare Gods word with reuerence as good newes from a farreProu. 25. 25. Countrey: Let this word be a straight rule to direct thee in all the cariage of thy life: let no worldlie businesse with-draw thee from it, while it is preached: Note These who eate their bread with greatest sweate eate not the sweetest bread: It is not earlie rising, nor late going to bedde that enricheth: Note Though for a time Marthas toyling and troubling her selfeLuk. 10. 41 about many thinges, seeme to bring much profite, it shall bee seene at last that it is the grace of God that en|richeth.
Note This is most certaine, the urest fastning in this world is but loofenes without God, in whom alone is the certainty of that which shal neuer perish.
Note In all thine affaires, in all compa|nies remember that in the secrete

closets of thine heart thou haue fre|quent ejaculations vnto thy God, that hee may guide and guard thee while thou shalt encounter with temptations, hardlie shall shee bee caught that feareth the snare: Sathan with his baites  lures is euer wai|ting for to catch his prey: Note Hee hath three great gunnes, three great impoysonners whereby hee wasteth the graces and good names of many, viz. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: It shall bee thy best to arme thy selfe against these three, by holding continually a wakening and jealous eye ouer thy whole conuersation: Note If the euill thought be stiffled so soone as it be|ginneth to stir into the heart, it shall neuer bee able to produce an euill action into the hand For this cause wise Solomon gaue a precept which I may call a spirituall Cordiall which is, that aboue all watch and ward menProu. 4. 23 and women should keepe their heartes:
Note Manie with Hypocrites may seeme to haue their hands in heauenLuk. 18. 12 by giuing almes with the Pharisee, while indeede their proude loftie  faithlesse heartes are in Hell, God looketh not so much to the outward action as to the inward affection Note The Lord cannot away with the painted superficiall flourishes of holines of these that are false hearted and meerelie formall: The Israelite in|deede, in whose heart is no guile, is theIoh. 1. 47. Lords delight: Studie therefore I intreate thee to the puritie and po|wer of godlinesse: Bee carefull to write all these heart precepts vpon the palmes of thine handes, lest that vn|awares thou bee woefullie caught and ensnared in some scandalous sin whereby thou shalt shame thy pro|fession: All mortall feete are feeble and stand in a sliperie ground. O what danger is in giuing way to our first sinfull motions, while sin is least fea|red it is most to bee feared: Sathan is

most dangerous while hee is trans|formed2 Cor. 11 14 into an Angel of light: Poy|son confected with Sucre is moste piercing and deadlie: Smiling Ioabs are most cunning in smiting, faire alluring  tickling temptations of|test preuaile: Note Manie are like the Larke, which while it playeth with the feather and stoupeth to the glasse is sud|denlie enwrapted in the Fowlers net.
There is nothing more dangerous than securitie: While Peter thought himselfe stronger than all men, Sa|than was hatching three abominations in his heart, which at last brake out, first in lyes and last in perjurie: stand in awe and sinne not: One sin dra|weth on another lik links in a chaine. Wee haue sinned, wee will goe vp, thatDeut. 1. 4 is wee haue sinned, wee will sin: Keepe euer GOD in thy sight, and bee humble.
Bee carefull in all thy cariage to liue in good example: Allow not thy selfe in that which is euill, flee

the folies of this age which is won|derfullie giuen to new guises of dec|king the bodie, most womens hearts are sowred with this leauen. Note Let spirituall joyes be thy jewels,  the good works of thine hands, let them be the gold rings of thy fingers the matter of thy pleasures: There is no|thing more pleasant than to doe wel: Note For this cause good workes are in that Song of songs called, a gatheringCant. 6. 1. of Lillies and flourishing of the Vines: She who is too curious of y^e outward decking of the Backe, cannot bee carefull of the inward trimming of the heart: Note Fard and foolish vaine fashions of apparell are but Bawds of allurement to vncleannesse: Note Away with these dyed Dames whose beauty is in their Boxe, such dawbinges are soone washed off from these painted Iezabels, such melting faces are not meete for marterdoome, for the cause of Iesus, vnder such false faces is no lodging for true and honest hearts.
In all things striue thou to be so|be: Note Beware to out runne thy rank or to out weare the fashions by atty|ring thy selfe too gorgeouslie: SoftMatth. 11. 8 appparell is but for Kinges houses: What are such Cuts and Cordons, Silkes and Satins, and other such su|perfluous vanities, wherwith manie aboue their ranke and place are so disguised, but infallible tokens of an vnsanctified heart? Note With such fol|lies often are joyned libertine eyes  wandering in wanton glaunces. Let my counsell please thee, Idol not thy bodie with these who habour in their bosome the snake of pride: Note Let thy chiefe care bee to decke the hidden man of the heart: A meeke and hum|ble soule is a great ornament in Gods eyes: This is Scripture, The orna|ment1 Pet, 4. 18 of a meeke  quiet spirit is of great price in the sight of God: Shee whose heart is truelie godlie, will be most carefull to put on that which most will please the Lords eye: Consider

well what I say: Follow not y^e fickle fancies of vaine wome~, whose minds are like the Moone in a continuall change, but rather bee a Schooler of these whose wisedome is constant|lie contrarie to all new fangled fol|lies: Note Too curious busking is the mother of lusting lookes, the Iuy-Bush hung out for to inueigle vnsanctified hearts vnto folie.
Note What are these finest silkes the fairest feathers of our pride? What are they, but wormes worke moathes meate? Striue for the power of mor|tifying grace: while the flesh is lusty and at a full sea, the Spirit is at vn|der euen at a low ebbe: The pam|pering pride of life is the bane and poison of spirituall graces, beware of it: It is an high treason against the most High, it is a sinne which first lifteth vp, and after bringeth downe with a shamefull fall that which it hath once lifted vp.
Note The heart of man is lik the shell|fish,

which pride as an Eagle taketh vp into the aire, but while it is come to a great hight, it anone let|teth it fall vpon the rockes of shame and disgrace; where after that it hath dashed it in pieces it greedilie de|uoureth it: Note Hee who in Heauen could not dwell with Pride will ne|uer on Earth harbour in that heart wherein it lodgeth: Outward coun|terfeit humilitie may for a time jug gle the eyes of the beholders, such a varnished pride is a double abomi|nation: O howe detastable vnto God are these who beeing vainlie puft vp in their fleshlie minde, haue noCol. 2. 18. lodging for humilitie, but into their mouthes: And yet who can haue patience to giue are, shall at last heare a Sibboleth some swelling word, which by the accent, shall giue notice that they are not such as they say.
Note Certainelie Humilitie is one of the fairest flowers in the whole gar|land of spirituall vertues: Whereas

Pride a spirituall tympanie bloweth vp the heart, and maketh the Arteries to swell with vncleane spirits, Humilitie tempereth the blood, and quieteth the Spirit with such a calmenesse, as that wherein the Lord appeareth to Elijah.1 Kin. 19 12
Some if they bee not Whoores or Theeues, they thinke that they can|not faile, and yet in one sinne are all sinnes, for who faile in one, faile in all: Note That which God said by his Prophet is notable, If a man beget a sonne that is a Theefe or a Murtherer,Ezek. 18. 10 or that doeth any one of these thinges: Obserue the words, Anie one, Thogh hee doe all these things, Shall be liue?vers. 13 hee shall not liue: He hath done all these abominations: See howe hee who hath done but any one is heere also said to haue done all these abomina|tions: See how all sinnes by a little bore creepe in with a deceitfull pace: If one poisonfull herbe bee in the Potte death is there.
What shall I say more of Humilie,

the rarest vertue in women? This I will say, The lowliest heart is euer in highest in Gods account, it euer hath the best share of his fauours: Note As streames of waters runne to the lowe valleyes, so doe the graces of God flow to the humble Soules: Shame and confusion of face is the ordinatie end of all the puffes of pride and of all vnlawfull daliance: This sentence neuer lighted false, Pride must gette a fall: This is Scripture,Psal. 38. 6 Though the Lord bee high yet hath hee respect vnto the lowlie: But the proud hee knoweth a farre off.
Bee constant in all thy wayes: striue to keepe peace with thy neigh|bours: Note For this end set a porter at thine eare, for to hold out fale re|ports: an open eare and a loose tongue are two deadlie foes to all sacred friendshippe: Where such are, triffles are taken for truethe after that a mat|ter it throughlie sifted, most mens r|ports are found to bee but babbling.
Note Let the true feare of God har|bour in thine heart continuallie: The feruent zeale of many is agueish lik feuers which come  goe by fits and starts: Ahab could crouch whe~1 Kin. 21. 27. hee heard that the Dogges should licke his blood. Till Pharaohs sorcerers wereExod. 8. 19 fearefullie plagued, none of them could pronounce, This is the finger of God Bee not like the wicked who neuer feare God but when hee is in a tempest: Fooles are so stiffe and steelie that for God they will not stir an inch, till his judgement cause them to stagger.
Striue to liue by precept  not by example: Many thinke themselues to bee well, beause they are not so euill as many others: Note In this they are like the Drapers who giue luster to a Karsey by laying it to a Rugge: The deeper damnation of some in the poole and puddle of perdition, shall bee a verie small comfort for these that are in the shallow foordes

of the floodes of fyre, kindled with the brimestone beames of euerlasting bur|nings: Note The fore-skinne of an vn|circumcised heart is so thicke and brawnie that no precepts can pierce through it, till the Spirite himselfe make a way.
Oh then, seeing wee are all a broode of corrupt loynes, it standeth thee in hand to bee earnest with that Spirit of grace, that he would teach thee to keepe watch and ward ouer all thy wayes.
Note If any creature offende thee, bite not at the stone, but lift vp thine eyes to God: None euill is in the Ci|tieAmos. 3 6 but that which hee hath done.
At diuine Seruice be not chill nor colde: Bee feruent in thy prayers, while thou speakest to God with thy mouth, suffer not thine hearte to wander vpon toyes, it is more dif|ficile to pray than to preach, wicked men may preach, but they cannot pray, God hath branded them with

this blot they call not vpon God: Note The Lord put into thine heart the juiceA prayer and sappe of his Grace.
My Spirit is so wearied that I am not able to expresse my minde.


The Pastour.
The Psalmest said well, The Lord willPsal. 138. 8 perfite that which concerneth mee: Hee who hath begun in you his graces, shall perfite that which concerneth you, yea, and shall make his grace to2 Cor. 12. 9 bee made perfect in your weaknesse.


The sicke Man.
O my Lord, lead mee in the landA prayer of vprightnesse: O God, with TheePsal. 143. 10 is the Fountaine of life: In thy LightPsal. 36. 9. wee shall see light: Reuiue mine heart, O Lord, with some new supplye of strength from aboue: Let the wordesPsal. 19. 14 of my mouth and the meditations of mine heart bee acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength  my Redeemer.
Aboue all thinges my louing Spouse, beware of euill companie, the corruption of good manners;

and fuell of folie: Note It is good to vse companie as Moses did his Rod, so lo~g as it remained a Rod he remained with it, but so soone as it became a serpent incontinent he fled from be|foreExod. 4. 3. it: Bee not like these most vile persons, who for to varnish their ap|pearances of euill with alledging in|nocencie, say, That they care not what men say of them, and that they cannot hinder men to speake: Away with such wordes, such vaine part|lings cannot secure the Conscience, nei|ther content the scandalized beholders of euill appearances: If thou doe not euill, doe not euill lik: Be not altoge|ther carelesse what others say of thee, but in all securitie of life striue for a good name, which is better thanEccles. 7. 3 precious oyntment: There is no such folie as folie practised with professi|on of wisedome: Hypocrites may warilie watch ouer their words and outward actions, but none but Nathanaels, haue hearts without guile.Ioh. 1. 47.
Consider well I pray thee, that wee are now come to the dregges of dayes, and extremities of time, and al|so to the extremities of sinne, for auoi|ding of the sands, we rush vpo~ the rocks: We liue in the last and most corrupt age, wherein the verie confluence of all the corruptions of former ages haue made their Randie-vowes: So, (as all may see) it is vtterlie impossible, except the Lord work wonders that anie keepe themselues so passinglie pure from all spice of contagion, but some one infection or other shall sticke vnto them, vnto Gods disho|nour, and their owne disgrace: O how manie rubs are in the way to life eternall! My best beloued let such instructions sinke deeplie down into thine heart, that thou bee not like Hypocrites, who are more thoughtfull for plausible conueian|ces and outward plastering appea|rances, than for anie substance of godlinesse: Bee truelie godlie, and

not prophane, like these who say what the Prophets will, must into y^e house of Rimmon, one thing or other must they doe, wherein God must bee mercifull vnto them.
Note As for thee bee a Church wife and also an House-wife: It is not seemelie for women to bee gading heere and there shee is most happie* Note who in this sinfull time is least known of the world, so that shee truelie striue to know God and her selfe: Wise Solo|mon who in his wisedome excelleth all, as also in number of wiues spake by experience, y^t wandering Women were not chast, by this special marke hee brandeth the whoore, That herProu. 7. 11 feete abide not in her house, but nowe shee is without, and now in the streetes:vers. 12. By Solomons record, shee that gadeth abroad cannot bee well thought of: With Wisedome shee hath cracked her credit: If Dinah had taried at home while shee went abroad, shee had not beene deflored, which was

the cause of great blood-shed, which made her brethren Simeon and Gen. 49. 7 afterward to bee diuided in Iaakob,  dispersed in Israel: The occasion of all that euill was from the vanitie of the Damosell, her folie is registred in Gods Chronicles for all Ages to come, that women chieflie may read it, and bee wise by her example: The wordes are these, And DinahGen. 34. 1 the daughter of Leah, which shee bare vnto Iaakob, went out to see the daugh|ters of the Land.
Remember well I pray thee these few pecepts: Bee carefull  sincere at the seruice of thy God: Serue him not by halfes: Note Hee who is onelie holie, must bee serued wholie: Take good heed to thy self, beware of claw|ing flatterers, who for gaine wil varnish thy vices, for to make them seeme ver|tues. Labour for a good name, per|rell it not for trifflles: If for light matters it bee mainelie hazarded it shall bee easilie cut off, where euer

thou bee, bee content with thy lot: See that in anie wise thou neuer har|bour in thine heart a discontented mind: Beware of an euill tongue, which is an vnruelie euill, within the com|passe of the mouth wherein it is, is aIam. 3. 6. vvorld of vvickednesse.
Bee carefull both for the inward and the outward of thy conuersa|tion, for many eyes will looke and spye what shall be thy life after me: Bee therefore euer vpon thy guard, sinne neuer in hope of secrecie, for none can sinne without a witnesse: Sequester thy selfe from all occasi|ons of euil, if thou wold haue grace to bee dearelie and deepelie rooted in thine heart: Where euer thou art, thinke God thereto be present: Tak him at all times to bee an eye-witnes of thy thoughts: Note Thogh ali be bar|red out, y^e Lord is within: Feare God  liue in peace with thy neighbours: Note Let the good thoughts of thine heart put the ouer in the handes of practise,

first know  the~ doe, which is com|pleate Christianitie: Grow in grace, grone for sins past, escape relapses, haunt the godlie, flie these that are of a prostitute Conscience: Sinne is like a Ring-worme of a contagious and spreading nature, from lesse to more ouer Shooes ouer Bootes like He|zekiels waters from the Ankles to the Knees, and so higher and higher from scabbe to scandale: Shune all appearance of euill, so shall thy conuersation sauour like oyntment, and most sweete perfume. Now the Lord bee with thee: Kisse mee, and so farewell.


The Pastour.
Heere Sir are your little Children waiting for your blessing, it is good that yee say some-thing to them for their instruction: The last words of a Friend or of a Father are often of greatest weight, and beare most in|to the rememberance of these to whom they are spoken.
I feare that ye faint in your weak|nesse, and therefore bee as summar and short as yee can.


The sicke Man.
I thanke God, though the strength of my bodie decayeth, my Spirit is become stronger like Samson, afterIudg, 16. 22 that his haire beganne to grow: My force  courage within is renewedPsal. 103. 5 like the youth of the Eagle by casting of its bill: Blessed be he who giuethIsa. 40. 29. power to the faint, and increaseth strength to them that haue no might.
O Lord, mould mine heart after theA prayer heauenlie modell of thy Law: Emptie mine head, and disburden mine heart of all earthlie cares, that my thoughts may be whollie and entirelie spent vpon thy selfe without any turning awry from holie and heauenlie meditations.


The Pastour.
Seeing God is with you in such a spirituall power, spend your short time the best yee may for his glo|rie and for the well of these whom

yee desire to bee best in this world after you.
Note That new strength which appear|eth in you at the sight of your Chil|dren remembereth me of old Iaakob lying on his death-bedde, when it was tolde him that Ioseph whom he loued was come to see him it is said, That Israel strengthen himselfe, andGen. 48. 2 satte vpon the bed.




The sicke Man.
I finde the like mercie, though not in such a measure.
O my God, fit and furnish my SouleA prayer with the sanctifying grace of thy spi|rit: Rouse vp my Spirit, whet vp my minde to feeke the thinges which are a|boue: Lord, put a liuing Soule within this dying bodie.


A speach to his Children
And now yee my Children ga|ther your selues together and hear|ken vnto your louing Father, that ye may remember well his last words.
Come neare mee I pray you, and

receiue your old Fathers blessing: Let mee lay both mine handes vpon your heads that I may make my last prayer for you.A prayer
The Angel which redeemed meeGen. 48. 16. from all euill blesse the Lads, and lette them grow in multitude as fishes, God make you as Ephraim and as Manasses. Behold now my deare Childre~, I goe the way of all the earth keepe the charge1 Kin. 2. 2. of the Lord your God to walke in his wayes, that yee may prosper in all that yee doe, and whther soeuer yee turne your selues: By instant prayers to God hemme in the folies of your youth: Note In this wicked euill world striue to bee like fishes which keepe their fresh taste while they liue in sal|test waters.
Bee carefull to consecrate the first yeeres, euen the flower and pryme of your life vnto the Lord, which shall bee a meanes for sanctifying the rest of your age: Note The first borne and the first fruites vnder the Law of ce|remonies

were the Lords: The sub|stance thereof in the Gospel, is that wee giue the Lord the best of our yeeres and the flower and strength of our age: Note Most men in the prime of youth are both hote and headie: Hap|pie is hee who in a sober moode and colde blood passeth the time of his sojourning heere chieflie, while hee is in the strength of youth: By care|full culture  manurance the fierce|nesse of Beares and Lyons will be mi|tigated and tamed: It is a great slight of Sathan to make young men sport in their sinnes, vnder hope they may repent when they are olde: But alas, who is so young that can say, that he shall liue vntill morrow? Note Is it not seene that there bee as manie little as great skuls in Golgotha? As soone, say wee, commeth the Lambe skin to the market as the olde Sheepes: Note But thogh they who are yong were assu|red to become old, they could not be assured of repentance which is y^e gift of God, which hee giueth to whom

and when it shall please his Majestie: That which is the gift of Gods good pleasure, is not a thing which a man may haue whe~ he pleaseth: Youth isIoh. 5. 4. lik the time of y^e stirring of the poole, a gracious time, if it be wel imployed: Christ I knowe may cure a Soule that hath beene sicke of the palsey of sinne eight and thirtie yeeres, but that must bee counted a most rare miracle: Note Late repentance is sel|dome sound: But alas, though a man were assured that in his olde dayes he should repent truelie of all the folies of his youth, how bitter a thing is that which Gods word cal|leth Repentance? Note A Pagan hauing gotten some little glimpse thereof, while he conferred y^e pleasures of sin with y^e paines of repentance, refused to bargaine for his pleasures, saying plainelie, Non emeim tanti poenitere, that hee would not buy repentance so deare: Most men in the heat of their sinnes lay about them to finde

some pretence for the lessening ther|of, lest they seeme vgelie.
Oh, that youth would bee wise, our youth is either a great friend or a great foe vnto our olde age: If we get a fill of Gods mercie in the mor|ningPsal. 90. 14 of our age, wee shall bee glad and rejoyce all our dayes: Note The remem|berance of a well spent youth, is in olde age lik the casting of the EaglesPsal. 103. 5 bill whereby its age is renewed: Note O the siluer coloured gray head of that olde man, who from his youth in the maine of his life, hath walked in the wayes of righteousnesse! Grace fro~ the Cradle is of great expectation: Note Happie is that youth which is old in grace: If yee get grace to your youth, yee shall get glorie after age: God it is who giueth both grace and glorie. which two I may call the Note e|uerlasting twinnes conceiued into the breast and bowels of that Mercie that is aboue.
Take heede my Children: In your

first dayes striue to bee like the Aun|cient of dayes: Note A good Conscience well kept in youth is a perpetuall feast for olde age: That mans youth is a great friend to his old age who can say with Obadiah, I feare the Lord1 Kin. 18. 12 from my youth: A well spent youth is a blessed seede time for Heauen: A well spent youth is spirituall physicke vnto olde age, which of it selfe on Earth, is a sicknesse drawing vnto Death.
As the well spent youth is a friend vnto old age, so if it bee euill spent, it is a most fearfull foe; a foe full of woes: Note woe to him whose old bones are sores with the sins of his youth: thePsal. 25. 7. Lord hath taken the penne in his hand wherewith after he y^t hath narrowly searched his wayes, hee shall write bitter thinges against him, and shall make him possesse the iniquities of hisIob. 13. 26 youth: * Beware therefore to set your corruption to worke, for to giue the Prime of your life vnto pleasures: Bee

wise in time, lest Sathan shely foist in and closelie conuay corruptions into your young and tender heartes by tickling and tempting you to folie: Note It is more easie while it is time to spend well the time, than after to re|deeme the mispent time: Why would yee trouble your olde age with young folies? If yee sawe the seede of folie in your youth, ye shall vndoubtedly reapesheaues of sorrows in your old age: It is a sore troubl to sow in laughter  reape in teares: Note In the best man that liueth, there is sufficient mater of mourning for his cloudie and rainie yeares: The old man hath enough to suffer vnder sicknes, though hee had no cumber of his sinnes: Note O how pleasant is the bit|ter haruest of a foolish youth! O folie, hath not olde age paines sufficient|lie in the bodie, though it bee not surcharged with the troubles of the Spi|rit: What wisedome is this to sur|charge the weakest age with the hea|uiest

burden? Note Thinke chieflie v|pon this, seeing the goodnesse of God followeth the whole life of man from his mothers bellie to his buriall, it is reason that his whole life as well youth as olde age, bee framed for to expresse his thankful|nesse.
My first and chiefest direction to you is, that yee giue to God the first fruites of your age: Note Suffer not sinne in your tender yeeres to get hold  haunt in your heartes: A godlie Youth hath a speciall promise  God, these that seeke mee earelie . 7. 17 finde mee: This parable was forged in Hell, young Saincts old Deuils, that is, A good Lad will bee an euill man: And this is turned ouer againe by the pro|phane world, viz. An euill Lad will bee a good man: Nay, but an euill Lad is in the way to proue an olde wag-string: A young scoffing Ismael will become an olde swaggering re|ueller. Children in Scripture are

called Plants: If in the Moneth ofPsal. 128. 3 May a  bee without leafes or buddes, we conceiue little good hope of anie fruites to bee had in the har|uest time thereafter: will a tree bring foorth fruites before it flourish? When flourish time is past without anie blossome, shall wee looke for anie fruite for that yeare?
Learne of the trees to know your seasons: Note Solomon sent the sluggard to Doctour Pismires schoole for toProu. 6. 6. learne wisedome, to prouide for the euill day: Striue with the trees in your youth to get a spring of grace, which may appare in the sprout and blossome of dispositions vnto vertues.
Muium est assescere a teneris.
Note To beginne well or euill is to bee in the midst of the journey: Most powerfull are the first impressions lik the loue of women which ordinarlie is greatest towards her first Match the guide of her youth, who tulit pri|mosProu. 2. 17 amores, hath gorten the prime of

her loue: It is hard to fall from her first loue: Note See what a liking these who are in Kings Courts will haue to remember of the Cottage or rurall village whereinto they were borne and brought vp: The secret draught is so powerfull that hardlie can anie expresse the cause: This made a Pagan to say,
Nescio qua natale solu~ dulcedine cu~ctos Ducit,  immemores non sinit esse sui.
By this yee may see how by a cer|taine secret instinct wee euer loue the places where wee haue beene borne  brought vp: Note Obserue the lesson of this, if yee passe your youth in sin  in the pleasures therof, hardly shal yee euer forget that company, doe what ye can, ye shall euer haue a cer|taine secret loue, which your Soule darre not auouch, toward that which yee once loued while ye were yong.
Note If your sinnes bee your Com|panions in your vouth, they will bee your Counsellers in olde age:

Rehoboams fall was in this, y^t he took counsell of the young men that were growne vp with him: If sinne bee1 Kin, 12. 10 brought vp with you in your youth, there is danger that ye take its coun|sell in your olde age: The time of youth is most dangerous, for in it the affections are boiling, in it reigne and rage vnhallowed heate, and passio|nate distempers, which except they bee repressed with the strength of grace, breake out into the thunders and tempestuous stormes of vncleannesse, of ryot  of drunkenesse, and such like, which make most fearefull breaches and deepe gashes into the Conscience.
Beware therefore at the first to sinne, lest at last ye sinne by custome:Isa. 48. 4. The hardening custome of sinne is in Scripture called, An yron sinew in the necke, and a brasen brow: Note If cu|stome of sinne make you impotent in well doing, it shall at last mak you impudent in euill doing: Note Hee who manteth or stammereth in his

speach while hee is young, will in all appearance speake so vntill his dying day: Note Fooles dreame that man is like March, if hee come in with an Adders head, they thinke that hee shall goe out with a Peacoks taile, as if an euill beginning were the way to an happie end.
Bee wise in time my deare hearts, from your youth consecrat your sel|ues Nazarites vnto the Lord, that is, Bee pure and holie, touch no vn|cleane thing, giue not prouocatio~ to the flesh, but rather abstaine from all1 Pet, 2. 11 fleshlie lustes which warre against the Soule: What shame for Gods sons to bee sinnes slaues.
If ye wold liue long, liue well: Note The wicked, saith Solomon, shall not prolongEccles. 8. 13 his dayes which are as a shadow, because hee feareth not before God: Note For this cause it shall be your best to take the first handsell of time for well doing: Resist the Deuill in the beginning of sinne: Note Fight against iniquitie

as against a foraine enemy at y^e borders of your heart, euen at the first landing, before it get fitting in fast and stable grou~d: While it is fleeting, fight it off the shore: Note Sinne is like a Cocka|trice it must bee killed into the shell before it come out with piercing ve|nemous lookes: Note Satan in this last and most corrupt age hath with manie blots branded earelie holinesse: As for you my counsell is, that with great care yee striue to beginne well earely in the morning of your age, and that thereafter yee constantlie goe on till like a Sunne yee come to the Noone of grace in glorie.
Note In three times of our age wee should striue to three degrees of ho|linesse: In Child-hood wee must bee good, in Youth head wee must grow better, in olde Age wee must bee best: Note Hee who is not best at last in mine opinion, was neuer good at all.
In all Ages tak heed to all your ways

be neuer wedded vnto any sin, thogh it seeme like Zoar but a little one: There is no sin so base that it wil goe alon without a Page at its back: while yee heare of others faults, practise Plato his Precept, Numquid ego tale? Haue I done any such lik thing my selfe?
Striue in all your affaires to be vp|right before God and man: Be euer of these that stand on the Lords side for the good cause: Let no conside|ration of profite or preferment mak you to stiffle the voyce of your owne Conscience: Shute not your eares at its cry like the Adder at the voyce ofPsal. 58. 4. the charmer. Bee not loth to know your selues, trye and examine well your inward parts. Doe neuer with great confidence that which yee can not doe with a good Conscience.
If yee sinne, delight not in sinne, such pleasures are too deare,  bought at too high a rate.
In your whole like reuerence your Pastour though subject to manie in|firmities,

for wee faile all in many things: Elias refused not his meate1 Kin. 17. 6 because a Rauen an vncleane fowle brought it vnto him: Best men often are signes and wonders euen in Israel.Isa. 8. 18.
Oh, that I had words of motion, that might stirre you vp to all Chri|stian dueties: Beware I exhort you to follow anie euill example giuen by mee: Note Striue by grace to bee better than the Rocke wherout of ye haue beene hewen: Manie a time haue I started aside and stumbled in the way: It is a rare mercie of God that hath brought mee thorow this world with honesty: It is only Gods guarde euen his sauing grace which hath kept my life from scab scan|dale, for in trueth, I speake it to my shame, that God may haue the glo|rie: I haue beene like a foolish Flee that flutters about the Candle: It is by the meere mercie of my God that the winges of my profession haue not beene scorched with the flammes of

some one temptation or other, which should haue beene to me the cause of some filthie downe-fall: Note A scandalous sinne is like a dampe which quencheth the bright Candle of a glorious profession.
Let these that are forwarned striue to bee forearmed: Happie is he who in time beateth downe his own cor|ruptions, and tameth his wild heart like an horse whom the Ridder brea|keth, that hee may trauell him the parts and the pace as he best desireth: It it onelie Gods mercie which hath stopt the torrent of my corruptions: Learne therefore of mee to passe the1 Pet: 1. 17. time of your sojourning heere in feare: The euill which man least feareth, he is nearest to fall into.
Take heede my deare Children, and giue eare vnto my counsell: * Where euer yee bee, thinke shame to commit that which yee would think shame to confesse: In all things striue to have a cleare Conscience to|wardAct 24 17

God and man: Respect more goodnesse than greatnesse and its sway: Bee alway courtesse: Note Cut not a man in the current of his speach, bee not selfe conceited, but bee little in your owne eyes: Striue rather to bee good, than to seeme to bee so: Obey your betters, hearken to the wise, reuerence the gray haires found in the way of righteousnesse: Note Suf|fer rebuke patientlie, for it is better than secret loue; faithfull are the wounds of a friend: Haunt euer theProu. 27. 6 companie of the godly: In all affaires be like the Bee, such out of all things the best, and leaue the worst, seeke out the honie, leauing the venome to the Waspe: Let euerie day bee to you as your last day: Note Before you goe to bed at night make your score euen with your Iudge: Be daylie care|full to fit your count so shall ye haue the lesse to account for at your finall reakoning: In all things be vpright and doe well, for as Iehosaphat said,

The Lord will bee with the good: If ye2 hro. 29 11 would dye, the death of the righteous,Numb. 23. 10 striue first to liue the life of the righte|ous: Note If ye would come to the end, ye must not leape ouer the meanes: While yee are young, kill your sinnes in their youth, euen in their first mo|tions, while they touch but the spi|ritEph . 4 of the minde, before they bee hat|ched out from vnder the affections:Isa. 59. 5. Breake betimes the Cockatrices egge, lest at last it breake out into a Viper: Beware to conceiue mischiefe, lest ye bring forth iniquitie: Note By the cor|ruptio~ of our corruptions, is the genera|tion of our regeneration. Pamper not y^e Carion: Note Beasts fed on y^e bare com|mons are not so neere the slaughter as these y^t goe into fatter pastures: B|ware of all vncleannes: Make a co|uenant with your eys not to behold wine women: keepe carefullie your vessels cleane in sanctification and ho|nour: Note If yee slippe in anie sinne, beware to sleepe in it, for that is death,

Vita in vigilia est: Note Godlie men in olde age regretting their former haunts, are lessons from God to teach Youth not to plot the pleasures wherewith God is displeased: Ma|nie sinnes of Youth be called tricks, but it is a terrible tricke to goe to Hell: Note People foolishlie cloake Fornica|tion with a tricke of youth, but the Spirit of GOD giueth it a scarlet cloake dyed in red with the blood of1 Cor. 10. 10 three and twentie thousand.
Bee yee wise in time, let the re|memberance of the shrill sound of the last trumpet euer hold your heart in a stirre so soone as yee see the least appearance of euill: Note Thinke no sin litle, seeing it is against so great a Ma|jestie: For eating of a tree Ada was banished out of Paradise: For touching the Arke shaken with the Oxen, Vzzah lost his life For loo|king2 Sam. 5. 7 into it fiftie thousand three score1 Sam. 6. 19 and tenne men were slaine at Bethshe|meth: For gathering sticks vpon the

Sabbath, God declared that the manNumb. 15 39 should bee stoned vnto death without the Campe: Such thinges are written for our learning: As for you, stand in awe to sinne in a thought: To clippe the Kings Coyne were it neuer so little, is an high reason: Be affraide at the first gloumes of your GOD: Crouch so soone as hee beginneth to shake his rod at you: In all com|panies be constantlie godlie; like the Sunne in his light: Too manie like the Moone, now glister with reflexes of light, and anone are darkened: Now and then they appeare with diuerse faces, now with Saul, they are Prophets among the Prophets, and anone as reuoking all former godli|nesse, they runne ry~ot with gluttons and reuellers: O my beloued, thinke ne|uer shame to be godlie among scor|ners: Care not that by your conscio|able cariage the wicked bee gauld and grieued, in their madde moode they will call all godlinesse but out|wardnesse

and formalitie.
Tak good hed to all your ways, set a guarde about your thoughts, and a watch before your mouth: Note Seeing the tongue is mans glorie, let it not bee abused with rotienPsal. 57. 8. words: Let not your eares bee o|pen for to receiue the scowring of o|ther* Note mens filthie mouthes.
Bee calme and quiet in all your wayes: Bee not rash or hastie, looke before yee leape, bee not selfe-wil|led,2 Pet, 2. 10 proude contemners of your bet|ters: Aspire not aboue your pitch: Note Care not so much for mans d|spight as for Gods displeasure: Let God be the caruer of all your cars. Abhorre to be idle like these who sit|ting in the Chire of sloth: passe their time at handie dandie: Loyter not while yee should labour: Note The first word that Pharaoh said to Iaakob  his sonnes was, What is your treade orGen. 44. 33 occupation? Be painefull and faithfull in your calling, liue not litherlie as

these that are giuen to sleepe the slug|gardes lingring sicknesse: Hee is of a base spirit who sluggishlie gaping and stretching himselfe, lyeth lus|king on the downe: Vp, vp from the feathers earelie in the morning striue with the Cocke in watchfulnesse, and rise with the chirping of the birdes: Ioyne watching against euill, with wishing and prayers for that which is good: Note It is good that the bodie bee moistned with the morning dew, earelie rising bringeth health to the bodie and increaseth the number of mans dayes: Note I remember of a verse which while I was young serued for a wakener for to rouse mee from my morning sleepe.
Sanctificat sanat, dit at quoque surgere mane.
That is it maketh holie, whole and rich to rise earelie in the morning, for this cause earlie buckle your sel|ues to your businesse: Bee wise and watchfull: In all your enterprisses

haue an eye vpo~ your God, doe all as into his sight, bee not too cast down in aduersitie, nor too puft vp in pro|speritie: Note If mans applause make you to ouerweene your selues at anie time, chasten your loftinesse with the memorie of manie infirmit es which are nested within you, in all thinges feare the worst, and hope the best: Note That which seemeth to man vnlik|lie, is not with God impossible.
Let your life in a godlie sober,  ciuill cariage shine before men that they seeing it, may glorifie your hea|uenlie Father: Striue not to bee cal|led Doctours and Rabbies though ye bee men of letters, but aboue all striue to bee teachers of others by good example and not by word on|lie, lest yee bee like the Fyle which smootheth all other thinges, but it selfe remaineth rough: Note Beware of all sinfull pleasures which like faire Ladies come with alluring propines to woo and catch the vnstable soule:

Note In the verie throng of all your a|does draw your selues to a set dyet of priuate deuotion.
Mine heart beginneth to faint, of force I must make a pause: After that I am refreshed with a little rest, I shall declare to you all that is in my minde and memorie.
O my Soule, seek  sigh for grace: Be carefull for a neerer acquaintance with the Lord of Heauen: Shortlie thou shalt embrace him whom the Fa|thers by faith saluted but a farre off.Heb. 11. 13




The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in Heauen theA prayer groanes of thine humble supplicant, mak him fullie  freelie to taste and partake of the pleasures of thy graces til he come to glory: Roll his wearied Soule within these compassions, which in thy mercie are rouled together: O deare Iesus, be|sprinkle thou his heart with thy precious Soule-sauing blood which is euer louelie to the mercifull eye of the Father.
Take breath a little Sir, that yee

may continue in such precepts: such heauenlie sentences were neuer bred nor brewed vpon the earth: The LordEzek. 3. 1. himselfe hath put the Roll of these things into your mouth which yee haue eaten, and which make your breath to haue the sauour of life vnto2 Cor. 2. 16 life: Certainelie in some measure the Lord Iesus hath breathed vpon you, as hee did vpon his Apostles, when hee said vnto them, Receiue theIoh. 20. 22 holie Ghost.


The sicke Man.
Lord imprint thine Image into my Soule afresh.
My Spirit is reuiued, a new po|wer is entered into mee: BlessedIsa. 40. 29 be hee who giueth power to the faint, and who increaseth strength to them that haue no might.
Giue eare now againe vnto my speach. O yee my deare Children: Incline your eares vnto the wordes of my mouth: Note See that yee liue in loue; a rent is the forerunner of a

ruine: If yee would liue  die in ho|nestie, practise all Christian dueties: Feare God, loue the Church, ho|nour your King, bee faithfull to your Countrie, reuerence your Mo|ther:1 Pt. 3. 8 Bee pitifull, bee courteous, liue in loue together: Note Your strength is in vnitie, like a sheafe of arrowes: AEccles. 4. 1 three-fold cord is not easilie broken: Note Our Lord after that he had ended his last Supper prayed fiue seuerall times, That his Disciples might be one:Ioh. 17. 11 21. 22. 23. 26. The smallest graine of discord will at last grow to such head  heare, that it will part these who are most intire in loue: Let the falling out of Paul and Barnabas that blessed paire of most worthie worke-men, teach all good men to liue in loue: Note Men of a waspish nature cannot worke Honie with the Bees: Bitter poyson is on|lie to bee found in their Combes.
So farre as is possible haue peacePsal. 34. 14 with all men: Seeke Peace, and follow after it: Note Bee not braggers nor braw|lers

like Ismael the wild man whose hand was against euerie man, and euerie mans hand against him: Re|turne neuer euill for euill, lesse euill for good, but rather good for euill: Be not like Lyons, which while they are young are gentle till their tallons grow long: Haue peace with all so farre as is possible, and the God of peace shal abide with you. Note Be not busie bodies in other mens matters for feare of after-claps if anie thing bee amisse: Note One saith verie well, In little adoe much rest, in much adoeno rest.
Learne of Peters fall to flee all euill companie, lest in the end yee come home with a weeping crosse: It were better to suffer colde without, than within to bee warmed with such as S. Peter met with in the high Priestes hall, such warmenesse is but a colde comfort: If yee fall in loue with any sinne striue not onelie to leaue it, but also to loath it.
The Lord giue you wisedome in

all things: Be neither giuen to much company neither to sancie singularitie: Enterprise nothing rashlie without conferring first with God and with some godlie friende: Note Before yee intend a worke, cast first the costs lik the wise Builder in the Gospel, hold euer your minde vpon God and ho|nest things: Note In most secret places thinke on Gods eye which seeth our thoughtes a farre off: Bee feruent in prayer: Grieue not the Spirit of Grace: Neglect not his graces with|in you: What euer they be, let them be carefullie imployed: See that ye be faithfull in traffiqueing with your Lords Talents. for to returne them with profite: Away with these who loue to lurke in a lazie luskishnesse.
This age is defiled with filthie Belghes of blasphemie: To sweare and roare is counted good fellowship: Bridle yee your tongues, beware of the language of Hell: Note By little and little in oathes the tongue is

inured till it strike at Christs wounds with bloodie blowes: Note Cursed shal they bee who dye their tongue red in that blood, which is the ransoe of the world.
Consider this I pray you, stand in awe and sinne not: Note Bee not like the worlds fooles who beeing loose without anie bridle of feare, care not what bee their end, so that their way bee pleasant: Belieue not all reportes: Note Try before yee trust: Be not like the blind whelpes which sucke euerie thing that is put into their mouth, thinking it to bee the teates of their mother: While ye liue in the world bee not worldlings: The most worthie are not most wealthie: Eutrapeles heaped riches vpon these whom he hated, for to burden them with cares. Vse the thinges of this world rather with hand than heart: Consider all things with a nature  impartiall suruey of all circumstan|ces: Let neither Loue nor Lucre mak

you to sway from the square and rule of righteousnesse: Note All things be|low are but tottering and transitorie trashes set vpon a whirling wheele: There is none earthlie thing of such worth for which a man should mak a breach in his Conscience: If yee stu|die to be rich, ye will fall into manie temptations, it is hard to win much soone and well: Note A short care is fittest for a short life: Note Most mens heartes so are curbed with carnall that spirituall meditations take vp their heartes but at reuersion by fitte and starts.
Bee in good example one to|another: Note Yee who are elders bee like the great wheeles of the Clocke whereof if one be set a going, it will moue its fellow,  that y^ other which is next vnto it: Note Let all your strife bee in this, who in the Chri|stian course shall out stripe his fellowIoh. 20. 4. in well doing, as Iohn and Peter ran a race who shuld be first at the Lords graue.
Note In all affaires see that your hearts bee euer downe right for the good cause: If yee would walke circum|spectlie in all your wayes, haue euer an eye vpon your compt: None of you can tel how soone ye must compeare in judgement.
While yee are tempted vnto sin, aske first your heart but these two questions, 1. What answere shall I make for tbis to my God at that great day? 2. Would I bee content that ano|ther did the like vnto mee?
Bee wise like Serpents and inno|cent like Doues: Let your life bee harmeles; for in that day Righteous|nesse shall beare  weare the Crowne.
If God spare your dayes,  blesse you with yeares, beware to celebrate new yeares with olde sinnes: * An old Father said of himselfe that when in his tender age hee had once lost the tenor of an holie life gray haires were got about his head before that hee could recouer it againe: Gray haires in the

way of righteousnesse are called, a Crowne of glorie: But seeing whileProu. 16. 31 yee are young yee haue no particu|lar promise of long life, dreame not of manie dayes: It is hard to sit fast vpon a sandie foundation: Delay not your repentance in a loitering lasines: But as a man that hath a set time for his taske daleyes not, but carefullie listeneth to the Clocke and counteth his houres, so doe yee: Bee euer vpon your watch vntill the time of yourIob. 14. 14 changing come: In the prime of your dayes bee thinking on your end: Be instant with God, like Moses that he wold so teach you to number your dayesPsal. 90. 12 that yee may apply your heartes to wise|dome and to well doing: Note Waste not the short Candle of your life at idle playe, which God hath allotted to light you vnto bed: There is no such foe to repentance, as to thinke that we haue time enough to repent, or that we may repent when wee please: Note Hee that will not while hee may, shall not when hee would.

Be not prophane like Esau: Liue not in a customarie grosse sin: Loose not the reines to your corrupt affections: If yee fall with the Sainctes, striue also with the Saincts to bee recoue|red out of your falles: Note Manie speake of Dauids fall who neuer re|member Dauids rising: The repen|tance of the Godlie is set downe not to teach sinners to sinne, that afer they may repent, but rather to driue them from sinne, by letting them see howe a short sweete is followed with a long sowre: Note What a foole is hee, who seeing his Neighbour breake his legge in breaking of an Orchard for an Apple, would leape the same loupe, beeing assured of as much, and all because hee seeth that now his neighbour is soundlie hea|led, and feeleth no more paine?
If yee wander from God, hasten your returne: A man out of the way must come back againe: The soone hee returneth the lesse is his labour:

If yee fall in sinne and rise againe, beware to bee relaps: Note An Horse comming by the same place where hee caught a fall, will starte a backe: Neither for Spur nor Wand will ye get him into the same hole againe: Dauid no doubt after once would not count the Tribes againe, neither would Peter after that awefull looke of Christ, denye his Master againe; neither would Iob seck anie more to dispute with his God againe: They all know by experience how bitter a thing such sins were, and therefore abhorred all such things at the verie rememberance thereof.
Note Remember well I pray you that olde age will inquire what youth hath beene doing: This now know, that all youthlie pranking pleasures are fol|lowed with pages of paines, which cry vnto others, that they listen not to the allurementes and deceitfull charmes of their filthie flesh: While Dalilah lulleth in her lappe, shee is

armed with Sissers for to cutte the haire of our strength.
It is good that both old  young haue their loynes euer girded  their Candles in their hands, waiting for y^t comming of their Lord: Learne of the foolish Virgines, how dangerous a thing it is to sleepe without oyle in your Lampes: Let neuer sinne reigne in your mortall bodies: Subdue the flesh to the Spirit: Note If yee liue in Gods feare, looke to die in Gods fa|uour: Note Happie is the man that keepeth a Calender of his days, wher|by hee may bee roused vp to thinke euerie day his last: Note It is certaine that our life like a shippe vpon the Sea is caried with a strang gale: There is none abiding heere; our Sunne is fast posting to the West, as hee arose so shortlie must hee fall.
And therefore though yee dwell one earth mind the thinges that are a|boue: Let your Soules here in earth,Col. 3. 1. Luk. 16. 19  on earth soare vp toward y^e euerla|sting

Tabernacles. Note Too manie Soules bee Trewands from God, on|lie minding the thinges that are be|low: Beware that thornie cares choak in your Soules the seede of grace: To be worldlie minded is death: Aspire not aboue your pitch: Note Thrust not yourselues in offices: An office is well called, A Calling, because man should waite till hee bee called vnto it: It is better to bee haled by force of others to great offices, than to rushrashlie vpon them vndesired: It were to bee wished that rather men want Offices, than that Offices want men answereable to their discharge.
Affect not to bee singular in glo|rious shewes of profession without substance, like Pedlers who hang out more than they haue within: There bee none so peeuish as prattling pro|fessours without the power of practise: Note The new creature in actions is the truest outward witnesse of the trueth of the inward affections: Affection

bewrayeth the euill affections.
Malo esse probus quam haberi.
It is better to bee good, than so to seeme.
Among all humane dueties bee carefull to keepe loue with your Neighbours: So farre as is possible winne the good word and will of all men: Bee not contentious nor stir|rers vp of discordes: God hath bles|sedMatth. 5. 9 the peace makers, The Apostles Precept is plaine, Let brotherlie loueHeb. 13. 11 remaine.
Forget not the poore: Hide not yourselues from your owne flesh: The rich and the poore will meete toge|ther,Prou. 22. 2 saith Solomo~: That is, One good turne may bee requited by another: If they ca~not recompence you, they will pray for you: Note Though that which yee giue vnto them at the first seeme to be lost, like seed sowne into a running water which carrieth it a|way, the Lord, who brought backe the Iordan shall bring back your lostIosh. 3. 16.

seede with a plentifull increase: Cast then your bread vpon the waters, forEccles. 11.  yee shall finde it after many dayes: Christs counsell is, that rich men makLuk. 16. 9 vnto themselues friends of the Mammo~ of vnrighteausnesse: If ye receiue the poore in their neede into your earth|lie mansions, they by their prayers shall receiue you in your greater neede into euerlasting Tabernacles: Note When Diues hath dyned let Laza|rus haue the crums: Note Cursed Adam was couered but with figge leaues, and Christ cursed the fig tree for ha|uing leaues without fruites: While ye giue almes let all be done without a desire to be seene or praised of men: Let not your left hand know what the right hand giueth, and God shall reward that humble secrecie with open honour: What euer bee done, see that it bee done in Faith, without which most glorious workes are but glistering sinnes, and Pharisees almes, beggers of praise, things done to be seene.
Bee meeke and gentle toward all: Note The Spirit of God cannot light vpon a Soule but in the shape of a Doue: Euerie way of a man is rightProu. 21.  in his owne eyes: But the Lord ponde|reth the hearts.
My Spirit fainteth, my breath shorteneth, mine heart sickeneth, I finde Death now besieging my Noble partes: I cannot tell how soone God shall fetch away my Soule: It is most certaine that I drawe neare toPsal. 107. 18 the doores of death.
I haue yet some-thing in my mind for to tell you, O my deare Childre~; but for weakenesse I cannot, till I be refreshed with a little rest: Within a little space I looke to bee lockt in my graue. O Lord, say vnto my Soule, I am thy Saluation: Refresh mine heart, rejoyce my Soule with a sight of thy re|concealedA prayer face, before that I goe hence, and bee seene no more.


The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in Heauen.
O how much fruite groweth off one stalke: GODS grace in you hath brought foorth a large haruest of comforts to all that haue heard you.
The Lord renew your strength, andA prayer put his Spirit within you: The Lord sanctifie your Spirit, which is the CandleProu. 20. 17 of the Lord, searching all the bowels of the bellie.
The God of all grace hath clean|sed and purified your words throgh the stramer of his great mercie: * So soone as ye haue gathered stre~gth let vs heare the rest of your counsell to your Children: In it is wisedome for to be learned of old age, recouer your force a little, that yee may conclude that which yee haue begunne: Note It is good in good things to goe throgh stitch.


The sicke Man.
O Lord, perfect thy strength in my great weaknesse.
My deare Children hearken vn|to mee: It is not possible but in this

euill world yee shall bee troubled with great and grieuous afflictions: In my great griefes I was euer wont to comfort my selfe with that wise speach of Solomon, When a mansProu. 16. 7 wayes shall please the Lord, hee shall make euen his enemies to bee at peace with him: If anie man offend you, or is offended against you, perswade yourselues that some of your wayes please not the Lord, and therefore if yee would please good men, or haue good men for to please you, walke in the wayes which will please the Lord: All mens hearts are in hisProu 21. 17 hands like riuers of water: Hee can make a foe of a friende, and a friende of a foe: Note If yee neglect this coun|sell, yee shall at last be forced to stand at staues end with the whole world: Hee who is at variance with his God, will neuer agree with himselfe, and so shall bee in discord with all, for as the Pagan said well,
Conveniet nulli qui secum dissidet ipse.
Hee who is not good to him|selfe, can bee good to none: Though commonlie men say of some, Hee is, or was euill to none, but to himselfe: A wise man in this land hath made a good replye to that speach, viz. It were almes to hang him that is not good to himselfe.
Now yee are young, yet breath is in the bodie, Worke while it is light: Note Bee carefull to keepe a Cal|lender as it were of your dayes which may call vpon you hourelie, bee di|ligent for the time is short: By years, dayes, and houres, our life is conti|nuallie cut and sklised away.
What shall I say more? The Lord giue you wisedome in all thinges: Godlinesse is true wisedome: Best spirited men are not euer most spiri|tuall: As for you striue truelie to bee religious Nathanaels Israelites in|deed.Ioh. 1. 47. Euerie night before ye goe to bedde, set before your eyes the mer|cies of y^t day: Muster them orderlie

and take a view of them carefullie, that vpon your knees from your heartes yee may giue God his praise While ye are gone from the publick prayer of the Familie vnto your pri|uate bed Chamber, remember Gods mercies afresh: While yee remem|ber them, let this bee your last colla|tion drinke before yee goe to bedde;Psal. 116. 13. take with Dauid the cup of Saluation and call vpon the Name of the Lord: Note As trades men haue a day Booke for daylie receites, it were expedient that all the godlie haue a register wherein may bee written the noble actes of the Lord, for to helpe ou weake memorie, lest wee suffer his mercies to slippe out of our minde: Note If yee either forgette your sinnes or Gods mercie, remember that yee haue a Conscience which is a daylie ob|seruer, a night watch, and a secret spye into your Soules.
In all your adoes striue to be righ|teous before God, and vpright be|fore

men: See in a short verse what shall bee the end both of the godlie and wicked
The memorie of the just is blessed:Prou. 10. 7 But the name of the wicked shall rotie.
O my deare Children, lay vp care|fullie these wordes into your hearts which I your olde Father haue spo|ken with much paine: Note Thinke v|pon this, one day Death will inquire what Life hath beene doing.
As for my worldlie affaires, as Rents or Goods, if they bee great lippen not to them: If they be little, little with Gods grace is enough: If yee bee godlie, God shall bee your Father and your feeder: If yee a|bound bee not prodigall: Make not a god of your Bellie: Beware to tipple or quaffe, or with the glutton to feede delicatelie: Care not for panch plea|sures:Luk. 16. 19 Iohn liued on locusts: Note It isMatth. 3. 4 better to liue on Cake and water with a godlie Elias than to feast royallie

with a foolish Nabal: Though feasts bee pleasant they are dangerous: When the dayes of feasting were en|ded Iob sent  sanctified his children,Iob. 1. 5.  rose vp earelie in the morning for to offer burnt offerings for them al: for Iob said, It may be that my sons haue sinned  cursed God in their heart: Single feasting is fittest for the Soule and most wholesome for the bodie: God sendeth sluggardes to the Pismire as to a Master of worke for to direct them from loitering to labour.
Note Let gluttons whose dearest de|lightes, are in panch-pleasures from morning vntill euen learne of the Swallowes who sit not down to dine but feede while they flee: As they feede on flees, so they flee while they feede: What should man doe with his Bellie, but feede it as in a flight: Let the winges of sobrietie carrie you from glutting plentie before yee bee ouer-taken with that which shall make you to be ashamed to morrow:

While yebegin to drinke, beware of after-clapes: Men by a litle distemper at the fist contract easily an habit of sine: Note S. Augustine speaking how his Mother MONICA, learned to tipple, aith,
Primoribus labijs sorbebat exi|guum:August. Confess. lib. 9 c. 8 Ita ad illud modicum quotidina modica addendo in eam consuetudinem lapsa erat vt prope jam plenos mero calices inhianter hauriret.
That is, At the first shee began but to kisse the cuppe, and to sippe a little of the wine while shee filled the Cup to her Parents, but anone shee came to this, that shee made no bones to sucke drie full Cups of wine: See how from sipping at last shee came to carousing.
Oh, but that is a deare drink, which costeth a man a Spot in his name  a blot in his conscience: Experience telleth that pleasures is more dan|gerous than paine, and feasting tha~

fasting: Remember Iobs children, see in what a feare that godlie Father was concerning their easting: Cer|tainelie his feare was not a foolish feare without anie ground: It is set down in Scripture for to teach men feare in feasting: Note Too manie at such times turne themselues into barrels and beastes swinishlie o|uerturning all reason  judgement that is within them: As for you, be yee sobber if yee would bee holie: God will not tarie into y^t heart which hath a god in the bellie: Note Hee who would lodge the Arke must chasse Dagon to the doore like a dogge:
Note Manie who neglect the bellie haue pride printed in great capitall Letters vpon their backe: Bee yee not sumptuous in apparrell: Note Let God giue you the coat according to the cold: Follow not new fashions: Beware of euill example: Woe to the world for scandales.
As yee should not bee prodigall,

bee not also misers, pinch-pennies: Defraude not your selues of your graunted good: Bee thankfull to God for all his giftes: Away with these who after they haue receiued that which they sought, haue done with God, till they neede him a|gaine.
In all the course of your life striue to hold the Ballance equall, vertues in the midst: Note Extremities are like Border Theeues not subject to the Lawes. Bee neither too nice, nor too pert, too scurrile nor too silent: Note In worldlie wealth trye before yee trea|sure: If yee bee rich, glorie not in your riches; if yee bee poore, pray God to keepe you from the extremi|tie of pouertie, lest that yee put foorth your hand to steale: Note If God send pouerty be not discouraged: Though it bee sore, it is no sinne: Lazarus with his ragges was welcomer to God than Diues with his purple: Hee who begged from that rich man on

earth, saw the rich man a begger into Hell: Hee is rich enough who hath the fauour of his God: Note In good life is long life.
Nequities vitae non sinit esse senem.
The wickednesse of life abbrid|geth the life.
Bee more desirous to liue well, than to liue long: Too too manie liue to spend their grace-right with their Birthright: Such like wanton Widowes are dead while they liue
If yee fall in sinne, vp, vp, make haste to returne vnto your God: Repentance delayed in youth is a strengthening of sinne against the olde and weaker age: The least sin entertained maketh a way for more: Note The least drop of the juice of euill is lik leauen that sowreth y^e whole lumpe
If in this world yee prosper, bee not taken vp with selfe foolish con|ceit: Take not outward prosperitie to bee the ell and measure of Gods

loue: Note Whether yee wither or yee flourish in worldlie thinges, thinke vpon this, that your miserie or hap|pinesse can be in nothing but in that which is eternall: Note Goe where ye please, the justice of God one day shall try the foote-steppes which ye haue troden.
The chiefe Legacie which I leaue to you all is the Charter of Gods pro|mise, which I haue receiued by the hand of Faith: In it is an Heritage of lines fallen in pleasant places, VIZ. That not onelie hee should bee my God, but that he should be a God toExod. 20. 6. my Childre~ vnto thousand generati|ons keepe fast this promise into the Charter Chists of your heartes: In confidence of this promise depend vpon your God in well and in oe, in wealth and in want: Though hee should slay you, yet say with Iob that yee will trust in him.
Nowe for to drawe to an ende, for my breath faileth, and mine

heart fainteth, I desire you aboue all things to bee earnest in prayer with God: Note By prayer morning  eue|ning dresse your Soules like the Lampes of Gods Tabernacle: Fill them of the pure oyle-oliue of his grace, that alwayes they may shine. Note Eli|phaz charged Iob chieflie with this, as beeing the chiefe cause of all his woe, that hee restrained prayer beforeIob. 15. 4. God: With this the Psalmest hath branded the wicked, They call notPsal. 14. 4. Psal. 5 3. 4. vpon God, and againe, They call not vpon God: Note It is obserued by the most cunning Physitions that paine in speaking and loathing of meate, be two symptoms of a diseased  distempe|red bodie: A Soule while it prayeth, it speaketh; while it heareth it eateth. If there be paine in the one and loa|thing in the other, that Soule can|not bee well: Thrise a day Dauid was wont to pray, at morning,Psal. 55. 16 euening and at noone: Note This zeale also wakened him while others were

sleeping: At mid-night he arole forPsal. 119. to pray vnto his God: Happie is that ma~, who shal so spend the short time of his life in this valey of mortalitie.
Let this in all things bee an awband aboue your heades, that the eye of the Almightie God is euer vpon you, and that hee is acquainted with all your wayes: Where euer yee bee thinke your selues euer to be in that most awefull presence: make Con|science of all your thoughts, for theProu. 24. 9 verie thought of foolishnesse is euill.
Beware of the lustes of youth: Striue with God in prayer, that hee would so ingage you in his grace  loue, that your corruption proue not strongest while your wittes are weakest: Intreate earnestlie the Lord that hee woulde make perfect his strength in your weaknesse.2 Cor. 12. 9
When yee finde anie good begin|nings of Grace within your selues, waite stedfastlie vpon the due ac|complishment thereof in Glorie:

Whom the Lord loueth hee loueth to the end, his calling and gifts are without repentance.
If this yee doe carefullie, ye shall bee like twigges which hauing a vi|gorous life, sprout and flourish till they come to trees.
And now at last for to conclude and summe vp the whole brieflie: If ye would haue God to dwell into you, bee yee an holie Sanctuarie for his Spirit: If yee would haue God to rest in you as hee did into his ho|lie Temple there must bee in you as was in his Temple an Holie of holies: Note As were within Gods Arke so must yee haue within your heartes, the Tables of Gods Law the summe of the Olde Testament, and with them the potte of Manna, euen Christ the bread of life the substance of the NewIoh. 6. 35. Testament. Loue this word; honour this word, bleed for this word, yea,  die for it. Manie in this world be like these Pultrons and base spirited

men of Thessalonica, who had noAct. 17. 11 courage for the tueth: As for you, striue to bee like these of Berea, who were better borne  of a more man|lie breeding in that they were coura|gious for the Trueth. Striue to y^e kee|ping of Gods Commandments for like friends they are so linked toge|ther that if one bee offended, all the rest will interest themselues in its quarrell, faile in one, and faile in all Pray feruentlie, that ye may practise all these my precepts This doing ye shal neuer find your selues fatherles: The great God shalbe your Father: To this Father now I giue you, ir|treating him to bee a Father vnto you in all times to ensue.A prayer
The Father of mercies, the Sonne of his loue, and the Spirit of cmfortes, so guide you in all your cariage that ye may carie an incorrupt Conscience to the1 Pt, 5. 10 Graue. The God of all grace mak you perfect stablish, strengthen, settle you,  leade you in the Land of vprightnes:Psal. 144. 10 The Lord blesse you all with his best

blessings: My blessing I leaue you: Kisse mee, and so fare well.
Now the day is fatre spent, and my strength beginneth to faile mee, seeing all things as the Apostle saith, are sanctified by the word of God and1 Tim. 4. 5 prayer, let vs conclude this dayes conference with our humble sup|plications vnto our God. My deare Pastour offer yee vp this Euening Sa|crifice: The Lord perfume it with the spirituall incense of Christs me|rites, that thereby our Soules being perfumed, the Lord may finde a smell as the smell of a fielde which theGen. 27. 27 Lord hath blessed. Pray earnestlie for me, y^t the Lord giue me both stre~gth and courage for the fighting out of this Battell, that in the ende I may bee crowned with the Laurels of an euerlasting victorie.


The Pastour.
My Soule rejoyceth to haue heard so manie good wordes from your mouth: Solomon said verie well and

wiselie, A word spoken in due seasonProu. 15. 23 how good is it?
According to your desire wee shall conceiue a Prayer to GOD for you. The Lord powre vpon all our SoulesZach. 12. 10 that promised Spirit of grace and of supplications.



A Prayer for the sicke Man. Sore weakned with sicknesse.
MOst gracious GOD, mostPsal. 19. 24. deare  louing Father, Let the word of our mouth,  the meditations of our hearts bee acceptable in thy sight, O LORD, our strength and our Redeemer. By thy Spirit banish all stragling thoughts, and keepe our mindes steddie and

attentiue in this chiefest worke of deuotion.
Beholde, LORD, and consider heere thy poore Seruant fainting in great weaknesse of bodie, But thogh flesh and friends, health,  wealth, and all should faile him, thou, LORD, will neuer faile him: Hee is thy Ser|uant, he is thy Seruant, the son of thy hand-maide: Thou hast most po|werfullie hitherto supported and vpholde~ him by thy mercifull hand: Now leaue him not while he is dra|wing neare vnto his long home.Eccles. 12. 5
It is easie to perceiue that his age is departing from him, like a shep|heardsIsa. 38. 12. tent, and that thou art readie to cutte off his life like a weauer: His desire, LORD, is to bee with Thee, Thou hast heard the sighings of this prisoner, and thou hast vnderstood the groanes of thine own Spirit: As thou hast begunne the good worke in him so perfect it in due time: As thou doest with the yeare crowne it

with thy goodnesse: with-draw not thyPsal. 65. 11 Grace from him till it bee made per|fect in weaknesse.
Thou, LORD, hast manifested thy loue to him wonderfullie, by putting into his minde and mouth such diuine preceptes and counsel to his Friends, Wife, and Children, that all that haue heard them haue beene forced to wonder at the glo|rie of thy grace.
Now deare Iesus let thy force be with him in his fainting, but the nearer hee draweth vnto his end, lt thy Spirit the Comforter enable him the more, till victoriouslie hee hath put an end vnto this Battell: As the strength of his bodie shall beginne to decrease, let the comfortes of thy Spirit increase in his Soule: Seale vp in his heart that peace which thou hast purchased by the blood of the Prince of peace: Assure him of the rest of these joyes which are to bee reuealed, whereof hee hath alreadie

receiued the earnest: O, say vnto his Soule, that thou shalt bee his Saluation.
In the silence of the night while deepe sleepe falleth on man, make thou hisIob. 4 13. reines to instruct him: Suggest vnto his heart the sweetest wordes of thy comforts which may bee vnto him like apples of gold in pictures of siluer:Prou. 25. 11 Waine his heart daylie more and more from the loue of things below: Make thou his Soule to soare vp with Eagles wings towardes the hea|uenlieIsa. 40. 31 Mansions. Prepare nowe his Soule to the last conflict: Put vpon him all the Armour of God: Streng|thenEphes. 6. 11 his Faith, that hee may holde fast by Thee, yea, so resoluedlie, that though thou should slay him, yet hee may trust in thee.
When the force of sicknesse shall tak away the vse of his tongue, make his heart to groane vnto Thee in the secret language of thy Spirite, hat in thine hands he commen  his Soule

and that he desireth thee to come quick|lie for his reliefe.
Let not the increasing throes and pangues of death discourage him: In greatest anguish vphold his enfeebled heart with the hope of Glorie: Look on him, Lord, with the eye of thy mercie, incline thine eare to y^e sighes of his heart, make haste to come for his Soule is longing for his appointedIob. 14. 14 time, till his change come: As thou art the Lord of life, so vnto thee be|long the issues of death: Let strength proceede from thee like vertue from Christes garment, whereby hee may bee encouraged against the fearefull assaults of death, which shortly in all appearance shall besiege his noble parts, for to bring him vnto dust fro~ whence hee came? Make thy Spirit to enter into his hearte for to vp|hold him against this feare  smart of his last and most heauie houre.
Let him know that if the earthlie2 Cor 5. 1 house of his Tabernacle bee dissolued

that he hath a building of God, an house not made with hand eternall in the hea|uen: Make his Soule more and more earnestlie to groane for to bee cloa|thed vpon with his house, which is2 Cor. 5. 6 from Heauen: Seeing while hee is heere at home in the bodie, hee is absent from the Lord, make thou him con|fident and willing rather to bee ab|sent from the bodie, that hee may bee present with Thee in the Heauens.
Let the hope of the Resurrection vphold him against all the terrours of the Grae: Perswade his Soule that at the sound of that shrill celestiall Trumpet, his bodie shall arise, and with these same eyes shall beholde his Redeemer, and none other for him.
Innumerable euils, Lord, haue compassed him about: Nowe the time approacheth that thou wilt de|liuer him from all his feares: Make haste, Lord, Come Lord Iesus, come.
Rebuke Sathan wee intreat thee,

that in the darksome night he inter|rupt not the comforts of thy Spirit: Suffer neuer that slie and craftie one, to bereaue him of the pledges of thy loue: Make him to holde fast that which hee hath, that none bee able to take his Crowne: O mercifull God, take notice of all his wants and necessities; and bee thou to him SHADAI GOD all sufficient for to supplie them: Let him not want that Grace without the which hee cannot serue thee: Through thy selfe make him to push downe all the enemies of his Saluation: Through thy Name make him to treade them vn|der foote that rise vp against him, for he hath not forgotten the Name of thee his God, neither hath hee stretched out his hands to a strange God.
While his eye-stringes shall bee broken, and when the throes of death shall make his heart to tumble with|in him, then bee thou the strength of

his heart, the health of his counte|nance, and his God. In his greatest griefes anoynt his Soule with some droppes of that oyle of gladnesse where|with thou once anointed our Lord and Sauiour aboue his fellowes: Letsal. 45, 7 thy Graces like that precious oint|ment that ran downe vpon the beard ofPsal. 133. 2 Aaron flowe down from thee aboun|dantlie vpon all the powers of his Soule: Let spirituall vertues drop downe vpon him as the dew of Her|mon, and as the dew that descended v|ponPsal. 133. 3. the mountaines of Zion. O thou the perfection of beautie shine vpon his Soule: Indue him with a mel|ting and relenting heart.
Bee mercifull to thy distressed Church, comfort Her in all Her teares and troubles: Pittie Her de|formities: Adorne Her with Puri|tie and Vnitie: Though Shee bee1 Cant. 1. 6. outwardlie 1. duskie because the Sun hath withered Her, yet Shee is the Kings Daughter whose 2. whole glo|rie2 Psal. 45. 13

is within: 3 Awake, O North3 Cant. 4. 6 Wind, and come thou South blow vpon Her Garden, that the spices thereof may flowe out: Declare vnto Her enemies that if they 4 touch Her, they shall touch4 Zach. 2.  the Apple of thine Eye. Let them all know that it is 5 hard to kicke against5 Act. 9. 5 prickes, and that if they perlecute thee, Thou wilt throw them to the ground.
Bee mercifull to our gracious SOVERAIGNE the Kings Majestie, as by thy Grace thou hast made him a King, so by thy Grace make Him a good King: Powre down a princelie Spirit vpon his Soule, that Hee may haue courage for the Trueth: Make Him answerable to his most honou|rable Style, Defender of the Faith.
Vouchsafe thy mercie vpon his Princelie Spouse: Let the beautie of the Lord Her God bee vpon Her, Make Her like the Kings DaughterPsal. 45. 13 which is all glorious within: Make Her a Mother in Israel, a Nurse Mother

to thy Church, an happie Mother of blessed Children.
Be mercifull to all the Nobilitie of our Land, fixe fast their heartes v|pon the thinges that are aboue,
Blesse our Pastours, make them painefull  Faithfull at thy Seruice, that they may gaine with the Talents which thou hast committed to their keeping: Make them to striue more then for states to bee in thy fauour: Let their chiefest care bee to winne and wooe manie Soules to the loue of Iesus, the blessed Bridegroome ofIoh. 3. 29. the Church.
Good LORD, bee mercifull to vs that are heere humbled before thee: Encrease our Faith, and bet|ter our feeling and apprehension of thy loue Look graciously vpon this our euening sacrifice which wee doe heere render vnto thy Majestic per|fumed with the merits of thy Sonne in that prayer which hee by his most sacred wisedome hath taught vs say|ing, Our Father which art, c.


The sicke Man.
Before the market time of my lifeA prayer be ended, O my deare God, let me haue a rich pennie-worth of thy mer|cie: Thou who biddeth vs buy with|out money, giue vs grace to tak the ad|uantage of the Market, before the Sunne of our life bee set. O that in this our day wee could know the things belonging to our peace, that in an holie zeale the corruptions of our affections wherewith our hearts heere bee inhralled and sold vnder sinne, may bee justled out and tread vnder foote.





THE EIGHTH DAYES Conference.

A Conference with a carnall Friend concerning his Buriall: Concerning Funerall Sermons: Diuerse prayers: Death approaching: A Soliloque betweene the Soule and the bodie in a trance, their last adewes: The last gaspes: Michael and Sathan disput for the Soule.


The sicke Man.
THE troublous toyles of this world are the bane of Mans life, they surfet his minde with cars: My Spirit is much wearied, Oh, that I had wings lik a Doue, then would I fliePsal. 55 7 away and rest: Note O with how manie rootes are wee fastened vnto this earth:

The World, Wife, Life, and Children, but most of all our owne corruptions are burdens which hang so fast on, y^t none hand but that of the Almigh|tie is able to shake them off: So long as wee haue health and wealth wee stalke in our vanities, like Nebuchadne|zar in his palace of confusion: Wee neuer perceiue that wee dwell in Ba|ble till one judgement or other bring vs to confusion: Wee will not suf|fer to bee reproued while the time is fittest for repentance: Wee are offended at the word except that it glyde by our faults: Wee will not with Peter bee with-stood to the face:Gal. 2, 11.
Note The Preacher must whisper his re|proofes behind our backes, or he must speake vnto vs as vnto Princes into Parables: Wee heare like stones, and2 Sam. 12. 1 goe like snailes: Fye vpon vs; Oh, that wee were wise.


A carnall Friend.
What are yee now doing Sir? In all appearance yee are shortlie for to

leaue this world, yee haue said all your adewes and haue turned your backe vpon all worldlie things as He|zekiah did when hee turned his facePsa. 38. 2. to the wall.
I desire Sir to knowe of you but one thing, Where would yee bee buried? Were it not expedient that your Corps lye into y^e Church, where are buried these which are in grea|test account in this world?


The sicke Man.
What haue I to doe with this world2 Cor. 7. 31 or with the fashions of this worlde which passe away? Note Wherfore should I make the glorious House of my God a flesh pot of corruption? Fye vpon our folie: Should it be conue|nient that my stinking bones cast vp anie noysome vapours, for to trouble the liuing at the seruice of the euer|liuing?
What aduantage shall it be to my Soule to come and fetch this bodie out of a Church more than out of a

Church yeard? What prerogatiue shall it bee to my bodie in that day, that it hath beene buried into Gods House? Gods House in Scripture is called, An House of prayer; but inMatth. 21. 13 no place is it called, A place of buriall: Let no ma~ mak me an euill example after my death: Note What is this; How long shall foolish man goe round in his course and compasse of vanitie, like a blind horse in a Mill?


The carnall Friend.
But would yee not at least haue a Tombe Sir, and your name written vpon it with this, Heere lyeth such a man?


The sicke Man.
Note Vaine man is glutted with vani|tie euen vnto the gorge pype: Why trouble ye me with vanitie in death, who is now mourning for y^e vanitie of my life? mine accou~t is cast vp for another world: My name is written into the Booke of life, what care I forReuel. 3. 5 Letters into stones? away with such

Banners of pride: Such things are but cold comforts to a wearied Consci|ence: Such thinges are but vanities of none abode: Where are nowe the Mausels and most glorious Tom|bes of Emperours: It was well said by a Pagan,
Sunt etiam sua fata Sepulchris.
That is for to giue a glosse to these words, Tombes wherein the dead are buried, will bee buried themselues: No|thing is heere permanent, Triumphs haue their Tombes, and Crownes haue their compasse. O my God, fasteA prayer and fixe the eyes of my Soule vpon that which is eternall.
O the folies of mens hearts, who vainelie and needleslie waste vpon their dead vanities that which might builde houses for the poore: But let proud men lye vnder their state|lie Towers, such lifted vp stones must at last fall downe as he fell who now lyeth vnder them.
I like well of Beza his answere on

his death bed to one that spak to himBeza his reply on his death bed. of a Tombe, Sub cespie viridi, said he That is Lay mee vnder the greene Turfe: A notable word of humili|tie:Gen. 35. 8 Good Deborah was buried vn|der an Oke tree: Manie may lie vnder painted stones whose Soules are pined into Hell: God will neuer in|quire of a mans Soule where was thy bodie buried? But how hast thou liued into that bodie shall he say:
Lay mee then vnder the greene Turfe: Note How manie Martyres haue beene burnt into ashes which haue beene cast vp into the winde, and scattered vpon the waters?
Coelo tegitur qui non habet vr|nam.
Hee is couered with the Hea|uens who wanteth a graue.
Facilis jactura Sepulchri est.
The losse of buriall is no great losse.
O that my Soule were truelie humble: Note I haue alas in the dayes of my vanitie beene too much pined

with y^e prid of life, sca~dalously appea|ring without: but, O, O, O, Si trabes in oculo strues in corde, a litle beame of pride in the eye telleth that there is a stake of it in the heart: And yet in this Turfe of humilitie which I cry for, I spy a lurking pride: Pride is a se|crete thing so small spun that hard|lie can it bee discerned: A man will bee proude that hee is not proude, or rather because hee will not seeme to bee proude: This is priuie pride: The humblest heart is not euer coue|red with coursest apparell, yet certain|lie it is good both in life  in death to shew good example: Lesser sins at the first make way, and paue a cau|sey for greater: folies framed by some are followed by others: Woe to the world for scandales.
The chiefe thing at burials where|of men would take heede, is that the dead burie not the dead Woe to these buriers when these who are dead in sinne burie them who are dead for

sinne: As for you Friend, bee wise in your words, The lippes of the foole,Eccles. 10. 12 said the wise man, will swallow vp himselfe In many men the affections keepe captiue the vnderstanding.


The carnall Friend.
I pray God to make mee wise. In all this which I haue spoken there is no great matter of follie: Seeing the pompe of buriall displeaseth you, yee may bee willing that a funerall Sermon bee made for your praise  commendation, no man of anie worth now wanteth this honour.


The sicke Man.
So manie men so manie mindes: A|way with the flattering panegyricks of such funerall praise: Let Christ be preached and not sinfull man: A|way with that preaching whereof man is the Text: Note Solomon speaking of the good wife, sayeth wiselie, LetProu. 31. 31 her owne workes praise her in the gates: So let the by past life of a man praise him in his death: All men are lyers,

but Dummie cannot lye.
Note If I haue liued well, my life shall grace and praise mee sufficientlie: If not, wherefore should I make the Trumpeter of truth to become a libel|ler of lyes?
Vivorum sunt haec solatia non mortuorum.
Such comforts are onelie for the liuing but not for the dead: O the vanitie of stinking pride which blasteth the soules of men with most filthie staines.
Note Tell mee I pray you who made Christs funerall Sermon when hee was laide into the Graue? Hee whose life could neuer preach, is not worthie to bee preached vpon after his death: If while wee liue our life preach, it will preach also af|ter our death: Note The best funerall Sermon a man can haue is when his life maketh all his godly neighbours to say, This man while hee liued  a Nathanael an Israelite indeede, with|out

anie fraude or guile: Hee was a man who truelie and sincerlie liued in the feare of his God.
But men must be preached, will yee say, for such is now the fashion: Well, if men will be preached with Seraphicall tongues, let him who prea|cheth their vertues also preach their vices, as the Prophets did of olde, not sparing Kings: Dauids treachery2 Sam. 11. 4 and his adulterie, his murther and his numbering of the people are as2 Sam. 24. 1 well set downe as his desire of the building of the Temple: So So|lomons1 Kin. 11 4 idolatrie and foolishnesse is2 Chr. 32. 25 2 Chr. 20, 37 as well put in write as his wisedome: So Hezekiahs pride, and Ioho|shaphats louing of these that haed the Lord, and Iosiahs rashnesse in2 Chr, 35, 22 battell against Pharaoh Neco, are plainelie declared  faithfullie pen|ned, that all the world may knowe that they were but poore sinners: It is written of Gods beloued peo|ple, that for their sinnes God deliue|red

his strength into captiuitie: ByPsal. 78. 6 this appeareth euidentlie that the best Kinges and best people are in Gods word as well painted in their vices as in their vertues.
He who would rightly draw a mans portrature must paint his blamishes as well as his beautie: In such a case his wrats  his wrinkles must be wroght with the pinsell, that his image may bee like vnto himselfe: Note If men be onelie portreyed in their vertues, the halfe of their face shall not be seene: What is the most part of mans life heere but a sinning against God, and a prouocation of the eyes of his glo|rie? Note The best men that liue here in the greatest perfection of Gods image are like a quarter Moone, in|lightened but in a fourt part: How many haue but a sharpe edge like the Moone first seene after the change?
If funerall Sermons were made after this fashion, that mens vices were as well reproued, as their ver|tues

commended, the Preacher should bee desired to keepe silence. If yee would preach my vertues, ye must also preach my vices, and then when should that Sermon haue an end? Fye on the pride of life, which all good men chieflie at their death should both condemne and con|temne.
Of olde in Scripture wee read of the pride of life: But now in this last age Satan hath hatched a new pride called, The prid of death, eue~ of death which bringeth all men low: Note Pride printed into stones cryeth to the li|uing, Heere lyeth a proude Fellow: Hee that will bee proude in death, when shall hee bee humble? * Away with that which is both hatefull vn|to God and hurtefull vnto man.
For all that is said, I would not absolutelie blame Funerall Sermons; for the death of Gods Saincts is pre|cious in his sight: Note That which is precious in the eyes of God, may bee de|clared

glorious in the eares of men. But yet with leaue I must say y^t with reason in a great part of our Chur|ches they haue beene abrogate and casseered because of abuse: Note Seeing the Brasen Serpent which was made at y^e first by Gods own appointment was broken in pieces for the abuse thereof and disdainefullie called, Ne|hushtan, a lumpe of Brasse, much more things which God neuer com|manded in his word for to bee, bee|ing filthilie abused, may be rejected Note For is it not now come to passe and that to the great disgrace of ma|nie Preachers, to the hearkening and hardening of lewd liuers that men whose life was full of scab  scan|dales, their names being rotten fore their bodies, are so decked  busked vp with flowers of Rethorick, so wrap|ped vp into hyperbolicke commenda|tions as it were into a seare-cloath, for thereby to keepe close within smo|thered the stinking smell of their most filthie memorie.
Let all abuse bee taken away: As for me I would not that men should bee too contentious and eager in things neither bidden nor forbidden by God: Note Paul and Barnabas for an indifferent thing came at last to such an heate, that they departed oneAct. 15. 39 from another: But I cannot reade that euer they met againe.
Note If none but these whom God set out as lights of life were praised after death for to bee a spurre vnto the liuing, for to follow their foote|steppes, it should not bee a misse brieflie to say some-what to y^e praise of the defunct: Note Why should not the glorie of Gods graces in his Saints passe along  glaunce clearely in the eyes of these that are aliue? But let euer the bodie of the Sermon run vpon Christs life  death wherefrae issueth all the grace and vertue of mans life, with|in one periode of a preaching the praise of anie ma~ may find sufficient bounds
Now I thanke you louing Friend

for your kindnesse and good will: But also let mee intreate you not to bee so worldlie minded: It may be that shortlie as I am now, so shall ye bee: Mans life at the longest may bee measured with a spanne: Behold, said the Psalmest, thou hast made myPsal. 39, 5, dayes of an hand-breadth: Mine age is as nothing before thee: Our life is but a vapour and a wind which once pas|sethIam. 4, 14, Psal, 78, 39 away returneth not againe: It should therefore bee your best in time to prepare your selues for a bet|ter life and not with many to relye securelie vpon a possibilitie of par|don: If yee bee wise, venter not v|pon such broken staues which faile in greatest neede.


The carnall Friend.
Thinke not the worse of mee Sir, if I desire you to be honoured with the best in Buriall, bee not too pre|cise, I hope that wee all shall come to heauen at last, wee are all sinners: I hope before I die, to repent mee of all my sins.



The sicke Man.
Note S. Augustins wordes are of great power.
Metuendum est ne te occidatS. Augu. spes:  cum multum speres de misericordia incidas in judi|cium.
It is to be feared that while men hope for nothing so much as mercy, euen then they fall into damnation.
I pray God that such hopes de|ceiue you not: Note Many foolishlie make a packe horse of Christs merites and Gods mercies, not caring what burdens they lay on: Note A broken heart is onelie an heart qualified for the par|dons of heauen: If Christ Iesus his wordes bee of anie credit among men, this wee must hold that none shall come to heauen but by the narrow way.Matth. 7. 13
Note Sathan with his temptations hath bored out the eyes of many as the Philistins did to Samson: ButIudg. 16, 21 alas, who hath the courage of Sam|son

to seeke to be ledde to the chiefe pillars that he may pull them down for to bee reuenged vpon his foes?
Alas, this is the fashion of this world, men like the sluggard liue inProu. 24. 33 delayes in steepe and in sloth; Yet a little while, and yet a little while: No man will build an Arke vntill theGen. 19. 16. floode come: Lot himselfe did linger to saue himselfe from a brime stone fyre: Note Men haue no leasure to bee saued; so hard is it for the most part to pluke their feete out of the clou|ches of this world: Note If wee could ouercome the loue of this worlde which is the great Goliah of our ene|mies then shuld we easilie ouercome the pride of the Philislins and the feare of Israel: But carnall men know not what it is to mortifie olde Adam with his corrupt lustes: Note Fooles feede on folies, and tickle their fond fancies with imagined contentments, not knowing the strick  narrow course of sanctification: Such mens speach

is often both vnseemelie and vnsea|sonable.
Note Blessed bee my God who hath giuen mee the staffe in the hand, and the stone in the scrippe wherewith I haue stricken all my strongest cor|ruptions in the temples: Sathan is tread vnder foote, my flesh is sub|dued, mine heart is in Heauen, I care for the worlde no more, nei|ther desire I to speake anie longer of clay, or of anie thing below: My minde is aboue farre from the dirt  drosse of all earthlie thoughts.
O my heauenlie Father wrap myA prayer Soule, wrappe it vp in the righteous|nesse of thy Sonne: Let that bee the white long robe of my Soule while my body wrapt in its winding sheete shal lye rotting into the graue: O my God, fill my fainting heart with a joyfull confluence of the precious sufferings of Iesus, of the promises of life  of the joyes of heauen: mak mine ende with that of the vpright

man to bee peace: Bee not cast downePlas. 37. 37 my Soule, neither bee thou disquieted within mee: Hope in God, for I shallsal. 43. 5. yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.
Oh, but mine heart is sicke: Oh, where is my deare and louing Pa|stour? His conference is most com|fortable vnto my Soule.


The Pastour.
I am heere Sir, waiting till I see the end of your Battell: I haue heard all your wordes with great content|ment: I haue plainelie perceiued that Gods Angels these noble Spirits at|tend both to guide  to guarde you: God by the arme of his power hath brought you out of the thicket of thornes and pricking thistles of monie temptations: He who hath made all things in number, weight, and mea|sure hath not surcharge your Soule aboue that which he hath made you able to beare.
God in great grace hath made you

first to know your selfe in your of|fences and miserie, and after that to know him in his Majestie and mer|cie: The Lord God in great kind|nesse hath furnished you with firme Faith, constant Hope, and sincere Loue: He hath led you thorow many tra|uerses and perplexities: Now haue ye passed the most dreadfull  darkest houre of all your temptations.
Now the dawning of a new day approacheth, now labour might  maine to be prepared for you: GodMal. 4. 2. within a short space Christ the Sun of Righteousnesse that day spring fromLuk. 1. 78. on high shall arise vpon your Soule neuer for to goe downe: Continue in your prayers to God, that he wold possesse your Soule with true hear|ted holinesse, without which no Soule shall see Gods face: What now Sir are yee doing?


The sicke Man.
My sillie Soule is heere waiting till Death come and open the prison

doore, y^t she may flee to her God  to her Contrie from whence she came: Fogs  mists arise before mine eys.
O my God, from the Throne of thyA prayer Grace rine downe vpon my wearied Soule the refreshing showrs of thy most iender mercies: Vouchsafe vpon mee some crummes of thy comforts.
Oh, that I had the wings of a doe for to flee to the woundes of IesusPsal. 55. 6 as to the holes of the Rock: Note My poore Soule in this bodie is like a Bird in a Cage looking through the wyres, Faine would it bee free of this sinfull cap|tiuitie.
O but my Soule panteth fast after my Sauiour: Note What now shall stay mee from my God, from my Christ, from my Father,  my brother, and my Comforter,  my dearest Darling of delight? I long to bee in Heauen the place of my rest: My desire is to goe to Goshen the Land of light, of Life, and of Libertie: Mine heart is fast linked vnto Christ in loue: O

Lord, what is man that thou art so mindfull of him.
O man what is God that thou art so forgetfull of him?A prayer
O my GOD, prepare mee to meete thee with a bruised Spirit: Melt my sinnes into sighes, and my troubles into teares: Let thy goodPsal. 143. 10 Spirit leade mee into the Land of vp rightnesse: Lord, let neuer this clay returne to clay till my Spirit be rea|die to goe to him that gaue it: O quicken  sharpen my care of hea|uen dulled and blunted with earth|lie thoughts: Make sound wisedome and discretion to bee life vnto myProu. 3. 23 Soule and grace to my necke: Make my Soule trimme with that costly wed|ding Garment bought with thy Blood: O Iesus, the blessed Bride|groome, who hast by thy Gospel of Grace betrothed my Soule vnto thee, in righteousnesse in judgement,Hos. 2. 19. in louing kindnesse,  in mercies, come now and perfect the marriage in glory

before the Sainctes and Angels that arePsal. 16. 11 aboue, where pleasures are for euer|more.


The Pastour.
Amen, Amen: The Spirit of God Sir is with you,  within you: Continue in such holie and heauen|lie thoughtes: Contemne still the transitorie triffles of this world, that gladlie yee may desire to goe dwell with your God.
Naturallie all men are so stiffe|necked, and so steele hearted that they cannot submit their will to the good pleasure of their God: O that men would bee wise in time, and could consider how they must bee accoun|table for euerie houre of time they haue imployed in their life! Note Our Soules, alas, are so sensuall, that they will not knit into acquaintance with Right and Reason, but like factious  ligged lieges rebell stifelie against their Lord: Hardlie will mans heart ran|der vnto that petition which is of|ten in his mouth, viz. Thy will bee

done in earth as it is in heauen: Note The pride of mans heart perketh it selfe aboue the Lawes of humble obedience.
Blessed bee God, whose mercie hath made you a resolued man: such wordes as I haue heard of you were neuer teached in the Schoole of Na|ture: Nature cannot speake the lang|uage of Canaan: We haue nothing to rander vnto God for his working mercies but the mites of praise.
O but ye are much beholden vn|to GOD, who hath endued your Soule with his loue,  subdued the raging power of temptations whe|with your Soule at y^e first was caried lik chaffe or dust before a gale  migh|tie winde: O but your heart at the first was fearefullie hacked and man|gled with most terrible temptations!
O but the Spirite of Iesus hath wrought wonderfullie within you: Now by him are ye made free from all the terrors of temptations which like venemous hornets did flie in your face.



The sicke Man.
I finde now all that to bee true: Glade is my Soule that euer it knew that Lord: Full welcome is his Spi|rit to me: Christ is now my Loue  mine hearts delight: Hee hath ridde my Soule of all mine heauie-hearted thoughts: By his blessed Spirit hee hath perswaded mee, that my Soule hath a true and reall enterest in these blessed tidings of peace and Saluation, which hee by his Blood hath bought and broght from the Heauens.
O the mercie of my God! O the Ocean of his compassions, which hath swallowed vp the most hudge mountaines of mine iniquities! O what a redemption is this? to bee deliuered from so great a death?2 Cor. 1. 10 wherin the damned must die so long as God shall liue! Note O death of tor|ments without anie end! O life of continuance without anie ease O the immortalitie of that death, where|in sinners shall euer bee dying, but

neuer dead, wherein the least touch of paine cannot bee counteruailed with the millions of pleasures! O the tumbling and tossing that shall bee there where the wrath of God shall infinitelie burne!
Now Christ the Lord of life hath made mee free of all these fears: I hope shortlie to bee with him: I re|joyce in hope of the glorie of God: To him will I say as hee said to Zacheus, Today I must bide with thee: I longLuk. 19. 5. to bee out of this state of strife: My bodie is weake and mine eart fain|teth within mee.
O Lord, recreate and refresh myA prayer Soule with the blessed Blood of the Lambe orientle streaming thorow the channell of his wounds: Giue mee a constant assurance that all my sinnes are blotted out of thy Regi|ster: Where no woode is, there the fyreProu 26. 20 goeth out: Where sin is taken away, there wrath ceaseth to bee: O Lord, conduct the Ruther of my Soule, till it

hath sailed thorow al the seas of sorrows and become to the Port of pleasuresPsal. 16. 11 for euermore?


The Pastour.
Take courage and continue so: Lift vp your head, with the eye of Faith behold the other Shore, euen the Land beyond the riuer, ThePsal. 143, 10 Land of vprightnes, Canaan which is aboue: Bend vp all your heart-strings with hauenlie desires: Fixe fast your eyes vpon that Crowne of immortali|tie: Let now all your thoughts claspe fast about the mercies of your God: Hee nowe imbraceth you, his hand is a sure hold fast, which neuer letteth slip, y^t which it once hath seized on: In al appearance your Battell is neare an end: Waite stedfastlie vpon the Lord: Christ shortlie with a soft hand shal loose the knot of your life, that your Soule may goe free to the place of its rest, your Soule alreadie by the mercifull Arme of Iesus hath beene deliuered from the painefull

racke of repentance, and now is sette vpon the rocke of your Saluation: The gracious God hath beene your Fa|ther, Feeder, and Defender: Your desirs which of before, were grap|pled to the ground, now only aspire to things which are aboue: Note Afflicti|ons to the Soule is like the gade to theThe He|brewes called the Gad Iudg. 3. 3 Malmad quod bo|ves do|ceat ara|re. Oxe a teacher of obedience.
Finde ye now the tempest of your Conscience so allayed as yee would wish? Is all calme and at quiet with|in? I hope that the blessed droppes of the Lambes Blood haue quenched that wilde fyre wherewith once your troubled Conscience was enflam|med: Yee as I esteeme are no more troubled for your sinnes, as though God neither would nor were able to forgiue: I pray God that yee may boldlie say with a godlie Father.
What shall I returne vnto my gracious God, that I darre nowS. Aug. looke my sinnes in the face, and not bee afraide?



The sicke Man.
My sinnes, I blesse God, fright mee no more: O the rich bowels of Iesus wherein is a Myne of mercie.
I remember now of a sweete say|ing of a godlie ma~ on his death-bed.
Note When mine iniquities, saide hee, are greater than thy mercies, O God, then will I feare and de|spaire.
The comfortes of my God now refresh my Soule lik the Riuer of Si|loahIsa. 8. 6. that watered the Citie of God: I blesse God for all my try all  trou|bles which hee hath made to worke together to my well: Note Grace in the heart is often like fyre in flint insensi|ble vntill it bee beaten.
It is good for vs that wee bee af|flicted: The bluenesse of the woundProu. 20. 30 purgeth away euill: My Saluation now is surelie sealed by the hand of y^e Spi|rit: By his seale it is made sure and authenticall: O how my Soule hath with a bright eye discouered the fa|uours

of his face: Note O if God for|sake a man, hee will shortlie with Iu|das* Note passe from the horror to the halter: O the mercies of God towards me.


The Pastour.
O how much are yee beholden vnto God, who by his Spirit hath so directed your heart and mouth, with wordes perfumed with the sa|uour2 Cor. 2 16 of life vnto life, yee haue refre|shed all our Soules as with a sweete breath: Note If the Spirit of Grace gui|ded not our tongues in our tempta|tions, our mouths to our euerlasting shame, should breath out stiffe and stinking blastes of blasphemie a|gainst y^e Lord our Creator: Praised be the Name of the most High, who hath borne and broken that vnspeak|able burden of wrath where with yee were surcharged at our first meeting.


The sicke Man.
Amen, Amen: Blessed bee the Name of Iesus: At that Name the knees of my Soule bowe in a most

humble manner to the ground, for to kisse it with my mouth a thousand times vpon Conscience of my by|gone miserie, and of his present mer|cie: All mine affections are set on foote and are so cheered and raui|shed with the loue of my God, as no tongue can expresse.
O happie,  thrise happie change: Note Once I feared damnation, nowe Christ is my Saluation: Once I sat in darknesse hee is now my Light Once I was in Death, hee is now my Life: Once I was in bondage, hee is now my Libertie: Once I was in want, hee is now my Wealth: Once I was in sicknesse, hee is nowe mine Health: Once I was in shame, hee is nowe my Glorie: What shall I say moe? Hee is mine onelie Deare, and and dearest heartes desire: Hee is my strongest Tower: I haue none other Arke to saue mee from the flood. Mine heart is prepared, mine heart is prepared: Note Oh that I were where

without let I shall sing Halleluiah for euer, where all earthlie objects shall seeme but filthie abjects in compa|rison of him.
Now Sir I intreat you to con|ceiue another Prayer, that thereby as by the Charet of Elijah my Soule2 Kin 2. 11 may bee carried vp into Heauen: Commend my Soule into the hands of Christ the Redeemer: Yee the Lords Priest stand still with the Arke till my Soule hath passed the Iordan for to enter into Canaan.A prayer
O Lord Iesus, pittie this poore Soule that panteth at thy feete, draw it out of this clogge of clay: Be with mee vnto the end: Graue thine owne shape deepe within mine heart, that it may bee in judgement as a piece of euidence, that the Heauens are mine heritage: O look vpon mee, who am heere, waiting v|ponTit, 2. 13 that blessed hope: Comfort  refresh mee with the sweetest breath of thy blessed Spirit: Set my sillie. Soule upon Pisga the sight hill of Canaan:

Guarde mee with the invinsible troopes of thine Angels: O thou whose Name and Nature is mercie, take my wearied Soule and lull it sweetelie in the softest armes of thy most tender compassions.
Ioyne your prayers vnto mine: The effectuall feruant prayer of a righ|teousIam. 5. 16. man auaileth much.


The Pastour.
According to your desire Sir wee shall worsle with God in prayer that your end may bee peace.Psal. 37. 37
The Lord gather all our scatteredA prayer thoughts, that beeing as twisted toge|ther into one threede, they may be likeEccles. 4. 12 the three-fold corde which is not easilie broken, powerfull to draw downe Gods Graces from aboue.
Let vs pray.


A Prayer for the sick ma~.
O Lord, settle earnest prayer in our Soules vpon true sense of

our neede: Let not our prayers be tumultuous: Tune thou our words by thy Spirit, while our lips walke, make our hearts to moue: Preserue vs from vaine babyling, lest our pra|yersPsal. 109, 7 bee turned into sinne.
O God, the God of all Spirites who hast the keyes of Heauen and of Hell: Thou steeketh and no man o|peneth: Thou openeth and no man steeketh: Open now thy mercifull doores vnto this poore Soule which panteth after thee as the chassed HartPsal. 41. 1 panteth after the water brookes: Let none of his sinnes stand betweene thy face and him for to ecclipse his Soule the light of thy countenance: Seale vp in his heart by thy Spirit y^e free  full forgiuenes of all his trans|gressions. Thou who by the vertue of thy death made y^e vaile of the TempleMatth. 27. 51. to rent for to mak an open way to the Holie of holies, mak also the partition wall of all his iniquities to cleaue from the toppe to the bottome, that his

Soule remoued from his bodie, may get entrie to the Highest and holiest of the Heauens where thine honour dwelleth: Make thy Graces in him to growe like Elias his cloud which at the first no bigger than an hand, at last by and by did ouer spread the whole skie. Sanctifie his Soule and soften his heart, with the diuine dew of thy Grace: Say vnto his Soule, I am thy Saluation: Behold, Lord, his Soule is seeking thee, let nothing in his search carie him on the by.
Keepe fast in his remembrance the blessed bloodie passion of his Re|deemer Iesus: When Death shall come, let him die with thy Christ in his Armes.
Strengthen and increase his de|sire to be dissolued, assuring him that it shalbe much better for him: Fur|nish him with strength, whereby he may row against the strictest streams of all temptations, till hee arriue in|to the hauen of the Heauens the sole

and safe harberie of Saluation.
And seeing no vncleane thing can enter into Heauen, Lord, wash this thy seruant, and wash him throughlie, that by the vertue of thy Blood, his sinnes though they were red like scarlet and crimson, may beeIsa. 1. 18. made white like wooll, and whiter than the snow. Pull off his Soule the men|strous cloath of his owne righteousnes, and cloth him with the righteousnes, of him whose statelie style is, THEIer. 23. 6. LORD OVR RIGHT TEOVSNES.
Thou who hast alreadie added strength vnto his Faith while it was scant like a smoking flaxe, let not theIsa. 42. 3. sparkle which once thou hast kind|led for euer bee quenched: Amid the sight of his sins, make him to lay hold vpon the merite and full satis|faction of his Sauiour: Let him with all the Faithfull receiue of that ful|nesse,Ioh. 1. 16. and grace for grace.
And seeing nowe, Lord, hee is comming vnto thee thorow the sna|kie

fielde of manie temptations, letteEccles. 6. 15 his feete bee shod with the preparation of thy Gospel: Thou, Lord, wilt neuer suffer anie that trust in thee to bee confounded: Hee followed thee constantlie in his life, nowe let thy Spirit tryst him at y^e houre of death: Hee disclaimeth all hope of helpe by anie other than by thy selfe alone: Though hee knoweth not perfect|lie what to say, yet his eyes are on thee: Thou who is Alpha and Omega hast begunne this good worke in him, crowne it with the perfection of thy goodnesse: Let him more  more feele that hee is euerlastinglie acquite by the Blood of the Lambe from the terrors of Gods Tribunall: Refresh his Soule more and more with celestiall spirituall joyes procee|ding from the Spirit of Grace: Let him feele himselfe assuredlie knit  vnited to thee: O thou preseruer of men that in and by thee hee may be presented blamelesse before thy

Majesties Iustice-seate.
Furnish his minde with light, and his memorie with strength, that hee may vnderstand and remember that Christes death is an absolute and all sufficient Sacrifice for remouing the guilt of all repenting sinners: Shewe him a signe of thy loue: Multiplie in his heart the pledges of thy kindnes: Make him faithfull vnto death, that hee may receiue the Crowne of life.
Thou hast alreadie subdued in him alloue and liking of this world: Nowe graunt that the hope of that glorie, which is to bee reuea|led, may bee so strong in his Soule, that it may shield and fence him from the force and furie of the last assaults: The nearer he draweth vnto death, inlarge the chanell of thy graces like a Riuer which is broadest towards the end of its course: Make his heart in the orest pangs of death to bee still lif|ted vp towards thee.
And seeing Death and the Deuill

mans two last enemies are euer busie the one for to fright, the other for to tempt: Prepare him, Lord, and furnish him so with thy Graces, that hee may proue victorious in this last assault.
O gracious GOD, assist him by thy force against the most violent blustering winds of the last and most fearefull temptations: If Satan looke in at the doores of his heart, seeking for an entrie, let him neuer get so much as one chamber-roome set a part for his sojourning: Make thy grace vnto him like a Sunne, like a Bridegroome comming out of hisPsal. 19. 5, Chamber to disperse the darknesse of his mistie minde.
Vnto his last gaspe direct him so by thy good Spirit, that his Soule may cleaue so fast vnto thee y^t neither sinne, nor sicknesse, life, nor death may bee able to separate him from thee: Thogh thou shuld slay him yet wil hee trust in thee: Faile him not now

in time of neede: vphold his heart in this heauie houre: Let his Soule lurke vnder the winges of thy mercie, till the tempest of wrath bee calmed  past ouer: Bee thou to him a shelter against the heauie showers of the last a|gonie.
O gracious Lord, in wrath remem|berHab. 8. 2. mercie: In the multitude of thy compassions blot out his transgres|sions, and that for the dearest drops of that sacred Blood that gushed vpon the cursed crosse: Rinse and cleanse his heart from all vncleannes: Giue him courage in his greatest fears: Let not Death bee vnto him as a king of feare, nor hee as one of the wicked, whose hope doeth perish with their breath: O Lord, let thy Name bee vnto him like a strong tower for to hid him into the time of trouble: Let this bee the cleare candle of his com|fort neuer to bee quenched, that Christ by his death hath for him and all the Faithfull, ouercome Death

and disarmed it of its sting: Declare by the inward motion of thy Spirit to his Soule, that the nature of death by the death of Christ is changed in|to a sleepe vnto all the friends of Christ, who by the infinite power of his di|uine Nature, hath swallowed it vp in victorie, and hath so digested it, that now the bitternesse thereof is past.
As the Arke was to Noah, and Zoar vnto Lot, so bee thou a refuge to this faithfull Soule fighting thy battels, not onelie against flesh andEphes 6. 12 blood, but against principalities and po|wers, against the gouernours of dark|nesse of this world, and against spiritu|all wickednesse in high places: Let thy strength bee made perfect in his weaknesse: As thou hast vp holden him hitherto by the strength of thy Spirit, so continue with him vntill the end: The battell is the Lords, fight Lord, for thine own cause, eue~ for this Soule one of thy redeemed

Ones: obtaine thou the victorie, and take the glorie to thy selfe. O God, both of grace and glorie seale surely vp in his bosome the pardon of all his iniquities: Perfect the comfortes which thou hast begunne, say vnto his Soule; That heauen is not so high, nor hell so low, nor the world so wide, as are thy mercies towards him: All thy creatures haue their owne dimensi|ons, but thy mercie, Lord, like thy selfe is without measure: Out of these infinite compassions make this sillie Soule partaker of the dearest mer|cies that euer rould together, the re|lenting bowels of thy tenderest loue.
Heare vs, Lord, in all these our sutes, and that for the sake of thy best beloued and onelie begotten Sonne the Lord Iesus Christ, in whose Name, and at whole com|mand wee powre out our heartes to thee in that prayer which by his own sacred and most blessed mouth hee hath taught vs, Our Father, c.


The sicke Man.
Lord, heare thou in Heauen: Bles|sed for euer be thy Name, for such spirituall comfortes, for so manie mercies, I can rander nothing but the little mites of praise and thankes|giuing.
Mine heart is filled with songs of Gods mercie: If his Spirit of grace had not vpholden mee in my first feares while (as I thought) I was wrapped into an infinite wrath, I had certainelie beene swallowed vp with ouermuch sorrow: But now blessed eternallie bee the Lord who hath made the earth to swallow vp all the floodes of temptations and tribulations, which that red Dragon the Deuill a bloodie murtherer hath cast out of his mouth after mee for to carrie my Soule down head-longs to perdition: Now finde I Gods word to bee true, that hee is ouer|comeReuel. 12. 11 by the Blood of the Lambe: Ex|cept that the Lord had beene on my

side, O in what a dumbe dumpe had my poore Soule beene driuen into ere now.


The Pastour.
Hee who followed Gen. 3. 8 Adam tho|row the thicke bushes, and Ino. 2, 1 Ionas in the bottome of the sea, Hee who Gen. 32. 29 blessed the crooked man, and made the 1 Sam. 1. 18 barren fertile, and the Luk. 1. 62 dumbe to speake, the Luk. 7. 22 deafe to heare, and the Ioh. 9. 7. blind to see, hath made his grace perfect in your weaknesse: He best feeleth the pulse of our heartes and the force of our life.
Loth would hee bee to breake theIsa. 42. 3 bruised reede, or to quench the smoking flaxe: Note All men by nature are but like an vncleane Dung-hill of drosse, their heartes at the first are but a den of Dragons: But so soone as the Spi|rit of grace hath begunne to drawe the draughts and lineamentes of Gods image within the soule of a man, no|thing shall bee able to deface or man|gle that liuelie image: To all sorts of

temptations Gods wisedome shall finde an out-gate: Note Neither the traines of Sathan, nor the treason of our bosome sinnes, nor the terrors of hell, nor the trashes of the world shall euer be able to preueale againstpsal. 16. 3. Adirim Gods excellent Ones: Accor|ding as Zacharias filled with the holie Ghost prophecied, It is gran|ted vnto vs that wee beeing deliueredLuk. 1. 14. out of the handes of our enemies, may serue him without feare.


The sicke Man.
I blesse God for such inestima|ble comforts: Sathan hath shrewd|lie assaulted mee, but could not pre|uaile: My corruptions haue beene subdued and awed by the Majestie of the Spirit of Iesus: My Soule re|joyceth in GOD: In the merites of Christ as in a glasse I see him a meeke  a mercifull Father: I am not now afraide to come to a tryall at his Tri|bunall, I am no more dismayed for the vnquencheable flammes of the fierie lake.
I thinke certainelie that there was neuer a man so much beholden to my God as I am: Truelie may I sing with the Psalmest, I waited pa|tientliePsal. 40. 1 or the Lord, and hee incli|ned vnto mee, and heard my cry: Heevers. 2. brought me out of an horrible pitte, out of the myrrie clay, and set my feete v|pon a Rocke, and established my goings: He hath put a new song into my mouth,vers. 3. euen praise vnto our God: many shall see it and feare, and shall trust in the Lord.
O that I had breath for the set|ting foorth of his praise! Happie is he who while he may vtter words, praiseth God continuallie: Blessed is that man who may call his tongue his Glorie: Note O my Soule, I charge thee by the Roes and by the Hindes of the fielde, that thou cease not to praise his Might his Mercie, and his Majestie: O my Soule, take heede and listen vnto his voyce: O Iesus, the great Deputie of mercie sent by

the Father, forsake mee not in this heauie houre.
Now I sore sicken, so that all natu|rallforce faileth me: My words now so weaie mee, that I thinke ere it be long this bodie shall bee lodged in the place of silence: But let mee intreate you Sir; so long as ye shall perceiue life to bee in mee, let it please you to continue in some good purpose concerning the world to come: By some holie discourse rouse vp my drousie Spirit, hold mine heart vpon an edge: Let me not die like a sense|lesse Nabal, of whom it is written, that his heart died within him, so that1 Sam. 25 37. hee became like a stone: Manie blind|lie and boldlie rush into hell.
I beseech you Sir: to waite well vpon mee till yee see the ende: I thinke that ere it bee long my Soule shall bee at the farthest tryst.
O Lord, warme my frozen SouleA prayer with the sense of the kindled com|passions of the bowels of thy loue

Inlighten my mistie minde  cleare it with thy countenance: Bee thou the comforter of my Conscience, vntil the day break and the shadows flieCant. 4 6. away.
Take now Sir my Soule into the armes of your prayers, lift it vp and lay it into that blessed bosome of my Lordes mercies: Bend yet againe your knees before God in prayer, that hee for his mercies sake would receiue mee into my Masters joye: O but my Soule fluttereth fast within mee for to bee at my God: Let it please you to bee feruent in prayer for mee, that I may foile vnder my feete the Deuill, Death, and all the powers of hell: The Deuill in death will not faile to giue mee a furious assault at the chiefest fortresse of my Saluation, for to batter it downe to the ground: Intreate the Lord that his mercie may bee a strong rempart and a blessed Bul-wark against all the Engines of hell which are readie bent

to waste and hauock all Gods graces within mee.
O Lord, campe thine Angels a|boutA prayer mee: Place thy Pauilions of war betweene mee and mine enemies: Refresh mee more and more with thy comforts: Giue mee the earnest of these joyes which passe all vnder|standing: Possesse mee with the Spi|rit of gladnesse, for that thou in mer|cie hast forgiuen mee my sinnes: Continue so vnto the end, that in the heauens for euer this may be the burden of my song, For his merciePsal. 136. 1 2. 3. c. indureth for euer.
Let it please you Sir on whome God hath vouchsafed the Spirit of Prayer in a good and great measure, to assist mee with your comforts and prayers, lest by temptations I should beginne to slacke off my care and watchfulnesse.


The Pastour.
Hold fast your eye vpon Christ your Redeemer: Follow him tho|row

the valey of death, for hee hathPsal. 23, 4 not onelie pointed out our path, but asHeb. 2. 10, Captaine of our Saluation, hath troden euery steppe before vs: Yee may well sticke a little in the narrow throate of Death, but that one steppeGen. 26. 22 being past yee enter into Rehoboth a place of roome, farre from the reekie smoke, vaine shadowes, and dreames of earthlie vanitie, and perish|ing pleasures: Note Bee glad Sir, to flit from this barren moorish ground and muddie mortalitie for to goe to a para|dise,Psal. 16. 11 a Palace, a place of pleasures for euermore. According to your desire wee shall returne to God by prayer.



A Prayer for the sicke man drawing neare to the doores of death.
O Father of mercies and God of all comforts in whom all good|nesse and graces are treasured, let it

please thee fauourablie to regard the soule of this thy seruant here, whose heart panteth after thee, as the wea|ried Hart panteth after the water brookes: Refresh his Soule with thePsal. 42. 1. diuine dew of thy grace till it bee entered in at the gates of Glorie: Powre into his hearte the sweete streames of thy loue: Settle his soule in a right and vpright course, so long as it remaineth in this mistie  mud|die mortalitie, send out thy light and guide it by thy Grace, till it hath passed the straites of Death for to enter into the Land of vprightnes. O Father of mercies, perswade him by thy Spirit, that the comming of Death shall bee to him a time of dis|charge, a time of freedome from sicknes of bodie, anguish of Spirit, trouble of Conscience, and from all possibilitie of sinning anie more: Let him know that while hee is go|ing to the Graue, hee is going to a bedde of ease, where most quietlie heIsa. 57. 2.

shall rest from all his toylesome la|bours.
Turne all feare of Death into a chearefull expectation, and longing for the houre of dissolution: Make quiet his Conscience, that he may die with comfort. O thou Sauiour of mankind, whose boweles are filled with mercifull compassions, spreade the wing of thy righteous garment ouer this Soule of thy seruant: Thou hast shaken him with thy terrours in diuerse assaults: Thou hast broght him low for to make him a fitte pas|senger for the little doore which lea|deth vnto Glorie.
Leaue him not now, Lord, in his greatest neede: Make thine Angels camped about him, powerfully to as|sist him against al the last assaults of y^t euill one: Thou who hast heard all his groanes, registrat thou his sighs, and put all his teares into thy bot|tels, suffer not thy kindled zeale to coole in him: In an holie despaire of

his owne worth, make him whollie to relye vpon thy meere mercies in Christe, the onelie salue for sicke Soules, and remeed for broken bones.Psal. 51. 8
While hee is weakest, work with thy Spirit feelinglie and powerful|lie into his hearte: Subdue euerie euill motion that may arise therein for the troubling of his soule: Draw vp his desire aboue the pitch of all natural knowledge: Banish all earth|lie thinges cleane out of his minde, and make all his thoughts to attend vpon thee: In thy diuine might rebuke Sathan, that hee interrupt not thy comforts: Let him not bee able by his secret craft and vyles to steale from him the pledges of thy loue.
O Sonne of GOD, O Sunne ofMal. 4. 2 Righteousnes, send a quickning heate with a shining light into his sillie Soule: Make thy blessed Beames to strik on his heart for to warme it with thy loue: Set all his desires a floate

from the moode of sinful mortalitie: Thou at diuerse times hast affrighted him fearefullie with dreadfull visita|tations of Conscience: His Soule hath bene sore racked with y^e pitifull perplexities of a vexed minde: Now death is approaching: Sight  senses  all are failing, but thou Lord will neuer faile him: While the naturall eyes of his bodie beginne to growe dimme, then cleare thou the spiri|tuall eyes of his soule, that hee may with Stephen see the heauens opened,Act. 7. 56. and the Sonne of man readie to receiue him: And alwayes, Lord, as the time of death shall approach, so let his Soule draw nearer vnto thee, that while sicknesse shall take away the vse of his tongue, his heart may cry to thee, Come Lord Iesus come, in thine hands I resigne my Spirit.
Nowe Father of mercies, seeing thy Girnels are prepared for him, by the power of thy grace fanne this Corne cleane from its chaffe that it

may bee treasured vp therein: Put his life in a readinesse, that hee may giue thee a chearefull account of all wherein hee hath imployed thy Ta|lents: Let him heare these words of joye, Faithfull seruant come and en|ter in thy Masters joye.
Long hath his Soule beene woo|ing the heauens with weake flutte|ring desires: Nowe open the win|dow of thine Arke and let in this wearied Doue crouding for thy Rest Manie depthes bee betweene vs and heauen: One deepth calleth vpon ano|ther deepth, for flesh and blood there is no possibilitie of passing thorowe: But, Lord, that which is impossible with men is possible with thee: Let therefore the vertue of thy death be to him like a Bridge for to sette him safe ouer all the gulfes of miserie: In his journey to thy Kingdome re|moue all rubbes out of the way.
O Lord, listen to our cry: Put these our vnworthy prayers into thy

golden Censer: Perfume them with the incense of thy righteousnesse, and offer them vp to thy Father vpon the Altar of thy diuinitie: And thou Fa|therof mercies, for the merites of thy Son his all sauing death which hee hath suffered for al repe~ting sinners: Receiuein mercy this Soule which Sathan hath sought to sift: Receiue the deare price of the Blood of thy Son: Let thy Iustice say, I am satisfied: Let thy mercie so smile vpon him, that it may bee the health of his countenance and the comfort of his Conscience: While hee shall finish his course, fi|nish thou his Faith with perfection whereby hee may die, hauing a set|tled assurance of that blessed Inheri|tance and massie Crowne of immor|talitie, which Christ hath conquised by his bloodie merites: To whom with Thee and the Spirit of Grace, bee all Glorie, honour, dominion and euerlasting power for now and euer, Amen.


The sicke Man.
Lord heare thou in Heauen. O blessed God, and Father of eternity,A prayer seeing my time nowe is short, giue mee grace to manage it well: Shute not thine eares to my sighes, while my tong in the jawes of death shall cleaue fast to the roofe of my mouth: O follow me with thy fauours, eue~ thorow the valey of the shadow of death: O Lord, because thou art faithfull,  cannot lie, I look short|lie to receiue in hand that which I haue in hope: O come now and put an ende to the dayes of my vanitie.


The Pastour.
Blessed  magnified be the Lord of e|ternitie for such wonderfull mercies towards you: Note He most powerfullie  most wonderfully hath brought you back from the corrupt course of Nature, as a Boat rowed against the streame by the force of Armes and of Oares: Behold, now ye approch vnto your Heauen Be of good heart Sir, ye are neare vnto your rest, the place ofPsal. 16. 11 pleasures for euermore.
Nowe seeing the ende draweth neare, yee haue to remember well if yee haue anie grudge against anie; that before yee decease, they may be fetcht and friended with you.


The sicke Man.
I wish all men to be well: I hope that no man wisheth otherwise to mee: Note My desire was neuer either to reuile or to reuenge: I am readie to satisfie where I haue failed, and to forgiue where I haue receiued the greatest wrong: Mans wronges a|gainst mee are but light in compari|son of my wickednes against God: Note Hee is not worthie that God shuld forgiue him his sinnes who will not forgiue his neighbour an injury: My good God hath forgiuen mee all: As hee hath forgiuen mee, so I forgiue all men, and desire the lik to be done by others vnto mee: Note My Soule abhorreth these words of ranckour, I may forgiue him, but I will not for|gete him: The softning Spirit of God

cannot dwell where there is such stonie steelie hardnesse of heart.
O Fountaine of Grace, powre the powers of thy Spirit within my breast,A prayer that, my Soule, may bee refreshed with thy blessed balmie comfortes of sauing grace: Draw vp my spirit toward the Tabernacles of immortalitie: O whenPsal 42. 2, shall I come and appeare before God! Put to the Spure to this dull jadde of my foggie flesh, that I may make more haste in my journey.


The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in heauen.
Seeing God hath blessed you with Wealth, I doubt not but that ye will doe some thing for the well of Col|ledges Hospitales:Note Colledges are the Seminaries or seede-plotes of vertues, out of which come these who be|come Rulers of the Church  Com|mon-wealth: Hospitals are shelters for the poore the friendes of Christ: Christs counsell to the rich is that they make friendes of the Mammon ofLuk. 16. 9, vnrigh|teousnes:

Such words were not spo|ken by our Lord without great and weightie reasons.


The sicke Man.
All these things were done in my Testament, while I put mine house to an order: I haue not forgot that point of duetie: Hee is not worthy to be called a faithfull man who lea|ueth not behind him some fruits of his Faith: Note That Faith which cannot justifie a man by good works before men, will neuer justifie his soule before God: Remember mee, O Lord,Nehem. 13 14 co~cerning this,  wipe not away my good deedes which I haue done for thy glory.
Let men dreame of Saluation as they please, S. Iames his precept is, that men shewe their Faith by theirIam. 2. 18. workes: Note Though Pharisees doe all that they doe for to bee seene, men must not in mens sight forbeare to doe well: Because Hypocrites come to preaching  prayers publicklie, true Israelites for that must not sitte at

home: The Godlie must not bee so base in heart as to abstaine from all publicke good, because the wicked worshippe but outwardlie: Shewes without substance in some, should not bee able to banish the shewes of sub|stance from others.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir yee speake wiselie: As the tree is first seene in the budde and then in the flourish, and after in the fruite, so muste the life of manMatth. 21. 9 bee: Because the barren figge tree had nothing but leaues, the fruitfull tree must not grow bare, the leaues of the tree haue their owne vse a|mong the fruites: So haue godlie shewes good vses when they are joy|ned with true substance: Note The Faith of a Christian should not think shame to shew her faire face, because Hypocrisies face seemeth to be faire while it is fairded: No not: God will haue true faith to come out, that the world may see her into works: Shew

mee thy Faith by thy workes: ChristIam. 2, 18 who desireth that the niggard or am|bitiousMatth. 6. 4 left hand know not or see not the liberalitie of the charitable right hand, commandeth that wee let ou light so shine before men, that they mayMatth. 5. 16 see our good works, and glorifie our Fa|ther which is in heauen.
The graces of Gods Spirit in a man are like a light candle: No man light a Candle, and put it vnder a bushell, but on a Candle-sticke,  it gi|uethLuk. 11. 33 light to all that are in the house: Note The good life of the godlie man should bee like a Citie sette on an hillMatth. 5. 14 which cannot bee hid: Note The labourer soweth not his seede on the ground that it may still remaine hidde vnder the cloddes; neither doeth God sow his graces in our heartes that there they may luk  still abide secret: Note I like not these who feare to seeme godlie left they should bee thought to be Hypocrites: Euen in that are they Hypocrites, that for feare they seeme to affect godlinesse, will not

doe good that may bee seene which would moue the true Israelits to glo|rifie our Father in heauen, yea, and al|so allure these to come to God who as yet are strangers from the Common|wealth of Israel.
I confesse that fewe bee troubled with such a feare: It is a sin where|of verie few in this Land are guiltie, yet seeing it is a sinne, it would bee carefullie auoided: Note Because Pa|pists whollie relye on their workes, Pro|testants with great scandale will one|lie bragge of their Faith: Thus both the one and the other against the truth of doctrine separate that which God hath joyned together.


The sicke Man.
O Lord, GOD of gods, O Father of euerlasting compassions, whose bles|sedA prayer bowels did bleede vpon the crosse for to saue sinners, pittie heere a fraile  feeble creature yet tugging and wre|stling in the Barras of this sinfull flesh: Furnish mee with strength,

whereby I may surmount and van|quish all difficulties which are be|tweene my Soule and the place of its euerlasting rest: I am weake, for|beare mee, Lord, in thy great mer|cie: Ioyne thy Grace with my grief: O that I were with my Christ, the Marke whereat I aime, the Port whereto I saile, the rest of my desires: Let thy good Spirit, O Lord, assist mee: Let thy fauour and grace bee my vade-mecum till I come to thy Glorie: O who shall giue to my soule the wings of a Doue, that it mayPsal. 55. 6 flee out of the Douket of this bodie vp to its God: O deare Sauiour, setCant. 8 6. Cant. 1. 4, mee as a seale vpon thine heart: Draw mee and wee shall runne after thee: Holde mine heart aloft, that it may onelie minde the things aboue.


The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in heauen, and grant the sute of thy seruant: I feare Sir that yee bee wearied with spea|king: As I perceiue yee force your

selfe in your words aboue the reach of your strength: Seeing yee tra|uell thus in paine of your speach, spend the little space of life that re|steth in holie meditations concer|ning the bloodie wounds of Christ your Sauiour.


The sicke Man.
Christ now is onelie my comfort: I loue him with the best bowels of mine heart: In the bowels of his mercie I reade by the eye of Faith most faire lines of his loue, all written in great Capitall letters of an heauenlie impres|sion: Note Christ is to mee in stead of all, for alreadie in my neede hee hath stood mee in more stead than all.
O in what a pitifull plight my sillie and forlorne Soule was once into! Blssed bee hee for euermore who in so great kindnesse hath shi|ned vpon me with y^e blessed, bright, and vnspotted beames of his mercy.
O but my Soule panteth after him! Oh, how this heart of mine

is euill to breake! What a piece of clammie teugh clay is this that sette|reth so my Soule, that by no meanes can it bee loosed from it, that it may soare vp to its God, from griefe to glorie: O that I were with him with whom I shall not want the thing that I can wish: Now, Lord, the time is come; pull off mee the dull wiede of sinfull mortalitie and cloath my soule in white with the Robe of Christes righteousnesse, that it may followe the Lambe: O but I am wearied: My Soule longeth to see the Face of my God.


The Pastour.
Waite vpon the Lords will, when it is time hee will open the prison doore and let your Soule flie vp to your Glorie: Thinke on Heauen still:Note Mount vp your minde to your Maker, who shall shortlie roofe with Glorie the graces which hee hath reared vp into your heart: Let the hope of these thinges hearten you

in the mudde and myre of this sin|full mortalitie.


The sicke man.
O Lord, pittie this Soule, whichA prayer I haue defiled and defaced with scar|let transgressions and crimsin ini|quities. Thou hast begunne the good worke in me: It is now neere to perfection: Put to now the last hand, and perfect the worke: Rub out perfectlie with the Blood of thy Lambe the least staines which sticke in my Soule, that while thou shalt look vpon mee, thou may know mee to bee thy redeemed one by the stampe of thine owne Image.
O Lord, fixe mine heart so intoA prayer thine owne heart, that nothing bee able to pull it out, without pulling out thine owne: It hath beene like a crooked twigge, O writh it so nowe the right way, that it may bee according to thine owne heart.



The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in Heauen, and graunt the sute of thy Seruant: Let nothing bee able to tickle, tempt, or trouble his Soule.
Be of good heart Sir, the Battell is neare an end: Fight out the good fight, finish your course, and keepe the Faith, hence-foorth is laide vp for you a Crowne of righteousnesse which2 Tim. 4 8 the LORD shall giue you at that day. Make now full proofe of your courage, which shall shortlie be co|uered with a Crown. Hold out still in your holie exercise till your change come.


The sicke Man.
I wearie of this cottage of claye: I am at a point with all that is vnder the Sunne: I care not for this worlds fauour, no more for its frowne: But O but my Soule longeth to be with my Lord, that I may see his face with fulnesse of joye.Psal, 16. 11
O thou with whom nothing is im|possible,A prayer

make the scales of mortali|tie to fall from mine eyes, that I may fee thee before euen as thou art: My Soule longeth to be out of this myry lak of miserie, for to dwell with thee into the Pallace of immortalitie: O when shall I get ridde of these sin|full bonds! O Sauiour of mankind giue eare vnto my sute: Deliuere mee from this seeming life, that I may die to liue the life of plesures for euermore: O drawe, drawe out this Soule entombed into this bodie: Before thou separate them sale sure|lie thy pardons within my Consci|ence, and doe perfectlie away all my transgressions: Guarde mee  assist mee and harnesse my Soule a|gainst Sathan his last on-sette.
Let my Soule graspe with an holy greedinesse in the hand of Faith, such spirituall comforts as thou, O Lord, makest to come from the boundlesse and bottomelesse foun|taine of thy mercie toward all these

who~ thouloueth: Let my soule feele more and more sensiblie these mer|cies which fairelie  oriently streame thorow the bloodie wounds of my blessed Sauiour Iesus the : wash and bath my drooping Soule in the well of life: Giue vnto it a drinke of the riuers of thy pleasures.
O Lord of loue, shedde thy loue into mine heart thorow the bleeding bowels of my blessed Sauiour: O blessed Redeemer of lost mankinde, O Pelicane of pittie, whose heart did euer melt with mrcifull compassi|ons, pittie my Soule in this painefull plight: Mine heart strings are racked, my bowels are rent, the house of the Soule is falling downe, nowe open the doore of thine euerlasting Ta|bernacles, that my Soule may goe from Grace to Glorie: Make the power of thy loue like a load stone for to draw mine heart after thee from the mudde of this mortalitie.



The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in heauen, andA prayer fulfill the sute of thy Seruant, burie all his sinnes and his sorrowes in the bottomelesse sea of thy mercie: En|tombe in the Tombe of Iesus where they may lye for euer without anie hope of a resurrection.


The sicke Man.
I waite for the Lord, my Soule doeh sal. 130. 5 waite  in his word doe I hope: My soulevers. 6 waiteth for the Lord, more tha~ they that watch for the morning: I say, More tha~ they that watch for the morning: My Soule is wearied of this earthlie Ta|bernacle:Psal. 42. 2. O when shall I come and ap|peare before God? O that I were at my wished home: O nowe moue the poole of thy mercie, and moue my Soule to runne into it.


The Pastour.
It is likly that within an houe God shall grant you your desire: Could notMatth. 26. 40 you watch with mee but an houre? said Christ to his Disciples: Yee haue nowe but an houres absence from

your God: Yee haue but an houres voyage from the bodie to the sight of Gods face the place of your rest: Fixe fast your eyes vpon the Crowne of immortalitie, till your Soule be past from toilesome Time to Eternitie: Yet a little while  God shall retire you from the tyring trauels of this life: Watch but an houre, and your end shall bee peace.Psa. 37. 37


The sicke Man.
The Lorde sende a good houre wherein I may lay downe the loade of this mortalitie: Alas, manie an houre haue I euill and idlie spent in pam pering this foggie flesh with the light and loose pleasures of this life.
O Spirite of Grace, drawe neareA prayer vnto my Soule: Make thy residence into this broken heart: Correct, cure, and couer all the corruptions of my Nature. Beginne and end  crowne the worke with thy goodnes: At last close in me thy graces with thy glo|rie: O make mine eyes to see, and

mine armes to carrie and mine heart to bee filled with thy Saluation: Conuoye vnto my Soule the war|mest blood that euer heated the heart of Iesus: Let that euer recking blood wherein is a Sauour of life vnto life: Comfort and vp-holde my Soule in this last heauie houre.
Now Sir, seeing the end draweth neare, helpe mee to spend well this houre, which in all appearance shall be my last: I wish that all my thoghts and affections bee nowe so bended toward my God that they neither sway nor swerue from him by anie idle wandering of minde.
O Thou that art high and excellentA prayerIsa. 57. 15. who dwellest in the high and holie place: Thogh thou be high, thy promise is to dwell also with him y^t is of a con|trite  humble spirit: According to thy promise reuiue the Spirit of the humble, and giue life to him that is of a contrite heart: O Lord, accor|ding to thy wonted grace make mee

in my last agonie, to possesse my Soule in peace and patience: Disa|point Satan in all his craftie fetches: O couer this sillie Turtle vnder the mantle of thy mercie: All other co|uerings are but light and slight like Spiders webbes which cannot endure the breath and blast of thy mouth.


The Pastour.
Lord, hearken thou in heauen,  giue eare vnto the sute of thy Seua~t.
I perceiue indeede that now your words wearie you: Lest yee faint I shall tak the speach vpon me: If it be your will I shall let you heare a most diuine discourse taken from a godly preacher on his death-bed, y^e words surely are weighty  of great power: If ye please I shal let you heare them, while I speake them, meditate yee, and in your minde make them your owne wordes.


The sicke Man.
I intreate your Sir, for to let mee heare them: I shall follow you in

mine heart as I can: I finde that my tongue almost now faileth mee.
O God, while I heare, let the Spirit of grace take harbour into mine heart:A prayer Set all mine affections on bensell, that I may carefullie giue eare vnto thy com|fortes the cordials of thy Gospel: O cleare the sight of my minde, daze|led with the mist of my corrupt af|fections.


The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in heauen, and forgiue the sinnes of thy seruant.
After this manner Sir, the man ofQuis hic fuit non liquet. God spake vpon his death-bedde.
I owe to God a death, as his Son died for mee: Euer since I was borne I haue beene sayling to this Hauen, and gathering patience to comfort this houre; therefore shall I bee one of these Guestes nowe, that would not come to the banket when they were inuited? Note What hurt is in go|ing to Paradise? I shall lose nothing but the sense of euill: And anone I

shall haue greater joyes than I feele paines: For mine Head is in Hea|uen alreadie, to assure mee that my Soule and bodie shall follow after.
O Death, where is thy sting? Why should I feare that which I wold not escape, because my chiefest happines is behind,  I cannot haue it vnlesse I goe vnto it? Note I wold goe through Hell to Heauen: And ther|fore if I march but through death, I suffer lesse than I would suffer for God: Note My paines doe not dismay mee, because I trauaile to bring foorth eternall life: My sinnes doe not fright me, because I haue Christ my Redeemer: The Iudge doeth not astonish me, because the Iudgs Sonne is mine Aduocat: The Deuill doth not amaze mee, because the Angels pitch about me: The Graue doeth not grieue me, because it was my Lords bedde: Oh, that Gods mercie to mee might moue others to loue him: Note For the lesse I can

expresse it, the more it is.
The Prophets and the Apostles are my fore-runners: Euery man is gone before mee, or else hee will follow after mee: If it please God to receiue mee into Heauen before them which haue serued him better, I owe more thankfulnesse vnto him.
And because I haue deferred my repentance till this houre whereby my Saluation is cutte off, if I should die suddenlie: Loe how my God in his mercifull prouidence, to pre|uent my destruction, calleth mee by a lingring sicknesse, which stayeth till I bee readie, and prepareth mee to mine ende like a preacher, and maketh mee by wholesome paines, wearie of this beloued world, lest I should depart vn willing like them whose death is their damnation.
Note So hee loueth mee while hee beateth mee, that his stripes are pla|sters to saue mee, therefore who shall loue him, if I despise him?
This is my whole office nowe to strengthen my bodie with mine heart, and to bee contented as God hath appointed, vntill I can glo|rifie him, or vntill hee glorifie mee: If I liue, I liue to sacrifice, and if I die, I die a sacrifice, for his mercie is aboue mine iniquitie.
Therefore if I should feare death it were a signe that I had not Faith, nor hope as I professed, but that I doubted of Gods trueth in his pro|mise whther hee will forgiue his penitent sinner or not. Note Hee is my Father, let him doe what seemeth good in his sight: Come Lord Iesus, for thy seruant commeth, I am wil|ling helpe mine vnwillingnesse.


Heere is the end of that godlie mans speach.
As at that Brydell in Cana, the bestIoh. 2, 10. wine came last, so shall it be heer: Af|ter the words of a godlie man I shall let you heare the words of God spo|ken by a man inspired by his Spirit, euen the last words of Dauid the man

whose praise is this, that hee was a man according to Gods owne heart.


The last words of Dauid.
Dauid the sonne of Iesse said, and the2 Sam. 23. 1 man who was raised vp on high, the a|ointed of the God of Iaacob, and the sweete Psalmist of Israel said.
The Spirit of the Lord spake by mee,vers. 2. and his words was in my tongue.
The God of Israel saide the Rockevers. 3. of Israel spake to mee: Hee that ruleth ouer men must bee just, ruling in the feare of God.
And hee shall bee as the light of thevers. 4. morning, when the Sunne riseth, euen a morning without cloudes; as the ten|der grasse springing out of the earth by cleare shining after raine.
Although mine house bee not sovers. 5. with God, yet hee hath made with mee an euerlasting couenant, ordered in all things and sure: For this is all my Sal|uation, and all my desire, although hee make it not to growe.
But the sonnes of Belial shall bee allvers. 6.

of them as thornes thrust away because they cannot bee taken with hands.
But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with yron, and the staffe of a speare, and they shall bee vter lie burnt with fyre in the same place
Alittle before his death at the in|auguration of his Sonne Solomon he spake manie notable words; among others these bee of great weight.
O Lord, wee are heere but strangers1 Chro. 29 15 before thee and soourners, as were all our fathers: Our dayes on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding.
O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, andvers. 18. of Israel our Fathers, keepe this for euer in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heartes vnto thee.
That hundreth and two Psalme is excellent: It is intituled a prayer of the afflicted when he is ouerwhelmed and powreth out his complant before the Lord.
Heare my prayer, O Lord, and lettePsal. 102, 1

my cry come vnto thee hide not thy face from mee in the day when I am in trou|ble, incline thine eare vnto mee: In the day when I call, answere mee spe|dilie.
For my dayes are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burnt like an hearth, c.
Seeing, as wee see, that nothing is stable in this world but as it is in that Sermon of the Preacher, vanity ofEccles. 1. 2. vanities, and all is vanitie, wee haue to intreate the Lord earnestlie as Moses did a little before his death; That hee would so teach vs to numberPsal. 90. 12 our dayes that we may applye our hearts to wisedome, and to well doing: All things below wither and decay, our best beauties are withed and wrink|led by time: But the beautie of the Lord is of euerlasting continuance:Psa. 90. 17 Let the beautie of the Lord our God bee vpon vs.
O the beautie of the things aboue: O the beautie of the Firmament: O

these azured Curtaines spangled with stars of light: What jewels of joy are within, no mortall tongue can tell.
Looke vp nowe Sir with the eye of your Faith and visite these heauen|lieIoh. 14. 2. Mansions and blessed buildinges for immortaltiie: Yee are shortlie for to change for the better.
So long as our sillie Soules are here, they are but poore Soules reading and meditating the mercies of God within a cottage of clay, hauing no|thing to see with but the weak light of the small Candle of grace; a light dimmed and darkened with the ree|kie smok of our sinfull corruptions: But so soone as wee shall bee dissol|ued by Death, we shall come to the euerlasting Beames of a Sunne which by nothing is able to bee ecclipsed, alight which knoweth no darknesse, euen that Light which bringeth light out of darknesse.Ioh. 1. 5.
Now Sir, vp with your heart saile out your course: Be like the Pylot who









while hee hath hand on the Helme, hath his eye fixed on the heauen: Take now the Cuppe of Saluation thesal. 116. 13 great Mazer of his mercie, and call vpon the Name of the Lord: Hee is worthie to bee praised for his vn|speakable fauour toward you: Note He in great mercy hath toward you tur|ned all the sharpe corrasiues of the Law into most sweete cordials of the Gospel: He hath now made you free of all these terrours whereinto yee found your selfe once lyable.
Oh, Lord, how did once the sharpe edge of thy Law laide to his mourning heart, cutte him thorow the verie gall! But blessed bee thou, who in thy great mercie hast cut the Cartropes of his sinnes where with hee was once kept fast vnder the most heauie bondage of Hell.
What say yee now Sir: How is it of all? Haue yee heard all these words, and laide them vp into your minde?




The sicke Man.
I haue heard them all,  that with great comfort; now mine heart is in heauen: Christ by the vertue of his vnualuable Blood-shed hath take~ a|way the gall of my guiltines: Note Now my bodie is wholly dead to its paine and my Soule is whollie aliue to its glorie. Note I see a Crowne of immortalitie which my Soule would not sticke to fetch thorow the brimstone beames of hell: My Soule seeth the face of its Redeemer: Christ with a soft hand is now loosing all the bondes of my miserie: Note. His most sacred Blood hath melted my marble heart.
Nowe come Lord Iesus come: Long haue I looked for thy Salua|tion: Nowe let thy seruant depart inLuk. 2. 29 peace, for mine eyes haue seene thy. Sal|uation.
O my deare Soule I summond thee with all thy powers and facul|ties to bee thankfull vnto thy good and gracious Lord: O what tribu|lations

am I come thorow! O with what balmie comfortes hath the Lord asswadged the dolours of my Soule, O my Soule I charge thee by the Roes and by the Hynds that thou haste thee vnto thy God in thy strongest affe|ctions: Keepe nowe tryst with the Spirit of thy God, who is now here waiting till thou bee readie.


The Pastour.
My Soule and all that is within mee praise the Lord, for the power|full working of his Spirite within you, whereby hee hath made such a change as is wonderfull.
Note This particula remembereth mee of a certaine Martyre who bee|ing condemned to bee burnt, could feele no working of the Spirit with|in his hearte till hee came neare to the stake: But beeing once comeox. Act  monu~. Fol. 1555.  im|pression. there, with a cry hee clapped his hands, and crying out amaine, said, O Austen, hee is come, hee is come: The Martyr was called Master Goner.



The sicke Man.
By the grace of God I hope short|lie to say as much: My Soule is rea|die bent waiting for his comming: O come Lord Iesus come: Let this mineReuel. 17. 7 hungrie Soule win in now at the ports of thy Palace for to get a share of y^e mari|age supper of the Lambe, in hope al|ready I feast vpon the joys of eterni|tie: Note In my Soule is now the Char|ter of my Saluation sealed with that most pure and purifying Blood of the immaculate and spotlesse Lambe that came to take away the monstrous and menstrous sines of the world: Note In the vertue of his Blood is my stron|gest comfort and highest resolution: By it alone all my blacke and bloodieIsa. 1. 18. sinnes are clensed from their crimsin colour.


The Pastour.
Indeede Sir, it is onelie that Lambes Blood that can purge away sinne and iniquitie: Note Though man should wash himselfe with nitre, andIr. 2. 22.

take him much sope, yet for all that shall his iniquitie bee marked before God, except that hee bee bathed in|to this blood of sprinkling.
Seeing now your Charter is well sealed, hold fast these writtings, that nothing aboue or belowe, no not principalities and powers bee able toEphes. 6. 12 wrest them out of your hands.
Happie is your heart now where|in is that white jewell of the ReuelationReuel. 2 17 euen the white stone wherein is a new name which no man can knowe ex|cept the receiuer: Note O the boundlesse bleeding bowels of Gods compassions! O that infinite store-house of Christs merites and mercies, which no sinne were they neuer so hainous, can bee able to stint or restraine before the repenting sinner get a parte of that purchase: Neither Death, nor Life, things present nor to come shall be able to with hold a mourning sinner from a share in our Lords dearest com|passions.
Christ now Sir is readie to receiue ou: Make your selfe readie for him: Lift vp your hea, for your Redemp|tion draweth neare: The ende of your time and toile is fast comming: The Angels of God are here waiting vpon your Soule, which is now loo|kingCant. 6. 10 out to Christ as the morning, faire as the Moone, cleare as the Sunne, and terrible as an Armie with Banners: Wherevpon is your minde nowe fixed?


The sicke Man.
All mine affections are bended toward God: Note O what shall bee able to hold or hinder me from haste|ning to my Lord, the repairer of life, the destroyer of death, y^e conquerour of Heauen,  the vanquisher of Hell? Note O my Sauiour come neerer yet vnto mee, let my Soule creepe in byA prayer thy wounds, euen to the verie bowels of thy mercie: Warme it like a Chic|ken vnder the vvinges of thy loue



The Pastour.
In Christ alone is Saluation: Out of his side did issue the water that hath quenched the vnquencheable fyre of Gods wrath, with the Blood that taketh away the sinnes of the world.
Note His holie Heart was racked, his Armes of compassio~ were stretched out vpon the Crosse for to declare to all repenting sinners the infinite widenesse of his mercies: Note His sacred Head hang down bowed for to giue eare vnto the gronings of his prisoners: Note His blessed Bowels rumbling with com|passions rolled together, made him to proclaime that Oyas of mercie,Matth. 11. 28 Come vnto mee all yee that are wearied and ladened with sinne and I will ease you.
Much hath hee suffered for our cause: Note Like a painefull labourer hee powred out sweate not onely of water but of blood, at the working the great worke of mans Saluation: At last by laying downe that Life of

loue, hee achieued the victorie ouer Sa|than, flesh, the world,  all the ene|mies of mans Saluation: Them all hee hath crushed and trodde vnder foote: Stand fast by Iesus: In Faith and Hope thrust your heart vpon him: What now, Sir, thinke ye v|pon?


The sicke Man.
Christ hath bund vp all my wou~ds; he hath perfectlie closed them with the blessed Balme of his comfortes: Now at the end of mine appointed time I am waiting earnestlie till my changing come: I hope ere it be long to bee translated from grace to glory.Iob. 14. 14


The Pastour.
O Lord, set this Soule as a seale vpon thine Hearte, and as a seale v|ponA prayer thine Arme: Out of thy greatCant. 8. 6, loue make this Soule beautifull as Tirzah, comelie as Ierusalem terrible as armie with banners: Thou, Lord, who crownest the yeare with thy good|nessePsal. 56. 11 tak in thine hand the crowne of immortalitie  in this Soule crowne

thy graces with thy glorie. Now Sir, yee are neare the borders of Canaan, three or foure steppes more would set you in that Land of life and loue.


The sicke Man.
Mine heart like an Hart braying after waters, panteth after God: OPsal. 42. 2. when shall I come and appeare before him? Now mine heart shiuers with|in mee, I am so sicke that I feare to faint.


The Pastour.
O Lord, now be mercifull  shew fa|uourA prayer toward this thy seruant: Distill thy graces into his heart vvith a blessed in|fluence from the Spirit of thy loue, pull in all his spirits to Thee, and thrust out all distractions: O Lord, of Life and Loue breath into his soule the life of im|mortalitie.
Take heede now vnto him ye who are neere about him, for death now approacheth with its last assaultes in all appearance: Looke well to him for hee seemeth to bee fallen into a sowne.






THE SICKE MAN IN A SOVVNE, A SOLILOQVEE, Or a priuie confe|rence betweene the Soule and the bodie of the sicke Man lying in a sowne.

The Bodie.
MY Soule desireth thou now to leaue mee that haue borne thee about mee so manie yeares?
If thou goe from mee I must no longer remaine among the inhabi|tantsIsa. 38. 1 of the world, but incontinent after thy departure I a vassell of death must bee hid vnder the dust among crawling wormes, farre from the eyes of the liuing: These who were once

glad to kisse my mouth shall abhorre to see my face: Is not the Graue a Babel a place of confusion? Doe not Iim and Zim resort there? Doe not the Satyres and the Fairies daunceIsa. 13. 21. there?
Mine haire startes all vp for feare, while I thinke vpon these solitudes and mansions of silence, I faint at the verie thought thereof: Oh, my deare Soule wilt thou abide with mee no longer? If thou depart, my Beautie, my Colour, my Conference, my Companie and all is gone: Oh, shall all my senses now bee closed vp? shall I speake no more, heare no more, see no more than if I were a stone? Must I nowe goe remaine into the myre of mortalitie, the place of silence? Must I abide the long nights among the Graues, places fearfull to the liuing, where men make no resort?
O wretched weakling that I am, by Death, as I see, I shall bee grapled to the ground where I shall bee forced

to make my bedde in the dake.


The Soule.
My Bodie bee not thou disquie|ted, I am but for a little space going before thee for to take seasin of Hea|uen for thee and for mee.
Though I bee absent for a space, I shall neuer forget thee: In Gods appointed time I shall come againe and fetch thee out of the muddie moulde of mortalitie.
At the first blast of y^e last Trumpet I1 Cor. 15. 52 shall come downe,  shall enter into thee and quicken thee againe: At that time God shal cleanse thee from all thy corruptions, and shall mak thee like an Angel of God.
My sillie Bodie wee haue taken much pains together for to get a rest which we haue looked long for, but culd not find: now goe to thy rest til|l come againe for to bring thee to eternall repose: If thou were co~man|ded to goe to labour  to pains, thou should haue some cause indeede to

whine and to shrinke, as one hampered in a snare: But the Lord is now de|siring thee like a wearied man to goe to thy rest for to sleepe soundlie in|to a bedde wherein thou shalt no more bee disquieted with dreames or with visions: When thou shalt once awake, thou shalt bee still with Iesus: If in mercie hee hath made mee to preuent thee in the possession of eternitie, let not his fauour toward mee worke in thee anie heart rising against that Majestie, who as the Pot|ter doth with his clay, may doe with all his creatures what hee pleaseth.


The Bodie.
But, O my Soule, the Graue is fearefull: It is a retired solitude and a place of silence, a place of filthie stinke: I abhorre to thinke of it, how that in that dungeon of darknesse, and denne of corruption I must lye downe naked implunged in myrie slime among wormes, a lumpe of most vile and life|lesse clay. Alas, my Soule.



The Soule.
My Bodie bee not discouraged: Note The Graue is a place where the bodie must lye till with the EaglePsal. 103. 5 there it cast its Bill, a meanes for to renew its youth: Note So soone as once there it hath cast the old slugh of Nature, incontinent thereafter it shall become a new creature: Ex|cept, saide Christ, that the corne ofIoh. 12. 24 wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone.
Haue patience but a little: New corne will come at the day of the re|surrection: The dayes of mans morta|litie are the Lords seede time: The bo|dies of the Saincts are his seede, the Church yard is his fielde: Suffer now the Lord to sowe his owne ground.
Bee not disquieted nor cast down with griefe: It shall bee thy gaine to goe downe to the graue: There shalt1 Cor. 15. 42 thou be sowne in corruption, but thou shalt bee raised in incorruption: Thou





shalt be sowne in dishonour, but thouvers. 43. shalt bee raised in glorie: Thou shalt bee sowne in weaknesse, but thou shalt bee raised in power: Thou shalt bee sowne a naturall bodie, but thou shaltvers. 44 bee raised a spirituall bodie: See what by Gods mercie shall bee the great gaine of the Graue.
After that the Graues of the god|lie shall bee ripe, the Lord by an infi|nite power shall make all their bo|dies to bee taken vp, for like fine wheate to bee laide vp within his hea|uenlie Girnals: When thou shalt arise, it shall bee to an immortall hap|pie life.
Haue patience for a little space, and bee not crabbed: Yet a little while and I shall not see thee, and againe a little while after the resurrection  I shall see thee, when thou shalt bee transchanged into the blessed estate of glorious immortalitie: Then shall I dwell in thee without anie spot or wrinkle: Let the hope of this, tem|per

thy present griefe. Let not the Graue afray thee my deare Body, for it is the last bed which euerie man must sleepe in: Lye downe into it gladlie: Bee content with the silke worme an argument of the resurrection to bee enwrapped for a space in thy Winding sheete, till the chill colde winter-tide of this mortalitie bee pas: At the glorious spring of eternitie; at the returne of the Sun of righteousnesMal. 4. 2. so soone as the heat of the beating beames of Gods loue shall pierce in vn|to thy Graue, in a moment in the twinkling of an eye thou shall be quic|kened and raised vp, yea, renewed and refined from the sinfull dust of corruption, and after that carried aboue the brightest azured skies vn|to the place of immortalitie amongpsal. 16. 11 pleasures for euermore.


The Bodie.
I cannot but lament and waile to bee depriued of thy companie: My dearest Soule full deare art thou to

mee: If two strangers had beene but some fewe dayes in their journey toge|ther, they will haue a certaine regret for to leaue one another: What wonder is it then, that wee two who haue beene of such olde acquaintance, mourne at this last and long adew.


The Soule.
As thy loue is great toward mee, so is mine also great toward thee my Bodie: But seeing it is the will of him who married vs together that nowe wee bee put asunder, wee must submit our selues vnto his good pleasure.
This separation shall be but or a little space, and that for the well of vs both: Note The husband will saile the seas and goe farre from home, in hope to returne with aduantage: The same hope encourageth his wife to liue lik a vvidow for a space: At last the husba~ds returne with ex|pected profite, is welcomed with greater joyes tha~ was his former pre|sence.
It shall bee so with vs my deare Bodie: At my returne in the day of the Resurrection there shall enter such a joy into thee, as eye neuer saw, eare neuer heard, yea,  which neuer could enter into the heart of man. As the long dark night maketh the morning seeme sweete to the wearied watch, who hath long loo|ked for it, so shall our little absence be a certaine commendation of that presence, which after the great day shall bee for euer.
Cease in time I pray thee to stick at such earthlie conceits: I may no longer tarrie with thee, the Crowne of immortalitie is alreadie in sight.


The Bodie.
But alas, howe is this that thou should goe to glorie before mee? and leaue mee in the dust of death, a peace of moulding clay? Haue I done anie wrong but by thy counsell and direction? What haue I beeene but the instrument of thy sinne? All the

action is from thee: Of all that is done amisse thou hast beene the in|uenter the contriuer and arch-plot|ter: God is no accepter of persons or of parties: What then is my guilt, that I shuld be behind thee left into the Graue a fearefull denne of death and pite of corruption?
What a miserie is this for me that I should lye vnder the power and bonds of Death, a Carion vnder a Turfe war|ded in deaths most loathsome denne and abhorred jayle? There must I lye chill with cold stinking and rotting with my mouth full of earth and my bel|lie full of wormes, closed in a Coffine.
O what matter of melancholie is this, that within a few dayes where are my two beautifull twinkling eyes, shalbe nothing but fearefull eye-holes in a rotten skull, which shall bee no|thing but a nect of clockes and abomi|nable creeping thinges: Within a few yeares this head which nowe lyeth softlie vpon this Pillow shall bee rolled

and trinnelled vp and downe by the feete of the posteritie: Heere a bone and there a bone, and not a bone together, all shall lye scattered heere and there: the dogges shall play with some and Children shall playe with others; some shall lye drying before the Sunne, and others shall be brui|sed into pieces, and grund into pow|der: O what a change is in this our mortalitie! Behold presentlie what a starueling I am, beeing nothing but skinne and bone: Behold, and anone all shall be turned into stinke.


The Soule.
All such thoughtes are all but worldlie, heauie, dull, and formall: Suffer the Lord to sow his owne seede: Thou art afraid for the Turfe of the Graue: Care not for the Turfe, for vnder it shalt thou bee as a pickle of Corne vnder a clod: The Spring time of the Resurrection is not farre froe, when thou shalt rise vp more beau|tifullie in honour, power, and glo|rie,

than euer thou was before.
Shall anie thing bee impossible vntoLuk 18. 27 God? Hee who in his death reuiued manie Sainctes, vvhose bodies Death had fast vnder the key of its power, shall with a blast of his voyce make open Gaues to let out all these who were prisoners of death, from Adam vntill that day.
Let this comfort cheare vp thine heart my Bodie: The Graue shall not bee able to keepe thee long Note As Ionah was vomited out of the Bellie of Hell, so shalt thou bee deliueredIona. 2. 2. from that Monsters mawe.


The Bodie.
But in the meane time what rea|son is it y^t I a carrionlie carkase shuld bee bund oth hand and foote and committed close prisoner to the graue a cold and chillie house, while thou art set at libertie? Behold, how al|readie I am both withered and wan|zed


The Soule.
The Graue to y^e Godlie is no pri|son,

but a resting bedde from their labours, where God reresheth with sleepe the wearied bones of his be|loued: The Prophet saith, That they rest in their beddes, and that theyIsa. 57. 2. enter in peace: Note While the moulds are cast on them in the Graue it is but the drawing of their Bedde curtaine: The buried bodies of the Saincts are in their graue lik Babs lapped in swad|ling* Note clothes in their Cradles: As a ty|red man will not bee offended if hee bee sent to his bedde for to sleepe, neither should the wearied bodie bee grieued to goe to the Graue the place of rest and quietnesse.
Bee not peeuish nor peruerse my Bodie; enuie not mine happie estat: Though the Graue should bee to thee a prison, why should thou com|plaine because I am set at libertie? If it hath pleased God in mercy to bee good to mee, why art thou offen|ded? May not the Lord say vnto thee, Is thine eye euill because I amMatth. 20. 15 good?
What happier should thine estat bee, though God should command mee to bee buried besides thee? May not God doe with his owne as hee pleaseth? Hee might haue taken thee to Heauen, and haue shute mee a prisoner in the Graue: In his justice hee might haue cast vs both into Hell.
Thinke it then a mercie that hee is so good vnto mee, who shall ne|uer count my glorie full till wee bee both crowned vvith immortalitie in the heauens: Note Bee not offended at the Lords good will towards mee, but rather thank him that he hath made death to bee temporall in his mercie, which was eternall in his threatning: Note Of a corrasiue hee hath made a cordiall.
Haue patience O distressed Body: Suffer a little, that God may be true,Gen. 3. 19. Dust thou art and to dust shalt thou re|turne: Dust beeing once deliuered from the power of the Graue, shall

reigne with God in glorie: Note The Bodie is like gold which cannot bee rid of its drosse, till it bee molten and dissolued.
Againe as this death is not total nei|ther shal t be perpetuall for at y^t first sound of the last trumpet all the be|ried bodies of y^t faithfull shall lik the Eagle cast the bill of their mortalitie.
Now mine olde companion and yoke-fellow art thou not content to goe to bedde and there to sleepe till the morning of theresurrection come? That day shall mak an amends for all that we haue suffered in this valey of teares: Then shall all thy confusion bee turned into comforts.
Let vs nowe bee content that the Lord loose the pines and slacke the cordes of this our Tabernacle of clay.


The Bodie.
Now glad am I my deare Soule that euer I had such a Soule as thee: now my deare Turtle goe with my bles|sing

to the seruice of our God: Goe from the Crosse to the Crowne, from a prison to a Palace, from the mourning-weede to the wedding-gar|ment: Goe dwell with the Lord and the Lambe, waite well vpon him: Goe nowe from the blacke and dis|mall dayes of drooping distresse and dir|tie distractions, to joye, to peace, to plea|sure, to light, to life, to libertie: Goe heare that happie harmonie of hea|uenlie Musitians in heauenlie Man|sions where mercies blesse without judgments blasts: Goe heare the voice of all the Menistrels of that celestiall Quire.
Bee thou aboue the Starres, while I am vnder a Turfe: All my comfort is in this that wee shall meete againe in Blisse: Note Now blessed Soule pre|pare thy Lampe, powre out thine oyle, the heauenlie wooer the BridegroomePsal. 16. 11 is come for to take thee to his Cham|bers of Charitie wherein are pleasures for euermore.
In hope of the Resurrection I goe gladlie to my Graue, whereout of I am assured to arise for to meete my Redeemer in the clouds: This Can|dle of my comfort shall neuer bee put out.
Nowe before wee shedde, let vs shedde some teares: Note The last raine of our afflictions, wherewith we mayCant. 2. 11 bath the bruises of our Lord which he in loue did suffer for our glorie.
Now I goe to rest in the dust a prisoner of hope: Goe thou to thy God, attend well his seruice, and court his Countenance for euer in his most pleasant Yuorie Palaces: I am nowe refreshed with a cooling taste to immortalitie to come: Farewell my deare Soule and truest Turtle, mount vp nowe to the Heauens: Thou hast alreadie past all toyle and turmoyle: The way that rests vnto the Kingdome is both smooth  euen, without anie rubbe of opposition thou shalt enter into immortalitie: O the

showres of grace and mercie which raine downe vpon vs both: Fare|well till that desired day of the Re|surrection come.


The Pastour.
His eyes stirre a little, they are full of teares the tribute of Repentance: He beginneth to shake, he now seemeth to bee wakened out of his traunce: I will inquire what his minde is set v|pon. What meditations are these Sir that yee are vpon? Yee seeme to haue beene in some good motion.


The sicke Man.
My Soule Sir and my bodie after a blessed agreement haue beene ta|king their adewes one from another: They haue bene blessing each other, beause they haue serued God to|gether, they looke to bee one day both glorified together.
A sea of comfortes hath rained downe vpon my Soule from the Heauens in most sweete and pleasant showers.



The Pastour.
Surelie that is a worthie exercise: Such good motions are plants of God and impressions of his finger: Happie are the Soule  the bodie that can serue God together with one shoul|der: At that last day they shall haue a joyefull meeting, they two shalbe clasped together in loue with such con|tentmentes as tongues of Angels are not able to expresse. But O when the vvicked soule shall returne from hell to take vp its bodie for to carie it to euerlasting torments, then shall they curse each other with ma|nie a woe for their Fornications, A|dulteries, Lyes, Deceits, Ryot  Drun|kenesse: Then would the bodie if it could haue intelligence of the soules comming wish that a rock or a moun|taine would fall vpon it for to hide it from the Soule, that beeing voyde of life, it might bee free of feeling.
But the decree is come foorth, of necessitie they must bee joyned to|gether:

O but they then shall looke one to another like Lyons: Their feede shall receiue none agreement, no not: They shall neuer agree in anie thing but in this, to  toge|ther that their comfortlesse dolours may bee doubled: Note This is a deare pennie-warth, so little pleasure for so much paine: In that day all the wic|ked shal bitterlie repent such barganes.
Now happie is your Soule Sir, and your bodie both, that are so well resolued to depart: Yee are cer|tainelie blessed that euer yee were borne: Note Behold, nowe yee rest in hope of the resurrection, which shall bee in that great day of Gods generall assemblie, when all that euer tooke breath shall compeare before Christ the Iudge of the World, for to re|ceiue that which they did in the flesh, bee it good bee it euill.
Now Sir, seeing yee are an inrol|led Citizen of Heauen, and an adopted haire of God, vp still with your heart

towarde that heauenlie Heritage, with sighes and grones beate on still at the doores of Gods mercie: God giueth vnto prayer victory against him|selfe.
Nowe the time draweth neere Sir, your houre is come to a quarter, fight out the good fight, fixe the eyes of your Faith vpon the bloodie wounds of Iesus: Lay hold on him, listen to his voyce, ere it bee long yee shall heare these words of joye, ComeMatth. 25. 21 faithfull seruant and enter into thy~ Masters joye.
O Lord, the giuer of grace andA prayer of glorie; out of the blessed bowels of thy mercie bath and wash this Soule with that arteriall blood which sprang thorow the pierced filme of the heart of his Redeemer: At the beginning of this Battell, Lord thou did see howe his poore Soule was scorched with the flames of hellish temp|tations, which did burne the verie marrow out of his bones: this is thy or|dinarie

dealing with thine owne: Hell on earth is for the heires of Hea|uen: But heauen on earth is the portion of the heires of hell: Now, Lord, from his hell bring him to thine Heauens: Mak his Soule more clearelie to look vp toward the blessed bloodie wounds of his Sauiour, wherein hee may perceiue the props of his protection: Make his Soule now to be fullie pos|sessed with an entire loue to the faire|nesse of thy face, wherein are pleasuresPsal. 16 11 for euermore.


The sicke Man.
Lord Iesus make clay againe withA prayer thy Spittle for to anointe my dim|medLuk. 2. 30. eyes, that clearelie with Simeon my Soule may see thy Saluation: We in our life receiue but y^e first impositio~ of handes like the man that saw menMar. 8. 24. walking like trees: Now, Lord, at death giue mee the second imposition, that I may see thee euen as thou art.


The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in HeauenA prayer

Maintaine the life of his loue towards thee: Now vvater the seede vvhich thou hast sowne: Weede out the tares vvhich Sathan hath sowne: Pittie and pardon: Lay all his sinnes v|pon the Sonne of thy loue Now let his feete be shod for the journey which hee is making to a better place: In|spire his Soule with the spirit of grace, till his life bee expired: Saue him by thy blood which saued the~ that spilt it.


The sicke Man.
I finde Death besieging my heart with se~sible blowes: O bring out my Soule out of this bricke of bondage of the bodie: Mine heart stringes are so racked within mee that they are like to breake: The hope that is defer|redProu. 13. 12 is the fainting of the Soule: Lord, helpe mee in this heauie houre.


The Pastour.
Lord, heare thou in heauen, and satisfie his hearts desire.


The sicke Man.
Pray, pray, that the Lord vphold

mee in the throng of these throes wherewith mine heart is gripped, lest I be whollie swallowed vp of de|spaire.


The Pastour.
O Sauiour of mankinde, who outA prayer of thy meere mercie and loue came vnder the charge of his accounts: Mak now answere for him as his Ad|uocat before that high Tribunall, be|fore which his poore Soule is now arraigned to co~peare: Turne all thy wrath in mercie, and thy Iustice-seat in a Throne of grace: Call home all his wandering thoughtes, settle and them vpon thy selfe: Main|taine the life of his loue: Make death to him a Messenger of mercie, and his paines a meane to bring him to thy pleasures: O Captaine of his Saluation vnder whose bloodie banner hee hath in his life made warre against the e|nemies of thy glorie, at death ouer|come thou all the enemies of his Saluation: With thy Trumpets and

Lampes terrifie all these merciles Mi|dianites: Make them like a wheele  as the stubble before the winde: Graunt the victorie vnto thy weake Seruant heere, that in the Heauens thou may crowne his Soule with glorious garlands of immortalitie, Lord heare vs for the sake of thy Sonne vnto whom with thee and the Spi|rite of Grace bee all glorie and ho|nour, Amen.
Now Sir, vp with your heart to the Father of mercies: Fight out coura|giouslie the fight of Faith: Christ now is holding out the Crowne, your Saluation is sealed, yee neede not feare, yee haue your warrant vnder the Broad Seale of the King of Heauen.


The sicke man.
O My deare Pastour, hee is come hee is come whom my Soule loueth:Cant. 7. 10 I am my Beloueds  his desire is towards mee: The lost sheepe is found: The vnthriftie Son is come home againe: All the snares of destruction are bro|ken:

My Soule is escaped like a Birde: I am now at a point, infinit|lie desirous rather to goe to my God than to sojourneanie more on earth: Mine heart is more in God, than in my selfe I haue a begunne possession of Heauen by the first fruites: I looke for perfection in fulnesse of joye andPsal. 16. 11 pleasures fore euermore.
O blessed Iesus set me as a Seale v|ponA prayer thine heart: O deare Sauiour,Cant. 8. 6. the Roote and the Rocke of my Sal|uation, loe I come: stretch out thinePsal. 40 7. Armes and take my Soule into thy bosome, yet a little while and I shall bee no more a stranger vvith theePsa. 39. 12 and a sojourner.


The Pastour.
O blessed bee our God for euer|more who hath made you to triumph so ouer all your enemies after such vn|uterable groanes of griefe where your mind was sore perplexed at the first: Hold fast now that which yee haue: Your heart is now richlie stored with

the true treasures of godlinesse: Yee are but sipping of these joyes wherof in Heauen ye shal drink in a full cup.


The sicke Man.
Christ the Lord is mine: Hee is mine:Philip. . 21 Hee is to mee hoth in life and death ad|uantage: My comforts are in my Bo|some: The Angelicali Guardes are heere about mee: I dye in the Faith of Iesus: Come euen Lord IesusA prayer come quicklie and loose this Soule a prisoner in clay groning to bee at li|berty: O my Soule returne vnto thy rest,psal. 116. 7 for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee: Now may I say, This poore manPsal. 34. 6. cryed and the Lord hath heard him  deliuered him out of all his troubles.


The Pastour.
The Lord is with you, who ere it be long shall fulfill all your hearts desires, yea, hee shall doe aboue all that yee can thinke or wish: Now Sir, yee haue him whom your soule loueth: His Spirit is in the verie bo|some of your heart: Hold fast the grip

yee haue: Dye in his Armes, sleepe in the blessed bosome of your God: Full libertie is at the doore readie to enter in: Yet a little and yee shall haue a joyfull meeting with Christ and all his Angels in the Kingdome of your Father: Till yee come out of this bodie sticke fast by Faith to Christ your Redeemer: Claime boldlie that which hee hath deere|lie purchased by his Blood.
O deare Iesus, his Staffe and his Strength, wrape now his Soule intoA prayer the white winding-sheete of thy righteousnesse: While hee hath life liue thou in him, y^t while he breaths hee may liue to thee, and after death may liue with thee for euer: Let neither life nor death bee able to se|parate him from thy loue: The nee|rer death approacheth for to sepa|rate his Soule from his bodie, daw thou the neerer vnto his Soule, till thy Spirit the Spirit of Life fullie  finallie in all perfection liue into him

the Soule of his Soule.
Fixe your eye nowe vpon the heart of Christ, deadlie wounded for your transgressions: Behold that Speare-hole in his heart, which hee suffered for to sae you: Consider his bleeding woundes all dropping the balme of mercie, which hath proceeded from the bowels of his compassions: Hee it is who hath died for your sinnes, and is risen a|gaine for your righteousnesse.


The sicke Man.
I know that my Redeemer liueth, hisIob. 19. 25 blood of an vnualuable price is the onelie ransome of my Soule: Hee onelie is the joye of mine heart, and the health of my countenance.


The Pastour.
Holde fast that confidence: Let your Soule repare vnto the euerla|sting Armes of his loue: Shroud  shelter your selfe vnder the winges of the Almightie: Yee are nowe neere the ende of the Race: The

Lord guarde you with his Grace, that no temptation of Satan be able trippe your heele before that yee be entered in his rest: Nowe the low|ring showring seede-time of teares is past, and the Haruest of joye is hard at hand: Now Sir, Christ is at the doore: Beholde, hee standeth at the doore and knockes, hee is nowe for to suppe with you on earth, that yee may suppe with him for euer in the Heauens: Behold, hee is with you.


The sicke Man.
I haue found him whom my Soule lou|eth, I will surelie hold him, and will notCant. 3. 4. let him goe: My Soule hath already taste of the fruite of Canaan by the re|port of the spye of my faith: Christ now is mine.


The Pastour.
Seeing yee haue him, wrap your soule into the bowels of his euerlast|ing compassions: waite on, perfectio~ is the last gift: Lift vp continuallie the eyes of your spirit to the worthy

woundes of Iesus: In them behold* Note  read in great Capitall characters the vnspeakable loue of the Father.


The sicke Man.
O Lord I haue waited for thy Sal|uation: Remember mee nowe whileGen. 49. 18 as thou art into thy Kingdome: Fa|ther into thine handes I commend myLuk. 23. 4 Spirit, my Soule I giue to thee who hast giuen it to mee.


The Pastour.
Now Sir, your wished houre is come: Christ is laying his Arms a|bout you for to receiue your Soule in his bosome: Solace your selfe in your Sauiour, who hath made it free of al weights, that swiftly with|out anie let it may flee vp to its God: O the loue of Iesus towardes you: Hee hath not onelie beene an Inte|cessour to pray for you, but an Ad|vocatalso to pleade for you: By the vertue of his Blood your cause is win: And therefore homage ye now your heart sealed with y^e sense of his

loue: Yeelde and surrender your Soule into the Armes of his mercie, that hee may perfect his graces in you with glorie in immortalitie.


The sicke Man.
Lord Iesus receiue my Spirit, andAct. 7. 59. glad it with thy glorie.


The Pastour.
He againe is fallen into a traunce: His battell is now neere an end: Let vs waite a little  see what he doth.
Hee now beginneth a little for to stir: There is yet some life into him as I perceiue.
Now Sir, be glad: Christ is knoc|king at the doore for to call foorth your Soule from bondage to liber|tie, from your banishment to an heauenlie home, from a prison of paine to a palace of pleasures for euer|more.
That we may haue assurance that ye die in the Faith of Iesus, shew vs some signe: Lift vp your hand in to|ken y^t yee are assured to goe to God
Behold how he hath lifted vp his hand.
Cortenet quod lingua tacet.
His hande telleth what is in his heart: O but this poore Soule since the beginning of this bloodie Bat|tell hath beene miserablie mangled, howed and hacked vpon by most bitter and bloodie temptations what carnall, what spirituall: Now bles|sed bee God, from all his troubles he is come to his good things: We are all oblished to giue praise vnto God, who hath set out this man be|fore vs as an excellent example and mirrour of his mercie.
It is the custome of God, as we see, to put his dearest Ones to the har|dest proofe, as wise Builders put the greatest timber and the heart of the Oake to the greatest stresse.
Note Manie thinke that Heauen stan|deth hard by their Bed-side, and that a light, Lord haue mercie, will make the doore of Heauen to goe wide

open to y^e wall, no not: Through ma|neAct. 14 22 tribulations we must enter into that Kingdome: Note As Aprill showers goe before the May flowers, so must our teares trickle before our Tri|umphs: Wee must smert before we smile, and grone before wee glorie: All Christian Soules like Christ himselfe, must enter by the port of paines vnto the palace of pleasuresPsal. 16. 11 for euermore: No co-reigning with|out a co-suffering.
O let vs consider what paines this godlie man hath suffered in this fierie tryall since this Battell1 Pt, 4. 12 beganne: O with what difficulties hath hee swimmed thorow so many temptations: If the righteous scarce|lievers. 18. bee saued, where shall the vngodlie and the sinner appeare? Note O sowre Apple of Adams pride, many teeth hast thou set on edge.
The Sparrow by wandering  the Swal. low by flying may escape, but where sinProu. 26. 2 hath beene once, there must also be

sorrow before that the sinner can come to joye: It is not so easie as manie men thinke to winne in at the doores of heauen, as though one Gods-mercy were enough for to doe the turne: Note Before that a man be able to winne in at the straite gate for to enter into his euerlasting rest, hee must be buffeted with diuerse temp|tations, and broken with sorrowes till his heart become contrit that is, grund  bruished small as if it were corne in a Querne: Note There is none entrie into rest for man before that in great griefe hee hath pluckt out hisMatth. 5. 19 right eye, euen his dearest darling  best bosome pleasure: Note Hee that would lodge with God in eternitie muste heere lay holde on his King|dome with an holie violence: What wonder that he auen be hard to win, seeing with all the infernall powers of darknesse, legions of our owne corruptions combined, oppose might  maine the grouth of Gods

graces in our Soules.
Manie foolishlie in the idle ro|wings of their braines content with a blush of zeale, thinke that Heauen may bee winne with wishes, and therefore in their life skippe wan|tonlie ouer the threatnings of the Law, in hope that easilie at death they may catch at the promise of the Gospel: But who had seene this holie man of GOD vpon the painefull racke of repentance, would count all the perishing plea|sures of sinne too deare bought plea|sures: Note Sinne at the beginning is like poyson in perfume, pleasant at the first, but not long after it worketh deadlie, except y^t it be repelled with some stronger Antidote: The way to heauen as wee see is not like the way to great maket Townes easilie dis|cerned by the multitude of foote|steppes.
Our good Friende is nowe in the verie panges of death: A patient and

Lambe like death is this: His life is on his lippe: This wearied Traueler is nowe neare the ende of his jour|ney: Seeing that the ende of a worke crowneth it, let vs conceiue a Prayer whereby wee may lay his Soule into the bosome of his God, who shall refresh him with euerla|sting comforts: O Lord, by the vi|gour of thy Spirit giue wings to our groueling prayers.


A Prayer for the sicke Man approaching vnto Death.

O GOD of mercle and of mans Saluation, who thinketh no|thing too deare for a repe~ting soule, were it to giue it a draught of the heart Blood of thy Sonne wee heere v|pon the knees of our hearts humbled againe before the foote-stoole of the the Throne of thy Grace, put vp to

thee our most humble sute for this thy seruant who is nowe comming to thee: His words now faile him, but thou, Lord, wilt neuer faile him: In stead of wordes let the crouding sobbes the Turtle finde roome into thine eares: Heaue vp his heart to thy mercie seate with the requests of thy Spirit, in sighs which cannot bee expressed.
O charitable Almes giuer open the hand of this Begger and thrust the money of thy mercie into it: Seale fast vp in his heart the remission of all his sinnes in the blood of Iesus: Bu|rie all his transgressions in Christes Burial: Establish thy free Spirit with|in him: Take from him all dulnesse and deadnesse of spirit, all secure and hardened thoughts, all that may hin|der him from comming vnto thee: Continue his comfortes begunne: Bee thou the ende and the ender of his worke: Lorde, disapoint Sathan who by his charmes and cun|ning

traines hath gone about both by force  fraud to catch this Soule of thy seruant.
Now Death is approaching: To thee belongeth the issues of death: Thou killest  thou makest aliue: thou bringest downe to the graue, and againe thou raisest vp: Now as euidentlie appeareth, thou art for to remoueIsa. 38. 11. this thy seruant from the Land of the luing, and thy will must bee done: Wee could haue wished the conti|nuance of his Christian fellowship with the lengthening and enlarging of his dayes: But most humblie wee submitte all our affections vnto thy good pleasure and will.
O Father of mercies in whose boundlesse bowels are moste pittifull compassions without anie passion, shew thy selfe mercifull, louing, and kinde towardes this Soule, which in the dayes of its fleshe hath beene with thee but a stranger andPsal. 39. 12  sojourner: His Soule now is saying

to thee with Iohn his two DisciplesIoh. 1. 38. Rabbi, Master where remaineth thou? Answere it as thou answered them louinglie, Come and see, and aftervers. 39. that tak it home to thine own house as Iohn tooke home thy Mother.Ioh. 19. 27
O deare Father of our Sauiour by Nature, O our dearest Father by a|doption; bee fauourable to this thy seruant, euen for that blood where|with thou art passing lie pleased: For|get and forgiue all his sinnes what|soeuer: Lay now thy louing Armes about him: Claspe him hard to thy bosome, and keepe him fast till hee be surelie and softlie placed into the heauens.
Now, Lord, thou hast begunne to loofe this Soule out of its prison: Let earth goe to earth, and his Spi|rit returne to thee that gaue it: Place it into one of these heauenlie Man|sions which thy Sonne is gone to prepare for these that are thine: Strengthen him now at the last and

highest point of his tryall.
O Great IEHOVAH, who neuer hucketh to giue mercie to heart broken sinners, let him finde more and more y^t thy bowels ouerflo|wing with mercie, are readie to re|ceiue him: In the bottomelesse sea of thy mercie make his sinnes all to bee choaked, and his Soule delici|ouslie to be bathed with euerlasting comforts.
And because Sathan in his last as|saults is most furious, bee thou most powerfull in him by the vertue of thy Spirite: Blunt so the edge of all his temptations that they bee not able any more to wound his Spirit: Let thy secret loue bee vnto his Soule lik a Secret or jack in this bloo|die battell, whereby he may be shiel|ded from the bloodie blowes of a most cruell aduersarie: Put on him, Lord, the compleate armour of God,Ephes. 6. 13 that hee may bee able to with-stand in this euill houre, and hauing done

all, to stand: Before this Battell end make him with stomacke and cou|rage to runne all his enemies throgh with the two edged sword of thy Spirit.
Haue now, Lord, a speciall care of him: Hemme in all his thoughts within the compasse of thy will: Possesse him so with the fulnes of thy presence, that in him there be found no roome for any ill motions: Furnish him with the supplie of all these graces which thou knowest to bee wanting into him: Let thy Spirit make residence in his heart, as in an house of God.
Now, Lord, while it is time to saue, saue the Soule of thy Seruant which is now readie to remoue: O|pen vnto it that euer-flowing foun|taine promised to the penitent of the house of Dauid for to tak away sinne and vncleannesse: O Fountaine of Grace, wash him and wash him throughlie with the blessed Blood of thy satisfaction: After that thou

hast made him perfectly cleane, hold out thy succouring  helpful armes vnto this Soule and take it into thy bosome: Let it there taste of the ho|nie of thy Compassions.
In this time of gloummines  dark|nesse of death, inlighten his Soule with the light of thy countenance: Turne thy face now vnto it: Hither|to it could see nothing but the Back|parts of Thee that Great IEHOVAH, which bringeth joye but in parte: From such parts now bring him vn|to the fulnesse: Turne thy selfe vn|to this Soule that it may fullie see thy face wherein is fulnesse of joye.Psal. 16. 11
And seeing no man can see thy face  liue, let this thy Seruant now see thy face and die, that after death hee may liue with thee for euer in the Heauens: Let neither the loue of life nor the feare of death turne his eyes from the prize of the highPhilip. 13. 14 calling of God: Make him now with a long steppe from the earth to the

heauens to step in into immortalitie.
Now, Lord, engraue deepelie this Soule into the palmes of thine hands Set it as a seale on thine heart: Wrap it within the Mantle of thy mercie, ware it within the bowels of thy loue, lappe it in thy bosome with that vn|speakable joye which Christ hath pur|chased with vnspeakable paine, euen through the bloodie merites of his most bitter passions: His wordes now are failed: Square thou all his thoughts by the rule of thy Spirit of grace.
Lord, make these our weake pra|yers, to mount vp lik Pillars of smoke parfumed with the mercifull merites of thine onelie Sonne: To him with thee his Father, and with the Spirit of Grace, be all Glorie, Praise, Power, and Dominion for euer.
AMEN.



The spirituall Friend.
O deare Friende whome I haue seene a sorrow beaten sinner; Re|joyce

now in your Sauiour, whose mercies haue beene the Bane of all your sinfull miseries: Cleaue still fast vnto your Sauiour: Let not him goe whom your soule loueth, till ye come to Peniel where yee shall see him face to face.
The Lord refresh your weariedA prayer. soule with the soft  sweete breath of his Spirit: The Lord kned into your heart these spirituall meditations which are of the purest straine: O Fa|ther of mercies giue vnto this soule a most sure Infefment of heauen by the hand of thy Spirit: Make some drops of thy Myrrhe to enter in by some litle creuice of his heart: Put in thine hand by the keye hole of the doore that his bowels may bee moued for thee: Let such a strength now repare from thee vnto him, that the world may see that thy strength is made perfect in weaknesse.
It shall bee expedient that nowe yee his Pastour in a short prayer re|commend

him to God againe: Be|hold him now at the last gaspes, his eye stringes are broken: The water of death trickleth downe ouer his cheekes: His life is now drawen to an haire.
O Lord, while bodilie sight and senses faile, make spirituall sight and sense succeede in a greater perfecti|on: Make a spaite of thy grace with a mightie streame to carrie him to glorie.A prayer
O deare Friend vp with your heart to your God: Nowe all your sins shall die with your sicknesse: The Rocke of your Saluation Iesus hath shiuered them in pieces: There is Rom. 81. condemnation to these that are in Christ, who out of the pangs of loue suffered y^t paines of hell for mans Rede~ption His Angels Sir are heere waiting v|pon your Soule for to carrie it to pleasures for euermore: Yet a littlesal. 16. 11 while and loe yee shall bee at the vp|shotte of all your woe: Yee are nowe

vtterlie out of the reach of all the po|wers* Note of hell, euen vpon the borders of euerlasting pleasures, vnmixed pleasures, which shall turne all your teares into triumphes.


The Pastour.
Now Sir, Gird vp the loynes of your1 Pet. . 13 minde, make haste to your God, who shortlie shall put into your ha~d the palme of victorie: Sathan is chai|ned vp now for doing you anie more harme: The night of your trouble isLuk. 1. 78. past: Christ that blessed Day spring hath brought a morning mercie vnto your Soule: His graces in you hath shined more and more and so shall doe vntill the perfect day euen vntill your Soule carried on Eagles winges reach the hight of Heauen, where without teares or tediousnesse are pleasures for euermore.Psal. 16. 11
Though your tongue now faile you Sir, let your heart be busie with God in prayer, hee will hearten and encourage you in all the businesse:

Your taske is at an end: Heaue vp your heart to Christ crucified with vs, and that with sighes and sobbes the groanings of his owne Spirit.
Though your bodie now be cold, the Spirit of Iesus shall by a free and vitall operation maintaine the heate and vigour of your Soule.A prayer
The Spirit of comfort conueye vnto your soule the warmest blood that euer heated the heart of Iesus.
Let vs pray.




The last prayer for the sicke Man in the ve|rie jawes of death.
O LORD, whose mercies are aboue all thy workes, it was ne|uer thy custome to send away a bro|ken heart without comfort: Now heare the secret goanes and sighes

of thy seruant, whose soule is ready in this gasping agonie to come out of its Tabernacle for to co~peare before thee: Thou who hast giuen him thy Son for a ransome, giue him thy Spirit for a pledge: Furnish him with force for to fight and finish this Battell in vi|ctory: As thou hast bene at y^e begin|ning of his beeing euen the beginner of his beeing, so now bee thou the ende at which hee aimes, euen the ende of all his woes.
And seeing hee is now in the nar|row throat of death, helpe him by thy power, till hee hath past this passage Put now into him a fresh lie that in a strong vigour hee may runne with the feete of the Hinde till hee come to thee in etenitie: Make him now supple and nimble while he is neere the ende of his race: His sillie soule hath beene sore weather-driuen with many temptations, now let his bat|tell take an end: Receiue his soule in thy Rest. and lull it in the bosome of thy pleasures.
Bee a shield and a shelter vnto him for to hidde and couer him from the last blowes and painefull thrusts of his enemie the Deuill: Disapoint that euill one, while hee looketh for the greatest victorie: Let him receiue the foulest foile.
Loose now sweetlie these two which thou hast joyned together, that after his eyes with olde Simeon haue seene thy Saluation, he may depart in peace.
Seeing the Battell is nowe come to the laf stroke, make thy Spirit, O Lord, in him to fight it out, that ha|uing ouercome, thou may put the palme of victorie into his hand after that the dayes of dangers are past: O draw this soule now vnto thee with the strongest cordes of thy loue: Pro|claime vnto his Conscience a full  a finall remission of his sinnes, whe|ther Originall or actuall, whether of Commission or of Omission: Sub|scribe his padon with the arteriall blood of thy blessed Sonne.
O Father of mercies, the Spouse of all faithfull Soules, receiue this Spirit into thy wed locke-bedde: It was betrothed vnto thee by thy faire promises in the Gospel, now ac|cording to thy promise accom|plish and fulfill that blessed Band in the presence of thine Angels: Long, Lord, hath hee thought on it, and earnestlie longed for it: Seale thou it now with the sense of thy loue: Fulfull it, Lord, and this day be thou the Bridegroome of his Soule: Heere hee hath seene but the Copie of thy countenance, let him now come where he may see thee euen as thou art: As thou gaue him his measure of grace in the world, so nowe giue him his portion of glorie bsides thy selfe: Let nothing sway his thoughts from thee in this last agnie: Season so his heart with thy loue that there bee no roome in his heart for any thing by thy selfe.
Now loose the pinnes of the Taber|nacle,

while his soule shall bee out of the bodie let it enter into y^e Palace of pleasures: Say vnto it as Laban saidGen. 24. 31 to Abrahams seruant, Come in thou blessed of the Lord: Thou who hast clasped his name within the Booke of life: Bind now his soule into the bundle of life: Drawe it out of this myrie mortalitie,  place it among the Angels and spirites of just men, who are alwayes in thy presencePsal. 16, 11 courting thy countenance, wherein i fulnesse of joye.
Vnto the end and in the end, keepe his heart vnblameable in holinesse that Sathan that roaring Lyon bee neuer able to catch him within the reach of his paw: Preserue the true rellish and sound joyes of thy Spirit of grace within him, till from grace thou bring him vnto glorie, where thou shalt crowne thy giftes and graces with thy goodnesse.
O now open the euerlasting doores  let in this Soule decked with y^e law|rels

of victorie: Let all the Hea|uens welcome this conuerted sinner with songes and shoutes of joye.
O Spirit of Comfort, thou hast guided him thorow many seas of sorrowes, sit still at the Helme till thou haue brought him to his Ha|uen. O now crowne thy graces with thy glorie: Lord Iesus receiue my spirit.
To the Father, Sonne, and holie Ghost, be euerlasting praise and do|minion for euer,
AMEN.



Michael and the Deuils dispute for the 'Soule of the sicke Man alittle before its depar|ture out of the Body.

Sathan.
I Haue many things to lay to this mans charge: I am the Lordes Proctor and Acturney appointed to

plead for his justice: I haue alreadie sifted his life: Of force this Soule must bee damned: None Assise can cleanse it: It is now taken red hand in the path and passage of sinne.


The Angel Michael.
I will not vse against thee a railing accusation, neither darre I for myIud. v. 9. Master the God of mercie and of meekenesse: It hath pleased his royall Majestie to license thee to accuse the soules of men: Thine accusations are euer most bitter and most bloodie: I am heere standing on my Masters side for to defend this Soule which hee hath bought with his blood.
But what can thou say against this man whose Soule is committed to me for to be carried vnto Paradise: I know thee of olde to bee the accu|serReuel. 12. 10 of the brethren: I remember well how once I contended  grappled withIud. v. 9. thee for the bodie of Moses which was buried sore against thy will: It is likelie that of it thou thought to make an idole.
Loose now thy leach and let all thy hell-hounds come forward: Come, come with thy most foule mouthed objections: what ca~ thou now alledge against the soule of this man before that it come out of this bodie: Thou art heere a Lyon against a Lambe: De|clare now what thou can in this As|sise: Thou can say no more than he hath alreadie said against himselfe: But come on, faime thine indite|ment against him: Discharge thy fie|ie dartes with the outmost of thy force.


Sathan.
Knowest thou not that there is a large haruest for Hell, manie called but few chosen.
Hee is my Vassall, I require but Iustice: Let him receiue but accor|ding to his deseruinges: Heere is a Bill of inditement able to conuinee him: In his wickednes he turned to his course as the horse rusheth into theIer. 8. 6. battell: Both fiercelie and feareleslie

marching vnder my collours in the pur|sute of his pleasures hee ranne ryote in the way of wickednesse.


The Angel Michael.
Is not God a God of mercie, able to forgiue? But what hath hee done?


Sathan.
Beholde, the pieces of Euidence which I produce against him: Let all the actions of his life bee brought to a true touch, and it shall appeare what a monster hee hath beene.
In his youth hee scorned at the Thunder of Gods word, counting it but Paper shot: His soule was neuer grieued to grieue the Spirit of grace: sel|dome came hee to the Church, hee was of the kinred of Noahs Raen delighting to flie about the Arke, not willing to enter into it: Gods hony word of vnspeakable sweetnesse was vineger to his teeth: The pure com|mandement of the Lord which in|lightened the eys was lik smok vnto hisPsal. 19. 8.

eyes the cause of blearednesse.
In all pointes he was disloyall vn|to his God: Hee misregarded his Parents: He burned with lust likeHos. 7. 4. an Ouen heated by the baker: Hee so loued his lust that it was his law: His hands were full of pickerie, his eyes were full of adulterie, and his heart was full of guile and his tongue full of lyes, euer gaggling like a Goose. He was a cunning clawbacke  a paunch|pike thanke: His custome was to de|file the aire with most filthie belghs of blasphemie: Hee sported at all re|proofes: O the noble jugling.Psal. 35. 26
There, there, this geare goeth trimme.
By hooke  by crooke he sought for gaine: Howe hee wanne it hee cared not if men perceiued not his fraude: With Iudas hee was whol|lie giuen to the bagge and baggage of his couetousnesse.
Shall this man come where God is who neuer walked in his way? In all

his wayes he did euer goe awry lik a Childe that scribleth without a rule: All his good intentions were but like false conceptions which are buried be|fore their birth: let me now tread him vnder foote, that I may lay him dead straight like a worme: O the infamous man whose name doeth goe with a brand vpon it like Cains marke: Hee followed Christ for loaues: But O when the corne was spent the Rate left the Barne.
His whole life was but a myre of mischiefe: All men can tell that hee was but an vntrustie Pilferer, a foole hardie fellon rushing in rebellion a|gainst God  man: If so bee that he was exalted, he cared not that God was dishonoured: In the pride of life he walked like Nebuchadnezar strou|ting in his Palace with bragging wordsDan. 4. 30 boasting of his Babel: Gods pati|ence hath long suffered. In his suffe|rings hee hath comforted himselfe in this, When I see a conuenient time

then will I execute judgement: Nowe is the time of execution come: Ei|ther now or neuer, for his sinne is now ripe and readie for the sickle.
I am wearied with accusing, what shall I say? His heart was euer swel|led with pride: By costlie apparell he gaue euill example: With his plea|sures hee was tyed like a dog in a leach: He could neither suffer a Superiour nor comport with  Companion: The blue enuie in his heart made him hate to see others thriue besides him: The praise of other mens vertues, was as who had dispraised himselfe in his face: Hee was euer malcon|tent at Gods graces into others: He was like a Swine vnder an Oake fee|ding, and foiling Gods benefites lik Acorns: But who euer saw his face lifted vp with thankes to the shaker of the tree? Hee was full of peppe|red sausinesse, sporting himselfe with checkes and taunts: As hee had a babling tongue to speake euill, so had

hee a bibulous eare thirstie after false reportes.
O what filthy dung hilles  heapes of sinnes were hoodred in his heart: If hee did not any euill, it was not for lacke of will, like the frozen ser|pent hee hissed when hee could not hurt, but so soone as hee beganne, hee lustilie lashed on. All his me|ditations were mould in malice.
As for his Religion hee vsed his libertie as a cloake of maliciousnesse:1 Ft, 2. 16 While hee come to the Church it was but for the fa~shion, for to shew the frindges of his hypocrisie: Hee thought a long Sermon a surfet, as Iudas thought the oyle spent that was powred vpon Christ, so thought hee all the time alloted to Gods ser|uice: Hee was euer cold in well do|ing as one of y^e frozen generation: A proude man was he in his own con|ceit while he found himselfe inlight|ned with some ca~fused glimmerings of light glauncing vpon his heart thorow

the deceiuing glasse of a tempora|rie faith: His necke was an yron si|new and his brow brasse: In a wordIsa. 48. 4. all his affections were out of order as bones beside the joynt.
It were more easie to count the sand than his sinnes of omission and of commission with excesse of riot.
I seeke but Iustice, now his life is neere an ende, let Gods vengeance take him at the rebound.


The Angel Michael.
That is a bloodie Lybell, if all be true that is said by the father of lyes: Though his sinnes were thus bloodyIoh. 8 44. as thou accuses, there is a redeeming Blood in Iesus for his ransome, his wounds are the holes of the Rocke of refuge: All that accusation is but founded vpon surmise.
But though hee were guiltie as thou affirmes, is there anie sinne so great that God cannot forgiue? There is no sinne so red but Christs Blood can make it white: Gods word

is true, sinne dyed in Scarlet-red lik crimsin, may by God be made whiteIsa. 1. 18. lik the wooll  snow: Thou cryeth for Iustice, Christs Blood cryeth for mercy; which of you two shall best bee heard?


Sathan.
But can Gods mercie bee against his justice? shall mercie against justice plead for the whitnesse of a Rauen? shall a most vile sinner escape dam|nation? shall not Iustice bee his bane? Let mee now giue him a knocke with the barre of judgement: While hee had strength to walke hee left the narrow path, for to goe croude with the wicked in the broad waye: Now let him suffer for all his riotes, let the doors of heaue~ be bared in his teeth, Gods mercies must not bee against his justice: Let mee now giue him a yercke with my whippe.


The Angel Michael
Auoide, there is no breach in ju|stice while his sinnes are pardoned,

for Christ his Lord hath suffered for him, he hath satisfied for all his debts at the brre of justice, and that to the vtmost farthing: When all was payed, Christ cryed with a loud voice that heauen and earth might heare Consummatum est, that is, Al is pa|yed,Ioh. 19. 30 the whole worke of mans Re|demption is finishd This was hard by the deuils themselues,  not one durst stand vp to say the contrarie.
Thou cyeth for Iustice,  is Iustice, heere is Iustice: Christ his Cautioner hath payed all his dbts: Note It is against Iustice to require one debt to bee twise payed: By Iustice then hee must be saued, because Christ in great mercie towards him hath made full satisfaction to the Iustice of God: Note His Lords passion is his pardon, for the droppes of his Blood his Father hath giuen him in exchange life euerlasting for all repenting sinners, what needes him to feare who hath Christ for his Cautioner.



Sathan.
Christ would neuer be Cautioner for such a Reprobate goate as hee: In wickednesse he hath out-stripped all others, he put on Christ like an Hat which goeth off to euery one that wee meete: The wine pynt and To|bacca Pype with sneesing pouder pro|uoking sneuell were his heartes de|light. His life hath beene a stum|bling blocke vnto manie: His best vertues were but splendida peccata glistering sinnes: His most precious pearles are but of pewter.
Away with this Child of Belial, out vpon him with all his faire wordes, all his Religion was but scroofe and scumme: Would Christ euer bee Cautioner for such a Banquerupt as hee, who all his dayes hath beene a boisterous reueller, the chiefe of a knot of knaues.


The Angel Michael.
Hee who is not in debt needethMatth. 9. 13 not a Cautioner: I came, said Christ,

to call sinners to repentance: Though his sins were manie as thou objectes, no miserie in man can ouer-reach the mercie of his God: Christ in all will bee answerable for him.


Sathan.
What hath Christ to doe with this stubburne and steele-necked Be|bell who was in his whole conuersa|tion both hote  hardie? The voyce of his Conscience within was out|cryed,  all honestie out-faced by his corruptions: After y^ euill turne was done he had his excuse readie at his fingers ends. Thinke ye that Christ will bee Cationer for all men, or that all men shall bee saued?


The Angel Michael.
Not for all, neither shall all men bee saued: But this man is one of Gods because of his Faith.


Sathan.
How could he haue Faith? Faith is by the Word. The Word had none abode in him a pettie-fogger a trouble

towne: What could such a smatterer as hee learne at the hearing of the Word? Hee hath beene but a Bung|ler delighting into gewgowes: Hee was a leaking vessell, letting thinges runne out as fast as they came in, his Faith was euer fained.


The Angel Michael.
Though his Faith was weake, yet was it neuer fained, God quenchethIsa 42. 3. not the smoking flxe: Note Hee looketh not so much to the strength as to the trueth thereof: Thou art fertile in foolish words which are the summe of the Deuils dictionarie.


Sathan.
I heare thee bragge much of his Faith, but who did euer see it? IHb. 11. 1, know not what the euidence of things not seene signifith: I could neuer vnderstand that Theologie: I vnder|stand S. Iames better, shewe mee thyIam. 2, 13. Faith, saith hee: If hee had Faith let it bee seene: To say that hee had Faith, is but a vaine blast: What

hath his life bene but a web of vices? What hath hee beene but a fruitlesse shrubbe in the Lords garden, where hee but marred the ground? What hath hee beene but a luttish sluggard a Gore-bellie, a Bellie-god, petting himselfe with paunch-pleasures, his mouth like a Bung-hole was for no|thing but for the filling of his bellie among his drunken Gosips: Hypocri|sie hath so enwouen it selfe into his heart, that all his thoughtes are be|come as blacke as hell: His heart was euer voyde of all Charitie: If he was well hee cared not for others in their calamities: This was his ordinarie speach concerning the afflicted: What haue I to doe whether they sink or they swim? Euery vessell must stand on its owne bottome: Let euerie man shift for himselfe: the well  wealth of others was to him an eyesore: curse now this barren ground which hath beene a soyle onelie fitte for weedes.


The Angel Michael.
These bee but accusations or ra|ther

cauillations without any grou~d. The Godlie saw that he was among them a fruitfull tree, whose branches were bowed downe that men might pull the fruites with their hand.


Sathan.
What fruites Could such a thorne as hee beare grapes? Could such a Thistle as hee beare figges? Where are these fruites of his Faith? What was hee euer but a monstruous person all mouth, tongue, and voyce, without heart or hand to thinke or doe good: he seemed to bee wise while indeede all his actions were contriued but by quirkes of vvite: Hee could giue God his lips in stead of his heart: He had many faire sweete wordes like the sounding of golden Bells, but vvhere are his Pomgranates fruites worthie amendement of life? All might see that hee was like that cur|sed ground vvhere Thistles growe inIob. 31. 40 stead of Wheat, and Cockle instead of Barley: Let him nowe cracke of his Cockle and boast of his Barley.



The Angel Michael.
These bee but calumnies and orged slaunder and detractions: He was indeede like a tree planted by thepsal. 1. 3. riuers of water that bringeth foorth the fruite in his season.


Sathan.
What was hee but a knottie, bar|ren, rotten scrubbe, marring the grou~d? Shew mee his Faith if thou can? make search of his workes: Try them and tell me what they are in thy best sraphicall discourse.


The Angel Michael.
This and this and this hee did: And if God had spared his dayes he was well minded to doe more: God euer preferreth the willingnesse of mans minde to the worthinesse of his woke: For if there bee first a wil|ling2 Cor. 8, 12 minde, it is acceptable according to that a man hath, and not according to that hee hath not.


Sathan.
All that was but hypocrisie for to

bee seene and praised of men: His chiefest care in that was fool shlie to gaine an opinion of more than ordi|narie pietie, as if hee had beene a Rabbi in Israel: But O inwadlie in his Soule hee jested at hell not caring for Heauen: Gods boaste seemed to him but Bugges thinges made to feare Children. His heart was a verie Vice of vices turning from euill to worse.


The Angel Michael.
God alone knoweth the heart: Mala mens malus animus: Thou judgest o|thers to be like vnto thy selfe: Note Be|cause when thou art Lucifer an An|gel of light a white deuill in appea|rance, then art thou most set on blac|kest darknesse, thou thinkest others to bee likewise disposed for to jug|gle.


Sathan.
But can he denye his sinnes? Are they not all written into mine accu|sation Booke? His debts are so hudge

that he cannot be able to pay: A way to prison with this Banquerupt, neuer pleade more for him, for his sinnes are so manifest that they cannot bee couered: Did not his open scandals strike the Drum of rebellion against the heauens? Who can denye his sinnes? Let mee nowe sheath this dagger in his bowels: The pleasures of his sinnes are past, nowe let him finde the sting of guilt.


The Angel Michael.
It is trueth that hee hath sinned, but also thou cannot denye but that hee hath confessed his sinnes: By the blessed blood of Iesus they are cancelled and blotted out of the Booke of Gods rememberance. O despightfull Spirit thou art first  craftie tempter and after a cruell tormenter: Thou are euer picking quarrells with Gods redeemed ones. What euer hee hath done amisse, hee hath sore repented it.



Sathan.
Hee but seemed to repent: His heart which men thought to bee a seate of sinceritie was but a sinke of sinne: If it were vncased and laid o|pen this should clearelie appeare: At preaching, the word without and the dumbe choppes of his Conscience within could not moue him to doe well: At his prayers, before men hee could chirppe like a gras-hopper: But wher are the teares of his Repentance?


The Angel Michael.
His prayers were not chirping, but crouding euen the crouding of the Doue: As for his teares the holie water of grace,  most pleasant dewe of Re|pentance, the Lord hath put them into his Bottalls: Manie a teare since this Battell began hath trickled down his cheekes for the grieuing of his God His eyes like two water sluces runing continuallie.


Sathan.
Wat is that? Hypocrites which

are but peeuish hyrlings and miserable wretches with their deceitfull rub|binges can wring water from their eyes: By such craftie conueyances they cu~ningly bleare the eyes of me~ who can see nothing but outward appearance: There be manie coun|terfeit teares in the world.


The Angel Michael.
The teares of Iacob while hee weptIos. 12. 4. made supplications were not the worse because prophane Esau could shedHeb. 12. 17 teares. The teares of the Godlie are like precious pearles, in Gods eyes.


Sathan.
I know his treacherie better than yee, hee was cunning in the arte of seeming: I euer knew him a doubling  dissembling Cmpanion; a Dra|gon with Lambes hornes: Well could hee straine the vtmost veane of his wittes for to bleare the eyes of men: The way of godlinesse in his heart was as the way of a man with aProu. 30. 19 maide most close from all accesse:
Manie a time could this crafie Bible-carier wring out a teare in the Church for to catch the applause and vaine breath of mans praise: But in secret he could prophanelie laugh in his sleeue and scorne at sinceritie: Among such as himselfe his mouth was blotted with blasphemies, a|mong the Godlie againe hee could pratle much of pietie: His chiefe studie was to dawbe the outward man withfaire shewes like a Rogue in a stage with the apparell of a Prince: While he did heare the word and his Bible before him, it was but of course and custome and not of Conscience: He like Nimrod was a mightie hunter not of beastes but of vaine praise and ap|plause: When hee gaue almes, hee caused blow the Trumpet that others might know when he did any good in appearance: Hee in his bragges was like the Hen which cackleth at euerie egge shee layth: To his lusts hee was a voluntarie vassell: Among

his neighbours hee was like a Cormo|rant: Hee was like an emptie boxe with a faire title written vpon it, an smaelite in the coate of an Israelite: All his religion was but an outward aperie of profession, a signe hanging without, hauing nothing within: When hee hang downe his head likIsa. 58. 5. a Bulrush, it was but for a day, so soone as the morrow came and hee to his olde byas againe: His best thoughtes were like a false conception which is buried in the birth; like a stalled Oxe hee set vp himselfe a fat|ting after his fasting: For the great treasures of Gods graces he neuer retur|ned the tribute of glorie; such was his vnthankfulnesse: Now let me drie him to my denne, that I may flash fire into the face of this most wretched forlorne sinner, who in his heart hath hatched all sortes of mischiefe.


The Angel Michael.
Well hast thou bene called y^e accuser of the brethren: away with thy slande|rous

lybell, not worthie that I shuld shape it an answere: what this poore man hath done amise deare hath he bought it, with manie a sore sigh and groane to his God, hath he both loathed and lamented his faultes: God hath heard him  hath sealed vp his pardon with the blood of his Sonne: The sweete  soft breath of Iesus hath refreshed him with comforts, and now his Spirit which vvas once sore troubled and distem|pered is made free from all his feares, God in his fauour hath seasoned his heart with a sauing grace: Thine hid malice hitherto confined vvithin the bounds of thy bosome, is now broken out into great distemper of vvordes.


Sathan.
Behold, behold, the great ve|lumes of the compt bookes of his con|science: Look vpon these scarlet  crimsin letters of his transgressions: Shall this short and abrupt deuotion of

his in his sicknesse, bee counted Re|pentance? Will not the most vvicked vvaile vnder Gods hand vvhile it is vveightie vpon them? Note There is no Crowne of life for carnall liuers: How easie is it to hang downe the headIsa. 58. 5. like a bulrush for a day? While hee had time to doe vvell hee vvas both colde and coward in well doing: All his good vvorkes were but in exter|nall forme, shewes without substance: Cunninglie could he tricke and trimPsal. 51. 6. the outward man: But hee neither loued the trueth in y^e inward partes: As he was double minded so had he a heartIam. 4. 8.  a heart, which he did apparell with faire Mantles of godlie appearance.
While vnder faire collours of Re|ligion hee did heare the world in hand that he stood for God,  vvas zea|lous for the good cause, he in his pri|uie practise vvas my close factor, ser|uing mee for his profites and his pleasures: Glad was hee to gogge the worlds eyes with the distinctions: Of

vurie he made a byting  a tooth|lesse: lyes, hee diui-ded in Officios and pernicious: His greatest faultes he could well cloake with mincing and excusing.
O the deepe dungeon of hypocri|sie that is within that breast: O how cunninglie hath all his wickednesse beene concealed hitherto? None hath beene vpon his priuie counsell but I and his owne corruptions: O that heart of his a pit and a puddle, a denne and a dungeon both darke and deepe! Who can see it? who can sound it? But why spend I time in y^e vnsauorie raking of this dung-hill. Good Lord, it is a strange thing how thou whose clearest eye hath seene him most perfectlie in the inmost closet of his heart, shouldest sende downe an Angel to plead for him: O how cunningly could he with his fists beate the breast with the Publi|can, beeing no lesse in his heart pre|sumptuous than the Pharisee! Here

lyes in this bed a painted Tombe faire without: But O what rottennesse is within his heart? none eye could abide to see it, if it were perced with a gimlet. Shall this man come where God is, who neuer walked in Gods wayes? Like a blinde horse he stam|mered  rushed in euerie myre: His heart was nothing but a kneding rough of wickednesse, yea, a gulfe and groope of vncleannesse: Let nowe the heauens cry shame on him.


The Angel Michael.
Thou art shamelesse in thine ac|cusations and dogged in thy malice: Thou with thy bellowes, of temp|tations fist bloweth at the coale of sine, and after that thou cryeth for judgement which should chieflie be directed against thy selfe, the father of all mischiefe.
But in this last point of thine ac|cusation thou hast plainlie bewrayd thy murthering malice in taking vpo~ thee to judge of the sinceritie of the

inward partes: Thou presumeth far aboue the reach of thy knowledge: God alone is the searcher of mens hearts: Note It is hee alone who hath an eye witnesse within vs.


Sathan.
Though God onelie knoweth the heart, yet by the fruits the tree is known:Matth. 7. 16 It is easie to gesse of his heart by the copie of his countenance, hee had a swift  a souple tongue: But his hand was heauie to practise: What hath hee beene all his life-time but a bag of imbred malice, a most filthie ex|crement into the Church? Behold how hee is altogether berayed vvith ordure: Let mee now vvith the be|some of iustice sweepe him outat Shel|coth the dirt porte of Gods house: What shame shall it bee to the hea|uens to receiue such a dunge hill  lump of filthinsse whose disbanded corruptions haue defiled the aire? It shall bee justice that now hee bee washed in the Kettle of Hell.



The Angel Michael.
What God hath cleansed that call thouAct. 10. 15 not common: Christ by his blessed Blood hath made him cleane: The Lord of glory vvho openeth and no man steeketh, hath opened the euer|lasting doores for to let in his soule: I am heere waiting on for to carie it to glory: It is in vaine that now thou sets thy temptations on foote  on fire: By thy craftie cosening thou shalt not be able to robbe or to filch from him the least graine of grace.


Sathan.
What? shall this bastard professour and runnagate escape the doome that is due to his villanie? While hee had time hee liued in pleasures, and feasted while others fasted: His seuen yeares of plentie are past, now let him smart vvith the Glutton into hell: Let him there bee refused of a drop by him to vvhom heere hee refused a crumme: Can God looke vpon his iniquities and not kindle a consu|ming fire in his vvrath against such a

varnished hypocrite, vvhose vvhole re|ligion vvas in a mouth filled with great swelling words of vanitie? In such de|ceitfull cunning colouring, hee among all did carrie away the Bell.


The Angel Michael.
God will neuer looke vpon his iniquities, for hee hath cast them all behind his backe: God beholdeth noneNumb. 23. 21 iniquitie in Iacob; neither doeth hee see peruersenesse in Israel: Note The Lord judgeth not his Children by the remnant of their olde corruptions, but by the beginnings of his renew|ing grace: Note The mercifull God is more pleased vvith a dram of grace, then prouoked with a pound of ini|quitie: Sinnes are not sinnes before God, except that they bee done vvith pleasure: That which I say is from that trueth: Hee that is borne1 Ioh. 3. 9. of God sinneth not.
Auoyde Sathan: Thou art euer couered vvith rage as vvith a ray|ment:

When thou seest anger kind|led thou art euer readie to adde tin|der to that fyre: Thou art cunning and craftie to clok thy bloodie mas|sacres vvith pretences of seeking ju|stice.


Sathan.
What say I but trueth; His whole delight vvas in sinne: While he was in health and strength, he did weare my Liuerie: Who did euer see him beare Christes cognisance? All his godlinesse vvas but cloake and co|lour vvithout life and vigou: Thogh hee sinne not now there vvhere he lyeth, he hath not left sin, but sin hath left him: If his tongue could speake. hee could not for his heart denye it: Scribitur in facie: Beholde his fierce and kill-bucke countenance: While he had youth and vigour hee obeyed no lawe but his lawlesse appetits: Was hee challenged? Then hee fa|thered his sinnes vpon mee.



The Angel Michael.
Thou in thy fond humour hast euer byting corrasiues, for bleeding Consciences: In his members I con|fesse there was a lawlesse law indeed, but in his minde vvas Gods Lawe warring against the law of his mem|bers: From his heart hee hated that law of his members: But his whole delight was in the Law of the Spirit: Note After that hee had sinned he  cast the first stone at him selfe.


Sathan.
All these be but faire cloakes and couers for to hide his transgressions: But they will not preuaile: The heauens know that he was but y^e car|rion of a Christian, aglozing hypocri, hauing the carkase of knowledge with|out the life of loue  the power of pra|ctise, euer fickle lik a Chameleon: Hee is nowe in his good moode, but if he shuld yet liue a space, all shuld soone see y^t in his heart is nothing sou~d set|tled  sincere: what need I more? this

Soule must bee mine, hee hath sin|ned, and therefore hee muste bee cursed, and so hee must bee mine: Behold his Band and Obligation: By the Lawe of God hee is mine: Now must hee runne into ruine: Let mee giue him a girke with my rodde.


The Angel Michael.
Avoid that bloody Bande hath bene cancelled by the blood of God, that Obligation long since hath beene uen with the nailes of the Crosse of Iesus: That which the Law had , hath beene loosed by the Gospel: What his workes could not doe, Gods grace hath perfected: By fa|uour the mercifull Lord hath chosen him out of the lost masse of man|kind: Seeing his ransome hath cost God his blood, all accusations must bee sealed with silence: In despite of the vtmost rage of all infernall force this Soule shall bee saued: Though all the powers of hell prodi|giouslie

madde should rage, rampe, and roare, they shall not be able to vnye the knot of Faith and Loue where with hee is vnited vnto his Sauiour.


Sathan.
I feare fore now that hee slippe the collar and goe from mee: At least seeing in his whole life I haue beene his Master, let him bee diuided, let mee haue any part and let God take his choice in the partner-ship.


The Angel Michael.
Auoyde Sathan with thy wittie wickednesse, whereby woluishlle thou woulde worrie this rede|med Lambe. Thy shaire is not with God: Thou hast neither parte nor lot in this matter: The whole man is Christes who hath bought him with a price.
Away with thy gun-pudered hu|mour: Attempt no more to touch him: Thou shalt neuer grippe him any more within thy cruell clouthes, nor inwrap him in thy snaires: Wo

to that Soule that serueth thee: Note It is like a Bird on a bush which is smit|ten in her song of the Archer for whom shee had tuned her song: In the vtmost of all crueltie thou hast discharged the vtmost of thy gall vpon this wearied heart: I will enter no more in parley with thee.
Now come our thou fillie Soule vnto him that breathed thee in that bodie: Come to thy rightfull owner: Come into mine armes that I may carrie thee vp the Ladder of Iaacob vnto blesse: Christ thine Advocat hath pleaded for thee, and hath winne the cause: Come now Soule out of that body, flie like an Eagle vp to the blessed Carcase of thy Lord, where is constant peace, vnmixed joye, and blessed immortalitie: Now thou art Christs  Christ is thine: Hear|ke~  heare the cry of thy Spouse, RiseCant. 2. 10 vp my Loue, my faire One, and come away: Rejoyce wearied Soule, lift vp thine head, Saluation is come:

The Heauens are opened goe enter into thy rest.
The Battell of the Soule is now en|ded: Now deare Soule come out to eternity, come out to thy Bridegrome who now calleth thee: Bee clothed with royall apparell: Put on the massie  bright crowne of immortalitie with y^e glorious Garland of celestial Lawrels spangled with Iemmes of joye: Come out wearied Traueller from doole, dolour and distresse, for to enter in|toPsal, 16. 11 pleasures for euermore.


FINIS.



A COMFORTABLE Speach for the Widow of the defunct.
M. WEE daylie may see the trueth of that in Iob, ManIob. 14. 1. that is borne of a woman is of few dayes and full of trouble: Hee commeth foorth like a flowre and is cut downe: He fleeth also as a shadow and continueth not: Of this is a necessitie, For it is appoin|tedHeb. 9. 27. vnto all men once to die: The de|cree is come foorth against all flesh, All flesh is as grasse, c. The grasseIsa. 40. 6. withereth, the flowre fadeth, because the Spirit of the Lord bloweth vpon it:vers. 7. Surelie the people is grasse: All must goe to y^e vast gulfe of the Graue: Be cause all haue sinned, all are mortall

without exceptio~ of persons: prince people, great and small, all must goe to Golgotha: To great men God hath said, Yee are gods, but yee shall die likepsal. 82. 7. men.
What man is hee, said the Psalmist,psal. 89. 48 that liueth and shall not see death? Were a man Monarch of theIob. 14. 5. whole world, Iob saith, That his dayes are determined, the number of his m|neths are with God: Hee hath appoin|ted his boundes that hee cannot passe: As the enemies of Christ could not laye handes on him till his houreIoh. 7. 30. was come, neither Death the 1 Cor. 15. 26, enemie touch the Sainctes till the houre of their change come.Iob. 14, 14
As for you M. whom now the Lord hath made a Widow, yee haue to take patience, and holde yourLeuit, 10, 3 peace with Aaron: Dauid said to God, I was dumbe and opened not myPsal. 39. 9. mouth; because thou diddest it: A Wi|dow in the holie tongue is called Al|manah from a worde that signifieth

dumb, a word warning her to lay her ha~d on her mouth for to seale it with a reuerend silence, because God hath done it: Let his decease prouoke and enkindle your desire to goe to him, for hee will no more come to you.
God, M. hath not left you comfortlesse, for now happie is your Husband who hath drunke of deaths cuppe so peaceablie euen a sleeping drinke wherewith hee hath gone to sleepe with these righteous, who are said by the Prophet to rest in their beddes: The friendes of Christ dieIsa. 57. 2. not, but softlie with Lazarus that friend of Christ, they sleepe in theirIoh, 11, 11 Graues, where they lye still and areIob, 3, 13, quiet. Trauell M. with your owne heart that it bee silent.
O but yee haue to blesse God, who hath dealt so mercifullie with your dearest hearte whome hee hath so powerfullie vp holden in so bloodie and bitter a Battell a|gainst the enemies of his Saluation

wherein by the strength of God in his weakenesse: After bitter bickeringes hee hath obtained so glorious a vi|ctorie which hath made all the hea|uens torejoyce.
Now assuredlie M. yee may say, My deare Husband the desire of mine eyes is now a Prince in heauen crow|ned with the euer greene Lawrels of immortalitie: Hee hath changed a fraile life, a wind in a worme for eter|nitie of Glorie. Faithfull Iob pati|entlie blessed God, by whose per|mission Sathan in a whirle-wind cru|shed all his Children together vn|der the ruines of an house, howe much more comfortablie may yee say, The Lord gaue,  the Lord hathIob. 1. 1. taken away, blessed bee the Name of the Lord.
Note How manie good and godlie persons haue their Husbands taken by Pyrates, pyned in Galleyes, rot|ting in prisons, slaine by poyso~, stob|bed in duells, murthered by Trai|tours,

killed in warre, drowned in Riuers, sunke downe in Seas with their whole substance, and diuerslie taken away in most doolefull man|ner? But be hold, which may blunt the edge of your dolours, your hus|band peaceablie deceased in his bed hauing his eyes closed with the finger of a Friend: Though all the sortes of death of Gods beloued Ones be pre|cious in his sight, yet it is most com|fortable for the liuing when these whom they loue best are remoued in this outward peaceable manner, both spirituallie and temporallie comforted: This Iob calleth to die inIob. 29. 1. our nest. If God had done otherwise to you in the rigour of his Iustice, who durst controll him?
This also ye must remember for the settling of any dru~blie mood of im|patiencie that may be in your heart, that hee was but lent vnto you for a space, and so contracted yee at the first to tarrie but a space together:

for if yee will take leasure to reade your Contract of mrriage, yee shall finde that therein is made mention of the death of you both: Let mee yet come neerer, after hee had taken you by the hand before the  on your marriage day, your handes a little after few wordes spoken did goe asunder againe, euen for to tell you that none immortall knot can bee had of any things heere below: hap|pie shee whose hearte is plyable and obsequious to the will of her God.
I confesse that yee cannot but mourne, beeing depriued of such  pleasure the fairest jewell of all your worldlie joy, the staffe of your estate on who~ your greatest comfortes did depend: what wo~der? for many days haue ye bene glad together, so that it is no possible were ye neuer so sa~cti|fied, but your heart must be deeplie wounded: Why not? Gods will was neuer against anie moderate mourning for the dead: * Grace

maketh no men and women Stoicks and stockes that cannot bee moued for anything: Nay, God permits vs to mourne but not to carke care1 The, 4. 13 as these which haue none hope, who ugging out their haire and downe their cheekes powre out their roa|ringes as waters, beeing swallowed vp of discouragement, hauing none hoe in their griefe, they some out myre and dirt.
It is permitted to mourne when Gods hand is gone out against vs: It is naturall: True grace is not a|gainst it, but against its corruption in excesse: In the Olde-Testament A|braham mourned for Sarah: For theGen, 23,  death of Deborah Rebeccas Nurse was sore weeping, for which cause y^ Oak-tree vnder which she was buried was called, Allon Bachuth, the OakeGen. 35,  of weeping: Iacob wept exceedingly for Ioseph, whom hee thought by some wilde beaste to haue beene rent inGen. 37. 33 pieces: After that Iacob had gathered

vp his feete  yeelded vp the ghost, Ioseph fell vpon his face and wept Gen. 50. 1 him and kissed him: Naomi after shee had lost both Husband and Children, would no more bee cal|led Naomi, that is pleasant: Call meRuth. 1. 20 not Naomi, said shee, that is pleasant, but call mee Marah that is bitter, For the Almightie hath dealt verie bitter  with me: I went out full, and the Lordvers. 21, hath brought mee home againe emptie: Why then call yee mee Naomie, seeing the Lord hath testified against mee, and the Almightie hath afflicted mee These all were interested, and there|fore they mourned, beeing pinched with the smart.
Behold, M. how in the Olde-Testa|ment God by taking away by death hath afflicted his dearest Ones  for to vse Naomis words hath testified a|gainst them: consider also how they haue mourned. In the New-Testa|ment Christ himselfe groaning inIoh. 11. 35 himselfe wept at Lazarus his Graue The wordes are these, And Iesus

wept: The sight of Christes death was by Simeon foretold to his MotherLuk. . 25. Marie: This Simeon called a sword which shuld pierce her thorow the Soule.
Note Thus as yee see a Christian heart is not a Marble heart but a mel|ing heart furnishing teares the tri|bute of our loue appointed for the funeral obsequies of our best beloued, whose appointed monethes of life are expired: Note Indeede where grace is, it stayeth at the course, stoppeth the ent and the streame of Natures blind and bold corruptions, bringing our most violent affections into an holie compasse of an humble submission vnto Gods will: But it neuer dissal|loweth a tempered Turtle crouding for the absence of our dearest comforts: Such cleare crystall teares the Lord will put vp in his Bottels: But as for these drumlie and barmie teares of fierce and vnrulie passions com|ming from the muddie fountaine of an vnhallowed heart, the Lord will

not respect them no more than  regarded the sacrifice of Cain: Note SucGn. 4. teares are like the waters of jealousi to the whoorish woman which madNumb. 5. 21 her thigh to rotte  her bellie to swell: None but humble and godlie grie|uances shall bee noted in Gods Re|gister for to be asswaged and allayed with comforts.
By all that which wee haue saide M. yee see that yee haue licence to mourne like these that haue hope: Ye haue indeede nowe to mourne, but first for your sins which might haue beene some occasion of his remoue from you: What is the best of our hearts, but a filthie sinke-hole and stinking dung-hill: That done, first ye may mourne thereafter for  losse: If the first yee doe sincerelie God in his appointed time shall bee the repairer of your losse with dou|bled contentmentes as hee did to Iacob who mourning sore for Benj|mine, in a clap recouered both I|seph

Benjamin: But how can that bee? will yee say: For him whom I haue lossed can I neuer in this world recouer: Note Know yee not what El|kanah said to his Wife Hannah wee|ping for want of Children, Why1 Sam, 1,  weepest thou? said hee, and why eatest thou not? and why is thine heart grie|ued? am not I better to thee than ten Sonnes? Shee is not worthie to bee comforted who thinketh not God to bee better to her than ten thou|sand Husbands: Hath not the Lord who sitteth at the Sterne, ruling all thinges aboue and below, proclaimed himselfe to the worlde to bee thatPsal. 68. 4. great IAH, The Father of the father|lesse,  a Iudge of the Widowes? Dauid was confident in this  my fatherPsal 27. 10 and my mother for sake me, aid e, then the Lord will take mee vp. As for your childre~ lay fast hold vpon y^e promises of your God, who hath oblished himselfe in a Precept of his Law, to shew mercie vnto the posteritie of

the godlie and that vnto thousands: There is Gods Obligation, whose word is faster than all the writs of men subscribed with a thousand No|ters: Such is his loue to the posteri|tie of the godlie that though the Mo|ther shuld forget the fruit of her womb, yet can hee not forget them whom hee hath printed vpon the palmes of hiIsa. 49. 16. hands: Hee who hath made the Egyptian to fauour his people, andExod. 12. 36 caused the firie flint to yeelde wa|terNumb. 20 11 for the thistie,  moued the de|uourer to affoord foode: Though heudg. 14. 14 suffer the Lyons to lack and suffer hun|ger:Psa. 34 10 They that seeke the Lord shall not want any good thing. All worldlie comforts may deceiue vs, as a Broo as the rising of the Riuers they passe away: But God whose bowels are euer earning ouer vs is euer fast and sure: With him is no shadowe of change: This comforted the Psal|mest in the failinges of his flesh and heart: God, said hee, is the strength

of mine heart and my portion forPsa. 63. 26 euer: This may vvell content vs except that wee bee heartlesse co|wards.
I know and am fullie perswaded that yee would gladlie haue still en|joyed your Iewell for some number of yeares, euen vnto the last date of mans dayes, euen vnto his three|score and tenth yeare, or to four score the vtmost feare of sinfull life set for these in who~ is the reason of strength:Psal, 90. 10 This I know would haue bene your desire: But bee yee thankefull to God, for the blessed time yee haue enjoyed him alreadie: How many bee Widowes before that their first yeare bee ended? Note And yet though so should haue beene done with you or with all these that liue godlie: A good marriage were it but for a day, it is in Gods Count Book reckoned to bee of long continuance: Many dayes make not the long life, but well spent dayes: A Childe of God

though an Infant of dayes, dieth anIsa. 65. 20. hundreth yeares olde, but the sinner an hundreth yeares olde shall bee accursed; hee is but as of yesterday. As for your Husband M there is no neede now of lamentations for him, for he is well: He is now among these ran|somedIsa. 35. 10. of the Lord, obtaining joye and gladnesse, where sorrowe and sighing haue none abode. God in great mer|cie hath taken him away, that hee should not see the euill to come. ThisIsa. 57. 1. was a fauour granted to good Iosiah, that he should be remoued in peace before the breake of weather: Behold, said the Lord, I will gather thee vnto2 King. 22 20 thy fathers,  thou shalt be gathered in|to thy graue in peace,  thine eyes shall not see all the euill which I will bring vpon this place.
Note In these last Dreggie dayes of the world the dead could speake to the liuing, they might well say to them as Christ said to the weeping women of Ierusalem, Weepe not forLuk. 23. 28

vs, but weepe for your selues, for behold the dayes are comming, c. In all appearance behold in this Age the dayes are comming fast on wherein that of Ieremiah shalbe said to the liu|ing,er. 22. 10 Weepe yee not for him that is dead, neither bemone him, but wepe for him that goeth away, for hee shall returne no more, nor see his natiue Countrie.
There bee such fearefull calami|ties now brewing for this Land that by all liklie-hood, when yee shall drinke the cup of wrath, our griefes shall so goe beyond all such sorrow, lik that of Ezekiel, y^t neither shall the Husband mourne for his Wife, nor shall the Wife waile for the Hus|band at their buriall: Beholde, a Paterne.Ezek. 24. 6
Sonne of man, said the Lord, Be|hold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroake: Consider well the sodainnesse, the increaser of griefe, yet neither shalt thou mourne nor weepe, nor teares runne downe:

Forbeare to cry, make no mourning forEzek. 24. 17 the dead: Bind the tyre of thine head vpon thee, and put on thy shooes vpon thy feete, and couer not thy lippes, and eate not the bread of men: All this was to declare that such calamities shul ouer-take that people, that all such mourninges for the death of Hus|bands, Wues, Children, c. should be swallowed vp by a greater griefe.
This is plaine by the wordes fol|lowing, Yee shall not mourne norvers. 23, weepe, but yee shall pyne away for your iniquities, and mourne one towardes another.
Let vs speake in Conscience: May not the Lord most justlie as he did threaten there, take from vs our strength, the joy of our glorie, the desirevers. 25 of our eyes  that whervpon we set our minds, euen the Gospel the Arke of his couenant? O let vs die before y^t euer that Glorie depart from this Israel.1 Sam. 4. 22
This consideration may sufficient|lie teach you and vs all moderat

mourning in so mercifull a visita|tion: It shall therefore bee your best in your deepest doole to Behaue andPsal. 131. 2 quiet your selflik a child that is wained of his mother: The choisest argument of comfort which the Apostle could finde concerning the dead, is foun|ded vpon the Resurrection, the day of the generall meeting of all Saints: I would not, said hee, haue you igno|rant concerning them which are asleepe,1 Thess. 4. 13 that yee sorrow not euen as these which haue none hope: For if wee belieue thatvers. 14. Iesus died,  rose againe, euen so them also which sleepe in Iesus, will God bring with him.vers. 15.
For this wee say vto you by the word of the Lord, that wee which are aliue and remaine vnto the comming of the Lord, shall not preuent them which are asleepe.
For the Lord himselfe shall dscendvers. 16 from heauen with a shout with the voyce of the Arch Angel and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first.
Then wee which are aliue, and re|mainevers. 17 shall bee caught vp together with them in the cloudes, to meete the Lord in the Aire: And so shall wee bee euer with the Lord.vers. 18.
VVherefore comfort one another with these words.
Consider well and weigh these words which that great Pen-man of God hath set downe with a precept that with them wee should comfort one another while wee are in doole for the dead.
Finallie this M. yee must know that all earthlie sorrowes were they neuer so sharpe, will at last growe blunt, and will bee meekened and skinned ouer by time: Nowe that which Time can doe to a Pagane, let Grace doe it to a Christian.
I intreate the Lord of all Grace andA prayer kindnesse to cast downe his compassio|nate eye vpon your afflicted  grieued case that your mourning beeing tempe|red with mercie ye may in your greatest griefe rejoyce in your God,
Amen.



A compendious Epi|taphe fit for a god|lie Man deceased.
To long Eternitie from toylesome Time,
His Soule is past, his Body sleepes in Slime.



A COMFORT for the fatherlesse.
MY deare heartes bee not dis|mayed in this grieuous affliction: But take it in patience, seeing it is fromRom. 8. 28 the Lord, who maketh all thinges to worke to the best of thse that loue him.
As Father Iob said while hee was made Childlesse, so muste yee say while yee are made fatherlesse, The Lord hath giuen, the Lord hath takenIob. 1. 21. away, and blessed bee the Name of the Lord.
Note If yee can blesse him for the re|mouing of his blessinges, hee shall double his blessinges vpon you, and shall make them to meete you at euerie turne.
The fatherlesse Children of the

faithfull whether their Fathers haue beene poore or rich, haue a rich Legacie left vnto them? or to them belong that promise of she|wing mercie vnto thousands: Such as bee blessed of him, saith the Psal|mist,Psal. 37. 2 mist, shall inherite the earth: In a|nother place hee saith, The genera|tionPsal. 112, 2 of the righteous shall bee blessed.
Wee knowe nothing on Earth more tender than a mother toward the fruit of her wombe: This madeIsa. 49. 15. the Lord to say, Ca~ a mother forget her sucking Childe, that she should not haue compassion of the fruite of her nombe? But what answered the Lord to thatvers. 16. question? Yea, said hee, they ay forget, yet will I not forget thee: Behold I haue grauen thee vpon the palmes of mine hands: This was Dauids greatest comfort that though his Father and his Mother should for sake him, yet the Lord would take him vp: If yee would heare of sensible Experience, My flesh, said hee, and mine heartePsal 73. 26

faileth: But God is the strength of my heart and my portion for euer.
Thus as yee see Father, and Mother, Sister, and Brother, flesh and Friendes, Heart, Health, and Wealth, and all will faile vs, but our God is onelie and euer fast; hee is the strength of our heart and our por|tion for euer.
Seeing it is so, let your hearts re|lye vpon your God alone: What euer your distresses bee (as Abra|ham said to his Sonne) The Lord will prouide: Note Will yee heare Ex|perience? I haue bene yong, said Dauid,Psal 37. 25, and now am old, yet haue I not seene the righteous forsaken nor his seede beg|ging their bread: Note Though the chil|dren of the godlie bee but Children of poore fathers, yet heere is their comfort, their godlie fathers before they die treasure vp for them many prayers in Heauen, and leaue vnto them the rich Legacie of Gods fa|uour.
Yee knowe certainlie that your Father was one that feared the LORD from his heart, whereof, to all our comforts, hee hath giuen a good proofe: And therfore yee may boldlie by the hand of faith laye holde on the promises of God which belong to all the faithfull and to their Children vnto many gene|rations.
Ye may know by the writen wordLuk. 12. 25 howe God feedeth the Rauens and clotheth the Lillies: Though they neither toile nor spinne, and though they neither sowe nor reape, and though they neither haue store|house nor Barne, yet are they suffi|ciently prouided: Note How much more are ye better than Fowles or flowers?
Christs precept is of profitable pra|ctise,vers. 31. Seeke first the Kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse therof, and all other things shall bee cast vnto you: Pray the Lord not coldlie and care|leslie, but most earnestlie, that hee

would cleanse  scoure your hearts from all these worldlie cares, of whatLuk. 12. 22 yee shall eate, and vvhat ye shall drink, and vvhat yee shall put on: Learne in time to cast your burden vpon the Lord, who desireth you so to doe, and that with a promise, that heePsal. 55. 22 shall sustaine you: Note A little with Gods blessing is enough: It is like that Widowes handfull of meale and little oyle which failed not: The vessels1 King. 17 12 of Gods grace are like that other VVidowes pot of oyle, which yeelded2 King. 4. 2 out oyle continuallie so long as there were vessels to receiue.
If yee bee earnest with God in prayer, hee will not repell your pra|yers with a deafe eare: The Lord himselfe hath taken vpon him to bee your Iudge and defender: If anie goe about for to molest you by a violent  boisterous course, he will certainelie bee their bane, like dung hee shll sweee them away from the face of the Earth.
Seeing then yee haue such faire promises of GOD, made both to your faithfull Father and to you also in the day of your Baptisme, beware by a lewde life to forfeite such Bandes and Obligations: Be|ware to followe the euill examples of this Worlde, in following the droue, which either by secret hypo|crisie or publicke prophaning, bid|deth Battells to all the Preceptes of Gods Lawe: Sharpe is that sauce which commeth after the sweetst worldlie pleasures: Let them bee as pleasant as yee please, there is an Hooke in the Bate: The most part of this world is but a rabble of Re|probates, an hoste of damned sin|ners rushing vpon their owne de|struction: Their cleanest Garments are spotted with the flesh: They areIud. v, 23, more clammie than pitch: None can touch them and not bee defiled.
Bee euer earnest to doe well: Though ye come faire short of that

you should and also would doe, yet bee not discouraged: Gods strength at last shall bee made perfect in your weaknesse: It cannot bee auoided but manie will trouble you by fraud  by cusenage, and by other diuerse afflictions: Note Though such things bee tedious to the flesh and goe a|gainst the streame of your affections, yet in the latter end all shall worke both to your well  contentment.
Let not sorrow ouerwhelme your hearts: Mourne not as these that1 The, 4. 13 haue none hope of the Resurrection: Let the meditations of Gods mercie and promised fauour rouse vp your Soules from that lumpishnesse and melancholious drowsinesse which may creep in into your hearts in this troublous time: Note Striue to bound and fence your heartes about deli|gentlie with the thoughts of Gods Fatherlie fauour, who shall neuer leaue you fatherlesse: Note Though your father be dead, yet God is aliue.
Now Sir, yee who at the elder bee yee the more thankfull to God, who hath giuen you the first place: Shew good example vnto the yon|ger: Oppresse them not, but rather bee a father vnto them: By your good counsell striue to make them plyable and frameable to Gods will reuealed in his word.
As for you who are yonger ones, bee not discouraged, for often grace maketh the yonger to bee the elder, and sinne maketh the elder the yon|ger: So Iacob found the blssing,Gen. 27, 33 though Esau was the first borne: Note It is Vertue that maketh the Heire.
Let your heartes therefore relye vpon the Lord: Let him bee the caruer of all your cares: If yee de|pend on him yee shall not want: Note Hee who created the world with|out matter and preserueth it with|out meanes, is God all sufficient who can easilie finde out meanes for the maintenance of al these that by faith

can laye claime to his promise: If wealth bee expedient for you, the Lord will giue you a large allowance, till hee make your Cuppe to ouer flow: Note But if otherwise hee hath appoin|tedPsal. 3 5. to exercise you with pouertie, know y^t he who hath the hearts of all men in his hands can easilie for your comfort stirre vp some who by their liberalitie towards you shall prouide themselues bags vvhich waxe not olde.Luk. 12. 33
If yee can bend your whole ende|vour to the seruice of your God hee shall satisfie you with the prouisions of his mercie: Note But if otherwise yee become lewde and prophane haunting euill companie the verie canker and cut-throate of all godli|nesse, yee shall neuer prosper; no not though by a painefull drudgerie ye should draw out the verie life-blood of your hearts: It is not earlie rising no late going to bedde, but Gods blessing that enricheth.
Now the Lord of grace blesse youAprayer

mine hearts: The Lord teach you to set  seale these comforts with prayers  patience vpon your hearts: And seeing the dayes are now euill euen the dregges of dayes: I intreate the most High to graunt you grace hour lie to renw and strengthen your watch, that your hearts  spirits may be preserued vnblamable, and that vntill the day of his most glo|rious appearance.
AMEN.


A diuine and heauenly discourse fit to be read to these that are conuee|ned in the house of mour|ning, that thereby the liu|ing may be remembered of their mortalitie.
DEarlie Beloued, this our godlie Friend one of Gods excellent

Ones is now deceased,  that peac|ablie like a Lambe into the armes o his God, who hath euer lasting lie fast bund his Soule in the bundle of life The death of such is often a fearfull preage of much anger and euill to come.
His Soule is now glorious in the Heauens like a Starre new created in the Skie: It is now liuing the life of God aboue, where it is filled with the infusion of that  which wee haue heere on earth  by imputation: Hee hath now al God and all that is in God in |speakable perfection beeing in that place where God is all in all.
At last after sore fighting and bit|ter bickering, as diuerse godlie per|sons haue seene, through the bent browes of an angrie Iudge hee hath seene the yearning and relenting bowels of a louing Father: Now af|ter his Battell ended, he hath  the Spirit: Note Clepsydr 

his houre glasse is now runne out, and his Soule is come to its wished home where it is free from the fetters of flesh: Nowe from the hanging turnes of time, hee is at last come to Eternitie: Note Thorow many seas of orrows both bitter and brimie hath he sailed before that hee could ariue at that blessed Port.
Our hearts cannot be but sorrow|full to bee depriued of such comfor|table companie as was is: But here i our comfort and the matter of our joye, hee is well and shall bee so for euer: Note By the mercie of his God hee is now passed ouer th knoppes of the mountaines of miserie and thorow the muddie myres of sinfull mortalitie, thorow fearefull tryals and troubles, euen from the dyets of grace to the dainties of glorie, from the Cant. 7. 11. Villa|ges of this world vnto Luk. 16. 9 euerlasting , farre aboue the rolling wheele of all changeable pleasures and smarting paines.
Poore mans life on earth is like a restlesse whirle-gigge whirled about: The mouing heauens are the place of our rest; and the resting earth is the place of our restlesse motions: Note The way of this life as wee may see is not adorned with Violets and Roses: No not: It is full of rubs and thornes and pricking whinnes of pier|cing griefe: O with what paines hath his sillie Soule sought vp the sweete streames of Gods mercie  to the Fountaine it selfe which is  to the Heauens!
God in great mercie hath now  last after manie dolours and bitter bickerings put his Spirit into the ac tuall and full possession of his  all joyes: Through fyre and water Psal, 66. 12 Lord hath broght him out into a  place: Now he is free from y^e bodie of bondage which did hang so fast  His Soule is set out of y^e reach of  troubles and sublunary toyes: Now blessed bee our God, hee is no 

lyable to our sinfull mortalitie into this earth a gulfe of corruption, God at last hath recompenced his light affliction with an euerlasting weight of glorie: O but he hath had a paine|full time in his sicknes! with manie deepe sigh and heauie groane hath hee beene heard in his feares: His face could neuer bee dryed for teares continuallie trickling ouer his cheekes: Note Happie is hee now for all the cloudes of his sinnes haue bene dissolued by y^e raine of mourn|full teares where with all Soules must be baptised before that they can be members of the Church Trium|phant: Now blessed bee God, all his teares and his trauels are turned into triumphes: If men shedde not eares on earth, God cannot wypt them away in heauen: All, as wee, must fight the good fight before hey can catch the Crowne.
Note Let vs all learne in him, and in his House of mourning to see

and conder the end of vs all, that while wee are liuing wee may lay it to our hearts and make it a matter of our nights meditations: Note Happie and thrise happie is hee that can pra|ctise that saying of Iob, All the dayesIob. 14. 14 of mine appointed time, will I waite, till changing come.
It is good that wee euer bee watchfull vpon our guarde well pre|pared for our last departure and fi|nall accounts: Note No man can ll how soone hee shall bee arraigned in the great Iudge his Consistorie: The day of this life wherein onelie wee can worke, declineth a pace: The fearfull night cloud hath taken post So soone as it shall come, man shall bee discharged to worke any more.
It is good often to consider (le wee should dote and dreame of Im|mortalitie heere) that the short threed of this life will bee soone drawne out to an end that by such thoughts we may learne in time not to bee taken

vp with abortiue earthlie pleasures which perish in the budde.
What is this earth but a muddie myre? What is poore mans life on this earth, but a map of miserie? Note The best of it is white and blacke checker work mixed with paines  pleasures, lashes and laughters: Euen in laugh|terProu. 14, 13 the heart is sorrowfull, and the end of that mirth is heauinesse: This god|lie mans death should bee warning for vs: Note Death knocking at our neighbours doore should remember vs of our mortalitie: There is no case of humane calamitie, but it is insident to all: In this our old friend wee may see and reade that we haue none abiding heere: Hee is nowe gone to his long home by the way ofEccles. 12. 5 all flesh: Note Aboue the rolling cir|cumference of heauen hee hath found the center of his rest: Natures neces|sitie subjecteth all flesh to mortalitie: Hee is gone before vs from the landIsa. 9. 20. of the shadowe of death thorow the

valey of the shadow of death vnto euer|lasting felicitie, and we all soone o since must all treade the same way: Let vs prouok our watchfulnes with this, that wee shall goe to him, but hee shall no more come to vs: Let vs worke while the day lasteth: Note Be|fore wee bee benighted by death, let vs wot where we shall get a lodging So long as wee haue breath and be|ing let vs like Moses bee instant with God in prayer, that hee would sopsal. 90. 12 teach vs to number our few and euill dayes that vvee may apply our heartes to vvisedome and to vvell doing.
Wee haue all great neede to goe to this Schoole for the learning of that lesson, because death in this nar|row passage of mortalitie stealeth v|pon vs all with insinsible degrees The course of our dayes is like theGen, 1, 16 course of the Sunne the ruler of the Day, whom our owlish eyes cannot perceiue to moue, though hee re|joycePsal. 19 5. as a strong man to runne a race:

we know him to be more swift than winde, yet while wee behold him in his course, wee cannot perceiue his motion: It is euen so of our life: Our dayes runne fast away, but wee perceiue not how: Note It is not long that wee stand, but when wee be|ginne to fall, wee are like the Yce which thaweth sooner than it froze: Our life like smoke or chaffe is carried away as with a gale winde, and yet we cannot consider: Oh, that this me|ditation like the Rowell of a Spurre could pricke vs forward in our voy|age from grace to glorie.
Note Nature hath taught the sillie Birdes, the Cranne, Storke, and Swal|lowsIsa. 8. 7. our winter strangers, to know their seasons: As if they had num|bered the dayes of their absence, they come precisely at their appoin|ted Spring: The Salmons also in their season returne to the place where they were spawned: They like skil|led Airthmeticiens number well the

dayes of their absence, and for no rubs in the way will they be moued to cracke their tryst.
All this haue they learned in the Schoole of Nature: Note But men who should haue grace with Nature, for|get to desire to returne to their God who at the first spawned or as Scrip|tureGen, 2, 7. speaketh breathed within them their liuing Soules: Men are often worse than y^e beasts, who wold faine know their duety, but cannot: Many me~ can, but will not, lik these whom2 Pet. 3. 5. S. Peter calleth Willinglie ignorant
The God of grace giue vs wise|dome, that before our day bee spent and our Sunne set, wee may weigh well and consider how wee may so liue to die, that wee may die to liueEzek. 9. 2. Note Happie is the man whom God his white man, hath in this life marked with the mourning marke: The way to Heauen is not so easie as manie dreame: Oh, how many lets bee within vs and without vs! Note Oh

howe manie weightes hang o fast on, whereby the vnstable Soule of man is tossed and swayed hither and thither.
Seeing this holie man of God such a strong Oake hath beene so sore sha|ken, what may we poore little shrubs expect? O but we haue great neede to coffer vp some comfortes against the euill day: All worldlie helpes depart from vs, when we depart out of this life, but Gods fauour faileth neuer: When all thinges haue for|saken vs, then onelie hee will stand by vs, and at last will draw vs out of this myrie lake of miserie.
Happie and thrise happie is the man that is holie heere, whome the Spirite of God may point out with an Ecce, Behold a true Israelite:Ioh. 1. 47. Such a man after death shall ob|taine a name, which shall giue him after death a second life: O thrise blessed is hee whom God in mer|cie remoueth in time, that his eyes

should not see the euill to come.Isa. 57. 1.
The world now is come to its dregs: From little to little our zeale is come to its last gaspe: Now, if euer, the Church is a Lillie among the thornes:Cant. 2. 2, Our sinnes are become like Oakes: but our vertues are pinched smal lik graines of mustard seede: Note Wee look in drumblie waters, and therefore we cannot see our sinfull blots and bla|mishes.
Lord, teach vs to grow better that so long as we sojourne in these man|sionsA prayer of dying wightes, wee may striue without guile to glid thorow this world, that at last following this our olde deare friend wee may come to him and to all the Sainctes into to that celestiall Palace, a place ofPsal. 16. 11 plentie, peace and pleasures for euer|more.



Another discourse of the same sort.
O How hard a thing is it for the liuing to remember that wee are but weedes of a day fading and flying vanities.
Note. Wee are all heere like poore Trauellers who haue farre to goe and little to spend: In our most con|stant estate below we are like IonahsIona 4. 6. gourd that sprang vp into a night,  withered into another, euen a oish vanitie.
This life, said a Father, is misera|rable:August. Consol. lib. 6. cap. 11. Our death is vncertaine: If it surprise vs vnawares, whither shall wee goe?  where shal we learne that which wee haue neglected heere? Men for the most part wallowing in their sins, while they looke most for life, are by their expectation surprised of

Death: But, Oh then, whether shall they goe? Alas, that we cannot con|sider while we haue time and breath: Note Man naturallie is so dull and dum|pish that hee cannot imagine that he is possest with a melting mortalitie: Note The best of vs in spirituall matters are pure blind: Wee cannot see farre off, no, that which is neere, euen this mortalitie among vs, yea, with|in vs: Note That which hath breath can hardlie thinke of buriall: Note A mor|ning mementomori is not able to wa|ken vs, so fast are wee lulled asleepe in carnall securitie, euen while the dead Bell soundeth wee forget o niortalitie: Note The House of mourning is become an house of drinking, of snuffing and of sneuelling with Tobac|ca: Though wee bee warned, wee are not wiser.
In Solomons dayes, the liuing in such places laid such thinges to their heart: But, alas, euen while in theEccles. 7. 2. thoughts of the gastlie visage of death

we are carrying others to y^e graue our hearts are not molten and liquified for sinne the cause of our mortalitie: Note While wee put our hand to the Beire wee may get some light sudden flashes of deuotion, but anone we for|get that within a short time as wee doe to others, so shall bee done to vs: Euen while wee walke with the dead to the Graue, wee dreame of immortalitie; forgetting our borro|wed dayes: Note If there bee any heate of zeale in our hearts how soone is it cooled: Mans heart is like water which as the Learned obserue, be|commeth more cold after the heatingArist. meteor. 1 12. than it was before: Such heate be|cause it is not naturall and kindlie, but forced by fire, it cannot conti|nue, but must bee foorth-with ex|tinguished: Note Man is like an Horse that naturallie rots, though by in|dustrie hee bee broken and made to mble for a space, yet euer and a|none hee preaseth to goe out of his

amble for to enter into his trot: While we are at the Beire and the dead corp in sight, an ambling sorrow for a space may make the bowels of our bellie to wamble: But haue wee once turned our backe vpon the Graue, and wee anone to the olde trot of our former folies.
While wee should learne to die, wee plant our selues in the face and glorie of the world: Note Wee are so troubled with Marthas many things that wee forget Maries best par: Note Many come to their death-bed be|fore that they had euer earnestlie thought of their life: They die euen then whe~ they thought to begin to amend their life: Thus as ye see they die deceiued in their delayes: they die before they know wherfore they liued Their Sunne setteth while they are entering on the journey. The euening of their life is the morning of their task: By by  base respects their mind are caried on the by: Note Foolish fancie

creepe in by stealth  slilie insinuate and winde in themselues into their heartes wherein beeing once fast cogged, they keepe the minde mu|sing on vanitie till the Sunne of their life bee set.
While their time is thus spent, they can doe nothing but lament the losse of that which they cannot recouer.

Vitae summa brevis, spem
Nos vetat in choare longam.

Note A short life is not for long and large projects.
Note Poore man is sent vnto this world for a great businesse to bee done in a short time: Hee must first of all glorifie his God, and in that doing hee must worke out the great worke of his Saluation: All the time alloted to this businesse is but three|score and ten yeares or foure score at the most: But, alas, most men sleepe both the morning and noone of their life: And yet which is worse, euen

while they see their Sunne going downe, and posting to the west, they haue no care to redeeme the time: At the comming of death, their assigned businesse is scarchlie well begunne: Note Most men are so miserablie muffled that they cannot see the sand of their houre glasse in a continuall course: Oh that we were wise to bee forearmed for death whereof wee are forewarned: As the Cananitish woman picked com|fort out of the reproachful name of Dogge, so out of all thinges should wee without daintie nicenesse bee sto|ring vp comforts for to vphold vs in our last and most heauie houre: But Oh, where is the man who in time is carefull to redeeme his euill  idly spent houres? O foolish man, fye vpon thee, shall the sickle follie of an houre cost thee the lose of that glorious im|mortalitie? Wilt thou not thinke in time that grimme Death shall come at last like an armed man for to be|reaue

thee of thy Soule, thou nei|ther can tell how, when, nor where: Note Happie is that man whose journey, time, businesse and breath, are finished together: Happie shall that tyst be when these foure shall finish in im|mortalitie.
It is good that in time wee set all the powers of our Soule vpon Christ, that out of his Sacred person wee may suck the influence of his goodnesse, whereby wee may bee saued from the traines  treasons of the Deuill: Note He is euer readie to strik fyre with his frezell and his flint, if wee will find him tinder: Oh, that our hearts con|tinuallie could minde things that areCol. 3. 1. aboue: All things below are vncon|stant, as water they sld away, but Gods fauour is more fixed than Mount Syon.
What an heart-scald should this bee vnto vs, that wee haue so long neglected this best part, not remem|bering our latter end? Let vs now

therefore consider in time that wee are all into this world but Tenants at will: Prince, people, great and small, all must leaue this Cottage of clay, at the first warning: Pale Death at its first approach will anone change the copie of their countenance.
Stat sua cuique dies.
Euerie mans day is set: None can transgresse his appointed houre: God absolutelie at Death must bee obeyed: None by force or fauour may sit his summonds: Wee by the death of others are all lawfullie fore|warned to flit  remoue: All things aboue vs, beneath vs, about vs, cry vnto vs, that wee must shortly leaue this world for to goe sleepe in slime: No contentment of man below can out-last the date of foure score years: O Lord, open our eyes, that we may see how the sickle figure of this world passeth away.
Note Happie and thrise happie is hee who after the bitter and bloodie Bat|tell

of this life is with olde SimeonLuk, 2. 29. departed in peace: As the life of the godlie is gracious, so is their death precious: This wee learne in Scrip|ture: Precious to the Lord is the deathPsal. 116. 15 of his Sainctes: Note But as for all the wicked who while they liued did justle out of their hearts all feare of God, they shall be so wrapped in his wrath that their hearts shall bee slitted with sorrow: Note While the godlie with Elias shall bee princelie carried into Gods royall Coach vnto heauen, the wicked Ahab shall be sent into a bloo|die Charet vnto hell, depriued of all these comforts which they on earth did most eagerlie desire: All their princelie pleasures shall be followed with pinching paines: Note Such will boast boldlie before death come, but at the slight and light touch of a Fe|uer or Fluxe they quickelie plucke in their snailes hornes like Ahab lowring in sacke-cloth: When sicknesse be|ginneth to lay siege to their noble

parts, they weakly waile  womanly lament: Then know they but too late that mans life is but a winde in a worme.
* O happie is that man in whose heart Christ hath grauen deepe the shape of himselfe in this world: when Death shall come then shall he know what blessed treasures of con|tentment, God hath stored vp for his beloued: When the Soules of the faithfull which on earth haue beene endued with a matchlesse concurrence of diuine graces, shall come out of their bodies, Christ the Father of mercies shall cast the armes of his co~passions about their necks: At their first entrie into Heauen, hee shall giue them the comfortable kisses of peace.
Lord, soften our stonie hearts, A prayer enlighten our mistie minds, that all our joye may bee in enjoying thee in whom is fulnesse without dislike: O satisfie vs yearely with thy mercie thePsa 90. 14

fairest flower of the Garland of thy Majestie.
While wee remember the death of others, make vs carefullie to stu|die vnto newnesse of life, that in this life wee dying vnto sinne, may after death liue vnto Thee, and with Thee vnto the vtmost bound of theGen. 49. 26, euerlasting Hills,
AMEN.
FINIS.
A. H.








emblem

THE LAST BATTELL OF THE SOVLE IN DEATH,
2. Volume.
Carefullie digested for the comfort of the Sicke: By M^r. ZACHARIE BOYD, Preacher of Gods Word at Glasgow.
Bernard in Serm.
Novissima sunt quatuor, MORS, IVDICIVM, GE|HENNA, GLORIA: Quid horribilius morte? Quid terribilius judicio? Quid intolerabilius gehenna? Et quid incundius gloria?
Idem.
Senibus mors est in ianuis, Iuvenibus vero in insidijs.
Printed at Edinburgh, by the Heires of ANDRO HART. 1629.




TEMPVS
emblem




TO THE MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESSE ELIZABETH Queene of Bohemia, c.
MADAME,
_IN corporall troubles let vs seeke for spirituall Comfortes: Dayes of sorrow are dayes of drousinesse: For the remeede of such sor|rowes

heere followeth a Discourse of heauens Happinesse, with diuerse other Christian comforts which I must humblie and heartilie dedicate to your Majestie.
If MADAME I were more able to present your Majestie with some mat|ter of greater worth, my will should not bee deficient to mine Abilitie.
Thus presuming out of your Royall bountie that this little Of|fer from One of SCOTLAND your Majesties natiue Soyle shall bee graciouslie accepted, I most humblie present it to your Majestie for to bee receiued and shrouded vnder your Royall safe-gard and louing protection.
After manie feruent and vnfained prayers made to God for the esta blishment of the Crowne vpon your Majesties Royall Heads, and also for spirituall Graces to bee aboundantlie powred vpon you, and vpon the rest of these Royall
Plants, which by the great mercie of God haue branched from You both, I humblie take my leaue.
Your Majesties most humble and most obedient Oratour and Seruant:
M. ZACHARIE BOYD Preacher of GODS word at Glasgow.
From Glasgow the 12. day of Februrie 1629.






THE QVEENES Lamentations for the death of her Son.


O But GOD is most terri|ble, when hee is angrie, He hath called as in a solemne day my terrors round about: surelie against mee is he turned, hee turneth his hand against mee all the day, My flesh and my skinne hath he made olde, hee hath broken my bones: Hee hath builded against mee, and compassed mee with gall and trauell: He hath set mee in dark places, as they that bee dead of olde: Hee hath hedged mee about that I cannot get out: Hee hath made my chaine heauie: Hee hath turned aside

my wayes, and pulled me in pieces: He hath made me desolate: He hath bent his Bow  set me as a marke for his arrowes: He hath caused the Ar|rowes of his Quiuer to enter into my reines: Hee hath filled mee with bitternesse: Hee hath made mee drunke with worme-wood: The verie Sea monsters are carefull for their young ones: They drawe out the breast to giue them sucke.
How should I bee like the vnnaturallIob. 39. 14 Ostrich which leaueth her egges in the earth, and forgetteth that the foote may orush them, or that the wild beast may breake them? Shee is hardenedvers. 16 against her young ones, as though theyvers. 17. vvere not hers: God hath depriued her of wisedome, neither hath hee imparted to her vnderstanding.
Alas, alas, the joye of our heart is ceased: our dance is turned into mourning: The crowne is fallen from our head: Woe vnto vs that wee haue sinned, for this our heart

is faint, for these thinges our eyes are dimme.
Wherefore, Lord, doest thou for|get vs for euer,  forsake vs so long time? Thou hast vtterlie rejected vs: Thou art verie vvroth against vs: O that mine eyes were a liuelie Spring of teares which day and night might trickle downe for the lamen|ting of my losse.
O yee Daughters of Britaine my natiue Soile: Conueene your sel|ues together: Come all and joyne your sorrowes with mine: Come contribute teares in aboundance, that wee may deplore our domage: Come, come and helpe mee to mourne for my first Borne: It is Gods will, it is Gods commande|ment that yee mourne with these that mourne: With whom will yee mourne, if yee refuse to mourne with mee?
O noble Ladies of Britaine, think vpon my sorrows: My griefe is great,

mine heart is broken, mine eyes doe faile with teares: Come yee all and condole with mee: Cast off your Rayments of joye: And thou BOHEMIA with the PALA|TINAT mak to your selues new Robes of doole: Fill al the La~ds with mourning like that mourning in Za|charie,Zach. 12. 11 The mourning of Hadadrim|mon in the valley of Megiddon, for the death of good Iosiah. Mine heart is sore gripped with griefe: Iam lik the Pelican in the vvildernesse: Mine eyesPsal. 102. 6 doe faile with teares; my bowels are troubled, my Liuer is powred vpon the earth: I was at ease, but hee hath broken mee asunder: Hee hath al|so taken mee by the necke and sha|ken mee to pieces, and set mee vp for his marke: His Archers compasse mee round about: Hee cleaueth my reines asunder, and doeth not spare: Hee powreth out my gall vpon the ground: Hee breaketh mee with breach vpon breach: Hee runneth

vpo~ me lik a Gyant: My face is foule with weeping, and on mine eye-lids is the shadow of death: My Friendes scorne mee, but mine eye powreth out teares vnto God: When a few yeares are come, then I shall goe the way whence I shall not returne.
The Lord hath made me as a by|word of the people: Mine eyes are dimme by reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow: Know now yee all that God hath compas|sed mee with his net: Hee hath fen|ced vp my way that I cannot passe, and hee hath set darknesse in my pathes: Hee hath stript mee of my Glorie, and taken the Crowne from mine head: Hee hath destroyed mee on euerie side, and I am gone, and mine hope hath hee remoued like a tree.
His troupes come together and raise vp their way against mee, and encampe round about my Taber|nacle: He hath put my brethrene far

from mee: My Kins-folke haue fai|led and my familiare friendes haue forgotten mee: Haue pittie vpon mee, O yee my Friendes for the hand of God hath troubled mee.Apostro|phe ad filium mortuum
O my Sonne, my dearest Sonne is gone: Hee is lost, where shall I finde him? O FREDERICK my Son where art thou? Shall I see thee no more? Shall I neuer kisse thy mouth againe? Once did thou lye in my bellie neere vnto mine heart but now alas, thou lyes sleeping in slime: Now thy bedde is made among the crawling wormes: Thy Princelie Bodie now lyeth in the place of si|lence: O where is thy Coloure now? Where is thy Countenance? Long shall it before I see thy smilling Face and twinkling Eyes: My deare Heart FREDERICK, Long may I cry before that thou make answere: How haue I lost Thee? How past thou from mee? When said thou thy last adewes? What were thy

last adews? what were the last words thou spake vnto me? Where saw I thee last? Oh, if I had knowne when I last saw thee, that I would neuer againe see thee aliue: Then would I haue kissed thee, then would I haue more constantlie considered thy countenance: I would haue said in my selfe, Is this the Face that I shall neuer see againe? Is this the Mouth that shall neuer speake againe? Are these the Eares that shall neuer heare againe? Are these the Eyes that shall ne|uer see againe? That Mouth, that Nose, these cherrie Cheekes and lillie Lippes, these Eares and Eyes would I haue kissed tenne thousand times kissed and ouer againe.
Alas that I should haue so journed so neere vnto the Waters: Alas that euer I knew that mercilesse Element.
O cursed Waters! O Waters ofApostro|phe ad mare  flumina. Marah full bitter are yee to mee: O Element which of all others shall bee most detestable to my Soule! I

shall neuer wash mine handes with thee but I shall remember what thou hast done to my best beloued Son the Darling of my Soule, I shall for euer be a friend to the Fire which is thy greatest foe.
Note Away Riuers, away Seas, Let me see you no more: If ye were sen|sible Creatures, my deare Brother CHARELES Prince of the Euro|pean Seas should scourge you with his Royall Shippes; with his thun|dering Cannons hee should pierce you to the bottome.
Note O Seas of sorrowes, O feare|full Floods, O tumbling Tempests, O wilfull Waues, O swelling surges, O wicked waters, O dooleful deeps, O peartest Pools, O botchfull butcher Boats, was there no mercie among you for such an hopfull PRINCE? O that I could refraine from teares and that because they bee salt water like vnto your selues: Away with you Seas of sorrowe, for yee haue

robbed mee of my dearest Darling of account, hencefoorth yee shall neuer bee able to repaire my losses: O my Sonne FREDERICK, my Son, my Sonne FREDERICK, would God I had dyed for Thee, O FRE|DERICK my Sonne, my Sonne.
A. H.




TEMPVS
emblem



mine or the water took away the life of my Children, than that a bloodie Herod should cutte all their throats most cruellie embrewing himselfe in their blood: While Dauid was in a great strait doubting of what plague to make choise, at last hee resolued saying, Let vs fall into the hand of2 Sam. 24. 14 the Lord, (for his mercies are great) and let mee not fall into the hand of man.
O but will your Majestie say, To die and to be suffocate in the wa|ters y^t is a matter of great sorrow: If he had died in a Battel honourablie; that had affoorded mee some com|fort: Then would I haue heard of his valiantnesse: The Colonels and the Captaines  others of Martial Spirits had beene the Trumpeters of his praise, so should hee haue died with great honour.
Let it please your Majestie to wiegh the matter well in the Ballance of the Sanctuarie.
Indeede MADAME, to die in a Battell is by men accounted hono|rable: To die fighting with a bloo|die Sword in the hand, is by men called, The Bedde of honour: Note But in my judgement it is better for the Soule to die in water, than in war: For in the one man is often in a rage, thirsting like an Horse-leach after the blood of his Brother: At that time there is nothing sound or settled within him: All his thoughts are in an hurlie burlie: If instantlie hee die the Sunne of his life goeth downe v|pon his vvrath: His whole desire is bended for to destroy his Brother: But in the water his chiefest desire is for to saue himselfe: To die in war is to die by the hand of man, but Water is like the Pest which that great Warriour called, The hand of God.
O but alas, will your Majestie ob|ject such as die so get not space once to cry Gods mercie.
God forbid MADAME that our Saluation should depend vpon the last words of our life, or vpon a pra|yer at the last gaspe: Our SaluationRom. 8. 1. is better fastened than so: There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Iesus. Your Majestie knoweth that the day of Iudgment shall come in an instant vpon both the Godlie and the wicked: Then shall they all bee changed in the twinkling of an eye: Not one of all the men and women then liuing vpon earth shall get so much time wherin they mightLuk. 1. 13. but say these few words, God be mer|cifull to me a sinner,  yet for all that shal we think that that sudde~ change shall bring any prejudice to the Sal|uation of Gods Elect  chosen ones?Rom. 11. 29 God forbid: Whom God loueth hee loueth to the end: His giftes and graces are vvithout repentance.
I know that your Majestie would haue earnestlie desired that hee had bee found aliue, and that a Preacher

by a prayer had commended his Soule into the hands of his Sauiour. For answere, I am assured that that young Prince was so well trained vp by your Majestie in the Schoole of pietie, that morning  euening hee was accustomed to be earnest at his priuate deuotion: It is the opinion of learned Diuines, That who carefullie in y^e morning hath cast his Soule into y^e Armes of his God, shall thereafter all the day finde the vertue of that prayer preuailing with God, though at the moment of death hee bee not able with his tongue to speake vnto GOD: The prayers that were conceiued before cry vp to God at the last gaspe for mercie, peace, grace and reconciliation, through the blessed blood of Iesus, which cryeth for better thinges than the blood of Abel.Gen. 4, 10,
Now seeing that without any doubting your Majestie is assured of his Saluation, consider these joyes

of heauen which his Princelie Soule now enjoyeth: These joyes haue I described as I can in this second Vo|lume of the Last battell which I haue dedicated to your Majestie: There yee shall clearelie see that hee hath changeth for the better: Note While hee was aliue hee was but a Prince on Earth, and now the Lord hath made him a crowned King.
Thus intreating the most High to send vnto your Majestie the COM|FORTER himselfe, who can most cun|ninglie cure the wounded heart, I humlie take my leaue.
Your MAIESTIES most humble and most obedient Ser|uant
M. Z. B.
From Glasgow the 12. of Februarie 1629.



TO THE QVEENE Of BOHEMIA.
OVR poore life heere is not of single Ioyes,
But mixt with Gall, and worme-woode of annoyes:
The dint of Winds, and waues, and stors mie streames,
Wee must endure before wee reach to Heauens:
Paines heere wants pause, all is but losse and labour:
A thousand cares Within our hearts doe harbour.
The life of man on Earth is but a blaste,
I comes with Teares and endeth with a gaspe:
All that is heere is with a speedie flight,
On jangling wheeles soone hurled out of sight.
All that is heere is out of Tune and tast,
All whirles about, but Rest will come at last.
VVaite still vntill that Day spring from on High,
Come downe with thousands brighter than the Skie.
Then mistie Cloudes of sorrowes shall depart,
When that Aurora shall rejoyce our Heart.



ANOTHER.
HEere bubbling Waters Seas of sorrowes dash,
Heere Waues, heere Winds which make the Cloudes to clash:
Heere Feuers, Fyres, heere fickle vanities,
Combined are to bring Calamities
To mortall man (not sparing young or olde)
Whose life is like vnto a tale thats tolde,
Now happie hee who free from all distresse,
Rests in the Heauens, far from this wildernes.


A Prayer for the afflicted.
MY troubled Soule Lord counsell and comfort,
My Sternelesse-Boate conduct thou to her Port
From cloudie cares my muffled Spirit redresse,
And of mine heart the griefe and groanes represse:
My Spirit to Thee its Maker high aspires,
VVho art the Zenith of my best desires.
Your MAIESTIES most humble  obedient Seruant and Ora|tour
M. Zacharie Boyd Prea|cher of GODS Word at Glasgow.






Faultes escaped in printing.





Faults
Corrected


69
feast
fast


142
tyred
tryed


172
wakened
weakened


176
waken
weaken


177
spake
space


191
lperous
leprous


198
Bairnes
Barnes


213
Skes
Skies


259
againe
against


28
desperati
desperate


293
frine
farre in


307
Tophel
Tophet


308
Companiourie
Companionrie


332
slubber
slumber


332
slumbert
slubbert


345
men
mee


345
haire
heite.


355
for
with


370
that after
after that


376
missacrours
masscrours


387
directeth
directed


405
carcing
carking


49
Burriors
Burrios


44
mortall
immortall


487
his of
of his


516
men
man


544
reignam
regnai


563
cosation
conuersation


597
hand
head


602
commond
common


603
sterts
streetes


609
spread
shread


620
found
sound


633
wrke
worke


649
decritorio
decretorio


659
vanished
varnished


664
vnwisored
vnvizored


669
sacaked the godly
sacked at Christs right


672
Christes right hand
hand


689
liuing
liue


695
whom
who in



The 2. Volume


Faults
Corrected


760
absurbiator
absorbeatur


804
hoc
haec


807
ac
at


851
haruish
haruest


960
habour
harbour


98
pleasant
vnpleasant


1003
nature
mature


1053
hearking
heartenin


1132
about mee
about with mee






TEMPVS
emblem







