




THE PREACHERS TRAVELS. Wherein is set downe a true Iournall to the confines of the East INDIES, through the great Countreyes of Syria, Mesopotamia, Armenia, Media, Hircania and Parthia. With the Authors returne by the way of Persia, Susiana, Assiria, Chaldaea, and ARABIA. Containing a full suruew of the Knigdom of Persia: and in what termes the Persian stands with the Great Turke at this day: Also a true relation of Sir ANTHONIE SHERLEYS entertainment there: and the estate that his Brother, M. ROBERT SHERLEY liued in after his departure for Christendome. With the description of a Port in the Persian gulf, com|modious for our East Indian Merchants; and a briefe rehearsall of some grosse absudities in the Turkish ALCORAN.
Penned by I. C. sometimes student in Magdalen Colledge in OXFORD.
LONDON Printed for Thomas Thorppe, and are to bee sold by Walter Burre. 1611.




TO THE VERTVOVS AND Worthy Knight, Sir THOMAS HVNT, one of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace and Quorum in the Countie of Surrey, I. C. wisheth all ter|restriall and celestiall happinesse.
_SIR, when I consider that it is the common manner of all, that write any Bookes in this age, to Dedicate the same to one or other of great place, I bethought me to whome I might offer these my trauels: and at last resolued with my selfe, none to be more fit, then your Worship; both in regarde of your zeale to Religion, because you doe giue to diuers Congregations in this land, Milke without siluer, and bread without money, which not many other Pa|trones doe; as also for your loue vnto Schollers, who though in this vnthankfull age of ours, men wonder at vs, V pueri Iunonis auem; and wee won|der againe at them, because they doe so litle for vs, yet my selfe, and many others now of some place in the Church neuer departed discontented from you. Many other respects as well publike as pri|uate, doe naturally beare this small discourse to

the very point and center of your Worships onely Patronage.
Concerning the matter of this discourse, you shall finde in the Preface: and concerning the ma|ner, there is no great matter of learning or ingeni|ous inuention, onely a simple relation of a simple truth; yet somewhat there is, which may happily concerne the learned, and giue some satisfaction to an indifferent Reader, when hee vnderstands, how two of the most mightie and most warlike Princes among the Barbarians, the great Turke and the Persian, are now in armes one against the other; stirred vp thereunto by two of our Country-men, Sir Anthonie Sherley, and Master Robert Sherley his brother.
A warre not onely like to be long and bloudie, but also very commodious and of great oportuni|tie to the Christian Commonweale: for that it doth gaunt and giue leasure to diuers parts of Christen|dome to refresh themselues, and to increase their forces, much weakned, both by the Great Turkes warres; and most of all by their ciuill dissentions at home. For Cortug-ogli the Turkish Pirate, in his perswasiue Oration to his great Mast. Solyman, The Magnificent, to besiege Rhodes, could say vnto him, And now dread Soueraigne, if it please you to vouch|safe but to looke into the matter, you shall see that there is a diuine occasion by the procurement of our great Pro|phet Mahomet, presented vnto your most sacred Ma|iestie, for that the Christians of the West are at discorde and mortall warre among themselues. And to say the truth, the discords and dissentions of Christian

Princes haue laide more Countreyes to the en|richment of the Great Turke, then euer his bowe or Shield could haue purchased. In the dayes of Mahomet the second, these polluted Sarazens had gleaned out of Christendome like scattered eares of corne neglected by the owners, Two hundred Ci|ties, twelue Kingdomes, and two Empires, and still as a canker running on, before the Persian tooke the field against them, they euery yeere did fret and eate into Christendome.
Finally, I might haue added many worthy col|lections, as well out of sacred as prophane writers, that haue written of the most stately and magnifi|cent Empire of the Medes and Persians in times past, and so haue compared it, with the moderne and present estate thereof; which hath scarce a shadow of the antique Gouernment, wherewith it was then ruled and gouerned. But the matter would haue proued too long,  made this volume too great: and therefore for those aduertisements, I purpose to put them forth, when God shal make me strong and able. In the meane time, whatsoeuer is here penned, I leaue it with your Worship, be|seeching you to giue it entertainment. And so I do most humbly take my leaue, commending both your selfe, your vertuous Lady, and your whole family to the best mercies of the Lord Iesus. 
From mine House in Southwarke, this 18. of October. Anno Dom. 1611. Your Worships to command in the Lord, IOHN CARTWRIGHT.



Gentle Reader,
_IT was my purpose to haue added to this Iournall, some obseruations tou|ching our Northwest Passage; with many reasons to haue proued the great probabilitie thereof. But I am per|swaded by some friends to make stay thereof, vntill the truth of the newes: That it is alrea|die discouered, be throughly examined. In the meane time moderate thy opinion of our former proceedings. And though some maleuolent tongues haue especially shot out their venemous poyson against me, vpon what ground they cannot iustly say, when they haue beene pres|sed thereto, yt God is my witnesse that my Conscience is cleare, either from wronging the Companie that then was; or any wayes from hindring the full proceeding of that Voyage, which I purpose shortly to make good vnto the world. And for this small discourse, if it passe cur|rant in thy iudgement, I shall thinke my sele to haue gained enough, in lieu of all the Trauels, of all the dangers,  perils, that I haue sustai|ned in those places.



THE PREACHERS TRAVELS. Wherein is set downe a generall description of the most principall Kingdomes, that haue beene, and are at this day in ASIA the great, viz. Syria, Mesopotamia, Armenia the great, Media, Hircania, Parthia, Persia, Su|siana, Chaldaea, Assiria, and Arabia. TOGETHER WITH THE MOST memorable occurrences and expeditions, which the Princes of those parts haue had each against the other.

THE PREFACE.
_POMPEY the Great being put to flight in the battell at Pharsalia, by Iulius Caesar, was desirou to know of Cratippus the Philoso|pher, what should be the euent of the warres betweene Caesar and himselfe, demanding of him, an sit Prouidentia? whether the purpose  decree of God were vnchange|able without alteration? To whom Cratippus answered,

not as a Philosopher, but as a true Diuine, saying, Fatales esse Imperiorum periodos, the prouidence of God is most sure and certaine; which Pompey found most true, in a small time after, when Caesar was created the first Emperour of the Roman Monarchy; and which also shall be verified (God willing) in the discourse of this Iournall: wherein is principally shewed, how all humane affaires, and the grea|test Cities of renowme haue had their Periods in their greatest perfections; to which though they haue ascended gradatim, yet they haue forthwith fallen into a retrograde of declination, till they haue beene brought to the lowest degree which misery can allot: So true is that of Seneca.

Nulla sors longa, dolor  voluptas
Inuicem cedunt: breuior voluptas,
Ima permut at breuis hora summis:
Nemo confidat nimium secundis.
Nemo desperet meliora lapsis.


No chance is long, for griefe and eke delight,
By course giue place, pleasure hath shorter flight,
An houre but shor, that presently doth end,
Doth make the lowest things aloft ascnd:
Let none too much trust in a prosperous state.
Let none despaire, but hope for better fte.

For in this small discourse wee shall see how vnauoidable destruction doth alwaies attend on the succession of great|nesse, and aduancement on the posterity of misery: as also the sacking of many Cities, the depopulating of the grea|test Countries, the deposing of Princes, and high descen|ded families of their liues, together with their Crownes and Kingdomes, and that in so short a time, as neuer the like was executed in the antique world. Two reasons haue moued me to set downe this Iournall:he causes  moued  Authour  write this urnall. The one for that I haue not yet seene any that hath made a full description of these parts, as they are at this day, which I hope shall be performed by my selfe, who spent much time in those Countries, being familiarly conuersant (to helpe my know|ledge

herein) with many Sultanes, and principall Com|manders in the Kingdome of Persia, as also diuers Ianiza|ries, who serued in the warres betweene the great Turke and the Persian. The other is for that I doe verily perswade my selfe, that this discourse will breede much delight vnto any indifferent Reader, when hee shall vnderstand how mighty the forces are of the Persian King, a capitall enemy of the name of Christ, as also in what termes he standeth at this day with the great Turke, what Kingdomes he posses|seth, what Prouinces are subiect vnto him, his worship, his religion, his kinde of gouernment, their weapons, their manner of fight, their forme of battell, the reuennues and expences of that Crowne, and in a word whatsoeuer else is necessary to be knowen.
Finally, you haue here described the seueral Nations, Si|tuations, Cities, Riuers, Mountaines, and Prouinces, which I haue seene and passed by. It is not my purpose to write any thing of the Ilands in the Mediterranean-Sea, which we sailed by, and are so much renowmed in old writers, viz. Maiorica, and Minorica, Corsica, Sicilia, Malta, Cephalonia, Zant, Candia, Rhodes, and Cyprus, howsoeuer many excellent things might be spoken of them; yet see|ing they are so well knowen to most of our nation, I omit to write, binding my selfe to a true relation of what mine eyes haue seene in more remote parts of the world, not re|specting the iudgement of the vulgars, but contenting my selfe with the conscience of truth, beside which (I protest) I purpose to write nothing.



The beginning of the trauell.
_ANd first I will beginne at Alexandretta: Alexandretta now called Scanderone, is a roade in the bottom of the Mediterranean-Sea, on the coast of Cilicia, where our Mer|chants land their goods to be sent to A|leppo: within eight miles of this roade is Tharsus, the chiefe Citty of Cilicia, and the Countrey of S^t. Paul: the place also where King Salomon sent for great store of gold, and other prouision for the building of the Temple: whither the Prophet Ionas also sledde, when he should haue gone to Nineuie. A little from this Towne did Alexander the Great giue the ouerthrow in person to Da|rius, in ioyning of their first battell together.
Lying at an Anchor in the aforesaid roade the space of two houres, our Ianizaries with a sufficient guard and horses for our selues, were ready to conduct vs vp to Alep|po, and safe-guard vs as well a they might, from the dan|gers and euils, which many times in the way doth befall passengers. In our passage vp, no matter of importance happened: many false rumours of Theeues were diuulged by the Countrey people, to affright vs; but we by the as|sistance of God arriued in safety at Aleppo, being some sixe miles before our approch to the Citty, encountred by ma|ny of our English Merchants, to giue vs the welcome on the Turkish shore. After mutuall courtesies ended, they accompanied vs into the City vnto the Consull Pallace; where hauing dismounted our selues, we were well enter|tained by M^r. Richard Colethrust worthy Consull then to our worthy English nation. At whose charge and expences, I abode two moneths and better: all which time I fell into consideration, not so much of the City, as of the Prouince, in which it standeth, offering hereby vnto my selfe two things worthy obseruation.



The description of SYRIA.
_FIrst the greatnesse of the Kingdome of Sy|ria, which confronteth East-ward on Me|sopotamia; South-ward on Arabia; North-ward on Cylicia, and Asia the lesse; and West-ward on Tyre and Sydon, and the bot|tome of the Mediterranean-Sea. The o|ther the diuision of the said Kingdome, which deuideth it selfe into fiue notable Prouinces: viz. Palestina, Foeni|tia, Celestria, Syria, and Camogena. The last of which fiue is that part which runneth vp to the Riuer Euphrates, and to the confines of Armenia, in which standeth the great and wealthy City of Aleppo. This Kingdome of Syria hath diuers Cities of importance, but my purpose is to speake but of those, which my Iournall leadeth me vn|to, and which my eyes haue seene: viz. Tripolis, Hamath, Antioch, and Aleppo.

The description of Tripolis.
TRipolis is a Towne which standeth vnder a part of Mount Lybanus, two English miles distant from a certaine Port, which trendeth in the forme of an halfe Moone, hauing on the one side thereof fiue block-houses, or small Forts, wherein is very good Artillery, and ept by an hundred Ianizaries. This City is as great as Bristow, and walled about, the walles being of no great force. The chiefest strength is a Citadell, which standeth on the South side within the walles, and ouer-lookes the whole Towne, and is strongly kept with two hundred Ianizaries, and good Artillery. Through the midst of this City passeth a Riuer, wherewith they water their Gardens and Mulbery

trees, in such sort that there grow on them abundance of silke wormes, where with the Inhabitants makes great store of very white silke, which is the chiefest naturall commodi|ty in and about this place. Finally, this roade of Tarapolos or Trapolos, commonly called Tripolis, was more frequen|ted (before Scanderone was found out) with all sorts of Christian Merchants, as Venetians, Genouis, Florentines, Marsilians, Sicilians, Raguses, and English men, then any other Port of the great Turks Dominions. Some say that the Scale is againe translated from Scanderone thither, but how true it is, I leaue to the Merchants to report. One inconuenience this Towne is subiect vnto: for right be|fore it toward the Sea is a banke of mouing sand, which gathereth and increaseth with the Westerne winds in such sort, that according to an old prophesie amongst them, this banke is like to swallow vp and ouerwhelme the Towne: for euery yeare it increaseth more and more, and eateth vp many Gardens and Orchards, albeit they vse all pollicy to diminish the same, and to make it firme ground.


The description of Hamath.
THree dayes iourney from this Towne in the mid-way to Aleppo standeth Hamath, a City of great Anti|quity, and very famous in the Scripture: for it was deliue|red vp into the hands of Dauid by Toi,Numb. 13.22. 1. Chro. 1.16. 2. Sam. 8.9. who was King of the same. It standeth on a very goodly plaine, replenished a|bundantly with cornemand cotton-wooll; but is much rui|nated, and falleth more and more to decay, and at this day there is scarse one halfe of the wall standing, which hath beene very faire and strong: but because it cost many mens liues to winne it; the great Turke will not haue it repaired, commanding these wordes to be set ouer the Castle gate, which standeth in the midst of the Towne, in the Arabian tongue: Cursed be the Father and the Sonne, that shall lay their hands to the repairing of this place.



The description of Antioch.
NOt farre from this Towne is the famous City An|tioch, which in ancient time was called Epidaphane, or Epiphane, and of the Hebrewes Reblatha, sometime the Seate of the Syrian Kings, and afterwards the Metropoliti|call City of Syria, hauing vnder it an hundred and fifty Bi|shops: famous for many things, but amongst the rest, be|cause it was the seate of the blessed Apostle S^t. Peter, and because it was the first place, where the professors of Chri|stian religion tooke the name of Christians. This City ly|eth vpon the Riuer Orontes, in Scripture called Farfar, about twelue miles from the Sea, and was once strongly fortified both by nature on the one side by high broken Mountaines, and on the other side by Art, being compas|sed about with a double wall, the vttermost whereof is of hard stone, of an huge bignesse, and the other of bricke with foure hundred and sixty towers on the same, and an impregnable Castle at the East-end thereof, whereunto was ioyning a deepe lake, comming out of the great Ri|uer, which waereth the South-side of the City.
But in the yeare of Grace 1187. Saladin Sultan of Ae|gypt, dealt so cunningly with the Patriarke, that by his meanes the Castle (otherwise almost impregnable) was for gold betrayed vnto him. By meanes whereof Saladin in a short time, became Lord and Master of that famous City (which was hardly gained by the whole power of the Christians, after eleuen moneths siege) and with it fiue and twenty Cities moe, that depended of the fortune thereof, with all the Prouinces belonging thereunto; and so now at this day the splendor and beauty thereof is altogether Eclipsed by the Turkes, there resting and remaining in the midst of the ruinous walles a small village to be seene.
Close by the walles of this ruinous Towne runneth the Riuer Orontes,The Riuer O|rontes. which courseth through the large and spa|cious

plaine of Antioch, being numbred amongst the fa|mous riuers of Syria, whose bankes I haue viewed, euen from his springing head to his maine channell, which is neere to Selencia Pieria, now called Soldin. This riuer a|mongst the Turkes and Arabians hath quite lost his aunci|ent name: but because it runneth very swiftly in his course, and hath many turnings and windings, (so that those that swimme in it are oftentimes drowned) as though the poore riuer had in that respect the nature of a murderer; therefore the Turkes and the Moores doe now giue it a name, that expresly signifieth a murderer or traytor.


The description of Aleppo.
FRom this miserable towne we spent a dayes iourney and halfe to the rich and wealthy Citie of Aleppo, which in ancient time was called Heliopolis, and was that ancient Haram mentioned so often in Scripture. The Moores doe call it Halip, which in our tongue signifieth milke, for the same Arabians doe say, that it was so called for the a|bundance of milke, which in the time of the Patriarkes was yelded by the heards and flockes of cattell, which fed in those champaines. This Citie standeth in the Prouince of Camogena, which runneth vp to Euphrates, and to the confines of Armenia, and is now become the third capitall citie of the Turkish Empire. And well it may be so accoun|ted, since it is the greatest place of traffique for a dry towne in all those parts: for hither resort Iewes, Tartarians, Per|sians, Armenians, Egyptians, Indians,  many sorts of Chri|stians, all enioying freedome of conscience, and bringing thither all kindes of rich merchandise: the trade and traf|ficke of which place, because it is so well known to most of our nation, I omit to write of.
The ayre of this Citie is much pleasing and delightfull to a sound and healthfull body, but very piercing and dange|rous for such as haue receiued any contagion at Scanderon;

and therefore it is not good for any passenger to lie long at that roade, but to hasten at his first arriuall so soone as he can vp farder into the Countrey. This City lyeth vpon the Riuer Singa,The Riuer Synga. which as some report a Souldier of Grand Caire drew from Euphrates, and hath a channell vnder ground, which produceth many fountaines both publike and priuate, yeelding no small pleasure and contentment to the inhabitants. It containeth in circuit foure hils, vpon one of which is raised a goodly Castle, hauing a deepe ditch intrenched round about, and a bridge ascending step by step, with foure gates, before you can passe into the Ca|stle it selfe, being guarded with a strong and sure garrison of foure or fiue hundred Ianizaries, both to curbe the re|bellion of the City, and to keep it from forraigne inuasion. The walles of this City are about three English miles in compasse, and the suburbs almost as much more: and round about for foure miles space are goodly Gardens, Or|chards, and Vineyards, which beare abundance of delicate fruits, and of the best Wines, which are notwithstanding very deare, by reason of the quantity thereof, that there is sold and eaten. The number of people which resort to this City may easily be comprehended, sith betweene the City and the suburbs in the yeare of Grace 1555. there dyed of the plague more then an hundred and twenty thousand persons in three Moneths. No building of importance is here to be seen,Cains are storehouses for forraigne Mer|chants. saue the Temples or Moschees, and Caines, all fabricated of hard quarry stone, arched and vaulted with Cesternes full of water in the middest of the Courts. In a word this City is one of the most famous Marts of the East: the customes that are paied by our English nation, the French, the Venetians, the huge Carauans, which come from Balsara, Persia, Mecha, are exceeding great, and therefore may well obtayne the third place of the Turkish Empire.
Neuerthelesse it hath indured diuers changes and sundry alterations, being in the yeare 1177. betrayed and taken

from the Christians by Saladin Sultan of Damascus; but afterwards in the yeare 1260. it was againe recouered by Haalon the Tartar, who hauing receiued the Christian faith was sent of purpose by Mango the great Cham of Tartary a Christian also, with a puissant army and a world of people to releeue the distressed Christians in Syria; and so Haalon with Hayton king of Armenia, scouring through the Countries of Persia, Asiria, and Mesopotamia, in the end entred into Syria, and in a few dayes tooke Aleppo, sacking and razing it downe to the ground. But it conti|nued not so long; for afterwards being repaired by the Christians, it was againe taken by the Sultans of Aegypt, who possessed it many yeares, but in the yeare 1516. when Campson Ganrus raigned in Aegypt, it was peaceably deli|uered vp by Cayerbeius the Traitor, into the hands of Se|lymus the first, who fauourably tooke the Citizens into his protection; and the more to winne their hearts, graunted vnto them greater priuiledges then they had in former time inioyed. And so euer since hath continued vnder the Turkish Gouernment, hauing vnder the regiment thereof, fiue and twenty thousand Timarriots, that is to say, Pensio|ners, which are all horsemen, so called of Timaro, that is a stipend, which they haue of the Grand Signeor, viz. the possession of certaine Villages and Townes, which they hold during their life, and for which they stand bound. For euery threescore Duckates of yearlie reuennew, to main|taine one horseman either with bow and arrowes, or else with Target and Lance, and that as well in time of peace, as in time of warre.
Hauing rested in Aleppo two Moneths and better, M^r. Iohn Mildenab and my selfe tooke our leaue of the Consull and Merchants, with a full intent and purpose to trauell vnto the great City Lahor, in the great Mogors Countrey in the East Indies: lodging all that night on a thinne Turkish Carpet in woods-caine, where the A Carauan is a great ma|ny of Camels lade~, not much vnlike our car|riers here in England. Cara|uan was assembled, to the end that we might bee with the

foremost: for delay in such trauell doth produce great and ineuitable danger. From Aleppo we spent three daies iour|ney vnto the bankes of Euphrates, passing by many villages not worth the naming, and fertile plaines, abounding with all sort of prouision necessary for mans life. One of those Villages is a Village of note vnto this day, called by the Countrey people Tedith,Tedith a Vil|lage of note, for the Great Synode holden there by the chiefest Iewes, for the refor|mation of the old Testame~t. where the Iewes keepe a monu|ment in remembrance of the great Synagogue holden there in the yeare from the Creation 3498. For after the twelue Tribes were by Salmanazar King of the Assirians led cap|tiue into a Country neuer inhabited by any before, a yeare and halfe iourney; so as men in this age trouble their wits to know where they remaine, in the East or West Indies, in Tartaria or Moscouia, and new inhabitants in their place; I say, it so fell out that after the captiuity of Babylon, an hundred and twenty men of the chiefest of the Iewes held a Synode at the aforesaid Village, of which Esdras was the Scribe, at which Synode (as the Rabbins affirme) were pre|sent, Nehemias, Mardocheus, Zorababel, Ioshua the high Priest, Daniel, Ananias, Azarias, Misael, Haggeus, Zacharias, and Malachiah, and placed the bookes of the old Testament in the same order as now they are, and chan|ged the hebrew characters (the figure T excepted) into the Assirian characters, which is the square forme vsed at this day: and changed the Hebrew tongue into the Armenian tongue, but that was altered afterward, and the right He|brew tongue restored.
Neare vnto this Towne is the Valley of Salt,The Valley of Salt. 2. Sam. 8.13. memora|ble for that great ouerthrow which Dauid gaue the Ara|mits, when he slew of them in one battell eighteene thou|sand men. Here also Campson Gaurus the great Sultan of Aegypt fought that deadly and mortall battell with Sely|mus the first, the great Turke; where hee lost his life being troden, without regard, to death, both by his owne Soul|diers and pursuing enemies, after he had with great Maie|sty gouerned the Kingdome of Aegypt, Iudea, and Syria

many yeares; and together with the losse of his life and o|uerthrow of his army, he lost the great and populous King|dome of Aegypt, which he and his predecessours had got|ten and kept by martiall prowesse aboue the space of three hundred yeares.
Being arriued on the bankes of Euphrates, we found it as broade as the Thames at Lambith; but in some places it is narrower, in some broader, running with a very swift streame and current, almost as fast as the Riuer of Trent. At this place doth this Riuer beginne to take his name, be|ing here all gathered into one channell, whereas before it commeth downe from the lake Chieldor-Giol in Armenia, in manifold armes and branches, and therefore is called by the Countrey people, by a name which signifieth a thou|sand heads. Here it is that Merchants vse to passe downe by Barke vnto Babylon, thereby to auoide and shunne the great charge and wearisomnesse of trauell through the de|sart of Arabia. Which passage they make sometimes in fifteene dayes, sometimes in twenty dayes, and sometimes in thirty dayes, answerable to the rising and falling of the Riuer: and the best time to passe thither is either in Aprill or October, when the Riuer doth swell with abundance of rine. The Boates are flat bottomed, because the Riuer is shallow in many places; so that when they trauell in the Moneths of Iuly, August, and September, they finde the Riuer at so low an ebbe, that they are faine to carry with them a spare Boate or two, to lighten their owne, if they should chance to fall on the shoales. Euery night after Sunne-set, they fasten these Boats to a stake, the Merchants lying aboord, and the Marriners vpon the shore, as neare as they can vnto the same. In this passage downe the Ri|uer, you shall meete with diuers troupes of Arabians, who will barter their prouision of dyet (for they care not for money) as Hennes, Kids, Lambe, Butter, and sowre milke, for Glasses, Combes, Corall, Amber, Kniues, Bread and Pomegranates, Pilles, wherewith they vse to tanne their

Goates skinnes, in which they Churne withall. All of them, as well Women, Children, and Men are very good swim|mers, who oftentimes will swimme to the Barke side with vessels full of milke vpon their heads. These people are ve|ry theeuish, and therefore in your passage downe good watch must be kept.
But to returne where we left, wee were constrained by the deepnesse of the riuer to ferry ouer our whole Carauan, which consisted of a thousand persons, besides Camels, Horses, Mules, and Asses, by reason of which multitude we spent a whole day in transporting ouer the said Carauan. The gaines of which transportation yeelded the ferriman a Shaughoe, which is fiue pence English vpon a beast. It was the manner of the Aegyptian Sultanes, not to account themselues worthy of the name of Sultanes, or great Gene|rall, before they had incamped their army vpon this side of the Riuer and in this place, and there with solemne pompe had in the sight of the army, forced their horses into the Ri|uer to drinke; giuing to vnderstand by that ceremony, the greatnesse of their Empire, and that they were ready by force of armes to proue, that all those Countries were theirs, which lay along the Riuer from the Mountaine Taurus, vnto the desart of Arabia.



The description of MESO|POTAMIA.
_BEing ouer the aforesaid Riuer, we arriued at Bir and entred into the famous Prouince of Mesopotamia; which North-wards bounds on a part of Armenia the Great, where the Altar of Hercules stood: South-ward on the desart of Arabia; Eastward on Assiria; and Westward on Armenia the lesse. The

Hebrewes were wont to call this Kingdome Aram Nea|rot, Syria amongst the Riuers, as the Iewes doe at this day. The Greeks call it Mesopotamia, because it lyeth be|tweene two great Riuers, which watered Paradise, Eu|phrates and Tygris. The Turkes doe call it Diarbech. This Prouince of it selfe is most fruitfull, but by the Turkish warres much ruinated and wasted: neuerthelesse there are some Cities of great importance.

The description of Bir.
BIr called by Ptolomey, Barsina, is an ancient City, but very ruinous. It is very famous for the situation, be|ing built on the side of an high craggy mountaine, hauing the Riuer Euphrates running close vnder the walles therof, and a most delightfull valley, yeelding abundance of graine and other necessary prouision. But because this towne is not much esteemed by the Turks, but left open to the fury of euery enemy, I will be sparing to speake thereof, and so passe to the rest.


The description of Orpha.
ABout two daies iourney from this vnrespected towne, we came to Orpha, a City of great account and esti|mation, which many suppose to haue beene the famous City Edessa, which Seleucus (the next King after Alexan|der the Great) built. For hauing conquered Asia and Syria, Functius reporteth that he beganne to build townes and Cities, as Antioch, Laodicea, Seleucia, Apamia, Bro|uea, Pellum, and Edessa; and they are not deceiued, because that as yet there remaineth certaine monuments of Balde|wine in Latin letters, who after his brother Godfrey was possessed of Ierusalem, is reported to haue taken Edessa, and there raigned. The aire of this City is very healthfull, the Countrey fruitfull, only wood excepted, and therefore

in steede thereof, they burne the dung of Camels and other beasts, dryed in the Sunne. This City is built foure-square; the West part standing on the side of a rocky mountayne, and the East part trendeth into a spacious valley, replenish|ed with vineyards, orchards, and gardens: the walles are very strong, furnished with great store of artillery, and con|taine in circuit three English miles: and for the gallantnes of the site, it was once reckoned the Metropoliticall seate of Mesopotamia, howsoeuer it is now translated to Cara|mida or Caraemit. There is in this City a fountaine full of fishes, so vsed to hand, that they will receiue any sustenance that shall be offered vnto them: both Iewes, Armenians, and Turkes reported vnto vs, that this fountaine was Ia|cobs-well,Gen. 29.13.27. and that here hee serued his Vncle Laban twise seauen yeares, for faire and beautifull Rachel.
The gates of this City were much battered,The Scriuano at the walles of Orpha. 1603. a little be|fore our comming by Eliazgee the Scriuano, and the rebels his followers; The successe whereof, so much tormented the haughty minde of Mahomet the Turkish Emperor,Mahomet much troubled with the Scriuano. as that it would scarce suffer him to thinke of any thing else. For the rebell growing stronger and stronger (by reason of the great numbers which he allured with the swete name of liberty, hope of prey, or the good entertainement by him giuen, daylie more and more resorted vnto his camp) had ouer-runne a great part of the Turkes Dominion in Asia the lesse, and in these parts, putting all to fire and sword, that stoode in his way, ransacking also diuers wal|led and fenced Cities by the way as he went: this City bea|ring a share in that misery: for being entred into the City, hee drew the citizens to a composition of fifty thousand Chekens, and so departed. A rebellion not only dangerous to the great Turke, but also very commodious and of great oportunity to the Christian commonweale, and to the Per|sian himselfe, if at that time they had taken vp armes toge|ther.
Memorable also is this City, then called Carras, for the

great battell which was fought before it betweene the Ro|mans and the Parthians, when Marcus Crassus was Gene|rall on the one side,Crassus and Su|rena ioyned battell toge|ther beore the walles of Orpha. and Surena on the other side, who ioy|ning both their armies together, there was fought a most mortall and deadly battell. For there might a man haue seene a miserable and lamentable sight of the ouerthrowne Romans, which were so tortured and tormented with the Parthians arrows, that some shewed vnto their Captains their hands fast nailed to their Targets, some their feete shot through and nailed to the ground, some their bodies stuce full of forked arrowes, and some wounded with speares and pikes, in such cruell manner, that the mst part of t Gntlemen of Rome slue tmselues: for Publius Crassus himselfe commanded one of his Gentlemen to kill him, whose had after was cut off by the enemy, and snt to his Father for a present, the Fathers fortune being no better then his Sonnes, for his head was cut off as his Sons was, and twenty thousand Romans of great account slaine; besides a great number carried captiues into Parthia. Plu|tarch affirmeth, that the Parthians so triumphed of this vi|ctory in their feasts and plaies; that they made rimes and iests of both Crassus heads.
At this City hauing paid our custome, which is a Dollor on a summe of goods, our Carauan was licenced to de|part: and at our ordinary houre which was three of the clocke in the afternoone, we set forward towards the aun|cient City Amida, now called Caramida, or Caraemit, fiue dayes iourney from Orpha, trauailing sometimes ouer rough and craggy mountaines, and sometimes through most delightfull plaines and vallyes: amongst which there is one of note, enuironed about with a pale of mountaines, in such wise that there is but one entry and passage.
The pollicy of Aladeules to inne vnto imself despe|ate Villaines to execute his mischieuous practises.In the midst whereof wee beheld the ruines of a great Fortresse, built (as the Countrey people report) by Ala|deules a mountaine King, who much annoyed Selymus the

first and his army, in his expedition against Ismael the Per|sian King. This plaine is very pleasant to the eye, by rea|son of the faire meadowes and brookes, wherewith the same doth plentifully abound. In this place did Aladeules build diuers houses of pleasures, causing the same to be in|habited with the fairest young men and women that could be found; so that, when he had surprised any young man, he brought him to this Fortresse, and gaue vnto him a drinke, which should cause him to sleepe so soundly, that he should so remaine a long space, as though he had beene dead. Then would he cause him to be carried into this val|ley amongst his beautifull women, and to bee cloathed in rich apparell, so that awaking out of his trance hee should finde himselfe another man, and as though hee came into a new world. Forthwith he was entertained with all kinds of pleasures, which youth and lust could desire, and this continued so long as one whole day lasted. But at night after a certaine banket, the drinke as before againe was gi|uen him to make him sleepe, his sumptuous attire pulled off, and his former garments put on, and so carried againe into the Fortresse from whence he came, a place farre vn|like to that which he had beene in the day before.
Hereupon the mountaine King would inferre, that the place where he had beene in, was Paradise, and that it lay in his power to send him thither when he would; if there|fore he had a desire to continue in such happinesse for euer, it was graunted vnto him vpon this condition, that hee should take courage to aduenture his life in such seruice, as hee should command him. To which those desperate villaines most willingly consented, as not esteeming any aduenture dangerous, yea though it were with the losse of their owne liues, so they might attaine that vaine Paradise, which Aladeules had promised vnto them. Selim the great Turke had like to haue lost his life, together with other Princes, too long to recite, by these desperate ruffians: But Selim in his returne from Persia, both destroyed their

King, and ruinated their Fortresse, with all the houses of pleasure built in the aforesaid valley.


The description of Cara-emit.
AT the end of fiue dayes trauell from Orpha, wee arri|ued at an ancient City, termed by Iouius and others Amida, but now Caraemit, which is to say, the blacke Ci|ty, either for the stone wherewith it is built, being like vn|to jet in colour, or for the fertility of the soile round about it, which is of a dusky colour. This City is seated vpon a maruailous high Rock, and containeth in circuit very neere sixe miles; and though it bee sufficiently fortified by na|ture, yet is it inuironed with a double wall: the outmost is somewhat decayed, but the inmost is well repaired, being fenced with great store of artillery. It is gouerned by a Bassa, who commandeth ouer twelue Sanzacks, and thirty thousand Tymariots: and is now become the Metropoliti|call City of Mesopotamia. There were mustered from this City, when Amurat the third inuaded Persia, in the yeare 1578. twelue thousand Souldiers, the Captaine being well checked by Generall Mustapha for bringing so few. The Souldiers of this City for the most part are archers, not of any courage, but very effeminate, and accustomed to the vse of the Scimatarre.
During our abode at this place (which was fourteene dayes) wee lodged in a very faire Caine built of free stone; for which lodging we paid to the Master of the Caine fiue Shaughes a peece: all which time nothing fell out worthy obseruation,A most cruell execution. but the cruell execution of a petty malefactor, who hauing but pilfered away certaine small wares, was mounted on a Camell, with his armes spread abroade, ha|uing two sockets-holes bored in his shoulder blades, into which were set two flaring torches, dropping continually on his skinne to his greater torment, and in the end hauing carried him in this pittifull manner through the principall

streets of the City, they brought him to the place of execu|tion, and there ganched him on a great yron hooke, suffe|ring him so to hang till he dyed.
Passing through the South-gate of this City, we paid to the Porter of the gate a Shaughee vpon a beast, descending from the City into a most fertile and fruitfull plaine, where are many Gardens and Orchards, and places of great re|freshment.
Through this plaine runneth the great Riuer Euphrates,Euphrates. with a very swift current; and is as broade here sometimes of the yeare as the Thames at London Bridge, but now was much dryed vp, by reason of the heate in Sommer, making thereby many Ilands and demi-Ilands, where the Citizens of Caraemit during the Sommer season doe vse to pitch their Tents, to enioy the freshment of the aire and riuer: but in the Winter it swelleth so abundantly ouer the said Ilands and bankes, that neither man nor beast is able to passe ouer: to auoide which inconuenience, there is a mile distant from the city a stone bridge of twenty arches, made ouer the said Riuer. This euening wee pitched two miles from the City, and staied all that night of purpose for some Merchants that were behinde. Here wee exchanged our Camels, and in stead of them tooke Mules, a creature farre more fit to trauaile ouer craggy Rocks and Mountaines then Camels: for now we were within a few daies iourney, to passe ouer the high Mountaines of Armenia, called in Scripture the Mountaines of Arraret: which trauell with Camels is not only laborious, but very dangerous, if the ground should proue moist or slabby; for then being la|den with great burdens, they cannot goe onwards, neither are they able to passe with their huge burdens, through the streight passages which are in those Mountaines.
Two daies iourney from Caraemit,One of the heads out of which Tygris floweth. we rested at the foot of a great rocky Mountaine, being one of the heads out of which Tygris floweth, and runneth downe with a swift current to Balsara, and so dischargeth it selfe in the Persian

gulfe. Strangely doth it issue out of three rocks admirably hanging, that a man as he passeth vnder them, would ima|gine them to bee ready to fall on his head. And for the strangensse of the site, the Turkes haue builded three Bridges in the midst of those rocks, to passe from one vnto another, thereby to bhold natures wisedome in framng them so wonderful. We went to view the same, but through the huge ouer fals, which came farre off within those Mountaines, and the steepnesse of the same, together with the hideous noise, and whistling murmuring, we found not so great contentment aboue, as we did beneath.
The next day we spent ouer many high Mountaines, on the toppe wherof grew great quantity of Gall-trees,Gall trees. which are somewhat like our Oakes, but lesser and more crooked: on the best tree in this place a man shal not gather a pound of glls: at euning wee pitched againe on the bankes of Euphrates;Euphrates. and in the morning passed the said Riuer, but not by barge as before, which was likely to haue bred no small annoyance to our whole Carauan; for through the swiftnesse of the streame and deepnesse of the channell, many beasts with their ladings had been carried away and drowned, if there had not beene in tie a shallow Foorde discouered, which had in such sort raised the depth of the channell, making as it were a shelfe for our commodious pasge: by helpe whereof there was not so much as one man or beast that perished.


The description of the Curds a most theeuish people.
WE were no sooner ouer, but forthwith wee were incountred with a crtaine troupe of people cal|led the Curies, which some thinke to be a remnant of the ancient Parthians, who so much annoied the Romans with their bowes and arrowes, as before is declared. This rude people are of a goodly stature, and well proportioned, and

doe neuer goe abroade without their armes, as bowes and arrowes, Scimatarre and buckler, yea and at such time, when a man for age is ready to goe downe to his graue. They doe adore and worship the Diuell,The Curdies worshippers of the Diuell. to the end he may not hurt them or their cattell, and very cruell are they to all sorts of Christians; in which regard, the Country which they inhabite, is at this day termed Terra Diaboli, the land of the Diuell. They participate much of the nature of the Arabians, and are as infamous in their Ladrocinies and robberies as the Arabians themselues. They liue vnder the commandement of the great Turke, but with much free|dome and liberty; For Selymus the second hauing a great multitude of them in his army against the Persians, they did him little seruice, performing no more then what well pleased themselues. This theeuish company did sundry times arrest our Carauan, affirming that their Prince had sent for a Dollor on a summe of goods, without the pay|ment whereof (being fiue seuerall times demanded) wee should not passe through their Countrey.
One Village of note is there in this Country,Manuscue. wholly in|habited by the Curdies, being fiue dayes iourney from Ca|raemit, and three dayes iourney from Bitclish, called by the Countrey people Manuscute. This Towne is seated in a most fertile and fruitfull valley betweene two mountaines, abounding with pasture and cattell: and about a mile from it, is an Hospitall dedicated to S^t. Iohn the Baptist, which is much visited as well by Turkes as Christians, who super|stitiously affirme, that whosoeuer will bestow either a Sheepe, Kidde, or some peece of money to releeue the poore of that place, shall not only prosper in his iourney, but obtaine forgiuensse of all his sinnes. To the Gouer|nour of this Village we paied for our custome a Shaughee on a summe of goods, and so were dismissed. The next day following wee passed ouer many craggy and steepe moun|taines, and at the last rested our selues and wearied beasts on the banke of Euphrates,Euprate. being the outmost bounds on

this side of Mesopotamia, and so entred the day following on the borders of Armenia the Great, which is by some distinctly deuided into three parts; the North part where|of being but little, is called Georgia: the middle part Tur|comania: and the third part by the proper name of Ar|menia.



The description of AR|MENIA.
The originall of the Arme|nians._ARmenia was founded by Armenius (one of the companions of Iason, who wonne the golden Fleece at Colchos:) for after Iason was dead, Armenius hauing gathered to|gether a great multitude of people, and wandering vp and downe the Countrey, in the end hee founded the Towne of Armenia, neere vnto the mountaines out of which the Riuer Tygris springeth; constituting many good and wholsome lawes, whereby from time to time, the Countrey of Armenia was gouerned by Kings of their owne Nation, vntill such time as the house of the Ottamans subdued the same.
The Turkes first came out of Scythia, and feated them|selues in Ar|menia.It is now called Turcomania, and was the first seate of the Turkes, after their first comming out of Scythia, who left their naturall seates in that cold and bare Countrey, to seeke themselues others in more pleasant and temperate Countries more Southerly, stirred vp no doubt by the hand of the Almighty, who being the Authour of all Kingdomes vpon earth, as well of those which hee hath ap|pointed as scourges wherewith to punish the world, as o|thers more blessed. This people thus stirred vp, and by the Caspian ports passing through the Georgian Countrey, then called Iberia, neere vnto the Caspian Sea; first ceased vpon this part of Armenia, and that with so strong an hand, that

it is by their posterity yet holden at this day, and of them called Turcomania; of all other, the most true progeny of the Turkes. These Turcomanes of a long time vnder their diuers leaders, in the manner of their liuing, most resem|bling their ancestours, did roame vp and downe with their families and heads of cattell, after the manner of the Scy|thian Nomades, their Countrey men, without certaine places of aboade; yet at great vnity amongst themselues, as not hauing much to loose, or wherefore to striue. This people did not only notably defend this Countrey thus by them at the first possessed, but still incroched farther and farther, and gayning by other mens harmes, became at length dreadfull vnto their neighbours, and of some fame also farther off. Whereunto the effeminate cowardise of those delicate people of Asia, with whom they had to doe, gaue no lesse furtherance then their owne valour; being neuerthelesse an hardy rough people, though not much skilfull, or trained vp in the feates of warre. But to leaue these Turcomanes for a while, wee will returne where we left.
This Countrey of Armenia hath for it vtmost bounds northward, Colchos, Iberia, and Albania; all which are now called by the Tartars Comania. Colchos was that famous Prouince, so much spoken of by the Poets, for the fable of Medea and Iason, and the golden Fleece: the inhabitants now are called Mengrellians, a Nation most barbarous and sauage, selling their Sonnes and Daughters to the Turkes for litle or nothing. Iberia is now called Georgia, and Al|bania, Zuiria: Westward it confronts vpon Euphrates and Armenia the lesse: Southward on Mesopotamia, with that which the Curdies inhabit: and Eastward on the Riuer A|raxis, which watereth the South part of Armenia, and al|most diuideth from Georgia.


A dscription of the people of Armenia, as they are at this day.
AT our first entrance into this Countrey, we trauelled through a goodly, large, and spacious plaine, com|passed about with a row of high mountaines, where were many Villages, wholly inhabited by Armenians; a people very industrious in all kinde of labour: their women very skilfull and actiue in shooting, and managing any sort of weapon, like the fierce Amazones in antique time; and the women at this day, which inhabit the mountaine Xatach in Persia. Their families are very great; for, both Sonnes, Nephewes, and Nieces doe dwell vnder one roofe, hauing all their substance in common: and when the father dyeth, the eldest Sonne doth gouerne the rest, all submit|ting themselues vnder his regiment. But when the eldest Sonne dyeth, th gouernment doth not passe to his sonnes, but to the eldest brother. And if it chance to fall out, that all the brethren doe die, then the gouernment doth belong to the eldest Sonne of the eldest brother, and so from one to another. In their dyet and cloathing, they are all fedde and cladde alike, liuing in all peace and tranquility, groun|ded on true loue and honest simplicity.
The Armeni|ans are a po|pulous nation.To discourse how populous this nation is at this day, is needlesse, since they inhabit both in Armenia the greater, and Armenia the lesse; as also in Cilicia, Bithinia, Syria, Mesopotamia and Persia. Besides the principall Cities of the Turkish Empire be much appopulated with them, as Brusia, Angori, Trabisonda, Alexandria, Grand-Caire, Constantinople, Cassa, Aleppo, Orpha, Cara-mit, Van, and Iulpha. Some of this nation affirmed vnto vs, that the chiefest cause of their great liberty in the Ottoman King|dome is, for that certaine of their Kings bare great affe|ction and loue vnto Mahomet their lewde Prophet, in re|gard whereof Mahomet did recommend them as his kind friends to his successours, who euer since haue permitted

the poore Armenians to liue amongst them. But the true reason is, for that they are very laborious in transporting merchandise from one City to another, by which meanes through the customes which are paid in euery City, the coffers of the Grand Signior are wonderfully inriched. Vn|to which doth well agree that scoffing taunt which Abbas now King of Persia did throw vpon an Armenian, who being desirous to forsake his Christian faith, and to em|brace the wicked and filthy superstition of the Persians, vp|pon hope of reward and preferment, the King did not on|ly rebuke his tepedity and coldnesse in his religion, but sent him away with this skornefull reproofe: That an Armeni|an now was good for nought, saue as a Camel to transport merchandise from one city to another: implying that how|seuer in antique times they had beene warlike and cou|ragious, yet now they were become Buffelloes and Pul|trones, altogether vnfit for martiall affaires.
This people haue two Patriarkes,The Armenis gouerned by two Patriarks. to whom they giue the name of Vniuersall: the one keepeth his seate in the City of Sis in Caramania, not farre from Tharsus: the o|ther in the Monastery of Ecmeazin, neere vnto the City Eruan in this Countrey. Vnder these two Patriarkes are eighteene Monasteries full fraight with Friers of their reli|gion; and foure and twenty Bshopricks. The maintenance allowed in times past vnto each of these two Patriarks was a Maidin on an house; each Patriarke hauing vnder him twenty thousand housholds: but now that large beneuo|lence the great Turke hath ceased into his owne hands, as if the tythe of the Church were fitter for his vnsatiable desire; then for those poore, miserable, and despised Church-men: and therefore now they are constrained to liue on the almes of the people, going continually in visi|tation from one City to another, carrying their wiues and whole family with them.
The people of this nation haue retained amongst them the Christian The religion of he Armeni|ans is spotted with many ab|surdities. faith, as it is thought from the time of he

Apostles: but at this day it is spotted with many absurdi|ties. They hold with the Church of Rome in the vse of the Crosse, affirming it to be meritorious if they make the same with two fingers, as the Papists vse; but idle and vaine if with one finger as the Iacobites. They adorne their Chur|ches in euery place with the signe of the Crosse, but for o|ther Images they haue none, being professed enemies a|gainst the vse of them. In keeping ancient reliques they are very superstitious, and much deuoted to the lessed Virgin Mary, to whom they direct their prayers. They imitate the Dioscorians in eating whit-meats on Saturday, which to doe on Wednesday and Friday were a deadly sin: neuerthelesse they will not refraine from the eating of flesh on euery Friday, betweene the feast of the Passeouer and the Ascention. They abstaine fiue Sabboths in the yeare from eating flesh, in remembrance of that time, in which the Gentiles did sacrifice their children vnto Idols. They celebrate the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary on the sixt of Aprill, the Natiuity of our blessed Sauiour on the sixt of Ianuary, the Purification the fourth of February, and the Transfiguration the fourteenth of August. The mi|nistration of their Liturgie or seruice, is performed in their natiue language, that all may vnderstand: but in their ser|uice of the Masse for the dead, they are most idolatrous, v|sing at the solemnizing thereof, to sacrifice a Lambe, which they first lead round about the Church, and after they haue killed it and rosted it, they spread it on a faire white linnen cloath, the Priest giuing to each of the Congregation a part and portion thereof. For which cause they are called by some Sabbatists, and Iulianists, as too much addicted to the ceremonies of the Iewes, and deuoted to the errours of Iulian. I haue heard some Papists boast and bragge much, that both Armenians, Iacobites, and Greoians, are vnited to the Chuch of Rome, but I could neuer heare either Ar|menian or Grecian uouch any such matter. They are (vn|lesse some few families) so farre from yeelding obedience

vnto the Sea of Rome, that they assume all antiquity vnto themselues, as hauing retained the Christian faith from the time of the Apostles. Many Iesuites and Priests haue been sent from Rome to bring this oppressed nation vnder her gouernment, but they haue little preuailed; for neither will they yeeld obedience, nor be brought by any perswa|sion to forsake their ancient and inueterate errours, to be|come more erroneous with her.
Hauing well refreshed our slues amongst these villages, we proceeded in our ordinary trauell, but ere we had pas|sed two miles, certaine troupes of Curdies incountred our Carauan, with a purpose and intent to haue robbed the same, but finding themselues too weake to contend with so great company, they departed vntill the next day follow|ing, when againe they met with vs in a very narrow pas|sage betweene two mountaines, where they made a stay of our whole Carauan, exacting a Shaughee on euery person, which to purchase our peace wee willingly paied; and so arriued that euening at Bithlis an ancient City, but a City of much cruelty and oppression, where little iustice and right is to be found to releeue distressed passengers.


The description of Bithlis.
THis City standeth in a pleasant valley, by which run|neth a little Riuer, falling out of the mountaines An|ti-Taurus, it was once a Towne in the confines of the Per|sian Kingdome, bordering vpon Mesopotamia, and had a Castle kept with a garrison of Persian Souldiers, before such time as Solyman the Magnificent did conquer these Countries,The great bat|tell fought be|tweene two great Bassaes Delymenthes a valiant Noble|man of Persi which was in the yeare 1535. In which yeare there was a memorable battell fought betweene the two great Bassaes of Caire and Syria, conducted by Vlemas the Persian Traitor; and Delymenthes a right Nobleman of Persia. The two Bassaes and Vlemas were commanded by Solyman (in his returne from the spoile of Tauris) to

follow him with eighteene thousand good Souldiers in the rereward of his army, to receiue and represse the sud|dn assauls of the Persians, if neede should require. But Delymenthes with fiue thousand Persian Souldiers pursued the Turkes, and ouertooke them in the aforesaid valley; and being furthered in this venterous designement, both by the darkenesse of the night, and the abundance of raine which fell at the same instant, as if it had beene wished for, on a sudden go within the Turkes campe: where the Per|sian Souldiers, as Wolues amongst Sheepe, did such speedy execution amongst the sleepy Turkes, that the two great Bassaes and Vlemas had much adoe to get to horse, and saue themselues by flight. And such was the fury of the Persians, and the greatnesse of the sudden feare increased by the darkenesse of the night, that the Turkes not know|ing which way to turne themselues, or what to doe, were slaine by thousands, some sleeping, some halfe waking, some making themselues ready to fight, and to flie, few of all that great army escaped the sword of the Persians. There was three great Sanzaecks slaine, one taken, and the other sled, eight hundred Iamzaries seeing themselues foraken of their Captaine, laid downe their Harquebusiers, and other weapons, and yeelded themselues vpon Delymenthes his word. It might then well haue beene said of the Turks, which the Poet speaeth of the night, wherein Troy was ack:
Quis cladem illius noctis qui funere fando
Explicet?
The slaughter of that night was such, as that it is of the
Turkes vntill this day accounted amongst their greatest
losses; and the victory so welcome to the Persians, that in
memoriall thereof they still keepe that day (which was
the thirteenth of October) as one of their solemne holi|dayes.
In Bithlis wee staied two dayes; and at our departure paied vnto the Gouernour of the said City a Dollr on a

summe of goods, and so set forwards towards the great City Van, three dayes iourney farther. In which trauell we had a very wearisome and painefull iourney, ouer high mountaines and craggy rocks, the way being exceeding narrow, that a beast could hardly passe with his burden, without much heauing and tumultuous shouldering. The which narrow passages the Turks told vs, was by the com|mandement of Amurat the third, the great Turke, cut through by the maine industry of laborers, for his army to passe, like that incredible worke, which Hanibal with vineger wrought vpon the Alpes. In this place our tra|uell was very dangerous, by reason of a brackish lake or little Sea, called the lake Arctamar, which was vnder the Rocke, ouer which wee passed, and wee inforced to ride shoaling on the side of the said Rocke, that had not our Mules beene sure of footing, both the and we had perish|ed with an insupportable downefall i hat Sea. Two miles from this shore in the aforesaid lake are two Ilands called the Ecmenicke Ilands,The Ecmenick Ilands. inhabited only by Armenians, and some Georgians, which two Ilands doe bring forth and yeeld such store of cattell and plenty of rice, wheate, and batly, that as the Island of Scycilia was called in time past Horreum. P. Romani, so these Ilands are at this day the gatners and store houses for all the Countrey round abou.
Being arriued at Van, our Carauan rested in the subbs of the said City, not daring to presume to enter the City, by reason that the Bassae was gone to fetch in a rebell, that was risen vp in those parts; in whose absence the City, vn|der the sub-Bassae, was no better gouerned then it should be. On the West side of this City lyeth a pleasant and de|lightfull plaine, wherein the Ianizaries twise a weeke doe exercise themselues after their manner in the seats of warre. On the North side runneth the lake Arctamar,The ake A|ctamar call in ancient ti Martiana. called in antique time the Moore or Marish, Martiana, or Mar|giana, or Mantiana. Strabo affirmeth that it is match|able in greatnesse with the lake Motidis, in the Kingdome

of Sermatia, so much spoken of by the Poets. Out of this lake is caught yearly an innumerable quantity of fish like our Herring, which being dryed in the Sunne, they dis|perse and sell them ouer all the Countrey thereabout.


The description of Van.
THis City is double walled with hard quarry stone, and is the strongest Towne in all these parts, being fortifi|ed with great store of brasse Ordonance, and a strong Ca|stle mounted on an high Rocke, to command and defend the City.Solyman after ten dayes siege tooke the City Van. It was once vnder the gouernement of the Per|sian, but Solyman the Magnificent in the yeare 1549. with a puissant army did besiege the same, which after ten daies siege was yeelded vnto him by the Persian Gouernour, vp|pon condition, that the Persian Souldiers there in garrison, might with life and liberty depart with their weapons, as Souldiers: which was by Solyman granted, and so the City was surrendred vp into his handes from the Persian King, who neuersince could get the same into his possessions. It is gouerned now by a Bassae, who hath vnder him twelue thousand Timariots.
At this City wee stayed fiue daies, paying a Dollor on a summe of goods, and passed from thence to a Turkish Vil|lage called Gnusher, the houses standing in two seuerall places, the one row fit for the Winter, and the other for the Sommer season: Here wee beganne the ascent of the high mountaines of Arraret, and about noone-tide we be|held Bruz; the very crest of the Periardi mountaines, now called Cheilder Monte, the hils of Periardo. These moun|tains so called, are very famous by the rising of many nota|ble great riuers, which doe so fructiferate the country ther|abouts, that the barbarous people call it Leprus, which is to say fruitfull, viz. First, the Riuer Araxis, which run|ning out of a certaine Marish, with many armes doth won|derfully inrich that champaine and drie Countrey.
This Riuer springeth out of the hill Taurus in this part,The Riuer A|raxis springeth out of the hill Taurus. where Periardo is situate, on the side of the hill Abo, and so runneth by East euen to the confines of Seruan, and win|deth it selfe towards the West, and by North, where it is ioyned with the Riuer Cirus, and then passeth to Artaxata now called Nassiuan, a City of the Armenians, right a|gainst Reiuan another City, and so watereth Armenia, and coursing along the plaine of Araxis, dischargeth it selfe in|to the Caspian Sea, on the one side by South leauing Ar|menia, and on the other side by North leauing the Coun|trey Seruania; whose chiefe City is Eris. This Riuer is deep and large; but yet at this present, it containeth not those maruels, that Herodotus reporteth of it; as also it is very hard to vnderstand, that which Q. Curtius writeth touch|ing the course thereof; and that which Natales Comes hath left written of it in his History.
The Riuer Cirus likewise springeth out of Taurus,The Riuer Cirus. and so descending into the champaines and plaines of Georgia, charging it selfe, and being greatly increased with other Riuers, it is ioyned with Araxis, and so maketh his issue also into the Caspian Sea. This Riuer the inhabitants of the Countrey at this day call by the name of Ser, in their owne language, but the Turkes call it Chiur.
Out of these mountaines also springeth the Riuer Ca|nac,The Riuer Canac. which maketh (as it were almost) an Iland, a little on this side the City Eres, and afterwards vnite it selfe in the Channell with Araxis, and so runneth into the Caspian Sea.
Two other mountaines are of great note in this place;The mounta Anti-Taurus. the one is Anti-Taurus, now called Mons Niger, the blacke mountaine, which runneth vp into Media; and the other Gordaeus, the tops of which mountaies are couered continually with white and hoary snowes.The mountai Gordaeus. The mountaine Gordaeus is inuironed with many other petty mountaines called the Gordaean mountaines; on the tops whereof (as we passed) we found many ruines and huge foundations, of

which nore son can be rendred,Ioseph. Antqui|tat. lib. 1. cap. 5. but that which Iosephus giues, saying: that they which escaped the flood were so astonished and amazed, that they durst not descend into the plaines and low countries, but kept on the tops of those mountaines and there builded. And some obserue that this Countrey was first peopled after the flood, for being high land it first appeared.Fruitfull pro|pagation ater the flood. The Tradition of the Hebrewes is, now in this place after the flood, the men accompanying with their wiues, euery woman brought forth at once a male and a female, and so did their children; for God and Nature neuer failed to the necessity, which belonged to the wealth and increase of the vniuersall world, no more then in this old age of the world, in the time of the infinite mul|titude, and increase of people, wherein God doth miracu|lously keepe them (as the Sea from ouerflowing the land) that they doe not so abound as that one cannot liue by an|other.
The Turkes call the mountaine Gordaeus Augri-daugh, the Armenians Messis-Saur: it is so high, that it ouer-tops all the mountaines thereabout. There issueth out of the foote of this hill a thousand little springs, whereof some doe feede the Riuer Tygris, and some other Riuers, and it hath about it three hundred villages inhabited by Arme|nians and Georgians; as also an ancient Monastery dedica|ted to S^t. Gregory, very large and spacious, able to receiue Shaugh Tamas the great King of Persia, and most of his army, who for the austere and strict life that he saw in those religious men, made him to spare it, and to change his determination, hauing a full purpose before to haue de|stroyed it. About this Monastery groweth great plenty of graine, the graine being twise as bigge as ours, as also Roses and Rheubarb,Rheubarb. which because they haue not the skill to dry it, that simple is of no esteeme or value.



The Arke of Noah rested on the toppe of the Gordaean Mountaines.
ON the top of this Mountaine did the Arke of Noah rest, as both Iewes, Turks, and Armenians affirmed. Berosus who registred the affaires and acts of the Chaldae|ans,Berosu. setteth downe diuers things both concerning Noah and the resting of the Arke in this place. Concerning Noah he writeth, that (the flood ceasing) Noah with his family descending out of the Arke from Mount Gordaeus (called by Manasseus Damascenus,Manasseus Da|masce. Baris, and by other A|raxis) into the plaine adioyning full of dead karcasses, which they call Mry Adam, that is, of dead men, wrote in a stone (for a monument) what was done. The inhabi|tants to this day, especially the Armenians, doe call this place where Noah descended, Aprobaterion, that is, des|cent, or Egressorium Noe, The going out of Noah. Hee furder setteth downe how that the eldest of all, father Noah did in the same place first teach his children Theologie and holy Writs,Noah wrote bookes. and afterwards humane wisdome, committing to writing many secrets of naturall things, which the Ar|menians and Scythians, did commit only to the Priests, to whom only it was lawfull, both to reade, to teach, and to looke into those writings, rites, and ceremonies left by Noah.
And as for the resting of the Arke, he setteth downe di|uers occurrences of the flood on this manner. Some (saith he) affirme that a certaine part of the Arke is yet in Arme|nia, neere to the mountaine of the Gordaeans, and that some men haue brought from thence, some part of the pitch wherewith it was calked, which the people of that place were wont to vse as a soueraigne preseruatiue against in|chantments. So Hierome the Aegyptian (who wrote the Antiquities of the Phoenitians) doe make mention of the same matter;Hierome the Ae|gyptian. and also Nanesius with diuers others.Nicholas Da|mascene. Ni|cholas Damascene speaketh thus: aboue the region of the

Minaeans, there is a great mountaine in Armenia called Baris, in which mountaine it is reported that diuers peo|ple retired themselues for safety during the time of the deluge, and there escaped; and that a certaine man (mea|ning Noah) arriued in an Arke on the highest toppe of the said mountaine, and that certaine plankes and timbers of the bottome of that Vessell was kept there a long while after. To verifie which, some Friers of S^t. Gregories Mo|nastery told vs, that euen at this day some part of the Arke is yet to bee seene on the toppe of this mountaine, if ny could ascend thither; but the way (as they say) is kept by Angels, so that whosoeuer shall presume to goe vp (as once a Brother of that Monastery did) shall be brought downe in the night season, from the place which hee had gained by his trauaile in the day time before. But to leaue this fable to the first inuentor, it sufficeth vs that here amongst these mountaines the Arke rested, since the Scriptures tell vs, that none were saued, but Noah and his Wife, with his three Sonnes, and their three Wiues, euen eight persons in the whole, in the Arke; and that the said Arke after the waters had preuailed vpon the earth an hundred and fifty dayes rested in the seauenth Moneth, in the seauenteenth day of the Mo|neth vpon the Mountaines of Arraret, which is expoun|ded by all Writers to be in Armenia.
From the foote of this mountaine, we spent a dayes iourney farther towards Chiulfall, which day wee trauel|led through very many narrow lanes in those mountaines, and very deepe vallies,The Riuer Araxis. wherein the Riuer Araxis with most outragious turnings and windings, and his many rushing downefals amongst the Rocks, doth euen be|dease a mans eares, and with his most violent roaming in and out, doth drowne and ouerwhelme, whosoeuer by miserable chance falleth downe head-long from the toppe of those narrow passages, which are vpon the mountaines. And vpon the crests of the said mountaines,

on the side of the said narrow passages, there growe most hideous Woods and antique Forrests, full of Bee|ches: Trees like Poplers carrying mast fit for Hogges, and Pine-trees; where the horrour of darkenesse, and silence which is oftentimes interrupted, only by the whistling winds, or by the cry of some wild beasts, doe make the poore passengers most terribly afraide.


The description of Chiulfal.
AT length our Carauan ferried ouer the foresaid Ri|uer, and so we arriued at Chiulfal, a towne situate in the frontiers between the Armenians and the Atropatians, and yet within Armenia, inhabited by Christians, partly Armenians, partly Georgians: a people rather giuen to the traffique of Silkes, and other sorts of wares, whereby it waxeth rich and full of money, then instructed in weapons and matters of warre. This towne consisteth of two thou|sand houses and ten thousand soules, being built at the foot of a great rocky mountaine in so barren a soile, that they are constrained to fetch most of their prouision, only wine excepted, from the City Nassiuan, halfe a dayes iourney off, which some thinke to be Artaxata, in the confines of Media and Armenia.The Chiulfal|lines great drinkers of wine, but no quarrellers in drinke. The buildings of Chiulfal are very faire, all of hard quarry stone: and the inhabitants very courteous and affable, great drinkers of wine, but no brau|lers in that drunken humour, and when they are most in drinke, they powre out their prayers, especially to the Virgin Mary, as the absolute commander of her Sonne IESVS CHRIST, and to other Saints as Intercessors. It is subiect and tributary to the Scepter of Persia, and contrariwise both by nature and affection great enemies to the Turke.Chiulfal much indangered in the last warre betweene th Turke and th Persian. This Towne was much indangered in the warres betwixt Amurat the great Turke, and Ma|homet Codibanda the Persian King, ready to bee swal|lowed vp of both. One while the Bassae of Reiuan,

on the great Turkes behalfe, made an inrode vpon them with a thousand and fiue hundred Harquebusiers, whom they were faine to pacifie with a very bountifull present, excusing themselues, that if they had beene backward in bringing vnto him their voluntary tributes, it was done for feare, least they should haue fallen into the displeasure of Mahomet Codibanda their King: who no doubt if he should haue vnderstood any such matter, would haue been ready to destroy their Countrey, and depriue them of their liberty and liues. The Bassae was no sooner departed with this answere and their present; but forth with Aliculi-cham was sent by the Persian King with three thousand Soul|diers, and with this direction, that if the country were sub|dued by the Turks, he should fight against it: and if it had voluntarily yeelded it selfe vnto them, hee should not only recouer it, but also burne it, and bring away all the chiefe men of the Countrey for prisoners and slaues. To auoide which danger, these poore Chiulfalini were glad to present the Persian Prince with greater and more liberal gifts, then they did their enemy Bassae. Thus these miserable people in the midst of armes and squadrons of the enemy, were con|strained, what with presents, and what with lies, notably to preserue their liberties, and their liues in safety.
The mortall battell sought betweene Se|lymus the first, Emperour of the Turks, and ismael the So|fie of Persia.Within a dayes iourney and halfe of this Towne is the Chalderan plaines; memorable for the battell fought there, on the seuenth day of August in the yeare 1514. betweene the two great Emperours Ismael King of Persia, and Sely|mus the first. Emperor of the Turkes. In which battell Se|lymus lost aboue thirty thousand men, amongst whom was Cassan-Bassae his great Lieutenant in Europe, seauen San|zacks, with the two Malcozzian brethren, who labouring the one to rescue the other, were both together staine. Be|sides his common foot-men, of whom he made least recko|ning, he lost most part of his Illirian, Macedonian, Seruian, Eirot, Thessalonian, and Thracian horse-men, the vndoub|ted flower and strength of his army, which were in that

mortall battell almost all slaine and grieuously wounded. And certainly had it not beene for the Turkes great Artil|lery, Ismael with his thirty thousand horse-men, had ouer|throwne Selymus with his three hundred thousand Turks. But Selymus reseruing all his great Ordonance, at his last refuge, caused it to bee discharged: by violence whereof such slaughter was made, as well of his owne men, as of his enemies, mingled together, what for dust, what for smoke, and thundering of the Artillery, hauing on both sides al|most lost the vse of sight and hearing; and eir horses be|ing so terrified with the thundering report of the great Or|donance, that they were not now to be managed, the bat|tell was broken off, and the victory yet doubtfull. In the end Hismael had the worst, and was put to flight by reason that the Persian horses had neuer beene vsed to the noise and thundering of the artillery, which they could not abide to heare. The Turkish stories to expresse the terrour of this day, number it amongst their dismall daies, terming it the only day of doome. The manner of this battel is painted in the Counsell chamber at Venice, and is reported that Selymus the great Turke caused it so to bee done, and sent it to the Senate there. At Chiulfal we staied eight dayes, and pas|sed againe the Riuer Araxis, leauing the noble Kingdome of Armenia, alled now Turcomania, because of the Tur|comanes a people that came out of Scythia (as before wee noted) who liue as sheepheards in their tents, but the na|tiue people giue themselues to husbandry, and other ma|nuall sciences, as working of Carpets and fine Chamlets. Wee were no sooner ouer but wee entred into Media; which by some is deuided into Media Atropatia, and Me|dia the Great.




The description of MEDIA ATROPATIA.
The King|dome of Sir|uan._MEdiae Atropatia is called by the Hebrewes Madian, but now it is termed Sruan or Seruania: The bounds of this Kingdome Northwards are the Albanians, and a lit|tle beyond them some wandering and va|gabond Tartars called Pericorschi, be|tweene Caucasus and the Riuer Volga, whereupon it may be, that the Tartarians are comprehended vnder the name of Volcenses: Eastward the lake (as Polycletes terme it) or rather (as other call it) the Sea of Corazan, viz. the Caspian Sea: Southward on Armenia, and more towards the South,Atropatia ex|ceeding fruit|full. and South-cast Media the great: The whole coun|trey is very fruitfull, and watered with the Riuer Araxi and Cirus, and other Riuers that are famous euen in an|tique Writers.
Diuers Cities are there in this Kingdome, but my pur|pose is to speake only of those, which we saw in these parts. viz. Sumachia, Derbent, Sechi, Eres, and Aras.
Sumachia. Sumachia is the Metropoliticall City of Siran; and lyeth betweene Derbent and Eres; where the Kings of Siruan vsed to keepe their great and sumptuous Courts, chiefly inhabited by Armenians and Georgians. In this City our English Merchants did traffique much, and had an house giuen them by Obdowlocan in the yeare 1566. (as reuerend M^r. Hackluit doth relate) who then raigned there vnder the Persian King. In this City wee saw the ruines of a most cruell and barbarous spectacle,A most barba|rous spectacle in Sumachia. that is to say, a turret erected with free stone and flints, in the midst of which flints were placed the heads of all the Nobility and Gentry of that Countrey: which fell out on this occa|sion.

This Countrey of Siruan in time past was of great renowme, hauing many Cities, Townes, and Castles in it; the Kings thereof being of great power, able to wage warre with the Kings of Persia, but through their diuersity in religion, the Persian made a conquest of them, razing downe to the ground their Cities, Townes, and Castles, that they should not rebell, and also putting to death their Nobility and Gentry, and for the greater terrour of the people placed their heads in the foresaid Turrer.
About a mile distant from this Towne is the ruines of an old Castle, once esteemed to be one of the strongest Castles in the world, and was besieged by Alexander the Great a long time before hee could winne it. And a little further off, was a Nunnery most sumptuously builded, wherein was buried (as they told vs) the body of Ameleke Canna the Kings Daughter, who slew her selfe with a knife, for that her Father would haue forced her (shee professing chastity) to haue marryed with a Prince of Tartary: vp|pon which occasion the Virgins of this Countrey doe re|sort thither once a yeare to lament her death. This City is distant from the Caspian Sea with Camels seauen dayes iourney; and from Derbent sixe dayes iourney; It was in the yeare 1578. yeelded vp vnto Mustaffa the Generall of the Turkish army, without resistance, who presently did surprise the City, intreating all the inhabitants in friendly manner, without doing or suffering any outrage to be done vpon them; but for this their infidelity in voluntary yeel|ding themselues to follow the religion of the Turkes, when as they were not induced thereunto by any necessity; E|mirhamze eldest Sonne to Mahomet Codibanda King of Persia,The Persian Prince punis|eth the inhabi|tants of Suma|chia with di|uers kindes o tortures and death. comming with his army into Seruan, did with great cruelty punish the miserable and infortunate commons of this City, making their houses euen with the ground, de|stroying both the old and new wals thereof, and bringing the whole land to nought, that somtimes was so desired a eceit of the Turks
Derbent buil|ded by Alexan|der th Great.Sixe dayes iourney from this City, lyeth Derbent; This city hath sundry names giuen vnto it by writers: Somtimes it is called Derbent, because it is in figure narrow and long: and sometimes Demir-Capi, because there were the yron|gates, that were sometimes the entrance into Scythia: and sometimes Alessandria; because it was first erected by A|lexander the Great, when hee warred against the Medes and Persians;The great wall which Alexan|der built be|tweene Der|bent and Tes|tis. at which time also he made a wall of a won|derfull height and thicknesse, which extended it selfe from this City, to a City in Armenia, called Testis, belonging to the Georgians. And though it be now razed and decayed, yet the foundation remaineth: and it was made to this purpose, that the inhabitants of that Countrey, newly con|quered by Alexander, should not lightly flie, nor their ene|mies easily inuade them. This City is seated vpon an high hill, and builded all of free stone much after our buildings, being very high and thicke: neuerthelesse it neuer grew great nor famous, and euen in these dayes, there is no rec|koning made of it: and the reason is because of the situati|on, seruing for passage only out of Tartaria into Persia, and out of Persia into Tartaria, receiuing those that trauell too and fro, not as Merchants and men of Commerce, but as passengers and trauellers; and to speake in a word, it is sea|ted in a very necessary place as the case standeth, by reason that it is in the ports of the Caspian Sea, but not profitable vnto it selfe: much like as it is in the passages of the Alpes, where though the Frenchmen, Switzers, Dutchmen, and Italians, continually doe passe by them; yet was there ne|uer found a meane City; much lesse any City of state and importance.
Sechi.About foure daies iourney from Sumachia, is Sechi, which also at the same time as Sumachia offred themselues to Mustapha, as vassals and subiects to the Turks, who all were gladly intertained of him, and some of the chiefe of them apparelled in silke and gold, and honored with great magnificence, and in the end had all protection promised

vnto them. Here also standeth the Citie Eres,Eres made Mamodaean silkes. most fruit|fully watered with the riuer Araxis and Cyrus, and hath yeelded in times past great store of those fine white silkes, commmonly tearmed by the marchants Mamodaean silkes, whereof at this day, there is not to be found, no not a very small quantitie, by reason of the monstrous ruines and o|uerthrowes, that hath happened in these countries, partly by the Armies of the great Turke, and partly by the Armie of the Persians, which still hath succeeded one another, in their cruell incursions, and bloodie inusions. For after the people of Sechi and Eres had yeelded themselues vo|luntarily without any resistance vnto Mustaffa great Amu|rats Generall; Emirhamze the Persian Prince came vpon them with his armie, as vpon rebels to inflict deserued pu|nishment. In effecting of which his purpose he spared nei|ther sexe, nor age, nor any condition, but though the per|sons were vnequall, yet was the punishment equall to all, carrying away with him the two hundred peeces of artile|rie, that were left in the sort by Mustapha, and presently sent them to Casbin to his father.
There is also in this Kingdome another Citie that bor|dereth vpon the Georgians called Arasse,Arasse the most chiefe and opulent Citie in the trade of Mer|chandize that is in all Serua|uia. being the most chiefe and opulent Citie in the trade of Merchandise, part|ly by the aboundant grouth of silke, there nourished, part|ly by other good  necessary commodities, there growing and there brought, as rough and smooth galles, Cotten wooll, Allome; besides all kinds of spices and drugs, and Diamonds, and Rubies, and other stones brought out of the East-Indies. But the principall commoditie is raw silke of all sorts; so that from hence hath beene and is car|ried yearly fiue hundred, and sometimes a thousand mules laden of silke to Aleppo in Syria. From this towne we spent sixe daies trauell to Tauris, passing ouer the riuer A|raxis, leauing Media Atropatia, and entring into Media the great.



The description of MEDIA the Great.
_THis countrey hath for it bounds, westward Armenia the great and Assiria: South|ward Persia: Eastward Hircania and Par|thia: and Northwards the Caspian Sea. The land is high and spacious, most part moun|tainous, full of hils, woods, rockes, and ru|ines, specially towards the North parts, but Southwards it aboundeth with silkes, fruits, wilde beasts and falcons. It receiued the name from Medus,The originall of the Medes. Iasons sonne, who being an earnest follower of his fathers vertues, in honour of his mo|ther Medea, after the death of his father Iason, builded the Citie Medea, and established the kingdome of the Medes, calling it after his owne name, which in continuance of time, grew to that estate, that all the East was in subiection to the Empire thereof.
I omit to write any thing of Astyages, who raigned in this countrey; or of his dreame, how he saw springing out of his daughters belly a vine, whose branches should ouer|shadow all Asia, meaning Cyrus that was borne of her; or how Cyrus was brought vp of an heard-man, and mira|culously preserued from death; and lastly how Cyrus was banished into Persia, and after being come to mans estate, ouercame Astyages his Grandfather, remouing the Empire from the Medes to the Persians, being all matters of anti|quitie, and not so pertinent to our iournall.
Schatana.The chiefe Citie of this country is Tauris, which in times past was called Ecbatana, as Ortelius and Minado do wit|nesse, howsoeuer P. Ionius very vniustly would haue it Ter|ua, and Nigro the Italian Tigranoama.uffinus de Medioru ori|ne. It was first founded by Deiocis the first king of Media, who no sooner gaue

out his edict for the building thereof, but forthwth the inhabitants with one consent did make it the chiefe Ci|tie aboue the rest; and so euer since it hath remained one of the chiefest seats both of the Median and Persian kings.
Memorable also is this Citie for the resiance once of the Prophet Daniel,The Castell which Daniel the Prophet builded. who neere vnto the same builded a most magnificent and sumptuous Castell, which many yeares re|mained a maruailous monument; the beauty wherof was so liuely and perfect, that continuance of time did little de|face it, being very fresh and flourishing in the time of Iose|phus. In this Castell were all the kings of Media,Iosephus Anti. lib. 10.11. Persia, and Parthia for many yeares together intombed. But now time hath worne it out, it faring with buildings as with mens bodies, they waxe old, and are infeebled by yeares, and loose their beautie: neuerthelesse Ecbatana now called Tauris remaines in great glorie vnto this day.

The description of Tauris.
IT is seated at the foote of the hill Orontes eight daies iourney or there abouts from the Caspian Sea, and is subiect to winds and full of snow; yet of a verie whole|some ayte, abounding with all things necessary for the su|stentation of man: wonderfull rch, as well by the perpe|tuall concourse of merchandizes, that are brought thither from the countries of the East, to be conueighed into Sy|ria, and into the countries of Europe; as also of those that come thither out of the Westerne parts, to be di|stributed ouer all the East. It is very populous, so that it feedeth almost two hundred thousand persons: but now open to the furie of euery armie without strength of wals, and without bulwarkes, sauing a Castle built of late by the Turkes. The buildings are of burnt clay, and rather low then high. On the South side of this Citie, is a most

beautifull and flourishing garden, large and spacious, re|plenished with sundry kinds of trees, and sweete smelling plants, and a thousand fountaines and brookes, deriued from a prety riuer, which with his pleasant streame denides the garden from the Citie: and is of so great beautie, that for the delicacie thereof, it is by the countrey inhabitants called Sechis-Genet, that is to say, the eight Paradises: and was in times past the standing house of the Persian Kings, whilest they kept their residence in this Citie, and after they withdrew their seate from thence, by reason of the Turkish warres, to Casbin, became the habitation and place of a|boad for the Persian gouernours.
Tauris yeel|deth to Selymus the first. 1514.Sundrie mutations euen of late yeares hath this Citie indured both by the great Turke and the Persian. For in the yeare 1514. it was yeelded to Selymus the Turkish Ty|rant, who contrary to his promise exacted a great masse of money from the Citizens, and carried away with him three thousand families, the best artificers in that Citie, especial|ly such as were skilfull in making of armour and wea|pons, onely to enrich and appopulate the great Citie Con|santinople.
Sacked by So|yman. 1535.Afterwards in the yeare 1535. it was againe spoyled by Solyman the Turkish Emperour, who gaue the whole Ci|tie for a prey vnto his souldiers, who left neither house nor corner thereof vnransacked, abusing the miserable Citi|zens with all manner of insolencie: euery common soul|dier without controlement, fitting himselfe with whatsoe|uer best pleased his greedie desire or filthie lust: beside the most stately and royall Pallace of King Tamas, together with the most sumptuous and rich houses of the Nobilitie were by the great Turkes commandement all rased downe to the ground, and the greatest part of the best Citizens, and beautifull personages of all sort and condition were carried away captiues.
iserably oled by Os|an Visier. 1583.And in the yeare 1585. it was miserably spoyled by Os|mun visier vnto Amurat the third, who commaunded his

souldiers to do the worst that possibly they could or might do to it. Here a man had need of a very learned  eloquent pen, to set forth the fierce and cruell execution of the Tur|kish souldiers. For in truth who is able eyther by writing, or by speech, sufficiently and liuely to lay open the trea|chery, the couetousnesse, the wrath, the crueltie, the im|pietie, the wickednesse of these triumphing Turks?The misery of the Taurisians. And on the other side, who can expresse the crying of infants, the gronings of the wounded, the teares of parents, the prayers of old men, the eares, the griefes, and to be short, the mise|rie of the Taurisians. There was nothing but slaughter, pillings, rauishing, spoyling and murdering: virgins de|floured, men children defiled with vnspeakable and hor|rible Sodomitry, younglings snatcht out of their mothers armes, houses laid euen with the ground and burnt: riches and money carried away, and to be briefe all things wasted and ruinated. Neither were those outrages committed once only, but the second followed worse then the first, and the third vpon that worse then the second: so that it was a miserie almost inexplicable to behold that Citie, which was once so populous and so rich, sometimes the Court and Pallace of the Crowne, and the honour of the Persian Empyre, now subiect to the furie and cruelty of the Turke plunged in calamitie, and vtterly destroyed. This is the vn|certaine state of the world, sometimes vp, and some|times downe, sometimes conquerers, and within a while after conquered.
For this Citie groaned not full foure and twentie yeares vnder the Turkish slauery,Tauris wonne by the Persian King in the yeare. 1603. but Abas now King of Persia reposing no lesse confidence in his owne good fortune, then the valour of his souldiers marched in the yeare 1603 with his armie directly to the Citie of Tauris, and that with such expedition, that he was come before it, before a|ny such thing was feared, much lesse prouided for: stirred vp hereunto, partly by the great Turke troubles at home, and his warres with the Christians in Hungarie, as also

with the disposition of the Taurisians, whose minds were then so alienated from the Turkish gouernour; that vpon the approach of Abas, they were all readie to forsake him. Neuerthelesse the King was constrained to besiege the Citie, being then kept with a strong garrison of Tur|kish souldiers. In which siege he for battery vsed the helpe of the Canon, an engine of long time by the Persian skor|ned, as not beseeming valiant men, vntill that by their owne harmes taught; they are content to vse it, being with the same, as also with skilfull Canoniers furnished by the Portugals from Ormuz. So that after sixe weekes siege this Citie was surrendred vp into the Persians hands to the great reioycing of all Persia, together with the whole countrey of Seruan, except a fort or two which still stands out.
At this Citie we paid a dolour on a summe of goods, and fiue Shaughes to the keeper of the Caine wherein we lodged, and set forward to the wealthy Citie of Casbin distant from Tauris ten daies iourney; passing the three first daies ouer many rough and craggie mountaines, full of a thousand difficulties, which were the more increased by wonderfull great snowes that were fallen, by meanes whereof many passengers, horses, and mules (if our guide had not beene good) had perished in one common de|struction. Euery night we had great flkes of lightening, and huge thunderclaps with geat store of raine  snowes which did much annoy our whole Carauan. We had no sooner left those hard passages, but we were forthwith encountred by a gallant troupe of Persian horsemen, who lay vp and downe the borders by the kings commaun|dement, to murder all Turkish merchants that should passe that way: vpon reuenge of the death of a Persian mer|chant, who being richly arriued at Van, (a little be|fore our comming) was iniuriously depriued both of his goods and life. Hereupon the gouernour of this troupe, demaunded of our Carauan-Bassa (who was a Chiulphalin)

to deliuer vp into his hands, all the Turkie merchants, that were in our company; to which request he durst not con|descend, affirming that there was none but Iewes and Christians vnder his conduct; and withall bestowed on him a bountifull present of two hundred and fiftie dollors, which was leuied amongst vs.
By this time we came to the full borders,Our first entry into the Per|sian kingdome. and outmost bounds then of the great Turkes dominion, so farre as the Othoman Empire on this side doth extend; and so entred into the territories of the Persian King: both which are deuided by the high mountaine Duzm, and by a pretie riuer that runneth at the foote threof. This night we re|sted at a Persian village called Darnah, much ruinated, but seated in a very delightfull place, both for springs of wa|ter, nd plentie of all things. For heere we bought foure hens for fiue pence, a kid for ten pence, and thirtie egs for two pence.
From Darnah we spent three daies further to Soltania, a very ancient Citie, trauelling by many Persian villages, and finding euery man at his labour, and neighbour with neighbour going from one towne to another,Great quiet in Persia. which bred much contentment, and made vs wonder at the great peace  tranquilitie, which the commons of Persia liue in aboue the commons of Turkie. The ruines of many faire Chri|stian Churches we beheld, but not without pitie, built all with great arches and high towers, lauorated with gold and other rich paintings to the beautifying of the same. And verily I take them to be those Churches, which Cosro King of Persia destroyed, who being in a battell discom|fited, fought betweene him and Heraclius the mperour, reaked his teene and malice on the Christian Churches throughout his dominions.



The description of Soltania.
AT Soltania we safely arriued. This Citie is called by Ptolome, Heraclea; but by others Tigranocerta, be|cause of the wonderfull ruine of the huge buildings; and was in times past one of the royall seates of the Persian Kings, but it was much ruinated by the Scythian Tamer|lane, when with a world of people he ouerran these coun|tries: it retaineth now no shew of the ancient majestie, but onely in the Churches by him spared. This desolate towne is on euery side enuironed with huge mountaines, whose tops are to be seene a far off, alwaies couered with deep snowes, called in ancient time Nyphates, Caspius, Coa|thras Zagras, taking their beginning no doubt of Can|casus the father of mountaines; which ioyning one to ano|ther, some one way, some another, doe deuide most large and wide countries.
Before this towne lieth a very great and spacious plaine, memorable for that dreadful  horrible tempest which fell on Solyman the Turkish Emperour and his whole armie in the yeare 1534.A most horri|ble and ter|rible tempest. For whilest he lay incamped in these plaine fields with his Army, there fell downe such an horrible and cruell tempest from the mountains, as the like whereof the Persians had neuer seene before at that time of the yeare, being in the beginning of September; and that with abun|dance of rain, which froze so eagerly as it fel, that it seemed the depth of Winter had euen then of a sodaine beene come in: for such was the rage of the blustering windes, triuing with themselues, as if it had beene for victory, that they swept the snow from the toppe of those high moun|taines, and cast it downe into the plaines in such aboun|dance, that the Turkes lay as men buried aliue in the deepe snow, most part of their tents being ouerthrowne  beaten downe to the ground, with the violence of the tempest and weight of the snow, wherein a wonderfull number of sicke

souldiers and others of the baser sort which followed the campe perished, and many other were so benummed, some their hands, some their feete, that they lost the vse of them for euer: most part of their beasts which they vsed for car|riage, but specially their camels were frozen to death. Nei|ther was there any remedie to be found for so great mis|chiefes, by reason of the hellish darknesse of that tempe|stuous night, most of their fires being put out, by the ex|tremitie of the storme: which did not a little terrifie the superstitious Turkes, as a thing accounted of them omi|nous. Many of the Turkes vainely thought, that this hor|rible tempest was brought vpon them by the charmes and inchantments of the Persian Magitians; whereas it was vndoubtedly by the hand of God, which bringeth the proud deuises of Princes to nought.


The description of Casbin.
FRom Soltania we spent foure daies trauell to Casbin, passing by many villages, where we paid a Shaughee a peece to the Beg or gouernour of the village, not as a custome, but as a free gratity, and so entred into the ter|ritories of Casbin, a Citie very wealthy, by reason of the Kings Pallace,  the great concourse of merchants which resort thither. It was in ancient time called Arsacia as in Strabo; but now termed Casbin, which in the Persian lan|guage signifieth chastisement, or a place of punishment, because the kings were wont to banish or confine such per|sons, as for their offences and misdemeanours had deserued such chastisement. This Citie is seated in a goodly fertile plaine of three or foure daies iourney in length, furnished with two thousand villages, to serue the necessary vses thereof: but euill builded,  for the most part all of bricks not hardened with fire, but onely dried in the Sunne; as are most parts of the buildings of all Persia.
It is now one of the seates of the Persian Kings Em|pire,

which was translated by King Tamas, (this kings Grandfather) from Tauris, who built one goodly Seraglio for himselfe, and another for his women, and hath beene euer since continued by his successors, though the king that now raigneth, make most of his abode in Hispaan fourteene daies iourney farther towards the East.
There are three places in the Citie most of note: viz. the Kings Pallace, the Bassars, and the At-Maidan. The gate of the kings Pallace is built with stone of diuers colours, and verie curiously ennameled with gold: on the seeling within, is carued the warres of the Persian Kings, and the sundrie battels sought by them against the Turks and Tar|tars; the pauements of the roomes beneath, and chambers aboue are spread with most fine carpets, wouen and tessu|ted with silke and gold, all ensignes and monuments of the Persian greatnesse.
Bassars are cer|taine streetes of trafficke.There is likewise in this Citie sundrie Bassars, where, in some you may buy Shasses and Tulipants, and Indian cloth of wonderfull finenesse: in others silkes of all sorts, as Ve|uets, Damasks, cloth of Gold and Siluer: in others infinite furres, as Sables and Martine out of Muscouia, and Agiam furres brought from Corassan. In a word euery speech hath a seuerall science or trade, wherein is sold whatsoeuer is fit and necessary for the vse of man.
The At-Maidan, is the high speech or chiefe market place in this Citie; and is foure-square, containing in a cir|cuit verie neere a mile; and serues as a Bursse for all sorts of Merchants to meete on, and also for all others to sell what|soeuer commodities they possesse, so that in one place is selling of horses, mules and cammels; in another place car|pets, garments, and felts of all sorts, and in another all kind of fruits, as Muske-mellons, Anguries, Pomegranates, Pi|staches, Adams apples, Dates, Grapes, and Raisons dried in the Sun. In this place do sit daily twelue Sheraffes, that is, men to buy  sell Pearle, Diamonds, and other pretious stones, and to exchange gold  siluer, to turne Spanish dol+lers

to great aduantage into Persian coyne; and to change the great peeces of the Persian coyne, as Abbasses, Larines, and such like into certain brasse monies for the poore. They wil also lend vpon any pawne,  that with as great interest as our diuellish Brokers and Scriueners take in London.
Finally the strength of this Citie consisteth not in walles and bulwarkes, but in the souldiers that are continually maintained in and about this Citie; for out of Casbin, and the villages belonging vnto the same, are maintained twentie thousand souldiers on horsebacke, howsoeuer in this kings fathers time were leuied but twelue thou|sand.Ardouil the first place that re|ceiued the Persian super|stition.
Two places neere to this Citie are very remarkable; the one is the Citie Ardouil; the other Giland. Ardouil is a Citie foure daies iourney from Casbin, and two from Solta|nia. A Citie of great importance, where Alexander the great did keepe his Court, when he inuaded Persia. It is a towne much esteemed and regarded, by reason of the se|pulchers of the kings of Persia, which for the most part lie there intombed: and so is growne a place of their supersti|tious deuotion; as also because it was the first place which receiued the Persian sect, wherein Gi the first Authour thereof did reside and raigne; A sect or superstition very commodious to the Christian Commonwealth, because it hath bred great contentions and warre among the Mahu|metane nations, which before were so vnited together by Mahomets deuice, that they seemed to be more then friends and in league one with another.
The Author of this nouelty was as we said before,The Author  the Persian s|perstition. one Giuni, a man well descended among the Persians, who con|temning al worldly honour, rches,  pleasure, as meere va|nities  trifles, led such an austere kind of life with such co~|tinency  contempt of the world, as that the vulgar people began to haue the man in singular admiration for the opi|nion they had conceiud of his vpright life  rare vertues. The fame of thi new Prophet (as so he was accounted) was

growne so great in the Persian kingdome, that the people without number resorted out of all parts of Persia vnto the Citie Ardouil to see the man. And he the more to seduce the people,The Turks and Persians differ not about the interpretation of their law, but about the true successour of their great Prophet Ma|homet. being by nature inconstant and superstitious, began to perswade them, that the three first successours of Mahomet, were vniust and vnlawfull vsurpers of that dig|nitie, and that iust Aly, Mahomets sonne in law, onely ought to be named the lawfull successour: that he alone ought to be called vpon in their prayers for helpe, and that all honours should be giuen to him, and taken from A|bubacher, Omar, and Ottaman, as from persons that were vndoubtedly damned. Finally he taught them onely to re|ceiue the writings of Aly as of others most authenticall, to reiect Abuchacher, Omar, and Ottaman, with their wri|tings as most wicked  accused; who~ the Turks had euer, and yet do honour  worship as the true successors of their Prophet Mahomet, and his sincere interpreters, together with the aforesaid Aly,he new prai|r of the Per|ians. whom the Persians do only acknow+ledge: and therefore in their prayers doe commonly say, Cursed be Abubachar, Omar, and Ottaman, and God be fa|uorable to Aly, and well pleased with him. Which their dif|ference about the true successor of their Prophet, in whom was no ruth, hath bene, and yet is, one of the greatest causes of the mortall warres betweene the Turkes and the Persians: and not the diuers interpretation of their law (as many haue written) which among the Tuks and Per|sians is all one.
This superstition was first broached (as we said) by Giuni, afterwards maintained by Sederdin, after him by Giuni the second, then by Haider Erdebil; afterwards by Hysmael the great Sophy it increased wonderfully, that Persia see|med to enuie the glory of Cyrus and Darius. After the death of Hysmael it was maintained by King Tamas his sonne, who raigned with lesse felicitie, being much damni|fied by Solyman the Turkish Emperour: After Tamas suc|ceeded Aidere the second, who raigned but certaine daies

and houres; and then followed Hismael the brother of Aidere, who troubled all the Cities of his kingdome with manifold hurly-burlies: after him Mahomet surnamed Codibanda this kings father, more vnfortunate then all the rest: and lastly the king that now is, who by his valour hath so largely dilated the confines of his kingdome, that it seemeth he hath (as it were) founded it anew.



The description of HIRCANIA.
_THe other place neere to Casbin remarkable is the countrey of Gilan, in the Prouince of Hircania very famous in antique time. Sundry names are giuen vnto it by the Bar|barians; some call it Girgia or Corca, from a certaine Citie which stood in the same: others Straua from a part of this kingdome: others Messandra, as Mi|nado: Mercator calles it Diargument: and in ancient time Hircania, so much spoken of by the Poets for the huge woods, and fierce Tygers that abound there. Westward this kingdome bounds vpon Media: Eastward on Mar|giana: Southward on Parthia, and the Coronian moun|taines: and Northward on the Caspian Sea. The North part of this kingdome is ful of thick woods  shadowi gones wherein grow diuers sorts of trees, but specially Cdas, Beeches, and Oakes, a fit harbour and shelter for Tygers Panthes, and Pardies, which wilde beasts make the pas|sage in those places very dangerous: but neere to the Sea side it is full of pasture, and very delightfull by reason of the manifold sweete springs which issue out of the moun|taine neere adioyning. Many principall Cities are there in this countrey, as Bestan, Massandran, Pangiazer, Bachu and Gheilan Cities of such state and condition, as deserue to haue a Gouernour of the same dignitie,

that the Bassa is with the Turkes.
Bachu.Concerning Bachu, it is a verie ancient hauen-towne, very commodious for ships to harbour in, as also profitable to vent commodities, by reason that Ardouil, Tauris, E|res, Sumachia,Oyle springeth out of the ground. and Derbent ly not many daies from thence. Neere vnto this towne is a verie strange and wonderfull fountaine vnder ground, out of which there springeth and issueth a maruellous quantitie of blacke Oyle, which ser|ueth all the parts of Persia to burne in their houses; and they vsually carrie it all ouer the countrey, vpon Kine and Asses, whereof you shall oftentimes meete three or foure hundred in company.
Gheilan.Gheilan and the rest stand likewise altogether in traffick: Gheilan being but foure easie daies trauell from Casbin; and very neere vnto the Caspian Sea.The Caspian Sea. A Sea that is very commodious and profitable; being in length two hundred leagues, and in breadth an hundred and fiftie, without any issue to other Sea: to the East part of this Sea ioyneth the great desart countrey of the Tartars: to the West part, the country of the Circassians, the mountaine Caucasus: to the North the riuer Vlga, which hath seuentie mouthes or falles into the same: and to the South part ioyneth the countries of Media and Parthia. This Sea is fresh water in many places, and in other places, as salt as the maine O|cean. It hath many goodly riuers falling into it, as the great riuer Volga, called by the Tartars Edell, which runnes at the least two thousand miles in length: as also out of Sy|beria, Yaic and Yem, and out of the Periardian mountains Araxi, Cirus, Canac, and diuers others too long to write of. And though so many goodly riuers do discharge them|selues into it, yet it emptieth not it selfe, except it be vnder ground into the blacke Sea by Constantinople.
A trade might be planted by he Muscouian erchants.Now by the commodious site of the Sea, a very profi|table trade might be planted, being but seauen daies say|ling from Astracan to Gheilan: the gaines of which pas|sage is as I haue credibly heard say both of Persians and

Armenians fifty in the hundred, euen in meere Buttanosses. To further which commerce and trade Abas the Persian king hath diuers times of late sent sundry Ambassadors to the grand Duke of Moscouia; among other things, reque|sting of him,The barkes which must passe the Cas|pian sea must nt draw fiue foote water, because in di|uers places it is very shoald. that merchants might haue a safe conuoy, to transport their goods downe the riuer Volga into the Cas|pian Sea, and so to Gheilan; which he promised most faith|fully to performe, so fare as his power would extend. I know the voiage will be chargeable, yet the benefit will quite the charge, were the passage safe and secure down the riuer, and had we barks of our building but of fifty or three score tuns, which might by reason of the great store of tim|ber in those parts be easily builded.
The co~modities to be found at Gheilan Casbin are silks of all sorts of colors,The commo|dities of Persia both raw  wrought, and that in such quantity, that a merchant may bstow thirty or forty thou|sand pounds yearly, as also all maner spices  drugs, pearls diamonds, and rubies, likewise carpets of diuers sorts, with diuers other rich merchandizes, the prices of which I think not meet to set down, because of their ising  falling as the market goes.The commo|dities to be carried from England into Persia. In exchange of which co~modities, we are to carry thither tin  copper and brassel; as also casies for the common pople, broade cloath for the merchants,  bet|ter sort of people, blacke cloathes for womens garments; good chamlets  vluets died in graine, with purple co|lours and fine reds; cloath of gold and tissue, veluets, imbroi|dered with gold; fine holland cloath for the king and Sul|tanes, dags and pistols, complete harnesses, targets of steele, shirts of male, stonebowes, brushes and such like.
The only colors of cloth which are to be sent,The colours of cloath to be sent into Per|sia. are skarlets, violets in graine; fine reds, blacks, brown blewes, London russets, taunies, Lion colors, faire liuely greens,  the like. I am perswaded that any honest factor residing in Casbin may vent a thousand cloathes yearly, wherof the Venetians haue good experience. But to leaue this noble countrey of Hircania, we will againe come to Casbin a principall Citie in Media, where we stayed fifteene daies.
From Casbin we set forwards to the great and populous Citie of Hispaan, lodging euery night eyther in a Persian village, or in a faire Caine built of stone, where we found all kinde of prouision necessarie for our selues and beastes trauailing sixe or seauen in a company: company suffici|ent, by reason of the great peace and tranquilitie, which the Persians liue in aboue the Turkes; and so hauing spent sixe daies, wee arriued at Com a verie ancient Citie.
The Citie Com once twice as big as Constan|tinople.This Citie is called by Ptolomie, Guriana, and was so great in times past, that the inhabitants affirmed vnto vs, that when it was in it first flourishing estate, it was twice as bigge as Constantinople; but it was much ruinated by Tamerlane, and euer since hath lien in the dust without repaire, Cassan carrying away the trade of merchandize from her, which was once the Mistresse and Ladie there|of. It is well seated for water and all other necessaries, ha|uing a spacious riuer running by it, with a stone bridge ouer the same: the which we no sooner passed, but wee entred into the bounds of Parthia; a kingdome once fa|mous, but now so mingled with Persia, that the verie name of Parthia is quite extinguished among them.


The description of PARTHIA.
_THis Prouince in antique writers is much renowmed: Nigro doth call it Corassan, and would haue the metropoliticall Ci|tie to be Charras, vnder which he would comprehend the Zagathean Tartars, but herein he is much deceiued, for Coras|san and the Zagathean Tartars is very nigh two moneths trauell from Hispaan, which is the chiefe and principall Citie of Parthia as shall be shewed in due time and place.

Mercator and Minadoi doe call it Arach: and Alphon|sus Hadrianus, Iex. The bounds of this Prouince East|ward is on Aria: Southward on the great desart of Cara|mania: Westward on Media: and Northward on Hirca|nia. The North part is very woody, and compassed about with huge mountaines; uery plaine is inclosed with a seuerall pale of high hils belonging to e same: though the climate heere be subiect to much heate, yet doth the countrie produce all sorts of delicate fruits (only Oliues ex|cepted) being watered with many prettie riuers which flow from the mountaines.
The natiue people were at the first a most base,The Parthians were at the first a most ser|uile and base people. vile, and obscure people, diuen out of the cold countries of Scythia at that time, when the Assirians and Medes flourshed, and they continued so a long time after, when the Persians gai|ned the monarchy from the Medes, yea and after Alex|ander had conquered Persia, they were so rude and bar|barous, that no Macedonian Prince would take vpon him to be king of Parthia. But in processe of time they became very valiant, and great souldiers: for after they serued in the warres one while vnder Eumenes, another while vnder An|tigonus, and after vnder Selucius Nicanor, and then vnder Antiochus, commaunders of great account, they grew so famous by their seruice, that finding themselues strong enough, they made head against Antiochus, and re|uolted from him, making choyse of a king among them|selues, who in short time brought such renowne to the Par|thians, as that they enlaged their confines, and augmented their territories in such mnner, that Parthia (once des|pised and contemned of the Mcedonians) within the raigne of eight kings became sole Lady  comaundresse ouer all the countries from the mountaine Caucasus to th riuer Emphrates: subdoing Persia, Media, and Assiria, sacking and dspoyling the great and weathie Citie of Ba|bylon, in so much that their fame spread vnto Rome, a Ci|tie that could neuer abide any kingdome or countrey to

flourish but it selfe. These were they that gaue the great ouerthrow to rich Crassus of Rome, who minding more his gold, then the guiding of his armie, was slaine himselfe and many thousand Romanes, the Parthians with exprobration of his thirst after money powred moulten gold into his mouth after he was dead. Against these great Lucullus fought many battels, and the Romanes were ne|uer able to bring them quite into subiection, vntill Au|gustus Caesar raigned.
I omit for breuitie sake to write anything of Arsaces, the first king of Parthia, whom the Persians loued so aliue, that they honoured him being dead, surnaming alwaies af|ter him the kings of Parthia, Arsaces, with no lesse honor and glory, then the Caesars of Rome, the Pharhoes and Pto|lomees of Egypt: or of Herodes the ninth king of Parthia, who so much preuailed against the Romans or of Phraherts their tenth and last king, who vnnaturally killed his aged father, and put thirtie of his brethren to death, and that the Parthians might haue no man left to to be nominated king after him, commaunded his owne sonne to be put to death likewise: or lastly how Augustus Caesar by his clemency,  iustice drew this bloody tyrant to submit himselfe and his kingdom vnto the Roman Monarchy, ending that without warre, which others could not do with warres, commaun|ding more with a word, then Antonius who sought it with blowes, or Crassus that sought it with his death. But leauing these matters of antiquity, we return where we left.

The description of Cassan.
AFter two daies trauell from Com, we arriued at Cas|san a principall Citie in Parthia; very famous and rich howsoeuer Ortelius, and others make no mention of it. This Citie is seated in a goodly plaine, and because it hath no mountaines neere it, but within a daies iourney the heate is verie fastidious, as great almost as it is in Ormuz:

the spring and haruest is sooner in this climate, then in any other pts of the Persin dominions. It wanteth neither fountaines, springs, nor gardens, but aboundeth with all necessaries whatoeuer: consisting altogether in merchan|dize, and the best trade of all the land is there, being great|ly frequented with all sorts of merchants, especially out of India. The people are very industrious and curious in all sciences, but specially in weauing girdles, and hashes, in making Veluets, Sattans, Damasks, very good Ozmuze|nes, and Persian carpets of a wonderfull finenesse; in a word it is the very Magazeen and warehouse of all the Persian Cities for these stuffes,
Here may you buy all manner of drugs and spices, and Turkasses with store of Pearle, Damonds, and Rubies; as also all sots of silkes as well wrought as raw. I am per|swaded that in one yeare there is more silke brought into Cassan, then is of broad cloath brought into the Citie of London.Ciuill and good gouern|ment. This Citie is much to be commended for the ciuill and good gouernment, which is there vsed. An idle person is not permitted to liue among them: the child that is but sixe yeare old is set to lbour: no ill ule, disorder, or riot is there suffered. Fr they haue a law among them, (resem|bling the Egyptian law which Diodorus mentioneth) wher|by euery person is compelled to giue his name to the Ma|gistrates, therewith declaring what kinde of life he liketh, how he liueth, and what art he exerciseth. And if any doe tell vntruly is either well beaten on the feete, or imploied in publike slaury.The Persian law against idlenesse. The greatest annoyance that this Citie is infesed withall, is the aboundance  multitude of black Scorpions, of an exceeding greatnesse, which many times doe much harme, if a speciall care be not had of them. At this Citie Master Iohn Mildenall and my selfe parted com|pany; he trauelling to Labor in the Est Indies; and my selfe setting forwards to the great Citie of Hispaan, three daies trauell distant from Cassan.



The description of Hispaan.
THis Citie as some affirme was built by Arsaces the first King of Parthia, being then called Dara. But whether so or no, is not much mteriall. Sure it is, that in times past it was called Ecatompolis, the Citie of a hun|dred gates: and well it may keepe that name still since the huge walles of the same containe in circuit an easie daies iourney on horse backe, and is become the greatest Citie in all the Persian dominions: which is so much the more magnified and made populous; by reason of the kings re|iance therein. For there is the supreme place of iustice; all matters of importance haue recourse to this place; all Ambassadours of Princes, and Agents of Cities, make their repaire thither; and such as aspire and thirst after of|fices and preferments runne thither amaine with emulation and disdaine at others: and in a word thither are brought the reuenewes that appertaine to the crowne, and there are they disposed out againe. By all which meanes this Citie hath wonderfully increased and appopulated it selfe with|in these fiue and twentie yeares.
Very strong is this Citie by situation, compassed about with a very great wall, and watered with deepe channels of running springs, conueighed into it, from a part of the Coronian mountaines, which are as a wal inaccessible about it. sort of . On the North side is erected a strong Fort or Castle, be|ing compassed about with a wall of a thousand and seauen hundred yards, and in the midst thereof is built a tower or rather a strong keepe, sundrie chambers and lodgings therein, but stored with little Ordonance. On the West side of this Citie standeth two Seraglios, kings . the one for the King, the other for his women; Pallaces of great state and magnificence, farre exceeding all other proud buil|dings of this Citie: the walles glister with red marble and pargeting of diuers colous, yea all the Pallace is paued

with checher and tesseled worke, and on the same is spread carpets wrought with silke and Gold: the windowes f Alablaster, white marble, and much other spotted marble; the postes and wickets of massie Iuory checkred with gli|stering blacke bony, so curiously wrought in winding knots, as may easier stay, ten satisfie the eyes of the won|dring beholder.
Neere vnto this Pallace,The kings garden. is a garden very spacious and large, all flourishig ad batiull, replenished with a thousand sundry kinds of grafts, rees, and sweete smelling plants, among whih the illy, the Hyacinth, the Gilly|flower, the Rose, the Violet, the flower-gentle, and a thou|sand other odoriferous flowers doe yeld a most pleasant and delightfull sigt to all beholders. There are a thou|sand fountaines, and a thousand brookes; among them all, as the father of them all, a prettie riuer, which with his mild course and delightome noise doth deuide the garden from the Kings Pallace; neither is this garden so straitly lookt vnto, but that both the kings souldiers and Citizens, may and doe at their pleasures oftentimes on horse backe re|paire thither to recreate themselues in the shadowes and walkes of those greenes.
And as a gard for the gate of this sumptuous Pallace,The gard of the kings Pal|lace. the king keepeth certaine orders of souldiers: wherof the most noble and the greatest in number are called Churchi, which are as it were the kings Pensioners, being eight thousand in number, all of them deuided vnder seuerall Captaines: which Captaines doe yeeld obedience to the generall Captaine called Churchi-Bassa, a man alwaies of great authoity. Next vnto this order is another called E|sahul, to the number of a thousand, distinguished also vn|der particular Captaines, and the chiefe Captaine is called Esahul-Bassa. All these are maintained by certaine townes and villages, which are feudataries to the crowne of Per|sia; and they receiue at certaine times of the kings armour, horses, apparrell, and tents, euery one as he is in place and

degree: with this strong garrison is the King daily atten|ded vpon, and maintaineth the Maiestie of his Court, es|pecially when he rideth in prograce.
The order of the Persian dignities in Hispaan.And for the gouernment of this Citie, there is besides the King and the Prince twelue Sultanes, but three especi|ally are appointed by the King, for the generall gouerne|ment of the whole Empire, hauing their seuerall di|stinct charges.The Sultanes. One hath the care of all martiall affaires throughout the kingdome: and the other two receiue all the reuenewes, keeping a iust account thereof, which two we may call Treasurers.The Treasu|rers. The geat Chancellours. Next vnto these are the Mor|dari two great Chancellors, whose office is to write all orders, commaundements, and letters concerning the gouernment of the kingdome: one of them keepeth the Seale, and the other the Pen. Besides these there are two Caddi,The Caddi or Judges. that is two Iudges, who make answere and giue sentence only in matters of controuersie and ciuill quar|rels; but as touching criminall causes, they haue no fur|ther authority, then to frame examinations of witnesses, and to make declaration thereof, which they call the Sygil, and this Sygil they deliuer vp into the hands of the Sulan, that is either gouernour of the Citie, or else of the Empire, and he causeth execution to be done according to custome. And looke as Hispaan is gouerned, so other Cities haue the selfe same Magistrates, all being at the kings disposition and appointment.
The Concerning the Church gouernment, there is in this Ci|tie, first the chiefe of the law whom they call the Mustaed|dini, a wicked and prophane Priest: and in the other sub|iect Cities are certaine peculiar heads, obedient to this chiefe Priest, who are not chosen and displaced at his plea|sure, as the popish Bishops are by the Pope, but by the king himselfe, who is not onely a King, but a Priest, as Maho|met and Aly were. But to auoid trouble, the King gran|teth that fauour, and putteth ouer that burden from him|selfe vnto others, to whose iudgement, he also referreth

himselfe, whensoeuer any consultation is touching their law or prophane superstition.The Califs. Vnder this great Priest are Califes, and these doe daily execute seruice in the Mos|chees or Temples. The chiefe of these Califes is he that put|teth the horne vpon the Kings head, when he is first inthro|nized. A ceremony once performed in Cafe neere Babylon, but since Solyman the Turkish Emperor won Assiria from the Persian, it hath beene sometimes performed in Casbin, and sometimes in Hispaan.The nature of the Persians.
Finally the inhabitants of this City do much resemble the ancie~t Parthians in diuers things, but specially in their con|tinuall riding. They ride on horseback for the most part, on horsback they fight with the enemy they execute all affairs as wl publike as priuat on horsebacke, they go from place to place on horseback, they buy and sell, and on horsebacke they conferre  talke with one another; and the difference betweene the Gntleman and the slaue is, that the slaue neuer rideth, nor the Gentleman neuer goeth on foote.
Besides the nature of this people is arrogant, seditious, de|ceitfull, and very vnquiet, but that the fiercenesse of their nature is much restrained by the kings seuere gouerne|ment.
To sensuality they are much inclined,The Persians giun to sen|sualitie. hauing three sorts of women, as they terme them, viz. honest women, halfe honest women and courtezans; and yet they chastice no of|fence with like extremity as adultery, and that as well in the halfe honest woman, as in the honest.
Last of all they are full of craftie stratagems, and are breakers of their promise (a vice that is very inbred in all Barbarians.The Persians verie incon|stant.) Not content with any mans gouernement long: and louers of nouelties. For testimonie whereof wee may auouch those ancient poysonings  wicked trea|cheries which were plotted not onely by subiectes against their soueraignes,The impietie of the sons of Artaxerxes the Persian king. but also by children against their natu|rall parents, for the name of father were in so small esti|mation with those fiftie sons of Artaxerxes, that with one

consent, they all conspired to murther him. The which monstrous impietie euer since hath beene practised in this nation, sometimes the father with the children sometimes the children with the father, and sometimes the children with one another. For instance whereof we may take A|bas that now reigneth, who being gouernour of Heri whilst his father raigned, did not onely conspire to haue his eldest brother Emirhamze, the hopefullest Prince that euer was in Persia, to be betraied into the hands of the Turkish generall in the yeare 1586, but also by force of money and gifts, perswaded one of his owne Eunuches to kill him;The Persian Prince slaine by one of his own Eunuchs. who was no sooner corrupted, put his treason in practice, and vpon a sodaine in the night time, as he slept on his pallet, stroke him through his bodie with a launce: and so the most resplendent and bright shining Lampe that euer was in Persia, was vtterly extinguished. And not con|tent with this impietie towards his brother, did shortly after condescend, (as the full report goeth) to haue his a|ged father Mahomet surnamed Codibanda poysoned with|out either regard of his fatherly maiestie,The impiety of Abas King of Persia. or reuerence to age, or naturall pietie, that so he might ascend into the kingdome. Infinite also are the calamities, which he hath brought (since he came to the crowne) on the houses of the ancient Persian Nobilitie.
Notwithstanding howsoeuer by the shedding of much bloud he was saluted King, vpon the death of his father, yet hath he so carried the matter, that now he is exceedingly beloued and honoured of his subiects, in so much that when they will confirme any thing by solemne oathes they will sweare by the head of Abas the king, and when they wish well to any man, they vsually say, King Abas grant thee they desire.
The descrip|ion of the Persian king.This Prince is verie absolute both in perfection of his bodie, and his minde, (but that he is in religion a profes|sed Mahumatine) excellently composed in the one, and honourablie disposed in the other. Of an indifferent sta|ture,

neither to high, nor to low. His countenance ve|rie sterne, his eyes fierce and piercing, his colour swaffy, his mustachees on his vpper lip long, with his beard cut close to his chinne, expressing his martiall disposition, and exorable nature, that at the first a man would thinke to haue nothing in him, but mischiefe and crueltie. And yet he is of nature courteous, and affable, easie to be seene and spoken withall: his manner is to dine openly in the company of his greatest courtiers, delighting much in hawking and hunting accompanied with his nobilitie, and the Ambassadors of forraine Princes. He will often|times runne, leape, and proue masteries with his chiefe courtiers, being himselfe a most excellent horseman and cunning archer.
Vually euery morning he visiteth his stables of great horses,The Persian horses very good. and according to an old custome of the Persian kings, the souldiers of his court (before mentioned) doe receiue horses at his hands, as he is in place and degree. And these their horses are of singular vertue, equall with those of the old time, which (as Strabo writeth) were accustomed to be fed and brought vp in Armeniae for the kings vse. They are wonderfull swift in course, fierce in battell, long breathed and very docible: when they are vnsadled, thy are gentle and milde, but when they are ar|med, they are warlike, hardie, and manageable, euen at the pleasure of the rider. And I haue seene of them sold for a thousand, and somtimes a thousand and sixe hundred duckates a peece.
After he hath viewed his horses,The weapons of the Persian souldiers. he passeth into his Ar|mory, certaine buildings neere vnto his Pallace, where are made very strong Curiasses, or Corselets, headpeeces  tar|gets, most of them able to keepe out the shot of an ar|quebusier, and much more to daunt the force of a dart. Heere also the king furnisheth his souldiers, not only with Curiasses, headpeeces, and targets; but with bowes and arrowes, pouldrones, and gantlets, and with launces made

of good ash, armed at both ends; with Scimatars  shirts of maile, most finely  soundly tempered, wherewith both themselues and their horses are defended in time of warre.
The kings ex|ercises in the A-maidan.By this time hauing spent most of the forenoone, he re|turneth againe into his pallace, and there remains till three of the clocke in the afternoone, at which time he makes his entry into the A-Maidan, which is the great market place or high streete of Hispaan: round about this place are erected certaine high scaffolds, where the multitude do sit to behold the warlike exercises performed by the King and his courtiers, as their running and leaping, their shoo|ting with bowes and arrowes, at a marke both aboue and beneath, their playing at tennis, all which they performe on horsebacke with diuers mo too long to write of. In this place also is to be seene seuerall times in the yeare, the pleasant sight of fireworks, of banquets, of musickes, of wrastlings, and of whatsoeuer triumphes else is there to be shewed, for the declaration of the ioy of this people.
Besides, the King very often in this place, in the presence of the Princes and Peeres of the Realme, will giue iudge|ment in diuers causes: much like vnto the ancient kings of France, who vsed ordinarily to heare the complaints of their subiects; but of late yeares the more the pitie, they haue committed this businesse vnto the consciences of sub|ordinate officers, hearing by other mens eares, and seeing by other mens eyes, well nigh concerning all their affaires: which course the Persian King holdeth neither good nor co~fortable for the people, nor yet by any means to further Iustice. And certainly, where such carelesnes doth enter into the maiesty of kings, the estate of the Realme cannot chuse but be weakned,  the maiesty royal imbased, so that in the end (it might be shewed) the people haue not refused to rise against the person of the king,  somtimes to murder him.
To be briefe in the execution of iustice he is very seuere, a well to the greatest as to the meanest, not sparing (as might be shewed) to hang vp his chiefe Cuddi or Iudges,

when he shal perceiue how that vpon bribes  fauour they delay the suits of his subiects,The Persian kings corre|ction of Iud|ges. Herodotus. against the clere  manifest truth: imitating herein Cambises who co~manded Sisamnes kin for giuing an vniust sentence, to be flead off, and coue|red the iudgement seat threwith, appointing also his son to iudge in his place, to the end that by sight thereof, all o|ther iudges might be warned, to be iust and vpright. And I haue seene him many times alight from his horse, onely to doe iustice to a poore bodie. Besides he punisheth theft  manslaughter so seuerely, that in an age a man shall not heare eyther of the one or of the other; which kind of se|uerity were very needfull for some parts of Christendome, I will not say for England though we haue faulted therein) but for France especially;See Les ombres des defuncts sieurs de Ville|mer  de Fon|taines. pag. 46. where within ten years sixe thou|sand gentlemen haue bene slaine, as it appears by the kings pardons. So that since king Abas came vnto the crowne, ful twenty yeares  vpwards, the Persian Empire hath flo|rished in sacred and redoubted laws, the people demeaning themselues after the best manner they can, aboundance of collections coming plentifully in, the rents of his chamber were increased more then euer they were in his Grandfa|ther Tamas his time, armes, artes, and sciences doe won|derfully prosper, and are very highly esteemed.
To this great Monarch,Sir Anthony Sherleys arriua in Persia. came Sir Anthony Sherley Knight, with sixe and twentie followers, all gallantly mounted and richly furnished; whose entertinment was so great, that the Persians did admire, that the king should vouchsafe such high fauour to a meere stranger without desert or tri|all of his worth. Of whose bounty, the world may iudge, since within three daies after his first arriuall, the king sent him fortie horses, furnished with saddles, and very rich trappings; foure of them fit for the proper vse of any Prince, twelue Cammels for carriage, together with sixe Mules, foure and twentie carpets, most of them rich and faire, three tents or pauilions, with all other necessaries of house, and lastly sixe men laden with siluer.
Sundry times Sir Anthonie had audience of the king, wherein he declared first with what perfidious dealing,Sir Anthony Sherleys speech vnto the King. and with what greedinesse and pride the Turkish Emperours haue alwaies set vpon the Christians, and that being dis|charged of the warre with them, he would of all likeli|hood set vpon the Persians, hauing the selfe same quarrell vnto the Persians, that he hath vnto the Christians: viz. an ardent and insatiable desire of soueraignty: a suffici|ent motiue for the greedie Turke to repute euery king, the richer that he is, the more his enemie. After that he set forth to the full the prowesse of the Christians, the won|derfull preparation, that they could make both at Sea and land, perswading the king with all his power to inuade the Turke, then altogether busied in the warres of Hun|garie, and to recouer againe such parts of his kingdome as his predecessors had lost. Warres he said were more hap|pily managed abroad then at home: that since his maiestie alone is able to withstand the Turkes whole force and power, he needed not now to doubt of the most prospe|rous successe, the Christian Princes (by his meanes) ioy|ning with him.
He told the King further, that he was much vnmindfull of his former losses and wrongs, if he thought he ioyned an assured peace, which he should finde to be nothing else but a deferring of one war vnto more cruel times: and that the Turke if he should ouerrunne Hungary, would forth|with turne his victorious armes vpon him and his king|dome: the end of one warre (as he said) was but the begin|ning of another; and that the Turkish Empire could ne|uer stay in one state; and it were good that his highnesse should obserue not the Turkes words but his deeds; and how the Othoman Emperors according to the opportuni|tie of the time, haue vsed by turnes, sometimes force, sometimes fraude, as best serued their purposes.
He wished also the king, that at length this his deceit might manifest it selfe vnto the world; and though in for|mer

times, there were sometimes wanting will, and some|times occasion to vnite their forces, yet now he hoped that by an imployment from his Maiestie to the Christian Prin|ces, that they would combine themselues for their common good against the common enemie; and that it concerned no lesse his Highnes, then the Christians to haue the power of the great Turke abated:  this taking vp of armes should be for the good of his Maiesty, howsoeuer the warre should fall out, if wel, he should then recouer what his predecessors before had lost, with much more that was the Turkes: If o|therwise yet by voluntarie entering into armes to counte|nance himselfe, and to giue the Great Turke occasion to thinke that he feared him not, which was (as hee said) the onely way to preserue the common safetie.
Many such speeches passed from Sir Anthony, but most of the chiefe counsellours were obstinately bent against it at the first;Sir Anthonie Sherley sent b the Persian King to eight seuerall Prin|ces. howbeit the King being stil animated by his forci|ble perswasions, and his Generall, Oliuer-chan a Georgian Christian furthering the busines in the end with the rest of his Councell consented thereto; and so Sir Anthony within three moneths after his first arriuall, was dispatched to these seuerall Princes: viz. to Queene Elizabeth of famous me|morie; to King Iames our dread Soueraigne; to the French King, to the Emperour, the Pope, the King of Spaine, the Se|nate of Venice, and the Duke of Florence, with Letters of credence, and very rich and bountifull presents; to conclude a generall peace among themselues, and betweene the Per|sian and our Christian world.
The chiefe things that the Persian requested of the Chri|stians was;The deman of the Persia King. that they would send him by the way of Syria, men skilfull in the casting of great Ordinance, an Engine once hated of the Persians, who held it a sinne and shame to exercise so cruell a weapon against mankind: yet nowe knowing by wofull experience, of what moment it is in a set battell, the King did specially require such men as were skilfull therein, hauing matter enough within his Domini|ons whereof to cast them: that they with an armie by land,  Turke promising

in the meane time himselfe to fill Asia the lesse with his ar|mie, and that if they would be in the field three moneths, he would be sixe monethes:  if the Christian Princes would bring an hundred thousand fighting men into the field, hee would bring two hundred thausand, and so they should giue vnto themselues a faire occasion to recouer both by land  sea, all such places as they had before lost, either in Hungari|a, or vpon coast of Peloponesus and Grecia.
Master Robert herley left as  pledge for Sir Anthonies eturne out of Christiandom.But how well Sir Anthony behaued himselfe in so waighty a negotiatio~, I leaue to the world to iudge of: sure I am that for his fidelitie therein, hee left his brother Master obert Sherley a worthy gentleman as a pledge for his returne out of Christendome, accompanied with fiue English men, viz. honest Captaine Powell, Iohn Ward, Iohn Parrot who after|wards died in Lahor, being in Master Mildenals company; one Brookes who is gone for the East Indies; and an English gunner, whose name I doe not well remember, who was slaine by an Italian in the way to Corassan. All these at the first were very kindly intreated by the King, and receiued large allowance; but after two yeares were fully expired, and no newes of that great and important Ambassie; and the King perceiued that Mahomet the great Turke beganne now to haue him in iealousie, and that the whole warre was like to lie vppon his owne necke, without any helpe from the Christians, he began to frowne on the English, notwith|standing Master Sherley through his good desert, soone gained the Kings gracious fauour againe. And as euident signes thereof obtained of the King freedome of conscience for all Christians throughout his Dominions: allowing also his house, to be the onely harbour and receite for all poore Christians that trauaile into those parts. And farther, the King to manifest his loue, gaue him out of his Seraglion in Marriage, a Cirassian Lady of great esteeme and regard. But that hee should haue a child in Persia, and that the King (a professed enemie to the Name of our blessed Sauiour) should bee the God-father; this certainely is more fitte for a Stage, for the common people to wonder at, then

for any mans priuate studies.
Notwithstanding, if we do rightly consider on the one side, the great power  preparation, that the Persian is able to make against the great Turke: and on the other side the miserable captiuity of many thousands of poore Christians that are subiect vnto the Turkish tyranny, we cannot denie but that both the Embasseies of Sir Anthony Sherley,  also of M. Robert his brother are of great importance,  that a combinatio~ of so great forces together would soone haue deliuered many poore Christia~s of their miseries, the world of it ignominy,  mankind of that monster of Turkish ty|ranny, that hath too long raigned  laid the earth desolate.
As for the first,The great power that the Persian king is able to make against the Turke. the strength of the Persian consisteth now in three kinds of soldiers: the first are the soldiers of his court, to the number of nine thousand, as we said before. The second kinde are such, who by custome and duty are bound to serue him in his wars,  these be his ancient gen|tlemen of hs country, who hold land  possessions desce~|ded vnto them from their ancestors, or holden by the gift of the king; these are sent for in time of wars,  are of duty bound to performe such like seruice, as the gentry of Italy, France, Spain do vnto their Soueraigns: these do amount (since Abas came to the crowne) very nigh to forty thou|sand, most of them come well armed, the rest content them|selues with headpeeces  Iacks, and vse for their weapons either horsmen staues or bowes, which they can most cun|ningly handle, discharging their arrowes also, very neere vnto that they ayme at, either forward or backward. The third sort are such as are sent vnto him from the Princes and neighbours his confederates: and these are commonly sent from the Princes of Iberia, Albania, and the countries bordering vpon Media and Armenia: who being halfe Christians, beare a mortall hatred against the Turke.
Besides the King hath vnder his dominions,The contrie subiect to Per|sia. these great  famous cou~tries, Seruania, otherwise called Atropatia,  some part of Georgia, these countries since the yeelding vp

of Tauris, haue voluntarily yeelded vp themselues vnder his protection; Besides Media the great, Gheilan or Gely, Massandran or Hircania: Parthia, Aria, Candhar, Heri, Corassn, Farsi, or Persia with the Caramanian desert, as also the Kingdome of Lar, which frontiers on Ormuz: Prouinces so great and large, that in ancient times were able with their multitudes to couer the face of the earth, and to drinke the iers drie. And to make himselfe more strong, within the bowels of his kingdome, he hath sub|dued the Turcoman nation, that were rebellious in his fa|thers time; as also he hath ruinated the houses of most of his ancient nobilitie; as of late Amet-chan Lord of Ghei|lan, Rustn Mrze the King of Candahar, Emir-Miran the ord of Iest, and Ebrain-chan the gouernour of Lar, who would neuer in his fathers time Mahomet-Codibanda send in their aide against the cruell enmies f their com|mon liberty, but impeach and molest their soueraigne, as much as they could, leauing many times the poore King to escape with his life. But now the King hath drawne all the aforementioned prouinces into his owne possssion; and is able to carry all his force clere without interruption, which at the least may be two hundred thousand strong and better.
The Perss bette souldi|ers then te Turkes.And for his souldiers they are for the most par very va|lorous and noble, which bing compared with the Turish people (who fo the most par are very scall, of vile race) are by good right very highly to be esteemed. For the na|ked Turkish horse-man is not to be compared with the Persian mn at ames; who comes into the field armed with a strong Cuiras, a sure head peece, and a good target: whereas the Turkish Europeian hosmen, altogether na|ked, vse only a square or crooked buckler, wherewith they doe scarcely couer themselues: and the Asian horsemen, bucklers mae of soft reeds, wound round, and couered with some kinde of silke. Againe, the Persian horseman, weareth his poudrons and gantlets, and beareth a staffe of

good Ash, armed at both ends, fighting with them as oc|casion serueth at the staffe, after the manner of the Numi|dans, and with doubling and redoubling their often thrust from on high, doe easily wound or kill the vnarmed Turks with their horses: whereas the Turksh horseman, af|ter the manner of the Grecians doe couch their staues in their rest, and so that the first course most commonly break the same, being made of light and brittle fire, and so presently come to their scimaars or horseman mace, being in all other things farre inferiour to the Persian man at armes. And for the Turkish archers on horsebacke, they are in no respct to be compared with the Persians, who are well mounted and surely amed, vsing both greater and stronger bowes, and shoote more deadly arrowes, making small account of the Turkes. So that all things well consiered, the Persian is now able to deale in field with the great Turke, hauing both numbers of souldiers, good store of shot, and other warlike furniture, as also (which is the chiefest stay of a state) obedience of his sub|iects. And verily when Persia was at the weakest, had not the Turkish Emperours Selymus, Solyman, and Amurat, beene allured either by treason, rebellion, or intestine dis|cordes, they would neuer haue taken that warre in hand. And so much of the Persians forces.
And as for the miserable thraldome that the poore Chri|stians doe endure vnder the Turkish tyranny,The miserable thraldome of the Christians vnder the Turkish ty|ranny. we (thanks be giuen vnto God) in these Northerne parts of the world may behold with safety, but not without pitie, when we rightly consider, how that the people among whom our Sauiour himselfe conuersed, at what time his beautifull steps honoured this world, with those Churches in Grecia, which his Apostles so industriously planted so carefully vi|sited, so tenderly cherished, instructed, and confirmed by so many peculiar Epistles, and for whom they sent vp so many seruent prayers, are now become a cage of vn|cleane birds: filthy spirits doe possesse them. The Turke

with his Curaam, and Mahomet with his Alcoran, are Lords of these places. So that now the Grecians haue lost their liberty, (which their ancestors had many times be|fore, to their immortall praise, worthily defended against the greatest Monarches of the world) and are now so de|generate, by the meanes of the Turkish oppression, that in all Grecia is hardly to be found any small remembrance of the ancient glory thereof: Insomuch that whereas they were wont to account all other Natio~s barbarous in com|parison of themselues, they are now become no lesse barba|rous then those rude nations whom they before skorned.
Infinite are the miseries, which they from time to time haue endured vnder the Turkish tyrants; and so great hath beene the fury of that barbarous Nation, that no tongue is able to expresse, or pen descibe. For what tongue is able to expresse the miseries that the poore Greekes in|dured, when the imperiall Citie of Constantinople was ta|ken and spoiled by Mahomet the great in the yeare 1453. when the cruell tyrant could not content himselfe with the spoile and riches of that faire Citie;The Gecian Nobility put to death in the presence of the great Turke, whilst he sat feasting with his Bas|saes. but caused also, as he sate feasting with his Bassaes and great commaunders most of the chiefe Christian Captaines, both men and women (of whom many were of the Emperors line and race) to be in his presence put to death: deming his feast much more stately and magnificent, by such effusion of Christia~ bloud.
The miseries of the Con|stantinopoli|tanes.There might a man haue seene the poore Christian cap|tiues driuen vp and downe, by the mercilesse soldiers, as if they had beene droues of cattell or flocks of sheepe. It would haue pittied any strong heart, to haue seene the noble Gentlewomen and great Ladies, with heir beauti|full children, who flowed in all worldly wealth and plea|sure, to become the poore  miserable bondslaues of most base and contemptible rascals, who were so far  shew|ing them any pity, as that they deligted in nothing more then to heape more  more misery vpon them, making no more reckoning of them then of dogs. There might the Pa|rents see the wofull misery of their beloued children,  the

childre~ of the parents, the husband might see the shameful abuse of his wife,  the wife of her husba~d,  generally one friend of another: yea such was their malice to the Christian faith, that they co~uerted the temple of Sophia, built for God to be honored in, into a stable for their horses, making it a place for the executio~ of their abhominable  vnspeakable filthinesse: yea the image of the crucifixe they also tooke down,  put a Turks cap vpo~ the head therof,  so set it vp  shot at it with their arrowes,  afterwards in great deri|sion carried it about in their campe, as it had beene in pro|cession, with drums playing before it, rayling  spitting at it,  calling it the God of the Christians, which I note not so much done in contempt of the images, as in despight of Christ  the Christia~ religion. Neither haue they commit|ted these outrages  monstrous cruelties in Grecia alone, but in other parts of Christendom also: as Italy hath sundry times tasted of their cruell incursions  bloudy inuasions.The countries which (besides Grecia) that groane vnder the Turkish slauery. Besides Seruia Bulgaria, Transiluania, Moldauia, Vala|chia do groane vnder the yoke of Trukish tyranny: what should I write of Hungaria that royall kingdome, since in the raigne of one Turkish Emperour (I meane Solyman the magnificent) the number of those which were slaine, and caried nto miserable captiuity were welnigh two hundred thousand Hungaria~s. So spoiled  harried in this kingdom by the Turks that it may welbreed an astonishme~t not only to the neighbor countries adioyning, but to others further remote. So that to wind vp all in a word, there i now to be seene in these Christia~ countries, which the great Turke possesseth, nothing but triumphs ouer Christ,  skorners of his religion: insolencies and violences against the profes|sors: extortions and oppressions vpon their goods: ra|pines and murderings vpon the very soules of their chil|dren, a case to be wailed with teares of bloud by all Christia~ harts that know it: hearing the onely anchor  stay of thir soules (our blessed Sauiour) daily derided  blasphemed by the pride of the Turks. Indeed it were a small thing, if the Turks extorsio~s were only on their goods  labors, or if the

bodies and liues of those poore Christians, were onely wa|sted and worne out in his workes and slaueries, it might be suffered, for goods are transitory, and death the end of all wordly miseries.
A tribute of soules paide yearly by the Christians to Mahomet that lying ProphetBut to be forced (as those poore countries are) to pay a tribute also of soules to wicked Mahomet, to haue their dearest children both sonnes and daughters snatcht out of their parents bosomes to be brought vp in his impious abhominations,  to be imploied (after they are so brought vp) in murdering their fathers and mothers that begat them; and in rooting out that faith wherein they were borne and baptized, and which onely were able to bring their soules into happinesse. This surely is a calamity in|supportable, and which crieth out vnto God in the heauens for reliefe.
I will say no more touching this matter, but euen wish with the humble petition of a minde pierced with griefe, to the iust Iudge of the world, Redeemer of mankind, and Sauiour of his people, to cast downe his pitifull eyes vpon those nations; to behold on the one side his triumphing fierce enemies persecuting without measure; on the other his poore seruants troden downe, and persecuted without helpe, hope, or comfort; to dissolue the pride and power of the one, to comfort the astonished and wasting weake|nesse of the other, with some hope of succour and finall deliuery: To inspire the hearts of Christian Princes (their neighbours) compounding or laying side their endlesse and fruitlesse contentions, to reuenge their quarrell against their vniust oppressors. For certainly if meane Princes haue incombred the course of the great Turks conquest; what would not the vnited Christian forces doe? if we might but once see the glorious beames of that bright shining day appeare?
Which vnion the The king o ersia or late eare hath nt fiue eve|ll Embasla|urs into hristendome Persian king hath often and instantly sought of the Christian Princes, and that within these few yeares. For first (as we said before) he sent Sir Anthony

Sherley a man very wise and valiant, if hee had not beene too prodigall. After him in the yeare of grace 1605. hee sent three other seuerall Ambassadors one after another: viz. Zincl Chan Beg, Methi Cult Beg, and Ius Bassi Hassan Beg. The two first came directly to the Emperour at Prage, and the other was sent vnto the French King, whose Embassie was for the common good also, though it wanted the wished successe. And to shew the great desire that the Persian still hath, to haue the pride of the great Turke aba|ted, he hath since imployed Master Robert Sherley as his Ambassadour to the same purpose.
Neuer did Christendome misse times of more aduan|tage, to haue preuailed much against the Turke, not onely to haue holden their owne (which they doe not in Hun|gary) but to haue recouered some good part of their los|ses before receiued also. And indeed true it is that the time then well serued for both, by reason that the great Turke was and is still troubled with warres both against his owne rebels, and the Persian King in Asia; most part of his for|ces being turned that way.The Persians promise vnto the Emperor. But what auaileth opportu|nitie without vnitie For howsoeuer the Persian king did instantly request of the Emperour to ioyne with him in all frendship and brotherly loue, and to continue his warres against the great Trke their common enemy: and also promised that for his part he would neuer lay down armes vntill that enemy were brought to nought and destroyed, so that the Christian Princes would on the other side like|wise impugne him:The Emperors promise t the Persian king. and though the Emperour for his part did promise to continue his warres, and to raise greater forces, and also by letters to exhort and incite the greatest Christian Princes  Potentates to extend also their power against the common enemy; yet could hee not effct it, neither performe any part of his promise to the Persian King.
For the next yeare following (seeing the Hungarians reuolted from him, and taking part with the Turkes and

the Turks with them, and finding himselfe not able with his owne power to hold the field against them,The reasons why the Empe+rour leaues the Prsian king in field to him|selfe, and con|cludes a pece wit the great Turke. much lesse to maintaine a defensiue warre, and his friends  allies, his wonted and greatest staies, then at his greatest need to faile him) was glad to leaue the Persian in the field to his owne strength, and to conclude a reasonable peace with Achmet the great Turke that now raigneth; being no way able without the great aide of other Christian Princes, to with|stand the huge and dreadful power of th Othoman Empe|rour VVhich (be it spoken without ominous presage) is to be feared, wil too truly appeare and manifest it selfe, when|soeuer the wars of the great Turke, and his troubles in the East with the Persian be ended, he shall the~ again turne his victorious  insulting forces, this way towards the West.
I conclude then, that those distressed parts of Christen|dome which are subject to the Turkish fury,Some parts of Chistendome greatly in in|debted to the Sherlies. cannot but be much beholding, both to Sir Anthony Shirley, as also his brother M. Robert Shirley for this twenty years peace which is concluded betweene the Emperour  the great Turke. They being (I dare be bold to say vnder God) the onely meanes that stirred vp the Persian king to take vp armes a|gainst the great Turke, and to draw by degrees the whole warre vpon his owne necke, therby to free and giue a time of breathing to the champions of Iesus Christ to refresh themselues, and increase their forces. A peace not only well pleasing to the Emperour, but to the Turke also, who no sooner heard from the the Bassa of Buda, that it was conclu|ded, but forth with conceiued so greatoy, that with a num|ber of Ianizries and others, he went from his Pallace in Constantinople in great magnificence to the Church, to giue thanks therfore vnto his Prophet Mahomet, spending the next day in great sport  pleasure, purposing from thence|forth to turne all his force  power for the subduing of the Persian king. But to leaue these two great Monarches, the onely enemies to the name of Christ in field each against the other, I come now to my returne from those parts.




The returne of the Author by the way of Persia, Susiana, Chaldaea, Assiria, and Arabia.
_HAuing tooke my leaue of Master Robert Sherley, and the rest of my country-men, I left them to the mercy of the king (whose bountie and goodnesse by their returne hath plentifully shewed it selfe) and be|tooke my selfe to the protection of the Al|mightie, to bring me in saftie againe into my owne coun|trey: being in my returne, accompanied with one Signior Belchior Dios d' Croce, an Armenian, Portugall or Portugall Armenian; and one Christophero a Greeke, who were sent with letters from the gouernour of Goa, to the king of Spaine, but lost afterwards their liues and letters by shipwracke in the Venetian Golfe.
From Hispaan we spent ten daies trauell to Siras by per|swasion of some Persian merchants that were bound for Aleppo with vs, trauelling through the very heart of Per|sia it selfe, paying now and then a Shaghee a peece to cer|taine villages in the way, no matter of importance worth the relating till we come to the Citie it selfe.

The description of Persia.
THis country (in which Siras standeth) is now called the Kingdome of Farsi, but in ancient time the Kingdome of Persia; a kingdome of it selfe very large and pacious; confining Northwards on Media Parthia, Eastward on the great desart of Caramania, Westward on Susiana, which Strabo maketh a part of Persia, and lieth betweene Babylon

and Persia, as shall be declared hereafter, and Southward on Ormuz and the Persian golfe, containing also the great kingdome of Lar, whence the best Bezar stones are brought.
Very famous is this countrey: for that it was the first place, where Elam the eldest sonne of Sem dwlt, where|by the people of this nation were a long time called Ela|mits, as appeareth by the prophecy of Daniel,No more but fiue kings in Persia. who na|meth it Elam: as also because it was the seate of those fiue great Persian kings mentioned in the Scriptures, viz. Da|rius Medus, Cyrus, Ahshuerosh, Darius Longimanus a|lis Artaxerxes, and Artaxerxes the third, which was that Darius whom Alexander the great ouercame.Darius Medus. For Da|rius Medus his acts and deeds were of so small esteeme and regard, that they are not worth the writing. But concerning Cyrus his sonne in law,Cyrus. many excellent things are spoken of him: for no king conquered so many king|domes as he did. Besides he was in grace and fauour with God: for by Daniels instructions he was brought to con|fesse and acknowledge the God of Israel. Of him did E|say prophesie an hundred yeares before his birth:Esay. 44.28. and his diligence was so great in ayding the Iewes afer their cap|tiuity vnto Ierusalem,2. Chro. 36.22. 1. Esdras. 1.2. Esdras. 2. Ioseph. Anti. 11. ca. 1. that he suffered them quietly to re|turne with wealth and treasure, and commaunded all his Princes of Syria, and subiects to fauour and to helpe them, publishing a decree for the building vp of their temple vn|to God. Notwithstanding this happy and fortunate Prince was slaine by Tomyris Queene of the Massogets in Scy|thia, who not contenting her selfe with the death of her enemy, commaunded also his head to be smitten oft, and throwne into a bole of mans bloud, with this expro|bration of his crueltie in killing her sonne: Tu quidem meum vluentis  in pugna victricis filium perdidisti dolo captum,Herodous. at ego te cruore saturan: Goe now, and glut thy selfe with the bloud of men, which in thy life time woul|dest neuer be satisfied with bloud.
Next vnto him raigned Ahashuerosh,Ahashuerosh. whom our wri|ters call Xerxes, the Chaldeans Artaxerxes the first (hus|band to Queene Hester) whose dominion did extend it selfe from India vnto Ethiopia, ouer an hundred and sea|uen and twenty Prouinces. The goodnesse of this king was fully proued, at what time the Church was miserably afflicted by proud Haman, and hindered by cruell Camby|ses against the decree of Cyrus: for he gaue full liberty and licence vnto the Iewes to build the Temple at Ierusalem. Neuerthelesse towards his latter daies, he was very vnfor|tunate in his warres, being twise ouercome both at sea and land; by which vnfortunate successe, he that earst while was termed the Terrour of all Nations, became in so generall contempt of all his subiectes,Iustin. lib. 3. that both himselfe and his sonnes were slaine by Artabanus the traitour.
Next vnto him succeeded Darius Longimanus.Darius Longi|manus. This Prince was no way behind his predecessours in pietie and deuotion towards God: for he would not by any meanes change their institutions concerning religious worship, but with great beneficence fauoured the Iewes. For in the se|cond yeare of his raigne the Temple at Ierusalem was fini|shed: and in the seauenth yeare Esdra with a number in his company returned.
The last King was Artaxerxes the third,Darius. whom they called by the name of Darius a Prince of great industrie, and noblenesse of spirit: yet at last was vanquished by Alexander the great, and slaine by one of his owne kins|men, ending his life together with the Persian Empyre.
So that now by the computation of the raigne of these kings which was one hundred fortie and seauen yeares,The Iewe confuted. Daniel. 9.25. we may easily confute that malicious tergiuersation and erroneous exposition of the Iewes, of the prophecy of Daniel, touching the threescore and nine weekes to the comming of the Messiah. The Iewes affirme that the same prophecie doth not belong to our Sauiour Christ,

but that it ended the day wherein the Temple was ouer|throwne by Titus: and doe interprete Christ (whom Daniel prophecied should be slaine after threescore and nine weekes) to be Agrippa the last of the Herodians (sur|mising peeuishly that the Messiah liueth in the word inuisi|bly) colouring their grosse errours therein by the false and lying Histories of some Greeks and atines,The Iewes sur|mise that the Messiah liueth in the world inuisibly. who at|tribute two hundred yeares and aboue to the Empire of the Persian kings: whereby some haue beene dri|uen to recken the beginning of those weekes after the time of Cyrus, that they may end at the death of our Saui|our Christ.
Which false Histories to make vp those yeares, name more Persian kings then euer were;Herodo. lib. 7. as Cambyses to succeed his father Cyrus; wheras he was but left by his father King in Persia, in his expedition into Scythia, according to the Persian custome mentioned by Herodotus, which was that if the king went out of the countrey with an armie, hee must appoint another king to abide in the countrey du|ring his absence. And so were Cambises and Darius Hi|staspis kings of Persia. And whereas some Persian kings had two or three names, as Darius, Xerxes, and Artax|erxes, they make so many kings; whereas the Scriptures set downe but the fiue before named,As the capti|uitie grew at three times. So the returne was at three times. who raigned (as we said) but one hundred fortie and seauen yeares. Where|upon it falleth out, that whether you beginne to account the threescore and nine weekes from the first yeare of Cy|rus, who then determined the Iewes reduction; and as the captiuitie grew at three times, so the returne from the cap|tiuitie was at three times.
For first in the second yeare of Cyrus, Zorababell with welnigh fiftie thousand Iewes returned, and then laid the foundation of the Temple; which was finished the se|cond yeare of Darius Longimanus: And many Iewes re|maining in Babylon, who for the loue of their possessi|ons and children, hauing purchased of the kings of Persia

a forme of a commonwealth, elected to themselues a Prince of the line of Dauid, (whom Origen calleth a Patriarch) calling him Aechmalatarcham, which sig|nifieth the head of the outlawes. And in the seauenth yeare of Darius Longimanns, Esdras with a number in his company returned. And lastly in the twentieth yeare of the same Darius, Nehemiah with his company de|parted.
So that it falleth out, that whether you beginne to account the threescore and nine weekes from the first yeare of Cyrus, who then determined the Iewes re|duction; or from the second yeare of Darius (as o|thers will) for that hee confirmed, and put the same in execution: or from the twentieth yeare of his raigne, for that hee then made a new edict in fauour of Nehe|miah, and sent him int Iewrie. (And not onely the tribes of Iuda, Leui, and Beniamin, to the number of thir|tie thousand, but some of the other tribes to the num|ber of tenne thousand returned also into Iewrie by the Edict of those kinges.) Euery way those threescore and nine weekes did ende eyther in the raigne of Augustus or Herode, vnder whom Christ was borne, or in the yeare of Tiberius vnder whome hee suf|fered.
Hee that would reade more of the ancient estate of Persia, eyther concerning the Royall Maiestie thereof, or the Religion, Lawes, Manners, and Customes of the same, or the Militarie Discipline whilest shee held the world in awe, let him reade Barnabas Brissonius, who hath written three bookes, De Regio Persarum Principatu. In the meane time, wee come to describe that which wee haue seene; returning where we left to Siras ancient Persepolis.



The description of Sieras ancient Persepolis.
The riuer Bin|damir.THis Citie is situated on the banks of Bindamir, a great and famous riuer, which courseth through Persia, and the kingdome of Lar, and so emptieth it selfe into the Per|sian Golfe, and was once the Metropoliticall seat of all the kingdome, vntill of late yeares, Hispaan hath gained that priuiledge from her. Notwithstanding it is large  spacious containing very neere ten miles in circuit, and lieth iust in the road way which leads from Hispaan to Ormuz. Plinie did call it caput Persiciregui, for so it was during the Mo|narchy, the head Citie of the Persian kingdome, which continued famous many yeares together, being stuffed with the spoyles of the whole world: for Alexander when he tooke it, found in the treasury fortie thousand talents of gold, euery talent being sixe hundred crownes by Budaeus his computation.Alexander at the request of a strumpet fi|eth Pesepolis. And the same tme at the request of a drunken strumpet he set this gallant Citie on fire, himselfe being the first president in that wofull misery, which in short time was quite burnt downe to the ground as Dio|dorus Siculus relateth. Which vnhappy mischance Quin|tus Curtius on this manner bewaileth: Huno exitum ha|buit Regiatotius Orientis, vnde tot gentes ante ira petebant patria tot regum, vnicus quondm Gaecia terror. c. Such a miserable end befell to the reall Citie of all the Ea, whence so many Nations did deriue their lawes and cu|stomes; which was the seate of so many kings, and in times past the onely terour of Greece.
So that in and about this towne are to be seene the ru|ines of many ancient monuments: as two great gates, tha are distan one from the other the space of twelue miles, which shewes the circuite of this Citie, as it was in the time of the Monarchy, to be both large and spacious. On the South side we viewed the ruines of a goodly Pallace, ilded as they say by King Cyrus, a Palla  agni|fied

by Aelianus in his first booke de animalibus. cap. 59. And on the North side the ruines of an old Castle, which seemes was gyrt about with a three-fold wall: he first wall being foure and twentie foote high, adorned and beaiied with many Turets and spires: the second was like vnto the first, but twice as high; nd the third was foure square, be|ing foure score and ten foote high. All fabricated of free stone. On each side were twelue gates of Brasse, with brazen pales set before them very curiously wrought, all which did shew the magnificence of the founder. On the East side of this ruinous Castle, some foure aces of ground distant, is a mountaine, on which was erected a goodly Chappell, in which most of the Persian kings in anticke time were intombed. And though this Citie hath endured sundry mutations and changes, yet is it not to be esteemed one of the least Cities in Persia: for out of it in short time is leuied twentie thousand horsemen well ar|med. Besides it is one of the greatest and most famous Cities of the East,Excellent ar|mour made in Syras. both for traffike of merchandize; as also for most excellent armour and furniture, which the armorers with wonderfull cunning doe make of yron and steele, and the  of certain hearbs, of much more no|table tempr and beautie, then are those which are made with vs in Europe; not onely Headpecs, Curiaffes, and complete armours, but whole caparisons for horses, curiously made of thinne plates of yron and steele.
Now by the stuation of this towne on the rier Bin|damir,Batan a com|modious por towne in the Persian Golfe for the East Indian company. a verie profitable trade for the East Indian compa|nie might be at Batan, an hauen towne in the Persian Gole, which trendeh in the forme of an halfe Moone, hauing a little pretie Iland, as a most commodious shelter, in the mouth of the same, whereby a shp of fiue hundred unnes and better may ride at pleasure. Very desirous is the Persian King that our shipping should come thither, or to any othr port in his dominions; promsing often|times

times (as may be iustified very probably) that it should be lawfull for vs to builde and fortifie,The riuer Ies|dri ninneth close by Batan. and to enioy all priuiledges in as ample manner as his owne subiectes; and that if the Portugals in Ormuz should offer vio|lence to our shipping, that then hee would become their professed enemie: whose league of friendship (I am assured) they dare not in that Iland breake, stan|ding so many waies beholding to the Persian King as they doe. Besides where wee planted in Batan, the King would quickly cut off the greatest trade of Merchan|dize eyther of raw silke or Indico from Tauris to Con|stantinople, and turne it vnto that harbour. There wee should haue a speedie vent for our broade cloath, Car|sies, Tinne, and Lead, and haue in barter for the same whatsoeuer eyther the kingdome of Persia or India doth affoorde. So that in mine opinion to haue Batan for a resting and refreshing harbour after our tedious say|ling through the great Ocean, were farre better then Bantam in Iaua, or Aden, or any other port in A|rabia Felix; places altogether of wrong and oppres|sion, where little iustice is to bee found being so farre from Constantinople: Whereas Batan standeth in such a Countrey as is full of peace and tranquilitie, ha|uing a most iust and vpright Prince (the onely true stay of traffike) Lord of the same, whose onely care and endeuour is to maintaine and vpholde the trade of Merchandize. But to leaue these thinges to the Merchants, wee come now to the Kingdome of As|siria.




The description of AS|SIRIA.
_FRom Siras, hauing spent eight daies tra|uell and better, we entered into the Pro|uince of Susiana, now called Cuestan, but in old time Assiria. The bounds of this Countrey, Northwards is on the South part of Armenia, Eastward on a part of Persia: Westward on Mesopotamia: and South|ward on a part of the Persian Golfe, which part is  of fennes and marish bogges, without either port or hauen. The climate in that part is exceeding hote, and very much infested with bituminous matter, which both spoiles the growth of trees, and corrupt the waters, where|by it comes to passe, that the people are not long liu'de. And howsoeuer this countrey was that land, wherein the first Monarchie was setled, so that many excellent things might be spoken of it; yet since, it hath endured so ma|ny mutations and changes by the outrage of armies, that it hath lost her ancient name, I will be sparing to write thereof, least I should write many things rather fabulous then true, and therefore, laying aside the danger of lying, I will passe vnto those townes and ruines which I haue seene.

The description of Susa.
TRauelling two daies farther from the entrance in|to this Kingdome,Herodot. lib. 5. wee rested at Valdac, once the the great Citie Susa, but now verie ruinous. It was first built by Tythonus and his sonne Memnon, but inlar|ged by Darius the sonne of Histaspis.
In the building whereof Memnon was so exceeding pro|digall, that as Cassiodorus writeth, he ioyned the stones to|gether with gold. It was once one of the regal Cities of the Kings of Persia;Cassiod. lib. 7. ariar. pist. 15. and was so rich that Aristagras did in this maner cheere vp the harts of his souldiers, when they came to besiege it. Hanc vos vrbem, si animose ceperitis, iam cum Ioue de diuitijs, licet certetis, If you can winne this Citie couragious souldiers, you may striue with Iupiter himselfe for riches: which Alexander had good experience of, when he found fiftie thousand talents in wedges of gold, besides siluer, and great store of coyne. Behold (saith Q. Curtius) that in an houre, which many kings had heaped to+gether for posteritie, falleth now into the hands of a stran|ger. In a word such was the beautie and delectablenesse thereof for situation, that they called it Susa, which then in the Persian tongue signifyeth a Lilly, but now it is called Valdac,The riuer Chaspes. of the pouertie of the place.
Close by this ruinous towne swimmeth the famous Ri|uer Choaspes, which after many turnings and windings through the countrey of Susiana dischargeth it selfe in the Persian Golfe. The water of this riuer is very delicate to the tast; so that it is no meruaile, though the Persian and Parthia~ kings in times past would by their good wils drink of no other water. For which purpose they had vessels of gold and siluer, to carry the same after them, whensoeuer they eyther did ride in prograce, or goe to the warres. Xerxes (as Varr relateth) being on a time exceeding thirstie, caused proclamation to be made throughou his campe, that if any soldier had any water of Choaspes left he should be well rewarded. And it so fell out, that a small quantitie was found, which though it was exceeding muddie by reason of carriage, yet that mightie Prince dranke freely of it. Of such account was his riuer in an|cient time.
Hauing passed ouer this riuer,The descrip|tion of Ni|neuie. we set forward towards Mosul, a very antient towne in this countrey, sixe dayes iourney from Valdas; and so pitched on the bankes of the riuer Tigris.The magnifi|cent building of Nineuie by Ninus. Here in these plaines of Assiria, and on the bankes of Tigris, and in the region of Eden, was Nineuie built by Nimrod, but finished by Ninus. It is agreed by all prophane writers, and confirmed by the Scriptures, that this citty exceeded all other citties in circuit, and answerable magnificence. For it seemes by the ruinous foundation (which I throughly viewed) that it was built with foure sides, but not equall or square; for the two longer sides had each of them (as we geffe) an hundreth and fifty furlongs; the two shorter sides, ninty furlongs, which amounteth to foure hundred and eighty furlongs of ground, which makes threescore miles, accounting eight furlongs to an Italian mile. The walles whereof were an hundreth foote vpright, and had such a breadth, as three Chariots might passe on the rampire in front: these walles were garnished with a thousand and fiue hundrth towers, which gaue exceeding beauty to the rest, and a strength no lesse admirable for the nature of those times.Ninus reig|ned in Nine|ue. Here it was that Ninus raigned, who after he had maistred Bactria, and subiected vnto his Empire al those regions betweene it and the Mediterranean sea, and Hellespont (Asia the lesse excepted)  finished the worke of Ninuie, he left the world i the yeare thereof 2019. after he had reigned two and fifty yeares. After him suc|ceeded Semiramis his wife,The rich and sumptuous tombe of Ninus. a Lady of great prowesse and vertue, who in this citty buried him so honourably and in such a sumptuous tombe, that it was the onely patterne which Artemesia the Queene of Caria made for her hus|band Mausolus, and accounted for the rarenesse thereof, one of the seauen wonders of the world. Vpon the Pillars whereof was set this Epitaph.His Epitaph. Mihi patr Belus Iupiter, Auus Saturnus Babilonicus, proauus Chus Saturnus Ae|thiops, Abauus Saturnus Aegiptus, Atauus Coelus Phoenix

Ogyges, repeating the pedegree of Ninus to be the son of Belus, the sonne of Nimrod, the sonne of Chus, the son of Cham, and the sonne of Noah.
Sardanapolus the last king of the Assyrians.Now as the Monarchie of the Assyrians began by Ni|nus, which lasted for the space of a thousand and two hundred yeares, and some adde fortie yeares more: so it ended in Sardanapalus, that beastly Epicure, who fin|ding his forces too weake to fight against the power of Arbaces and Belochus his two Lieutenant, the one in Media, and the other in Babylon, retired out of the field to his pallace in Niniuie, and there caused an huge fire to be made,Sardanapalus destroyeth himselfe. into which hee cast himselfe and all his riches; herein onely playing the man. Such was the effeminate wantonnes of this King, that he consumed whole daies in the nurcerie among his concubines, sparing no time from incontinent exercises. As appeares by the Epitaph, which liuing, he commanded to be written on his tomb:
His Epiph.Ede, Bibe, Lude.
Eate, Drinke, Play.
Which Epitaph, Aristotle chancing to find, stayed, and read the first part thereof, and smiling, said: A man wold thinke, this writing fitter to be fixed to the graue of an oxe, then written vpon the tombe of a Prince And hauing per|used the three verses, concluded, That Sardanapalus en|ioyed that being dead, which liuing he neuer had, but so long as he was in feeding his panch. Intimating, that all pleasures which are not reduced to necessity and hone|stie, are very reprochfull
Sanheib slain by hs 2. sons. 2. Reg. 19 37. Herodotus lib. 2.Here also raigned and dyed Saneherib, who at his re|turne from the beseeging of Ierusalem was slaine by his two sons, Adramelech  Sharezar, as he was in the tem|ple worshipping Nisroh his god. Herodotus relates, that after his death, an image was set vp vto him with this inscription; Learne by me to feare God; for a memoriall of Gods iudgement against him.
Finally, that this city was farre greater then Babilon,

being the Lady of the East, the Queene of Nations, and the riches of the world, hauing more people within her wals, then are now in some one kingdome: but now it is destroyed (as God foretold it should be by the Chaldae|ans) being nothing else, then a sepulture of herself, a litle towne of small trade, where the Patriarch of the Nesto|rians keeps his seate, at the deuotion of the Turkes. Sun|dry times had we conference with this Patriarch: and a|mong many other speeches which past from him, he wi|shed vs that before we departed, to see the Iland of Eden, but twelue miles vp the riuer, which he affirmed was vn|doubtedly a part of Paradise.


The description of the Iland of Eden.
THis Iland lyes in the heart of the riuer Tigris, and is (as we could guesse) in circuit ten English miles, and was somtimes walled round about with a wall of strong defence, as appeares by the ruinous foundation of bricke which there remaineth. And howsoeuer the beautifull land of Eden is now forgotten in these part, with those flourishing countries of Mesopotamia, Assyria, Babylonia, and Chalda, being all swallowed vp into meere Barba|rism, yet this Iland stil retains the name of the Ile of Eden
Now whither this Iland were the very Eden of Para|dise, is not probable: but certaine it is, that, that garden of Pleasure, which God chose out to set Adam into, was seated in the lower part of the Region of Eden,The Descrip|tion of the Re|gion of Eden. afterward called Aram fluuiorum, or Mesopotamia: a country which Southwards stretcheth it self ouer the great riuer Euphra|tes, toward Shinar nie Babylon: and Northwards contai|neth that continent of Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Arme|nia, which is watred with Tigris, between mount Taurus and Seleucia.
That there was such a Paradise as the garden of Eden,That Paradise was vpo the earth, is with|out all disput. vpon earth, is without all dispute, because the Scriptures tell vs of it: And the Lord God planted a Garden, East|ward

in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had made. gen. 2.8. And it is said of Caine, that he dwelt in the land of Noa towards the East side of Eden. gen. 4.16. The Pro|phets likewise doe often make mention of the land of E|den and the inhabitants thereof, As in Esay 37.12. where after Gozan, and Haran, and Reseph, the Prophet speak|eth also of the children of Eden which were at Telasser. And the Prophet Ezechiel in the. 27. chap. and 23. vers. bewailing the desolation of Tyrus, sheweth what Mer|chants resorted thither, and among many other nations, he reconeth the merchants of Eden. Now as they make mention of the land of Eden, so also of the garden it selfe. How is this land wast, which was like the garden of Eden. Ezech. 36.35. And in the Prophet Ioel. 2.3. the land is as the garden of Eden before him. By which places of scripture it is euident that the garden of Eden, was a certaine place vpon the earth, which God chose out (aboue all other places of the world) to set Adam into after he had crea|ted him.
Paradice planted in the country of E|den neere BabiloniaAnd that the very Eden of Paradice was in this contrey is plaine by the relation of Moses, who saith that it was eastward in Eden, that is, it lying eastward (as this countrey doth) from Indaea. For so it is sayd, that the Lord God planted a garden Eastward in Eden, which quarter of the world is to be vnderstood, eastward, in respect of Iuda. Besides this countrey standeth in the most excellent tem|per of all other, to wit fiue and thirty degrees from the Equinoctiall line, and fiue and fifty from the North-pole: in which climate the best wines, the most delicate fruits, the sweetest oyle, and the purest graine of all sorts, are this day found in great aboundance.
The riuers which wate|red Paradic.Againe the very riuers, which course through this coun|trey, doe make good, that the very Eden of Paradice, was here planted: For Moses describeth, that a riuer went out of Eden to water this garden, and from thence deuided it selfe into four braunches: and we find by experience, that Tigris

and Euphrates, running through this country of Eden doe ioyne in one, and afterward taking seuerall waies a part, doe water both the land of Chus, and Hauilah, as Moses relateth: the true seates of Chus and his sonnes, beeing then in the valley of Shinar, in which Nimrod built Ba|bell, and not in Ethyopia as some would haue it. And as for the land of Hauilah, that country ioyned to Persia eastward, where Hismael and his Sonnes dwelt: for they dwelt from Hauilah vnto Shur, that is towards Aegipt, as thou goest to Assiria. Gen. 25.18. And therefore they that make the riuer Pison to bee Ganges,The eour of those dispro|ued, which make Pson to be Nilus. doe contrary both Scripture, experience, and reason. For how can the riuer Ganges, which runneth through the great Mogors coun|try in the East-Indies, be a braunch of those riuers which watred Eden, since the riuer Tigres (though it rise in the same quarter of the world) is distant from Ganges, aboue foure thousand miles? And as for them that would haue, the riuer Gihon to bee Nilus, doe dreame of an impossibi|lity; because the riuer Nilus is farther distant from Ti|gris and Euphrates, then Ganges is: being begotten in the mountaines of the Moone in Ethyopia, almost as farre off as the cape of good hope (which our East-Indian shippes doe double) and falleth into the Mediterranean-Sea; whereas Euphrates springeth (as we haue said) out of the Mountaines of Armenia, and falleth into the golfe of Persia: the one rising South which is Nilus, and running North; the other rising North, which is Euphrates, and coursing South, threescore  three degrees one from the other.Strange ferti|lity and happi|nesse in the region of E|den. Finally this country aboundeth with all kind of fertility and happinesse though not in that exquisit man|ner, as before the fall of Adam, because it was accursed in special, like as all the earth in generall, yet thus much I find written of it; Strabo maketh mention of the South-part of Armenia, which is the North border of Eden, or a part thereof; to bee a region which aboundeth with most pleasant fruites and delightfull trees, alwaies greene

and florishing, witnessing therby a perpetual spring, not fou~d elswhere, but the Indies only. And Q. Curtius writeth on this maner: As you trauell on the left hand of Arabia (fa|mous for plenty of sweet odours) there lieth a champain coun|try placed between the two riuers Tigris and Euphrates, and is so fruitful and fat a soile, that they are said to driue there cattaile from the pasture, least they should perish by Satietie. And true it is that the vngy, or hay, which groweth in these parts, is of so strong an operatiue power to fatten, that they are constrained (before they giue it their cat|taile) to flake and coole the heats thereof with water.
Herodotus speaketh as an eye-witnesse, that the place where Euphrates runneth out into Tigris, not farre from the place where Ninus is seated, is a Region, of al other most excellent, which bringeh forth corne so aboundantly, that the ord nary fields in his time did returne the seed sowne in them two hundreth fold: the better places three hundreth, that is thre hundreth bushels for one,Palme-trees in gret a|boundance. or at the least three hundreth graines for one corne. And there is no|thing that better proueth the excellency of this soile, then the abou~dant growing of Palm-trees, in these pla|ces, without the care  labor of man. The most of which trees do beare fruit, out of which the inhabitants make both meat,  wine,  hony, and whatsoeuer else the life of man begetteth at nature. Pliny affirmeth, that such is the fertility of the grou~d, that they are co~strained twise, to mow down their corne-fields,Pliny. nat. i. stor. lib. 18. c. 17.  a thid time to eate them vp with sheepe: adding this singularity to the soile, that the second yeere, the very stubble (or rather falling downe of the seed againe) yeeldeth them a har|uest of corne without any farther labour.
So that by these few collections we may gather, that they are farre besides the truth, which haue sought Pa|radise, either beyond our knowne world, or in the mid|dle region of the aire; or nere the Moone; or as far as the South-line; or the North-pole, beeing meere vanities imagined in mens fancies. Cardinal Bellarmin in his co~|trouersis is likewise much troubled, to finde out the

place where Paradise should bee,Bellam. lib. de Grat. primi hominis. whether it be in the earth or in the aire; yea some are so mad, that they doe peremptorily set downe, that the earthly Paradise, after Adam was banished thence for his sin, was by God lifted vp into the aire: but this (as His Maiesty learnedly shew|eth in his Praemonition to al Christin Monarchs, free Prin|ces and states) is like one of the dreames of the Turkish Al|coran, seing no such miracle is mentioned in the scriptures, huing no ground but from the curious fancies of some boi|ling braines, who cannot be content sapere ad sobrietatem. We conclude then, that the garden of Eden was created by God, in this habitable world, and that in the lower part of the region of Eden, called by the Iewes Aram Fluuioru~, Aram amongst the iuers: and by the Greekes Mspotamia, conteyning a part of Shinar Armenia, and reteining the name of Eden, in some part vnto this day, as before is declared.
From the Island of Eden wee returned to Mosu, and staied there eight daies  so went down the riuer Ti|gris to Bagdt or New Babilon, beeing carried not on boat, as down the riuer Euphrates, but vpon certaine Za|tarres or rafts, borne vpon goates skins blowne full of winde like bladders. Which rafts they sel at Bagdat for fire,The strang coursing o the riuer Ti|gris.  carry their skins againe home vpon Asses by land, to make other voiages down the said riuer. This riuer is very famous because it watered Paradise, whose coursing is very strang: for some part of it, issuing out of the Mountaines Nifates, passeth through the lake Topiti in Armenia, (a lake which hath Nitrum in it, the property whereof is to rent and teare a mans apparell) with such swiftnesse, that it mingles not it selfe with the water of the said lake, and therevpon it is called Tigris, which in y^e languag of the Medes signifieth an arrow. Nere to the vttermost corner of this lake, it falleth into a great deepe  runneth for a great space vnder ground, and then ris|eth againe neere to Colonitis, and from thence courseth towards Opis and the ruins of Nineuy, and so to  Persian gulfe.



The description of New Babilon, now called Bagdat.
BY this riuer the cittie Bagdat is very aboundantly furnished with all kinde of prouision both of corne, flesh, fowle, fish, and venison of all sorts; besides great store of fruit, but especially of dates, and that very cheape. This citty by some is called new Babilon, and may well be, because it did rise out of the ruines of old Babilon, not farre distant, being nothing so great, nor so faire: for it conteines in circuit but three English miles; and is built but of brick dryed in the sunne: their houses also beeing flat roofed and lowe. They haue no raine for eight mo|neths together, nor almost any clowd in the skie night nor day. Their winter is in Nouember, December, Ianu|ary and February, which moueths are neuerthelesse as warme as our summer in England. In a word, this towne was once a place of great trade and profit, by reason of the huge Carauans, which were wont to come from Per|sia and Balsara: but since the Portugalls, Englishmen, and Hollanders, haue by their traffique into the East-Indies, cut off almost all the trade of Marchandize into the gulfs of Arabia and Persia, both Grand Cairo in Egipt, and Bag|dat in Assyria, are not now of that benefit, as they haue beene, either to the merchant, or great Turke; his tributes both in Egypt, and his customes in this place being much hindred thereby.
Bagdat the seat of the Ca|liph for sixe hundreth yeere. Memorable not withstanding is this towne; for that it was the onely place, where for the space of six hundreth yeares, the Mahumetane Caliphes were resident and kept their sumptuous court; vntill the Tartare Prince and the King of Armenia (as before is declared) did besiege it,Bagdat won by the Tartar Prince and King of Armenia. and in the end tooke it, with the Caliph also, together with an inestimable masse of treasure. Which treasure when the two Princes saw, they demanded of the Caliph,

why he would not with the same leauy and wage souldi|ers for his owne defence. Whereunto he answered, that vnto that time, he thought, his owne subiects had beene sufficient enough to haue resisted any forraine enemie: which they vnderstanding, immediatly caused all that treasure to be carried into the castle, and the couetou wretch set in the midst of the same, forbidding that any man should giue him either meat or drink, where he mi|serably dyed through famine,Bagdat yeel|ded vnto the Turkes. in the midst of his riches.
After it continued vnder the Tartar and Persian go|uernment, vntil it was taken by Solyman the Turkish Em|peror, from Tamas the Persian king, who (after it was yeelded vnto him) according to an old superstitious man|ner, receiued at the hands of a poore Caliph,A Caliph is a man reueren|ced of all Ma|hometa Prin|ces, and hath an old priui|ledge in the choice  con|firmation of the Assyrian kings and Su|ans of Egyp the ensignes and ornaments of the kings of Assyria so this city, with the great countries of Assyria and Mesopotamia, somtimes famous kingdomes of themselues, and lately part of the Persian kingdome, fell into the hands of the great Turke, in the yeare 1534, and so haue continued euer since Prouinces of the Turkish Empire. It was reported vnto Rodulphus the Emperor for a certaine truth, that the king of Persia had won this citie  these countries again from the Turk, in the yeare 1604 but that newes was not true; for in Aprill last 1611, it was then vnder the Turkish go|uernement.
Within two daies trauell of Bagdat,At Case the body of Aly intombed. lyeth Cafe a little village, where the bodies of Aly, whome the Persians ho|nor, and his two sons Hassan and Ossain lye entombed: by whose sepulchers, it is in great credit, and is euery vere vi|sited by the Persians in all respects, after the same sort, that the Turks do visit the sepulchers of the three first succes|sors Abuchacher, Ottaman, and Omar: yea the very Kings of Persia vsed to be crowned and git with the sword in this place, where the Caliph was wont to keepe his resi|dence as being the man that represented Aly, and occupied the chiefe roome of their filthy  abhominable priest-hood.
Hauing stayed 20. daies at Bagdat, wee put our selues into the company of a Chiaus, who was bound from the Bassa of Bagdat for Constantinople, being in number sixe|teen persons and no more, to trauell through a great part of Chaldaea, and the defart of Arabia. So soon as we were out of this cittie, we passed ouer the swift riuer Tigris, on a great bridge made with boats, chained together with two mighty chaines of Iron: and so entred into a part of Bag|dat, on this side of the riuer, like London and Southwarke, where we stayed foure dayes.


The description of Chaldaea.
THis part of new Babylon standeth in Chaldaea, which hath on the East, Assyria: on the West, Syria and Pa|lestina: on the North, Armenia: and on the South the desart of Arabia. It is called by some, by the name of Me|sopotamia, because it lyeth in the middle of the two great riuers Euphrates and Tigris. This country is famous for many things: and among the rest, for that it was the coun|try wherein Abraham was borne.The country wherein Abra|am was born For Eupolemon in his booke of the Iewes, relateth, that about the tenth gene|ration from the loud, Abraham was borne in Camerine, a towne of Babylonia, otherwise called Vr, or Chaldeopole: where he inuented Astronomie, and was in such fauour with God, that by his commaundement, he remoued into Phoenicia, and there taught the course of the Moone, of the Sun, and of the Planets, to the great liking of the king of that country: all which (saith the same Author) he had receiued by tradition from Enoch, whom the Greeks call Atlas, vnto whom the Angell had taught many things. Besides, here were the great Southsayers, Enchanters, and Wise-men, as they call them: the first Astrologians, which are so described and derided in the Scripture: and indeed from this country and Egypt is supposed to haue sprung e first knowledge of Astronomie.
Two places of great antiquity did we throughly view in the country:The tower of Babel. the one was the ruines of the old tower of Babel, (as the inhabitants hold vnto this day) bult by Nymrod, the nephew of Cham, Noahs sonne: a man very valiant and couragious, yet very prophane and irreligi|ous; insomch, that he perswaded the nations about him, that all their prosperitie and happie fortune came not from God,The perswa|sion of Nim|rod. but from their owne prowesse and industrie: giuing them farther to vnderstand, that if God should send any more flouds, he would on their behalfe and his predecessours take reuenge on him, by building a tower so high, that the waters should not dare to touch the top thereof. Hereupon they began to build, and continu|ed building (as lycas saith) forty yeares together, raising the worke to such an height, that it was beyond all ex|pectation. But God seeing their madnes, did not punish them with a generall extermination, (because as yet they had made no vse of those fearefull examples which peri|shed in the Floud) but made them mutinous one against another, by changing their language, whereby they could not vnderstand one another. Of which ouerthrow Sybilla thus prophecied: At such time as men vsed one kind of language, they builded a most high tower, as if they would haue mounted vp into heauen: but the Gods sent downe winds and ouerthrew the tower, giuing euery one his distinct and se|uerall language,
So that the Diuision of Languages was not a deuise of man,The diuision of languages no humane d|uice, but a p|nishment of God vp on mankind. (as some wicked spirits that call that storie into que|stion, would haue it) but a punishment cast by God vp|pon mankind. For it was a common opinion (by the verdict of Abidenus) that men beeing bredde of the earth, and tru|sting in their owne strength, would needes, in despight of the Gods, go reare a toer vp to the Sunne, in the same place, where Babylon now is: and farther addeth, That at that time beganne the diuersite of Languages, whrupon the Hebrewes called that place Babell And now at this day that which

remayneth, is called, the remnant of the tower of Babel: there standing as much, as is a quarter of a mile in com|passe, and as high as the stone-worke of Paules steeple in London. It was built of burnt bricke cimented and ioy|ned with bituminous mortar, to the end, that it should not receiue any cleft in the same. The brickes are three quarters of a yard in length, and a quarter in thicknesse, and between euery course of brickes, there lyeth a course of mat made of Canes and Palme-tree leaues, so fresh, as if they had beene layd within one yeare.
The descripti|on of old Ba|ylon.The other place remarkable is, the ruines of old Baby|lon, because it was the first citie, which was built after the Floud. For after Nimrod had drawn the people together, he did not onely make lawes, but began to build the great citie Babylon, his son Belus amplifying it, and at last Semi|ramis, the wife of Ninus, finished it in great glory  shew, as Herodotus and Solinus relate.erod. lib. 1. This city was built vpon the riuer Euphrates, as we found by experience, spending two dayes iourney and better, o the ruines therof. It was so great that it contayned in compasse foure hundred and fourescore furlongs, the walles were fiftie cubites in breadth,rist. Pol. li. 3. and two hundred cubits high. Aristotle reports, that it was so huge and great, that when part therof was taken by the enemie, the other part heard not of it in three dayes together: and the Inhabitants were so many in number, that they durst giue battell vnto Cyrus, the grea|test Monarch for power that euer was in Persia.
Amongst other stately buildings was the temple of Bel, erected by Semiramis in the middle of this citie, of Belus  by Semi|ais. inuironed with a double wall, carried foure-square of great heighth and beautie, hauing on each square certaine brazen gates curiously engrauen. In the vault of the square, shee ray|sed a tower of a furlong high, which is halfe a quarter of a mile: and vppon it againe (taking a Basis of a lesse cir|cuit) shee set a second tower; and so eight in all, one a|boue another: Vppon the toppe whereof the Chaldaeans

Priests made their obseruation of the stars, because the tower ouer-topped the ordinary clouds. Some do thinke, that the ruins of Nimrods tower, is but the foundation of this temple of Bel,  that therefore many trauellers haue bin deceiued, who suppose that they haue seene a part of that tower which Nimrod builded. But who can tel whe|ther it be the one or the other? It may bee that confused Chaos which we saw, was the ruines of both, the Temple of Bel being founded on that of Nimrod. In a word their were burnt in tis Temple an hundreth thousand talents of Frankincence in a yeere as Herodotus relateth. This Temple did Nabuchadnezar adorne and beautifie with the spoiles of Ierusalem, and of the Temple of Solomon: all which vessels  ornaments Cyrus re-deliuered. And Xer|xes after him euened this Temple with the soile; which Alexander is said to haue repaired, by the perswasion of the Chaldeans. I denie not that it might haue been in his minde so to doe, but hee enioyed but a few yeeres after the taking of Babilon, and therefore could not performe any such worke.
But to returne where wee left.The captiuit confirmed b the Heathen To this city were the Iewes carried captiues, and so thereof it was called the captiuity of Babilon. A captiuity so well known to heathe~ writers, that they make mention of it. For they expresly affirme, that in the time of Ioachim King of Iuda, Ieremie the Prophet was sent vnto them from God, to foretell them of extreame calamity, because they worshipped an Idol called Baal; whervpon (as they relate) Ioachim com|manded Ieremy to be burnt a liue. But Ieremy tels them, that the King of Assiria should put them to sore labor,  make them to digge a channel, to saile, out of the ri|uer Euphrates, into the riuer Tigris: wherevpon Na|buchadnezar did set forward with a mighty army spoyling Samaria, winning Ierusalem, and leading away King Ioachim prisoner. Yea they doe set downe the very time of the captiuity: viz. that it should last three score

yeers and ten: and that Nabuchadnezar at his returne to Babilon, was stricken with madnesse, and did cry out for a certaine time, night and day to his subiects the Babi|lonians, that so great a mischiefe would shortly fall vp|on them, that all the power of the Gods should not stay it. For (quoth he) an halfe asse of Persia shall come  make you thrals: foreshewing that Cyrus should bee the man, which should both build againe the Temple of Ierusa|lem, and subdue Babilon. So that now wee may iustly aske; what is become of this proud city, which once held the world in awe? Where are her conduits, the rare|nesse of her bathes, the hugenesse of her towers, the greatnesse of her Temples, the beauty of her princely pa|laces,  a number of other monuments of her kings va|nities? Alas! time hath worne them out: and we may say.
Miramur perijsse homines? monumenta fatiscunt:
interitus Saxis nominibus venit.
Why wonder we that men doe die?
Since monuments decay,
And towers fall, and founders names,
Doe perish cleane away.
For first she was subdued by the Medes, then by the Persians; after by the Grecians, then by the Saracens; then by the Tartars, after that by the Persians againe:  now by the Turkes. So God doth appoint, and God doth disapoint states and commonwealthes, according to the decree of his Eternall will, sinne being the only cause of his anger, his anger the cause of all calamities and sub|uersion of Kingdomes, according to that of Syrach; Reg|num a gente in gentem transferetur propter iiustitiam. Be|cause of vnrighteous dealing and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceit,, 10. the Kingdom is translated from one peo|ple to another.


The description of Arabia.
FRom the ruines of old Babilon wee set forwards to

Alepo; traueling, for the most part, through the De|sart Arabia. This country of Arabia hath on the North Palestina, and Mesopotamia: on the East the golfe of Persia: on the South the maine Ocean of India; on the West Egipt  the red-sea. It is deuided into three parts: the North-part whereof, is the desart Arabia: the South-part is called Arabia Foelix: and the middle be|tweene both, is Arabia Petrosa. It is not my purpose to write any thing either of Arabia Foelix, or Araba Petrosa, because they lie not in the compasse of my tra|uell: onely it shall not be amisse to insert a word or two, of Mahomet and his superstition, who was borne in this country, and hath seduced the greatest part of the world with his abominable religion.
Concerning Mahomet,The opinion of them of Mecha touch|ing Mahome their Prophe the people of Mecha (where he lieth intombed) doe altogether condemne him both for his robberies and murders. And himselfe in his Al|coran confesseth himselfe to be a sinner, an idolator, an adulterer, and inclined to women aboue measure, and that in such vnciuil termes, a I am ashamed to repeate.
And concerning his Alcoran, wherein hee hath in|serted the precepts of his inuention,The Turkish religion a meere signe inuention. there is no truth in it. For first vpon paine of death, it may not bee dispu|ted vpon, whereas the truth loues triall, so that though the Arabians, Turkes, and Persians will not spare to say, and that vauntingly, that the doctrine of Mahomet, is di|uine  conformable both to the old  new Testament, yet as good as they make it, you may not examine it or call it into question; as if a man should say, behold you are paide in good money; but you must not weigh it, neither looke vpon it by day-light. 2 Besides his Alco|ran is pestred with a number of fables and falsities, as nine hundreth vntruthes;It is ful of li and fables. whereof two are most grosse, that Abraham was the sonne of Lazarus: and Mary the sister of Aaron. 3. Againe it pointeth out at things sensible and corporall, and not to things internall and

spirituall: for Mahomet most blasphemously reporteth in his prograce vp to the throne of God, that hee felt the hand of God three-score and ten times colder, then any yee: that he saw an Angel that had a thousand heads, a diamond table of a thousand miles in length, and a Cocke of a wonderfull bignesse, which is kept vntil the day of doome, that then by the shrilnesse of his crowing the dead may be raised: and further he setteth it downe that the diuell is circumcised, with this leasing also, that the starres, are very candles hung out euery night from the firmament.Th promises are meere car|nall pleasures. 4. And for his promises to all such as call vpon him faithfully, are meere carnal and earthly, such as I am ashamd to name, being fit for none but Heliogabalus, and Sardanapalus. 5. His precepts are indulgent to per|iury, giuing leaue to haue as many wiues as a man will, to couple themselues not only with one of the same sex, but with bruit beasts also: to spoile one anothers goods, and none to be accused vnder foure witnesses.Mahomet wrought no mircles, but propagated his doctrine with fire and sword. 6. For his miracles he wrought none at al, but hee confesseth that God sent Moses with miracles, and Christ his forerunner with miracles, but for himselfe he was to come with fire and sword to force men, to obey his law, whereas the truth doth draw men of their own accords: rediculous al|so is that which hee writeth of himselfe, how when hee was a child, an Angel was sent from God to open his heart, and to take out that lumpe of bloud, which is the cause of sinne,The effects of he Turkish religion. as though the cause thereof were not spirituall. 7. The effect of his doctrine is periury, as that they need not to keepe any oth made with a Chri|stian, who is an Infidell: and also murder, as the eldest brother, so soone as hee commeth to weare the crowne, to strangle all the rest. For instance whereof, Mahome the third (this Kings father that now swaieth the Scep|ter at Constantinople) did not onely murder his brethren, but to rid himselfe of the feare of all competitours (the greatest torment of the mighty) at the very same time

caused ten of his fathers wiues and concubines, such as by whom any issue were to bee feared, to bee all drowned in the sea.
And is it not now a wonder, that the people of the Turks and Persians, being both warlike and politicke, magnifi|cent and stately, and to say in a word, the very hammer of the world, as it was said of Babylon, should be thus ledde away with these vild inchantments of their wicked Pro|phet Mahomet. I will say no more, but since the darknes of Turkie and Persia is so great, that it may be felt, and that it is a wonder in our eyes, to see such mists in those places, then let vs in this land reioyce, that are not onely endued with nature as they are, but with a speciall inspi|ration from aboue besides: hauing the celestiall doctrine of the euerlasting Sonne of God, to guide vs vnto true happinesse. For certainely the time will come, when both the great Turke and his Bassaes, and the Persian with his Chans, shall bitterly rue the time, and wish, with the losse of both their eyes, that they had but heard and seene, as much as we haue done.
Let this then perswade my louing Countri-men, that either shall hereafter serue in the warres of Hongary a|gainst the Turk or trade in those places, vtterly to detest the Turksh Religion, as the only way that treads to death and destruction.Lud. Viues  1. de veitate Fidei. We may conclude with Ludouicus Viues, who compareth Heathenisme and Mahometisme, to glasse: Touch not glasse, for though it be bright, yet is it brittle, it cannot endure the hammer: and Christianisme to gold, do you melt it, or doe you rubbe it, or do you beate it, it shineth still more orient.
But to returne where wee left, hauing spent three dayes and better, from the ruines of old Babylon, wee came vnto a towne called Ait, inhabited onely with Ara|bians, but very ruinous.The mouth c. Hell. Neere vnto which towne is a valley of pitch very merueilous to behold, and a thing almost incredible, wherein are many springs throwing

out aboundantly a kinde of blacke substance, like vnto tarre and pitch, which serueth all the countries there|abouts to make staunch their barkes and boates; euery one of which springs maketh a noise like a Smiths forge, in puffing and blowing out the matter, which neuer ceaseth night nor day, and the noyse is heard a mile off, swallowing vp all weighty things that come vpon it. The Moores call it, the mouth of hell.
Heere wee entred on the Desart of Arabia, wherein it pleased God, after the deliuery of his people out of E|gipts fornace, to exercise them, for their rebellion, vnder the conduct of Moses for fortie yeeres together; feed|ing them from heauen with Manna; and giuing them drinke miraculously out of the drie rockes. Three daies spent wee on this Desart,Anna a towne in Arabia. and so arriued at Anna, a town of three miles in length, but very narrow, inhabited al|together with Curdies, a most theeuish people. Here we staied two daies, and could not bee suffered to passe without a present to the gouernor of this towne, which came to a duckat a peece. Close by this towne run|neth the riuer Euphrates, with a very swift current, which doth merueilously fructiferate the country round about, whereby we prouided our selues of all necessaries fit for trauaile through the rest of the Desart.
Fom this towne wee proceeded, and euery second night, through the good descretion of our guid, we pitch|ed on the bancke of the riuer Euphrates, which much re|freshed our selues and wearied beasts, beholding euery day, great droues of wild beasts, as wild Asses all white, Gasells, Wolues, Leopards, Foxes, and Hares. And now to winde vp all, in passing from Babilon to Alepo, they ordinarily with Camels spend forty daies, trauelling through this sory  barren Desart lying vnmanured be|cause of the scarcity of moisture. Neuerthelesse great is the mutuall commerce and trade, through these sandy and barren places, and that by the labour of Camels,

which carry wonderous burdens, as a thousand weight a peece,The Camll a commodi|ous beast. and that for forty daies and vpwards. They drink in these sterill and sandy places, but once euery fifth day, and if extremity inforce, they will indure the want of water tenne or twelue daies. When their burdens are off, a few thistles, thornes, or leaues of trees, and a little round ball of paste made of barley meale wil suffice them. There is no lyuing creature lesse chargeable, and more laborious then the Camel, how beit wee vsed not their seruice, by reason of the speed which the Chiaus made for Constantinople, so that the trauell with the Carauan is forty daies about; wee passed in eighteene daies in much security, and so in great safety by the mercy of God I arriued againe in Alepo.
FINIS.





ERRATA.
PAg. 6. l. 26. read corn and. p. 10. l. 32. read Mildenal. p. 25. l. 26. r. Maidin on an house. p. 25. l. 31. r. then for. pa. 28. l. 26. r. funera. p. 30. l. 26. r. Ararat. p. 37. l. 5. r. as. p. 38. li. 21. r. was. p. 50. l. 22. r. street. l. 25. r. street. p. 63. l. 35. r. was. p. 65. l. 5. r. inexorable. p. 68. l. 25. d. one. p. 73. l. 8. r. firre p. 75. li. 24. r. is this. p. 84. l. 1. r. Siras. l. 2. d city. p. 85. l. 14. r. antique.




