




THE
Maintenance of the
MINISTERY.
Wherein is plainely declared how the
Ministers of the Gospell ought to be main|tayned:
and the true and ancient practise of our Church
in this case, shewed to be agreeable to the word
of God, and all Antiquity.
Necessary in these times to be read and considered of all sorts
of Christians, but specially of such as liue in
Townes and Citties.
By RICHARD EBVRNE, Minister of the word.
1. Cor. 9. 11.
If we haue sowen vnto you spirituall things: is it a great matter if we reape your
carnall things.
LONDON,
Printed for Eleazar Edgar, and are to be sold at his shoppe
in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the
Wind-Mill. 1609.




To the right Reuerend Fa|ther
in God, Iames by diuine Prouidence,
Lord Bishop of Bathe and VVelles, Ri|chard
Eburne wisheth in Christ Iesus feli|citie
externall, internall, and eternall.
_IT is the Custome (Right reuerend father in
God) and that vsual, auncient, and appro|ued,
of such as publish to the world their
writings, to dedicate the same to some or
other personage, eminent in the Church
or Co~mon-weale. What others ofttimes
doe, more for fashion then occasion, for
fauour then neede, thereto am I moued and euen compel|led
by some Necessitie; because handling an argument
somewhat rare (for fewe they be that haue laboured in the
like) and though verie profitable for the Church of God
at all times, and in these exceeding necessarie, yet not very
pleasing to such as either by too much couetousnes, or too
little consideration may be carried with vnequal censure to
condemne that they like not, or reiect without iust cause,
that they vnderstand not; I neede the Patronage of such a
one, as by his authoritie countenancing it, might shielde it
from iniurie, and by his iudgement approcing it, defend
it from enuie.
And to this purpose, after I had pend this my Treatise of
the Maintenance of the Ministerie, bethinking with my

selfe whom to I might offer it, vpon some necessarie  iust
causes I resolued to dedicate the same aboue any vnto your
Lordship. First in regard of the very subiect and nature of
of the worke it selfe: which being such, as wholly concerns
the Fabrique (as I may say) of the Church, whereof your
Lor: is a principall vpholder; and the estate of the mini|sters
in the Church, of which no small number doe labour
(if I may so speake) in your vineyard, seemeth properly to
require such a one to vndertake the protection thereof, as
by his calling and dignitie in the Church, rather then the
common-wealth, is enabled thervnto. And then in regard
of my selfe who haue heretofore employed the first and no
small part of my ministery within your Lordships iurisdic|tion
and Diocesse; and now againe (by Gods special pro|uide~ce)
called back to finish my course within the same, doe
acknowledge it to bee my duety to respect aboue other, as
the vine vnder whose shadowe I rest, that Architect vnder
whom and by whom I am set on worke: and doe hope I
may bee bolde to haue recourse as a Soldiour to his owne
Captaine, or a seruant vnto his owne Lord, for the patro|nizing
of my labours, where my selfe am entertained.
Touching the worke it selfe; The scope whervnto I haue
therein principally,  in maner onely aimed, is to declare
how necessarie and conuenient it is, That the Ministers of
the word in all places,  in each seuerall congregation should
bee prouided of due and competent maintenance. In explaining
whereof I haue haue shewed, by whom, by what meanes,
and in what sort, this maintena~ce should be yeelded: with|all,
against such as affect new fashions, and whom nothing
pleaseth but what is deformed by some innouation, I haue
made it apparant that the ancient and most vsuall practise
of our land in this case is agreeable to the word of God, 
practize of the most auncient and best times. Such indeed
as can not iustly by anie pensionarie or other like confused

and strange course be bettered and amended. Where our
practize doth digresse, as best thinges seeldome stand anie
long time without some corruption and declination from
their integritie, I haue in hope of some redresse partlie noted.
It is a thing too manifest, that the estate of our ministerie at
this day is not such, that we may affirme of it, That it is euery
where duely prouided for:  that we that are therin haue no cause
for want of maintenance and necessaries for our life to com|plaine.
But contrariwise, howsoeuer in many places it is,
yet (God be thanked) Such as it ought to bee: yet in not a few,
by reason that that course which God himself hath appoin|ted,
equitie approued, and ancient practise confirmed, is in|terrupted,
and not in anie measure there obserued, it is such
as becommeth not the Gospel of Christ: such as not a lit|tle
hindereth the prosperitie thereof, in a word such as the
ministers themselues haue a iust cause to complaine of, all
reasonable men must acknowledge needes amendment; 
it behoueth those that are in place and authority therevnto
gratiously, to heare, farther to consider of, and speedily and
duely to redresse.
Which beeing a worke acceptable to God, needefull for
our Church, profitable and honorable for the whole land,
will (no doubt) the more be respected, and the sooner bee
effected, if it shall please your good Lordship, together with
the rest of your brethren (the most reuerend fathers of our
Church, looking according to the experience  wisedome
that God hath inriched you withall, into the estate of ma|nie
distressed and impouerished churches within your Iu|risdictions)
to open your mouthes in the cause of the affli|cted,
and according to the power  authority, which God
hath giuen you for the benefit  edification of the church,
indeuour to repaire the ruines,  make vp againe the brea|ches
thereof. Wherein you may doe great seruice to the
Ch: much further the Gospell, and become euen founders

of manie churches within your seuerall Diocesses, which
ow (alas) through vnreasonable customes, cruell and hard
compositions, beggerly stypends, small endowments, and
non payement of personall tithes, bee in manner desolate;
and doe pittie the hearts of all such as duly regard learning
and religion, truly loue  respect the ministers of the word,
rightly know what becommeth the house of God, and vn|einedly
wish the prosperitie of our Zion, to see howe they
lie in the dust. You are the Pillers vpon whom wee doe
stay, the mountaines from whence we doe looke for helpe,
and the rockes vnder whose shadowes we trust to be assisted
and sheltred against the rage and violence of such extremi|ties
 miseries as manie of your churches are subiect vnto.
And wee hope that the loue you beare to learning, the care
you haue of the people committed to your charges, the
zeale you carrie vnto the Church of God, and the respect
you haue to vs of the ministrie vnder you, of whom manie
(hauing not in this plenty and peace wherewith God hath
blessed Israel, wherewith parc  duriter to sustaine their
liues) are discouraged not encouraged, vnabled not ena|bled
to the worke they should performe, and made euen
wearie of their calling, will mooue you, after the Gospell it
selfe now throughly setled, and the sects and schismes of our
church now quieted, as louing fathers, to relieue what you
may, the externall wants of your children;  as good Cap|tains,
what lies in you to prouide for the due pay of all such
Souldiours as are vnder your hands: that henceforth none
of them (as co~monly yet many are) bee inforced, as it were
starting out of the camp, to entangle themselues with the
affaires of this life; but attending wholly the seruice where|to
they are prest, may please you that haue admitted them, but
chiefly Christ Iesus the high Bishop of our soules,  Primate
of the whole church, that hath called them to be souldiors.
To further, and (if I may presume so to speake) as it were

to open a way to this so godly, so good and necessary work,
I haue, occasioned therevnto aboue manie, (and which I
might not with good conscie~ce not prosecute) as the poore
widow offered my mie, and as a plaine, but a willing hear|ted
workman bestowed a little labour. Which if your good
Lordship, approouing my sincere and religious purpose a|boue
mine abilitie (which, knowing my selfe to be, as from
my heart I doe acknowledge the meanest of a thousand 
most vnable of many thousands to put my hand to so great
a work, and open my mouth in so weightie a cause, I freely
confesse is very small) vouchsafe in good part to accept; and
whatsoeuer my desert or handling of the cause bee, to affect
and fauour the cause it selfe, which for it selfes sake, deserueth
all furtherance; that so what I haue spoken in the behalfe
thereof, beeing defended from the peruerse iudgement of
the ignorant, and iniurie of all, others may bee moued of
their abundance to cast in richer gifts, and as God hath fil|led
them, like vnto Bezaleel the sonne of Vri, and Aholab the
sonne of Ahisanch, with greater knowledge  more plen|tie
of his spirit, to adorne  inlarge what I haue but rudely
informed, or may be but sparely pointed at: you shall en|courage
mee to proceed yet what I may, in that I haue be|gun,
till I see it come from seed to fruit, and purchase both
the thanksgiuing of many to God for your readines to this
worke of the Lord, and the prayers of mee  manie others
with me vnto the Almighty for his graces  blessings both
spirituall  temporall, to be continued and increased vpon
you. The Lorde Iesus vouchsafe vnto you his heauenly
gifts, and so guide you by his holy Spirit, that you may sin|cerely
set forth his Gospel,  seeke his glory in this world,
 in the world to come be crowned by him with celestiall
and eternall glorie. Amen.
Your Lor. euer to be commanded in the
worke of the Lorde,
Richard Eburne.




To the Reader.
_ACcept I pray thee (Christian Rea|der)
in good parte, what I present
vnto thee, to good purpose. Let
not my plainenesse displease thee;
which for to profit thee, as the fittest
phrase for an argument of this forme, I haue more
then ordinarily affected. In other stile I might hap|pely
more better haue pleased a few, but am assu|red
should lesse haue satisfied all. It is the hearers
dutie that I principally teach: necessarie therfore I
should so expresse it, that they, euen they of mea|nest
reach, and slowest capacitie, husbandmen,
trades-men, artificers, and whosoeuer else, might
fully conceiue me. As heere is whereby to direct
the vnlearned, so there wanteth not wherewith
to exercise the learned, whether teacher or hearer.
Th' one shall find his due, th' other his dutie, more
plainlie taught then hitherto by any. To whom
this seemeth not enough, occasion at least is offe|red,
the way thus opened, to performe more.
Mine attempt is no restraint of other mens liber|tie.
For the matter, I nothing doubt of thine as|sent

in most points. If in some we dissent, so it be
not in the chiefest, the matter is not great. Yeelde
mee these, That the Minister ought to haue cer|taine,
sufficient, and liberal maintenance: that there|to
euery one of anie abilitie, ought (according to
his abilitie, and of such goods as hee hath) to con|tribute:
That the best meanes to raise it, must
needes be that, which God, Gods church, and all
Antiquitie haue, by practise, approoued: and for
the rest I will not contende, nor when these are
duely practised (for of that, questionles we come
yet farre too short) any more complaine.
Thus hoping, if my labours like thee, thou wilt
wishe to them such successe as thou perceiuest I
desire: if not, yet thou wilt affoord me that or|dinarie
fauor, which other men in works of lesse
moment,  worse argument, doe often obtaine,
I wish to thee as much good as thine own heart,
christianly affected, can desire.
Thine in the Lord, and for the
seruice of the Churche,
R. E.



The Argument and Summe of the whole Trea|tise
following, according to the Chapters there|of,
which may serue in steede of a Table.

The first Chapter
THe first Chapt. as an Introduction to the whole, i of the Writer of the par|cell
of Scripture which in this Treatise is handled, and of the occasion why
it was written. And therein is shewed:

1. How necessarie and fit this kinde of doctrine was then and is now.
2. How contrary ministers in these dayes are oftentimes dealt with
3. The principall causes of such ill dealing.



The second Chapter
SHeweth, That euery one that is taught by the minister, ought (hauing goods)
towards his teachers maintenance to be contributarie, and can from that due|tie
by no priuiledge, custome, c. be exempt.
God doth assigne and warrant to Ministers their maintenance.
They ought to haue it, first and principally in regard of their labour.
Which is painefull to themselues, profitable to others.
2. For that they doe not intermeddle in other mens labours  Trades of life.
Their maintenance cannot without great sinne be denyed them.


The third Chapter
BEing a more speciall explication of the hearers duety before in generall sorte
onely set downe, declareth:

1. What this word (Goods) vsed in the Text doth signifie.
2. Of what sorte of goods the minister must haue a pat.



The fourth Chapter
1, THat the right  best maner of payment to the minister, is That he be payd
his part of euery thing, in its proper kind, as naturally God doth send it.
2. and not by a set Stipend.


The fifth Chapter
THat toward the Ministers maintenance, euery man ought to contribute pro|portionably,
and not voluntarily onely what euery man will.
That is tollerable onely in some cases,
But generally or ordinarily it is a course very pernitious and euill.
Yet how it might be somewhat tollerable.



The sixt Chapter
THe Minister must haue  his maintenance, not an imagined competent por|tion
onely. But specially besides offerings, the Tithes of all things.
Which are still due by diuine right: And be of . sorts. viz. Predial  Personal.


The seuenth Chapter
YEeldeth some speciall reasons, why God vouchsafeth to haue (as his owne.)
some part of all mens goods.
Why the Ten.
Why so great a portion, as is Tithes, Offerings, c. bee hath assigned vnto
his Ministers. Where the Reader shall finde diuers weightie cause, why Mi|nisters
ought to haue, not a beggerly and sparing, but ample and liberall main|tainane.


The Eight Chapter
COnteineth Answeres to diuers Obiections, Namely,

1. Touching the vnworthines of the Minister.
2. The greatnes of the Tenth.
3. The wealth of the Minister.
4. Custome.
5. Personall Tithes, which to pay is a benefite.
6. The Statute of Edu De Decimi.

Why it were to be wished, that for a perpetuall Composition about Personall
Tithes, the Custome of the Citie of London, aboue any other, might, the whole
Land through, bee put in practise.


The ninth Chapter
WHat comes by laying out our goods vpon worldly vses.
And what, vpon heauenly and spirituall vses.
How daungerous an vnprofitable, euen in respect of their outward and temp|rall
estates it is, men to be illiberall, and ouersparing to their Ministers.
And on the other side, how gratefull to God, and gainfull to themselues to be
liberall and bountifull.


The tenth Chapter
COmprehendeth the Summe and Conclusion of the whole discourse.
And declareth some motiues that haue put the Authour of this Treatise in
hope, That his labour shall not be without some good effect.

Which God for his Gospels sake vouchsafe, Amen.





THE MAINTE|NANCE
OF THE
Ministerie.

Gala. 6. 6. 7.
Let him that is taught in the word, make him that teacheth him parta|ker
of all his goods. Be not deceiued: God is not mocked. For whatso|euer
a man soweth, that shall he also reape.


CHAP. I.


1 Of the Writer of this parcell of Scripture, and the occasion why it
was written.
2. How necessary and fit, this kinde of doctrine was then, and is now.
3. How contrary therunto Ministers in these daies are ofttimes dealt
with.
4. The principall causes of such ill dealing.


_THis parcell of Scripture (as the
words themselues doe plainly e|nough
to euery mans vnderstan|ding
declare) is an instruction or
direction vnto all Christians, tea|ching
them how they ought to
deale with their Ministers tou|ching
their maintenance: that so
they be not discouraged, but in|couraged
to labour painfully and
profitably among them in the
word and doctrine. It doth con|tain
three principal parts: that is, first a Precept, secondly a Com|mination,
and thirly a Confirmation: first a Precept, verse. 6. in

these words, Let him that is taught, c. 2. A Commination, in the
first member of the 7. verse, Be not deceiued: God is not mocked.
3. The Confirmation, in the latter member of that verse: for
whatsoeuer a man soweth, that also shall he reape. The first of these
sheweth briefly euery mans dutie in this behalfe. The second is
an answere to all such cauils and obiections, as either vngodly or
vnwilling people vse to pretend and make for excuse of their
carelesnes and neglect of that dutie. The third, by an argument
and reason taken partly from the profit and good that shall arise
and redound by the due performance of this dutie, to all that
carefully obserue it: partly (for that also is implied) from the dis|profit
and hurt that doth and will befall them that be carelesse
and backward in the practise thereof, confirmeth whatsoeuer in
the former is taught.
To the opening of the words themselues before I do come,
it wil not be amisse to consider a litle, First of the writer of them,
who it was: then secondly of the occasion that might moue him
thus to write, what it was.
The writer hereof (as the title or inscription of the Epistle
shewes) was the Apostle S. Paul. He being the teacher of this doc|trine,
the proclaimer of this precept; who was, as the Apostle of
Iesus Christ, so that Apostle which laboured more then any of
the rest, and did in sundry gits excell them all: hee (I say) tea|ching
this kinde of doctrine, which he doth not here alone, but
almost in euery Epistle, as 1. Cor. 9. 1. Thess. 5. 1. Tim. 5. c. his ex|ample
and doing therein doth sufficiently shewe vs, that it is a
kinde of doctrine, As requisite and necessary for the Church of
God, and to be published and taught abroad: So, well beseeming
the grauitie of a Preacher in the Church,  befitting the mouth
of the Minister of God in the Pulpit. It is a kinde of doctrine, I
am not ignorant, as seldome in these dayes handled and dealt
withall as any: vpon doubt it seemeth, least people take occasion
thereby, to deride them that vtter it, as speaking for themselues,
and taxe them as desirous of filthy lucre, rather then respect as
the truth, or obey it as is meete. But by this kinde of silence the
Ministers themselues haue receiued (I am perswaded) more hurt
then possibly they could by speaking: and the Church hath in|curred
more detriment, and the Gospell more hindrance by the
ignorance thereof, then possibly they could preiudice or re|proach,

if it had bene made more knowne.
People know in generall tearmes, and that rather by the ve|ry
light of reason, then rules of religion, That the Minister must
haue maintenance: and can say, That the labourer is worthy of his
hire. But, as their practise often argues, they account hee hath
that, when many times it is in name, rather then in deed; in shew,
then in substance: that they vse him very well, when they paie
him in maner nothing: and do their dutie to the vttermost, euen
when they withhold from him the greatest part of his due. Ne|cessary
it is therefore that they be better instructed in this be|halfe,
and Ministers oftner to teach this lesson: which we finde
hitherto, by many badly learned, and worse practised. To encou|rage
and imbolden them hereunto, they haue many examples:
as of old the Prophet Malachy, who ch. 3. handles it of purpose,
reprouing sharply the people of his time, for not performing,
as they should, this dutie towards the Lord himself,  the sonnes
of Aaron the Lords Ministers. Then our Sauiour himselfe, who
assoone as euer he sent abroad his Apostles to preach, prescribeth
them what order to obserue for their maintenance, and sheweth
them with what right they might demaund,  receiue the same.
But specially this our Apostle; who intreating thereof, both of|tentimes
and at large, offers himselfe their leader, and (if I may so
speake) their companion in this kinde of labour. In whose step
while they do but tread, whose course while they do but follow,
what cause is there any should either feare the spurning of the
contentious, or care for the scorning of the contemptuous?
2. And herein too, I cannot but obserue the prudence  proui|de~ce
of God, which inspires this kind of doctrine into the mind,
and in stils it into the pen of this Apostle rather then any other,
whose labours were to come most to light: and who labouring
with his owne hands, and liuing for the most part by his occupa|tion,
and not vppon the Churches charge, as appeareth, Act. 0.
34. and otherwhere (howsoeuer he had power to haue done o|therwise,
aswell as the rest of the Apostles, and namely the brethre of
the Lord and Cephas) 1. Cor. 9. 4. (was thereby the freest and fittest
of all other to speake in this matter: because it could not be ob|iected
vnto him, That he preached for himselfe, or sought his
owne gaine, and bewraied a coetous minde, c. Surely, the doc|trine
comming from his mouth, could not but thereby be re|ceiued

with lesse preiudice then from some other it might haue
beene: and being contrary to that himselfe oft times did practise,
did plainely shew, That in this his doctrine he did respect the
good of the Church and glorie of God, which he knew (whatso|euer
his practise was) were ordinarily this way and in this sort to
be furthered: and, That his doing and example was no necessary
rule, and therefore ought not to binde others; as which was pe|culiar
to him, not common to all, who generally must liue legi|bus
non exemplis by lawes not by examples, and practise ordinarily
according as of God we are all taught: and not, as, without Com|maundement,
and without necessitie, vpon some singular and ex|traordinary
respect, some few doe.
The occasion that mooued the apostle to write this doc|trine,
was no doubt, the care of the Church. 1. He did see euen
then, that the hearers of the word began to be weary of weldo|ing,
and to be negligent and slacke in ministring their temporall
things to their teachers, which bestowed on them spirituall: lea|uing
them destitute and vnprouided, whom they ought chiefly
to maintaine: which he knew well could not but turne to the
great hindrance of the Gospell, and preiudice of their soules. 2.
He did also foresee, That in the ages to come euen as it is come to
passe in these our daies, people would againe be at the same
point, little regarding their ministers so they might enrich them|selues,
and be better content to be vntaught, then at charge (as
they account it) for teaching. And therefore to meet with these
euills, to beat downe such errour and mischiefe betimes, and to
to arme vs there-against, as was fitte and necessary, he wrote
thus.
Now looke what occasion S. Paul had to write and publish this
doctrine at the first; the same, if not greater, is offered now a|gaine
to vrge and vtter it. Time was, when people thought no|thing
too much for the minister, but could euen finde in their
hearts with the Galathia~s, Cap. 4. 15. if it were possible, to haue pluckt
out their owne eies, to do them good. They offered to the Church
in such abundance, that there was rather an excesse then want:
for they did account those their best employed goods that went
to such vses. Insomuch that as Moses, Exod. 36. 6. was faine to
make proclamation thorough the hoast, That none should bring
any more stuffe for the work of the Tabernacle, there was already

enough and to spare:Cod. lib. 1. tit. 5. leg. 16. so the emperour Iustinian and some other
princes were inforced to make lawes of restraint against the ex|cessiue
liberality vnto churches. Yea the Popes themselues made
some Canons to that purpose. Those daies are now past, the case is
altered, and the matter turned cleane vpside downe. It is now be|come
a time not offerendi,See also our owne statutes of Mort|maine. but auferendi, not a time to offer and
giue to the Church, but to auferre and take from it Euery man, in
maner, euen bestudies himselfe how to pull from the ministery
that he neuer gaue:  though it be no charge nor cost of theirs,
yet think it al too much that it hath. Hence it is, that in many pla|ces
of the land, the Churches are so gliebd and gelded, that more
then the better halfe of their right and inheritance is transferred
vnto new owners: and in places not a few, the whole; only a beg|gerly
not a scholerly, a miserable not a ministerlike stipend re|serued.
And they into whose hands these things are fallen (a
thing to be wondered and lamented) make so little care or con|science
thereof, that among an hundred is hardly founde one,
that vppon conscience of what he holds (the Churches right)
or loue and zeale to the Gospell, or respect to the ministery
thereof, or compassion vppon the soules of the people, which
(their ministers maintenance kept away) both liue and die as
sheepe without a sheepheard,A Christian motion. hath restored any parte thereof to
the Church from which it is taken: but among a thousand, nay
among them all (so farre as I know) not one, that hath in all this
time of the Gospell, reendowed one Church of many, and resto|red
the spoiles thereof. Hence it is, that many Patrons of be|nefices
forgetting their names and titles, that is, that they be but
Patroni, defenders and keepers of their Churches, not Propri|etarij,
owners and inheritors, doe prooue latrones, robbers there|of;
for mony selling them, and by consequence euen the soules
of men, to the very diuell of hell, as Iudas did Christ to the
Scribes and Pharisies. Some conveying the gleib or temporali|ties
of the Church to their owne possession: Others cunningly
reseruing their owne tithes:  in a word, the most part of them
(yea though they haue already the fatt and best thereof) not wil|ling
to bestow but the scraps and fragments freely: To such an
height is Sacriledge and Simonie growne; one way or other,
making of that which is or should be beneficium ecclesiae a benefice
for the Church, a benefite to themselues, little regarding the

while how the people are prouided for, and whom they pre|ferre,
so they may come to a good market. Besides those mis|chiefes,
the people that are to pay the minister his due, make litle
or no conscience how they do it. Many count it not as Gods
parte, but reckon it as a priuate right to this and that man: and
as they be affected to the party that is to receiue, so are they
more or lesse willing to giue; as if it were left vnto their power
to limit each man his portion, and the ministers due were to be
laid out by euery mans arbitreme~t, according to his supposed de|serts,
and not according to the rule of God, and right of the
Church. Many account it a vertue to pare away what they can
from the ministers part, and hold it wisedome and well done, to
get all things done by him at as lowe a rate as may be. They
thinke they haue done the office of good parishioners, if (to sha|dow
their couetousnes or malice, with the colour of iustice)
they can deuise any shift and quirke in law how to debarre (I will
not say defraud) the minister of any due, and bring him to that
state, that he must crouch to them for a peece of bread, and not
be incouraged by them to his office: caring little though he do
not his office as he should, so they may deale with him for his
due as they would.
By all which and other like meanes, too long here to recite,
miserable verily is the estate both of minister and people in ma|ny
places. The people are not taught as they should be, but liue
still in blindnes and errour, in ignorance and superstition, to the
no little preiudice and slaunder of the Gospell, dishonor of God,
and the exceeding hazard of their soules. They haue mini|sters
rather in name then indeede. And as the poets faine of their
Tantalus in the waters, in the midst of all abundance and plenty
of the word round about them, they remaine needy enough; as
fed rather with the sight of the Gospell then the substance, and
hauing heard of it rather by fame, then tasted of it indeede. The
ministers themselues are many where disabled to do their duty;
and beeing but weake and meane of themselues (for such be
commonly thrust into such places) are made more weake and e|uen
vtterly vnapt, for want of meanes to further  enable them:
whereby being giuen to Idlenes and neglect of dutie, they are
confirmed therein: or being better disposed, by meere necessitie
are inforced thereto; least else they either shame themselues, or

sinke vnder the burthen.
Whence these euilles haue, and do spring; if we consider, I
cannot  other, but that it is principally from these . or . pe|rillous
roots: namely first from the roote of all euill, that is from
Couetousnes, secondly from contempt of the Gospel, and third|ly
from very ignorance. For, to speake nothing of the time past,
couetousnes it is that makes sacrilegious patrons at this day,
daily to make marchandize of holy things, not their own: to rob
and spoile their Churches, and into them to thrust (for desire of
gaine) such as are not to the saluatio~ but the perdition of the peo|ple.
And couetousnes principally it is, that so blindeth and hard|neth
many of the people, that they neither do, nor will vnder|stand
when they do most open wrong to the Church of God,
and manifestly abuse the ministers thereof.
The second cause I take to be the very contempt of the
Gospell; a disease too common in all places. There is not that loue
and estimation of the word, nor that desire of the preaching
thereof, that should be in people. Few they be that account the
very feete of them that bring the glad tidings of saluation vnto
them beautifull,Rom. 10. 15. or that receiue the preacher thereof as the Gala|thians
did Paul,Gal. 4. 4. euen as an Angell of God:Luc. 10. that esteeme the word as
the better parte with Marie: and finde it as did Dauid,Psal. 119.  19. dearer to their
soules then thousands of golde and siluer, or sweeter to their tast then ho|nie
and the honie combe. For then it could not be, but that as that
wise merchant in the Gospell,Math. 13. 45. hauing found one pretious pearle,
sold all that he had and bought it; so they would, for loue to the
word, spare no cost, and stand at no charge: and as Lidia, Act. 16.
15. hauing receyued the faith, constrained and euen adiured Paul
and all his companie, to accept of entertainement at her hands; so
they would rather enforce vppon the ministers of the Gospell,
more then their due, that they might encourage them to their
worke, then debarre them of any thing that is their owne; the rea|dy
way to make them wearie of all. He that is hungry wil buy him
foode how deare soeuer it be: he that is sicke, will haue physicke
what euer it cost him: he that loues play, will spend many times
that he can ill spare: And if men hungred after the Gospell as for
the bread of life, and counted the preaching thereof the only
physicke for the soule: if they tooke asmuch delight therein as
many do in vanities; it could not be, but that they would be as

ready to imploy their goods for the one as for the other: and
not pinch at expenses for this, being lauish and prodigall for
those: nor count euen nothing too much for this vse, and foure
or fiue times asmuch but little for vses much worse, and lesse ne|cessary
a great deale. We haue had the Gospell long, euen so long
till wee are wearie of it in a manner, as the Iewes were of Manna.
The continuance hath not, as it should, increased our content 
delight therein, we tasting more and more the sweetnes thereof;
but bred rather contempt. Els it were not possible, but we should
entertaine it with better affection, and maintaine the ministerie
thereof with greater contentation: not suffering and seeing them
to want, whose labours yeeld vs most benefit: nor enuying or
begrudging them necessaries, without whom we should be in
extreame and miserable penury.
The third cause of these euils, is very ignorance, grosse ig|norance:
wherewith many being blinded (as I haue already said,
and shall hereafter more shew) do sinne in this behalfe; and not
knowing that they sinne, continue in it without remorse, thin|king
they performe their dutie at full, when (God knows) they
be very farre from it.
To remedie these mischiefes, I see no readier nor better way
for such as be ministers, for such I say as bee in the ministery,
then following the plot laid out before them by this our apostle
S. Paul, To teach  set abroad this kind of doctrine more vsually
 largely, which long hath lien as it were buried in silence  ob|liuion:
that so the Gospell beeing now replanted amongst vs,
men may, after other doctrines more necessary to saluation,
learne also the way how to maintaine and continue the Gospell;
the wrongs and oppressions hitherto done to the Church, and
with much patience endured, may at length somewhat be righ|ted,
and the world henceforth begin to be ashamed of the Simo|ny,
sacriledge, and other like abhominations, whereby it hath hi|therto,
euen in the time of this cleare light of the Gospell, made
hauocke of our churches.



CHAP. II.


That euery one that is taught in the word, ought (hauing goods) toward
his teachers maintenance be contributarie.
And can from that dutie by no priueledge, custome, c. be exempt.
God doth assigne and warrant to them their maintenance.
They ought to haue it, principally in regard of their labour, which is
painefull to themselues, profitable to others.
And therefore cannot without great sinne be denied them.
Also, for that they do not intermeddle in other mens labors and trades
of life.



Verse. 6.
Let him that is taught in the word, make him that teacheth him parta|ker
of all his goods.

HAuing spoken sufficiently of the writer and occasion of the
words, I come now to the words themselues, and first to the
precept or commandement, ver. 6. In which (as the speciall
branches thereof) may more particularly be obserued, agreeable
vnto our purpose, these 3. things. First the persons commaunded,
who they be that must contribute vnto the minister, viz Hee, e|uery
one that is taught in the word. 2. the reason or cause why he
must do it: and that is, because he is taught; because the minister
doth teach him, for the Labourer is worthy of his hire. The third
is, what he must impart vnto him, namely a parte of all his goods.
I Concerning the persons, that must contribute, conferring
these first words of the precept, Let him that is taught with the later
of the same verse, viz. make him partaker, c. we may gather eui|dently,
That all and euery person whatsoeuer, which being a
hearer of the word doth owe and possesse to his owne proper
vse any kinde of goods whatsoeuer, is liable to this pay, subiect
to this precept,  within compasse (If I may so speake) of this sta|tute
and law of God. This statute and commaundement, I say,
reacheth vnto all  singular parishioners, as we tearme them, yea
to all hearers of the word whosoeuer both rich and poore, yong
and old, maried and vnmaried, housekeeper or not, maister and

seruant, merchant and mariner, officer and artificer, tradesman
and husbandman, townesman and countryman, or whosoeuer
els by profession he be; they all and euery of them, being hearers
of the word, and owners or possessors of any kinde of goods
whatsoeuer, are lyable to this course, payable to this purpose, and
must contribute more or lesse, according to their seuerall abili|ties,
to their teacher. As they haue a benefit by him in spirituall
things, so must he by them in things temporall. This may plain|ly
appeare vnto vs by the words of the Apostle, in that he doth
set downe the precept in the singular number. For when as he
doth not say, Let them that, c. but let him that is taught, c. he
declareth manifestly that the precept extends to euery one in
particular. No one is or can be exempted from this dutie, but is
necessarily to be charged therewith. He onely is excepted, which
possesseth no kinde of goods, hath nothing proper to himselfe,
deales not (as we say) for himselfe any way, but liues altogether
either vnder or by others, as children, prentizes, c. which are
yet wholly vnder the tutele, keeping,  finding of parents, mai|sters,
and other like: or such as be extreame poore, and so doe
liue, not by their owne goods, but by the goods and almes of o|ther
men. This precept is very like vnto that law, which God of
old had by Moses giuen vnto his people Israel, as appeareth, Exo.
23. 15. in these words, None shall appeare before the Lord emptie; and
is both repeated  explaned, Deut. 16. 17. thus: Euerie man shall
giue according to the gift of his hand,  according to the blessing of the
Lord thy God, which he hath giuen thee. That is, euery man shal giue
according to his abilitie more or lesse: the rich man shall giue
according to his riches, a great  liberall portion, and the poo|rer
sort of his tenuitie a little also, euery man something: None
shall come without any thing at all. Like to this was the lawe of
tithes, vnto which euery man was subiect that possessed ought.
The tenth was the Lords, and must be paide vnto the Lord,
wheresoeuer and with whomsoeuer it was to be founde: as appea|reth,
Numb. 18. and otherwhere.
Wherevnto we may finde the practize both of the Iewes in
time of the law, and of Christians aswell in the infancie as flou|rishing
estate of the Gospel, to haue bene very co~sonant, as may
appeare sufficiently for the one, by the hystorie of that poore
widowe, Luc. 21. who offered, of her penurie, somewhat into

the treasurie of God, aswell as did the rich and wealthy much, of
their abundance and superfluities. And yet neither is she blamed
by our Sauiour, as doing more then her dutie, more then she nee|ded,
but highly commended as dooing her duetie, and but her
duetie, cheerefully and liberally: nor are the priests that receiued
the offrings, reprehended for taking an offering of a widow so
poore, themselues beeing rich: And by the words of the Phari|sey,
Lu. 18. 12. who (speaking no doubt according to the generall
practise of al) protesteth, That he gaue tithe of al that he did possesse.
whereto accordeth our Sauiour, Math. 23. 23. acknowledging
for them, That tithed euen the very mint and annis, Rue, and Cum|min,
et omne olus, and euery other herbe; and saying, That they
howsoeuer they ought to haue done also greater things, yet
those they ought not to haue left vndone.
As for the times of the Gospell, Act. 2. 45. we read, how the
Church at first, being not otherwise prouided for, So manie as had,
either possessions or goods, that is, either lands or moueables, (for
so the wordes in the iudgement of learned interpreters doe sig|nifie)
sold them,  laid downe the price at the Apostles feete, that the~ce
distribution might be made to euerie man, poore and rich, hearer 
teacher, according as he had neede. And so euery man that was
taught in the word, did that way, make him that taught him, par|taker
with him of all his goods.
The Gospell once throughly planted, and, by the co~uersion of
Constantine and other Emperours and Kings vnto the faith of
Christ, setled in peace, this law was more generally and fully as
practized, so established and confirmed. For vpon due notice
and consideration thereof, euen then vniuersally in all nations,
kingdomes and countries that had receiued the faith, landes
were giuen and consecrated, and tithes restored to the Church in
such a generall, vniforme, godly and goodly sort, both for the
maner  the measure thereof, as is yet admirable to as many as
note either the action then, or the disposition of people now. To
which course, how had it beene possible euer people could so ge|nerally,
so vniformely, and so readily haue beene drawne, vnlesse
Christians then with one minde and one mouth had ac|knowledged
this doctrine here taught them by the Apostle, viz.
That it was euerie mans duetie to make his minister partaker of all his
goods, and thereupon consented, as it were by diuine inspiration,

That for the better successe of the Gospell then, and auoyding of
contentions in time to come, such course should be taken as
might once for euer yeeld  settle it to the Church. Some may
happily thinke, That the Church got these thinges in time of
blindnes and popery, when men in superstitious zeale, did they
knew not what: but I am fo farre from their opinion, that I assure
my selfe, and with great probabilitie can gather and make de|monstration,
That those things which are the Churches in right,
and properly belong to the maintenance of her ministers, were
all graunted and established in their largest, best, and vprightest
forme, before popery was planted, euen in the purest and most
flourishing time of the Gospell; and that in time of Popery little
was added thereunto, but rather much thereof was then, and
thereby, taken from the Church: And am readie to prooue and
shew, That the very forme it selfe dooth plainely and plenti|fully
argue true zeale, great piety  much wisedome with sound
knowledge; and not blind zeale and foolish superstition, to haue
beene the founders thereof. But of these, more hereafter.
The doctrine and sense of the words beeing thus laid downe,
it shal not bee amisse now to consider somewhat withall of such
motiues as the words themselues may farther affoord, wherby
to moue euery man to the careful and due performance of this
duety. To which purpose, t furthereth much, As we haue already
seene, who and what persons are commaunded, So to consider
likewise, who it is that thus commaundeth: For that, in any law
and precept, is a matter of moment, and specially respected. All
scripture is by diuine inspiration, and hath not man but God the
author thereof. It is not therefore Paul but the Lord aboue, not
man but God that maketh this lawe. The person is such as hath
authorithy to commaund  power to compell: such as of whose
Iustice in decreeing and equity in prescribing, without extreame
impiety none may doubt. Such consideration of the person
commanding may serue vs to diuers vses  instructions. For,
First it dooth well confirme that already sayd touching the
persons that must pay, shewing: That seeing God requireth
this duety of euery man that is a hearer of the word, therefore
from performance thereof no man can bee free and exempt.
For who can discharge a man from obedience to God? As for
the lawes that men doo make, beeing but meere humane or|dinances,

ciuil constitutions, they that make them, may re|voake
them, or except and exempt from the penalty of them
whom they will: or a higher power may dispense therewith: but
what man may revoake that with God dooth enact? or dispense
with those whom God doth bind? t is a ruled case amongst Di|uines,
graunted euen in time of greatest ignorance, that
against Gods law, no dispensation or decree of man can hold: 
shal wee thinke or practize otherwise in our greatest knowledg?
Who can giue thee power or leaue to commit murther or adul|tery,
to breake the sabboth, or dishonour thy parents, to steale,
to oppresse, c. or make, if how dooest any of these things,
that it shal not bee sinne vnto thee? neither can any man giue
thee power to breake this law of God, or acquit thee of sinne,
if thou dooest breake it. Let men pretend custome, lycence,
dispensation, pardon, priuiledge, or whatsoeuer els of like nature
in this behalfe, it helps not. For as in the Law it is a Maxime,
Nullmtempus occurrit Regi, Against the king, Prescription of
time holds not: so in Diuinity is this another, Neque Tempus,
neque consuetudo, c. Neither time, nor custome, nor priuiledge,
c. can bee a barre against God. Men may aswel say, That by
custome, by licence, by priueledge, c. they may bee discharged
from seruing of God, and hauing any Church, any Sacraments,
any publike seruice, and so any religion amongst them. For
doubtlesse so farre and so long as they are bound to honor and
serue God publikely, to haue the Sacraments administred
amongst them orderly, to haue the word preached vnto them
effectually; so long and so farre are they and euery one of them
bound necessarily iure diuino, by the expresse Law of God, by
th'eternal and inuiolable decree of the highest, whose law is
surer then that of the Medes and Persians with altereth not, to
contribute and yeelde a part of their goods toward the mainte|nance
 continuance, the vse and exercise of that Religion, and
Ministery among them. Which whoso neglecteth and refuseth
to doo, hee dooth thereby, so farre as lyes in him, hinde the
seruice of God, shut vp the Church doores, and roote out from
among them the Ministery of the Church of God, by which
alone those things can bee and are to bee performed.
Secondly, it sheweth vnto vs the equity of the law. God
being the law maker, this law must therefore bee most equall

and iust. For who should make a iust lawe, if not Iustice it selfe?
decree that which is equal and right, if not equitie it selfe? or or|der
a thing wisely and excellently, if not wisedome it selfe? Shal
not the Iudge of all the world doe right? Genes. 18. 25. Rom. 3. 5.
Thirdly, it warranteth vnto the ministers themselues, their
right  title to their maintenance. God commanding the peo|ple
to pay, doth allow them to receiue that which is their due.
And therefore they may lavvfully and with good conscience
take it, bee it much or little; as their owne; because God, who
hath authoritie ouer all, and whose is the earth  all therein,
hath assigned it vnto them. They challenge not their mainte|nance
by warrant of mans law onely, or onely by the rule of
equitie, but also iure diuino, by the law of God, who as hee made
lawes for the Priests  Leuits that serued at the altar in the time
of the law: so hath for his ministers in the time of the Gospell.
Which thing this our Apostle plainly testifieth, 1. Corint. 9. 13.
where he telleth vs, That as by Gods ordinance, They which mi|nistred
about holie things did eate of the things of the Temple: and they
which waited at the altar, were partakers with the altar: So also hath
the Lord ordained for the time of the Gospel, that they which
preach the Gospel should liue of the Gospel. Wherefore if at any time
they preaching the Gospell, haue not thereof whereon conue|niently
to liue, it is not because God hath not allowed  allotted
them sufficient for their labour, but because men iniuriously 
wickedly withhold from them one vvay or other, that which is
indeede their due. This should aduise men to make conscience
hovv they deale with the minister, seeing it is God that hath
interessed him to that whereby hee is to liue. For they cannot
debarre him of his due, or defraud him of any part of his right,
without an open breache of Gods lawe, and manifest infringing
of diuine ordinance. Were it not great iniury and sinne to denie
a noble mans seruant, or withhold from one of the Kinges offi|cers,
the reuenues, the lands, the pension, or other maintenance
which his Lord and Maister hath out of his landes,  possessions
lawfully giuen him? But no noble mans seruant, no officer of
any king or potentate, can haue greater right or better interest
vnto any lands, reuenues, pension, or other incomme giuen him
by his Maister, then the minister hath to that with is his due,
because hee hath it not from man but from God, and holds in

right of the truest and highest owner, the Lord of all. In the
law of God there is a curse against him that remooueth his neigh|bours
landmarke, which his sore-elders had set: Deut. 27. 17. If he
bee accursed that remooueth the bounds that men haue laid
out, is not hee nigh vnto cursing, and in daunger of Gods
great indignation, that remooueth the bounds of the Church,
and altereth the right of the minister, which the father of vs
all, hath for many generations past, fixed to stand for euer?
This is the principall reason why euery man should
pay of his goods to the minister,That is taught. namely (which I
obserued to be the second branch of the first gene|ral
part of this verse) Because hee is taught in the worde by the mi|nister.
The minister dooth teach the word and religion of God,
and so ministreth to his hearer the food of the soule: it is but
equitie therefore, as hee receiueth spirituall things, that hee ren|der
temporall things; and that the minister labouring for him
whom hee teacheth, bee likewise payd by him that is taught:
for the Labourer is worthie of his hire. Naturall  common
reason without Diuinitie can teache euery man that it is but e|quitie,
if hee would haue a man take paines and worke for him,
that hee dooe pay and content him for it as is fit. Sith then
that euery man, euery parishioner doth looke that the minister
stould labour and take paynes for him in his mynisterie as occa|sion
requireth, it is meet, that hee allow and yeelde him for it
condigne recompence. Thou wilt not lightly offer that indig|nitie
and iniury to a scholemaister, to haue him to teache thy
childe in the schoole halfe or a whole yeare: to a labourer to
worke for thee in thy field or barne, a month or a vveeke:
to a messenger, to trauaile on thy busines a day or two: or
to a Scriuener to write for thee, and it bee but an houre or two,
but that thou will pay the one and the other for his labour and
worke,Too often practized. as it is woorth,  he deserueth. And wilt thou offer that
to thy minister that hee shall attend thee day by day, a weeke, a
month, yea a whole yeare together, at Church, and at home, for
nothing, or that vvhich is as good as nothing?
But say I these things according vnto man? saith not our
Apostle the same also? who, 1. cor. 9. 7. reasoneth thus: Quis militat
propriis stipendiis? c. who goeth a warfare at any time of his owne
cost? who planteth a vineyard,  eateth not of the fruite thereof?

or who feedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the milke of the flocke?
Reade the place: it is worth the perusing. And 1. Tim. 5. 17.
writeth thus: The elders that rule wel are worthie of double honour,
specially they which labour in the word and doctrine: for (saith hee) the
scripture saith Thou shalt not mousle the mouth of the oxe that treadeth
out the corne, The labourer is worthie of his wages. Where you may
note, That hee dooth expound himselfe what that double honour,
is viz. when besides the co~digne reuerence yeelded to their per|sons
for their office sake, the ministers haue such maintenance
also yeelded them as is fit and due: and by conseq. that, it denyed
or withheld from them, they are abused and dishonoured. God
himselfe doth in his law likewise, Num. 18. 21. alleadge this rea|son
as the principal cause why the tenthes and other duties
allotted to the sonnes of Leui (who were the priests or ministers
of God in those daies) should accordingly bee payd vnto them.
Behold (saith God) I haue giuen to the sonnes of Leui all the tenth in
Israel for an inheritance, for their seruice which they serue mee in the ta|bernacle
of the Congregation,  ver. 31. It is your wages for your seruice.
Our Sauiour in like maner liketh this reason so wel, that spea|king
of this matter, and shewing his Apostles by what right they
might enter into any house,  eate and drink such things as were
set before them, and tary in that house without going from
howse to house, for one meales meate here, another there, like
beggers; vseth no other reason for it but this, For the labourer
is worthy of his hire. Math. 10. 10. Luc. 10. 7. And it is so con|sonant
not only to religion, but also to all naturall reason and
common humanity, that it is hard to finde that man which thin|keth
it not requisite to bee obserued; I say not as I haue alreadye
sayd, toward his seruants  labourers, but euen towards his very
cattel, the beasts of the earth. For who is there but will allow his
horse prouander, that hee may trauell well? or his oxe fodder
enough, that he may plough well?
Here be goodly comparisons, it may bee some will thinke, 
faire proofes. What, from beastes to men? yea, and marke it
well. For the comparison though it bee plaine and homely, is
not of my inuention. I borrowed it from our Apostle S. Paul,
who likes it so vvell, that hee doth vse it in tvvo seueral places
of his epistles, viz. 1. Cor. 9. 9. and 1. Tim. 5. 18. and hee did
borrow it of Moses, who receiued it of God, as appeareth, Deut.

25. 4. where thus it is written, Thou shalt not mousle the mouth of the
oxe that treadeth out the corne. From whence the Apostle doth
apply it to his purpose, and shewes, That God in making such
a law, did it more for our sakes that bee men and ministers, then
for the care hee had of oxen, though them also hee leaues not
vncared for: and would thereby giue vs to vnderstand, that if it
bee an vnreasonable  hard course to mousle the mouth of the
labouring Oxe, and pinch him of his meate, much more it is
vnreasonable and vnconscionable to deny to a man that labours
any way for thee, his due hire: but most of all, to the minister,
that labours for the good of thy soule, nourishment for his
body, and conuenient necessaries for his life. And therefore it
may wel bee feared, That the keeping and feeding of their oxen
and horses, will one day be a testimony against many Christians
in this behalfe: because they offer that measure to the minister,
which they doo not, nor will dooe, to the oxe that ploughes
in their field, or the horse that serueth for their iourney; beeing
careful that these bee kept well and fed at full, as knowing that
the better they are kept, the better they will labour: but very
carelesse for those other, though they pine for want of food, 
liue in misery for lacke of necessaries; yea, and yet exclaime and
grudge against them too, if they be not as laborious as those
that bee duely and wel mainteined; as against idle and carelesse
persons vngodly and slack in their ministery, without zeale,
c. as if they had neuer heard or quite forgotte~ the old prouerb,
They that will haue their lampe to giue them light, must
maintaine it with oyle accordingly.
The harder that a man dooth worke, the better hee deserues
(as wee commonly account) his wages: and the more his la|bours
doo profit vs, the willinger wee are to pay him his due. If
other men bee the better worthy of wages, because they worke
hard; of hire for their labour, because we get well thereby; much
more the minister of God: and that whether we respect the
greatnes of his labour, or the goodnes of his worke. For it is
not, as many account it, an easie, an idle, a pleasant  loytering
kind of life, to doo the worke of an Euangelist, but one of the
hardest and greatest of all others: nor a needlesse and fruitlesse
worke, but of all other the most necessary and profitable that
can bee. For to speake nothing of that long and laborious

preparation whereby a man is made fit for this worke, by spen|ding
all his time, euen from his cradle, till well-neere 30. yeares
of age, stil wearying himselfe with many studies, and wasting
the wealth of his friends with great and excessiue charges. Is it
not (thinke you) a great labour and an hard, to imploy his mi|nistery,
attend his study, and execute from time to time those
things that appertaine to his charge? They that are any thing
acquainted with these kind of exercises, can somewhat tell, how
it incombreth their sences, troubleth their mindes, breaketh
their sleepe, wasteth their goods, weakneth their bodies, impai|reth
their health, and sometimes shortens their daies: And as
it is a great labour and painfull to them, so is it exceeding good
 profitable to their people. These watch, but for their soules.
These fight, but to defend them from their spirituall enemies.
These are pastors, but to feed them: shepheards to keepe them
from the wolfe: lights, to direct them: salt, to season them.
These are ministers to doo them seruice: messengers, to bring
vnto them, the glad tidings of saluation: Embassadors on the
Lordes behalfe, to intreat them that they would bee reconciled
vnto God. These are Gods labourers, and they are Gods hus|bandry:
these are Gods builders, they are Gods building.
Suffer mee a little to magnifie the office. By the Labours of the
minister, wee are begotten vnto the Faith, brought fro~ darknes
vnto light, from the power of Sathan vnto God, stirred vnto
repentaunce when wee haue sinned, exhorted vnto our duetie
beeing slacke, reprooued when wee offend, confirmed beeing
strong, strengthned beeing weake, comforted in heauines,
humbled in prosperitie, instructed beeing ignorant, and in a
word saued in the day of the Lord: Without them wee could
neither know God nor our selues, eschew vice, or ensue vertue;
abandon errour, nor follow trueth; shake off infidelity, or receiue
the faith: to be short, neither auoyde hell, nor attaine heauen.
Wherefore, their worke  labour being so great vnto the~selues,
and so profitable vnto vs, if others bee worthy of wages for
their worke, they rather: of hire for their labour, much more
they: of liberall recompence for their paines, they most of all
of loue for their diligence, they of singular loue: of any honour
for their indeuours, they of double honour, that labour in the
word and doctrine. There must bee an equalitie; They to re|ceiue

of our labours, as wee of theirs: and seeing they doo
enrich vs in spiritual things, wee to keep them from pouertie 
needines at least in temporal things, that so they may labour
and euer bee ready and able to labour with ioy and not with griefe;
for that is as vnprofitable for vs as grieuous vnto them. If any
take my words as of no moment, let him heare yet how the
Apostle himselfe, 1. Corinth. 9. 11. speaketh in the same maner,
saying: If wee haue sowen vnto you spiritual things, is it a great thing,
dooth it seeme such a burthen to your shoulders, such a charge
to your purses, if wee reape your carnall things? For, is the ex|change
bad to receiue gold for copper, siluer for drosse, pearles
for stones, celestial treasures  eternal, for worldly and tempo|rary
trash? Other men looke to reape more then they doo sow,
(for haruest naturally dooth exceed the seed time) but wee are
content to reape both worse and lesse then wee sow; and shall it
yet bee thought ouermuch? yea, where other men sow in teares
and reape in ioy, shall wee bee infored to sow in ioy, and reape
in teares? or (more rightly to speake) both to sow and to reape
in teares?
Thow seest now (Christian Reader) a farther interest the mi|nister
hath vnto his maintenance. It is not only an inheritance
and annuitie giuen  assigned him by God, and so due to him,
because the Lord hath passed it ouer vnto him by assignation
(as also wee shal hereafter see): but it is also due to him by the
Law and rule of equitie, because of his labour. Hee deserues
it at our hands, and earnes euery penny thereof dearely, before
hee hath it: And therefore looke what right the seruant hath
to his wages, the labourer to his hire, the very like, as great
right and interest hath the minister to his maintenance, and
whatsoeuer is his due.
As his right is great, and the cause, why it ought to bee payd
him, iust and equall: so is the fault great, and the course very
vnequall, if it bee not performed. In the common opinio~ euen
of wordly men, hee is counted very vnreasonable, and of a bad
conscience, that will keep away wages from a seruant, or not pay
a workman and labourer his hire. Iudge then, what reason or
conscience is it, to keep backe the ministers maintenance which
is his wages? to deny or debarre him his due, which is his hire?
God dooth so exactly require the performance of that dutie

toward hm that worketh in thy field, that in his law hee sets an
houre by which it must be payd, Leuit. 19. 13. The workemans hire
shal not abide with thee vntil the morning. Hee must bee payd
ouernight, the very same day at euen that it is due. Deut. 24.
15. Moses addeth a reason why: least, (saith hee) hee crie against
thee vnto the Lord, and it bee sin vnto thee. And in Malac. 3. 5. the
Lord laies an heauie curse, and threatens to be swift in Iudgement
against them that keep backe the hirelings wages. The Lord
beeing thus prouident for the good vsage of the poore labourer
in thy barne or field; lookes hee not for as good dealing, and as
due payment vnto those that labour in his owne vineyard, and
whom he hath sent foorth into his owne haruest? or will he not as
speedily and seuerely reuenge their cause, and right their wrongs,
when they shall cry vnto him for the iniuries that are offered vn|to
them, and for the wrongs and oppressions they receiue and
sustaine at the hands of such as keepe backe their hire,  pay not
the~ their wages, but deny them their iust  appoynted portions?
The bread of deceit (saith Salomon) is sweete to a man:Prouerb. 20. 19.  9. 17 but after|ward
his mouth shalbe filled with grauell. It is goods cleare gayned, 
so much well saued some may thinke, that is gotten from the
Church, and kept from the Minister: but if any proue the richer
thereby at length, or such goods doe long prosper, I am much
deceyued. For sure I am, that there is a God that iudgeth the earth.
Thus farre of the principall cause why, viz. in regard euen of de|sert,
people ought to yeelde vnto their Ministers due mainte|nance.
Besides which, the same wordes of this parcell of scrip|ture
in hand, viz. let him that is taught, and him that teacheth, may
yeelde vs yet another reason or cause thereof: and that is, in re|gard,
not of that they doe, but (as I may say) in regarde of that they
doe not. I meane for that they doe not intermeddle, (for so
they should not) in the trades, occupations and professions of o|ther
men: but as they are consecrated to god, do giue themselues
wholly  the Ministerie and seruice of the Church,  so do not
by dealing in their trades, take from other men their liuings. In
which respect, euen as that was one especiall reason, why the
Iewes payd tithes vnto their brethren the Leuits, viz. for that they
had none inheritance among them; but that which should haue
beene their part, went in common among the rest: so this ought

to be one sufficie~t cause, why the Ministers of the Gospell should
haue maintenance of and from others, Because they entangle
not themselues with the affaires of this life as doo others: which
if they did and might doo, would happily bee more preiudice
to others then their maintenance now comes too. For were
they not called by God to this busines, and set a part for this
worke of the Gospel alone, they could set themselues, some to
bee Lawyers, some Marchants, some husbandmen, some artifi|cers,
c. which would greatly increase the number of them that
bee of such professions, to the no little hindrance of such as liue
thereby, and so dooing they might bee able to liue of
themselues. But this seeing they doe not, beeing yet all seruants
of one God, all members of the same common-wealth, all
subiects to the same King, it is reason they bee releeued  proui|ded:
for by some other way: least extreame necessitie co~pell them
intruding vpon the trades, sciences  professions of other men,
to doo that which otherwise they neither should nor would.


CHAP. III.

Being a more speciall explication of the hearers duety, before in generall
sort onely set downe, it sheweth; Of what sorte of goods the minister
must haue a parte. And what this word (goods) vsed in the
text dooth signifie.


Text.
Make him partaker of all his goods.

WHereas I obserued in this verse, conteyning the pre|cept,
3. things (to bee specially obserued, viz.) First
the persons who must contribute; secondly, the cause
why; and thirdly, the matter what: viz. a part of all his goods: I am
now come to that point, to examine and discusse, what it is, that
hee that is taught must doo for his teacher; that is, make him
partaker of all his goods.
This is the point which is Caput Rei, the chiefe of all, as
wherein lyes (as they say) the key of the worke, in respect
whereof, all that I haue hitherto said, is but little. For that
already past, consisteth wholly in generall points: but now
follow such as are particular. In laying downe whereof, I know

before, that I shal speake directly against some such courses
as manie thinke to bee very good, and bring to light some
things vnthought off in these daies. And therefore here
specially I doo intreat thee (curteous and Christian Reader) to
lay aside all passion and preiudicate opinion, and to read mee
with such religious affection, and indifferent minde, as be|commeth
him that seeketh the truth, and preferreth the minde
of God, before the maners of men. My meaning is not to offend
any, but to satisfie all: not to contend about any thing, but to
examine euery thing by the rule of righteousnes, trying out by
the very touchstone of all truth (Gods vndefiled word) what
is gold, and what is copper: which cannot but bee as necessary
for others to know, as for mee to vtter. Let not man therefore
receiue that with the left hand, which I deliuer with the right:
For mine owne part, knowing this to bee a very necessary kinde
of doctrine for these times; as Paul would not forbeare to set
foorth the doctrine of the resurrection to the Athenians,Act. 17. how|soeuer
it were accepted: so neither I this. And I will hope still,
That as Paul so preaching, though some mocked, others doub|ted,
and some dissented, yet some beleueed, and claue vnto Paul:
so I thus writing, though some regard it not, others wholly
reiect it, yet some and those the better some and sort too, will
both accept it, and put it vnto practize. But howsoeuer, veritas
non quaerit angulos. Trueth is not ashamed of the light, it seeke
no corners.
And now leauing preambles, let vs come to the point. The
matter, now to be considered off is, what hee that is taught must
doo, viz. Hee must make his teacher partaker with him of all his goods.
In these words, 2. things specially doo offer themselues to our
consideration. The first is, whereof hee is to let him haue a
part. The second is, what part or how much thereof, hee
must let him haue. For the first of these, the words are plaine.
Hee must haue a part of his goods, that is, of his goods in generall
whatsoeuer they bee, and of all his goods, that is, of euery sort of
his goods, some, of what kinde or sort soeuer they bee in spe|ciall.
What the Apostle meaneth by goods,Of () his goods. it is no hard
thing for any man to co~ceiue; seeing all men know,
That whatsoeuer it is that a man hath to liue by, 

serues eyther ad victum, or ad cultum, to yeeld vs either meate
for the belly, or clothing for the backe, are all of them Bona, the
goods of this world. If the Apostle had sayd of all his lands, or of
all his increase, or of all his fruites, or all his labors, some question
and difficultie might haue beene made, what might be the sense;
but vsing no word that is any way ambiguous  subiect to equi|uocation,
but this word  goods, which comprehends
in all mens knowledge indefinitely (as Bona amongst the Latins)
whatsoeuer a man liues by, there is no place left for any
euasion or contention. If any difference at all bee, and that the
Apostles words should bee pressed more to one sort of goods
then another, the vse of the word with vs, would permit
it to bee vnderstand rather of moueable goods, of goods
gotten by labour and art, as by trade and occupation, then of
land and its increase. For in our English phrase we do com|monly
call those kinde of meanes to liue by goods, but the other
lands. And accordingly when wee will expresse a mans whole
estate, wee say in lands and goods: or put a difference betweene
the different estates of men, wee say, One is worth thus much in
lands, another thus much in goods: which maner of speech wee
finde also vsed in scripture, as Act. 2. 45. where it is sayd, That
the godly conuerts sold their possessions and goods; that is, all that
euer they had, mooueable and vnmooueable, lands and other
thinges whatsoeuer. So that vnlesse wee will vnderstand the
word here vsed, to signifie, onely and specially, not lands but
other goods, not riches, rising of inheritance  possessions, but
such onely as are gotten by arte and labour, which indeed were
absurd; wee must take it as reason requires, and all interpreters
doo consent, for all that a man hath, all sorts of goods and sub|stance
whatsoeuer.
This sense standing for good, and going currant as needs it
must; this clause dooth plainely shewe, That such as liue by
trades and sciences, by art and labour (as the greatest number
do in townes and Cities) are no lesse lyable to this dutie, and
bound to contribute toward the maintenance of their ministers,
then those that liue by husbandry  tillage, by the fruites and
increase of the earth. Many of that sort of men doo presume,
that because they haue not lands  fields to yeeld them increase,
therefore they ought to pay little or nothing. But, that therein

they doo deceiue themselues, these words of our text doo
make it as apparant as the light at noone daies. For if that
whereby they doo liue, bee goods: if that which they get by their
trades and occupations, sciences and industry, arte and labour,
bee goods, as wel as that the husbandman getteth by his tillage
and increase of the earth, (and that is already so apparantly con|uinced,
that it cannot be denyed) then is it cleare that the mini|ster
ought to haue a part with them thereof, aswell as with the
husbandman in that he possesseth and liues by. As the Minister
makes no respect in executing of his Ministerie, whether those
he teacheth be husbandmen or merchants, tradesmen or artifi|cers,
but teacheth all, ministereth the word and sacraments to all
indifferently; so they are to make no difference betweene these
and those goods, whether they be gotten by land or by sea, by
trade or by tillage, by husbandry or by merchandize, by natures
increase or arts industrie: but by that whereby they doe main|taine
themselues and liue by, by that and those kind of goods,
they must helpe to maintaine him too.
That the Apostle did speake it indifferently of the one sorte of
goods aswell as of the other, and intended directly it should be a
rule for the one sort of hearers aswel as for the other; there needs
no better proofe nor other argument, then the practise of this
kind of doctrine in those times. For it is most certaine and easie
to be conceiued, by any that hath neuer so small knowledge, and
but superficiall vnderstanding in the scriptures, That Christians
in those daies were for the most part citizens and townesmen,
tradesmen and artificers: and therefore they were the first and
most speciall persons that were then to practize thus, and did a|boue
all others impart of their goods vnto their teachers. The
historie, called The Acts of the Apostles, is full of examples of this
sorte: which for breuities sake I leaue to the Reader to be peru|sed.
2. If we call to minde the principall cause and reason, already
noted out of the text, why all sorts of men should giue of their
goods to this vse, is it not the same to one sorte as well as to ano|ther?
If townesmen haue as great neede of teaching as they in
the countrey or rather more? If they can no more be without a
Minister then the other? why should they not maintaine him as|well
as the other?

3. Goe to the rule of Equitie, which telles vs, that The labou|rer
is worthie of his hire: and if by that rule, the townesman, or
tradesman, be bound to pay him that worketh for him in his
shop, his house, or other busines which co~cerns his body, no lesse
then the husbandman is, and dooth and will giue as good wages
for such causes as hee: why should hee not pay his minister
likewise, that labours for his soule, and doth his best worke, as
largely and bountifully as the husbandman dooth?
4. Looke vpon the necessity and state of the minister: And
hath not hee that liues in the towne need of asmuch maintena~ce
as hee that liues in the country? Nay rather hath hee not
need of much more? For, needes not his study to be greater?
Is not housekeeping, is not diet and apparell, more chargeable
vnto him? is there not greater cause of hospitalitie? why then,
where there is greatest need, should there bee meanest help? and
where is most vse of maintenance, there least bee yeelded?
5. Besides all this, Consider wee whence all men haue their
goods. Is it not God, that same God, that giueth his blessing
aswel vpo~ the labours of them that liue by trades, or handicrafts,
as vpon the increase of the earth? that maketh men to prospe,
whether it bee by sea or by land? that giueth the townesman
power to get riches, aswel as the countryman? And then seeing
it is euery mans duety that hath receiued ought at Gods hand,
to honour God therewith, and shewe himselfe thankfull to God,
as to the authour  giuer of all things; ought not the tradesman,
the townesman, and Citizen doo this aswel as the husbandman?
When Salomon, Prou. 3. 9. saith, Honour the Lord with thy riches:
or as other translations read, With thy substance, and with the first
fruites of all thine increase: dooth hee speake onely of goods that
arise by increase of the earth? or dooth hee not rather in the first
clause speake generally of all goods whatsoeuer? and in the latter
particularly of such as arise by tillage? Read but the note in the
margent, and consider.
Thus, by the manifest words of the text, the practise of the
doctrine in the Apostles time, the vse of the ministery, the rule
of equitie, the state of the minister, and the authour from whom
all haue their goods; it appeares, that they that haue one sort
of goods aswel as another, ought to pay of that they haue, to the
minister for his maintenance.

Let men therefore learne to make more conscience of this
matte;, seeing wee plainely see, That as it is a very vnreasona|ble
thing to looke that the minister should teach them,  labour
in his ministery for them for nothing, beeing flatly against the
rule of equitie: so it is also a wicked and vngodly thing; beeing
a manifest beach of Gods ordinance  commaundement, who
hath ordeined  commaunded, That euerie one that is taught in the word,
of those goods that hee hath whatsoeuer they bee, should giue a
pt to him that dooth teach him, and so honour the Lord with
his substance.


CHAP. IIII.

Sheweth, That the right and best maner of payment to the minister,
is. That hee bee payd his parte of euery thing in specie, that is, in
its proper kinde, as naturally God dooth send it, and not by a set
stipend.


Text.
Partaker of all his goods.

HAuing now seene in generall whereof the minister must
haue a parte, next wee are to note the same thing in special;
that is, in what sort it ought to bee payd vnto him. To
which purpose it serueth well, that our Apostle saith not only
of his goods, but which is more, of all his goods; that is of euery sorte
of his goods some. Hee must, as wee say in this case, bee payd in
specie, in the very kind. Otherwise, hee may haue a part of his
goods; but not of all his goods: as two pence at Easter, a sheafe
of corne at haruest, c. is a part of a mans goods, but not of all
his goods. But then thou giuest him a parte of all thy goods,
when then payest him a parte of thy corne, thy hey, and
thy cattell, thou hauing corne, hey, and cattel: a part of the
fruits of thine orchard and garden, thou hauing orchard and
garden: a parte of thy fish and of thy foule, if thou haue taken
fish or foule: a parte of thy spoiles taken in warre, thou hauing
gotten a bootie in warre: a parte of thy money gotten by thy
trade or labour, thou hauing gained by thy trade and labour: in
a word, a part of euery seuerall thing which thou doest liue

by, and comes to thine hand as thy goods, his sare is many
therein aswel as thine owne, how sortes soeuer thow hast.
Thus the children of Israel, Gods owne people, dealt with the
priests in their daies, as wee may read in diuers places of those
auncient stories; and namely, Num. 31. where it is recorded,
That the children of Israel hauing gotten a great booty in arre,
they payd out of it (and that by the Lords appointment) the
Lords tribute vnto the Leuits, both of the person, women sles;
and of the cattell, beeues, asses, and sheepe. Yea of the very iewels
they gaue also an offring, of euery sort some, as there they are
reckoned vp, vers. 50. Iewels of golde, bracelets, and chaines, rings,
earings, and ornaments of the legs. The like haue wee 2. Chro. 31.
where it is reported thus; The children of Israel and of Iuda brought
vnto the house of God, for the Priests and the Leuits, bullocks  sheepe,
corne, VVine, honie, and of all the increase of the field, and the tithes
of all things, and laid them on manie heapes. Nehem. 10. and 13. wee
doo read how by the commaundement and encouragement of
that good Ruler Nehemiah, the whole congregation of Israel,
beeing newly returned from the captiuity of Babylon, doo enter
couenant with the Lord to doo the like. And that this practise
continued euen in our Sauiours time, and not without his ap|probation,
wee may gather by his words concerning the Phari|sies,
Math. 23. 23. who (as he testifieth) tithed the vere  
rue, annis and cuin, and euery other hearbe. They payd not for
the tithe of them; but tithed the~, that is, payde the tithe thereof
in its kind. And this saith our Sauiour, they ought to haue done,
whereunto accordeth that vain-glorious ostentation of the Pha|risee,
Luc. 18. 12. who saith, That hee paid tithe of all that euer
hee did possesse.
How much this course of paying the minister euery thing in
his owne kinde pleaseth God, wee may easily coniecture by this,
That hee allowed none other course amongst his owne people
for his seruants the sonnes of Leui, vnto whom notwithstan|ding
they dwelt not as mynisters doo now, at home amongst the
people in euery seueral City, towne or village, but were resident
by themselues, either at the house of God, or in their owne
Cities, hee appointed by expresse Law, at their owne charge, as
farre as I can gather (which was no smal trauaile and expense)
to bring home to them all their dueties, as your may read, Deut.

12. 11. VVhen there shallbee a place which the Lord your God shall
choose to cause his name to dwell there, thither shall you bring all that
I commaund you; that is, your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, your
tithes, and the offerings of your hands,  all your speciall vowes whi
yee vow vnto the Lord. Besides that, whereas there were of the
seed of Leui two sortes, Priestes Leuits, the tenth of all things
beeing payd vnto the Leuits in kinde, they (the Leuits) were
bound by expresse law likewise, to pay vnto the priests the tenth
of that tenth in his kinde also; as appeareth, Numb. 18. 26. and
Nehem. 10. 38. neither it is vnlikely, but that that which com|meth
from God vnto vs, by the natural course of his prouide~ce,
which we know to be most innocent and pure, is (beeing retur|ned
vnto him) therefore best accepted, because least spotted
with the staine of vnlawfull or indirect procurement.
And as this course best of all other pleased God, so hath it
likewise most liked the Church of God, and the Christian go|uernors
of the Church (as imitators of God) in all ages since:
as may and dooth manifestly appeare by the practise of all
Christendome, for many hundred yeares together,  by sundry
lawes and constitutions both spirituall and temporall, ciuill and
cannon; which here to recite were but superfluous.
I may adde further, That not onely the Iewes in time of the
lawe, and Christians in time of the Gospell, haue approoued this
course, but that likewise it was in practise through the very in|stinct
of nature,  light of reason, euen before the Law in time
of nature, and where the Law reigned not in its time, amongst
the very heathen. For, to speake nothing of the offerings of
Cain and Abel, Genes. 4. (because therein is no mention made of
any priest, though it bee probable, that they were not offered
vp vnto the Lord without a priest; who, seruing at the altar, by
the very Law of nature was to participate with the altar) who
offered according to their seuerall professions of life, of such
things as they had; that is, Cain of the fruits of the ground, and
Abel the first borne and fatte of his sheep. Wee haue, Gen. 14. a
plaine instance for it in Abraham: who (hauing obteined a great
victory against his enemies) is there expressely reported to haue
giuen vnto Melchizedec, Priest of the high God, a certaine part
of all; that is, as some vnderstand it, of all the goods he had what|soeuer,
or of all, that is as others expound it, and the text of scrip|ture,

Heb. 7. 4. seemes to co~firme, of all the spoiles  prey that hee
had taken in the warre, of euery sort some. And the like in Iacob,
Gen. 28. who there voweth (which no doubt hee, most religi|ously,
after performed, Gen. 35. 3.) to giue vnto God of all (that is,
of euery kinde of thing according to his kinde) that God should
giue vnto him, a certaine part. And touching the heathen, Plinie,
an Historiographer of no smal account and credit, reporteth of
the Romanes, That they vsed not to spend their wines or new fruites,
till the Priestes had receiued a part thereof. And of the Sabeans
Aethiopians, people of the East, That of those spices which those
countries yeelded in great plenty  varietie, the custome was, that
the merchants might not meddle with any, till the Priests had laid
out of euery sort vnto their Gods, their accustomed portions. And
of diuers other nations, Festus another story-writer, dooth giue
this generall testimony; The people of auncient times vsed to offer of
euerie thing a part vnto their Gods. So that before the Law, vn|der
the Law, and since the Law, amongst Heathens, Iewes and
Christians, the auncient and common, and so the best and most
approued practise hath beene, to pay to the Priestes and mini|sters
of the Church, Gods part in kind.
Neither is it without great and apparant reason that thus it
should bee. For if wee consider of it, wee shall finde that it is
euery way the best, most equall, and indifferent course that
can bee.
First, it dooth after a sorte correspond vnto that the teacher
dooth; while, like as the minister of God dooth impart
vnto his hearer in spiritual things all the counsell of God, and
deliuers vnto him euery principle of Religion, instructs him
in all seuerall duties, and increaseth him in all kinde of
Christian knowledge, hiding and keeping backe nothing from
him, that God hath appointed him to teach, and behooues
the other to learne; as notably our Apostle dooth for himselfe
protest, Act. 20. 27: so the hearer againe for his parte, by a kinde
of retribution, dooth render vnto his teacher in te~porall things,
a parte of all that hee hath, some of euery sorte of goods
that God hath blest him withall, hiding and keeping backe from
him no kinde of thing, that is once his owne.
2. It is the truest and iustest kind of payment that can bee.
For, so the minister may haue his ful due, without diminution or

alteration: which how much God respecteth, may appeare by 2.
speciall places in his law. The first is, Leuit. 27. 33. where it is sayd,
Of that which was the Lords parte, hee that was to pay it, should
not looke whether it were good or bad, neither shall hee chaunge it. See,
God would haue it as it did rise; else if he did chaunge it, both it 
that it was chaunged for, was holie to the Lord, and might not be
redeemed. The other place is, Deut. 26. 12. where the people
paying their tithes are inioyned to doo it in maner vpon their
oathe, with very solemne protestation before the Lord. The
summe whereof is this; VVhen thou hast made an end of tithing, then
thou shalt saye before the Lord thy God, I haue brought the hallowed
thing out of mine house, and also haue giuen it to the Leuit according to
thy commaundement. I haue not eaten thereof in my mourning, that
is for any necessitie whatsoeuer, nor suffered ought to perish through
anie vncleannes; by putting it to any prophane vse; but haue
hearkened to the voice of the Lord my God, and doone after all that thou
hast commaunded mee. That is, I haue payd euery thing iustly, as
in thy law I am appointed. Looke downe therefore from thine holie
habitation, euen from heauen,  blesse, c. As who would say, Hee
desired to be blessed and prospered in all that hee had, none
otherwise, but according as hee had dealt truely and iustly with
God and his ministers in that point: and acknowledged as was
iust, and dooth no doubt come still to passe, that there were
no hope to prosper well, if hee should defraud God and his ser|uants
of their sacred and appointed portions.
3. It is the speediest course whereby the minister may re|ceiue
his due, sooner then else hee possibly can or should. For,
payd in kind; assoone as it can bee seuered from the rest of that
kinde, it may bee payd: which cannot so speedily alwaies bee
done, if the owner bee permitted to conuert it first into mony.
And this also was a point specially prouided for, in the Law of
God; as appeareth,Whereupo~ S. August. ser. de temp. 219. Exod. 22. 29. where it is sayde: Thine abun|dance,
and thy licour shalt thou not keepe backe: that is, thou shalt not
defer the payment of them to the priest; for that is meant by
keping backe,Si tardius dare peccatu~ est, quanto peius est non dedie? as interpreters doo agree, the olde interpreter
expressing it thus; Non rdabis offerre. Thou shalt not linger
or foreslow to offer it. And another (Tremell) thus; Ne differto
dare, Deferre not, that is, put not off the payment of it from
time to time, but doo it out of hand, so soone as it is payable.

And indeed if it bee an offence to God, to keep backe the wages
of the ireling, that worketh for thee about thine owne busines,
and not to pay him assoone as it is due, as wee are taught Deut.
24. 15.  otherwhere; shall we thinke that hee wilbe pleased, if
his workman that labours for vs in his haruest bee payd when
it pleaseth vs, at our leisure once in a yeare, happely in 2. yeare,
and not so soone as any parte of his maintenance falleth out to
bee due vnto him?
4. It is the most necessary course that can bee. For the mi|nister
beeing to keepe house, and hospitality too, (for that is
required at his hands, 1. Tim. 3. 2. and they must doo it that
haue wherewith) hee shal bee the better enabled, yea, and the
more occasioned thereunto, receiuing euery thing in kind, and
so hauing prouision of one thing or other alwaies at hand. And
this is a point so necessary to bee considered of in these daies,
wherein charity is growne colde, houskeeping let downe, and
hospitality in maner banisht both out of Churchmens and
laymens houses; that if by this meanes, viz. by paying the mi|nister
his due in kinde it might any whit bee reuoked, and resto|red;
that onely good thereof were cause enough why it should
with all care bee performed: that so, in so holy and necessary a
good worke, men, specially they that should bee men of exam|ple
to others, might not bee any way hindred and discouraged,
but furthered therein to the vttermost.
5. It is the most certaine and stable course that can bee, as
which is least subiect to alteration: because howsoeuer the prices
of things dooe rise or fal, and daily change, yet the things them|selues
change not. And therefore Nature, which commonly is
one, must needs bee the most indifferent and permanent stan|dart
betweenes God  man, the minister and his people, that
can bee. God seemed to haue respect herevnto, Num. 18. 27.
when commanding the Leuits to pay the tenth of their tithes to
the priests in kinde, he sayth, that so dooing it should bee recko|ned
vnto them as the corne of the brne, or as the abundance of the wine|presse:
that is, it should bee accounted, as if it had beene growne
vpon their owne ground: by meanes whereof the priests with
them, and they with the people, should still from time to time
receiue more or losle, as God gaue the increase, which obserued
still, must needes bee the most equal and certaine course how|soeuer

the world goe. For so, the minister, as God blesseth the
people, shall bee partaker of the blessing; and if they suffer losse,
hee likewise shall beare (as is fitte) the burthen equally with
them.
Thus by all hitherto sayd, that is, by the practise of all ages,
the Law of God for his owne people, and by manifest and ma|nifolde
reasons, it may appeare, that the right and best course
for payement of the minister is, to paye him in specie, a parte of
euery sort of a mans goods, as it dooth arise in his kinde.
Some doo make a question, whether it were better that mini|sters
generallie were payd their maintenance by the things
in kinde, as commonly they are, or as in some fewe places,
by set stipend?
Such a question is sufficiently aunswered by that already sayd.
I deny not, but that in cases extraordinary, and in some places, a
stipend may prooue more conuenient: but generally and or|dinarilie
(for that is the question) to turne all into stipends,
must needes bee generallie and absolutely the worst course.
As for that that may bee obiected, touching the toile and la|bour
that the minister must haue to receiue his things in kinde,
by meanes whereof (they will say) hee is faine to worke and la|bour,
specially at haruest time, otherwise then befitteth his
calling: I say first, That alwaies needeth not; For, hauing
family and keeping house, hee may haue those to labour for
him, which can performe such things better and fitter then
himselfe; and hee needs not, except it bee for pleasure or re|creations
sake, put one finger to that burthen. Secondly, in
smaller parishes where the profits of the place are so slender,
that hee is inforced to take more paines then others need or
doo, the matter is not so great, but that it may without offence
bee tolerated; nor so tedious, but that it may soone bee dispatcht.
And it were very hard there, that others should doo it for him,
and not hee or his: because it is not probable, but that hauing
already very little to liue by, hee should by that meanes haue
lesse; For, his gatherer or pay-maister would looke to haue a|share
with him for his paines. And that is the marke I thinke
(and it behooues the Cleargie to consider of it) that many doo
shoot at, that would haue ministers brought to stipends, that so
their Lay-farmers, or pay-maisters, might get yet more of the mi|nisters

profits into their hands, whereof they haue already too
much.
2. Againe, wheras others may obiect against the receiuing of
things in kinde, that it breeds much trouble, wrangling  con|tention
betweene the minister and his parishioners, the like may
bee more iustly feared, in the leuying, imposing, collecting, de|manding
and paying of stipends.
3. Lastly, whereas the corruption of patrons and others, that
haue interest in the bestowing of liuings vpo~ Cleargie men, is at
this day exceeding great, and doth not a little daily impouerish
the ministerie, and spoile our Churches: by stipends, that pest
would nothing bee stayd, but rather increased. For whereas now
the minister receiuing all things in kinde, whatsoeuer the patron
or others receiue of the minister, directly, or indirectly, must
bee in secret, knowne to God, and them alone; because the pa|trone
cannot take away any part of the gleeb or tithes, but that
the worlde also will see  know it: then, hauing all in his hands,
and being to pay onely a stipend, it is easie to gather how easily
hee might finde the meanes to share what part thereof hee lus|ted,
with the minister of the place; and yet vnlesse it bee by the
poore mans threed-bare coate, or thin cheekes, the matter neuer
bee espied.
All which things considered, I am so farre from liking that
stipendary maintenance, that I wish rather the number of sty|pends
in our Church might not bee increased but diminished,
and (if it were possible) wholly taken away. I meane specially,
That whereas there bee diuers Church-liuings in our land,
eazed into lay-mens hands, on which onely a set stipend of
ten pounds or there about is reserued for the Curat of the place,
that that course might bee vtterly cut off; and in steed of that
stipend, such a competent parte of the gleeb, tithes, and other
profits of the place beeing allotted for a perpetuall Vicar, as might
bee fit and able in some tollerable sort to maintaine a sufficient
teacher there.
That my motion is very godly, iust and necessary, I doubt
not but that all indifferent men will easily graunt. But it will
perhaps seeme a matter hard to bee effected.
I graunt, that to enforce any to surrender the whole, because it
is their proper inheritance, were Summum ius: but yet I cannot

bee perswaded, but that if power perswasiue bee all in vayne, that
power coactiue may with great equity, reason, and piety too, bee
vsed, to inforce such to surrender so much of that they possesse, as
may in lieu of that beggerly stipend, bee a competent mainte|nance
for one, that is, though not excellently (as the whole
would haue bene) yet competently learned, and able in some
measure to discharge the duetie of a Pastor to the people.
This were not to straine the Law, but to put in execution the
very true sense and meaning thereof, which by ouer-strict obser|uing
of the letter, is abused. For it is out of all question, that
when such stipends were allotted, it was intended, That the
Churches should still be prouided for, of able ministers,  then thought
(The condition of ministers, who were then all singlemen; the
sate of these times, wherein all things to liue by, were foure
times at least better cheap then now they are; the disposition of
people in their voluntary offerings beeing much more liberall
then now it is, c. beeing considered) that ten pound a yeare or
thereabout was a sufficient and schollerlike maintenance. But
that things beeing so much altered as now they are, the pay it
selfe should stand without alreration, is an open  certaie per|uerting
of the mind and sense of the Law. And therefore no
breach of Law, no wrong to the possessour, no contrarietie to
reason; if men will not of their own accord, vpon very conscie~ce
of what is necessary, doo that is fit, that they bee ouer-ruled
and enforced thereunto. And I speake herein no more then
what our Sauiour did in another case, Math. 12. against such of
his time as ouerstrictly stood vpo~ the very letter of the Law of
the Sabboth, telling them that the Sabboth was made for man, 
not man for the Sabboth; and therefore it were not an obseruation
but an abuse of the Law, to let a man perish on the Sabboth
for want of present help. And is it not worse in this case, when
through ouerstrict straining of words that had a meaning good
enough, many soules are suffered daily to perish, many ministers
of the word are dishonoured, the Sabboth from time to time
prophaned, and God made offended? No more then what
the lawes themselues doo affirme. For in the ciuil Law, Cod. lib
1. Tit. 17. Deleg.  conf. 5. thus wee read: Non dubium est in le|gem
committere um c. that is, There is no doubt but that hee
offends against the Law, which retayning the words of the Law,
dooth contrary to the meaning thereof. Neither shall hee auoid

the penalties set downe in the lawes, who contrary to the minde
of the Law, dooth, by a strict prerogatiue of the words, frau|dulently,
excuse himselfe. No more then what is practised di|uers
wayes in other things. There bee auncient statutes con|cerning
the wages of seruants, labourers, c. agreeable no doubt
to those times; but will any reasonable body affirme, that it were
fit, they should bee vrged now? And haue not the rates therein
set downe, iustly vpon due consideration beene made alterable
by later statutes, as of An. 5. Eliz. Cap. 4? What the common pay
of schoole-maisters, where no schoole was founded, was wont to
bee, few but can tell. But hath not common reason preuailed
there against so farre, that now a dayes there is scarce any that
wil either accept or offer it? If very conscience  reason can see it
requisite to alter the pay for other men, what lets it should not
for the minister too; vnlesse it bee that of all other wee respect
them least? Lastly, nor doo I mooue other then that which
long since was by law intended  attempted to bee donc: as may
appeare in the abridgement of statutes in the title Appropriations,
by these words; Because that much hurt hath come to Parishes by Ap|propriation
of Benefices, c. Bee it enacted, c. That hence foorth
in euery Church so appropriated, a secular person bee ordeined
Vicar perpetuall, canonically instituted and inducted in the same,
 Couenably endowed by the discretio~ of the Ordinary to doo di|uine
seruice, and to informe the people, and to keep hospitality
there, c. And that the said statute, viz. (a statute of An. 15. Ric. 2.
Cap. 6.) shuld be kept  put in execution,  all Appropriations
made since the statute co~trary thereunto, to be reformed before
a certain time, or else to be voyd. An. 4. Henr. 4. cap. 12. Where
wee may note, That euen then in time of grossest Poperie and
greatest blindnes, the Appropriations of benefices was accoun|ted
(as indeed it is) a great hurt and not a benefite to the peo|ple;
So necessarie to be reformed and restrained) what might be,
that the estates of the land feared not to oppose themselues a|gainst
the Pope, the onely cause and cocatrice of those euills:
and thought the same not to bee in any measure sufficiently re|formed,
vnlesse there were a perpetuall Vicar there endowed, and
that so conuenably that hee might bee able to read diuine
seruice, 2. to preach, and also 3. to keepe hospitalitie: neither of
which, much lesse all, is it possible for him well to doo that

hath but such a stipend as wee speake of, or such Vicarage as many
at this daie are in the land. Thus it is manifest, That it is a thing
but iust and reasonable, that there should in such cases an alte|ration
be made. 2. That it were best to bee doone by things in
kinde, is also as apparant. By which meanes (a thing that ought
not little to bee respected) the minister (each seueral Church
beeing endowed) should not liue in that seruilitie vnto lay-men,
as now a daies many doo to their pay-maisters: Nor should so
many bad and vnworthy men as there are,  (things standing as
yet they doo) needs must bee, bee thrust into the ministery;
Such places, beeing now capable of none but such as bee most
vnworthy and vnlearned, would then (as others are) bee able to
entertaine such, as for learning and other gifts required in a
minister, were worthy maintenance.


CHAP. V.

That toward the ministers maintenance euery man ought to contribute
proportionabely, and not voluntarily, onely what euery man will,
That is tollerable onely in som cases. But generally or ordinarily it is a course very euill and peritious. Yet how it might be somewhat tollerable is noted.


Text.
Make him partaker of all his goods.

HAuing in the former Chapters spoken of the qualitie of the
things whereof the minister is to haue part, wee are now to
consider of the quantitie, and examine out how much, or
how great a part of euery mans goods hee ought to haue; The
hardest indeed, but the chiefest and most necessary point of all
the rest. On which, if I dwell somewhat longer then in the other
I haue done, I trust the curteous reader, considering how neces|sary
and how difficult a point it is, will easily beare with my pro|lixitie.
This that wee way finde out, a two fold quantity must be
considered of; that is, how much in proportion,  how much in
number, c. For the former, The very words of our Apostle doo
at least intimate vnto vs, That there must a certaine Proportion bee
obserued by them that giue of their goods to their teacher. For,
requiring euery man to giue a part of all his goods, hee shewes

plainely enough, that men must giue profacultatu~ ratione, accor|ding
to their ability, and the quantity of the goods they haue,
some more, some lesse. Not euery one like much, arithmetically:
but euery man alike geometrically; that is, proportionable, ra|tably.
As men doo differ in ability and wealth, one hauing more,
another lesse: as God hath and dooth blesse men, some with
one or two sortes of goods, some with diuers and sundry sorts:
so they must blesse God againe by imparting to their minister, a
part of their few or many sortes; so that of all, and of each sort
of goods, euery man may returne a part. This accordeth well
with the course which God appointed vnto his owne people the
Iewes, for maintenance of their Priests and Leuits then. Their
principall maintenance was a tenth part of all things. Now, who
knows not, that where a certaine equall part, as the tenth,
twentieth, or xxx. part is allotted, there must needs bee a most
equall and exact proportion among all; one paying no more
then another dooth according to his abilitie. 2. They had a
Law, That three times a yeare, all their males should appeare be|fore
the Lord;  none must appeare emptie, but euery one must
bring somewhat, of his owne voluntary goodwill; yet with this
Prouiso, Deut. 16. 17. Euery man shall giue according to the gift of
his hand, and according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which hee
hath giuen thee: that is, according to his estate and abilitie. 3. And
in their ordinary offerings, for cleansings, for attonements, c.
the richer sorte were appointed their offerings of greater worth,
as a bulbocke, a am, a goat; the meaner sorte a lambe, a payre
of turtle doues, or two young pigeons. So as, a proportion ac|cording
to the ability of the persons was still obserued
And this course so liked all wisemen of former ages, that they
resolued none fitter then it for the maintenance of the ministers
of the Gospel. As if wee doo but looke vpon the maner thereof,
obserued for the most part, all Christendome ouer, for many
hundred yeares past, viz. That a certaine parte of euery thing
bee payd to that vse, may euidently appeare.
That thus it should bee, wee may reason and gather, First, from
the rule of equity: which requireth, that euery one bee dealt
with indifferently and equally. Now as in other payments of
rents, of customes, of subsidies, and the like taxations to Lord
and King, to this and that vse, all men will graunt, that there is

no indifferency vsed, if men bee not rated and taxed according
to their seuerall estates, as their abilities are, in regard of others
that are rated aswel as they: so neither in this. Then onely is the
matter caried with equalitie, when that rule which the Apostle
prescribed in another case is obserued also in this; that is, That
Some bee not burthened, that others may bee eased; but vpon like
condition, that there may bee an equalitie. 2. Cor. 9.
2. From the vse of the ministery, which is one  the same to
all. Euery seuerall person, euery seuerall familie hath like inte|rest
in the labours of the minister;  as free, and as full and large
vse thereof to all intents, one as another. It is reason therefore,
that they contribute toward the maintenance of the same, one
asmuch, and as farfoorth as another: This they onely doo
which giue equall with others, not in summe, but in proportion.
For, a little to a poore  meane man, is asmuch after the rate, as
20. or 40. times so much vnto a richer man, whose estate dooth
by like degrees exceed the other.
3. From the honour and duety, that all doo owe to God. For
seeing it is God (as I haue before obserued) that giueth to euery
man the goods hee hath, bee they more or lesse: why should not
euery one according as hee hath receiued, honour God with
those his goods, expresse and declare foorth his thankfulnes, as
liberally, and as largely for the rate, one as another? It is true,
That God respecteth not the gift, but the giuer; and lookes not
so much to the value of the offering, as to the heart  dispositio~
of the offerer:  therefore did more accept the widowes mite,
then the great offerings, and rich gifts of the wealthier sort.
But yet I doo not beleeue, that hee would aswel haue accepted
a mite, a peece, from the rich mens hands, as from the poore
wydowes: or that a rich man by a poore mite or 2. may ordina|rily
expresse a rich affection to God, aswel as by offering some
greater portion; specially in such a case as this, where men are
taught and tolde before-hand,Deut. 16. 17 That euery man must bring not
absolutely what pleaseth himselfe, how much, or how little hee
lusteth,Ecclu~s 35. 10. but according to the blessing of God vppon him: that is, ac|cording
to his estate and ability: which euen children know, hee
dooth not, That hauing very much bringeth very little, and
possessing many things, giueth part but of a few.
4. By this meanes, euery man is made q. d. to see with his

bodilie eyes, and feele with his very fingers the truth of that
Maxime, There is no respect of persons with God;Act. 10. 34. while as all are
taught, accustomed and inured to giue of that they haue alike to
the honour of God the authour, and to the maintenance of the
Gospel and ministery thereof, the meanes of their saluation:
and so doo finde and see by daily experience, That God ac|cepteth
of euery man according to that hee hath, and not according
to that hee hath not, so it bee giuen with a chearefull eye; and
expecteth to be honoured of euery man accordingly.
5. If this course of proportion bee not obserued, much
iniurie and dammage must needs bee doone vnto the mini|ster:
and great cause of scandall and discontent bee ministred
vnto the people.
1. To the minister it cannot but bee much iniurie and
dammage; if some paying him in good sorte, others, as well
able as those, winde out themselues for little or nothing.
2. Offence and discontent must needes arise among the
people, if some shal perceiue themselues to be farther charged
then others. For who is, or wil be content to bee rated to any
payment more then the rest of his neighbours of like state and
worth? and bee pleased to beare a great charge of any busines,
and that continually from time to time, from yeare to yeare;
others aswell or better able, going either altogether free, or
alwaies farre lesse charged then hee?
Concerning the former sorte of quantitie, that is, touching
proportion, let this hitherto sayd suffice: which how duely it is
alwaies and eachwhere obserued, I leaue to the diligent reader
with himselfe to consider.
Let vs now proceed to see and enquire of the other kinde
of quantitie, that is, how much in number, c. the minister
must haue. Touching which point there bee sundry opinions.
Some of them bee but of the vulgar sorte, some againe are
the opinions of the learned. Those of the vulgar sorte I could
very willingly passe ouer in silence, and let them dye with
their authours; were it not partly, that such as bee wise in
their owne conceits, would thinke happily what is not direct|ly
aunswered, cannot: partly, for that the practise thereof is
at this day pernitious to the Church, and preiudiciall to the
ministery thereof: and therefore as an euill plant which our

heauenlie father hath not planted, needs to bee pluckt vp by the
rootes. Of vulgar opinions I will at this time touch but one,
which is this: That the minister is to haue no certaintie, but euerie
mans good will, euen what they, as their affection leads them, will
voluntarily contribute. This opinion reignes commonly
among townesmen and tradesmen; who hauing not lands, to
yeeld tithes of the increase of the earth, will needs persuade the~|selues,
That of their other goods it is at their owne choise, whether they
will giue him ought or nought. This I call a vulgar opinion, because
I doo not know that euer any man of learning or knowledge,
eyther Diuine or other, did hold the very same.
This may bee a course good enough and tollerable in cases
extraordinary: as first in time of trouble  persecution, in which
if by vsurpation and violence of tyrants, the Church cannot
maintaine her ministers as it should, it must doo it as it may. 2.
Where such as properly belo~g to one parish, doo either soiourne
for a time in another, or els for their ease or other like occasions
often resort vnto another. These as they doo by an extraordi|nary,
and but a voluntary maner, take benefit of the labours of
a minister, so may they in a like sorte (prouided alwaies it bee
doone without preiudice of their owne Pastour) yeeld him a
benefit of their labours and goods. So for Chappels of ease, c.
In the like nature doo I reckon the practise of many people at
this day; who beeing through the corruption of patrones, or
other iniquity of the time, destitute of fit and able teachers, doo
better prouide for themselues by some extraordinary (but yet
certaine) stipend, raised among them by a voluntarie contribu|tion.
Which course, as I cannot, where it is sincerely handled,
but highly commend,  praise God for the readinesse of heart,
which thereby many doo shewe vnto the furtherance of the
Gospel: so in it, I cannot but admonish such as bee godlily, and
zealously affected, that they take heed they doo not deceiue
themselues,Hinc caput mali by deteyning from their owne Pastors, that which
properly and by all lawes is their right, to confer it on others; 
so disable their owne pastors from dooing that which others
performe; feed others with their bread, they the while enfor|ced
to gather vp the crums: and wrong themselues, thinking
they deale exceeding godly and religiously, when indeed it is
(many times) scarce iustly; and looke for praise, where they are

scarce free from blame.
In such cases (I say) as these are, the course afore mentioned
may be tollerable: but that this is not a fit course ordinarily (the
thing wherevpon I stand) and for continuance any where to bee
practised, nor it that God prescribeth, which wee seke after; I
shall, I doubt not, make it appeare by many arguments.
First of all, There is no such thing taught vs in the word of
God: wee are I say, no where in the scripture taught, That euery
man should giue to the maintenance of his minister, but what
hee will, asmuch or as little as pleaseth himselfe. This is the way
to mainteine  reliue the poore of the parish,  not the Pastour.
Concerning the poore, saith our Apostle. 2. Cor. 9. 7. As euery
man is disposed in his heart, so let him giue. But concerning the mi|nister,
neither S. Paul, nor any Apostle else so speaketh. They
alwaies vse such phrases of speech, as import not a beneuolence
but a dutie; not an vncertaine almes, but a certaine reward:
as in our text, hee must bee made partaker, that is, haue a part of
all a mans goods; a maner of speech neuer vsed concerning the
poore. So, 1. Cor. 9. Who gooes a warfare at anie time of his owne cost?
c. Whence wee may gather, That as the souldier knowes his
paye, the sheep-heard his wages, c. and depends not on a meere
vncerteintie: so must the minister. For, To releiue the poore is
a worke of charitie; but to maintaine the minister is a worke of
Iustice,  duety: the one must begge; the other demaund: the
the one craueth; the other challengeth: th' one hath it by fa|uour
 of pitty; th' other by right, and of desert.
If any wil obiect the times of the Apostles  primitiue church;
My aunswere is, There was no such practise then. They did
not maintain their ministers then as it were by almes: But as we
read, Act. 2. and 3. They that had lands  goods sold them, and laid
downe the price at the Apostles feet: and so distribution was made;
by whom? by the Apostles themselues, Act. 4. 35.  5. 2. and
afterward by the Deacons, Act. 6. To whom? to euery man, hea|rer
aswel as teacher. In what sorte or measure? as euery man had
need, and was fit and sufficient for him. Were ministers tyed to
mens good wills here? when as they were the treasurers for the
whole Church? had all at their owne disposition? and had like
part as any other had?
Let it bee graunted that then it was so Dooth it follow it must

bee so now? There is a difference I take it, twixt a Church vnder
persecution, and a Church in peace; a time of trouble, and a time
of rest: as also betwixt a Church planting, and a Church plan|ted.
In time of persecution, as then, men must doo as they may,
and not as they would: and take if their right cannot safely bee
had, insteed thereof, what the time will affoord.Mat. 12. 1. And yet that
no more proueth or maketh such dooing to bee a Lawe for vs
that liue in better daies,1. Sam. 21. 6. then Dauids eating of the shewbread in
a time of need dooth argue, that any man might haue doone the
like at any time as well as hee: or S. Paules working with his
owne hands while hee preached at Corinth Ephesus,Act. 20. 34. that all mi|nisters
must follow some occupation,1. Cor. 4. 12.  liue of themselues, not
taking of the people any thing either of duetie or beneuolence.
2. The affections and mindes of people bee not such toward
their ministers of the Church as in those times they were.2. Thess. 2. 9. Then
they thought nothing too much that was giuen to such vses.
Churches had their common treasuries,  euery man striued,
who might exceed others in enriching the Churches, in augme~|ting
the treasure thereof:Cap. primo. so that (as before I haue noted) Moses
was forced, Exod. 36. to make proclamation, That none should
bring any more stuffe for the worke of the Tabernacle. So there
was rather cause to restraine the people, and to disswade them
from giuing so much, then either to complaine of them (as now)
for giuing too little, or vrge  compell them to giue more. But
now quite contrary, many thinke all too much that the minister
hath:  diuers striue to pull from the~ vijs  modis, what they can,
as if they accounted those the sweetest morsels that are pluckt
out of his mouth, and those goods best gotten, that are wrung
from the Church. And therefore if the liberall disposition that
was in people then, did mooue the ministers of the Church to
rest satisfied with the voluntary oblations of the people, for they
were abundantly enough: yet now, as the vncharitable  pittiles
affection of many toward the poore in these daies, hath inforced
the rulers of our land to draw the wealthier sort to a rate,  co~|pll
them to giue, not what euery man will (though indeed all
almes should be voluntary) but what is meet  necessary: so, and
more then so, because this I speake of, hath greater warrant, the
illiberalitie of the people to the ministers, their vnconscionable
dealing toward them for their labours, dooth require, That a

certaintie should bee appointed for them.
3. The maner of oblations  voluntary contributions then,
was farre other then now it is with vs. For as the auncient fathers
that liued neerest vnto the times of the Apostles doo report, it
was the custome of Christians then, both men and women, some|where
euerie Sunday,  somewhere menstrua die, euery month
(sunday) to make oblation. By which often dooing thereof,
though they offered neuer so little at once, but (as one of them
calls it) modicam scipem, a smal beneuolence, it could not bee but
that it must rise in the whole yeare, to some reasonable quantitie;
For as the old saying is, Marie a little make a great. The custome
of our Church once was, to offer 4. times a yeare at least: but that
is now come, through a worse custome, to once a yeare, at Easier
onelie;  then how little it is, it is a thing lamentable, and almost
incredible to relate: as little  lesse happely, as in auncie~t times,
they did offer at once, that offered euery month, or euery sunday.
So that the times, the disposition of people, the maner of offe|ring
being so much altered as they are, it is no reason that that
course should bee pressed vpon the minister now, which was in
practise then. The cases and causes are nothing like.
Secondly, it is against the rule of equitie. Equitie requires, that
as hee that paies, knowes what worke to receiue for his pay, so
hee that worketh should know what to receiue for his labour.
That is, As the parishioner doth know certainly what hee is to
require at the ministers hand, as that hee preach thus often at
least, minister the Sacraments, read Diuine seruice, in this and
that sort, c. so the minister should know as certainly what
hee is to demaund and haue of his parishioner in recompence of
his labours:  not hee to bee tied to conditions for his dutie, 
stand at curtesie for his maintena~ce: they allowed to commaund
him for that hee is to doo,  hee inforced to intreat for that he
is to haue. Thirdly, It is contrary to the practise of all times. Be|fore
the lawe, Genes. 47. wee doo read of the Egyptian priests, that
they had their lands certaine  reserued vnto them to liue vpo~:
 (oh that heathens should bee more righteous then Christians)
besides that in time of famine, they had an ordinarie of Pharaoh; ver.
22. And before that, wee doo read, cap. 14. of the same booke,
That Abrah. payd to Melch. Priest of the high God (and in him
is expressed to vs no doubt the common practise of all the

godly of those times) hee payd I say, not what he lusted at ad|uenture,
but thus much; a certaine portion of all that hee had. In
time of the Law, the Priests sonnes and seed of Leui stood not to
mens curtesies, but had their tithes certaine; and knew their
parts of euery kinde of offering, that came to the altar. And in
time of the Gospell, howsoeuer some particulars haue failed;
The general practise in all ages, nations  countries whatsoeuer,
hath been, and is, that the minister should know (for the princi|pal
part of his maintenance) what to demaund, and the people
what to pay.
The same course holds currant in all trades, sciences  pro|fessions
else. Goe into all Courts of iudgement, haue not euery
one their knowne and seuerall fees? Goe into the City, haue not
all officers their certaine salaries? Goe out into the field, hath not
euery Captaine, Lieutenant, Sergeant, Soldiour, c. his knowen
pay? Goe into the country, hath not euery labourer his ordinary
wages? Come home into thine owne house, will thy seruant
trust to thy curtesy for his seruice? will any workman worke with
thee, either by the day or at taske, without agreement what to
haue? And is it not a straunge thing, That should bee thought to
bee a course fit and good enough for the minister, which is good for no
bodie else? and hee bee inforced to that kinde of dealing, which
all others disclaime and vtterly refuse?
Plutarch, a worthie Historiographer, writes of Licurgus, that
famous Lacedemonian Lawmaker, That beeing aduised by one, to
plant in the Citie Democracie, that is, popular gouernement in
steed of Aristocracie, that is, the gouernement of the chiefe men;
hee made only this answere: Begin (saith hee) that, thy selfe;
Plant thou first a Democratie in thine owne house. His meaning
was, That kind of gouernement would neuer prooue good in a
common-wealth, that was so bad, that no man would endure
or admit it into his owne house. The like answere and no more
I might haue shapen to this obiection: Let them that thinke it
good for the minister to stand at mens curtesies, practise it in
their owne houses a while, and bring vs word after a while how
it frameth: The wiser sort would thereby haue co~ceiued enough.
But hauing to doo with the vulgar sort, (for it is their opinion
that I am in hand with) let wise men beare with me, though I
bestowe more wordes then one or two, to stop the mouthes of a

multitude.
In euery thing how good or euill it is, is commonly percei|ued
by the effectes thereof: it is not a good tree that bringeth
foorth bad fruite. If wee goe this way to worke, what good
comes there, of this course? of this I meane, That the minister
should stand to euery mans curtesie?  take (as they tearme it)
their good wills, as if he were their alesman? For mine owne
part, I can see none: what others can shewe, I long to see or
heare.
Indeed, as in building of the tabernacle in the wildernes in the
daies of Moses,Exod. 36. the people there beeing left for that once, to doo
euery man what he would according to the willingnes of his heart;
they performed it in such sorte as testified the exceeding loue
and zeale they had to the seruice and house of God: so people
co~tinuing the like course for the maintenance of the ministerie
 house of God in these daies, this good might come of it, They
might thereby take occasion to shew their great loue and zeale to the
house of God, to the ministerie and ministers thereof, by offering and
giuing thereto of their owne accord, without Law or compul|sion,
as much and as plentifully as others doo ( happely against
their wills) by force and constraint of lawe. But it experience
may speake her knowledge in this matter; If by mens dealings in
this case, by that many doo giue, and would of their owne ac|cord
but giue, to this so holy, so good, and so necessary a vse,
in such places where they stand vpon it, That they neither ought,
nor will doo otherwise, a man shall iudge of their loue, to God  his
ministers, of their zeale to his Church and the Gospell; surely
we must iudge it to be very colde and small very backward and
bad.
Now as there comes no good of this course for ought that I
can see: so on the contrary side, I know it and see too often that
much euil and hurt comes of it.
As first, It disables the minister vtterly to doo his duetie. For
wanting, as that way hee cannot but doo, all necessaries both
for his life and his study, how can hee possibly be able, either to
study that hee may preach, or preach when hee hath studied?
2. It is the ready way to discourage him from dooing his
duety, to make him timerous and fearefull in reproouing of
sinne and wickednes; as knowing before hand, that liuing vpon

the courtesie and good will of his hearers, if hee but once crosse
them (as they tearme it) that is, but once touch the sinne, that
such and such do liue in, they will be euen with him for it. Dis|please
any in word or deed, and of them ye get nothing.
3. It is the ready way to induce the Minister of God to flatter
and soothe the richer sort, in hope of the greater reward and bet|ter
Beneuolence at their hands, Both which vices (flatterie and
fearefulnes) how pernitious they be in a Minister, who of all o|ther
men shuld be most free from respect of persons, no man but
may easily conceiue.
4. It discourageth and disables him vtterly, from any good
house-keeping and hospitalitie; as who liuing himselfe, like a
begger, rather then an house-keeper, knowes not how he shalbe
able to keepe house, and giue entertainment to others, beeing
certaine of nothing himselfe.
5. It is the sure way to keepe the Minister of God in extreame
pouertie: then which, there is not any mischiefe more dangerous
to the Church of God. For such is the charitie and good deuoti|on
of the most part this way, that if they may hold the Minister
at that bay, not one among. 20, I speake within compasse, and that a
great deale too: I say, not one among 20. will by his good will,
deale with the minister, Ministerlike.
6. It emboldens euery man against the Minister, to vse him
for his maintenance at their pleasure. Because, if he will not take
their allowance. What they be disposed to giue him, though it be not
woorth the taking vp, not the twentieth, happily not the 40.
part of his due, hee shall haue nothing at all; seeing by lawe, (as
they account and will handle the matter,) hee shall or can re|couer
nothing of them.
7. It is such a course, as if it hold a while longer, and be not
speedily by due law reformed, will (it may iustly be feared) bring
the Ministers of diuers places to very beggery, or the Ministrie of
such places to be dissolued. My reason is: many such are resol|ued
already, that they owe the Minister nothing, or at least, that
he can recouer of them nothing at all but their accustomed offe|rings;
that is, two pence a peece at Easter. And if they come once
generally (as already many doo) to practise it, we may soone
coniecture what the sequell must needs be. And this is a com|mon
thing, whatsoeuer any hath vsed of his voluntary to pay,
howsoeuer their wealth increase, scant one of an 100. will aug|ment

any thing to the minister: but contrariwise, in maner
all bee ready vpon any light occasion to abate  giue lesse. And
abatement once made, it is neuer bettered againe. So that by
all likelihood in a little time it will come to nothing at all.
8. It is such a course and kind of dealing, as if it should (which
God forbid) bee practised generally, were the readie way to
ouerthrow the Gospell, to beate downe the preaching of the
word, and to banish religion out of the land. Goe throughout
the land, from Dan to Beersheba, and looke what maner of mi|nisters
and ministerie there are in such places, specially, where
the minister depends vpon mens goods wills; and finde one
place or parish almost, if it bee possible, where the minister
liues not in great needines, and the people perish not for want
of teaching. Wee haue at this day (God bee thanked) a great
number of learned and excellent teachers in the land: but if
they should be all brought to such a kind of mainteinance (And
how can that hee good for some, which is nought for all?) Doo you
thinke within a few yeares, there would bee found halfe the
number that now is? Where are able teachers at this day most
wanting? and where bee the simplest and meanest ministers
commonly found? is it not (where the best need to bee) in
townes and Cities? I see no greater, nor almost no other cause
then this, for that in such places, The minister hath little or
nothing prouided him to liue vpon, but is inforced to take like
a begger, what men will give him. And therevpon none of any
learning, of any gifts, delight to come into such a place; or
alighting on such as it were by chaunce, or vppon some neces|sitie,
when hee once sees his entertainment, will long tary there.
Such be the effects that come of this kinde of course: now iudge
of the tree by his fruites.
9. Lastly, if it bee a good course, commendable, or but tolle|rable
in the land, why dooth not some Machiuillian head or
other suggest vnto the highe Courte of Parliament, how ne|cessary
and profitable it were to bee planted throughout the
land? what land and reuenues it might bring to the Crowne,
what profits and treasures to the Kings coffers, what inheri|tance
for gentlemen, younger brothers, what possessions and
habitations for many people in our so populous country,
what wages for souldiours, c. if all the tempoalities,

and other certaine emolumentes of the Church were
seazed vpon, and the Cleargie left vnto the curtesie and bene|uolence
(maleuolence indeed) the offering and good willes of
the people: which (as may bee seene in diuers places already)
were prouision ynough for them, and would well ynough con|tent
them. For why might not all, as well as some, liue on that
fashion, and rest vpon the kindnes of their hearers, who would
not of conscience see them perish for want? c. If this were not
to bee endured, maruell not much (good Christian and godly
Reader) though I seeme vehement against that pestilent practise
in few, which were intollerable in all. For, speaking from some
experience, I haue seen so much euill  inconuenience thereby,
that I cannot but from my heart detest it, and desire and labour
what lyes in mee the vtter extirpation thereof. And I doo hope
that by this little Anatomie thereof layd before thine eyes,
thou wilt bee moued, to confesse and conclude with mee, That
a voluntarie contribution for the ordinarie maintenance of the Minister
is no where tollerable; and that, it is the duetie of all Christians, as
they make conscience of their duetie, to God, respect equitie,
haue any loue to the ministerie of the Gospell, and desire the
prosperitie thereof, to yeeld the minister a certaine paie, one way or
other: that so both themselues may know what they ought to
pay, and hee what to demaund;  how to recouer it, if it bee
withheld.
Though this voluntary maintenance bee (as I haue shewed) a
course that Gods word dooth not approiue, that agrees not
with the rule of equity and reason, that neither Iewes nor Chris|tians
did euer generally practise, a course whereof comes to the
Church of God no good, but many euills and perills: yet it is
not vnlikely, but that many, vnles there bee soome good lawe to
inforce them thereunto, will hardly bee reclaymed from it, and
will (say what either I or any else can) sticke to it still. To direct
such therefore, the while, to vse (if it bee possible) a bad thing
well, and to keep themselues from sin in so dangerous a course;
I will for their sakes bestow a little labour,  adde yet a few lines
more, to shew them, what measure  proportion they should in
reason and equitie keep in this case; that so in some measure, they
may satisfie their duety to God, and content the minister of his
Church; to whom though they will giue but what they will, yet

they are bound in conscience to giue that that is somewhat tol|lerable
and reasonable. Reason must take place, though law doo
not, and conscience gouerne our actions where compulsion is
not. A heathen man being asked what good hee had gotten by
his Philosophie? Aunswered; I haue (saith hee) gotten this
good thereby, that I can doo those things vnbidden, which
other men doe for feare of the lawes. Religion ought to preuaile
no lesse with vs. Wee should not need humane lawes to compell
vs to our duties, whose consciences are informed by the rule of
equitie, That euerie man of his owne accord ought to doo to others,
as hee would, if the case were his, bee done vnto. If this bee but
right and equal, as I thinke euery reasonable and religious man
will graunt it is; Let vs (presupposing for a while that there is no
positiue law, either to direct, or compell vs to any thing in this
case) consider accordingly, when the minister hath laboured
for thee the whole yeare (I am bold now good Reader, to talke
somewhat familiarly vnto thee) and hath bestowed vpon thee
most liberally and carefully spirituall things, and rests yet all
the while vpon thy good will, contented without any agree|ment
or certaintie assigned to stand to thy curtesie for tempo|rall
things, what, or how much (if thou bee a man of any ability)
it is fit and requisite in any reason thou shouldest giue him? I
will speake what I thinke: and because it is but a conceit of my
owne, a proportion by mee alone in this case propounded, I
will speake with the least too. Let the indifferent Reader vouch|safe
the reading of it, and then iudge: know throughly what it is,
and then censure it as it liketh him. Mine opinion is this; That
though the minister doo stand to thy curtesie, yet thou in con|science,
I say in conscience and reason, oughtest to giue him no
lesse for his whole yeares labour for thee and thine in the mini|sterie,
then thou doest or wouldest giue vnto a schoole-maister,
for teaching one of thy children a whole yeare. I say it againe.
Euerie man ought in conscience, to giue his minister for teaching him,
and his whole familie in the word of God, so much at least, I say so
much at the least, (for his due is more a great deale many times)
as a schoole-maister commonlie hath for teaching one childe.
I know this will seeme much and straunge to such as bee so
farre wide of this rate, that by their good willes they will not,
nor vsually doo not giue the minister halfe, nor a quarter, no

some sant the tenth parte so much.Note this. But, howsoeuer it seeme
to any, That it is a proportion most reasonable, and indeed
the lowest rate that reasonably can bee kept, I doubt not
to make it most euident and plaine to the vnderstanding of all
that bee not willfully blind, and exceeding obstinate in their
owne opinions. Neither will I, nor need I goe farre from
the Text wee haue in hand; as which of it selfe dooth offer
to yeeld mee 3. or 4. very plaine and speciall reasons and argu|ments
for it.
First, the Apostle here calleth the minister a teacher, and the
parishioner one that is taught: as you would say, a schoole-maister
and his scholler. And in the iudgement of interpreters
that are very learned, hee dooth vse that maner of speech, pur|posely,
to shew, That as it is the dutie of the scholler to main|taine
his maister, so it is the dutie of the hearer to main|taine
his minister: which whoso will not doo, euen among
prophane men, is accounted impious and vniust. And indeed
what other is the Church but a Diuinitie-schoole, the minister
a Lecturer, and the hearers schollers? According wherevnto
it is, that Christians at first were called Disciples, that is in plaine
English, Schollers.
2. Looke what thou giuest for teaching one of thy children,
If thy Schoole-maister deserue it for teaching one alone,
doth not the minister deserue so much at the least for teaching
thee,  thy whole familie? thee I say, thy wife, thy children, thy
seruants, and the straunger that is within thy gates?
3. What dooth the minister teach thee? Hee teacheth thee
(saith our Apostle) in verbo. Hee teacheth thee the word of
God. Hee reads to thee a Diuinitie Lecture. Hee dooth minister
vnto thee spirituall things. Hee speaketh vnto thee (as it is
said otherwhere) words whereby thou and all the housholde
may bee saued; A kinde of doctrine, then which none is, nor
can bee, more excellent, pretious and worthy reward.
Now I pray thee, is it not a reasonable thing and an ordinary,
according to the excellencie of the learning that a man tea|cheth,
so to giue him greater or lesser pay? Why then is it
not reason thou giue him that teacheth thee (and all thine)
Diuinitie, that informeth thee to know God, that sheweth
thee the way to eternal life, that brings thee the glad tidings

of saluation, so much at the least, as thou doost giue a man to
teach thy child to read, or write, to vnderstand the Latine or
Greeke tongues?
4. What ought to bee his reward? a parte (saith our Apostle)
of all thy goods. And that is more I thinke, if it bee well shared,
then any man dooth allow to his Schoole-maister for any one
child.
But leaue wee for a while the Apostle, and let vs turne our
eyes aside to behold the practise of times; that so wee may see
how neere others both in our  former daies haue come to this
proportion.
1. How did the Israelites maintaine their priests and Leuits?
Who knowes not, That by Gods appointment, besides diuers
other things that fell to their share, they had the tenth of all
things?
Is it likely their School-maisters were maintained in that libe|rall
maner? and had another tenth for euery child they taught? I
trow not.
2. Looke all England ouer, and behold what prouision our
fore-fathers made for ministers, and what for Schoole-mai|sters.
Is it not so, That the meanest benefice in the land almost (that
is whole) is better in reuenues then the best schoole? And
hath not the minister many times of one, euen a meane man,
ten, yea twentie times as much as the Schoole-maister for one
Scholler?
3. Doe but enquire in London, where the ministers of the
Church are in commendable sorte prouided for; and which
may in that respect, bee a glasse and patterne for sundry other
Cities and townes in England: and tell m, whether the mi|nisters
part out of euery house (if hee bee iustly dealt with) bee
not commonly so much at least, as a Schoole-maister takes for
one Scholler?
4. Remember of such places where Lectures haue beene
kept, and preachers maintained by an extraordinary stipend;
Is there any such place where they could possibly raise a sti|pend
of any meane competencie, but that the inhabitans must
be content to contribute therto, viritim, man by man, house by
house, for all the better sort, asmuch at the least, as they vsually

giue for teaching one of their children?
5. In all reason and equitie, in all reputation  account, is not
the minister of the Church, before the maister of the schoole?
The schoole is commonly but as it were a step to the ministerie,
and a stay for a man till hee bee fit for the ministerie. In all
meetings  assemblies, hath he not his place before the schole-maister?
is it not reason then, as hee is before him in degree, so
hee should bee equall with him at least, in maintenance?
But now a daies with vs, in places not a few, for the most part
it is quite contrary. The condition  estate of schoole-maisters,
is commonly farre better then the ministers. If a man can get 4
or 5. score schollers, hee shalbe sure to liue like a scholler, nay
like a gentleman by them: but though a minister haue so many
housholds to his Church, if hee haue nothing to trust to but
their good wills, hee liues not like a scholler, but a begger rather.
Some would thinke it scant credible, happily if I should say, That
a man may haue more maintenance by 40. or 50. boyes in a
schoole,Note this well: then by an 100. housholdes, by 400. communicants in
a parish: but I doo beleeue it,And see in what miserie many of our ministers doo liue. and can speake it of mine owne
knowledge, That it is probable  possible, That a schole-maister
may haue better maintenance by 7. or 8. boyes, then a minister
by 7. or 8. score housholds. Where it is so, and I thinke if due
enquiry be made, it will be found so in many places of our land,
the greater our sinne, the heauier Gods wrath; the more lamen|table
and miserable the estate of our ministerie: can wee say that
people doo deale conscionably and liberally with their mi|nisters?
and Christianly  thankefully with God? or that mini|sters
complaine without cause, and be already euery where duly
 sufficiently prouided for? I know that these things will seeme
straunge, to such as are not acquainted with them, and doo con|ferre
to the maintenance of their ministers in another maner of
measure: but I would to God, they were not most true, and that
our ministers felt them not.
I hope (good Reader) that by this that I haue said I haue (ac|cording
to my purpose) made it euident vnto thee, That such as
will needes continue that euill custome, to giue the minister
but what pleaseth themselues, yet ought in reason  conscience
(if they bee of any abilitie) to pay him so much a peece at
least, as they giue a schoole-maister for teaching one of their

children. And this rate doo I hold to bee so reasonable and in|different
for both sides, that I wish with all my heart, That as
Dauid made it a Law in Israel, 1. Sam. 30. 24. That of things
gotten in warre, as his part was, that gooeth downe to the battell, so
should his part be that bideth by the stuffe, and keepeth the campe:
so, in such places where people will not willingly  justly pay as
they should, tithes of their labours  gaines, but inforce the mini|ster
to stand to their curtesies, till a better Lawe come in place; That
either the people themselues, would make it a custome, or the
superiours of our land, a law and statute in England, That in steed
of those tithes, besides their accustomed offerings and other ex|traordinary
prouentions, as his paie is that teacheth in the schoole
for euerie scholler; so should his paie bee, that teacheth in the Church for
euerie familie: that is, the icher sort to pay as for the best schol|lers,
the meaner as for meaner schollers, and the poorer sorte
that are payable, as for meanest: that so yet some conuenient
portion and proportion, some certaintie might bee obserued 
knowne.By this rate, where now of an hundred houshoulds, the minister hath scantten pounds, then of euerie 40. housholds hee could not but haue more. It is a rate so reasonable and easie, that as by it, where
the place is any thing populous, as those commonly are where
it needs chiefly to bee put in practise; in some co~petent measure
the minister might haue sufficient wherevpon to liue: so by a
lesse, such as now is too common, it is not possible in these
times, for a man to redeeme himselfe from extreame need, and
bee other then very poore. In a word, it is a rate so small and
easie, That I more feare, least I sinne against God, and offend his
Church in approouing it, then suspect that any which is contrary
minded, shall bee able to prooue against mee that it is too great,
too hard, and vnreasonable.
I haue held the Reader somewhat long I confesse, vpon this
one point, and it may bee some will obiect, altogether without
any cause: For (may some say,) As it is not fit indeed, that the
minister should bee left to the curtesie of the people, so neither is
hee; For by expresse law  statute already in force, hee is euery
where prouided for of some certaintie; as of prediall tithes, where
they are to be had,  of personal tithes, where the former are not:
as appeareth in the Statutes of Ed. 6. An. 2. Cap. 13. De Decimis.
True it is, and not to bee denied, That that Statute dooth in|deed
so enact. From which I trust I may bee bold to obserue
this one thing farther, for confirmation of that I haue sayd, viz.

That it is the iudgement of our whole Church of England, and of all
the estates of our land, confirmed in expresse wordes by act of
parliament, That the Minister ought to haue a certaintie to de|pend
vpon; And that the contrarie, not in mine opinion onely,
but in their wise and generall iudgement is, as indeede it is, intolle|rable
and vnfit.
But for a full aunswere to the obiection proposed; First, I doe
speake of that is practized, not of that is enacted: and doe con|demne
that course which now is growne with many into such
a custome, that nether that lawe, nor reason, no nor the word of
God can hitherto reclaime them from it; and so doe not weary
my Reader with waste matter, nor fill my paper with an vnne|cessary
discourse.
Secondly, I say, and with all reuerence and Christian humi|litie,
prostrate at the feete of my Superiours, desiring and
crauing leaue that it may bee free for mee in so great a
cause, and that so neerely and so much concerneth the glory
of God, and good of this Church, for which euery good man
ought to be content (if neede be) to lay downe his life to speake
the truth; I say it, That that statute doth in very deed rather say
it, then assure it to the minister, shew what he should haue, then
enarme him to recouer it. Because whereas it debars him of the
defendants oath, the surest and most vsual remedy in al causes of
tithes, it is found by long and too too much experience, that
thereby (that clause being commonly abused against him) he is
also debarred of the thing it selfe that he seekes to recouer. For
people being now a daies very apt to abuse any aduantage that
law may yeeld, doe easily learne, That if they will but not confesse
any thing, the Minister can recouer but what he can prooue;
which commonly must needes bee iust nothing: whereby his
case becomes such, that vnlesse he will take with quietnesse (as
they call it) what they wil of curtesie giue him, by contending
for more, he is sure too loose al. No doubt ther were some reasona|ble
causes why the oth was forefe~ded,  it may be the integrity
of those times) whe~ the statute was made) such, that it was presup|posed,
me~ needed not to be pressed so far, but wold of very con|science
to equity  right, of loue to the Church  Ministery, of
zeale to God  his Gospel, do that were fit voluntarily, it being
but shewed them; or at farthest, vpo~ examination, acknowledge

the trueth freely. But the corruption and backwardnes of these
our times shewing wholly the contrary, and beeing such, that I
thinke that man to bee as rare as a blacke swanne, that by vertue
of that statute, hath of late yeares recouered any thing;  that
there bee many hundreds that can iustly alledge, That by abuse or
weaknes thereof, they haue done, and doo daily leese in maner all: sure|ly
there bee causes more iust (vnlesse some better course bee
taken) why it should bee againe permitted them: without the
which the ministers may iustly and with griefes enough com|plaine,
That that statute (standing as yet it dooth) allowing them a
certaintie, viz. personall tithes, in name, dooth take the same from
them is very deed, and remittes them to that it seemes to condemne; the
mercie and curtesie of the people.


CHAP. VI.

That the minister must haue for his maintenance, not an imagined competent portion: But specially, besides offerings, the tithes of all things; which are still due by diuine rht: and bee of
two sortes, viz. Prediall, and personall.

_FRom the opinion of the vulgar sorte, Let
vs come (God assisting) to those of the lear|ned.
Among whom, some doo hold, That
concerning the ministers maintenance, what
it should bee, there is nothing certainly
determined in the word of God; onely this
is therein taught vs, and required, That the
minister must haue competent maintenance. This if it be yeelded him,
how, whereof, or by whom; so hee haue it, it is no matter.
Others bee of the minde, That the scripture teacheth vs, both
that the minister ought to bee maintened: and that his mainte|nance
ought to bee not an imagined competencie; but specially
Tithes, the tenth of the increase of all things.
The former of these opinions (The reuerence  honour that
I beare vnto the persons, learning,  iudgement of those that be
contrary minded alwaies saued  reserued, because amicus Plato

amicus Socrates, sed magis Veritas: Trueth is to bee preferred aboue
all men) I doo dislike. For it seemeth vnto mee improbable, that
God, who from the very beginning till Christes time (for that
neither is nor can be denied) as carefull for them whose Priest|hood
was nothing so excellent and worthie honour, as the mi|nisterie
of the new Testament, had declared  reuealed, whereby
hee would haue the priests of those times to bee maintained: as
by tithes, offerings, c. and did not leaue it to the discretion of
men to allot what they imagined to bee competent; should now,
in the time of the Gospell onely, the later daies, and worser age of
the worlde,2. Tim. 3. 2. 3. wherein his spirite had foretold, That men would bee
louers of themselues, couetous, boasters, proude, disobedient to parents,
vnthankefull, vnholie, without naturall affection, intemperate despisers
of them that bee good, louers of pleasure more then louers of God, hauing
a shew of godlines, but denying the power thereof, c. All and euery
which vices in whomsoeuer, and wheresoeuer they reigne, would
hinder the condigne entertainement of his ministers: That hee
should I say, in these wicked times  perillous daies, leaue the~ (the
preachers of the Gospell) whose ministerie by farre excelleth
the former, to the mercy of the world, and conscience of the
worldlie minded to appoint them maintenance, as carelesse how
they were dealt with.
2. Whereas the Church of Christ euen from the Apostles
times almost, put in practise generally all Christendome ouer,
the payment of Tithes for the maintenance of the ministers of
the Gospell: shall wee say, They did this, onely as accounting that
to bee a fit course, and a competent maintenance for that pur|pose?
or shall wee say they did it as accounting that to bee the
right course commaunded of God, and which they had lear|ned
out of the word of God ought to stand in time of the
Gospell, as it did in time of the Law, for the Lordes owne
ordinance? To affirme the former is against all apparance of
trueth. The expresse wordes of the Fathers and learned that
wrote in those times doo plainely (as hereafter shall be shewed)
testifie the contrary. Doo wee not see then (graunting the later)
that this conceit of a competent maintenance, dooth (which
is neither safe nor godly) openly check  crosse the iudgement
and practise of all Antiquitie?
3. And forsomuch as wee seeke not what may bee done at

some times, and in some cases, but what is Gods ordinance in
this case, and therefore ought ordinarily and generally euery
where and at all times to bee done: what President and practise
in any one age of the Church can any shew for this competent
maintainance without tithes, as we can throughout many
ages, for the ordinarie maintenance thereof by Tithes? Before
the time of the Apostles the ordinary maintenance of Gods
ministers was tithes: in the time of the Apostles, it was
either by a communitie of all things, or by a voluntary contri|bution:
sith their time and a fewe succeeding yeares without any
interruption vntil this present day, the ordinary maintenance
of the ministers of the Church before Popery, vnder Popery, 
since Popery, hath beene by tithes, and not by some other sup|posed
competent maintenance. Now is it probable, That should
bee Gods ordinance for the ordinary  perpetuall maintenance
of his Church (for that is the question) which at no time, in
no age of the Church hath beene generally practised by the
Church? And that insteed of Gods ordinance (all the lights of
his Church beeing blinded) another course of mans inuention
should generally from time to time bee approoued and ad|mitted?
4. But bee it supposed, that nothing particular and speciall
can bee demanded; but onely the generall, a competent mainte|nance.
Let vs enquire, if happely that may bee found, what is a
competent maintenance. If any will shew it vs out of the word,
thence wee are sure nothing can be shewed vnlesse it be tithes. If
Tithes bee not it, I aske first whether it bee more or lesse then
Tithes? If they will aunswere more; is there any hope that dis|claiming
Tithes, in steed thereof a greater  richer portion may
bee obteined? Nay is it not very likely that many doo gladly
heare of and fauour this conceit of a competent maintenance,
in hope to drawe thereby the authors thereof to ouerthrow
themselues, and so get yet a great parte of the tithes and other
emoluments of the Church, which hitherto haue escaped the
hands of spoilers, as a prey? Not a few will quickly learne this
kind of Logicke; Ministers are to haue, by their owne confes|sion,
but a competent maintenance:  what then should a mini|ster
doo with so great a liuing, so much tithes? lesse by halfe is
enough for a minister. If one refuse it, yet a great many other

will bee glad with it, and acknowledge that they haue liuing
sufficient too, c. 2. If they will say, Lesse then tithes is a
competent maintenance; doo they not then iustly prouoke
against them the mindes of all that truely fauour learning, and
duelie consider how it ought to bee honoured? doo they not
then openly, without any colour at all, set open the doore vnto
extreame impietie  sacriledge? making way, and as it were iusti|fying
it, To haue all Church liuings, tithes, lands,  all long since
consecrated vnto God, to bee prophaned, and turned into that
whereof the land is already too full (and too lamentable expe|rience
hath taught vs, is a great parte of the misery of our mi|nisterie,
the ruine of learning and religion among vs) Impropria|tions?
Nay, doo they not speake manifestly against the scope of
the scriptures,1. Tim. 5. 17. which teach, That the minister must haue
double honour; that is, an honourable and liberall, and not a
sparing and poore maintenance?1. Tim. 3. 2. must be a keeper of hospitalitie,
and so bee able to entertaine others, aswellas to liue himselfe?
must liue of the Gospell,1. Cor. 9. 14 that is, haue such maintenance for his
preaching of the Gospell, that hee may bee able to liue thereby
alone, without any intermedling, for lacke of maintenance, in
other trades of life: not sparingly and needily neither, but well
and wealthily as becommeth his calling, and as did they by
the altar, that waited on the altar: which cannot Ordinarily bee
done, if his maintenance be lesse then the tenth.
Secondly, I demaund who shall (if the word of God doo not)
determine what is competent? Shall the Clergie? It is likely they
shall not bee admitted as competent Iudges in their owne cause.
Shall the Laitie? What is then to bee expected, but that they
will fauour themselues enough, and too much? will there not
bee among them, Quot capita, tot sensa, as many men, so
many minds. And as men are surprised with the affections
of couetousnes, of contempt of the Gospell, disgrace of that
calling, neglect of learning, and other like: so is it not likely
one will detetmine this to bee competent, and another that, and
the fewest of all come any thing neere the marke? and they
(the ministers) bee inforced to accept that for competent,
which is not, and to take that for suffitient many times, which
is halfe lesse then enough?

And what remedie? For (seeing as they say, God hath sayd
nothing to this purpose) they must beleeue others  not them|selues,
That to be competent, not which they themselues know,
but which others say is competent.
If already there had bene no tryall of the practise of supposed
competencie, men might happely be thought to feare, where no
feare were, and to suspect more then they had cause. But be|cause
experience is the surest, though not alwaies the safest tea|cher:
let vs heare from it, what (vpon perswasion no doubt, That
a competencie onlie was required) men haue already determined
vpon that point, and what good beginnings it hath made; and
the  culmo spicam, ghesse while it is yet in grasse, what corne it is
like to prooue.
1 It is not many yeares agoe, That tenne pound a yeare
was held a competent maintenance for a minister, and according|ly
some Church-liuings being seazed into lay-mens hands, in
lieu thereof, there was allotted backe againe, either a few of the
fragments thereof, then worth thereabout, or else a set stipend of
like valew.
But how competent a maintenance that hath proued, as
we cannot but with griefe consider, and had need with teares
lament; so I feare many a damned soule in hell dooth feele. All
confesse that such allowance is now incompetent: but who are
they that amend it?A godly and necessarie motion. It were reason, that as the temporalities:
themselues are by the alteration of times become woorth 4. or
5. happely 10. times so much as they were when such stipends
and endowments were allotted out of them; so they should
now increase the same accordingly, in such measure (at least)
that a man might bee able to liue thereby now, as hee might
haue done at that time by such allowance: and fit, in very con|science,
That hee that takes all the paines, should haue, if not
all, nor one halfe, yet at least a fourth or a fift part of the
profit. But men haue so learned S. Paules lesson backward
(that is, not Godlines is great gaine, 1. Tim. 6. 6. but gaine is god|lines)
that nothing contrary therevnto soundeth well in their
eares.
2. For our present daies, what doo men account now to be
competent? Bee there not many that thinke twenty pounds
a yeare enoughe? The ordinary reckoning and practise

is fortie. Some few there be, that are so liberally minded toward
the ministers, that they could wish, they had an 100. markes, or
an hundred pounds a peece: and that were abundantly enough
(if they bee not deceiued) for any minister. So that in all their
opinions that talke of a competencie, and would bee the caruers
thereof, if ministers will maintaine the generall,  lay-men may
determine the particular; from 10. or 20. pou~d. to an 100. pou~d.
is competent maintenance for any minister. But what co~petency
there is in these rates I leaue to others to iudge: this only added,
That for mine owne parte, I thinke of them all caeteris Paribus, as
once Demosthenes did of the counsels of certaine Orators in his
daies which he resembleth to the dyets of sick men,Demosth. in Philip. which neither
giue a man life, nor suffer him to die. And, for the opinion it selfe,
of this supposed competencie, the more I doo consider thereof,  of
the euils and inconueniences and mischiefes that it must needs
bring with it (quite contrary to the nature of trueth, whose pro|pertie
is, the more it is eyed, the fairer to appeare,  further to allure)
the more am I drawne to dislike and reiecte it.
Leauing it therefore, Let vs come to the other opinion, viz.
theirs which holde That by Gods ordinance,  Law yet in force, the
minister ought to haue the Tithes for his maintenance. Which point I
shall with the more alacritie  facilitie intreat of, because diuers
euen of those that denie Tithes to bee de iure Diuino, Gods or|dinance
for the ministers of the Gospell, doo yet graunt and
affirme,Willet in Synop. cont. 5. qu. 6 err. 79. That to the end the minister may haue a competent
maintenance, this is indeed, The most safe, indifferent, and surest
waie to raise such a maintenance: yea, so excellent and good a way,
as none better can come in place thereof.
A thing may bee sayd to be de iure Diuino, 2. maner of wayes:
that is, either after a sorte, because it is grounded vpon Gods
Law; or else absolutelie, because it is directly commaunded by the
Law of God. According to the former sense there be that easily
graunt, Tithes bee de iure Diuino:  that (vsing their owne words)
in 2. respects. First, in respect of the equitie of the law in paying
of Tithes which is this, That the minister ought to liue of the people,
and to haue sufficient and competent maintenance by them.
Which equitie and substance ef the Law, beeing morall, ought
alwaies to continue, beeing grounded vpon the Law of Nature,
Thou shalt not mousle the mouth of the oxe that treadeth out the corne.

Secondly, in asmuch as the lawes of the land and of the Church
(Princes lawes) doo confirme this ancient and excellent consti|tution
of Tithes, we are bound iure Diuino, to obey such lawes,
beeing agreeable to the word of God; which commandeth obe|dience
to our magistrates in all lawfull ordinance. To these wee
may adde a third respect: and that is, The obligation wherewith
the Church of Christ hath long since bound her selfe to the
payment of the Tithes;Hooker Eccl. pol. lib. 5.  79. hauing for many ages past, consecrated
them vnto God. Whereby it commeth to passe, That howsoeuer
at the first, Tithes might probably haue seemed mens owne, and
men haue had some colour to vse them as they saw good: yet
now, beeing made Gods by dedication, beeing giuen vp and
yeelded vnto him for the seruice of the Church, they are be|come
his proper inheritance; And therefore can not now,
without open iniury to God, and his Church without transgres|sion
of his Law, bee alienated from God, taken from his
Church, and put againe to common vse. Hee (I say) hauing thus
long time beene in such sorte inuested with the possession of
them, it is now altogether vaine and superfluous, to enquire
wether they bee a matter of diuine right? Thus Quodammod
after a sort, in this sense, and in these respectes, the point con|trouerted
is graunted. But because this concession doth not sa|tisfie
the question it selfe, let vs examine the other sense also.
Now searching the scriptures for this matter, Gen. 14.  28. wee
shall finde that Tithes were payd by holy and godly men, as by
Abraham and Iacob, before euer there was any law written, in the
time of Nature. Whe~ce wee may not obscurely gather I thinke,
That, to paie the Tenth, is a parte of the morall law; a dutie which
God from the beginning required of man as His sacred Right.
For those holy Ptriarkes, no doubt, did nothing in that point,
but what it was all mens dutie to performe and are set foorth as
examples and Presidents, in whom wee are to see what other
godly men of those auncient ages and former times did accu|stome.
And herein I am the more confirmed, for that in prophane
histories I doo finde, That the very heathen of those elder
yeares, the time of Nature, vsed almost euery where to pay the
very same portion, The tenth, vnto their imagined Gods. Some
to Iupiter, as the Persians; some to Hercules, or Apollo, as the Ro|manes

and Grecians: the Sabees and Aethiopians, to the sundrie
gods which their countries worshipped: And in a word, as Fe|stus
an auncient Storie-writer doth report, generally, decimam
quaeque veteres dijs suis offerebant, All nations of former times
offered to their gods the tenth. For how could it be, that all peo|ple,
euen those that knew not the true God, yet should herein
consent with the true worshippers? but that either by the light of
nature, or by auncient tradition receiued euen from Noah and o|ther
Patriarks, they had learned, that The tenth was Gods part.
If any will obiect, that the heathen did it by instigation of
their gods, diuels indeed: [for, such a thing doth a certaine
Chronographer of those times relate,Diod. Sicul. Bibl. lib. 5. cap. 2. as opening the reason how
that custome Vouere decimam Herculi, To vow and pay the tenth
to Hercules, tooke his beginning; saying, that Hercules (a diuell
appearing in such a likenesse) being on a time friendly entertai|ned
by Potitius and Pinarius, promised a happy life and increase of
wealth, to all such as should offer to him the tenth of all their
goods.] This is so farre from ouerthrowing that which I infer,
that it helps not a little to the proofe thereof. For why else
should it be,Why the diuel desi|red to haue the tenth. that the diuell should claime precisely that part, but
because being an enemy to God, and desirous, as enuious of his
honour, and as the Ape and imitator of God, to transfer vnto
himselfe Gods worship, and to rob him of his glory and due e|uery
way; as in sacrifices and oblations, so in tenthes likewise, he
did assume and vendicate this part of Gods worship: as if not
God, but he had beene the maker and owner of the world, and
giuer of prosperitie and riches vnto men vpon earth.
The story of Iacobs payment of tythes carieth a greater shew
of repugnancy, because it reporteth that he paide them vpon a
vowe. Gen. 28. 20. saying; If God will bee with mee in this iournie
which I goe, and will giue me bread to eate, and clothes to put on, so that
I come againe vnto my fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my
God, and this stone (which I haue now set vp as a pillar) shall bee
Gods house; and of all that thou (O God) shalt giue me, I will giue
the tenth vnto thee. Whereupon it is obiected by some, that Iacob
paide them not as a morall duetie, but as a vow.
But that is easily aunswered. First, that Iacob had a respect
to the couenant made with Abraham; namely, I will bee thy God
and of thy seede, Gen. 17. 7. By vertue of which, hee was bound

to shew himselfe thankefull as Gods seruant by outward seruice,
whereof tithes were a part: and secondly, seeing it is manifest
by manifold examples  practise of godly men, that it is no
new thing nor vnusuall with the godly, by vowing to binde
themselues to doe that which by the law of God and former
duetie they are bound to performe (so to stirre vp their owne
slacknesse, and enkindle their zeale to necessary obedience)
what letteth but that wee may conceiue the like of Iacob in this
case? Hee knew it (no doubt) to bee his duetie, to paye to God
the tenth: yet partly to stirre vp his owne care and zeale; part|ly
to testifie more apparantly his thankefull heart, which euen
before blessings receiued, bethought it selfe what to render to
the Lord for the same, receiued: partly, as abhorring and disclay|ming
the prophanenesse of the world, which (likely) euen then
began euery where to cast away the feare of the almightie, and to
detaine to themselues as their owne, Gods part of their riches; he
bindeth himselfe by speciall vow, to performe that which hee
knew to be, though he vowed it not, his duety to doe. That I
straine not his words from his meaning; he himselfe, by his for|mer
words, being also a part of his vow, doth beare me witnesse.
For, if you note the words well, he voweth three seuerall things.
First, that the Lord shall bee his God; that is, That hee would
worship and serue none other God. And it is out of al doubt (saith
a very iudicious interpretour) that therein hee comprehended
the summe of (his) pietie and religion. Secondly, that that stone
shall bee Gods house; that is, that there where he had pitched the
stone, hee would (as in Gods Tabernacle) serue God, build an
altar, and offer sacrifices, c. as Cap. 35. 1.  7. verse. Thirdly,
that of all that God should giue him, hee would giue the tenth
to God; as the proper maintenance that belonged to the
house of God, for the sustenance of the priests that should
attend on the altar. Here no man I suppose will say, but
that it was Iacobs duetie, euen without a vow, to serue and wor|ship
God onely, to offer to him Sacrifices, c. Yet doth he by vow
promise to performe it. And therefore as because hee vowes
those dueties, it followes not, else hee was not bound to haue
done them: so neither doth it follow, because hee vowed
tithes, therefore to pay them, was (else) no pare of his dutie.
It is more probable a great deale, that being a most religious and

wise man, knowing that God delights not in rash and vnlawfull
vowes, and knowing the payment of Tithes to bee acceptable
vnto God; vpon mature deliberation resolueth, to the end his
vow might please God, that should be a part thereof.
Thus notwithstanding any thing that can bee obiected, it ap|peareth
by payment thereof before the Law, that to paie the tenth,
is a part of the morall law, deriued from the very law of Nature.
Whence it followeth, That such payment is in force still: for the
morall law is perpetuall, as a duetie taught vnto man from the
beginning, to continue to the end, so long as there remaineth a
man vpon the earth. Which standing firme, this also must stand
for firme, That such Tenth is now due to the ministers of the
Gospell, because they are to vs as Gods Substitutes, as were the
priests then. And therefore as one saith of Abraham paying
Tithes; What Abraham owed vnto God, hee payd it vnto Mel|chizedec,
as vnto God himselfe: So, what people owe vnto God
(viz. Decimam) they ought to pay vnto the ministers of the
Gospell, as vnto God himselfe.
To say it is a morall precept, To maintaine the minister, or to
giue God some part of our goods, is but a weake euasion; forso|much
as it euidently appeareth, that the Tenthe, and not any
other, or any vncertaine part hath beene from the beginning
payd vnto God, receiued by his Substitutes,  accounted Gods
part: and that God himselfe so soone as hee maketh claime to
his right, and once nominateth what it is, claimeth and calleth it
by the name of the Tenth, as Leuit. 27. 30. Numb. 18. 20. saying,
The Tenth is mine.
2. From the time of Nature, if wee come to the time of the
Lawe; all doo know, That from Moses till Christ, the tenth of all
things was accounted Gods part,  that the Lord made challenge
therevnto as to his owne proper right and peculiar portion. The
Tenth of the lande is mine. All tithes are holie vnto the Lorde, and I
haue giuen the Tithes vnto Leui and his seed. And herevpon it is,
that hee saith, that Hee is their inheritance: and that Malac. 3. 10.
hee doth charge the people, that in withholding their Tithes and
offerings they had robbed him, c.
In these speeches and their like, wee must note two things: First
the Lords right vnto Tithes. Hee claimeth that parte and none
other: not an viij. or xv. or a xx. but the tenth precisely; as his

owne proper inheritance. The tenth (saith he, is mine.
True it is, that all wee haue in a sense is the Lords, because
All thinges are of him. 1. Chronicles 29. 14. And in that sense
it is saide Psame 24. 1, The earth is the Lords and all that
is therein, the round world and they that dwel in it:  Ps. 50. 10.
All beasts of the forrest are mine, and so are the cattell vpon a thou|sand
hilles. And saith our Apostle, what hast thou O man
what euer thou bee, and whatsoeuer thou haue, which
thou hast not receiued? But in this case God dooth clame
the tenth to bee his in a more peculiar sense and sort; and that
is not Iure Creationis, because hee hath made all: nor Iure Po|testatis,
because hee hath the disposing of all; for in these senses
the other nine partes are also the Lordes: but Iure Proprietatis
siue Reseruationis, in respect of the very proprietie thereof, or
by way of reseruation; because hauing giuen all the rest vnto
the sonnes of men, he hath reserued vnto himselfe, to bestowe
where hee will, the tenth, as his owne immediate right and por|tion,
euen in a like manner as a Lord passing away his land to
a tenant, reserueth yet for his owne vse, a certaine rent out of
it.
The notice and consideration whereof no doubt moued some
very learned and iudicious expositors, to intitle tithes by the
name of a sacred and holy rent or tribute, as it were insinuating
thereby, that as the land of Egypt (Gen. 47.) being sold into the
hands of Pharao, there was reserued vnto Pharao, the first part
of the increase thereof, as a rent or annuitie thereof, and the peo|ple
allowed to take the other foure parts for the seede and for their
labour, and for prouision for them and theirs: So the whole earth
being Gods, and hee giuing it to the sonnes of men, hee hath not|withstanding
for a token and acknowledgement of his soue|raigntie,
reserued vnto himselfe, as a rent and sacred tribute for
the whole, the tenth of all.
The other thing I note out of the words, is the bestowing of
tithes. Tithes (saith God) areine. But to what vse? I haue giuen them
(saith he) vnto the Sonnes of Leui for an inheritance. And why to Leui
 his sonnes? for the seruice which they serue mee in the tabernacle,
Num. 18. 1. And this teacheth vs, that in Israel so long as Leui
serued at the altar, and wayted in the Tabernacle, so long

he had right to Tithes. How right? Not Proprio iure, not by his
owne proper right, but in the Lords behalfe, and by way of as|signation
from the Lord, who had (to speake after our fashion)
passed them ouer vnto Leui and his heires so long as their ser|uice
did continue. These things being obserued, that is, first, the
Lords right vnto Tithes, which cannot but bee perpetuall; then
his assignation of Tithes to Leui, which was but temporary; and
herewithall that the ministers of the Gospel are to God now
in the steed of Leui,  do minister vnto him, not in the same but
a more excellent forme; we may with great, and I think vndenia|ble
probabilitie gather, that forsomuch as the Lords right vnto
the tenth holdeth still, he hath Leits to serue him still, his tem|ple
and seruice to be attended still; that stil they ought to receiue
that right on the Lords behalfe, which haue succeeded in the
steed of those that receiued it heretofore.
To say, that the law of tithes ceased when Leuies seruice ended,
is an argument of no force. First, because they were assigned not
so much for the persons sake as for the office, the Seruice of God:
which continuing though in another forme, doth necessarily
require the continuance of the maintenance, vnlesse a better
come in place, which is already graunted cannot bee. Second|ly,
because the right and so the law of Tithes tooke not his be|ginning
at Leui (for the payment of Tithes was not then first
instituted, but assigned onely to whom for that time, and in that
land, they should bee payd) It is therefore improbable, that
the payment of tithes should end with Leuies seruice, which took
not beginning thereat; but were Gods, and belonged to the
priests of God, when as yet Leui had not the office: but reason 
equity doth rather yeeld, that as the priests of God in time of na|ture,
had them before Leui, and the law: So the Ministers of the
Gospel should haue them now after the law,  since Leuies time.
Farther, we are to consider, that the assignation of tithes made
to Leui pertayned onely to them that were vnder the law. Then,
that those nations which liued without the law (written) could be
no lesse bound to the payment of tithes euen in time of the law
from Moses til Christ, then they were before the law from Adam
till Moses: whereupon it must follow vndeniably, that howsoeuer
the heathen fayled in this as in al other parts of Gods seruice, yet
Gods right (for right according to our English prouerbe, neuer

rots) continued among them still: and therefore if there had bin
among them any godly worshippers,  priests of God, they both
would and ought to haue paid tithes to those priests of the high
God,  not to the sons of Leui; as Abraham, Iacob, and other godly
men of their and former times, did pay the same to the priests
that were in their daies. If all this be true, and what thereof can be
denied I see not; then forasmuch as the preaching of the Gospel,
is but a reuoking of them backe into the right way, that were
gone astray, and a restitution of the true worship of the onely
true God ouer all the world; what letteth that the ministers of
the Gospel should not now haue restored vnto them also, what
by continuall right belonged to the priests of God wheresoeuer
the law raigned not from Adam vnto Christ? So that whether we
consider of the ministers of the Gospel as successours in office
(for the substance is still one) either to the seede of Leui vnder
the law, or the priests of God without the law, it will be hard to
shew why they should not succeede them both in maintenance
aswell as in seruice.
Besides this, whereas there are in tithes two things to be con|sidered,
that is, the Institution and Assignation, Gods proper and
immediate right, and mans mediate and subordinate possession,
the one respecting God himselfe as Lord of all, the other man,
Gods ministers for the time being: can any man shew, nay wil any
Diuine say, that God hath no longer any proper right  interest
vnto the temporall goods of men on earth, but hath remitted
vnto man that holy rent, that sacred tribute, which once, before
the law, and in the law, in signe, and for an acknowledgement of
his vniuersall Soueraigntie, he imposed vpon the wolrd? If that
may not be affirmed, for all Diuines I thinke hold the contrary:
what is or can be that Sacr. vectigal, if it be not Tithes? Who can
shew vs any other? 2. or must we imagine, whereas in true wise|dome
and good policie, all kings and princes of the world, all
landlords, and proprietaries of the earth, doe impose vpon their
subiects and tenants, their tributes, customes, rents, c. Certaine,
whereby the one may know stil from time to time, what to de|mand,
the other what to pay; that God the fountaine of al wise|dome
and author of al good policy,  order, and not of confusi|on,
permitteth men now in time of the Gospel (as seeing the
tenth to be graamen Ecclesiae, a burthe~ too heauy for hi church,

an exaction too hard and great for the world now to beare, and
therfore repenting him of that course which for more the~ 4000.
yeares he had approued and continued to honor him with their
goods in what proportion and quantitie they lust, to paie for tri|bute
to him what they will? whereby neither he that paies it, nor
he that on Gods behalfe requires it, may be able to say, This is
it: I assure you, it soundeth not in mine eares. And therfore vntill
the institution and right of tithes to God, aswell as the assignati|on
of them to Leui, be prooued to bee voyd and at an end, I see
no sufficient reason to yeeld, either that men ought not to pay
them, or ministers to require and receiue them as Gods part stil.
3 From the time of the Law, let vs come to the time of the
Gospel, and so from the old Testament (for proofes) vnto the
new:  therein for orders sake, first, vnto our text it selfe. Where
if we demaund of the Apostle, how much the minister must haue
of his hearer, true it is, he doth not say expressely the tenth of all
his goods, but a part. Make him (saith hee) partaker of all his goods.
But if we may coniecture what, or how great a part hee should
meane, forasmuch as we are assured that Saint Paul knew well,
that the priests of God before the law, and the Leuits likewise
in time of the law, had alwaies the tenth part, and that in
the whole scripture there is no certaine parte but that, na|med
to bee the Lords, or approued and assigned by name to any
that serued in the worke of the Lord: what part may wee imagine
that hee meant, but that which hee  all the learned, yea learned
 vnlearned knew, had euen from the beginning of the world
beene counted the Lords parte,  the priests portion? And it is more
probable, that therfore in the new Testament, that point is not
so directly handled as it was in the old, because by the old, it
was already very manifest; then that the mention thereof was
omitted, because it was to grow out of vse. For the alteration
needed a speciall declaration, which the continuance needed
not. And therefore in my opinion the Apostle must bee vnder|stood
to speake of the tenth part, and not of any other, new, and
neuer yet in vse. As if hee should say: Let the hearer make his
teacher partaker with him of all his goods, according to the or|dinance
of God, insuch maner and measure, as from the begin|ning
it is not vnknowne that the seruants of God haue euer
beene accustomed to receiue. As in a like sense, speaking of

a thing already knowne wee say, Let such one haue his due: and in
the Gospell, Math. 20. The Lord of the vineyard hauing first
agreed with all the labourers for a peny a day, ver. 2. when Euen
was come saith vnto his Steward, Call the labourers and giue them
their hire. And it is the more probable, because he doth require
expresly (as I haue already taught) that this part bee payd
in specie in its kinde, and out of all such goods as a man hath, by
due proportion, which was and is the true and ancient payment
of the tenth. For speaking plainely of the maner how this part
should by payd, hee might thereby easily bee conceiued what
hee meant concerning the measure. How probable it may seeme
to others I cannot tell: but this I know, That these considera|tions
haue seemed to some  those very good Diuines (though
contrary minded) so weighty, that they haue therevpon yeelded
thus farre, That if any place in all the new Testament doo make
for Tithes, it is specially this.
If the Apostle bee obscure in this place by reason of the bre|uitie
of his writting, let vs see whether hee bee not more plaine
in some other where hee is more large. Turne wee backe ther|fore
to 1. Cor. 9. where, vpon another occasion hee dooth insist
vpon this doctrine of the ministers maintenance. There ver. 13.
taking an argument a simili, from them that ministred in the
temple about holy things, and waited at the altar, how dooth
he conclude? Ita etiam Dominus constituit, c. So also, hath the
Lord ordeined, that they which doo preache the Gospell should liue of
the Gospell. Here it seemeth vnto mee, the Apostle plainely tea|cheth,
That the same measure and the same maner of mainte|nance,
which they had that once serued in the temple, and at|tended
at the altar, is now allowed  assigned to them that serue
in the Church and preach the Gospell. They were maintained in
very liberall  co~petent sort, so must these. Their maintenance
was sealed  certaine, not voluntary, so must these. They were
maintained by tithes  oblations, so must these. Their portion
was of holy things, that is of Gods part, of things consecrated to
God, so must the portion of these bee. Neither is it a matter of
equitie onely, that it were fit thus it should be, or a humane con|stitutio~,
supposing it were best so to bee: but ita Dominus constituit,
or as others read, mandauit, it is the constitution, ordinance or
commaundement of the Lord, that this ought to bee. The

Lord, who hath a peculiar right to a certaine part of euery mans
goods, hath thus appointed. As once God assigned ouer his tithes
 other duties to the seed of Leui, because hee had separated them
to serue in his Tabernacle: so now their seruice beeing ended, 
hee hauing substitute in their roomes for the worke of the Gos|pell,
not some certaine families of the earth, but Pastors and Tea|chers,
who~ it pleaseth him to call; To these, to the end they may
liue by their ministerie as the former did by theirs,  bee incou|raged
to the worke they haue in hand, hath bee assigned ouer
that which the former had, viz. his Tithes and Offeringes. In a
word, the Apostle speaking of a kinde of maintenance that is of
Gods ordinance  not mans, established by the Lord, not deuised
by man, allotted the preachers of the Gospel to liue vpon,  such
a one as they had that ministred in the temple, and serued at the
altar; let such as bee contrary minded prooue vnto vs, That their
maintenance was not tithes: and then,  neuer tell then will wee
yeeld, nor shall they bee able to prooue, That ours ought to bee,
not Tithes, but some other thing. For it is euident by this place
of the Apostle, That such as theirs was, ours must bee.
From this place of the Apostle, let vs proceed to another, 
that is, Heb. 7. where hee maketh mention very often of Abrah.
his paying tithes to Melch: which though he do to another end,
yet by those his wordes, beeing about another matter, he sheweth
withall, That Tithes pertaine vnto the ministerie of the Gospell
as once they did to that of the temple. First of all it is euident
by the Apostles words, that Melchizedec was a figure of Christ:
whence it followes that Christ in the person of Melchizedec re|ceiued
tithes of Abraha~,  that they are due no lesse to his priest|hood,
then to that of Melch. But if Christ had right to tithes be|fore
the law, hath he not the same right also since the law, in the
time of the Gospell? For his priesthood being perpetuall, so must
his right bee too. Farther, if wee consider of Melch. in his owne
person, that is, not as a figure of Christ, but as the priest of God;
if Melch. had right to receiue them in the behalfe of God, whose
priest hee was, how much more Christ, who is a priest for euer af|ter
the same order that Melchizedec was?
Touching Abraham, wee may consider of him, either as a
priuate man, or as a Patriarke. As a priuate person in paying
tithes, what other thing did he, but what was euery godly mans

dutie to doo? which (saith a certaine learned writer) is so repor|ted,
that thereby it may sufficiently appeare, that it was a custome
or ordinarie thing among the godly of those times. And who
can shew vs, that the godly are freed from that dutie since the
law, which they owed to God before? Or, that God which accep|ted
Tithes, as his sacred Right then, hath reiected it now? As a
Patriarke, and father of the faithfull, if wee consider him; dooth
not hee the father, by performing that duetie, shew in what steps
his children ought to walke, whose ofspring wee are, not accor|ding
to the flesh, but by that which is the surer side, by faith?
But what is all this to vs, that be ministers of the Gospell? very
much euery way. For seeing we are in Christes steed, 1. Cor. 5.
20.  hee that receiueth vs receiueth Christ, Math. 10. 40; as
Melch. beeing Dei subrogatus, Gods deputie, lawfully receiued at
Abrahams hand what was due to God: so wee on Christes behalfe
doo as lawfully claime  receiue of the hand of Christians what
is Christes right. Which thing is not improbable that our Apo|stle
respected, when 1. Cor. 9. the place before alleadged, he saith,
The Lord hath so ordeined: as it were giuing vs thereby to vnder|stand,
That such maintenance as the Leuits receiued in the Law
as Gods right, for their seruice at the altar: such ought the mi|nisters
of the Gospell receiue now in Christes behalfe for their
seruice to him in the worke of the Gospell: because as God assig|ned
it vnto his Leuits then, so hath Christ (who in the new Te|stament,
by that title of Lorde, is commonly distinguished from
God the father) vnto his ministers now. And as Abrah. the father
of the faithfull was then to pay the tenth to the priests of God,
as to God himselfe: so all the faithfull now, are to pay them to
the ministers of Iesus Christ, as to Christ himselfe.
Now that I haue shewed warrant and proofe for this point out
of scripture, I will adioyne also the testimonie and iudgement of
the learned and ancient fathers and others of the Church: who
wheresoeuer they speake any thing of tithes, so speake thereof,
as generally in their times acknowledged to bee of diuine insti|tution;
no man for well nighe a 1000. yeares (the depth of all
corruption and blindnes) after Christ gainsaying them. This I
do, aswell to confirme more fully that I haue auouched, as also
to take away all pretext from such as shall thorough ignorance
imagine this to bee but mine owne priuate opinion. They shall

perceiue that I teach none other thing in this matter, then the
auncients for many ages past haue done.
S. Origen liued within 200. yeares after Christ,Origen. not aboue 90.
yeares after the death of S. Iohn the Apostle of the Lord. Hee
writing vpon the booke of numbers, Hom. 11. and speaking of
the Law of Tithes saith plainely, Hanc ego legem. This Law (of
Tithes) as also some other, I (saith hee) doo thinke necessary to
bee obserued still, according to the letter. And in the same
place reproouing the people of his time for not paying tithes,
hee hath these words, Quomodo abundat Iustia nostra? that
is, how doth our righteousnes exceed the righteousnes of the
scribes,  of the Pharises, if they dare not taste of the fruites of
their ground, before that they bring foorth the first fruites to
the priests  the tithes be separated for the Leuits? and I dooing
none of these things, doo so abuse the fruites of the earth; that
the priest knows them not, the Leuit is ignorant of them, and
them the diuine altar feeles not? Againe in the same place; Non
videtur huiusmodi anima habere memoriam Dei, that is, That person
seemes not to remember God, not to thinke, nor beleeue that it
is God that hath giuen him the increase which he hath receiued,
which he so layeth vp as if God had no part in them. For if hee
thought them to bee giuen him of God, he would know also, by
rewarding the ministers of the Church, to honour God, with his
owne gifts  rewards. And a little after, Indecens  magnu~ existimo,
 impium vt is qui Deum colit, c. I hold it to bee a thing vnde|cent
(saith he) vnworthy and impious, that hee which worship|peth
God, and comes into the Church, who knows that the
priests and ministers doe waite at the altar, and serue either in
the word of God, or ministerie of the Church, should not of the
fruits of the earth, which God (causing his sunne to shine, and
sending raine in due season) doth giue, offer some part to the
priests. And where our Sauiour saith, Math. 2. 23. speaking of
Tithes, These ought yee to haue done, and yet not leaue the other va|don,
that he expoundeth to bee a morall precept no lesse for
the vse of Christians then of the Iewes: and so accounteth that
by these words our Sauiour gaue his approbation for payment,
of Tithes in time of the Gospel. So his iudgement is this, that the
law of tithes, is still in force euen according to the letter: that
Christ approueth the payment of them: that our righteousnesse

doth not exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharises,
if wee pay them not: that that person forgets his dutie to God
with omitteth it: that it is a thing in a Christian, vndecent, vn|worthy
 impious not to giue to the ministers of the Church
a part of those fruits and increase which God hath giuen him, c.
Not many yeares after Origen, liued S. Cyprian. Hee, epist. 66.
reproouing one Geminius Faustinus a minister, for intermedling
in secular affaires,Cyprian. saith, That Ministers haue nothing to doo with se|cular
affaires: but as the Leuits had no other busines but to attend
the altar, so the Lord had prouided for ministers, that they
might not bee drawne by wordly occasions from their holie bu|sines,
but might liue honourably maintained with their brethre~,
as they who receiued tithes of the increase of the earth. Hee
saith that the Lord had prouided such maintenance for his mini|sters,
alluding (it may seeme) to the place of the Apostle 1. Cor.
9. where he saith So hath the Lord ordained, c. So, that is, as the
Leuits and priests, ministring in the temple and wayting at the
altar, liued of the same.
Three hundred yeares and more after Christ his time liued S.
Hierome.Hierome. Hee writing vpon the Prophet Malac. cap. 3. where
mention is made of Tithes saith, What wee haue said of Tithes,
which once were giuen by the people to the priests and Leuits;
vnderstand to hold in the people of the Church that now is.
And a little after, The people of the Church (of Christ) are com|maunded
to giue tithes. For the farther proofe whereof hee
alledgeth S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5. 17. The elders that rule well are wor|thie
double honour; expounding the word Honour there to signifie
maintenance, and maintenance to bee Tithes.
In the same age though somewhat later,Ambrose. flourished S. Ambrose.
In a Sermon de Quadragesima, hee hath these words. Quicun|que
recognouerit in se, c. whosoeuer shal cal to minde that he hath
not faithfully payd his tithe, let him now amend that wherein he
hath failed. What it is to pay faithfully? but that hee bring at no
time, neither lesse, nor the worser sorte of his graine, or of his
wine, or of the fruits of his trees, or of his cattell, or of his gar|den,
c.
Neere about the yeare of grace 400. liued S. Chrysostome: who
writing vpon, Matthew, Homil. 41. saith directly, Iustitiam, Mi|sericordiam,
 fidem. Iustice, mercy and faith hath God com|maunded

for his owne glorie, but tithes for the maintenance of
his ministers. And Hom. 18. teaching the husbandman how he
may be a worthy Christian  doo good works though hee build
no Churches, hee saith: Quasi ducta vxore velspo~sa, c. n English;
As toward thy wife whom thow hast maried, or thy virgin whom
thou hast endowed, so bee thou affected toward the Church. As|sure
it a dower: so shall the reward, (or as some read praedium the
possession) of blessing bee multiplied vpon thee. For what good
will there not come thereof? Is it a small matter I pray thee that
thy vinepresse bee blessed? is it little that God of all thine increa|se
dooth first receiue his part, the tenth? This furthereth much
the peace or prosperitie of the husbandman. In all which words
hee dooth onely teache, That men ought to pay tithes, affir|ming
it to bee Gods ordinance,  calling them Gods part; but
withall giueth these reasons why, viz. 1. because so the minister
is to bee mainteined, and it is the meanes to haue a plentifull
blessing vpon the rest.
I come now vnto S. Augustine,August. An. 420. who so succeeded the former
in time, that when some of them were very aged, hee but began
to write. Hee hath written of this matter more then any of the
rest. There is extant one whole sermon of his de Decimis, tou|ching
Tithes, besides many sentences thereof in other places of
his workes, of which I will recite some. Tom. 10. Hom. 48, Hee
hath these words: Reddite dictum est Caesari, c. It hath beene
sayd, Giue to Caesar those things that are Caesars,  to God the
things that are Gods. Our foreelders therefore abounded in all
kind of wealth, because they gaue to God his tenth, and payd to
Caesar his tribute. But now because deuotion to God is gone, the
oppression of the court is come vpon vs. We haue refused to lay
out to God his tenth part, now therefore the whole is taken from
vs. The Chequer hath that, which Christ hath not.
Againe writing vpon the 146. Psalm. hee hath these. Exime
partem reddituum tuorum, that is, Lay out a part of thy reuenues
or increase. Wilt thou lay out the tenth? lay out the tenth
then: though this be but little. For it is sayd thath the Phari|sies
gaue the tenth also. And what saith the Lord? Except your
righteousnes exceed the righteousnes of the scribes, and of the
Pharisies, ye shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen: and
he whose righteousnes thine ought to exceed, giueth the tenth

but thow giuest scant the tenth of the tenth. Likewise Ser. de temp.
Serm. 219. de Decimis. Deus qui dignatus est, c. God (saith hee)
which hath vouchsafed to giue vs all that wee haue, vouchsafeth
to receiue againe the tenth thereof, yet so as shall bee profitable
not for himselfe, but for our selues. And a little after, reprouing
them that made no care to pay their tithes, he expostulateth with
them in this sorte. Audi indeuota mortalitas; c. which is. Heare O
thou mortal wight without deuotion. Knowest thou that what|soeuer
thou hast is Gods?  wilt thou not giue to God the maker
of al things any part of his owne? The Lord hath no need of thy
goods. God craueth not reward but an hon: he requireth none of
thine but his owne. He vouchsafeth to demaund the first fruites
 tenthes of that thou hast from him, and doest thou couetously
deny him? what wouldest thou doo if reseruing the 9. partes to
himselfe, hee had left thee only the tenth? Hitherto out of S.
Aug. Out of all which his words wee may note these specialties;
That he counteth the tenth to bee Gods, as tribute to bee
Caesars: calleth it Gods parte: saith that God receiuing it, re|ceiueth
but his owne: that long before his time tithes were
payd: and expoundeth and applieth the scripture for it; as
before him, Origen and others had doone: and affirmeth that
the paying of them is the meanes of plentie and blessing from
God, as the withholding of them the cause of scarcity  oppres|sion
among men, c.
Long after S. Aug. viz. about Anno 600. liued S. Gregorie.Gregorie. Hee
Hom. 16. vpon the Euangels hath these words, Suut offerre in lege,
c. that is. As yee are commaunded in the Law (deare brethren)
to offer vnto God the tenth of your goods, so striue to offer also
the te~th of your dayes. Wherein expressely he applieth the pre|cept
of tithes written in the law vnto Christians, so teaching, or
rahter taking it as a trueth without question  co~trouersie, That
Christians are commaunded by Gods Law to pay Tithes.
To whom agreeth Beda,Beda. that liued about an hundred yeares
after him: who in a treatise that he intituleth Scintillae insisteth
vpon the point, and prooueth by scripture and by fathers, Tithes
to bee due, inferring out of S. August. among the rest this sen|tence.
Tithes are required of dutie: and them who that will not
pay, dooth invade goods that are not his owne, asmuch to say
as he is an oppressour or extortioner.

Of the same minde is Caesar Arelatensis,Caesar Arela. saying; Tithes
bee no priuate mans, no lay mans goods, but the Churches
right.
To all these, as it were a Summist of them all, I will adioyne
Strabo a storie writer,Strabo. who lib. de reb. Eccl. cap. 87. maketh this
collection; Decimas Deo  Sacerdotibus, c: which is to say; That
Tithes ought to bee giuen to God and his ministers, Abraham by
his facts, and Iacob by his vowes doo insinuate: besides the Law
(of God) hath so appointed, and all the holy Doctors (of the
Church) doo consent and testifie.
From particular men let vs come to generall councels: so
shall wee see not onely what some, yet of the best, but what all the
learned of former ages thought of this matter; consenting as it
were vno ore, as vpon a trueth vndeniable, that Tithes euer were, 
stil are due, De iure Diuino.
Anno Dom. 580.Concil. Matisc. was held Concil. Matisconens. the second. In
the 6. Canon wherof, it was thus decreed; Leges Diuinae Sacerdotib.
 ministris Ecclesiaru~ consulentes, c. Which in English is to this
effect: The Lawes of God prouiding for the priests  ministers
of Churches, haue commaunded all people, that, as their inhe|ritance,
they should pay them in the holy places the Tenths of
their increase; that so beeing intangled with no wordly labours,
they may be at leasure to atte~d their spiritual ministeries. Which
lawes all Christendome haue for many ages past, kept inuiola|bly:
wherevpon we doo ordaine  constitute that all people doo
bring in their Tithes Ecclesiasticall accordingly. And if any shal
contumaciously breake our decrees, let him be excommunica|ted.
Neere about an hundred yeares before this councell, was held
the first councell of Orleaunce, which affirmeth also the same.
In the time of Charlemaigne,Duriens. Sy|nodus. Anno 779. followed Duriens. Sy|nodus:
wherein Cap. 10. it was decreed, That Tithes should bee
payd, and that they which refused so to doo should hee compel|led
therevnto; not only by the excommunications of the Church
but also by the officers of the common-wealth.
About 30. yeares then next ensuing, viz. Anno 813. was held
Synod. Moguntina.Synod. Mo|gunt. In the which they thus determine; Admonemus
vel praecipimus, vt decimae de omnib. dari non negligantur, c. Wee
admonish or commaund (saith this counsell) that Tithes of all

things being due by Gods law, bee not neglected to bee payd,
because God himselfe hath appointed them vnto himselfe to
be payd. For it is to bee feared (marke their reason) lest who|soeuer
with draweth from God his due, happely God, for that
his sinne doe take from him his necessaries.
Concil. Rothomag.Concil. Rothomag. is thus cyted by Gratian. Caus. 16. q. 1. Omnes
decimaeterrae, siue de frugib. siue de pomis arborum, domini sunt, c. All
the tenth of the earth, whether it bee of fruits of the ground, or
of the trees, are the Lords, and they are sanctified vnto him
Sheepe, Bullockes, Goates, and whatsoeuer passeth vnder the
rod, euery tenth thereof shall bee accounted holy vnto the
Lord.
Concil. Tribur. cap.Concil. Tribur. 13. saith thus, Quid si diceret dominus, Nempe
meus es homo, mea est terra quam colis, measeminaquae spargis, mea
animaliaquae ginas, meus est solis ardor, c. that is, What if the
Lord should say, Truely thou O man thy selfe art mine: mine is
the earth which thou tillest: mine is the seede which thou so|west,
mine are the cattell which thou feedest: mine is the heat of
the sunne, c. And whereas all being mine, thou which lendest
mee but thy hand, deseruedst but only the tenth part, yet doe I
allow thee nine parts. Giue me therefore my tenth. If thou wilt
not giue mee my tenth, I will take away thy nine: If thou giue
me my tenth, I will multiplie thy nine. If any therefore do make
a question, why Tithes are payd? Let him know, that therefore
they are to be giue~ (Two notable reasons) First, that God by such
deuotion being pacified, may more abundantly giue vs neces|saries:
 secondly, that the ministers of the Church being there|by
releeued, may be the more free to the fulfilling of their spi|rituall
exercises.
And in the decrees (the Canon law of all Christendome) Ex|tra
de decimis, cap. 14. Parochiano, these words are read; Forsomuch
as Tithes haue their institution not from man but from the
Lord himselfe, they may be required, as a due debt.
Time will not permit me to recite all: diuers other ancient
councels haue determined the same things. These cited, being
the common voice and full assent of all the learned of the first
and best times, doe plainely and aboundanly testifie That Tithes
are still due by Gods law, holy to the Lord, his due ordained by God, c.
They doe not challenge them at all, as due by the rule of equi|ty,

much lesse by positiue law and constitution of princes, but
by Gods ordinance. True it is, that the lawes imperiall, the lawes
of seuerall nations and kingdomes, doe mainetaine and ap|prooue
tithes: but we must vnderstand it thus (and so no doubt
in auncient times the lawmakers themselues intended) as con|firming
and restoring to the Church, that which they had learned
by the generall and vncontroulled doctrine of their owne and
former ages, to be the Churches in right, as did the godly kings
and rulers in Israel, Ezechias, Iosias, Nehemias, c. which resto|red
to the Leuits their appointed portions, and brought againe
to the house of God the tithes, first fruits, offerings, c. which in
currupt times had beene withdrawen. This is manifest enough
by that already alleadged out of the Fathers. For thereby, it may
appeare, that tithes were claimed and paid to the Church, before
there were any Christian Magistrates to confirme them by law.
For Constantine surnamed the great, who was Emperour about
the yeare 300. was long after Origen and Cyprian; and yet hee (as
faith Hermannus Gigas) was the first that euer we read of, to haue
made any law, that tithes of all things should be paid to al Chur|ches.
Foure hundred yeares at least after whose time (as Kranti|us
in Metropoli sua lib. 1. cap. 8.Krantius. doth note) it was that Charles the
great did also remit to Christians their tributes, and in steede of
of them assigned tithes vnto Churches  bishops. And it is yet
more apparant by that which antiquity recordeth of DionisiusDionisius.
that was Bishop of Rome before the daies of Constantine almost
an hundred yeares, how that he made diuision of parishes, assig|ning
seuerall Churches to seuerall ministers, and assigned tithes
 lands accordingly vnto them all. Adde to these the testimony
of S. Augustine before mentioned, Maiores nostrl, c. For he, li|uing
not aboue an 100. yeares after Constantines raigne, saith yet
that their foreelders vsed to pay tithes; giuing vs thereby to vn|derstand
that that custome had beene auncient, euen before any
princes were Christian, to make lawes to that purpose.
Concerning the present time, if I were alone, hauing so many
of the auncients on my side, I neede not feare the cause much.
Truth chaungeth not with times; nor is to bee measured by
multitude. But God be thanked I am not alone. For howsoe|uer
some and those learned men of our Church bee con|trary
minded; the greater Number, I assure my selfe, doe goe

with mee. I doe but as a lerner, sitting at the feete of so ma|ny
worthy Gamaliels, subscribe vnto their reuerend iudge|ments.
If any enquire what the learned of other Churches think, the
testimonies of a few may giue vs a probability of the rest.
Iunius saith thus;Iuius. Tithes by allawes (that is, by the law of Nature,
of Moses, of Christ; and of nations) haue for euer beene hallo|wed
vnto God. Rdulphus GualterGulter. though he be Caluins imita|tor,
and as it were Commentator in his Homil. vpon Math. cap.
23. dissenting from him in this point, saith plainly, These things
(speaking of tithes) ought to bee transferred to the Church of
the new testament. And a little after; Nec est quod aliquis deci|marum
legem, c. That is, neither is it to any purpose for any
one to say, that the law of tithes was abolished together with the
ceremonies of Moses law. For by what arguments may it euer
bee prooued, that that law of Tithes was euer by God abroga|ted?
Zepperus differs as not in minde,Zepperus. so almost not in wordes
from Gualter; for de leg. lib 4. cap. 10. thus he hath: A quibus argu|mentis.
c. And by what arguments shall it be prooued that law
of tithes to haue beene by God at any time abrogated? And
againe. Quemadmodum in quartodecalogi praecepto; Euen as in the
fourth precept of the decalogue, that which is ceremoniall is
ceased, the morall parte remayning: so at this time, tithes are a
parte of that stipend, which by the law of God and of nature, is
due to the ministers of the Gospel, for their labours in their
office.
Now that we haue seene, what God, what the auncient Fa|thers
and reuerend councels, and some of our late, but learned
writers haue determined vpon this point, I trust I may safely
without preiudice to the truth, or doubt of errour conclude
with them, and maintaine what I haue so oft affirmed, viz. that
tithes are still due euen by the law of God; The right and ordinary
meanes for maintainance of the minister,  (which is our princi|cipall
question) That very part and quantitie which euery man out of
his goods increase ought to giue to that vse. Herein If I doe erre, I will
not say as Ieremy did, cap. 20. 7. O Lord thou hast deceiued me, and
I am deceiued: but this I may well say; The pillers of the Church
haue failed vnder me: the lights of the world haue blinded

me: the guides of Israel haue led me out of the way: the fathers
of the people haue caused me, desiring to walke in their steps, to
wander: with whom, so many, so holy, so learned and so auncient,
while I doe erre, if the olde prouerbe (Cum Platone errare tutissi|mum)
be worthy any respect, I feare and care the lesse.
Well: be it that it bee most true, that the tenth is Gods part
and so the ministers,Obiection. yet what is that to such as haue no lands, no
fields, no cattel, no fruits of the earth, c? What is that to trades|men,
artificers and other like, which liue by their imployments,
by their labour and industry?
To such an obiection I answere thus:Answere. First, Bee it thou haue
no lands, no fields, nor cattell, c. Yet, if thou dwel vpon the
face of the earth,Small it is maruaile but thou hast part of the earth
more or lesse,Tithes. an orchard or a garden at least. And if thou graunt
that Tithes ought to be paid of the fruits of the earth, then must
thou by thine owne confession, pay tithe of thine orchard, and
thy garden be it little or great, as doth the husbandman of his
field, his medow, his cattell, c. If it be a small matter, yet some|what
it is: and where is but little, euen a little is worthy the recei|uing,
and it cannot but be sinne to withhold it. Marke but our
Sauiours words, Math. 23. And thou shalt see plainely that those
minutae decimae small tithes, as the law tearmes them, are to be
paid aswel as the greater. For there he speaking of the Pharisies
that payd Tithe of their Rue, annis, mint, cummin, and of euery o|ther
herbe, all garden hearbs, as euery woman can tell, saith ex|presly,
that as they ought to haue done weightier matters: So this,
though a small thing, they ought not, (as they did not) to leaue vn|done.
Which speach of Christs, as I haue already shewed, in the
iudgement of S. Origen containes a precept for Christians now,
as well as an approbation of that the Pharisies, in that point, did
then. And as we doe spie day at a little hole, and try how good
the tree is, by the taste of one of the fruites: So by this little, try|all
may be made, and notice taken, how good, or how euil a pay|er
of tithes thou wouldest be, if thou hadst possessions and great
store of lands and cattell as the husbandman hath. It is our Sa|uiour
owne rule and therefore currant, Luk. 16. 10. Hee that is
faithfull in the least, he is faithfull also in much: and hee that is vniust
in the least, is vniust also in much. If therefore thou haue not great
and many tithes to pay, yet pay thou thy few and smaller tithes

faithfully. As Zachariah and Elizabeth are commended for iust,
in that they walked in all both precepts and ordinances, that is both
greater and smaller obseruances of the law of the Lord without
reproofe: so is it the part of a iust mn, to make a conscience of
euery duty small and great.
Secondly, be it that thou haue no fields, nor lands, nor cat|tell,
and such like, that yeeld such kinde of tithes, yet if thou
haue other kinde of goods,Personall tithes. there is a kinde of tithe, marke well
what I say, there is a kind of tithe to be paide of those kind of goods that
thou hast: as of fish, of foules, of spoiles in warre, of money gay|ned
by trade,S. August. by art and labour. S. Augustine, as hee wrote
of this matter de decimis most of any of the Fathers, so is he
playnest of all other. Serm. de Temp. Ser. 219. de dec. he saith di|rectly,
Quodsi decims non habes, c. But (saith hee) if thou
haue not tithes of the fruites of the earth as the husbandman
hath, yet whatsoeuer meanes thou hast to liue by, it is of God: 
of that whereby thou doest liue, he demandeth tithes. Pay thou
therefore tithes of thy warfare, of thy trade, and of thy handy|craft.
Thus preached, and wrote, S. Augustine for 12. hundred
yeares agoe and therefore it is no new opinion: he goes farther
and giues reason why this kind of tithe should be payd as well
as the other. Aliud. n. pro terra dependimus, aliud pro vsura vitae pen|samus:
that is, The one kinde of tithe we pay for the vse of the
earth (which we possesse) the other for vse of our life vpon the
earth. Pay therefore O thou ma~, whatsoeuer thou be, thy tithes;
because thou dost possesse the earth, and because thou art vouch
safed thy life: his proofe is; For thus saith the Lord: Euery man
shall giue a redemption of his life: and so shall there not bee a|mong
them any plague or sicknes. The place of scripture he al|leadgeth,
is Exod. 36. 12. Whence this father gathers that e|uery
man is to pay to god a tribute of his goods such as hee
liues by.
S. AmbroseS. Ambrose. writeth to like effect in a Sermon, he hath de qua|drages.
Qicunque recognouerit inse quod fideliter non dederit decimam
c.The same in Pag. 73. Whosoeuer (saith he) shall call to minde that he hath not
faithfully paid his tithes, let him now amend that wherein hee
hath failed. What is it to pay faithfully? but that he offer and
bring at no time, neither lesse, nor the worser sorte of his graine,
or of his wine, or of the fruits of his trees, or of his garden, or

of his trade, or of his very hunting. With these agreeth S. Gregory,
saying (as in the decrees he is alleadged) Extra de dec. cap. 23. Ex
transmissa. Fidelis homo, de omnibus quae licit potest acquirere, deci|mas
erogare tenetur. . Euery faithfull man is bound to pay tithes
of all such goods, as he can lawfully get.
According hereunto, whereas the first and most auncient
lawes, as well temporall as Ecclesiasticall, run in general tearmes,
Decimae de rebus omnibus: Tithes of all things; the Canonists and
other Lawyers as well of former as of later ages willing and ende|uouring
to explane the same by specialities, haue inue~ted, appro|ued
 hitherto continued that vulgar  knowne distinction of
Tithes prediall and personall. By prediall meaning such as arise of
the increase of the earth:Pet. Rebuff. tract. de dec. by personall such as arise of goods
gotten by labour and industry whether they be gotten (saith a
very famous Lawyer) by handicraft, industry, science, warfarre,
trafficke, or any other lawfull act. And so doe all agree vpon
the point, That euery man is to pay one kinde of tithe or other: viz.
prediall if hee be a husbandman, personall if hee be and quate|nus
as he is a tradesman, artificer, c. Of such goods as a man
hath and liues by himselfe, they determine that God and his
Church must still haue some or other parte. Hee that is taught,
of what vocation and course of life soeuer he be, must make
his teacher partaker with him of all such goods as hee hath.
Reason and equitie doe consent it should be so. For as in
the common-weale, it is but reason that in subsides and other
dueties to the King, c. one sorte of subiect bee taxed as well
as another: So in the Church for the seruice of God. It is a
weake plea for a trades-man, an artificer, a townesman, a cit|tizen,
that is of wealth competent, to say I haue no lands,
therefore I ought not to bee seazed to subsidy: it suffiseth
that hee bee found worth thus much in landes or in goods. And
as bad and weake a reason it is to say, I haue no lands, no corne,
nor cattell, therefore I ought to pay no tithe. If thou haue
other kinde of goods, pay of those thou hast. God requires
a parte of that a man hath; and not of that, hee hath not. Giue
therefore to God, that which is Gods, as well as to Caesar that
which is Caesars.
2 Further, looke vpon the vse whereunto the tithes are assig|ned
by God and man: what is it but the maintainance of

the minister? now haue not townesmen vse and neede of the
Gospel? of the ministerie? of teachers, as well as husbandmen?
Why then is it not reason they yeelde thereunto the due and
appointed maintenance as well as they? Haue they other meanes
equiualent? wee know of none: the ministers find none. The
very law of nature saith The laborer is worthy of his hire, for whom|soeuer
it be that he doth labor. Why should any then looke that
men should labour for them, gratis. The law of God and man hath
appointed this, Tithes to be the hire of the Minister, his wages for
his worke in the Gospell. Why then should any sort of people
denie or withhold it? They that will haue spirituall things must
render temporall. Otherwise, a man hath no reason to account
himselfe bound to labour for them as his hearers, that will not
intertaine him as their teacher. They that contrary to the law,
which saith Forsake not the Leuit, all daies of thy life, forsake the mi|nister,
 Keeping from him his appointed maintenance,Deut. 12. leaue him to
seeke the bread of his body, where he may; haue no wrong done
them,Hos. 3. 4. if they be forsaken, and left without Ephod and without Te|raphim,
to seeke for the foode of their soules where they wil; and
are little to be pitied though they wander from sea to sea,  from
the north to the east,Amos. 8. 12. running to and fro, to seeke the worde of God,
and yet finde it not, because they haue brought such famine vpon
themselues, and reap but such fruites as their owne hands haue
sowne. Their owne bloud bee vpon their owne heads, that will
prefer riches before Religion, earth before Heauen, the world
before God,  the welth of their body to the health of their soul.
From proofe let vs come to practise: to which purpose if en|quirie
and search be made, all ages and times will affoord vs re|cord
sufficient, when, where,  by who~ such tithes haue bin paid.
The first Tithes that euer wee reade to haue beene paid,
were those that Abraham paid to Melchzedec. And what kind
of tithes were they? If the common translations of the Bible de|ceiue
vs not, the text of holy Scripture, Heb. 7. 4. telleth vs, They
were tithes of the spoiles, the tenth of the bootie taken in battell,
that is, Personall tithes.
2 Concerning the Isralites whether they paid the~ or no I wil not
contend. It is as probable, yea, as no. First by the words of the law,
which after an enumeratio~ of some particulars vseth this general
terme al the te~th in Israel, Tithes of al things. Nu~. 18. 21. 2. Chro. 31. 5.

Secondly, by their certaine and knowne practise in other things,
namely in al kind of offerings  sacrifices to be performed vnto
the Lord. In those there was no difference among them betwixt
one and other, but the one sort were bound to performe them,
as wel as the other. The law is plaine for it, Exod. 12. 49. but speci|ally,
Nu~. 15. 13. Al that are borne of the countrie shall do these things,
thus: and one law, and one maner shall serue for both. They that had not
beasts of their owne for sacrifice, must buy them of others, c.
Now as they were to prouide the~ offerings for the Lord by such
goods as they had; likely it is, they were also to pay tithes for the
maintenance of the Leuits and priests of God, of such goods as
they had. Thirdly we do read Num. 31, That being returned from
battel, the Lord did expressely require, by the name of The Lords
tribute, a certaine parte of the bootie, as one of 50.  of 500. one,
lesse indeede a great deale then a tenth, yet bearing proportion
to a tenth. And whether it may be accounted a right personal te~th
that is diductis expensis, the expenses diducted, let others iudge. It
doth shew vs at least thus much: That God would by some part of
that which was gotten, be acknowledged to be the giuer of the whole,
and authour of the victorie. And that such custome continued
in Israel, we may not obscurely gather, 1. Chro. 26. 26. where we
read, That of the battailes and spoiles taken in warre Dauid the
king  the chiefe Fathers, the captaines ouer thousands  hundreds,
and all the captaines of the armie, and besides them, Samuel the Seer,
Saul that had bin King, Abner the son of Ner, Ioab  others, had
dedicated (according as the Lord commanded, Nu. 31. say some
expositors) such an abundance of treasure, that there were trea|surers,
men of great name, elected  deputed for keeping therof.
Fourthly, The Leuits themselues, hauing none inheritance of
lands, c. yet did pay to the priests the tenth of their tenth:
 that was accounted vnto the~, as we read Nu. 18. 27, as the corne
of the barne,  abundance of the winepresse. If the Leuits themselues
that receiued tithes of others must  did pay tithe of that they had, is
it not probable, that others of what condition soeuer they were
for whom the Leuits serued, did pay of that they had, which might,
be acounted vnto the~, as the corne  wine to the husba~d-ma~, 
 as the tenth of the tenthto the Leuits?  doth it not intimate,
that by such meanes as a ma~ hath,  doth himself liue by, he ought to co~|fer
to the maintenance of the minister; who must liue by him, because

hee laboureth for him. Fifthly, Luk. 18. 12. our Sauiour brings
in a Pharisie speaking proudly I graunt, yet truely thus: I giue
tithe of all that euer I possesse. Herevpon I aske first, whether in the
person of this one Pharise, bee not expressed vnto vs the ac|tions
of them all? and in this point, of the whole nation? then,
whether all Pharisies were husbandmen onely, or whether t
bee not probable, That some of them were artificers as Paul,
Lawiers as Gamaliel, townesmen, as they that dwelt at Ierusaelem, c
And thirdly, if beeing townesmen, tradesmen and artificers, they
did giue tithe of all that they possessed, whether it must not ne|cessarily
follow, That they gaue Tithes of their trades, labours,
stipends, c. seeing goods gotten that way, bee part of that a
man dooth possesse aswell as cattell, corne, c. and is the same
to him, that the field, the tree, the beast, c. is to the husband|man?
Sixtly, Admit (contrary to so euident probabilities) that the
Iews did not pay any personall tithes, yet it followes not by and
by, that therefore Christians ought not. For the case is not al|together
like. Because their priests and Leuits dwelt together,
either at the house of God or in other their owne Cities assigned
them as their peculiar possession by the lot of God, vnder the
hand of Iehoshuah, and did not dwell so dispersed as the ministers
of the Gospell doo and must, viz. in euery Citie, towne and vil|lage.
Our maner of habitation therefore dooth necessarily re|quire
that which theirs did not: that is, That the minister of euerie
place, haue his maintenance according to the place; viz. by prediall
tithes where are prediall, and by personall tithes where are per|sonall.
Otherwise, seeing in Lawe and equitie too, there is no
compartition betwixt ministers of the Gospell as was among
Leuits for their tithes; either such places, where prediall Tithes
are not, must bee without ministers for lacke of maintenance, or
else the ministers hauing little or nothing must (as commonly
they doo, but woe bee to them by whom it commeth) liue not
like their brethren that haue prediall tithes, minister like; but, as
if they were the drudges and dregs of the world deseruing no
reward, beggarlike. And to this agree the words of the Apostle
who saith, 1. Cor. 9. That the minister should eate (as the sheep|heard)
of the milke of his owne flocke: drinke (as the husband|man)
of the fruit of his owne wine: be fed (as the oxe) of that

corne which himselfe dooth thresh out: and as our text decla
plainely) ee made partaker of all his goods, whom hee dooth
teach in the word. Which is not obserued, vnlesse as the hus|bandman
yeelds him tithe of his corne, of his cattell, of his
fruites, c. so the fisherman yeeld him tithe of his fish the fou|ler
of his fowles, the Soldiour of his pray, the hireling of his
wages, the tradesman and artificer of their monny gotten by
their labour, art  industrie, c.
3. From the Iewes if we goe to the heathen to search for
this matter, their stories doo abundantly testifie that touching
their bootres  pray taken in warre it was an ordinary thing with
them to pay Decimas the tithes thereof (as Abraham had doone
to the true God) to some or other of their imagined Gods. As,
 Generall among the Greeks, hauing gotten a notable
victorie against the Persians, Decimae seposuae, the Tithes of the
pray were layd aside to sacred vse,  employed part vnto the ho|nour
of Apollo, part of Iupter,  part of Neptune. Sabellic. Aenead.
3. lib. 2. pag. 339. Camillus Dictator amo~g the Romanes, subduing
the Veians, Tithes were payd vnto Apollo. Liui. Decad. pri. lib. 5.
The Carthiginians payd vnto Hercules the tenth of their Sicilian
pray. Dauell. pag. 464. Of other goods to pay the tenth was hap|pily
not so vsual among them, yet not altogether without exam|ple.
For as Plutarch in Lucullo reporteth of Lucullus a Romane
Citizen and a rich, that he obserued the vse of paying tithes to
Hercules: so Diodor. Sicul. Biblith. lib. 5. Cap. 2. dooth testifie. That
not Lucullus one he, but also many Citizens of Rome,  not onely
those of meane wealth, but likewise they that were esteemed the
richest of them all, vsed to pay Decimas the tenth of their goods
to Hercules. Thus it appeareth that the heathens also vsed to
pay personall tithes aswel as prediall.
4. Descnd wee lastly vnto our selues, that is vnto Christians
And what hath beene accustomed all Christendoome ouer for
many 100. of yeares together, is not obscure to perceiue nor
difficult to gather, by the number infinite almost of Decrees,
Lawes, constitutions, discourses  writings that are extant at this
day to bee read of all men touching this sorte of tithes aswell as
other. Among the which, our owne English. Statutes made since
the aba~doning of Popery in the daies of the worthy  renowned
Kings of most famous memorie, King Henrie the eight, and K.

Edward the sixt, deserue remembrance. In the preamble wherof
all such as shal attempt to withhold their tithes either prediall or
personall are branded with the note of euill disposed persons; and
in the body wherof is at large expressed the nener how such kind
of tithes ought to bee payd. And what? Shall wee offer that vnto
the makers of such lawes and constitutions to imagine that they
enacted such things as they either knew ought not, or they in|tended
should not be put in practise? Or that vnto our forefa|thers
 other auncient Christians, That they liued vnder lawes
lawlesly? gaue ther superiors leaue to decree what they would, but
tooke libertie to themselues to obserue what they listed?  made
no conscience to pay such Tithes as the lawes both of the Church
and land informed and required them to pay? If wee would; yet
the memorie of former times wil conuince vs to our faces, seeing
it is not vnknowne vnto the present age in what wealth and good
estate the ministers of the Church in former daies as well in
towne as country did liue. For how could that bee, except that
people then had made a conscience to pay all maner of Tithes, 
acknowledge personall tithes to bee no lesse due then prediall?
5. For our owne time it can not bee denied, That in London,
and some few other places that are tyed therevnto by auncient
composition, (And happie were our land, and blessed shall hee
be that effects it if the like were established the whole land ouer)
they are still yearely payd, to the glory of God, great good of the
Church,  content both of pastour and people. If in other places
where such composition lies not; they bee not payd either by
computation, or other reasonable composition, yet that they
ought to bee payd is a case most cleare. And the withhol|ding
of them can bee none other but a most grieuous sinne to
God, wrong to his Church, preiudice to learning, hindrance to
religion,  decay of our ministery. Of which there is no hope it
may bee furnished with learned and able teachers in townes and
Cities specially, where at this day they are most wanting,  yet
most needfull, to bee had; vnlesse people be drawne either by
instinct of conscience, or strength of good  able lawes, to the
due, or at least much better performance of this dutie.
Thus scripture, fathers, reason, lawes and practise affirme that
there are two sortes of Tithes to bee payd, viz.  and
Personall. That the tradesman, artificer, c. must pay a kinde of

Tithe of such goods and profits as  hath, aswell as the hus|bandman
dooth of his.
But, what kinde of Tithe? (for that I willed before to bee noted)
what? a full Tenth of all hee receiues, as dooth the husband|man
of all that which to him increaseth? herein I acknowledge
some difference. Neither will I about it dissent from them in
whse steps I haue traced hitherto. The common determina|tion
of the learned and Lawes in this behalfe both is and hath
beene, That the tradesman, artificer, c. shall pay the tenth of his
cleare gaines, that is, Expensis dductis, his ordinary and necessary
charges from the whole beeing first deducted. By which aduan|tage
it must came to passe, That whereas the husba~dman payeth
intgram Decimam, an entire Tenth, one of euery Tenne, it may
so fall out, according to the greatnes or smalnes of the expen|ses,
that the other shall pay but one of xij. or xv. of xx. or xxx.
happely of fifty, which yet is still called (rather I thinke for the
relation it hath to that number, then for the proportion or
quantitie it selfe, and for auoiding confusion) a tithe or Tenth.
See now good Reader, This is that Durus Sermo, that hard
saying, that vnreasonable motion, whereof who can abide the
hearing? But let no man bee offended without cause. Let all
things bee considered well and weighed in equall ballance, and
what hardnes, what extremitie, is there in this? whe~ as the trades|man,
the artificer, c. in regard of his charges, labours, aduen|ture,
c. is so much fauored more then the husbandman, that
where the one bath but nine parts for his labour and charges
whatsoeuer it bee, th'other may haue 2. 3. 4. or 5. times so many
parts or more to himselfe for his charges? What, because it is no
reason, by reason of his much charges, and many casualties, hee
should pay an entire tenth, which no body dooth demaund no
affirme; is it reason therefore, he should pay no tithes at all?
honour God with none of his goods? reward the minister that
giues him spirituall things, with none of his temporall? What?
nothing but his accustomed offerings? For so some sticke not
to stand vpon it,viz. 2. pence  eece at aster. That they which haue no lands, cattell, c. ought to
pae nothing but their offerings; except (forsooth) they will of
their owne good wills (as if their minister were their almesman)
giue him anie more: A speach so deuoide of sense and reason, that
I wonder it can come out of the mouthes of such as will seeme

to guide their words by reason, and their action by religion. For
is there any law that saith: None shall pay Tithes but such as haue
lands, cattell, c? Doth not our owne Statute law, (which yet of
all other is most fauourable to the people in this case) and the
Canon Law, speake directly of 2. sorts of tithes, Prediall Perso|nall?
And whereas the accustomed offerings are so small, that it
is not possible they alone might be able to maintaine a minister
in any sorte, no not in the greatest parish in England: may it bee
imagined, that any lawmakers should but intend such a thing,
viz. To exempt all such from payment of Tithes as haue not lands, c.
knowing that there bee many hundred parishes in the land,
where if personall tithes bee not payd, the minister hath and can
haue in maner nothing to liue by? There is none I thinke of so
little knowledge and experience in the world, but knowes well
enough, That in all places the land ouer, wheresoeuer men pay
tithes of corne, cattell, c. to the vttermost, yet they pay these
accustomed offerings too. Now mee thinkes, people (knowing
this) should of themselues conceiue, that tradesmen, c. pay
not their offerings in lieu of those tithes and other emoluments
which husbandmen paye: but that as husbandmen pay the like
offerings, notwithstanding their Tithes payd in the largest ma|ner;
so themselues should, besides those offerings, pay some thing
or other, which might bee somewhat equiualent to the hus|bandmans
Tithes. That so it might appeare by their deedes,
Phil. Iud. lib. de prae  hon sacerd. Victus sacer|dotum lautior, argumentum esse potest pietatis publi|c. That they loue the Gospell  ministers thereof, no lesse then
the husbandman dooth,  are as worthie thereof as hee. Which
thing, without all question, our forefathers and auncient lawma|ters
carefully did intend and respect in appointing personall ti|thes:
and is only then performed, when they, in one or other
maner, are yeelded.



CHAP. VII.

Yeeldeth some reasons and speciall causes, why God vouchsafeth to haue
as his owne, some part of all mens goods. Why the tenth. And
why so great a portion, as tithes, offerings, c. are, hee hath assigned
vnto his ministers. Where the Reader shall finde diuers weightie
causes, why ministers ought to haue, not a beeggerly  sparing but
ample and liberall maintenance.

HItherto I haue shewed what right the Church hath vnto
Tithes,  proued by sundry arguments drawne from the
scriptures, fathers, lawes of nations, rule of equitie, and consent
of times, That Tithes both prediall and personall, are still due to
the ministers of the Gospell, and ought now in the time of the
Gospell by diuine right  ordinance to be payd. Now I hope it
will not seeme to the good Reader time ouerlong, nor labour
superfluous, to consider somewhat also more specially of the end
 reason wherefore it hath pleased God to sanctifie and set a|part
vnto himselfe, as a continuall inheritance, any part, or such
a part of our temporall goods. Such a consideration can not
but bee a profitable and necessarie motiue and incitation to the
true  better performance of this kinde of dutie.
Of this point I conceiue that there be 2. principall causes one
that respecteth directly  immediately God himselfe; another
that respecteth the Church of God.
That which respecteth God himselfe, is the acknowledgment
of Gods sole and souereigne Dominion ouer all. God will by
by some certaine portion of our goods, returned backe and of|fered
vp againe vnto him, bee acknowledged to bee Lord of all.
I say againe: As God is the giuer of all our wealth, and he onely
who blesseth the workes of our hands: so for acknowledgement
of his vniuersall Dominion, he will haue a part thereof set a|part
for himselfe. This is it the Lord meaneth, when making
claime vnto Tithes, offerings, vowes  other hallowed things,
hee calleth them his;  speaking of them, tearmeth them Mine
offerings, my hallowed things, the Lords tribute, his inheritance, c.
as we read in sundry places of the law; namely, Numb. 18. Leuit.
27. c. that Salomon meaneth when (as a morall dutie written in

the hearts of men by nature) he teacheth euery man, To honour
the Lord with his substance, Prou. 3. 9. that the Prophet insinua|teth,
when on Gods behalfe he chargeth the people, that in
withholding their tithes and offerings, they had robbed and
defrauded, not so much the Priests and Leuits, as the Lord him|selfe.
Yee haue spoiled me, saith the Lord: wherein? in Tithes 
offerings.
Accordingly auncient Diuines counted it currant Doctrine
and a kind of speech very agreeable to pietie  trueth, to speake
after this maner: Wee offer vnto God our goods as tokens of thankeful|nes,
for that wee receiue.Ireaeus. Origen. August. Iren. lib. 4. Cap. 34. Hee which worshippeth.
God (saith Origen. in Numb. 18. Homil. 11.) must by gifts and obla|tions
acknowledge him Lorde of all. S. August. tract. de Rectitud.
Cath. conuers. hath these words, Vnusquis de quali ingenio vel ar|tificio
viuit, c. Euery man of that meanes whereby hee liueth,
thereof let him pay to God the Tenth. Let him consider that
all is of God, that he liueth by, whether it be the earth, or the wa|ters,
or seeds, or all things that be vnder heauen or aboue;  if he
(God) had not giuen it vnto him,Decret. Greg. lib. 3. Tit. he had had nothing. And
in the decrees, as a Maxime vndeniable, such like preambles and
assertions are to be read; Cum autem in signum vniuersalis Dominij,
c.De Decimis. W. Linde|wood.
forsomuch as in signe of his vniuersall souereignitie, as it
were by a speciall title, the Lord hath reserued Tithes vnto him|selfe,
auouching  clayming them to be his owne, c. And some
of our owne later writers very iudiciously,Prouinc. lib. 3. Tit. De Dec.  oblat. See before fol. vpon like considera|tion,
haue tearmed tithes and other holy things appropriated
vnto God Sacrum vectigal, a sacred Tribute, or rent: Sacred both
in regard of the person (God) to whom properly it is due,  of
the vse, vnto which God hath assigned it to bee payd.
There cannot bee a clearer trueth then this:Marlor. in Heb. 7. 4. yet so are mens
eyes now a-daies blinded with couetousnes, or their minds
daseled with ignorance, that a great part of men, euen of
men professing godlines and knowledge, seeme to account it a
straunge doctrine. Many would faine perswade themselues that
for their wordly goods, if they vse them soberly and without ex|cesse,
if they get  keep them without the detriment  iniury of
others, specially if they goe one degree farther; I meane, if they
bestow some small  contemptible portion to some charitable
vses; they haue discharged their dutie to the vttermost, and God

requireth no more at their hands. But indeed wee must know yet
farther, That as wee cannot honour God rightly, vnlesse both our
bodies  soules bee imployed sometimes meerely in his seruice:
and as wee cannot with our bodies and soules religiously  duly
serue God, vnlesse some part of our times, as the seauenth day,
bee taken cleane away from our wordly busines  vses, and im|ployed
wholly in his: so wee doo not and cannot truely and
throughly honour him, vnles wee giue vnto him likewise a
part of our substance. For are not our goods his, aswell as our
daies, and as our selues? why should wee not then honour him
with a speciall part of the one, as well as of the other? And vnles
with part thereof we acknowledge his supreame Dominion, by
whose beneuolence wee haue the whole, how doo wee giue ho|nour
to whom honour belongeth, or how hath God the things
that are Gods? I would know what nation in the world, did euer
honour God, and did not thinke it a point of their duetie to doo
him honour with their goods? So that this we may blodly set
downe as a principle cleare in nature, an axiome which ought
not to bee called in question, a truth manifest  infallible, That
men are eternallie bound to honour God with their substance, in token
of thankefull acknowledgement that all they haue is from him. To ho|nour
him I say with their worldly goods, not onely by spending
them in lawfull maner,  by vsing them without offence in the
world, but also by alienating from themselues some reasonable
part or portion thereof, and by offering vp the same to him,
as a signe that they gladly confesse his sole and singular Domi|nion
ouer all, as a dutie which all men are bound vnto, and a
part of that very worship of God, which, as the Law of God
and nature it selfe requireth, so wee are the rather to thinke all
men no lesse strictly bound therevnto, then to any other natu|rall
dutie: inasmuch as the hearts of men doo so cleae to these
earthly things, so much admire them for the sway they haue in
the world, impute them so generally either to nature or chance,
so little thinke vpon the grace and prouidence from which they
come, That vnles by a kinde of continual tribute men be inured
to acknowledge Gods Dominion, it may bee doubted, that in
short time men, would learne to forget whose tenants they are,
and imagine that the worlds is their owne, absolute, free and in|dependant
inheritance.

Thus it appeareth by the Testimonie of God himselfe, and of
godly men from time to time, that as God out of the whole
masse of mankind hath reserued to himselfe some, whom he cal|leth
his elect: out of the habitations of the snnes of men, their
earthly buildings, some, which he calls his temple, his house: of
times  seasons some, his Sabbaths, his solemne feasts: of seruants 
attendants, some his Priests ministers: So likewise of the goods 
wealth that me~ enioy vpo~ the earth soe portio~ vnto himself, viz.
his Tithes  oblations, as his proper right, portion and inheritance.
That God ought to haue some parte of our goods sanctified
and offered vnto him, wil happely be soone graunted of the most
part to be but necessary iust  reasonable: But may it be possible
to shew any reason or cause why God should vouchsafe to make
choise of the tenth part rather the~ soe other, either greter or lesser?
The maine  surest reason of al is his will: against which (he ha|uing
once reuealed that his will is, to reserue the tenth part as his
owne) who may dispute? He is not bound alwaies to giue vs a rea|son
of his will, which wee know cannot but be iust and wise what
euer it be. Of daies and times, why he hath sanctified to himselfe
the seuenth day we haue the reason and cause euidently taught
vs, viz. because on that day herested fro~ al his work which he had crea|ted.
Ge~. 2. 3. Exo. 20:  therfore it behoued that day not the 6. or 8.
or any other to be celebrated. If we haue not y^ like for our goods
yet that it is no lesse reasonable and iust, we may not doubt.
2 And reason it selfe must needes teach vs, that it is no reason,
if we must giue to God some part of our goods, that it should bee
any contemptible portion; as if it were fit to honor God as we re|lieue
the poore of the parish, With some cold beneuolence: and ther|fore
that Centesima, an hundreth, or which is worse (though oft
practised) Millesima, the thousandth parte of our goods were e|nough
for him. We shame to bring vnto a Noble man, a prince,
a king, any other then some royall and notable present, the best
and goodliest we can get: such as may wel beseeme vs to giue, and
him to receiue: such as may argue our affection toward him, and
procure  win his liking toward vs. How much more then, being
to come into the presence of God, and to offer to him of our
goods should both reason and religion mooue vs, to the end it
may be the better accepted, to offer to him no beggarly nor
niggardly parte, but such as may shew a thankfull hearte,1. Chro. 29. 12. and

liberall mind: nor of the worst and scruffe, but of the fattest, fay|rest
and best of our goods; according as God did, by expresse law,
require of his people, Leuit. 22. 19. Deut. 15. 21.  17. 1. Exech. 43.
22. and being not performed, did in them sharpely reprooue, as
yee may read, Mal. 1. 8. Wherefore seeing reason teacheth this, it
cannot but conclude withall, That must be a tenth or thereabout.
3 But the likeliest reason that I can coniecture is, the end 
speciall vse whereunto God assigned  intended to depute this
his portion; which is (as after I shall shew at large) the maintenance
of his ministers: for whom it seemeth he accounted the tenth to be
a portion so co~petent, as by which ordinarily together with his
offerings, they might in some sufficient and fit measure be able
liue: which they could not do vpon a lesse, as the 15. or 20. parte.
And this reason I thinke the whole world in manner (heathen,
Iewish  christian) hath in all ages, as, if not obeying, at least yet
imitating God, approued  respected, in condiscending to yeeld
(as a portion to that vse so competent, that any other more co~pe|tent
it were not possible for the wit of man to deuise) that parte,
to the maintenance of the priests and Ministers of God and his
Church. The farther fro~ reason (religion I wil not say) this present
age; which (dissenting fro~ the iudgement of God, of ancient  best
Christians, besides Iewes and heathen) account the hundredth, yea
many times, the thousandth part of the goods to be enough for
God,  maintenance sufficie~t for his Church  ministers therof.
4 And as God by expresse law required the best and fairest to
be offered vnto him: So in many things men haue obserued
(how truely I leaue to others) the tenth as it were naturally to
be the best, the very croppe and principall. Insomuch that in
old PlautusPlautus. the word Decumanus is vsed for magnus, that is the
tenth thing for a great one of that kind: and (as scholers doe
know) in other Authors Decumana oua, decimus fluctus, decumana
porta, and decumanus limes, are vsed for, or accounted, of others
the greatest. So that God requiring the best, and the best and
goodliest being naturally the tenth, it seemeth that in deman|ding
the best, he meaneth the tenth.
5 Some thing there is also to be considered in the very num|ber
it selfe. For it is certaine, that not onely men indued with re|ligion,
and true knowledge of God, but euen heathen wise, haue
respected much the Numbers of 3. of 7. and of 10. which pro|bable
it is they haue done by a certaine secret and speciall in|stinct

of natures light, suggesting vnto them 3. as a number my|sticall
because of the Trinitie; 7. as a number of holinesse because
of the seauenth day; and 10. as a number of perfection, contay|ning
in it, and vnder it, al other numbers: as which in the speech
and reconing of all nations vnder heauen, take their nominati|on
and proceeding still by 10. and from ten to ten. Now (as one
saith well) Three being the mysticall number of Gods vnsearch|able
perfection within himselfe: 7. the number whereby our
owne perfections thorough grace are most ordered: and Ten the
number of natures perfections (for the beautie of nature is or|der,
and the foundation of order number, and of number ten,
the higest we can rise vnto without iteration of numbers vnder
it) could nature better acknowledge the power of the God of na|ture,
then by assigning vnto him that quantitie, which is the
continent of all she possesseth?
6 Law or expresse word of God, whereby he had reuealed to
man that he required the tenth rather then any other part, till
Moses time we find none: but when as we read that long before
Moses the tenth was paide to God, may we not with good proba|bilitie
gather, that they knew that God accepted that part grate|fully,
 required it rather then any other parte, at their handes?
Let vs also see the other cause, viz. that which concerneth the
Church of God: and that is, That so hee might haue wherewith to
maintaine those that should attend his Ministerie and seruice in all ages
and in all places the world thoroughout.
It cannot be denied, but that God from the beginning of times
required of al men to be publikely worshipped  serued:  there|upon
it is not possible to name that nation vnder heauen, which
liuing in any forme of humane societie, hath not by the meere
instinct  light of nature professed a publicke  solemne honor
 worship of God. So that whether they haue done it rightly, as
did the Patriarks  Church of God fro~ time to time; or erroni|ously
 corruptly, as the heathe~ that knew not the true God, nor
true form of diuine worship: yet they haue al,  alwaies agreed in
the matter, viz. that God was publikely to be worshipped, howsoeuer
they disagreed and varied in the manner, viz. in what sorte that
ought to be done. Secondly, it is as clear and out of all question,
that for the due  better celebratio~ of that his publik worship 
seruice, God ordained from the beginning a publike ministery

and priesthood,Heb. 5. 4. and would not that any should presume to inter|meddle
in that function,Exod. 28. and vndertake that worke, but such as
he himselfe had either ordinarily by men,Num. 3. . 17. or extraordinarily by
himselfe called and chosen thereunto.Ephes. 4. 11. And reason: For if among
men, Princes, Lords, c. will not be serued and attended on, but
by men of their owne choise;1. Cor. 12. 28 is it not more probable a great
deale, that the King of Kings, and Lord of all Lords, will not be
serued in his Church, but by such as himselfe hath thereunto
elected and appointed? Now as God would euer haue publicke
worship of his owne description; seruants and attendaunts ther|unto
of his owne ordination: so it was his will, and his wisdome,
to reserue vnto himsele a parte of the goods, increase and pro|fits
of the world that so he might haue of his owne, wherewith to
maintaine those his owne seruants. This I take to be cleare by
Gods owne speach vnto Moses: when hauing set his marke vpon
diuers things, calling them mine offerings, mine hallowed things,
my tithes, c. he addeth, These haue I giuen to the sonnes of
Leui, Why? for the seruice which they doe me in the Tabern, and It
(viz. the tithes,Philo. Iud. lib. de praem.  . Sacerd. Sed ne quis ex conferentibus, exprobret ac|cipienti suum Beneficium, iu|bentur prius in templu~ defer|re munera vt tum demu~ inde sacerdotes de|umant. offerings, c.) is your wages for your seruice vnto
mee. Which words doe plainely show, that God would that such
as attended him, and serued at his altar, should receiue those
things as his pay, and not as mens; as from his hand and not
from man: in lieu of the wages and reward which for their ser|uice
it was fit and necessary, that he their maister  Lord should
allow them. Whereupon he aith not to the people (The maner
of speech is much to be noted) you shal giue them your offerings,
c. for the seruice they doe you: but I haue giuen them mine, c.
as who say, You shall pay it me, and as mine from my hand shall
they receiue it, that so I may pay them out of mine owne purse,
with mine owne hands, of mine owne goods, and not they serue
mee or I retaine them at other mens cost.Theophi. in 1. Cor. 9 Nec sa|n dixit, vt ex oblationibus e|deren, sed ex lacrario, ne uel qui aliquid ca|perent puderet accepti, perinde ac si ab hominibus alerentur: vel qui impartirentur his su, insolese erent. Idem. Manducandum afferit, non ex discipulorum facultatibus, sed de Euangelio: ne fort f|perbiant quod apostolos sustentarent. Neque. n. inquit, tu his alimoni subministras, sed propri quadam indu|stria, hoc est, E|uangelij nun|ciatio ipsos alit. That they haue, they
haue it of me, and from me, it is mine and not yours. Which if
you yeeld not to them as I haue commanded you, you rob and
defraud me your God, aswell as them my seruants. To this accord
the words also of the Prophet Malachie. cap. 3. 8: where God spea|keth

thus: Will a man spoyle his Gods? yet haue yee spoiled me. But yee
said wherein haue we spoyled thee? in tithes and offerings. Yee are cursed
with a curse: for ye haue spoyled me, euen this whole nation. Bring yee all
tithes into the storehouse, that there may bee meate in mine house, c.
Where the Lord againe challengeth al tithes  offerings pro|perly,
and in right to be his, calleth the Priests barne his barne, the
Priests house his house, and sheweth plainely; that he hath allotted
those his duties to them as their mainetenance for the seruice they
doe him. It was the least thought the people had, to defraud God,
they accounted they had but pinched a few fat bellied priests that
had no neede thereof, and kept shorte a sorte of lazie Leuits vn|worthy
of it: but God tells them, that in abusing them, he was a|bused;
in defrauding them, he was spoyled: because those things
which they should haue receiued, were properly his,  not theirs.
Neither were the very heathen so blind and ignorant but that
they saw this: and therefore whatsoeuer they vowed and offered
vnto their Gods, they deliuered it alwaies into the hands of some
or other priests; as they that knew, that God had assigned ouer to
his priests  ministers the vse of such things, as should be giuen,
consecrated, or offered vnto him. And therefore whereas they
themselues made great conscience of touching or prophaning
hallowed things, they neuer accounted it a fault, but a freedome
and dutie in the priests, to liue thereof.
And truely I cannot therein but commend the religious in|tention
of our foreelders, who did euer account the tithes, c. as
none of their owne goods, but, as they did vsually call them, Gods part;
as who had learned, that such things properly were due to God
himselfe, and therefore did pay them euen of conscience to God,
as they that considered  knew that God had giuen them to the
Church for the maintenance of the ministery thereof:  know|ing
that to rob God, to commit sacriledge, could be no light offence,
did often in their Testaments make prouision to pay a certaine
sum of mony, as a recompence for tithes forgotten; wheras now
no conscience (and much lesse recompence) is made pro dec. ab|latis
for tithes any way taken from God and his ministers.
The same perswasion was no doubt one speciall motiue that
induced them to be willing  careful to pay such duties without
respect of persons, without grudging  repining, without excep|tion

at this man  that; as they that knew and considered, That
whatsoeuer men deserue, or may seeme worthy or vnworthy of:
yet God, who is the giuer of all is still worthy to receiue his owne
part out of the whole, without diminution or alteration: and they
still bound, what euer he be that receiues it, to pay the same. Ad
verily the want of this perswasion is one maine and principall
cause, why at this day in many places people pay the minister
his maintenance so grudgingly  so badly. They co~sider not, that
what they pay, is none of their own, but properly Gods part, due
first of all vnto him as an Honorarium wherewith they ought to
acknowledg him the supream Lord. They account that they pay
to be their own,  they deale with the minister as for mine thine.
And accordingly as they affect the ma~, so they presume to deale
with him, not thinking that they haue to do with god in this case,
more the~ in any other ordinary or wordly matter:  therfore as
loue or hatred, co~tent or disconte~t, couetousnes or equity caries
the~, so they deale more or lesse liberally  iustly in this behalfe.
This hath come to passe (I coniecture) a great deale thorough
the ministers owne defalt; in that diuers of them, not looking
thoroughly into the matter, haue taught people, that Tithes are
not now due Iure diuino, and claime tithes  offerings as their tithes
 their offerings: wheras indeed if they folowed the phrase of holy
scripture, and spake as the word of God teacheth, they should
rather call them Gods tithes, the offerings of God,  claime them
by the name of Gods part, the Churches right, c. I doe not deny,
but that they may in some sort call them, their tithes, their offe|rings,
their duties, c. because they are by assignation from God
become and made theirs: but yet I doubt whether they can with|out
sin alwaies so speake; and should not rather, euen in honor of
him by whose right they hold, whose receiuers  substitutes they
are, speake more properly, and if not alwaies, yet vsuallie cal them
as they are, the offerings of God, Gods tithes, c. This would mooue
men that heare it, to be more religious in this pointe. It would
strike some better awe, and mooue the conscience of men the
more in this case, to vse more sinceritie, equity and liberalitie
then commonly they doe.
The Fathers and men of auncient time did neuer almost
speake otherwise then thus; Redde Deo decimam: Deus dignatur dec.
accipere: decimae Deo debentur: Pay to God his tithes: God vouch|safeth
to receiue the tenth: tithes are due to God. And they bring

in God claiming in this sort, Giue me my tenth part: if thou
wilt giue me my tenth, I will multiply thy nine parts: if thou
wilt not giue me my tenth, c. And if we shal imitate them there|in,
we shall doe but as the best haue done.
But to bring the matter to some issue, the point is, that God
hath reserued to himselfe tithes, offerings, c. that so he might
haue wherewith Desuo, of his owne proper goods, to maintaine
his ministers.
Herein I note a special point of the great and diuine wisdome
of God, that would so prouide for his seruants  not leaue them
to the curtesie of men. And I would it might be well considered,
whether they do not check this wisdom of God, which deny this
verity,  affirme, that God (as not so prouident for his seruants, as
men of any place or fashion be for theirs) hath prouided them of
nothing of his own, but left them to the curtesie of the world, which
hates them, and mercy (for the most part) of the mercilesse.
Further consider we, whether God hauing reserued vnto him|selfe
a part of that men possesse,  yet to that end specially that
therewith he might maintaine, among vs, such as might, being
his seruants, guide vs in the way of saluation, bring vs to Ged, win vs to
Christ, confirme vs in the truth, c. and so be our ministers as well
as his, ours in the worke of the Lord: Consider, I say, whether it be
not a great sin, a notorious argument of extreame ingratitude to
God, to defraude them of, or to deny the~ that maintenance, those
means to liue by, which God hath giuen the~ for our good? seeing
thevse of their ministery, the fruit of their labors,  seruice in the
worke of the Lord, redoundeth properly  specially vnto vs. If a
King receiuing tributes, subsidies, c. of his people, should em|ploy
the same in defence of the country, the good of the co~mon|wealth:
If a land-lord receiuing fines  rents of his tenants shuld
spend the same among the~ in keeping of good house, in repay|ring
their tenements, in mending their high-waies, c. we wold
easily grant, that such subiects and such tenants were much to be
blamed, if they would not willingly pay those payments to the
vttermost. God doth so and more then so with vs. He receiueth
of vs the tithes and offerings as his Sacru~ vectigal his sacred tri|bute,
his holy rent: and what doth hee therewith? hee em|ployes
it all againe to our good, to our vse, in maintaining
worthy Captaines and Souldiers, that may defend the Gospel

and continually encounter the enemie of our faith: vpon labo|rers
that may worke hard in the worke of the ministery, and be
painful in publishing the Gospel, that so we might be builded vp
as holy temples and spirituall habitations to himselfe, yea that so
we might be exalted to dwell with him in eternall glory. And
therefore I think our sin cannot be little, nor our fault excusable,
if as it were condemning his wisedome,  enuying our owne fe|icity,
we will not suffer his goods, his portion, to be conuerted to
our best profit, nor willingly pay and yeeld him that which is his
right, that so we may receiue it againe, not to his but to our owne bene|fit.
Hardly, it is likely, would we be drawne, as did many godly
Christians in the primitiue church, in our daies some few people
do,  as in the iudgement of such as be wise  religious, it is but
the duty of all Christians (if need be) to do, viz. (paying our tenth
from the Church) maintaine the minister out of the other nine
parts, as by allotting him another tenth, because the very tenth is
taken away: or giuing him otherwise vnto that which remaineth
that which is somewhat competent; seeing wee grudge to him
that which is none of ours, but Gods, and so his (the ministers)
owne already: that which not by vs, but indeed by God is allo|ted
 assigned vnto him. This reason and consideration seemed
vnto S. Aug.S. August. Ser. de tem. 219. so good, that speaking of tithes in one whol Sermon
thereof, it is the very first that he doth vrge; Deus qui dignatur to|tum
dare, c. God (saith hee) which vouchsafeth to giue vs the
whole, doth vouchsafe to receiue againe of vs the tenth, which
shal yet redound not to his, but doubtlesse to our profit. How to our pro|fit?
but because our outward estate shalbe bettered thereby, by
Gods blessing vpon the 9. parts, for that the tenth is iustly paid,
as there he shews, and hereafter we shall see: and our inward estate
shalbe amended, while the ministery of the Gospel being therby
planted and continued among vs, our knowledge, faith, and
piety shall thereby be increased. The same also the whole coun|cel
of Tribur.Conc. Trib. considered, as appeareth by their words, where sup|posing
God to speake thus, Giue me my tithes, c. they co~clude
in this manner; If therefore any man make question, why tithes
are paid? Let him know, that therfore they are to be paid, 1. That
God by such deuotion being pacified, may more abundantly giue
vs (corporall) necessaries: and 2. that the ministers of the Church be|ing
therby releeued, may be the more free (from worldly and secular

incumbrances) to the fulfilling of their spirituall exercises
(the fruite whereof we are to receiue.) For (as it is well knowne)
they labour not for themselues, but for others.
And thus appeareth sufficiently the other, that is the second
reason, why God hath assumed vnto himselfe part of mens
earthly goodes as his owne proper right  inheritance.
But yet, before I proceed any farther, a farther question doth
arise,  may bee moued, vpon that last set downe, Namely, why
it pleased God to allott out vnto his seruants, his ministers, so
great a portion, so honourable maintenance, as (besides offe|rings,
vowes and other things consecrated to God, both mo|ueable
and vnmoueable) the Tenth is: All which it is certaine,
that not without Gods approouement or appointment, the
priests and ministers of God in all ages receiued  had: and in
this age  time of the Gospell, ought to haue.
For answere herevnto, many and those maine and very appa|rant
reasons may be giuen:  they all either expressed in, or
deducible out of the word of God: as
1. First, thereby to honour their calling before men, who
naturally doo respect them that haue some good meanes to liue
by: and contrariwise, contemne and despise such as bee in
pouertie, as persons obscure and contemptible. The elders
(saith S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5. 17.) that rule well, are worthie double ho|nour,
specially, c. Where, by double honour, in the opinion of al
expositors hee meaneth aswell liberall and honourable mainte|nance
for themselues, as due reuerence and obedience to them
and their Doctrine. The Lord did account it an honour to
Aaron and his priesthood to bee well and worthilie maintained, nei|ther
can it bee other to the ministers of the Gospell. And if in
time of peace and prosperitie men thinke it commendable for
men of other degrees and callings to liue in wealth, and haue
some abundance of these externall blessings: how can it bee but
commendable likewise for the minister of God, to reape some
fruite of the same things, to refresh his head with oile, to haue his
table wel furnished,  his cup full: That it may not be sayd, that The
arke of the Lorde dooth rest in a tent of skins, and lie vnder a couering
of goates haire, when men doo dwell in their houses of Cedar, and haue
their sieled chambers, 1. Chro. 17. 1. and Hag. 1. 4. And expe|rience
dooth shewe, That as howsoeuer men should receiue the

faith of our Lord Iesus Christ without respect of persons; yet it is rare
to finde the man, that dooth not preferre the man that weareth
the gaie cloathing before him in the vile rayment:Iac. 2. 2. so it is hard to
finde that people, which dooth not contemne a minister of God,
if hee liue in pouertie and basenes; and esteeme him much the
more, whatsoeuer his desert bee, that carries some sway in the
world, and liues (as wee terme it) in good reputation, and of
himselfe.
And when his person is once in disgrace and contempt, what
is to bee expected of his labours it is easie to iudge. Salomon ob|serued
longe agoe, Ecclesiast. 9. 16. That, Better is wisedome then
strength; yet the wisedome of the poore is despised, and his words are
not heard. I remember I haue read, how that the Athenians on a
time being in a common counsell,Aul. ell. about some weightie matter,
one that was but a poore and abiect fellow, gaue indeed best
aduise and spake most to the purpose: The chiefe of the Citie
considering that it would bee the lesse and worse accepted, if it
should be knowne to proceed from such a one, seemed to take
no notice thereof; and therefore assembling together another
day, caused one that was of greater place  more authoritie with
the people, to propound the same aduise againe: and so they fol|lowed
it, as the later mans, when indeed it was the formers. And
I haue my selfe obserued and seene ere now, that two men prea|ching,
the one beeing poore and of no note in the world, and
th'other rich and of account for his wealth and liuing, though
the poore man hath by many degrees in the iudgement of such
as could discerne, and were not affectionate, exceeded th'other,
yet hee hath beene farre lesse regarded; and his labours, of the
greater number, as scarce worth the hearing, disdaigned  little
set by. It is a fault I grant, to respect the doctrine and labours
of a man the lesse for his pouerty: but yet it is such a fault, as farre
as I can finde, which God will haue amended, not so much by
reprehending men for it, as by incouraging and inducing men
to take away the cause thereof by maintaining his ministers wel,
that they may not fall into contempt. Where that course is not taken,
but men will first by disabling and impouerishing the minister
bring him into contempt, and then contemne him; as the
Philosopher not vnworthily laughed at the folly of them which
reiected him when hee came in his old rags, but admitted him

curteously when hee returned in trim apparell, as if his new attire
had made him to bee another, and not the same man hee
was before: so may wee iustly condemne the wickednesse of
such as make the minister, by ill and vnworthy maintenance,
contemptible; and then hauing themselues made him such,
doo vndeseruedly contemne him.
2. Secondly, this is doone, To mooue and draue men to bee wil|ling
to vndertak this kinde of calling. For else who almost will be|take
himselfe to the ministerie, and bee desirous to become a
Diuine, if he see before hand no hope of perferment, no likely|hood
of due maintenance to arise thereby? I graunt, that pre|ferment
 reward is not the principall end, wherto men should
looke: yet when as men are not of that degree and calling by
birth, as the seed of Aaron was, but are, in respect of themselues,
free to make choise what kinde of studie, what course of life
and profession they will follow, it will be hard to finde many
that will preferre that calling aboue others; when they foresee,
hauing spent their time, their patrimonie, their studies, for many
yeares together that way, little or no hope of condigne reward,
and fit maintenance. Many will rather (as is daily seene) betake
themselues to other professions, to the Law, to Physicke, to
the schooles, yea to seruice, c. wherein they see more hope of
maintenance, and a ready way opened vnto preferment and esti|mation
in the world. And few parents will there be, that will
haue any great desire to train: vp their children of purpose for the
ministery, when as they shal perceiue that when a man hath spent
vpon one child (if he be a man of any fashion) 2. or 300 pounds,
thrise or twise asmuch as vpon any of the rest of his children, yet
he is farther off from preferment then any of the rest, while it
is not easie to attaine any thing vnlesse it bee some beggerly sti|pend,
or a peeld benefice scarce woorth the taking vp.
Heathen men could obserue, That Honos alit artes,Tulle. it is ho|nour
and preferment that maintaineth any kinde of learning:
 that, probata virtus inhonora cessat: vertue though it be com|mended,
yet if it be not honoured and rewarded, will soone be
discouraged. And wee may obserue, say what men will, That it
is maintenance that dooth and will mainteine religion, and pre|ferment
that dooth  will draw fit and worthy men to the mi|nisterie:
That the want of due mainteinance in our land is the

principall cause, that religion among vs flourisheth no better:
and the lacke of due preferment in our Church the maine and
speciall reason, whie our ministerie till this day after so long a
preaching of the Gospel, so great a peace of the Church, so large
a tme for breeding vp and planting of sufficient men, remaines
yet so vnfurnished, as it dooth, of able teachers; one halfe at the
least, beeing yet far from any competent sufficiency to that of|fice:
Besides many others, who being with learning  gifts very
sufficiently qualified, which for want of due maintenance are
both discouraged to employ their studies, disabled to doo that
which otherwise they would  could performe,  compelled
to bend their witts,  spend their time otherwaies.
Would to God therefore the Gouernors of our land would
at the length respecte this purpose of God, who hath allotted to
his ministers so great and competent a portion, to the end there|by
to allure and inuite men to vndergooe the calling:  accord|ingly
prouide that euery where the same might in some measure
so bee layd out for them, that there might bee apparant hope of
preferment, and some certaintie of sufficient and good mainte|nance
for such as would betake themselues to that course of life.
Then within a little while it would appeare, that there should bee
no occasion nor need for furnishing of places, to fil them vp with
Tailors, Weavers, or out-worne spend thrifts. The vniuersities
like good fruitfull mothers would breed vp  send abroad of
her children well neere enowe to supplie such vacations. Many
would open their mouthes with ioye, that now byde silent with
griefe: not a few would stirre vp the gifts of God in them, which
now either like the slouthfull seruant bury them in the earth,
or with Martha employ them about things though necessary
for themselues, yet lesse necessary for the Church:  some no
doubt that for preferments sake, haue halfe against their wills,
left this calling, would returne againe from the schoole, Physick,
Law, c. to this most sacred function.
3. A third cause is, to enable them that bee entred into the mi|nisterie,
that bee ministers already, to bee faithfull, diligent and as|siduous
in their charge; wherevnto they can not but bee the more
occasioned, when they haue all their necessary wants ad victum
 ad cultum sufficientlie and abundantly supplied: and wherein
to faile, they haue either none at all, or farre lesse excuse when

as they be not, for want of necessaries, enforced to leaue the word
and serue tables. Act. 6. 2. that is, to discontinue their chiefe and
principall studies, and betake them to some other calling or
courses, to their profession not pertinent. Contrarie to the rule
and the minde of the Apostle, who 2. Tim. 2. 4. saith, No man
that warreth intangleth himselfe with th'affaires of this life, because hee
would please him that hath chosen him to bee a Souldiour, c. mea|ning,
that, as hee that goes to the warres giueth ouer his ordi|narie,
priuate and domesticall affaires that so hee may follow his
Captaine without et, and doo good seruice vnto his countrie;
so should he that betakes him to the ministerie of Christ, forgoe
all other vocations  courses of life, as husbandrie, handicrafts,
merchandise, schooling, Physicke, Chirurgerie, c. and follow
onely that worke of God, wherevnto only hee is called, which
alone will require a whole man. Contrary to the minde of the
auncient fathers, who, as wee may conceiue by the words of S.
Cyprian, epist. 66. reprooued one Geminius Faustin that had vn|dertaken
the charge of pupills, and ouersight of a mans will; as
dooing therein against the Canons of the Church then: saying
that Ministers haue nothing to doo with secular affaires: but as the
Leuits had no other busines but to attend on the altar, so the
Lord had prouided for his ministers now, that they might not bee
drawne by wordly occasions from their holy busines, but day 
night should attend their heauenly and spirituall exercises:  by
the words of S. Gregorie,Duaren desacr. eccl. minist. lib. 1. cap. 25. who rebuketh a certaine bishop or mi|nister
of his time, for that hee did vndertake to teach grammar,
thinking it vnmeete for ministers of the Church to meddle in
any secular affaires,  get their liuing by worldly labours. Con|trary
to the auncient Canons and Decrees of the Church, as may
appeare Decr. Greg. lib. 3. Tit. Ne cler. sec. neg. se immisceant.
Contrary to the practise of the best of that sorte in all times, as
of Aaron, who left the magistracie wholly to his brother Moses,
and held himselfe onely to the seruice of the Tabernacle: of the
Apostles, who Math. 4. 20. et. 19. 27. gaue ouer their trades of
fishing, c. and following Christ, endeuoured only this, to be|come
fishers of men: and after Christes Ascension, assoone as the
Churche was a little encreased, refused any longer to bee en|combred
with the seruing of tables, but washing their hands
thereof, left the charge of it wholly to others, that so they might

giue themselues continualie to praier and ministration of the worde,
liuing thencefoorth not vpon the labour of their owne hands, in
this or that secular trade, but vpon the charge of the Church: as
S. Paul dooth plainly testifie, 1. Cor. 9. 4. where, in defence of
himselfe, that yet vpon some speciall  extraordinarie occasion
vsed not this power, he saith, Haue wee not power to eate  to drink,
that is, to liue vpon the charge of others, without labouring
our selues, aswel as the rest of the Apostles and as the brethren of the
Lord, and Cephas? I might adde likewise the example of Christ
himselfe, the Prince of all Pastors, who comming once abroad
to preach the Gospell, gaue quite ouer that trade of life wherein,
as a priuate man, he had spent his time, mar. 6. 3. Iustin. in Apo|log.
and betooke himselfe, onely to doo  to teach those things
that perteined to the kingdome of God, liuing and susteining
him  his, of such goods as by the faithfull that followed him,
were ministred vnto him. Luc. 8. 3. Iohn. 13. 29.
I confess, they doo not well,  as they should, to spend their
time in worldly busines, as in teaching of schollers, c. These
things were fitter a great deale for men of those professions, the~
for any of the ministerie. But say I, who is in fault for this? yow
know the old prouerb. Necessitas non habet legem, Need hath no
law. It is not fit they should doo thus, but it is better to doo thus
then to starue (or steale) for want of necessaries. Emalis mini|mum:
Of two euills the lesse is euer to be chosen. A hard shift
that a man must be faine to intrude vpon others, because he can
not haue that which is his owne. A lamentable thing that
whereas in all other trades  courses of life (if a man be of any
industrie or meanes) he may be able by his trade and profession
alone, to liue wl  somewhat wealthily, for as the old saving is,
Ars quae suum alit artificem. Euery arte susteineth his artist: only
such is the state of our ministerie in England, that in many
places, it is not possible for a man therein,  thereby alone to liue,
though parc  duriter, in any tollerable estate. Which conside|red,
no man may iustly deny but that the Gouernors of our
Church haue doone well, that in their late Canons, Ca. 78. they
haue reserued to the minister of any place the prerogatiue of
teaching there aboue any other. A poore supply where better
meanes are wanting. And I wish that, Things standing as yet
they doo, they might be assisted to the vttermost, to enioye the be|nefit

thereof. But on condition that the Gouernors of our land
would prouide that in euery place there might be some compe|tent
maintenance (a matter with no great difficultie to bee soone
effected) for the minister thereof: I could wishe that there were a
Law, That no minister should intermedle with any practise or
profession but his owne. For, for my part, though I wish well
to all the ministers of the Church, and doo know that many of
them in these daies doo liue asmuch or more by other meanes
as by the ministerie, yet knowing by long  much obseruation
 experience, how vnfit  preiudiciall a thing it is to their mi|nisterie,
I am so farre from iustifying, liking and commending
such courses, wherevnto their owne extreame necessitie, and the
iniurie  iniquitie of the time dooth compel them, that I hold
their condition therein, a thing to bee pitted more then ap|prooued:
and their fact a matter rather to be tollerated then de|fended.
How vnapt and vnable a man is for such a charge  worke as
is the worke of the ministerie, when hee is vnprouided of time 
meanes to prouide  sustaine himselfe, and furnish his studie, it
is no hard thing for any man though vnacquainted with scho|lers
life to conceiue. For who can worke  labour that hath not
food co~uenient to strengthen his body? who can in his labour
doo anything workmanlike  artificially, that wanteth time,
tooles  instruments conuenient and fit for the purpose? who
can trauaile a iourny that hath not wherewith to defray his ex|penses?
Besides that, when a man goes about any thing not with
ioy  comfort, but with griefe  discontent, what he is like to
effect, let all gesse that euer haue felt any Dsquietnes of minde
or anguish of spirite? Ministers also are men  not Angels, flesh
 bloud and not spirite,  therefore when they see themselues
neglected of those they labou for, left destitute by them for
whom they spend  consume themselues,  for their best and
chiefest labours, least  worst rewarded, how can they haue any
edge vnto their books, or courage to their studies? Or, to speake
nothing of the griefe of mind which must needs assault the mi|nister
of God in such a case, is there not iust cause to complaine,
when as a mans meanes that way is so slender, that it is hardly
sufficient in any measure for very bookes, paper,  other studie
expenses? can a man so liue? must hee, not then of very ne|cessity

either supplie his wants by other meanes, or if that faile,
forsake his studie, giue ouer his book,  conuert that which his
studie dooth  would require, to the vse of his life?  then if hee
must study without books  helpes, or preach without studie, as
many doo, that want times  means conuenient; what good is to
be expected at his hands, or fruitfull speach from his mouth, no
man but may conceiue that knowes any thing what belongs
to a scholler; or, is not so senselesse as to thinke, That it is
no more for a minister to preach a Sermon, then for him|himselfe
to pull open the pulpit doore. The Philistins feared
but little of the Hebrewes, so long as there was neither shield nor
speare i Israel.1. Sam. 13. 19. They knew that a multitude vnarmed could doo
no great harme. And I thinke the common enemy of our sal|uation,
the diuell,  of our religion the Papist, feares little of such
ministers of the Gospell, as are without meanes to liue by or to
studie with.Lunae radijs non matu|rescit Bo|trus. They assure themselues such wil doo no great harme
to either of their kingdomes; seeing certaine it is, such for the
most part, were as good sit stil as labour: better many times to
hold their peace, then to bring into the pulpit, as oft they doo 
must, such rawe  vndigested matter: and should shew more dis|cretion
by beeing more silente, then true zeale by vttering, as
busilie as any other that is  may be better prouided, quicquid
in buccam venerit, what comes first to hand.
And in such cases I doo maruaile with what conscience men
can expect at the ministers hand, That he should labour  teach
them as diligently as others that feele none of these wants and
greeuances,  (as many doo) murmur or complaine against the~
as idle, carelesse,  negligent in their dutie  charge; when they
are thus inforced, wil they, nil they, to be encombred about worldie
things,  co~tinually distracted from the best. I cannot tell where|vnto
better to liken it then to the dealing of the Aegiptians with
the children of Israel (Exod. 5.) when they would not allow them
any longer straw to make brick withall;  yet, they being infor|ced
to seeke for stubble  straw about in the fields,  all the land
ouer where they could get it, exacted of the~ the whole tale of bricke as
in former time, when they had straw allowed the~. So these, they allow
not the minister conuenient maintenance as he should,  others
haue (happily themselues keep it from him):  he is inforced for
want thereof to shift where he can, to put his hand to any labour

 spend his godlen time in worldly employme~ts:  yet, as if he
were prouided for to the vttermost, had nothing to do but atte~d
his booke, nothing to trouble him, but the care of their souls,
they require him to preach vsuallie,  looke that he should per|forme
his dutie (as they call it) and doo the worke of an Euan|gelist,
to the vttermost, as they doo or may, that are not distra|cted
with any such things: But with as good reason truelie as if
a man hauing employed his seruant all day long in busines
abroad, should yet when hee returnes all wearied with former
labours, at 3. or 4. a clocke at afternoone, require him to per|forme
as good a daies worke that euening, as he might haue done
the whole day: or (to vse the very phrase of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 9.)
mousling the Oxes mouth, should inforce him notwithstanding
to labour in the floore, aswell, or as much as he whose mouth is
not mousled, but may by eating as he labours, as Inathan did by
licking hony as he pursued the Philistians (1. Sam. 14.) continue
and repaire his strength.
But to bring this point to a conclusion. As it is fit that the mi|ster
labour, so it is fit that he haue maintainance. Dignus est. n. Ope|rarius
mercede sua. The laborer is worthy of his hire. And as peo|ple
know it is the ministers duty to minister spirituall things: So
let them know it is their dutie to minister temporall things. And
therefore let the one be as ready to employ their goods, as they
would haue the other to employ their gifts: that so the man of
God, hauing his Chamber, his bed, his table, his stoole, and his candle|sticke
ready prouided for him and his seruant,2 Reg. 4. 8.  13. may be willing to
turne into the Shunamits house, and bethinke himselfe what hee
may doe for her to requie her great care for him:Act. 10. That so Peter
with all his company, being intertained of Cornelius with al kind|nesse
and liberalitie, may be incouraged to tary with him, and
speake vnto him words whereby he and his may be saued: that so the
feete of them that bring glad tidings of good things being preti|ous
in ous eies,Rom. 10. they may shew vnto vs the way of saluation: And
Christ being intertained of the Samaritanes  intreated to tary a|mong
them many moe may beleeue,Ioh. 4.  be turned to the faith. This
out of all question better agrees with the mind  cou~sell of God,
then the measure that many times is offered to his ministers.
God is not so bad a maister, as to looke his seruants should at|tend
him without wages; nor so ill an husband, as to haue any to

labour in his vineyard, and not yeeld him his peny. Hee hath
otherwise prouided for them, if men by cruelty or craft bereaue
or defraud them not thereof. Let that be yeelded them, and then
if they imploy not their function and performe not their duetie
with all diligence, let them beare the blame for euer, be censured
at the worst, and condemned, yea and punished as idlers and loy|terers
doe deserue.
4 Fourthly, this so liberall a portion hath God allowed to the
minister, to the end he should be as a patterne vnto euery good
worke. 1. Tim. 4. 12. so specially a maintainer of that commenda|ble
worke wherby Some haue receiued angels into their houses vna|wares.Grego in Pa|storal. Egentis mentem doct|rinae Sermo non penetrat, si hunc apud e|ius animum mans miseri|cordae non commendat.
Heb. 13. 1. I meane hospitalitie which how can he do (as is ex|presly
required at his hands, 1. Tim. 3. 2) If he haue not so liberall
and plentifull a maintainance as may suffice, not onely to his
owne priuate and domesticall necessaries, but also in some
good measure redound and exceed to the supply of the want
of others. Neither doe I thinke but that this was one speciall
cause that induced the Christian world, in auncient times to al|lot
to the ministery, not onely that which God required, viz
his tithes and offerings, but besides and withall, to the end they
might haue wherewith to keep house commodiously, such lands
 other emoluments as at this day in many places (God be prai|sed)
it yet enioyeth, and in many moe we may perceiue once it
had. And (to speake my conscience sincerely in this matter) I ve|rily
think, that one maine cause, why God permitted such spoile
to be made of Churchlyuings (as at this day we see ther hath bin)
was, because the Clergy forgetting to what end so ample main|tainance
was alloted them, did for the most part, either coue|touslie
conuert it to the enriching of themselues, their kindred
and allies: or ryotously dissipate it in vncleannesse, pride,  other
excesses. And I doe feare that some like sinnes remaining in our
Cleargy at this day, is no small cause, why God in his iudgement
against vs, suffers the Church to continue without restitution,
that so they might be pressed with want  need amo~g the~selues,
that are carelesse to ease  succor the wa~ts  distresses of others.
5 Farther, we may coniecture, that so great a portion God al|lotted
to his ministers for their maintainance, partly, that so they
might haue wherewith likewise to sustaine in good sort their fa|mily,
their wiues, children and others necessarily depending vp|on

them. For it was neuer the mind of God, That his priests 
ministers should remaine (as the papists dreame) altogether vn|maried
 in single life, as may euidently enough appeare by his
calling of Aaron a maried ma~ vnto the high-priesthood:  of the
whol Tribe of Leui to his seruice in the tabernacle, which without
mariage would within one age haue bin extinct: by Christ his
chosing such to be his Apostles as were for the most part maried
me~:  by S. Pauls descriptio~ of a Bishop  minister of the church,
1. Tim. 3. wher he makes mentio~ both of his wife  childre~ shew|ing
thereby, that that degree being honorable in all, Heb. 13. 4. was
notonly tollerable (which the papists deny) but also as lawfull 
commendable in him as in any other. Now inte~ding they should
be maried men, as well as any other profession of people,  for|bidding
the~ to intermedle in worldly affaires, it must follow ne|cessarily,
that he intended that their wiues and families should
be sustained by the same meanes by which themselues liued, and
that the same should be such  so great as might, if occasion ser|ued,
suffice therto. Our people are sufficie~tly perswaded (I think)
concerning the lawfullnesse of mariage in ministers, as well
as in others: (and of what minde and iudgement for that matter
the ancient  best Christians were, the very liuings themselues
ancie~tly allotted to the ministers of the Church in euery parish,
do euidently argue: whereas if they had bin o the Papists mind,
some blind cells, small dormitories  stipendary paies had bin
fitter for them.) but they bee not alike perswaded, that it is their
duetie to giue them such maintainance as may suffice, whether
they be maried or vnmaried. No, they thinke they haue notably
wel discharged themselues in this point, if they allow them such
a sparing portion, as will somewhat tollerably keep a single man.
Neither hath this errour done a little harme in our Church. But
I stand vpon it, that God hath allowed them, and would that men
should allot them such a sufficient part as may suffice them all
their life long, whether they be maried or vnmaried. Which of
them (not ministers) betakes himselfe to any course of life, but
lookes so to get by it, that he may haue wherewith to maintaine
himselfe and a family also? And what reason is it that a minister
should not expect for, and receiue the like in his profession? Is it
not their Vltimum Refugium? the place of their rest?  That wher|vnto
when they haue once put their hands, they may not looke

backe? If then it will not yeeld them such reasonable contentati|on
and sufficiencie to liue vpon, though they haue family and
charge, better disclaimed then accepted, and left in time then re|pented
of afterward.
6 Neither is it probable, that God had no respect to age, to
impotencie, to sicknesse, c. In respect whereof, because they are
such as are incident to men of this calling, as well as of other; no
doubt it is, and euer was the Lords will, that they should be so
prouided for, that they might haue wherewith to susteine them|selues,
if any such thing should befall them.
This may sufficiently appeare vnto vs by that leuiticall law,
Nm. 4. 47.  8. 24. whereby he ordained that the Leuits after 50.
yeares should be discharged of that part of their office which
was hard and laborious, and which they had in the prime and
strength of their life susteined;  it should suffice that they were
present at the businesse, to assist and ouersee the rest. From which
we may gather euidently, that God would, due respect should be
had of men in his ministerie, according as either age or other
accidents should require: and not they bee cast off, and left pe|nilesse
and comfortlesse when their labour failes; verifying in
them also the olde prouerbe, A young Seruingman, an old begger:
as if their continual and many labours, and the spending of their
chiefe strength  best time, deserued no farther compensation,
nor other reward, then for the present, and might not purchase
them any thing for the time to come. To the like purpose may
the example of S. Paul, receiuing reliefe and maintainance from
the Philippians long after that he had preached among them,Phil. 4. be
very well applyed: neither did they more, or other then their
duetie was: which the Apostle noteth, where he saith Yee haue
done well, that yee did communicate to mine afflictions: nor did
he, in receiuing it, presume farther then was fit and lawfull hee
should. For they being still daily bettered and benefited by his
former labours which like good seede continued grouth after
seed time, he might, if necessitie so required as then it did, with
good reason and conscience receiue some reward and recom|pense
of his labours passed,Philm. v. 13.  19. the fruit whereof remained still, and
for the which they did owe vnto him euen their owne selues. If such
prouision be not had (as in many places it is not) for our mini|sters,
their case and estate cannot but bee miserable. For what

shall they do, if by reason of any impotencie befalling them, they
neede a Coadiutour? they neede some extraordinary succour?
hauing but as it were from hand to mouth. What? Shall they
longer then they be able personallie to performe their duties, be
behoulding to the almes-house? Nature hath taught the Em|met
to gather corne in haruest wherewith to supply her want in
winter: and reason and religion both doe aduise men to prouide
afore-hand. But if they of al other, which should direct others to
follow reason  religion, and be carefull to be helpefull still, but
at no time chargeable to others, be held so short, and fed so spa|ringly
that their very haruest is, but as the gleaning of grapes
after vintage, and their most income, but as the gathering of
eares behind the reapers, what must their Autumne  Winter
bee, but needy miserie, and what possibility to reserue ought till
time of need? A thing abhominable no doubt in the sight of
God, who hath alwaies shewed himselfe as vnwilling to haue any
beggar in his ministerie, as in Israel.
Thus it may appeare, that there be many, and these very great
and weightie causes, why God would his ministers should haue
a liberall allowance, and thought it good to assigne ouer to them
so great a portion as (in some mens eyes) the tithes  offerings
seeme to be. If men will take vpon them to bee wiser then God,
and thinke that they can see greater  iuster causes why to take
the same (or some part thereof) from them againe,  tye them
to a shorter allowance, the euil be vpon their owne heades.
For mine owne part, considering how preiudiciall to the mi|nisterie,
dangerous to the people, dishonourable to the Gospel,
and repugnant to the minde and purpose of God, the beggery
impouerishing and spoile of the ministerie is, I say (concluding
this point with the words of a certaine learned  iudicious writer
of this time) That,Lower. de pa. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 25. Vide tot. If a man should euen by couena~t  Oath bind him|selfe
to the Diuell, to doo his vttermost in oppugning  wasting the king+dome
of Christ, he could not attempt it anie waie more directlie then
this, viz. By driuing  bringing the ministers of the Church to such
straights  difficulties, that hauing not necessarie  conuenient main|tenance
for them and theirs, they must of necessitie either giue ouer the
ministerie quite,  betake them to some other trade of life wherein they
may be able to liue; or else deuoide of all courage and comforte in their
office and ministerie, with Sighes and sorrow exercise their function, by

occasion whereof others also might be discouraged from applying their
mindes to the studie of Diuinitie,  not be desirous to bue pouertie
so deare. It was the only plotte and pestilent course that Iulian
that Apostata and vtter enmy of our faith could deuise to roote
out Christianitie withall. He thought it not best by violence 
crueltie, as his predecessours had doone, to oppresse and cut off
the Christians,Hist. tripart. lib. 6. Cap. 1.  27. but taking from the Cleargie their preferments
priuedleges, stipends  liuings, and exacting of them such sti|pends
as before they were wont to receiue, remoouing also out
of their places the chiefe  best of the ministers; he resolued, that
by such meanes Christians wanting such as might rightly teach
and instruct them in faith and religion: in time, by degrees, the
religion would of it selfe decay, and they forget their owne pro|fession.
And no doubt this is euen a Stratageme of the Diuell
himselfe, now hee can no longer averto marte impugne the Gos|pell,
thus by keeping downe, disabling and discouraging the mi|nisters
therof through need and penury effected by Sacriledge,
Simonie, beggerly stipends and other like indirect meanes, to
hinder the proceeding and prosperitie of the Gospell at this day
among vs. and fill vp the Church with a number nomine, non e,
ministers learned and able, rather in name then indeed.


CHAP. VIII.

Conteineth answeres to diuers obiections. as, Touching the vnworthines
of the minister. The greatnes of the Tenth. The wealth of the mi|nister.
Custome. Personal Tithes. The Statute of Ann. 2. Ed. 6. de
Decimis. Why it were to be wished that for a perpetuall composi|tion
about personall tithes, the custome of the Citie of London,
aboue any other, might the whole land through be put in practise.


Vers. 7.
BE NOT DECEIVED: GOD IS
NOT MOCKED.


HItherto haue I continued (as thou seest beneuolent Reader)
the explication of the former verse, beeing the first general
part of the whole parcell of scripture which I haue taken in
hand, wherein hath beene shewed somewhat at large the hearers
dutie toward his teacher touching his maintenance. Now in
order follow, as the seconde generall part of the text, the words
proposed. In handling whereof I am to vndertake the answering
of such, or at least some such obiectio~s, as are or may be prete~ded
against that I haue formerly deliuered. wherevnto our Apostle
doth giue mee apt occasion in the wordes that now I am come
vnto, which (as I noted at first) are a Comination warning euery
one to take heed that in this matter (wherein to bee deceiued it
is very easie, for that men doo not easily beleeue those things
that seeme to sound against their worldly profit) he bee not de|ceiued,
neither by others, nor by his owne vaine pretenses. And
why? for God is not mocked. And it soundeth as if hee should say
thus. I know well ynough what shifts and deuises, what excuses
and pretenses many doo and will make to cloake and excuse
withall their ingratitude to God, and illiberalitie to his mini|sters,
but let men take heed how by friuolous and vaine pre|tenses,
they blind their owne and other mens eyes. For God
neither can, nor is, nor willbe mocked. Hee searcheth the very
hearts and reines  seeth not only what men doo and knoweth
to the vttermost their abilities what they are able and ought to
doo: but obserueth likewise with what minde either willing or
vnwilling, with what affection either of zeale or contempt to
the Gospel, of loue or neglect to the ministers thereof, men doo
cary themselues in this case. And therefore let men looke to
this matter in better sorte, and make more conscience thereof
then many doo, knowing  co~sidering well, they haue herein to
doo, not only with men, but also with God himselfe, who both
dooth and will, as surely as seuerely reuenge the wrongs  op|probries
that are offered and doone vnto himselfe and his ser|uants
in this behalfe. This is the some and generall sence of the
words, the branches whereof are two, an Admonition, Bee not
not deceiued, and a reason, God is not mocked. of which I will
speake somewhat more, first in generall, then in special ma|ner.
1. By this Epiphonema, BE NOT DECEIVED, the Apostle

takes awaye all excuse for not maintaining the ministers of the
word,  shewes, that if any excuse be made, though in the iudg|ment
of the world ofttimes it seeme iust yet before God it is vn|iust,
 hath no place. Many are wot to winde out this way  that.
One prete~ds that he must maintaine his familie: another denies
statly that hee hath whereof to giue or lay out: some beeing ca|relesse
thinke that others doo giue enough, so as they need not
to giue likewise. I haue got nothing this yeare saith one, and
saith another, I haue lost very much. This man pretends the
hardnes of the time, the dearth of vittailes, c. that man com|plaines
of the many payments and greeuances that daily are im|posed,
and what not? Some crie out against the ministers, They
be couetous and haue neuer enough. And there bee that say if
that which we, of our good wills, giue them, wiil not content the~
they may worke  labour for more as we doo. Haue they not
this  that, c. And indeed who can reckon vp all the idle and
vaine pretenses wherewith men doo cloake their sinne, whereby
it comes to passe that oftentimes the minister is left destiture, 
God prouoked against the people. But saith our Apostle, Be not
deceiued, The matter is not so easily  slightly answered. Euery
word, that is thus headlongly shot out, is not by and by an alle|gation
sufficient. These be but vaine shifts,  wil litle preuaile at
length. yet who almost hath not such in his mouth?  thinketh
not that he hath sayd enough,  spoken very much to the pur|pose
when he hath made some such protestation? For, so willing
are men to be soothed in this sinne  so apt through their owne
preiudicate affections to be deceiued in this matter, That the
slightest reason, the vainest pretense,  simplest argument that
can bee, is vnto many good enough, And cause all sufficient to
confirme them in their sparing and illiberall humour: but the
strongest reason, the plainest proofes, the authoritie of scriptu|res,
the iudgement of fathers, decrees of councells, determina|tion
of Lawes, consent  practise of all times, are all too weake, 
without force to draw them forward  induce them to performe
this dutie sincerely,  as they ought. And what is this, but will|fully
to be blinde? purposely to abide in errour? and as it were for
the nonce casting a mist before their owne eies, to suffer them|selues
to bee deceiued?
2. The reason. God is not mocked. that is, first it is a mat|ter

of greater moment then you take it. You haue herein to doe
with God as well as with men, and you cannot wrong the one,
but you shall offend the other. Shew not your selues therefore to
be as the vnrighteous indge in the Gospel, that neither feared God,
nor cared for man. He that accounts it to be nothing to him, whe|ther
the minister be condignly maintained or not, doth sinke or
swimme, is farre deceiued. Such vaine and idle pretenses, such
carelesnesse and deniall of duetie is none other then a very moc|king
of God himselfe, and a kind of scorning and derision of his
most excelle~t maiestie  glorious name, Which al the world should
feare. Which to be no small sinne, the words of the first Psal.
alone, may sufficiently teach vs, where the scornfull are placed
in the third, that is, the highest degree of wickednesse, whereto
well accordeth a saying that S. Hierom hath as he is cited. Decret.
caus. 16. q. 1 wherein alluding, as it were to the phrase of the A|postle,
Tit. 3. 12. declaring the desperate case of such as bee in
heresie, he saith when a man is growne to that height of of sinne,
that he will not contribute and giue as he ought, condigne main|tainance
and intertainement vnto them that be Apostolike
men, and Preachers of the Gospel of Christ, he doth euen (as one
that hath made himselfe vnworthy of the Gospel) condemne
himselfe.
Secondly, God is not mocked: that is, he is such a one as cannot
thorough ignorance in himselfe or shifts in others be deluded:
men may be mokt with and beguiled because they be ignorant,
and know not the state of euery thing, and of euery person, God
not so: men may pretend vnto men pouerty, losses, charges, and
what not? and so blind the eies of men at their pleasure: But God
is not mocked. He seeth and iudgeth righteously: men may tell
the minister that his due is but this and that; and protest that
what they offer, is more then their abilitie, then their due, c. but
there is a God which knoweth who speaketh truely and who not,
who dissembleth and who dealeth vprightly, vnto whom, if we
must (as our Sauiour teacheth, Math. 2) Giue an account of euery
idle word  vaine speech that scapeth our lips, how much more
for such words and protestations whereby any in a matter of such
moment, doe goe about purposely to delude and deceiue the mi|nister
of God.
Whereof to aduertise people the better to consider what they

had to doe, it seemeth to me, first, that God himselfe among his
owne people did expresly command euery man, that as well
for payment of their first fruites as also of their tithes, he should
come into the place which God should choose, and there, before
the very altar of God, and in the presence and hearing of the
Priest should protest before the Lord his God, in this sort. And
Now loe I haue broght the first fruits of the land which thou O Lord hast
giuen me,  I haue brought the hallowed thing out of mine house,  also
haue giuen it to the Leuit, c. I haue not eaten thereof in my mourning,
nor suffered ought to perish through vncleanes, nor giue~ ought thereof for
the dead: that is, I haue not conuerted it to any prophane  vn|lawful
vse, nor kept it back  any way defrauded the Leuit ther|of:
but haue harkened vnto the voice of the Lord my God. I haue done
(viz. in this point touching the true paime~t of hallowed things)
after all that thou hast commaunded me. Looke downe therefore from
thine holy habitation, euen from heauen, and blesse thy people. c. as you
may read more at large in the place it selfe, Deut. 26. A solemne
kind of protestation litle lesse in effect then an oath, whereby the
party did testifie his vprightnesse in that behalfe, or otherwise
made himselfe culpable of notorious abuse of the sacred name
of God, which he had called to witnes. Secondly, that the church
of God of old did ordaine  accustome, that people, for paiment
of their offerings, their personall (or priuy) tithes, and other like,
should come into the Church,  there rekon with the minister,
there tender  pay him his right,  there offer vp into his hands
as vnto God himselfe, that which is holy to the Lord,  seperated for
Gods parte; which might be no small motue to a reuerent  re|ligious
care in this behalfe, if people would consider, that the mi|nister
is there in Gods steed,  receiues what is appointed in the
honor  name of God: that they themselues doe stand there as
it were in the very eye and speciall presence of God who is the
searcher of the very heart and reynes: and That therefore it
behoues them to deale vprightly and sincerely, to speake truely
 vnfainedly, as they that doe know and remember, that they
haue then  there to do not with man onely, but with God like|wise,
 therefore do abhorre, yea  tremble to vtter an vntruth,
and speake a lie, for sauing a little of their worldly goods.
3 And therefore, in such cases, let men take heed, For, God is
not mocked: as he cannot (thorough ignorance) be deluded, so he

will not be mocked with: men may be mockt with, because they
be not able many times, to right themselues, and reuenge or re|dresse
such wrongs as are offered and done to them,  therefore
must with Patience perforce put them vp: but with God it is not
so. Heb. 10. It is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the li|uing
God, for our God is a consuming fire. Heb. 12. he being a iudge
most iust and vpright, both can and will reuenge himselfe of all
such, as by their mockeries and shiftings doe abuse and wrong
him and his seruants. For
First in regard of his ministers he hath told vs, He that de|spiseth
you despiseth me: as on the other side. He that receiueth
you, receiueth me. And we are not ignorant what God said once
to Samuel, 1. Sam. 8. 7. They haue not cast thee away, but mee haue they
cast away: nor of the sentence of Moses to his people, Exod. 16.
your murmurings are not against vs (Aaron and my selfe, Gods mi|nisters
 seruants) but against the Lord. And we may be assured, se|ing
that Christ doth account whatsoeuer is done or giuen to the
poore  needy, his little ones, to be done vnto himselfe, Math.
25. 40, 45. much more doth he, and will he so reckon of that
which is done to those that are neerer vnto him by their office,
and doe as it were represent his owne person, his messengers and
special seruants. We read of Dauid, 2 Sam. 10. 4. when his messen|gers
that he had sent in kindnesse vnto Hanun King of the chil|dren
of Ammon were vnkindly handled and sent backe with
shame and discredit, their beards clipt, and their coates cut off
at the wast, c. how grieuously and offensiuely he tooke it; and
how wrathfully and extreamely he did reuenge it. Let vs not
thinke but that God doth tender as much as euer Dauid did, the
cause of his seruants: and if their beards be clipt, and their coats
cut short, I meane, their liuings gelded, and their mainteiance
taken from them: if they be made to eate the shes and take
the straw, when other haue the kernells and the corne: he both
can and will in due time reuenge it. He hath testified, that
it shall be easier at the day of iudgement for them of Sodome
and Gomorha then for such as will not receiue his messengers,
whom he hath commanded, departing to shake off against such
the very dust of ther fecte for a testimonie. Wherof of their ex|treame
ingratitude and contempt of God and his worde, and of
Gods wrath and indignation against such contemners.

Secondly concerning himselfe, fearefull and notable euen to
this purpose is the example of Ananias and Sapphira his wife, Act.
5. who making a shew to lay downe at the Apostles feete the
full price of their land, when indeed they kept backe a great part
thereof, are by Saint Peter reprooued in this sort. Why hath Sa|than
filled thine heart, that thou shouldest lie vnto the holy Ghost? and
Thou hast not lied vnto men, but vnto God. and againe, verse 9. Why
haue yee agreed together to tempt the spirit of the Lord? and thereupon
by and by for a perpetuall monument of his indignation against
such sinnes are smitten (horresco referens, I euen tremble to tell it)
both of them, with suddaine and terrible death: with whom, in
sinne how neerely doe they concurre that keepe away that,
which for many ages past, is consecrated to God and his
Church, by the lawes of equitie, of God, of the Church, and of
our land: and therefore is not now in their owne power, and can|not
without great and apparant sinne be now conuerted, or ra|ther
peruerted to any prophane and common vse, and to couer
their shame and sinne withall, come into the Church, and pre|sence
of the eternal God, and there protest to their minister, that
they haue nothing to pay: that they owe him of right but this
and that: that they doe not, nor will not deceiue him of a peny,
c. but God is not mocked.
Hitherto of these words in generall tearmes, which being
briesly thus run ouer, I will now more largely touch also cer|taine
speciall obiections particularly. Them for orders sake (be|ing
many) I will sort into 4. ranks, as vnto certaine heads, wher|unto
all such may be referred; and they are these, Personal, Gene|rall,
Local and Speciall.
Personall I terme such obiections as may be pretended against
the persons themselues that should receiue such maintainnce.
Against whom their vnworthynesse sometimes is obiected.
And that is twofolde, either in life, if they be such as be not of
Good conuersation, but giuen to some or other notorious
vices: or for learning, if they bee such as can not preach
at all, or not so learnedly and excellently as some others
doe.
To which one answere may serue, viz, That notwithstan|ding
any such defects, yet the maintenance, the ordinary
maintenance of the minister (for of that do I speake altogether)

ought to be in such sort setled vnto him, that it may not be lawful,
not easily possible for any priuate persons personall vnworthines
to withdraw it, or anie part thereof. People must know, it is not
lawfull to requite one wrong with another: not fit that they bee
at libertie to withdraw their pay from anie vppon supposed vnwor|thinesse,
least they take libertie to pretend vnworthines where there
is none, and vnder colour of fault in some, offer iniurie to all, and
abuse vpon light occasions euen the best. They must yeelde the
minister his due howesoeuer. If hee be such a one as deserues it
not, the fault beeing not theirs, but his; hee must answere for his
faults other waes. No reason euery man be his owne iudge in his
owne cause, least malice or auarice become parties. What is pu|nishable
or reformeable, must be referred to superiours on earth,
or to God in heauen.
God neuer permitted anie such libertie to his owne people.
Whatsoeuer the Priests or Leuites were in their desert, yet the peo|ple
without any exception are co~manded to bring in their tithes
and oblations. The Priests are reprooued by the Prophets, and
termed Dumb dogs, Deceiuers, Sleepie watchmen, c. but the people
are not aduised and taught by the prophets, therefore to withholde
from them their appointed  legall maintenance, neuer was there
greater corruption among them, neuer more wickednesse and all
kinde of vnworthines then in our Sauiours time: yet he sendeth
the leper cleansed to the priest,  bids him offer as was appointed.
And sitting ouer the treasurie, and there beholding how men cast
in their gifts, commendeth the poore widowe for her riche mite,
and approoueth the fact of all, calling it the Offerings, not of the
Priests, but of God, Luk. 21. 4. It is also forefended by ancient lawes
 ordinances of our Church  land. Among which one is nota|ble,
made in the time of King Hen. the 8. An. Dom. 1538. the words
whereof are these. Foras-much as by lawes established, euery man
is bound to pay his tithes, No man shall by colour of duety omitted by
their ministers, deteine his tithes, or be his owne Iudge, but shall truly pay
the same as hath bene accustomed without any restrainte or Diminution:
and such lack or defalt as they find in their Pastouts and Curates,
to call for reformation thereof at the Ordinaries or other superi|ors
hands. To this effect we read also in the Decrees, lib. 3. cap. 20.
De dec. Tua nobis. Nonnulli vitam clericoru~ tanquam abhominabilm
detestontes, Decimas ijs ob hoc subtrahere non verentur. Verum si. c.

that is, manie detesting the life of Cleargie men as abhominable,
feare not for that cause to withdrawe from them their Tithes; But
if such parties had due respect vnto God, from whome all their
goods do come, they would not offer to diminish the right of the
Church, nor presume to deeine their Tithes. And a little after,
Seeing that God (whose is the earth and the plentie thereof, the
whole worlde and all that dwell therein,) ought not to bee of
worse condition then a temporall Lord, that lets out his land to
others; It seemeth truely too vnequall, if Tithes which God in
token of his vniuersall Soueraigntie hath commaunded to bee
payed vnto himselfe, affirming Tithes to bee his, vppon occasion
premised: or rather by purposed fraude should bee diminished.
And againe; Whereas no man may giue away that which is ano|thers,
without the good will and consent of the owne Because
therfore we wil not suffer that the right of Churches and church|men
vpon any presumption bee diminished, we commaund you,
That you doe compell all such as either in respect of their per|sons
or of their possessions ought to pay tithes (personall or pre|diall)
to the Churches and cleargie-men of your Diocesse, to pay
them to the vttermost. I will adde to these a notable saying of a
later writer, that is, of R. Gualter Tig. in his Homilies vpon S. Ma|thew.
Homil. 269. They obiect (saith hee) that manie doe filthily a|buse
Tithes, and therefore they are vnwoorthie to haue them.
But this is a bald excuse, For of such abuses, they shall yeelde an
account to God, which doe commit such things, not who paye the
Tithes. And what reason will excuse him that with-holdes from
the needy his necessarie Liuing, least happely hee abuse it to surfet|ting
and drunkenns? It is the parte of euerie Christian man to
paye to euery man that which is his due, and not to goe about to
excuse his owne iniquitie by anothers fault: hitherto hee. Thus
it appeareth, neither the law of God, nor of the Church, nor yet
anie equitie, doe permit anie vpon a conceit of the ministers vn|worthines
any way to with-holde from him his due: but that they
are bound to pay it to him, as hee is their minister, and not-as he
is so or so worthie a minister. The principall reason why, ex|pressed
also in some of the former allegations is worthy to be no|ted,
and that is Because the ministers maintenance is not proper|lie
his, but Gods part.

The Tithes are Gods, as hath bene before shewed. If he there|fore
be not worthy of them, yet God to whom they are princi|pally
due, is not vnworthie. And therefore as it cannot be but a
great fault to withholde rent from a Land-lord, or denie tribute to
a Prince, for the persons sake that is his receiuer: so it cannot
but bee an open sinne to denie to God his right, for his sake into
whose hand it is to be paid.
I haue insisted vpon this point a little the more, because how|soeuer
it bee a thing vnlawfull, yet it is too vsuall with vs, in case
of personall tithes.
There are not a fewe which abusing the weakenesse of the Sta|tute
that should restraine them, doe take what libertie they lust
vpon any occasion to wrong the minister. Which being a prac|tise
so apparantly contrarie, not onely to reason and equitie, but
also to the word of God and all good practize, I trust, as a thing
not tollerable in a Christian common-wealth, (among them that
carry any zeale to the Gospel, or loue to them that bring the glad
tidings thereof,) shall not long continue (being so apparantly dis|couered)
without due reformation.
2, General Obiections I tearme such as may bee made against
tithes in generall, or against the whole maintenance of the mini|ster,
as this. The Tenth is a portion too great for the minister,
and a burthen too grieuous for the people. Lesse a great deale,
as a 20. or 40. or but an hundreth parte, seemeth to manie might
be enough, if not too-much.
But who shallbee iudge in such a case, what is too-much, or
or what but enough? what euery priuate person? or onely this
present age? Then indeed Vae vobis, woe to you ministers, Your
staie is bad already, and daylie worse and worse it wilbee. There
will be then no ende of oppression and crueltie, of fraude and de|ceit,
of Symonie and Sacriledge. And why? but because all you
haue is thought nowe a dayes of manie to be too-much: And
that though there be, in places too many, but little left, yet lesse
were enough, But if God, if our forefathers, if all Antiquitie may
giue Iudgement and obtaine Audience, sentence is already long
agoe past on your side, viz. That the Tenth is but a competent por|tion,
and not too much. For
1. First, God assigned not it onely, to his Leuites and
Priestes, but together with it, well neere as much more in other

things. For as appeareth in the bookes of Moses. Besides the
Tithes of all things,The Leuites lot. They had first, 8. Citties with their Sub|burbs
of a mile circuit at least, for their habitation. Num. 35. losh.
21. Secondly, theirs were the first fruites of all things both annu|all
and naturall: Leuit. 23. 10. and 19. 24 Thirdly, of diuers sortes
of sacrifices and offerings, either the whole, or a great, and euer a
certaine part was theirs, as Exod, 29. 32. Leuit. 7. 31. and 8. 31  10.
14.  24. 8, 9. and Num. 18. doth appeare. Fourthly, of all cose|crated
things, whether it were man or beast, house, or grou~d, either
the thing it selfe without redemption, or the redemption thereof,
at a full and certaine value was the priests. Leuit. 27. Fifthly, in ca|ses
of restitution, if neither he to whom the goods belonged, nor
any of his kindred could be found, the goods to bee restored, was
the Lords, and the priests had it. Num. 5. 8. 6. And lastly, Their
inheritance could neuer be diminished, but (notwithstanding any
sale) returned still in this Iubile, increased it might be by Dedica|tion.
c. Leuit. 25. 30.
2. As for the Church of Christ; it hath bene generally so farre
from accou~ting the Tenth too much for the ministers of the gos|pell,
That Suasponte of her owne voluntary and free heart, it hath
added therevnto (to the ende they might honorablie and condignely
be maintained) no small nor few augmentations. Of Constantine the
great that worthie Emperour, it is recorded, That ouer  besides
Tithes of all things, which hee first of all, by lawes Imperiall con|firmed
to the Church,Eueb. de vit. Costan. lib. 2. p. 36.  39. to enriche it withall. First; all such lands,
liuings, houses, and fields, c. as in former times had beene giuen
to the Church, and in times of persecution taken away againe, he
restored. 2. Of the heathen images which were of purer metall, he
made much money,Szomen. Ht. eccles. lib. 2. c 4. and gaue that money vnto the Church trea|suries.
3. Out of the publike tributes throughout euery cittie, he
deducted a certaine portion,  assigned the same to the Churches
and Cleargie of euery place. 4. If anie had dyed in martyrdome
without heires, or others of their bloud,  left any goods behinde
them, he decreed, the same being enquired out, should be brought
into the treasurie of the Church, c. 5. Whose munificence o|ther
Emperours, Kings, Queenes, Princes, and sundry other rich,
but deuout Christians, following; by sundrie meanes, The goods
and treasures of the Church (saith one,) were wonderfully aug|mented.

3. If we come neere home, (and by that which remaineth, and
the ruines of the rest, iudge of the whole, who so wil but cast his eie
vpon that vniforme, general, goodly,  godly course, which once
our land-ouer was throughly planted, for the maintenance of our
ministerie here in England, shall be not see, That our ancient pre|decessours
did account the tithes alone, to be euen with the least?
And therefore beside the tithes, To the ende the ministers of God,
the Leuites of the Gospel, might haue wheron to liue, as becom|meth
the Gospel of Iesus Christ, they did (as it were imitating the
best, God I meane in his law, for the Leuites lot) endow euerie se|uerall
Church with some reasonable portion of land, called The
Gleebe: and 2. ordained likewise, that euerie Christian (of yeares)
both man and woman, should of his free accord at certaine times
in the yeare, offer vnto God something, more or lesse, according
as either God had blest him, or his deuout heart mooued him: 3.
vnto which, if we adde the worthie,  those not a fewe dignities 
preferme~ts without cure of sundry name  title, a great part wher|of
(God be praised) remaineth vnto this day, what was there more
to be desired, whereby they might testifie their zeale to religion,
loue to learning, regard to the ministerie, and (the scope we aime
at) That they, in the abundance of their loues vnto their teachers,
thought not the Tithas alone to be a reward or maintenance sufficient,
much lesse too much for them? How therefore, commeth it to passe,
that degenerating from the steps of our owne auncestours, from
the example of the primitiue Christians, yea,  from the patterne
of all perfection, God himselfe, any should account the tenth, nay
the tenth alone, to be too much either for the minister, (or rather
God) at their hands to receiue, or the people to pay? As S. Paul
said once, speaking of God, 1, Cor. 10. 22. What? are wee stronger
then hee? so may I say, What? are wee wiser then he? and then all they
which for so many ages past, (as it were) vno ore  animo, with one
minde and one mouth agreed, The Tenth to be but enough? Doth
knowledge and vnderstanding dwell onely with vs? And hath
our age alone the lucke, to espye Nodum in Scirpo, an ouersight
that had escaped the eyes of God and men before?
4 Last of all, practize and experience doth shew, that the tithes
euen with other emolume~ts besides, are many times not enough.
For so it ofte falleth out, That either by the smalnes of the place,
or greatnesse of desert in the person, the ordinarie maintenance,

though yeelded in the best and largest manner, is found manie
times to be farre too little,  needeth supplie by other places and
meanes. And therefore that is a friuolous obiection, That the
Tenth is too much, which God himselfe, the Church of Christ ge|nerally,
the Church of England particularly, and our daylie expe|rience
affirme to be with the least. It is too much in their eye
onely, that sincerely loue not the Church, nor the Gospell: that
delight to see the ministers therof (to the end they might be con|temned)
in Contempt rather then in honour, in shame then
in credit: and desire to make a prey of that which is Gods and
his Churches, and to bee inriched with that which is not their
owne.
2. Of the same nature I take their Obiection to be, that pretend
the estate of the minister. Hee hath no neede of these or those
profites; say some. For, he hath enough besides: his liuing with|out
these is sufficient. A speeche both wicked and absurd. Who
hath made them iudges aboue others what is a sufficie~t liuing for
the minister? or giuen them power to pare off the superfluitie
thereof? All men will acknowledge I thinke, that it were an open
wrong, and manifest sinne, to refuse to pay a rent or other debt to
a riche man, because he is otherwise (in his conceit) rich enough,
and able to spare it. And I see not, but the case is all one, if vpon
like pretence a man deteine ought from the minister. Againe,
what is this but to enuy at another mans prosperitie? why should
anie grudge the minister his liuing for the greatnesse, more then
he doth the greatnes of his owne charge in generall, or the wealth
of anie of them of his charge in particular? It is not in their po|wer
to disburden him of his charge any way:  why then should
they presume or attempt to abridge him of his due anie way? If
the place bee so spatious and populous, that it may arise yearely
to any round Summe, what is that, to anie particular persons, who
are no lesse bound to paye their due to the vttermost, then if it
were 5. times lesse? For the question is not, what may (in mens spa|ring
conceits) suffice such or such a man? but, what in duety and
conscience euery man, or any man ought to paye? in which res|pect
the payment of one thing and not of another: of one person
and not of anoaher; of one part of a parish, and not of another,
standes not with equitie. If one part of a parish contribute to|wards

the maintenance of the minister well, and as is fit, and an|other
little or nothing: if one bodie paye his whole duety, ano|ther
deteines the whole, God is dishonoured, the minister de|frauded,
the Church wronged.
That which one payes, is no discharge for another, but for himselfe.
And as he that payeth doeth but his duety: so he that payes not,
doeth not his duety; Neither is hee freed by that which another
doeth for himselfe, but condemned, the one hauing indeede no
more libertie then the other. Parishes were sorted with inequali|ty
at first, not for easing of some, more then others, in maintena~ce
of their minister, but that by such inequalitie of diuisions, there
might be such inequalitie of maintenance as might be fitting to
the inequality of the ministers desert or charge.
Which godly and necessary purpose they doe directly crosse,
who vpon their owne priuate conceit of a sufficiencie of Lining
without their paye, doe attempt to enforce vpon the ministers a
kinde of equality in maintenance with others, twixt whom there
is no paritie of desert or charge.
Neither do I see, the state of our ministery for maintenance stan|ding
as now a dayes it doth, how the minister himselfe can be ex|cused
from blame and sinne,Zanc. de Red. lib. 1. cap. 19. in 4. precept. if hee vpon any occasion or meanes,
hauing otherwise sufficiently to liue vpon, doe refuse or neglect to
receiue of any, or of all, that which is his due, or any part thereof.
For by such meanes hee shall cause those of other places to be en|uyed
and euill spoken of, that doe receiue or demaund the like:
and so hinder the course of the Gospell among them.
2. Hee shall maintaine Auarice if not Sacriledge in his owne
people. And 3. which is not lightly to be regarded, hee shall by
such meanes (as manifolde experience doth testifie,)Lindewood. Prou. ecl. preiudice for
the time to come, both himselfe and his successours, or at least
sowe the seeds of dissention,Angl. lib, 3. Tit. de Dec.  Oblat. which will break out whensoeuer any
such omitted or neglected duties shall be required.
To which purpose, I doe remember that I haue read a cer|taine
ancient Constitution Ecclesiasticall of this our Church of
England, wherein after due Censure pronounced against all
such as shall vppon anie colour detaine the Tithes and other
maintenance of the minister, the ministers likewise are cen|sured,
that shall, (the feare of God set aside) for feare or fauour

of men, mit effectuallie to demaund and seeke to obtaine those rights,
which vnto themselues, and their churches of right doe apper|taine.
3. From these let vs come to some other obiections, as to such
as be locall, that is, such as concerne some speciall places more
then other. Of this kinde, Custome is not the least, nor least vsu|all.
Neither doe I denie but that it is a thing that ought much to
bee respected, and doe willingly acknowledge concerning the ve|rie
point in question, viz. the ministers maintenance, that in our
land and Church of England, it is one principall cause of much
good and quietnes betwixt pastour and people, while both, ruled
by custome, doe rest satisfied with that, which it, by course of time
hath made a law. And so long and so farre as any custome is good
and reasonable, accordeth with trueth and equitie, doe say of it,
with Saint Aug. Cum consuetudini verit as suffragatur, nihil oportet
firmius retineri,Aug. cont, Donat. lib. 4. Cap. 7. when trueth it selfe (and reason) approoueth a cu|stome,
nothing ought more firmely to bee reteyned. Non. n. (as
saith Tertullian,) possumus respuere consuetudinem, quam damnare non
possumus) For we ought not,Tertul. de virg. vel pag. 491. nor cannot refuse that custome which
wee cannor condemne.
Where Custome is not such, but is appara~tly euill  wicked, be|ing
repugna~t either to reason, or nature, or the word of God: c.
for so much as by the very lawes of men,Decret. lib. 1. Tit. 4. a Custome to the ende it
may haue the force of a law, ought to be both agreeable vnto rea|son,
and lawfully prescribed:De Consu. cap. vlt. we may iustly alledge against it that
saying of our Sauiour to the pharisies, Math. 15. 3. Why do you trans|gresse
the Commandement of God by your tradition, or Custome? and
the lawe of God to his people, Leuit. 18. 30. Keepe ye mine Ordinan|ces
(saith God)  doe not anie of those abhominable customes which haue
bene before you.Ciprian. E|pist. lib. 2, ep. 3. ad. Caecili. And say with Cyprian, we ought not to attend what
anie before vs hath thought fitte to bee done, but what first of all
Christ who is before all, did first doe: neither must wee followe
the Custome of man, but the truthe of God. For (as the same Fa|ther
saith otherwhere) Custome without veritie, is but the An|tiquitie
of errour.
These things premised, Bee it nowe, that there is any where
such a Custome (as they will call it) risen and vsed, that peo|ple
shall not maintaine their Minister, not giue of their goods

to him that teacheth them: seeing this is a custome wicked
and vnreasonable, as which is directly 1. against reason, which
saith, that The labourer is worthie of his hire. 2. against nature,
which forbiddeth to mouse the mouth of the oxe that treadeth out
the corne. 3. against the word of God, which commaundeth
him that is taught to make his teacher partaker with him of all
his goods: and biddeth euery man so to honour the Lorde with
his substance: Therefore it ought to be broken, and not suffe|red
among men. For as it is no good argument to say, it hath
not beene our custome to serue and worshippe God, to ho|nour
Christ, to haue diuine seruice, to haue any Church,
to receiue the Sacramentes, to haue any preaching, to haue
other then a Sermon once in a month, or in a quarter, with o|ther
like; and therefore we will not now begin to doe it, or
to haue any such thing: so it is neither good argument, nor
agreeable to good reason to say, it hath not beene our cu|stome,
to maintaine our minister, to pay any tithes: to giue
him any thing but what wee lust: to bee at any certaintie,
and therefore wee will not now begin any such matter. For
reason and trueth (as well said S. Augustine) must be preferred
before custome. And the Truth being manifested, custome must
not be followed, because the Lord said not, I am the custome, but
I am the truth.
Yet sometimes custome is falsely prepentended. People
count that to be a custome, which is none. For in these cases
properly to speake; Custome is an ancient and long continued manner
of payment of any kinde of tithe in this or that sorte, in this or that
quantitie. And therefore holdes onely de tanto, as I may say,
not de toto. It preuailes I meane, and is iustly pretended, when
question is about the manner how a thing should be paide, but
not for the thing it selfe. For it is a ruled case, or Maxime in
the lawe, that Non est mos de non decimando. There is no cu|stome
for paying no tithes at all, or no tithe of any one thing.
But where any thing hath beene payd for the tithe of such
or such a thing, though it be but two pence for that which is
worth two shillings, or but twelue pence, where in very deede
tenne shillings were with the least, or but the twelfe or fifteenth,
or but the thirtieth or fortieth parte of the thing it selfe, cu|stome

carries it, be it reasonable or not, that it shall still be paid
in no other sorte. Otherwise the denial, or non-payement of any
kinde of tithes, is nothing else but a flat deniall, debarring and
withholding of a manifest right, and no more makes a cu|stome
(how long soeuer it hath been left vnpayd) then doth a
a tenants denial, or detayning of his rent from his land-lord,
prooue and cause it to bee irrecouerable, and not due, when|soeuer
he list to claime or sue for it, as a thing whereof the lesse
is already payd, the more is behinde and to come. In a word,
Then properlie may it be called a custome, when some cer|taintie
is knowne, that the Incumbent may bee able to vn|derstande,
what is his due, what his predecessours haue, and
himselfe ought to receiue, and the parishioners what they are to
pay.
Here it were not in vaine to recite some of those many hard
customes and vnreasonable compositions wherewith at this
day our ministery is oppressed, that being laid open to the
cleare view of all men, they might the easier be discerned, and
the sooner (If the case be not desperate) mollified. But as well
for auoyding tediousnesse as for other causes, I leaue them to
the consideration of the godly and conscionable reader, who
being any thing acquainted with the state of our ministerie,
may of himselfe obserue diuers such; and doe onely wish that
such due regard might be had thereto, that hereafter neither
any man may haue cause by writing, nor any minister by grie|uance
to complaine thereof: which might easily be effected
(if my coniecture faile me not) if one thing alone, not fore|seene
at the first, were rightly lookt vnto now. I meane the mu|tabilitie
an alteration of times.
For likely it is, that whereas for diuers things, by custome
or composition, onely thus much is now payd for the tithe
thereof both in towne and countrie, which prooueth now to be
farre too little. and the Church and ministery to be thereby
greatly hindred, the reason why so small a pay (according to our
times) was heretofore either imposed or agreed vpon, (for I
thinke that they were setled at first with consent and liking of
both sides) was because in those times it had prooued, and was
one yeare with another, reasonable, and such as was indifferent

as well for the one as the other: and the cause why they are
found to be so farre from indifferencie, and so vnreasonable
for the one side alone, in these daies, is onely or chiefly the
alteration of the times, by which, ground, fruites of the earth,
cattell, houses, and all other things titheable, are growne
to such a high rate  extreame worth, as in those daies was not
imagined they could possibly haue risen vnto with continu|ance.
The speciall reason that mooues mee to coniecture this
to be the cause is, for that I know that in those times, when
such customes and compositions tooke their beginnings (for
most of them seeme to be somewhat ancient) not the laytie
but the Clergie, the Church-men, were the stronger side, and
therefore (questionlesse) would neuer yeelde but to such com|position
or Custome, as in their iudgement and knowledge,
or conceipt (then) should not be preiudiciall to their Churches.
Wherefore if this errour of the times alone were amended,
probable it is, that diuers customes and compositions, which
now ministers (not without cause) complaine of and grudge at,
might stand without dislike on either part. The readiest way
to amend it, were to make such rates and payments somewhat
alterable that so as prices of things doe rise or fall to any no|table
difference, the rates and payments themselues might
from time to time, as vpon euery vacation of the benefice, or
altenation of the possessour, or other like opportunitie, vary
and alter: and not the minister enforced to looke, with his con|tinuall
hindrance, when things will come (which happely and
verie likely will neuer be) to those old rates and valewes againe:
and be faine to liue the meane while, not as his parishioners, ac|cording
to the present times; but as no body else doth, accor|ding
to the former: as if it were possible for the minister alone,
and aboue any others, now a daies to liue well enough, by that
which was thought and found, when meanes to liue by, were
more then ower times cheaper then now they are, to be but
sufficient for him,  euen with the least: or reason that any how|soeuer
vnreasonable  preposterous composition should bind
as well the succeeding as the present Incumbent:  men haue
power to preiudice not only the~selues, because me~ may do with
their owne as they lust, but also all that ome after them, euen
in things that are not their owne, farther then for the vse, and

present time.
I come now to the fourth and last sorte of obiections, viz.
those which are more special then any of the former, that is such
as concerne Personall tithes. Touching which very much is to be
spoken and answered, as which of all other are most in question.
It seemes vnto many, a thing most vnreasonable and hard, that
personall tithes (such I meane as of Artificers, Tradesmen, Mer|chants,
c. are to be paid) should be demanded. And therefore as
if the Statutes and lawes to that purpose made, and yet in force,
were a thing against all reason and conscience, they will not a|bide
to heare thereof. What? men to pay tithes of their labour,
and of their priuate gaines? Tradesmen and artificers to be ac|countable
for tithes?
But for answere. 1. That such kinde of persons ought
to contribute toward the maintainance of the minister as well
as others, is alreadie so plainely and firmely prooued, that any
man, not voide of sense and reason, cannot but be satisfied with
it.
2 This kinde of contribution, whether any lust to call it a
Tithe, or a tribute, or a rate, or a pay, or what else any will, it is
not much material; it is the thing it selfe, and not the name that
is in question. If the name seeme odious vnto any, let it be chan|ged
if it may. Though I thinke there be more reason to retaine
also the name, as all our predecessors and lawes haue done, then
to alter it.
3 Concerning the quantitie, how much they should pay,
this is graunted that such persons are not required to pay as
the husband man doth, an entire tenth, but a tenth of their
cleare gaines, their expenses and charges being thence deduc|ted.
4 If the quantitie determined doe seeme also (as to many it
doth) ouer great, what might be little enough, I cannot easily
gesse. And I suppose our predecessors, and the wisest and most
learned of all Christendome, which did determine it, saw more
cause (and I doubt not but they saw in this matter as much as
was to be seene) why so to determine, then any now can shew
for the contrary.
Their common allegations are as followeth.
1 They of whom such personall tithes are demaunded, are

poore tradesmen, artificers, c. which hauing no lands, no cat|tel,
c. as hath the husbandman, are not able to pay.
Answere. 1. Where pouertie is truely pretended, their case I
grant is to be pittied not burthened. Neither is it intended that
ought should be payd, but where it is due. But he is very poore
that hath nothing at all to pay. If their gaine and income bee
but small, yet according to that it is, as they haue receiued, so
ought they to returne againe to God. It is not fit, nor it is not
lawfull, because they haue not asmuch as they desire, therefore
they should spend Gods part and their owne too,  eate vp that,
by which the minister should liue, as well as that which pertei|neth
to themselues.
2. But whether pouertie be alwaies iustly pretented (as if none
were to be accounted rich, but such as haue lands and cattell)
may very iustly be made a question. For if, as a tree is knowne
by his fruites, so pouertie or riches may by the effects: then out
of all question, if we compare the husbandman and tradesman,
the townesman  contryman together in other outward things,
as in diet, apparell, house, houshould furniture, building, ex|penses,
c. it will easily and quickly appeare, who is the poorer.
And now, is it not strange, that whereas in all other things in
worldly matters, the tradesman, c. oftentimes exceeds the
countryman very much, and will bee taken for the richer,  more
able person, onely in honouring God with his substance; in
vpholding religion with his riches, in maintaining the mini|sterie
of the Church with his wealth, he wil not come neere him by
manie degrees: but though he delights to haue the fairest house,
the best apparell, the furest armour, goodliest furniture, richest
table, c. Whatsoeuer it costeth him: yet is, contented (rather
then he wilbe at any charge) to haue the worst teacher, the ab|iectest
minister. And is pouertie the true cause of this? is need
alwaies iustly pretended? Is that I say, euer the right cause, why
now a daies among such vix inuenias locupletem, locupletem dico
(they bee S. August. words, not mine) non tam facultatibus sed op|rib.
a man can scant finde a rich man, a man I meane that is
rich, not so much in worldly goods, as in good workes, in abilitie
as in deeds? Why, that many etsi in domb. aeurount diuites, tamen
in Ecclesia sunt mendici, Though at home in their houses they
want neither siluer nor gold, that appeare very rich, yet at

Church, in the house of God, they seeme to bee very poore:
though for their owne priuate and worldly respects, they haue
and will finde plentie, yet for the seruice of God, and good of
their owne soules, they haue little to spare? I will not say as S.
August. dooth, we all worship one Christ,  professe all one reli|gion,
but not all with one minde: yet some cause there is, but
it is not pouertie, what euer it bee.
It was not thus in former daies, in time of Popery,  among
our owne forefathers. There bee some yet liuing that can partly
remember,  more that haue heard their fathers tell, That the
ministers of the Church liued then no where more richly  wel
maintained then in townes and Cities: That diuerse small townes
did mainteine 4. or 5. Popish priests in better sorte, then now a
daies one minister of the Gospell can be maintained. Yea, as
some worthie credit doo write, some Cities, and those not very
great, did in those times maintaine 30. or 40. Masse priests, bet|ter
then now they doo 3. or 4. preachers of the Gospell. By
what meanes they did this, though it bee not much to the mat|ter
in question, for all was of their liberalitie  readines of heart
toward religion, yet they hauing as small lands as many haue
now, and liuing by their trades and sciences as such doo now, it
must needes be that they made that care and conscience of
their offerings and personall tithes, which dooth not appeare
now.
Therefore as the Apostle sayd once to his Corinthians in ano|ther
matter, so may I in this. I speake it to our shame; Ours, that
do professe the Gospell, that glorie of knowledge, and pre|sume
of our zeale vnto the Truth, and speciall loue vnto the
Gospell: ours that condemne ignorance and detest Popery:
that the children of darknes should be wiser them the chil|dren
of light: That they which rightly knew not God, but
liued in Idolatrie and all kinde of superstition should be found
more righteous in this so materiall a pointe of religion then
wee: and bee iustified by our selues (their aduersaries for the
Gospells sake) that they did (as indeed they did and doo) better
honour and maintaine their vaine teachers, blinde guides and
false Prophets, the wee our sincere Pastours, faithfull leaders
and true teachers. Indeed it is no new thing, and therefore the
lesse wonder. The Egyptian priests had better prouision made

for them in a time of penury and famine, then our Euangelicall
ministers in the Halcyon daies of all abundance,Genes. 47. peace,  plentie.
The Prophets of Baal 450. and of the Groues 400. are fed at I|zabels
table with the best, when as Elias is glad to eate with the
Rauens by the riuer Cherith,  other the Prophets of the Lord
are susteined in a caue by Obadiah with thin fare (God knowes)
bread and Water.1. Reg. 18. But what may wee thinke of it? may wee not
therefore iustly feare, That as our Sauiour protested against his
owne nation, that the men of Niniuch,  the Queene of the South
should arise against them in the daie of iudgement, and condemne them,
because they repented at the preaching of Ionas,Math. 12. and shee come from
farre to heare the wisedome of Salomon, but they would not re|pent
at his preaching that was greater then Ionas, nor heare his
doctrine that was wiser then Salomon: so our Popish forefathers
and other blinde Idolaters shall arise in the daie of Iudgement and
condemne many of vs, because they had that due and good res|pect
to their priests such as they were, which wee haue not to
ours, such as they are. They were content many times to empo|uerish
themselues to maintaine the Church and enrich the mi|nisters
thereof, whereas wee care little how to empouerish the
one and spoile the other, so wee may enrich our selues. And if
this way they any thing offended, it was in this, That they made
their priestes beeing but bad, to bee worse with ouerfeeding, 
pampering them too much; wee runne quite into the other ex|reame
and (that which is of the two, the worse) do make them
that bee good men, and would bee good ministers, many times
to bee bad, vnprofitable and contemptible, by pinching them,
and keeping from them that which they should liue by: and to
the no little detriment of learning, and ruine of religion, turne
to our prophane vses, and reserue to our priuate estates, that
which in equitie and right, by the Law of God and his Church,
should bee employed to a more common good. But take wee
heed, God is not mocked. A masked pretence of pouertie will one
daye bee a seely shield, and little helpe when God shall bring
euery worke into iudgement,  disclose the things that now lye
in darknes.
2. Secondly, it is obiected, That those of whom such kinde
of tithes are demaunded, doo commonly aduenture much, and
so be subiect to many losses, c. more then the husbandman is:

and therefore no reason that they should pay any such tithes.
Answ. 1. That their estates are more casual is not denied.
And in consideration thereof, partly it is (I thinke) that by the
consent of all, an entire tenth is not required of them, but (as I
haue formerly noted) a te~th of their cleare Gaines, diductis Expensis
But because it is no reason that they pay so much as the hus|bandman
dooth, is it reason they pay nothing at all? I will not
here actum agere, Let the Reader thinke of it as God shall moue
him: Enough is already sayd touching that point.
2. As for the aduentures and hazards, the great perills and
many dangers, which they doo passe  endure, I for my part am
so farre from thinking it reason, that in regard thereof they
should befreed from yeelding to God or his minister any part
of their goods, that thereby I hold them rather, to be the more
bound (beeing deliuered out of such perills, and hauing obtey|ned
good successe) to shew themselues therfore the more thank|full
to God, as vnto whose only great fauour, singular proui|dence,
 speciall mercy, they doo (as they ought) impute their
safetie and good euent. And of my minde it seemeth were those
godly  truelie religious Captaines of Israel in Moses time, who
hauing bene at warre, and their whole army beeing but 12000,
had fought  vanquished 5. Kings of Midiam,  all their people,
and yet found vpon reuiew of their companies, that they had not
lost a man,Numb. 31. though they had already by the Lords appointment,
parted with one halfe of the bootie, vnto the rest of the people that
went not into the field, and of the other halfe had giuen as a
tribute to the Lord, of euery 500. one, did father voluntarily ouer
and aboue all this, in token of their speciall thankfulnes for
Gods so great and vnexpected deliurance, offerd vnto the Lord
another rich offering of their Iewels  ornaments which they had
pillaged, to the valew of 16750. sekels of golde, a memorable
testimonie of their gratefull mindes. They thought it not
enough to giue to God as others did, and as was ordinarilie re|quired,
but because they had tasted of Gods mercie aboue
others, they account it their dutie (as euery godly man should)
to giue to God more then others. For, nature, much more reli|gion
teacheth, all, that The more a man receiueth, the more hee is
bounden. The greater benefits, the greater thankfulnes is requi|red
at his hands.

True. But cannot we be thankfull to God,Obiection. though we offer vn|to
him none of our goods? we can praise him with our hearts,
and with our tongues declare the wonders that he had done,
we can exalt his name in the congregation of the people, and
tell out his workes with gladnesse.
Or,Answere. To be plaine, we can be content to offer vnto him the
oblations of our hearts and our lips, but not of our hands. We
can be content,S. Bernard. as S. Bernard very aptly, to this purpose spea|keth)
to goe with the wise men to seeke Christ, yea, we will with them
fall downe and worship him too, but we be growne too wise with the~
to open to him our treasures; That is, the very renting of our hearts,
we cannot endure to be tied vnto it. If Paul will make Agrippa a
Christian, he must except these bands too. But be not we decei|ued,
God is not mocked. He requires that we honour him with our
goods, as well as with our bodies and our spirits, for both those
and these are his. Which the man after Gods owne heart Dauid,
well considered, when (as we read Psal. 116.) hauuing bin in such
distresses and troubles, that standing vpon the brincke of the
pit of dispaire, he said, All men are lyars, and vtterly deceiued, that
say or account of me, that euer I shall esape these daungers, and
be exalted to sit vpon the throne, and yet at length finding Gods
mercies so vnmeasurablie heaped vpon him, that he was not a|ble
to expresse them, bethinking how to shewe himselfe not
vnmindfull thereof, nor vnthankfull therefore, hee did enquire
within himselfe, saying; Quid retribuam Domino, c. What shall I
render to the Lord for all the benefits that he hath done vnto
me? He resolueth not onely I wili take the cup of saluation, and call
vpon the name of the Lord: but also this, verse 15. I will offer a sacri|fice
of thanks-giuing according to the law, and I will pay my vowes
euen now in the sight of all his people; that is, I will with my goods per|forme
such ordinarie duties as the Lord in his law doth require:
and I will besides render of my goods such other things as in my
trouble I vowed extraordinarilie to giue or offer vp vnto my God,
if he should deliuer me out of them. Now if men be so farre from
Dauids minde, that (because they haue beene in trouble and
danger) they will not onely not vow, nor giue any thing extra|ordinarily,
but refuse likewise therefore, to render euen that
which God doth ordinarily require, let them take heede, least
pretending to draw neere vnto God with their lips, their hearts

(whatsoeuer they pretend) be as farre from him as their hands;
and insteed of shewing thanfulnesse, they do not openly bewray
manifest vnthankfulnesse, and so make themselues vnworthy of
future blessings, that be so vngratefull for former.
3 But it is not fit, that the minister should receiue personall
tithes: because so he will from time to time, be acquainted with
mens seuerall estates, and know as well as they in manner, what
they gaine or lose from yeare to yeare.
Answere. But why is it not fit he should know, in some generall
sort at least, how god doth blesse or not blesse, prosper or not pro|sper
his people? For how they do rise or fal,  what their states
alwaies are, hee cannot know, because he is nothing the more ac|quainted
thereby with their expenses and spending of that they
haue. God thought it to be fit enough among his own people the
Iewes: as may appeare by appointing them, 1. To pay the tenth
of euery thing. 2. to bring 3. times a yeare euery man his offering
according as God had blessed him. In diuerse of their offerings, to
offer an offering of greater or lesser valew, according as they
were either riche or poore. Againe we doe see, that the
husbandman at this day euery where doth account to the mi|nister
of God how God hath blessed, inriched and increased him,
or otherwise diminished and brought hm low, in euery thing he
hath, both great and small. And why shall tradesmen, c. thinke
that not fit for them to doe, which God did iudge to be very fit
for his owne people, and which husbandmen neither refuse nor
think vnfit? Let others thinke what they will, I doe verily think
it to be not onely fit, but also expedient and necessary too, that e|uery
man whether he be husbandman or tradesman, doth liue by
by land or sea, by natures increase, or by his rte and labour,
should let his minister know how God doeth either blesse or
not blesse him, that so he (the minister) may be the more oc|casioned,
the rather for that it so neerly toucheth himselfe, either
to praise God for plentie and abou~dance sent, or to pray to God,
where his hand is heauie, for the remoouing therof, and sending
of better successe.
Farther, But where som composition lies, vnlesse the minister
be made acquainted with the Income  increase or decrease of
his parishioners estate by Computation, which way is it possible he
shall know what certaintie to demand, or depend vpon? but must

(the thing that it most disclaimed,  indeed vtterly intolerable)
stand stil to the curtesie  beneuolence of the parishioner. Wher|fore
sith it is most vnfit and vnreasonable that the minister be
left to mens curtesies  co~scie~ces, which now a daies be but short;
let such as think it not fit that he should be acquainted with their
gains and losses from time to time, condiscend at least to that
which neither parte hath any iust cause to except against, that is,
some reasonable Composition, as in London alreadie there is:
which one yeare with another may be indifferent for both sides.
4 But where is any such Tithe payd? who is there that
paies them? Therefore why should we doe otherwise then others
doe?
Hereunto though I might answere in a word, We ought to liue
by lawes not by examples: And therefore though it were true,
that this kind of Tithe were now no where paid, yet this being
prooued (as it is) that of right it ought to be paid, such examples of
non-paiment doe not iustifie, but make more euill the facte.
For, The more trangressors, the greater the sinne. The farther the
disease is spread, the more intolerable and needing speedy care,
ne pars syncer a trahatur, least al be mard: yet if the willing Reader
will vouchfafe but to turne a little backeward he shall there find
it sufficiently declared, how long, by whom,  where, those kind
of Tithes haue, from time to time beene paid.
Farther I answere that in diuers parts of our land, they are
paid in one or other manner namely in the citties of London 
Canterburie, as both by practice, and by the statute for that pur|pose
extant in print, is euident.
2 Besides London, these kind of Tithes are also paid in diuers
other places, in some other manner, as I doe gather, by the very
words of the statute touching such tithes; wherein is this Prouis,
That in al such places where handiecrafts  haue vsed in some other
manner, (viz. otherwise then by computation of the tenth, the ex|penses
diducted) or by compositio~ for the tenth proportionably,
with London) to paie their tithe, that there the same Custo~e of payme~t
of tithes shall be obserued  continue stil. For these words do plainly
signify that there be such places in the la~d, wherby some ancient
custome, artificers, trades-men, c. haue vsed to pay such Tithes
though in other manner, then either by the statute generallie is
prouided, or in London, c. particularly is vsed: otherwise that

Prouiso were superfluous.
3 Also in fisher townes, the fisher-men doe pay tithe of their
fish, and so doe fowlers of their fowe, both which are a kind of
personall tithe, as by the manner of payment thereof, and cu|stome
of euery place may easily be coniectured.
Now seeing personall tithes are paid in fisher townes, likewise
in London  some other places else, after one sort; and in diuers
other places after another; and in all other places (of like nature)
ought to be paid: it is superfluous to aske where they are paid, and
who doe pay any personall tithes? Rather they shew themselues
apparrantly worthy blame, that mooued neither by the exam|ple
of husbandmen that pay predial tithes, nor of the best of our
townes and citties (such without all exception is London,
being the head cittie of the whole kingdome) which doe
in one or other manner pay personall tithes, and so yeelde
the minister a certaine maintenance, will looke onely vpon those,
which regarding neither law nor good example, doe not their
duetie; and account they doe not amisse, so long as they doe
but as such (the worst, not the best) doe.
5 But this were a great charge to townes and citties, where
people already, though they doe pay the minister nothing to|ward
his maintainance, yet haue inough to do to liue. And were it
not a great benefit to them, if they might continue as they doe
in many places, that is, giuing that way but what they lust?
Answere, 1. Why should any account that to be a charge and
burthen ouer heauie, which others do easily beare, and that, I say
not without any griefe, but euen with desire to continue? Be there
not diuers places in the land, where prediall tithes being paid
to the Church, the minister receiueth yearely more pounds,
then shillings in some townes, that yet are the more populous,
which neuerthelesse doo not count it a matter of charge, nor
repent that euer their predecessors condescended thereunto,
but (may count themselues, and) are indeed of all other therby
most happy, because they haue those notable meanes which
others want, to obteine the best and most learned teachers to
reside with them? And what charge, what burthen is it to the
Citizens of London, to pay as they do by the house? Doe they
complaine thereof? Doe they finde it a beggering  vndooing
vnto them? and see that they haue cause to curse the time, that

euer such a course was taken betwixt them and their ministers?
Nay rather, doo not many of them of their owne liberalitie and
loue to the Worde, augment and enlarge it? And dooth not in|fallible
experience shew, manifest  manifold reasons conuince,
That it was an happy thing for them, that euer so iust  ne|cessary
a law was enacted, and so excellent, good  indifferent
a course prouided and planted for their ministerie? And that
the ministerie of our land, specially in places of like condition,
will neuer stand in good estate, nor the people thereof haue due
and necessary teaching, till the same or some other like course
for personall tithes bee generally and duely planted and setled
among vs.
2. Men ought not to count that a charge (a burthen not to
bee admitted, beeing yet absent, nor endured beeing present)
without which they cannot well bee. But except men will main|taine
a minister, they cannot haue, nor indeed are not worthie to
haue a minister among them. Wherefore as a tenant counts it
no charge to pay his rent, because vnlesse hee pay it, start; he knowes
hee cannot dwell in the house: so neither ought the parishioner,
who ought to account himselfe no lesse bound to pay to the
Church the rights thereof: and bee as willing to yeeld his mi|niste
that is due, as hee would him to be to performe the office
and duetie of a minister.
3. It is certaine  euident, That our predecessours, ancient 
best Christians, did not account it a charge ouer-great to paie
their personall Tithes, and maintaine liberally their ministers:
nor a benefit to tradesmen, c. to pay them nothing, and
giue them but what they lust. For then they would neuer haue
condescended (as it appeareth generally they did) to the pay|ment
and establishment of personall aswell as of prediall tithes.
And it had been an easie matter for them, while yet no such
thing was in practise, and not so much as the name of personall
tithes deuised and knowne, to haue admitted no such kind of
imposition, but to haue held fast such a priuiledge and benefit:
but that, besides reason it selfe, religion had rightly enformed
them, that, which couetousnes will not suffer vs to learne, That
such freedome was bondage, such ease the worst burthen, and
such a benefit the greatest detriment: and therefore it was as ne|cessary
for them to impose personall tithes on tradesmen, c.

as prediall on husbandmen,  no more benefit for those to bee
free of the one, then these of the other.
4. I appeale to their owne consciences that thus obiect, what
benefit it is to any parish, where prediall tithes are due, to haue
them taken from the Church, and nothing there to be left, ex|cept
it bee some peeld Vicaridge, scant woorth the taking, or some,
beggerlie stipend worse then it? I am sure vnlesse they will speake
against their owne consciences  all reason: vnlesse they bee of
that minde of which it is likely that some are, viz. That, so they
might haue their tithes,  other profits, which now the Church
dooth or should enioy into their owne hands, they cared little,
whether they had any minister, any publike seruice of God, or
any teaching at all: they must answere, That (howsoeuer the
case now stand,) that is not benefit to the place, but an extreame
miserie  plague; seeing by that meanes they of the place must
needs haue such teachers, not as are fit, but as they can get 
rest contented for the most part, with the dregs and refuse of the
Cleargie, whereby the blinde leading the blinds, both fall into the
Pitt: whereas if the minister (as in other places) had the whole,
they might haue some learned  very able teacher to their Pa|stour;
who, carefully attending them, might saue both himselfe, 
them that heare him. Now if the matter be well lookt into, what
difference is there twixt the one and the other? I meane, if in
the one place the minister hath all the prediall tithes kept from
him, and in th'other all the personall? and thereby as well the
one as the other is a fit receptacle for only the worst and vn|worthiest
Pastour? And what is this but as that, a kinde of Im|propriating?
vnlesse happely it bee of the two, the more wicked
and intolerable. First, because in the other, that the minister
hath though it bee but little yet is certaine. Hee knowes what to
demaund of euery man, and hath good Lawe for recouery of it, if
it bee deteined, in this, not.
2. For the most part it is more in quantitie then the personal
tithe is; the number of parishioners or communicants one
with the other compared.
3. The other is taken away by Law; this by very fraud, and
nothing else but abuse (or at most vnsufficiency and weaknes) of
Law.
4. In the other euery parishioner payes his full tithes, if

not to whom of right, yet to whom by Lawe, it ought to bee
payd: and so is, quod ammo, discharged of his debt and dutie
to God and the Church: but in this, the parishioner without so
much as any cloake or couert of Law to hide his sinne withall,
deteines his tithes to himselfe, and so conuerteth to his owne
pruate vse, that which the other either directly or indectly
paes to God and his Church.
5. Finally,Note th well. what benefit it may bee to any people to vsup
this libertie, I know not; vnlesse this bee a benefit, That by
this meanes they may at their pleasure abuse, wrong, impoue|rish,
persecute, weary out and driue awaye their minister when|soeuer
they list. For by this meanes, if a companie of them shal
but lay their heads together, vpon any conceipt they haue
against the man, to hold him short for his maintenance, and to
pay him no more then perforce they must, and both he  they
know (how muchsoeuer in very deed his due bee) hee is able by
anie lawe et in force to recouer; then it is easie to coniecture what
will within a while become of the poore minister. And whether
this be not a kinde of persecuting of the Gospell, (and therefore
vnfit to bee tolerated where the Gospell is professed) let all
men iudge. For if in warres, as experience dooth shew, it bee
possible to assault and ouerthrow the enemy aswell by famine,
and secreat vnderminings as by open battaile in the field:
and it be true which Diuines haue obserued, that there is a kin|de
of persecution that is priuy and wrought by subtilitie and
policie, and it no lesse dangerous, then that which is open 
by planie force and violence; then out of all question, this is as
fine a pollice  as notable a subtilitie, whereby men may perse|cute
the minister of God at their pleasure, keep him and driue
him from them whe~ they list,  yet be reputed in the face of the
world for none other then good and honest men, yea religious
and good Protestants, as any lightly the deuill can deuise.
And therefore knowing the whynes of Sathan, I will not mar|uell,
if any such as are secreat enemies to religion, and indeed
despise and contemne the ministers thereof, what shew soeuer
they make vnto the world shall labour and stand vp with tooth
and naile to hold fast this (supposed) priuiledge  benefit. But
I shal more then marueil, if (this diuelish Stratageme being thus
disuered,) any that sincerely feares God, vnfcinedly loues

the Gospell of Iesus Christ,  in trueth  veritie affects the mi|nisters
thereof, shall but open his mouth to haue it continued, 
such an aduantage  ready meanes for the diuell and his mem|bers,
to persecute the ministers of the Gospel, at their pleasure,
suffered among Gospelling Christians.
I haue shewed sufficientlie that it is no benefit to any (what|soeuer
some account it) to be freed of personall tithes. Now
will I also shewe (for the farther satisfying of all) that indeed it is
diuers waies, a great benefit, and the right way to do themselues
good to paie them, and so their owne great harme that they
doo not.
1. By that meanes, they shall honour God with their riches,
as God hath commaunded, Prou. 3. 9. as did Abraham, Genes. 14.
Iacob. Genes. 28. the Israelites, Numb. 31. their neighbours and
brethren that are husbandmen round about them doo: and all
men, by the Law of God and nature are bound, as already is
proued and declared in the 6. and 7. Chap. of this treatise at
large.
2. They shall procure vnto themselues able and good tea|chers,
one of the most principall benefits that God can bestow
on men in this life; and not bee subiect, as commonly they are,
vnto the worste and vnworthiest of all other. Maintenance for
learned men once setled  had, learned men will easily bee had
also to accept it: not had, it is vaine to expect or hope for such
to come among them. I denie not, but that sometime learned 
very worthie and able men doo accept of very meane places.
But it is either for very necessitie, making of such as it were a stay
till they can bee better prouided for;Dionisium Corinthi. Or it is for a supplie, and
by way of augmentation, hauing some better preferment other|where.
And then not seldome it so falls out, that delighting to
be most with them that best maintaine them, these are left to vn|learned
Curates: and so haue indeede learned men rather in
name then in deede to their Pastors, according to the measure
they offer them, which is a liuing in name, and not in deed; a
maintainance in shew, but not in proofe.
3 They shall procure the blessing of God vpon them  their
goods, euen in regarde of their outward estates. For (as after I shal
shew more fully, Cap. 9. following) God doth blesse the~ with ple~ty
 increase of wealth, that duelie pay their tithes, as well personall

as prediall, and liberally maintaine ther ministers, whether in
towne or countrie: as contrarywise hee  them with los|ses
shipwrackes, scarcenes, barrennes, pouertie, and neede of all
things, that deale otherwise.
4. They shall procure much vnitie, amitie, and good liking
betwixt them and their ministers; wheras now there is continu|all
dislike, grudge, discontent, griefe, and murmuring on both
sides. They think him a man couetous  vnreasonable, one that
will neuer be satisfied: he againe counts (as the trueth is) them
vnreasonable and vnconscionable in their dealing toward him,
that look he shuld rest satisfied with their offerings only,  those
other scraps that now and then fall out, togither with what they
lust besides to giue him. Which is in truth a kind of beggarly con|dition
 so vnseeming a minister of the Gospel, that I hold him
worthy much reproofe that shall accept and approoue it.
5. They shall auoid the grudge and enuy of their neighbours,
husband-men, and others that pay in good sorte, who (as I haue
heard oft with mine owne eares) doe repine and grieue that they
should paye so much (yet but their due,) to the maintainance of
their ministers, when others better able a great deale in wealth
and worth (though not in lands) paye in manner nothing: not
the fortieth, nor manie times the hundreth parte that they doe.
They ask (not without reason) why one husbandman, his liuing
beeing not worth aboue 10. or 20. pounds by the yeare, should
yearely paye 20. or 40. shillings a peece at the least; and a Mer|chant,
a Clothier, a Trade or handicrafts-man, dispending by his
trade or science an hu~dreth pou~d a yeare at least, esteemed worth
500. happely a 1000. poundes, shall paye scant so manie pence?
Or when the husband-man payes somewhat either in Specie. OF
by custome and composition for euery thing hee doth possesse,
why these shall not pay of anie one thing almost the tenth? For
they be not so blinde, but they can see, nor so bad accounta~ts but
they can tell, That if trades-men paid but the te~th of their gaines
for anie one commoditie that oft they deale in, it would  must
needes be more then that they commonly giue for the whole.
Such inequalitie  vn-indifferency seene betwixt them that be
of one parish, one church, one countrey, and one kingdome, and
therfore should be as equally and indifferently dealt with, one as
another, how can it but offend, and grieue them that be still pres|sed,

and beare euer the heauier burthen? And so much the more
when they see, That by this meanes many times it is, that they
are ill taught, haue had Ministers, and their Ministers liue in need
and beggerie: whereas they know well, that if the rest of their
neighbors did maintane them, and allow them as much a peece,
(or but half so much) according to their ability as they do ( in
al reaso~  equity, besides religio~ so they ought) they might haue
as able  good teachers as in other places  parishes there bee.
6. Whereas now it oft falleth out, That where the place con|sisteth
not of trades-men c. some of the wealthier sort are faine,
(they seeing by the with-drawing and ill payment of the grea|test
number their Minister else not able to liue among them) to
pay more then is their due: hereby, a due certaintie setled by law,
all shall alike according to their estates be lyable to the Mini|sters
maintenance, and so he better maintained then before and
yet they that before were ouer-charged much eased.
7. Whereas now in diuers places, some well disposed peo|ple,
considering their want of teaching, haue of late yeares dui|sed
a remedy by surcharging themselues, that is, by maintaining
a preacher besides their Minister: by this meanes they shalbe
eased of a great part of that charge. For their owne Minister be|ing
condignely sustayned, would oftentimes performe that the
other doth.
7. 6. We do pay personall tithes: as they are due, so they are
not denyed. Answ. I do not denie, but that diuers trades-men, ar|tificers,
c. doe pay their Ministers somewhat aboue 2 pence a
peece, as 4. pence, 12. pence, 2. shill. ten groates, or it may be a
crowne, c. but howsoeuer they may account that ouerplus, to be
their personall, or (as they call it) their priuie tithes, and pay it
in name thereof: yet for my part I am altogether of another
minde, and do verily thinke and take the same to be but a meere
offering onely. My reasons are, 1. If Tithes be Decima pars, a
tenth part of that a man doth possesse, or of a mans gaines or in|crease,
for so the word doth sound, men haue defined Tithes,
and the law of God doth determine: then in no sense, can such a
scantling or pittance iustly be termed or counted for any Tithe:
seeing many times, it is so farre from the tenth, that is not Cen|tesima
the hundreth, happely vix millesima pars, scarce the thow|sandth
part of that yeares increase, and cleare gaines, and so no

way proportinable to tithes, either as gods law, or as mans law
doth lay them out.
2. They which pay it, do pay it, not as a thing due and ac|countable
as tithes are, but as a matter voluntarie, such are offe|rings:
which they may, as they account, and indeed vpon the
least spleene in the world against the Minister, do deny to pay,
thinking ( a man may beleeue them) that by law he hath right
to nothing but his two penie offerings: and that whatsoeuer
they pay him more, it is their curtesie forsooth, as a gifte or
almes, and not their duetie or his desert.
3. It comes neerer to the quantitie and nature of an offe|ring,
which commonly is and hath bene a thing voluntarie, far
lesse then the tenth part, variable according to mens minds as
well as their estates, c.
4. Otherwse the right payment of offerings cannot be seene
among vs. For that 2. pence which alone they account to be
their offering, is enforced by lawe, which requireth not so much
onely, but (as I take it, and els it is wrong) somuch at the least of e|uery
one, and therefore is not voluntarie. Secondly, that is (as
they account it) equall to all: whereas gods lawe (whence the
custome of offerings hath his chiefest ground) required it should
be more or lesse according to euery mans abilitie, Deut. 16. 17.
And it were a shame and discredit to the richer sort, that they
should offer, not like rich men much, but as poore widowes euerie
man his mite, or as one tearms it,  wel, micas, their rums; as if they
reconed of the minister in the, Ch. as of Lazarus at their doores.
5. It was the custome once of our Church of England, to make
their offerings 4. times in the yeare at the least. Which though
now by a worse custome they be brought all to once; presuppo|sing
it were yet invse, if a rich man shuld offer but 4. times a yeare,
I would but aske what might be expected from him? what? but
an halfe-peny at a time? Could he for very shame, setting aside
Deuotion or Religion (though he did pay his tithes besides in
the largest maner) cast downe lesse then a groate, sixe pence, or
twelue pence at a time? which cast in all at once comes to a like
reckoning.
So that euery way this matter considered, make of it what
they can, they can make no Tithes of it.
At the most it is but an offering, and that a poore one too, if it

be compared with the aboundance which some of those offerers
doe possesse, or with the little which it selfe is, in respect of that
the husbandman doth pay, or with the maner of offering among
the people of the Iewes; who I doubt not by way of volunta|rie
offering alone, besides their tithes, their vowes, their first
fruites, and their appointed sacrifices, gaue farre more then ma|nie
of those of whom I speake, doe giue euery manner of way.
Wherefore I may with good reason and euidence conclude,
That they which paye their minister but in such sorte, therein
paye him no tithes at all; and so with-hold from him the greatest
part of his maintainance, viz. his Tithes, wherein properly the
very substance of the ministers maintainance doeth consist: the
rest viz. his offerings, beeing but as an ouerplus cast in, and ad|ded
to the heap.
Wherein I would to God people would or could see, First
how hardly and iniuriously they deale with the minister, in that
for his whole yeares labour and paines among them, they yeelde
him no ordinarie maintainance at all. For the offering (as I haue
sayd) is but as an extraordinry bountie. And therefore speaking
of these matters I am wont to say, That he which payes his of|ferings,
and other pettie and extraordinary duties, but with|holds
his tithes, doth like as if a man making a shewe to paye a
man a bushell of corne by heape, should deliuer him but the o|uer-measure,
and keepe backe the iust bushell for himselfe.
Secondly, how vnconscionable and voyde of due consideration
they shew themselues, who seeing the husbandman to pay tithes
as well as offerings, and to contribute towards the maintainance of
the minister so liberally, That there is scant a man among them
whose liuing is worth Com. annis, an 100. pounds, but yeelds the
minister 7. or 8. pounds at least, and in places that be fertile and
good a great deale more: and diuers tradesmen, c. (in London I
meane) to pay by the house 7. times asmuch at least, as they doe
by this voluntary course: yea, knowing that they themselues doe
many times giue the minister, more for one houres labour, as at
a marryage, a funerall, c. then this way for the whole yeare,
yet can perswade themselues that they doe well, and satisfie their
mindes, that they performe their dutie to God and his minister
in very good sort?
For what conscience, reason, and equitie is in it, that a man

able to dispend by his trade, science, and profession 100. markes,
or an 100. pounds yearely, should looke to haue the benefit of
a ministers labours, for him and his all the yeare long, for twelue
pence, or tenne groates, c: specially when as an husband-man
not of like worth in liuing by farre, giues him as manie or moe
pounds?
I hope I haue nowe made it most euident and cleare to the
eye of all indifferent persons, that notwithstanding any thing
that can to the contrary be obiected, it is both reasonable and
necessary that Personall tithes aswell as Predial be payed:  by con|sequent,
That the lawes, and namely the Statute of An. 2. Edu. 6.
cap. 13. to that purpose made, are, in that pointe, not hard and vn|reasonable,
but reasonably equall, and iust. Against the which,
howsoeuer some doe murmure and complaine in that respect,
yet I would to God, that the ministers had no more cause of
complainte then the people haue, by reason of the greeuances,
which by occasion, or abuse, at least, of that Satute, concerning
personall tithes, they doe endure.
For, if (as I trust it may) it may bee lawfull for them that be
grieued to groane, and that feele themselues distressed, to call for
helpe, and open their griefes: if in this time and libertie of the
Gospell it may be free in defence and furtherance of the Gospel,
to speak the trueth; the trueth is, That that Statute (in other re|spects)
is ouer-fauourable to the people, (as made altogither or
their aduantage) rather then to the minister, and too hard to the
minister, not to the people. Namely,
First, in regard of the time allowed for payement, which is
at Easter. For, till then by the Statute, the parishioner may
choose, whether hee will pay any penie of offerings, or of those
personall tithes.
This clause, I assure you, goes harde for the minister. For
howsoeuer in some countrey parishes, where are fewe or none,
that ought ot paye personall tithes, and the minister hath his li|uing
come-in, at other times of the yeare in due sorte, it is no
great matter, nor hurt to him to tarrie for his personal tithes and
offerings till Easter: yet in Townes and Citties, where the poore
minister hath but a little (God knowes) as yet, to liue vppon, to
tarrie for all till the yeares ende, and to bee faine (as no doubt
manie doe) to borrowe, c. wherewith to keepe house till

Easter, that goes hard. 2. And as the forbeara~ce of a mans due so
long time, cannot but be to him some trouble and hindrance;
yet it were well, if he lost nothing thereby in the end: but that is
seldome so. For the parishioners who commonly are ready to
prey vpon euery aduantage, and ingenious to deuise meanes
and shiftes to pay as little as may be, take thereby occasion to
shuffle together their whole yeares employments; And then
though they haue gayned well in the former quarters of the
yeare, if happely they haue lost any thing in the later, the par|son
payes for it: whereas if they payd those personall tithes, as
the husbandman doth his prediall, or as fishers and fowlers doe
their personall, viz. alwaies when they arise, or at the quarters
end, as in London, the Minister might happely fare a little better
then commonly he doth. Neither is this all: but by this means,
3, if the Incumbent hauing serued 2. or. 3. quarters of the yeare
and more, happen to die before Easter, all is lost; he, his wife,
family, c. for a great part of the yeares seruice, shall haue no|thing,
but the next Incumbent shal reape the fruits of his whole
yeares labours.
Secondly, in regard of the persons exempted by law from
such personall tithes, which be, first all common day-labourers,
and then in fisher townes, all saue those that haue fish to pay. For
of these, the former is a fauour more then the husbandman
hath, who, how poore soeuer he be, yet doth and must pay some|what.
And then the later is more then a fauour, euen a great pri|uiledge
to the wealthy, besides the meaner sort of such townes|men:
seeing it is probable, That no towne standes so on fishing,
but that there are in it dyuers  they wealthy too, of sundry o|ther
trades and occupations, who yet (if I mistake not) go cleare
by benefit of the expresse words of the statute; where it were
disagreeing neither to reason nor religion, that they should help
to maintaine their Minister of that they liue by, aswell as their
neighbours that liue by fishing: and not the whole charge rest
vpon some few, and the Minister receiue nothing at all of many
of them.
Thirdly, in regard of the meanes appointed for recouerie of
those tithes: wherein the partie greeued is vtterly debarred of
the defendants oath, and per Conseq. of any certaine and readie
meanes thereto. Of which point let that suffice which is before

spoken.
Fourthly,pag. 54. in regard of the very words of the statute concer|ning
the quantitie prescribed. For I do not yet find it agreed, nor
explaned by any, what is to be accounted Cleare games.
The common opinion is: That only to be Cleare gaines, and
so titheable, which a man putteth vp (as they say) in his purse at
he yeares ende, aboue all charges and expenses whatsoeuer: Or
which a man at the yeares end findeth his last yeares stocke to
be increased, aboue that at the beginning of the yeare it was. But
though I know, that neither this way, after this so large a sense,
do any almost now a daies satisfie the law, that this neither is nor
can be the true sense of the law, I haue many and those apparant
reasons: as,
1. So might the Ministers maintenance proue exceeding small,
nothing happely some yeares. For it is probable that many
trades-men c. may gaine well, and yet lay vp nothing at the
years end, but spend all in housekeeping, gaming, drinking, c.
2. So there should be no maner proportion, betwixt predial
and personall tithes. Because where as the husbandman, how smal
soeuer his increase be, yet paies somewhat: the trades-man
though he gaine indeed verie much, yet if he haue occasion
thereunto, or but will spend all, shall pay nothing. And then wher|as
among husbandmen the maintenance of the Minister lies
equally vpon them all, both poore and rich, euery one paying
more or lesse, according to that he hath; among trades-men it
shall lie onely vpon some few, and those the honestest and thrif|tiest
onely.
3. So should the practize of that law for personall tithes, vt|terly
differ from the practize of the same law in places exempt,
as in London, in fisher townes, c. In which euery man rich or
poore, that hath either house or fish, paies accordingly: euerie
man spending but his owne, and not the Ministers parte like|wise.
4. By this meanes the Minister stands still at an vncertain|tie
and the curtesie of his parishner; (the thing principally
disclaimed.) For the parishner what euer hee gaine is still at his
choise if he list, to spend all: and may handle the matter so,
that though another gaining but 20. pounds, yeeld the Minister
10. or 20. shill yet he gaining an 100. pou~ds, may not yeeld him

twentie pence.
All which absurdities and inconueniences weighed, it is pro|bable,
that is not the true sense of the law, vpon, and from which
they doe arise.
Another therefore if we seeke, that I take it, must needes be
this; That euery such person shall pay the tenth part, not of his
gaines absolutely, aboue his first stocke or principall, but of his
cleare gaines: that is, of that, which, hauing diducted and abated
all such charges  expenses as besides the first penie that he had
occasion to lay out, surmounteth towards house-keeping, and in|crease
of stocke.
So that wheras in prediall tithes, the husband-man is not al|lowed
for his seede, ploughing, weeding, reaping, mowing, shea|ring,
carriage, or any other like charges; in personal tithes it is o|therwise:
The trades-ma~, c. shalbe allowed (besides his principal,
for his expenses in tools, rent, reparations, for carriage, cellerage,
custome and other like, and pay Tithe onely of that which ari|seth
cleare aboue all such charges, and is lefte him, when hee hath
made his full and absolute returne toward his houshold necessaries,
or to bee newely imployed as a stocke.
This sense, as any man may easily perceiue, first, is very con|sonant
to reason: secondly, beareth some proportion betwixt
prediall and personall tithes, in that wel-nigh all trades-men, ar|tificers,
c. may be found lyable more or lesse, to such a kinde
of paye: thirdly, admitteth some knowne certainety (the thing
specially intended) in euery mans estate: fourthly, it is confir|med
by the vsuall practize of the payment of such tithes, in such
cases as are out of question, as in London; where paying by the
house, euery man whose house is 10. shill. or aboue, of yearly re~t,
paies accordingly: of fish, wherof in most places the tithe is paid,
not of the iust Tenth, but of the twelfth,  in some places, but of
the fifteenth part, 2. or 5. parts (as the expenses may appeare to
be more or lesse) being allowed for boate and Sayne, c. Which
doth plainly argue, That the expenses mentioned in the statute,
should be vnderstood,Inre, circa+rem,  ex|trarem. not of all kind of charges whatsoeuer, that
a man may bee at, for himselfe and his Trade, the whole yeare
thorough, but those onely which are imployed about the very
thing it selfe,. lib. 3. fol. 99. as instruments and meanes, or as the principal, or a
part of the principal, to bring it (the gaines) to hand. Which kind

of charges or expenses once deducted, the remainder, being
cleare gaines is to be shared betwixt the gainer thereof, and his
minister, toward the maintenance of them both: euen as the
husbandman doth his whole increase as naturally it doth arise,
without any such deduction.
These things considered, that is, the time of payment, the per|sons
exempted, the meanes for recouery, and the ambiguitie of
the words, I hope I may without any da~ger, wrong, or sca~dal at al,
iustly conclude and affirme, that the statute for personal tithes is
not hard, but exceeding fauourable vnto the parishioner: , That
the ministers rather haue great cause, finding by iust  long ex|perience,
how men abuse those fauours, and peruert that law, to
their great preiudice, the hurt of our ministery, hindrance of the
Gospel,Stop not your eares at the crie of the afflicted. and decay of learning, to complaine thereof,  with all
earnestnes to craue  desire the magistrats of the land,  al those
in whose hands it lies to redresse such euills: that weighing the
matter more thoroughly, and considering more seriously of the
cause, for the righting of their wrongs for furtherance of the gos|pel
 learning, for increase of preachers in the land, they would
either alter this statute wholly, and settle in steed of it a perpetuall
composition betwixt the incumbent  his parishners for personall
tithes, either after the maner of the citie of Londo~, or some other
like: or else at least, so explane, amplifie and perfit (a common
practise in sundy cases euen of inal moment) the present sttute,
that al ambiguities and euasions being taken away and stopped, the mini|ster
might plainly and directly know, what to demand, and how
to recoer it, and the parishioner what and how to pay. Wherein the
case being so doubtfull, ambiguous, apt and open to contenti|on
as now it is, any reasonable certaintie were much more be|neficiall
to the ministerie, then that which now can bee had.
And it could not but be a meanes of much peace and concord
betwixt pastour and people (a thing worthy to be bought with
som loss) who now in this case, wil yeeld in maner nothing, with|out
continual contention: which moueth the greater number of
ministers, rather to lose in manner the whole, then to be litigious
and accounted contentious for a part. The statute was made in
such a time, when it was thought a vertue, to nip and abate the
height of the Cleargy: and therefore if it do seeme o fauour ra|ther
the parishioner then the Pastor, and giue the one aduan|tage
to pay little, rather then the other to recouer much, it is not

much to be wondered at, or greatly misliked. But now that
time it selfe and truth her daughter haue discouered the defects
thereof, and the present time affecting (as is necessarie and iust)
a learned and able ministerie, it were requisite and a very godly
act, if it might so be lookt into, that it might appeare, we are no
lesse respectiue of our times, then they of theirs:  as willing to restore
to the Church and ministerie what wee finde wanting and need|full,
as they to take from them what they thought superfluous
and needlesse.
Thow mayest maruell happely (good Reader) why in vrging
this matter of personall Tithes, I doo so often mention the cu|stome
and order of the Citie of London: but both that thow maist
not bee ignorant of my meaning, and bee mooued the sooner to
be of my mind, I will not conceale from thee the causes thereof,
which are as followeth.
First long and good Experience hath prooued that course,
beeing duely and without fraud and corruption practised, to bee very
equall and good. Such indeed, as it is hardly possible for the wit
of man to deuise in the like case, a better.
2. It is a thing desired of the greatest part of the ministers
of our land, whom the case concernes: as which, if it might in
case of personall tithes, bee generally planted, would, as already
appeares by the practise therof in that one place, make our land,
our Church, our ministerie and people much the happier.
3. What course, disclayming that which is found by too long
and too much experience to bee very preiudiciall and vnsuffi|cient,
should any rather looke vnto, then vnto that, which the
head Citie of our Church and kingdome, hath as a spectacle and
example to the whole (if men had as great desire to imitate the
best as the worst) vpon due and mture deliberation, established
and planted in it selfe, and for the good it findes therein,
without any desire of change or alteration, hitherto continued?
4. It could not but bee a thing praiseworthy and goodly, if as
there is one Law for prediall tithes, the whole land thorough|out,
so there might bee likewise for personall tithes.
5. It is a rate so small, a pay so tollerable, for the people, (
yet where the parish is any thing populous, reasonably compe|tent
for the minister also) that a lesser or easier cannot with
any reason or equitie bee desired. For it is nothing so much as

either the husbandman dooth vsually pay, or as the trades|man
 artificer some yeares otherwise, of right ought to pay.
6. Seeing it cannot bee denied, but that by meanes thereof,
the ministers of London liue in very good  Scholer-like sorte,
in so much that (to the praise thereof bee it spoken) There is not
a poore and needy minister among them: The people also seeing
thereby their ministerie to bee good, and the Gospell to flourish
among them, yeeld it with greate contentation; what haue the
ministers of the places, townes and Cities speciallie, offen|ded,
that they may not bee as well prouided for as they of Lon|don?
Are not their labours and studies as deare vnto them? Are
they not Pastours in the same Church, and members of the
same kingdome? Or what haue the people of other places,
(townes and Cities specially) committed, that they also should
not bee as duely prouided for of a good ministerie, and of able
teachers, as they of London? Are they not members of the same
Church and kingdome,1. Sam. 2. 36  their soules redeemed with the same
price?Math. 9. 36. but that the one as if they were the ofspring of Eli, should
bee faine to crouch for a peece of siluer,Amos. 8. 11. and a morsel of bread? and the
other like the people of our Sauiours time (but none taking
compassion vpon them) should bee left dispersed and scattered
abroad to seeke here and there for the word of God, as sheep hauing
no sheepheard?
7. If that course planted in London so long time since, euen in
time of Poperie, while yet the Law for personall tithes stood in
his greatest strength, and the offerings  other deuotions of the
people to the Church were 7, I might say infinite times more
then now they are, was found euen then to bee most necessarie
and fit for both sides, to bee a meanes of great agreement and
content betwixt the people  Pastour, and more beneficiall for
the Church it selfe, beeing at a certaine composition, then the vn|certaintie
of those tithes: No man is able to shew any reason why
now, the statute for personall tithes beeing very weake and vn|sufficient,
the deuotion and offerings of the people beeing come
as it were to nothing, such a compsition and certaintie should not
be fittest and most necessarie the whole land ouer.
8. Last of all, Imagine the Londoners did deale at this pre|sent
with their ministers as the tradesmen  artificers of many
places doe, that is, did yeeld vnto the minister, but two pence

a  at Easter, and if any thing ouer, yet but what them|selues
lift, no certaintie, lesse for his whole yeares labours, and
for all dueties commonly, then the country minister, besides
his gleebe,Aquilanon cpit muscas. and besides his great and smaller tithes, receiueth
for his Ester booke onely; is it probable, or is it possible, there
would notwithstanding be in London, as many learned and wor|thy
preachers as now there are of the Gospel of Christ, and the
preaching of the word flourish and abound therein as now it
doth? no man I thinke will be so sencelesse as so to conceiue
and affirme; for vi cadauer, bi aquilae. Why then? is it not ea|sie
for men to conceiue, If they will not be blin, how expedient it
were for other places to be prouided for, as it is? and how dange|rous
and hurtfull for them that they be not?
The onely thing that I see can here against be obiected,Obiection. is;
The state and condition of other places, is not like vnto the
Cittie of London. And why? Because in London there is no
meanes in the world, in diuers of their parishes (personall tithes
being not paid by Computation) how to raise any maintenance,
but by the house: but in other places there are some prediall
tithes, or other kind of personall tithes, which are and easily may
be paid in their kinde.
1 This helpe and augmentation is but in some places only.Answere.
For diuers places there are, where the state of the Citie of London
and of them in this respect, is all one.
2 Though in some places, there are more prediall tithes
then in London, yet the parishes being not so populous, nor the
rent of houses so great by a great deale, the personall tithes
(though rated according vnto London) must needs be lesse: and
so the maintenance, one thing considered with another, not
much different.
3 Be it (as in some countrie market townes) that in some
places, there are some prediall, or other personall tithes to be
paide in kinde; yet doth it therefore follow, that tradesmen,
artificers, c. of such places must goe free, and bee exempted
from maintenance of their ministers? Surely that cannot
bee but an open iniurie, an apparant sinne. For what is this
but to liue by the sweat of other mens browes? an iniury to
to their coparishners. And how hath the minister a part of all a
mans goods? And what doth he in this case but take wages of one, to

do another seruice? or rather being duely and well pay 
of his parishioners (the husbandmen) serue the other, the trades|men
for nought? or of some part of goods, bee derauded of
other sortes? And so whereas his liuing might be sufficient and
good, if all did their dutie, now the greatest number withdraw|ing,
it is very sparing and little. A double iniurie to the mi|nister.
Some also may happely obiect,2. Obiect. That in diuers places, they
bee already rated by the house, though not in proportion as
London.
But those rates,Answ. (the times considered, the auailes of the
Churche then and now compared) are commonly so small and
vnreasonable, that they can with no equitie, reason  conscience
bee accounted indifferent  fit to stand. See for this more, pag
129. 130.  131. in the title of Customes.


CHAP. IX.

Sheweth, how dangerous and vnprofitable vnto men euen in respect of
their outward and temporall estates it is, to bee illiberall and ouer|sparing
to their ministers. And on the other side how gratefull to
God, how profitable and gainefull to themselues, to bee liberall and
bountifull towards them.


Vers. 7.
For whatsoeuer a man soweth, that also shall he reape.

THis later clause of this 7. Vers. (as I noted in the beginning)
is a confirmation of the former clause and doctrine, by an
Argument or reason taken ab euentu, from the good or euil
euent, and successe, which shall  will (whether men will or no)
follow of mens actions, good or euill, equall or vnequall, in this
behalfe.
The words may diuersly bee taken. For they may bee refer|red,
either to the qualitie of things, as they are commonly read,
whatsoeuer a man soweth, that also shall he reape: or to the quantitie,
as of some they are expounded, as a man soweth, so shall hee reape.
The former sense intendeth, that forsomuch as it is a thing both

natull and ordinarie, That a man reap such corne as hee dooth
sowe; therefore if any doo employe his goods to this so good 
necessarie an vse, viz. the Maintenance of the Minister, hee shall
reap good fruite thereof accordingly, that is spirituall thinges.
But that whosoeuer refuseth to doo, and employeth his goods
onely about prophane  worldly matters, hee shall reape there|after:
if any, onely worldly commodities. So our Apostle see|meth
to explicate his meaning in the next verse, where he saith:
for he that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption: but hee
that sowth to the spirite, shall of the spirite reape life euerlasting. For,
to sow vnto the flesh is to prouide for the necessaries or pleasu|res
of this present life, no respect had of the life to come. That
whoso dooth, shal reape that which he dooth sowe, that is, that
which will soone be lost, perish  consume; happely besides and
withal, shame  confusion. On the other side, the spirite beeing
here taken for the spirituall life, to sow vnto the spirite is to res|pect
heauen more then earth, the kingdome of God more then
the riches of this world,  therevpon so to order our life, that we
may aspire to the kingdome of heauen, and so to employ our
goods, that they may further vs therein, by procuring vnto vs,
by  with them those things that perteine to pietie  religion:
not sparing these transitorie goods, so as by them, wee may get
vnto vs spiritual, heauenly,  neuer fading treasures.
Hence thence wee learne first, if wee lay out our goods vpon
worldly things, to buy vs houses, lands and possessions here on
earth, to procure vs wealth and treasures of this life, or which is
worse, to maintaine  increase our pleasures  delights: such as
wee seeke we shal finde, as we sow we shal reape, that is, at the best
hand, such treasures  riches as rust  moath will consume, as
thieues may breake in  steale from vs: such as time it selfe will
take from vs, or vs from them. For, all these things how dearly
soeuer they are bought, how farre soeuer they are sought, how
carefully soeuer they are kept, yet doo, must, and will turne to
corruption. And then what auaileth all the labour and toile that
wee haue taken, all the costes  charges wee haue spent, all the
time and trauell wee haue bestowed, in getting to vs such things
as will consume and come to nothing, as will be gone euen as
soone as they bee gotten,  such as wee can by no meanes cary
hence withv?Mat. 16. 26. Specially what profiteth it a man, if hee win the whole

world and lose his owne soule? what helpeth it if our barnes be full,
our storehouses full, our cellars full, our coffers full, and so full
that wee can scarce tell wher bestow more, if that voice once
sound in our eares, Thou foole this Night shall they fetch thy soule
awaie from thee, and then whose shall all these thinges bee which thou
hast gathered? I denie not, but that there is a moderate care,  a
lawfull seeking after these things to be permitted and vsed: but
beware we, that this bee not either our onely, or our chiefest
care. For the end will surely then bee corruption, and not cor|ruption
onely, but (as some translate the word in this place) in|teritum,
destruction, perdition too. Where these things are
so sought, that true treasures are wholly neglected, and on these
our wealth  substance is so employed, that little or nothing is
bestowed on heauenly things, the returne, the haruest, must
needs bee thereafter, that is, want of what wee most need,  losse
of that we should chiefly haue found.
2. Then secondly on th'other side, if wee lay out our goods
on spirituall vses, for furtherance of religion, Maintenance of the
Ministerie, to haue the Gospell preached, c. then, as hee that
soweth wheat, shal reape wheat:  he that pla~teth good trees, shal
haue good fruite: so he that employeth his goods to so good,
holy  heauenly vses, shal reap,  receiue, accordingly, increase
of knowledge, furtherance in religion,  finally by the good vse and
plentifull benefit of those things, which by his worldly goods
he hath so procured, eternall life. Maruaile not at this. For these
things follow by a necessarie consequent one vpon another.
Wee cannot be saued but by faith, we cannot haue faith without
preaching, we can not haue preaching without maintenance for
preachers: If therefore our goods doo yeeld vs the one, we may
say, That by our goods wee attaine the other. Wisedome is not
to be bought for mony, nor (properly to speake) to be obteined
for much gold. Iob. 28. 15. Gold shal not be giuen for it, neither shal
siluer be weighed for the price thereof. It shall not be vlued with the
wedg of gold of Ophir, nor with the precious Onix, c. Yet seeing God
dooth al things by meanes. 2. Sam. 14 14. Experience doth shew,
That mony and goods doo vsually procure learning, learning
breedeth knowledge, knowledge causeth vnderstanding and
so oftentimes thorough knowledge and learning procured by
mony as by meanes, wisedome it sefe is attained. So, saluation.

eternall life is the gift of God thorough Iesus Christ our Lord: Rom. 6. 23. and is not to bee atteined of our selues, nor to be obteined
with mony, nor any this worldes goods: yet seeing God doth
giue his gifts by meanes, seeing maintenance may procure prea|ching,
preaching knowledge, knowledge faith, and the end of our
faith is the saluation of our soules, 1. Pet. 1. 9. true it is also, that by
the good employment of our transitorie goods, wee may (as
our Apostle here vseth the Phrase) reape at length life euerlasting.
It is not that goods properly which causeth this, but the
preaching of the word, the publishing of the Gospell, which
(seeing they by whom it must be preached and published vnto,
bee men and not Angels; and must liue, not like Chameeo,
by the aire, but as men with ordinarie maintenance) hardly can
bee had without the laying out of our goods. And therefore as
Cornelius,Act. 10. beeing told that S. Peter should come and speake to
him, wordes whereby hee and all his house should bee saued: knew full
well, that hee could not haue Peter to speake those words vnto
him, vnlesse hee would send for Peter, receiue him,  entertaine
him; (which hee did ioyfully and liberallie) so in vaine it is for
vs to looke to haue the Gospell published, the word of God
preached, the way of saluation opened among vs, vnlesse wee
will with our goods entertaine those by whom it may and should
bee done, not standing vpon the charge, so wee may haue the
thing.
Looke now which is the best employment. Wee see the fruite
of the one and of the other. What wee lay out vpon worldly
vses, yeelds vs at the most, but worldly profit: which of it selfe
in time, will turne to corruption; happely (which is worse) to
destruction, to shame and confusion. What wee laie out vpon
religious vses, will yeeld vs at the least, the vse of religion, of the
Gospell, of heauenly things among vs; happely (which is chie|fest
of all) euerlasting comfort, and eternall life. For the word
taught, as seed sowen, is seldome without good fruite, but taketh
firme roote in some.
Why then, Seeing wee will not spare to lay out much, to get
thereby only a little worldly benefit, should we bee sparing and
loth to lay out but a little, to get vs great store of spirituall and
heauenly goods? As God hath allowed vs sixe daies for our
owne labours, for worldly works and busines, and requireth but

the seuenth, for his seruice, and our spiritual vses: so is he content
that of our goods, we imploy nine parts for earthly purposes,
for worldly vses, and looketh onely that the tenth part, his owne
portion, as the crop and chiefe of our substance, be employed
to his honour and our owne good. If this we refuse, and (as if we
were all body and no soule, had hope onely of this life, and none
of that to come, or cared altogether for this earth, and dspsed
heauen) will imploy all our goods wholly and solely vpon the
world, for earthly profit, shall we not shew our selues too vn|mindefull
of heauen, vngratefull to God, and 
to our soules? And shall not the fault bee onely ours, if wee be
left without teaching, without instruction, and consequent|lie
without saluation? (For where Prophecie faileth, the people pe|rish.
Prouerb. 29. 18.) seeing Wee refuse to entertaine such as
should teach vs, and count the cost and charge thereof (as we
tearme it) better saued? It will goe hard with vs at the last day,
the day of reckoning, when euery man must giue account of
the employment of all his goods, if we shall aunswere, that we
haue employed all vpon prophane and worldly vses. And if,
being to giue a reason, why wee wanted the Gospel and liued
without preaching, destitute of knowledge and vnderstan|ding,
wee bee inforced whether wee will or no (for then
truth must be vttered, dissembling will take no place, preten|ses
and vaine excuses will not serue, for God will not be moc|ked
and deluded) we be inforced I say, to testifie with our
owne mouthes, It was, Because wee refused to imploy our goods to
any such vses. Let vs not therefore be deceiued, for what a man so|weth,
that, onely that, shall he also reape. And hitherto of the for|mer
sense.
2 Let vs likewise consider of the other sense of the wordes:
which respecteth the quantitie, and intendeth, that as a man
soweth, either sparingly or liberally, so shall he reap. He that so|weth
sparingly, shall reap sparingly; but he that soweth plenti|fully,
shall reap plentifullie; signifying that benefits are not in
vaine bestowed vpon the ministers of the Gospel, for they shall
returne with greater fruit, euen of worldly increase. For euen
as the husbandman that soweth his seed in the field, doth at har|uest
receiue the same with great increase: So they that be libe|rall
of their goods vnto the preachers of the Gospel, and mini|sters

of the word, shall at length receiue fruite thereof, viz.
Gods blessing and increase vpon them euen in temporall
things: Whereas contrariwise, they which, thinking all to
be lost, and as it were so much cast away, that the minister hath
from them, and themselues to be impouerished and hindred by
impartig to them of their goods, are therefore sparing and
cruell vnto them, shal in steed of plentie finde scarsitie, and reape
according to their deserts and doings, penury and want. And
to this sense seeme our Apostles words, verse. 9. best to agree,
where ioyning this particular doctrine of the ministers mainte|nance
with other more generall, he concludeth them all in this
sort; Let vs not be weary of well doing: for in due time we shal reap, if we
faint not. As it were intimating, That whereas men are loth many
times to lay out their goods on necessary and spirituall vses,
for feare least so themselues should want, that indeed such laying
out is the very direct way, to make the same increase, because it is
as the casting of seed into the ground; which, as nature and ex|perience
daily teacheth, doth and will returne with great profit,
and increase.
This sense if we follow (as some expositors doe, and indeede
it agreeth very well with the Scriptures otherwhere) the wordes
doe yeeld a twofould reason or cause why to be liberall and
not sparing this way: and that is in regard o the euent that will
follow vpon it, euen concerning our temporall estate, namely
penury and want, if we be sparing and niggardly: 2. plenty and
aboundance if we be liberall. I wil speak somewhat of each euent
seerally.
The metaphor or similitude, it selfe, of sowing and reaping,
which the Apostle in this place vseth, importeth thus much,
that as naturally he that soweth but little can reap but little, so
he that to this vse, viz. the seruice of God, the maintenance of
the minister, bestoweth but little, shall thriue thereafter. Here|unto
agreeth that which we read. Mal. 1. 13. You haue offered that
which was torne and the lame and the sicke: should I accept this at your
hands aith the Lord? But cursed be he which hath in his stocke a male,
and voweth and sacrificeth vnto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a
great king, saith the Lord of hosts, and my name is terrible among the
heathen. In which words all they are condemned, that offer to
God, they care not what: any thing is good enough. And the pro|phet

tells them that they procure themselues by so doing the
curse of God; as also is more plainly declared; Cap. 3. 8. where a|gaine
thus the Lord expostuateth with his people: Will a man
spoile his Gods? Yet haue ye spoyled mee. But ye say Where in haue we
spoyled thee? and he answeres in tithes and offerings. And it follows,
Therfore are yee cursed with a curse, for yee haue spoyled me, euen
the whole nation. Verse. 5. of the same Chap. there is an heauy
commination against such as keepe backe the wages of the
hireling. I will (saith God) come neere to you to iudgement, and I
wil be a shift witnes against those which wrongfully keep backe the hire|lings
wages. It is grounded vpo~ the law of God. Leu. 19. 13. Deu. 24.
14. 15. The words indeede are spoken in a more large and gene|rall
sense then this in question: but seeing that Luk. 10 7. 1. Tim.
5. 18 and Num. 18. 21. the pay and maintenance of the minister
is called his hire and wages, that generall including all particu|lars,
may well, without any wronge to the text, be applied to
this purpose.
Now as God threatning a curse may seeme to allude to his
owne law, where pronouncing cures, they are such as con|cerne
mens outward estates, according to the expresse wordes
thereof Deut. 28. 16. totu, Leuit. 26. and other where in sundry
places: So what speciall curse and kinde of punishment in this
place, he doth meane (in hope such may credit others, as hap|pely
will suspect my iudgement) let S. HieromeHierom. shew it who wri|ting
vpon that place of Mal. before alledged. C. 3. 8. doth in the
person of God paraphrastically explane it thus? For that yee haue
not paid me mine offerings, therefore in fmine and penurie ye are
accursed, and me haue yee deceiued and defrauded. Behold the
yeare is compleat and ended, and nothing is brought into my
treasuries, but all into your owne storehouses: and therefore for
the tenths and first fruites, which had beene but a small matter
for you to haue giuen me, You haue lost all the plentie of your osss|sions,
and the abundance of your fruites. But that you may know,
that this is done by me in mine anger, because yee haue defrau|ded
me of my part, I exhort and admonish you, that hence|foorth
yee pay me that which is mine,  then will I restore vnto
you that which is yours: that is, the other 9 parts which, as S.
Aug. obserues,Augst. God doth ofte~ take away from them that refuse to

pay to God his tenth: his words be plaine, Serm. de temp. 219.
Quid auid supputas? Nouem tibi partes retractae sunt, quia decima
dare oluisti.August. Whereupon dost thou greedily reckon? The nine
parts are taken from thee, because thou woudest not pay the
tnth. For, (as he saith a little after) This is the Lords
most iust custome, that if thou wilt not giue him his tenth
parte, thou shalt bee reuoked or brought to a tenth. What hee
meaneth by that speech sheweth Aacensis. tract.  dec. where
citing the said sentence of S. Augustine,Aiacens. he expoundeth it thus:
ad dc. ruocaberis, id est, nouem partes amittes. Thou shalt be re|uoked
to the tenth, that is, Thou shalt loose thy nine parts. An
easie thing with God, if a man withhold from him his tenth, to
make him, in steede of gaining a tenth part (which he seekes to
gaine by keeping it from the minister) to leese ten times as much
another way. Also in the Glosse vpon the decrees, Cap. Maiores,
16. q. 17. S. August. is cited, as saying, that Therfore now a daies there
are so often tempestes and sterilities of Sea and Lande, dearth of victu|alls,
mortalities and fmines, because people doe not pay to God
their Tenthes. And in the sermon before alleadged hee saith
directly; What wouldest thou doe, if taking to himselfe the
nine parts, God had left thee but the tenth? which surely is
euen now done, when as the blessing of the raine being with|held,
thy hungry haruest faileth, and either the haile hath smit|ten,
or the frost hath scorched thy vintage. And let vs
not thinke but that this reacheth farther then to the hus|bandman;
vnlesse we suppose with the heathen Syrians, That
our God is if the God of the mountaines,1. Reg. 20. 23 and not of the vallies, of the
land, and not of the sea.
Vnto these two Fathers, I will adioyne the words and de|termination
of two auncient Councels, and so the iudgement
of many Fathers at once. The one is Concil.Concil. Tribur.Tribur. which Cap.
1. bringeth in God, speaking thus: Da mihi deimam, c. Giue
me my tenth. If thou wilt not giue mee my tenth, I will take
away thy nine. If thou wilt giue mee my tenth, I will multiplie thy
nine. The other is Synod.Synod. Arelat.Arelat. 4. Cap. 9. which affirmeth
that No man can can giue acceptable  of the rest, vnlesse first
he separate the tenth vnto the Lorde. Which (saith that Coun|cell)
hee hath appointed or reserued for himselfe from the begin|ning;
and that many grudging to pay that tenth, are therefore oft

brought to a tenth parte. According wherevnto it hath beene long
since held for a case of conscience among the Canonistes very
cleare;Ioan. An|drad.  Ho|stien. in C. propter st|ril. de Locat. C. That a man not prospering vpon a liuing which he rents,
if it bee found that hee hath not vsed to paie his tithes well, his land|Lord
is not bound in conscience to abate him his rent; because it
is to be presumed, That because he paieth his tithes no better, God
doth punish him, and will not suffer him to prosper. And the like
sense and notice seemeth at this day to rest,Reuertim. 16. q. 1. Pe|rus. lib. 6. de Decim. cap. 1. c. as receiued by tra|dition
from former times, in the hartes and minds of many of
our owne country people, husbandmen, who are found to make
such conscience of paying their Tithes, which they very aptly
and truelie call Gods part, that they thinke they should not pros|per
(as men that haue robbed God himselfe) in the rest of their
goods. Which part of godly feare beeing wiped out of the
mindes of others, makes them many times to defile their hands
with this sinne without remorse:  to vndoe  ouerthrow them|selues
without any notice of the true cause thereof.
Now hauing spoken thus much of the disprofit  hurte that
ariseth in defrauding the minister of his due, in communicating
to him our of goods sparingly, it is easie to gather on the other
side, that by conseq. If for illiberalitie and ill dealing, men bee
punished, that for Liberalitie and vpright dealing in this kinde,
men are blessed of God. For first generallie, That God doth 
will blesse them that keep his commaundements  ordinances,
is a thing so out of all question, that it were monstrous impietie
to doubt of it. And this beeing a principall commaundement,
appertayning to the first table, Gods owne immediate worship,
it must needs bee likewise, that the greater blessings doo attend
vpon it. For God hath sayd, Them that honour mee, I will honour: 
they that despise me. shal be despised. 1. Sam. 2. 30. Then for the par|ticular,
we haue God himselfe the giuer of all blessings, speaking
thus, Mal. 3. 10. Bring ye al the tithes into the storehouse, that ther may
bee meat in my house. And proue me now therewith saith the Lorde of
hoastes, if I will not open the windowes of heauen vnto you, and poure
you out a blessing without measure. And I will rebuke the deuoure
for your sakes, and hee shall not destroie the fruite of your ground: neither
shall the vine bee barren in the field, saith the Lord of . To
this accordeth Salomon, Prouerb. 3. 9. where he saith: Honour the
Lorde with thy riches, and with the first fruits of all thine increase. So

shall thy Barnes bee filled with abundance, and thy presses bust with
new wine. Neither are the words of the imitatour of Salomon, I
meane Iesus the sonne of Syrach, in this case vnworthy to bee re|cited,
who Ecclesiasticus. 35. 6. hath thus: The offering of the right|eous
maketh the altar fat, and the smell therof is sweet before the Lorde.
Giue the Lorde his honour with a good and liberall eie,  diminish not
the first fruits of thine hands. In all thy gifts shew aisifull countenance;
and dedicate thy tithes with gladnes. Giue vnto the most highe accor|ding
as hee hath enriched thee; and looke what thine hand is able, giue
with a cherefull eie: for the Lord recompenseth it, and will giue 7. times
as much. To these, forsomuch as the Temple and ministerie of
the Temple bee Connexa, wee may adde that of the Prophet
Haggai, cap. 2. 19. Consider I praie you in your minds, from this daie
and afore from the 24. daie of the 9. moneth, euen from this daie that
the foundation of the Lords temple was laid. Consider it I saie in your
minds: Is the seed yet in the Barne, as yet the vine and the fig-tree, 
the Pomgranate and the oliue tree hath not brought foorth. From this
daie I will blesse you, viz. with all kinde of plentie,  abundaunce
of wealth and riches.
But what are these to vs? These things were spoken to the
Iewes,Obiect. and of their times. Answ.
Yes,Answ. they perteine to vs also; for God is no chaungeling.
As they shew vs how hee would blesse his owne people, if they
did mainteine his priests and Leuits as hee appointed: so, seeing
God respecteth his ministers now no lesse then in those times,
they doo also shew, That hee will blesse vs too, if wee doo
mainteine them, as hee hath appointed. The one is a seruice
and sacrifice no lesse acceptable vnto him then the other, as our
Apostle also sheweth most excellentlie in the last Chap. to the
Philip. V. 10. Now I reioice in the Lorde greatlie, that now at the
last, yee are reuiued againe to care for mee. Yee haue done well that
yee did communicate vnto mine affliction. Not that I desire a gift, but
I desire the fruite which maie further your reckning. Now I haue re|ceiued
all and haue plentie. I was euen filled, after that I had receiued
of Epaphroditus that which came from you, an odour that smelleth
sweet, a Sacrifice acceptable and pleasant vnto God. And my God shall
fulfill all your necessities thorough his riches in Christ Iesus, c.
See what words of affection are here. what commendation of
this dutie our Apostle giueth. It is a sacrifice acceptable  pleasant

to God: he reioiceth at it: he desireth it not so much for his owne
need, though hee were in necessitie, as for their riches: that by
it their accounte might bee augmented: and for it, God (as hee
assureth them) would fulfill all their necessities. Syrach saith, God
will recompense it 7. fold. Salomon assureth that so thy barnes shalbee
filled: and the presses euen burst with abundance. And God himselfe
saith: if they would but prooue him vpon this point, they
should see how hee would open the windowes of heauen, and poure
downe blessings: that hee would rebuke the Deuourer, and make their
land to bee a pleasant land, c. What words might God haue vsed
rather then these, to perswade vs in this point, to stop their
mouthes and answere all them, that account the mainteance of
the minister to bee a matter of charge, and themselues to bee
empouerished thereby? Hee will haue vs to know, that he doth
recompense it cum foenore with aduantage; and that it is a surer
way to make a man rich, then the imployment of it in any other
course.Gen. 39. Potiphars house  all that hee had was blessed for Iosephs
sake:2. Sam. 6. 12. The house of Obed Edom because of the Arke: and the
wydowes store by reason of Elias. Euen so men are blessed, bet|tered,
and enriched: not beggered,1. Reg. 17. hindered or impouerished
by the minister of God, when hee is mainteined as hee should bee.
God deales with men in this case as husbandmen with their
grounds. The ground which of it selfe is fertile,  yeelds them
most store, they toile and keep best, they plant and sow most,
that it may the better yeeld them increase: And God, those
that shew themselues most thankefull vnto him, by paying
duelie his part, most louing vnto, and carefull for their mini|sters,
by mainteining them aright, hee doth most blesse: ma|keth
their stoare most increase, and their labour best to prosper,
that so they may bee more and more able to doo their dutie, and
further religion.
1. The godly Iewes beleeued thus: in consideration whereof
they vsed of old, to call their Tithes Diuitiarum Sepem, the hedge
of their riches;See the sense  vse of this Phrase, Iob. 1. 9. as which did fense and preserue in safetie their,
together with Gods part. Rab. Aq. in Pirt-Aboth.
They taught it (as wee haue already seene) for doctrine cur|rant
and worthy beleefe, That The Lord dooth recompence this kind
of Lieralitie,  (will giue for it 7. times asmuch, Ecclesiasticus, 35.
7. That thereby their barnes should bee filled with abundance, and

their presses run ouer with new wine.Phil. Iud. lib. de praem. Sa|cerd.  hon. Alae (gentes) gmeates  coactae vix tadem confe|runt, peroae quaestores cu pestem publi|cam, nunc has nu~c illas causas fin, endo, e+ad praesitutu~, tempus tribu|ta repraesen|tent. At haec gens Sacerdo|tib. debiam pecuniam libe~s gaudensque depromit, quasi no~ daret sed accipert, addes faustas ominationes  gratiar. ac|tiones popula|riter, idque quotannis, nec viris cessantib. nec mulierib. sed alacritte spontanea, quanta nullis verbis exprimi potest, confe|rentibus. Prouerb. 3. 9.
And vpon assurance and perswasion thereof vsed to pay their
tithes, and other accustomed duties, not as our people often
doo, with murmuring and grudging, sparingly  fraudulentlie,
as if they counted all lost that went that waye: but cheerefully
and gladly, liberallie  most iustlie, as if they accounted them|selues
to receiue not to yeeld a benefit: and to bee beholding to
the Leuits and priests that they did vouchsafe to accept at their
hands such oblations, c.
2. The deuouter sorte of the heathen thought thus, as with|nesseth
Diod. Sic. lib. 5. cap. 2. Biblith. who saith, that many of
the Rmanes vowed  payd their Tithes to Hercules: postea for|tunatiores
facti,  afterward became the wealthier: and that the
Custome of paying Tithes began of this, That some of the hea|then
Gods had told and promised, that whoso would offer vnto
them the tithes of all their goods, should haue a happie life,  great in|crease
of wealth: which the heathen people beleeuing to bee true,
did obserue such payment.
3. That this was also the faith and perswasion of the godly
Christians in auncient times, is very manifest by their Testimo|nies,
 their practise. For S. August. saith expressely: Our fore|fathers
therfore abounded in all kinde of wealth and plentie, be|cause
they duely payd to God his tithes, and to Caesar his tribute.
And a little after in the same place, in the person of God, he spea|keth
thus: what? wouldest thou put out thy goods to increase?
wilt thow lay out little, and receiue for it more? Behold, Giue
to mee then saith the Lord: I doo receiue little, and giue for it
more. And otherwhere. O homines stulti, c. O men vnwise,
what hurte doth God commaunde, (in demaunding the tenth)
that hee should not deserue to bee hearde? Thou giuest not
this gratis,August. Hom. 48. Serm. de temp. 219. de Decim. Prou. 3. 9. Exod. 30. 12 Conc. Trib. cap 13 which thou shalt receiue againe with great interest.
And a few lines following: Loe, Thou hast in the holy scriptures
warrant from the Lord himselfe, by which hee hath promised
thee, that If thou wilt giue him thy Tithes, thou shalt receiue
not only aboundance of fruites, but also health of body. Thy
barnes (saith the scripture) shallbee filled with corne, and
thy presses flow ouer with wine. And, There shall not be among
them any plague nor infirmitie. The Councell of Tribur. (as
you heard before) supposeth God to say thus vnto vs; Da mihi

decima~, c. Giue mee the tenth: If thou giue mee the tenth, I will mul|tiply
to thee the nine parts:  againe Si ergo quaerat aliquis, Cur deci
dantur? Sciat . If any therefore doe make a question, why tithes
are to be paid? Let him know that therfore they are to be giuen, that
by such deuotion God being pacified, may more largely afford vs those thing
that be necessarie. c.
It may appeare also by their practise, in that they did so gene|rally
euery where, all Christendome ouer, giue vp and establish to
the Church their tithes both Predial and personall, 2. continue their
oblations, and 3. bestowe vpon the Church sundry endowments
of lands  possessions, c. which how might it be they could possi|bly
in so generall, vniforme, large and liberall manner and measure
euer haue been induced vnto, had it not been, that they hel  belie|ued
this as a truth most certaine  vndoubted, That being liberall to
God and his ministers, they should procure God to be liberall vnto them: by
dealing fauourably and vprightly with the one, they should obtaine fauour
blessing and prosperitie of the other?
Now as the very heathen, the godly Iewes, and the auncient and
most religious Christians beleeued this to be true, viz. That by pay|ing
to God their tithes, and honoring him liberally with their goods, and by
consequence, by maintaining the minister of God in good and liberall sort,
they were not the poorer, but the richer, they did not hinder themselues, but
made themselues to prosper: So must we beleeue also, vnlesse we do or
will imagine, that they all were foolishly deceiued,  did they knew
not what, or (which God forbid) thinke that God in making such
promises and offers of blessings, and happines, doth but feed  de|ceiue
vs with vain words, but draw vs on with friuolous allureme~ts
to hinder  vndo our selues. But Be not we deceiued. God neither will
be mockt with in this matter at our hands, nor doth he mocke 
delude vs: what he promiseth he will make good. He hath wel wher|withall
to doe it. If we sowe plentifully, we shall reape plentifully.
God (saith S. Aug.) is alwaies ready to do vs good but he is oft stayed
fro~ doing it,S. August. through the malice  wickednes of men, who wil haue
the Lord God to giue them all things, and yet they will not (of that
they haue) offer or giue to him any thing againe. Heereof let men
conside well. Seria res agitur. It is a matter of importance that is in
hand:  such as concernes euery man very much. Hereby shall al be
tryed. I know that men do now adaies respect profit and gaines not
a little: and will not deny, but, that (as the world now goes) men
had need to vse any good course they may, to saue and spare, to get

and increase their goods. But let men be aduised, that in this matter
they run not a wrong course, and whereby they think to saue a little,
they leese much:  fearing to lay out any thing, they gaine nothing.
In no case more then in this, is that fulfilled which Salomon hath,
Prouerb. 11. 24. There is that scattereth, and is the more increased:
but he that spareth more then is right, surly commeth to pouertie. And
ponder aright, whether of the two they ought to beleeue; Humane
and carnall imaginations that suppose men are hindred, or God that
saith they are enriched thereby: mens vaine fantasie, that say it is a
burthen, a charge, a very beggering of the place, to maintaine
the minister liberally, or Gods word that teacheth, it is a benefit, the
way to riches, the direct meanes to get aboundance, wealth,  pro|speritie:
worldly  couetous motions which insinuate, that to haue
lesse teaching, and preaching, lesse exercise of religion is most for
their profit, and best for the place, or Christ himselfe which testifi|eth
and assureth vs, that if we seeke the kingdome of God, which is there
principally found, where the preaching of the word is most plenti|full,
all these things, these outward, transitorie  worldly things which
serue for this present life onely, shall bee added and as it were were ex|abundanti,
throwne in vnto vs, and come vnlooked for.


CHAP. X.

Comprehendeth, The summe and conclusion of the whole discourse. And
declareth some motiues that haue put the Authour in hope, that his
labour shal not be without some good effect: which God for his Gospels
sake vouchsafe. Amen.

NOw haue I through Gods Asista~ce, broght to an end the expli|cation
of this parcell of scripture that teacheth al men the wil
 rule of God, touching the ordinarie maintenance of the ministers of
his Church. In handling whereof I haue somewhat at large (and yet
not so largely as vpon many occasions I might) declared the parti|culars
therof in such sort and maner as at the first I purposed them,
and the scope whereunto I haue had respect, did require: And haue
plainly prooued by apparant reasons,The sum of the whol treatise. euidence of the word of God,
the iudgement of the Fathers, and pactise of al times, That the mini|ster
of God to the end he may be enabled and not discouraged in his Minist|ry,
ought to haue such maintainance, allotted  assured him as is liberal 
sufficient, and the same certaine not voluntarie: that so he may as well know,
what to receiue for his maintenance as to doe and performe for his office. To

this, euery one that is a hearer of the word, must for his part, without re|spect
what others doe, according as God hath enabled him yeeld and contri|bute,
out of such goods in general, and out of all such goods in speciall, as God
hath blest him with with. Wherein no vaine pretenses, no idle excuses can
take place, for God will not be mocked. This being Gods rule and measure,
that what a man soweth, that also shall he reape.
Touching the practise of this doctrine, He that reades aduisedly
what I haue written, shall plainly perceiue, That the auncient and v|suall
practise of our Church was agreeable hereunto. For so long as our
Ministery enioyed wholly her endowments, her offerings and her
tithes: in a word so long as there were in the land none other
then Rectories so long as each sort of Tithes Personal as well as
Predial were duely paid vnto the Church: so long our ministers
could not but be condignely mainteined. From which looke how
farre the estate of our ministery at this present is declined, so farre
doe we come short of the due and right practise of this doctirne.
The principall cause that hath moued me to handle this argu|ment,
hath beene the loue I beare vnto the Church of God, and fer|uent
desire I haue to see the Ministerie thereof in our land at length
to flourish, or at least to be competentlie prouided for,  redeemed from
that seruile condition, needines  conte~pt, wherein a great part the|reof
doth dwel. The sight and notion wherof cannot but moue the
harts of all such as sincerely loue learning and religion, to lament
it,  to desire, and, what in them is, indeuour the redresse thereof.
To bring this throughly to passe, the right and best way is, That
the true, and ancient practize of our Church in this behalfe, which
yet continues (God be praised) in the greatest part of our land, and
in most parishes, might be restored into all, and firmely setled a|gaine
throughout the same.
But of that seeing there is little hope, the next way is, That the
state of our Ministerie for maintenance might be reduced as neere
vnto that best and absolute course, as possibly and conueniently
might be.
How this might be effected, may be perceyued by that I haue
written.
Which I haue published to the world, in hope thereby to occasi|on
such of the lay sorte as are godly minded, of their owne accord,
so farre as lies in the~, to put the same in practise those that be of the
ministerie, better to consider of its estate and miserie,  with mee to
open their mouthes in so good and necessary a cause: Neither am I

altogether without hope that the same may be some motiue and in|ducement
vnto such as be in place of authoritie, to prouide for it by
holesome and effectuall Lawes.
The causes and motiues that haue bred and confirmed in mee this
hope and expectation are these;
1. For the matter handled the whole treatise throughout, I haue
deliuered nothing but the truth, nothing but what is consonant to
the word of God to reason  equitie, and to all auncient and good
practise. For though I dare not assume vnto my selfe (let no man so
vnderstand mee) that euery sentence, euery reason and argument,
euery answere is such: yet for the maine points and more generall
positions themselues, I hold them to bee so agreeable to trueth, 
consonant to reason, that I doubt not to affirme, That therein I
haue spoken nothing but the trueth, nothing but what is agreeable
to reason and equitie: and therefore ought where wee faile to be put
in practise, aswell as where already we are in the right be continued.
2. In regard of the persons who~ it concerneth, namely the mini|sters,
 those not a few, of our Church, the ministers I say of the Gos|pel,
and Preachers of the word of God. Their cause it is that I doo
handle, their greeuances that I doo make knowne. And it semeth vn|to
mee, That seeing there is regard had of men of all other profes|sions,
 vpon due suggestion, conuenient relief  remedies graun|ted
 affoorded from time to time for their wants  distresses, there
is great reason  cause why we should hope, that they also may ob|tein
the like fauour  benefit, the like or greater cause once appea|ring.
For, for my part, I can not, nor will not conceiue so euill of
those thorough whose hands these things must passe, and by whose
meanes principallie this kinde of redresse must come, that they will
be vpright  indifferent to all sorts of persons else,  partiall  hard
vnto the ministers of the Gospell only. Though it be true, that, The
Laytie is alwaies offended with the Cleargie,  ready to hurt them
what they can: yet my perswasion is, that this shalbe found true, but
only in the vulgar sorte of the~:  that the better  worthier sort, spe|cially
they, who are chosen  singled out from all the rest, as men of
an vpright hearte  fearing God, wil shew themselues euery way in|different
to one as wel as to another: and howsoeuer any passion or
affection may sway them this or that waye at home in their priuate
affaires, yet beeing in place where only the Commune Bonum of Ch.
or countrie is to be respected, they will with the heathen man em|ploied
for his common wealth, Simultates deponere, lay aside all grud|ges

 passions,  looke only to that which their place and calling,
equitie and pietie requireth at their hands.
3. The present time: In which, religion being now throughly set|led,
Heresies extirped, Schismes suppressed,  all contentions about
doctrine or discipline wel quieted, also knowledge  learning abou~|ding,
 the vse  necessitie of a learned ministerie more then here|tofore
appearing, that opportunitie is offered to prouide for the ex|ternall
state  good of the Church and ministerie thereof, which in
former times was not to bee had.
4. The present estate of our ministerie, which differing farre from
that some 30. or 40. yeares agoe it was, necessarilie requireth a bet|ter
regard to be had thereof. For then the ministerie was filled vp
with Tag, rag, such as the time would yeeld: Taylers, Weauers, Co|blers,
c. and whosoeuer else but would, was made a priest. Whose
desert commonly was such, That if they had but x. pounds a yeare,
lesse (if their maint. should be proportioned to their merit) was
enough for them. But now (God be thanked) our ministery either
is, or (if due prouision for them were allotted) presently might bee
stoared with able  learned men. And were it not lamentable (what
if I sayd intollerable?) That such men, graduates, Preachers, c.
should be faine to serue, (as oft they doo) like those hedge priests, for
x. pounds a yeare? And that men, hauing spent their friends wealth,
their owne patrimonie, their golden time  best daies, in great and
sundry studies, should be inforced to accept of a peeld Benefice not
worth aboue 20. pounds, or 30. pounds a yeare? Is this condigne
reward for such studies  expenses?  fit maintenance for such men?
Surely in mine eye, it is an indignity so great, That with lesse sin a great
deale might we continue and keepe still those vnworthie men in the ministerie,
then, not prouiding due and competent maint. for them, procure in
these: considering that to contemne and abase them that are worthy
contempt is in it selfe no great fault; but to make them contempti|ble
that deserue honour, and debase them that for their learning 
excellent gifts are worthy double honour and great preferment, can
be no small offence.
5. Whereas the reuerend fathers of our Church haue by their late
Canons prouided, and will no doubt to their vttermost, carefully res|pect
the obseruation thereof, viz. that hencefoorth none be admit|ted
into the ministerie, but such, as in some tollerable measure be fit
therefore; I see not how they can to the full performe this, vntill all
their Churches be duely prouided for, of some tollerable  compe|tent

maintenance which in many 100. Churches is yet wanting: but
must, will they nill they, now  then lay their hands on some vnfit
 vnlearned persons; least else, such poore, ransacked and impayred
Churches be left wholly destitute. Wherfore, it behooues that bet|ter
prouision be made then yet in many places is: til which be done,
the fault  cause in mine opinion is rather to be imputed vnto those
that, rather then they will duely prouide for Churches, will haue
such: then vnto those, that such necessitie compelling, ordeine such
to be in the ministerie.
6. This also doth not a little encourage mee, for that I doo not, as
affecting innouation and singularitie broach any straunge, new, dif|ficult
and vntried course, but (against all such as affect newfangled,
confused and deformed platformes) doo, vrge only A Reducing (and
that but in some measure) where wee haue by corruption of times
digressed, Vnto that course, which alreadie planted in the land, since Po|pery
vnder Popery, and before Poperie, hath continued, in most pla|ces
is still practized, and for the particulars is such,  of such sorte, as
I am assured no reasonable and religious man, but will easily graunt,
that it were to bee wished might in all places bee setled.
7. The things in particular that I intimate to need redresse, are so
few, so reasonable, so necessary,  so easie to be effected and had, that
is to say;
1. An endowment of all Churches; all those Beggerlie stipends that
many where yet doo stand, being wholly remooued  doone away.
2. A larger endowment of some Churches, which hitherto are very
sparely, badly, and vnreasonablie endowed.
3. A mitigation of some vnreasonable, and ouerhard Customes,
prescriptions and Compositions.
4. A due prouision for recouerie of personall tithes, either in kinde
by Computation, or (more likely to be obteined) not in kinde, by
some reasonable  real composition. These things are I say so few,
so reasonable, so necessary, and so easie to bee effected, that verely I
doo hope, few or none will oppose thereagainst.
8. Ad to these the effects and vse of these things, namely the in|crease
and condigne reward of learning, the furtherance of the Gos|pell,
the bettering of our ministerie, the planting of able  worthy
teachers (where now they are most seldome found) in the greatest
congregations, and by consequence, the peoples owne saluation 
eternall good, c. All which, with other like laudable effects can|not
but ensue of the practise hereof, if it were in all places in some

good measure setled. There is great desire pretended at this daie of
a learned ministerie,  not a few doo see, that the greatest  in ma|ner
the only let thereto at this present is want of maintainance. If
the desire thereof be as great and sincere, as the meanes to procure+maint
is ordinarie and easie to be had, the thing desired will with
great facilitie and readines be accomplished.
9. It doth also appeare, that there is great care had,  much desire
expressed, to weed popery out of the land,  reduce the fautors ther|of
into a better course. To which purpose former lawes haue lately
bene much and worthily explained enlarged  corroborated. This
can by no one means better e effected, then by encreasing (by means
of good maintenance) the number of good  able teachers. Where
doe such commo~ly desire to nestle themselues, but in some obscure
and blind places where is little or no preaching? And what Ministers
of our Church doe they more fauour, then such as bee ignorant and
simple? which argues, The more preachers, the fewer papists; The
better Ministerie, the lesse poperie. Light and darknes, preaching
and papistrie will neuer dwell together. So that this is one principall
way indeed Sine vi et Sanguine to root out and expell from among
vs this pestilent religion.
10. Moreouer, I doe see that the performance heereof will tend
much to the credit of the Gospell, and praise of vs that professe it:
as contrariwise the neglect and omission hereof is to the reproach
of the one and shame of the other. For how can it be other then a
reproach and dishonour to our land, that God hauing blest it aboue
other lands with varietie and plentie of all things, yet no small
nu~ber of the ministers of God therein should liue, as if it were some
hungry  barre~ soile, in neede  penurie of al things? that professing
religion and pretending a zeale vnto the Gospel, we should yet hold
in conte~pt  vile account the Ministers of the Gospel?  should suf|fer
them (as hitherto in many places) to liue by the curtesie of the
people, no due maintenence prouided for them? And how can it be
but a reproach  discredit to our towns  Cities, to our trades-me 
artificers (if they could see their owne shame) that whereas the Mini|sters
that liue in the countrie parishes  among husband-men, doe
commonly liue in very good sort, equall with the wealthier of the
place; such as liue in townes and citties, among trades-men, c. liue
commonly in very poore and needie estate, like vnto the poorer
sort: and that among the former, though the parish be not aboue
30. or 40. housholdes, the Minister liues better then among the later,

though the parish be an 100. yea 200. housholdes? On the other side,
would it not be a great praise vnto vs, and singular testimonie of our
sincere zeale vnto the Gospell, if the Ministers thereof were so well
respected, and so duely prouided for, that in euery parish there were
such tollerable maintenance at the least, for the Minister of the
place, prouided and setled, that generally the whole land through,
aswell as in London, it might truely be said, That (vnles it be through
their owne default) There is not one needie and very poore Minister
therein.
These with some other,Phil. Iud. of the leui|ticall priests. which here for very breuities sake I omit,
be the Considerations, which, I oft reuoluing in my minde and pon|dering
vpon, haue wrought in me that hope and expectation before
mentioned. The issue and euent whereof I referre to God alone, in
whose hands are the hearts of all men,Nemo Sa|cerdos tam pauper, quin diues videatur. and whose is the cause I haue
in hand.
The God of all grace, authour and giuer of euery good gift, so
worke in all those that professe the name of Christ, and desire the
prosperitie of his Gospell, by the inward operation of his
holy spirit, That they may alwaies doo those things that
be well pleasing in his sight: and yeeld such Christian 
vnfeined obedience to his holy word  ordinance, as
may be to the edifying of his Church, furtherance
of his Gospel, the good example of others, the
euerlasting comfort of their owne soules, 
aboue all to the eternall praise and
glory of God, the father of our Lord
Iesus Christ. To whome with
the Father and the holy spi|rite
bee all honour and
glorie both now
and for euer.
Amen.
FINIS.






