



A true and exact RELATION OF THE Proceedings of His Majesties ARMY IN Cheshire, Shropshire and Worstershire,
Together With what hath happened to the late Lord Strange now Earl of Derby, before MANCHESTER.
WITH The Resolution of the Town to oppose him; and the number of Men which were slain.
LONDON, Printed for M. Batt. Octob. 5 1642.







Bridgenorth,Octob. 1. 1642.
_OUr Countrey is in a most mise|rable condition, there is no|thing can be expected but a to|tall ruine thereof, except God do miraculously help us with assistance from the Parliament. The Kings Souldiers are altoge|ther bent on mischief, taking, wasting, and spoyl|ing those things we should live by: they do take our Corn unthresht to litter their horses, spoyling that which many a poor creature wants; if any one speak, be it man or woman, either a Pistoll or a Sword is straight set to the party, with many grievous oathes; They know what they do, they are the Kings servants, and will not be limitted of their will: you may judge by this what a case we are in; and for any thing we can perceive, like to be worse; for as long as these out-rages are per|mitted, no question but the Kings Army will en|crease: What with Papists, Atheists, and all de|sperate Russians, they have made Shrewsbury strong, as it is reported to us; many Pieces of Ordnance, 300 Crts laden with Ammunition;



and our County of Shropshire is very much a wed, many wel-affected people withdraw themselves; The Sheriff here hath lately seized certain thou|sands of pounds at our Town of Bridgenorth, in|tended to be sent down Severn lately to Bristoll, by M. Charlton of Aylcy, M. Baker of Hamond, and o|thers: We have many brags here of the Cava|liers,  what victories they have had at Worcester, though we know for certain they are notorious lyes; yet we dare not contradict them; it grieves the soul of every good Christian, to see how His Majestie is misled. We are glad to hear of your constancy to the King and Parliament; our affe|ctions are the same, though we dare not shew it  for all the reports you have heard, you may per|haps understand by the next, that Shropshire is not altogether so malignant as it is reported; fear makes us yeild to many things. I am in haste.
Yours,
T. C.


Chester;  Octob. 1. 1642.
WE are here in great fears; 260 horse loads of Arms are come hither out of the North,  they tell us of 5000 men that wil come out of Lancashire, and the parts adjacent, besides what Cheshire and these parts of Wales will afford: The Lord Cholmley sets out 200 Foot, and 20 Horse. The Lord Grandison, with 200 Horse, hath possest himself of  for the King,



and hath billetted his Troops in the Town; who have since their entrance, plundered divers houses of well-affected men in the Town and Country, which hath put the people round about into such a fear, that many flie from the country to the city,  take houses, and carry their best goods thither; I my self am come this last week to live in Chester, and have left my servants to look to businesse in the Country. Since my coming hither, there were 200 souldiers billetted in our little village, and 13 of them appointed to my house, who, I thank God, departed without doing any more hurt, then what victualls they eat, which they took in an orderly manner: His Majesty departed Chester on Tuesday, and went hence by Wregham to Shrewsbury, whence he came: At his departure from us, he put 100 men for a Garrison into the Castle, and commanded Sir Thomas Delves, Sir Richard Wilbraham, M. Philip Manwaring of Badely, and M. Berkind the Pronotary, and his son, to wait upon His Majesty, and to be confined to Court. The same day the King went, Captain Salisbury and his men did burn Sir William Bruertons Decoy; and the Kings Souldiers in all places where they come, grow very insolent, and do much spoyl and mischief; the Commissioners of Array by the Kings coming hither are much strengthned in these parts, for the aforesaid men which the King hath taken away with him; were the chief of those that attempted to put the Mili|tia

in execution. The report is here, that the King likes the City so well, he intends shortly to return and winter with us. My Lord Strange, now Earl of Derby (for on Munday last his father died here in Chester) is gone with great Forces against Man|chester, who have fortified themselves, and resolve to keep him out with all the might they can; they have three Pieces of Ordnance; my Lord Strange hath six Pieces; Bullets have been exchanged on both sides, and two of my Lords men slain, and some Commanders; which hath so far incensed him, that he is resolved to have the Town, or to die before it. The times are like to be miserable, God grant a happy Reconcilement.



Worcester, September 29. 1642.
ON Munday last we set forward with his Ex|cellencie, accompanied with six Regiments of foot, and 26 or 27 troops of horse purposing for Coventry, but News neer Coventry reaching us, that the Enemy being at Worcester, his Excellencie commanded our march thither, where within 8 miles upon Friday last in the morning we attain|ed, from whence Sir William Belford Lieutenant Generall of the horse with 10 commanded troops and 600 Musquetiers, were commanded to make good the passage to the City, that our Army might march in safety from the Enemy: Upon our passage we found little or no Intelligence of what strength the other party was; and drawing neer the City, we found the Enemy engaged on the other side the bridge, and in fight with some of our troops, so that it was impossible for us to make good our purposes, being not able to passe the River, we laid severall Ambuscadoes about the City, and the horse shewed themselves, but all in vain, for the Enemy durst not make the least lly upon us; but they after the skirmish, and a|bout one of the clock at night still and silently



with their losse departed the City, and made good their retreat towards Bewdley, and no living soul would give us the least notice of the same. It is certainly reported, that Prince Robert came in with 11 Troops and 500 Dragooneers. Next morning was found dead 24. but all not known when they were viewed; Prince Maurice is cer|tainly reported to be shot through the jaws, and Prince Robert in the heel: Some two more of the great ones amongst them were buried the same Friday evening ere they departed: Wilmot is cer|tainly run through the body, and it is said divers of them dyed upon the way, but certain it is that their losse was full as great as ours, which had been more, could we have had any Intelligence out of the City, which is desperately Malignant, and the Country also. Of our side onely of prin|cipall Officers, Sargeant Major Douglas was slain, and Colonell Sands sore wounded. Our next march will be towards Ludlow, where Prince Robert is.

FINIS.





