




THE KINGS MAIESTIES SPEECH, AS It was delivered the second of November before the Vniversity and City of OXFORD. TOGETHER With a gratulatory Replication expressed by that learned Man Doctor Wil|liam Strode, Orator for the famou Vniversity of OXFORD.
First printed at Oxford, and now re-printed at London, 1642. Novemb. 9.






The Kings Maiesties Speech. As it was delivered the second of November, before the Vniversity of Oxford.
TOGETHER With a gratulatory Replication expressed by that learned Man Doctor William Strode, Orator for the famous Vniversity of OXFORD.
_IT brings great comfort unto me, that I am now almost in the heart of my Kingdome; and it brings more com|fort unto me, that I am now in the hearts of my subiects. I would to God we had all one heart in earnest, that so neither my Kingdomes should suffer, nor I complaine. You see what is daily committed against me (who am in|deed the father of your Countrey) and I am most so|ry, that any par of my Kingdome should owne those subiects (who in pretence of religion) should lament

it, and destroy it. I come not here as a Cunquerour but as your Soveraigne, and beleeve me, there is not a drop of blood hath fallen from a true royall sub|iect, but I have sympthized with it All the blood is lost, doth but open my wounds the wider, and  sorry tht you doe not understand it. Beleeve me on e word of a Prince, on the word of your Sove|igne, there i nothing more deare unto me then Re|igion, the Religion of my father and the Royall Queene his predecessor, a religion which ever from her owne flme hth arised more pure, and multi|plied. This is my businesse to you, in which I hope I shall satisfie both God and you And since I have left the warre behinde me, take peace and the day while you see it I see the clouds make hast to over|come it. The Sceper is and must bee mine, V|nite your selves to maintine so honourable, so iust a cause, and what one hand cannot infringe, let ma|ny maintaine: You hae God for your cause, you have me for hi second; and since both are together, who can oppose us: You have seene the first and se|cond victory, which the iustice and mercy of God hath beene pleased to bestow upon me. In the first we have taken prisoners and slaughtered the chiefest of their men, which was the sinewes of victory. In the second, we have taken all their treasure, which is the sinewes of warre. Warre and Victory, Victory and Warre and since the first is come unto us by necessity, I hope the second will bee devolved to us and to ours by inheritance.
Gentlemen, my heart doth bleed to see the losse of so many of my people, and where warre cannot preuaile upon me, piety hath done. I bleed in your wounds, and am much overcome to heare my selfe a Conquerour. Give me your hearts, and preserve your owne blouds. The heart of a Prince is kept warme with the blood of his subiects: the blood of the subiects being not to be preserved, were it not loyally entertained into the heart of the Prince. The movings of my Lord of Essex, did never trouble mee, I have offered my selfe in a quiet and inoffensive march, which I have found as open as it was in my progresse.
I have indeavoured after a desired reconciliation, and I hope ere many daies passe over, to see it accom|plished. It shall be a great happinesse unto mee, if through the many troubles and trauailes of my life, I can distill at last the Soveraigne Balme of peace into the desperate wounds of my distracted Kingdome.


The Speech of the Vniversity Orator to gratulate his Majesties comming unto Oxford.
HIgh words cannot reach the ioy that your pre|sence hath created in our hearts, which doe blesse our eyes for so desired an obiect. Learning doth ac|knowledge the mercy of Heaven in bringing your Maiesty to give voyce to the dumbe Academy, and renue the Muses, slaine by that Briareus of igno|rance, which breathes nothing but Religions destru|ction. Our Oxford hath now throwne off all clouds of discontents, and stands cleare, guilded by the beames of your Maiesties Royall presence. The bur|den cast on me, is my ioy, or rather the ioy of the A|cademy, extaside into a learned amazement, and rap|tured into speech to see your Maiesty. All gratu|lation cannot comply with our thoughts, to shew the pleasure our fancie takes to behold your Maiesty. See Royall King, how Oxford, beauteous in her age, doth kneele, making teares of ioy a Sacrifice, and begging to be protected from threatned ruine. Shall the Spring of learning bee dam'd up? while igno|rance doth teare and rend the Muses Garlands, as would both contemne and destroy Schollers: For no enemy can learning have, unlesse it bee the ignorant. Your Royall Maiesty is by descent, a protector of learning, and borne (as your Father was) to bee the

glory and defender of the Muses. This may strongly invite your love, wherein wee are already happy in some degrees. But wee feare a malignant enemy should violate our cleare Minerva, and banish from her both maintenance and glory. Pure zeale doth make them seeke with one blow to destroy both learning and Religion, now bleeding and wounding by schismaticall heads, and expecting cure from your Royal Maiesty. Yet our feares are great, and groun|ded upon the unhappy fate of learning, which is de|spised of precise Schollers that weare black onely to mourne for the decease of learning. But ioy cannot imagine the time discreet for a iust reproose, and therefore I must tell what pleasure doth refresh and water our thirsty Garden, rather then complaine of scorching heate of persecution. Our memory must not be active in striving to manifest sorrow in|compatible with our present ioy. Enlarge rhy selfe therefore Oxford: and let not any griefe so blinde thy heart to a stupid peace, but let loud gratu|lations wound the aire with reporting welcome to our Gracious King CHARLES.





