




A
Duke and no Duke.
As it is Acted by Their
Majesties Servants. To which is now added,
A PREFACE concerning Farce:
With an Account of the Personae
and Larvae, c. Of the Ancient
THEATRE. By N. TATE,
SERVANT to Their MAJESTIES.
LONDON:
Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's
Church-Yard, 1693.




THE
PREFACE.
BOTH Italy and France have swarm'd with Critiques
upon the Business of the Stage, and trac'd it's Histo|ry
up to Thespis's Cart. The Mimica Satyra Tra|goedia
Comoedi have been thoroughly canvass'd. A Man
might almost conjure with their Planipedes, Attalanae, Prae|textatae,
Tabernariae, c. Distinctions, Divisions and Sub|divisions,
but amongst them All not one word of a Farce.
None have taken into Consideration, or condescended to
tell us, whether the Trappolin, Scapin, Harlequin or Sca|ramouch
be Originals; or if France be a Species of Stage-Poetry
unknown to the Ancients. This Subject therefore
being yet untouch'd, and the Bookseller having occasion to
re-print this short Play, I thought it worth the business of a
Preface to speak my Sentiments of the matter, though but
to provoke some Learned Person to clear the Doubt, and
set the Question in a true Light.
In order to this Enquiry, 'twill be proper first to speak
something of those Stage-Properties or Implements called
Personae and Larvae, used by Players of former Times; for
Harlequill was not the first that acted in a Vizard.
Athanaeus in his Twelfth Book mentions one Aristopha|nes
of Byzantium, with several others, who had written
particularly on this Subject. Amongst Latin Writers An|lon.
Codr. Vre. is said to have published an Elegant Epistle
concerning this matter. Caelius Calcagn. in his Book Entitu|led,

Personati, speaks pretty home to the Point; and above
all, the Learned Bullinger, lib. 1. de Theatro.
But I meet with enough for my purpose in the Syntagm.
of Marischott, who, for the benefit of most
Readers, contents himself with citing the
Latin Version of LucianDe Personis  Larvis., and others, which
I have so transcribed on occasion as I there found them.
Neither can my Abstract of his Book seem needless, because
the Treatise it self having been only Printed in Italy, is
scarce to be met with in England.
'Tis agreed that the Word Persona in a restrained Sence
signifies only the Vizard or Counterfeit Face worn by the
Actor: But in larger and more frequent Acceptation, the
whole Habit or Dress of Him that enter'd the Scene;
which (under the Reign of Old Comedy) was contrived
exactly like the usual wearing Garb of some Person
whom they had a mind to represent upon the Stage. An
Instance hereof against no less a Person than Socrates we
find described at large by Aelian. The Substance of the
Story is this: That Aristophanes in his  represented
both the Figure, Gesture and Habit of Socrates, with which
Spectacle the Athenians were at first surprized. However, the
common sort presently expressed their Applause. Socrates
himself being then amongst the Audience, not by chance
but design, and seated where he might be most exposed to
view, encountring with his grave, steddy and unconcerned
Countenance at once the Mimickry of the Actor, and Ral|lery
of the Poet.
But whether the Stage-dresses and Masks were made in
Imitation of some particular Person, or contrived by Hu|mour
and Fancy, as might be most agreeable to the Fable,
(in which they always observed a Decorum.) 'Tis evident,
says my Author, that they never enter'd the Scene nisi Per|sonis
induti.
But who was the first Inventor of them is a matter of no
small Dispute. They appear to be as ancient as the Practice

of Plays and Drolls themselves, which were of as old a date
as the Worship of Bacchus, or perhaps any other Gods.
That this manner of Celebrating the Rites of Bacchus was
in use not only among the Thracians and Greeks, but also
very frequent and ancient among the Latins. We have
evident Proof from Virgil's Georgicks, Lib. 11. with a most
Elegant Description of the Personae in these Words:
Baccho caper omnibus Aris
Caeditur  veteres ineunt proscenia Ludi:
Praemiaqe ingentes pagos  compita circum
Thesidae posure, atque inter pocula laeti
Mollibus in pratis unctos salire per utres;
Neo non Ausonii Troj gens missa celoni
Versibus incomptis ludunt, risuque soluto
Oraque corticibus sumunt horrenda cavatis.
Ovid hints almost as much in the Minores Quinquatrus
celebrated in Honour of Minerva.
Et jam Quinquatrus jubeor narrare minores
Huc ades O caeptis slava Minerva meis;
Cur vagus incedat tota tibicen in urbe.
Quid sibi Personae, quid Toga picta velint.
Suidas affirms Chaerilus the Athenian to have been the
first that erected a Stage, and used the Larva; yet else|where
(according to Diomedes and other Greek Writers) he
makes Thespis Inventor of the Persona, who at first disco|loured
his Face with Vermilion, before he came to use the
Juyce of Purslane; or, according to Horace, the Lees of
Wine.
Plaustris vexisse Poemata Thespis
Quae canerent agerentur peruncti faecibus ora.

This Practice, and Cartshow's of Thespis were performed
about the 56th Olympiad. Others give the Honour of
this Invention to Aeschylus, and presume that they have
likewise Horace's Word for their Opinion.
Post hunc Personae pallae repertor honest
Aeschylus
But Horace is still consistent, if rightly understood; for
he does not affirm Aeschylus to be the absolute Inventor of
the Persona, but of the Persona Honesta, of more graceful
Masks and Habits than were contrived by others; for
which Reason we may suppose, as Philostratus relates, this
Aeschylus was called the Father of Tragedy. After Aeschy|lus
Stage-Habits for Women were also invented by Phryni|cus.
Amongst the Romans till Livius Andronicus his Time, the
Galeri and not Personae were used upon the Stage; and
Suidas will have Roscius Gallus to be the first that brought
the Personae into custom with the Romans; But Donatus tells
us, that Minutius and Prothonius were the first Players that
Acted Tragedy, Personati: Which Fashion afterwards ob|tained
that Degree, that Nero Caesar himself is recorded by
Suetonius to have appeared in such Dresses upon the open
Stage. Tragoedias cantaverit Personatus; Herum Deorum|que
item heroidum  Dearum, Personis effictis. That pom|pous
and splendid Dresses were proper for Tragedy, both
Pollux and Donatus affirm.
Next to Tragedy came Satyr, which was but a Species
of the former, as appears by the Cyclops of Euripides.
This sort of Dramma (though less practised as the World
grew more civilized) had also it's peculiar Personae or ,
made of Goats Skins and Hides, and other Beasts,
which are described by Dyonisius, Pollux and Causa|bon.

The personal Habits used in the Licentious Comdiaaevetus
were contrived (as we instanced) to repre|sent
particular Persons,Poet. Lib. c. 4. 14. Lib. xi. c. 12. l. 4. c. ix. Mo|rum Charact. Ch. 6. which therefore
could he no constant or fix'd Garb; For Suidus
says expresly, , c.
That is, Moris fuit ut Comici Personas Hi|strionibus
darent eorum similes quos imitaren|tur.
Horace alludes to the same Custom, Sat. 4. L. 1.
Quivis Stomacheter eodem quo personatus Pater. Their re|sembling
Dresses (says the Scholiast upon Aristoph.) were
so aptly contrived, that the Spectators knew what Person
the Actor mimick'd at his first appearance, before he spoke
a Word. While Athens was a popular State, the Rabble
were so much delighted with these Representations of par|ticular
Men, that Isocrates complains they would run to
those Entertainments from their Orators, while they were
haranguing upon Matters of greatest Importance to the
Publick. 'Tis true, this Practice of exposing Men upon
the Stage, was at its beginning more justifiable, while con|fin'd
to those Limits mentioned by Horace,
Si quis erat dignus describi quod malus aut fur,
Quod Maechusve foret, aut Sicarius, aut alioqui
Famosus.
Nay, it did not a little conduce to the reforming of the
State, in deterring Men from Wickedness;
upon which Dionys. Halycarn. did not stick toDionys. .
affirm of Eupolis Cratinus and Aristophanes,
that they perform'd the Office of Philosophers
and States-men as well as of Poets. But when from repre|sentation
of evil Men, the Practice declin'd to the Tradu|cing
of the Good and Vertuous, and even to the Disho|nour
of Religion, and ridiculing their very Gods, 'twas

high time for the Government to take Cognizance of the
Matter, and enact Laws to restrain their License.
Lex est accepta Chorus
Turpiter Obticuit Sublato jure nocendi,
Horace, Art. Poet.
Iam saevus apertam
In rabiem verti caepit focus  per honestas,
Ire domos, c.
And a little after,
Lex
Paena lata malo quae nollet Carmine quemquam,
Describi.
Epist. Lib. 3.
Upon this Regulation succeed the Media and Nova Co|media,
in which the Personae ludicrae  ad risum accommo|datae
were invented and made famillar to the Stage. One
contriv'd a peculiar Habit, when the part of a Paedagogue
was to be plaid, another of a Parisite, others of Bawds,
Cooks, c. All which are recited by
In prolegom. ad Terent. Donatus, and more largely byLib. 4. c. 19. Pollux.
That Comedians acted Personati in Te|rence
his time appears by an ancient Copy
of that Author preserved in the Vatican, where Figures are
drawn of the Actors in the Play, as they were Larvati
and Personati.
'Tis impossible for us to conceive the Art and Curiosity
in the Contrivance and Making of these Shapes, in which
these Players acted, or how much the Player himself was
sometimes enamour'd on his Persona, or Stage-dress, attri|buting
his Success and Theatrical Applause to the Sem|blance
in which he acted. As to this Particular, Pliny has
given us an Instance of memorable Event in his Natural Hi|story,

Lib. 8. cap. 43. speaking of M. Opilius Hilarius. He
tells us, That this Actor having wonderfully pleas'd the
People in performance of a certain Part; He invited his
Friends to a Treat upon his Birth-day, and this Shape in
which he succeeded so well being brought into his sight,
he pull'd off his banqueting Wreath from his Head to put it
upon the Figure, which he survey'd with such Pleasure,
that he lost his Sense, grew stiff and cold, and unperceived
by the Company, expir'd with Transport.
Hitherto we have discoursed of the Persona in the larger
Acceptation, as it signified amongst them, the intire Stage-Habit.
But must acknowledge that it was sometimes taken
in a more restrain'd Sense, and used by Actors for only
the Larva or Vizard, as the Larva again is sometimes men|tioned
to express the Persona intire.
Martial uses the Word for a Border or Perriwigg, Epigr.
43. Lib. 3.
Mentiris juvenem tinctis Lentine capillis,
Tam subito Corvus, qui modo cignus eras;
Non omnes fallis, scit te Proserpina canum,
Personam capiti detrahet illa tuo.
But Seneca expresly for a Mask or Vizard, Quid tantopere
te supinat? Quid Vultum habitum oris praevertit ut malis
habere Personam quam faciem.
The Advantages of using these Persona or Disguises on
the Stage were, in Comedy, that they might first have Re|semblance
to the Person imitated, and afterwards adapted
for Humour, and to excite Mirth; besides the Consulting
the Decency of the Actors, who were in those Days gene|rally

too modest to Act barefac'd,
Yet Nero that Monster having compell'd Noblemen to act Parts in a Play, he Com|manded them to pull off their Vizards on the Stage, Histrio|num apparatu eos patefaci|ens Hominibus apud quos ipsi paul ante Magistratum gesserant. and in usual Habits. In Tragedy
the Dress assisted to the Pomp and
Show. The Tragedian's Vizard
making the Voice to come forth
more sonorous, being made with a
largerLucian de Salt descri|bing the Mimick-Mask, says it was Larva pulcherrima, Quae non immane hint ut Tragica. Mouth that seem Hiare
as the Actor spoke, which I could
almost suppose Persius to hint at in
that Verse,
Fabula seu maesto ponatur hianda Tragedo.
The Convenience of these Disguises on other occasions, as
in Interludes at Sacred Rites (as they call'd them) is ma|nifest
from Servius on our fore-cited place
ofVpon theBac|cho caper omni|bus aris, c. Georg. l. 2. Virgil, Quia necesse erat pro ratione Sa|crorum
aliqua ludicra  turpia fieri quibus
populo possit risus Moveri, qui ea exercebant,
propter verecundiam remedium hoc adhibue|runt,
ne agnoscerentur.
Yet were not Disguises Masks and Maskers, employ'd
only in the Service of the Theatre and Temples, but pro|miscuously
used by the Ancients on many other occasions,
as in Triumphs, Feasts, Marriages, Funerals, c. the Hi|story
whereof would be furnish'd with many entertaining
Circumstances; but I must remember that I am confin'd
to the scanty Limits of a Preface.

The good Uses that have been made of Vizards
and Counterfeit-Habits, without the compass of the
Theatre would make no small Collection, but the Abu|ses
of them much greater. This would afford more
Horror than Diversion. The yearly Harvest of Wick|edness,
and evil Consequences occasion'd by the Car|nival
at Venice, give too sufficient Proofs of the Mis|chief.
Larvati took their Appellation from Larva,
a Vizard; and Larva from the Lares, whom the Anci|ents
supposed to possess Men's Minds with Madness.
This was ascribed as peculiar to those Powers. Can
there be greater Demonstration of Distraction and
Frenzy of all sorts, than in the Impious Practices and
Debaucheries at the fore-mentioned Festival? Can all
their Mortifications of the ensuing Lent make any to|lerable
Amends for the Lewdness then committed? Has
the Devil at any time such a Jubilee, where Vice like
an Infernal Cebele sees all her black Offspring assembled
together? What are the effects of this Masquerade,
but Whoredoms, Adulteries, Incests, Brawls, Murders,
and a general Corruption of Manners. Pollydor. re|cites
it to the Honour of our English Ancestors, that
they had Law in force against Masqueradings, Capitale
fuisse si quis personam induisset. De Rev. Invent. l. 5. c. 2.
Ludovicus vives, lib. de Christian Faemin, thinks he
did the Masquerading Ladies no wrong, in affirming,
that detrimentum quod sub Person earum accepit vere|cundia
citra personam se proferat  ostendat. That they
proved after wearing those Disguises just as modest out
of their Masques as they were in them. And honest
Iuvenal civilly puts the Question,
Quem praestare potest mulier Larvata pudorem?

But restoring these Guises to their proper Owners,
the Stage-Players, let us proceed from the Considerati|on
of th Larva to our first Enquiry about Farce, and
whether or no the Ancients had any such Species of
Stage-Poetry.
In the first place I would ask the Readers Opinion, if he
can suppose any more genuine and natural use of those
Larvae or Vizards which we have described, than for
Farce-Players, especially if we take in those other Im|plements
mentioned by Lucian, de Salt. thus rendred by
Marisch. Mitto adscitia pectora  ventres fictitios, ad|junctam
 arte compositam corporis crassitudinem. One
would almost conclude from this Description of their
Stage-Properties, that they could be contrived for no|thing
but Farce.
I have not yet seen any Definition of Farce, and dare
not be the first that ventures to define it. I know not
by what Fate it happens (in common Notion) to be the
most contemptible sort of the Drama. 'Tis thought
to bring least Reputation to an Author. But if the dif|ficulty
of the Task were to decide the Case, we should
soon alter our Opinion. I would desire him who thinks
it an easie thing, to make Tryal of it with all the speed
he can, it being such a Work
Ld. Roscom. Transl. As every man may think to write,
And not without much pains be undeceiv'd.
The reason of the Difficulty I presume to be this,
(and the Undertakers will find it true) That Comedy
properly so called, is an Imitation of Humane Life,
(quicquid agunt homines) and subsists upon Nature; so
that whosoever has a Genius to coppy her, and will take
the Pains, is assured of Success, and all the World af|fords

him Subject. Whereas the business of Farce ex|tends
beyond Nature and Probability. But then there are
so few Improbabilities that will appear pleasant in the Re|presentation,
that it will strain the best Invention to find
them out, and require the nicest Judgment to manage
them when they are conceived. Extravagant and mon|strous
Fancies are but sick Dreams, that rather torment
than divert the Mind; but when Extravagancy and Im|probability
happen to please at all, they do it to purpose,
because they strike our Thought with greatest Surprise.
But to our Question.
I cannot averr, that the Ancients had Entertainments
on the Stage entirely resembling the Harlequin and Sca|ramouch,
but 'tis highly probable that the Satyrical Diver|sions
and Interludes invented toAs the French now make use of their Farces. relieve
the Heaviness of Tragedy were of this
Nature For that they were introduced
for Mirth and Rallery, and thereby to
help off the serious Action, is expresly told us.
Carmine qui tragico vilem certavit ob hircum
Mox etiam egrestes Satyros nudavit,  asper
Incolumi gravitate, jocum tetavit: e quod
Illecebris erat  grat Novitate morandus
Spectator.
For as Madam le FevreIn her admi|rable Preface to her Version of Amphitrio. says, the Stage-Satyr;
or Satyrizing Scenes must by no
means be confounded with Satyrique Poems
written by Lucilius, Horace, or Greek Sa|tyrist.
The business of the Satyr-Actors
was not to lash out into long Invectives, only now and
then a Elurt of such harmless Sarcasm as used to be some|times
thrown out by Harlequin or Scaramouch, because as
Horace adds,

Ita risores ita commendare dicaoes
Conveniet Satyros, c.
Which shews they were to keep within Bounds; and what
he subjoyns
Ita vertere seria ludo.
Seems to emply Drollery, Banter, Buffoonry, Vagaries,
Whimsies, which are so many Ingredients of Modern
Farce. Nay, I have some where read (though I cannot
at present recollect my Author) that their Comick
Actors used to deliver what they had to say in various and
feigned Tones, which was Harlequin's manner.
Nor will this appear unlikely, if we consider particu|larly
the Gesticulations, Tricks, Feats of Activity and
wonderful Performances of another sort of Actors whom
they called Mimi and Pantomimi, from their admirable
knack at Mimickry; which was not the least of Harle|quin's
and Scaramouch's Talents. 'Tis unconceivable how
expert these Persons were in humorous Actions, as will
appear by a few Testimonies very well worth our menti|oning.
Their Performance was so extraordinary, that as Strabo
informs us, Lib. 14. their Art was called . their
Legerdemain Shifts, Slights and Postures, Magical Arts,
Praestigia: And further asserts, Eos quam saepissime argu|mento
 Comoediis desumpto varias personas representasse,
nunc foeminae, nunc lenonis, nunc Adulteri, nunc temulenti.
To which we may add that old Epigram,
Tot Linguae quot membra viro, mirabilis Ars est,
Quae facit Articulos, ore tacente, loqui.

There was no Fable accommodated to the Stage, which
these Mute-Actors could not represent by Gestures and
Movements of their Body. For as Lucian says, Perso|nis
in Scenam introductis, gestibus per omnia responderent,
neque ea quae dicuntur ab introductit optimatibus, aut agri|colis,
aut mendicis discrepabant sed in unoquo illorum pro|prietas
 excellentia demonstrabantur. In dumb Action and
Gestures they could express, and as it were, speak what
they pleased. WhereforeVid. Scalig. Poet. l. 1. Tigranes amongst
all the Rarities the World's Imperial City
afforded, begged one of these Pantomimes
to serve him as it were for an Interpreter to all Nations.
Pantomimus (says Cassiod. Var. 4. Epist. ult.) a multi|faria
imitatione nomen est, idem corpus Herculem designat
 venerem, fminam presentat  marem; Regem facit
 Militem; Senam reddit  Iuvenem ut in uno videas
esse multos. And Lucian seeing a Pantomime prepare to
personate five Representations, cries, That the Mimick
seem'd to him to have five Souls, who could exhibit so
many Personages with one Body. What was all this but
Farce to the Degree of Harlequin with his Cloak, whisk'd
about, and acting a Windmil.
All this, you'll say, was only Farce of Action, Farce
in the Player, nothing on the Poets Part, no Proof that
the Ancients had any written Farce.
I will not affirm they had any Stage-Play entirely of
Harlequin and Scarramouch's Cast; but if Molier's Come|dies
come under the Denomination of Farce, (as every
body allows) 'tis plain that both the Greeks and Romans
had Farcical Plays. The Comedies of Aristophanes and
Plautus are mostly of this Cut, call them Palliatae, Togatae,
mixt Comedy, low Comedy, or what you will. Their
Old Comedy, generally speaking, had the very Air of
Farce. Aristophanes his Socrates Philosophing in a Bas|ket,
c. is as much Farce as any thing in the Character

of Mr. Shadwell's Virtuoso. The Frog and Swimming-Master,
Tame Spider, Bottled Air, c. are not more
Humorous and Farcy. Aristophanes his Frogs were a ve|ry
Rehearsal of those days; As our Fletcher's Knight of
the Burning Pestle was a sort of Quixot on the Stage.
Which teaches us, that Farce is not inconsistent with
good Sence, because 'tis capable of Satyr, which is Sence
with a Vengeance. The Amphytrio and Menaeh of Plau|tus
through the whole Contrivance and Course of Acci|dents
are all Farce. They were the Originals of Shake|spear's
Comedy of Errours, and the Italian Trappoline.
I would not be a Heretick in Poetry, but Reason and Ex|perience
convince us, that the best Comedies of Ben.
Iohnson are near a-kin to Farce; nay, the most entertain|ing
parts of them are Farce it self. The Alchymist which
cannot be read by any sensible Man without Astonish|ment,
is Farce from the opening of the First Scene to
the end of the Intrigue. 'Tis Farce but such Farce as
bequeaths that Blessing (pronounced by Horace) on him
that shall attempt the like.
Sudet multum frustra labret
Ausus idem.
The whole business is carry'd on with Shuffles, Shm
and Banter, to the greatest degree of Pleasantness in the
World. For Farce (in the Notion I have of it) may ad|mit
of most admirable Plot, as well as subsist sometimes
without it. Nay, it has it's several Species or Distincti|ons
as well as Comedy amongst the Romans Stataria mix|ta,
c. but still 'twas Comedy. So Comedy may admit
of Humour, which is a great Province of Farce; but
then it might be such Humour as comes within compass
of Nature and Probability: For where it exceeds these
Bounds it becomes Farce. Which Freedom I would al|low

a Poet, and thank him into the Bargain, provided he
has the Judgment so to manage his Excursion, as to
heighten my Mirth without too grosly shocking my
Senses. I cannot call to mind one Humour in all Terence's
Plys, but what he might have taken by Observation,
all lies within the Compass of Conversation; but there|fore
Caesar (amidst all his Beauties and Excellencies) says
he, wants the Vis Comica, which made Plaurus so divert|ing.
There is so much said for these two Authors by
their respective Admirers, that a Man knows not where
to give the Preference. All that I would presume to say,
s, That I esteem them both admirable in their way;
that one chose to write pure Comedy in the strictest No|tion,
and the other liberty of extending Comedy some|times
into Farce; and each got his Point, Terence of be|ing
exact, and Plautus pleasant. Neat Terence, witty
Plautus, says our greatestBen. Ialmson's Verses on Shake|spear. Master of Co|medy,
who scorn'd not to Copy some|times
from the Ancients; yet for one Hint
he has taken from Terence, he has bor|rowed
three from Plautus. I will instance only that
pleasant Passage in his Alchymist, where the Confederates
banter and play upon Surly disguised like a Spanish Don,
not supposing that he understood them. We find the
same Humour in the Paenulus of Plautus, where the old
Carthaginian speaks in the Punick Language; Milphio a
Roman Servant plays the wagg, and drolls upon him, un|der
pretence of interpreting for him; the Stranger suf|fers
him to run himself out of breath with his Ribaldry,
and then surprizes him with thundring out as good Latin
as the best of them could speak. Vulpone's playing the
Mountebank in the Fox is Farce; and Sir Politick's turn|ing
himself into a Tortoise. This Passage however is un|diverting,
which proves (as I said) the Nicety of Judg|ment
required in managing Improbabilities. Had this

been told to the Audience like other Projects which are
only recited, it might have made a pleasant Relation.
Now if we enquire into the best of our Modern Co|medies,
we should find the most diverting parts of them
to be Farce, or near a-kin to it. Remembrancer Iohn in the
Cutter, Sir Martin turn'd East-India Gentleman, the Try|al
Scene in the Spanish Fryar, where Gomes menac'd by
the Colonel in dumb shew, runs Counter in his Evidence,
says and unsays in a Breath, till he confounds himself and
the Court. Such Pleasantry as this is I cannot think be|low
it's great Author, who in the Serious Scenes of the
same Play, has shewn us the Refinedness and Perfection
of the English Style. Quintilian, speak|ing
of Repartees, after these Words,Lib. vi. c. 3. de Risu. Lon|g
venustiora omnia in respondendo quam in
provocando; That more Wit's required to retort a Jest
than to break one, adds this Expression, Accedit difficul|tati
quod ejus rei nulla exercitatio est, nulli praeceptores.
The same may be said of Farce; there are no Rules to
be prescribed for that sort of Wit, no Patterns to Copy,
'tis altogether the Creature of Imagination. And our
English Mecnas (to whose Judgment the Muses willing|ly
subscribe) has declared that he approves Genius and
Invention beyond the best Performances of Imitation.
Such is the Farce-Writers Task. Neither can I assume
any thing to my self by the Preference I have given to
Farce on account of the Trapoline, which I only new
modell'd: I pretend but to have Improv'd what I would
be proud to have Invented.



PROLOGUE
Written by a Friend of the Author's
Upon the first Drinking of Islington Water.
Gallants,
WHo would have thought to have seen so many here,
At such a rambling Season of the Year;
And, what's more strange, All well and Sound, to the Eye!
Pray Gentlemen forgive me if I Lie.
I thought this Season to have turn'd Physician,
But now I see small hopes in that condition:
Yet how if I should hire a Black Flower'd Jump,
And ply at Islington, Doctor to Sadler's Pump?
But first let me consult old Erra Pater,
And see what he advises in the matter.
Let's see
Venus and Mars, I find in Aries are,
In the Ninth Housea dull dry Bobbing Year.
The Price of Mutton, will run high, 'tis thought,
And Vizard Masks will fall to ten a Groat.
The Moon's in Scorpio's House or Capricorns,
Friends of the City govern well your Horns:
Your Wives will have a mighty Trade this Quarter,
I find they'l never leave their Natural Charter.
For once take my Advice as a true Friend,
When they a Walk to the new Wells pretend.
If you'll avoid your Fate quick hasten after,
They use more ways to Cool, than Drinking Water.




The Persons.
Lavinio, The Great Duke of Tuscany.
Brunetto, alias Horatio, Prince of Savoy.
Barberino
Alberto.
Lords, Councellors to Lavinio.
Trappolin. A Parasite, Pimp, Fidler, and Buffoon,
transform'd by Magick, and Usurper
to Lavinio.
Mago. A Conjurer.
Captain of the Guards.
Isabella. The Dutchess.
Prudentia. Sister to Lavinio.
Flametta. Trappolin's Sweet-heart.
Women. Puritan. Embassadours.
Servants and Attendants.

The SCENE FLORENCE.



A
Duke and no Duke.

ACT I.

Trappolin and Flametta.

Trap.
FOR ever thine Flametta.


Fla.
Thanks my Dear.
But am not I a fond Fool to believe you,
When you have been from me these two long
days?
I'm sensible I love you but too well,
For truly Dear you are a naughty man.


Trap.
Pretty Rogue! how she fires my heart! now could I cry
like any roasted Lobster.What would old Lord Barberino
give for one such kind word from her. But young and poor as
she is, she is yet most constant and Virtuous.Not that I care
much for Virtue neither.Alas my Dear, I have been much
opprest with Business since I saw thee. My Honour was at stake
for procuring Convenients for no less than five Ministers of
State. It'as been dead trading of late, but 'tis a comfort to see
times mend, now we are upon our Matrimony.


Fla.
Let me Conjure you leave these vitious courses,
You must indeed, or we must never marry;
But you will be my Convert and Reform.


Trap.
All in good time Love; it becomes me to see my Bet|ters
go before me, when I do mend I shall certainly do it to pur|pose,

I am so long about it.In the mean time I give thee
leave to be honest; and I think that's fair.
Enter Barberino and Officers.
Whose here my Rival Lord?


Barb.
Here is the Villain with his handsome Wench,
And what (afflicts me more) an honest One;
I have these many weeks attempted her,
But neither Threats nor Presents can prevail,
She must be virtuous, or her Poverty
Could ne'r withstand the Offers I have made;
Yet were she virtuous she would ne'r allow
This wicked Pandar so familiar with her;
This Fidling Parasite, Buffoon and Beggar:
But on pretence of his enormities,
I have procur'd this Order from the Duke
For his immediate banishment from Florence.
Most certainly, he bears some Spell about him,
And when he's once remov'd, I shall succeed.


Trap.
Again my DearMy good Lord Barberino, your
Honours humble Servant.For this free Promise, Love, I
ne'er enough can thank TheeYour Lordships to com|mand
No Fortune shall divide or change our Wills.Your
Honours humble SlaveWhat's Wealth or Power where
Hearts consent like ours?Your Lordships Vassal
When thou dost sigh, thy Trappolin shall weep.Your
Honour always shall Command MeAnd when thou
sings't


Fla.
We are observ'd.
Learn to be honest, and I am Thine for ever.

[Exit.

Trap.
I beg your Lordships pardon. Your Lordship saw how
I was employ'd. The poor wretch has taken a Fancy to me,
and your Lordship knows I am a Person of liberal Education:
That I bear not a Breast of Flint, nor was Nurs't with the Milk
of Hircanian Bulls. Now if your Lordship has any thing to
Command me, here I stand ready, I'l fido Trappolino, your Ho|nours
humble Servant in all things possible and impossible.



Barb.
You are a sawcy peremptory Villain,
And have too long escap'd the stroak of Justice.


Off.
Nor is there such a Coward in all Tuscany,
He's able to corrupt an Army.


Trap.
Fear not that Seignior Capitano, for I never mean to
come into One.


Barb.
So lewd a Pandar ne're infected City,
What Wife or Daughter of the Noblest Blood
Is safe, where such a Hellish Factor breaths.


Trap.
And can your Lordship on your Honour tax me
For want of Diligence in my Vocation?


Barb.
Industrious hast thou been in Villany,
But Florence must no longer be the Scene;
This is your Warrant, Captain, from the Duke,
To drive this Miscreant from our City Gates.
And when he's seen again in Tuscany.
That Minute forfeits his abandon'd life.
Thus has our Duke decreed.


Trap.
At whose request?


Barb.
On mine.


Trap.
I am glad to find your Honour has so much Interest in
His Highness, and therefore make choice of your Honour as the
most proper person to sollicit my Repeal.


Barb.
Audacious Slave.


Trap.
His Highness knows travelling is chargeable, and be|sides
my Stomach is of no ordinary Dimensions.


Barb.
Away with him if he dispute your Orders,
Call for the Parish Whips to your Assistance.


Trap,
Seignior Officer you may take his Lordships word when
he says a Thing. You hear his Lordship hath private business
with me, and desires your absenceFor certain then his
Highness is upon Treaty of Marriage with the Millanese; your
Lordship and I, were always of opinion it would come to that.


Barb.
Such harden'd Impudence was never seen.
Take him away.


Trap.
My Lord, my LordSuch a Primrose in a Corner
for your Lordship, never blown upon my Lord,


Barb.
Force him along.



Trap.
Flametta my Lord, what says your Lordship to Flamet|ta?
There's Eyes and Bubbies! Shall I bring her to your Lord|ship
Nay my Lord, my Lord.

(they bear him off)
[Exeunt.
Enter Duke Lavinio, Alberto, Guards, and Attendants.

Lav.
I'm stung with Adders and shall go distracted;
Let me have breathing room.


Alb.
Your Highness knows
I ever have been watchful for your Honour,
And next to that I would preserve your quiet.


Lav.
Choice Method, first blow poyson in my Ears,
And after that preach patience to me.


Alb.
I fear my Duty has been too officious;
Dread Sir, reflect where was the mighty harm
In holding talk with him by open day?
I hope this fanning will incense the flame.
[Aside.


Lav.
What harm? the very Bawd to their desires
Could never have Forehead to dispute the harm:
A Virgin and a Princess seen to walk
And hold discourse apart with one of Race
Obscure, at least unknown, and no harm in't?
'Twere lewd, though they had only pray'd together:
Bring the Audacious Traytor to Our Presence.

(Brunetto brought in here.
Enter Brunetto.

Bru.
Dread Sir, and twice my Noble Conquerour,
[Kneeling.
First in the Field, in which your Self alone
Could stop my Conquest with resistless Might,
And since in Gen'rous Princely Favours.


Lav.
Rise.
I am not us'd to hearken after Praise,
Or Thanks for Benefits by me conferr'd,
For hitherto they always fell on Merit,

Which can at best be call'd but paying Debts.
Only in this Acknowledgment, I hear
Ingratitude from it's own mouth condemn'd:
This Lord, the watchful Argus of my Honour,
Has charg'd you with a Crime will stain the Worth
You shew'd in Battel, and make Valour blush.


Alb.
I but inform'd your Highness what I saw.


Bru.
He's prejudic'd, I kill'd his Son in fight
In Service of my Prince, as he of you.


Lav.
I have a Sister, dear to me as Fame,
Our Royal Father's only Care and Comfort,
' My Dukedom (said he dying) I bequeath thee,
' A slender Present and thy Due by Birth;
' But with it all the Glory of our Race,
' The spotless Honour of the Medices;
' Preserve the Princely Blood from base-born taint,
' But most secure it in the weaker part,
' And match Prudentia with her Peer in Birth;
' So shall I with my Ancestors have rest.
' Now Sir, how far you have infring'd these Orders,
And brought a guilt unknown upon my head.
I leave your self to judge: Confess your Crime,
And Torture shall revenge it; smother it,
And Tortures shall extort it.


Bru.
My charmed Soul
Came panting to my Lips to meet your Charge,
And beg forgiveness for its high presumption.
But since you talk of Tortures, I disdain
The servile Threats, and dare your utmost Rage;
I love the Princess, and have urg'd my passion,
Tho' I confess all hopeless of return.
This with a Soldiers freedom I avouch,
Who scorns to lodge that Thought he dares not own:
Now Sir, Inflict what punishment you please.
But let me warn you, that your vengeance reach
My head, or neither of us can have rest.



Lav.
Chains, Straw and Darkness! this is meer distraction!
To Prison with him; you that waited on him
(They lead off Brunetto.
Be now his Guard: Thin Diet and no Light;
Such usage may restore himVengeance thus
Converts to Charity.
Enter Prudentia.
Prudentia,
Your Entrance has prevented me a Visit
To your Apartment, and half sav'd a Chiding;
Yet I must tell you, you have been to blame,
But Sister learn reserv'dness for the future,
Such as becomes your Quality, and hold
That place which Nature and unspotted Virtue
Has hitherto secur'd you in my Heart.


Pru.
Most gracious Sir, If e're my secret Soul
Admits one thought that is not first submitted
For Approbation to your Royal Will,
The Curse of Disobedience fall upon me;
As I in you have found a Fathers Love,
I shall repay't with more than Filial Duty.


Lav.
Vertue and Honour ever guide thy way.
Thou'rt solitary, but shalt quickly enjoy
A sweet Companion in our Royal Bride.
Sforza the Duke of Millain, our old Friend,
Who always in our Wars hath sent us aid,
Here offers me the beauteous Isabella
His Daughter for my Wife, and instantly
We will to Millain on the Expedition.
That Treatment once determin'd, wee'l return
To Florence, where wee'l celebrate our Nuptials
With that Magnificence becomes our State.


Pru
Go and be happy Sir in your fair Choice,


Barb.
That Blessing's only wanting to our State.


Lav.
Lord Barberino and Alberto, you
Whom I have always found most faithful to me,
To you I do commit the Government

Of Tuscany 'till my return; your Power
I leave unlimited, keep open Ear
To just Complaints: Allow and Act no wrong;
Look closely to our Prisoner Brunetto.


Alb.
So may your wish't Return be safe and speedy.


Lav.
Sister, your tears afflict us; a few Weeks
Shall grace our Court with the fair Millanese.
Lead on, 'tis time we were upon our way.

Exeunt.


SCENE. A Desart.
Enter Trappolin.

Trap.
THis banisht life is very dolefulWhat an inhu|mane
Duke was this to banish me, that never banisht
him? At every step I take, my poor Flametta comes into my
mind: She met me at the Towns end, and would fain have
come along with me, but that I told her she was not banisht
and might not.Methinks this is a very melancholy place,
I have not met a living Body yet, but they had wings or four
legs. Let me bethink me where to betake my self, I would to
Rome, and turn Friar, but that I have too much Learning. A
Man of my Occupation might once have singer'd the Polux
Ryals in Venice, but now the Gentry go a more compedious
way to work, and Pimp for one another; 'tquite spoils all
trading.
[Soft Music in the Air.]
What sound is this? Sure this place must needs be haunted:
This with a good Dinner were something, but as it is, it feels
as if they were playing upon my small Guts.
[Storm and Thunder.]
So now, my airy Fidlers are fallen out amongst themselves; I

lik'd their first strein somewhat better. I would his Highness
would come and banish me from this place too.
[Storm again, Mago the Conjurer rises.]
What's here? a decrepit old man? Now and I were sure he
was of mortal Race, I would set upon him in the name of Fa|mine
But if he should blow Brimstone in my Face there
were a hopeful beginner baulk't.


Mag.
Son, Thou art Banish'dI know all the matter.


Trap.
'Tis true old Friend, I am banish'dBut how the
Devil came you to know it?


Mag.
Why, the Devil told me.


Trap.
The Devil he did?Why 'twas e'en his own do|ing,
and so he could give you the best account of it.


Mag.
Be not dismay'd, Preferment waits upon thee,
I am so far from hurting thee,
That from poor Trappolin, I'le make thee a Prince.


Trap.
Look you there again, he knows my name tooFor
certain, this must be the Devils kinsmanA Prince!
poor Trappolin thanks you Father Conjurer, but has no mind to
domineer in Hell: I know where your Territories lye.


Mag.
Besotted Wretch, Thou dost not understand me;
I tell thee Son, thou shalt return to Florence


Trap.
And be hang'd there for my labour.


Mag.
Be honour'd there, exalted o're thy Fellows.


Trap.
On a Gibbet.


Mag.
There shalt thou shine in wealth, and roul in plenty,
The Treasures of the East shall Court thy wearing;
The haughty Nobles shall seem Pigmies to thee;
All Nature shall be ransack'd for thy Board,
And Art be tir'd to find thee choice of Banquets;
Each day and hour shall yield new Scenes of pleasure,
And crowding Beauties sue for thy Embraces.


Trap.
Sure I have pimp'd for this old Fellow formerly, he's
so kindWell, as you say, Father Conjurer (on some private
Considerations that I have) this may not do amiss: But how
shall it be done?


Mag.
By Eo, Meo, and Areo.


Trap.
What they mean, I know not, but I am satisfi'd 'tis by
going to the Devil for it, and so much for that matter.



Mag.
Here, seat thee in this Chair.


Trap.
To be shav'd Father Conjurer by one of your black
Valets? I shall lather under their hands without a Ball.


Mag.
Sit still, and see the wonders of my Art;
Eo, Meo, and Areo, rise.


Trap.
What will become of this temporal Body of mine?I
am glu'd to my Seat here.But hear you good Father,
must this Retinue of yours needs appear?


Mag.
Of indispensible necessity.


Trap.
Then good Father let them appear invisibly, I have no
great inclination to their Company: For to tell you the truth,
I like yours none of the best, you are like the Devil enough to
serve my turn.


Mag.
Now by the most prevailing Spell
That e're amaz'd the Powers of Hell;
That mid-night Witches ever try'd,
While Cynthia did her Cresent hide;
While watchful Dogs to bark forbore,
The Wolf to howl, the Sea to roar;
While Robbin do's his midnight Chare,
And Plowmen sweat beneath the Mare;
By all the terrours of my Skill,
Ascend, ascend, and execute my will.
[Lightning and Thunder, Spirits rise, and sink down with
Trappolin.
Now proud Lavinio, little dost thou know
This secret practice of my just Revenge.

[After a Dance the Spirits rise again, with
Trappolin dressed exactly like the Duke Lavinio.

Trap.
Oh Father what metal do you take me to be made of?
I am not us'd to travel under ground? Oh for a Dram of the
Bottle of a Quart or two! Call you this preferment? Marry he
deserves it that goes to the Devil for't, but I see no preferment
neither.


Mag.
Thou dost not know thy self, look in that Mirrour.

[Shews him a Looking glass.]

Trap.
Whose there, the Duke?Your Highness is well
return'd: Your faithful Servant Yrappolin begs of your Grace to
call him home, and hang up this old Wizard; he'l Conjure

your Grace out of your wits else, and your Subjects ou of your
Dominions.What's he gone again? He's for his frisque
under ground too. I have made way for him, I have work'd
like any Mole, and made holes you may thrust Churches
through.


Mag.
'Tis thou thy self that represents the Duke;
What in that Glass thou saw'st is but thy Picture.


Trap.
If that be my Picture I am the Picture of the Duke.


Mag.
And shalt be taken for the Duke himself.


Trap.
The Dress is just like him, and for ought I know, it is
Dress that makes a Duke.Let me see, what must I say now?
my Highness is your Highness's humble Servant.This Con|jurer
is a rare Fellow.


Mag.
As thou didst here seem to thy self.
So shalt thou to the world appear the perfect Duke:
To Florence then and take thy State upon thee.


Trap.
Trust me for Duking of it: I long to be at it. I know
not why every man should not be Duke in his turnFather
Conjurer, time is precious with us great Persons: However, I
should be glad to see you at Court. It may be the better for
you, for as I take it, we shall have some change of Ministers,
and so Farewel.


Mag.
Stay Son, Take this inchanted powder with thee,
Preserve it carefully, for at thy greatest need
'Twill give thee old: When any Foe assaults,
Cast but this Magick Powder in his face,
And thou shalt see most wonderful effects.


Trap.
Good, Now I'm satisfi'd I am the Duke
Which some shall rue: Good Father, Fare you well.
Eo, Meo, and AreoPass.

[Exit. Conju. vanishes.



SCENE. The Palace.
Barberino and Flametta.

Flam.
I Do beseech your Honour to repeal
My only joy, my banisht Trappolin;
Take pity on a helpless Virgins tears,
Abandon'd to DistressYou mustYou will
For as our Sov'raign left his Power with you
He left his Mercies too.


Barb.
Her tears inflame me:
And were this Dukedom which I hold in trust
My due by Birth, I'd give it in exchange
For this sweet Innocence, this Artless Beauty.
Indeed (my pretty One) you wrong your Charms;
Nay I must say, you wrong your Virtue too
By this concern, for an abandon'd Slave.
Devoted to all Crimes; forget and scorn him.


Fla.
I gave my heart before I knew his Vices
But it will be my triumph to reclaim him,
I do beseech your Honour to call him home.


Barb.
And what Return may I expect for this


Fla.
Goodness has always been it's own reward;
But to convince you that your Courtesie
Shall not be wholly thrown away upon me,
By Day or Night you shall command


Barb.
What?


Fla.
My Prayers.


Barb.
A very hopeful Recompence;
What Statesman ever yet took Prayers for pay?
Deluded Maid, thou dost not know thy worth,
This Beauty must not be a Beggars Prize,
Design'd by Nature for a Nobler Sphere.
What can this Minion whose repeal you seek

Perform for thee what can a Peasant do
To deck thy Youth, or to inrich thy Age?
Come be advis'd, here's Gold and Jewels for thee,
The Pride, the Pomp of Nature shall be thine:
Make all your study how to please your self,
Fortune shall wait to see your wish perform'd.


Fla.
Are you our Prince, my Lord?


Barb.
What means that Question?


Fla.
If you were,
The Prince should be deny'd.


Barb.
Then much more I.
Why do I trifle thus? I am no Prince,
Yet will not be deny'd;Who waits without?


Fla.
Heaven shield me! You intend no Violence.


Barb.
What I intend is Love; if you refuse,
You make the Rape, that's all: Who waits I say?

Enter Servant.

Fla.
Help Heaven!


Serv.
My Lord, my Lord most unexpected News!


Barb.
Come near
And bear this peevish Girl to my Apartment,
Shee'l thank me for the Force.


Serv.
The Duke, my Lord, his Highness.


Barb.
Take her Slave.


Serv.
His Highness is return'd from Millain.


Barb.
Ha!
The Duke return'd from Millain? Thou art mad.


Serv.
Just now arriv'd my Lord, and coming hither.


Barb.
Here!
Dispose of her as I commanded thee,
'Till I find out the meaning of this Dream.
Ha! that's his voiceAnd here he comes in Person:
Let her go Slave.Away dear Maid, away.

[Puts her out.

Enter Trappolin with his Spirits invisible.
Alberto from the other side.

Barb.
Great Sir,
Upon our knees we welcome your Return,


Trap.
And upon our Legs we take it:Hem! hem!

[He struts about.

Alb.
Your Highness comes unlook't for, we did not expect
This happy time so soon by fourteen days.


Barb.
So please: your Grace, where is our Dutchess?


Trap.
Your Dutchess will not come 'till the Gods know
when; for my part I know nothing of the matter. I left my
Train behind me and came unlookt for, to see how you Go|verned
in my absence, which I fear you have done scurvily
enough.


Alb.
How wild he talks!


Trap.
Eo, Meo, and Areo, well stuck to me I'faithWell
Lords, you never pity my Misfortunes; I have been robb'd in my
journey, had my Horse taken from me, and if it had not been
for Father Conjurer.


Barb.
How Sir?


Trap.
I say, if I had not been a Conjurer, I had ne're got home
in my Royal skin;Well stuck there again, Boys, well stuck.


Alb.
What means your Highness?


Trap.
Our Highness means to take exact account of Affairs;
I left an honest Fellow here, call'd Trappolin. What's become of
him?


Barb.
Your Highness gave me charge to banish him.


Trap.
Why there's the Pillar of our State gone. You took
him for Buffoon, but I found him one of the best Politicians in
Christendom; other Countries will value him, and for ought
I know, he's a Prince by this timeEo, Meo, and Areo true
Lads still.


Alb.
I am amaz'd!


Trap.
Hear me, you Lord Barb. I love dispatch in Affairs, tell
me therefore quickly what you take to be the duty of a States|man?


Barb.
To study first his Royal Masters profit,

And next to that his pleasure; to pursue
No sinister design of private gain;
Nor pillage from the Crown to raise his Heirs,
His base-born Brood in Pomp above the Race
Of old descended Worth; to know Desert,
And turn the Princes favour on his Friends;
And keep an open Ear to just Complaints.


Trap.
Why there 'tis. I have travel'd, and can tell you what
a Statesman should be. I will have him ten times prouder than
his Master; I, and ten times richer too. To know none of his
old Friends, when he is once in Office; to inform himself who
has Merit, that he may know whom to do nothing for; to make
Sollicitors wait seven years to no purpose, and to bounce thr'o
a whole Regiment of 'em, like a Souldier through the Gantlet.


Alb.
This is meer Frenzy.


Trap.
And there is another good Friend of mine, Brunetto,
where is he?


Alb.
Dread Sir, You Highness knows that for his presump|tion
in Courting of your Sister, you confin'd him.


Trap.
Nothing but lying in this world! I confine him: 'Tis
well known I never had a Sister in my life.


Barb.
No Sister, Sir?


Trap.
No, Iack Sawce, none that's worth imprisoning a Friend
for; honest Brunetto I'le be with thee in the twinkling of a
Eo, Meo, and Areo, fit fast; pass.

[Exit.

Alb.
He cannot counterfeit so much.


Barb.
I know not;
But if he do not, he is surely mad.


Alb.
The Heav'ns be merciful!
What wild fantastick things he do's? And talks
Of Eo, Meo, and Areo; Names
Unheard of in the Court before.


Barb.
Some Millain Counts I warrant you.
This kindness to Brunetto is most strange.


Alb.
Let's after him, and wait his better leisure.

[Exeunt.



SCENE. A Prison.
Re-enter Trappolin.

Trap.
WHat a dismal Place is here? I'le have it carry'd bo|dily
out of my Dukedom. Alass poor Brunetto,
what has he done to be shut up here?Oh here he comes!

Enter Brunetto.

Bru.
What can the Duke design by coming hither?
For certain, it must be to see me strangled:
Well let him execute his Tyrant will,
For Death itself were Mercy to this Dungeon,
Great Prince.


Trap.
He makes a very low leg, but I scorn to be out done in
Courtesie.


Bru.
What can this cruel Mockery intend?
Your Highness does forget your self extreamly
I am your Prisoner.


Trap.
My best Friend Brunetto.


Bru.
I am astonish't! Sir, upon my knees
I do congratulate your safe Return.


Trap.
And upon my Knees I do embrace thee, honest Brunetto.


Bru.
I know not what to think or speak.
I do beseech your Highness Rise.


Trap.
Not without thee: Therefore up I say; away with
Complements, I cannot abide them.


Bru.
You honour me above expression.


Trap.
A Fig for honour, I love thee man; Sirrah Jayler,
bring Chairs hither presently.


Bru.
Your Highness.


Trap.
Away with Highness, I say, away with it; call me
Lavin, plain Medicos.



Bru.
Sure I am awake, this is no Dream?


Trap.
We will live merrily together, i'saith we will! Come
Sirrah what a while have you been bringing these Chairs? I
have known a Pimp made a Prince in less time. Brunetto sit thee
down, sit down I say.


Bru.
I will attend your Highness on my Knees.


Trap.
Why, I am not thy Father, am I? Sit thee here.


Bru.
On the right handThat must not be.


Trap.
Why an'thou wilt have it there, there let it be
But hold, I am mistaken, that is on the left hand; that must
not be: Dost thou think I have no manners in me.

[They remove their Chairs several times.]

Bru.
There is no remedy, I must obey.


Trap.
Very well,What now art thou afraid of me?
Marry an'thou draws't back, I'le draw back too: Therefore sit
still I say, and let us talk.


Bru.
Great Sir, I am unworthy of these honours.
Your Noblest Florentines would be most proud
To be thus grac't.


Trap.
I love not these set speeches. Let us talk as if we were
in a Tavern together.Now, I prithee Man, how cams't thou
into this damn'd Dungeon?


Bru.
I, now the Storm comes,Pardon me Dread Sove|raign.


Trap.
What, on thy Knees again? Dost take me for Mahomet?
As well as I can pardon thee, I do pardon thee whatever it be,
tho' thou hast kill'd every body.


Bru.
Wherefore this Torture Sir, before my Death,
'Tis Tyranny; your Highness knows my Crime
Was in aspiring to your Royal Sister.


Trap.
Wast thou laid up for that: Alas for thee! Hast marry'd
her?


Bru.
Beseech your Grace.


Trap.
Well, An'thou hast not, I would thou hads't; get her
consent, and here I give thee mine. So come along with me to
Dinner.


Bru.
Your Highness shall command me to my Death.


Trap.
I say, Thou shalt have her, and if I had two Sisters thou
shoulds't have them bothWho waits there?

[Barberino, Alberto, Attendants Enter.]
Now my good Lords, you see this Apartment, and you thought
sit to have Brunetto shut up here for making Love to my Sister.


Alb.
It was your Highness Judgment and Command.


Trap.
Jayler, take me these two Coxcombly Lords, and keep
them under Lock: They are never well but when they are doing
mischief. In my Conscience and Soul, here is such incumbrance
of perplexity, that I protestCome along Friend.

[Exit. with Brunetto.

Barb.
Why, this is meer Distraction.


Alb.
We must endure it.

[They go in.



ACT II.

SCENE. The Palace.
Enter Trappolin.

Trap.
THis Dukes Life is very pleasant! Did ever any
man come to preferment upon lighter terms, I
am made a Prince; and Father Conjurer goes to
the Devil for't.
Enter Flametta.
Whose here my pretty little Rogue? I mar'l what makes
her at Court, tho' I fear this Affair will cost Lord Barberino a
Castration.


Fla.
Here is the Duke alone, whom I so long
Have sought for, to petition for repeal
Of my Dear Trappolin:
I do beseech your Grace

Take pity on a Miserable Maid
Bereav'd of all her Joys.


Trap.
All her Joys, that's Me!


Fla.
I humbly beg
Poor banish't Trappolin may be recall'd.


Trap.
Dear Honeysuckle, she even makes me weep.


Fla.
Great Sir, That you have Noble thoughts.


Trap.
I have so.


Fla.
The World is Witness, and by Consequence
A heart full of Commiseration.


Trap.
'Tis so; What a torment is this now, that I must coun|terfeit
with her? Fair Maiden rise; What is your Name?


Fla.
Flametta.


Trap.
Thou shal't fare the better for that:Trouble not your
self, your Trappolin shall be recall'd; and I would I were sacri|fic'd,
if I do not love him as well as I do my self.
Who comes yonder? the Princess.

Enter Prudentia.

Fla.
This is most Gracious.


Trap.
Some of my roguy Lords talk't of hanging him, if er'e
he come home again; but upon my Honour I swear it, that if they
hang him, they shall hang me; and so set thy heart at rest.


Fla.
Heav'n bless your Highness.

[Exit.

Trap.
If this be the Princess, I'le be sworn Brunetto was in the
Right of it.


Pru.
Ten thousand Welcomes, Sir: I never found
Such tedious hours since you left the Court.


Trap.
Fair Lady, come hitherYou are our Sister you'l
say.


Prud.
I hope my Conduct Sir, has ne'er giv'n Cause
For you to doubt of my Relation to you:
I am your Sister Sir, and Servant.


Trap.
I am sorry for't.


Prud.
I do beseech your Highness, on what ground?


Trap.
For a Carnal Reason, that shall be Nameless. But since we
are Brother and Sister, we must content our selves as well as we
can.



Prud.
I am surpriz'd at this: I heard indeed
His Language and Deportment was much alter'd;
Sir, I am glad to see you safe return'd,
But should have been more joyful, had you brought
Your Dutchess with you.


Trap.
She'l come soon enough, never fear it: But Sister, To
our Affair in hand (for I am Vengeance hungry.) At my Re|turn
here I found Brunetto in Goal, and it appear'd to be for Love
of you: Tell me Sister, can you fancy him?


Prud.
Your Will, Sir, is the square of all my Actions;
I have no Aversion for Brunetto's Passion:
Besides, his Quality, tho' yet conceal'd,
Is worthy of your Blood, he is a Prince;
His Name Horatio, and the second Son
To Savoy's Duke.


Trap.
My Friend a Prince; besworn I no more thought of see|ing
him a Prince than my self: Sister, you shall have my Con|sent
to marry him, and so there's an end.
[A confused noise without.]
What's there to do?

Enter Officer.

Off.
Dread Sir, This is the Day and Hour, in which your
Highness is wont to determine Causes in your Chair of State
here. And accordingly here are several Persons come to appeal to
your Highness for Justice.


Trap.
What! Justice before I have Dined? I tell you, it is a
dangerous thing: I had like to have been hang'd once my Self,
because the Judge was Fasting;Well, let them enter.
[He takes the Chair of State.]
Well, here sits the Government: In the first place I would have
the Court take notice, that in Affairs of State, I think that words
are not to be multiply'd, and I think so I shall not do so; and if I
do not, no body else must: So that in this Assembly, he that speaks
little, will speak better than he that talks much; and he that says
nothing, better than they both.


[The People being brought in, A Woman with her Daughter
stand forth.]

Wom.
I do beseech your Highness to do me Justice;
I have liv'd long with Fame amongst my Neighbours;
My Husband too bore Office in the Parish
'Till he was kill'd in fighting for your Highness,
And left me but this dear and only Daughter,
Whom this old Sinner has debauch'd,
And spoil'd her Fortune.


Trap.
Debauch'd? That is to say, lay with her? and got her
Maidenhead.


Wom.
Your Highness has a most discerning Judgment.


Trap.
And how did he do this? Lawfully by the help of a
Pimp, or without it?


Wom.
O most unlawfully! For Sir, he has a Wife and Son too
of his own Inches.


Trap.
A Son of this own Inches; good,
Then the Decision of this Cause is easie:
Do you hear Woman, we will have that Son debauch'd, you
shall get that Son's Maidenhead, and spoil his Fortune.


Wom.
I do beseech your Grace, what?


Trap.
No replying after Sentence.Whose Cause is next.

[Another Woman stands forth.]

Wom.
Great Duke of Tuscany, vouchsafe to hear me:
I am a poor and helpless Widow, one
That had no Comfort left me but my Child,
Whom this vile Minion Whipp the Coach-man here
Being Drunk, drove over him and left him dead.
I do beseech your Highness, make my Case
Your own, and think what sad Distress


Trap.
Hold, hold, I will have no flourishingThis Cause
requires some half a Minutes Consideration more than the for|mer:
Whipp you say, being drunk drove over your Child and
kill'd him: why look you Woman, Drink will make a Coach
man a Prince, and Vice vers by the Rule of Proportion, a Prince
a Coachman, so that this may be my own Case another time;
however, that shall make no obstruction of Justice:There|fore
Whipp shall lye with you, and be suspended from driving,
till he has got you another Child.



Wom.
So please your Grace, this is still worse.


Trap.
No replying after Sentence.Whose next?

[A Puritan stands forth.]

Pur.
So please your temporal Authority.


Trap.
How now! my mortifi'd Brother of Geneva, what car|nal
Controversie are you ingaged in?


Pur.
Verily, there is nothing carnal in my Cause: I have
sustained violence, much violence, and must have much Com|pensation
from the ungodly.


Trap.
What is your Grievance?


Pur.
I will pour it forth in the words of Sincerity.


Trap.
I care not a Farthing for Sincerity, let me have it in
Brevity.


Pur.
This Person here is by Occupation a Mason or Tiler, as
the Language of the world termeth it; whilest therefore I stood
contemplating a new Mansion that I had prepared unto my self
at the same time that this Person occupied his Vocation aloft
thereon, or rather should have occupied; such was his wicked
negligence, that he fell from the top of the building most un|conscionably
upon my outward man, even with all his carnal
weight, and almost bruised me unto the Death, I being clad in
thin Array (through the immoderate heat of the Season,) namely,
five Cassocks or Coats, seven Cloaks, and one dozen of quilted
Caps.


Trap.
Believe me Sirs, a most important matter! If such
enormities go unpunish'd, what Subject can be safe? Why, if
any perverse Fellow take a Pique against his Neighbour, it is
but getting up 8 or 10 or 14 stories high, and so fall down upon
him as he stands thinking no harm in the Street: I do there|fore
Decree, That this Tiler shall stand below, while you get
upon the Battlements of the House, and fall down upon him.


Pur.
This is still most monstrous.


Trap.
As for petty Causes, let them wait till we have
DinedEo, Meo, and Areo!Come along Sister.

[Exeunt.

Enter Duke Lavinio, Isabella the Dutchess,
Ladies, and Attendants.

Lav.
My hearts best Treasure, charming Isabella;
You are most welcome to the Court of Florence,
And when I lose the sense of such a Blessing;
And cease to make your happiness my study,
Let me become a Tributary Lord,
And hold my Birth-right at anothers will.


Isab.
Dread Sir, I know and prize my happiness:
Blest doubly in your Fortunes and your Love.


Lav.
My absence from Affairs so long, requires
My close Attendance now for some few hours;
Then I'le return to settle Loves Account,
With flaming heart at Beauties Altar bow,
And pay my Vows with double Adoration.
Mean while, our Princess and her Train once more
Shall welcome you to Florence:
Attend the Dutchess in.
[Ex. all but Lavinio and Guards.
The Face of things seems alter'd since I went;
Some strange fantastick humour has possest
In general the Citizens of Florence.
As yet I have met with none, but who amaze me;
And speak of Matters done by me, as if
I had been here before my Dutchess came.
Call Barberino and Alberto to me;
They'l soon resolve

[Barberino and Alberto appear through the Grates.]

Barb.
Most gracious Sir,
Pitty your Subjects, and most faithful Servants.


Lav.
Confusion! Are my Eyes and Ears both charm'd?
Our Deputies whom we did leave in trust
Of our whole Power, chain'd, shackl'd, and in Jayl!
Set them at large, and in my Presence now
Before this Minute can expire, or I
Shall go distracted 'ere I know the Cause.
Sure some ill Spirit has possest

My Subjects minds when I was gone; D'ye know me?


Barb.
The Duke of Florence our most gracious Master.


Lav.
Are not you call'd Barberino, you Alberto,
My prudent faithful Counsellours to whom
I left the Government of Tuscany?


Alb.
We are your Loyal Subjects, tho' your Prisoners.


Lav.
How came you so?


Barb.
Great Sir, your self knows well
'Twas only for obeying your Commands.


Lav.
A Plot, a general Plot upon my Wits;
Tell me the meaning, jest not with my Rage,
I charge you do not, therefore speak sense to me;
Or on your naked hearts I'le read the Riddle.


Alb.
Alas! what shall we say? Great Sir, you know
That none except your Royal self could do it,
And to your Sacreed Justice we appeal
How far we have deserv'd.


Lav.
Perdition! Furies
Where will this end? Gods! I shall burst with Choler.
Be merciful good Heav'n, and give me Temper.


Alb.
Amen good Heaven: I fear the fatal want.


Lav.
Some Frenzie has on the poor Wretches seiz'd,
Or else they durst not thus to tempt my Fury.
Indeed I was to blame in threatning you.
Who so much need my pity: My good Lords,
I do beseech you to collect your Wits,
And tell me gently how you came in Prison.


Barb.
By the Prosperity of Tuskany,
Your Highness left us there.


Lav.
When did I so?


Alb.
The self same time you went in Person thither to free
Brunetto.


Lav.
The self same time that I went thither
To free Brunetto: Death, whom? What Brunetto?


Barb.
Your Prisoner taken in the Mantuan Wars.


Lav.
The more I search, the more I am confounded,
Quite lost within a Labyrinth of wonders.


Alb.
Gods! how he speaks, as if all we were mad,
And he had done nothing.


Lav.
I will yet have patience:

Tell me my Lords, if you are very sure
That you are well and Masters of your Sense.


Barb.
If e're your Highness knew us so we are.


Lav.
Yet give me leave to think what I do know;
I can sustain no more.Come hither Captain.
These Lords affirm, that I put them in Prison,
How say you to't?


Capt.
Great Sir, your Highness did,
You saw them left in Custody that Minute
You freed Brunetto.


Lav.
He's in the same Tale:
Tho' they are all alike depriv'd of sense,
Yet do they all agree in what they say;
But why, good Captain, I will reason't with you,
Should I desire Brunetto's liberty?
Would it not be a foul dishonour think you
To the Great Family of Medices,
To cast away our Sister upon one
We neither yet know whom, nor what he is:
I pray you therefore Captain, if you have
Any small fragment of your Wits remaining
Reply accordingly.


Capt.
Sir, it is certain,
That if your Highness should bestow your Sister,
On such a one as you are pleas'd to mention,
The Conduct would surprize the world; but Sir,
I heard your self, distinctly I did hear you,
to call Brunetto, Prince Horatio,
The second Son to the Duke of Savoy.


Lav.
Vengeance!
My wonder is so great, that I want words
Wherewith to give it vent: I see that all
My Subjects being distracted, think me mad.


Capt.
Nay more, Your Highness gave the Princess charge
That she prepar'd herself, for in two days
You'd see her marry'd to the Prince Horatio.


Lav.
Enough! Yet Gods I'le hold my Reason yet
Florence I left a most ingenious City,
But find it wofully at my Return
Possest with strange unheard of Lunacy.

Captain, I swear to you by my Dukedom,
I'd rather send for that Brunetto's head,
Than such a message as you say I did.


Capt.
Beseech Your Highness look, let your own eyes
Convince you of the Truth of what I said.

Enter Brunetto and Prudentia.

Bru.
Divine Prudentia, All thy Sexes Charms
In thee are centred, and from that fair Union
Receive a fresh unspeakable Addition;
Your Brother's good ev'n to a Miracle,
And gave me thraldom, but to raise my Joy.


Prud.
Indeed it speaks a Noble Nature in him
To Crown Desert, though in an Enemy.
And now I must confess without a blush,
You long have been my hearts dear secret choice,
But never durst give Ear to your Addresses
'Till by my Brothers free consent allow'd.


Bru.
Said you Consent? Alass! that Name falls short
Of his Transcendent Grace: He's earnest for us,
Urges and drives us to the Bow'r of Joy.


Lav.
Furies and Scorpions drive you, Whirlwinds part you.


Prud.
My Royal Brother.


Lav.
Damn'd Infernal Creature!
More false than Helen, and the greater Plague.


Bru.
I did suspect at first 'twas his Distraction
That favour'd my aspiring hopes, and now
I fear't has chang'd his mind to my undoing.


Prud.
Wherein Dear Sir, have I deserv'd this Usage?
Was't not your Order?


Lav.
Sulphur choak thy voice:
I'le spend no Breath upon a thing so vile.
You Sir, My new made Favourite, come near
And tell me, are you Son to Savoy's Duke?


Bru.
Your Highness knows I am his Second.


Lav.
I know you are his Second? Blood and Fire.
This Frenzy has feiz'd him too.
Then know Sir, were you Savoy's Eldest Son,

My Sister once deserv'd a better Match;
And she shall rather in a Monastery
Sigh out a weary Life without Devotion,
Than be your Wife.To Prison with the Boaster
'Till Savoy fetch him thence.

[The Guards hurry him off.]

Barb.
This relishes of Reason.


Alb.
Heav'n preserve
This temper, and restore the State of Florence.


Lav.
Come Lords, and lend your best Assistance to me,
Sleep shall not close my Eyes, nor food refresh me,
'Till we have search't this Mischief to the Core;
Wee'l stop at no extreams of Blood or Torture,
Baulk no rough Means that may our Peace secure;
Such desp'rate Ill's, must have as desp'rate Cure.

[Exeunt. manet Prudentia.

Prud.
Unhappy Florence! more unhappy I
To see a Prince and Brother thus decay'd,
Bereav'd of Reason, and made less than Man!
My dear Horatio, grieve not at this Usage,
But rather pity thy Oppressors Fate.

Enter Trappolin.

Trap.
Whose here? the Princess in Tears? Dear Sister, how
dost thou do? Come, I know your Grievance, and out of my
Natural affection have taken care for you; you marry the Prince
Horatio this Night.


Prud.
One Minute then has chang'd his sullen humour!
Why then Sir, have you made him a close Prisoner?


Trap.
A Prisoner say you?Run Guards and fetch him
to our Presence.Do not so much abuse your self dear Sister,
to think I would confine my Friend to Prison.


Prud.
You did it Sir this Minute, he's scarce there yet.


Trap.
Madam Sister, If I did, it was in my Drink, and cer|tainly
I had some politick Reason for it, which I have now for|got.Some
more Wine Slave to clear my Understanding.


[Brunetto brought in here.]

Bru.
How soon his mind is chang'd? The Heaven's be
prais'd.


Trap.
Dear Prince Horatio an' you do not forgive my Locking
you in Prison, I shall never be merry again, and so here is to you
dear Prince Horatio.


Bru.
Upon my knees I pay my humblest Thanks.


Trap.
Come, come, Take her along Man, take her along, I
know Lovers would be private, and to agree the rest among
your selves.

[Brunetto leads off Prudentia.
[Barberino and Alberto passing over the Stage]

Trap.
Who's yonder? My Lords Banishers at large agen?
will the Government never be able to drink in quiet for 'em?
Seize these Traytors there, and carry them to Prison. And do
you hear Sirrah, it shall be Treason for any body to let them out.


Off.
Unless by order from your Highness.


Trap.
Orders from my Highness? I tell you Rascal, it shall be
Treason to let them out, tho' I command it my self. Away with
them, go.
Enter Isabella.
What Bona Roba have we hear now?


Isab.
My Dearest Lord.


Trap.
For her Dress and Beauty, she may be a Dutchess, who
are you Madam?


Isab.
Do you not know me Sir?


Trap.
It seems she is none of the wisest, tho'.


Isab.
How am I alter'd since I came from Millain?


Trap.
Oh! 'tis the Dutchess: You are our Wife, you'l say?


Isab.
Sir:


Trap.
I am glad of it I promise you; come kiss then incont|nently.


Isab.
What mean you Sir, you are merrily dispos'd.


Trap.
Madam Dutchess, I am somewhat jovial indeed, I have
been drinking freely, and so kiss me again.


Isab.
My Lord.


Trap.
You are a handsome Woman I promise you, and tell me
Madam Dutchess, am not I a proper handsome Fellow?



Isab.
Sir, Do not jest with me, you know you are
The Man whom I esteem above the World.


Trap.
What a winning look was there too?To Bed my
Dear, to Bed.I'le but take 'tother Flask, to put State Af|fairs
out of my head, and thenAh! ha! ha!

[Exeunt.



ACT III.

Enter Lavinio.

Lav.
YOU Glorious Planets that do nightly guide
The giddy Ships upon the Ocean Waves,
If some of your malignant Influences
Have rais'd this madness in my Subjects minds,
Let some of your more gentle Aspects now
Restore them to their Sense.
[Barberino and Alberto appear in Prison.]
I am astonish'd, Heaven's! What do I see?
My Lords imprison'd? Free them instantly
Without reply, for should you answer me,
I know you'l say I did it, and distract me.


Capt.
His ill Fit's off again.


Lav.
I do not think that since the Infancy
And first Creation of the World, a madness
Pestiferous and equal unto this
Was ever known, all-Gracious Heav'n reveal
The fatal Cause, or lay our Cities waste.


Barb.
Most Gracious Soveraign, How have we deserv'd
Thus to be made the scorn of Vulgar Eyes?


Lav.
Yet send me Patience Heav'n!
I wonder Lords, that you of all my Subjects,
Whom I have known to bear the Noblest Judgments,
Should thus distract your selves in your wild Fits:
You run to Prison of your own accord,
And say, I sent you.



Alb.
Most Royal, Sir, we grieve to see these days;
You did command us thither,


Lav.
I?


Barb.
Your Highness self.


Lav.
You are both deceived, to act such idle Errors,
And lay the blame on me.


Capt.
So please your Grace, You did again commit 'em,
That very hour in which you set them free.


Lav.
I commit them?
I tell you all with sorrow, witness Heav'n
How deep that sorrow is! you are all mad
Therefore in this small interval of Sense,
Betake you with one voice to your Devotion,
And pray the incens'd Gods to be appeas'd
And keep you from Relapse.


Both.
Heav'n bless your Highness.

[Ex. All but Lavinio.

Lav.
Plague, Famine, War, the ruinous Instruments
Wherewith incensed Deities do punish
Poor Mankind for mis-deeds, had they all fall'n
Upon this City, it had been a thing
To be lamented, but not wonder'd at.

Enter Isabella.

Isab.
My Lord, I have this hour expected you.


Lav.
O, my dear Isabella, I have brought thee
From Millain flourishing with all Delights,
Into a City full of men distracted.


Isab.
He is not sober yet: Go in and sleep Sir.
You do not well my Lord, thus to betray
Your weakness to the publick view.


Lav.
Oh, Heavens!
My Wife and all.


Isab.
What say you Sir?


Lav.
My Isabella, Thou hast cause to curse me
For bringing thee into a place infected;
The Air is poyson'd, and I wonder now
How I have scap'd so long.


Isab.
I pray go sleep.



Lav.
Why Isabella?


Isab.
You have drunk too much.


Lav.
Madness unmatch'd!
She's farther gone than any of the rest.
Dear Isabella retire into thy Chamber;
Compose thy thoughts a while, and I'le come to thee,
There we'l beseech the angry Gods together,
That they would yet remove this heavy Ill.
[Ex. Isab.
Enter Brunetto and Prudentia.
What do I see? Brunetto unconfin'd;
I am astonish'd how he came at large;
Whom I would have to lie in Prison, walk
In freedom, and whom I would have in freedom,
Run of themselves to Prison.Hell! They kiss,
Embrace before my Eyes! My Guards there.


Bru.
Ha!
He's chang'd again.


Prud.
My Noble Brother.


Lav.
Off.
Hadst thou thy Reason, and shouldst offer this,
I'd study Tortures for thee; as thou art,
I pity thy misfortunes.Seize your Prisoner:
Next time I see him free, your head is forfeit.


Prud.
Wonders on Wonders, I beseech you Sir
By all the Bonds of Nature, for what cause?


Lavin.
It is vain to answer frantick People.

[Exeunt.



SCENE Draws, and Shews
Trappolin asleep, Flasks of Wine by him.

Trap.
WHat a Princely Nap have I taken!But as I
remember I was to have gone to my Dutchess, or
dreamt so.Give me a Bumper.
[Barberino and Alberto enter.]
My Lords at large again?


Barb.
Long live your Highness.


Trap.
Amen.


Alb.
And happily.


Trap.
Amen for that tooBut my small Friends how
came you hither? I thought you had been under Lock and Key.


Barb.
Alass! he is relaps'd as bad as ever.


Trap.
Sirrah Captain, Why kept you not these Vermine up till
I bid you let them out?


Capt.
So please your Grace I did.


Trap.
Will you lie Rascal to my Princely Face?

[He throws Wine in his Face.

Capt.
Gods! will this Humor never leave him?


Barb.
We must in again.


Trap.
To Kennel with them, walk my good Lords Banishers
your Honours know the way. Along with them. Trugh! trugh!


Alb.
There is no remedy.

[They are carried off.

Trap.
Thus far I take it, we have kept the Government in
good Order; now for my Dutchess, lead to her Graces Apart|ment.

[Officer enters.]

Off.
Ambassadours from Savoy desire admittance.


Trap.
What are their Names?


Off.
Sir, I presum'd not to enquire.


Trap.
Then what's their Business?


Off.
That Sir were worse presumption.


Trap.
Thou insolent Varlet, What a Vulgar Fellow dost thou
take me for, to speak with Strangers before I know their Busi|ness?

Well Sirrah, set a Bumper by our Chair of State, and
bring them to our Presence.


Off.
What can this mean?


Trap.
Suppose now, that those should be Spies upon our Go|vernment,
in the shape of Ambassadours: Loving Subjects, if
that be their business, I shall be frank and tell them, they have
the wrong Sow by the Ear. For as the Ancients were wont to
say, (those Ancients were a wise Nation) it was with them a
principle Maxime, Some wiser than some: Trust me for Politicks,
I'faith.

Enter Ambassadours.

1. Emb.
Dread Sir, By us the Duke of Savoy sends
To greet your Nuptials with the Millanese,
Wishing all happiness to great Lavinio.


Trap.
'Tis civilly done, by my Troth, and there is no Love
lost, I can assure him.


2. Emb.
Is this the so much fam'd Lavinio,
Renown'd for Wisdom and Severity.


Trap.
I say, it shews his good Nature as well as his Breeding,
and so here's his good health.


1. Emb.
This is most strange.


Trap.
So much for Ceremony, now to our Business:
For what can more befit a Prince than Business,
Which always is best done Propri Person:
I therefore Spice my Mornings Draught my self.


2. Emb.
I am astonish'd.


Trap.
The next prime Quality is for a Prince
Well to inform him of neighbouring Courts,
What Customs and Diversions are in use;
But chiefly by what Politicks they steer,
What Method in Affairs of State they take,
Whereby to square his own Concerns at home:
I therefore ask, What Wine you have in Savoy?


1. Emb.
This is gross Mockery.


2. Emb.
Or utter Frenzy.
We come not Sir to trifle, and 'tis time
We now declare the Order of our Message:

Our Royal Master is at last informed,
His only Brother, and his Dukedoms Heir,
Lyes here confin'd in close Imprisonment;
Release him instantly, and we are Friends:
Refuse us; and our sole Reply is War.


Trap.
If you bring nothing but War, e'en carry it back with
you again: We can drink and quarrel fast enough amongst our
selves;But heark you, For the sake of some Dukes that
shall be nameless, before I treat with your Master, I must know
by what Title he holds.


1. Emb.
By Native and Legitimate Claim.


Trap.
That is as much as to say, I am an Usurper.


2. Emb.
By most unquestion'd and immediate Right
From Heav'n.


Trap.
As who should say, my Preferment came from the
Devil.


1. Emb.
We ask your final Answer, Peace or War.


Trap.
My final Answer is, to tell no man my Pleasure, till I
know it my self.


2. Emb.
Let us declare for Arms then, and away.


1. Emb.
It cannot be with this Fantastick Tale;
To bring this strange account, will speak us mad,
And with our Prince ne'er gain the least Belief.


Trap.
Look you Sirs, Your Master and I, can agree to fall out
at our leisure; but if he pretend to love the Prince Horatio better
than I do, he is a very uncivil Person, and so I shall tell him when
I next light into his Company.


1. Emb.
Heaven's! this is still more strange.


Trap.
Will he fight for him?


2. Emb.
He'l Conquer for him, Florence shall confess it.


Trap.
Then I have one familiar Question more,
Will he Pimp for him?


1. Emb.
Prodigious!


Trap.
Not Pimp for him? Let him pretend no further;
If he ne'er Pimp'd for him, his claim is done.
Will he give him his Sister?


2. Emb.
That were foul Incest; and besides, he has none.


Trap.
Why no more have I, nor ever had in my life, and yet
I have given him mine.But as for your Princess, let her set

her heart at rest; for if my Friend must not have her, I will mar|ry
her my self.


1. Emb.
What, while your Millanese is living?


Trap.
That I confess I had forgot, Care for the State has turn'd
my Brain:But here is to our better Understanding.

[Drinks.

2. Emb.
This is beyond all sufferance, gross affront;
And Florence shall in Blood lament the Folly.


Trap.
In the name of Mars, then let your Master know, I care
not, when we meet at the head of our Armyto crack a
Bottle.

[Exeunt severally.
Enter Lavinio hastily.

Lav.
I've found, I've found at last the fatal Riddle:
It must be so, the Gods inspire the Thought,
Call Barberino and Alberto to me.


Serv.
From Prison Sir?


Lav.
From Prison Slave, what mean'st thou?


Serv.
Your Highness but this Minute sent them thither;
Nor will your Officer at my Request
Release them, 'twas so strict a Charge you gave.


Lav.
Here take my Signet for a Token: Bid them
Attend me instantly in my Apartment.
It must, it must be so, some spiteful Fiend
Permitted by the Heav'ns assumes my shape:
And what I do, undoes; no other Cause
Remains in Nature for these strange Effects;
Pity me Gods, your lab'ring Minister;
Remove this Plague, and save the State of Florence.

[Exit.
Enter Trappolin, as going to the Dutchesse's Bed-Chamber.

Trap.
The next is the Dutchesse's Bed-Chamber.and
yonder she is fast asleep.What a Neck and Breast is there?Now
do I reckon that my Friend Brunetto and I shall encounter
much about a time. I ought to have seen him a Bed first, but
my Natural Affection to my Dutchess prevail'd above my
Manners.


Re-Enter Servant.

Serv.
Here is your Ring again Sir,


Trap.
What Ring?


Serv.
Your Signet Sir, which you sent me with, I have ac|cording
to your Order releas'd the Lords.


Trap.
Give it me: Now, go Slave commend me to Brunetto,
and bid him start fair.


Serv.
from Prison Sir?


Trap.
Prom Prison say you?Here take my Signet with
you again, and release him: and say, I charge him on his Allegi|ance
to go to Bed to the Princess immediately; make all fast
without there; I can find the way to her Grace by my self:
Away.

[Ex. Servants, c.
[As he is going in, he meets Lavinio entring.]

Lav.
'Tis strange they come not yet;What do I see?
This is the Hellish Phantasm that has bred
All this Confusion in our Court; good Gods
How he resembles me! That I my self
Would almost take him for my self: What art thou?


Trap.
I am Lavinio Duke of Tuscany.


Lav.
He speaks too, and usurps my Name.
If thou art a Fiend, the gracious Heav'ns be kind,
And put a Period to thy wild proceedings;
But if thou art a Witch, I'le have thee burnt.


Trap.
Burnt? Traytor, burn your lawful Duke!


Lav.
I'le try if thou hast substance, struggle not,
For thou mayst sooner break from Hercules:
I'le have thee ead from thy enchanted skin,
In which thou represents my person.


Trap.
I say, beware of Treason; flea off my skin?


Lav.
Guards, Guards, Guards.


Trap.
Guards, Guards.


Lav.
A Traytor, a Traytor.


Trap.
A Traytor, a Traytor.

[As they strive and call together, Trappolin flings the enchant|ed
Powder in his Face, Lav. quits his hold.
There's some of Father Conjurer's Powder for you; what it will
do for me I know not, but there 'tis.


Lav.
The Sorcerer has blinded me.


Trap.
Ay, so would Powder of Post for the present; but if this
be all the wonderful Effects, I'le save my skin while I may.

[He runs off.

Lav.
Stop, stop the Traytor, help? Guards, Guards!

[Runs after him.
Enter Isabella in her Night-Gown.

Isab.
Sure I did hear the Duke my Husbands Voice
As in distress, and calling out for help;
Or did I dream? It must be more than so:
Nay, as I thought, I saw two Figures of him
One coursing of the other:
The noise continues stillWho waits? All Deaf?
[Rings a bell.
What, no Attendance here? What can this mean?
This is the private passage to the Princesse's Chamber.
I'le see if all be as silent there.

[Exit.
Re-enter Trappolin.

Trap.
What will become of me? I shall never have the heart
to swagger it out with him: The Guards are coming too:Oh
rare Powder! 'thas done the work I'faith.

Re-Enter Lavinio, transform'd into the Like|ness
of Trappolin.

Lav.
I have thee, and will hold thee, wert thou Proteus.

Enter Captain and Guards.

Trap.
Help Subjects, help your Duke's assaulted.



Capt.
Audacious Slave.


Lav.
Death and Furies.


Capt.
What Trappolin return'd:


Off.
He is distracted sure.


Trap.
No, no, Trappolin was too honest to assault his natural
Prince, this is some Villain transform'd by Magick to his likeness,
And I will have him flea'd out of his enchanted skin.


Lav.
Blood and Vengeance.


Trap.
Look to him carefully, till you have our further Orders:
Now once more for my Dutchess.

[Exit.

Lav.
Unhand me Slaves, I am the Duke your Soveraign.


All.
Ha! ha! ha!


Lav.
That Villain that went out, a damn'd Imposter.


Off.
Foul Treason, stop his mouth.


Capt.
Alass he is Lunatick.


Lav.
Why did you let th'Impostor Devil scape?


Capt.
Compose thy self poor Trappolin.


Lav.
What mean the Slaves by Trappolin?
Enter Servant.
Sir, Are you come? Where is my Ring?


Serv.
Trappolin come home? And as great a Knave, it seems,
as ever: He has heard the Duke sent me with his Ring, and this
impudent Rogue thinks to get it.


Lav.
The Slaves are now gone mad another way.
They take the Counterfeit for their true Prince,
And me it seem for one I do not know.
Sure some amongst my Subjects yet will know me,
Then Slaves, your Heads shall answer for this Crim.

Enter Flametta.

Fla.
I am or'ejoy'd. you are welcome home my Dear;
I fear'd alass, I ne're should see you more:
Indeed my Dear, you are beholden to me;
'Twas I that won the Duke for your Repeal.


Lav.
Blood and Fire!



Fla.
This is unkind to treat me with such coldness
After so long an Absence; have you then
Forgot my Truth and Constancy?


Lav.
Off Strumpet.


Fla.
Dost thou reward me thus for all the Pains
I took for thy Return to Florence?


Lav.
Leave me,
Or I will spurn thee from me.


Fla.
O faithless Men! Women by me take heed
How you give credit to the perjur'd Sex.
Have I all thy long Banishment been true,
Refus'd Lord Barberino with his Gifts;
And am I slighted thus?


Lav.
What means the Harlot?
Heav'n, Earth, and Hell, have all conspir'd together,
To load me with a Crime unknown before.
Enter Barberino and Alberto.
My Lords, You never came in better Season.
For never was your Prince so much distres't;
My very Guards deny me for their Master,
And take a Wizard for the Duke of Florence.


Barb.
What means the Vagabond, how came he home?
I hope the Duke will take care to reward him.
Say Captain, which way is our Royal Master?


Lav.
Nay then, Destruction is turned loose upon me.


Fla.
Alas, he is mad!
Distracted with his Banishment.

Enter Isabella and Prudentia.

Pru.
The Vision you relate is wonderful,
And all these strange disorders in the Court
Must needs proceed from some prodigious Cause.


Lav.
That is the Princesse's voice; Prudentia, Sister,
Pity your Brother, speak to these mad Subjects
That do not know their Prince.


Pru.
What Fellow's this?



Capt,
Off Sirrah.


Lav.
Is she bewitched too?My Dear Isabella
Thou sure wilt own the Duke thy Husband:Ha!
She turns away in wonder! By the Bonds
Of Duty, and of Nature, I conjure you
To do me Right, and own the Duke your Lord.
Alberto, Barberino, Prudentia, Isabella.


All.
Ha! ha! ha!


Isab.
What do you with this frantick wretch? look to him
And lodge him in the Hospital.


Lav.
Confusion!
Nay then 'tis time to lay me thus on Earth,
And grow one Piece with it.

[Throws himself down.
Enter Brunetto.

Bru.
Your Highness humble Servant,Dear Prudentia,
The Duke once more consents to make us happy,
Here is his Royal Signet for our Marriage.

Enter Trappolin.

Trap.
Eo, Meo, and Areo, rare Boys still.I am out of breath
with looking for her; the Bed I found, but no Dutchess, and
not one of her Women can tell me where she is:Why here
they are now all on a Bundle. Dear Pigs-ney, what a naughty
Trick was this, to Spirit your self away, when you know how
frighted I am with lying alone?My Princely Friend, Hast
thou consummated? That sneaking look of thine confesses thee
Guilty: Well, marry'd or not marry'd, I am resolv'd to see you
a Bed together incontinently.


Lav.
The Devil you shall.

[Rising up hastily.

Fla.
Dear Trappolin be quiet.
You will destroy yourself and meI do beseech your Grace,
Forgive him; alass, he is Lunatick.


Lav.
Oh Heav'ns! endure this Impostor thus
With his Enchantments to bewitch your Eyes.


Trap.
Alass, poor Trappolin! That ever such good Parts as
thine should come to this.



Alb.
Will he e're suffer this abuse?


Barb.
I know not perhaps one Madman will pity another.


Lav.
Ye Florentines, I am Lavinio;
I am the Tuscan Duke; this an Impostor
That by damn'd Magick, and Infernal Arts
Has rais'd these strange Chimaera's in the Court.


Alb.
Your Highness is too patient.


Fla.
Sweet Trappolin be rul'd.


Trap.
Shew him a Glass.


Lav.
What do I see? even thus I seem to them:
Plagues, Death, and Furies, this is Witchcraft all:
[Breaks the Glass.
Still I assert my Right, I am Lavinio.


Trap.
Nay then, I see hee'l ne're come to good; to Prison
with him, take him away.

[As they seize him, Thunder and Lightning breaks forth, Mago rises.]

Mag.
Turn thee Lavinio Duke of Tuscany.


Lav.
Ha! who art thou that own'st my Power and Title,
Disclaim'd by all my Subjects?


All.
This is strange.


Trap.
Father Conjurer here?I warrant he's going to the
Devil now, and calls at Court for Company.


Lav.
What e're thou art, dissolve this Magick Mist;
Restore my State, and right an injur'd Prince.


Mag.
My Spells alone can do it.


Lav.
I know that voice.


Mag.
Remember Guicardi the Tuscan Count,
Whom twelve years since, thou didst unjustly banish;
Which tedious hours I chiefly have apply'd
To Magick Studies, and in just Revenge
Have rais'd these strange disorders in thy Court;
Now, Pardon what is past, I'le set all Right.


Lav.
I swear by all the Honours of my State,
By both my Dukedoms, Florence and Siena,
I pardon what is past.


Trap.
So here is his Grace and the Devil upon Articles of
Agreement, and excluding me from the Treaty:Well, I'le
e'en banish my self whilest I have the Authority in my own
hands: I have got a handsome Face by the Bargain, and it

would grieve me to be flea'd out of it, and therefore I will steal
off as silently as I can.


Mag.
Then take that Chair.

[He places Lavinio in the Chair. Thunder and Lightning again.]

Bru.
What mean those Prodigies?


Mag.
Ye Noble Florentines suspend your fears,
And you shall see the wonders of my Skill.
Thus with my Powerful Wand I Crown thy Brow
With grateful slumbers till my Charms are wrought.
You Spirits fram'd of milder Elements,
You that Controul the black malicious Fiends,
Ascend, ascend, and execute my Will.

[Soft Musick. Spirits rise and dance about Lavinio, who by a device is transform'd before the Audience into his own Appearance, and Habit.

All.
The Duke! Good Heav'n! How have our Eyes been
Charm'd?
Long live your Highness.


Lav.
Where have I Been? Sure all has been a Dream.


Mag.
Your Royal Word is past, you pardon all;


Lav.
I do, and weep for Joy
To see my Subjects to their Sense restor'd.


Mag.
Brave Prince Horatio, your elder Brother,
[To Brunetto.
The Duke of Savoy's dead.


Lav.
Then he is Savoy.
Sir, I entreat forgiveness of what's past,
And wish you Joy.

[Gives him Prudentia.

Brun. Prud.
You Crown our Happiness.


Lav.
Methinks, we have all been scatter'd in a Storm,
And thus by Miracle met here together
Upon the happy shore.Horatio, Lords,
Prudentia, Wife, let me embrace you all.

[Trappolin brought in by Spirits, in his own likeness.]

Lav.
Here is th' Impostor, Gods! what abject Things,
When in your Hands, prove Scourages of a State.


Trap.
Good Father Conjurer, for old Acquaintance sake
Beseech your Grace, use Moderation:
[To Lavinio.
You see by me what a Prince may come to.



Lav.
Thy Pardon's granted, but depart the Realm.


Fla.
Dear Trappolin embrace the happy Fate,
And take me with thee.


Trap.
My Lord,I have stood your Lordship's Friend.

[To Brunetto.

Bru.
In Savoy I'le requite thee Trappolin:


Trap.
Savoy, Girl, Savoya Count, a Count I warrant
thee.


Mag.
Son Trappolin I am thy natural Father;
And since my Banishment from Florence, have
Sustain'd much Hardship, serv'd the Turk in's Galleys.


Trap.
By your leave Father Conjurer, you have serv'd the De|vil
too.


Mag.
But from this Hour renounce my wicked Arts.


Lav.
So, lasting Happiness on Florence fall;
Our Plague's remov'd, and now we'l pass the Time
In Courtly Joys; our Tuscan Poets shall
From these Disorders, frame Fantastick Scenes
To entertain our beauteous Millanese:
Each Accident at leisure well recite,
Misfortunes past, prove Stories of Delight.







SONGS.

A SONG written by Sir
George Etheridge.

TEll me no more I am deceiv'd,
while Silvia seems so kind;
And takes such care to be believ'd,
The Cheat I fear to find
To flatter me should Falshood lye
Coinceal'd in her soft Youth;
A thousand times I'd rather die,
Than see the unhappy Truth;


II.
My Love all Malice shall outbrave,
Let Fops in Libels rail;
If she the Appearances will save,
No Scandal can prevail:
She makes me think I have her Heart,
How much for that is due?
Th she but act the tender part,
The Joy she gives is true.



A SONG written by a Lady

AH poor Olinda! never boast
Of Charms that have thy Freedom cost,
They threw at Hearts, and thine is lost.
Yet none thy Ruine ought to blame,
His Wit first blew me to a Flame,
And fans it with the Wings of Fame.


II.
In vain I do his Person shun,
I cannot from his Glory run,
That's Universal as the Sun,
In Crowds his Praises fill my Ear,
Alone his Genius does appear,
He, like a God, is ev'ry where.



A SONG written by a Person of Quality.
WHO can resist my Celia's Charms?
Her Beauty wounds and Wit disarms;
When these their mighty Forces joyn,
What Heart's so strong but must resign?
Love seems to promise in her Eyes,
A kind and lasting Age of Joys;
But have a care, their Treason shun,
I look'd, believ'd, and was undone,
In vain a thousand ways I strive,
To keep my fainting Hopes alive;
My Love can never find Reward,
Since Pride and Honour is her Guard.




The EPILOGUE.
TRAPPOLIN suppos'd a Duke, This Action shows
Strange matters may depend on meer suppose.
One may suppose Masks chast, loud Nonsence Witty,
No Flatterers at Court, no Cheat i' th' City
I am my self by one i' th' World thought Pretty.
[Pulling off his Perriwig.
Whereas you see no Lillies grow nor Roses,
So Masks for Beauty pass, that want their Noses.
The Reverend Citizen, Sixty and above,
That by poor inch of Candle buys his Love,
Supposes that his Son and Heir he Got,
But ask his Wife and she supposes not.
Mean time the Sot, whil'st he's a Cuckold made,
Supposes she's at Church praying for Trade.
The Country Squire newly come up to Town,
By Parents doom'd to Lawyers daggl'd Gown,
Supposes some Bright Angel he has gotten,
In our Lewd Gallery till proving Rotten,
His Study soon he leaves for Swearing Tubs,
And Cook and Littleton, for honest Hobs.
Nor had dull Cit sent Spouse to Drink the Waters,
And found them helping to her Sons and Daughters,
Had he suppos'd when so the Belly swells,
There must be something in't besides the Wells.
There's no Man here had Married I'm afraid,
Had he not first suppos'd his Wife a Maid.
Thus, 'tis Opinion must our Peace secure,
For no Experiment can do't I'me sure.
In Paths of Love no Foot-steps e're were Troc'd,
All we can do is to suppose her Chast;
For Women are of that deep subtile kind,
The more we dive to know, the less me find
Ah Ladies! what strange Fate still Rules us Men?
For whil'st we wisely would escape the Gin,
A kind suppose still draws the Woodcocks in
In all Affairs 'tis so, the Lawyers Baul,
And with damn'd Noise and Nonsense fill the Hall,
Supposing after Seven Years being a Drudge,
'Twill be his Fortune to be made a Iudge.
All things are helpt out by suppose, but Wit;
But what shall we by That suppose to get.
Unless a kind suppose your Minds possess,
For on that Charm depends our Play's Success.
Then tho you like it not, Sirs, don't Disclose it,
But tho you are not satisfi'd, suppose it.





