


ENGLAND's JESTS Refin'd and Improv'd. Being a Choice COLLECTION OF THE Merriest Jests, Smartest Repartees, Wittiest Sayings, and most No|table Bulls, yet Extant. With many New Ones, never before Printed TO WHICH ARE ADDED, XIII. Ingenious CHARACTERS Drawn to the Life.
The whole WORK compil'd with great Care and Exactness: And may serve as the Witty-Man's COMPANION, the Busie-Man's DIVERSION; and the Melancholy Man's PHYSICK and RECREATION.
The Third Edition, with the Addition of several Jests, not permitted to be Printed in the for|mer Impressions.
Calculated for the Innocent spending of the Winter Evenings, By H. C.
Semel in Anno Ridet Apollo. Horat..
London, Printed for Iohn Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey, 1693.




ENGLAND'S JESTS REFIN'D AND IMPROV'D
Spectatum admissi Risum teneatis Amici Horat.
London Printted for John Harris at y^e Harrow in y^e Poultry





LICENS'D, And Entred, According to Order.



The Preface to the READER.
READER,
AS I know and own Plain-Dealing to be a Iewel, so I were much too blame if I did not use it with You: Therefore as a taste thereof, there were two Reasons that chiefly induced me to compile this small Piece, and which I proposed to my self as the end there|of, viz. Your Pleasure, and my own Profit. For let Men pretend what they will for their Scribling, as the Informaion, Instruction, or Obligati|on of their Friends and Countrey-men with Twenty other Reasons given for it; I must beg their Pardons if I can't screw up my Faith to believe 'em: For 'tis too plain that Interest sways

the World, and that all sorts and de|grees of Men, even from the Courti|er to the Cobler, are its Votaries. You will not then admire if I propo|sed it to my self; nor do I think that I stood in need of a Preface to con|vince you of it: But Custom calling for one, a Book being without it (as our Modern Wits say) Like a House without a Porch, or a Play without a Prologue, c. Tho I must confess I am no great admirer of Prefaces, look|ing upon 'em, I mean the Generality of 'em, (for there are some that are Concise, Pithy and Instructive) to be for the most part Impertinent, Su|perfluous, and little to the purpose; stuft with Flattery and Ostentation, and many times excessive long and te|dious, like too much Ceremony before a good Feast; which by its long de|taining a Man, palls his Appetite: Notwithstanding which, I was wil|ling to give you some short account of tjis Book; which you will find to be a

choice Collection of the merriest Iests, c. (as you may see in the Title Page, to which I refer you) extracted from the several Authors that have written on those Subjects: Wherein their Gold is separated from their Dross, their Vnpolite ones are Refin'd, their long and tedious ones Retrench'd, their old ones render'd Modern, and those un|worthy an ingenious Mans Reading, wholy left out; The Composure there|of, having cost me no small Care and Pains, as you may judge; that not only the reading over, but Critical Examination of the several Books written (as aforesaid) on those Sub|jects, must needs amount to. But perhaps some carping Zoilus, or se|vere Cato, will either blame the Com|posure of those Iests, or utterly deny the usefulness of any. As to the first, I leave it to your Candor to judge of it, knowing that if you come to de|light your Self with Ingenious Fan|cies, and not to Carp, you may find

some in this Collection that may an|swer your Expectation: But if there still remain any that ought to be Ex|pung'd, pass 'em by; and let the Me|rits of the Majority atone for their Defects. To the latter Objection a|gainst all manner of Iests, I think Example and Authority will be a suffiient Apollogy, especially since they do not interfere with Religion, or good Manners. But I leave the whole to your Perusal; Hoping that as I have done what lay in my Power, to contribute to your Pleasure and Delight, so you will do your part, and show your kind acceptance thereof in buying it, especially when you may have it at so Reasonable a Rate as One Shilling.
Farewel, H. C.





ENGLAND's JESTS Refin'd and Improv'd.

1.
APelles the Famous Painter, having drawn the Picture of Alxnder the Great on Horseback, and presented it to him, he gave it not that Praise that so exquisite a Piece deserved; where|upon Apelles desired a Living Horse might be brought, who seeing the Pi|cture, fell o awing and Neighing, taking it to be a real Rival: Upon whch Apelles ingeniously told that Great Emperu, That his Horse under|stood Painting better than He.


2.
An Ignorant Countrey-man coming to Town, went to Covent-Garden, to a Gentleman to whom he was direct|ed;

who out of civility to the Coun|trey man, shew'd him what was re|markable thereabouts, as the Piazza's, and several Persons of Quaities stately Houses: At length he came to the Church, and the Countrey-man point|ing to it, asked the Gentleman whose House that was? He told him it was the Lord of Hosts: The Countrey-man having never heard of such a Lord before, reply'd, It was some Scotch Lord, he'd warrant him.


3.
A Gentleman of Grays-Inn last Win|ter desir'd another of the same Inn to lend him Bakers Chronicle for an hour or two: He sent him word That he could not spare it out of his Chamber, but if he pleased to come thither, he might use it all day there. Not long after, the other Gentleman desir'd him to lend him his Bellows: he sent him word, He could not spare them out of his Chamber, but if he pleased to come thither he might use them all day long there.


4.
A Mayor of a certain Corporation dining with the Aldermen his Bre|thren; after Dinner, to shew his Loy|alty,

began his Majesties health on one Knee, and presented it to one of the Aldermen, whom he imagin'd to be no great Admirer of Health-Drinking; The Alderman took the Glass, and pledg'd him on both Knees: which the rest of his Brethren observing, the Loyal Mayor was not a little concern'd to be out-done (as he thought) by the Alderman, and asked him why he did it not as he had begun it, on one Knee? Why truly (says the Alderman) one Knee was in Honour of the King, and the other to ask God Forgiveness for so doing: What (says the Mayor) for doing the King Honour? No (says he) not for that, but because I pledg'd a Health on that which I ought to pray on.


5.
A Spaniard and a Frenchman meet|ing in Covent-Garden, after the usual Complements passed between them, fell to disputing about Religion; Why (quoth the Spaniard) will you contend with us about Religion? There are more Saints in Spain then I have Hairs on my Beard: And there are more in France (said the Frenchman) then I have Hairs on my Head and Beard too. Then said the

Spaniard, let the contest be thus decided, I will pull a Hair off your Beard, for every Saint I name; an ou shall pluck one off mine, for every Saint you name: So the Frenchman began, and pull'd one off the Spaniards Beard, crying St. Dennis; then the Spaniard doing the like, said St. Ignace: The Frenchman pulling another, cryd St. Martin; the Spaniard, St. Xavier; The Frenchman, St. Lovis; the Spaniard, St. Terese; the French|man, St. Clotilde; the Spaniard, St. Isidore; the Frenchman, St. Bun; the Spaniard pulling two at once, cry'd, St. Cosme and St. Phillip; the French|man resolving to be reveng'd, pluck'd off a whole Mustache, saying, The Ele|ven Thousand Virgins: Upon this, the Contest ended; the Spaniard not being able to endure or parallel so great a number.


6.
A Countrey-fellow Thatching a House, had an arch Boy to serve him with Straw; now there comes by a great Hog, and turns up his Head, as is he were listening: says the Thatch|er hen to the Boy, What does that Hog think now? O (says the Witty Rogue) I'll warrant you he's hatching

of Mischief. And while he was busie at his Work on the Ladder, the Boy hunted the Hog just towards it, and justling against it, down came the Lad|der, and Man and all: Pox on you, says this Blockhead to the Hog, 'tis true as the honest Boy said, you were hatching of Mischief indeed; for I think my Shoul|ders out: And if ever I thatch for any Body hereafter, I'll make my Bargain with them, that they shall all tye up their Hogs.


7.
Two young Scholars travelling from Roan to Paris, mit a Countrey-fellow riding upon an Ass, which bray|ed in such a manner, as if he had been over-joy'd to be in such learned Com|pany: These Students thinking to put a trick on the Fellow, said, Friend, why do you let your Brother cry so? Can't you find out some way to still and quiet him? The Fellow, who was none of the dullest of the Parish that he dwelt in, answered, My Ass, Sirs, is so extreamly pleased to meet with his Re|lations and Old Acquaintance, that he cou'd do no less than sing a Song of mirth and merry glee, in testimony of your hearty Welcom to him.



8.
One told a Gentleman, That he wou'd willingly marry, but he wou'd have a Wife that is perfectly good: To whom the Gentleman replyed, That if none but such a one wou'd serve his turn, he must bespeak her, for there was no sch ready made.


9.
Two young Students were in a deep dispute about the Man in the Moon, whether he was a Gentleman or a Ci|tien: and after a great many Pro's and Con's between them, one of them very wittily solv'd it thus: When the Moon was at Full, then there was a Gentleman in her; but when she appear'd with two Horns, then he might swear there was a Citizen in her.


10.
Three Souldiers talking together, were over-heard by a Courtier to say thus: One said, Had he a Thousand Pounds; he should be happier than the King, the other said, Were he a Captain under the King, he should be happier than he: the third said, That had he one Nights Lodging with the Queen, he should be the happiest Man in the World. The Courtier related this to the King,

and his Majesty, for Divertisement, set for the three Souldiers the next day before him, and commanded them to tell him what they said the night be|fore at such a time. The first, fearing the Kings Displeasure, said, That he had indeed rashly said, That if he had a thousand Pounds, he should be as happy as the King: so the King commanded a thousand Pounds should be given him. The Second begg'd his Majesties Pardon for his bold saying, That had he a Cap|tains Command under him, he should be as happy as he: then the King confer'd that honourable Office upon him. Then the third fell upon his Knees, imploring his Majesties Pardon for that he had said, That if he lay one Night with the Queen, he should be the happiest man in the World. Well, said the King, that is not in my power to grant; but if you can get her consent, you shall have mine: So he brought him before his Queen, and told his Petition; but the Queen, to shew that our desires ought to be pla|ced on suitable Objects, caused him to be soundly whipt.


11.
A Witty Young Fellow was tryed

for his Life, since his Majesties Restau|ration, and being cast, they told him he must be hanged: But he pleaded in his own defence a long time? at last desired the Judge, That if he must be hanged, he might be hang'd after the new way that Oliver was, three or four years after h  dead.


12.
One that was advised to marry a Widow, replied, That they were too Politick a Generation for him; which he prov'd by Similies: Many Voyages, said he, make an expert Seaman; many Offices, a Crafty Knave; and many Mar|riages, a Cunning False Widow.


13,
A Justice of Peace overtaking a Par|son upon the Road, between London and ow, told his Company that he would put a Trick upon him: and so coming up to him, said, Sir, You don't follow your Masters Rule, for he was con|tent with an Ass, but you have a very fine Horse: The Parson replyed, the reason was, because the King had made so ma|ny Asses Iustices, that a Clergy-man could not get one to Ride on.



14.
A young Gentleman of the Temple, left a Note in the Key hole of his Cham|ber-door, thus, I am gone to the Devil; but if you cannot Read, carry it to the Stationers at the Gate, and he will do it for you.


15.
A Rich Man, in the Countrey, who was never thought to be one of Solo|mon's Off-Spring, went with his Wife to see a Child of his at Nurse: when he came, he very wisely asked the Nurse whether she was a Maid or Married? she replied, she was Married: says he, I'll have no Married Woman, I'll have a Maid to be my Childs Wet-Nurse; Truly Sir, says she, then you had best bespeak one at London, for we have no such ready made here in the Countrey.


16.
A Valiant Fellow who had been in the West, was met by a Gentleman here, who asked him what Exploit he had done there? he answered, That he had cut off one of the Rebels Arms: the Gentleman replyed, That it had been something if he had cut off his Head, O said he, you must consider his Head was off before.



17.
When Metellus Nepos asked the fa|mous Roman Orator, in a jearing way, who was his Father? he replyed, Your Mother has made that Question harder for you to Answer,


18.
A Rich Blade, that was a very great Eater, came to a Gentleman's House to Court his Daughter: the Gentleman out of Civility, desir'd him to stay and Dine with him, which he did, and Eat very heartily: After Dinner, he began to speak to the Lady about the matter, and having utter'd several Ex|pressions of his Passion; he protested that he loved her as his own Soul; to whom she wittily replied, But not so well as your Body, Sir.


19.
A Gentleman coming into London out of the Countrey, as he came by Stepny Church his Horse threw him, which a young Gentlewoman seeing, fell a Laughing: the Gentleman being an|gry that she jeered him, said: Pray admire not at this, Madam, my Horse always stumbles when he sees a Whore. To which she answered merrily, Have

a care then, Sir; for if you ride into the City, you'll break your Neck.


20.
A sharping Scholar of King's Colledg in Oxford, being in the Kitchin, and seeing the Cook take up a Plumb-pud|ding out of the Pot, watching his op|portunity, while the Cook's back was turn'd; he whipt up the Pudding into his own Chamber: which the Cook presently missing, runs up into the Scholars Chamber, and searched all about for it, but could not find it; the Scholar swore it was not in his Chamber (though the Cook smelt it) for he had ingeniously hung it out of his Window, which when the Cook was gone, he pulld in, and eat as in|geniously.


21.
One desiring a pretty Maid to go to a Gentleman and Kiss him, Nay Sir (says she very wittily) I'll nev're go to Market for that Ware which I can have brought home to my Door.


22.
At the Battel of Newport, the Prince of Orange having the Spanish Army be|fore him, and the Sea behind him, said

to his Souldiers, Gentlemen, if you have a mind to live, you must do one of these two things; either eat those Spaniards, or drink up this Sea.


23.
A London Serivener dying in Cam|bridg, a merry Fellow writ thus over him: Know all Men by these pre|sents, That I that have bound so ma|ny, am now bound fast my self, by a Gentleman of an Ancient Family, whose Name's Mr. Death, who brought me my last Sheet, and to my last full Point. And though I was never Guilty of any great Wickedness, yet I often made many a Blot, which my Daughter Pen was the occasion of: I gave no bad Example to any, but good Copies to all: I was not unlearn'd neither, because I always dealt in good Letters, and was a Justice of Peace in my own Dominions; and though I could not hang (except an Arse sometimes, when my own money was to be Paid) yet I cou'd draw: I made all Bond-men but my Apprenti|ces, for those I made Free: And af|ter I had finish'd all my Letters, this Mr. Death threw some dust upon 'em,

and as I was making Bonds, assaulted me with Bills, and at last Seald the Letters of my Eyes quite up, and then sent me away to my long-home.


24.
A Welsh-man that was condemn'd to be Hang'd, just before he was to be turn'd off, the Hang-man ask'd him if he had any thing to say; he answer'd he had a desire to speak with some of his Countrey-Men, before he died (if there were any there) so the Hang|man call'd to know if there were any there he should hold up his Hand. It so happened that there was one there, so the Hang-man told him that the poor Man wou'd speak with him; so he drew near, and the Welsh-man ask'd him if he knew such and such in Wales, he replied he did; Then, says the Welsh-man, You know my Father and Mother, who I am certain will be very sorry to hear of my Misfortune; but pray, to comfort them, tell them that I dye a e|ry good Christian, and am informed that I shall go to Heaven, and I hope they will follow me thither the same way.



25.
When Charles the Bald was Empe|rour and King of France, one Iohan|nes Eringen, a Scotch-man, for his great Learning had the honour to sit at Ta|ble with the Emperour; but being ve|ry ungentiel in his behaviour, the Em|perour asked him, Quid interest inter Scotum  Sotum? Which in English is, What's the difference between a Scot, and a Sot? To which he readily, (but rudely) answered, Mensa, that is, The Table: thereby calling the King Sot, by craft.


26.
Another time this Iohannes, who was but of little Stature, din'd at the King's Table, with two other Scholars who were tall men. The Emperor set him a Dish with two great Fishes, and one small one, bidding him divide them between himself and the two Schollars; whereupon Iohannes took the two large Fishes, and laid them on his own Plate, and gave the small one to the two Scholars. The Emperor smiling, said, In saith, Mr. Johannes you are no equal Divider: That's your Highnesses mistake (said he) and pointing to himself and the two great

shes, said, Here are two great, and one ttle; and on the other side, is one little, nd two great.


27.
One going in the dark, held both is Arms out to save his face, and co|ing accidentally against the Door, hich it seems stood slanting out, he it his Nose a good blow against it, ey ho, says he, I never thought my Nose as longer than my Arms till now; but if ver I go in the Dark again, I'll have a andle in my hand.


28.
A noted Countrey Gentleman bla|ing a Comical Poet for bringing a eud debauched Ruffian on the Stage, nd so gave bad Example to young en, Truly, Sir, said he, I brought such man on, but I hang'd him before he went ff, and so gave them a good example.


29.
An Englishman and his Wife lodg|ng at a French-mans House in Paris, he Englishman's Wife cried out in the ight; so he ran up stairs to acquaint he Midwife who lay there, of his ives Condition, and went down to form his Landlord and Landlady of it;

so he stood by their bed-side shivering in his shirt, for it was in a cold winter night; but could not speak Fench and so had much a do to make them under|stand him; at last he did: his Landla|dy pitying him, said to her Husband, Prethee, my Dear, let him come into Bed to us, and lye till day light, seeing it is so cold, and that he cannot in Civility go in|to his own Chamber; you need not fear any thing since you are in Bed with me: so he consented to it, and the English-man came and lay down on the other side of the Woman; the French-man being tir'd soon fell fast asleep, the English-man presently grew warm, and began to Caress the French-woman; the mo|tion of the Bed, which was caus'd by their amorous Engagement, wakd her Husband, he call'd out, Wife, Wife, What are you doing? Why, what would you have me do, said she, if I should speak to him, you know he can't understand a word of our Language.


30.
A Countrey Gentleman being at Dinner in London, with several Gen|tlemen of his acquaintance, one of them whose Name was Chambers, thinking to

put a Joque upon him, asked him why he woud not live in London in the Win|ter, where he might find all sorts of Company to fit his Humour, I would Sir, says he, if I could find a House fit for my turn. Says Chambers, I can help you to one that has three Rooms of a Floor, but 'tis built of Wood. Where is it, says the Gentleman? Says he, at Tyburn; 'Tis true indeed, says the Gen|tleman, 'tis a convenient House, and stands in a good Air; for it will quickly Cure a Man of all Diseases, and for a House that is but one Storyhigh, 'tis a very good one, and wants nothing in it but Chambers.


31.
An extravagant young Heir, having sold all his Lands to maintain his De|bauchery, fell Sick and sent for a Phy|sician; who perceiving that his Di|stemper arose from ill Humours, con|tracted by his Intemperunce, order'd him to be let Blood, and coming to see it, he told him it was very green. Alas Sir, says he, how can it be other|wise, when I have Eaten up all my Mea|dows and Corn-fields.


32.
A Doctor of Divinity that had

a good Estate, and no Child, resolv'd to make himself memorable to posteri|ty, by some publick Charity; and so order'd a Cau-way to be made to a Market-Town, for the secuity of Tra|vellers in the Fenny Countrey. As the Labourers were at Work, the Doctor being there to oversee them, a Noble-Man came by, who had no great esteem for Men of his Coat, and said jearingly, Doctor, for all the Cost you have been at, I don't think this is the way to Heaven. I am of your Mind (quoth the Doctor) for then I could not have expected to meet your Lordship here.


33.
A Quaker being in Bed with his Wife, in the middle of the Night she pulled him, saying thus, Awake, Eben|ezer, awake: What sayest thou the Wife of my Bosom, says he? Arise quickly, says she, and go into the next Room, and nigh unto the place that pays Tribute to Caesar, there standeth a Wicker-Chair, thereon hangeth my Red Petticoat; take from thence two Fartings, and go to our Friend Theophilus, the Tallow-Chandler, and buy therewith two Candles; light one of them, and spring in hastily, for I

fear our youngest Son Aminadab has Beshit himself.


24.
A Nun reading at the bottom of a Book, it is good to know all things, was resolv'd to try a Man; but turn|ing over she found, but not to use them, at which she was not a little troubled to be so soon depriv'd of her so delectable expected enjoyment.


25.
A Constable carrying a big belly'd wench before a Justice, said to him; An't please your Worship I have brought you a Maid-with Child: whereupon the wench called him Fool and Knave; being reprov'd by the Justice, she answer'd thus: Sir, this Constable must be one of them; for if I am a Mid, he is a Fool to think I can be with Child: and if I am not with Child, he is a Knave fr saying so.


36.
Two Gentlemen quarrelling, the one gave the other a Challenge to meet him at six a Clock the next morning at such a pla upon his Ho|nour: Hang Honour, says the other, for we both are but Worshipful; and you know 'is not my custom, and I know

'tis not yours neither, to rise before Eleven or Twelve a Clock; therefore pray let us consider whether we should break our Rest to break our Limbs. The other told him, If he did not meet him, he'd Post him: Well, said he to him, if you do, I'll ride Post out of Town, and stay there till your furie's over.


37.
An Oxford Scholar going along Fleetstreet, was met by a huffing Fop, who thrusting between the wall and him, jostl'd him almost to the Kennel, saying (with a no Sir Courtly-Face) I don't use to give the Wall to every Saw|cey Loggerhead: To whom the Scho|lar, with Cap in hand, replied smartly, But I do.


38.
A Proper Tall Gentleman that had married a very little Woman to his Wife, being ask'd the reason of it, he repli'd, That of all Evils, it was always the best to chuse the least.


39.
A Serjeant kneeling before the King, to have a Bill si'd, being troubled with the Wind Chollick; gave vent to his Posteriors in three or four loud Vollys: the King hearing, smileingly says: I

never understood till now that a Ser|jeant had authority to let go a Prisoner, it being against the Law. An't please your Majesty, says the Serjeant, he was a turbulent Rogue, and crept through the Key-hole, and necessity has no Law.


40.
A Countrey man coming up to London, a little after the rebuilding of it, to see a Friend who made great Complaint of his own particular loss, as well as of the loss of so stately a City: As for your own loss, says the Countrey man, I am very sorry for it, but as for the loss of your City, I can't tell what to say; for who would be troubled to have a good new suit for an old one?


41.
Cardinal Woolsey being to pas through St. Pauls Church, his Gentle|man went before, to make a way for him, and coming to a poor Priest kneeling at Prayers in the way, he said to him, Room for my Lord Car|dinal's Grace: No says he, the Pope is not dead yet, what should he do there? remove out of your place, says he, to make way, why saies he? do you think My Lord will take my place.
An Arch Wag speaking of the late dreadful Fire of London, said, Cannon-street roared, Wood-street was burnt to Ashes, Bread-street was burnt to a Coal, Pie-Corner was over-bak'd, and Snow-hill was melted down.


43.
A Man Thatching a House in the Country, and the Thatch being loose under him, his Feet slipt, and still as he found himself falling, catching hold of the Thatch which fail'd him, he cry'd Lord bless me, Lord help me, c. but coming to the Ridge of the House, and seeing what a great way it was to the ground; Zds, says he, what a confounded fall am I like to have.


44.
An old Gentleman was chid by a neighbour for marrying a young Girle; to whom he replied, She'll be a Woman to morrow; for, says he, Wives are young mens Mistresses, Mid|dled-ag'd mens Companions, and old mens Nurses; and will you blame a man to have a Nurse in his old Age? No, says he, I don't blame you for ha|ving

a Nurse, but for your not Providing for Heaven; but that your Wife must do, for says he, Don't you know whether all Cuckolds go? O, says the old Gentleman, Now you put me in mind on't, 'tis true; for I have heard your Wife say some years ago, That she was sure her husband would go to Heaven; and now I find which way; and mum for that, my dear neighbour too.


45.
A certain Woman brought a man before the Duke of Millan, and accused him for killing her Son, complaining of her great loss by it, saying that no|thing in the World was so dear to her; The poor man excused himself as well as he could, telling his Excellency that he did not design to hurt her Son; but that the head of his Hatchet flew off, as he was cleaving some Wood, and bit him accidentally on the head, and prov'd his Death: Well says the Duke to the Woman, I am willing that thou shouldst have all the reasonable satisfaction in the World,




therefore, for repairing thy loss: he shall lie with Thee and get thee such another Son: which stopt the womans mouth, that se went away without speaking a word more, and never troubled the man after wards.


46.
A Highway-man being to be hang'd in a Country Town, Order was sent to the Carpenter to make a Gallows; which he neglecting to do, the Exe|cution was forc'd to be defer'd, for which the Judge was not a little angry, who sending for the Carpenter, asked him why he had not done it? Why Sir, said he, I have done two or three already, but was never paid for them; but had I known it had been for your Worship, I would have left all other bu|siness to have done it.


47.
A Scotchman going along the street, jostles a Gentleman, The Gentleman said to him, Goddamn you. The Scotch|man reply'd, God bless you Sir, may nei|ther of them light.


48.
One ask'd a Gentleman if he'd ven|ture any thing at the Lottery this Fair,

and what he won, his Wife shou'd have for her fairing? No, says the Gentlemen, for there's not one in forty has any luck but Cuckolds; which his sweet Wife hearing, said, Dear Hus|band, pay venture, for I'm sure you'l have good luck.


49.
A Cambridge Schollar crossing King Iames's Steed, when he was riding a Hunting: The King was in a great Passion at it, and rid after him with his drawn Sword, and being going to cut him over the Pate: the Schollar said to him, Pray Sir, don't Knight me till my Elder Brothers Dead: for I am but a younger Brother: at which witty saying, the King was pacified and pleas|ed, and gave him a Guinney for his ingenuity.


50.
A silly Fellow hearing a Ladys ser|vants call her Madam, at every word, he thought to be more mannerly than they, and therefore made an Addition of Mistress, to it, saying, Mistress Madam, an't please your Ladiship.



51.
The late engenious Bishop Wilkins having in his juvinal days written a Book, intiuled the World in the Moon, wherein he allotted Land to se|veral Princes in the World, and parti|cularly a considerable quantity to our late King. After Dinner one day the K. having a mind to be merry, said to the Bishop, I have seen a Book of yours wherein you allot me a great deal of Land in the World in the Moon; now it being so far off, and troublesome to look after, I will sell it you if you please; to whom the Bishop replid, I thank your Majesty, but I don't care to med|dle with Crown Lands.


52.
At another time the Countess of Newcastle being a whimsical Lady, ask'd this Bishop Wilkins, how she should get up into the World in the Moon which he had discovered: For say she, it must certainly be a very great Iourny thither, and unless one can rest by the way, it is impossible to get thither: Oh Madam says the Bishop, your Ladyship has built so many Castles in the Air, that you may rest in one of them.



53.
One that had a confounded Scold to his Wife, being continually tromen|ted with the perpetual Clack of her Tongue, wish'd one day, That she was in Heaven; she knowing thereby that he had a mind to be rid of her, in a great rage told him, she had rather see him hang'd first.


54.
A Lords Son in the North, that was much addicted to the Pleasures of Venus, haunted all the pretty Girls thereabouts, but especially one above the rest, that was a very handsome Maid, and a Farmers Daughter who was his Fathers Tenent; which gave him the more liberty of Courting her; and having inpertuned her very much, yet she would not grant: At last he promis'd her Marriage, and thereby had the pleasure of Enjoyment: But his Father and Mother fearing that he would make up a Match with the Far|mers Daughter, by going so often thither, sent to another Lord that lived five Miles off, to Treat with him for his Daughter, who was a pretty Woman also, for his Son. So they

soon agreed, and the Marriage day was appointed, and the Young Blade was Riding with his Man to the Bride-House; but the Farmer and his Daugh|ter had way laid him. The Farmer ask'd him, What satisfaction he shou'd have for the wrong he had done his Daughter? Well, says he, There's forty Guinneys for you, and I'll give you a Bond, to make it up a hundred Pounds, to be paid in three Months, if you'll be contended. So the Bond was making under the Hedg, and the People at the Bride-House admiring at his stay, sent one to see; who when he came, found him Indenting with the Farmer and his Daughter under the Hedg. So when he had doe  Rid away to the Bride-House as fast as he could Gallop, and soon afte was Ma to the La|dy; and whn they were a bed toge|ther, he began to Kiss her: Pray, says she, resolve me one Question first: What made you under the Hegd with the Farmer  his Daughter so long? Why says he, that does not concern you at all Well, says she, I will know, or else you and I shall be at a distance. Why then, says he, if you won't be angry, I'll tell you.

Well, I will not, says she, let it be what it will. Why then, says he, I got the Farmers Daughter with Child, and she was such a Fool to tell her Father of it. So she was by my Troth, says she, for my Fathers Man got me with Child above a Twelvemonth ago, and you are the first that ever I told of it.


55.
The Bishop of Mentz, had a merry Fellow to his Tenant, who was deep in Arreers for Rent, to whom the Bi|shop sent his Steward, who told him that unless he took more care to pay his Rent, the Bishop would take a Course with him; to whom the Fellow repli|ed, he did not value the Bishop, for he knew how to keep out of his Clutches: Why, says the Stward, you must go out of the Bishopwrick then, no replied the Fellow, I wont; for I have forty lurking places about the Diocess where he will never find me: where can they be, I beseech you, says the Steward, why there's one in every Church, says he; Then he'l quickly find you out, says the other, for he's there once a Week at least. O but, says the Fellew, I'll hide my self in one of the Pulpits, where I'm sure he won't come in hast.



56.
An Ignorant Fellow, having got in to be a Reader in a Countrey-Church; the first Chapter of Matthew being ap|pointed to be Read, which contains the Genealogy, and is full of hard Names: He began with Abraham be|gat Isaac, and so read on three or four more, till he was quite nonplus'd but casting his Eyes forward, And so, says he, they begat one another to the end of the Chapter.


57.
A Knight in Northmpton Sire, that had three Sons, and no great Estate, told his youngst Son that he must needs bind him an Apprentice, and bid him chuse his Trade. The Boy beig of a smart and ingenious temper, told his Father he'd be a Tanner. Push, says he, that's a nasty Trady: That's true, says he; but yet 'tis the most convenient Trade for me of any; because you have but a littl to give me, and three Hides will set me up. What Hides are those, says his Fa|ther? Why Sir, Reply'd the Boy, Yours and my two Brothers.



58.
An Impudent Fellow having several Indictments brought against him, the Judge seeing the Notoriousness of his Crimes, said, Sirrah, if you ben't Hang'd, I'll be Hang'd for you: To whom the Rogue reply'd, I thank your Honour, for your kind Offer; pray be not out of the way when that time comes.


59.
A Gentleman of Lincolns-Inn, hear|ing of the Death of his Father, in the Countrey was not a little con|cern'd, as not knowing how he had left his Estate. An Itimate Fiend of his seeing him, said, Chear up, Jack; if your Father has left you a good Etate, you have no great cause to grieve; and if he has given you nothing, who'd grieve for such a Father?


60.
A Ranting Bully Drinking a Health to a Sober Man, he refusd to Pledge im; upon which e wish'd this Curse might light upon him. That in a dark and cold Rainy Night, he were set upon a tir'd Iade, bare Ridg'd, in a dirty Lane, with a Pocky Whore behind him, and his own Bones rotten, and seven Miles




from any House, not knowing one step of the way, and with never a Penny in his Purse, both Hungry and Thirsty. Hold Sir, says the Man, there's enough al|ready: I thank you for your good wishes; but hope in a little time you'll enjoy 'em all your self.


61.
An Arch Fellow in Oxford, took a great many Rams horns in his Basket, and went about the City with them, crying, Fair Cherries in Winter; this made many People call to him, and amongst the rest a Lawyer, who seeing his Ware, laught at him, saying, You Fool, who do you think will buy your Horns of you? O Sir, replie he, Though you are provided, yet I may meet with some that are not.


62.
A Gentleman told his Cook that he would dine on a Venison Pasty, and so order'd him to provide one; which he did, with two or three other dishes preliminary to it. So when the din|ner was ready, he brought it up in or|der; the first dish was a good Surloin of Beef, which he set upon the Table before the Gentleman, which as soon

as the Cooks back was turn'd, he took and threw out of the Window; then the Cook brought up the second Course, which was a Legg of Mutton and Colly-flowers, which he sent out of the Window after the other; then the Cook brought up the Venison Pa|sty, and threw it out of the Window, after the other two dishes; which his Master storming at him for, ask'd him the reason of it, says he, I thought your Worship intended to dine below, becaus you sent the dishes down.


63.
Two Persons who had no great kindness for one another, were in|vited to dinner together with a Knight, who had a mind to be merry. Now they were both pretty witty; but one was slovenly, and the other spruce and neat: the spruce man was thee first, and when the oher came, he ran to the door to salute him and conduct him in, and thinking to make a Jest on his un|courtly habit, started back, saying, I thought to have met a worthy Doctor; but I doubt in his stead I accost a Butcher. The Doctor (who very well under|stood Repartees) answered, Sir, I

can't blame you for being surprized, be|cause 'tis natural for horned Beasts to dread the Butcher: which to one mar|ried under Capricorn, was a very close Repartee.


64.
One held a Paradox, that Wise Men were the greatest Lyers; for says he, the Proverb says, Children and Fools speak Truth.


65.
A certain Person speaking unseemly Words before a Gentlewoman, she ask'd him what Profession he was of? Madam, says he, I am a Civil Lawyer. Alas, Sir, replied she then, If Civil Lawyers are such rude People, I wonder what other Lawyers are.


66.
Socrates being asked Why he suffere so much brawling from his Wife: says he, Why do you suffer so much kackling of your Hens? Because they lay Eggs, says he. And I from my Wife, replied So|crates, because she bears Children.


67.
At a Market Town in Somerset|sire, there lived a Quaker that was a Barber, to whom the Parson of the Pa|rish

came, demnding fifeen Shilligs of him for Tythe; The Quaker told him he owed him none, nor none would he pay him: He told him it was his due, and if he would not give it him by fair means, he' make him do it by foul. The Quaker asked him for what it was due? he told him for Preaching and Reading Divine Service, and o|other Ministerial Duties in the Church: Why, says the Quaker, I never came there: You might if you would, says the Parson, the Door stands open. Soon after the Quaker hearing that he was sing him for the money, enters an Action also against the Parson for fifteen Shillings; the Parson hearing of it, went and asked him how he came to owe him fifteen Shillings? he told him for Trimmin. Why, says the Parson, I was never Trimmed by you in my life: You might if you would, sayd the Quaker' my Door stands open.


68.
A Doctor of Physick in Oxford that used to salute every one he met, with these Words, I am very glad to see you well; A Student, a Gentleman of good




quality, whom he so greeted, told him ingeniously, He believed he lyed, for the World went ill with him when People were well.


69.
Oe perswaded a Man to hang his Dog that had done some mischief, I am loath to hang him, says he, but I'll go a|mongst his Neighbours and give him an ill-name, and that is as bad.


70.
A French Captain having been a long time closely Besieged in a place where for four months he eat nothing but Horse-flesh; at length being re|lieved, he repaired to his former Mi|stress, thinking to enjoy the same da|liances and caresses that he was former|ly blessed with; But she having been informed how he had faed since his departure; Hold, says she, Monsieur; for though I have a mind to be gotten with Child, yet I am resolved never to be gotten with Colt.


71.
A covetous Tradesman had a mind to be married, but was afraid of the charge of having Children too fast; at last he resolved to be married, and a|greed

with his Wife that they would lie together but once a Fortnight; and, says he, I intend to get every Fortnight a Joyt of the Child from Head to Foot; so by that device we shall not have too many Children: But I do it, my Dear, to ease thee in the bearing of them, which you know, would be no small trouble to you. After Mar|riage, it seems he lay with her the first Night, and I can't tell how it came a|bout, but at forty Weeks end she was brought to bed of a brave Boy. Why how now Wife? says he, this is not according to my Expectation: Yes Husband, says she, but I may thank good Neighbours, or else for ought I know we might have had a deformed Child.


72.
The King of Spain coming into one of his chief Cities, the Mayor came to make a Speech, and began thus: When the King of Peace rode to Jerusalem; but being dashed out of Countenance, he said again, When the King of Peace rode to Jerusalem; and so the third time, but could not proceed: Then the King turning to his Coutiers,

said, We may easily imagine this Man to be an Ass by the Consequent.


73.
Mr. Philemo Holland having Tran|slated several Books, as Plutarch, Pliny, Livy, Cambden, c. at length he Tran|slated Setonius Tranquillus into English; upon which, an ingenious Blade writ this Distich on him:
Phliemon with Translations doth so fill us.
He will not let Suetonius be Tran|quillus.


74.
A Gentleman going into a Church in London when they were chaunting Sternhold's and Hopkin's Psalms, which are not the most Mellodious in the World, the Words were these, Have mercy upon us Miserable Sinners: Ay, (says he) they might as well hve sid, Hve mercy upon us Miserable Singers.


75.
Two Sparks standing together in the Cloysers, seeing a pretty Lady pals by, says one of them. There goes

the handsomest Lady that ever I saw in my Life: She hearing him, turned back, and seeing him very ugly, said, Sir, I would I could in way of Requital say as much of you: Faith, says he, so you may, and Lye as I did.


76.
A Poor man in Smithfield having a mind to bind his Son to a Butcher; but being olicitous to get a Master of whom he might learn his Trade well, he asked his Friend, who was an Inge|nious Gentleman, and had great Ac|quaintance, to whom he should Bind him? O, says he, there is a Physitian hard by you, Bind him to him; for he kills more than all beside in the Town.


77.
A Gallant, Dining at a Friends House, had promised a Lady to meet her in the Afternoon; but being en|gaged after Dinner at Cards, could not fairly get away; wherefore he called his Boy, and sent him to the La|dy to excuse him; whispering him in the Ear, that whatever Answer the Lady returned, he should tell it him as if it were from a Man; that the Com|pany might not know. So the Boy

went on his Errand, and a little after returned to his Master, who asked him aloud before the Company What was the Gentleman at home? Yes Sir, an|swered the Boy: Well, what said he to you: He said, Sir, you might appoint any other time: What was he doig, says the Gentleman? He was putting on his Hood and Scarf, to go to Mass, says the Boy, which discovered the Intreague, and set them all a Lugh|ing.


78.
A Woman asking her Husband for some Money to buy a broad Silver and Gold Lace, to put on her Petticoat, he replied thus to her, If I once make you a Gold-finch, you will prove a Wag-tail all your Life after.


79.
One that was a great Eater, sitting down to Supper, complained that he had lost his Stomach, Well says a merry Fellow that was there, If a Poor Man has found it, he will be utterly un|done.


80.
A Bishop being informed by hi Steward of the greatness of his Ex|pence,

that it was over proportion|able to his Estate; and that particular|ly the number of his Servants was too great: The Bishop ordered him to draw up a Note, of such as were necessary, and such as were not; which being done, he Summoned all his Ser|vants together, and reading the Note, separated them; and then said, These I have need of, and therefore they must continue; those have need of me, and therefore they must continue also.


81.
Just after the late Kings Restaurati|on, when going to Church came to be in fashion, an old Woman was advised by her Neighbours to go to Church; for fear of being Presented, she was resolved to go once a month to save her Bacon: So Dressing her self very fine, she came into the Church just at the Expiration of the Letany, and the Parson having said, Lord have Mercy upon us, and then the People Respon|ding thereunto; she Cryed out aloud, I never was here before in my Life, an since you make such a Wonderment at it, I will never come again.



82.
Two Gentlemen walking in Cheap|side, in Oliver's time, saw the Sign of the Golden-Cross; One of them prof|fered to lay two Bottles of Wine with the other, that he would make the master of the Shop pull down the Sign: The Wager being laid, he pulls off his Hat, and makes half a dozen Leggs to the Sign, first on one side, and then on the other, which the Master of the Shop seeking, thinking to prevent his future Superstition, suddenly pulled down his Sign, whereby the Gentle|man won his two Bottles of Wine.


83.
A Minister finding his Parishioners to be Ignorant, was resolved to Exa|mine and Instruct them at home; so going to an Ancient Womans House, amongst other Questions, he asked her how many Commandments there were? She told him she could not tell: He told her there were Ten: Whereat she replied, A Iolly Company! God Bless you and them both together: Well, but Neighbour (says he) Do you think you can keep these Commandments? Ah! God Bless you, Sir, (said she) I

am a poor Woman, and can hadly keep my self; I hope you will not put me to the Charge of keeping any of the Command|ments for you.


84.
Going to another of them, e asked her, who made her? She Replyed, She did not know: A Child standing by, he asked him the same Question, who Answered, God; whereupon the Parson Reproving the Old Woman, told her it was a shame that she should be so Ignorant, who had lived to those Years, and that little Child could tell Marry, quoth she, I am old Woman, and have been made a great while, and he was made but t'other day; he may well tell who made him.


85.
A Quaker went to sell a Horse in Smithfield, a Chapman who looked on the Horse, complained of his Head; Quoth the Quaker, He that made that Head, won't learn of thee to make Heads. Why Friend, says the other, may I not speak of thy Horses faults if I see them? Nay, said he for he sees none in thee, why shouldst thou see any in him. The Man was so taken with the bluntness

of the Quaker, that he bought his Horse; which, as he had told him be|fore, was stark blind.


86.
Two Gentleman Riding on the Road, espid at a distance an old Wo|man a doing her necessary occasion, by a Hedge side; one of them offered a Bottle of Wine, that she would turn and see what she had done; they a|greed on the Wager, and she accor|dingly did. Well, says the Loser, I'll ask her why she did so when I come to her; then Riding up to her, Well, good Woman, said he, I see you have been Evacuating your self; Did you so? quoth she, you see no more with your Eyes, then you may carry away in your Mouth. But pray Mrs. said the Gen|tlean, what made you look back on it, when you had done? To see if there were enough for you Both, Sirs, replyed she.


87.
A Young Esquire, who had more Money than Wit, Travelling into Spain to a University, where a Man might be made a Doctor for Money, had a mind to take his Degrees; so

for his better Reception, he invited the Doctor of the Chair to Supper, where being a little flushed with the ex|pectation of his new Honour, he asked the Doctor if he would take Money to make his Horse a Doctor too? Yes, says he, I may make a Horse a Doctor, as well as an Ass; and so by consequence yor Horse as well as your self.


88.
An Impertinent Fellow told a Gen|tleman, that he was mad for doing a thing with less Judgment then he ought to have done, and that he ought to be sent to Bedlam to be cured of Frenzie; and went on at that rate, till the Gen|tleman wittily answered, That he ad|mired as much, why (as in every Com|monwealth there was provided a Bedlam for Madmen) there was never any place alotted for Fools.


89.
A merry Archer coming into the Market on a Market day, necked an Arrow as if he intended to Shoot, and said, with a oud Voice, Now have at a Cuckold. A Woman thinking he aim|ed that way, and her Husband being by her, cries out, Stand away Husband,




stand awy Husband: Why you silly Jade (says he) I am no Cuckold, am I? No, no, (quoth she) but who knows how a confonnded Arrow may glance?


90.
A Farmer in Essex, who for his Means was made a Knight, and his Wife thereby growing very Gallant and Fine; a Jocose Gentleman told his Worship, That he did not do well, in spoiling a Good Wife, to make a Mad-Dame.


91.
A merry Gentleman seeing a great Dish of Broth brought to the Table, with a little Chop of Mutton in the middle of it, began hastily to unbut|ton his Doublet: one asking him the meaning of it; I mean (says he) to swim through this Sea of Pottage, to that Island of Mutton.


92.
A merry Fellow Riding with his Master, he desired to ask him a Que|stion; his Master knowing him to be a jocose witty Rogue, gave him leave: Why then, Sir, said he, you see a Horse and an Ass yonder feeding toge|ther: now suppose you were forced to

be a Beast, which of those two would ou be? You Fool, said the Master, I would be a Horse, as being the noble and more generous Creature: I am of another Opinion, said the Man, for I would be an Ass: His Master being pleased with the Humour, asked his reason? Why, said he, I have often seen an Ass Ride the Great Hoe, strut brisk|ly before his Company, be made a Iustice, have the honour of Knighthood conferred on him, and often Elected Mayor of a Corporation; but I never knew a Horse capable of any of these Prefer|ments.


92.
An Ignorant Countrey Fellow com|ing along Paternoster-Row, had occasi|on to change a Half-Crown into small money, and looking over a Grate which stood on the Stall, there sate a large Monkey, whom he prayed to change his money; the Monkey took it, and put it into the Till of the Com|pter, where he had observed money to be put, and then came and Grinn'd at the M; who being in a passion, made a noise at the Door, whereat the man of the Shop, coming into the Shop,

asked him what was the matter? Sir, said he, I gave your Son half a Crown to change, and he will not give it me again, bt laughs at me, and will not give me one word of answer, tho I have asked him for it many a time.


94.
Two Friends meeting, one being o|verjoyed to see the other Hark you Sir, said he, Between you and I, my Wife's with Child. Faith, cry'd the other, you're a liar, for I have not seen her this twelve Months.


95.
Two Persons who had been former|ly acquainted, but had not seen each other a great while, meeting on the Road, one ask'd the other how he did, he told him, He was very well, and was Married since he saw him: the o|ther reply'd, That was wel indeed: not so well neither, said he, for I have Mrried a Shrew. That's ill, said the other. Not so ill neither, said he, for I had 2000 Pounds with her. That's well again, said his Friend. Not so well neither, for I laid it out in Sheep, and they died of the Rot. That was ill indeed, said the other. Not so ill

neither, said he, for I sold the Skins for more money then the Sheep cost. Tht was well indeed, quoth his Friend. Not so well neither, said he, for I laid out my money in a House and it was burned. That's very ill, said the other. Not so ill neither, said he, for my Wife was burned in it.


96.
One that had been very much vex'd in Law-suits, went to Tyburn one day to see the Execution, and vow'd, That 'twas better to have to do with Tyburn, then Westminster Hll; for there Suits hang half a year, but at Tyburn half an hours hanging ends all.


97.
A young Countrey Esquire, who you must think never read Cook upon Lit|tleton, c. had a mind to borrow some money privately, for which he was to give a Bond, and hearing it run, Be it known unto all men; Hey boys! says he, if all men must know it, then I'm sure it will come to my Fathers Ear; therefore I will have no such Bond drawn.


98.
A Handsom young Widow having lately Bued an old grave Husband,

called Old Simon, had been so used to  Bedfellow, that she could not sleep without one; but could endure the thoughts of none but her dear Hus|band; wherefore she ordered a Carver to make her Husbands Statue as near as he could; which every Night (be|ing wll warmed) had a Shirt and Night-Cap put on, and was laid by her in Remembrance of her Husband, hat she might, at least, embrace him in Effigie. This Trade had lasted ever since her Husbands Death, and she would not admit the Courship of any Siter, till at last a young Gentleman who was inflamed with no small passi|on for her, had by the help of his Wit, and some good Angels prevaled with her Maid to lay him one Night in the place of Old Symon: So the Widow came to bed to him, and casting her hand over her dear Satue (as she thought) she felt a more agreeable warmth than usual; nay, she fancied 'twas alive and had motion; She was not frighted at it (which is not a little wonderful) but by degrees crept closer and closer to her Side-mate, till at length they were locked in mutual em|braces;

by which she with pleasure found that it was not her Wooden Bed|fellow. In the Morning the Maid call'd at the Chamber-door, as she ud to do; Madam, what will you please to have for Dinner to Day? she replyed, Rost the Goose, and the two Pheasants that were brought in Yesterday, Boyl a Leg of Mutton and Colly-flowers, and get a good Dish of Tarts and Cu|stards, and a Dish of good dryed Fruit. Madam, says the Maid, I think we have hardly Billers enough for a quick fire. You may burn Old Symon, says she, burn Old Symon.


99.
A young Buxom Maid, that was newly Married to an old Man (by her covetous Father for money (was very melancholy; which a merry Fellow seeing, to comfort her, said, Be of good Chear, my pretty dear Rogue, for an old Horse will perform as good as Iourney as a young one, She Smirking and Sighing said, withal stroaking down her Belly, But not in this Road, Sir.


100.
A Gentleman that was a Lawyer, coming up to London, to the Term,

met a plain Countrey-man, and after the usual Complement, of well met, c. says the Gentleman, Pray Friend an|swer me this Question, Which are the greatest Wonders in the World? To which, after a little consideration, he dryly Replyed, Womens and Lawyers Tongues; for, says he, they always lye, yet never lye still.


101.
A Gentleman Riding on the Road, overtook a young brisk Countrey Lass, who after some time Travelling toge|ther, consented to his Amours; the Man being conscious of what he had done, and how Prejudicial it might prove to the Maid; told her, if any thing came of their Endeavours, she should hear of him at a certain place in London: 'Tis no matter Sir, said she, I am to be married on Monday.


102.
An ignorant old woman in the Coun|trey, hearing a Minister Preach on the Passion of Christ, of the Cruel and Barbarous Death that the Iews put him to, wept grievously; and when the Minister had done, she came to him, and asked him how long ago it was

since this sad thing was done? The Minister told her it, was Sixteen hundred Years since: O then, says the Woman, being a little revived, if it be so long ago, I hope in God it may not be true.


103.
A brisk young Woman going to her Husbands Funeral, a Gentleman comes and whispers her in the Ear, proffering his Service in way of Court|ship: She thanked him very kindly, but told him, He came too late; for says she, I was Yesterday made sure to another.


104.
A Citizen Travelling into the Coun|trey, came into a very good Inn, where the Master of the House was Complai|sant to him, showing all his conveni|encies; which were so far beyond the common Ins, that he told him, It was a House for a Nobleman; at which the Inn-keeper fell into a great Passion, calling him Rascal, and abusive Fellow. The Gentleman not being pleased with his Entertainment, went to the next House in the same Town; where telling his Host the business, he in|formed

him, That the Man had lately Broke, and Paid but a Noble in the Pound of his Debts, which had Enabled him to Build that spacious House.


105.
An Amorous Gentleman in Paris, Playing under his Mistresses Window with a Lute, she commanded her Ser|vants to throw Stones at him, which he took in good part, and esteemed as a great Grace, fancying himself like Orpheus; saying, The Stones danced af|ter his Musick.


106.
A Wine Cooper in Mark Lane, ta|king a Gentleman down into his Cel|lar to Treat him, he finding no Seat there for him to sit on, asked him the reason of it: Why, says the Wine-Coo|per, I will have no Man here Drink lon|ger than he can stand.


107.
A Citizen of London had for a long time been Jealous of his Wife, mistru|sting her Chastity, but had no real proof of it; till at length he resolving to have an ocular Demonstration, pre|tends to go into the Countrey, but re|turns the same Night; and coming in|to

the House, looks through the Door into his Wives Chamber, and sees a brisk Spark Caressing her in an Amo|rous manner. Having thus satisfied his Curiosity, he retires, resolving to discipline her the next day: So he comes to her, and after some little Dis|course, taxes her with the last Nights Recreation. She denies it, and he af|firms it, telling her that he saw it with his own Eyes: to which she wittily and simperingly said, What, my Dear! Won't you believe your own dear Wife, before your own Eyes?


108.
Two young Fellows observing a Countrey man go up into the Monu|ment, went up after him, and when they came to the top, they bound him, and pickt his Pocket: which as soon as ever they had done, they heard some body coming up: So being put to their Shifts, and in some danger of discovery, they made haste down, and meeting a Man, they told him, There was a pleasant Scene acting at top, be|tween a young Maid and her Sweet|heart: So the Man believing them, and being a merry Fellow, went down

with them, saying, That if he could make no sport, he was resolv'd to spoil none, and so by this witty Stratagem the Rogues escaped with the money and the poor Countrey-man was left to be relieved by the next comer.


109.
An old Bawd being brought before a Justice of Peace, in London, for keep|ing a Bwdy-House, and being ac|cused by several Witnesses, and upon probable Grounds, the Justice said in a Passion to her, You old Hag, you do keep a Debauched House, and I will maintain it: whereupon the old Jade dropt him a Courtesie, saying, I most humbly thank your Worship, I desire no better Warrant.


110.
A Tinker coming through Cornhill, and sounding briskly on his Kettle, Have you any Work for a Tinker? A Grocer that thought to put a Jest upon him (there being a Pillory near his Door) bid him stop those two Holes, pointing to the Pillory: to whom the Tinker smartly replyed, Sir, if you will lend me your Head and Ears, I will

find a Hammer and Nails, and give you my Work into the bargain.


111.
A modest Gentlewoman being forced by her Mother to accuse her Husband of Defect, she desired the Judge, being in Court, that she might Write her mind for Modesties sake. So the Judge granted her request, and ordered Ink and Paper to be given her: So she took the Pen without dip|ping it into the Ink, and ade as if she would Write, says one of the Counsellers to her, Madam, there's no Ink in your Pen. Truly Sir, says she, that is just my Case, and there|fore I need not Explain my self any further.


112.
Queen Elizabeth coming into a School in London, and seeing a very pert Boy, asked him how often he had been Whipt? To whom he Ingeni|ously answered in these words of AEne|as to Queen Dido,
Infandum Regina juber removare do|lorem.
For which she gave him a Reward.



113.
Another time the Queen coming into Westminster-School, had some Verses made to her Extempore, by a poor Boy: and being pleased with his quickness, she bid him make some Verses upon this, Pauper ubique jacet, which he did presently as follows:
In Thalamis Regina tuis hac nocte Ia|cerem,
Si verum hoc esset, pauper ubique jacet.
For which the Queen took special notice of him, and gave him great preferment afterwards.


114.
A Gentleman being in Mourning for his Father, was Riding out with some fine Ladies, who seeing his Horse have a Velvet Saddle, and Embroy|der'd Cloath, ask'd him why that was not black too? O, says the Gentle|man, my Horses Father is not dead yet.


115.
A Countrey Farmer coming up to London, had a Token to deliver to his

Landlord's Son, a young Gentleman of the Temple: when he came to his Chamber, he found a Note in the Key-hole, written, I am gone to the De|vil: Whereupon the poor Farmer fell into a great fright, having the saddst apprehensions imaginable. Alas! said he, that ever my Landlord should send his Son to this wicked place: a fine young Gentleman that has cost his Fa|ther many a fair pound to bring him up to Learning, and that ever he should come to this Ungodly Town, in two or three Months time to go to the Devil; I dare not carry this sad evil Tydings to his Father: And as he was making these sad Lamentati|ons, a young Student came up and told him, that the Note only meant the Devil-Tavern had by, and that he believed he might find him there. So he went thither, and found the Gentleman, and presented his Fathers Token, and then told him the extra|ordinary Trouble he was in, upon Reading the Note. At which the Gentleman laughed heartily, and gave the Farmer such an Entertain|ment, that when he came down into

the Countrey, he told his Friends, That he never fared better in his Life, than he did at the Devil, which put them all into no small Astonishment.


116.
A Scholar of Oxford, having wore out the Heels of his Boots, brought them in his hands to a Cobler, and shewing him them, said, O thou curi|ous Artificer, that hast by no small pains and study, arrived to the perfection of that exquisite Art of repairing the defects of old decayed Calcuments, affix me two Semicircles to my Suppeditors. The Cobler stared upon him, as if he would have looked him through: but a lit|tle recovering himself, said, Before George Sir, I understand not your hard Language: but if I put on two Heel-pieces, I'll have a Groat for them.


117.
The same Scholar being asked by a Porter for a Gentlemans Chamber in the Colledg, he directed him thus, you must crucifie the Quadrangle, and as|cend the Grades, and you will find him perambulating in his Cubicle, near the Fenkster. Pray Sir, says the Porter, what is that Fenester? It is, replies

the Scholar, the Diaphanous part of an Edifice, erected for the Introduction of Illumination: which so amazed the Porter, that at first he did not know what to think, till recovering himself, he went and enquired of another, who gave him plainer directions, in more intelligible terms.


118.
An old Usurer dying, left a good Estate to his Son, who was more la|vish in the spending of it, then his Fa|ther had been careful in scraping it up: As this young Spark was riding in his Coach to Epsome, he was angry with his Coachman, for not driving faster, calling to him, saying, You Dog, if you do not make more haste, I will come and kick you to the Devil. Sir, replied the Coach man, I swear if you do, I'll there tell your Father how extravaganly you have spent his Estate.


119.
A Gentleman living in the Coun|trey, having some urgent business at London, and his Lady at the same time being ready to Lye in, leaves order with his Servant, a Welsh-man, that when his Lady was Delivered, if it

were a Son, he should come to London, and acquaint him, promising him for his paines a new Suit of Cloaths; the Lady was in a short time after Deli|vered of a Daughter; however Iack (unwilling to lose his Suit of Cloathes) goes to London, and acquains his Ma|ster that his Lady was brought to Bed of a brave young Son: the Gentle|man being over-joyed at the News, performed his Promise, and Iack be|ing well accoutred, returns to his Mi|stress: and in a short time after, the Gentleman returns; and meeting his Wife, wisheth her much Joy of her Son; but she alledging it was a Daugh|ter, and he finding himself abused, orders Iack to be sent for; who when he came, still continued in his former saying, that it was a Son; wheeup|on the Child was produced, and shown to the whole Company; Iack still avers it to be a Son: Why thou Fool, quoth the Nurse, if it were a Son it should have a Cock here. Cots|plut, quoth the Welshman, Is hur in haste? Would hur have a Cock there already? Let hur keep hur till hur is sixteen or seventeen years old,

and if hur have no Cock then, Hang hur.


120.
A brisk young Lady, seeing the Sheriff of a County, who was a come|ly young Man, wait upon the Judge, who was an old Man, was asked by one, which she had most mind to, the Judge, or the Sheriff? She answered, the Sheriff. He asking the reason, she replied, That she loved Iudgement well, but Execution much better.


121.
Some Souldiers in the Camp being very Lowsie, complain'd to their Cap|tain, who being a Jocose man, bid them turn their Shirts, and shake them, telling them that the Lice would have a days March, at least, before they could come to their Skin.


122.
A Handsome Countrey Maid coming to Croyden Market, and being very nimble, leaped off her Horse, but the Pummel of her Saddle being high, catcht hold of her Petticoat, and shewed almost all that Nature gave her; which a Gentleman standing by and seeing, said, Sweetheart, you have a very clear

Skin, To whom she answered briskly, Sir, if you like it so well, why did not you come and Kiss it, to take your leave on't, for you are not ever like to see it again?


123.
Two Scotchmen meeting about Din|ner time, one asked the other to lend him Six-pence; by my Troth, quoth he, I have but a Groat; Prithee Man, said he, lend me that, and I will trust you for the other Two pence.


124.
A young Woman having married a great Student, who was so intet on his Studies, that she thought her self too little regarded by him, and one day when they were at Dinner with some Friends, she wished her self a Book, that she might have more of her Husbands Company; If it must be so, says her Husband, I wish thou wert an Almanack, that I might change thee for a new one once a Year.


125.
A Gentleman alighting out of his Coach at White-hall, ask'd a Fot-man that stood there, what a Clock it was? Sir, says the Foot-man, what will you

give me? Why, replied the Gentle|man, must I give you any thing to tell me that? Yes Sir, said he, for we Courtiers do nothing without money.


126.
Two Gentlemen discoursing over a Glass of Wine, of the Affairs of En|gland, and of the several Classes of men therein; One of them wittily said, That in it there were neither Scho|lars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Iews enough. I can b admire at your ope|nion in that, says the other Gentleman; for methinks there are rather too ma|ny of those sorts than too few. To which he replied, If there were Scholars enough, so many would not be double or treble beneficed. If Gentlemen enough, so many Peasants would not be reckoned amongst the Gentry. And if Iews enough, so many Christians would never profess Vsury.


127.
A conceited Scholar that was late|ly come from Oxford, Drinking with two or three Gentlemen at the Mitre-Tavern in the Poultrey, was very brisk and airy, and would needs be forming of Sylogismes c. One wise one was

this, He bid them fill two Glasses of Wine, which they did: Now, says he, I will prove those two Glasses to be three, thus, Is not here one, says he? Yes, says the Gentleman. And here another, that's two, says he: Yes, says the Gentleman again. Why then, says he, one and two is three, so 'tis done. Very well, says the Gentleman, I'll have one Glass, and that Gentleman shall have the other, and you shall have the third for your pains in finding it out.


128.
One who had lain with his Female Servant, the next day asked her how many Commandments there were? She answered nine. Thou Fool, quoth he, hast thou lived to this Age, and knowest no better? There are ten. I know, says she, very well, there were ten Yesterday; but you and I broke one of them the last Night, so that there are but nine of them left.


129.
A witty, though unfortunate Fellow, having tried several Trades, and failed in them all, at last took an Ale-house, and set up the Sign of the Shirt; Wri|ting under it, This is my last Shift;

which witty Device, brought him much Company and Profit.


130.
A Gentleman that had never been used to Wounds, received a small Scratch with a Sword in a Tavern-Fray; at which he was sadly frighted, and sent immediately for a Chyrurge|on, who coming, and seeing the Wound but slight, and the Gentleman in a great fear; for sports sake pretended great danger, and therefore sends his Man with great speed to fetch him such a Plaister: Why Sir, quoth the Gentleman, is the wound so dangerous? O Yes, replyed the Arch Chyrurgeov, for if he don't make great haste, it will heal of it self, before he comes.


131.
A young Lady being to be sworn at Hygate; the Lord Judge asked her whether she would have a Pr, or a Pear? A Pr my Lord, says she, Well said Madam, says he, you speak like a Modest Lady; for some of your Sex can't be contented with a Pr but they must have a pair.



132.
A Woman in the Countrey that had Ten Children, told her Husband that Nine of them were his, and no more; now he mistrusting the Parson of the Parish had been sweet upon her, said, Well, Wife, I'll keep the Nine, but I never denyed the Clergy their due, and so will not begin now; for the Parson shall have the Tenth for his Tythe, it being rightly due to him.


133.
Parson Bull coming to visit one Mr. Hide. Hide said smileing, Bull, where are your Horns? Sir, replied Bull, they always go with the Hide.


134.
A Countrey man coming through Cheapside with Hob nails in his Shoes, and treading in a slippery place, his Heels flew up; which a Ciizen taking notice of in his Shop, said to the Fel|low, How now, Friend? You see our Ci|ty stones are so proud, they scorn to let a Countrey-Clown tread on them. Hah! says the Countrey-man, as proud as they are, I made them kiss my Arse.



135.
A Scotchman having found an extra-ordinary large Turnip in his Garden, which is a Root that Scotchmen love very well,) came and presented it to King Iames; who being pleased with the humour of the Man, gave him a hundred Pounds. A Courtier seeing this, thought with himself, thus, if the King regards a Turnip so much, and rewards the Giver of it so nobly, how much more nobly will he reward me for a greater present. So he presented the King with a curious Race Horse, which when the King received, he said to his Nobles, what shall I give to this man for his present, and when they were all silent, says the King, By my Soul man I will give thee the Turnip.


136.
A Welshman that was condemned to be hanged, had the benefit of the Cler|gy granted to him, and so was burnt in the Hand; which when it was doing, they bid him say, God bless the King. Nay, says he, God bless hur Father and Mother; for if they had not taught hur to read, hur might hwve been hanged for all the King.



137.
A Lady that was going to Mass, was interrupted by a Rustical Fellow that stood just in the Church Door, and hin|dred her going in. She prayed him to make a little way, to which he gave hr a Clownish Answer, which stirred up her Passion a little, and thin|king it in vain to expect any Civility from him, she said, Sir, I perceive that the Mass for Clowns and Fools is over, so that you having no more business here had best be gone. Yes Madam, says he, drily, that is over, and that for Wh's is just now beginning; you ha best make haste in, and put in for a share.


138.
Another Lady going to Mas to present her Tapers, fixed one to St. Michael, and another to the Devil that was at his Feet. The Clerk seeing her, told her she did not do wel to offer a a Candle to the Devil, No matter, says the Lady, 'tis good to have Friends eve|ry where; for we know not where we shall g.


139.
A ussing young Blade coming to Esom, cal'd an honest plain Countrey-man,

that was there to hold his Hors Can one hold him, says he? Yes, yes, says the Gallant. Then you may do it your self, replied the Countrey-man, and so went away.


140.
A Cuntrey man that was very ig|norant, coming to the Arch-Bishops House, with his Rent, the Ach-Bishop coming through the Hall, asked who 'twas? An't please your Worships Ho|nour, says the Countrey man, I am come to pay you your Rent; so the Arch Bishop went out; and the Servants told him, he must say, An't please your Grace; But the Arch-Bshop coming in again, he was at, An't please your Worships Ho|nour; they told him he must say Grace; Must I so? says he; then putting his Hat before his Eyes, he said The Eyes of all things, c.


141.
A Qaker having took a Lodging at the Kings-Arms Inn in Holbourne; the House being full, a damming Blade came up into the Room, and would have hectored him out, but the Qua|ker told him 'twas his Room, and by Yea, and Nay, he should not come there.

The Hector began to thunder out his Oahs, and to strike him; but the Quaker being a stout Fellow, return|ed him his Blows with Intrest, and at last very fairly kicked him down stairs, upon which the Master of the House sent up the Tapster to know what was the Cause of this noise above, he told h 'was nothing ut that Yea, and Nay had kickt God Damme down Stairs.


142.
A Gentleman reproving hs Friend that was a married Man, for getting a Maidwith Child, saying, He admired that such a man as he would defile his Bed so: You mistake, Sir, says he, there was no defiling of my Bed in the Case, for I did it in the Fields.


143.
An Arch Wag asking why Monks, and Fryers were called Holy Fathers, since they never Married. O replied an Ingenious Gentleman, if you consi|der how much the World is beholden to them for Propagation, how many swarms of young Frieslings they supply the World with, you'll see a great deal of reason for it.



144.
A conceited Fellow, that had an ex|traordinary good opinion of himself, asked his Friends what others thought of him? Why, says his Friend, The Wise think you foolish, and Fools think you wise; Now pray, What think you of your self.


145.
Pope Vrban using to commend the Institution of the single Life in Priests, and to blame their using of Concubines, was wont to say, God has forbidden  to g Children, and the Devil has given us Nephews.


146.
Two Gentlemen that had been a great while at Law together, and had spent a great deal of Money at it, one of the Gentlemens Friends told him, That his Antagonist had removed his Suit into Chancery; Let him remove it into Hell, says he, I don't question but to get a Lawyer to follow it for Money.


147.
A Gentleman in Brussels talking with a Priest about Religion, asked Why they kissed the Cross more than any other

pece of Wood? and what there was more in that, than in any other Trees else, that they did not kiss them? Why, said the Priest, Is not your Wife made all of the same Fsh and Blood? and what's the reason you don't kiss her back-side, as well as her Mouth.


148.
An English Merchant at Lisbon in Spain, old some Jews five hundred pounds worth o Gloves; but they falling off from their Bargain, would have but half of them: Well, said the Merchant, you st give me ometime to sr them, and then you shall have half; so he ordered his Man to put all the Right handed Gloves in one par|cel, and the Left-handed Gloves in ano+ther. Then when the Jews came, he bid them take their Choice; which when they had doe, and were pack|ing of them up, they perceived them to be all for one band; and so were glad to take the other parcel at the Mrhants own rate.


149.
One standing in the Pllory at the Exchange, and his Wife being by him to bear him Company, a Gentleman

that saw him, said, He believed he was a Papist, because he had his Cross with him.


150.
Another man hearig a Parson Preach on that Text, Take up your Cross and follow me; took his Wife upon his Back the next Sunday, and came into the middle of the Church, while the Pason was preaching, and looking up to him, said, Nw Sir, I have brought my Cross, what must I do with it? The Minister being a little supiz'd at the humour of the Fellow, hardly knew what to say to him, but at last he bid him set it down there: Yes, that I will, says he, with all my heart, though it were in the middle of the Sea: But I s, savs he, as well as you pretend to love the Cross, mine may lie upon my hands this forty Years, before you'll ease me of it.


151.
A Gentleman ask'd on of the Fe|male Sex, Whether she was Maid, Wife, or Widdow; and bid her tell him truly: She being a little put to it, after some consideration upon this hard question, and being above twenty years old an|swered

him thus, Though I was never married, Sir, yet you may write me down Young Woman.


152.
King Henry the Eighth, going once to Gravesend, took Will. Summers his Jester wih him for his diversion; the Wind being very high, it was very tempestuous; and Summers being ve|ry fearu, thought himself in great danger, and said to the King, Harry, Harry, I had rather be thy Fool by Land, than thy Companion by Watter: At which the King laugh'd heartily.


153.
A Nobleman having a mind to be merry, sent for his Chaplain, and tol him, That unless he could resolve him these, Three Questions, he should be discarded, and turn'd out of his Service; but if he cou'd, he shou'd have Thirty Guinneys and the best Horse in his Stable: So he propos'd the Questions to him, which were these; First, What compass the World ws about? Secondly, How deep the Sea was? And Thirdly, What he thought? The Poor Chaplain was in a peck of Troubles, and did not know how to

answer them, or what to say, think|ing them very unreasonable Questi|ons; so that all he could do was to desire a little time to consider upon them, which the Earl granted. So he going a long the Fields one day very melancholy, a Cobler of the Town, a merry Fellow (who was very like the Chaplain, both in Physiognomy and Stature) met him, and ask'd him the reason of his sadness; which with some Reluctancy he told him: O Sir, says the Cobler, don't be dejected, chear up; I've thought of a device to save your Place, and get you the Mo|ney and Horse too; but you shall give me Ten Guinneys for my pains. So he agreed to't; and it was hus: Says he, I'll put on your Cloaths, and go to My Lord, and answer his Questi|ons. Accordingly he went, and when he came before him, he answer'd him thus: To the first Question, What Compass the World was about? He an|swered, It was four and twenty hours Iourney; and if a man could keep pace with he Sun he might easily go it  tat me. To the Second, How deep e Sea was? He answer'd, Only  stones

throw; for cast it into the deepest place of it, and in time it will come to the bot|tom. To the thd, (which I fancy your Lordship thinks the most difficult to be resolv'd, but is indeed the easi|est) which is, What your Lordsip thinks? I answer, That you think I am your Chaplain, when as indeed I am but the Cobler of Glcester. The Noble|man was so pleas'd with his witty An|swers, that he prform' his Promise t his Chapan, and gave the Cobler Ten Guinneys for his Ingenuity.


154.
Says a Glazier to a Painter, I see you do all under a Colour. Get you gone, you Rogue, rply'd the Painter, you're al|wys icking of Quarrels.


155.
A Certain King kept a Fool in his Court, that us'd to write down in a Book all the Follies of the great Men in the Court which Book the King sometimes, when he was dispos'd to be Mery, wou'd look into. Now one day after Dinner, the King read|ing of the Book, found himself in it, with a Story of five thousand Pounds, which he gave a Iew in his Court, to

go to Brbary and buy Horses with: So the King ask'd his Jester, Why he put him in, Why, says he, for giving your Mony to one tt you may never see, again: But says the King, What if he should return and bring the Horses, what Folly is it then? Why, if he doe's, replyed the Fool, I'll blot out your Name, and put in his, for a Fool, for not keeping your Money whe he had it.


156.
Two Women scolding in the Street, another of their Acquaintance came by, whom they would refer thir Ca|ss to; N, says the Wmn, pray Excuse me, I won't meddle in it, but will stand Neuter: How can that be, says on of them, when you have been com|mon to all the Town?


157.
Doctor Flr, overtook one Mr. Woodcock upon the Road, falling ino Dscurse in a facetious manner, ask'd him what diffrece thre was between a Woodcock and an Owl, (suppo|sing M Woodcock had not known him) He wittily replyed, That an Owl was Fuller in the Head, Fuller in the Face, Fuller in the Eyes, Fuller in the Neck, and Fuller all over.


A Scholar meeting a Countreyman upon the Road, Rid up vey briskly to him; but the Countreyman out of Respect to him, was turning off his Horse to give him the Road, when the Scholar laying his Hand upon his Sword, said, 'Tis well you gave me the Way, or I'd.What wou'd you have done? said the Countreyman, holding up his Club at him: Given it you Sir, says he, pulling of his Hat to him.


159.
One Reading in the Famous Histo|ry of the Sven Champions, how St. George kill'd the Dragoon, and sav'd Sabra the fair Maid of Egypt, said, He admir'd how Men co'd invent such Lies; for, says he, I believe there never was any such Draoon, or such a Man as St. George. O, says another, I can believe that, better than that there was a Maid.


160.
A Tallow Chandler dying, a mer|ry Fellow said, He wondred, that he that had made so many Weeks, cou'd make his Life no longer.


162.
A Lusty young Man, in Somerset|shire, after he had been Married about four Months, grew very Lean and Fee|ble, so that he cou'd hardly crawl a|long; He one day seeing a Butcher run over a Plough'd Field after a Mad-Bull, ask'd him the reason of it? Why, says the Butcher, it is to Tame him: O, says the Fellow, Let him be Mar|ried, let him be Married; if that don't Tame him, I'll be hang'd.


163.
A Soldier, a merry Fellow, finding a Louse on his Sleave, walking to take the Air, took him up by the Back, and said, I swear, if I catch ou agin out of your Quarters, you shall be Hang'd; and so put him into the Collar of his Dublet.


164.
A certain Highway-man having committed a Robbery in Devonshire, was taken in Dorsetsire, making to|wards London, and brought before a Justice of Peace, who wou'd not med|dle with him, but wou'd send him back into the Shire where he committed the Robbery; which a witty Coun|trey man hearing (that had been at the

trouble of taking him, and was unwil|ling to Guard him back into the other County) desir'd leave to ask the Ju|stice one Question, which he granted: Why then, says the Man, I desire your Worship to tell me, if a man be taken abed with your Wife to Night, whether e must be sent thither again the next night.


165.
A Gentleman ord'd a Crane for Supper; but his Cook having a Sweet|heart in a longing condition,  off a Leg and sent her; so the One-Leg'd Crane was set on the Tabe, which the Gentleman seeing, was enrag'd at his Cook; but he being an arch Wag, readily told the Gentleman, that Cranes had but one Leg? and avow'd it with that cofidence, that he gain'd upon his wise Masters belief; but he resolving to observe it as he was walk|ing in the Fields one Frosty Morning, he saw a flock of Cranes, and sending for his Cook, they held up one of their Legs under their Wings, as is the cu|stom of those brds in the cool wea|ther; So, says his Cook, I hope your Worship is sufied that they have but one eg; but the Gentleman going pretty

near to them, cries Cush, and frighted them up. wherupon both Legs ap|pear'; Look, says the Gentleman, they have now two Legs: Oh, says the Cook, if you had cried Cush to that in the Dish, it wou'd have had two Legs too.


166.
A Gentleman losing his Watch, Complain'd to his his Fried of his loss; Alas, Sir, says he, all the World c't help it, Time will away.


167.
A Bully meeting a brisk Lady in St. Iame's Park, with her naked Breasts appearing very tempting, says to her, Madam, is that Flesh to be sold? No, replied she, no money shall buy it: Then, says he, Madam, if you won't sell you Ware, I'd wish you to shut up your Shop: Faith, Sir, says she, you may be sure I'll never let you come within my Doors: 'Tis no matter, Madam, replied he, for I am sure they ae wicked ones.


168.
A Person of Quality in the Coun|tre, keping a Baboon at his Door with a handsome fine Coton; a Coun|trey Fellow brought a Letter and gave it to the Baboon, who tore it to pieces;




and the Lord happening to come out, saw him do it; at which he was angry with the Fellow, and asked him why he delivered it not to him himself? Why, says the Fellow, I gave it to your Son, and he tore it: You Fool, says he, 'tis a Baboon: Indeed, says the Fel|low, I thought it was your Son, he is so like you.


169.
A Woman having a mind to oblige her Husband, desired him to invite some of his Friends to Dinner, and they would be merry, for, says she, I have provided a curious Leg of Mut|ton for you: I thank you my Dear, says he, you are always very free of your Flesh to me, and every body else that has any Appetite to it.


170.
Some Sholars having a spight a|gainst their Master, becuse of his Hashness to them, resolved to play him some trick; so knowing him to be a very curious neat Man, they dau|bed the Railes of the Stairs with a Sir R Now the Master coming down in the dark, laid his Hands in it, which set him into a terrible feu'd;

so he called all the Schollars, and took them into strict Examination; but suspecting one above the rest, he was very sharp upon him, urging him to confess it, telling him he did it; the Boy utterly denied it; but the Maser was the more prssing upon him: In|deed, said the Lad, with all the Asse|verations imaginable, I did it not, but if you please, I'll tell you who had a hand in it: Hereupon the Master thought to have found out the Truth, and so very eagerly asked him who? Your Worship, Sir, says he: Whereupon he was dismissed, with the applause of all his Fellows, for his Ingenuity.


171.
A Merry Fellow in a great Storm at Sea, when all were at Prayers, Eat heartily on Salt-Beef; and being asked his reason, answered, He should Drink more that day, than ever he did in his life.


172.
Iohn Taylor the Water Poet being aboard the Ship, called, The Hector, was so Treated with Punch by the Captain, that it was easily perceived by the Sea|men, who began to play upon him;

whereupon Iohn in a Poetical rage, in+voked the Patron of the Ship thus,
O Noble Hector Valiant Son of Priam,
Grant all these Men may be as Drunk as I am.


173.
A certain Knave asking a virtuous Gentlewoman, Jearingly, What was honesty? She answered, What's that to you? Medle with those things that con|cern you.


174.
A Young Man in London being caught a bed with his Mistress, was se|verely reprimanded by his Uncle, who set before him the example of Ioseph: O, ays he, if Joseph's Mistress had been as handsome as mine, I doubt not bt he would have done as I did.


175.
A Gentleman that had many Child|ren, was saying one day to his Friend, that his Wife was more Fertile then his Land. I'll give you a good reason for that, says his Friend, for if you are weary, and wn't take pains to make her so, others will.



176.
A Witty Fellow going along Pater|noer-Row, in a dark Winter Night, saw a Lanthorn hang out with a Can|dle in it, which he had a mind to, to light him home; bt as he had clim'd up to it, and was just going to unty it, the Maid of the House saw him, and asked what he medled with the Lan|thorn for? I beg your Pardon, says he, Sweet-heart, I only went to snuff the Can|dle, that I might see to go along.


177.
Two Gentlemen riding from Barnet to London, met a Miller riding softly on his Sacks; and they being merrily disposed, had a mind to abuse the Mil|ler; so one went on one side of him, and the other on the other, and having Rid so a little way with him, they prayed him to resolve them one Que|stion, Whether, says they, art thou more Knave or Fool? Trully, replyed the Mil|ler, I don't know which I am most, but I think I am between both.


178.
Mr. Randolph, the Great Wit of Cambridg, coming to London, had a mind to see Ben Iohson, who was

Drinking at the Devil Tavern with Mr. Drayton, Mr. Daniel, and Mr. Sil|vester, three famous Poets of that Age; he being loth to intrude into their Company, and yet desiring to be call'd in, peep'd in at the Door several times, till at last Mr. Iohnson perceiving him, said, Come in, Iohn Bopeep: which he did: and when the Reckoning came to be aid, which was Five Shillings, they agreed among themselves that he that made the best Extempory Verles, should be excused from paying any thing, and the other four should pay it all; so every one made his Verses, and when it came to Mr. Randolph's turn, he made hese:
I John Bopeep, to you four Sheep,
With each one is good Fleece;
If you are willing to pay your five Shilling,
'Tis fifteen Pence a piece.


179.
Ben Iohnson and Silvester being very merry one day at the above named Tavern, began to Rhie upon one another; so Silvester began thus:

I Silvester
Lay with your Sister.
To whom Ben-Iohnson answered:
I Ben Johnson
Lay with your Wife.
That, says Silvester, is no Rhym; but, Faith, 'tis true though, says Ben Iohn|son.


180.
Mr. Noy the Attorney General making a Venison Feast in a Tavern, where Ben Iohnson and some of his Companions were Drinking and he having a mind to some of the Venison, wrote these Verses, and sent them to Mr. Noy:
When all the World was drown'd,
No Venison could be found;
For then there was no Park:
Lo here we sit
Without e're a bit,
Noy has it all in his Ark.
 For the ingenuity of which, Mr. Noy sent him a good corner of a Pasty, and half a Dozen Bottles of Sack to wash it down.


181.
At another time, Ben Iohnson in|tending to go through the Half-Moon-Tavern

in Aldersgate-Street, was deni|ed entrance, the Dor being shut: up|on which he made these Verses,
Since the Half Moon is so unkind, to make me go about,
The Sun my Money now shall take, the Moon shall go without.
 And so he went to the Sun Tavern at Long Lane end, forsaking the Half-Moon, for this affront.


182.
A fool being very sick, and like to dye, one that went to see him, went to comfort him, bidding him chear up, for if you dye, says he, Four proper Fellows shall carry you to Church: Ay but, quoth he, I had rather by half go thither my slf.


183.
A Courtier importuing Queen Elizabeth, for a certain place that was vacant, the Queen told him, He was nt fit for it: An't please your Majesy, says he, I can get one to Officiate fo me: Very likely, says the Queen and I can put in one of my Maids, that can do so too.



184.
A Tutor in Oxford, reading a Le|cture to his Scholars about the Virtues in moral Philosophy, gave them this general Rule to know Virtue from Vi|ces, The Virtues consisted in the Middle, but Vices were Extreams. The next day he bid his Scholars give an Example of the fore-going Rule; so one of them, being a sharp Lad, instanc'd in Virginity. Why Sirrah, says the Tutor, who told you that Virginity was a Virtue? You did, that Sir, replied the Lad, for you told us, that all Virtues consisted in the Middle, and so does Virginity.


185.
Says a Tall Man, going along with a little Man, The People won't gaze so much at a Pigmy, because I'm in your Company. Yes, says the little Man, they will gaze he more upon me, to see me have an Ass n my Company, and not Ride.


186.
A Lawyer meeting a Country Fel|ow driving his Cart, ask'd him mer|ily, why his Fore-Horse was so Fat, nd the other so Lean? Why, says the ellow, my Fore-Horse is a Lawyer, nd the rest are his Clients; for which itty answer, the Lawyer gave him Shilling to Drink.



187.
A Country-man coming up to Lon|don, having never been there be|fore, star'd into a Scriv'ners Shop; the Scriv'ner standing at a Door, ask'd him what he wou'd buy? What do you sell, says the Country-man? Why Logger-heads, says the Scrivner, will you buy one? Yes, says he, but I see you have such a good Trade, that you have no choice, having but one left in your Shop.


188.
One said; That no Man had a greater confidence in their Country, than Thieves, for they put themselves upon it, though they are Hanged for their pains.


189.
One told his Wife, that there was a Law making, That all Cuckolds should be drown'd: O pray, my Dear Husband, says she, then learn to Swim.


190.
A Blunt Rustical Fellow, having been netled with a Jest that one put upon him, resolv'd one way or other to be even with him; therefore having a good Cane in his Hand, he laid him over the Pate with it saying, Every

Man has his Talent; you can break Iests, and I can break Heads.


191.
Some Thieves coming to Rob a Gentlemans House before he was a+sleep, he call'd out of the Window, and bid them stay but one hour, and by that time he should be a sleep; which frighted them so, that they ran away faster than they came thither.


192.
A Gentleman having his Pocket pickt whilst he was at Prayers at Church, complain'd to his Friend of it; why says his Friend, If you had Watch'd as well as Pray'd, you would not have lost your Money.


193.
A Constable taking a pretty Wench late at Night, brought her before a Justice, who seeing her handsome and gentilely Dreft, was very favourable to her, winking at her fault in being out so late, and bid the Constable take her home to his House that Night. Yes, that I will with all my heart, says the Constable, if your Worship will be pleas'd to commit my Wife till the Morn|ing.



194.
Two young Oxford Scholars agree|ing together to go into an Adjacent Warren to steal some Rabbets; one be|ing to watch, and not to speak one word, and the other to catch them: So they being come to the place, he that watch'd, cried out, Ecce Cuniculi multi; which noise frighted all the Rab|bets into their Burrows; whereupon the other was very angry with him; Why, says he, who thought the Rabbets had un|derstood Latin?


195.
A Lady receiving a Letter from a Foppish Gentleman, taken verbatim out of Cassander, which he had read, she sent it him back again, bidding the Messen|ger tell him, That he was mistaken, for though the Letter was directed to her, it was written to Madam Roxana.


196.
A Gentleman borrowed five Pounds of his Friend, and lost it at Play; thereupon he sent to borrow five Pounds more, by the Token that he ow'd him five Pounds already: Pray, said his Friend, bid your Master send me the Token, and I'll send him the five Pounds.



197.
A Wench that was got with Child, sent her Friend to the Father of it, to tell him that she was quick; he repli|ed, If she be quick, I'll be as nimble, and so run away.


198.
One seeing Doctor Mathew, that was a very Learned man, but little of Stature, pass by, said, There goes mini|mus Apostolorum; which the Doctor hearing, merrily replied, That Ma|thew was Maximus Evangelistarum.


199.
A Gentleman standing in a brown Study, a Lady askd him, What he was thinking of? He said Of nothing: What do you think on, says the Lady, when you think on nothing? Faith, says he, Then I think on you, and the inconstancy of your Sex.


200.
The Lord Bacon going the Northern Circuit, a Fellow that was try'd for Robbing, was very importunate with the Judge to be favourable to him, tel|ling him that he was a kin to his Lord|ship: Why how so, said the the Judge? Why, answer'd the Fellow, An't please your Lordship, your Name is Bacon, and

my Name is Hog, and those two are alike. 'Tis true, said the Judge; but you and I can't be Kindred till you are Hang'd, for Hog is never good Bacon till 'tis Hang'd.


201.
King Iames Riding a Hunting in Essex comes to a Gate which he must go through, and seeing a Countrey-Clown at it, he says to him, Prethee good Pellow open the Gate? But he knowing who it was, answered, No, an't please your Grace, I am not worthy to be in that Office; but I'll run and fetch Mr. Johnson, who is a Iustice of Peace, and lives a Mile off, and he shall open it for your Grace; and so he run away as fast as he could, and left the King to open it himself.


202.
When the Turks were Besieging Vi|enna, a Gentleman being to be sent to the Grand-Vizier, upon some impor|tant Affair, desir'd to be excus'd; for, says he, I'm affraid, because he is so faithless and treacherous, that he'll take my Head off: If he does, says the Governour, I'll take a Thousand of his Mens Heads off. I, Sir, replied the Gentleman, but I question whether any of them will fit my shoulders.



203.
A young Lad being chid by his Un|cle, for lying a Bed so long in a Mor|ning, telling him that such a one had found a Purse of Money by rising early in the Morning; I, says the Lad smart|ly, but he rose too early that lost it.


204.
A merry Gentleman, in the begin|ning of the late Civil Wars, being ask'd, if he should dye, how he would be buried? Answered, With his Face downwards s For, says he, in a little time England will be turn'd up side down, and then I shall lie right.


205.
A man being brought before the Duke of Millan, for falling down from a House (which he was Tiling) upon a poor man that was going by, and bruising him very much: Look you Friend, says the Duke to the man that was hurt, I'm for the Law of Retaliati|on; You shall go up to the top of the House where he was, and he shall go along just where you did; and so you shall fall upon him, and bruise him as much as he did you: Which unexpected piece of Ju|stice, put an end to the mans Prosecu|tion.



206.
A Farmers Daughter in the Coun|trey bringing up her Fathers Cows near the House to be Milk'd, they all run away from her down a dirty Lane; upon which the Girl cry'd out, O, Mo|the, the Cows are ru down the Lane to the Devil; shall I go after them? No, Child, says the Mother, let your Father go, for he has high Shoon.


207.
A Tallow-Chandler having some Candles stole, complain'd to his Friend: O, says he, be patient, for I'm confident in a short Time they'll all come to light.


208.
An Oxford Scholar coming up to London, went into a House of Iniquity in Covent-Garden, which had the Flow|er-de-Luce to its Sign, where he got a Clap: whereupon he writ these Ver|ses over the door at his going away:
All you that hither chance to come,
Mark well e'er you go in;
For Frenchmens Arms are Signs without,
And Frenchmens Harms within.



209.
One asking a Painter how he cou'd draw such curious Pictures, and yet get such ugly Children? He answer'd, Be|cause he drew the Pictures in the day, but got his Children in the night.


210.
Another asking why men sooner gave to Poor People than to Scholars? was answer'd, Because they think they may sooner come to be Poor, than Scholars.


211.
A Player Riding along Fleetstreet in great haste, a Gentleman of the Tem|ple stop'd him, and ask'd what Play was to be acted that night? The Player was not a little vex'd at him, for hinde|ring him on such a slight occasion; however recovering himself, he told him he might see that on every Post: I beg your Pardon, said the Gentleman, indeed I took you for a Post, you rid so fast.


211.
Two Gentlemen being drinking to|gether, one of them prest the other to drink more then he could well bear, and therefore he refus'd it, desiring to be excus'd; but the other being pret|ty

well dipt, swore he shou'd take  o|ther Glass, or else he'd run him tho'. No, says he, you shan't, I'll save you that labour, for I'll run my self through, and Pledge you afterwards; saying so, he run through the door down stairs, and left the Spark to pay the Reckoning.


213.
Sir Thomas Moor being surveying of St. Paul's Church, as he was walking on the Leads of it, there happened to be a Madman there, who seeing some Jack daws flying about the Church, catch'd up Sir Thomas (being a little man) in his Arms, saying, Now Sir, we will fly down as those Birds do; and so was going to throw him over; but he cryed out to him, saying, Hold Friend, let us go down, and fly up to them, which stopt the Madmans hand.


214.
A Woman coming to a Parson, de|sir'd him to preach a Funeral Sermon on her Son that was lately dead; the Parson promised her to do it; but she desiring to know the Price of his Ser|mon, he told her it was Twenty Shillings: Twenty Shillings! says she; An Ass spoke for and Angel, and won't

you speak under Twenty Shillings? The Parson being a little netled at her, told her she was better fed than taught: Sir, says she, 'tis very true; for my Hus|band feeds me, and You teach me.


215.
A Countrey Gentleman riding along Cheap-side, his Horse stumbled and threw him in the Dirt; so he got a fellow to hold him, and went into the next Shop, the Mistress of which be|ing a pleasant Woman, smiling, (see|ing he had no hurt) asked him if his Horse used to serve him so? Yes Ma|dam, says he, When he comes just again a Cuckold's door. Then in truth, replied she ingeniously, You are like to have twenty falls, before you get to the Ex|change.


216.
A Gentleman riding to Epsom, over|took a handsome Countrey Wench jogging along easily upon a poor dull Mare; the Gentleman being merrily disposed, asked her how she did? and told her, if she pleased he'd occupy her. O Sir, says she, what good will that do me? Why, says he, 'twill make you brave and brisk; Pray then Sir, says she, Occupy my Mare, for she's very dull.



217.
An Elder Brother told his younger Brother, that that White Camlet Cloak he had on, became him extra-ordinary well: Faith Brother, says he, but a black mourning Cloak for you, would become me a great deal better.


218.
A Great Sweaterbeing subpoena'd to give his Oath upon a Trial they brought him a Book to swear on: Faith, says he to the Clark, You may save your self that Labour, for there is no Oath but I can Swear it without Book.


219.
A Scolding Woman used to abuse her Husband, who was pretty softly, and call him Cuckold twenty times a day, which a silly Fellow hearing, said, He wondred the Husband was such a fool to let his Wife know that he was a Cuckold.


220.
A Drunken Countrey Fellow whose name was Will Iohnson, driving his Cart between Cambridge and Surbridg, fell fast asleep in it; and in the mean time his two Horses were stole out of it: he awaking said, Either I am Will. Johnson, or I am not Will. Johnson: If

I am Will: Johnson, then I have lost my two Horses: if I am not Will. Johnson, then I have found a Cart.


221.
A Gentleman discoursing of his Travels, was interrupted by a Lady in the Company, that said she had tra|vell'd further then he: Say you so, Ma|dam; says the Gentleman, Then We as Travellers, may lye together with Autho|rity.


222.
One that had been married but a Week, call'd her Husband Cuckold: which her Mother hearing, reproved her? You stut, says she, do you call your Husband Cuckold already? And I have been married this twenty years to your Father, and never durst tell him of it yet.


223.
A Countrey Man going along Lime|strest, saw a Rope with a handle to it hand out of the Door; now he not knowing what was the meaning of it, went and played with it; and pulling it a little hard, the Merchant being in the Comptinghouse, came out to the door, and asked the Countryman what he would have? He answered, nothing but he pull'd the string, and the Bell

rang: the Merchant seeing him so simple, asked him what Country-man he was? I am an Essex man, an't please you, says he: Ay, says the Merchant, I have heard that in Essex a man can't beat the hedg, but out comes a Calf? True, says he, and I see that in London a man can't ring a Bell, but out comes a Cuckold.


224.
A Drunken debauched Dyer, com|plaining to his Friend that was a sober man, that whatsoever he took in hand to dye, came to some mischance or other: O, says his Friend, The way to succeed in your Business, is to amend your Life; for a man that does not live well, can never dye w.


225.
A Fidler boasting what a chaste Wife he had: says a Gentleman, I'll lay my House against thy Fiddle, that if I have opportunity, I'll get her con|sent to lie with her: the Wager was laid, and he had the Fidlers consent to try; but the Fidler went in the mean time, and sung this Song under the Window:
Hold out, my Dear, hold ot;
Hold out, but these two hours:
If you hold out, there is no doubt
But the House, and all is ours.
To which his Wise answered:
I Faith sweet William I cannot,
He has caught me about the Middle:
He hath me Won, thou art undon,
Sweet William thou'st lost thy Fiddle.


226.
A Facetious Gentleman discoursing with a Witty Lady, who was speak|ing of the Weakness of her Sex, and the vast advantage that men had above them: Hold, Madam, said he; I beg your Pardon, if I dissent from you in this commonl-received-point; for it is no difficult thing to prove that your Sex is now a days stronger than ours; for Samp|son, the strongest Man, carried only the Gates of the City upon his Shoulders; but now every little Lady of your Sex car|ries a Tower upon her Fore-head. To which she wittily and briskly replied, Certainly, Sir, you have a very strong Head, to carry so many Windmils up and down in it.


227.
One that had weak Eyes, being jear'd by a man that had clear Eyes; he told him, They were not so di, but he could

see a Fool: It may be so, says the other, but you must look in a Glass then.


227.
A Schoolmaster examining his Boys, and asking them several Rules for Pea|sing, espied one to have a dirty face  hands, and asked him by what Rule it was that he was dirty; the Boy readily answered, By de me Lavo Lavi.


228.
One telling his Friend that he saw a Man and his Wife Fighting: Why did not you part 'em, says he? Part 'em! says the Genleman, I have been better bred, then to part Man and Wife.


229.
Some Gentlemen coming into a Ta|vern, whose Sign was the Moon, (where for a Fancy they sold nothing but Cla|ret, for which they were very noted, and had great Custom) called for a Bottle of Sack: whereupon the Draw|er told him they had none: At which, they not a little admiring; as not know|ing the Humour, asked the Drawer the reason, who told them, The Man in the Moon drinks Claret. The Fancy of which pleased them so, that they said they were resolved o be socia|ble;

and so called for each Man his Bottle, to drink their Brothers Health in the Moon.


230.
One being asked what he was that had a fine Wit in Jest? Answered, a Fool in Earnest.


231.
One gave a Fellow a Box oth' Far, upon which the Fellow whom he strook gave him another: What do you mean, said he that gave the first Box? I did not lend you a Box, I freely gav it you: No matter, says the other, I am a Gamester, and am always used to pay the Box.


232.
Says a Gentleman to his Friend, methinks a Player, has the idlest Em|ployment of any: No, replyed he, you are mistaken, for he is always in A|ction.


233.
A Gentleman was used to say of a Drunkard, That it signified not much what he said in his Cups; for he seldom spake any thing that he could stand to, tho he made by Indentures.



234.
One seeing a Book that was but one sheet of Paper, said, A Man need not libel it, for it did Pennance in a sheet al|ready.


235.
One Tom. Love, University Capper in Cambridge, ringing in one of the Belfreys, the Clapper of the Bell fell upon his Head, and almost killed him. An arch young Student seeing his Mis|chance, and thinking the Wound Mor|tal, writ over against the place where he sell, these following Verses.
Here lies Tom Love, the Vniversity Capper;
That liv'd by the Bell, and dy'd by the Clapper.
But Tom. Love recovering, and see|ing these Verses, under-writ thus:
Tom. Love's alive, and lives in hope
To live by the Bell, when thou dy'st by the Rope.



236.
Cambden, n the 25th. Page of his Remains, tells you of a Fryer, who Preaching in the Countrey, espied a poor Woman, whispering to one that sat in the same Pew with her, at which the Fryer being enrag'd, call'd to her aloud, saying, Hold thy Peace Babble I bid thee, thou Wife in the Red Hood; whereat the Woman angry, started up and cried to him again that all the Church rang of her; Marry Sir, I e|shrew his Heart that bableth most of us two; for I do but whisper a word with my Neighbour here, and thou hast babled there a good large hour.




Witty and Grave SAYINGS.

1.
SOldiers in Peace, are like Chim|neys in Summer.


2.
Painters are cunning Fellows, for they have a Colour for whatever they do.


3.
Coblers may be said to be good men because they set men upright, and are always mending Soles.


4.
A Prison is a good Instrument of Reformation, for it makes many Lewd Fellows staid men.



5.
Physicians, of all men, have the be on't; for if they do well, the World proclaims it; if ill, the Earth covers it.


6.
Carpenters are civil and honest Fel|lows, for they do all their business by Rule.


7.
Vertue is easier than Vice; for the Essential difference between Vice and Virtue is Truth and Falshood; and it is easier and less pains to tell Truth than a Lye; and for Vices of the Senses, Custom is all in all; for to one that has lived honestly, it is as much shame to commit Sin, as for another to abstain.


8.
At a certain Marriage, One let fall this Silver Saying, That Parents might forbid their Children an unfit Mch, but may not force their Consent to a fit one.



9.
Aristippus being accus'd by a Strum|pet for having got her with Child, an|swered, Thou may'st as well, going through a Thorn-Hedge, tell certainly which Thorn prick'd thee.


10.
The Merits of a deserving Lady are enough to serve her for a Protection, amongst the Savage Indians; whilst their Rudeness and Barbarity knows not so perfectly to hate all Virtues, as some mens Subtilty does.


11.
Carry a Watchful Eye, upon Dan|gers till they come to ripeness;  when they are ripe, let loose  speedy hand: He that Expects them too long, meets 'em too soon, and gives advantage to the Evil. Commit their beginnings to Argus's Eyes, and their End to Bri|'s hands, and thou art safe.



12,
Fortune has no Power over Wis|dom, but of Sensuality, and of Lives that Swim and Navigate without the Loadstone of Discretion  Judgment.


13.
Aristarchus Scoffingly said, That in old times hardly cou'd be found seven Wise Men throughout the World: But i our Days, says he, much ado there is to find so any Fools.


14.
Antisthenes being ask'd by one, What Learning was most necessary for Mans Life? Answer'd, To Vnlearn that which is Naught.


15.
Diogenes being ask'd in a kind of scorn, What was the Reason that Phi|losophers haunted Rich Men, and not Rich Men Philosophers? Answerd, Because the former knew what they wanted, the latter did not.



16.
When it was said to Anaxagoras, The Athenians have condemn'd you to dye; he said again, And Nature them.


17.
When Croesus for his Glory shew'd Solon his great Treasures of Gold, So|lon said to him, If another comes that has better Iron than you, he will be Ma|ster of all this Gold.


18.
Chilon us'd to say, That Gold was try'd with a Touchstone, and Men with Gold.


19.
Solon compar'd the People unto the Sea, and the Orators and Counsellors unto the Wind; for that the Sea would be calm and quiet if the Wind did not trouble it.



20.
An Arch Blade us'd to say, That of all Trades the Midwives was the most commendable: For, says he, they live not by the hurts of other men, as Chyrur|gions do; nor by the falling out of Friends, as Lawyers do; but by the Agreement be|twixt Party and Party.




Notable BULLS,

1.
A Young Countrey Squire riding very hard, his Horse grew very Sick upon it: he complaining to hi Friend; says he, I rid my Horse har and he's sick; and I fear he'll never  his own Man again.


2.
Another being ask'd whether  Friend Tom, that was lately dead, h left him any Legacy? No Faith, says  Not a Tester to drink his Health.


3.
One ask'd a Fellow if he would into the Water with him: No, fa

he, I'll never go into the Water till I have learnt to Swim.


4.
Some Gentlemen being at Dinner in a Tavern, one of them that was a little nicer than the rest, seeing the Salt look a little dirtily, called to the Drawer, to bring up some fresh Salt.


5.
Some Gentlemen being at Dinner together, were diverting themselves with Jests and Bulls: One among hem more curious than the rest, de|ired an Oxford Scholar in the Com|pany, to give him the definition of a Bull; who ingeniously told him, That a Bull was an Ox gelt.


6.
A Blind Minister coming to speak with a Gentleman, the Gentlemans man came running to him, and told im, That the blind Minister was come o see him.



7.
A Young Scholar was very much troubled, and did not like his Dicti|onary, Praying his Father to get it chang'd, because, He could not find what was Latin for Aqua-vitae in it.


8.
A Country Justice examining a poor thieving Schollar, said, Sirrrah, you are an Arch Rogue, but take warn|ing, for if you are once hang'd, your Book can't save you from the Gallows.


9.
One being advis'd to go to Sea, No says he, I had rather travel all th World over by Land.


10.
A certain King being sick, on pray'd, That he might Reign as long a the Sun and Moon should endure, an the Prince his Son, after him.



11.
One finding his Friend abed at Ten a Clock in the Morning, asked him why he lay so long? Why Faith, says he, I came home late last night: Why, how late was it, says his Friend? Late! says he, 'twas three a Clock in the morn|ing.


12.
An Ignorant Fellow complaining of the Folly of the Age, said, That men were far wiser in future times then now.


13.
One boasting of his Credit, said, He knew a Scrivener that would lend him Fifty Pounds at any time, on his own Bond, without either Scrip or Scrowl.


14.
One going over in the Ferry-Boat from Richmond to Twitnam, the Fer|ry-mans Wife Officiating, admiring said, He never saw a Woman Ferry-man before.



15.
Two Persons going along Cheapside, a Dumb-man accidentally meeting 'em, jostled against one of them; whereupon he held up his Stick to strike him; but the Dumb-man ma|king some sign, which the Person that was with him perceiving, stopd his Friends blow, asking him why he would strike a Dumb-man? Is he Dumb, says the other? Why did he not tell me so.


16.
One seapking to a Gentleman of the unkindness of his supposed Friend, said, in a Passion, That he had no sooner trn'd his Back, but the Rascoal abused him before his Face.


17.
A Countrey Fellow passing by the Exchange, saw the Picture of a Uni|corn hang up; says he to one that stood by, I have seen several Pictures of these Beasts with one Horn only; pray are not there some Vnicorns with two Horns?



18.
One asking a certain Person how his Friend came off at the Sessions-House? he told him he was to be Burnt in the Hand; Pish, says the other, that's a small matter; for, for a little Fee, the'll Burn him in the Hand with a cold Iron.


19.
A Sea-Captain was invited to a Hunting-Match, who when he came home related what sport he had, af|ter this manner: Our Horses, says he, being well Rigg'd, we man'd them; and the Wind being at West-South-West Fif|teen of us in Company) away we stood o|ver the Downs; in the time of half a Watch, we spied a Hare udner full Gale, we Tackt and stood after her, coming up close, she Tackt, and we Tackt, upon which Tack I had like to run aground; but getting clear off, I stood after her a|gain, but as the Devil would have it, just as I was going to lay her aboard, bearing too much Wind, I and my Horse over-set, and came Heel upward.



20.
A silly old Fellow meeting his God|son, ask'd whether he was going? To School, said the Boy: That's well, said he, there's a Penny for you; Be a good Boy, and mind your Book, and I hope I shall live to hear the Preach my Funeral-Sermon.


21.
A foolish young Esquire, being new|ly come to his Estate (taking after the old Miser his Father, grew covetous.) He hearing his Steward say, he had killed him a Bullock against Christmas. What, said he; do you mean to undo me by such extravagant Expences? I will have but half a one kiled at a time.


22.
A Parson who had not much Wit to spare, seeing his Son play roguish Tricks, Why Sarrah, said he, did you ever see me do so, when I was a Boy, as you are.



23.
A Precise Fellow hearing much Swearing in a Bowling-Green, said, For shame Gentlemen forbear, it is Gods great mercy the Bowling-Green doth not fall on your Heads.


24.
One sitting at Supper, his Cat pat to and fro through his Arms, brushing her Tail against his Mouth, which made him so angry, that he cut off the tip of her Tail, saying, I think now, Mistress Puss, I have given you an Ear|mark: For a little time the Cat staid away, but the next day came again, according to her usal manner; where|upon in a rage, said he, Why, how now, you troublesome Bitch? Are you come a|gain? I thought I had given you your Break-fast last night.


25.
A Gentleman hiring some Labour|ers to pull down his old Wall, that he might build a new one; as they

were doing it, cry'd out to them to have a care, least the Foundation should tumble on their Heads.


26.
When Guiennys were first Coyn'd, they were a great rarity in the Coun|trey: A young Fop coming from Lon|don, more Gallant than Wise, seeing the People so earnest to see them, A|las, said he, throwing down two or three of them on the Table, These are so common in London, that you cannot receive Forty Shillings, but you must take five or six of them whether you will or no.


27.
One going by Water, said to ano|ther in the Boat that had affronted him, Speak another word, and I'll knock your Head and the Wall together.


28.
One that was Born in the Parish of St. Gile's Cripplegate, said When I dye, I'll be Buried in Cripple-Church-Yard, an't please GOD I live.



29.
The same Person affirming there was two sorts of Fishes allow'd to be cry'd on a Sunday; being ask'd what Fishes they were, answer'd, Milk and Mac|karel.


30.
One saying, That the Fenny-Coun|treys were very unhealthy; I am of your mind, said another, for I liv'd there once, and I believe if I have liv'd there till this thime, I had dy'd seven Years ago.




Thirteen Ingenious Characters. Drawn to the Life.

I. Of a CHARACTER.
IT gives you the hint of Discourse, but Discourses not; and is that in Mass and Ingo, which you may Coyn and Wyer-draw into infinite; 'is more Seneca than Cicero, and speaks rather the Language of Ora|cles

than Orators: Every Lin's a Sen|tence, and every two a Period. It says not all, but all it says is good; and like an Air in Musick, is either full of Closes, or still driving towards a Close: 'Tis no long winded Exercise of Spirit, but a forcible one, and there|fore soonest out of Breath; 'tis all matter, and to the matter; and has nothing of Superfluity, nothing of. Circumlocution. So little comporting with Mediocrity, as it extols to Hea|ven, or depresses unto Hell; having no mid place for Purgatorv left. 'Tis that in every sort of Writing delight|eth most; and though the Treatise be Gold, it is the Jewel still, which the Author of Characters, like your La|pidary, produces single, whilst others, Goldsmith like, inchase them in their Works. 'Tis a Portraiture not only of the Body, but the Soul and Mind: Whence it not only delights, but tea|ches and moves withal, and is a Ser|mon as well as Picture to every one. In fine, 'tis a short Voyage; the Wri|ter holds out with equal force, still coming fresh unto his Journeys end, whilst in long ones they commonly tire

and faulter on their way: And to the Reader 'tis a Garden, not a Journey; or a Feast, where, by reason of the Sub|jects variety, he is never cloy'd; but at each Character, as at a new Service, falls too with fresh Appetite.



II. Of an Importunate Dun.
AN Importunate Dun, is the Quin|tessence of Vexation; a Single Plague, worse then all Egypts Ten; a kind of Substantial Ghost, perpetally haunting a Man, and sucking him as eagerly as an Hobgblin does a Witch; an Horse-leech that always cries, Give, give; or rather a Cuckow, that has ne|ver but one Note, Pay, Pay, Pay; Money, Money, Money: A trublesome Devil, not to be laid with Holy Wa|ter, and only exorcis'd by Silver

Crosses, an Evil Spirit, whom no Mu|sick but the sweet Gingling of Coin can charm.
Should we enquire his Pedigree, he seems one of Nimrod's Bastards, for he is a Tyrant by Nature, and a migh|ty Hunter by Profession. A Blood-Hound of a notable Quick Scent to discover his Game, and a deep Mouth tu pursue it; he takes upon him a Pre|rogative to get, where even Kings themselves must lose their Rights; Nay, presumes to Ape Creation, by at|tempting to squeez something out of nothing, and raise a World of Cash, from the baren Womb of meer Va|cuities.
He would make an excellent States-man, for he has the best inteligence in the World, and will find out a lurk|ing Acquaintance in a City crowd, or Countre corner, sooner then a pur|blind Astrologer, or a limping Hue and Crye; Yet nothing lights him to you sooner, or more exasperates him against you, then a new Suit, a good Dinner, or a merry Glas; for he holds it for a Maxim, That whoever owes him any thing, ought to be in

Arrear likewise both to back and belly. If the Debtor live so remote, that he cannot convenietly wait on him every other day, he makes him pay Interest (even to Extortion) at the Post Office; for he is sure of more Letters than a handsome Girle of Sixteen, that has a great Fortune at her own Di|spose; his Stile in these Familiar Epi|stles, is extramly Civil in the Front, but close and pressing in the Rear He would rather lose his small concern, than put you to the least nconvenience But must needs have hi Money next re|turn, or else shall be forced to turn over the Debt, or take his Course, Yet he at|tributes your Non-payment to your unmindfulness, and desires you not to take this one more Item unkindly; He talks much in the Language of Bacon's Brazen-Head, Time's past: and (as if you were a second Ioshua) blames you for not keeping the day; he Pre|tends extraordinary kindness for you, but hates all Protections so much, that he dares not say at the end of his Let|ter, He commits you to that of Hea|ven; but always hoping to hear from

you speedily, and with Effect, rests, Your humble Servant.
At this rate (as the Weapon-slve heales) he wounds at a distace; but if you are come-at able, (as he calls it) he will rack the very Soul of you; for he attends you as duly as your Sha|dow, and proves as constant a Tor|mentor as a Guilty Concience to a Murderer: You can neither eat, nr drink, nor slep nor walk in quiet for him. Indeed the Tenter-Hooks he pus a Man upon, are enough to stretch the tenderest Conscience, and warp the best Nature in the World; for when he will not be satisfied with Truth, you are forced to tell him what is not so, to gt rid of him; afterwards by in|cessant Importunities, he provokes you to swear at him; and at last, by de|grees, hardens you into a Resolution, never to pay him. Thus we may call him the Devils Usher, that temps people from Lying to Swearing, from that to Dishonestly, and so Improves them from Form to Form, in the School of wickedness, till they are sitted for the Academy of Hell.
Etymologists think he is called a Dunn, by Antiprasis, because he will never ave dne bawling; or (as others write) takes the Appellation from a quondam famous Officer or Justice of that name, with whose Natre he simpathizes, and worries a poor Man with as little Re|morse, as that New gate Squire could a Traytor. His Faith is enough to make one turn Ifidel, for he ues none so bad as those he Trusts: Nor can he be counted a Christian, since his Charity both begins and ends at home. And if ever he says his Prayers, he skips over that Petition, Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Dbtors, in the Pater Nster, as sily as a Phanatick does the Article of Be|lieving in the Catholick Church, in the Creed. He is commonly early up, and never the near; for he wakes a man in a morning, before the Lark is up to chut her Mttins, and a Guard of Switzers cannot keep him out of ones Chamber: Alledging Business, Phy|sick, Sleep or Sickness, cannot divert his Persecutions: And 'tis happy for him that doors can't maintain Actons of Asault and Battery. He beats up

your Quarters so often, that they quickly learn to deny you at home: but if he chance to find you at any of your Haunts, he makes you believe 'was by the meerest Acciden, though he have waied eight and forty hours on purpose. However, he it heartily glad to see you, (that's the only Truh you shal have of him) and shaking you by the hand, he asks you,  What News? But before you can answer, out comes the little Money between us. Then, Lord bless him! Times are so hard, and Money was never so scarce since Adam wore Fig leaved Breeches! His Credi|tors are so ugent, they won't be put off, but he must forthwith make up a Sum, and therefore if you cannot help him to all, spare him but a little, for five pound now will do him as much good, as fifty another time: Nay, 'twill be as great a favour, as if vo gave it him out of your Purse, c. With this rally of Rhetorick, the buhing Debtor is Non-plst, and Promises as many Impossibilities, as a Quack Doctor, or a trembling Cully, under the Terrors of a ully Rampant, only silently wishes, he had a handful of

Guinnies to beat out his Brains with: for he is as much afraid of him, as a saw|cy Pretice of meeting a Gentleman at White-Hall, whom he hath affronted in the City: This makes him shun the place where he lives, as bad as a Pest-House: And (if we may credit an experienced Author) when he is to pass from Algate to Covent-Garden, and the low ebb in his Pocket will not suffer him to go by Water, he must first trot down to Tower hill, thence strike up to Norton-Falgate, then down again to Queen-hive, thence up to Charter house-yard, from thence to Slisbury Court, and so to Red-Lyon Fields, before he can reach Drury-Lane in Safety; and yet for all this caution, his head stands awry, with continual looking about.
Yet take them both together, they are two of the greatest Hypocrites in Nature; for though behind one ano|thers backs they rail each at other, as bad as a Weaver against a Frenchman, yet when they met, they are so glad to see one another! And truly, I have ever found you very Civil to me, says one,

and I can't in the least question your Ho|nesly, says the other; when the short of it is, 'tis forty to one, but one of them will prove a rank Knave: Te Creditor, if ever he be paid; or te Debtor, if he never pay.



III. Of a Serjeant, or Baylif, and his Setting-Cur.
THe first, is a kind of Excrescence of the Law, like our Nails, made only to Scratch and Claw; A sort of Bird-ime, where he lays hold, he hangs; a Raven that picks not out mens Eyes, as others do, but all his spight is at their Shoulders; and you had better have the Night-Mare ride you, then this Incubus. He is one of Deucalion's By-blows, begotten of a Stone, and has taken an Oath never to pitty Widdow nor Orphan. His first bu|siness is to bait you for money for his (confounded) civility; next to call for Drink as fast as men for Buckets of Water in a Conflagration; After which, becoming grave and serious, he advises you in revenge to Arrest the Plantiff, and offers to do it; with or without cause; 'tis all one to him, if he perceive you have money.
His Follower is an Hanger that he wears by his side; a false Dye of the small Ball, but not the same Cut, for it runs somewhat higher, inflames the Reckoning, and so does more michief. He's a Tumbler that drives in all the Coneys; but is yet but a bungler, and knows not how to Cut up a man with|out Tearing, unless by a pattern. This is the Hook that hangs under water to choak the Fish, and his Officer the Quill above, which pops down as soon as e|ver the Bait is swallowed. Though differing in degree, they are both much of a complexion, only the Teeth of this latter are more sharp, and he more hungary, because he does but snap, and hath not his full half share of the boo|ty. A main part of his Office is to swear and bluster at their trembling Prisoners, and cry, Confound us! Why do we wait? Let's Shop him: Whilst the other replies, Iack be patient, 'tis a civil Gentleman, and I know will consi|der us: Which spies of wheedling in Terms of their Art, is called; Sweeten and Pinch. The Eyes of these Wolves are as quick in their Heads, as a Cut|purses in a Throng; and as nimble are

they at their business, as an Hang-man at an Execution. They'll court a bro|ken-Pate, to heal it with a Plaister of Green-Wax, and suck more Silver out of a Wound, than a Chyrurgeon. Yet as these Eels are generally bred out of the mud of a Bankrupt, so they com|monly dye with their Gut ript up, or are decently run through the Lungs; and as they liv'd hated, die unpitied. We speak here of those only that abuse the intentions of the Law, and act Oppression under the Colour of ser|ving common Justice.



IV. Of a Paun-Broker.
AN Unconscionable Paun-Broke, (for there are conscionable Dea|lears in that way, that are a Relief and Comfort to the Poor, and those are not concern'd in this Character;) An unconscionable Paun-broker, I say, is Pluto's Factor, Old Nick's Ware|hose-keeper, an English Jew, that lives and grows fat on Fraud and Oppressi|on, as Toads on filth and venom; whose Practice outvies Vsury, as much as In|cest simple Fornication; and to call him a Tradesman, must be by the same Figure that Pickpockets stile their Le|gerdemain an Art and Mystery. His Shop like Hell-Gates, is always open, where he sits at the Receipt of Cu|stom, like Cacas in his Den, ready to devour all that is brought him; and having gotten your Spoils, hangs them up in Rank and File, as so many Tro|phies of Victory. Hither all sorts of

Garments resort in Pilgrimage, whilst he playing the Pimp, lodges the Ta|by Petticoat and Russet Breeches to|gether in the same Bed of Lavender. He is the Treasurer of the Thieves Exchequer, the common Fender of all Bulkers and Shop-lifts in the Town. To this purpose he keeps a private Warehouse, and Ships away the Ill-gotten goods by wholesale; dreading nothing so much, as that a Convict should honestly confess how he dispos'd the Moveables. He is a kind of Di|sease quite contrary to the Gout; for as that haunts the Rich, so this mainly torments he Poor, and scarce leaves them so much as a primitive Fig leaf to cover their Nakedness. Mistress Ione, when she is minded to see her sweet|heart, and Gamer Blew-Bottle going to a Christening, muster up the Pence 'th' Saturday Night, to redeem their best Rigging out of Captivity; but on Monday Morning infallibly bring them back (like Thieves that had only made an escape) to the old Limbus; and this so often, till at last they know the way, and can go to Pawn alone by themselves. Thus they are forced to

purchase the same Cloaths seven times over; and for want of a Chest to keep them in at home, it cost thrice as much as they are worth for their Lodging in his Custody. When they come in like other Prisoners, they first pay Garnish, the Two pence for Entrance money; after this, Six-pence a Month, for every Twenty Shillings lent, (which yet indeed is but 19s. 6d.) that is (according to their Reckoning of thirteen Months to the Year) Six Shillings and Six-pence Interest for one Pound for a Year; which makes Thirty three Pounds, Six Shillings and Eight-pence in the hundred, viz. One-third part of the Principle, and just 27.l. 6s. 8d. more than the Statue allows; besides Twelve-pence for a Bill of Sale, if the matter be conside|rable. So that since they never lend half the value on any thing that is brought them; if a Paun-Broker lay out an Hundred Pounds, he first make near Forty per Annum Advantage cer|tain, as aforesaid: And then consider|ing how many Thieves, c. (thei chiefest Customers that bring th lmping Bargains) never intend t

redeem, and how many Poor are not able (especially since as soon as the Year ad Day expire, they presently dispose of their Pawns, or pretend to do so) we may reasonably conclude, that these Horse-Leeches make Cent per Cent at least of their Money in the Year, And all this by a course tend|ing only to the encouragement of Theives, and Ruine of those that are Honest but Indigent.



V. Of a PRISON.
A Prison is the Grave of the Li|ving, where they are shut up-from the World and their Friends! and the Worms that Gnaw upon them, are their own Thoughts and the Jaylor. Tis a House of Meagre looks, and ill smells, for Lice, Drink and Tobacco, are the Compound; Pluto's Court was exprest from this fancy. And the Persons are much a|bout the same Party that is there. You may ask as Manippus in Lucan, which is Nirus? which Thersities? which the Begger? which the Knight? For they are all suited in the same form of a kind of Nasty Poverty; only to be out at Elbows is in fashion here, and tis a great Indecorum not to be Thread|bare. Every Man shews here like so many Wrecks upon the Sea, here the Ribs of a Thousand Pounds, and here the Relick of so many Mannours,

is a Doublet without Buttons; and 'tis a spectacle of more pity then Exe|cutions are. The Company one with another is but a vying of complaints, and the causes they have to rail on Fortune, and fool themselves; and there is a great deal of good fellowship in this. They are commonly, next their Creditors, most bitter against the Lawyers, as men that have had a great stroke in assigning them thither. Mirth here is stupidity or hard heart|edness, yet they feign it sometimes, to shun Melancholy, and keep off them|selves from themselves, and the tor|ment of thinking what they have been. Men huddle up their life here as a thing of no use, and wear it out like an old Suit, the faster the better; and he that deceives the Time best, best spends it. It is the place where new commers are most welcomed, and next them ill News, as that which extends their Fellowship in Misery, and leaves few to insult; and they breathe their discontents more securely here, and have their Tongues a more liberty than their Bodies. Men see here much Sin and Calamity, and when the lat

does not mortifie, the other hardens; and those that are wicked here, are desperately wicked, as those from whom the horrour of Sin is taken off, and the punishment Familiar. And commonly a hard thought passes on all that come from this School; Which though it teach much Wisdom, it is too late, and with danger: And it is better to be a Fool, than to come here to learn it.



VI. Of a TAVERN.
A Tavern is a degree, or (if you will) a pair of Stairs above an Ale-house, where men are Drunk with more Credit. If the Vin|ners Nose be at the door, it is a Sign sufficient, but the absence of this is sup|plied by a Bush: The Rooms are ill breathed, like the Drunkards that have been well washt over Night, and are smelt to fasting next morning, nor fur|nished with Beds apt to be defiled, but more necessary Implements, Chairs Tables, and a Chamber-pot. It is a broacher of more News then Hogs|heads, and more Jests than News; which are suckt up here by some spun|gy Brain, and from thence squeezed into a Comedy. Men come here to make merry, but indeed make a Noise, and this Musick above, is answered.

with te Chating below: The Draw|ers are the  cople in it: Men of good bringing up; and howsoever w esteem o thm, none can boast mre jtly of their High Calling. It is te bt Theatre of Natures, where they are truly actd, not plaid: and the business, as in the rest of the World, up and down; that is, from the bottom of the Cellar to the Great Chamber. A Melancholy man would find matter to work upon, to see Heads as brile as Glasses, and as ften bro|ken. Mn come hither to quarel, and come hither to be made friend. It is the common Conuption of the Af|ternoon, and the Murderer or Maker away of a Rainy Day. It is the Torrid Zone that scorches the Face, and T|bcco the Gun powder that blows it up. A House of Sin you may call it, but not a House of Darkness, for the Candes are never out; and it is like those Couis far in the North, where it is as clear at Mid-night as at Mid-day. After a long sitting, it be|comes like a street in a dashing shower, where the Spouts are flushing above, and the Conduits runing below:

while the Jordans, like swelling Ri|vers, overflow their Banks. To give the total reckoning of it, 'Tis the busie mans Recreation, the Idle mans Busi|ness, the Melancholy mans Sanctuary, the Inns a Court-mans Entertainment, the Schollars Kindness, and the Citi|zens Courtesie. It is the Study of Spark|ling Witts, and a Cup of Canary their Book, where we leave them.



VII. Of a SCOLD.
A Rank Scold is a Devil of the Fe|male Gender; a Serpent per|peually a hissing and spitting of Venom; a Composition of Ill-na|ture and Clamour. You may call her animated Gun Powder, a walking Mount-AEtna, that is always belching forth flames of Sulphur. A Burr about the Moon, is not half so certain a presage of a Tempest at Sa, as her Brow is of a Storm on Land. And though Laurel, Hawthorn, and Seal-Skin, are held pre|servatives against Thunder, Magick has not been able to find out any Amu|let

so Soveraign as to still her Ragings; for like Oyl poured on flames, good words do but make her rage the faster; and when once her-Flag of Defiance, the Tippet, is unfurled, she cares not a straw for Constable nor Ducking-stool.
Her Tongue is the Clapper of the Devils Saints-Bell, that rings all-in to Confusion. It runs round like a Wheel, one Spoke after another, and makes more Noise and Jangling, than Countrey-steeples on the Fifth of No|vember.
If she be of the preciser cast, she a|buses Sacred Language in her Railing, as Conjurers do in their Charms; calls her Neighbours Heathen domites, her Husband Reprobate, or Son of Belial; and will not Cudgel her Maid without a Text for'. But now I speak of Husband, methinks I see the Creeping Snail, shivering in an Ague-fir when he comes in her presence. She is worse then Cow-itch in his Bed, and as good as a Chasing-dish at Board; But has either quite forgot his Name, or else

she likes it not; which makes her Re|baptize him with more noble Titles, as, White-liver'd Raskal, Drunken Sot, Sneaking Nickpoop, or Pittiful Low|sey Tom Farthing. Thus she worries him out of his Sences at home, and then she ferrets his Haunts abroad worse than a Needy Bawd does a de|cay'd Bullies. In a word, A virulent Scold is her Neighbours perpetual Dis|quiet, her Families Evil Genius, her Husbands Ruine, and her own daily Tormentor: And that you may the better know her Pedigree, I'll give you a serious Account of the Receipt or Method made use of for her Producti|on into the World, lately found in a long-concealed Manuscript of Theo|phrastus Bombastas Paracelsus; as fol|lows, viz.
Nature to form a Scold, first took of the Tongues and Galls of Bulls, Bears, Wolves, Magpies, Parrots, Cuckows, and Mightingals, of each a like num|ber: The Tongues and Tails of Vi|pers, Adders, Snakes and Lizards, se|ven a piece: Aurum Fulminans, Aqua-Fortis, and Gu-Powder, of each one

Pound: The Clappers of Nineteen Bells, and the Pestles of a dozen Apo|thecaries Mortars. Which being all mixt, she Calcined in Mount Strom|bello, and dissolv'd the Ashes in a Wa|ter distilled just under London-Bridge at three quarters Flood, and Filtrated it through the Leaves of Calapines Dictionary, to render the Operation more verbal. After which, she di|stilled it again through a Speaking-Trumpet, and closed up the remaining Spirits in the Mouth of a Cannon. Then she opened the Graves of all new-decased Pettifoggers, Mountebanks, Barbers, Coffee News-Mongers, and Fish Wives; and with the Skins of their Tongues made a Bladder, cover'd o er with Drum-heads, and filled with Storms, Tempests, Whirle winds, Thun|ders. Lightnings, c, These for bet|ter Icorporation, she set seven years in a Rough-Sea to Ferment, and then mixing them with the rest, rectified the whole three times a day for a Twelve month in a Balna of Quick|silver. Lastly, to Irradiate the whole Elixir, and make it more Churlish, she cut a Vein under the Tongue of the

Dog-Star, drawing thence a Pound of the most cholerick Blood; from which Sublimating the Spirits, she mixt them with the Foam of a Mad-Dog; and then putting all together in the fore|mentioned Bladder, stitcht it up with the Nerves of Socrates's Wife. Out of this notable Preparatory, Dame Nature composed a Shrew.



VIII. Of a bad HVSBAND.
A Bad Husband, is an inconside|rate piece of Sottish Extrava|gance. For though he consists of several ill Ingredients, yet still good Fellowship, is the Causa fine qua non, and gives him the Ho go. He is the Wise Mans Scorn, the Shirks Exche|quer, and the wheedling Hostesses Ho|nest Man; the Moth of an Estate, the Shipwrack of a Family, or a mischief Three-story-high; for he scandalizes his Ancestors, ruines himself, and strangles the hopes of all his Posterity. He throws away his Wealth as heartily

as young Heirs, or old Philosophers; and is so eager of a Goal, or a Mum|pers Wallet, that he will not wait Foue leisure to udoe him, but Rids Post to Beggers-Bush; ad takes more pains to spend money, hen Day-Labourers to gt it; whilt still his word is, Let's not pinch while we have it, since 'tis time enough to wt when we have it not.
He knows no difference between Prodigality and Liberality, bu is so foolishly free, that he dries up the Springs of Bounty, by cutting down the Banks, and letting the Streams run at waste. If he pretends to Gentility, he thinks he can no way make good that Title, but by paying (where ever he come) all the whole Reckoning; and evry Rascal that can bu cry, My Noble Mtr, is Master of his whole Purse; which sucking Vermine cnti|nully fltter about him, as thick as Flies in a Confectioners-shop. If he go to Market, 'tis but to purchase a Fox, and two days after returns, ha|ving only Truckt away his Corn for

Drink, and put off his Cattle to make him a greater Beast.
His first business after Marriage, is to pay Ale House Scores with his Wives Portion; and his next, to pawn her Cloahes for supplies of fresh Debauchery. If he be a Citizen, he counts his Shop a Prison, till at last he is Shopped in a Prison indeed. He pre|tends always extraordinary business abroad, and must needs go to the Ex|change: when he has nothing to do there, But change Shillings into Six-pences, and reduce Guinneys into Far|things. He still cries, 'tis too soon to go home yet, and will trudge a Mile about, rather than come near his own Door, for fear he should e obliged to come in before his hour, which is mid-night, or past: for if he goes home before, he says, He can never sleep well. He is an Hogshead set up upon two stumps fit for nothing but to hold strong Drink: and i he be not at the Pot, is like a Fish out of Water, that does nothing but Gape. He thinks Nature gave him a Mouth not so much to Speak, as to take off his Liqor: and his only equiry is, Where

dwlls the best Sack and Claret? He is a passionate Lover of Morning Draughs, which he generally cotinues till Din|ner-time: a rigid exactr of Num-Groats, and Collector-General for Foy' and Biberidg: He admires the Prudence of that Apothegm, Let's drink first: and would rather sell 20 per Cent to loss, than make a drie Bargain. You shall infallibly find him and his Tribe about the Fag-end of the day at Ran|dezvouz, like a Constellation fixed in the lower Region of a known Ta|vern, where their Noses appear like Comets, that evermore portend ex|cessive Draughts: They go in upon Parol not to exceed Three-pence, but seldom come out under a Half Crown Club: and their Noise (for Discourse you cannot call it) is more Nonsensi|cal and Impertinent than a She Qua|kers Sermon, or the Tattle of an Up-sitting. As soon as they are accom|modated with a private Room, an half Pint, for so they modestly begin, some clean Pipes, and a Jordan; their first Argument is the goodness of the Wine, which being voted a Flower, produces next a Bottle; and then

News is the Subject of Dbate, or for want of that, who was most Drunk he Night befre, or Reeled home with the greatest Gravity and Decorum. Though they live like Publicans yet they imtate Pharisees in their Exactness of making clean the inside of the Glass: and their strictst Criticisms are, See it go round, and take it off Sir.
In this sweet Society, our trusty Trojan bears his part, till he has not discretion enough left to know at which end to light his Pipe: then staggering away, if he escape the Compter, 'tis forty to one, but he meets with some little Ton-Baggage, who picks his Pocket, and in Requital, bestows up|on him a swingng Clap. In the mean time, the good Woman at home sits lamenting till Twelve at Night, over a piece of mouldy Bread, and a draught of Rot-gr: and the Children are fain to go to Bed without their Supper, be|cause the vile Milk-woman is grown faithless. At last, when her precious Husband comes with a Breath that stinks with Canary and Tobacco, worse

than Hell of Brimstone: he perhaps picks a cause less quarrel, gives her a remembrance with a Bed-staff, that she is forced to wear the Nrthumber|land Arms a week after, which the good natur'd Soul must excuse, by pre|tending an ulucky Fall, or blaiming an Innocent Door-latch for the Ijury. But put Case he go peaceably to Bed, what comfort can be expected from such a Swine?



IX. Of a TOWN-FOP.
THE Town-Fop is one tha plays Rex whereever he comes, and makes as much hurry as Rbin good-Fellow of old, amongst our Granums Milk-bowls; he is a kind of a Squib on a Rope, a Meteor composed of Self-con|ceit and Noise, that by blazing and cracking engages the wonder of the Ignorant, till on a ddain he vanishes and leaves a stench, if not infection be|hind him; he is too often the stain of a good Family, and by his Debauch|ed life blots the noble Coat of his An|cestors: A wild unacked Colt, whose

Brins are not half codled; idebed for his Cloathes to his Taylor, and for his Wit, (such as it is) to his Company. The School had no sooner indued him with a few Superficial besprinklings, but his Mothers Indulgence posted him to Town for genteler breeding, where three or four wild Companion, half a dozen bottles of Burgundy, two leaves of Leviathan, a brisk encounter with his Landlords Glass-Windows, the charms of a little Miss, and the sight of a new Play, dub'd him at one boh a Wi and a Hero; ever since he va|lues imself mainly for understanding the Town, and indeed knows most thigs in it that are not worth know|ing: The two Poles wherein all his discourses n, are Atheism and Bw|dry, bar him from being prophane and obscene, and you cramp his Ingenuity, which forthwith flags and becomes useless, as a meere common Lawyer, when he has crossed the Channel.
He is so refractory to Divinity, that Morallity it self canno hold him: He affirs humane Nature knows no such thing as Principles of good or evil; and will swear, all Women are Whores,

though his Mother and Sister stand by; whatsoever is Sacred or Serious, he seeks to render ridiculous, and thins Government and Religion fit objects for his idle and fantastick Buffoonty: His humour is proud and assuming, as if he would Palliate his ignorance by scoffing at what he understands not; and therefore with a pert and pragma|tick scorn, deprecates all things of no|bler momnt, but most passionately af|fects pretty All-a-mode words, and is as covetous of a new Song or Ayr, as an Antiquary of Cato's Statue, with never an Arm and but half a Nose; these keep him always imployed, and fll up the Grotesco't of his Conversation, whilst with a stately Galantry, once in every alf hour he combs out his Wig, Careens his Breeches, and new Marshals his Garnitre, to the Tue of, Methinks the poor Town has been troubled too long.
His mind used to whistle up and down in the levities of Fancy, and ef|feminated by the childish Toying of a rampant imagination, finds it self in|disposed for all solid imployment, especially the serious exercises of Piety

and Vertue, which begets an Aver|sion to those lovely Beauties, and that prompts him on all occasions to expose them as rediculous and vain: Hence by degrees he comes to abuse Sacred Scripture, makes a mock of Eternal Flames, joques on the venera|ble mysteries of Religion; and in fine, scoffs at that All-Glorious and Tre|mendous Majesty, before whom his Brother Wits below tremble. 'Tis true, He will not confess himself Atheist, yet in his heart the Fool hath said it, and boasts aloud, that he holds his Gospel from the Apostle of Malmsbury, though it is more then probable he ne|ver read, at least understood, Ten eaves of that unlucky Author. Talk of Witches and youtickle him; speak f Spirits, and he tells you he knows one better than those of Wine; name but Immaterial Essence, and he shall out at you as a dull Fop, incapable of Sense, and unfit for Conversation: Nor is he better pleased, then when he cn here hedge in some Raw Divine, t Bull-bait with Scurrility, and all kind  Prophaneness.
By means of some small scraps of Learning, matcht with a far greater stock of Confidence, a voluble Tongu and a bold Delivery, he has te ill luck to be celebrated by the Vulgar, for a man of parts; which Opinion gains credit to his Insolences, and sets him on farther Extravagancies to maintain his Title of Wit, by conti|nuing his practice of Fooling; where|as, all his mighty parts are summ'd up in this Inventory; Imprimi, A Pedling way of Fancy, a lucky hit at Quibling, now and then an odd Metaphor, a n|ceited Irony, a ridiculous Simile, a ld Fetch, an unexpected Iference, a Mi|mick Gesture, a pleasing Knack in hu|mouring a Tale: And lastly, an irresi|stable Resolution of speaking last, and never be dasht out of Countenance.
By these Arts, dexterously managed, he engrosses a vast Repute? The grave Citizens call him shrewed man, and n|table Head-piece; the Ladies (we  the things so called of his acqua|tance) vote him a most accomplist Gentleman, and the Blades swear he is a walking Comedy, the only Mer Andrew in the Age, that scatters Wi

where ever he comes, as Beggars do Lice, or Musk-Cats Perfumes; and  nothing in Nature can compare wh him.
You would think he had gotten the ian Art, for he speaks Extempore on all Subjects, and ventures his words without the relief of Sence to second them; his thoughts start from his Imaginatiod, and he never troubles himself to examine their decency, or solidity by Iudgment; to discourse m seriously, is to read the Ethices to a Monkey, or make an Oration o Ca|'s Horse, whence you can only ct a Wee hee, or Iadish Spurn; after  most convincing Arguments, if he  but muster up one plausible Joque,  are routed. For he that under|ood nt your Logick, apprehends his Drll; and though Syllogisms may be anwered, yet Iests and loud Laughter can never be confuted, but have more swa to degrade things with the un|thining Crowd, then Demonstrations: he being a Root of envy in too ma|ny en, that invites the to applaud th which exposes and villifies what the cannot comprehend. He pretends

great skill in curing the Teers and Ring-worms of State, but blows in the sores till they rakle with his poyso|nous Breath; he shoots Libels with his forked Tongue at his Superiours, and abuses his dearest Friends, chsing to forfeit his Neck to the Gibbet, o his Shoulders to the Battoon, rather tan lose the driest of his idle Quibbles. In brief, He is the Iack-Pudding of Sociy a Fleering Bussoon; a better kind of Ape, in the Judgment of all wise  but an incomparable Wit, in his ow



XI. A Fantastique Lady.
HER Life is a perpetual Contra|dirction, she would, and she would not; and, Make ready the Coach, yet let it alone too; Drive to such a place, yet do not neither, is her ordinary Dia|lect: She differs from the Irresolute, in hat he is always beginning, and she ver makes an end: She writes and lots out again, whilst he deliberates hat to write; th'one being a Resty, nd the other a Restless Pain: So you n tell what to make of t'one's Ne|gaive, and how two Negatives make  Affirmative; but of her I and No oether, you know not what to make,  only that she knows not what to ke of it he self. Her Head is just  a Mill, or Squirrels Cage, and her nd the Squirrel that turns and irls it round, and her Imagination ers from others, as your Grotesque ures do from Natural; and from otesque, in that these have some

deign in them, but her Imagination has none; she never looking toward the end, but only the beginning of things; or if she does, forgets or dis|approves it strait: For she will ca n haste for one, and have nothing to a to him when he is come; and long, ay dye, for some Toy or Trifle, which having once, she grows weary of pre|sently, and throws away. In fine, who are of one mind to day, and another tomorrow, are constant, to her; and Saturn's Revolution, compar'd to the Moons: For you know not where to have her a moment, and whosoever would hit her Thoughts, must Shoot flying; and fly themselves, whoever would follow her.



X. Of a Young Enamourist.
HE's one who as soon as he quitted his School-boys Toys, next Toy he gets is a Mistress, when 'twould make you forswear Love to see how ridiculous he makes it; and to hear him talk of Gods and Goddes|ses, you would take him for some Pa|gan never converted to Christianity. There is nothing so cold as to hear him talk of Flames, nor so dull as his discourse of Cupids darts; and to hear him sigh like a dry Pump, or broken-winded Bellows, you would ne're wonder at Lapland Witches affording winds so cheap. Of all Servants he is the necessariest and easiest to content and feed, for he is his Mistresses Squire, Dispencer, Lacquey, or Messenger, but above all, her Fool, to which he is bound by the Proverb; 'Tis impossible to loe and be wise: Mean time you may

feed him cheaper than a Camelion, for a good look serves him a week at least, and he is prouder of holding his Mistresses Busk or Fan, than a School-boy with a Scepter in his hand, play|ing the Emperours part i'th' School; to keep him to which, his Mistress ets him know that 'tis with Love as 'tis with War, which once declared, you are to expect nothing but Hostility; and knows her self, that 'tis with Lo|vers as it is with Anglers, who feed the Fish e're they are caught; but caught once, feed on them: whence she bites not greedily at the bait, but craftily tolls him on with hopes, and like a Rope-maker goes backwards still, the better to advance her work, and draw him on; mean while he follows her so long, till either he wax weary and ceases his pursuit, or catch|es her tripping, and then falls down on her, when fastning her in the Mar|riage Nooze, he carries her away, and either turns kind Cuckold, and keeps open house for all; or jealous Coxcomb, and shuts his door against every One.



XII. Of an Honest Drunken Cur.
HE's a Pickl'd Youth to be sure, for he always lyes steep'd in his own Liquor; of which, like a Whale, he carries so much about him, that wen-ever he disgorges, he may swim away in his own Flood. Clap but a good Sucker into his Belly, and he makes an excellent Parish Pump: And if you add but a Pipe to his Muz|zle, he may pass for a Water-Engine, a do good service in time of Fire. Yo need not fear drawing him dry, so long as all the Alehouses and Ta|vers in Town, like little Rivlets, pply the decrease: He contains a|bout as much as those in Churches; bt  so unchouth a Trough, he's twice as d to be Gaug'd: Yet by frequent exrience he can guess his Measure to a , especially if you expcept Leak|age. His Veins are so throng'd, and

his Blood  anted with Scurvey, Gout and Dropsie, (and a natch of the French man too boot, which he g when he was Drunk, and does  know who to lay it to)  fies the Intrusion of any other  per: wherefore he stalks in as  State through a Pestilence, as  Arm'd Soldier through a Shower Bullets: for his forementioned Diseses have taken such large Possession  his Body, that there is no room left fo Infection.
He has drunk himself into a Jelly and is so moist, that if you squeeze him, he drops like an Orange.
His Body is a perfct Still, wh he fuels with Brandy instead of Char-coal: being throughly, heated, you may discern t weat Distilati|on tricle from his face, as from te Lid of a Limbeck; and if any chance to drop on his Nose, you may hear it iz as if it fell upon heated Bricks. In fine though he always lives Joakingly and Merry, be hates nothing more than a dry Jest.
Thus having acquainted you with his Constitution, I shall only cosi|der

him in his Conversation, and iendship, and so leave him to sleep ot his Nap.
And first for his Conversation; To te him in the Morning (for who can fi him all the Day after? he pre|vnts his Prayers with a Pipe of To|bco, and Smoaks at such a Rate, as f e prefer'd Sacrifice to Devotion. A Tinder-Box is as necessary to him, as a green Bagg to an Atturney's Clark, with which he seems as ravish'd as Alander with the Odisses, for he caot sleep unless it lye under his Pil|low In that little night he makes, he cannot so properly be said to sleep, as to Chew the Cudd on his Quotidian Debauchery; for he often disturbs the repose of a Family, with Muttering a Reion of his Oaths and Healths. Whn he awakes, he stares about with uc wild Curiosity, as one would fan|cy dam did immediately after his Ceion; for he generally makes himlf so Drunk over Night, drown|ing hs past Actions in Liquor and Ob|ivo, that he scarcely knows the the Morning from the Resurrection, and is hardly perswaded that ever he liv'd before.
But after he is convinced of the affirmative, spends about a quarter of an Hour in examining the Bed-posts and Windows, before he discovers whether he be in his own Lodging: And afterwards remains as doubtful how he got thither.
Then Bed staves and Slip-shoos go to wrack, for clattering on the Bed|stead, like Bows at the Bear-Garden, he calls up the People as Countrey Wenches do Swine, by knocking; and after a Petition for a Cup of Settle-Brain, begs them to resolve his Quae|ry; whereupon they tell him the truth, which indeed is, that either he came the old Porterly way, Cruch'd with a brace of Watch-men; or else the Mo|dern and more Genteel way, viz. On Pick-pack, instead of a Sedan.
Now although my Honest Drunken Cur be guilty of many Vices, which lie Younger Brothers hang on this great one, which has got possession; Yet (Give the Devil his due) I think the World has Sully'd his Reputation with divers Scandals of which he is no ways Guilty: Wherefore because I only intend his Conversion, not his

Consumpon; Like an honest Histo|ian (since I write his Life) I ought not to sue him wrong'd but rather to res|cue him from those Callumnies thrown o him, by persons in some respects orse then himself.
The first imputation therfore that y impose on him, is that he is proud: d why for sooth? but because when  has a Drop in his Eye; he brags  if he were a better man than his eighbours. A stout reason indeed!  if a man might not do as much, that ere either Light-headed, or in a Fe|er; Nay, Passion alone makes the wisest of us Bedlams. But let us do as we would be done by, and take him when he is himself, (that is, in a Morn|ing) and then I am sure he is as free rom Pride, as a Quaker from good anners or Ribonds: from would Cu|om admit, I am confident he would ather go to the Ale-house Naked, an undergo the hard Pennance of Sobriety while he dresses himself.
Secondly, They call him an Idle fellow: a good fellow all the World knows he is, but as for idleness, let me dye if I now any one more free from it than

he; What would they have of him trow? he rises early, sits up late; and I dare swear he grudges himself his very Sleep, because it keeps him from his Business: When he is at it, no Man more expeditious than he, for as if his Minutes, like his Estates, ran away too fast, you shall freequently see him with an Ale Glass in one hand, and a Looking-Glass in the other, which betokens both speed  frugality.
The third and most fallacious Accu|sation is, that they say, He's Prodigal, and Pisses his Estate against the Wall. But I am confident he Enriches or Per|fumes the Walls no more than others; only this I know he does, that where|as Usurers use to hide their Riches in Earthen Pots, he puts his Estate in a Pewter one, (which one would think were the safer Cabinet) so that it is not the Honest Drunken Curr, but the Impudent Rogues, Drawers and Tap|pers, that imbezle and make it away. Much more might be said of him both in his Vindication, and in commen|dation also: For he is one of the quie|test Subjects his Majesty has, and most submissive to Monarchical Government.

e would not e without a King, if  were for no other Reason than meer| Drinking his Health. He hates offee, as Mahomatizm; and thinks  a lesser sin to go to Bed Drunk, than to Drink Coffee to make him Sober.
He hates a Studious man; as Caesar id a lean one; and for the same Rea|son; for he is so confident he's hatch|ig of Treason, that he could find in his Heart to impeach him at adven|tre.
As for his Friends, he nver trou|les his Head to pick and cull them, but takes them as superannuated Maids o Husbands, or Fish-women do Ma|karel, as they come next to hand: For, fixing himself in the next Ale-house or Tavern he comes at; at first he sits as sullenly as a degraded Courtier, or an nsurer upon Advice of a Loss. And no less than a Quart of Purle-Royal, or Two Kicks in the Guts, can remove his Morosity. After he has digested either of them, perchance he'l vouchsafe to bless you with a Smile, especially if you will purchase it at the expence of a Bawdy Song; to which you shall see him turn head, and listen s heedfully

as a Lynnet to a Flaijolet, but infinitely more easie to be Taught.
When you have done, 'tis twenty to one but he comes and hugs you; swear|ring you are the best accomplisht Gen|tleman that ever he met with in his Life; and tho he never saw you be|fore, from that time you may date his Friendship: He makes Friends faster than Children do Babies; and like them too, he often forgets where he has left them.
His Reason, like a bad Shop-keeper, is seom at home; or rather, like a Countrey Gentleman, has left the Ma|nour of his own Body, and is gone to dwell in strange Lodgings: So that 'tis no wonder, he's Hobgoblin'd by his fiery Nose to any Debauchery, or that Men call him Beast; since by giving Reins to is Sensuality, he makes so perfect a Swine of himself, that he Drinks till he can hardly Grunt. However, since the Church allows him Christian Burial, I'll Hopkins and Stern|hold him with.


An PITAPH.
Here lies Drunken Tom,
Whom Heaven in Mercy save;
He Stumbl'd o're his Death,
And Reel'd into his Grave.




XIII. Of a Natural Beauty.
WHether a chearful Air 'does rise,
And Elevate her fairer Eyes;
Or a Pensive Heaviness
Her lovely Eyelids does depress,
Still the same becoming Grace
Accompanies her Eyes and Face;
Still you'd think that Habit best,
In which her Count'nance las was dre.
Poor Beauties! whom a Blush or Glance
Can sometimes make look fair by chance;
Or Curious Dress, or Artful Care,
Can make seem fairer than they are.
Give me the Eyes, give me the Face,
To which no Art can Add a Grace:
Give me the Looks no Garb nor Dress
Can ever make more fair, or less.

FINIS.



Books Printed for Iohn Har|ris, at the Harrow, in the Poultrey.
COme and Welcome to Iesus Christ: Or a plain and profitable Dis|cose on Iohn 6. Verse 37. Shewing the Cause, Truth and Manner of the Coming of a Sinner to Iesus Christ, with his Happy Reception, and Blessed E|tertainment, by Iohn Bunnyam, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.
Price Bound one Shilling.
[2.] The Saints Comfort, in all, but more especially in Evil Times. Drawn from Twelve several Texts of Scrip|ture; which are briefly explained in this small Piece, By T. G. Minister of the Gospel. Price Bound one Shilling.
[3.] A Present for Ladies. The Nymphs of Diana; or the Excellen|cies

of Women-kind, describ'd as well in their External Beauty, as Internal Virtue; being an Advocate for the Fair Sex; compriz'd in an Illustri|ous History of it. Represented not only in Lively and Pathetical Discour|ses grounded upon Reason, but in sundry rare Examples of Virtuous Love, Piety, Prudence, Modest, Cha|stity, Patience, Humility, Temperace, Conduct, Constancy, and Firmness of Mind; With what else in the like na|ture is necessary to the Accomplish|ment of the most Celebrated Beauties. With other Examples of Woman skill'd in the most curious Arts and Sciences. To which are Added, The Examples of Warlike Women, their Noble Exploites and Victories: With the Prophecies and Predictions of the Sybils, in Relation to our Saviour Christ, c. And as an Apendix, the Character of a Virtuous Woman in all her Capa|cites, viz. Of a Virgin, of a Wife, and of a Widow; wherein is shew'd, the happiness that accrues to Man in the possession of so great a Blessing, as a Virtuous Woman; with the Reasons why Man's happiness is not compleat

on Earth, without the Charming Creatue Woman. The whole Work Enri nd Intermix'd with Curious , d Delicate Fancie, suitable o o Carming a Subject.
Price Bound one Shilling.
[4.] The True Fortune-Teller: Or,  Knowledge. Discovering the whol Art of Chyromancy, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy and Astrology. Contain|ing, 1. A discription of the Planets, their power and influence over the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children. 2. Of the several Lines, Mounts, Marks, Angels, and sacred Characters in the Hand and Wrist; and by what Planets they are governed as to good or bad fortune. 3. Of Physiognomy. 4. Observations on the Eyes, Eyebrows, Nose, Chin, Neck, Hair, Beard and Face. 5. Metoposcopy, or the sig|nification of the Lines in the Face. 6. Of Moles, and their significations. 7. Of Dreams, and their interpretations. 8. Of Nativities, and their calculation. 9. Of the Rod, by which hidden Treasure is fond. 10. Of Marriage, and at what time any Person shall be Married. 11. Rules to know the

danger of Death. 12. Of good and bad Days. 13. The manner of e|solving doubtful Questions, as to Friends, Marriages, places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, Love or Business. 14. Of Pythagoras, his Wheel of Fortune. Of the good and bad Days in each Month relating to Health. To which are Added, Ari|stotles Observations on the Heavens, their Motion. Of Fiery Meteors, Thunder, Lightning, Eclipses, Co|mets, Eath-quakes and Whirl-winds. Illustrated with several proper Fi|gures. The Second Edition.
Price Bound one Shilling.
[5.] A Short and Plain Account of the Late-found Balsamick Wells at Hoxon. And of their Excellent Vir|tues above other Mineral Waters; Which make 'em Effectually Cure most Diseases, both Inward and Out|ward; With Directions how to Use 'em. By T. Byfield, M. D.
Price Sticht 6d.
 Physick. wing te method of uring the ost usual isases happening to humane Bodies. All lated out of the best Latin editions, into Ensh; and caefully claused, or divided into Chpters, and Sections, for the mor pleasant ding, and easier understanding of those Au|ors. Together with a singular Comment upon he First Book of Hermes, the most Ancient of losophers. The whole compleated in three oks. By William Salmon, Professor in Physick.
Price Bound five Shillings.
The Treasury of Drugs unlock'd. Or a full d True Description of all sorts of Drugs, and ymical Preparations, c. Very useful for all Gentlemen Merchants, Druggists, Doctors, A|othecaries, Chirurgeons, and their Apprentices:  also for all Travellers, Seamen, Customhouse ficers, c. By Io. Iacob Berlu of London Mer|chant in Drugs.
Price Bound one Shilling.
The Revelation Unvailed: Or, and Essay to|wards the discovering I. When many Scripture Prophesies had their Accomplishment, and turn| into History. II. What are now Fulfilling. . What rest still to be Fulfied, with a guess  the time of them. With an Appendix, pro|ving, that Pagan Rome was not Babylon, Rev. , and that the Jews shall be Converted. By muel Petto, Minister of the Gospel at Sudbury in Suffolk.
Price Bound one Shilling six Pence.
FINIS.





