




THE
ACCOMPLISH'D
Woman.
WRITTEN
ORIGINALLY in FRENCH,
since made ENGLISH,
BY
The Honourable,
Walter Montague, Esq;.
LONDON,
Printed for GABRIEL BEDELL
and THO. COLLINS, at the
Middle Temple Gate in Fleet|street,
1656.




To the
DUTCHESSE
of
BUCKINGHAM
Her Grace.
Madam,
_IF yee could
see your self
without the
help of a re|flex,
I should
not need to
present you with this glass,

but since even internal spe|culations
result most from
outward intuitions in this
mirror of an Accomplished
woman, you may let your
self into your self at your eies,
and so fit them with an ob|ject
proportionable to their
own beauty: and only thus
could I lessen the distance be|tweene
my obligations and
my services, by an exact ac|compt
of you to your selfe,
since it is so hard for you to
take it from our sex, which
are auditors in the valuation
of yours, because the loveli|nesse
of your person may ex|pose
even a true estimate of
your vertues to your suspi|tion

of passion. This is
the only ill office, Madam,
your body can do your mind,
which it doth by so faire
meanes, that you may easily
forgive it. The original of
this Woman is French, whose
perfection must needs fall
some degrees, in this change
of the Horizon. You, Ma|dam,
are in English the E|dition,
as well as the Dedi|cation,
and your actions do
translate better this booke,
then my words; so that this
cannot enform your under|standing
in any new unac|quired
grace or vertue, but
by a duplication of your me|mory,
convince your mode|stie

of a needlesse desire to
improve; and as your con|versation
may be instruction
for others, so this which
was meant for edification, is
but strict enough for your
entertainment. Here (Ma|dam)
you shall find Ill both
severely reproved, and fairely
shamed, by shewing the ex|cellency
of good in Ill's grea|test
brag, Variety: and shame
doth not only restrain, but
rectifie more then fear; For
women apprehend lesse the
effusion of blood for punish|ment,
then the diffusion of it
for shame. Here you shall find
humors as well mix'd and
shadowed by one another, as

ever you saw colours; and
so much diversity in Loves
archery, as one would think
Cupid shot out of a Rain-bow.
Each severall humour hath
a point to fasten on its
correspondency, therefore
there is no wondring at the
seeming extravagancy of pas|sions.
Here (Madam) I conceive,
you may learne by reading,
what you cannot so easily by
conversation, because no body
dares tell it you, when any bo|dy
is in love with you; which
you may be assured of, when
you find a judicious admirer
of an Accomplish'd Woman;
and this Rule is their prote|ction

as well as their discove|ry.
I (Madam) may be an
admirer of this Woman in
French, but an excuser of this
in the language of
Your Graces most Humble
and Obedient Servant,
WALTER MONTAGUE.



The CONTENTS.

Of Chearfulnesse and Melan|choly,
1
Of Reputation. 19
Of Inclination to Vertue, chiefly
to the Devotion of the times. 30
Of Chastity and Complacency. 38
Of Courage. 47
Of Prudence and Discretion. 56
Of Knowledge and Ignorance. 65
Of Constancy and Fidelity. 72
Of Curiosity and Censure. 83
Of a Debauched Woman. 88

Of the Cruelty and Pity of Wo|men.
95
Of Beauty. 102
Of Gracefulnesse. 109
Of Cloathes and Ornaments. 116
Of Iealousie. 123






THE
ACCOMPLISH'D WOMAN.

Of Cheerfulness and Melancholy.
_THe Noblest Designe that wee
can propose to our selves in
conversation, is to have such
a kind of wit as makes us ac|ceptable,
and by a welcome
violence acquires us a command as powerful
as pleasing. A cheerfull humour is more
advantageous for the attaining of this, then
a Melancholy; which indeed is not unfit
for Knowledg, but is too heavie for Dis|course,
and too gross for delicacies and sharp
returns. Cheerful humours are gracefuller
and freer in all they do, and so are welcom|er
to all Companies; as more naturall in
their affections, and lesse constrained in their
behaviour, and more innocent in their de|signes
and thoughts. Notwithstanding all

that can be said in favour of the Melancholy,
if their thoughtfulnesse be commendable in
something, it hath as many il effects as good;
and those that call it the Mother of Wise|dom,
must confesse also that it is often too
of Extravagancy. They would perswade
us, that their wits make many discoveries,
and that they reach far in their Meditations:
But sometimes too their journey is so long,
as they never come home again; or if they
do return, 'tis like Pilgrims, that leave their
owne Countrey, to wander idly in strange
ones, without any advantage, but to bring
from thence povertie and wearinesse.
Thinking is a Labyrinth where one may
be easily lost, and is hardly to be got out
of; yet the Melancholy call it the Element
of good Wits; believing to excuse their
own weaknesse by giving it a brave name.
But as lame men cannot brag, if after the
expence of a great deal of time and labour,
they get a little way; so these musing Wits
deserve no praise, for being long a seek|ing,
what quicker find sooner, and with
more ease. Readier Wits have the same
advantage of them, as Birds have of Ser|pents,
or Angels of Bodies and materiality
But chiefly, I cannot conceive why they
glory in speaking little; because their silence

comes rather from barrennesse then discre|tion;
and if they hold their peace in many
occasions, 'tis not so much to chuse words,
as to seek them. Such persons would have
easily been good Disciples of Pithagoras, but
that they holding their peace by command,
would not have been capable also of learn|ing
to speak handsomly. They should have
a School quite contrary to these Philoso|phers,
to learn the faculty they want; they
had more need of Physicians and broths,
then of Tutors; they must not onely have
Lessons read them to cure them, but Mira|cles
wrought upon them. Just as Fire can
easier descend, then Earth ascend; so ha|stie
humours may be moderated by reading
and experience; but grosse and heavie ones
can hardly with what pains soever be taken,
be made lively and subtile. Though Birds
have wings to fly, yet they can trusse them
up when they will, to ease themselves; tran|scendent.
Wits can do so for action or rest:
but when the Melancholy ones strive to a|nimate
their languishings, they run Icarus
his hazard, that was too materiall, and had
not skill enough to fly upon artificiall
wings. Their Discourse and their Argu|ments
are ungracious, when they force
themselves to expresse in them a heat that

is not naturall to them. They are like some
old men, that run when they think they
walk, and get not forward but by chance;
and after the least straining of them|selves,
are suddenly out of breath, in
stead of wiselyer fitting their pace to their
weaknesse. The most part of these sick
ones glory in the disapprobation of ordina|ry
company, seeking to perswade the cre|dulous,
that nothing but affairs of that im|portance
(w^c^h heretofore the Senators con|sulted
with the Gods about) can serve them
for discourse: But to believe that their cold|ness
should be so excellent at that, it should
seem, one must be of the same humor, to make
that conclusion; If ever it prove happy that
way, its more by chance then art. If quick
Wits be accused of snatching too soon at
opportunity, Melancholy ones are in danger
of making use of it too late: and if those
stay not till it present it self; these often|tentimes
think not of it till it be past: they
are inclining to fear and despair; as they
want heat, so they are unactive, and their
frozen humour figures almost all things im|possible
either to avoyd or undertake. It is
a Lethargine feeling, not to be perceived but
by a wound, by blowes and violence; they
seem rather resuscitated then waked; they

are sick ones, that one must almost kill, to
know they are not dead. If they have judg|ment
to deliberate, they have almost no
confidence to resolve, and yet lesse courage
to execute. It is a Palsie-vertue, that must
be thrust into occasions, and that lies lan|guishing
by the remedies, without applying
them, unlesse it be drawn to them by fear.
It were to do them too much wrong, not
to believe that there be many wise and ho|nest
persons of that temper: but we must
affirm too, that it is too injurious to wisdom
and vertue, to keep them alwayes in a stu|dy
or musing, as though those that nei|ther
fear nor wish any thing beyond them|selves,
should not shew a cheerfull counte|nance,
to witnesse the satisfaction of their
conscience. On the contrary, if Serpents
engender in still waters, ill thoughts are
nourished in musing humours; and if their
Wits be fit to invent knaveries, their Face is
no lesse to cover them. When rust is got
into the Spring of a Clock, there is no more
regularity in the motions, nor certainty in
the point. When once a continual thought|fulnesse
possesseth us, the mind is disquieted
and the face distorted: what light or reason
can one believe to be, where there is no|thing
but black fumes, which Melancholys

sends up to the brain? Just as evill spirits
joyn with storms to destroy Men, to burn
Temples; so do they often make use of this
black humour to cherish in the soul super|stition,
despair and hypocrise. Caesar mis|trusted
more the melancholy humour of
Brutus and Cassius, then the mirth of Do|labella.
Notwithstanding, if coldnesse be
onely an effect of this constitution, it de|serves
excuse or pity: but if it proceeds from
art, it cannot be exempted from suspition
and blame. And to examine well the dif|ference
between these two humours, the
modestie of women that are naturally free
is in all their heart, and that of the affected
ones is onely in their faces and outside;
the one are not good in effect; the other
ill onely in shew. Suppose that Casuists
may rightly say of sports and pass-times, as
Physicians judg of Mushrooms, that the best
are naught: notwithstanding that, pleasures
that are of themselves indifferent, and that
the intention may make good, may not be
absolutely cryed down: St. Elizabeth of
Hungary did not forbear dancing, and her
good humour did not impeach her canoni|zation.
Those that are so nice in the use
of lawfull things, are ordinarily very free
in the enjoying of forbidden, when they

are free from witnesses. And it is the mis|fortune
of these times, that people put on so
much colouring and studiednesse, that one
dares not so much as laugh without giving
occasion of suspition to weak spirits, or cen|sure
to wicked; as if a merry humour were
an infallible foreteller of the ilnesse of the
mind. There be some Stipocondriaques,
that can endure mirth no more then Owles
can day-light; and indeed, their faces pre|sage
somewhat so ominous, that it raiseth
rather horror then inclination. They that
will maintain their own good humour with|out
any constraint for the vulgar errour,
should chiefly keep themselves free from De|sire
or Sorrow, as from the greatest Tyrants
over our quiet; for the one transports us to
what is to come, and the other brings us
back to what is past; taking from us the li|bertie
of setling our happinesse in our pre|sent
content, as long as we either desire
what is not yet, or lament in vain that which
is no longer. Strong wits easily resist this
tyranny: As when ships are toss'd even in
the height of the storm, the Needle keeps
alwayes straight upon its Star, though the
Masts break, and the Sails tear; So wee
should alwayes be even in the greatest ine|quality
of our businesse. And if the winds

can cast off the Ship from the Port, not the
Needle from its Pole: So when it happens
that misfortunes retard our pretension,
they should notwithstanding never remove
us from our reason and constancy. It is
fit alwayes to avoid Melancholy, what pre|tense
soever it hath, as too troublesome to
others, and too prejudicial to our selves;
for if it be natural, we humour too much
such a temper; if it be casual, we yeeld too
much to the inconstancy of Fortune.
After having told what I like in a Mer|ry
humour, 'tis time to examine what I find
fault within it: And since we have marked
out those defects which many ascribe to Me|lancholy,
let us set our selves to speak the
good effects and commendations of it. 'Tis
that which renders our spirits subtle for
knowledg, indefatigable for businesse, serious
in conversation, constant in their designes,
modest in good fortune, patient in ill, judici|ous
and rationall in all things. 'Tis with this
just temper that Vertue cloathes her self to
appear with all her ornaments; and it is that
which Nature hath chosen to make Kings
and Philosophers of; and that Grace it self
hath alwayes imployed to bestow on the
world extraordinary portions. Those of this
humor seem to be born wise, and that Nature

gives them more then th'others can acquire
by study; and that without the incommodi|ty
of age, they are possessed betimes of the
maturity of it. Indeed, their meditation is
sometimes better then their discourse; but as
their judgment is solid, they despise that su|perfluous
gloss which light wits set out to
get opinion among the vulgar. In this mode|sty
they resemble the Eagle in the Apocalyps,
that had lights hidden within, and had eys
under her wings; whereas great talkers have
them only in their feathers, as Peacocks have
them on their train, being rational only in
colour and appearance. I deny not but mer|ry
humours have a kind of pleasantness in
them, but they are subject also to great faults,
because if jests (which they ordinarly exercise
themselves in) be wel received of some, they
offend more then they please, especially when
Religion or Reputation are made their sub|ject,
it is the easiest thing in the world to turn
them into impiety or scandal. Points of wit
are fine in discourse; but we must take heed
they be not so sharp as to draw bloud; or o|therwise,
since one cannot jest on great
ones without indiscretion, nor on the misera|ble
without cruelty; so that one must always
offend against the laws of Policy or Nature,
Serious wits do well to abstain from such a

practice, w^c^h most co~monly makes those that
use it passe for buffons or enemies; and gives
themselves at last occasion to cry, after they
have presented one for others to laugh: For
my part, I think it not injury to Melancholy
humours, to affirm, they have no inclination
to so idle a quality, which supposeth almost
alwayes a lightnesse of wit, and often a loose|nesse
of conscience. It was of this windy
temper that the foolish Virgins were of;
and that those are of yet, which have more
wit then judgment; which notwithstand|ing
seem at first to have some light, but it
is such as is either false, or else lasts not long
ere it be extinguished, letting it self be sur|prized
for want of prevision enough in mat|ters
of importance. Whereas the wise do
never so much as slumber, when they should
be ready upon good or ill accidents, for
fear of being reduced to repentance and
shame. And to take things as they are,
since the soul and senses have a quarrell that
must last as long as our life, and that the
minde is strongest in the weaknesse of the
body, as in the ruine of an enemy; it is
likely that when the humour is so gay and
free, that is become the stronger; on the
contrary, when it is sad and pensive, it is
made a slave to Reason, as a maid that hath

a discontented face when her Mistris chides
her. The joy that riseth from the Consci|ence
is not of this kinde, 'tis purer, and is
like the Stars, that appear alwayes the same;
but that which comes from the body or
constitution, is like Comets, that draw their
nourishment from below, from the exhala|tions
of the Earth, which presage only wo|full
events, and seem to leap into the air to
run after vapours that nourish them, till
they go out for want of that terrestrial mat|ter:
The passion of the Melancholy ones
hath no such thing as these tragick Meteors
to form or preserve it self: their love hath
no pretension beyond the possession of the
spirit; so as their fire is most pure, it remits
not the heat, it remains alwayes equall, like
that which the Philosophers beleeve to be
under the Orb of the Moon. I confesse, that
for affection, quick and lively humours are
readier and franker; but then the Melan|choly
are the discreeter and more confident:
these fasten themselves constantly to their
designes, whilest the other change every mo|ment;
their passions fitting themselves to
all objects that are presented them, if not
out of malice, 'tis out of weaknesse; and
though their simplicity may deserve some
excuse; yet sure it is not reasonable that one

should value much a natural goodnesse, that
is rather an effect of the Constitution, then
the Election: one that cannot easily do ill,
may not glory in being good: if the simple
do not much harm, they are not the better
for that, since they do as much as they know
how. And to alledg, that if they be not the
better, yet they are the happier, because
their spirits are as free from disquiet, as void
of designe; indeed this is the greatest re|proach
can be made them, to speak thus of
them; since it is to ground all their felicity
upon their defects, and to confesse them
happy only by their ignorance or stupidity.
Because Marble feels no pain, we do not say,
it is in good health; we do not call it
healthfull, but insensible. 'Tis thus that
the simple are not unhappy, as the want of
sense secures them; and it is no great ad|vantage
to them to be exempt from care or
disquiet, as Stones are from diseases, or
Beasts are from contrition. If the stupid
find themselves sometimes at the same point
of tranquillity of spirit as the Philoso|phers,
'tis in a different way; these over|come,
what those understand not: Snakes
under ground are as safe from storms, as
the Serpent in the sky; low spirits find
security as well as they in crawling, safe|ty

in weakness: but it is much a braver
thing to be above, then below the storm,
to have it under our feet, then over our
heads: Since true felicity cannot be attained
without vertue, and without morality, the
happiness of the silly ones is of a far different
nature from that of the wise: and (me thinks)
they are happy in this world, but as infants
without Baptism are in the other world, in
a Limbus, where they subsist between good
and ill, without being affected with either.
The Melancholy live not in this indifferency,
they ow not their felicity to ignorance, but
to the force of their wits; they would be a|shamed
of such a happiness, and would com|plain
of it, if they were injoyned to purchase
an exemption from the sense of ill, by an in|sensibility
of good.
To know how much Melancholy is supe|riour
to other humors, we must consider that
those that have but the hasty and light part
of it, are not lesse incapable of resisting mis|fortunes,
then of tasting true delights. Their
heat precipitates them into extremities;
they do nothing but by fits; and as if they
were composed of sulphur and gunpowder,
the least spark fires their actions  thoughts,
for which there is no remedy but to stay till
the end of that impetuosity, which is quickly

weary, and likely puts out it self. Those
spirits that have no conduct in their under|standings,
have also no courage in their af|flictions;
they are ill souldiers, that use their
buckler as ill as their sword. The same
lightnesse which makes them rash in their
assaults, renders them as yeelding or impa|tient
when they come to suffer or defend
themselves. On the contrary, the Me|lancholy,
that by a profound meditation, and
a long habit of reasoning, have as it were
formed to themselves a certain knowledg of
the successe of all things, are never surprized
with ill events. This Stoicall vertue (es|sentiall
to their temper) easily masters all
those tumultuous and unruly motions that
agitate violent spirits: the solidity of their
judgments lets nothing be new or extraor|dinary
to them, both for the diseases of the
body, which they curb as wild Beasts, when
they cannot tame: and for the distempers
of the minde, which are the Passions, which
they subdue by force of reason, and so re|main
alwayes victorious.
If heretofore there hath been a man so
bold as to stab the Duke of Milan in the
midst of his Guard, in the face of his Court,
nay in the Church, (the reverence and re|spect
of the place, the glorious and awfull

Majestie which God imprints on the sacred
face of Princes not being able to give him
the least sense of horrour or apprehension,
in a purpose as detestable, as difficult to ex|ecute)
onely by having often practised up|on
the picture of this Prince: What bold|nesse
will not providence afford the wise?
since this Parricide, by having only studied
a little while such a design, the very thought
of which was enough to shake into a trem|bling
every moment, both his hand and his
conscience, testified so much assurance and
resolution.
We should not wonder if the Melancholy
are so constant, and that we never see them
troubled, even when they are constrained
to yeeld to necessity; since they keep a se|cret
retreat within themselves, whither the
storms of Fortune cannot reach. 'Tis thi|ther
where the soul retires to maintain her
self in an eternall serenity, where she ob|tains
an absolute Empire over her opini|ons,
where she entertaines her self solita|rily
even in the midst of company, and the
crowd of the world interrupts not her re|pose
and silence: 'Tis in this solitude of
the superiour part, that the minde fortifies
it self, and learns true morality, and where
she advanceth to her self almost without

time or experience, the providence of old
Men, and the Wisdome of Philosophers.
Lastly, 'Tis here, where if we lay up the
Images of pleasant things, by these means
we may furnish our selves alwayes with
fair thoughts; for if the pleasing Ob|jects
displease us, we may, coming
back into our selves, content our spi|rits
while our senses are persecuted, and
entertaine our fancy with Beauty at the
same time when Deformity takes up our
eyes. But who can praise enough this
noble thoughtfulnesse of the Melan|cholly?
since it is by that the soul
seemes to rid her self, when she plea|seth,
of the troublesome commerce with
the senses; and we consider with an in|tention
lesse distracted, what we are,
when our imagination reflects us to our
selves more clearly, and with lesse dan|ger
then the lovely Fountain did to Nar|cissus.
I wonder not, that the Poets
faine that he lost himself, since he look|ed
for himself out of himself: We are
to be found truly no where but in our
selves, every where else we meet but with
our fantasme or our shadow. And there|fore
many have reason to say, That Me|ditation
is harder then Extasie, as its easier

to go out of our selves, then to re-enter
into them, without the use of this noble
Thoughtfulnesse, to which the temper of
Melancholy is disposed. Man seems to have
but an imperfect reason, and even an use|lesse:
For as Bees must retire themselves
to make the honey, when they have gather|ed
the matter from flowers; so it is necessary,
that after we have surveyed many objects,
we should make a regress into our selves, to
gather their fruit, and to draw from them
conclusions; otherwise all the study or expe|rience
we can have, will be but a confusion or
mixture, it would be wealth that we should
be ill husbands of; our actions would be
misguided, our thoughts without order, and
our discourse without judgment.
The most part of grosse spirits are of a
quite contrary opinion, and cannot imagine
pensivenesse to be any thing but such a trans,
as mad men or sick persons are in; this kind
of meditation would hurt them as much
as it frights them, and would be as contra|ry
to them as unpleasing: It dazels weak spi|rits,
and vexeth malicious ones; it is the blind
of the one, and the torment of the other:
it is not like, that they that have nothing
in their mindes but ignorance, or in their
conscience but crimes, should bee much

pleased to look into themselves to seek there
satisfaction or rest: But to despise pensive|nesse,
because many lose themselves in it, is
it not to condemn the use of fire and wa|ter,
for some incommodities they have, with|out
considering their necessity for our life?
I had as lieve blame the Sun, because Owls
cannot endure the brightnesse of it, which
Eagles look upon so fixedly; as if one should
quarrell with the Light, because weak eyes
are dazled with its beams, and because they
draw darknesse even from the spring it self of
Light.
There is enough said for the Apology and
praise of Melancholy, and for fear of be|ing
tedious in the Problem, if I should go on,
since both Humours have somewhat good
and ill in them, I have nothing to add, but
that they should serve for remedies to one
another: For the Romans accounted them
best among the Tribunes that were most in|clined
to the Senate, and those the wisest a|mong
the Senators, that favoured most the
Party of the People; to divert on the one
side authority from tyranny, and on the O|ther,
liberty from insolence. So it seems, that
the most excellent of the Merry humour, are
those that draw nearest to Melancholy;
and amongst the Melancholy, they that

confine closest to the Merry; for being so
tempered, the first will be discreeter, and
the other lesse austere and troublesome.


Of Reputation.
_REputation is a great Treasure, and
is no lesse usefull to Vertue, then
light to Pictures, to set them off;
it is the fairest ornament of our
civill Life, and without which,
the most glorious and illustrious actions re|main
smothered and obscured: But as it is
got and lost now a dayes, it may be reckoned
among the benefits of Fortune, of which
fools have often a better share then deserv|ing
persons. If it were to be distributed by
good Iudges, Vertue would suffice for the
acquisition of it; but it hath often so ill Ar|bitrators,
that were we not bound by all
means possible to avoid Scandals, worthy
persons might content themselves with the
testimony of their own Conscience, without
being troubled for the Opinions of the un|advised,
which chance may make good or

ill. Opinion depends too little on our selves
to make us unhappy, and it were a felicity
very unsure, that the ignorance or malice of
an Enemy could remove.
Fame is sometimes an effect that seems to
have no cause, and is rais'd like those alarms
that disorder a whole Army, without any
bodyes conceiving the occasion. Why then
should we spend our spirits with so much un|quietnesse,
to know how we stand in the opi|nion
of others, and afflict our selves for the
errour of the vulgar; as if the ignorant be|gan
but now to deceive themselves, and belie
others. I should have reason to wonder with
Aristotle, why the Ancients rewarded rather
the strength of the body then minde, giving
Lawrels to Wrastlers, and not to Wise men;
but that ignorance and poverty disenabled
them to set a prize of Vertue: Ignorance,
because having the foundation and roots in
the heart, Men abuse themselves in their
judgments of Vertue Poverty, because when
we perceive the excellency of it, there is no|thing
in the world precious enough to serve
for the recompence or Coronation. The
unadvised conceive often Vertue, where
there is nothing but Vice, and without think|ing
what they do, give ill-favoured names to
lovely things; like Astronomers, that call

some Stars Buls and Scorpions, that notwith|standing
have neither fury nor venom, onely
purity and light.
I could wish that those that undertake to
judge of things without well understanding
the nature of them, were punished with such
a correction as Midas, that (as Ovid re|ports)
did prefer the noise of Pan's rustick
Field-pipe, before the sweet ravishing tunes
of Apollo's Lute, giving his voice to that
whch made most noise. His judgment is like
many of these times, that value every thing
by the colour and looks, deserving no lesse
then he, to wear long Ears for a mark of
their stupidity, and indeed to make more ac|count
of apparency then reallity; is it not to
prefer Pan before Apollo? a Pipe before a
Lute? Noise before Harmony? There is much
brutality in such savage opinions; yet not|withstanding
they are the greatest number in
the world, and 'tis they that defame those
that deserve a fair estimation: Therefore I
would reserve my sensiblenesse onely for
those that may justly award reproach or
praise, and would not think it fit to be angry
at that, which I should laugh at. There are
very few competent judges of things;
many mens Wits goe no further then their
Eyes, and stay upon the colours: And I

think that avoiding scandals, 'tis enough to
scape their imputations, without seeking their
approbation.
We are in an age of bravery and shew,
where morality is thrown down, and where
the vertues of the times consist no more in
any thing but excesse and extravagancy: to
be believed devout, we must go as far as su|perstition
or hypocrisie; and politick spirits
use Christianity as the Stocks did Philoso|phy,
to abuse the vulgar, forming to them|selves
imaginary vertues, which humanity
cannot attain to. It is a great unhappinesse
that there is no honesty left in commerce, nor
purity in Religion; and that we, as well as
they in the Exchange, must over-value our
selves above what we are worth, or hope for,
to keep up our credits.
But to speak my opinion, rather as a Phi|losopher
then a Disputant, we must not con|clude,
that Reputation is to be neglected,
because it is il distributed: This disorder doth
not dispence with us for our duty; and it
were as ungracious to make our selves infa|mous
for that reason, as to commit murders
or robberies, because there have been thieves
acquitted, and innocent persons condemned
for that crime. Since all women are not wise,
and that there are more ruled by example,

then by reason; the most vertuous should
consider, at least, that Reputation is a pub|lick
good, and when it is corrupted, we are
to seek to cure it, as we would to quench a
fire, or to purge a popular contagion. In|deed,
one may laugh at them that allow
themselves all kinde of liberty, because ill
tongues rank the most vertuous with the
most dissolute in the ill repute, and the most
vitious with the most worthy in the good:
as if Kings would light torches at noon, be|cause
the Sun lights Peasants as well as them;
or as if they would be sick, and cast away
their health, because their Subjects are
well!
We should not make our selves vitious,
because others think ill of us; but we should
live better to deserve another opinion: the
testimony of the Conscience is more to be
esteemed then all reports, though there were
neither friends nor enemies to praise or re|proach.
Handsom Women will alwayes find
satisfaction enough in their Glasse; and ill|favoured
ones, vexation: The Conscience
doth the same for vice or vertue, as a glasse
for Faces. Dissolute Women are far from
standing on good opinion, since they do all
they can to have an ill one: And to consider
well the life of a great many, it seems they

would imitate Lesbia in Martial, that affe|cted
pomp and ostentation in her Debauche|ry,
and took more pleasure in the Spectators,
then the Adulteries. Shee was in her volu|ptuousnesse,
as the Sophisters were in their
vertues; they loved to do nothing well, shee
nothing ill, but upon the Stage. Men should
not throw themselves into despair for this,
since this misfortune depends not on their
carriage, and since the most illustrious persons
have been lyable to it. The insolency of Lu|cia
did not abate the glory of her Husband's
Victories. Drusus Nephew to Augustus and
Marcus Aurelius, obtained an immortall
reputation, notwithstanding the lascivious|nesse
of his Wife. Infamy should be perso|nall,
as sin is; and we should not partake of
the punishment or shame, when we have no
part in the crime. Since it is not enough to
be vertuous, but it must be believed, we must
be carefull of the apparances, and leave no
pretences for ill tongues, which makes faults
when they finde none. I will allow, that
Socrates loved not young Alcibiades, but
with all kinde of honour, and that his affe|ction
did not contradict his Philosophy: Yet
notwithstanding, making him lye with him
every night, he should have been cautious of
his coming, and return, to take away the

means from those that saw him come back
in the mornings, to make use of the time and
place of his visit for an occasion of censure;
though the Oracle published his vertue, one
cannot justifie his unadvisednesse in the car|riage
of this friendship. Discretion and love
agree not even in the best wits: It may be 'tis
for that the Poets faign Cupid to be still a
Childe, because let love grow never so old,
it never arrives at the years of Discretion;
his childishnesse lasts as long as himself, lest
he should be ashamed of the fondnesse of his
sports and dalliances.
I do not wonder if Love make us lose our
Reputations, since it makes us lose our wits;
and since Socrates himself could not scape re|proach
in a bare friendship amongst the Ro|mans;
Claudia, a vestall Virgin, was inno|cent,
yet was accused to have forfeited her
honour, for smelling too curiously; and it
was thought enough to condemn her, that
shee took a little more pains with her cloaths
and discourse, then was necessary for a Nun.
Indeed it was a light apparence to arraign
her on; but shee would not have been ac|quitted
but by a prodigy, when shee moved
a ship with her girdle, that many Engines and
Men could not stir.
Whatsoever one can do or avoid, there is

no infallible rule or means to preserve her
reputation; and since it depends on the opi|nion
of others, there is more fortune then
wisdom in it. We must not think that igno|rance
joyned with caution is sufficient for it,
since God himself that is the spring of good|ness
and wisdome, saw himselfe traduced
for a while by the impostures of his enemies
that reported him a Man addicted to vice
and debauchery. This one example shewes
sufficiently that there is somwhat else requi|site
besides vertue and dexteritie to preserve
it. There is a strange unhappiness in some per|sons,
that exposeth them to be talked of, no
body knowes why: and that happens oftner
to the vertuous then the other, because
their denials procure them Enemies, and
they are often in danger, like Susanna, to be
accused of a crime they have refused to com|mit.
There are some faces too that attract
censure; and this proceeds from fools, ima|gining
that one cannot laugh without being
vicious, and that there is no innocence but
in frowardness  Melancholy. It is the beliefe
of the ignorant, that vertue should alwaies
cry, and know not that we should beware
of a dark humour, as of water that is over|cast.
And of all kinde of wits, there are none
so harmless, as the most cheerfull. It were

to be very dull, to beleeve one could not have
a good humor without having an ill con|science:
if there were neither malice nor ene|mies
in the world, there are few things so
sure or so true, that cannot bee taken di|verse
waies; and if we examin well all our
Actions, it seemes that they are almost all
subject to interpretation and dispute. Who
can judge certainly (setting Christianity a
side) of a man giving almes in publick, if it
bee for good example or vanity? May not
one say of a patient Man, that it is a signe
of insensibleness, as soone as of vertue? Who
knowes whether a merry humor bee a testi|mony
of loosness or of freedome? Those that
are serious, may they not pass for vaine or
stupid, aswell as for modest? the interpre|tation
makes all; and if the things were not
indifferent, wee speake of them more accor|ding
to our sense, then their nature. Since it
is so, wee should seeke our consolation in our
owne hearts, as wise men doe; and when we
have done all that lies in us to deserve a good
reputation, wee may despise an ill one. The
neglect of detraction silences ill tongues, and
the being moved with it quickens them: It
is to acknowledg the force of their weapons,
to confess that they have wounded us; and
those that are extreamly troubled with them,

comply with their designes that would offend
them, for tis to satisfie our enemy to let
him know, hee keepes us unsatisfied. They
that say that ill tongues are like sharpe set
rasors, should add, that their edge hath most
effect upon soft and yeelding things, and
that stones turne their edge: it is as much as to
say that spirits too sinsible suffer more then
those that are of a firmer and more constant
temper. Whatsoever one steales or cuts from
Reputation, at last it comes againe like hair
after it hath beene cut, if the roote remaine,
and innocence staies with patience: howso|ever
if we be unjustly tax'd, we should com|fort
our selves more in the truth, then be
displeased by an imposture. The innocent
should be no more afflicted when they are
called guilty, then if they were said to be
sicke when they are well. From hence we
may learne why vertuous women are less
vindicative when they are tax'd then vitious,
because as the most ill favourd will somtimes
be thought the handsomest by painting, so the
most unworthie strive by their cunning to be
beleeved the modestest. This is the reason,
they are so troublesome, and that one cannot
touch their sore never so lightly, but they
will cry out. All the world knowes how
Lucretia kild her selfe upon the violence of

Tarquin; she said when shee was dying, that
she had two irreproveable witnesses, her
bloud to Men, and her soule to the Gods.
But I am almost of the opinion of a great
Author, that accuseth her not to have bin al|waies
so chaste, as she would have had be|leeved
by her death, and that if she had not
bin guilty, she would have found more re|medie
in her Conscience then in her death.
Some say, that she resisted rather out of an
humor then consideration of vertue, and that
having pass'd her time with some other Mi|nions
of lesse quality then the Tyrant, she
feared that all her other faults should have
been discovered by this, and that this fear
made her resolve rather to let her selfe out
of the world with her owne hands, then
to stay in it too long to survive her Repu|tation.



Of Inclination to VERTUE,
chiefly to the Devotion of
the times.
_THose that imagine that Wo|mens
Piety is but a tender|ness
in their nature, or weak|ness
of their wits, are not of
my opinion; and me thinks,
do them no less affront, to deny them this
divine quality, then if they should take
their eyes from them, which make the best
part of the face. We may believe, that they
that would have a woman irreligious, de|sire
she would be insolent and without in|genuity;
and having after razed out of her
minde the sense and respect of Religion,
they mean to spoil her of that which gives
her so powerful an advantage amongst men.
It is an old craft that began with the world,
and licentious men do but the same in that
with the Women of this age, which the Di|vel
did practise upon the first, when he took

from her the fear of God, that so he might
afterwards easily perswade her to all kinde
of liberty. Those impious ones, that steal
the immortality of the Soul, to bestow it
on their infamous delights, and that would
(if they could) deprive of an eternall exi|stence
this most pure and simple essence, that
contains all, and is bounded by nothing,
are very foolish to aime at the reputation
of good wits, by the slighting of Religion;
especially during a Reign, and in a Court,
where there may be engraven in greater
Characters, then was ever upon the Medals
of Adrian the Emperour, The Emperiall
Piety. The Hermits of this time, may (as
well as that of Theodosius the younger) leave
their solitude, and come and study perfecti|on
in the Kings Palace, and take examples
of austerity in the seat it self of pleasures.
We have no need now adayes to seek in
Cloysters precepts for a Christian life; 'tis
enough now to be a good Courtier, to be
devout. One cannot now observe the laws
of Policy by violating those of Christianity;
and it is an happy necessity, that makes the
licencious Wits of the Court inexcusable;
that now adayes, unless one will make him|self
ridiculous, a man must get his fortune
and his salvation both together. Ladies that

would shew that they are inclined to ver|tue,
should be more gratious to such Spirits
as are addicted to it then to the other, lest
it should be thought if they favour'd either
libertines, or stupid ones, that the resem|blance
had tyed this knot; Those that shew
either hatred or coldness to deserving per|sons,
declare by the repugnancy to good
things, they are fit for nothing but ill ones:
weake wits have not estimation enough to
publish their vertue, nor discretion e|nough
to conceale their defects. Yet we often
see those that are full of vanity and affe|ctation,
picke out among those fools their
admirers and confidents; as if it were not
a blind choice to elect so ill judges of their
merits, and so ill secretaries to their de|lights.
Ignorance and simplicity are two
unsure trusts, interest and perswasion will
drawe any thing from them, and if im|prudency
were not provoked, it would
often speake, when it should be silent.
Midas addrest himselfe ill to reedes to
keepe secret his long eares; he would
have been better served by a discreet Man,
then he was by that plant; and dull peo|ple,
as he did, finde by wofull experience,
that there can be no true fidelity, where
there is no wit or reason: there are more

Histories of this then fables, we need not
look back to the times past to seeke exam|ples,
which we have store of every moment,
which might serve for the subject of Tragedy
and farses.
And for piety, if any body objects against
it, that it deads good humor, and breeds
too much Melancholy for company. In|deed
I doe not approve of those that put
their devotion upon the racke to make it
scoul, as if one could not be saved without
being ugly. When the grace of God is in
the soul, the face is toucht over with the
sweetness of it, and not the features and
colours of the damned. The weather is o|vercast
when it is disposed to raine, and
dejected looks prognosticate somewhat
ominous in their musings. Those that have
no purpose to doe ill, nor remorse for ha|ving
done ill, are not of this froward humor,
which is as contrary to devotion as to com|liness.
This no way detracts from penitence;
it raines in summer, aswell as winter,
and love sheds as many teares, as feare.
Joy cryes aswell as sorrow, and the remem|brance
of sin doth not deject us so, that
the returne to grace may not raise us a|gain
to joy. Sometimes it rains when the
Sun shins, so Repentance doth often

powr down tears upon smiling faces. Bees
draw honey from Flowers without spoyling
them by touching them; Devotion doth
yet more in every profession where it is,
beautifying and making it more lovely.
And if precious Stones put into honey, take
a lustre from it according to their naturall
colours; so there is no condition in the
world that doth not improve the estimation
of it, when it is accompanyed with Piety;
it makes the professed Religious more cheer|full,
and Lay men lesse insolent, modera|ting
pleasures, and sweetning austerities; it
makes Marriage the comlier, Warre the
juster, Commerce the faithfuller, and the
Court the fuller of honour. It is much ig|norance
and tyranny, to believe it can be
found no where but in Cloysters, and that
one can have nothing to do with it abroad
in the world, without incroaching upon the
Charter house or the Capuchins.
We are in times where it is not account|ed
of, if it be not excessive in appearance;
so that many content themselves to have a
becoming Devotion, or rather, a humane
Religion. I never see this monstrous De|votion,
but it puts me in mind of the Tro|jan
Horse, that was stuff'd with enemies, for
which notwitstanding (by reason of the pre|tence

of piety they did not onely open their
Gates, but broke down their Walls to re|ceive
with more solemnity the Present de|voted
to Minerva; but since Laocoon, that
took a Lance in his hand to sound it, and to
try if it were hollow, was punished for his
just curiosity, let us content our selves to
disapprove of these shewes of the times,
lest we come off as ill as he did, if we un|dertake
to quarrell with it. Indeed, those
Women that keep such adoe, and use so
much craft to deceive some eyes under the
pretext of conscience, do like Spiders, that
take a great deal of pains to make Webs,
where they themselves are hung at last,
without any other advantage, but to have
caught flyes, and they shallow-brains. Cleer
spirits scorn this, and I cannot conceive how
discreet women can mistake dreams for re|velations,
or let themselves be surprized
by such illusions. Likely, those that seem
very fond of their Husbands, it is with de|signe
to deceive them; and among the Ro|mans,
Ladies have been suspected of their
Husbands death, onely for crying exces|sively
over their Tombs.
In Religion as well as Society, dissimu|lation
is commoner then truth; and this
great shew is at least suspicious, if not viti|ous:

superstitious women make more scru|ple
of a litle sin then of a great one. And
are like the Jewes, that made more Conscience
of entring into the Pretor-hall, then of con|demning
Christ; or of not washing their
hands, then of persecuting Innocence. It is
true, that women retaine that of the first,
that made more Ceremony, and shewed
more feare to touch the forbidden fruit,
then to eate it. These questions, tales and scru|ples
without reason, trouble not discreet
persons, that follow Alexanders example,
vertuously cutting off troublesome knots, ra|ther
then yeelding themselves to unty them,
as the vulgar doe, that are ignorant of true
devotion. Notwithstanding this, lest we
should passe from one extreme to another,
we must behave our selves in taxing supersti|tion,
as those that in the time of Xerxes,
burned the houses in Asia. They medled
not with the buildings neer the Temples, not
only to preserve those sacred places from
being burnt, but for feare they should be so
much as black'd: so in this case, we omit ma|ny
things which we might blame with justice,
but not without danger of driving weake
Spirits to impiety: when superstition riseth
from simplicity, it deserves pitty or excuse;
but when from art, punishment and suffering.

The ears that cover the corne, or the leaves
about trees are not superfluous, nature hath
given them either to preserve or beautifie
them. Ceremonies are of the same use to Re|ligion,
and as devotion is inseparable from
love, it borrowes often loves raptures, and
Gods servants can containe themselves no
more, then prophane ones, which honor
their Mistresses, even in haire and Ciphers;
Divine love expressed more favour in the ef|fects
then the worldly: and a great Author
sayes very well, That if the Poets Cupid have
two wings, that the Seraphins have six. It is
true, that Hypocrites are not so reproveable as
Libertines, because it is better to counterfeit
vertue then vice. But in what concernes con|versation,
the best covering is to have none,
because it is easier to be good in effect, then
only in shewe, and it is lesse paine to certifie
the Conscience then to set the behaviour.
After all this, it cannot be denied that women
are not firmer and truer in their devotion
then men, since in that occasion where there
was most affection to be shewed to God,
there were found three Maryes under the
Cross, where there was but one Disciple.



Of Chastity and Complacency.
_IT is fit to joyn these two fair
Qualities, to reduce them to a
perfect temper; since there be
some that become shy and wild
by being Chaste; and others
that refuse nothing out of Complacency. It
is indeed, to be either too good, or too ill
an humour, and is but changing of vices,
in stead of avoyding them. If Vertue have
two extremes that offend it equally, one
must not make use of the one for defence a|gainst
the other; as if one must be covetous,
for fear of being prodigall; or throw ones
self into the fire, to escape the water. Mo|rality
approves not such a carriage; it doth
not teach us to pick out, but fly from sins;
to fix only upon Vertue, which is hard to
find, because either excesse or scarcity hides
it from the ignorant. They that think wo|men
cannot be vertuous and obliging, un|derstand
little the nature of Vertue: nay,

are voyd of common sense, much more of
any right opinion. Vertues are but divers,
not contrary, and the correspondence is too
naturall not to be able to subsist in the same
subject; when they are well suted, they do
better in one anothers company, then a|lone.
'Tis that which Theodosius was so
much commended for among the Emperors,
seeming to make himself esteemed by con|trary
Qualities; his gentlenesse abated not
his Majestie, nor his severity his Compla|cency.
There are some that affect so much a plea|singnesse,
as their smiles seem rather ridi|culous
then cheerfull; and others so much
on the contrary, as to put on gravity, look
like Furies, or School-mistresses: whatsoe|ver
is in it, when one considers well these
two Humours, they are to be suspected ei|ther
of art or stupidity; because if it be
without design, there is no wit in it; if it
be with design, the serious ones intend to
deceive, and the easie ones to be deceived.
These believe, that their easinesse is ascribed
to their humour; and the others, that their
coldnesse is understood an effect of their
Vertue. These tricks take not long, espe|cially
with discreet persons, among which
the best way to seem chast is to be so. As

the Hypocriticall are least devout, so the
most reserved are sometimes the least
chaste. Hecuba may have an handsome
Masque, and Hellen an ill-favoured one;
but this ugliness or that Beauty abuseth but
such eyes as stagger at appearancies. They
have more diversity of falsifying and co|lours,
then the Rain-bow, whose figure
turned upward, their dissimulation doth of|ten
set on their husbands foreheads Cha|stity
must needs be a divine Quality, since
even the enemies of it esteem it, and that
the most debauched respect them lesse that
yeeld, then those that hold out. Apollo
being in love with Daphne, when he could
not work upon her by his discourse nor
pursuit, turned her into a Laurell, of which
he himself hath since worn Crownes. Iu|piter
being passionate for Io, had no soon|er
gained her, but he chang'd her into a
Cow. How different are these two Me|tamorphoses?
the refusall is better rewar|ded
then the consent. Respect waits up|on
Desire, and neglect followes Possessi|on.
The God Pan being taken with the
beauty of a Nymph, used violence after
his prayers, pursuing her to the brim of
a River, where she going to precipitate her
self, he in pity of her, chang'd her into a

Reed, which he made himself a Pipe of, in
honour of her resistance, and to have it e|very
foot in his hands to play with it, and
kisse it. Those that are gained are not used
so, because they have not that honour,
which our Cavaliers seek with so much care
and pains. Those that promise to them|selves
never to go so far, and never to do
any but indifferent favours, such as Civility
allows, after having given way to more then
they should, find a precipice where they
look'd only for entertainment. Love (like Ser|pents)
works himself in intirely, at the least
overture is made him; his beginning is ordi|narily
contrary to his end; the pretences are
alwayes usefull or honourable. I could wish
that the imprudency of many Ladies did not
so often make a truth of the Fable of Euro|pa:
This young Princesse walking innocent|ly
on the sea side, where she considered her
flocks, saw a Bull that pleased her better then
any of the rest; she draws neer to make much
of him, and gets upon him; he proud of his
fair office, gets by little and little into the
water, and so far, as she looks back too
late to the shore, not being able to return to
it, she was carried away into an Iland, where
she finds too late, that this Bull was a God,
disguised to surprize her. Thus you see what

becomes of it when one playes with beasts,
when one is freer and more familiar with
stupid then witty passions: Europa was
bolder with a Bull, then she would have
been with Iupiter, if he had declared him|self;
He made his approaches easier under
the skin of a beast, then he could have
done in the likenesse of a God. The most
crafty (in his imitation) counterfeit them|selves
simple and ignorant, to attain easier
their pretensions. They steal from little
favours to greater, and so still carry on
their work, till they change their intreaties
into threats, and their softnesse into vio|lence;
and then one finds too late, that
true simplicity is abused, when it plays with
falsified. The fear of losing their reputation
after having given some advantages, debau|cheth
many: but 'tis fit they should be pu|nished
for this facility, to teach them, that
there is no trusting to beasts; and that the
freest and most ingenuous wits are the most
vertuous, and most capable of friendship. A
Poet speaking of the Favours which Ladies
give, sayes, That fools are happier in them
then deserving persons, because their vio|lence
takes more then the others perswasion,
by reason of their opinion, that it is lesse
shame to let men take, then to give, as the

violence seems to excuse the consent. But
tis the opinion but of one man, fitter to be
despised, then believed; and that doth not
detract lesse from Truth, then from Ladies
Honours, which ordinarily are not wound|ded,
but for want of cunning against the sub|tilty
of their enemies.
It is hard to use so many tricks and inven|tions
to be lovely, without loving; those
that give love at their pleasure, do some|times
receive it as pleaseth him. They
should do a miracle, to have so much fire
in their eyes, without any in their heart; and
let them be never so confident, their looks
cannot warm others, without heating it self
in its own sphere. Loves weapons are but ill
ones; for one seldom useth them to wound
others, but they either begin or end with
themselves.
I have heretofore thought much upon the
Statue of Venus made by Phydias, which
had a Tortoise under the feet of it; and I
believe, the greatest mystery that can be
found in it, is, that Tortoises seldom move,
or if they do sometimes stir, 'tis always co|vered
or armed, carrying their house over
their head. Venus despiseth the solitary
and the reserved; those that run after all
companies and publick assemblies so eagerly,

please her better to enlarge her Empire;
and above all things, she hath alwayes lo|ved
Nakednesse, since it got her the golden
Apple, which Pallaases Arms and Iunu's
Cloathes could not obtain of Paris. When
either solitude or company grow wearisome,
they serve for remedies to one another, as
rest and labour, or day and night; but we
must know, that the one gives more occa|sions
of doing ill then the other; and those
that delight to be often among their ene|mies,
have a mind either to master them, or
make them friends. Let the company be ne|ver
so good, cautiousness is better then confi|dence:
and since she that should be the Ex|ample
of her sex, was abash'd with an Angel
that appeared with the face of a man, women
should always apprehend men, though they
are in the form of Angels, unles it be, that not
meaning as she did, they have no need of fear.
It is ill argued, to say, that timorousness re|strains
women more then vertue: if their in|clination
be ill, sollicitation will imbolden it;
experience teacheth us, that if they be appre|hensive,
it is rather of being vitious, then of
being censur'd. Those that writ the Scrip|tures
and the Proverbs, have said all things
to their advantage; they have confess'd, that
Chastity belongs particularly to Women, be|cause

they that have it not are counted Mon|sters.
One could not have wonder'd so much
at the want of it, if the quality were not na|tural
to them. Indeed, there have been men
that have possessed this Vertue, but it hath
been upon occasions where some considerati|on
hath taken away the merit from it. Alex|ander
shewed some continency with Darius
his wifes; but to prove it was rather policy,
then vertue, what did he not do with the A|mazons?
Scipio being very young, restored
a very handsom woman that was presented
him, to her Husband; but there it was pride
that was stronger then love, because he had
lost his credit with the Spaniard, if he had ac|cepted
the offer. What praise doth Lenocrates
deserve for forbearing to enjoy that Lady
which was brought him? his coldness pro|ceeded
from his age; besides, he was drunk,
and sought for rest; and if he had not been
neither drunk nor sleepy, it was so common a
one, as the most debauched would have been
ashamed of, as well as a Philosopher. There
needs no long discours to prove that chastity
belongs not to men, they themselvs quit their
part of it, and believe it were to encroach on
the profession of women, to practise the pre|cepts
they give them, or not to be before them
in the violation of so fair Maxims for Honor
and Chastity.

Is is not a strange custom and worthie of
reproof, to see men take all kind of liberty,
without allowing the least? One might think
by their tyranny that Marriage was institu|ted
to only make Jailers for Women. There
is much ingratitude, as well as injustice in it,
to exact a fidelity which one will not re|turn,
when the obligations to it are equall.
Women have wit and conscience enough to
beleeve that revenge would cost them too
dear, if they lost their own Vertue to take
satisfaction of their Husbands viciousnesse.
Octavia did not desist from loving Mark
Antony singularly, whilest he made love to
Cleopatra, and left a great Beauty at Rome,
to possesse a lesse in Aegypt. They that
have this constancy, deserve admiration;
but those that have it not, have some co|lour
for their weaknesse: Example pleads
for them; for they imagine that it is not
likely that a Chrystal should resist blows that
might break Diamonds or Marble.
If I may be allowed to give my opinion
after my prayers, since God loved one of his
disciples more tenderly then the rest, one may
have a particular inclination without ble|mishing
chastity, that doth not banish affe|ctions,
but regulates and moderates them:
yet we must take heed that kindnesse which

in its own nature is a vertue, be not made a
vice in the practice: not to be couzened in
it, the end and designe of it must be exa|mined
as soon as it begins, and we must as|sure
our selves, that it is forbidden, if we
pretend to any thing but affection; since
dishonest love is the trade of those that do
not spend their time in some commendable
imployment; we must believe that Chasti|ty
is preserved by occupation, and corrupted
by idlenesse. Diana hunts, and Pallas studies,
but Venus is idle.


Of Courage.
_MEN think that Courage is a
Qualitie inseparable from
them, and by a peculiar pri|viledge
essentially tyed to
their Sex, without bringing
other ground or title to it, but their own
presumption: But he that had much adoe
to imagine that there was so much as one
brave or valiant Woman in the world, made
them full reparation for so great an injury;

and though he was accounted the wisest and
most powerful of all men, he lost that high ad|vantage
among women, which weakned him
so far as to bring him to Sacrifice to Idols:
Histories are full of their generous action
for the preservation of their countrey, for
love of their husbands, and for the Religion
of their ancestors. As the strength of the
braine is shewed in walking a top on high,
without feare of falling; so the force of our
wits is expressed in looking upon precipices
and danger without disorder. The stupid
have not this advantage when they expect
hazards, nor the rash when they seeke them;
none but the wise defend themselves from
misfortune, without either being precipitate
or insensible, since Courage should always
be with a free deliberation; and that it is
neither a forced vertue, nor a parly natural.
I can hardly hold them generous whose con|stitution
makes so light, as they are transport|ed
without any cause; nor those that Nature
has made so heavy, as they cannot resent
injuries and offences. This is either an excesse
or a defect of sensibleness, and may be better
cald stupidity or levity then courage. If there
must be Judicionsnes in all the discourse of an
Orator, prudency should be found in all the
actions of a wise man; and without that,

let Polyphemus be never so strong, it will
not save his sight; and though Vlysses be
the weaker, the Gyant with all his strength
cannot defend himselfe against him.
They that know the temper of women,
will confesse, that they have a great dispo|sition
to true Courage, being neither cold to
a degree of insensibleness, nor hot to a degree
of rashness. Couragious persons do not throw
themselves into all occasions, as if they had
as many lives to lose, as the world had
hazards  misfortunes: let them set never so
good a face on it, even the bravest find some
paine to expose themselves, for that which
depends meerely on opinion, and are un|willing
to commit a fault, which even the
losse of their lives cannot repaire. Temerity
is punished in the other world after it hath
bin blamed in this: those that have this ver|tue,
will not allow anger or dispaire the
name of Courage, and I cannot thinke that
men have reason to call women fearfull, be|cause
they are not hasty  unadvised. Those
that say, I make an Apology for slackness, wil
not take it ill, if I answer, That they make
one for brutality. What glory is there to cut
one anothers throat? and what advantage,
but the fashion to brag of a Profession, which
the Gthes were masters of, and hath given us

both the rules  examples of? What is easier
then to let our selves be carried away with
fury, and follow the Motions of our passions?
Those that the vulgar call valiant are like
glasses, which one can scarce touch without
breaking. They know not that wits, like
bodies, are alwayes most sensible where they
are weakest. If it be generosity to be tetchy
and complaine every foot, the sick have
more then the found, old men then young, 
fools more then wise men: when seare and
boldness are reasonable, they oppose not one
another, the one opens our eyes for a pre|vision
of misfortunes, the other animates us
to a resistance of them when they are pre|sent.
I doe not thinke that any body will deny
this faire quality to women, when they shall
have read this story which Tit. Livius hath
left us to their advantage, which he con|fesseth
to have writ with love and admira|tion.
After Philip King of Macedon
had put to death the Principall Lords of
Thessaly, Many, to avoid his cruelty, fled into
strange countries; Poris and Theoxena took
the way to Athens, to seeke that Safety which
they could not have in their owne Province:
they put to sea, but so unhappily, as the con|trary
winds drove them back into the same

port from whence they had set sayle. The
guards perceiving them at the Sun rising,
advertised the Prince of it, and strived to
take from them that liberty which they va|lued
above their lives. Poris in this extre|mity
useth prayers to satisfie the souldiers,
and to call the gods to his relief. But The|oxena,
seeing her death unavoidable, and re|solving
not to fall into the tyrants hands,
saved her children from captivity by an ex|traordinary
resolution. She offerd a dagger
to the eldest, and to the lesser a little cup ful
of poyson, saying thus, There is no saving
of our lives and liberties; and since we must
resolve to die, Courage Children, it is bet|ter
to chuse a death then to be forced to take
it from these insolent hands. They that are
strong enough let them make use of this wea|pon,
and the weaker of this drinke. Her chil|dren
having obeyed her, she threw them
half dead into the sea, and embraced her
deare Poris to throw her selfe into the water
in his armes in the sight of his souldiers, that
could not chuse but lament the losse, and
admire the resolution of this Lady.
I doe confesse, there is somewhat in this
story contrary to our faith, but courage and
constancy shine in it in a marvellous bright|ness.
I can scarce beleeve there can be found

among men greater, nay even a parallel.
If the courage of Theoxena appeared in
the defence of her liberty, this of Megistona
was yet more remarkable to save that of her
countrey. After that Aristotimus had usur|ped
the soveraignty of Elida, he expulsed
the best part of the Citizens, and seemed to
grant the prayers of those unfortunate men,
that asked leave for their wives to follow
them in their distresses: he yeelded them
their request; but assoone as he perceived
that the wives were prepared to be gone,
and preferred the company of their husbands
before the staying in the towne, he put many
of them to death and the rest in prison. Yet
because Tyranny doth not doe lesse hurt to
those that exercise it, then those that indure
it, and that there is little safety when one
hath as many enemies as subjects, Aristoti|mus
began to apprehend his fall; news was
brought him that the banishd Citizens had
made a body and joyned to besiege Elida.
The Barbarian being in dispaire, conscious
of his owne weakness, finding no readier re|medy,
went furiously to the prison to com|mand
the wives to write to their husbands to
pacify them. Megistona despised his com|mand,
and without fearing the effects of his
unjust power, made this answer in the name

of all. Thou shewest enough that thou wan|test
judgment, as well as Courage, if thou
comest to entreat those that thou hast used
so ill, and if thou expectest favour from
those that never received mercy from thee;
The horrid darkness of this place, nor the
threats of death shall never make us so base
as to betray our countrey, for which we will
constantly give our lives, after having lost
our liberty. Aristotimus being exasperated
by this discourse commands Megistona's
sonne to be brought to him to put him to
death in the presence of his mother; and when
he could not be knowne among the rest,
Megistona calls him out by his name, with a
protestation that she had rather see him dead
then captive in Aristotimus his hands, who
drew his sword to kill him. In this disorder
the Tragedy was ended, he was besieged
without, and they conspired against him
within the towne, where he was murdered
in the market place. Megistona comes out of
prison to be as mercifull as she had bin gene|rous.
She saved Aristotimus his daughters
from being ravished, representing to this
mutinous people, that they should not make
themselves guilty of a crime that they had
punish'd, nor commit a cruelty upon the
children in doing Justice on the Father.

Euripides admireth the temperatness of Iphi|genia,
when she was made an immolation to
Diana for the stag which Agamemnon had
kild. Why doe you lament (said she to her
father) her that dyes so pleased, since the
oracle commands it, and for the good of
Greece? and if the successe of your armes be
dependant on the losse of my life, I accuse
not destiny, and am sorry for nothing but
that I have but one life, that I might offer
you as many lifes as I wish you triumphs:
howsoever your victories shall be cheerfull
like to this offering, which is the price and
presage of it. This young Beauty in the midst
of the publick feares dyed thus sweetly and
, and ressted no more the Sacrifi|,
then a Rose doth the gatherer.
What resolution did the French Ladies ex|presse
at the siege of Beauvais, when they
repulsed Charls Duke of Burgundy when he
besieged the towne in Lewis the Second his
time? Though Xenophon hath made Cyrus
the example of all Monarks, was he not
defeated by Queen Tomyris, with these re|proaches,
Drinke now thy fill of that thou
bast so much thirsted after? Did not the La|dies
of Aquileia give their hayre to make
bow-strings against the Emperour Maximi|nus?
Did not the Roman, and Marcellian

Ladies doe the same? And if I may be allow'd
to give my opinion after my commendati|ons,
Those that kill themselves are not cou|ragious
but defperat; it is to render the place
in stead of defending it, and give our selves
to the enemy, without his taking the pains
to overcome us. There is no great resolution
to choose death for its owne remedy, and
become our owne executioners. Notwith|standing,
men are found as often guilty of
this lightness as women, without exempting
even the greatest personages. Cato conceived
he should find more redresse for his ill for|tune
in his wounds, and his violence to him|selfe,
then in constancy  reason. Ladies must
take heed too, that they be not bolder for
their passions, then for vertue; 'tis that
wherewith their enemies charge them. But
howsoever I cannot approve of those that are
like Theria the Corinthian; She was so a|fraid
of flies, as she would indure no light in
her chamber, for feare of seeing them; yet
she had boldness enough to kill her husband.
It is to abuse feare aswell as boldness, to ap|prehend
flies, and to commit murders with so
much confidence.



Of Prudence and Discre|tion.
_IF the Oracle of Apollo decla|red
Socrates the wisest of all
men: Socrates confessed free|ly,
that his Diotima had
taught him the Wisdom and
Prudence which the Gods themselves judg|ed
incomparable. It was no little advan|tage
to this Woman, to have instructed this
Philosopher, which might give rules to all
men for life and manners.
Though Aristotle were one of the grea|test
enemies of Women, he hath notwith|standing
given testimonies, that he prefer|red
truth before hatred, confessing in the
second Book of his Politicks, That they
did mannage amongst the Lacedemonians,
the Affairs of greatest importance. It is
a Tyranny and a Custome that is not lesse
unjust then ancient, to reject Women from

Publick and Particular Government, as if
they were fit for nothing but to spin: Their
Wit is apt for more elevated actions: and
if one will mark what they have done, one
may easily judg what they are capable of.
If men sometimes took their advice, whom
God hath given for their help and conso|lation
in their affairs, it may be they would
have a happier successe. At least, these
following Stories will witnesse, That the
praises we give them, are not ill grounded,
and that we have a reason to maintain, that
their Prudence hath often brought reme|dy
to the most desperate diseases of States
and Provinces.
When the Sabines demanded Roman
Women in Marriage with their Swords in
their hands to revenge a refusall; The Se|nate
was puzzled to make an answer, in a
case where a denyall would beget a cer|tain
Warre, or the grant of it would ha|zard
their State; because their Allyance
was but a colour to make themselves Ma|sters
of Rome: Tutola being very young,
presented her self with her advice, which
at first surprized them; but afterwards suc|ceeded
to the glory of the Romans, and
shame of the Strangers. After having per|ceived
a great irresolution in the discourse

of so many old Senators, whom experi|ence
should have furnished with good coun|sell,
she proposed to them, to agree to
their demands, and to dresse their Maids
like Brides, and to carry them to the Sa|bines,
who preferred their pleasure before
their designe of making Warre. These
slaves seeing their pretended Husbands in
a sound sleep, subtilly stole their Armes
from them, and advertised the Roman
Souldiers of it by a lighted Torch; who
carryed back a Victory where Fortune had
no part. One cannot praise enough the
conduct, courage and affection of Tutola,
that found an expedient for the Common|wealth,
when all the Senate could find no|thing
but fear and apprehension.
The Sabine Women have not got lesse re|putation
in the like occasion, then the Roman.
Although these two people were allyed, yet
they made mortall war one upon another:
The Squadrons being ready to joyn bat|tell,
the Sabines threw themselves between
the two Armies, covered with mourning,
their hair about their ears, and their chil|dren
in their arms. What? (said they to
the Romans) have you forgot that we are
your daughters? Do you not see that we
are between our Fathers and our Husbands;

and that you will be no lesse obliged to la|ment
the victory if you gain it, then if you
loose it; since these children will be without
Fathers, and your daughters without hus|bands.
And you Sabines, what fury transports
you to seeke the spilling of blood, which is
so allyed to you? You can never report your
victory, without publishing in Parricide,
and relating a story which will be as shameful
to you as lamentable to us. We have put on
black, because mourning is unevitable, since
we must needs bewaile our husbands, or
our Fathers: if you have a minde to goe on,
exercise your rage upon us, that had rather
dye then be either widows or Orphans. This
Spectacle with their discourse, did so soften
the hearts of those warriers, that they con|tracted
an inviolabile Friendship. The Sa|bins
afterward inhabited Rome, and these
two people became one; and Romulus, to
honour the wisedome and conduct of the
Sabines, gave their names to the Decargos,
bands of ten men.
The prudency and generosity of Ladyes,
gave the Laced monians an occasion to build
a Temple dedicated to Venus armed, where
Pallas seemed to cite her before Paris, to
demand satisfaction of him for taking a|way
her armes, after having carried the

Apple from her; but Venus replyes nothing
in her defence, but that if she had been vi|ctorious
naked, she would be so much
more, armed. Yet to speak my opinion
more particularly in this Morall; me thinks,
it is not enough for worthy women to have
a pleasingnesse without Discretion: La|dies
are but humane by Beauty; but as it
were divine by Prudence: Beauty asketh
but love, but Wisdome challengeth admi|ration.
It is Vertue that gives them most
authority and respect: and without which,
the rest are without ornament, at least with|out
order, like scatter'd Flowers which the
wind parts, and carries up and down confu|sedly.
With Discretion the vicious preserve
their honour, and without it the vertuous
lose it. In matters of Love and Pride Wo|men
never want dexterity; their Wit al|wayes
accompanies their Passion. Iacobs
Mother is witnesse enough of their ability,
in the inventions she gave him to supplant
his brother.
Prudence and wariness are inseparable:
and as Rashness exposeth the most powerfull
to danger, so Distrust keeps the weakest
in safety. Ladies may, as well as Misers, be
afraid of the shadow of a Reed, that is, of the
least occasion; since they have a treasure a|bout

them as well as they, which is easier
lost, and worthier to be kept. The Poets
Pallas, which should be an example to the
wise, was alwayes armed; to shew them,
that they should be still upon their guard.
And indeed, what worth soever one can
have, she that is without fear is like a Ci|ty
without Walls; as easie to be taken as
hard to be kept. I mean not a frantick
fear, which is a greater ill then that which
is threatned; but a wise one, which propo|seth
ill accidents without distempering the
Body or disquieting the Conscience. If
pratling and pert Women be offended that
I esteem Modesty more then Prudence, I
would advise them to quarrell with their
own shameless humour, that decryes them
in all companies. Those that ordinarily
take so much upon them, have little in
them; that are like Apes, that are never
more beasts, then when they put on mens
cloathes. Discretion is never parted from
Prudency, it is Treasure that nourisheth it self
whilest it is covered. Like that Lamp in the
time of the Romans, that remained almost
a thousand years lighted, as long as it was
under ground, and went out as soon as e|ver
it was brought into the air. Those that
would seem wise labour in vain; the best

wits cover the Springs of their motions,
lest they should not be ingenuously dealt
with, and so they should be rather fenced
with then trusted.
The greatest and most common sin in
the world, is to chuse ill, either for love or
fortune. Prudence provides against this
miscarrying, since it is particularly imploy|ed
to deliberate and elect. Indeed, a great
many have much need of this Vertue, and
should not wonder if they repent them of
their loves; because understanding and e|lection
doth not precede them. There are
some Women that seem to have meer bru|tality
in their designes, making monsters
the objects of them, even as far as to imi|tate
her in Ariosto, that preferred a Dwarse
before a Prince; violating at once the
Lawes of Merit, Quality, and Marri|age.
There's no wisdom to hold ones peace,
or to talk alwayes; Pratling shews a gid|dinesse
in the brain, and overmuch silence
either stupidity or scorn. One may dis|course
a whole day, and yet speak little;
but sometimes one may say too much in
speaking but a word. There is not so much
discretion to speak few words, as no super|fluous
or impertinent ones: Otherwise,

the dumbe were borne with great advan|tage,
if we must retrenche the use of the
tongue in stead of moderating it. Women di|spute
secrecie with a great deale of Justice,
with men; and though they are accused, to
have no inclination to silence, they doe
keepe it inviolably when it is required.
What threats soever Nero could make to
Epicarmis a Roman Lady to learne of her the
Complices in a conspiracy she was accused
of, he could never make her speake against
the purpose she had, of keeping a secret of
that importance; the sight of torments
shooke the resolution of her partners, but
she prevented the executioners, and made
the Tyrant confesse, that she had more con|stancy
and discretion, then the men had
feebleness. This Action witnesseth sufficient|ly,
that they are much to blame, that ne|glect
women where wisedome and silence
are required. When Theseus was in the
Labyrinth exposed to the Mino-taur, who
gave him meanes to escape but Ariadne?
whithout the thrid that she gave, how could
he ever have unwinded himself out of
those Mazes? This Labyrinth is the Image
of intricate affayres or occasions, Theseus
represents men puzled in them, the thrid is
wisedome: and Ariadne gives it, who fi|gures

to us judicious Ladies, which ordi|narily
rescue men in extremities, which
they could not deliver themselves from.
When Iason should have served for a prey
to the furious Bull which guarded the
Fleece, was it not Medea that charmed
them, and freed the passage for that Ca|valier,
to carry that away which no body
durst undertake? By the Bull we must un|stand
Perils, which often intercept the pos|session
of brave things; by the Fleece, our
designes and pretensions; and by Medea,
ingenuous women, that can charme dangers,
and have no other spels but their wisdome
and behaviour to deliver those that, like Ia|son,
have more boldnesse then dexterity to
undertake what they have no means to ac|complish.



Of Knowledge and Igno|rance.
_A Woman without wit when
shee is handsome, is an object
rather of pity then desire; and
when shee is ill favourd, t'is
a fearfull Monster that frights
all the world: because as beauty withont
discretion, cannot defend it selfe; so ugliness
with ignorance is not to be endured; and if
the knowledge of good things, sets a gloss
and luster on the actions of the one; it serves
to excuse and varnish the imperfections of
the other, to make her lesse troublesome,
and to repaire by the faculties of her wit,
the defects of her face. And if I would
maintaine, as my theame obliges me, that
a Lady should be learned to excell in con|versation,
It may be this opinion will offend
at first, that of Ignorant and stupid men,
that imagine to make a neere resemblance

to themselves, that a woman cannot study
nor read without forgetting honour and
vertue, at least without requiring a justi|fication
for it. But those that judge so rash|ly,
neglecting what they should desire, as
if they were bound to hate the perfection
they have not, or that they should not e|steem
any but shallow wits, to satisfie the
diffidence of themselves, in stead of repre|senting
to themselves, that such women,
that have not judgement enough to discerne
vice, have no more to make choyce of vertue,
or to know how to prefer upon all occasions,
reallity before apparency. But they that are
never so little versed in morality, are not
of this mind, because we find every day by
experience, that the light of reason is as it
were natural vertue, which disposeth us to
doe well, almost without study. And that we
seldome see a good wit, without a good
conscience. The helpe of reading fortifies
this good inclination, and those that perswade
themselves, that reading is a Schoole to learn
to doe ill cunningly, it would become them
better to beleeve, that Ladies find in it more
arms to defend, then to hurt themselves; and
more meanes to Conquer, then to be over|come.
Reading and conference are absolutely
necessary to render both the wit and the hu|mor

acceptable; and as the one collects the
matter of our discourses, the other gives us
a method to expresse them gracefully, to
joyne together facility and abundance;
otherwise conversation is but an insuppor|table
tyranny, and tis impossible without
suffering the torture, to stay long with such
women, that can entertaine one with no|thing
but with the number of their sheepe,
if they be of the country; or if they be of the
Court, that speake nothing but what bands
and gownes are in fashion. Taylors or shep|herds
are better read in this, and a plain sem|stresse
hath a great advantage over them in
company. It must not then be imagined,
that speaking of this accomplished woman,
whose image we have now to draw, that wee
meane to figure the mother of a family, that
can governe well her maids, and takes care
to combe her children. Musick, History,
Philosophy, and other such exercises, are
more sutable to our designe, then those of a
good huswife, and there are none so removed
from common sense, that will not confess
that without these good qualities, though
Ladies have an excellent wit, yet it is often
full of ill things, and troublesome in dis|course;
the best land beares but bryars and
thornes, when there is nothing sowed upon

it, where Art and Labour might bring fourth
Lillies and Tulips: It is that which is often
wanting to their good inclinations and de|sires,
when tyranny or some other misfor|tune
barrs them the possession of these faire
qualities, of which Nature has given them
a capacity. For to say they are not fit for
knowledges, me thinkes it is to mis-judge of
there constitution, which as the Physicians
say, being more delicate then ours, is also
better disposed for them: but it maybe, 'tis an
effect of their Judicious choyce, to quit
freely the vexation and musings of study, as
an occupation that the wisest and most know|ing
of men, had call'd wearisome. And I may
say without flattering them, or without
pretending by this insinuation to the honour
of their good graces, that they are capable
of as many vertues as men; and if sometimes
they quit their claime which they may lay
to them, 'tis rather out of Modesty or consi|deration
then unaptness. Our ancient Gaules
divided with them, the glory of peace and
war: reserving only the active part of armes
unto themselves, and leaving them the esta|blishment
of the lawes and the preservation
of common wealths, that was not to be
done by ignorant ones: and one may judge
in what esteeme our ancestors held them,

since they alloted to the men onely the exer|cises
of the body, and to women the abilities
of the minde. What knowledge can be
thought either so difficult or so divine, in
which women have not excell'd, at least, as
well as men? was not Aspatia judged wor|thy
to teach Pericles, who notwithstanding
might have instructed all the world? What
need we to name many women, that have
penetrated the greatest mysteries, and have
bin so knowing in Divinity, even to the admi|ration
of the greatest Doctors?
This matter is too ample to prosequute;
although men be very sparing and reserved
in writing their prayses, they cannot choose
but wittnesse this truth, and fill their bookes
with such examples. And if we may be al|low'd
to go as far as Fable, wee shall find
that if men have an Apollo for an Author
of their Sciences, that women have also a
Minerva, that hath invented the best Lear|ning,
and that gives them as just a claime
for this pretension. And if I did not feare to
support so knowne a truth by fiction, I would
be content to refer those that doubt of it to
the Poets nine Muses, to which we ascribe
the invention of Arts. But not to continue
farther proofes, which authorise the justness
of this side, Those that say that women draw

great advantage out of ignorance, doe they
not doe too much honour to the silly and ri|diculous
village-simplicity, which ordinarily
defends it selfe ill in occasions, and makes
little resistance against the importunity of the
first that presses or sollicits her. Or if this
opinion be good; were not blind men the
surer for having lost their sight? as if winking
were enough to avoyd a precipice. In the
Court, as in the ocean, one must know the
rocks, and the sands, to prevent shipwrack;
and if woman doe ill after they know it, one
should impute the cause of that misfortune
to their will, not their knowledge. Otherwise
if all kind of reading or Learning be inter|dicted
them, a thousand disorders will arise
out of their ignorance: they will find to
their cost, if contempt can move them, that
those that forbid them the use of reading or
study of good things, cannot endure an Ine|quality
of wits. I cannot choose but laugh,
when I thinke of the error of Francis Duke
of Brittany, that expressed a great passion for
Isabella the daughter of Scotland, when he
understood that she had been studied, belee|ving
that a woman was knowing enough,
when she knew the difference betweene her
owne smock, and her husbands doublet. The
beleese of this good Prince, would be very

ridiculous in those countrys, where the men
goe naked, or among those nations that
make the shirt and the doublet all of a piece:
his estimation of the silly and ignorant obli|geth
me to beleeve he had made a vow to
love only his owne refemblance. The Empe|rour
Theodosius did not so much value the
ignorant, he maryed Athenais only for her
wit and learning, without sticking at her
being but the daughter of a Pedant, of whom
she had received nothing, but beauty in her
birth, and Philosophy in her education.
Those that mistrust a woman when she un|derstands
any thing but her beads, live ac|cording
to the proverbs,  dare not doe any
thing, when it is told them that our ance|sters
did not use it. These are weake Spirits,
that deserve what they feare, and that ground
their suspicions even on the same reasons that
should secure them. Indeed I doe not com|mend
those that affect too much sufficiency.
But excepting this abuse, it must be acknow|ledged,
that women that have knowledge
and reading, are more pleasing in conversa|tion,
and are better pleased in solitude when
they entertaine themselves. Their Idea hath
somewhat to delight it selfe with, whilst the
ignorant lye open to ill thoughts, because
knowing nothing wherewith to busre their

wits, as their discourse is wearisome, so their
thinking must be extravagant. Therefore
I would advise them to vow a perpetuall So|litude,
because they are every where insup|portable,
easie to be seduced, vertuous by
chance, and vitious by necessity.


Of Constancy and Fidelity.
_THose that beleeve levity natural
to women, reading this dis|course,
which proves the con|trary,
will imagine that I have
undertaken to find setlednesse in
the wind, assurance in the waves, and strength
in reeds: but passing by their opinion, since
I have neither purpose nor commission to
undeceive all those that are in error, I will
shew that for inconstancy, women are in
more danger to be injured by it, then guilty
of it; and that their diffidence is very just
in this time, when the friendships that are
promised them with most ceremony, are

either without truth, or durance. Constancy
is: but for good things, obstinacy for evill.
otherwise sinne should be Eternall, and re|pentance
should be forbidden for feare of
charge. When the alteration is just, it is
election, and when it is not, 'tis lightness. As
it is not just, that they that are sicke, should
alwayes remaine in that state, for fear of
being inconstant; so I beleeve that it is
no more blamable, to shake off an ill opi|nion,
then a feaver, and that repentance is
as necessary for the mind as Medecines for
the body. What harm is it to prefer a greater
merit before a lesse? or to confesse that the
Sunne has more light then the Stars? other|wise
the first thing wee had seene in the
world, should chayne up our liberty, and
even deprive us of the right of choice, or
make us love that which should be hated.
Those that esteemed Nero, whilest he
carryed himselfe moderatly, the first five
yeares of his raigne, were they bound to
love him when he be came a Tyrant? af|terwards
when he had lost his vertue, was
there any affection due to him? I loved this
man for his merit, this face for beauty, that
flower for colour; this man is become vi|tious,
this face disfigured, this flower fa|ded;
after this why should I dote on an ob|ject

whose lovely qualities are ceased?
How can the building subsist when the foun|dations
are removed? unlesse to keepe the
adored lawes of constancy, those that love
a picture are obliged afterward to love the
cloth, when the features are defaced?
There is no religion in love, that obligeth
us to honour such relicks, unlesse that
the affection change into pity, and that it
be rather to avoyd ingratitude, then incon|stancy.
This is the reason that those that
love but the beauty of the body, cannot
both live and love long. There is nothing
but the fairness of wit and vertue, that
can truly fasten our constancy: Faces aswell
as yeares, have their seasons, though the
spring be never so pleasant, wee must re|solve
to see the flowers passe away, and to
suffer a winter after the faire weather.
Yet for all this, there is no colour to
intend to blame so noble a vertue, and a
quality so necessary in the world, as Con|stancy,
without which all Love is but trea|chery,
whether it be understood ac|cording
to custome, or reason. The follow|ing
examples will show sufficiently, that
men are to blame, to give the name of vice
to womens vertues, calling them obstinate
in their perseverances, and light in theirreaso|nable

changes. Synogaris being in love
with Camna wife to Synates, used all man|ner
of devices to bring her to yeeld to his
passion; but all his pursuits, with the emi|nency
of his Qualitie having no power
to shake the resolution of this Lady, he
imagined that if her Husband were out of
the world, he should compasse what had
been refused him: He put him to death,
and after this cruelty importuned so the
kindred of this Widow, that she made
show of an agreement to a Marriage with
Synogaris: when they came to the Ceremo|nies,
and that they were to go to the Temple
of Diana, this chast Lady carried with her
a drink, of which she drank half her self,
and then gave the rest to Synogaris, who
drank it joyfully, not imagining it to be
poyson: Camna seeing her designe accom|plish'd,
cast her self upon her knees before
the Image of Diana, to whom she presen|ted
these thanks and excuses; Great Dei|ty,
thou knowest how unwillingly and to
what purpose I have consented to a Mar|riage
with this murderer: If Grief kill'd
as often as it ariseth to an extreme, I had
not been now in this world: where not|withstanding
I have not refused to stay a
while, to take vengeance of this persidious

man, that thou seest, who beleeves that I can
love him, after he hath ravished from me my
dear Synatis. Think on thy self, barbarous
man, and confesse what right I have to sa|crifize
thy life to that, which thou hast rob'd
my Husband of. I do not reckon mine own,
since I have imploy'd the end of it to give
posterity a remarkable testimony of my love
and thy cruelty. Camna was so happy, as
to see him die first, though he drank last:
the Gods gave this satisfaction to her Fi|delity;
and she went out of this world of|ten
calling upon Synatis, that he might come
and meet her to accompany her in this her
journey. Can men produce a nobler exam|ple
of Constancy? and was it not an erring
Philosopher, that maintained publickly, that
among a thousand men there could hardly be
found one constant; but amongst all wo|men
none?
If Constancy be shewn in the continuation
of a designe, in spight of all impeachments
and crosses; how great was that of Psyche
in the search of Cupid? shee saw three god|desses
set against her pretensions, Iuno,
Ceres, and Venus, and yet her passion became
victorious over their malevolence, she
did things that seemed impossible, she went
down to hel, where she spoke to Proserpina,

and the gods esteemed so much her resoluti|on,
that they Deified her, and gave her her
love, which she had sought so constantly.
After so many effects of their fidelity, it is
hard to decide whether the Prince of
Philosophers had reason to compare wo|men
kind to the first matter, because they
desire alwaies to change forms, and though
they have a most perfect one, they turne a
generall inclination for all others. This
Philosopher meant to conclude by this
parallel, that women are insatiable and
variable for men, as matter is for formes
But it is a comparison too injurious, and
would suit better with this Philosopher, then
with the lightest woman, since he left
his Herina for another Mistresse, to whom
he erected Altars, to convince himselfe
with more solemnity of that fault, which
he had accused women of. They have
more reason to complain of men, then to
fear their reproaches. How is the simplicity
of credulous ones now abused? What pawn
soever men give, they my be better called
cousners then inconstant, because at the
same time that they promise fidelity, they
purpose to violate it, so as there is no change
in their resolution, but only in their dis|course.

Variablenesse doth not distract Wits of
the higher strain, one may rely on them:
even their least designes remain firm in all
the storms of Fortunes. Levity ariseth from
the weaknesse of the brain, and Constan|cy
from the force of it. After Affection
hath fastned two hearts, the separation of
them should be impossible; for if Love
in its own nature be immortal, it is not true,
if it can cease. S^t. Austine himself said, that
his friend and he seemed to have but one
soul to live, as well as to love; and death
had not so properly separated two, as divi|ded
one; and after the losse of this his con|fident,
he feared death and abhorted life, be|cause
without him he lived but one half of
himself; and that he was obliged to preserve
this rest, lest his friend should die out-right.
There were few so constant as this great per|son.
On the contrary, many would believe
themselves too innocent, if they did not an|nex
treachery and persidiousnesse to Incon|stancy.
I cannot conceive how there should
any remain of this profession, because all the
world detests it; those that use it distrust it,
and those that are injured by them, cannot
orgive them. Indeed, not to pursue all the
ules of Physiognomy to know them, their
mind alone witnesseth, that falling out with

all the world, they do not agree themselves;
confessing without speaking, that horrour
which is their sins conception. It must needs
be that theirs is the greatest guilt in the
world, since they arraign themselves in their
own Court of Conscience, even going some|time
as far as execution with their own
hands; practising a new form of justice, where
they are Judges, Parties, Accusers and Exe|cutioners:
though we naturally love our
selves, they cannot shew themselves mercy;
and one may read in the colour of their face,
that none can absolve them, when their own
soul condemns them and torments them. It
must needs be the most horrible, and the
most inexcusable of all sins, since those that
are guilty of it have so much pain to commit
it, and that they do much harm unto them|selves,
in doing it to others. 'Tis for this
reason, that Fidelity is alwayes cheerfull a|mong
thorns, and Perfidiousnesse alwayes
troubled, and pensive even in the beds of
Roses. A loyal spirit feels not his torments,
and a trayterous one tasts not his pleasures.
Their senses are diversly suspended, because
vitiousness bitters even their delights, and
vertue sweetens and relisheth the others ills
and sufferings.
There needs no proofs to shew that Wo|men

are seldomer perfidious then men: we
may judg by these following examples of
the rest. What excuse could Ptolomy King
of Aegypt find after the receit of so many
obligations from Pompey, for his comman|ding
him to be murthered, while he fled to
him for refuge, after the defeat of Pharsa|lia?
those that have read the History, will
confesse that it was an unparallell'd cruelty
and treachery. Though Iulius Caesar had
declared Brutus for his heir, yet he was one
of the first that struck him in the Senate,
without any consideration of the favours
which he expected or enjoyed from this Em|peror.
When the soul is sullied with this vice,
it is capable of all the malice that can be ima|gined.
Covetousness keeps close to it, which
when any woman hath a propensity to, she
can hardly be faithful; there is nothing that
she would not buy or sell to be made rich.
It is the most infallible mark of a gross spirit
and a debauched soul: Ladies should not ex|presse
any inclination to it, for fear of the
fortune of Prochis, who after she had resisted
menaces and submissions, yeilded when she
saw the money told. Credulous and ignorant
women are in no less danger, their goodness
betrayes them; they are perswaded to many
things which their easiness consents to against

their honour. It seems that such are neither
false nor faithful, since they have neither in|tention
for the one, nor ability for the other.
It is this simplicity, which as the Poet sayes,
may be excused, so they delight not in their
own delusion. The crafty are subject to do
that by malice, which the silly do by misfor|tune.
Subtilty sometimes lays traps where
it self is caught: There are ills in which flight
is better then resistance; good swimmers are
oftnest drowned, because their skill tempts
them to fall so far down the stream, as they
cannot come up again. Constancy and Fide|delity
expresse themselves even in the least
actions; the gate gives marks of it, and the
lightnesse of the motions leads us to judg of
the weight of the wit.
Alfonso King of Arragon said, that womens
inconstancy appears in their inclination to
dance; It was an ill conclusion drawn from
an innocent thing: But that Prince seemed
to have such an experience of it, as seeing a
young Lady dance with a Gentleman who
made love to her, said to him, Comfort your
self, this Sybil will quickly render the Ora|cle
you ask; because the Sybils heretofore
gave no answers but in motion.
But to leave the marks of Constancy and fi|delity,
 come to the effects. It must be con|fessed,

that women have been incomparable
in them. Among the Heathen, Pompeia Pau|lina
caused her veins to be cut, when she saw
her Husband Seneca condemned by Nero,
refusing to live after the death of him that
had taught her to love philosophically, that
is, constantly. They closed up her veins a|gainst
her will, but she testified alwayes after,
by the palenesse of her face, that the cure
was unwelcome, and that she stayed in the
world unwillingly, Seneca not being there,
of whom she had learn'd to despise life and
death, to value Constancy in love. The Wife
of Mithridates seeing the Affairs of her
Husband desperate, took the Crown that she
had on her head, and hung it about her neck,
so to end her self; and having broke it at the
first stresse, she took the rest into her hands,
complaining sensibly, that Crowns, which in
good fortune serve for ornament, could not
serve for remedie in ill. Among the Chri|stian
Ladies, in the most noble occasion of
courage that was ever offer'd, did not Mary
Magdalen constantly accompany her Master
every where, when the Disciples fell off, af|ter
all their protestations of never deserting
him?



Of Curiosity and Censure.
_CVriosity never agreed well
with silence those that know
much newes, do not resolve
to hold their peace; and Cen|sure
infallibly disperseth what
indiscretion collects. The wits of curious
women are like the vessels of the ,
that emptied as fast as one went to fill them.
That which comes in at the eares, run pre|sently
out of the mouth, because indiscre|tion,
that directs to hearken as lightly
as to speake, lets lies out as freely as in. I
do not taxe the divine curiosity of Philoso|phers,
and good wits, which have detected
the secrets of nature, and given us means to
regulate the passions of our minde, as well
as brought us the wisdome of above; 'tis
that hath taught us more morality, civility,
policy, and what is usefull to the civiliza|tion
of our lives. I condemn but that which
is a desire to know what is uselesse or vit|ous

which removes us from the knowledge
of our selves, and the truths necessary for
vertue or for conscience. Ladies that are
pleased to hear all kind of censures, oc|casion
ill opinion of their vertue, because that
easinesse they shew to believe ill, is as it
were an assured proof that they would have
the same to act it. There are those that
cannot endure that any body should be
advantageously spoken of, and that be|lieve
the censure of all the world, to
be an Apology for their faults, since
it comprises them in so much company
as if the number of the malefactors did au|thorise
the offence; when they hear other
womens vertues commended, they grow
as sad, as ugly when handsome ones are
made love to before them. And if one
should examine their thoughts, one should
find yet a blacker spring; They are glad
to have company in their infamy, but
they would have none in their delights,
being more moved with jealousie then
shame, imagining that those that use their
pleasures, steale somewhat from them
They are like the Emperour Tyberius,
that set officers in Rome to discover
and condemne adulteries, that he onely
might commit. Vertuous women excuse

faults, in stead of publishing them;
vitious ones are alwaies mercilesse to
their like, thinking to testifie by their
hatred, that the crime is unknowne to
them; but the effects give their words
the lye; and this cunning takes so ill,
that they rather defame then defend them|selves.
Worthy women banish vice
from the world by charity, and licentious
ones expell vertue by detraction. 'Tis
easie to discerne a chast woman from
another; the last examines all, even to
the least circumstacce, her ill-nesse is
the pattern shee judges by, her expe|rience
and her designe makes her give,
even to the best things ill interpretations.
After Prochis had betray'd her husband,
shee spyed into all his actions, hardly
blieving him cleare in what shee her
selfe was guilty. Vitious old women are
alwaies apprehensive, and fear the abuse
of liberty, not imagining that even
conversation or taking the ayre, may
be harmelesse. They feare, me thinkes,
lest any should doe so much ill, as they
have done, or would doe yet, if they
had as much vigour as vitiousnesse. They
have no better means to cover their sin, then
to expresse displeasure or astonishment,

when they heare others blamed, because
shewing so ready a beliefe to all imputations,
one may judge that they are farre from be|ing
lyable unto them; for if they did
not set off themselves by a comelinesse,
their face consenting to what their mouth
forbids, a vitious boldnesse would be too
much encouraged, which is well pleased
too with a slack facility. Curiosity for
trifles and ill things, is a mark of the loos|nesse
of conscience, and defect of wit.
Such as busie themselves with little tales of
their neighbours, and entertain company
with them, furnish their wits, as the Chi|nesais
do their Cabinets, with old strange
rags and gugaus: I would advise all of this
humor, that bestow their time either use|lesly
or ill, to study the Anatomy of flies,
or the art to count the Attomes of the aire;
and to punish their body as well as their
mind, to live only upon shrimps, in which
there is more businesse then meat. This
light idlenesse gives an ill character of them,
because they are judged capable of vice by
weaknesse, if not by illnesse. There are
those that speake ill of other on purpose,
yet would seem to do it unwillingly; but
'tis to do like Archers, that draw the shaft
towards themselves, that it may go strong|er

to the mark. How much error and va|nity
is there in our judgments and discourse,
since between the even and the next mor|ning
we differ from our selves more then
wee did from others? How can we be
assured that she that was to day given to
pleasure, shall not to morrow shut her self
up to austerity? But suppose our judgments
be not false, we must needs offend against
charity, if not against truth. Such as have
but yet committed one sinne, should not
be called vitious, and those that have done
many, it may be, will not continue in
them; the first correct, the other change
themselves. And indeed, there is no cer|tainty
to speake of the illnesse of any,
without indangering a lie, since a
moment or a thought are enough to change
perdition into penitence.



Of a Debauched Woman.
_THere are few such Islands as
that of Cio, where it is said
that the lawes of honour and
chastity, were preserved in
their purity the space of se|ven
hundred years, without ever being vio|latedby
the ladies of the country. I know not
whether it be an effect of their cunning, or
their vertue; but howsoever, it was either a
chastity, or a reputation of a great standing,
which deserves as much admiration, as the
depravation of this age doth blame, suffer|ings,
or corrections. It may be this discourse
will not be welcome to such as I should be
glad it should be usefull. But if the vitious
be not disposed to take our remedies for
this cure, at least they must resolve to
endure our reproaches for their shame; and
if our precepts be not Soveraigne enough
to close up the incurable ulcers of these old
she-sinners, and to draw them out of the mire

where the weight of their crimes hath buried
them; and those whose eyes are more con|trite
then their consciences, being alwaies a|water
rather to lament the losse of their
youth, then the enormity of their crimes: at
least this will restraine the young ones from
sinking into so obstinate a loosnesse; I
speake boldly of all, because if they be debau|ched,
I would not be friends with them; if
they be vertuous, I need not fear falling out
with them; the one will applaud my censure,
the other wil do me honour in disproving of
my doctrine, as I do of their life. This passion
is not that which properly is called love, but
some other disease which cannot be cured but
by miracle; and one may reproach such as are
infected with it, as the Poet did Myrrha,
that it is not Cupid, but one of the enraged
furies that lights such a flame. It is a
fire of hell that has blindnesse for smoke,
scandal for light, and infamy and shame for
ashes; these are the sad relicks of such, that
having long prostituted themselvs, save of the
ruins of their honor, nothing but a sad repen|tance
but what honour soever we conceive of
them, we must be more obscure then reproch|ful
in this matter, in which we should cover
by modesty, that which hatred  truth might
oblige us to publish: this crime has one great

advantage being so reproveable, that its
own beastlinesse defends it, but 'tis rather by
others shame then pity.
Those that have inclination for all our
sex, love none, though they love all; when
one is come to that passe, there is no more
distinction, the most bruitish seemes the
loveliest, their fire kindles even in water,
by objects that deserve even horror and
hatred. Semyramis loved a horse, Pasiphae
a Bull, Glauce a Dog, and Glaucippe an
Elephant; Appelles musing on this, drew
Venus face with her mouth halfe open,
to shew, that those of her humour
have never their mouths closed, for lures
to their own designes; and though they
be never so old, their desires alwaies ex|ceed
their abilities. Indeed, many resemble
Iberina in Iuvenal, that would have as
many men as kisses. Then the number of
their sinnes passes that of their thoughts,
and without borrowing any thing from
Poetry, one may say that Arithmetick can|not
multiply so high.
Many of this humor have sought reme|dies
for their infamous disease in magicall
intoxications. What extravagancy is it
to think to find in druggs means to be belo|ved,
as if love had any roots but in merit

and vertue? 'tis that which gives it
birth and nourishment; and those that use
so much art to make themselves lovely, run
the hazard which Apuleius speakes of, that
used an oyntment to get wings to flie in at
his Mistriss window, but in stead of being
changed into a bird, he was turned into a
beast. If herbs had any power to recover
those that are struck with this disease, Apollo,
which is the god of Physick, would have
made use of it, when the beauty of Daphne
had made him quit heaven for earth, and
chang'd the form of a god, for that of a
shepherd, Those that endure with so much
delight lascivious discourse, show that they
would take much more in the action, and
that there is nothing said to them, but
what they are acquainted with, both by
knowledg and desire; 'tis not their gentleness,
nor good humor that brings this facility,
complacency reaches not so farre. Modesty
is alwaies severe, when it is entire, and
is tainted, when it is brought to such a soft|nesse.
The widow of Sigismund discove|red
her self sufficiently, by an answer she
made to those who counselled her to imi|tate
the turtles, That she loved as much the
company of men, as our Lady apprehended
that of an Angell; she told him, that if she

were to live like birds, she would take an ex|ample
rather from Sparrows, then Doves.
There is no less danger to read mens Court|ings,
then to hear them. After Helin had o|pened
Paris his letter, she imagined then
that she ought to refuse him nothing.
When one has given any favour, she enga|ges
her selfe afterwards beyond either
the obligation or the intention. Those that
have no mind to be overcome, should
at first distance all rash hope, lest
they take a gentle refusall for a permissi|on.
As the most ill-favoured have most
need of painting, so the most debauched are
most curious in the apparency of vertue
This is the reason that they are ordinarily
unequall, appearing to day insolent, accor|ding
to their humour, and to morrow modest
by affectation. Those that compare vi|tious
women to Syrens, it may be, do not
know the mystery of this similitude. One of
the monsters was call'd Parthenope, which is
to say, virgin, having a smiling face to allure
Marriners, to break their Ships against the
points of rocks that were cover'd under
water. The most immodest, ordinarily,
study to appear the chastest; but for all their
falsifying, they are whirlepits of infamy,
where none but the unadvised and desperate

are shipwracked. The reservednesse of an
honest woman, is far different from that of
another; the one is natural, the other forced;
they seem to live freely and ingenuously,
the better to deceive those that are so
simple as to believe, that what they doe,
is by their humor or innocence, which is
a plot to sinke some young Pilot. I never
saw censorious women, that were not debau|ched,
or that did not mean to be so, imagi|ning
that by a false policy, that the universa|lity
of their sin would be their justification.
Yet to shew the irregularity of their humor,
they hate those that imitate them, so that
conformity that produceth correspondence
in all other professions, begets aversion in
this; this is the way to dis-agree with all sorts
of women, since the presence of the ver|tuous
seems to reproch them, and the
company of the vitious to diminish
their delights. Poyson dogs adultery,
when a woman is once branded with that
vice, shee believes shee cannot preserve
her Reputation, nor find rest nor as|surance
in any thing, but the extincti|on
of the witnesses of her uncleane|nesse;
then reason cannot curb a Spirit that
is frighted with the remembrance of sinne,
who drawes boldnesse from vengeance,

and naturall weaknesse renders it incon|siderable.
The salvation of impudent women is al|most
desperate, how well soever they pro|pose
to themselves their own conversion,
they relapse alwaies into their owne hell,
and there repentance may be ranked among
the miracles. If death did not purge the
world of them, we should be constrained
to make publick processions, to desend our
selves from them, as from a curse, that is
worse then the other three; but God re|serves
to himselfe their punishment, and
forbids our medling with those afflictions
which he hath prepared for them in the
world to come.
If one had well considered these old she-sinners,
and compared the features of their
faces, with those of their conscience, one
should find an equall deformity; or if one
could draw them to the life, and perswade
us that the divels are like them, I believe
no body would be damned; and that this
fearfull object would deter us more from
hell, then the severest preachers.
But that I may be as briefe as obscure in a
subject that feeds my melancholy, and gives
me ill thoughts, I will finish this old pi|cture,
as Apelles did one of his: When this

admirable painter had considered with much
delight, the features and charmes of Com|pasps
face, Alexanders Mistriss, he grew
so passionate, that he was faine to ask
the Originall of the Emperour, in stead of
finishing the copy. I do that out of hatred,
which he did by love; I find so many horri|ble
features in the picture of a debauched
woman, as the pensill falls out of my hand,
having too much anger, and too few revi|lings
to perfect this piece in colours black e|nough.


Of the Cruelty and Pity of Wo|men.
_WHatsoever the most part of
men believe of womens fury,
pity is so naturall to them
and their inclination bent to
mercy, as even the furies
themselves could not chuse but lament the
mis-fortune of Orpheus, that went into Hell
to demand his Euridice; those pitilesse

places, where horror raigns alwaies with
cruelty, were not able to suppresse the
sensible compassion that the furies were
affected with, at such a misery. Af|ter
this must it not be confessed, that ten|dernesse
is an inseparable quality from wo|men.
Since anger is an enemy to this com|mendable
habit, I believe it were more ad|vantageous
to them, wholly to extinguish
this passion, if it were possible, then to
think to moderate it by prudence. In|deed
it is the most unjust of all, because
other passions may have a reall good for
their object, whereas this hath never but
a seeming, to satisfie the error of those it
possesseth, which account not themselves
happy, till they have left others in an in|capacity
of being so. Thus therefore this
passions flattery is ill grounded, because
if mischief be transportable from one sub|ject
to another, it is without a self dimi|nution,
as torches communicate their light.
I must confesse it is an incomparable blind|nesse
to believe that the impression of an
injury, weares out by stamping its owne
likenesse on another: Women are accu|sed
of extremities in their passions, the
world believes that they seek not so much
the opportunity of an hasty, as a home

revenge, especially when they are irritated
either in love or fortune. Though this
imposture require rather neglect then an|swer;
yet if one would do so much as exa|mine
their inclination, one shall find it as
innocent as their enemies have drawn it
injurious: at least excusable, if not to
bee commended. Indifferent wits are
easily moved and setled, because their
violence slacks; and their motions must
needs grow remisse and weake if they
continue, because they are neither natu|rall
nor rationall. Time, that is received
of all the world for so great a Physician,
cures but the first troubles of our mind;
but when passion is just, it augments pro|portionably
as it lasts, because thoughts
and meditations strengthen and nourish it,
when we weigh maturely the reason of its
generation. The sensibleness of infirm and
loose spirits, is like fire, that flashes out,
as soon as it is lighted in flax; but con|serves
it self longer in Iron, and more
solid Subjects. Women are not of this light
temper, to fly out without reason; as
they are unapt to be moved, so have
they an equall backwardnesse to reconcilia|tion
as well as quarrel. One would be very
much deceived, if he should believe by this

that my proofs were lesse reasonable then
natural; I submit alwaies Morality to Chri|stianity,
and confesse that I should rather
set up a School for vice then vertue, if I
would justifie revenge to oblige women to
the prejudice of Religion, and even their
own nature, which is enclined to gentle|ness
and courtesie. I only praise the con|stancy
of their designes, when they are
just, otherwise I should be a pernicious Ad|vocate
if I pleaded for a sinne that is so pre|judiciall
to them, as it makes them passe
for monsters; and which they have so little
inclination to, or acquaintance, as it is not
improper for them only to be cruel, but mis|becoming
to be severe; and of the two parts
of justice they seem to be borne, but exe|cute
the milder. Amongst all the effects
of cruelty, one of the most insupportable is,
that it is as averse to beauty, as it is to con|science:
If tears sometimes become a face,
anger hath the same priviledge as grief, and
though one may often see a beautifull me|lancholy,
yet I have never heard of a lovely
fury; this passion is too violent, not to race
out all the faire lineaments out of the face:
the eyes by little and little fright in stead of
charming; the frowardnesse of their mind
is drawn out by all their motions, and that

may come to such a degree of horror, that
one shall not dare to approach them with|out
prayer, as we do such as are pos|sessed,
whose faces they either have or
make.
Proud and ill women are almost alwaies
infected with this crime, because that meet|ing
with many enemies to their evil intents,
there is no malice so black that passion
doth not infuse into them, for the
ruine of those that intercept either their
love or fortune. Aphrodisia wife to the
Emperour Dioclesian, tryed alwaies to be
beloved of her son in law Erastus, but af|ter
having lost many intreaties on him, in
a chamber where she thought the opportu|nity
would afford her victory, the refusall
incensed her with as much spite as shame,
she came perplext to her husband to accuse
this innocent of a crime he would not com|mit.
'Tis the custome of Debauched wo|men
to turn their love into hate, when
their desires are discovered and not satisfied
and to plot the preservation of their credits
even by the ruine of those that would not
be their complices. It should seem that
the Philosopher Chilon spoke of such when
he maintained that it was the uttermost of
all comminations could be made to ene|mies,

the anger of women. Me thinks
it is an incomparable Master-piece, and
an art that no body is passed Master of,
the pacification of a furious woman. If
this passion last till they grow old, they will
be sick of it all their lives, because they
will fright those that would appease them;
when they can no longer give love, they
will hardly give patience. The wrinkles
will score out their years in their faces, as
lines do hours upon the Dyall. And you
may judge of the vilenesse of their infa|mous
age, since they frighted their nurse e|ven
in the Cradle. The head of Medusa
that struck so much fear into the world, had
but her hair changed into Serpents: these
have their eye-browes over and above, to
be compleatly horrible. The divel which in|spires
them with so much fury, must needs
trouble their sight also, when they look in a
glasse, since they do not scare themselvs, and
in stead of being content to be endured, ex|pect
stil to be beloved. Hel may keep its fu|ries,
these wil serve in the world, to act or
perswade sins blacker, then those that here|tofore
drew fire from heaven, or have ope|ned
the jawes of the earth. If ugliness be the
mark of cruelty, want of wit is the spring
head of it. I hold it infallible, that those

that have no sweetness nor gentlenesse, are
void of understanding and courage. Gene|rous
women are alwaies pitiful, they know
it is more glorious to overcome their
own passions, then their enemies; and
that to give life where it may be taken,
is almost to resusciate the dead without a
Miracle.
But for fear this morality should not be
understood, Anaxarates was not cruel in
seeing Iphis die in dispaire before her door;
the refusal was just, because the demand
was not so. 'Twas an offender that did
injustice on himself for his temerity. Worthy
women should fear less the ruin of importu|nate
men, then of their own honour; and it
were to be ill advised, to be cruel to them|selves,
to be so unfittingly pitifull to inso|lence
or detraction.



Of Beauty.
_THose that adore or despise
Beauty, either offer too much
or too little to the image of
God. It is one of the rarest
presents that heaven hath made
to earth but we must ascribe all the merit
to the power of him that gratifies us with it.
In the opinion of Plato, it is a humane
splendor, amiable in its own nature, that
has the power to ravish the mind with the
eyes. Since heretofore deformed Mini|sters
have been rejected from the Temple,
let us not believe ill of beauty; God him|self
hath thought it necessary, for those
that approch his Altars; it must be a mark
of our inclination to good, since we as sel|dome
find beauty without vertue, as ugli|nesse
without mischief. The judgment
that we make of the beauty of the min
by that of the body, are not most common|ly
ill grounded; soules like Queens, pre|pare

their residence, where they themselves
take the pains to adorn them when they
are received into them. And indeed, if
vertue be necessary for the establishment of
Soveraign authorities: beauty also sweetens
them, and welcomes even servitude which
otherwise would be insupportable. I find
sometimes fair wits in ill-favoured bodies,
but they are relicks ill set, which the coun|try
people do not so much respect and
reverence, as if they were covered with
Gold or Pearl. This lovely quality may chal|lenge
a command every where, wherethere is
the light of eyes or reason. The face alone
of Scipio the Affrican Subdued many a
barbarous Nation without so much as the
drawing of a sword; and Heliogabalus
himself from a Priest of the Sun, rose to be
Emperour of all the world, as soon as his
mother had shown him to the Souldiers;
so as all the world payes a duty to such
as nature hath thus advantaged. The vul|gar
believe, that if there be no ill in hand|some
women, at least there is inconveni|ence;
the temptation is there, though the
sin be not: when beauty is the occasion of
ill, 'tis an innocent that makes offenders,
and those that complain of it, do as idly, as
if one should accuse the Sun for dazling his

sight, when he looks too fixedly on that glo|rious
body. This is objected, one can hardly
keep that which many love, and there is no
great assurance in the possession of that all
the world aspires to: sometimes Towns are so
long besieged,  assaulted at so many several
places, as at last they are taken: one cannot
praise beauty better, then in confessing all
desire it as the object of their delight. If
handsome women are sometimes gained,
this complaint must be addressed rather to
their wit then face. A place is not the
weaker, because he hath yeilded which
should have kept it; the fault is in the
Captaine, not the Fort. Howsoever,
ill-favoured ones can have no advantage in
this reproach, because since they are never at|tempted,
their holding out cannot argue
their strength. They should have curiosity
only to seek darknesse, because the Sun
never rises but to their shame, which seems to
shine only to give light to faire objects.
They are in more paine to defend themselvs
from contempts, then suits, and patience is the
vertue they had most need of. Handsome wo|men
are accused of being scornfull, but
when we think well of it, we shall find
that their disdain proceeds rather from
conscience then vanity, because they

cannot endure the idolatrous pursuits
of the excessive praises which artificiall
men offer up to surprize them. As Kings
laugh at the complements of Courtiers, be|cause
they are made more for interest then
affection: so women may mock the offi|ciousnesse
of Gallants, because all their
pains tend but to their own pleasure,
and the ruine of indiscreet ones. There is
not so much presumption in the most admi|red
women, as there is poorness in men that
tie their own chaines; the services they
do them, and the names they give them,
express as much their weaknesse, as the ex|travagancy
of their passion. What reason
is there to call their Empire Tyrannicall,
since their subjects are but so to their own
wills, and refusers of liberty? The grave
Cato reverenced beauty so much, as he
said publickly, it was no lesse crime to in|jure
it, then to sack a Temple. Those
that imagine that the number of their
Gallants, addes something to their beau|ty,
and are over-pleased with the submissions
and duties that are rendred them, goe
out to meet their enemies, and shew they
be easily overcome; since respects and prai|ses
are strong enough against them, of
which men are no lesse prodigall, then

women can be covetous; but they should
believe that when ingenuity bargains craft,
that it seldome gets any thing by it. If
women are handsome, those that praise
them would deceive them; if not, but make
sport with them. Therefore all kind had
need of wit and vertue to exempt themselves
from danger or neglect. There are some
that are scrupulous to praise beauty, because
it passes away so soon, and lasts no longer
then lightning, and most commonly as well
as that, promises tempests and stormes. 'Tis a
flower, say they, that fades as soon as ever
it is blown, which the wind sheds, the Sun
dries, the rain flaggs, and hands do gather
it; and that is so delicate, that without be|ing
touched, or having enemies, in a mo|ment
dyes by its own naturall faintnesse.
But is not the same to be said of all other
things in the world, which cannot last al|waies?
and all beauty can be complained
of, is, that it hath not the durance of stars,
as well as the fairnesse and lustre. The fai|rest
women would find an excellent preven|tion
of vanity, if they could represent to
themselves at sixteen or twenty years old,
the defects, decayes, and incommodities
of age. What fair plumbs soever nature or
art decks them with, they would like Pea|cocks

be ashamed, looking downe to such
horrible feet, if they foresaw so much change
and ruine. I do not professe here, to
preach mortification; but mee thinkes,
they should not so much afflict themselves
for what years drawe from them insen|sibly,
and even diminishes it selfe every mo|ment
in spite of Art; were it not for painting,
which discovers the defects 'tis laid upon,
they would be comfortless and irremediable.
Natural beauty deserves estimation, but that
of their own making nothing but aversion.
Sulpitia among the Romans had so lovely
eyes, that those of her time could not see
her without adoring. The cheeks of Lavinia
were so cornation, that they amazed the Ro|ses
into palenesse. The neck and brest of
Theodota an Athenian were so beautiful, that
Socrates himself fel in love with them. These
features or charms must not be acquired by
art, nor possessed by vanity; nature blesses
some persons with them, on purpose to please
our eyes, and elevate our spirits to the love
of him that is the head of all humane perfe|ction.
Counterfeit beauties fall shame|fully
in the sight of all the world, almost
like those false stars, which after they have
abused our eyes a while, shew us by their
fall, that what we tooke for stars, was but
a little lighted vapour.

Yet for all this we must not altogether
forbid ornament or care for the face, since
we whiten over walls when they are
old. The ill-favoured also are to be
allowed to paint, so it be for publick good,
and out of a consideration of not frighting
those that look upon them. They would be
very much surprized, if they were used as
Phryne used those in her company; as
soon as ever this Curtisan appeared (saith
Gallen) she distasted all those of the assem|bly,
leaving them nothing to shew but shame
and jealousie; they invented a Game to
relieve their dejection, which was mutuall
commands to one another; when it came to
Phrynes commands, she gave order there
should be water brought, and they should
all wash their hands and faces; as soon
as they had obeyed her, one might see
patches and plaisters float, and none al|most
knew one another, they were o|ther
faces full of spots, and fearful features.
This game would trouble many of this time,
that naturall beauty remained with a great
advantage. By her the Are pagites
themselves lost the names of uncorrupted,
because not believing her innocent, yet
having seen her, they could not judge
her faulty. Hyperides pleaded against her

to no purpose, though he was very Elo|quent;
as soon as she appeared, her
presence made her Apology, and she did
but shew her self for her defence. It
is not now adayes only, that handsome
Women get their Causes; when Justice
unvayles her self to see them, with a very
little Solicitation they get a happy
Tryal.


Of Gracefulness.
_THe Soul is not more requsite
to life then gracefulnesse
to please: it takes off from
the defects of the ill favou|red,
and sets off the beauty
of the handsome, by an addition to their
perfections. When one is possessed
with this lovely quality, (whose prai|ses
I write, rather then rules) all
that one undertakes is comely. There
be many kinds of it; hearts as well

as bodies are wounded with severall wea|pons,
the complexion, the hair, the gate,
the shape, the looks, the discourse, the
actions, the voice, and even silence have
diverse attractions. There have beene
those that were never so handsome, as
when they cryed. Panthea had so grace|ful
a melancholy, as she obliged Aras|pes
to adore her tears; it seems that La|dies
possesse this taking quality, with more
advantage then men, and this command
which they obtain by these charms, is
much more powerful and more assured
then that which we take by violence.
Though this be a gift of nature, rather
then art, yet it needs some rules to perfect
it, which are learned with pleasure and
easinesse in the conversation of Ladies. If
the face be the mirror of the soul, mo|rality
is necessary to preserve this perfe|ction,
since it prescribes rules to the mo|tions
both of the body, and the mind.
And indeed anger, fear, the disquiet and
repose of the conscience, are well figured
in the looks; and malice has an inseparable
remorse, which dissimulation cannot long
bail; by this we may perceive that the beau|ty
of the body depends partly on that of
the mind, and that the rules of graceful|ness

are annexed to those of this regula|rity.
One may better understand the effects
of this admirable quality, then expresse
the nature of it. It is never to be found
where there is constraint, art or ignorance;
we must not aspire to an impossible ex|cellence.
And art cannot straine it self
too high, no more then nature, without
making monsters. It happens often, that
the extreme desire that some have to please,
begets hate in stead of love. On the con|trary,
naturalnesse has so gentle charms, as
none resists, because they arise from inno|cence;
and affectation is never without
some imperfection, or too much self-love.
How ridiculous is it not to dare to laugh
for fear of loosning their patches? or not
to change their looks, but in the morning
when they dress them? yet this is the fashion
of the life of those which will have no
glasse, if it do not flatter, nor no light
if it be true; and though they pretend
much to the devotion of the time, they
never go to Masse till the holy water be
spent, for fear that receiving any of it,
their plaisters should be moystened, and
that there should be stains discovered on
their faces: but their designe shows it

self with their deformity; because stri|ving
to shadow their Defects, they make
them the more conspicuous. Graceful|ness
is so averse to this slavery and fetter|ednesse,
as though we could alwayes do
well, it is a question whether that would
alwayes please. There must be in every
thing intermissions to unbend our spirits.
Art in this should conform it self to Na|ture;
that hath not set Stars all over the
heaven, nor Flowers over the earth; and
though flowers are not so fair and preci|ous
as Stars, yet we look upon them with
more pleasure and attentivenesse, be|cause
their beauty being of so little stay,
leaves us alwayes a desire of seeing them
again. Our spirits are cloyed as well as
our Senses; they need some rest and re|laxation
to digest delights. 'Tis not my
meaning to perswade by these reasons,
that one should affect faults; but so they
be but light ones, we may sometimes
commit them so happily, as they prove ad|vantageous;
because bashfulnesse that
followes them, and displayes it selfe in the
face, is an infallible testimony of an
innocent soul; that is far from concei|ving
of great ills, since it is so sensible of
slight ones, and sometimes when they are
but imaginary.

If gracefulnesse then be described by
doing all things by Nature, and not by
studiedness; an ingenuous freedom is better
then constraint. All the world yeelds,
that difficulty consists in rarities; there is
no dexterity to declare a painfulnesse,
since a Clown may do as much, but to
hide it so finely, as the cunning of it
may not be discerned. Candor and In|genuity
is not lesse to be wished for
Discourse, then for Action; the most or|dinary
words are most excellent; a word
that is obscure is forbidden. The Philo|sopher
that alwayes wept, it may be,
would have had a mind to laugh, if he
had heard many women, that would
passe for Learneder then they are, use
in their Discourse such hard words, that
do easier expresse their Extravagancie
then Conceit.
This excessive desire of pleasing
which wee have blamed, goes along
almost alwayes with the apprehensi|on
of not being liked; and then when
these two contrary passions meet, they
cause great inequalities, because if desire
excites them, fear cools them; when the
one animates us to speak wel orsharply, the
other interrupts us, and tyes us to silence:

by this one may judg, how much appre|hension
as well as vanity injures grace|fulnesse.
It happens ordinarily, that such
that are alwayes on their guard, and
fear every moment to fail, do almost no|thing
else. Extreme fearfulnesse dispo|seth
the mind to error, as well as the bo|dy
to sickness.
Me thinks, if one examined well the
cause of this same troublesome passion,
that Education doth not contribute lesse
to it, then Constitution or Nature. There
are those that are bred in such a slave|ry,
they can do nothing freely, they dare
not hold up their heads with that be|coming
confidence that graces actions:
their thoughts are alwayes low, and what
good inclinations soever they have, shame|fac'dnesse
retards the successe of their
purpose: Those that have seen nothing,
are subject to be amazed at a very little,
because the diffidence of themselves makes
them admire or fear every thing. Most
commonly, after their Salutations they
begin their Complements, as we end our
Letters. They would find an excellent
remedy, if they could beleeve that so
little things are not to be admired; and
that if one were at leisure to examine that

which we wonder at first, after an hours
conversation, we should often change the
subject of our admiration into the object
of our contempt. But every body can|not
attain to this resolution; 'tis hard even
for the best Wits, to have dexterity with|out
experience, or facility without pra|ctice.
Actions beget Habits with difficul|ty,
and then the Habit being formed, it
produces actions with gracefulnesse and
ornament. Yet notwithstanding, in bla|ming
this rustick shamefac'dnesse, I doe
not mean to praise Impudency, because
both have limits and effects irregular, be|cause
the one carries us beyond our
power and decency, and the other keeps
us short of them; whereas the modesty
that I desire, is between these two viti|ous
extremes, to distance us from too
good or too ill opinion of our selves.



Of Cloathes and Orna|ments.
_THere must be a certain dis|cretion
observed in cloaths,
lest old men should tax the
excess, or theyoung defects;
and that a decency may
keep the one from laughing, and the other
from being angry. This is the reason that
it is so hard to please all, and to sute
the fashion well to reason, because there
are some so absurd humours, as they can
endure nothing done in the fashion, and
will certainly conclude every thing unjust,
if the invention of it be not proved by at
least one ages Antiquity. This is very
much to undervalue the present time, and
to honour that that is past, without con|sidering
that wisdom suffers what it can|not
redresse, and that there is also lesse va|nity
and difficulty to follow the received

fashion, then to resuscitate the antiqua|ted.
Indeed the light and giddy invent
fashions, but the wise and sober accommo|date
themselves to them, in stead of con|tradicting
them. Habits and words
should be suted to the time: and as one
would think them mad, that should speak
in the Court the language of Chaucer; so
we could not judg better of such as would
affect to be cloathed so too. Those that
censure the inconstancy of the French,
should do better to quit their own slavish
opinions, that forbid them their owne
commodity, lest they should not be cloa|thed
like their Grandfathers. I would
fain know of those that will not follow the
times, of what date they would have their
cloathes; because if Antiquity must be the
rule, they should go back as far as Adam
to cloath themselves with leaves, to render
the fashion more venerable by this ancient
derivation. Those that say, reason and
custome resemble the Sun and the Moon,
did light well upon it, because we
must serve our selves according to the
occasions of the Illuminations of both
these Lights, though the one be
clearer then the other. Excesse is
blameable in all things, but prin|cipally

in novelties; tis folly to dispaire
them, and vanity to be too much affected
with them. As I do not approve those
women that study with too much curiosity
new fashions, so I cannot esteeme those
that yet lament the putting down of high
wyers and vardingals. This obstinacy comes
from self love; they are no lesse punishable,
then those that would make old medals
current in commerce for mony, against the
lawes of Princes, and custome of the Coun|try.
Such women make their owne an|tiquity
ridiculous, and make much a do
to bring the ruine of time, and the defects
of nature to be more remarkable in them|selves.
The care and time that is spent
in curious dresling, is reprovable when
it is excessive, or when the intentions are
not allowable. I do not believe that there
is any more harm to beautifie faces, then
to set precious stones, or polish marble.
We azure wainscots, paint images, guild
swords, enrich garments. We make even
Temples brave, why should ornament be
forbidden to complexion or beauty,
when the designes are faire too, since it is
permitted to all things else? Saint Ierome
writing to Gaudensius, about the cloaths
of young Pacutula, seemes to excuse the

curiosity of women in very remarkable
terms. Their sex (saith he) is curious in
ornaments, and studies naturally the
sumptuousnesse of cloaths, in so much
as I have seen many chast Ladies, that
dresse themselves very costly, without ha|ving
any aim in their designes but their
particular contentment, by a certain harm|less
complacency or satisfaction: This
inclination is so natural to them, as here|tofore
many Ladies did entomb their or|naments
with themselves, to carry into the
other world, that which they had loved
so much in this.
Those that dislike these indifferent things
which the intention either justifies or
perverts, imagine that they have a great
advantage over women when they call
them the divels fortresses, without consi|dering,
though ill spirits work sometimes
in their actions and clothes, that they
are no more guilty of the ill that happens
when their designes are irreprochable,
then thunder is when the divels make it
light upon men or Churches. Yet this
discourse doth not enlarge it self to the
defence of vice, or the justification of
licentiousnesse. Modesty is a powerfull
charme, without it beauty is soul-lesse,

and other Vertues may deserve admira|tion,
that only merits love: Fxcessive
Ornaments add not to Beauty, nor
diminish deformity, since in Pythago|ras
his Opnion, an ill favoured wo|man
set out very brave, is laughter
for Heaven, and lamentation for earth.
Women that glory so much in their rich
cloathes, have nothing but what may be
had in Shops; and if they were well con|sidered,
it would be found that they a|buse
our eyes, as those old Images, which
are all hollowed within with rotten|nesse.
But is it not a shameful thing, to see that
men are more set on these Superfluities
then women? Hortensius a Romane O|rator
passed halfe the day in considering
and sprusing himself, in stead of learning
his Speeches: And without going back so
far, we are in an Age where men professe
more then ever this blameable curiosity.
I believe if one had well examined the set
faces and Baby looks of a great many, one
would give them the quality of Aristoga|res,
that took so much pains to make him|self
fine and genteel, that at last he was cal|led,
Madam: To speak truly, they are
as far out of their design as the decency of

their Sex, because they are never lesse
pleasing then when they force themselves
to constraine others to think so. Ne|gligence
is more advantageous to them,
then studiednesse, and freedome then
reservation. Therefore me thinks that
a Poet sayes well, that marks, that
Theseus was not brave when Ariadne
gave him such proofs of her love. It
is to be feared Ladies that too Chevaliere,
are beyond modesty: Men too much
Ladyed, are short of Manhood. I
do not wonder that Pompey lost so ma|ny
Battles, since his men had so much care
of their faces, as they were never hurt, but
in their backs.
But to return to what concernes our
purpose. Caesar seeing his daughter
Iulia Augusta too curiously brave,
considered her a great while, without
gracing her with a word, expressing
his dissatisfaction by his silence. The
next day seeing her more modestly
drest, he told her with a smiling face;
That that habit became better the
daughter of Augustus: the reply of
this Princesse was not lesse considera|ble,
then the admonishment of the

Emperour, I was dressed yesterday
(said she) for my Husband, but to day
for my Father. The wisest allow wo|men
to please many, to subject one;
but after they have made that choice,
then they are forbidden the continu|ance
of their designe. It must be ac|knowledged,
that if women dressed
themselves only for complacency to mar|riage,
there would be not so much ex|cesse;
and Husbands would not complain
so much, that profusion introduces po|verty
and jealousie into their Families. I
do not wonder that women have so much
ado to walk, since most commonly they
carry three or four houses hanging at
their eares.



Of Iealousie.
_ONe cannot lose that without
sorrow, that is possessed
with love, and preserved
with carefulnesse; there|fore
Jealousie is not so un|just
as many imagine, because it makes
us only fear that another should dispoile
us of that which we believe should be on|ly
ours. Is it such a fault to watch the
keeping what we love; principally in
a time where fidelity is so rare, as there
is none but those that are assured to be
deceived, that do not fear to be so? If
the goods of fortune and body yeild to
those of the mind, so their losse must be
most sensible: when affections which we
believe we have deserved by ours, are
taken from us, it is the greatest stealth, as
they are the most valuable proprieties.

And indeed, to reason well of it, Love is
an Empire only of two Persons, which
cannot be extended further without de|struction,
 in it obedience  soveraignty
are reciprocal. It is so covetous, as it would
not lose so much as a cast of an eye, or a
haire. Indeed it is no lesse folly to believe
that there is no love left in the mind that
begins to be jealous, then to conclude that
there is no life in one, that is but sick: on
the contrary, pain and sensiblenesse, are ne|ver
in dead bodies; so jealousie is never
found in hatred or in difference. It must
needs be, that this passion has likelihood
of reason, since God himself heretofore
allowed husbands to try the fidelity of
their wives, with a water which they called
the water of probation or jealousie. If all
suspicions were extravagant or unjust,
God would have interdicted them, not
have cured them by so solemn remedies, he
would have shown rather a detestation,
then compassion on them.
So those are grosly deceived, that think
they have criminated jealousie, when they
maintaine that it derogates from the o|pinion
of our owne merits, or the fideli|ty
of the person we love: if one examine

well this passion, it rises not commonly
from that distrust; and we do at the same
time believe our selves lovely, and others
beloved. 'Tis a fear that discovers not so
much our own weaknesse, as it confesseth
the merit of our enemies. We do but the
same in this, as we do for treasures or other
things, which we cannot love without fear
of losing. As the most firm in Religion
may have doubts, so the most confident in
love are capable of some suspicion. The
strongest trees are shaken by the wind,
though the roots be fixed, whiles the leavs
and branches are tossed. One would wish to
have no il belief, but reports  conjectures
shake us rather to a fearful then a confident
conclusion. The mind suffers much in this ir|resolution,
and apparencies trouble much
when one cannot directly judg of the fals|hood
or truth of them. There are both good
and ill examples, both to settle and to shake
us; and ordinarily our thoughts light up|on
them that persecute us, rather then
those that ease us. That of Penelope com|forts
us, when we represent to ourselves,
that her fidelity lasted five  twenty years
in the absence of her Husband; but that of
Messalina tyrannizes over us, and awakes
our suspicions: when we think of our infa|mous

impurities, our minds are balanced
on both sides, but the misfortune is, that
conjectures having given the Alarm, that
by too strict an enquiry, we either
find, or invent somewhat, to change our
doubts into beliefs. Should we not rest
our selves, after having had a tryal of a
person, and may effects for testimonies
of the affection? But all those proofs keep
us not from vexing our selves, because
fear which is not in our power, interprets
ill the least appearances, and buries it selfe
even in false objects, when it finds no
true.
What tryal soever we have had of fide|lity,
when love hath nothing left to desire,
it hath all to fear. It is the natural course
of our passions, that threaten change,
when they are in extremes, and ruine them|selves
without any occasion, only because
they are humane. Hypocrates has made a
good maxime, to advertise us, that bodies
are in danger of sickness, when they are too
high and strong. But a Poet has a better
conceit, for the alteration of minds raised
with too violent an affection. The will de|serves
as well a wheele of inconstancy for
her passions, as fortune for her favours; in
the top there is no subsistence long, either

by reason of misfortune, or imbecility.
Those that are in the highest pitch in love,
are like those which are on the top of too
great Elevations, their head growes diz|zy,
and though no body touch them,
they reel till they fall of themselves,
meerly by the fear of falling. When the
Sun is at noon, it begins to decline, because
when it cannot pass that point, it retires
and removes it self, when nothing drives
it to its setting or another Hemispheere.
Our minds seem to have the same motions,
and distaste followes liking by an order
that is as natural, as that which makes
night succeed the day, or ebbs and floods
in the sea.
We feel our selvs insensibly weary even of
the loveliest things, and though the soul be
immortal in her own nature, yet she seems
in her actions to express a youthfulness and
age, as bodies do. Socrates said, that the
Gods did strive to mingle pleasure  pain
one with another; but when they could not
do that, yet at least they tyed them toge|ther,
that the alternative succession may
prevent insolence and despair. This hap|pens
often without our own voluntary
contributions, and as we slip down from
joy to sorrow, so oftentimes we perceive

our love change into coldnesse or indiffe|rency.
The diseases of the mind as wel as
the body, are formed most commonly
without our consent; we lose the quiet of
our soul, as our health, all at once, without
any prevision of the change, and not know|ing
how to find the cause or remedy of this
passion, no more then of a Quartain Ague.
But I have too long spoke against my
own mind, as well as reason, in favour of a
passion that ruines loves reputation, and
disorders the souls tranquillity. Reason in|genders
love, and love jealousie: but the
one and the other resemble little wormes
that corrupts the matter that forms them;
The one kills his father, and the other his
mother. How moderate soever this passi|on
be, it is alwayes dangerous, and in this
case there must be injustice commit|ted,
forbidding the practice by reason of
the abuse, because they are too much fast|ned
to one another. As there is no little
Serpent without some Venom, there is no
so well tempered jealousie, that does not
produce many misfortunes. Those that
compare it to Ivy, do it very fitly, because as
that growes ordinarily but upon old heaps
of ruines; so this passion wreaths it selfe
most commonly about tortured and deject|ed

spirits. We see Ivy flourishing with green
upon trees that are dry and sapples, so the
older men grow, this passion youthens the
more, and becomes the stronger in such as
age or craziness of wit infeebles or stupi|fies;
other plants have their root at the foot
Ivy has every where, and even more root
then leaves; Jealousy roots it self every day
more and more, and insinuates it self more
inseparably into the soul, then Ivy can do
into trees or walls. It is but the middle kind
of wits, that are capable of this contagion;
excellent ones are above it, and mean ones
below; these are ignorant of the occasions,
and the other unmoved with them. It is in
this, that stupidity arrives at the same point
as wisdom, and Clowns are as happy as
Philosophers, otherwise those that afflict
themselvs for a mis-fortune where there is
no remedy but patience do entertain this
error in the world, and have a whole moon
in their head, when they think they
have but halfe an one on their forhead.
It is to be very senselesse, to afflict
ones selfe without obliging any body,
and make a damnation in this world,
for fear of missing it in the next. If the
mistrust of jealous ones be knowne, they
augment the il instead of the redress; if it be

not, it is superfluous, and it is a hidden pain
which silence and modesty render more
supportable. I do not wonder if jealous
ones be lean, their passion feeds on no|thing
but phantasmes. Good wits re|strain
their curiosity, while indifferent
ones let it loose to learn what should be
unknown; not considering that in the
commerce of this world, the most exact
do not make best their accounts. If we
could regulate well our opinions, we
should suppresse many enemies. Melan|choly
and meditations entertain jealousie;
diversion and forgetfulnesse put it away.
Wit as well as sight wearies, when it is
fixt too long on one object. In these oc|casions
we must overcome, as the Par|thians
do by flying, and rather divert
our thoughts, then direct them with too
much intentivenesse; it is an enemy
with poisoned weapons, and his ap|proach
is enough to overthrow; when
the memory has once received it, reason
comes often too late for a resistance. One
may hinder the entrance, but it never
goes out before it has ruined the host.
Cydippus among the Romans, was so
pleased to see buls baited, as he thought
so much of it all night, as he rose in the

morning with hornes on his head. This
spectacle pleasing him, he had enter|tained
his fancy with it, and in the end
his imagination did him this ill office.
'Tis thus that many make their heads
ake without considering that their un|quietnesse
and curiosity is hurtfull to
them, because if they discover their sus|pitions
to be false, they are obliged to
repentance; if they find them true,
they cannot be too miserable for
being too curious. Those that thinke
jealousie or envy was the sinne of the
Angels, do halfe justifie those that have
this passion, since Angels were capable
of it with all their illumination, which
is so above the reach of men. But we
learn too by this example, that it was that
which made hell, and that every day ren|ders
many miserable, by their own de|lights,
even to drive lovers out of Para|dise,
if there be one in imaginary content|ments.
There is no malice black enough
to blind this passions capacity, it gives
craft to the dullest, and perverts the most
vertuous, to seek satisfaction for this injury.
Cyrce jealous of Silla, fearing that
Glausus was in love with her, poisoned

the water where she did ordinarily bathe, to
make a monster of a Nimph. Murder, poi|son
and witch-craft are but sports; jealousy
has no bound to its inventions and crimes,
but impossibility; tis strange, that those that
pass their time, are notwithstanding jealous
of their husbands, and violate the law of
nature, as well as of Divinity, not enduring
to be paid what they lend. Women are
most commonly debauched, because they
practice what they fear, and their apprehen|sion
arises from their experience. Jealous
spirits never confess their error, but when
there is no help for it. All the world
knows Herods suspitions of Mariana,
only because she was handsome, having
no other ground to believe her faulty,
but because her merit might make
her be sollicited; but what fury and rage
is this, after that he had put this inno|cent
Lady to death, he calls for her, as
if she had not been dead, and thinks to
find her in his palace, as if he had not
sent her to her grave? This Tyrant would
have committed many of their crimes in
a month, since he forgot them so soon,
and had as ill a memory as a judgment.
Jealousie carries us out of our selves;
we have some reason to disavow the ef|fects

of it, when we are come back, and
when we consider the malice and extra|vagancy
of it. We do often by his exam|ple
grieve many to death by our suspitions,
and then we sorrow for it to no purpose,
rendring them their reputation by our
repentance, but not their life which they
have given to Melancholy, because we
do too late convict our blindnesse, to
justifie their innocence. The reports of
ill spoken women, made Prochis jealous
of her husband Cephalus; she imagined he
had a Mistris, which he went to seek in the
woods, under the pretence of hunting; she
hid her self behind a bush, thinking to hear
the discourse of his solitary thoughts; he
hearing a noise, and believing it was a
Deer, shot an arrow at it, which hit her in
the heart, she dying, cried out, Cephalus.
This word made him know, that he had ta|ken
his wife for a beast, it may be he was not
deceived, it is to be very senseless, so lightly
to abandon our reason,  give a belief to
our worst interpretation of the best things.
An ingenuous liberty is a better guard
then any restraint, freedom extinguishes
desire, and interdiction kindles it. When the
opportunities of sin are common, they are
neglected, when they are rare, they are made

use of lest they should not be met with
again so commodiously. In any case, how
extreme soever jealousie were, me thinks,
the jealousie of Vulcan should remedy it;
when he was jealous of Mars and Venus,
he spread nets to take them in presence of
all the gods, but afterwards what got he
by all his curiosity and dexterity, but to
be declared infamous with more solemnity,
even to be thrown from heaven with a
broken leg?
Yet for fear of being deceived in this
matter, we must take notice, that jea|lousie
is for love, envy for fortune, and
emulation for vertue; the goods of for|tune
are too gross and material, those of
love too light for our minds, only those
of vertue deserve to be made their object.
'Tis for her only that competitors endure
one another in their designs, and there is no
more sedition or dispute amongst them,
then there is for the impropriation of the
light of the Sun, or the influence of the
Stars. So we see among the ancients, that
the three Graces hold one another by the
hand, and are united in the alliance of
vertue, while the three Goddesses are
quarrelling for the apple of beauty, and
the Triumvirate cannot agree about the

possession of the Empire. If we must joyn
for this, Christianity to morality, to find
retreats for the persecution of jealousie,
let us make use of holy Ioseph and the
Virgin to teach us, that the chastest of wo|men,
has made jealous the simplest of
men. There is sometimes more mis-for|tune
in it then ill meaning; we must neg|lect
the apparencies like him, and suffer
suspicions like her. It is no small conso|lation
to thinke, that after all the proofs
and testimonies that may seem to con|strain
us to conclude ill, it is better in this
extremity to believe a miracle then a sin,
and to acknowledge the power of God, ra|ther
then the weaknesse of the creature.
FINIS.





Pag. 78. last line but two, read forgive line penult.
read rules line ult, read mind.




A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and
sold by Gabriel Bedel, and Thomas
Collins, 1656. viz.

Books in Folio.

THE Complete Ambassadour, by Sir Dudly Diggs,
Containing the Letters and Negotiations of Sir
Francis Walsingham, the Lord Burleigh, and o|ther
Eminent Persons: being a perfect Series of the
most remarkable Passages of State, both at home and a|broad,
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed me|mory.
The History of the Civil Wars of France, Written in
Italian by D' Avila, Translated into English by Sir
Charles Coterel Knight, and William Aylesbury Esq
the whole fifteen Books.
Idem, The Continuation alone being ten Books.
Sir Richard Bakers History of the Kings of England.
Stowes Chronicle, continued to the year 1631. by
Edmund Howes Gentleman, with an Appendix of the
Universities of England.
Seldeni Eadmerus.
Idem, His Mare Clausam.
Idem, His Notes or Illustrations on Palaealbion.
The History of the Reign of King Henry VII. writ|ten
by the Right Honourable Francis Lord Verulam,
Viscount S. Alban; unto which is annexed a very use|ful
Table.

The Life and Reign of King Henry VIII, written by
the Right Honourable Edward Lord Herbert of Cher|bury.
Orlando Furioso, in English Heroical Verse, by Sir.
Iohn Harrington Knight, with the Addition of the
Authors Epigrams.
The Marrow of the French Tongue, by Iohn Wood|roph.
Babbingtons Fire works, with Logarithmes.
A French English Dictionary, with another in En|glish
and French, compiled by Mr. Randal Cotgrave:
whereunto are added, the Animadversions and Supple|ment
of Iames Howel Esq.
Usserii Annales, in two Volumes in Latin.
Devotions upon certain Festivals, piously and lear|nedly
exprest in Meditations, by that Accomplished
Gentleman, William Austen of Lincolns-Inn Esq.
Of Government and Obedience, as they stand di|rected
and determined by Scripture and Reason, four
Books by Iohn Hall of Richmond Gentleman.
Daltons Country Iustice, Corrected and enlarged by
the Authors own hand before his death; unto which
is Annexed, an Appendix or Abridgment of all the
late Acts and Ordinances that relate to the Office of a
Justice of Peace, to the year 1655. by a Gentleman
learned in the Lawes.
A Collection of Acts, in the years, 1648, 1649,
1650, 1651. very useful especially for Justices of the
Peace, and other Officers, with several other Ordinances
of like concernment, by Henry Scobel Esq Clerk of the
Parliament. In Co-partnership with Mr. Lee and Mr.
Pakeman.



Books in Quarto.

Cabala, sive Scrinia Sacra, Mysteries of State and
Government, in several Embassies and Letters, by the

great Ministers of King Iames and King Charles, col|lected
by a Noble hand, in two Parts.
Mr. Seldens History of Tythes.
Clavels Recantation, or Discovery of the High-way
Law.
Powels Search of Records.
Three Readings by the Lord Dyer, Brograve and
Rysden of Wills, Jointures and Forcible Entrie.
The Arguments of the Learned Iudges, upon the
Writ of Habeas Corpus, with the opinion of the Upper
Bench Court thereupon, with Sir Iohn Elliots Case.
Miscellanea Spiritualia, first and second Part, writ|ten
by the Honourable Walter Montague Esq Abbot
of Nantuel.
Barclayes Argenis, Englished by Sir Robert Le
Grey's Knight.
The Christian Man, or the Reparation of Nature by
Grace, written in French by that Elegant and Pious
Author, Iohn Francis Sennault, Englished by H. G.
Master of Arts, and Student of Christs Church in
Oxford.
Potters Interpretation of the Number 666.
The Perfect Conveyancer.
Shoppards Legal part of Tythes.
The History of the Grand Seigneurs Serraglio, unto
which is added the History of China.
Ross against Copernicus and Gallilaus, concerning
the Earths motion.
Mr Durhams Assize Sermon at Warwick before the
Judges, 1651.
Palmerin D' Oliva, both parts compleat.
The Iesuit the Chief, if not the only State Heretick
in the World, or the Venetian Quarrel, by Dr. Swad|lin.




PLAYES.

The Divels an Asse, by Ben Iohnson. in Folio.
The Marriage of the Arts, in Quarto, by Barton
Hollyday.
The Iust General, in Quarto.
The Bastard, in Quarto.
The Raging Turk, or Bajazet
the II.
The Couragious Turk, or A|murath
the I.
The Tragedy of Orestes, in
quarto.
Written by Thomas
Goffe, Master of
Arts, and Student
of Christs Church
Oxford.
The Wits
The Plationick Lovers
The Triumphs of Prince
D' Amour, a Mask.
Written by Sir Will.
D' Avenant, in quarto.
The Faithful Shepherdesse, by Iohn Fletcher Gen|tleman.
The merry VVives of Windsor, by Shakespear, in
quarto.
Edward the IV. the first and second part, in quarto
Michalmas Term, in quarto.
Fine Companion, in quarto.
Capils Whirlegig, in quarto.
The Phaenix, in quarto.
Love in its Extasie, in quarto.
The Combat of Love and Friendship, by Dr. Mead.
The Martyr.
Horatius.
Savol, now in the Press
Three Tragedies by Sir
William Lower Knight
in quarto.
The Hectors, or the False Challenge, a Comedy new|ly
written, by a Person of Learning and Eminency;
wherein is discovered the humours of our present
Hectors, false Gamesters, c: in quarto.




Books in Octavo.

Horace, englished by Richard Fanshaw Esq
An Apology for Learning and Learned Men, by Ed|ward
Waerhouse, Esq
Idem, His two Divine Tracts.
Shepherds Iustice of Peace, two parts with Additi|ons.
In Copartnership with W. L. and D. P.
Idem, His Court-Keepers Guide.
Idem, His Clerks Cabinet, or Presidents.
A Learned Treatise of the Common Lawes of Eng|land,
by Francis White Esq, Barrester of Grayes-Inn.
In Co-partnership with W. L. and D. P.
Lambards Archeion, or Comment on the High
Courts of Justice.
The Parsons Law.
Ashes Tables to the Lord Cooks Eleven Reports,
English. In Co-partnership with W. L. and D. P.
Davenports Abridgment of the Lord Cooks Institutes
English.
The Nuptial Lover
Hippollito and Isabella
Two small Romances.
Brinsleyes small Copy-Books. 3 d. price.
Callendarium Pastorale, by Theodoro Bathurst, La|tine
and English.
The Countess of Arundels Experiments.
A Synopsis, or compendium of the Fathers in En|glish.



Books in Twelves.

Sir Henry Wottons Works.
The Book of Oaths.
Ross his Cases of Conscience.
Of Liberty and Servitude, in English, by I. E. Esq.
Iacksons Evangelical Temper.

Balzacks Prince, in English.
Malvetzies Politick Christian Favorite, or the Life
of C. Olivarez.
The State of France English, published by I. E. Esq
Haywards Life and Reign of Edward the VI.
Supplementum Lucani, by Thomas May, Anglo.
The Accomplish'd Woman, written by the Right
Honourable Walter Montague Esq.
Steps of Ascension to God, or a Ladder to Heaven,
Containing Prayers and Meditations for every day of
the week, and all other Occasions, by Edward Gee, Do|ctor
in Divinity, now the ninth time reprinted.




Courteous Reader,
YOV may please to take notice, that here
are some few Playes worn out of print,
which we purpose to reprint; and there are se|veral
other Books in the Note also grown
scarce, and but smal numbers left. The rea|son
of this intimation, or printed Catalogue,
is to perpetuate the memory of the said Books
and Copies belonging to your Servants,
G. B. and T. C.
FINIS.





