




SIR
IOHN
ELIOT
HIS
GRAVE AND LEARNED
SPEECH
Spoken in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT. Desiring an orderlie Proceeding in
Matters of Religion, and that it may not be onely disputed
of, but firmely established, as it ought to be. Expressing the Misprision and Errour, whereby his Majesty
is traduced by evill Members about him. And the great danger of over-whelming that we were in, by
the Bishops Articles, and their Proceedings. Exhorting to main|taine
our King, Country and Religion, even with the
sword against all Opposers. With a Motion propounded, for laying downe of the Grounds,
wherein the Arminians and wee differ.






SIR
JOHN ELIOT
HIS
Grave and Learned Speech in Parliament.
I Have alwayes observed in the proceedings of
this House, that our best advantage is in order,
and I was very glad, when that noble Gentle|man,
my Country-man, gave occasion to stay our
proceedings; for I feare, it would have carryed us
into a sea of confusion, and disorder, J having now
occasion to present to you in this great  weighty
matter of Religion: I shall be bold to give you a
short expression of mine owne affection, and in
that order, that I hope will conduce to the effe|cting
of our worke, and direct our labour to an
end.
To enter into a particular discussion of the wri|ting
of the opinion of the Divines, I feare, it will
involve us into a Labyrinth, wee shall hardly get
out, and perchance, hinder the way, and darken the
path, in which we must tread. Before we know
what other men have declared, it is necessary wee
should presently lay down what is the truth. And,
as I presume, we come not hither now to dispute
of religion, farre be it from the thoughts of this

church, that have thus long continued, and confessed
now to dispute. Shall posterity think, that we have
enjoyed our Religion fourescore yeares almost, and
are now doubtfull of the sense? God forbid. It may
be, Sir, out of something lately delivered, I have
not unnecessarily collected, that there is a jealosie
conceived, as if wee went to deale in matters of
Faith; it is our profession: this is not to be dispu|ted;
neither will that truth be receded from this
long time held, nor is that truth decaied. It is con|firmed
by Parliament, because it was truth. And
in this, before J shall come to deliver my self more
particularly, give me leave, that have not yet spo|ken
in this great cause, to give some apprehensions
that J have of few; for it is not in the Parliament
to make a new religion, nor J hope shall it be
in any to alter the body of that truth we now pro|fesse.
I must confesse, Sir, among all the feares we
have contracte, there ariseth to me not one of the
least dangers in the Declaration, which is made 
published in his Majesties name.
And yet notwithstanding this Conclusion exclu|sively,
let me say, that I may not be mistaken, that
either in that, or other things shall appeare to
carry mention of his Majesty. We have not the
least jealousie in him, we have that comfort in his
piety and goodnes, as if there be any misprision or
 is by those Ministers about him, w^c^h
not onely  but all Princes are subject unto. And
to cleere that Princes are subject to misinforma|tion,
and many actions may bee intituled to their
owne names, when there is no suspition of it to be
done by themselves: but give mee leave to looke

back to presidents of other times, and what I find
in other storyes, may be usefull in these.
Antiochus of Asia sent Letters unto his Provinces, if
they received any dispatches in his name, not agreeable
to Justice, Ignoto se literus esse scriptas, ideoque non pare|rent,
I find by Plutarch of the great King Antiochus of A|sia,
who saith, that Princes are obnoxious to abuses of Mi|nisters,
and it could not at all times be prevented: there|fore
he sent Messengers, that Letters, or Dispatches sent in
his name, that were not warrantable by Law, and agreea|ble
to Justice, should not be conceived to bee done by
him, and therefore they should not give way unto it.
Sir, I find another booke, and I beseech you, let
it be apprehended; for I hope I shall cleere some
misprisions. Gratian did not onely note and con|fesse
the same, but added the reason also, which the
Masters of the Civill Law can also testifie, from
their bookes wherein it is thus expressed, Quod in|veretundia
potentium in instigation, principes saepe
restringuntur ut non concedenda concedant; because
that oftentimes with importunity of Ministers, 
those about them, Princes are drawne to grant
things not fit to be granted. As it was in that, so it
may be in this, I speake it to this end, to draw this
conclusion; that if there bee any thing that carryes
the title of his Majesty, it may bee the fault of his
Ministers: far be it from me to have any suspiti|on
of him.
And now to that particular, in the Declaration,
wherein I confesse, it is an apprehension of more
feare, then I have in all the rest; for in the rest of the
particulars, we heard what was said of popery and Armi|nianisme.
It is true, our faith and religion is in danger, but
it is by degrees. Here, Sir like an inundation doth breake
in at once, that we are in danger to be ruined  overwhel|med.

For I beseech you, mark the ground of our religi|on,
it is contained in the body of these Articles. If
there be any difference of opinion concerning the
sense and interpretation, the Bithops  Clergy in
the Convocation, have power admitted them to do
any thing that shall concerne the continuance, 
maintainance of the truth professed, which truth
being contained in these Articles, and these being
different in the sense: so as if there be any dispute
about it, it is in them to order which way they
please: and for ought I know, to Popery, or Armini|anisme,
may be a sense introduced by them, and then
it must be received.
Js this a sleight thing, that the power of religi|on
must be drawn to the persons of these men? J
honour their profession, and honour the persons;
but give me leave to say the truth, what wee pro|fesse,
is not mens but Gods: And God forbid, man
should be judg of that truth. Look upon the con|clusion
they have made, and from thence J draw
their Arguments. J remember a Character I have
seene in a Dyary of Edw. the 6. that young Prince
of famous memory, wherein he doth expresse the
condition of the Bishops and Clergy of his time,
and saith under his owne hand-writing; that some
for sloath, some for age, some for ignorance, some
for luxury, and some for Popery, were unfit for
Discipline and Government.
Sir, I would it were not so with us, nay give me
leave to vindicate the honour of those men, that o|penly
shew their hearts to the truth. There have
bin Bishops, such who were fit to be made exam|ples

to all ages, who have shone in vertue like
those two faithfull witnesses in heaven, of whom
we may use that Elegy, which Seneca did of Camis
that to their memory and merits, Ne hoc quidem
obstet, quod nostris temporibus nati sunt. To whose
glory, I may use the saying, others faults are no
prejudice to their vertue, who are so industrious
in their works. But that ours now, are not such, so
free, sound,  Orthodox in religion, as they should
be: Witnesse the man nominated lately. I apprehend
such fear, that should it be in their power, we may
be in danger to have our religion overthrown: but
I give this for testimony. And thus far to expresse
my religion, against all the power or opposition
of these men, or whatsoever opposition shall be,
we shall still maintaine that religion we professe,
for that we have bin born and bred in, nay if cause
be, in that to dye. Some of these, Sir, are Masters of
Ceremonies, and they labour to introduce new
Ceremonies into the Church, I hope wee should
draw our swords, to defend our Prince, Country,
and religion, against all Opposers.
This I speake out of the care I have to preserve
the honour of our King against them, who by these
Innovations, I feare, have fought to undermine it.
But to come to the manner and method of our
proceeding, having made this expression: where|in
if I have transgressed the rule propounded, I
crave your pardon. I desire to avoid confusion, and
distraction, and that wee may goe presently to the
ground of our Religion, and lay downe that rule,
wherein all others rest; and when that is done, it

will be time to take into consideration the Brea|kers
and Offenders against this rule in the next
place; for before wee have laid downe that, our
worke will be in vaine.
Therefore lay downe the profession wherein
we differ from Arminianisme, and in that I shall
be ready to deliver my opinion.
And this is my humble Motion.
FINIS.




