




A further Accompt of the Progresse of the GOSPEL amongst the INDIANS IN NEW-ENGLAND, AND Of the means used effectually to advance the same.
SET FORTH In certaine Letters sent from thence declaring a purpose of Printing the Scriptures in the Indian Tongue into which they are already Translated.
With which Letters are likewise sent an Epi|tome of some Exhortations delivered by the In|dians at a fast, as Testimonies of their obedi|ence to the Gospell.
As also some helps directing the Indians how to improve naturall reason unto the knowledge of the true God.
LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for the Corpo|ration of New-England, 1659.




TO THE CRISTIAN READER.
Beloved Brethren,
_AS it is the Ardent prayer of all that love the Lord Iesus in sincerity, that his Kingdome may be enlarged, and the glorious lght of Psal. 67. 3. 5. Psal. 22, 27. 98. 3. Dan. 2. 35. Isa. 2. 18. Zeph 2. 11. the Gospell may shine forth into all Ni|ons, that all the ends of the world may see the salvation of our God, that the Stone cut out without hands may become so great a mountaine as to fill the Earth, that the Idols may be utterly abolished, and the Gods of the Earth famished, and that all the Isles of the Heathen may worship the only true God: So the strange  scarcely to be paraleld concussions which have been in the world of late yeares, and so still continue, may seeme to be no improbable harbingers of the more glorious manifestations of Christ thereunto, in answer to those desires of his servants. For the Shaking of all Nations maketh way for the com|ing Hag. 2. 7. of him, who is the desire of all Nations. The wind, and the earthquake, and the fire did usher in the still voyce 1 King. 19. 11, 12, 13. which spke unto Eliah. When the Spirit came down upon the Apostles. there was a sound as of a rushing mighty wind, and the house was shaken, when the people therein Act. 2. 2. were to be silled with the holy Ghost.
How much those winds and shakings which carried ma|ny good mn out of Old into New England have made way to  publishing of the name of Christ in those barba|rous plas,  the day of small things hath not been al|together despicable there, How the leaven of the Gospell doth

still continue to season more of the lump, as it hath by ma ny former publised specimina been demonstrated, so these papers now printed by the care of the Corporation for New-England, do give us further evidence  assurance thereof. And truly it cannot but be matter both of abundant thanks|givings to God, to find poor Americans speking the languag Isa. 19 18. of Canaan, subscribing with their hand unto the Lord, and sirnaming themselves by the name of Israel:  also of Isa. 44. 5. great comfort and encouragement unto all those whose hearts the Lord hath stirred up, either here in a way of libe|rall , to honour him with their sustance, and to Prov. 3 9. Numb 15 19. Isa 0. 9. Isa. 23. 8. bring their Silver and Gold unto the name of the Lord, that their merhandize may be Holinesse unto him: or there, in a way of labour and service, settig their heart and hand to snach poor souls as brands out of the fire, to see such a signall blssing upon their paines and prayers, and such seeds of the Everlastig Gospel come up in so barren and desolate a soile, making way unto a plentifull harvest for those who shall after enter upon their labours. No monies, no sudies will make a more ample returne then those wbich are 1 Tim. 6. 17, 18, 19. laid up in heaven, which are laid out upon building the house of God. If David and his princes did praise the Lord, for that they were able to offer so willingly towards the E|recting 1 Chron. 29. 14. Nehem. 4. 6. Exod. 35. 5. Brierwood de ummis In|daeorum cap. 6 of a materiall Temple, for which was gathered one of the greatest summs, as some learned judge, that we read of in any history, how much reason have we to blsse God when he giveth us hearts to offer willingly towards the building of living and spirituall Temples, and when he lteth us see so glorious a returne to our prayers, contributions, and labours in the conversion of many souls unto God.
To the end that God may be glorified, good men who have already furthered this excellent work, may be comforted, and others excited and provoked to put to their hand unto the advancement thereof, are these papers published, being testi|monies

of the great zeale and care of our Brethren there to promote the Gospell, and of the blessing of God on their la|bours, in the professed subjection of many poor soules thereunto.
Two great works we find here further undertaken in or|der to that service.
The one some helps and directions to the Indians how to improve their naturall reason unto the knowledg of the true God. The reason why there is so short and im|perfect a specimen given of it is, because the ships came a|way from New-England, before any more of the Copy was wrought off from the presse. It is a work likely to be by the blessing of God of singular use to the natives there, and a ve|ry proper and necessary course for those to take who would convert and perswade Pagans to beleeve the Truth.
The Lord was pleased at the first preaching of the Gospel to confirme it with signs and wonders following for the Mark 16. 20. Act. 14. 3. Heb. 2. 4. more speedy planting of it by only twelve, and those possibly aged men, in so many places of the world. And how farre he may still bear witnesse thereunto, not only by the holy lives of Christians, but by eminent and remarkable providences, which may tantamount to miracles, I shall not here inquire. But certainly here may be much use made of naturall rea|son, to demonstrate unto Pagans the falsenesse of the way they are in, and so to prepare a way for entertainment of the Truth. Though the Doctrine of the Gospel be supernatu|rall, and not investigable by humane disquisition, beng made 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10 Gal. 1. 12. Matth. 16. 17. known to men and Angells onely by the Revelation of the Holy Spirit: yet when it is revealed, the awakening of Le|gall impressions in the naturall conscience, will provoke men to attend,  prepare them to entertain it, when it shall be preached unto them.
1. All men have in them a desire of Happinesse, and an Aristot. Ethic. l. 1 c. 1. aversation from misery.

2. All men more or lesse have some indeleble impressions Nulla gens est ne tam immantueta, ne tam fera, qae non, eti|amsi ignoret qulem habe re deum dece|at, tamen ha|bendum sciat. Cicero de le|gibus, lib. 1. Deum agnos|cis ex operi|bus ejus Tus|cul. qu. Q 1. Nulla gens ia~ fera, nemo omnium tam immanis, cu|jus meem non imbuerit dei opinio. Ibid. Senec Ep. 118. of a Godhead, which cannot be utterly worne out, heathen Philosophers have acknowledged that no nation in the world is so barbarous where the confession and adoration of a Dei|ty is not to be found.
3. There are innate praesensions of the Immortality of the soul within it selfe, for Pluto in Phaedro, e a|pud Plutarch consolat ad Apollon Cicero de se|nectute. Senec. Epist. 118. consolat ad b c. 28. Heathen Philosophers have by the light of nature discover'd and acknowledg'd it.
4. There is a natural  or habit of morall and pra|cticall principles, and consequently there are naturall im|pressions of guilt and fear upon the conscience, and tacit evi|dences of judgment due unto the workers of iniquity, An Iuvenal. Tertull. lib. de Testimonio a|nimae. heathen Poet could say, Frigida mens est Criminibus, ta|cit sudant praecordia culp.
5. There being in all men a naturall desire of Good, and a naturall Testimony of Conscience that God is the giver of it, so that when evills are upon them which they cannot re|move themselves, they naturally call out for a divine helpe a|bove them to give them deliverance; from hence it cometh to passe, that there are innate apprehensions of some Religi|on necessary, in order to the knowledge and service of a God, as a requisite means to the obtaining of so dsireable an end as Happinesse is.
6. Since it is exactly consonant to right reason, that he to whom service is due, should direct and prescribe the way whereby he will be served (for to serve another is to do that which he willeth to be done:) It is therefore necessary that the way of service and Religion be revealed unto us from God.
7. Because these premises are indelebly written in the minds of men by nature, Therefore Satan not being able, as Prince of this world alone, to carry men on in a quiet way Ioh. 12. 31. 16 11. of wickednesse, without some face of Religion and worship amongst them, hath invaded the name of a God, and made

himselfe God of this world, and as a God, hath set up vari|ous wayes of wicked worship consistent with his other 2 Cor. 4. 4. principles and laws of wicked lusts, thereby to bind men the faster unto himselfe, ut fiant miseis delicta religiosa, as Cyprian speaks, that men might be tied by their Religion unto wickednesse.
Now the work of Christ in the Gospel is. 1. As he is Prince of righteousnesse to destroy the lusts and works of Heb 7. 2. 1 Jh 3 8. Rom. 9 5. Act. 14. 15. the Devill. 2. As he is God blessed for ever, to abolish the Idols, to famish the Gods, and to turne men from vani|ties unto the living God which made heaven and earth.
This to doe, we may in this manner proceed with an hea|then who knows not God. We may convince him by his own naturall and implanted light.
1. That there is a God who is righteous and holy, who cannot be deceived, will not be mocked.
2. That this God hath implanted in all men a light and Rom. 2. 14, 15 law of nature by which they are to walk.
3. That he, with whose soul we deale, hath violated that light and law of nature, and is thereby become a sinner. Rom. 1. 29, 30. 3. 9. Rom. 1. 32.
4. That sinne is attended with guilt and punishment,  bindeth the sinner over unto death and judgment.
5. That there is in him a naturall desire to be delivered from death and to be happy.
6. That he is not able by any strength or power of his own to free himselfe from death, or to make himselfe happy.
7. That that way of worship and service which he trusteth in for this deliverance, will never e able to effect it for him. For the vanity of Idolatrous and Satanicall worship may by evidence of Reason, and by the inherent characters of im|purity and absurdity within it selfe, be demonstrated. By that way the Lord in Scripture usually doth disprove it. Deut. 4. 28. Psal. 115. 4, 8. Isa. 41. 24, 28. Isa. 44. 9, 20. Isa. 46. 1. 9. Jer. 10. 3, 11. Habak. 2. 18, 20. Act. 14. 15, 17.

Act 17. 23, 31. Rom. 1. 23, 25.
8. Being thus brought into straits and extremities, and reduced ad impossibile very self-love, awakened by the spi|rit of bondage, will dictate unto a man, when he is convinced of being uttterly out of the way, to inquire what he shall do to be saved, and to listen unto that, which is by credible per|sons  Acts 16. 30. reported to be the right way.
9. Being thus perswaded to look into the Gospel, which is represented unto him as the alone way unto salvation. He findeth inherent characters of purity, Sanctity, and spiri|tual beauty in it. He considereth the miracles and Mar|tyrdomes whereby it hath been confirmed (which he hath no more reason to distrust then the truth of any other hi|story) He considereth the prevalency of it in the world by the ministry of twelve poor men, notwithstanding all the per|secutions which have been from time to time raised against it. He considereth the holy lives of the Professors of it, where|by the wicked lusts which his impure religion alloweth, are shamed and rebuked. He considereth the nature of it whol|ly contrary to carnall and secular interests, no way complying with, or giving the least countenance unto any sinful de|lights: so that it is evident that it was not contrived or ob|truded upon men by humane wisdome, or to gratifie any car|nall designe upon these and the like considerations being set on by the finger of the holy Spirit, he is perswaded to beleeve 1 Pet. 1. 8. Rom. 15. 13. 2 Tim. 1. 12. the Gospel, and by beleeving comes to reape those Ioyes and comforts as make him know whom he hath beleeved.
The other work which is set about in order to the premo|ting of the Gospel amongst the poor Indians is the transla|ting of the Scripture into their tongue, and Printing it for their use, which as it is a necessary and an excellent worke, and a work of great labour (in consideration whereof the Reverend Translator deserveth great thanks and encourage|ment) so will it be a worke of cost and charges to provide

paper, workmen, and letters for so large a work. And there|fore, as men, when the foundation of a goodly building is go|ing about, will lay a stone with their own hands, to shew some bounty and encouragement to the workmen who are to carry it on; so the laying of this foundation stone seemeth to call unto all those whose hearts the Lord hath made willing, to give in their helping hand and chearfull assistance, unto a work tending so immediately to the Salvation of souls and glory of that God, who hath promised, That they who sow bountifully shall reape bountifully, who will multiply their eed sown, and increase the fruit of their righte|ousnesse. Certainly if Christ look on the supplies which are given to his poor brethren for their bodily reliefe, as given to himselfe; much more will he accept and reward the en|deavours of those, who lay out their bounty, as he did his blood, for the good of mens souls, and for the advancement of his kingdome. To his blessing I commend you, and this ex|cellent service
Yours, and the Churches Servant in our Com|mon Lord.
Ed: Reynolds.
1 Aprill 1659.






This following Letter is sent from the Commissioners for the united Colonies of New-England in New-England, and directed as followeth.
For the much honoured Corporation for the propagation of the Gospel amongst the Indians in New-England, these present.
Honoured and worthy Gentlemen.
_BY our last of 16^t^h instant, we certified you of our purpose to send M^r Peir|sons Chatichisme by the first oppor|tunity to be Printed in England; Since which time; it is come unto our hands but upon further conside|ration in regard of the hazard of sending, and difficulty of true Printing it; without a fit overseer of the presse by one skilled in the lan|guage; we have chosen rather to have it printed here; and accordingly have taken order for the same; and hope it will be finished within three months, we have sent you herewith the accounts of this years disburse|ments in reference to the Indian work,  shall be rea|dy to attend your advice in any particular therein mentioned. Many charges will be dayly grow|ing, but we hope there will be suffieient in M^r Ushers hands to discharge the same till the Spring: and for after supply to carry on the work be pleased to take notice that we have drawn upon you three Bills of Exchange of one tenure and date for five hundred

pounds to be payd to Mr Iohn Harwood for the use of M^r Hezekiah Usher, and have taken his Bill to satisfie so much here, according to his former agreement with us, we pray you to take care it be duely paid at the day, without which the worke cannot be comfortably carryed on, it is our joynt and unfeigned desires with you; that those gifts and contributions may be im|proved according to the pious minds of the Donors; for the promoting the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ amongst these poore Natives; and we hope and beleeve there is a reall good effect in severall places, which that it may dayly increase to the bringing of many poor souls to heaven, is the earnest prayer of
GENTLEMEN, Your very loving friends and Servants, The Commissioners of the united Colonies.

Iohn Endicott President
Simon Bradstreete
Thomas Prence
Iosiah Winslow
Iohn Winthorpe
Iohn Talcot
Francis Newman
William Lerte

Boston 22. Sept. 1658.



A Letter from M^r Iohn Eliot directed unto M^r Richard Floyd Treasurer of the corporation for New-England.
To his much respected and Christian friend M^r Floyd Trea|surer of the Corporation for promoting Religion among the Indians in New-England. these present.
Christian Friend and Beloved in the Lord.
_AFter Salutations in the Lord Jesus. I shall not trouble you with any thing at pre|sent save this one businesse of moment, touching the Printing of the Bible in the Indian Language, touching which busi|nesse sundry of the Elders did petition unto the Commissioners, moving them to further it, as a principall means of promoting Religion among them. And God so guided (without mans contrivance) that I was there when it came in. They moved this doubt whether the Translation I had made was gene|rally understood? to which I answered, that upon my knowledge it was understood as farre as Conecticot: for there I did read some Conecticot is about 100 miles up in the Country. part of my Translation before many hundred English Witnesses, and the Indians manifested that they did understand what I read, perfectly, in respect of the language, they further questioned whether I had expressed the Translation in true language? I answered that I feared after times will find many infirmities in it, all humane works are subject to infirmity, yet those pieces that were prin|ted, viz. Genesis and Matthew, I had sent to such as I thought had best skill in the language, and intreated

their anadversions, but I heard not of any faults they found. When the Commissioners ended their meeting, they did commit the further consideration of this matter to our Commissioners, as I understand, of whom our Governour is president. Therefore at the coming away of this Ship, I repaired to the Gover|nour about it. I proposed this expedient, for the more easie prosecution of this work, viz. that your selves might be moved to hire some honest young man, who hath skill to compose, (and the more skill in other parts of the work, the better) send him over as your servant, pay him there to his content, or ingage pay|ment, let him serve you here in New-England at the presse in Harvard Colledge, and work under the Col|ledg Printer, in impressing the Bible in the Indian lan|guage, and with him send a convenient stock of Paper to begin withall. The Governour was pleased to send for M^r Norton to advise in it, who came and did heartily further it, whereupon the Governour pro|mised to write unto your selves, and propose the mat|ter, which also I doe, and doe earnestly intreat your assistance herein. And I beseech the Lord to bow your hearts, and incourage you in promoting so good a work, so profitable for the furtherance of Religion, which to further in the best manner, I know is already the bent of your hearts, and your constant prayer and indeavour, and thus committing you, and all your weighty affaires unto the Lord, I rest
Yours to serve you in the Service of Christ.
John Elliot.
Roxbury this 28 of the 10^t^h 1658.



A Letter from Iohn Endicott Esq President of the Commissioners for the united Colonies in New-Eng|land to the Corporation here in ENGLAND.
For M^r Richard Floyd Treasurer and the rest of the Gen|tlemen of the Corporation for the affaires of New-Eng|land. these.
Honourable Gentlemen.
_I Have been moved by divers able and godly men here with us to propound unto your pious consideration, whether it be not needful for the better instructi|on of the Indians amongst us in the true knowledge of God, to get the whole Bi|ble of the old and new Testament, which is already Translated into the Indian tongue, to be printed; Many here with us Divines and others judge it a thing that will be acceptable to God, and very profi|table for the poor Heathens. If your selves doe so esteeme of it too, it will be necessary to provide paper and letters and such things as may further the work, as also a Journey man Printer to be helpefull under M^r Greene our Printer to expedite the work. This is only propounded to your serious consideration, which if God please to put into your hearts to further, being so good a work; It will rejoyce the hearts of many godly ones here, and I doubt not of many there also.

The rest of the Commissioners being gone home to their own dwellings, and none left here at Boston of the Commissioners but my selfe: and the Ship being ready to set sayle I have made bold to write these few lines unto you, and leave the issue of all to God, and your godly wisdomes: M^r Eliot will be ready at all times to correct the sheets as fast as they are Printed, and desireth nothing for his paines. I shall not trou|ble you further at this time, but shall desire the Lord so to guide you in all your affaires, as God may have the glory of all, and your selves comfort and peace. So prayeth
Your Unworthy Servant.
Iohn Endicott.
Boston the 28 of Decem. 1658.



Here followes another Letter from M^r Iohn Eliot of New-England, directed to the Corporation, viz.
To the Honourable Corporation for spreading the Gospell among the Poor Indians in New England. these present.
Christian Gentlemen, and much honoured in the Lord.
_YOur constant prayers and paines for the pro|moting of the Kingdome of Christ Jesus in these ends of the earth, among these our poor Indians, is a work of sweet favour unto the Lord: and your labour of love bestowed therein; shall be assuredly rewarded, when the Lord shall say unto you (out of the riches of his free Grace) Come ye blessed of my Father, c. and, what you did unto them, you did it unto me, and in that day, Blessed is the man who hath his hands full of such free will offerings. The Lord hath given us this amazing blow to take a|way my brother Mayhew. Mr Mayhew was cast away ceming over from New-England, with an Indian who was a Preacher a|mongst the In|dians. His aged Father doth his endeavour to uphold the worke among the poor Indians, whom by letters I have incouraged what I can, and moved in his behalfe, our Commissioners, and they have given him some incouragement, so that the work in that place is not fallen to the ground, I blesse the Lord for it. As for the work among us, I shall for the present be silent, for severall Reasons, only let the work it selfe speake. I am bold to present you here inclosed, with a few notes which my Sonne and I ga|thered up, which were delivered by the persons here

named, in a day of fasting and prayer; out of which short notes you may see what life is in the work. The very reason of my gathering up these notes; was be|cause my Sonne (who had not been at a fast among us before) was very much affected with what they deli|vered, so far as he understood them, and when I had communicated these notes to some, they were very well relished,  thereby I was imboldened to present them to your selves, not knowing, but (if the Lord please) thereby you may have more reall informati|on of their state and progresse, then by any thing which were meet for me to say. For my selfe I feele my strength to decay, and I am not able to doe and bear what I have done, and although temptation may sometime breed waverings, yet my soul doth desire  beleeve, that I shall live and dye in the work. And as I have dedicated my sons to serve the Lord in this work (if he please to accept them) so I doe it as they come up; and this yeare my second son having taken his first degree in the Colledge, I presented him also unto our Commissioners, and he is accepted unto the work: which mercy my soul doth greatly rejoyce in, and I humbly beg your prayers for them, that the Lord would bow their green spirits unto the worke, and inable them to overlooke the difficultyes and discou|ragements which lye in the way, and thus committing you unto the Lord, and to the guidance of his holy Word, I rest
Yours to serve you in the Service of our dear Saviour.
John Eliot.
Roxbury this 10^t^h of the 10^t^h, 1658.



Here followeth a Briefe Epitomy of such Ex|hortations as these Indians hereafter named, did deliver upon a late day of fasting and prayer at Natick, much more largely, 15^t^h of the 9^t^h month, 1658.
The causes of this fast were partly in preparation for gathering a Church, and because of much rain, and sicknesse and other tryalls.



An Exhortation from Waban, an Indian,
The Text of Scripture he spake of was,
Matth. 9. 12, 13.
12. But when Iesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a Physitian, but they that are sick.
13. But goe ye and learne what that meaneth; I will have mercy and not sacrifice; for I came not to call the righ|teous, but sinners to Repentance.
I am a poor weak man, and know but little, and there|fore I shall say but little.
_THese words are a similitude, that as some be sick, and some well; and we see in experience that when we be sick, we need a Phisitian  goe to him, and make use of his Phisick; but they that

be well doe not so, they need it not and care not forit: So it is with soul-sicknesse; and we are all sick of that sicknesse in our souls, but we know it not: we have many at this time sick in body, for which cause we do  and pray this day, and cry to God; but more are sick in their souls: we have a great many diseases and sicknesses in our souls he instand, as Idlenesse, neg|lect of the Sabboth, Passion, c.] Therefore what should we doe this day? goe to Christ the Phisitian; for Christ is a Physitian of souls; he healed mens bo|dies, but he can heale souls also: he is a great Physiti|an, therefore let all sinners goe to him. Therefore this day know what need we have of Christ, and let us goe to Christ to heale us of our sins, and he can heale us both soul and body. Again, what is that lesson, which Christ would have us learne, that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. What! Doth not God love them that be righteous? Doth he not call them to him? Doth not God love righteousnesse? Is not God righteous? Answ. The righteous here are not meant those that are truly righteous, but those that are Hypocrites; that seem righteous, and are not; that think themselves righteous, but are not so in|deed; such God calleth not, neither doth he care for them: but such as see their sins, and are sick of sin, th Christ calleth to repentance, and to believe in Christ, therefore let us see our need of Christ, to heale all our diseases of soul and body.






Delivered at the same time by Nishohkou, another Indian.
The Text he spake of was,
Gen. 8. 20, 21.
20. And Noah built an Altar unto Iehovah, and took of every clean Beast, and of every clean fowle, and offered burnt offerings on the Altar.
21. And the Lord smelled a sweet Savour; and the Lord said in his heart, I will not againe curse the ground any more for mans sake; for the imaginations of mans heart is evill from his youth, neither will I again smie any more every thing living as I have done.
A little I shall say, according to that little I know.
_IN that Noah sacrificed to God he shewed him|self thankfull; in that he worshiped God, he shewed himselfe godly; in that he sacrificed clean beasts, he shewed that God is an holy God, pure and clean, and all that come to God, and worship him, must be pure and clean: and know that we must by repentance purge our selves, and cleanse our hearts from all sin; which is a work we are to doe this day. In that he sacrificed, it was the manner of worshiping God in old time: but what sacrifices must we offer now? Answ. By that Psal. 4. 5. Offer to God the sacri|fices of righteousnesse, and trust in the Lord. These are true and spirituall sacrifices which God requireth at our hands. Sacrifices of Righteousnesse, that is, we must look to our hearts, and Conversation, that they be righteous, and then we shall be acceptable to God, when we worship him but if we be unrighteous and unholy, and wicked, we shall not be accepted, our sa|crifices

are nought. Againe, we must trust in the Lord: for who else should we trust in, we must believe in the word of God; for if we doubt of God, and doubt of his word, then our sacrifices are little worth; but if we trust stedfastly in the Lord then our sacrifices are good. Again, what kind of sacrifices must we offer? Answ. We must offer such as Abraham offered; and what sacrifice did he offer. Answ. see Gen. 22. 12. Now I know that thou fearest me, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thy only son from me; he had but one dearly beloved son, and he offered him to God;  thn God saith, I know thou fearest me, because thou hast not withheld thy son: This was to sacrifice indeed and in truth; so we must sacrifice indeed, and in truth, but God doth not require us to sacrifice our sons, but our beloved sins, our dearest sins: God calleth us this day to part with all our sins, though never so beloved, and we must not withhold any of them from him: if we will not part with all, it is not a right sacrifice: we must part with those sins we love best, and then we offer a good sacrifice. Again, God smelt a sweet sa|vour in Noahs sacrifice,  so when we offer such wor|ship to God as is cleane, and pure, and sacrifice as A|braham did, then God accepts our sacrifice. Again, God manifested his acceptance of Noahs sacrifice, by pro|mising to drown the world no more, but gave him fruitfull times and seasons. God hath chastized us of late with such raines, as if he would drown us, and he hath drowned and spoiled a great deale of hay, and threatens to kill our Cattel, and for this we fast and pray this day; now if we offer a spirituall sacrifice, clean and pure as Noah did, then God will smell a sa|vour of rest in us, as he did in Noah, and then he will withhold the Rain, and give us fruitfull seasons.




These two before mentioned did exercise the fore part of the day (besides what we did) the four next ex|ercised in the afternoon. The first of which was Antony.



The Scripture w^c^h he grounded his exercise upon was
Matth. 6. 16, 17, 18.
16. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad Countenance, for they disfigure their face, that they may appeare unto mn to fast: Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward.
17. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face.
18. That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy father that is in secret, and thy Father that seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.
A little I'le speak, according to that poor little I know
_THe Doctrine that Christ teacheth us in these words, is the Doctrine of fasting and prayer; and the duty we doe this day, is to practice this Doctrine, for God calleth us this day to fasting and prayer. There be many causes of prayer to God this day; as to prepare our hearts for Church, covenant, and Ordinances, and to pray for the taking away our sicknesse, and these great rains [here he did enumerate sundry causes of seeking God] But why must we fast? Answ. That we might the more effect|ually mourn for sin. If any of you bury a child or a friend, then you will mourn, and fast too, for if we of|fer you meat, you will refuse it, yea you cannot eat, be|cause your heart is so full of sorrow: no matter for meat then, your tears, and sighs, and sorrows fill you

so, that you cannot eat; so that fasting is an help to mourning. Now this day is a day of mourning, and what doe we mourn for? not for a child or a friend, but a greater matter; we must mourn for our sins, and we should be so filled, and possessed with mourning for our sis, that we should forget hunger, ye so afflicted in our hearts, that we cannot eat though it should be offfered to us: our hearts should be so full of sorrow, that we cannot be an hungry nor eat. Againe we fast that we might repent of our sins, and amend our lives, according to that Matth. 3. 8. bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance. This is a day of Repentance, we must therefore fast this day, so as becometh Repen|tance, therefore we must confesse our sins, and we must mourn for our sins, and we must forsake our sins, for these are works meet for Repentance. Again, we must not be like hypocrites in our fasting, for they disfigure their faces, and seem to men as if they mourned and fasted, and repented, but in their hearts they doe not so, and therefore God who knoweth what is in the heart, and seeth in secret, he doth know their hypocrisie, and so he knoweth our hypocrisie, if we come here, and ap|pear to man as if we fasted, and yet in our hearts we fast not, if we do not mourn and repent for sin, we do not fast, God doth not account that to be a fast. Again, such as fast an hypocritical fast, they shall be sure to be rewarded, and what reward will God give to such as fast like hypocrites? I answer, that you may see what the wages of hypocrites is, Mat. 24, 51. shall cut him a|sunder,  appoynt him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, and this is evill wa|ges: and therefore let us be moved, to keep a right fast this day, by repenting of our sins, and amending of our lives, and then the Lord will reward us openly, if he see that our hearts are right before him.



The next that followed was Iohn Spene.



The Scripture he spake of was.
Matth. 9. 14, 15.
14. Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, why doe we and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy Disciples fast not.
15. And Iesus said unto them, can the children of the Bride|chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them, but the dayes will come, when the Bridegroom shall be ta|ken from them, and then they shall fast.
A little I will say, for I can say but little, for I am weak and know but little.
_THis is a Parable, as when young people are at a wedding, there is feasting, and joy, and mirth, but no sorrow, nor mour|ning, nor weeping: So when Christ is with his people, he brings joy and com|fort with him, and fills their hearts with comfort: but if he be angry, and depart from his peo|ple, and leave them to afflictions, then there is sorrow, and mourning, and weeping, and fasting, as it is this day with us; for we are called to fasting this day, because of the great raine, and great floods, and unsea|sonable weather, whereby the Lord spoileth our la|bours: our corne is much spoiled with the wet: so that the Lord doth threaten us with want of food; also our hay is much spoiled, so that God threatneth

to starve and kill our Cattel: also we have great sick|nesse among us; so that many are dead: the burying place of this Town hath many graves, and so it is in all our Towns among the praying Indians. Also in our houses are many sick, and a great many are crazy, and weak, and not well; God threatneth to kill us, and therefore surely he is angry, and what maketh him an|gry? we may be sure it is our sins, for we are great sin|ners. This day is therefore a day of Repentance, of fasting, and of mourning. And what are we to doe in this day of fasting? Answ. We must search out all our sins, and with hearty Repentance forsake them. And when we goe about to search out our fins, we must remember that there be three places where we must search for sin: First, in our hearts; Secondly, in our words; 3ly, in our works and doings, and in all these places we find too many, but especially in our hearts; for there be evill thoughts, and the root sin [that is to say Originall sin, for so we call it in their language] and therefore it is a great work to search our hearts,  find out the roots of sin: and if any doe say it is an hard work, and I know not how to doe it: I answer, it is true, it is hard work, but therefore we must take so much the more paines, and care to doe it, as we doe about hard works. If any say I cannot tell how to find out my sins: I answer, we must this day pray unto the Lord to help us to find them out, and to forsake them, for he knoweth them all.
Againe, another cause of our fasting this day, is to prepare us to make a church of Christ among us: and if you say what must we doe to prepare for Church|estate. I answer we must repent of our sin, and make our selves clean, we must get cleannesse of heart, when we come neer unto God, according to that Mat. 3. 2.

Repent for the Kingdome of heaven is at hand.
Againe, to prepare us for church estate, we must pray unto God, to send his Spirit into our hearts, be|cause the Spirit of God will convert us, and purge our hearts, and sanctifie us, and teach us to pray, and com|fort us, and will never leave us, till he have brought us to the Kingdome of heaven (as you know we are taught in our catechisme) And it is the gift of God to send his Spirit into our hearts, and Christ hath pro|mised to doe it for us, as the word of God speaketh, Mat. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that cometh after me is mightier then I, whose shooes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the holy ghost, and with fire. Where we see that Iohn did baptize them with water, but Christ doth baptize them with the holy ghost  fire; we desire to be baptized by man, and man baptizeth with water, and that is a sign of Repentance; but we must look for the baptisme of Christ,  he giveth us his Spirit, that is his baptizing. And when Christ baptizeth with his Spirit that doth more then water can doe, for the Spirit doth purge our soules, and maketh our hearts pure and clean.
Again, he baptizeth with fire, what i that? I Ans. not outward fire, but spirituall, and it is a similitude, thus: what will fire doe? I answer, you all know what fire will do; for when your Tobacco-pipes are filthy, foule, stinking, unfit for your use, you cast them into the fire, and that doth not burn them up, but burneth up all their filth, and maketh them clean and sweet,  fit for your use. So our hearts are filthy, and unfit for Gods use, but cast our hearts into the word, for there the Spirit is, and then the Spirit of God will burn out all our filth and sin, and make us sweet, and fit for the Lords use.



Another that preacht, Piumbuhhon.



The Scripture which he did insist upon was.
Matth. 5. 1. ad 10.
1. And seeing the multitude, he went up into a Mountain and when he was set his Disciples came unto him, and, he opened his mouth, and taught them saying,
2. Blessed are the poore in Spirit, c.
I will speak but a little, because I am a poor creature.
_HEre we see that when Christ saw the Mul|titude come together, he taught them; in like manner you all being come toge|ther, this day Christ teacheth you, for it is Christ, that teacheth us all by his word, and these are Christ his words, which I speak unto you, and therefore heare ye Christ this day, for all these words of blessing Christ doth speak this day unto this multitude.
1. For poverty of spirit, we are the most poor, feeble, despicable people in the world, but let us look in what case our spirits be, for if our hearts be answer|ably poor, and low, as our outward condition is, then we are in the way to be made truly rich, for the King|dome of heaven is promised to such as are poor in spirit.
2. For mourning this is a day of mourning, and not so much for afflictions, as for our sins, now if we doe

truly and heartily mourn for our sins, then the bles|sing is promised to us and God will find a time and way to comfort us.
3. Again, They that be meek and patient are bles|sed, therefore those that be froward and passionate and make strife, they are not blessed, and therefore we have cause to mourn this day, for our often passions and fallings out, and learn to be meek and pati|ent.
4. Again, They that hunger and thirst after righ|teousnesse are blessed: This is a day of hunger and thirst, and fasting for our bodyes, that we might mourn for our sins, but it is a day of feasting for our soules, and Christ doth here offer a great many blessings for our soules to feast withall, if therefore our souls be hungry after righteousnesse and godlinesse, then we are blessed.
5. Again, God is mercifull and commandeth us to be so too, and will therefore blesse those that are like unto himselfe.
6. They that are pure in heart are blessed, and this purity of heart the Spirit of God worketh in us, when he cometh and dwelleth in us (as we are taught in our Catechisme) and therefore Christ doth blesse them.
7. Blessed are the peace-makers, and who be peace|makers? I answer, that the Devil is the maker of strife, and he is alwayes so doing, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, and so he is labouring to do in all the Towns of the praying Indians; but such as be wise and Godly will not suffer the strife to continue, but will use such means as shall reconcile them, and make them friends againe, and this is a blessed worke so to doe.



The last that Exercised was Wutasakompavin, whom I formerly wrote of by the name Poliquanum.



The Text he spake of was,
Matth. 8. 2, 3.
2. And loe there came a Leper and worshiped him, saying, Master, if thou wilt thou canst make me clean.
3. And Iesus putting forth his hand touched him saying, I will be thou clean, and immediately his leprosie was cleansed.
A very little am I able to say, and besides it is late (for it was very neer night)
THis day is a day of fasting and prayer for many causes, and one is for the many sicknesses, and deaths among us, and this Text doth shew us the best Physitian in the world, and the best way of curing all diseases. Christ is the great Physitian, he healed many when he was on earth, and he healed this Leper. This sick man came to Christ and worshipped him and con|fessed his power to heal him if he would, which con|fession of his was so pleasing to Christ, as that he pre|sently touched him and healed him. So let us this day cry to Christ, and worship him, and if we do it in faith then he will heal us.
Again, God doth chastise us with raine, and spoy|leth our Corn, and Hay, but let us take hed that in our hearts we be not angry at God, for God is righte|ous, and we are sinners, let us be angry at our sins, and repent this day, and goe to Christ as this man did, and then he will blesse us.





Postscript.
UPon these exercises I will animadvert a little. These things ar|gue a good favor of spirituall things in the speaker, and here is spirituall food for the hearer. I doe know assuredly that many Godly and savory matters, and passages have slipped from me, and these expressions are but a little of a great deale. I know not that I have added any matter, which they spake not, but have let slip, much which they spake. I have cloathed it with our English Idiom which is the greatest difference which I have knowingly made, but their Idiom to them is, as ours is to us. They have none of the Scriptures printed in their own Language, save Genesis, and Mat|thew, and a few Psalmes in Meeter, and I blesse the Lord they have so much, and such as see these Notes may easily observe that they read them, and improve them, which putteth my soule in|to an earnest longing that they might have more zeal. I blesse the Lord, that the whole book of God is translated into their own language, it wanteth but revising, transcribing, and printing. Oh that the Lord would so move, that by some means or other it may be printed.









SOME HELPS FOR THE INDIANS SHEWING THEM How to improve their natural Reason, To know the True GOD, and the true Christian Religion.
1. By leading them to see the Divine Authority of the Scriptures.
2. By the Scriptures the Divine Truths necessary to Eternall Salvation.
Undertaken At the Motion, and published by the Order of the COMMIS|SIONERS of the United Colonies.
by ABRAHAM PEIRSON.
Examined and approved by Thomas Stanton Interpre|ter-Generall to the United Colonies for the Indian Language, and by some others of the most able Interpreters amongst us.
LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, 1659.




To the Reader.
_WHO have occasion to make use of this Book, may please to observe, that the accute or long accent thus noted () signifies that the syl|lable over which it is placed is to be pronoun|ced long, the rest of the words be short, till the like, or a circumflex do regulate the sil|lables following. Words of two sillables most frequently be not accented at all, being commonly of equal measure, and hardly mispronounced. Also, sundry times the prepositions in, with, for from by, c. be set after the Substantives in the Indian and before them in the English, that so no harsh|nesse (this caution remembred) may sound in either.
Likewise sometime a phrase is used in the Indian, which word for word can hardly be rendred in the English; but then, and ever, care is had that in every sentence, and with|in the limits of every stop, the Indian doth truly answer the English. The Lord pardon, accept, and give successe, that this may be an help towards the spiritual good of Indian|souls.
So prayes
A. P.



Some helps for the POshshe Airenamwetouwngash wutche Enske|tmbawg, Indians, shewing them how to improve Okkekod: mnganuwaus ten auwrchan their natural Reason to know njek arumbuwe penauwuawunk wauhan webe the only true God, and waugh wauwrhummat Mando Jehovah, quah wr|ramuwe the true Christian religion. First by Christianuwe routsowank. Negnne spe leading them to see the divine Autho|rity pummoawarinau nejekkenwmen Mndowe tuh|kretssowunk of the Scriptures wutche God wuskwhgansh. Nesee|tetuwe Secondly by the Scriptures the divine spe God wuskwhgansh mndowious wr|ramauwngansh Truths necessary to eternall querahikkamuks re michme kej|hiitawunk. Salvation.





Question Nttoohtemuwetoowunk. How prove you that there is a God? TOohgdje kormen neh tta Mandouh
Answer. Anasquetuweten.
From the universal and constant agree|ment Wutche wwinnakommuk quah yeiache wrraw|wunk of all Nations, and persons wutche wame arkes, quah skeetambwg mit|tuhkuk in the world, who are not void of terre, owwnnak matta suwaiguk wutche right reason and humanity. sompio penauwwuk quah renowunk.
For the things which are grounded Wutche ai akqusiks chawgwunsh wekakontamoo|awk upon particular mens fancies skeje nanseawk rnwawk rytammongansh and opinions are not acknow|ledged quah wtramawytammoungansh matta wrramattau|omunks of all men, and are wutche wame rnawawk, quah wegonje often changed but this notion that ssowunnamanosh: webe (youheymmoouk) neh there is a God is common to all men, nor is it chan|ged Mandoo nnnarwee re wme rnawawk matta ssow|nu by the changes of times; oanas spe assowunnmongansh quompaious; therefore it must are from rgouche youh paughke muche songme wutche some light, which is common to all chawgun nowta weq-ai, teou nannarwe re wame

men, and that light must be ei|ther nnawnwk, quah youh wequa-ai pahke mouche nuk|qddee from tradition which hath flowed wutche af-hittewunk wutche pommochaw|shst from the first parents of mankind to uwus wutche negonk oushwwog  all their psterity from age wamenejk wttansewgannooawk wutche ntseun|ganak, to age who would notlye re ntsnganak, ouwnnak matta ppetruw|gup to therchildren in a matter re n kkrasloownganas ame ischuwnganak of so great importance; or from terre wuchio rio shai shramanwganak; ux wutche an inward light implanted in the minds ramik wquai ramekzekekzzo ramee tteoitm|moonganoo of all men by wutche wame rnnawawk spe Jehovah himself. And that such a light is in nagum. Quah neh nenar wequai tteamoptngua|nau every man naturally appeareth by wme nnnawawk renmpatiwe; mouskme spe the feares that are in all wz-sassawungansh teous tteamp nguanau wame men when they have done that which they know rnnawawk pkkatche rehit chawgun waughtassoo|wawk to be evill, though no man knoweth matchrwunk, mukko renna matta waugh|tamnin, and upon extraordinary quah skeje chechge mncharawannguo|tush accidents, as Thunder, Earthquakes, a hrrmuks, arra Pddaquhhum, Quequansh, sights in the Aire, blazing Stars, n zzennguottush ksesuk terre, squrrug arrksak, c. which shewes that they know c. youh kakkoodumchmo neh nejek wautnnau there is a power above the creatures, though mouche milkissoowunk ausin keizhittishnnuk, muk|ko they see him not, who will punish sin, matta nawah, ouwun bitch arroutatak matcher|wunk,

and can do it when he will, And quah m uttrn hanrkkeque roytak. Quali this is youh mutche God Jehovah.
Secondly, from the beginning of all things. Nzetatawe, waske noujiitch wame aiakquiiks, that have a dependant being. For teous uttahhnau rambatsen pummaiawunk. Wutche the things which had a beginning could not be cause aiak quiiks teous noujaiiggishhansh, matta hom wje of their own being, for that whch is not pummaiawnganoo, wutche ne matta pummaynook cannot act, nor could any thing matta hom rmanoo chaugun, matta hom chaugun be before it was therefore it must pummio, askam pummy nshan, newutche paughke have its beginning from [muchh]outhhamo noujaiewunk wutche chaugun some other cause which is without beginning nowta perrewawhjaioohittit teou matta outchinoh, and therefore the first [mehchu noujaiewunk] quah n-wutche negonne being and efficient cause of all pummayawunk quah kezhwan waje wutche wame other being. unkatagganakpum mayawngansh.
There was a first man, and a fist woman and Moh negnne ren, quah negnne krequabus, quah a first in every kind of liv|ing negnn rame wame achabwehittawunk wutche pm|pamantajek creatures, but that fist man kezhittshaunak, webe youh negnne ren and woman those first of quah kerequbus, quah yujek negonnijek wutche all kinds living wame attchabrehittewngansh pmpamantejek creatures could not make themselves kezhittishank matta hom kezhwwk hoggww|wo: therefore there was a fist being, which neguche moh negonne pummyhuad, youh absolute and independent sunkaio [sambi] quah webe negamo te wutchai.

and rests upon nothing that was quah matta chetamssennmanah chaugun, nh moh before them all, and made them all, a kam wme nejek, quah kezhw ushan wanne wame, and upon whom all other beings quah skeje youh wame katggansh pummyaw|gansh depend. And this is korchetmsenak. Quah youh atta God Jehovah.


How can you know that there is a God, seeing Ob: Ten hn kuttawuhtaun ne atta Mando maetax you never saw him, nor can see him? kekenuwah, matta hm nauwo?
I know I have a reasonable An. Nouwuhtun no wadjnaman penaunuwe soul, though I never saw it, nor can mittachonkq, mukko matta ne nauwah matta hm see it. The soul were not a spirituall nauwo. Mittachonkq matta hom rasha wrndowe substance if it could be seen with bodily eyes, pummyawunk hm na wit spe hogguwe skesuks, and so no soul In like manner were not a Spirit quh ri matta otachonq. Rio God matta rashau|wandoo, if he could be seen with bodily eyes and so om na wit spe hogguwe skesuks; quah rio no God. matta Mando.


But no man can fully know Ob: Webe maa howan nowta hom tabre wauhtawn Gods nature, therefore no God? Iehovah riwunk [arndvit] ngouche matta Mando?
It followeth not for an An. Youh matta nskommena, wutche wmar|remggeee  nature cannot fully understand arrumuit hommatttabaie wuhtawn the things of an higher and more excellent aiakquiiks wutche shramggesee quah arwenngesc nature, then it self. Beasts arrumbait, ase ngamo hoggunk. Oppishshamok cannot understand what man is, much hommatta wauhtuunau chawgun ren atta share ok|kssisse

lesse how to plant and overn Com|mon-weales ten rokkechan, quah soudamotuan korta|sodomongansh; or to become learned ux koodamanchan wnskwhagana|kre, or sayl over the Seas, c. For ux seboghmman akkmmuk kathans, c. Wut|che these things exceed their yous aiakquiiks [remuks] rrookawuwunk ne|jek capacities in like manner man seeing wahtamma wnganoo rio ren nauwun ewo himselfe to be made of a more noble nature hoggakezhean wutche arwenguot arrumbuwunk then beasts, and that not of asinre oppishimmok, quah youh matta wutche him selfe, must eeds inferre that he nagum hogga, pauhke moushe pakadoowun ne h|wan who made him superiour to beasts, he kezhuwus uwio arrokawah oppishim, ewo no lesse above man, thn man is above ausinre arrokawah renok arra ren arrokawant beasts; and therefore that the full knowledge oppishshim; quah ngouche ne tabio wauhtawunk of his nature wutche uwio arrndoit [rrumuwunk] usin exceeds mans capacity. errokawah renna kitchshantmmoowunk.


Are there many Gods? or is there but one Q. Shraog Mandak? ux webe tta papsaguun wah true God? wrramat Iehovah?
There are not many Gods, there is only one An. Matta sharou Mandoak, atta webe psuk wah true God. wrremat Mando Jehovah.



How do you prove that there is but one true Q. To gouje kormen n webe psuk wah werremat God? Iehovah?
Because the reason why singular An. Wutche waiiewunk tohdje nansiewok things of the same kind are multi|plyed aiakquiiks wtche ansjekmuche nenar kokkodish|ahawk is not to be sound in the nature matta misskommauwaon rme rumbu|wunk of for the reason arndoit] wutche God; wuche wajiewunk why such like things are multiplyed is tohodje arsauk aiakquiiks kokkodishhauk atta from the fruitfulnesse of their causes: wutche hokkissgowunk wutche wajaiwunganooas: but hath no cause of webe God matta oua~he wajiewunk wutche his being, but is of himself uwio pummaewunk, webe wutche nagum hogga therefore he is one. neguche papasaqun.
2. Because singular things of Newutche nansioaks aikquiiks wutche the same kind when they are multiplyed, are nenar rak nantsjek kokkoodrishshahettit, chabis|sohawawk differenced among them selves by yaru we ngamuwo hogguwo weche their singular properties; but there nejek nanseas artumbauhittaw ngansh webe muche cannot be found another God differenced hom matta skwah, unkatak Mando achabizhan from this by any such like propertyes. wutche yuh spe chawgunsh arrious chabissewn|gansh [arrambmuks.

3. Because its proper to God Nwutche webe mohtantammim re Jehovah to do whatsoever he willeth; if there were many Gods they uein hanharroytaks, hom sharehit Mandoak hom might will contrary things, and one might be hindred by pperrewrrantammock, quah nejek hom wowotam|hittawawk another, so that he could not do what he ran chawgun rio matta hom re kaddau|weatteou would, which can not stand with the Omni|potency hom matta toukranah weeche wame keiz|tauwunganuk and nature of God. quah arrandoit Jehovah.


But may there not be many Gods: yet so that Ob. Webe hom matta shraog Mndoak: narraio ne one o the chiefest and greatest of all? pasuk negnquassik quah oussewe kerik wutche wame?
No, because the first being must An. Matta, wutshe nego~nne pummyhuad pauke be absolutely Supreame mutche nagamo utse osewe quonnguoso [sqon|guoso because he dependeth upon nothing, he rests wutche matta rambtsnno chawgun, muche not upon any person but is alsufficient to matta hown kachetamsenno webe wame tabbaio re him selfe and to all things; and all nagamo hogga quah wame r aiakquiiks; quah wame things depend upon him that which is not aiak quiiks rambats'nntankq' chawgun nowta matta absolutely chiefest and above all nagmo uts negnquasik quah rrouksso wame cannot be God. matta hom Jehovah.
2. Because the Essentiall pro|perties Wutche Mndowious pummyawous rwe, of God are such as cannot be nunquesongansh Jehovah nearrious ar matta hom

given to any more then one. meittonoush unkatgganak re ause pasuk.


What are those Properties which are Qu. Chaugunsh yous arwenunguesonngansh teous mou|tantamminoush peculiar to God alone? Iehovah webe ise?
There are many I shall instance in three which include An. Phaitchch' nen swanch mishom teous minna|mok the rest. unkaggansh.
1. That all perfections are Neh wame arwnunquesongansh uttmous in him originally, and eminently as in rame ewo negnne, quah wuna shi auwe ah' rame the first cause, from which heaven and earth negnne wajiewunk, ten wutche kesukq' quah hke and all things in them receive quah wme ajak quiiks rame nejek uttmmonmmok what soever good they have that all nauweta chwgun warrguk utthhit neh wame perfection are in rwejannguesongansh uttmous rame Jehovah infinitely the reason why the wame rroukawwe wajiewunk to hodi pumm|yawunk being and goodnesse of all quah wurrgowunk wutche wame kei creatures is limmitted is because the higwushnnak sachwhngankuwo, atta wutche wai|iewund cause whereby they exist hath communicated spe teou poummiomauk maugamous so much to them and no more, and youche re neiek quah matta wunk, quah hath made them capable of so much kei-heous neiek tabe ttumminmmin youche

and no more, but receiveth not quah matta wunk, webe Jehovah matta attum|minmmo any thing from another, but is a Spirit chawgun wtche , webe Rash|shuunk living in him selfe, or pmpemantammin nagamo ewo terre, ux of himself therefore God is not lim|mitted nagamo utse negauche Jehovah matta sachwhn|gankuwo his strength is infinite ewo milkissewunk wame arrukassmo whatsoever he willeth he doeth in heaven and earth hanharrytaks tteren kesukuk quah okkak-tere his knowledge is Infinite he know|eth ewo wwaughtuwunk wame arrukassomo waugl|taun all things; he heareth all the words, wame aiakquiiks; padak wame ruwuwun|gansh, and he seeth all the works of quah wonaumen wame rengansh wutche all men in all the world his Goodnesse wame renouh warne mittukuk terre, ouraiwunk is Infinite he is exceedingly good, he goes beyond all wame arrkass no oussewe werrego, arrukan wame in goodnesse he doth good towards wahwregewnganak terre wauhwrrerat rak'que all creatures, the presence of God is wame keisheaus-hnnak, taterit Jehovah wame infinite, he is every where in all the world filling all arrukssmo wampsin wame mittauk remssen wame places, and goes not from place to place, as doth ahapmmuks, quah matta ahntse a, arra rehit the creatures his life is keizhittishnnak uppomantammewunk wame arro|k infinite, he is Eternal, without beginning, assmo, ewo muche Micheme, mtta nenuj aious, and without end. quah matta akquino.
3. That the true God is perfectly Neh wauh wrramat Manduh muche onks

blessed in himselfe, Alsufficient of himself, wawerrehea ngamo utse, Wame tabaio ngamo he needs not supply from an utse, matta queruhik quo irananammauetounk pai|u other, For, wutche, Wutche,
1. He knowes all things at once Waughtunk wame aiakquiiks, passukutte and together in all the world, without quah nppe wawa mittukuk terre, matta keke|tokaanak discourse by the infinitenesse of terre, spe wame arroukawawunk wutche his Essence. wo Pummayawuk.
2. He willeth most freely whatsoever Wrrantmmo ossewe narrawe chawgun is good, and so perfectly that whatsoever nowta warrguk, quah asonkkaiowe neh chawgun he willeth is good so farre as he werrantmmo muche warreguk, rikqueque arry|tak, willeth it, and because he willeth it, For quah wutche warrantmmen, Wutche Jeho|vah is simply and Infinitely good. saioo quah wame-arrukowauwe werrego.


How do you prove that heaven and earth, and Q. Ten hom wutche kormen neh kesuk quh hk, quah all things in them have the Originall wame aiakquiiks rame nejek out hhenau noujiewunk of their being from wutche nejek pummayawungano wutche Iehovah?
This followeth from what An. Yowh nskonsmo wutche chaw|gun was said before, for we have proved arwamacup negnne, wutche nrramana|nas that God hath his being neh Jehovah uttahe ewo pummyawunk of himselfe, and is but one: therefore all nagamo utse, quah webe pasuk: negauche wame


Postcirpt.
THere might have been much more printed, concerning the pro|gresse of this work amongst the Indians, certified in other let|ters sent from New-England, which would be too tedious to insert, only the Corporation established here think fit, that the following Certificate lately received (which gives an account what proficien|cy two of the Indians now at the University in New-England have made in their learning) be printed, which is as followeth (viz.)

August 18. 1658.
THese are to testifie to all men to whom these pre|sents may come, that two of the Indians that are trained up at the Grammer-Schoole in Cambridge of New-England, whose names were Caleb and Ioel, were called forth upon tryall at the publick Commence|ment before the Magistrates and Elders, and in the face of the Country, and thereupon very little warn|ing gave good contentment (for their time) to them that were present, being examined by the Praesident of the Colledge in turning a part of a Chapter in Isaiah into Latine, and shewing the construction of it so that they gave great hope for the future of their perfecting. Witnesse
Charles Chauncy,
Praesident of Harvard Colledge, in Cambridge.







