




AN
ACCOUNT
Of several
New Inventions and Improvements
Now necessary for England,
In a Discourse by way of LETTER
TO THE
EARL of MARLBOURGH,
Relating to

Building of our English Shipping,
Planting of Oaken Timber in the Forrests,
Apportioning of Publick Taxes,
The Conservacy of all our Royal Rivers, in
particular that of the Thames,
The Surveys of the Thames, c.

Herewith is also published at large
The Proceedings relating to the Mill'd-Lead-sheathing,
and the Excellency and
cheapness of Mill'd-Lead in preference to
Cast Sheet-Lead for all other purposes
whatsoever.
ALSO
A Treatise of NAVAL PHILOSOPHY, writ|ten
by Sir Will. Petty.
The whole is submitted to the Consideration of our English
Patriots in Parliament Assembled.
LONDON, Printed for Iames Astwood, and are to
be Sold by Ralph Simpson at the Harp in St. Pauls
Church-yard. MDCXCI.



LICENSED,
March 6^t^h^. 1690.
 Rob. Midgley.






A
TABLE
OF
Some of the Principal Matters
contained in the following
LETTER
TO THE
EARL of Marlbourgh.

Tetian Ambassador's Complaint of the
ant of publick-spirited Men in Eng|land,
Page 1, 2.
Few or no Inventions come into the World
perfect, p. 2.
Reason not believed against Interest, p. 4.
The illumination of every New Art stands in
some Mens light, p. 6.

The Invention of the Sea-Compass, Printing,
and of the Circulation of the Blood, ma|ligned,
p. 6, 7.
The knowledge of Anatomy advanced a third
part in this last Century, p. 7.
The Invention of an Ayr-Chamber, p. 7.
The old lost Invention of Malleable Glass, and
the fate of the Inventor, p. 7, 8.
Inventors honoured by Kings, p. 8.
Charles the 5th. visited the Tomb of William
Bckeld, which recorded his being the In|ventor
of Pickling Herrings, p. 9.
The Dutch States erecting a Monument for Lu|dovicus
a Culen, on which was engraven his
discovery, ib.
Peter Pett Esq the first Inventor of our English
Frigats, p. 10.
The Constant Warwick the first Frigat, and built
by him in the Year 1646. ib.
Sir Phineas Pett built 15 Capital Ships of the Na|vy-Royal,
besides many of lesser Rates, ib.
Much admirable Invention in the Kings-fisher, by
him built in the Year 1675. ib.  p. 11.
K. Charles the second observed the Invention of
Frigats in danger to be lost, p. 12.
The Britannia, built by Sir Phineas Pett, the
best Ship in the World, p. 13.
The proud Inscription on the St. Lewis of
France, ib.
The Verses in Latine and English under the
Draught of the Britannia, p. 14, 15.
Sir William Temple quoted about the strength
of our Shipping, making us an over-match for
our Enemies, p. 17.

He is again quoted about the strength of our
Oak, and the Art of our Shiprights awing
our Enemies, p. 17.
Our Shipwrights bound by their Charter not
to communicate their Art to Forreign Prin|ces
or States, ib.
The Contracts at the Navy-Board 'till of late
restrained Builders of Ships, to build only
with English Timber, ib.
The Word [English] now left out in Con|tracts,
ib.
Shortly after the Restauration of King Charles
the second, the Corporation of Shipwrights
presented him Proposals in Writing for the
preservation and encrease of Oaken-Tim|ber,
p. 18.
His Majesty referred those Proposals to the then
Attorney General, ib.
Mr. Attorney referred it to the Navy-Board
to consider. ib.
A Report from Sir Will. Coventry, Sir Will. Bat|ten,
Mr. Pepys, and the rest of the Navy-Board,
how a sufficient number of Oaken
Trees might be planted in his Majestys
Forrests, ib.
Acorns sown have in 30 Years born a Stem of
a Foot diameter, ib.
Timber of a Foot and a half so, will be suffi|ciently
useful in building Ships, ib.
The scarcity of Timber in the Forrests, makes
for the necessity of promoting the Mill'd-Lead
Invention for Sheathing, especially in
time of War, p. 19.
The Mill'd-Lead Invention of age to speak for
it self. ib.

King Charles the second highly approved of
the Invention, p. 20.
The Phoenix sheathed therewith at Portsmouth,
and the good success thereof after divers
Voyages, ib.
His Majesty's Reason why several Shipwrights
opposed the Invention, p. 21.
His Majesty's Master-Shipwrights approved
thereof, p. 23.
A superstitious Fancy of an impossibility made
use of against it, p. 24.
Several excellent Inventions have been run down
by Superstition, ib.
What ensued upon the Mill'd-Lead Company's
Reply to the Navy-Board before the Com|missioners
of the Admiralty, p. 25, 26, 27, 28.
The Company's large Reply, drawn by the ex|cellent
Pen of Mr. Pepys, p. 26.
Tycho Brahe appealed from the Judgment of the
Age he lived in, to that of Posterity, p. 30.
The Verses writ by Tycho Brahe under the Pi|ctures
of the old famous Astronomers in his
Study, and under his own Picture there,
p. 30, 31.
An Account of the Fate of Galilaeus, p. 32.
Of Peiresk's Letter to him, ib.
He confuted Pope Urban's idle Comment upon
Aristotle de Coelo, ib.
The Pope got his Book condemned as Hereti|cal
by the Consistory, ib.
Dr. Robert Wood's learned and excellent Inven|tion,
drawn by himself, in Latine and English,
for the fixlng of Easter for ever, from p. 32,
to p. 38.

The Author of The Happy future State of Eng|land
referred to for celebrating the Royal
Society, p. 39.
That Author referred to as the first Discoverer
of the Numbers of the People of England
from Records, ib.
An An~imadversion on such Fops as ridicule the
Royal Society, ib.
Mynheere Van Beuninghen made the People of
England and Wales but two Millions, p. 40.
Dr. Isaac Vossius made the People of England,
Scotland and Ireland but two Millions, ib.
The Observator on the Bills of Mortality with
excellent fine spun Notions made them about
six Millions, ib.
The Author of The Happy future State of Eng|land,
doth from the Returns on the late Poll
Acts, and the Bishops Survey in the Year
1676. make them about 8 Millions, p. 41.
He hath given Accounts of the Numbers of the
People of France, Spain, Holland, ib.
He hath given Directions about the apportion|ing
Taxes with equality, p. 42.
The want thereof is the only Grievance in
Taxes, ib.
Sir Will. Petty's Judgment how a Million should
be raised in England, p. 43.
Half as much more now paid by the Land-Tax
alone, than in the Million, as distributed by
Sir Will. Petty's Proposal, ib.
By the Rule of Sir Will. Petty's Calculation of a
Tax of one Million, above six Millions may be
raised, and no Man feel it much, if equally laid,
and yet according to it no man will pay above
a tenth part of his yearly Expence, p. 44.

Princes and their Ministers to be steered in their
apprehensions of the Danger of Civil War, by
the Rule of Dulce Bellum inexpertis, p. 45.
An Account of the French King's Expences and
Receipts in the Year 1614. out of Thua|nus.
p. 46.
The yearly Expences and Receipts of the pre|sent
French King, more than quadrupled since
that time, ib.
Sir Will. Petty's Naval Philosophy herewith
published, p. 47.
That Work of his justly extoll'd, ib.
The Earl of Marlbourgh's Courage and Conduct
in the taking of Cork and Kingsale referred to
with Honour, p. 48.
An Account of the Invention of Gunns in the
Year 1378. i.
That Invention maligned by Polydore Virgil,
Cardan and Melancton, ib.
King Alfred the first Inventor of Lanthorns,
p. 49.
Of our new Invented Glasses and Lamps, p. 50.
Of the Scarlet or Bow-Dye, p. 51.
Of the New-River-Water, p. 52.
An Account of the New Engine for taking a|way
Obstructions and Shelfes in the Thames,
and other Royal Rivers, p. 53, 54.
How much the River of Thames is shallower
before the King's Yard at Deptford, since King
Charles the second's Restoration, p. 55.
Of the City of London's Applications to the for|mer
Commissioners of the Admiralty for the
Preservation of the River of Thames, p. 56.

Of the City of London's Reasons in writing, pre|sented
to that Board against Letters Patents
for licensing Encroachments, p. 56.
If that River were spoil'd, the great Trade
of England would be transplanted, not to
other Sea-Port Towns in England, but to
Forreign Parts, p. 57.
A Lease made of a great part of the Soil of the
River, and by which the Conservatorship
thereof may accrue by Survivorship to a
Colour-man in the Strand. ib.
Those Commissioners of the Admiralty took
much Pains in preserving that River, ib.
The Report from the Judge of the Admiralty
of the Admiral's being Conservator of all the
Royal Rivers, and having a Concurrency
with the Lord Mayor in the Conservacy of
the Thames, p. 58.
The Wisdom of our Ancestors in making them
both Conservators of it, p. 59.
Of the Conservators of the great Rivers among
the Romans, ib. p. 60.
The River of Thames now labouring under its
most Critical State, p. 60.
The great ill effect that the Fire of London had
on the Thames, p. 61.
The Stream of the Thames more clear and gen|tle
than that of Severn, and the Cause there|of,
ib. p. 62.
Why the Tide flows up so high into the heart
of this River, p. 62.
The Cause of the shifting of the Tides there, ib.
The three Constituent parts of a River, p. 64.
Of the destruction of several great Rivers by
Sullage, ib.

The Administration of the Banks of great Ri|vers
is a part of the Regalia, p. 65.
The Conservatorship of such Rivers is a part
of the Regalia, ib.
Of the Conservators of such Rivers, and their
Banks among the Romans, p. 66.
This Branch of the Regalia granted to our Ad|mirals
in their Patents, ib.
The Vice-Admirals of Counties are in their Pa|tents
from the Admiral, appointed Conser|vators
of the Royal Rivers there. ib.
Of those Vice-Admirals Non-user of the Power
to demolish Nusances, p. 67.
Of the Agreement of the Common-Law and Ci|vil-Law
Judges An. 1632. that the Admiral
may redress all Obstructions in Rivers be|tween
the first Bridges and the Sea. p. 68.
Licenses granted by the Admiral for enlarging
Wharfs, c. p. 69.
The illegality of granting Forfeitures before
Conviction, p. 72.
Sir George Treby, the Attorney General, men|tion'd
with Honour, ib.
The Benefit the People now find by being freed
from illegal Grants of Forfeitures before Con|viction
doth much outweigh all the Taxes
they pay to their Majesties, p. 77.
The Passage concerning the Alderman who
ask'd King Iames the first, if he would re|move
the River of Thames, ib. p. 78.
Of the Survey of that River by Sir Ionas
Mor, p. 79.

Of the Survey of that River by the Navy-Board
and Trinity-house, with the assistance of Cap|tain
Collins, ib. p. 80.
Captain Collins his Draught of that River com|mended,
ib.
The only way possible for preventing future
Encroachments on that River, ib.
The Nature of the Office of a Conservator, as
defined by the Writers of the Regalia, p. 81.
The same agrees with the Measures of our Law-Books,
ib.
Granting things to the Low-water-mark vexati|ous,
p. 83.
The Course taken by the Council-Board An.
1613. to preserve the River of Tyne, p. 84, 85.
An Order of Council for demolishing a Nusance
to Navigation in the Port of Bristol, An. 1630.
p. 87.
More of the Conservacy of the Royal Rivers,
ib. p. 88, 89.
That Care be taken against the Sea-mens being
molested, ib. p. 90.
In a little more than 12 Years after the Year
1588. our Seamen were decay'd about a third
part, p. 90.
In the Act of 35 Eliz. for restraining New Build|ings,
a tender regard was had to the Sea-men,
ib. p. 91.

A necessary Document to be thought of by the
Conservators of our Rivers, p. 92.
The Wardmote Inquest referr'd to for the pre|servation
of the River of Thames, p. 93, 94.
A fifth part of the River of Thames in our Me|mory
taken in by Encroachers, p. 95.
The Profit accruing from the River of Thames
to the Admiral and Lord Mayor, ib. p. 90.
Of the Charge incident to the Lord Mayors in
the Conservacy of that River, ib.
Of the Charge born by the City in the obtain|ing
Patents to be vacated, that prejudiced
that Conservacy, ib. p. 97.
Of the City's applying to King Edward the 4th.
for a Scire Facias to vacate a Patent of that
Nature, and of the Lord Mayor's obtaining
and prosecuting that Scire Facias to effect,
p. 97.
The Diligence of several late Lord Mayors in
thus shewing their Zeal for the Conservacy of
the Thames, ib.
The present Lord Mayor referr'd to with Ho|nour
on the same account, p. 98.
Courage in Magistrates commended, ib.

The City of London apply'd to the Government
in Henry the eighth's Reign for a Proclama|tion,
and obtain'd one, for the better enabling
the Lord Mayor and his Deputies to pro|mote
the Conservacy of the River of Thames,
p. 99.
Of the late King Iames rejecting a Proposition
for Building on the Shore above Bridge,
p. 100.
More of the present State of Encroachments on
that River below Bridge, and the only way
to prevent future ones there and in the other
Royal Rivers, from p. 107, to the end.







To the Right Honourable
Iohn LORD Churchill,
Baron Churchill of Sandridge,
Viscount Churchill of Ay|mouth
in the Kingdom of
Scotland, Earl of Marlbo|rough,
and one of their
Majesties most Honoura|ble
Privy Council.
My most Honoured LORD,
IT hath been observed by several of
our late ingenious Writers, that an
eminent Venetian Embassador, af|ter
a long residence in England, sayling
homeward, did cast his Eye back on this
Land, and said in his own language, O

Isola felicissima, c. The happiest Coun|trey
on the face of the Earth, did it not
want publick Spirits among them: Nor
do I think that the pudet haec opprobria
nobis, c. was in any Age so justly ap|plicable
to England on this account as in
the present one, wherein Men generally
depraved by a selfish inhospitable tem|per,
do like the Hedge hog, wrap them|selves
up in their own warm Down, and
shew forth nothing but Bristles to the
rest of the World, and cry out !
when they have found a Stone to throw
at an Inventor of any thing beneficial to
Mankind, instead of giving a tender
helping Hand to the Inventions them|selves,
and which might with Iustiee be
expected, since few or none come into the
World with all the perfection they are
capable of.
But, My LORD, th this Inventi|on
of Mill'd-Lead (how much or little
soever I contributed to its first Concep|tion,
it matters not, I being at its Birth
concerned in a greater share and Interest
therein, and the Transactions relating
thereto, than any one else, although 
willingly then admitted the use of other

Names more considerable to give Counte|nance
and Credit to the Work, and to
avoid Envy) hath been accompanyed
with tho fate of all Inventions, namely,
a peevish ndeavour of some narrow-soul'd
Men to run it down, yet accord|ing
to the saying, Unus dum tibi pro|pitius
est Jupiter, tu hosce miutos
Deos, flocci feceris: Your Lordship
with your great Heroical Genius, and
your incomparable penetrating Vnder|standing,
having surveyed all the circum|stances
relating to this Invention, and
the past Transactions about it, and your
having afterward been pleased to patro|nize
the Inventors and Invention, I can
easily be unconcerned at the Censures of
smaller People who are concerned against
it.
My LORD, I have been long since
taught by a great Philosopher of the
Age, that When Reason is against
Men, they will be against Reason, and
have sufficiently observed, that the way
that most Men take to be cryed up for
Masters of Reason, is to make Reasn
serve them, that is, to serve their
urn.
I am not now to learn, that whoever
attempts the settlement of any Question,
which would be the unsettlement of any
mens Interest, may be suspected to have
either an unsettled Fortune, and that
like a Newcomer to the Coast of such a
Question, he comes to settle himself there|by,
or to have an unsettled Head, and
to be one who knows not that against
any thing by which Men get their living
they would not own to believe any that
came from the dead. Th the Proofs for
any thing are as clear as the Meridian
light, yet where Men are Antipodes to
each other in Interest, at the same time
'tis Noon-day with the one, and Mid|night
with the other.
And moreover, Reason as it resembles
Gold in being the most valued, so (as
one saith) it doth too, in being the most
ductile thing in Nature.
We know how much Mechanicks de|pend
on the Rule of Rectum est index
ui  obliqui; and here it comes into
my mind to entertain your Lordship with
no unpleasant or vulgar Spculation in
Geometry, that Maximus Angulus est
recta linea,  minimus Angulus est

recta linea, the greatest Angle and the
least are both the same with a right
line.
But if it were for the general profit
or pleasure of Men to deny that there
is any right or strait line, or that any
Right Line can be made so much as for
use, many would be found to deny it
strenuously, and who perhaps either would
argue, that there is not in Nature any
right Line, and that all Lines are Ar|tificially
made by the ducture of some
point, or the meeting of two superficies,
making the edge of any thing, or the
Contact of a Cylinder with a Plain,
and that neither of these wayes can pro|duce
a right Line, because there is no
true strait Superficies, but what has in|equality
or hollowness in it, and that
consequently the motion of any Point up|on
any uneven Superficies, or the mu|tual
concurrence of two uneven Super|ficies
can never produce an even or right
Line, or who else would, if not cut off,
yet jogg the Hands of those they found
making right Lines, or if they found
any made, would either oblitterate them,
or apply Microscopes to them, whereby

some inequality or raggedness in them
would be discovered, or they would per|vert
Witnesses to swear, or Iudges to
decree, that they were not Right Lines,
or perhaps they would turn the making
of Right Lines into Ridicule, according
to the Humour of this Age, or accord|ing
to the humour of an old barbarous
former one, maliciously call it the Black
Art.
We know that according to the Sea-phrase
one Ship is said to wrong ano|ther,
that excels it in swiftness of sail|ing:
And thus the Shipwrights and
Plumbers may if they please think the
Mill'd-Lead Invention hath wrong'd
them in doing so much right to Shipping
and Navigation in particular.
Nor is it indeed possible for any New
Invention, how profitable soever to Man|kind,
to appear in the World, but that
such new Illumination must stand in some
Mens light, and obstruct their pratique
in those Arts of life wherein they were
expert. Thus there is no doubt but the
Invention of the Sea-Compass was ma|ligned
by the old dull Coasters, and that
of Printing by the Hackney Writers,

and the excellent Notion of the circula|tion
of the Blood, by the old Mumpi|mus
Doctors, who being sufficiently at
ease by the Circulation of Money and
Trade in the Realm knew how to stuff
their hollow Teeth with their Patient's
Bread, without studying Anatomy; the
knowledge whereof hath been enriched by
a full third part at least within this last
Century, as the learned Dr. Henshaw
tells us, in his very ingenious Book call|ed
A Register for the Air, printed An.
1677. and wherein he hath published an
excellent Invention of a Domicil or Air
Chamber and by means whereof in any
part of our Native Soyl we may
have the Air as pure as on the top of the
Pike of Teneriffe, and made so pure as
is not to be found on the face of the ha|bitable
Earth.
And thus no doubt but the Gold-smiths
and Silver-smiths would think
themselves injured by any who could
revive the Art of making Glass malle|able,
which one in Tiberius's time had
found out a way to do, and withall
so yielding, and such as would rather
bow than break; for he bringing a Glass

Vial to the Emperour to shew his Art,
he threw the Vessel against the Stone-pavement,
with which blow it was not
broken but dented, and then taking his
Hammer, be again beat out the dent:
But he was secretly made away for his
pains, as likewise several Inventors have
been by the Dullards who only had the
Wit to do that, and the Assassinates
have thought they might dispatch them
as justly as Souldiers think they may deal
so with those who come to beat up their
Quarters.
Yet however the fate of some Inven|tors
hath been to fall at the feet of En|vious
Plebeian Mechanicks, others of
them have had that reward of their dili|gence
in all Ages and Countreys, to
stand before Kings; and the Vicege|rents
of the God of Nature have with
peculiar respect treated such as the King
of Kings delighted to honour, by im|parting
the secrets of Nature to them.
And such respect hath been shewn to
the Memory of useful Inventors by the
greatest Princes, that several Histori|ans
have mentioned it, that Charles the
5th. with a great Parade of his Atten|dants,

went out of his way to see the
Tomb of William Buckeld, who (as
it was recorded in his Epitaph) was
the Inventor of the Dutch way of Pick|ling
of Herrings, which is so beneficial
to those States, that may make it be said
that Amsterdam is founded upon Her|ring
bones: His Countrey-men it seems
were so just to him, as to perpetuate
the fame of the Invention as well as
the Name of the Inventor by a grate|ful
Inscription.
And thus too was the Memory of
Ludovicus a Culen, Professor of Geo|metry
at Leyden, honoured by those
States, by their taking care that on his
Tomb should be engraven his Attempt to
find out the proportion between a Dia|meter
and a Circle, dividing the Cir|cle
into more parts than Sand would
constitute the whole Earth, and yet an
Unie was too much, and a Null too
little.
I am here minded of mentioning how
the Tomb of Peter Pet, Esq the Ma|ster-builder
of England (and whose An|cestors
for upwards of two hundred
Years have been Master-builders and

principal Officers of the Navy Royal) re|cords
his being the first Inventor of our
English Frigats, and of which the Con|stant
Warwick, built by him in the Year
1646. was the first, and which sort of
Shipping is variously the most excellent
and useful in the known World.
And it having been the fortune of
all the Master builders of that Family
gradually to excel each other in their
Art, I cannot here omit to take notice
how Sir Phineas Pett, the Son of that
great Artist, having built fifteen Capi|tal
Ships for the Royal Navy, besides
many more of the lesser Rate, hath obli|ged
his Countrey with a great deal of ad|mirable
Invention in the Fabrick of the
Kings fisher, a fourth Rate, built by
him in the Year 1675.
For whereas all Ships before, since
the first use of Navigation, were built
by rising Lines, which made not so re|gular
a Figure in the Water, he built
that by Horizontal ones, and so contri|ved
the Port holes therein, that most of
her Guns might point to one Center, and
thereby cause such breaches in the sides
of the Ship she fought with, that could

not be stopp'd with Pluggs, and that
brought her safe off from her being taken
by seven Algerine Men of War, accord|ing
to the Relation of it in the Gazets
I have been informed of, and which
could not have happened but by her
Guns so pointing, making such great
breaches in their sides as forced them to
draw off. And so much hath the New
Invention of the building her by such
Lines, contributed to the excellency of
her sayling, that I have read it in a re|lation
of the Engagement between her
and the Golden Rose of Algiers, so
much famed for her sailing, printed in
London in the Year 1681. that the
Kings-fisher much out sail'd that Ship,
and having taken her, found so much
Water in her Hold, occasioned by the
great breaches in her sides, which made
her to sink down within an hour after
her Capture.
What the great effects of such an In|vention
may hereafter be throughout the
Maritime World, I know not, Capital
Ships being now liable to be sunk by Bul|lets
which before they were not, by rea|son
of the multitude of Pluggs and Hands

to apply them, always in readiness, unless
a Shot had lighted in the Powder-room,
as was supposed to have happened in Ad|miral
Opdam's Ship. But he having
done so much impartial Iustice to the
Invention of the Mill'd-Lead-Sheath|ing,
I am very well contented that it
comes in my way here to retaliate to him
by the just mention of the matters of fact
whereby he hath obliged this Age and suc|ceeding
ones, to account him a Benefactor
to his Countrey.
And, my Lord, I do think my self
the more obliged out of my love to my
Native Countrey, to present your Lord|ship
with this glancing View of these
two great Inventions, because they are
very likely in a short time to come a|mong
Panciroll's Res deperditae, with|out
care taken to prevent it; for King
Charles the second, who had very great
Skill in the Mystery of the Shipwrights
Calling, hath been heard to observe it,
that the Fabricks of our English Ships
did for several Years more and more
degenerate from the Friga way in
whch the Constant Warwick was built,
to the way of our sluggish old built

Ships, and not at all adapted for swift|ness
of Sailing, and insomuch that the
Constant Warwick it self being after the
Death of the Inventor repaired by a|nother
Artist, was in its repairing spoil|ed
of the excellency of its sailing.
Nor have I heard of any other Ship
built by the Kings-fisher's Lines, ex|cept
the Katherine Yatcht. And there|fore
it is of great importance to the Na|tion
that the Draughts of those three
Vessels particularly should be transmitted
with great Care to Posterity.
I must not here forget to mention, that
among the many Capital Ships built by
Sir Phinehas Pett, the BRITANNIA is
by the concordant Voice of all the curious
Iudges of Naval Architecture allowed
to be the best Ship in the World, and far
exceeding in excellency of Building and
Strength the great first Rate of France,
call'd the St. Lewis, on the which is
engraven this proud Inscription, Je uis
L'unique de l' Onde,  mon Roy du
Monde. An admirable Draught or
Sculpture of this Ship BRITANNIA,
in four large sheets of Dutch aper,
will shrtly be published, with more mo|dest

but just Encomiastick Verses in La|tine,
English, French and Dutch un|der
it, which I thinking fit to Copy out
on my sight of the Draught, shall here
entertain your Lordship with those of
them that are in Latine and English,
Viz.



Ad Navem Britanniam.
Nomine digna tuo Navis, cui vela Britanii,
Imperii titulo jure superba tument;
Quid Tormenta vehis? Patrium pro fulmine Nomen,
Fluctibus  terris quo modereris habes.
Tum Caesar tibi Numen adest dextra|que
refulgent,
Majora Aequorei Sceptra Tridente Dei.
Quod Natura potest, potuitve Ars prae|stitit
in Te.
Ingenio Artificis, Robora tuto tuo es.



To the Ship Britannia.
Hail mighty Ship: None hath so just a claim
To swell her Sails with great Britannia's Name.
Thou need'st no Guns, that Name o're Sea and Land
Thunders aloud, and gives thee full Command.
Thy Prince's Hand a Triple Scepter wields,
To which great Neptune's Trident ho|mage
yields.
The Builder's Skill equals thy strength; in thee
What Nature could, what Art can do, we see.



I have the rather thought fit to
mention the just celebration of this
Ship, because some impudent Scrib|lers
of the Coffee-House News-Let|ters
presumed last Summer to scan|dalize
her, as if she were rotten, and

disabled for Sea-service, whereas in
truth she was then only put into the Dock
for such necessary. Repairs as most of
the thirty Capital Ships required, which
were built pursuant to the Order of
Parliament, but from thence she will
be lanched out perfectly good, and as
strong as ver.
It was a proverbial saying among the
mans, Moenia Sancta: And the pro|fane
Vulgar, who write their despicable
Lyes for Bread, ought not to be suffered
to pollute the Walls of our Nation with
their vile Pens; and such Epistolae ob|scurorum
Virorum should meddle, with
the Gally-oists of my Lord Mayor's
Show, and not first Rate Ships: And I
believe had any such pauvres Diables
in France so belyed the Shp St. Lewis,
they would have been Pillory'd, or
Keel-hauled under her.
Our excellent Statesman Sir William
Temple (who truly deserves the Name
of a publick spirited Man, for the ex|cellent
Writings he hath published) in
his Suvey of the Constitutions and In-Interests
of the Empire and other Coun|tries,
with their relation to his Maje|sty

in the Year 1671. mentions the
strength of our Shipping, as having for
many Ages past (and still for ought we
know) made us an over-match for the
strongest of our Neighbours at Sea;
and speaks of the Dutch having been
awed by the strength of our Oak, and
the Art of our Shipwrights, c. It is
therefore not without reason, that the
Charter of the Corporation of our Ship|wrights
hath obliged them not to com|municate
their Art to any Forreign Prince
or State. But yet when I consider that
whereas the Contracts of the Navy-Board
for building of Ships did 'till
within these few Years past oblige the
Builders to build with good substantial
English Oaken Timber and Plank, and
that such not being now to be had, that
word [English] is left out, and liber|ty
given to build with forreign; and fur|ther
consider, that application was made
to the Ministers of King Charles the se|cond
by the Cnrporation of Shipwrights,
shortly after his Restoration, with their
Proposals in Writing for the preserva|tion
and encrease of Oaken Timber
(and Copies of which I have seen

under the Hand of Sir Phinehas Pett,
and many others of the most eminent
of that Corporation, and that those Pro|posals
being referred to the then Attor|ney
General, he referring their Consi|deration
to the Navy-Board, Sir Willi|am
Coventry, Mr. Pepys, Sir Willi|am
Batten, and the rest of the Com|missioners
of the Navy, did with great
Iudgment Report in Writing how
and where a sufficient number of Oak|en
Trees might be planted in his Ma|jesty's
Forrests, and that the judicious
Report from that Board carryed with it
self-evidence of the practicableness of th
thing with ease, and that had not so great
a Proposition then evaporated, but on the
contrary have been vigorously pursued, the
Oaken Timber sufficient for the use of the
Navy Royal had now been in a forward way
to its sufficient growth: For it having been
known that Acorns sown, have in the space
of thirty Years born a Stemme of a Foot
diameter, 'tis obvious how soon they will
bear a stemme of a foot and a half diame|ter,
and that such Timber so of a foot and
a half, will be sufficiently serviceable in the
building of Ships. I say, when I consider

these things, and fear how few else consider
them here, and how many observe and con|sider
them abroad, I think there is too
much occasion to bewail our Soils not being
fertile with men of publick Spirits.
Whether we shall at this rate come to
build with English Oak again before
Plato's great Year, I know not: But,
my Lord, this that I have said doth
speak, (or as I may say) cry it aloud to
us, that while we have the Mill'dLead
Sheathing for Ships, without fear of
losing it, that he will scarce deserve to
be thought a Patriot, who at this time of
day, when the Crown hath so little Timber
in its Forrests serviceable for Shipping,
and hath Lead of our own for Sheathing,
would have it unnecessarily send a great
deal of Money for Eastland irr for that
purpose, of which the arrival here will be
so uncertain, and indeed hazardous in
time of War.
My Lord, I intend not to entertain
your Lordship with Rhetorical flourishes
and Harangues of the usefulness of the
Invention of the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing:
It is of Age in the World to speak for it
self, and it hath had the Honour not on|ly

to have great unbyass'd Artists for
its Encomiasts, but a great Prince, who
had a profound Iudgment in the Ship|wrights
Mystery, I mean King Charles
the second: For as soon as Sir Francis
Watson had acquainted him with the
Invention of Milling Lead for Sheath|ing,
his Majesty was very impatient 'till
he had made experiment thereof, where|upon
Lead was prepared by a small En|gine,
wherewith the Phoenix, a fourth
Rate was sheathed by Sir Anthony Dean
at Portsmouth, which he saw done with
care, the Bolt-heads, c. being fairly
parcelled, as they ought to be in any
sheathing; and after divers Voyages to
the Straits, Guinea, and the West In|dies,
she had her sheathing strip'd at se|ven
Years end to repair the Plank, but
not for any defect in the Sheathing
it self. Nor could those of the Navy-Board,
when at their attendance on the
Council with their Complaints of Eight
Ships in Twenty, make the least Obje|ction
(though they were fairly challeng|ed
to it) against the Rudder-Irons, Bolts,
or other Iron work of the Phoenix; the
which made that judicious Peer, the then

Earl of Hallifax declare, That if of
twenty Ships they complained of Nine|teen,
and had nothing to say against the
twentieth, he must conclude it to be the
Workmens fault, for if they had done the
other nineteen as that twentieth Ship
was done, they must have proved all as
well as she: The King also at the same
time, when they objecting that the Mer|chants
did not use it, which they would
do if it was so good a sheathing as was
pretended, replyed, That the Shipwrights
(whose best Friend the Worm was)
wanted not Skill to discourage them;
yet that their decrying it must soon be
discerned to proceed from their inte|rest.
And indeed it is obvious how the
Shipwrights do influence the Merchants
and Owners in the Sheathing and other
Repairs of Ships, by their being general|ly
Part-Owners in all the new Ships they
build.
Nor is it to be wondred at that the King
from the beginning gave all the encou|ragement
he could to this Invention; for
when he considered of the thing upon Sir
Francis Waton's first laying it before him,
his Majesty pressed him to make effectual

Preparation for the Work, saying, It
would save him at least 40000 l. a
Year in his Navy, the which was not
improbable, if it had met with that due
encouragement, use and application for
Sheathing, Scuppers, Bread rooms, and
all other purposes it was capable of, with
regard had to the charge and damage
that a Wood-sheathing brings to the Plank
by the great Nail-holes, which they use
to spile up at stripping, and other in|conveniences
that attend Wood-sheath|ing.
And here it occurrs to my thoughts,
that his Majesty being occasionally in
Depford yard, as the Workmen were
bringing on an ordinary Straits-sheathing
with Wood upon one of his small Ships, he
asked them why they did not sheath her
with Mill'd-Lead, and answer was made,
she was a weak Ship, and required
strengthning. The King thereupon replyed,
they had as good have sheathed her with
Sarenet, as such a sheathing to streng|then
her, and saying, Lord have Mer|cy
on the Men who depend on that
sheathing, if the Ship be not strong
enough her self without it.
One would think now, my Lord, that
after so great a King, so judicious in all
Naval Mechanicks had approved the
great usefulness of this Invention, and af|ter
all his eminent Master-builders (and
who were the only Shiprights disinterest|ed
from opposing it, in regard their sub|sistence
depended only on their Salaries
from the Crown) had done so too, it
should be some potent and weighty Obje|ction
that should be a Remora to s pro|gress.
But according to the idle con|ceit
of the Fish Remora, which mens
sotishness hath made a vulgar one, name|ly
that it can stop the motion of a Ship
under sail, (and some vain Authors have
essayed in print to give reasons for such
energy of that Fish; and other Authors
have attributed the cause of that Fish's
power to that mighty nothing of occult
qualities, whereas the true cause of that
vulgar Error was what an old famous
Naturalist said of that Fish, Flent ven|ti,
saeviant procellae, semper Navem
immobiliter tenet; which implies no
more, but that notwithstanding ny vio|lent
Tempests, it always did stick to
the Ship immoveably) a superstitious

vain imagination of an impossibility,
namely, of the Mill'd Lead corroding
the Iron-work, through some occult
quality, hath been made use of as the
Remora that hath hindred the progress
of this Invention, when it was so fair|ly
under sail, and had made so good a
Voyage for the Crown, as to bring it
above Cent. per Cent. profit, besides
the great advantage in sailing.
But it is no matter of Raillery, to
observe that many excellent and most
useful Inventions have been run down in
the World by superstitious Fancies and
Imaginations, and fortifying impossibi|lities
with occult qualities; insomuch
that our late Act for burying in Flan|nel,
that was of such benefit to the pub|lick,
was once in danger of being run
down by an idle Notion of an impossibi|lity
that intoxicated the beliefs of the
Mob, namely, that the Air was likely
to receive putrefaction by Flannels ma|king
the Dead to sweat; and as reaso|nably
may the populace here imagine,
that the New-River-Water conveyed to
dress their Meat through Pipes of Lead,
will corrode their entrails, if Lead hath

such an occult quality to corrode Iron:
And as well may we be afraid to take
the Venice Treacle, because of its be|ing
long kept in boxes of Lead.
But your Lordships Iudgment is so
excellent, that it cannot be imposed on
by a Non Causa pro Causa, or any
other fallacy; and that I might total|ly
avoid the least suspicion of one who
would impose either on your Lordship,
or on any of Mankind, while under the
shelter of your Lordships Name I write
to the World, I have here fairly and
candidly set forth the Matters of Fact
in the Transactions the Settlement of this
Invention hath occasioned on the Stage
of the World.
My Lord, I know it is fit for your
Lordships entire satisfaction, and that
of others, that I should mention what
ensued upon the Company's Reply to
the Navy-Board before the Lords Com|missioners
of the Admiralty. In short,
one of those Lords, who was likewise a
Member of the Privy Council, was by
that Admiralty-Board desired to carry
both that Report and Reply to the Coun|cil-Board:
And upon reading the Re|port,

his Majesty in Council was pleas'd
to referr the whole matter back again
to those Commissioners of the Admiral|ty;
and whereupon the Company ad|dressed
themselves by the Memorial here|with
also published, desiring that for the
greater clearness of the matters com|plained
of, that what the Navy-Board
or the Company had further to say, might
be laid down before them in Writing. It
is fit I should here acquaint your Lord|ship
that the Companys Reply was drawn
by the excellent Pen of Mr. Pepys, and
whom the Author of that most elaborate
Book, The happy future State of Eng|land,
doth deservedly call the great
Treasurer of Naval and Maritime know|ledge,
and of the great variety of the
Learning which we call Recondita Eru|ditio.
And it is no reflection on the In|tegrity
of those Gentlemen of the Navy-Board,
who made the complaining Re|port
against this Invention, when I shall
say that Mr. Pepys his Character justly
renders him aequiponderous to them in
Moral, and much superiour in Philoso|phical
and Political Knowledge, and the
universal Knowledge of the Oeconomy
of the Navy.

But before there was any further pro|ceeding,
his Majesty thought fit to su|persede
that Commission for executing
the Office of the Lord High Admiral:
And the King then taking the Admiral|ty
into his own hands, and the Compa|ny
having thoughts to Petition his Ma|jesty
to hear the whole Matter himself,
they were by some Persons newly put into
the Navy-Board, (who had for several
Years shewed their approbation of the
Mill'd-Lead Sheathing) advised to offer
to that Board a New Proposal to sheath
at a rate certain by the yard qure,
and with an intimation that the Navy-Board
would take it more kindly, and
that they were by this time satisfied that
their former Complaint was by misinfor|mation.
This Advice was approved, and
a new Proposal laid before the Board,
the 20th. of December, 1686. which
was much approved by Mr. Pepys, say|ing,
That he doubted not but they
would comply with it; and declaring
that on his part when it came into his
way, he would promote it, as he had
a full Conviction (to use his own words)
that it was a great Service to the King;

and whether for that there was no occa|sion
for a good while to sheath any of the
Kings Ships, or by reason of a great deal
of peremptory business calling for the time
of that Board, or by the Company's hap|pening
to be slack in their application, I
know not; but it seems that after a years
time that Board was pleased to referr to
two of their own Members, Sir Phine|has
Pett and Sir Anthony Dean (who
had both of them been Master-builders)
the Consideration of the Company's new
Proposal. Nor could the Company wish
for more equal Iudges of the Mill'd-Lead
Sheathing, than those two worthy
Persons, who so well understood it, and
had formerly done so much right to it up|on
all occasions, as judging it so much for
the King's service: But the Kings ser|vice
calling them from the Navy-Board
to a long stay at Chatham, to which
place it stood not with the Company's con|venience
to repair, and there press them
to make their Report; and a long Sick|ness
seizing on Sir Phinehas Pett at his
return from Chatham, and he being
shortly after his recovery, employed in a
Iourney about the King's service in some

other of his Majesty's remote Yards; or
what else being the true Cause thereof,
as your Lordship may judge, so it is that
the said Proposal, which is herewith also
printed lies still before that Board with|out
any further proceedings thereon ever
since.
My Lord, I have now let your Lord|ship
see how I have been damnatus ad Me|tallum
in the progress of this Invention:
And considering the course of corrupt and
degenerate humane Nature, no Inventers
can promise themselves a nobler fate, th
the scene of their Invention lay in a no|bler
mettal.
For as Sir William Petty well ob|serves
in his Observations on the Bills of
Mortality, that if the art of making gold
were known to one person, such single
adeptus could not, nay durst not enjoy
it, but must be either a Prisoner to some
Prince, and slave to some voluptuary,
or else sculk obscurely up and down
for his privacy and concealment.
And so churlish hath the generality of
Men been to Inventers, whose discove|ries
have only salved the Phoenomena,
that they have been unwilling to give

those a good word who have taught the
Age great things, yet such where the
brightness of their knowledge would not
have the operation of the Sun-beams, in
putting out any mans Kitchin fire.
And this made the Great Tycho
Brahe, as to his famed Discovery con|sole
himself, by appealing from the judg|ment
of the Age he lived in to that of
Posterity.
I shall here divert your Lordship, by
entertaining you in his Study which he
had in an Island in Denmark by the
Munificence of his Patron King Frede|rick,
and where (removing the cover of
the room) he could as he lay with his
face upward in the Night time exercise
his speculation with beholding the Stars.
And there he had all the famous Astro|nomers
painted, and the following Ver|ses
were added, each to the Picture to
which they belonged.



Salvete Heroes, vetus O Timochare salve:
Aetheris ante alios ause subire po|los.
Tu quoque demensus solis, lunaeque re|cursus,
Hipparche,  quotquot sydera Olym|pus
habet.
Anriquos superare volens, Ptolomaee, labores,
Orbibus innumeris promptius astra locas.
Emendare aliquid satis Albategne stu|debas,
Sydera conatus posthabuere tuos.
Quod labor  Studium reliquis tibi con|tulit
aurum,
Alphonse ut tantis annumerere Viris.
Curriculis tritis diffise Copernice ter|ram
Invitam, astriferum flectere cogis iter.



In the best place Tycho Brahe had set
his own Picture with the following Ver|ses,
Quaesitis veterum  propriis Normae astra subegi,
Quanti id, Judicium posteritatis erit.
Your Lordship who knows so many things,
can be no stranger to the fate of Galilaeus,
who after he had placed the Earth among
the Heavens, found so much ingratitude
on it as to be made a Prisoner in it for so
doing, by no meaner a Man than Pope
Urban the 8th. Gassendus tells us of this
in his Life of Peiresk, and how Peiresk
wrote a Letter to him, to condole with
him during his confinement, and employ'd
his interest in a great Cardinal to pro|cure
his enlargement. Pope Urban, it
seems, had wrote an idle Comment upon
Aristotle de Coelo, and Galilaeus thought
fit to confute him, giving him the Name
of Simplicius: But the Pope got his Book
condemned by the Consistory as hereti|cal;
ab arte su non recedens, th ve|ry
unnatural.
Thus dangerous a thing is it for a Man
to over-oblige the World.
And here it comes in my way to ob|serve
how Dr. Robert Wood, a person
very famous for all Mathematical know|ledge,
lately trying to salve the Credit
of this Age from being thought barba|rous
on the account of Easter-day being
so ill fixt in our Liturgy, hath not been

by any Author I have met with, except
one, so much as quoted for his illumina|ting
us.
The only Person who quotes him for it,
is, the Author of The happy future State
of England, and he there in p. 241. like
a careful observer of the Age, hath these
following passages, viz. The great Con|troversie
about Easter, that heretofore
put all the World in a rattle, and al|most
shook it to pieces, what a toy is
it self now reputed, insomuch that our
latest Ascertainers here of the time of
its celebration, seem'd not to think it
tanti to awake when they were about
it; and th onr lately having in our
Almanacks two Easters in one Year, ea|sily
awaken'd the Non-conformists to
take notice of it, and to say, that
therefore they could not give their un|feigned
assent and consent to all and
every thing contained in, and prescri|bed
by the Book entituled The Book of
Common-Prayer, c. And th thereup|on
a Person of the Royal Society, very
profoundly knowing in all the Mathe|matical
Sciences, hath publish'd an in|fallible
way of fixing Easter for ever,

(and that it may be no longer a fugi|tive
from the rule of its practice, as it
often is at present, nor dance away
from it self, as I may say in allusion to
the vulgar Error of the Suns dancing
on Easter-day) and fixing it so as per|haps
none else could have done, nor
possibly himself any other way, yet
hath this great right done to that great
day, been by the generality of People
not so much regarded as would an Ad|vice
to a Painter, or such like Compo|sure
have been.
But however, the Doctor having pub|lish'd
it but in a quarter of a Sheet of
loose Paper, and that may be likely to
come among the Res deperditae, I shall
here record that his Invention in his own
words, that it may the better be trans|mitted
to the Judicium posteritatis, the
present World being not only a kind of
Areopagus that sits in the dark, but is
also asleep.






Novus Annus Luni-Solaris, sive
Ratio Temporis Emendata:
Ita ut Mensis quilibet Initium su|mat
a Novi-lunio, intra u|num
plus minus Diem; 
quilibet Annus, intra semi|mensem
ab Equinoxio ver|no.
I. Incipiat Calculus cum 10/20 Martii,
1680.
II. Distribuatur inde Tempus in Pe|riodos,
continentes 38 Annos; viz.
24 ordinarios, (Mensium duodecim)
and 14 extraordinarios, mensium tre|decim.
III. Anni cujuscunque, communes 
priores duodecim Menses constent  Die|bus,
alternatim, 30, 29, c. Hoc est,
primus Mensis,  diebus 30; secundus,
29; tertius, 30, c. viz. Impar Luna
pari, par fiet in impare Mense.
IV. In Periodi cujuscunque Annis 2,

5, 7, 10, 13, 15, 18, 21, 24, 26, 29,
32, 34, 37, hoc est, in 14 extraordina|riis
Annis, intercaletur Mensis decimus
tertius, Dierum 31, 30, c. altern eti|am
numerandorum: viz. in periodi An|no
secundo, Mensis 13^u^s intercalaris ha|beat
31 dies; Anno quinto, 30 dies; sep|timo,
31, c.
V. Singulis (37 Periodis) 1406 An|nis,
inserantur 14 Dies: Hoc est, 1 Di|es
singulis 100/7 Annis; vel potius, in
800 Annis, 1 Dies singulis 100 Annis;
 in 606, 1 Dies singulis 101, alterna|tim
interponatur.
Quo facto, aequabitur Temporis Ra|tio
in Secula seculorum.
R. W.


Mensura Mensis Medii Synodici  Communis
secundum Astronomos, viz.




d.
h.
I
II
III
IIII


Hipparch.
Ptolom.
29
12
44
3
15
44


Lansberg.
Vendelin.
29
12
44
3
12



Kepler.
29
12
44
3
10
50


Copernic.
Reinold.
29
12
44
3
10
48


Vieta.
Clav.
29
12
44
3
10
43



R. W.
29
12
44
3
10
27



Dechales.
29
12
44
3
10
9



Ricciol.
29
12
44
3
10



Bulliald.
29
12
44
3
9
37



Tyco.
29
12
44
3
8
39






A rectified Account of TIME,
by a New Luni-Solar Year;
So as the beginning of every
Month shall be within about
a Day of the New Moon;
and of every Year, within
half a Month of the Vernal
Equinox.
I. LET the Account begin with
March 10, 1680. From thence
II. Let Time be divided into Periods,
of 38 Years each; viz. 24 ordinary
Years, of twelue Months; and 14 ex|traordinary,
of thirteen Months.
III. In every Year, let the twelve first
common Months consist of Days 30,
29, c. alternately; viz. the first
Month, of 30 Days; the second, of
29; the third of 30, c. that is, The
od Months, of even days; and the even
Months, of od days:
IV. But in the Years 2, 5, 7, 10, 13,

15, 18, 21, 24, 26, 29, 32, 34, 37, of
every Period, viz. in the 14 extraor|dinary
Years, let a 13^t^h Month be in|tercalated,
having Days 31, 30, c,
alternately also: viz. the intercalar 13^t^h
Month of the second Year of the Period,
to have 31 days; of the 5^t^h Year, 30
days; of the 7^t^h, 31, c.
V. Let 14 additional Days be insert|ed
every (37 Periods) 1406 Years;
that is, 1 Day every 100 Years and 3/7
of a year; or rather, 1 Day every 100
Years, for 800; and for 606, 1 Day
every 101 Years, interchangeably.
The which being done, will adjust the
Account of Time for ever.
R. W.




The Author in that Book mentions his
having chosen in the conjuncture in which
he writ, to build his Fabricks of Num|bers
and Calculations on the course soil
of Popery and the Papal Usurpations,
and that finding that Mens Fancies at
that time relished no subject grateful
but Popery, he made that the Vehicle
of the Notions he meant as Phyfic to
cure their Understandings: And he there
hits a blot in the Papal Teners that was

never hit before by any Protestant Writer,
namely the rendring it to be one of those
Tents, That it is lawful to burn a
whole City, in which the major part are
Hereticks, expecting such a Discovery
should be very welcome to the populace in
that Conjuncture.
His so much and so often celebrating
the Royal Society throughout his Work,
was too a stemming of the tide of humour
that prevailed with a great part of the
Age, who knowing little either of the Old
or New Philosophy, or real Learning and
Experimental Philosophy, value them|selves
on the ridiculing and crying down
those who advance the same.
And having thus again referred to this
book of the Happy future State of England,
and to which I do but common Iustice in
representing it full of most useful Inventions
and new Discoveries in Politicks, must too
refer to the common fate of Discoverers it
hath met with, namely, in finding the
World an unteachable Animal. I do not
account the Author's great Notion in p.
112. new, namely, That the knowledge
of the Numbers of the People is the sub|stratum
of all Political Measures: For

that Thesis those words of the Captain
of our Salvation have long since taught
the World, namely, What King going to
make War against another King, sit|eth
not down first and consulteth whe|ther
he be able with ten thousand to
meet him that cometh against him with
twenty thousand? or else while the
other is yet a great way of, he sendeth
an Embassage, and desireth Conditions
of Peace?
But after so great a Minister of State
as Myn Heer Van Beuninghen had (as
De Leti hath mention'd it in print) made
the People of England and Wales to be
but two Millions: And after so illustri|ous
a Writer as Dr. Isaac Vossius in his
Variarum Observationum liber, dedi|cated
to King Charles the 2d. had made
the People in England, Scotland and
Ireland, to be but two Millions, (th
both of them probably had read the Ob|servations
on the Bills of Mortality where|in
excellent fine-spun Notions had made the
People about six Millions) his so largely
instructing us out of Records, (and a|gainst
which there is no averment) and
particularly out of the Returns of all the

Counties of England and Wales upon
several late Pole Acts; and out of the
Numbers of the Conformists and Non|conformists
upon the Bishops Survey
made in the Year 1676. that the Peo|ple
of England and Wales are above
eight Millions (and indeed that we may
probably conclude them to be about ten
Millions) may be said to be an happy New
Discovery for us in Politicks, he being
the first who evinced it out of Records,
and wherein his Benefactorship to his
Countrey in the doing it at his own charge,
might in the paying of Fees to Clerks
and Registers well be thought to surpass
the charge of the impression of that volu|minous
Work; without reckoning in the
great charge he must have been at in
having accounts of various importations
taken by Officers of the Custome-house out
of their Books, as particularly in p. 254.
The Author gives well-grounded Ac|counts
of the Numbers of the People in
France, Spain, Flanders and Holland:
But if he had took the pains to calculate
the Numbers of the People in China,
Aethiopia, or Tartaria, it had been as
acceptable to many of our continuando-talkers

of Politicks, and to some who
would take it ill not to be vogued for
first-rate Politicians, though they never
spent a thought about reducing Politicks
ad firmam, by Number, Weight and
Measure, as this Author hath done.
I shall commend to your Lordship a
frequent Conversation with this Book,
as containing in it more variety of Po|litical
Calculations than you will find in
all Printed Books in all Languages: And
it is the rather worthy your serious per|usal
in this Warlike conjuncture of time,
because the Author hath in so nervous 
Manner given our English World so ma|ny
New Directions about the Modus of
our being furnish'd with the sinews of
War, and in apportioning great Taxes
with great equality, the want where
is in effect the only grievance in publick
Supplies. And this your Lordship wil
find if you consult what he hath in p. 192
and out of Sir William Petty's Verbu
Sapienti, in Manuscript, viz.
If a Million of Money were to be
raised in England, there should be le|vyed
on the



M. lib.


Lands
216 viz. 1/30 of the Rent.


Cattel
541/600


Personal Estate
601/600


Housing
45 viz 12 d. a Chimney
in London, 10 d.
without the Liber|ties,
6 d. in Cities
and Towns, and
4 d. elsewhere.


People
625 at 2 s. 1 d. per Head,
or rather a Poll
of 6 d. and 19 d.
Excise, which is
not full 1/84 part
of the mean ex|pence.



M. lib.


Total a Million
1000


There is half as much more paid now
y the Land-tax alone than in the
Million distributed on the several Fonds
s above. And by the Rule of Sir W. P's.

Calculation of a Tax of one Million,
above six Millions may be raised, and
no Man feel it much, if equally laid
And th it falls heaviest upon Persons
yet according to it no Man will pay 
tenth of his yearly expence.
It is certainly now the Opus diei, and
a propos what he had said before in tha
Page, viz. That he believed that the
suture State of Christendom will necessarily
prompt all Patriots instead of studying
to make men unwilling to pro|mote
publick Supplies, to bend thei
Brains in the way of Calculation t
shew what the Kingdom is able to con|tribute
to its defence, and how to d
it with equality.
Your Lordship will find this Book sol
at the Shop of William Rogers, Bookseller,
at the Sun over against St. Du|stans
Church in Fleetstreet, as I find 
in an Advertisement thereof in one 
the New Almanacks for the Yea
1691.
I must frankly own that I should no
have repented of my expence in the pur|chase
of this Book, had there been 
Calculation in it but that in p. 188

and 189. where the Author Calculates
the number of the now living here, who
were born since the Year in which our
Civil War ended, or were then Children,
viz. of such Years as not to have ex|perienced
or been sensible of the Miseries
and Inconveniencies of the War, and a
Calculation of what Numbers of those
who lived in 1641. are now dead, and
what proportion of those now living
who lived in the time of the War did
gain by the War, and of the number
f such in Ireland and Scotland. The Au|hor
giveth a very momentous reason
or the finding out those things by Calcu|tion,
and the which might well seem
mpossible to be perform'd. For that
rinces and their Ministers being ratio|ally
to be steer'd in their apprehensions
 the danger of Civil War by the great
ule of Dulce Bellum inexpertis, ought
arefully to have their Eye on the Num|ers
of such inexperti in any long time
 Peace.
So little regard hath been had by our
eat Political Writers to Matters of
alculations and Accounts of the Re|enues
of Princes, that I have in the

great Thuanus observ'd but one passage
relating to the same, and which by this
Author is cited, p. 246. viz. as to the
Receipts and Expences of Lewis the
13th. for the Year 1614. (and in p.
250, out of his own Observation he makes
the Expences and Receipts of the pre|sent
French King more than quadrupled
since, as to what they were in the Year
1614.) and in the so much cry'd up Po|litical
Treatise call'd Nouveaux Interests
des Princes de l'Europe, and commend|ed
by the Author of la Republique des
Lettres, there is little or nothing of
such Political Calculations contained.
But tho at present in the many such
curious Calculations presented to the Age
by that Author of the Happy future
State of England, he doth as to the Rab|ble
of Readers, Vinum raris praemini|strare,
whereas Water would have serv|ed
their turns as well, yet I believe its
impression on Men of refined thought and
sense will be such as to make the way of
writing of Politicks hereafter without
Calculations, grow as much out of Fashi|on
as the garb of Trunk-breeches.
My Lord, I have herewith for your

Lordships farther Entertainment thought
fit to publish Sir William Petty's rough
draught of Naval Philosophy. The
filings of Gold are precious, and a Schytz
or hasty Piece of Painting done by a great
Hand is of great Value. To have drawn
so great an historical Picture of that
Philosophy, as he had the Idea of in
his Mind, would have took up his whole
Life: And he therefore considering the
little value the Age hath for such Curio|sities,
thought it only worth his while to
finish this Piece up at one sitting, and to
shew Posterity what he could have done.
But in this as it is, the Judicious few
will find many a Coup de Maitre, and
may instruct themselves thereby in some
very considerable principles relating to
Naval and Maritine knowledge.
My Lord, I know that Providence
hath so disposed of the course of your
Lordships Life, as to call you to do things
that are to be written of, rather than to
read things by others already written.
Your Lordships great and successful
Courage and Conduct, lately so conspi|cuous
to the World in the taking of Cork
and Kinale, will employ the Writers of

the Annals of our Nation, and adde a
further lustre to the Name of Marlbo|rough,
which was so much ennobled by
your Lordships Predecessor, that the great
Poets of the Age crown'd him with their
just Laurels, when they said,
Marlborough who knew, and durst
do more than all.
There is one noble Invention that was
there tributary to your Lordships success,
I mean that of Guns: But as great and
noble as this Invention is, (and which
was found out by a German in the Year
1378. and whereby the Lives of Men,
if we reckon by wholesale, are better
preserved in the defence of Cities, and
by the fate of Victory being sooner decided
in Camps, that hinders Armies from so
much butchering one another as former|ly)
it hath been by snarling Writers of
great Name maligned; and because by
it some Men were killed by retale, it
hath been render'd execrable and dia|bolical;
and that not only by Poly|dore
Virgil, but by Cardan and Me|lancton.
Nor need it be told your Lordship how
much this Invention hath been improved
since its first use. The manner of con|triving
and applying them hath not been
less improved than the way of preserv|ing
light for the Passengers in our streets,
since the finding out of Lanthorns hath:
The only Author I know, who hath re|corded
the Original of Lanthorns is our
learned Antiquary Mr. Gregory, in his
learned Notes on Ridley's View, c.
He there tells us, p. 286. That the In|ventor
of Lanthorns was our King Alu|red,
in whose dayes the Churches were
of so poor and mean a structure, that
when the Candles were set before the
Relicks, they were often blown ou by
the Wind which got in, not only per
Ostia Ecclesiarum, but per frequents pa|rietum
rimulas; insomuch that the in|genious
Prince was put to the practice
of his dexterity, and by occasion of
this Lanternam ex lignis  bovinis
cornibus pulherrime construere impera|vit;
by an apt composure of thin Horns
in Wood, he taught us the Mystery
of making Lanthorns.
But our New invented Glasses and
Lamps, that casting out so powerful and
extensive, and withal so durable and
chearful an Illumination, as to make Mens
passing about their Affairs in the Night
not only tolerable but pleasant, have
much outdone the Lanthorns invented by
our Monarch, in diebus illis.
Yet on the publishing of a Paper con|taining
the various uses this Invention
might be of to the Nation, and where|in
it was mention'd inter alia, that these
Lights might for the publick good be
employed at the Light-houses, which
give directions to Sea-faring People in
dark and stormy Nights; and that these
Lights being so clear and strong, and
continued with so much certainty as
might probably save many from Ship|wrack,
where the usual Coal-fires or
Candles often fail, by either not giving
sufficient Light, or by the uncertainty
of these Lights, subject to so many ac|cidens
as doth often occasion the great
losses both of Men, Merchandize and
Vessels: The Patentees of these New
Lights being invited to discourse with
those that have the Charge, and re|ceive

the profits of the Light-houses, they
said, they thought they came to save
their Candles, but since the Oyl necessa|ry
to maintain these Lights (though a
Pint, which would cost about a Groat,
they were told would serve one Lamp burn|ing
twelve hours) was dearer than Can|dles,
they declined the use of these
Lamps; whereupon the Patentees telling
them, they thought the saving of Men
Lives and Goods to be of more import|ance
than the saving a few Candles, de|sisted
from further application.
I might here too instance in the In|vention
of the Scarlet or Bow-dye, the
exportation whereof hath brought us in
return so much Treasure, was put to it
to make its way into the World through
much opposition. And thus is, and was,
and always will the birth of every New
Art and Science be of difficult parturi|tion,
and the Inventors be enforced to
cry, Fer opem Lucina, I mean, to crave
aid and Patronage from such generous
and Heroical and publick spirited men as
your Lordship.
My Lord, about eighty Years agoe
the Invention of the New-River-Wa|ter
was much labour'd, and it was a kind
of partus Elephantinus, about ten Years
in bringing to perfection by Sir Hugh Mid|dleton;
but Stow tells us of the great
danger, difficulty, detraction, scorn,
envy and malevolent interpositions it
first encountered with.
And indeed it may be said, that after
the six days Work and Adam's Fall the
World was yet a kind of Chaos as to the
use and service of Man, till necessity and
humane Industry set his Reason to work,
and by degrees to invent and contrive how
to apply and dispose the things he found
therein best for his ease and service; and
teeming Nature goes still big with new In|ventions
to improve the things we have,
and is ready to bring them forth, when|ever
Philosophical and Industrious Men
lend her their Midwivery: And for this
purpose I am thinking, it was a noble and
ingenious saying of Seneca, Pusilla res
mundus est, nisi in illo quod quaerat om|nis
mundus habeat, Senec. Nat. Qu. l. 2.
par. 3. i. e. The World were a poor little
thing, but for its affording ample mat|ter

of research and enquiry to all suc|ceeding
Ages.
My Lord, there is another incompa|rable
Invention that was found out not
many Years since, and which without some
such Patriotly Hero as your Lordship
awakening the Age about it, is likely to
fill up the Number of lost things; and it
is the New Engine that so much exceeds
all formerly used for the eternal preser|vation
of our Royal Rivers, by deep|ening
them, and making them every where
Navigable, and taking away all Ob|structions
and Shelfs in a very short
time. Sir Martin Beckman, the chief
Engineer of England, and as I am in|formed
the ingenious Sir Christopher
Wren, their Majesties Surveyor Gene|ral,
have given their approbation there|of;
and as likewise did King Charles
the second, who was highly pleas'd there|with,
and declared after he had seen the
working of the Engine, which in his Ma|jesty's
presence took up about a Tun and
an half in little more than a Minutes
time, that he was perfectly satisfy'd it
would answer the end proposed; and that
by means of its working horizontally, it

made no holes, but rather fill'd such as
lay in the way of its working, and left
the bottom of the River level as it wrought,
whereby such inconveniencies would be a|voided,
as had happened from the com|mon
Ballast-Lighters making such great
Holes in the River of Thames, and in
which several of the Kings as well as
Merchants Ships coming to an Anchor,
had broke their backs.
And his Majesty having been made ac|quainted
that this Engine being sent down
below Bridge to Berking-shelfe, where
is nothing but hard Shingle, and that
after half an hours breaking ground, it
took up at 19 Foot deep, about two Tuns
in a Minute and a half, during the whole
time it wrought, he said thereupon, That
he thought there was no way practica|ble
for the deepening the River of
Thames, and removing Shelfes therein,
but by this Engine.
This Engine was invented by Mr. Bay|ly,
an excellent Engineer, and much cul|tivated
and improved to its perfection by
the great Expence of Mr. Joseph Co|tinge.
King Charles the 2d. so often going

down that River in his Barges and
Yachts, took occasion thereby often to con|sider
the State thereof, insomuch that up|on
a publick Hearing in Council, that
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen had up|on
their Complaint against Patents that
straiten'd the River, and licenced En|croachments
on it, he took occasion to
speak it openly, that the River was shal|lower
before his Yard at Deptford by
three Foot since his Restauration, and
that if it should be but a Foot shallow|er
there, his Ships that did ride at An|chor
there would be spoiled.
But I have heard Mr. Shishe, the
Master-builder there, and likewise Sir
Phinehas Pett, who was formerly Ma|ster-builder
there, and afterward at Chat|ham,
averr, that the River is there ve|ry
near four Foot, if not altogether, shal|lower
than it was at that King's Restau|ration;
insomuch that their Majesties
Ships there (as likewise in the River of
Medway at Chatham) do ground about
four Foot before they have Water enough
to wind up with the Tide of flood, the
which doth very much strain and wring
them to their great prejudice, and that if

there be not a speedy course taken to
remove some Encroachments, and pre|vent
all future ones, and the farther
stopping up those Rivers with sullage,
those two Royal Rivers will be spoiled,
and in a short time useless for Capital
Ships riding therein, and the Crown be
put to immense Charge in purchasing
of ground for other Ship-yards, and in
making of Docks and Store houses, and
building new Dwelling-houses for the
Officers of the Yards.
I remember, visiting my worthy Friend
Mr. Brisband, who was Secretary to the
former Lords Commissioners for the
Admiralty, he entertain'd me with the
fight of many Papers in his Office that
related to the Applications that had been
made by the City of London to that
Board, for the preservation of the River
of Thames, and one of them was a Pa|per
of the City's Reasons against the Pa|tents
for Licensing Encroachments, and
straitning that River, and which seem'd
to me very weighty, and drawn with
such great care and pains, that what
Councellor soever drew them, I am sure
he deserved a very large Fee from the

City; and out of which I noted down
this Passage, namely, That if that River
were spoiled, the great Trade of Eng|land
would be transplanted, not to
other Sea-port-Towns in England, but
to Forreign Parts. Those Reasons men|tioning
Patents of the Soil to the low-water-mark
on both sides the River, in|ferr,
That without speedy care taken,
the River will be so straiten'd as to be|come
thereby not only useless, but even
hurtful to Shipping, by a violent and ra|pid
course of the Tide that will then
necessarily ensue: And the City there|in
Complains of a Lease made of a great
part of the Soil of the River, and that
the right of the disposal of the Shoar of
the River, or the Conservatorship there|of,
may by survivorship accrue to a
Colour-man in the Strand.
Mr. Brisband informed me, that those
Commissioners of the Admiralty as well
as the Lord Mayor had taken a great
deal of pains in the preserving of the Ri|ver,
and that it was incumbent on both
their Offices so to do; for which purpose
he shew'd me a most judicious and learn|ed
Report made by the Judge of the Ad|miralty,

wherein it was said, That the
Admiral is by his Office and Patent
not only Custos Maritimarum partium,
but Custos portuum  Conservator Flu|minum
infra fluxum  refluuum ma|ris;
and that he is by his Patent em|powered
to make Sub-conservators,
and hath by the Statute of primo Eli|zabethae
a concurrency with the Lord
Mayor of London in the Conservator|ship
of the River of Thames, and that
the Shoar of the River is a part of the
River, and ought not to be held by
private Persons, as of their own right,
but by those Conservators in trust for
the Government.
And in fine, that Secretary acquaint|ed
me, that there was to be a Survey of
the River and the Encroachments on it,
to be made by Trinity-house and Navy-Board,
with the assistance of Captain
Collins the King's Hydrographer: And
I have since seen a Copy of that Sur|vey
made accordingly, and great pains
was therein taken. The great pleasure
I have taken in going down that River
in Boats and Barges, made me always
wish well to the State of it; but the sight

of the Papers before mention'd, inclined
me to account it a Patriotly thing to pro|mote
its preservation by all the means I
could, and gave me occasion to reflect on
the great Wisdom and Care of the Pub|lick
that appear'd in our Ancestors, when
they made the Admiral and Lord Mayor
the Conservators of it; after the exam|ple
of the old Romans, as Gryphiander
in his learned Book de Insulis, p. 430.
quotes several places out of the Civil
Law, to shew, that they appointed their
Hydrophylacas, or Conservators of their
great Rivers, and deliverers of them from
being choaked up with Annoyances and
Shelfes; and he there p. 441. cites A.
Gellius for the ratio retandi flumina, id
est, purgandi  Virgultis, arboribus|que
in alveo Natis, ne impedimento sint
navibus, practised by them: And he
saith, that simili verbo returandi usus
est Nonius quod est obturando contra|rium,
Turneb. l. 28. advers. 12. And
then speaking of the Engines they used to
that end, he saith, In quem usum In|strumenta
hydrautica deducendis, hau|riendisque
aquis inventa sunt, de qui|bus
Vitruvius, l. 10. quem explicat

Turnebus, l. 2. advers. 22. Gothof. in
l. 4. c de Excus. Mun. l. 10. Dala|camp.
ad Plin. l. 7. c. 37.
Those Engines are long since gone a|mong
lost things: Nor do I think we
need wish any other Engine for the purg|ing
the River of Thames from Obstructi|ons,
than this I have referred to: And
according to the common Observation of
Providence taking care to send both new
Diseases and Remedies into the World in
the same Conjuncture, and often from
the same place, (as for example the Lues
Venerea and Guacum, and Sassafras from
the West Indies) it was worthy of its
care for England, that at this time,
when this our River, on which de|pends
the Fate of our Nation is labour|ing
under the most critical state it ever
knw, and is ready to be destroy'd, to
offer us such an Engine for its being re|stored
to such a good Condition of being
Navigable, as its Conservators can wish.
My Lord, There is one thing that
hath caused most horrible ill effects to this
River, and which I have met with no
Man who hath observ'd, and therefore

it is fit it should be known; and that is
the Fire of London: For every five
Yards of Pavement a load of Gravel is
used, and a great part of this Gravel
lyes so loose, that by the force of the Rain
it is frequently driven into the Sewers
and the Thames: And every Pavement
raiseth the Street paved two Inches at
least; but the burn'd part of London is
at a Medium four Foot higher: And
so I account that by the Fire and Re|building
of London, more Gravel and
Soyl hath gone into the Thames than
perhaps will again in the next three hun|dred
Years.
Some who are interested in this En|gine,
have said, that by it the Bar of
Dublin might be taken away; but I have
heard that that is a rocky Barr; and
if so, such effect of the Engine is not to
be expected: But that such Shelfes ari|sing
in our River from the Gravel and
Sullage that are wash'd into it, may with
ease be removed by it, is not to be doubt|ed.
This River glides along with a much
more clear and gentle stream than the
River of Severn; and the Cause of the

clearness of its Water, is its running in
a Gravelly Valley, and over a clear
Ground: And the great winding of the
River, which locks in the Water that
it cannot make that haste down to the
Sea that it would, and the low-lying of
the Head-springs of it, from whence there
is but an easie descent to the Sea, are
the two chief Causes of the gentleness of
its Current: It may be here remark'd,
that this easie descent of the Waters to
the Sea-ward, is another reason why the
Tide flows up so high into the heart of
this River; for the more steep the Ri|ver
is, the less able is the Tide to force
its way up into it. Swift Rivers have
always their Heads lying high, or their
Course direct, or both.
Since I have been (as I may say) a
Student of this River, I have took oc|casion
to pitty those who look on the strange
shifting of Tides in this River as a great
Prodigy, because happening seldom: But
I think the Cause of the shifting of the
Tides, is only the over-bearing of their
Course, when they are at their slackest,
by a Northwest Wind, which is the most
powerful adversary they can have on our

Coasts: For if a slow Ebb be encoun|ter'd
full in the teeth with a hard Storm,
what can follow but a return of the Tide
back again? And if the Northwest
Wind either abate its fierceness, or shift
into some other quarters, as the South-west
or North-east for some short time,
and then either return to its former place,
or resume its former force, and do this
once, twice, and again (which we know
is not inconsistent with the Nature and
Custom of the Wind off at Sea, th at
Land its wanderings are not altogether
so sensible) we may easily believe (see|ing
so plain a reason for it) that there
will be a playing of the Tide too and
fro, and several Floods and Ebbs suc|ceeding
one another in a few hours space.
My Sentiments in this place are those of
the Author of Britannia Baconica. It
was the Praediction of Campanella, that
Venice should at last be destroy'd by Obli|mation,
that is, by the Sullage of its
Waters that should spoil their being Na|vigable.
And Gryphiander in his Book
before mention'd, hath a great deal of cu|rious
Learning, to shew what famous Ri|vers
in the World had been destroy'd by

Obstructions: He in p. 448. cites Ovid
for hisVidi factas ex aequore
erras. He in p. 177. making the three
constituent Parts of a River to be Wa|ter,
the Banks and Channel, considers
the Mutations incident to them all, and
in p. 460. saith, Ravenna Italiae urbs
ab Augusto Caesare portu manufacto
aucta, nunc pro flumine spaciosissimos
hortos ostendit, malis plena, sed de
quibus non pendeant vela sed poma.
Ita Patavij, Aquileiae,  alibi latissima
nunc jugera sunt, ubi olim classium
stationes fuerunt, c. Leowerdia, Boss|werdia,
aliaeque Frisiae urbes olim ma|ritimae,
nunc integro milliari a Mari
recesserunt: And then speaks of other
excellent Harbours there destroy'd by
Oblimation or Sullage. And in p. 177.
he hath a great deal of excellent Learn|ing
much to this purpose, and saith,
Quod si perpetua sit fluminum mutatio,
viderur ipse Deus imperij  provinciae
terminos mutaros velle, qui ob hanc
cauam Moabitis minatur, fluvium ip|sorum
Nimrim exsiccatum iri, Ierem.
48. v. 34. Psal. 107. v. 33. Atque hoc
experientia confirmat. De qu Lucian

in Charon. Atque urbes tanquam ho|mines,
 quod magis est admirabile,
etiam universi Fluvii evanescunt. Inachi
enim nullum Argis extat vestigium. Se|neca
in Hercul. Oetheo.
Mutetur Orbis, vallibus currat Novis
Ister, novasque Tanais accipiat vias.
Inde factum cum ex fluminum insoli|tis
mutationibus praesagia sumerentur de
mutationibus imperiorum, ut flumina
ipsa ab Ethnicis pro diis colerentur. v.
Natal. Comit. lib. 1. Mythol. 11. Ita
Nilus in Aegypto pro Deo cultus. De
cujus presagiis, Seneca l. 4. Nat. quest. 2.
And there afterward speaks of the chan|ges
of the Channel in the Rhine.
He doth often inculcate that Notion,
That the administration of the Banks of
Rivers is a part of the Regalia; and he in
p. 436. quotes a great Writer of the Re|galia,
to shew that the Work of the Inspe|ction
and Conservacy of them is among
the Regalia: Sicuti etiam jus retardandi
flmina, ripas muniendi, alveumque
purgandi: And there saith, Hinc sem|per
potestas statuendi de aggeribus ad
uperiores pertinuit. Ita Romae reme|dium

coercendo Tyberi ex Senatus con|sulto
Ateo Capitoni  L. Aruntio Man|datum,
Tacit. 1. Annal.  Constitutus
est in eum usum certus Magistratus ab
Augusto Caesare, Sueton. cap. 37. Nem|pe
curator Riparum,  alvei Tyberis
ut inscriptiones veteres habent, Lips.
in Comment. ad Annal. Tacit. Tyberi|us
etiam quinqueviros constituit, Dio
Cass. lib. 37. Quos titulos usurpare ne
principes quidem puduit.
This great part of the Regalia, name|ly,
the Conservation of all the Royal
Rivers of England, hath been always by
our Kings deposited in the hands of the
Lord High Admiral of England and
Ireland; and the trust thereof is both
granted to our Admirals in all their Pat|tents,
and is inherent in their Office;
and in all the Patents of the Viceadmi|rals
of the maritime Countyes in both
Realms, the Viceadmirals are expresly
constituted Conservators of all the Royal
Rivers and Ports belonging to those Coun|ties,
as Mr. Brisband inform'd me upon his
having perused the draughts of many Vice|admirals
Patents; I thereupon asking him
whether those Viceadmirals did put their

power of being Conservators of the Royal
Rivers in execution; he told me that upon
his having consulted some of the Offices and
Officers in the high Court of Admiral|ty
about this very thing, he could find
no foot-steps of their having minded the
Power of such Conservacy: That he ob|serv'd
them diligent enough in that part
of their Office that enabled them to re|ceive
several Admiralty Perquisites and
Droits, of the which they were Col|lectors
for the use of the Admiral, and
to whom they often gave their accounts
about the same; but that he never found
in the Accounts of their Disbursments
any thing inserted of a Penny charge
they ever were at in the demolishing
any Nusances, or removing any Shelfs
in the Royal Rivers; and that the do|ing
this being a thing of great charge,
and they having no allowance of any
Sallary to support their Office, this
Work was never expected from them.
Thus then have Eneroachers took what
liberty they pleas'd, to make Purprestures
on the Royal Rivers in the Countrey, and
to build Houses thereon as seem'd good
in their own eyes; and it hath there been,

as Gryphiander saith, p. 522. In Cor|cyraeos
propter impunitatem malefici|orum
jocus est apud Eustat. in Dionys.
. i. e. Li|bera
Corcyra, caca ubi velis.
But the Secretary shewed me how that
in the Finalis Concordia of the 18th. of
February, 1632. before the King in
Council, between the Common-Law
Iudges and the Iudge of the Admiralty
concerning Prohibitions, one Article a|greed
to, was, That the Admiral may
enquire of and redress all Annoyances
and Obstructions in all Navigable Ri|vers
beneath the first Bridges, that are
any impediments to Navigation, or
Passage to or from the Sea, c. and
no Prohibition to be granted in such
Case: And from the foremenion'd Re|port
of the Judge of the Admiralty to
the late Commissioners of the Admiral|ty,
it is plain that the Lord high Admi|ral
in his high Court of Admiralty here,
under the eye of the Government, hath va|riously
acted in the Conservacy of the
River of Thames; for thence I noted
down what follows, viz. It can be made
appear by Records in the Court of

Admiralty, that Licenses have been gi|ven
by the Lord Admiral for the en|largement
of Wharfs, and that the said
Court hath punish'd Persons for not
keeping them in repair, and Orders
have been made from time to time for
the regular lying of Ships, by appoint|ing
how many shall ride a breast, c.
and the Report mentions, that one was
treated with by Persons concern'd in a
late Patent, that he might be permit|ted
to take in some part of the Shoar
to the Low water-mark, and that ano|ther
had de Facto agreed with them for
the summe of 20 l. for taking in 80
Foot deep, and 100 Foot long of the
Shoar. I have been by my Council at
Law inform'd, that he hath seen various
late Patents for granting away the Soil
of the Shoar to private Persons, not on|ly
in Middlesex and Surrey, but in the
Counties of Kent, and Southampton, and
Norfolk; and that he saw a Deed under
the Hand and Seal of the Colour-man be|for
named in the City's Reasons, the
which Deed was dated the 22d. of Ja|nuary,
in the second Year of the late
King James; and in which he Covenants

with some Sea-faring People, inhabitants
by the Thames-side in Wapping, that
neither he nor his Heirs and Assigns
will build any House or Wharf on the
Soil between their Houses and Ground
and the Low-water-mark; which ne|cessarily
shews that he claim'd a Power
of so doing if he would.
But at the Admirals granting Licen|ses
for the Enlargement of Wharfs I
do not wonder, tho' yet there is no doubt
but that both the Admiral and Lord
Mayor as Conservators of the River of
Thames, have administred that branch
of the Regalia candid  cast, and
with great precaution, with reports after
references to sworn Surveyors, that the
River would not be damnify'd by such
enlargement of Wharfs, causing any Jet|tys
to obstruct the course of the Tide in
carrying away the Sullage; a thing that
generally happens by the Encroachments
that private Persons have presumed to
make on the River.
And here I shall take occasion to ob|serve,
that it is not only possible in some
Cases to take in some part of the River
without prejudice to it, but it is also pro|bable

that the taking in some places of
the River would tend to the good of it.
The general Rule is, that we may with
safety to the River gain upon the hollow
shore, but not on the Convex Shore, or
where there are Head-lands; for then it
would change the Channel and turn the
stream into Eddys; as for example, If
the Custome-House-Key should be car|ry'd
further, which is already brought to the
Channel, it would be fatally mischievous.
It hath been by several skilful Survey|ors
told me, that after the Fire of Lon|don,
they upon the digging the foundati|on
of the present Custome-house, found
that it was all such as we call made
Earth, and had been gain'd out of the
Thames, and therefore it was (I ac|count)
with great Prudence, that the
Conservators of the River consented,
that 'till they came to deep Water,
it should be gain'd in for the better
Convenience of Navigation, that Ves|sels
might float at ebb as they now do
at the Custome-house.
The same Surveyors assured me that
under St. Magnus Church they after the
Fire met with an old Campshot and

Wharfing, gain'd from the Thames, and
that at the same time they were inform'd
that there were found Campshots much
further from the Thames in digging of
Cellars; and whence it may be inferr'd
probably, that all Thames-street from
Queenhithe downward to the Custome-house,
was gain'd out of the Thames.
I give no hint of this, that any Pro|jector
may take occasion from hence to begg
Thames-street. God be thanked, the
illegality of granting Forfeitures before
Conviction is now out of fashion. All
vexatious or prolling Patents are now
in the State of damnati antequam Na|ti:
And it must be acknowledged to the
immortal praise of that true English-man,
Sir George Treby, the Attorney Ge|neral,
that he finding their Majesties
Names surreptitiously used in the Prose|cution
of such a Patent, did that great
Iustiee to the Honour of the Government,
and to his own Character, as to cause a
Cesset Processus to be enter'd in the
Case.
When I consider the many Patents,
both illegal and vexatious that passed in
the Reign of King Charles the second,

I call to mind that Maxime, that the
King can do no wrong; that is, he can
in no Grant cum effectu, injure his Peo|ple,
but by some of his Ministers in the
Law passing it, and who in so doing may
be said, Violare Sacramentum Domini
Regis. I believe that that excellent
Prince did in his Nature wish well to the
Ease of his People as well as his own,
while by the fault of some of his Ministers
so many Grants surreptitiously did pass of
the Same conceal'd Lands, and of Purpre|stures,
and of Lands derelicted, c. and
when after Composition paid by the People
to one Court-beggar, he sent another to their
doors; and when the suffering Populace,
whose pretended Forfeitures were granted
before Conviction, were so often tempted
to cry out, Quem das inem Rex mag|ne
laborum.
It was in that Reign excellently well
said by the Earl of Shaftsbury, in his
Speech in the Exchequer, at Serjeant
Thurland's being sworn a Baron there,
viz. Let me recommend to you, so to
manage the King's Justice and Reve|nue,
as the King may have most pro|fit,
and the Subject least Vexation:

Raking for old Debts, the number of
Informations, Projects upon conceal|ments,
I could not find in the eleven
Years experience I have had in this
Court, ever to advantage the Crown:
But such Proceedings have for the most
part deliver'd up the Kings good Sub|jects
into the hands of the worst of Men.
And Sir William Petty in a Manuscript
I have seen of his, of the Trade of Ireland,
for this purpose, taking Notice of the seve|ral
Trades by which People there subsist,
speaks of many there driving the Trade of
Projectors, and of such who make use of
the King's Name, and the Process of the Ex|chequer,
about concealed Lands, to spunge
Composition out of such as are willing to
buy their Peace; and he having shew'd
how much the King is damnified by those
Traders, he saith very judiciously in the
end, That this Trade doth not add any
thing more to the Common-wealth than
Gamesters, and even such of them as
play with fale Dice, do to the common
stock of the whole Number.
It is here therefore but just to take no|tice
of the Prudence of the Trinity-house,
in that after they had on the

18th. of August, in the 15th. Year of
that King's Reign, passd Letters Patents,
not only of the Ballast of the River of
Thames, but also of all the Wast ground,
Purprestures and Encroachments, and
Soil to it belonging; they soon found
that it would engage them in Controver|sies
with the City of London, and Sea|men
and Sea-saring People, and there|fore
surrender'd it, and the Surrender
was enroll'd in Chancery the 9th. of De|cember,
in the 16th. Year of that King;
and on the 24th. of June, in the follow|ing
Year, they took out Letters Patents
for the Ballast alone. But there were
Patents passed of the same Encroach|ments
Prior to the Patent of Trinity-house
as well as after it; and it may be
said, that on those after it, the Paten|tees
came a gleaning, not only after the
Reapers, but after the Beggars, since
whatever Trinity-house receives, is only
for the use of the Poor: However, the
Trinity-house in taking out that Patent
for Encroachments on the Thames, was
made use of afterward as an Example or
President in that Reign, for other Cur|tiers
Petitioning for a Grant of the En|croachments

on the Rivers Royal in the
Outports through all England; and the
Petition referr'd found a favourable Re|port
from one of the King's Council at
Law, but was stopp'd on the Letters
from all the Sea-port Towns in England
to oppose it, as likely to be troublesome
and vexatious to the People, and of
which Letters I have seen the Abstracts.
I thank God for his inclining me to
value that habit of ind, namely, of not
giving any man the least Offence to get
the greatest profit to my self, equal with
my Life; and as those divine words of
Tully shew he did with his, viz. Non
enim mihi est vita mea utilior, quam
animi mei talis affectio, neminem ut
violem commodi mei grati, lib. 3.
Offic. And were I commanded to write
the History of the Reign of any Prince,
and therein in proper Colours to delineate
any of the Ministers at Law to him who
violated the ease of his fellow Subjects, by
the illegal passing of Grants of Forfei|tures
before Conviction, I should trans|mit
his Character to Posterity, in the
words of Vir natus ad corruptissimum

istius saeculi Genium: But the Genius
of the Age is now for the making it self
easie by its spewing up such Patents:
And the benefit the People find thereby,
doth in a modest Computation outweigh
all the Taxes they pay to the Govern|ment.
The Magistrates of our Metropolis are
now eased from the labour of going in their
Formalities, and with a Parade of City-officers
attending them to Whitehall, to
seek relief as formerly in the Reign of that
Prince.
And I may for the Edification of the
Citizens of our Metropolis in Loyalty,
fairly take occasion here to mind them,
that when (as the Story is in Howel's
Londinopolis, p. 19.) King James the
first, being displeas'd with the City of
London for their refusing to lend him
Money, told the Mayor and Aldermen
attending him, that he would remove his
Court, and the Tower Records, and
Courts of Westminster-Hall to some other
remote place; and an Alderman then
ask'd him, if he would remove the Ri|ver
of Thames? that if the Alderman
thought that an impossibility, he was cer|tainly

ar gone in Caponbrot.
For upon a discourse I had with a most
sklful Surveyor, on the occasion of my ell|ing
hm that I thought whoever brgain'd
away that part of the Shoar that was be|fore
mention'd, viz. 80 Foot deep, and
100 Foot long, for 20 l. sold Robin
Hood's Penny worths of it, his Measures
agreeing with mine therein, and that ma|ny
a Man would have given 500 l. for the
same; I found on the Result of our Confe|rence
how the Crown might grant away but
a Moity of the River of Thames, name|ly,
the Shore to the Low-water-mark on
both sides, (and which would in effect de|stroy
the whole River as aforesaid) and
gain the value of four Aldermens Estates
by it.
For thus his Calculation was, viz.
to shw that whoever gave 500 l. for it,
would gain 200 l. by the bargain. To
go into the Thames 100 Foot long be|low
Bridge, will cost a Man 300 l. with
the slighter sort of Wharfing. If he
goes 80 Foot deep, he hath it fill'd for
nothing with rubbish; so then he gives
500 l. and giveth 300 l. more for the
charge of his Whar: And he may gain

200 l. by the bargain by the groundrents,
thus, viz. He may build forward
and backward on the Premises, and
may compute the ground rent by 6 or
7 s. the front Houses per Foot, and 2 s.
6 d. per Foot the back Houses; so then
there being in a Mile above 5000 Foot,
he will gain in one Mile 50 times 200,
that is, 10000 l. and the like on the
other side; and so proportionably for
another Mile on both sides; Quod erat
demonstrandum.
There were by the appointment of King
Charles the second two Surveys made of
the River of Thames, the one of the se|veral
depths of the River in its parts be|low
Bridge, perform'd with great Care
and Skill by that excellent Mathematical
Person, Sir Jonas Moor, and a Copy
of which I can direct the Conservators
of the River where to obtain for an in|considerable
Charge.
The other was a Survey of the En|croachments
I before referred to, per|form'd
by the Navy-Board and Trini|ty-house,
with the assistance of Captain
Collins, his Majesties Hydrographer,
and wherein I said great pains was taken;

and a Copy whereof is herewith publish'd
for the use of the Conservators of the Ri|ver,
and I can direct them to Captain
Collins his most accurate Draught of the
River, and most necessary to be had by
them: And he in my judgment deserves
to be well rewarded with some acknow|ledgment
by the City for the great Pains
taken, and Skill by him shewn in that
Draught, tending to the preservation of
their River: For he hath thereby laid an
everlasting Foundation for the easie and
certain Prevention of all future Encroach|ments
on the Thames, and which may be
this way, and I believe cannot possibly be
effected by any other; namely, if the
Lords Commissioners for executing the
Office of the Lord High Admiral shall ap|point
the Marshal of the Admiralty, or
some other Person, and the Lord Mayor
appoint his Water-Bailiff at the mend|ing
or repairing of any Wharf upon the
Thames, to see a Stake stuck down, be|yond
which the Repairers of the Wharf
shall not proceed; and both of these Offi|cers
shall be order'd to demolish immedi|ately
whatever shall be added beyond such
Stake. Captain Collins his Draught doth

sufficiently set forth how far the Encroach|ments
went that were made before the
Month of October, 1684. the Month
in or about which he gave in his Draught,
and to which this printed Survey re|ferrs.
Vpon my consulting the Authors that
write of the Regalia, to know their sense
of the Office of a Conservator, I found
this definition of it there, viz. Conser|vator
est qui sine judiciali examine jus
aliquod publicum tuetur. Nor is there
any moot-point in our Law that need
divert our Conservators of the Royal Ri|vers
from the immediate demolishing of
Nusances, sine judiciali examine.
For as little as I have convers'd with
Law-Books, I find1 Crook 184. James and Hay|wards Case. Coke 5th. report. that a Nusance once
erected may be abated by any Body,
and that before prejudice receiv'd, and
that it cannot be granted by the King,
nor continued by the King's Grant or
Pardon.
And therefore when any one buyes a
Nusance,101. Penruddock's Case; and 9th. Report. 53. Bettons Case, cum|multis aliis. say I, Caveat Emptor: I wish
that all Mercy may be shewn to those
who have formerly encroached, and even
to their old Encroachments, as may be

without Cruelty to the River. But I
am inform'd that that merciful Prince,
King Charles the 2d. gave Order to the
Lord Mayor for the demolishing some
particular New Encroachments that were
very prejudicial to the River of Thames.
He wll knw that two parts of three of
the Customs come to the Crown from the
Port of London: And no doubt but the con|sideration
of that, as well as the National
concern of his Subjects, inclined him to
endeavour th preservation of that River
by the most effectual means; and he being
so ofen upon the River, knew well that it
would bear no more Enroachments, it
 in the Pool so full of
 in of the
 that a Bar can hardly pass.
He  that the great strainess
of the  the Con|servaos
 more Ships to
 been former|ly
 might produce
he danger of .
His Majesty and al his People, both
representative and diffusive, had been
long sufficiently acquainted with the Do|ctrine
of Nusaces, since the passing of

the Act against Irish Cattel, and that a
Patent for a Nusance was not worth its
weight in burnt Silk: And he hath been
often heard to say, that he would damn
all Patents that damned the River; and
that the granting of things to the Low-water-mark
must needs be vexatious; for
that the Neap tides and Spring-tides be|ing
so various at different times of the
Month, and different times of the Year,
beside all variety of Wind and Weather
from abroad, the great uncertainty of
such Grants must make perpetual disturb|ances
among his Subjects; and that if
any presumed to take in the River to what
may seem the Low-water-mark, that
then Ships lying by the Walls would en|crease
the Mudd there, and add to the
dirt thrown in, and that that might be
built on too, and so the River be anni|hilated.
And he being inform'd that the
Person who had made that Encroachment
so prejudicial to the River, and which he
purchased for 20 l. was only Fined by my
Lord Mayor's Court of Conservacy 5 l.
for it, was resolved to have it demo|lish'd,
bth for the good of the River, and
to terrifie Encroachers for the future;

for that he well knew the demolishing of
that one Encroachment would spoil the
Market of selling Nusances for ever.
Nor is it to be wonder'd at, that his
Majesty was so thoughtful and resolv'd
about the preservation of his River of the
Thames, since the Care of some Royal
Rivers, not so considerable as that, hath
been known to take up so much of the time
of the Council-Board, when they were
much endanger'd by Obstructions and An|noyances.
I shall here take occasion to
mention what I find in Sir Julius Caesar's
Manuscript Collections of Matters of
State, that after King James had grant|ed
the Conservacy of the River of Tyne
to the Mayor and Burgesses of New-Castle,
Complaints were brought to the
Council-Board, of the great Decay of
that River; whereupon on the 29th. of
January, An. 1613. certain Articles
were order'd to be put in execution for
the remedying the Abuses complained
of: And it appearing that that River
was in such eminent danger of being
destroy'd, if a very speedy course were
not taken concerning it, the Council
order'd that Sir Iulius Caesar, and Sir

Daniel Denne, one of the Judges of the
Admiralty, with the assistance of the
Trinity-Masters of London, should draw
up additional Articles to be joyn'd with
the former, for the effectual Conserva|tion
of that River: And one of them
was, That some truly trusty substantial
Men, Burgesses of New-Castle, be ap|pointed
to View the River every Week,
and to make Oath of the abuses done to
the same; two of them to be Masters
of the Trinity-House of New-Castle, and
they to have no Coles, nor Mines, nor
Ballast-shores, and who might be
thought not concern'd for their own
profit in casting Sullage into that Ri|ver.
The Government then thought not fit
to make any Men Guardians of the Soil
of that River, who had a pretence by Pa|tents
to inherit it.
In short, when the Sun is just come in|to
its Winter-Tropic, the dayes begin
to lengthen, and not 'till then; and when
things were at the worst with the River
of Tyne, they did then begin to mend:
And the Wisdom of the Government
shew'd its Dominion over all the Starrs,

whose influences threatned that Royal Ri|ver:
Dictum, factum; and that Ri|ver
is preserv'd to this day, and so I hope
with Gods help will the River of Thames,
and all our Royal Rivers be for ever.
It was the saying of Maximilian the
first, Deus aeterne nisi vigilares quam
male esset mundo, quem regimus ego
miser Venator  ebriosus ille Julius.
The Viceadmiral of the County, and the
Mayor of Newcastle were in that Con|juncture
drowsie Conservators of that
River; but Divine Providence was then
awake to preserve that great useful Ri|ver,
and to awaken the Government to
take those Measures for its preservation
that were necessary, and suitably to which
a fac simile might easily be taken on oc|casion
for any other of our Royal Ri|vers.
There is another of the Royal Rivers
where the great Concern of Navigation
did so wothily employ the time of the
Council-Board in the Reign of King
Charles the first: For one Morgan ha|ving
built a House at Crockyernill,
in the Port of Bristol, (and in which
place Posts had formerly bn erctd,

for Ships and Barks being fasten'd to
them) the Lords of his Majesties Coun|cil
upon a Complaint of that hindrance to
Navigation, made an Order that Mor|gan
should demolish and pull down that
House, that so Posts might remain there
as formerly, for the fastening of Ships;
as may appear by two several Orders
made at Council-Board, the one bearing
date the 11th. of June, An. 1670. and
the other the 29th. of October.
And if any private Person may abate
a Nusance, even before prejudice re|ceiv'd,
none need make it a Question whe|ther
the King or his Privy Council may,
or Persons by them Commission'd so to
do.
Because (as we say) that which is eve|ry
body's work is no body's, for that rea|son
the Law hath entrusted that power of
abating Nusances in the Royal Rivers
to the Lord High Admiral, as their Con|servator,
ex Officio; and here for the
doing that in the River of Thames, the
Lord Mayor hath been admitted to that
trust; and it is vested in both of their
Offices, both by Grant and Prescription,
according to that distinction so often used

among the Writers of the Regalia, cu|mulativ
but not privativ; that is to
say, by the accumulating the power of
Conservacy both to the Lord Admiral
and the Lord Mayor, neither of them is
deprived of it. Neither would either be
deprived of the exercise of their Power
of demolishing Nusances, if the King
should grant a Commission to many other
particular Persons so to do: Nor yet
would the Commissionating of many other
such Persons deprive the rest of their fel|low
Subjects of their right so to do.
And here it is obvious to be said by the
way, that th a Patent that pretends to
grant Encroachments or Nusances is void,
yet a Patent or Commission to throw them
down is most certainly very legal. But
yet if any Man were so publick-spirited
as without a Patent to attempt a thing so
beneficial to his Countrey, he would be
able to effect it with as much readiness as
that honourable Person, who hath on ma|ny
Accounts deserv'd so well from his Coun|trey,
the Earl of Craven, without Patent
or Commission, or a Parade of Officers
and gilded Maces going before him, hath
been long obey'd in the quenching of Fires.
My Lord, I believe the English Na|tion
is doubled in populousness, since the
ancient Methods were first used of trust|ing
the Care of Conservacy of the Roy|al
Rivers in the Countrey to our Vice|admirals,
whose so long Non-user of their
power relating to the Encroachments on
them, hath sufficiently appear'd by the ma|ny
Patents of those Encroachments in the
several Countreys granted in the Reign of
King Charles the second, and the which
hath beside the inconvenience of the strait|ning
those Rivers, produced another to
our Navigation, namely, the Creating
much trouble by innumerable Law-suits
to our Navigators, who generally inhabit
by the sides of those Rivers, and where
their Ships use to lye: And it is pitty but
that some Clauses should have been insert|ed
in those Patents, to direct a different
way of Prosecution in their Case from
that of other Subjects, and that unless ve|ry
enormous prejudice had come by their
Encroachments to the Royal Rivers, the
Seamen might not have been put to it to
give Compositson-money for the licensing
their Nusances. It hath been truly ob|serv'd

by a late Writer, That Seamen
are easily tempted to seek good Enter|tainment
in other Countreys, if they find
it not in their own, and that they are
apt to change their own Quarters, and
embarque in Forreign Service, some|times
upon a Capricio of their reputing
themselves disobliged at home, and at
other times on their expectance of be|ing
better used abroad. And in a Re|monstrance
from Trinity-house to the
Earl of Nottingham, Lord high Admi|ral,
it was certify'd by them to his
Lordship, that in a little more than 12
Years after 1588. the Shipping and
Number of our Seamen were decay'd
about a third part.
It seems by the wise Conduct of the
Government then, our Sea-men and their
numbers were carefully enroll'd.
But so indulgent was Queen Elizabeth
to the Seamen in her Reign, that we find
in the Act of Parliament, 35 Eliz. c. 6.
An Act for restraining of New Build|ings,
a particular tender regard is had
to the Seamen; for there it is said, Pro|vided
also notwithstanding any thing in
this Act, it shall and may be lawful for

every such Mariner, Sailor, c. as
shall be allow'd by the Lord Admiral,
ad the Masters and Company of the
Trinity-House for the time being, in
writing under their Hands and Seals to
continue in his habitation in any House
that hath been built sithence the said
Proclamation, near to the Thames-side,
serving only for the habitation of such
Mariner, and not to be used for any
Victualling-house, nor for any House
for any Merchandize, c. and likewise
that any Mariner may hereafter build
any House for such purpose, and for no
other, on or near the Thames-side, so
as it may be distant from the very
Wharf or Bank thirty Foot, so as Peo|ple
may pass between the said Houses,
and the said Bank and the Thames, c.
I speak not this as if I would have any
Mariners make any new Encroachments
on any of our Royal Rivers, especially on
the Thames, which is already so much
straiten'd: But I urge it to shew how the
Wisdom of the Government then did
make it (as I may say) a fundamental
Rule for the Preservation of the River
of Thames, that even while encourage|ment

was providing for the Sea-men, (the
Walls of the Kingdom) yet Houses by the
Thames should not be permitted, but by
the Allowance of the Admiral, the great
Conservator of all the Royal Rivers, and
the Trinity-house, first had under their
Hands and Seals. Several of the Mem|bers
of the Trinity-House dwelling by the
Thames-side below Bridge, cannot but as
they go up and down by Water, take no|tice
of the Encroachments as they are ma|king,
and which of them will eminently
prejudice the River, and which not, and
so are the more proper to be consulted in
the Case.
And from hence we may Collect this
great Document, and so necessary to be
thought of again and again, by the Con|servators
of our publick Rivers, namely,
That whatever alteration is made in
them, by building on them, th never
so little, ought to be with great Care,
and with the use of the Consilium peri|torum,
and not by the arbitrage of pri|vate
Patentees and their Executors, but
by the Publick Conservators, to whose
personal Circumspection and Skill that
great trust was always committed by

the Government; the Office of the Ad|miral
having never been granted by In|heritance,
as some great Offices, viz. the
Earl Marshal and Lord Great Cham|berlain
have been.
And there is another instance of the
ancient Care of the Government over the
River of Thames, that is very memo|rable,
namely, the excellent Institution
of the Wardmote Inquest, the which
thing hath worthily made the Govern|ment
of the City of London so famous
all over the World.
I have read the Articles of the Charge
of the Wardmote Inquest, that were in
print in Queen Elizabeth's time, where|of
the 4th. Article is, Ye shall swear
that ye shall enquire and truly present
all the Offences and Defaults done by
any Person or Persons in the River of
Thames, according to the intent and
purport of an Act made by our late So|vereign
Lord King Edward the 6th. in
his High Court of Parliament, and also
of divers other things, ordain'd by Act
of Common Council of this City, for the
redress and amendment of the said Ri|ver,
which as now is in great decay

and ruine, and will be in short time past
all remedy, if high and substantial Pro|vision
and Help be not had with all
speed and diligence possible, as more
plainly appeareth in the said Act of Par|liament,
and the said Act of Common-Council
of this City.
Here the most grave and substantial
Citizens, are put to it by a promissory
Oath to stake their Eternities, and in
effect to invocate God, both as Witness
and Revenger, about their doing right
to that River in their Presentments; and
I am sure the present State of it being
conformable to the Words, in that Arti|cle
relating to its great decay and ru|ine,
c. is what they may safely swear
in an Oath assertory.
Howel in his Londinopolis, p. 392.
speaks of this Article still continuing in
Presentments in the Wardmote In|quest.
When the Government did anciently
order the Lord High Admiral and the
Lord Mayor to espouse the Interest of
this River, our Monarchs did not pre|sent
to them, as one did who told a Ro|man
Emperor, he offer'd him a Lady,

who was Vidua  indotata. As much
as it hath been (as I may say) widdow|ed,
and bereaved of that Care it should
have found, while many now living re|member
at least a fifth part of it to have
been taken in by Encroachers, it brings
in still a very fair and plentiful Dow|er
to the Lord Admiral and Lord May|or.
The Lord Admiral hath been by it
enabled to support the Trinity-House by
the Ballast-Office; and I in my Conscience
think it well bestow'd on them, that is
to say, on the poor Seamen whom that
excellent Corporation relieves thereby.
The Chainage of Ships belongs to the
Admiral, and the right of the Ferriage
over all Rivers between the first Bridges
and the Sea is a Perquisite of Admiralty,
and the right thereof is inherent in the
Office of the Admiral; and 'tis notori|ous
that the Right of the Ballastage in
all the other Royal Rivers of England
belongs to the Admiral, as well as in the
River of Thames. There is the Perqui|site
of Anchorage in the Thames, as
well as elsewhere, belonging to the Ad|miral,
as are likewise many other Per|quisites,
and that are enumerated in the
Admiral's Patent.
Nor can any Right belonging to the
Admiral be pass'd by the Crown under the
Great Seal to any one but by the Admi|ral's
Warrant to the Attorney or Soli|citor
general.
To the Lord Mayor as Water-bay|ly
and Conservator of the River of
Thames, several Fees and Profits be|long:
And to that Office of Conservator
belongs the Office of Measuring Coals,
Grain, Fruit, in the Port of London,
with the Fees belonging to it; and the
Fines imposed in his Court of Conserva|cy,
or by the Commissioners of Sewers
for Misdemeanors that concern the Ri|ver;
and other Perquisites, and in the
which the Admirals have long ceased to
intermeddle; and not without cause, be|cause
of the great Charge incident to the
Lord Mayor's Conservacy of the River,
and particularly in matters relating to the
Fishery, and the charge that attends the
traversing Indictments, and removing
them to the Kings-Bench, as likewise the
Charge of suing out Scire Facias 'es to va|cate
the Grants of particular Persons that
entrench on the rights of the Lord May|or's
Conservacy, and which Charge they

have often supported without being there|in
assisted by the Lord Admirals.
I might instance in many passages in the
reigns of our Kings long ago, concern|ing
the Lord Mayor's applying to the Go|vernment,
when private Courtiers had
surreptitiously obtain'd Patents that in|terloped
in the Conservacy of the Ri|ver;
as for example, Edward the 4th.
having made a Grant to the Earl of Pem|broke
for setting up a Weare in the
River of Thames, and the Lord Mayor
applying to the King about it, obtain'd a
Scire Facias to vacate that Grant, and
vigorously prosecuted the vacating there|of
to effect.
And how in the two last Reigns seve|ral
Lord Mayors with great Industry and
Charge prosecuted the vacating of Patents
that they judged entrenching on the Con|servacy,
that both by Charter and Pre|scription
belong'd to them, is known to
every one: Nor will the unwearied dili|gence
of those Patriotly Lord Mayors,
Sir William Pritchard, Sir Henry Tulse,
Sir James Smith, Sir Robert Jefferys,
Sir John Peak, in thus shewing their
Zeal for the Conservacy of the River,

be ever forgot, while that City keeps Re|cords.
And they are strangers to the Chara|cter
of the present Lord Mayor, both for
integrity and prudence in Political Con|duct,
and his Zeal for maintaining the
known Rights of the City, who shall think
that if he had been at the Helm of them
Government of the City when they were,
he would not have steer'd the same Course
as the most active of them did, and that
with such a Courage as is worthy the high
Sphere of Magistracy he moves in. A
Coward (saith one) cannot be a good
Christian, much less a good Magistrate.
Solomon's Throne of Ivory was support|ed
by Lyons. Innocency and Integrity
cannot be preserved in Magistracy with|out
Courage. Magistrates are great
Blessings, Modo audeant, quae sentiunt,
if they dare do their Conscience.
Me quae te peperi ne Cesses Thorna tueri,
was the ancient Inscription of the Bridge-house
Seal, and which may give an oc|casional
hint to any Citizen of London,
advanced to Authority and Opulency

therein, to wish well to the defence of
that River that hath so long bred and
preserv'd the Riches of that City.
I am here led to observe, how that Ri|ver
being pester'd by various Annoyances
in the Reign of Henry the 8th. and the
Lord Mayor's Offices being made unea|sie,
and hinder'd in the Conservacy of
the River; the City apply'd to the King
for a Proclamation, who accordingly issu|ed
out one in the 34th. Year of his Reign,
strictly requiring, That none should pre|sume
to resist, or deny, or impugne
the Lord Mayor or his Deputies, in
doing or executing any thing that might
conduce to the Conservacy of the Ri|ver,
c.
And methinks the Customary yearly
Solemnity of the New Lord Mayor's at|tended
with all the City Companies in
their Barges on the Thames, and there
on that River above Bridge having their
first Scene of Triumph, as they are go|ing
to Westminster-Hall to be sworn,
should give them occasion to think often
of that Rivers preservation in the fol|lowing
part of the Year.
I am here led to call to mind a fatal
danger that that River above Bridge
escaped in the Reign of the late King,
when some were so hardy as to offer him a
Proposition, and in the way of a Project
to enlarge his Revenue by straitning the
River, and by building another Street,
between the high and low-water-mark,
from the Bridge to White-Hall. But
th so great a straitning of the River there
would not have been so prejudicial to the
publick as lesser straitnings of it below
bridge, where the great Scene of Navi|gation
lyes, yet his Majesty with great
judgment gave a peremptory denyal to the
Proposition, for this particular reason,
namely, that such an alteration in the
River might perhaps produce an alterati|on
in the Tide of Flood, and be the cause
of its not flowing so many hours as it doth,
and which effect too he thought the build|ing
of a Bridge at Lambeth (a Project
that some offer'd to his Consideration)
might produce, it being obvious that the
Obstacle the course of the Tide meets
with by London bridge, doth much oc|casion
the Tide of Flood being the short|er.
And if great Care had not been taken
by the Trinity-house, in the government
of their Ballast-Lighters, and ordering
them not to draw up Ballast too near the
Banks of the River, there would have
been great danger of another accident that
might have curtail'd the Tide of Flood;
I mean by their coming nearer to the shoar
than the safety of the great Level by
Limehouse will admit. In the same time
that they can draw up one Tun of Ballast
in deep Water, they may draw up three
near the shoar. A breach in that Level
did within these few Years cost the Pro|prietors
25000 l. a third part of the va|lue
of the Land: And if a new greater
breach came, perhaps it would not be re|pairable,
and possibly cause the Thames
not to flow up so far as it did, and yet
doth. But any thing of this Nature we
may well hope will be prevented by the ex|cellent
Management of the Ballast-Office,
by the industry of that Virtuous and Pru|dent
Lady, the Lady Brooks, who hath
the Lease thereof from the Trinity-house,
and hath taken much more Care of its be|ing
managed for the good of the River,
than was took formerly.
I forgot when I was just now consider|ing
the Affair of the Annoyances and
Streightning of the River above Bridge,
to mention it, that a Gentleman of the
Temple, who has not been many Years
a Barrester, told me, He remembers
that since he was of that Society, the
River at low-water came up so far as
to touch the Garden-wall; and every
one knows at what great distance it is now
from the Wall at low-water.
My Lord, I have here given your
great active thoughts the best entertain|ment
I could upon our Royal Rivers, and
particularly on the Thames. Great men
are like the heavenly bodies that find
much veneration but no rest, unless we
find a Salvo for their having the latter,
by saying what the Philosophers do of
the Heavens, that Movendo quiescunt.
And whoever will be just to your Lord|ship,
must acknowledge that you have
esteem'd your self most at your ease and
rest, while in the high Orb Fate hath
placed you in, you have been most active
and busie in blessing the World with your
ifluences. Your Lordship need not be di|rected

to that Moral remark, that your
private good is included in the publick,
Tanquam Trigonum in Tetragono.
And as in Nature we see that all bodies
do by their own proper Center tend to the
Center of the Universe, so they that know
your Lordship, know it is natural to you
by your tendency to your own Welfare and
Happiness to endeavour to promote the
bliss of your Countrey in all the wayes you
can.
Your Lordship is no stranger to what the
Roman Poet saith of Caesar,
media inter praelia Caesar,
Astrorum Coelique plagis, superisque vacabat.
And therefore if his great mind could
in the heat of Battel find leisure to em|ploy
it self about the imaginary Circles in
the Heavens, and which only salve the
appearances, I believe if presently after
you had charged in a Battel, I had hint|ed
to you some of the great matters before
mentioned, that are as real as thse three
great Foundations of real Learning can
make any thing, I mean, number, weight,

and local motion, and matters on which
the Salus Populi doth absolutely depend,
your Lordship would have given me the
hearing. And having said this, I shall
not doubt but that now you are by Pro|vidence
brought to support the Crown and
your Countrey, by the great Figure you
make in the Council and Parliament, and
in the peaceable administration of the Ci|vil
Government, your Lordship will there|in
be as vigilant for the publick as ever
you were in War.
Nor to a Soul so refined as your Lord|ships
could any War but what is in order
to Peace seem eligible; and when in the Case
of any degenerate stupid Members of
Mankind, who are deaf to all Reasons
for their being happy, or suffering others
to be so, you are call'd to awaken the
World out of its Lethargy with the sound
of Drums and Trumpets. But it is an
easier and gentler way of awakening any
of our Magistrates, whom you may judge
to be sometimes drousie in the Admini|stration
of those great trusts reposed in
them by the Government, that I here most
humbly offer to your Lordships thoughts,
and particularly as to the publick concern

in the Conervacy of the publick Rivers,
and the Care of which in this growth of
the populousness of our Countrey, and
overgrowth of the abuses done to those Ri|vers,
may well call for the Supervisor|ship
of some particular Person or Persons,
who either being Commission'd for their
Conservacy under the Crown, or the
Commissioners of the Admiralty may
really Conserve them.
Nor need the Vice-admirals Commissi|ons
on this occasion be alter'd. Let them
be nominal Conservators still, and real
ones too as far as they please. Nor need
any the least deduction be made from, or
intrenchment on any Fees taken by the
Lord Mayor's deputy Water-bayly or Sub-Conservators
for the River of Thames,
as I find him styled in that Book of How|el,
where he p. 35. treating of the State
of the Lord Mayor, saith, He hath
a Sword-bearer, Common-hunt, and
Common Cryer, and four Water-Bay|liffs,
Esquires by their Places; whether
he there makes three too many, I know
not, I have formerly heard of one too
many. But th neither Mayor nor Ad|miral
can erect a New Court of Justice

without an Act of Parliament, or Let|ters
Patents from the Crown, yet com|mon
reason tells us they may make as ma|ny
Sub-Conservators or Deputies for
the Ministerial work in the Conservacy
of the River as they please. And if any
one publick spirited Man were either by
the Crown or Admiral entrusted with the
Conservacy of the other Royal Rivers, he
might for each of them employ what hands
he pleas'd. Quod quis per alium facit
per se facere videtur.
According to the vigilance and pru|dence
of the former Commissioners of
Admiralty, in effecting the before men|tion'd
Survey of the Encroachments on
the River of Thames, and likewise the
Draught of the River by Captain Col|lins,
the like Surveys and Draughts of
all the other publick Rivers beneath
the first Bridges, may in a Years time
or thereabout be prepared, the which
draughts of the respective Rivers being
fairly set out in Frames, may usefully
be hung up as Ornaments in a Galle|ry
in the House of such general Con|servator
for the time being, and be
left to his Successors to have the Cu|stody

of. And to such Draughts recourse
may easily be had by any of their Maje|sties
Ministers of State, or Officers in the
Admiralty Court or Navy, or by the Tri|nity
house, upon occasion. Such Surveys
and Draughts being skilfully and accu|rately
prepared, and some Elbows of
Wharfs and Jettys being taken away,
whereby the sides of the Rivers may as
much as is needful come toward the shape
of a right Line, the Course of the Ri|vers
themselves will begin to Cure them
of their Sullage; and such Eddys as
caus'd the Water to settle with the
mud formerly be prevented: And these
Draughts of the Rivers serving as the
Standards by which all future Enlarge|ments
or Diminutions of Wharfs or Banks
may be guided, will make it appear as ab|surd
for Encroachers to break in upon
them thus reform'd and regulated, as it
doth to Clippers to incroach on our cu|rious
new Mill'd Moneys and the Letters
about their Edges, and as absurd for any
to begg Patents from the Crown to take
in the Lines of our publick Rivers, as the
Letters of our Coyn.
And thus after a little diligence
and resolution employ'd in the first set|ling
of this work, the constant Con|servacy
of all our Royal Rivers, would
be comparatively easie, the populace see|ing
that the Government was in earnest
in the thing, and as it appear'd to be in
the Conjuncture before mention'd, when
the Magistracy did rouze it self for the
preservatio of the River of Tyne.
Who would have thought that after the
Survey of the Encroachments on the Ri|ver
of Thames, and the Draught of that
River by Captain Collins, they should
be no more minded than if such a Survey
had been made of the Annoyances of the
Rhine or Texel?
Would any one think that after the vast
pains taken by the Trinity-House in go|ing
down the River to perfect its Survey
so many times, in the extremity of Win|ter-weather,
and many of them being Ve|teran
Seamen, thereby contracting dan|gerous
Colds, Coughs and Catarrhs, be|cause
the Government required the Sur|vey
to be made with all expedition; and
after that excellent Seaman and Hydro|grapher,
Captain Collins, had in order

to the making his Draught of the River
exact, made so many weary steps in the
mud of the shore, yet many Summers af|ter
Summers should pass without any thing
brought to effect for the good of the River,
or the abatement of one Causway or other
Nusance, and both Survey and Draught
be no more regarded than an old Alma|nack
calculated for the Meridian of Paris
or Madrid? Nay, which is more, can it
be imagin'd that Captain Collins, a Per|son
of great integrity, should relate it to
another such Person, That he within this
Year or thereabouts, going to see the
sides of the River formerly survey'd,
and to find what effects the Survey and
his Draught had there produced, that
he there found Stone-wharfs built into
the Thames for three or four hundred
Foot in length, and from ten to thirty
Foot in breadth; and that he found a
great many other smaller Encroach|ments
on both sides of the Water, and
several new Causeways, which in time
would raise the Mud equal to the su|perficies
of the Causways; and that he
acquainting the City-Officer entrusted
with the Care of the Concerns of the

River therewith, had from him instead
of thanks a ruffianly Answer? yet these
very words of the Captains speaking were
Noted down from his Mouth by the Per|son
to whom he spake them. Thus is the
Case of the Rivers Survey and Abate|ments
of its Nusances, like that in the
Epigrammatist,
Eutrapelus tonsor dum Circuit ora Lu|perci
Arraditque genas, altera barba subit.
His dilatory Shaving occasion'd a New
Beards forth coming.
But that the Watermen may have no
cause to complain that they cannot Land
nor take in their Fare, if they may not
have that use of the Causways that the
Survey mentions as prejudicial, I shall
here say, that both their Fare and they
may be accomodated as well below Bridge
as above, by the Vse of a Truck or Board
with Wheels at the end next the Wa|ter,
to move too and fro as the Tide comes
in or goes out, which may answer their
purpose.
And if those to whose Care the Con|servacies
of the Rivers are entrusted as

Depositories, may happen to tell your
Lordship that they are not at leisure to
mind the vigorous discharge of this trust,
a Reply may be had from the trite pas|sage
of King Philip's telling a Complain|ing
Woman that he had no leisure to do
her Justice, and on which occasion she
said, that then he should have no lei|sure
to be King. Most certainly he who
receives a Depositum, obligeth himself
to be at leisure to preserve it: And I
never knew any Iudge but who would find
leisure to ampliate and enlarge his Iu|risdiction,
especially when he saw any
Men find leisure to try to diminish it.
There was one thing that seem'd to be
of some moment for the discouraging any
one from a belief of the likelyhood of any
of the Encroachments on the Royal Ri|vers
being shortly removed, or of the
event of any Person of Honour or Qua|lity's
being likely to undertake to serve his
Countrey therein; namely, the want of
any Fonds to support the Charge of such
Office. But as to which, it is obvious to
consider that the Law is open to compel
Encroachers to be at the Charge of abat|ing
their own Encroachments, if able to

do it, and wherein such especially who af|ter
the Survey made Encroachments
on the Thames, will deserve little Fa|vour.
And in the Case of Insolvents, the
Encroachments of solvent Persons that
shall by the Conservators be permitted to
continue, as consistent with the safety
of the Rivers, may easily be made to bear
that charge.
I remember a Person employ'd by some
of the late Kings Ministers to discourse
Sir Robert Jefferys, when Lord May|or,
about this Matter, acquainted me
that Sir Robert then moved it to the
Court of Aldermen, That a Committee
thereof might be appointed to meet at
his House with that Person, and he
there offering it to their Coasideration, as
the sense of those Ministers, that Com|missioners
should be appointed by his
Majesty to make moderate Composi|tions
with the Owners of such En|croachments
as were not very prejudi|cial
to the River, and were to be con|tinued,
and the Charge of the demo|lishing
the prejudicial ones might be
defray'd out of such Composition, and

that he desired to know whether they
had any thing to object against it. The
Lord Mayor and the rest of the Com|mittee
unanimously declared that they
were very well pleas'd with the Pro|position,
and did thankfully embrace
it.
And no doubt but if the like way of
Compositions were order'd for such En|croachments
as are to continue in the
Royal Rivers in the Countrey, the charge
of the demolishing some there, and of the
regulation of those Rivers, might not
only be thence defray'd, but a conside|rable
summe of Money might be thence
brought in to support the Charge of the
Government, and that without any gain|saying
or reluctance from the People, pro|vided
that they might be deliver'd from
the vexatious Prosecutions of the many
Patents to private Persons for such En|croachments;
to whom they have been in
a manner forced to give Money to re|deem
their Vexation, rather than out
of hopes that they could buy a good Title
for the continuance of their Nusances.
And certainly the Condition of the
French Subjects being so ill on the ac|count

of their being forced to buy Salt'
any Mens being harrass'd into the buy|ing
such inspid things (or as I may ra|ther
say noxious) as Nusances, is a more
compassionable Case. This is humbly
offer'd to the Consideration of the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, in
order to their offering it to the Conside|rations
of their Majesties, or of the
House of Commons, (who are the grand
Inquest of the Kingdom) or of the House
of Lords, as they shall see occasion. And
perhaps if by their Application, a Clause
may be inserted in some new Act of Par|liament,
for the continuance of Peoples
Enchroachments that shall be compound|ed
for by Commissioners in the respe|ctive
Counties named in the Act, or by
their Majesties, they being by the Le|gislative
power secured in their Titles
to such Encroachments, will no doubt be
chearfully ready to pay near the full Va|lue
thereof.
The common Observation, that Pre|rogative
in the Hand of the Prince is
a Scepter of Gold, but in the Hand
of the Subject a Rod of Iron, is appa|rently
applicable to the Case of the Jubile

such People will have, when freed from
the Vexations by Colour of Law given
them by the Proling litigious Instruments
employ'd under such Patents, who are usu|ally
the Faex Populi, and may well bring to
our minds the saying of Solomon, A poor
Man that oppresseth the poor, is like a
sweeping Rain which leaveth no Food.
I have been inform'd from Mr. L. J.
a worthy Bencher of the Temple, that
the poor People were so miserably harras'd
by the Agents employ'd in the Lady
Sll's Patent for derelict Lands, about
twenty Years since, that the Court of Ex|chequer,
burden'd with Complaints about
it, Order'd, that no Process of the Court
should be further issued out pon it.
I do studiously avoid the naming of
other Patents or the Patentees, or any
of their Instruments or Agents, and do
not desire to give our Admirals any trou|ble
with reflections on such, however yet
in the course of my little reading in Par|liament-Records,
I find that many Per|sons
have been censured in Parliament
for taking out and procuring illegal
and vexatious Letters Patents from the
Crown. The Case of Sir Francis Mitchel

for his prouring a Patent of forfeited
Recognizances before Conviction, is
fresh in Memory.
Nor shall I here mention the Names
of those Patentees particularly, who gave
multitudes of the Seamen so much trou|ble
at Law by their Patents for Encroach|ments,
while they knew there were Prior
Patents in being for the same Encroach|ments,
and that therefore no Action was
then maintainable by the latter Paten|tees,
and that they could have no de|sign
by bringing their innumerable Acti|ons
against the Seamen, but to get Com|position
out of them.
Nor shall I mention the Name of a
Waterbailiff, who was reflected on in
Council in the two last Reigns, for having
the Encroachers on the Thames for his
Tenants, and whom a late Lord Mayor
reproved very worthily on that account.
Nor shall I name a later Lord Mayor,
who instead of being a Conservator of
the River, appear'd as a Patron of En|croachers,
by effecting it that a Ring-leader
of the Encroachers should be fined
only a Noble for an Encroachment, that
in the Survey of the Navy-Board and

Trinity-house is particularly branded
with its dimensions as prejudicial to the
Thames, and his being suffer'd to con|tinue
that Encroachment; and the which
Favour his Lordship was known to shew
him at the request of a Person who was
by Name reflected on in The City Rea|sons
before mention'd, as an Encroach|er
of their Conservacy. The words
of the wise are heard in quietness; and
I therefore desire not to ruffle the Cares
of any of our Magistrates, from whom
the redress of these evils may be hoped,
by the noise of the Names of Persons. I de|sire
that they may please to look forward,
not backward, and that at things rather
than Persons,  nequid detrimenti capi|at
publicorum fluminum Conservatio.
And here it falls in my way to ob|serve,
that supposing the Conservators
should not think it necessary in hast to
abate any Nusances, or to effect the raising
of any Revenue for the Crown, or Fond
for this Office on the Encroachments, yet
may the charge of the Office before men|tion'd
be competently supported out of Ad|miralty
Perquisites, either as they are
already vacant, or as they shall be; and

such Perquisites as to common reason
may seem most proper to be apply'd to a
publick use, and as I before mention'd
how the Ballast was. The truth is, con|sidering
how little the standing Fees of
the Judge and other Officers of the High
Court of Admiralty are proportion'd to
the great pains by them taken, and trust
in them reposed, and for how much a
greater income than yet belongs to Tri|nity-house,
that is so useful a receptacle
as to the Charities to be bestow'd on de|cay'd
Seamen, and their Widdows and
Orphans, and where they are to such with
so much exact Care apply'd, I have been
much troubled when I have heard of Ad|miralty
Perquisites bestow'd formerly on
Courtiers and Voluptuaries, by whom the
Admiralty Office and Jurisdiction, and
the moral Offices incumbent on the same,
have not been promoted one jot.
But since the Nature of things doth
Call so loud for the speedy Settlement of
this Office, by which means only the Trust
in the Admiral's Office can be discharg|ed
for the prevention of future Encroach|ments
on the Royal Rivers, and for that
frustra differtur remedium quod est

unicum, it may be worthy the Care of
those honourable Persons who administer
that Office, to see some support provided
for that Office as soon as may be, and to
apply to the Crown or the Legislative
Power, as they shall find occasion, for any
thing to be done, necessary to the settle|ment
and support thereof.
Both because the River of Thames is
the most principal of the Royal Rivers,
and for that the Countrey is naturally
in all things influenced by the Example
of London, the effectual Conservacy of
its River may well seem to require the
Priority of their Care. And here af|ter
the example of the Government, that
as was before mention'd provided A. 1613.
for the preservation of the River of
Tyne, that the Persons who were ap|pointed
to View that River, should
every Week make Oath of its State,
and the Abuses done to it, perhaps it
may appear necessary, both to the Com|missioners
of the Admiralty and the Lord
Mayor, to apply to the Parliament that a
New Form of Oaths may be enjoyn'd to
all Persons ministerially concern'd in the
Care of the River of Thames, and the

which kind of Oaths may likewise be en|joyn'd
to Persons employ'd in the Conser|vacy
of the Royal Rivers in the Coun|trey.
This is here mention'd, because 'tis
conceiv'd, that a New Oath cannot be
imposed but by Authority of Parlia|ment.
I suppose the Lord Mayor's Deputy
Water-Bailiff was never upon his Oath
not to connive at Encroachments on the
River: But the very common Fame a|bout
the Water-Bailiff's Tenants, may
make either a promissory Oath to that
effect necessary in the beginning of every
Mayor's Year, or at the end of it an
assertory one that he hath not done
it.
I know a Gentleman, who charging a
late Water-Bailiff with taking of Mo|ney
from Encroachers, was answer'd,
That he did no such thing, but would
not deny but that some of his fol|lowers
might do so. Good God! what
unsafe anchoring do all our great Trusts
in this World find, while we trust our
Bodies to Apothecaries Boyes, our E|states
to Lawyers Clarks or the Appren|tices
of Scriveners, our Souls to poor Cu|rates,

and our principal Royal River to
a Water-baily's Followers!
When I consider that mighty spirit of
Industry that appear'd in France with
success, for joyning the two Seas, a
work that heretofore abash'd the Roman
Empire, and was attempted and given
over in foregoing Reigns, and yet not|withstanding
the remoteness of the two
Seas, the Mountains, the Boggy-Lands,
the scarcity of Water in a Countrey
where there was hardly enough to sup|ply
the Gardens, and many other diffi|culties,
that it was in a few Years
brought to its perfection, while the
Crown there was in War against the
most powerful States of Europe united
together, I shall wonder much if we
have not a stock of Brains and In|dustry
enough going to keep our River
of Thames.
What great Pains and Charge the
work of meliorating that River cost
our Ancestors, the Chronicles tell us,
and how useful for the preservations of
it the pains taken in a late Conjuncture,
(when the Cities Charter was in its
low estate) by the former Commissioners

of the Admiralty, proved, is obvious;
and therefore the Wisdom of our An|cestors
in Complicating the Office of the
Lord Admiral with the Lord Mayors in
its Conservacy, was very profound;
for the Admiral's Office being during plea|sure,
we are sure that whoever have that
Office, are the actual Favourites of the
Government; and by being so, they have
with the better success signalized their di|ligence
in the preserving that River.
It must here in Iustice be acknowledg|ed,
that the late King James, while the
Admiralty was in his Hands, was not
by all the Cares and Business incumbent
on the Crown, diverted from the Conser|vacy
of the River. And if all the par|ticulars
of the vast pains taken by Mr.
Pepys therein, while he was Secretary
of the Admiralty, were enumerated, they
would fill a much larger Volume than
what I here send your Lordship. His
concerning himself so much and so often
in the behalf of Petitioning Seamen who
conceiv'd themselves injured by the Agents
of Patentees requiring Money of them
for their Ships lying on the Shoar, and
his Frank interceding with the King

as Admiral for them, and effecting their
being speedily righted, and that with|out
any Fee of Office expected or paid,
are things fresh in the Memories of
those who live by the Thames-side below
Bridge.
And the truth is, to a Person so know|ing
in the Office of the Admiral, it
must needs be known, that Seamen being
more than other Subjects compell'd to serve
the Crown in times of Peace and War,
and at the Crowns own Rates both at
home and abroad, are entituled to a
more tender Protection from the Crown
than other Subjects are: And that the
Seamen being call'd to such Service by
the Admiral's Warrant, will in the Case
of any general pressure happening to them
wherein the King's Name is used, ex|pect
that the Admiral shall apply to the
Crown in their behalf, as knowing that
no Admiral ever refused or delay'd in
such Case to take the trouble of patroni|zing
them.
My Lord, I have now almost done
troubling you for the present; and yet
according to a Jewish Proverb, that Mo|lestus

ubi se molestum agnoscit, no
est molestus, shall hope I have not done
it at all. But I shall chiefly fortifie my
hopes of my not having so done, by the
Consideration of its being no trouble to
you, but an Obligation for any One to
furnish your great thoughts with any use|ful
Materials for the promoting the ser|vice
of your Prince and Countrey, in
such a critical season as this, that calls
so loud for that Old heathenish Virtue
of the Pietas in Patriam to awaken it self
among English Christians.
We may well believe our Chronicles,
that tell us of a Porter who slept fourteen
dayes and nights together, when we have
seen so great a part of a whole Nation asleep
four or five Years, and much longer.
The last Reign save one was a time
wherein men made pleasure their business,
and when the Nation suffer'd more by
Lethargy than the Plague. But as
Nature doth now call upon us to make
Business our Pleasure, and to build
Work-houses as well as Play-houses, so
it may be supposed that our World is as
weary of sleeping as ever it was of
waking, and that Reasons for Mens

being publick spirited and nobly active
in all the publick Spheres in Magistra|cy
to which they are call'd, may be
patiently heard, and that it may seem
a reasonable Request, since we see in
things natural, some inanimate things
to serve the Nature of the Universe
do sometimes forgo and quit their par|ticular
Nature (and as for example,
water to prevent a Vacuum which Na|ture
abhorrs, doth ascend,) that Magi|strates
would go on in their own natural
Course to what lyes in the plain way of
their Duty, and what is incumbent on
them by moral Obligations. Faxit: And
that he may neither be a shame to, nor
ashamed of his Countrey, who hath the
Honour of being
My LORD,
Your Lordships most Humble and most Devoted Servant,
T. H.





ERRATA
In the foregoing Letter to the Earl
of Marlbourgh.
PAge 2. for ! read . p. 14. for
Britannij r. Britanni. ib. for Robora r. Robore.
p. 18. l. 3. after the word Corporation close the
Parenthesis. p. 26. for Moral r. Morals. p. 46.
for raris r. Ranis. p. 54. for Mr. Ioseph Coting
r. Mr. Ioseph Colinge. p. 59. for Hydrautica r. hy|draulica.
p. 77. l. penult. instead of a Point of In|terrogation
make a Comma. p. 87. for the Year
1670. r. 1630. p. 97. for patriotly r. particular.
p. 98. for Thorna r. Thoma. p. 105. l. 18. for Sub|conservators
r. Subconservator. p. 110. l. 3. for
making r. speaking. p. 110. l. ult. for are r. is.
p. 114. l. 13. dele perhaps.







THE
New Invention
OF
MILL'D-LEAD,
FOR
Sheathing of Ships against the
Worm, better for Sailing, and
Cheaper above Cent. per Cent.
than the old way with Boards.
As also For
Bread-rooms, Scuppers, Furnaces, c.
The Objections, Answers, Proofs and Proceedings,
between the Officers of the Navy and the
Mill'd-Lead Company, before the late Lords of
the Admiralty and Council-Board, submitted
to Consideration.
ALSO
The said Mill'd-Lead from many Years Experi|ence,
as well as the reason of the thing it self,
proved to be much better and cheaper, for
Covering of Houses, Gutters, Pipes, Furnaces
for Dyers, Copperas-works, Lining of Cisterns,
and other Vessels for Brewers, Dairies, and all
purposes whatsoever, where Sheet-Lead is
used, than Cast-Lead can be, and the Plumb|ers
suggestions decrying the same, proved
to be idle, scandalous and false.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1691.




A
TABLE
OF
The Principal Matters
in the following Dis|course
of the New In|vention
of MILL'D-LEAD.

THe substance of the Na|vy-Officers
Report to
the Lords of the Admiralty,

October 28. 1682. giving
their Opinion against any
further use of Lead-sheath|ing,
p. 1.
The Companies Reply thereto,
together with their whole
Interest and Right in this
Affair, entirely submitted by
them to his Majesty and their
Lordships, p. 2.
An Accompt of the Compa|ny's
first becoming Masters
of this Invention, and their
submitting it to the Censure
of his Majesty in Parlia|ment,
Anno 1670. p. 3.
The Parliaments strict Inqui|sition
into, and most ample
Approval of the said In|vention,
in an Act passed in
favour of the same. p. 4.
The first Essay made thereof
by the Company upon the
Phoenix, in March, 1670/1.
and successively on other of
his Majesties Ships, p. 6.
The studyed Obstructions ne|vertheless
raised and long
continued against it, from
Persons interested in the op|posing
it, p. 6.
The final removal of those Ob|structions
by the express Or|der
of his Majesty and the
Lords of the Admiralty in
the Year 1673. upon three
Years proof of the efficacy of
the said Invention, and the
King's personal Observa|tion
of its success upon the
Phoenix, p. 7.
The Navy-Officers contracting
with this Company for the
use of this their Inventi|on,
(after five Years try|al
of it) in March, 1675/6.
in terms expresly declaring
their sufficient experience
thereof, both as to Lead and
Nails, p. 8.
The first breaking forth (af|ter
this five Years proof)
of a Complaint from the
Streights of an extraordi|nary
decay discovered in
Ships Rudder-Irons, from
their being sheathed with
Lead, p. 9.
The care of his Majesty and
the Lords of the Admi|ralty
by their several Or|ders

to the Navy-Officers
for the finding out the true
grounds of that Complaint,
and improving (in Order
thereto) a Suggestion and
Proposal of this Compa|ny's,
touching their Iron-work, p. 10.
The particular Instances of
Complaints, upon which the
Navy-Officers do found this
their Iudgment against
Lead-sheathing, with the
Companies solutions thereto,
and observation of a greater
number of Ships resting
uncomplained of, than those
they have instanced in, were
their Complaints true, p. 11.
The Companies Remarks upon
the Philosophical reasoning

of the said Officers upon the
Lead it self, as a Met|tal,
p. 17.
The Companies Opinion and
Argument, that the sheath|ing
Ships with Lead, nei|ther
is, nor can be the true
Cause of this decay of Iron-work, p. 19.
Their Iudgment and Rea|sons,
what alone this Mis|chief
ought rightly to be
imputed to, p. 23.
The only certain and effectu|al
Expedient of arriving
at the knowledge of the
truth in this matter. p. 32.
Instances of the Discourage|ments
and Obstructions

wherewith this Company has
ever hitherto been prevent|ed
by the Officers of the
Navy, in their Endea|vours
of serving his Ma|jesty
herein, p. 34.
Their fresh Offer nevertheless
of the proposing of an effe|ctual
Remedy to the Evil
complained of, after pre|mising
the three following
Reflections, viz. p. 36.
1. That Sheathing with
Wood (the only securi|ty
before this of Lead,
for sheathing Ships a|gainst
the Worm) is,
and has always been own|ed
to be attended with
circumstances greatly de|trimental

to his Majesty,
with respect both to his
Ships and to his Service,
p. 36.
2. That the only Expedient
besides this of Lead, for
obviating those Evils in
Wood-sheathing, has hi|therto
been the exposing
his Majesty's Ships to the
Worm unsheathed, p. 39.
3. That the only third Me|thod
yet extant of serv|ing
his Majesty herein,
is this of Lead sheathing;
against which none of the
Evils in the former two,
nor any other are at this
day so much as suggest|ed
by the Officers of the
Navy themselves, after
near twelve Years ex|perience

of it, saving this
relating to the Iron-work,
p. 40.
The Company's final Proposal
of an obvious, easie and
chargeless Remedy to the
said Evil, to whichsoever
of the supposed Causes the
same should be found impu|table,
p. 41.
A particular of the Navy-Offi|cers
Complaints, with re|ference
to the Company's par|ticular
Answers thereto in
the Reply, p. 45.
The Navy-Officers Report, and
the Companys Reply, laid be|fore
the King and Coun|cil
by one of the Lords of
the Admiralty, p. 50.
The Council-Boards Order up|on
hearing, referring it back
to the Commissioners of the
Admiralty, throughly to ex|amine
the Matter, and Report
the Fact upon each Article,
with their Opinion, p. 51.
The Company's Memorial pre|sented
to the Commissioners
of the Admiralty upon the
Council-Boards Reference,
p. 54.
The determination of the Ad|miralty
Commission before
any Report, p. 58.
The Company's New Proposal
to the Navy-Board, 20 De|cemb.
1686. to sheath the
Kings Ships per Yard square,
and to keep them in constant

repair at a rate certain, a|bove
Cent. per Cent. cheap|er
than the present Charge,
p. 60.
Letters and Certificates from
Master-Builders, Carpen|ters,
c. in behalf of the
Lead-sheathing, p. 72.
Pursers Certificates how the
Sheathing Lead proved in
the lyning their Bread-rooms, p. 82.
A Brief of the Controversie be|tween
the Officers of the Na|vy
and the Mill'd-Lead
Company, p. 86.
The Excellency and Cheapness
of Mill'd-Lead for Covering
of Houses, c. p. 92.
An Advertisement lately print|ed
and published, to all that
have Occasion to make use of
Sheet-lead, abundantly prov|ing
Mill'd Sheet-Lead to be
much cheaper, as well as bet|ter
than Cast Sheet-lead, for
any use whatsoever, p. 93.
A Paper presented by the
Plumbers, to prevent the
Company's Contract with
the Navy-Board, wonder|fully
decrying the Mill'd-Lead,
and commending their
own, naming half a score
Houses that they say were
amongst many others cover|ed
with Mill'd-lead, which
being defective, were strip'd,
and their Cast-lead laid in
the room, p. 102.
Letters and Certificates from
the Owners or Inhabitants
of those Houses, proving the
Plumbers said Paper to be
scandalous and false, p. 105.
Also their idle suggestion there|in
about their Solder answer|ed,
p. 113.
A Memorial given in to the
Navy-Board by the Mill'd-Lead
Company, proving that
by two Tryals purposely made
with the Plumber in Jan.
and Febr. 1678/9. the Mill'd-Lead
Scuppers were accord|ing
to the Order given, which
the Plumber could not obey,
and above 25 l. per Cent.
in both those Tryals cheaper
to the King than theirs,
p. 114.
A Treatise of Naval Philosophy,
written by the ingenious Sir Willi|am
Petty, p. 117.
A Survey of the Buildings and En|croachments
on the River of
Thames, on both sides, from
London-Bridge Eastwards, to the
lower end of Lyme-house, taken
by he principal Officers and Com|missioners
of his Majesty's Navy,
with the assistance of the Elder
Brethren of Trinity-House, in
pursuance of an Order of the Lords
Commissioners for executing the
Office of Lord High Admiral of
England, Dated the first of
March, 1683/4. Wherein is also
particularly expressed which of the
said Buildings and Encroachments
are old, and which are new, and
likewise which of them are judged

most prejudicial to Navigation
and the River, together with Re|ferences
to each of them by Num|bers
in the Draught of the River
lately made by Captain Collins.







To the Right Honourable,
The
LORDS COMMISSONERS
For executing the Office of
Lord High Admiral of England.
The humble Reply of Sir Philip How|ard,
Sir Francis Watson, K^t^s.
and Comp. interested in the Ma|nufacture
and Invention of Milled-Lead,Octob. 28. 1682.
to the late Report to your
Lordships from the Officers of the
Navy, touching the Method of
Lead-sheathing, used upon his Ma|jesties
Ships: Wherein they shew to
your Lordships,
THat from every Ship of his Majesties
that has been so sheathed, they have
had complaints of the extraordina|ry
Eating and Corroding of their
Rudder-Irons and Bolts, beyond whatever was
found upon any Ship not so sheathed, and an|nexed
a Transcript of several Complaints by
them received from several Commanders and o|thers
to that effect: And that therefore upon due

sideration had thereof, and of the many Expe|riences
had of the great damages arising from
this sort of Sheathing; They give it as their
Opinion, that it will not be for his Maje|sties
Service, that the same be longer used
upon his Ships: but that the Ships so Sheath|ed,
may have their sheathing stripped off, and
new Iron-work supplied where defective, as well
to prevent any further damage from the lon|ger
Continuance of the said Sheahing upon
them, as that they may be in a condition of ser|vice
whenever on a sudden occasion, the same
may be called for.
To which Report, and the Matters
of Complaint wheron the same is
grounded, importing a vehement sug|gestion
of ruine likely to attend the
Ships and Service of his Majesty,
in Case this Method of Lead-sheath|ing
should be continued: The said
Sir Ph. Howard and Comp^a. do
make this plain Return, viz.
THat as their first interesting themselves in
this undertaking, was wholly founded
upon the hopes they had of being enabled to
contribute somewhat thereby to the Service
of the Royal Navy, and those hopes confirm|ed
by as ample Instances of Publick approba|tion
as were ever given to any precedent In|vention;
so do they still give his Majesties

Service the same entire preference to all con|siderations
of private advantage that either
has or can arise to them from the same un|dertaking;
And therefore are not only con|tented,
but desirous, that in case your Lord|ships
shall (after perusal of this Paper) hold
the reasonableness of the said Officers Advice,
for suppressing the further use of Lead-Sheath|ing,
sufficiently demonstrated by what they
have offered as the grounds thereof in that col|lection
of Complaints: No Considerations re|lating
to the Interest or Right of this Com|pany,
may stand in the way of whatever his
Majesty and your Lordships shall think most
for his Service to determine concerning it.

A Deduction of the whole Matter re|lating
to the Lead-sheathing of his
Majesty's Ships, with what this Com|pany
do in their Duty hold themselves
bound on this Occasion to offer of their
own Reflections and Sentiments thereon.
IT was in the Year 1670. when this Com|pany
becoming Masters of this Invention
of Milled-Lead, they soon met with Encourage|ment,
not only from sundry Officers and Buil|ders
of the Navy, but from his Majesty him|self,
and his Royal Highness then Lord High
Admiral of England, to an immediate expo|sing
the same to practice.
But such was their backwardness to pre|sume
upon falling into the exercise of an In|vention,
(though never so self-convinced of
its Efficacy and Safety) whose first Experi|ments,
and future use, were principally to be
made upon a Subject of so high consideration,
as that of the Royal Navy of England, with|out
passing the most strict and solemn proba|tion
a matter of that kind could, and ought
to have in a Government like this subsisting
by Navigation, namely, That of his Majesty's
in Parliament, that they in the same Year
brought this their Invention into the Parlia|ment
then sitting: Where, after all the seve|rities
of Scrutiny capable of being exercised
in each of the Houses successively, and publick
Conferences had with all Persons qualified
for giving Advice therein, and those attend|ed
not only with the prejudice all new Pro|positions
ordinarily meet with, but from op|position
of the Persons interested in the pre|servation
of the old ones, (whereof more here|after,)
it not only received full Approbation
by being passed then into an Act, but had the
same done in Terms the most expressive of
the Conviction and Satisfaction wherewith
his Majesty and Parliament passed the said Act
with regard both to the Invention and Inven|tors;
as by part thereof following appears,
viz.




An Act for granting unto Sir Phi|lip
Howard, Knight, and Francis
Watson Esquire, the sole use of
a Manufacture, Art, or Inven|tion
for the benefit of Shipping.
WHereas it appears upon Examina|tion
that Sir Philip Howard,
Knight, and Francis Watson, Esquire, by
their great Charge and Industry have
found out a New Manufacture, Art, or
Invention to preserve Ships, and other
Uessels under Water, with certain Com|modities
chiefly of the growth of his Ma|jesties
Dominons, which is much cheap|er,
and more smooth, and dureable than
any way by Deals for Sheathing, or
Pitch, Tarr, Rozin, Brimstone, or any
Graving hitherto used: Now for the En|couragement
of Ingenuity and Industry
in the like cases; and to the intent that
the said Sir Philip Howard, and Francis
Watson, may be protected in the use of the
said Manufacture, Art, or Invention,
and have encouragement to make the same
publick, for the benefit of his Majesties
Dominions in general, c.



This being done, and the said Company
not only invited, but by his Majesty com|manded
to apply themselves forthwith to the
putting in use this Invention upon some of his
own Ships, they by his Order, and on Terms

adjusted with the Officers of the Navy, pro|ceeded
to the making the first Experiment
thereof at Portsmouth upon the Phoenix, in the
month of March, 1670, and not long after did
the like upon several others, of which these
following were part, viz.

Dreadnought.
Henrietta.
Mary.
Lyon.
Bristol.
Foresight.
Vulture.
Rose.
Hunter.
Harwich. c.

But your Lordships may be pleased here to
be informed, That (however upon the stamp
given it by Parliament) this Company were
so let in by the Officers of the Navy to the
exercise of their said Invention; yet was it
not without fresh assaults from some who
were interested in the benefit arising from the
labour, and the Materials employed in the
bringing on, and stripping off the Wood-sheath|ing,
in whose place this was to succeed: And
by their Arts and Industry, were Sir Philip
Howard, and Company in a restless manner ur|ged
to give Answers (all over again) to the Obje|ctions
formerly raised against them, and their In|vention
in Parliament, namely, Its excess in charge
above the ancient method, its rough lying on Ships sides
to the prejudice of their Sailing. Its liableness to gal|ling
from the Cables, and cracking when brought on
ground. Its tediousness in bringing on and off. Apt|ness
to foul, and difficult in cleansing. Lastly, Its

undurableness and doubtful efficacy in what was
chiefly expected from it against the Worm.
But so convincing were the Solutions brought
(as before) to every particular, and the same
so confirmed by a three years proof by this
time made of the whole, and more especially
by a Personal view had by the King himself
of the Phoenix, then come in and Careened at
Sheerness, in the Year 1673. after two Voy|ages
to the Streights: That his Majesty to put
an end to the unreasonable importunities till
then continued upon himself and them on this
Subject, was pleased by his then Commissioners
of the Admiralty, to give a final Declaration
of his Opinion and Pleasure concerning it,
in an Order from those Lords to the Officers
of the Navy, bearing date the 20th. of December
1673. as followeth, viz.

AFter our hearty commendations, in pursuance
of His Majesties Pleasure signified to us
by himself at this Board; that in regard of the
many and good proofs which had been given of the
usefulness of Sir Philip Howard, and Major
Watson's Invention of Sheathing his Majesties
Ships with Lead, in preference to the doing of it
with the materials, and in the manner anciently
used, (with respect had no less to the charge
thereof, than the effectual securing the Hulls of
his Majesties Ships against the Worm) his Ma|jesties
Ships may for the time to come be Sheathed
in no other manner than that of Lead, without es|pecial
Order given for the same from this Board:
These are to Authorize you to cause this his Maje|sties

Pleasure herein to be duly complyed with. And
so we remain,
Your Loving Friends,

Anglesey.
Ormond.
G. Carteret.


Notwithstanding which, such was the Re|luctancy
(or Caution) wherewith the Officers
of the Navy did yet think fit to proceed in the
adventuring to give any Encouragement to this
Invention, That not adjudging a three Years
proof available in this Case, they thought
expedient to take two Years more, and the
benefit of what Observations they could either
make or collect from the several Lead-sheathed
Ships employed on Southern Service within
that time, the better to enable themselves
without mistake to determine concerning the
execution of his Majesties said Order; which
indeed (after the five Years end) they did
comply with, by entering into a solemn Con|tract
with Sir Philip Howard, and Company,
for the future sheathing his Majesties Ships
with Lead, and this with such alacrity and
fulness of seeming Conviction concerning it's
advantageousness to the King, that (besides
their voluntary exchanging many and good proofs,
c. the terms of his Majesties said Order, in|to
sufficient proof and Experience of the Goodness
and Usefulness of the Invention of Milled-Lead,
and Nails for the Sheathing and preserving Ships

against the Worm) they would not permit the
said Company to reserve to themselves any
part, but would secure to the King in the
said Contract a Title to the whole term then
remaining of the time for which they were
by the Act of Parliament invested in the sole
benefit of their Invention, and whereof there
was then twenty years yet to come. And
thus stood this Matter at the close of the Year
1675. when it might reasonably have been
thought, that it had come to such, and so de|liberate
a settlement, as no new scruples could
have been raised about it, on the part of the
Navy Officers, or any occasion of fresh disqui|et
created to this Company.
But so it was ordered, or at lest fell out,
that no sooner were all things thus seemingly
satisfied, and established at home, but a new
Cry, and of a quite new kind, breaks out
from abroad, of a quality discovered in our
Lead-sheathing, tending (if not timely prevent|ed)
to the utter Destruction of his Majesties
Ships, namely, That of the Eating into, and
wasting their Rudder-Irons and Bolts under
water, to such a degree, and in so short a
space of time, as had never been observed up|on
any unsheathed or Wood-sheathed Ships.
Nor lay this long unseconded by concurrent
Advices from Portsmouth, in reference to some
of them that were sheathed with Lead, and
then in that Harbour, and the Accompts there|of
circumstanced with such particularities as
seemed to obtain Credit not only with the
Navy Officers, but his Majesty, and the Lords
of the Admiralty, and even this Company too,

at least so far, as to excite in all a desire of En|quiry
into the true grounds of it.
In order to which (leaving it to the Navy
Officers to give your Lordships an Accompt
of theirs, as we shall (by and by) of our own
Endeavours therein) it pleased his Malesty,
and my Lords of the Admiralty, not only by
several Orders to recommend to the said Of|ficers
the general matter of this Enquiry, but
(upon a suggestion made to them by this Com|pany,
of their apprehending this evil to arise
from some defectiveness in the Iron-work it
self, with a tender of their service, towards
finding out the full truth thereof) to direct
the Officers of the Navy by no less than four
several Orders within the Months of April and
May, 1678. to receive from the said Compa|ny
what Rudder-Irons should be so provided
by them, and employ no other upon any Ships
to be thenceforward sheathed with Lead, than
what were so provided, since which (being
full four Years and an half) this Company has
nevertheless been so far from having any oppor|tunities
given them by the said Officers of doing
his Majesty the service by these Orders expected,
That the first and only sight or knowledge we had
of what progress they in all that time made to|wards
the decision of this matter, is what your
Lordships were pleased so lately to surprize us
with in this their Report; wherein the whole
supposed Consumption of the Iron-work of his
Majesties Ships, and all the ruinous Conse|quences
apprehended therefrom to the Navy,
are expresly laid on Lead-sheathing, and that
only; and grounded this their sentence upon

no other Inducements (for ought appears) than
the particulars of Complaint accompanying
the said Report: The Truth, Consistences, and
Conclusiveness of which Complaints for pro|ving
the chargeableness of this evil on Lead-sheathing,
your Lordships will (we doubt not)
see through, upon a bare review of the said
Complaints, joyned with this their Reasoning
therefrom, as follows.
1. From Sir Iohn Norbrough's saying, That in
Iuly 1678, the Plymouth's Rudder-Irons began
to be much eaten, doubting his being forced
thereby to send her home that Winter, from
the incapacity he was in, of getting her re|cruited
abroad, and Sir R. B's adding in
September 1682. that had she not been sup|plyed
with new Rudder-Irons before her com|ing
out of the Streights, she had been in the
same ill condition with another Ship he had
then newly spoken of; whereas we are under no
doubts of Sir I. Narbrough's owning to your
Lordships what he has lately done to some of
us, that she had no supply of fresh Rudder-Irons
abroad, but came home with her old
ones, and those (it seems) in so good case,
that Sir R. B. could not distinguish them from
Irons of a new supply.
2. From Sir R. B's descripition of the ill
condition of the Harwich's Iron-works discover|ed
at her cleaning in 1682. in their being eat|en
away to nothing, so as to make it matter of
wonder that she sunk not in the Sea; whereas
(besides her said Iron-works having been fast|ened

in her five Years and an half, without any
Complaint heard of concerning them all her
Voyage, or at her coming home in Iuly, 1679.
Sir R. B. must be thought subject to some mis|take;
or both he, and the Surveyor of the Na|vy
made accountable for a breach (much less
easily answered for) both of the general Laws
of the said Navy, and their particular Instru|ction
therein, by suffering a Ship of her Va|lue,
and coming home in so sinking a conditi|on,
to lye afterwards above three Years in Har|bour
unsearched.
3. From Sir Iohn Kempthornes Complaint in
Iune 1677. of the Dreadnought's Rudder-Irons
being within a Year and an half (and that in
Harbour) so eaten, as not to be fit for her being
adventured to Sea again with them, for more
than a small tripp; and that followed by
a later, from Sir R. B. in October 1682.
wherein (after her having been abroad) he
makes the Condition of her Iron-works so mi|serable,
as to be under the same wonder he
was before, that she also had not sunk at Sea;
whereas it appears even from their own calcu|lations,
that her first set of Rudder-Irons last|ed
her four Years and an half, (which were
it a common standand for their duration, and
then to be renewed, would yet leave Lead-sheathing
greatly cheaper than that of Wood,)
and her second (for ought that appears of any
supplies) six Years and three quarters.
4. From a Certificate of the Officers in Ports|mouth-Yard,
in October 1677. declaring the Con|dition

of the Lyon's Iron-works under water, to
be such as they never saw in any Ship they
ever had to do with, not sheathed with Lead,
though droven twice as long: Whereas that
Certificate it self does not only expresly confess
her Bolts having been all in her five Years; but
will here furnish your Lordships with one In|stance
(besides the many you may hereafter
meet with) of what this Company is owing
for, to the sincerity as well as Thoughtfulness
of its Accusers, if your Lordships shall please
to have their last Assertion examined by the
Books of the Navy Officers, with whom it
carries so much weight, this Company being
well assured, that instead of no Ship, not
sheathed with Lead, being ever found perish|ed
in their Iron-work under water in twice
five years, variety of instances will be met
with, within much a shorter time.
5. From Sir Iohn Narbrough's saying in Fe|bruary
1676. that he had found the condition
of the Henrietta's Iron-works no other than
that of the forementioned Harwich: whereas
your Lordships may be pleased (here) to take
notice, that the Lords your Predecessors in the
Admiralty did by their Order of the 9th of
April 1678. (upon some Complaints touching
the Iron-works of this Ship,) recommend to
the Officers of the Navy, the making a strict
enquiry into the general and natural Reasons
of this great Evil, directing them twice in the
same order to the particular case of this Ship:
For execution whereof the said Officers con|tented
themselves, with answering the Lords

not with any effects of their own Inquisitions,
but with a bare Transcript only of Sir R. B's
Conceptions thereon from Chatham; when
(had they so thought good) they could as well
have given their Lorships something of their
own, by communicating to them the Result of
an Occular Survey by them had in their Pub|lick
Office (this Company being present) of
the Rudder-Irons themselves, sent from Chat|ham
for that purpose; where (upon the out|ward
coat of the said Irons being eaten off
with Rust) the inside of their Pintells, (as ne|ver
having had their due welding) discovered
themselves in three several arms or branches,
like the stalks of so many Tobacco-pipes, not
only to the removing the wonder of this Ships
condition, but confirming the suggestion this
Company had before made to his Majesty and
the Lords touching the Smiths neglects, and
contributing not a little towards the making
a right Judgment in the Matters in question,
of which more in its due place.
6. From Sir R. B's observing in September
1682. the eating off of two of the lower Pin|tells
and Gudgeons wholly, and a third in part
of the Rose, which will not (as this Company
conceives) be thought very extraordinary when
it shall be understood that this is the first and
only Complaint heard of her, not only after
two Voyages to Sea, and one of them three
years long, and her having lain now three
years more in Salt water in Harbour; but af|ter
her having worn those Irons eight years,
and the Complaint it self (when all is done)

amounting only to three Pintells and Gudge|ons,
without any thing objected to the rest
of her Iron-works.
7. From Sir Iohn Narbrough's Information
in Iuly 1678. touching some defectiveness then
discovered in the Iames and Charles Gallies,
which he fears would force him to send them
home that Winter, as not being repairable in
the Streights: Whereas the Iames being sheath|ed,
and sent forth in October 1676. continued
there three years, when making a Tripp for
England, she within two months after return|ed
thither, and has there remained to this day
(being in all six years) without ought said by
the Officers of the Navy, of her having any
Recruits of her Rudder-Irons in all that time
either at home or abroad.
And for the Charles, which accompanyed
the Iames to Sea in October 1676, (instead of
being driven home, as Sir Iohn Narbrough ap|prehended
in 1678.) she continued there till
about August 1680. (being four years) and
has now remained at home above two years
more, (in all six years) without any such re|pairs
alledged to have been given her either
in the Streights or here.
8. Lastly, From these particulars of eight
Ships, thus circumstanced, the Officers of the
Navy have held it reasonable to assert to your
Lordships their having received Complaints of
the extraordinary Corrosion of the Iron-works
of every of his Majesties Ships sheathed with
Lead: Whereas these make but eight of twen|ty

so sheathed, without any thing either of|fered
now, or heretofore appearing to this
Company in exception to the other twelve,
viz.

Mary,
Defiance,
Woolwich,
Bristol,
Hampshire,
Foresight,
Phoenix,
Assistance,
Kingsfisher,
Hunter,
Vulture,
Norwich.

but on the contrary many Instances might
be drawn from them, in advantage to the
Credit of Lead-sheathing, of much more force
(were that the business of this Paper) than
any thing of what has been before offered to
its diminution:
But this Company humbly referrs your
Lordships for that to the Navy Officers, con|tenting
themselves with an Appeal only to
the Phoenix, and Norwich, the first and last of
all the twenty: The former of which coming
home after two Voyages, and three years
spent therein, happened (as has been already
mentioned) to Carreene at Sheerness, where his
Majesty receiving full satisfaction in her ha|ving
answered all that was aimed at in this
sheathing, she from thence proceeded to Gui|ny,
and after return in 1674. was sent to Ia|maica,
(Voyages all calculated for the proving
her against the Worm,) and coming back, was
in 1677. stripp'd of her sheathing, and then
sent abroad unsheathed, without having one

Bolt under water shifted from her being so
sheathed to that day, being seven years.
And for the Norwich, we are well inform|ed,This is a Mistake, for she was neglected to be sheathed with , th Order'd.
that not one word of Advice, much less
of Complaint has ever been received either
from her Commanders, or any other hand, of
the least defect discovered in any of her Iron-work
under water during the whole four
years time of her service in the West-Indies,
from her first sheathing to the day of her
Miscarriage.
Nor does this Company (after having thus
opened the matters of Fact reported in these
Complaints) conceive it will appear to your
Lordships less allowable for them in this place,
to make one Remark upon what the Officers
of the Navy have offered in the same Paper of
suggestions Philosophical, in support of their
present Sentence against Lead-sheathing, which
is, that they were suggestions, which seem ra|ther
calculated for the giving countenance to
an Opinion already espoused, than for the
raising an Opinion upon that, is yet in seeking;
One being that of Sir Iohn Kempthornes, who
with some of his Officers lighting upon a
piece of Milled-Lead, (which seemed to them
to have taken some wet) they conceived it
presently to look of a Cancarous and Corroding
substance, and venomous to Iron, (qualities
not usuaily judged of by the Eye) promising
the sending up a Sample of it to the Officers
of the Navy for their Inspection; which if
they did, the said Officers would not have
needed any other Evidence against Lead-sheath|ing,
than their Experiments upon this one piece,

had Sir Iohn Kempthornes conceptions of it,
met with any Confirmation therefrom; where|in
your Lordships will easily receive full satis|faction
from the said Officers.
Another, That of Sir R. B's, who in
his Declaration upon this matter chargeth
this Eating of the Lead-to the mixture it is
prepared with for the making it run thin, by which
it is rendred of a more blew colour than Lead or|dinarily
is, and with Salt-water creates a kind
of Coperas that consumes the Iron-works under wa|ter;
whereas whoever is conversant in the me|thod
of this Company in the manufacturing
part of their Invention, know that the only
mystery thereof lies in the application of Lead
to Rollers, by which it is reduced without any
inequalities to what degree of thickness or
thinness is demanded, without the least other
Preparation or Mixture exercised upon the Me|tal
it self, but is pressed, and brought upon
the Ships sides as simple, and unaltered as ever
it flowed from the Pig.
The last, that of Sir Iohn Narbrough's Opi|nion
of its being the Copper covering the Rud|der-Irons,
and the Copper nailes the sheathing is
fastened with, that destroys the Iron-work: where|to
we hold it unnecessary here to return any
thing in opposition more, than what the said
Officers at the same time present you with of
a quite contrary Principle, though in main|tenance
of the same Position, from Sir R.
B. who expresly declares his having found
by experience, That it is not the Irons covered
with Copper, and nailed even with Iron Nails,
that suffer from the Rust; but only those which

the Lead together with the Salt water drains
and falls upon.
And this, My Lords, having been said in
Reference to all that the Navy Officers have
in their Report thought fit to give for the
grounds of this their so positive Determinati|on
against Lead-sheathing: And wherein this
Company have only this to ask, that they may
not from ought they have already, or may
yet further say upon this occasion, be misun|derstood
by your Lordships, as if they were
under any disbelief themselves, or aimed at
the getting any in others, touching the Truth
of Fact now discoursed upon, there being
none more sensible than themselves, both of
the Reality of this wast of Iron-work by Rust,
and the ill importance of it, in its consequen|ces;
They now proceed to the giving your
Lordships the best assistance they can towards
the discovery of what is the true sourse of
this Evil, and that in the plainness of this
following Method, viz.
1. By submitting to your Lordships their
Opinion, and its Reasons, That the
Sheathing of Ships with Lead, neither is,
nor can (as such) be the true Cause of
this decay of Iron-work.
2. By doing the like in reference to the
Evils (for they are more than one) where|to
this matter under enquiry ought right|fully
to be imputed.
3. By conducting your Lordships to that,
which they take to be the only, certain,
speedy, and effectual Expedient of arri|ving
at the Truth in this matter.
 For the First, Against the charging this Mis|chief
upon sheathing with Lead, be pleased to
receive the Measures of this Companies judging
therein, in the following Considerations.
(1.) That without taking upon us to Dis|course
as Philosophers of the different Struc|tures,
Consistences, Sweetnesses and Acidities of
Bodies, and other Difficulties wherewith they
have been frequently entertained, in their En|quiries
on this Subject, They have made it
their Endeavours to gather the best Informa|tion
they can, by resorting to that purpose,
to Persons of most allowed Name in Natu|ral
Phylosophy and Chymistry, without being
able hitherto to meet with one that will ad|mit
any thing to lye within the whole natur
of Lead, that either singly, or from any alte|ration
that can be begotten by its meeting with
Salt-water, can contribute ought to the decay
of Iron by Corrosion, as being a Mettal so void
of any disposition that way, as to subdue that
very quality of corroding in other Bodies the
most acid and sour, of which, as we have had
the honour more than once of hearing his Majesty
himself discourse in Confirmation, so do we rea|dily
and humbly referr your Lordships not on|ly
to the same Royal Advice, but to the ho|nourable
and learned Gentleman, and most
eminently so, for his researches into those ab|struser

parts of Natural Knowledge, Mr. Boyle,
or whoever you shall please to consult with
herein, taking with you the like confideration
about the Nails, to which some (as has been
already shewn) seem more inclinable to im|pute
this Evil, than to the Lead, our daily
experience shewing them at seven years end,
as free from Rust, as at their first driving, and
being so Rust-proof in themselves, will not any
more be admitted with those we have dis|coursed
with, as capable of infecting with Rust
any other adjacent, or even continguous Metal.
(2.) That from beyond the Memory of Man,
and therefore before the being of this Inventi|on,
(at least within these Dominions) univer|sal
Practice both in his Majesties Yards, and
Merchants Buildings, has and does at this day
make Lead the common security of Iron-work
against Rust, not only by covering therewith
(upon all Ships unsheathed, and designed on
long Voyages) the Iron-work about the Rudder,
but by capping the heads of their Bolts under
water with pieces of Lead sized to, and nailed
over the said Bolts.
Nor is this all, for at this day whatever Mer|chant-Man,
or Man of War is appointed for a
Voyage where the Worm eats, the back of her
Stern-post, and Beard of her Rudder, are sheath|ed
with Copper or Lead, and this even where
the Ships also are sheathed with Wood, the
East-India Company it self, (upon whom we
may best depend for cautions, wherever pre|servation
of Ships is in question) not omitting in
that very case, to sheath their Rudders with Lead
or Copper.
Which Practice could certainly never have
prevailed with our Fathers, and been followed
with so continued a consent to this Day by us,
if the vicinity of either of these Metals assisted
(as is by some imagined) by Salt-water, had
been ever found of so pernicious and certain
Effect upon the very Matter they are imployed
to secure.
(3.) Nor does what is thus approved of in
the general, and universal Practice of England,
want its confirmation, by the like of several
Forreign Nations, to wit, the Dutch, Portu|guese
and Spaniard; the first of which are
equally observant with us, in the sheathing their
Rudder Irons, and the Back of their Posts with
Lead or Copper upon all Ships bound in the
way of the Worm; and for the two latter, not
only the Rudders but the whole Bodies of their
Ships under Water, even of their Gallions them|selves,
have of long time been, and are well
known at this Day to be entirely sheathed with
Lead; which concurrence of these two latter
Nations, seems in this Cause so much more
considerable than that of any other, by how
much not only their Voyages are the longest,
their hazards therein from the Worm the great|est,
and Cargoes the most valuable of all that
Navigation knows, but for that the Hulls of
their Ships abound the most with Iron-work, as
having all that in the fastening of our Plank
we perform with wooden Trunnels, done by them
with large Spikes of Iron.
(4.) Lastly, Were this Spoil of Iron-work

chargeable with nothing but what is contained
in the Lead and Nails, these pretended Effects
of theirs would be constant and uniform in all
Ships alike sheathed; whereas nothing is more
frequent than the Instances of their Inequality,
as will enough appear from a bare Observati|on
of what lies before your Lordships in this
very Report of the Navy-Officers: Forasmuch as
this Company dare put the whole Credit of their
Cause upon that one Issue, viz. of your Lord|ships
ever finding an Equal Consumption of Iron|work
under Water, whether upon the same,
or different Ships at any one time, or equal
distances of time; the Account now before you
of the twenty Ships that have passed this Me|thod
of Sheathing, affording a most ample
Proof of this Inequality, by having eight of
them loaden with Complaints, (and every one
of them different from the rest, and at diffe|rent
times from it self) while we are yet to
be told, whether the other twelve were not,
(as we are sure some of them were) free from
all ground of Complaint.
To our Second Undertaking, we conceive 
the real Causes of this Evil, (that is to say,
so much thereof as is Extraordinary) to be
these three.
1. The perfunctory Performance of the Smiths
Part in this Affair, by some Deficiency either
in the choice, mixture or temper of his Metal,
or failure to give it its due welding or work|ing:
Forasmuch as by this alone can be re|conciled
the forementioned Disparities in the

Duration of Iron-work; whence otherwise can
it be, that all other circumstances (whereto
that Disparity can be referred) being the same,
but the matter, one particular Piece of Iron
shall remain undiminished three times as long
as that next to it; and this not only in sheath|ed
Ships (as in the Case of those before you)
but unsheathed too; as (to give but one In|stance,
in a Cause where every Ship is ano|ther)
appears in the Swiftures first Voyage to
the Streights with Sir Rich. Rooth, where two
of her Rudder-Irons were eaten entirely in pie|ces,
and shifted at her return in Portsmouth-Dock;
while at the same time the rest (though
all put on together several Years before) were
found as firm and unwasted as at their first
fastening.
The consideration and thorough conviction
of which led this Company in the Year 1678. (when
these Complaints were most active, and the
Lords of the Admiralty's Inquisitions into the
Reasons of it, the more pressing) not only to
Communicate to them, and the Navy-Offi|cers
their Opinions therein, but at their
own hazards and the Ordinary Price, to be|come
Undertakers themselves for what fur|ther
Rudder-Irons should be from thence call|ed
for (whether at home or abroad) by any
Lead-sheathed Ships: Which Proposition was
not only approved of, but the Officers of the
Navy (as has been already said) by Orders up|on
Orders from their Lordships directed, to
see the same instantly put and continued in
practice.
But whence it was that those Orders me

with no better complyance, or how it came
to pass, that so certain, speedy and chargeless
an Expedient of coming by the Truth in a matter
of this Importance (and after a provocation too,
so publick and seasonable, as that of the Henriet|ta's
Rudder-Irons above mentioned) could be so
disregarded as never once to be set on Tryal,
your Lordships will be best informed from
them themselves, by whom variety indeed of
Ships were sent to Sea, subsequent to the said
Orders, but without any call or notice given
thereof to this Company, that his Majesty might
have the proof and benefit of the Service so
much expected from them, and required from
the said Officers both by the King and Lords
on this occasion.
2. The manifest and knowing Omission of the
Persons charged in seeing the said sheathing
brought on, to do in this case what the pra|ctice
of all times, and at this very day, both
in the Kings and Merchants Service, has made a
sanding and necessary piece of care to be ex|ercised
in the fitting forth of all Ships (sheath|ed
and unsheathed) bound on Forraign Voya|ges,
namely, The parcelling, or laying with
Tarr and Hair all the Iron-work under water,
before the sheathing, (in case of the former)
or the forementioned Capps (in case of the lat|ter)
be brought over them.
In which as we are ready to appeal to the
Surveyor of the Navy, or whoever else is con|versant
in the Rules and Methods of Ship-Building,
for the Truth of what is here assert|ed,
and what is owned in some of the Navy
Officers own Evidences, and particularly in a

Letter of Sir R. B's; so do we willing|ly
referr our selves to the same Surveyor for
the Truth of this suggestion of ours, touching
the under Officers omitting the performance
of this their known Duty of laying the Iron-work
under water, at their bringing on the
sheathing of the said Ships.
And if so, and that this Companies preten|sions
in this Method of sheathing never extend|ed
further, than to answering the efficacy,
cheapness, and other circumstances of advan|tage
appertaining to the prevention of the
Worm, (as the Act of Parliament, and their
Contract with the King abundantly prove)
what more Reason is there for their being held
accountable for the Consequences of this Omis|sion
in the Kings Officers, than for that of start|ing
of a But-head in a Ships side, that never
had its due fastening? It being no part of their
Undertaking to answer for the Tightness of their
sheathing when laid on, and droven with Nails,
further than for its unpassableness, not to the
Water, but to the Worm: And that being al|lowed,
what can be more demonstrable, than
that the neglect of ordinary Cautions, must be
attended with the ordinary Evils, those Cau|tions
were provided against.
Of which, that this of giving the Iron-work
of these Lead-sheathed Ships, their ordinary
Defence against the Salt-water by Parcelling,
or laying them with Tarr and Hair under their
Sheathing, is one, we shall not need to confirm
to your Lordships by more than the single In|stance
of the Phoenix, which having had her
Sheathing performed by Sir Ant. Dean at Ports|mouth,

with this common right done to her, ap|pears
not to have had one Bolt shifted within
the whole seven Years of carrying the same:
Nor are your Lordships without an eminent proof
of your own, touching the constancy and univer|sality
of this practice of laying the Iron-work of
all sheathed Ships with Tarr, and Hair, or Par|celling,
and the acknowledged importance of
it, for the securing the said Iron-works from
the Salt-water, (which alone can perform upon
that Metal, all that is here laid upon the Lead)
in the Happy Retnrn, sheathed but very few dayes
since with Wood at Woolwich, where your Buil|der
will be found in the ordinary course of
his Trade to have laid with Tarr and Hair all
her Bolt-heads under water, and fastened Caps
of Lead over them, notwithstanding this
Sheathing with Wood was to be brought on
over all.
3. The unaccountable continuance of these
Ships for nine, ten, and eleven years together
in their sheathing, without their being in all
that time unstripp'd, for the necessary searching
of their bottoms, and timely supplying the de|cayes,
(whether in Iron-work, or otherwise,)
which are of course to be expected within
their proper distances of time; which as it
contradicts all ancient practice both of the
Royal Navy, and that of Merchants, especially
in the case of Ships of value, and under care|ful
Owners, so seems it in this of ours, to be
designed only to render that very Vertue for
which (amongst others) Lead-sheathing ex|ceeds
all that ever went before it, namely, its
durableness, a Vice of much worse consequence

to the health of a Ship, than all it pretends to
do, and does against the Worm, can make
amends for.
Your Lordships might otherwise be pleased
to inform your selves from the Officers of
the Navy, whence it comes to pass, that after such
Complaints received from abroad, as they have
handed to your Lordships, touching the dread|ful
decays of those Ships Iron-work under water,
they should suffer them, when come home, to
continue for two, three, and four years toge|ther
in Harbour, without any thing more done
in all that time, towards their Relief against
the growing Mischiefs they are yet daily exposed
to, than a Declaration of Wonder at the three
or four years end that they had not before
sunk in the Sea.
Very dissonant is this Method of Proceed|ing
(my Lords) from the Primitive and pre|sent
Institution of the Navy, that provides so
carefully both in its joynt and separate Instru|ctions
to the Officers thereof, and more par|ticularly
to the Surveyor, not only for the ge|neral
good Government and Preservation of
his Majesties Ships, but a more strict and An|nual
State to be had of all their respective
Hulls, Masts, and Yards, in order to your
Lordships taking such course for their Ran|sackings,
Groundings, Dockings, and Repair|ings,
as by you shall be thought most for his
Majesty's Benefit.
Nor are those Instructions a little inforced
upon the said Officers by that standing Arti|cle
in the ordinary Estimate of the Navy,
wherein they Annually make Demands of a

particular summ of Money towards their Exe|cution
thereof, nor were ever denyed the Al|lowance
of it by his Majesty, as Duties owned
on each side necessary to be performed.
Which, how far it has been done in refe|rence
to those unhappy Ships, which of all
others have the least reason to suffer under this
neglect; for that by the terms upon which their
Sheathing is performed by this Company for
the benefit of the King, They are well able to
bear the charge of their having it done twice
within the Time, some of them (to the ha|zard
of their Ruine) are suffered to remain
under its being done but once. We humbly
submit to your Lordships, and (with our full
concurrence to that part of their Report,
wherein they have at length bethought them|selves
of advising your Lordships to order the
doing of that now, which the Practice of the
Navy, and the acknowledged condition of those
Ships would have expected their having done
long since) proceed to the third and last branch
of our Undertaking, and to that humbly
say, viz.
3. That in order to our leading your Lord|ships
the more satisfactorily to what we take
to be the only True and Competent method
of rightly determining of the different validi|ties
of what has been severally offered and
asserted by the Officers of the Navy, and this
Company, in Maintenance of their different
Conceptions touching the Evil now enquired
into: Your Lordships may in the first place
be pleased to take notice, (and therein to have
the Opinion of the said Officers) that no Ship

however sheathed or unsheathed, did ever
make a Voyage to Sea, where her Iron-works
came not home in a greater or less degree sei|zed
on, and impaired by Rust. Next, That
this Company does voluntarily take upon it self
(beyond what by any thing in their Contract
they are obliged to) an accountableness for
this their Method's being as secure on behalf
of the King, in reference to this very point of
the Iron-work, as Wood-sheathing, or any o|ther
hitherto known, can be shewn to have
been.
Which being premised: And forasmuch as
nothing is more true in Fact, or more legible
in the Records of the Navy, than the constant
charge the Crown has been always at for the
shifting and supplying the defects of Iron-works,
besides what is to be read in the heaps of de|cayed
Bolts, Rudder-Irons, c. rarely missing
in his Majesty's Yards, but after a sale: And
whereas it is no less manifest, that among
the other Instances already spoken of, of the
unequal decay of Iron-works, this is one, viz.
That is has not been seldom noted to exceed in
the same Ship while unsheathed, what it has
at another time been, even while in a Lead-sheathing;
witness the forenamed Phoenix,
which being furnished with a new Sett of Rud|der-Irons,
at the stripping of that Sheathing in
Ian. 1677. and soon after sent so stripp'd to the
Streights, was forced in the very same Year,
about Christmas, to shift every one of them,
but one Brace, and much of her Bolts, and o|ther
Iron-works, while (as has been already
noted) she appears not to have shifted so much

as one Bolt, or received any considerable Re|cruit
of other Iron-work within the whole
seven years of her being Sheathed with Lead,
with which concurrs the case of the Foresight,
whose new sett of Rudder-Irons, put on in Ian.
1672. when unsheathed, were shifted in little
more than a year and an half, viz. in Aug.
1674. when being Sheathed with Lead, she
continued without any supply of Rudder-Irons
till 1679: Nor do we think it would conduce
a little to the satisfaction of your Lordships,
upon this very head to require a just account
of what has been lately observed in the Ran|sacking
even of a sheathed (that is to say a
Wood-sheathed) Ship of his Majesty's, where
under the protection of such sheathing, Ships
Iron-work has been reckoned the best secured
against Corrosion; yet even in this case will
your Lordships find upon the forenamed Hap|py
Return, the greatest part of her Iron-work
eaten to pieces, and particularly her Bolts
from Stem to Stern.
This Company therefore being in no kind
desirous that his Majesty should be under any
Obligation, of serving himself with their In|vention,
longer than it shall appear as safe to
his Service and Ships in this particular of Iron-work,
as it has proved it self Superiour to that
of Wood in every other circumstance, and they
being to that purpose most willing to have the
same determined by the difference that shall be
found between the Charge his Majesty has been
at for Iron-work for any number of years
backward upon unsheathed, or Wood-sheath|ed
Ships, and those sheathed with Lead, where

the work thereof in their sheathing and fitting
forth has in other respects been performed,
but with the same ordinary care, and obser|vation
of the common practice of the Navy.
They come now to offer to your Lordships
that which (and which only) can give you a
full, easie, and uncontrollable account of the
Truth in this matter, namely, Your Order to
the Officers of the Navy, for their directing a
thorough and impartial Inspection to be made
into the Books of the several Yards, with a
particular Account drawn thereout, of what
new Rudder-Irons, Bolts, c. have been for
ten or twelve years last past furnished to any
of his Majesty's Ships, mentioning the Names
of the said Ships, and distinct times of such
their supplies, distinguishing also between such
thereof as were wholly, and that were but in
part supplied with new Rudder-Irons, and men|tioning
(in the latter case) how many, and
which of the said Irons they were; with a
Report of the result thereof to be made to
your Lordships as soon as it shall be prepa|red,
and mutually accorded to (for its Truth)
between the said Officers, and this Company,
who have nothing more now to add on this
Subject, than the observing to your Lordships,
that had it pleased the Officers of the Navy
to have contributed their furtherance to the
searching out the Truth in this Cause, with a
zeal equal to what this Company have, to the
best of their understandings ever endeavoured
to express towards it, this work (no more
than that relating to the Smith's) had been at

this day to do, they having made the same o|verture
to the Lords and them, touching this
very Expedient of examining their Books, at
the same time with the other in 1678. and
prevailed at length with the said Officers to
issue Orders to the several Yards suitable to this
Proposal; but with what success, we humbly
crave your Lordships to receive your satisfa|ction
from themselves, whose producing the
Returns thereof from the Yards, (if made)
would at one view have helped your Lord|ships
to what must be owned by the Officers
of the Navy, for the only, secure, clear and
effectual means of determining this Controversie,
without either creating to your Lordships, or
continuing upon themselves and us, the trou|ble
attending this tedious method of Dispute.
But, My Lords, that while we speak of tedious,
we may render what we are now doing, as little
so to your Lordships, as the Matter put into our
hands, and our Desires after his Majesty's and
your Lordships Satisfaction will permit; we shall
now betake our selves to the last Article of our
purpose in this Paper, namely, the opening so
to your Lordships a no less certain view of a Cure,
than we hope to have now done of the true
Means of right discovering the Disease: For,
My Lords, however astonishing the Gentlemen
of the Navy seem to make it, that Ships aban|doned
to all the above mentioned neglects,
and even arts of ruine, should in length of
Time arrive at such a state of weakness, as
to be suspected in their being able to support
themselves above water; We cannot but hold

it a Subject much more fit for Wonder, that
they who under the Lord High Admiral, are
by the Crown made the first and principal
Curators of the Health and Safety of its Ships,
should not only content themselves for several
years together, in joyning with the Cry against
an Evil, they describe in Terms so frightful,
without making in all that time any one of|fer,
or seeming step towards its Remedy, but
publish to all the World a neglect, contempt,
and endeavour of Discouraging, and even direct
withstanding whatever was proposed to that
purpose by any others, as may appear,
(1.) From their open patronizing every of
the Objections and Difficulties that this In|vention
has from the beginning had to contend
with, though so groundless, that not one of
them is now thought fit to be remembred in
this their Report to your Lordships Inquisiti|on,
after the Complaints made against it.
(2.) From the manifest Industry wherewith
(when time was) they laboured to expose it,
by an application of it upon the Eagle, and
serving themselves at her return, with the
success of their so doing, towards verifying
their former declaiming against its sufficien|cies,
viz. The Condition it now came home
in upon this Ship all cracked, and rent from
Stem to Stern; whereas the ingenuity of their
dealing with us in this particular, had the
misfortune of being first discovered by the
KING himself, upon a personal view he was
pleased to take thereof, and his therein observ|ing

the said Ships being by age become so
decrepit, as to be brought home by her Com|pany
with her whole Body woulded about
with Hawsers for preventing her very sides
falling out, and Bottom dropping into the Sea.
(3.) From their violation of every of the Orders
heretofore mentioned of his Majesty, and Lords of
the Admiralty relating to this Affair, one forbid|ding
(above nine years since) the use of any other
method of Sheathing, than this of Lead, without
special Order; whereas the contrary has been pra|ctised
by them in many Instances. Another, for
their sheathing two Ships, one with Lead, the other
with wood, in express order to a Proof to be made
(upon some difference in Opinion between them|selves
and one of their own number) touching
the good quality of their Rudder-Irons: A Third
for doing the like to the Norwich, with Directions
to imploy such Rudder-Irons thereon, as should
be provided by this Company: And a Fourth
(inculcated within few dayes by a Fifth) for|bidding
the whole use of any other Rudder-Irons
upon Lead-sheathed Ships, than of this
Company's furnishing: But with so little re|gard
ever paid to the same, that rather than
any Order, or even the most Essential Rules
of the Navy should stand in the way of their
prejudice to this Invention, they have taken
upon themselves the sending into the mouth of
the Worm no small number both of Men of
War, and others of his Majesty's Ships naked
in their Hulls, without any security against the
worst effects thereof; which, what they have
been, your Lordships will more properly be

informed in, upon their Return home and Ran|sacking
from the Officers of the Navy, than
from this Company; some of whose Experi|ence
nevertheless, and what present Advice
they have received from abroad, will justifie
their saying thus much before hand, that those
Effects will be found of many times more Charge
to the King than all that the Complaint now
before your Lordships concerning Rudder-Irons
can be made to amount to.
But, (My Lords,) As these Proceedings
have not heretofore, neither shall they now
discourage this Company from a free Dis|charge
of their Duty, by opening whatever
Conceptions of theirs they think reasonably
grounded towards the Remedying as well as
Right understanding the Original of the Evil
laboured under, and a Remedy both Obvious,
Easie, Effectual, and next to being of no Charge,
we take our selves to be Masters of, and shall
lead your Lordships to the concurring with
us in it, by the few steps, or Reflections fol|lowing,
viz.
First, That the only competent and allow|ed
Defence of Ships against the Worm, before
this of Lead-sheathing, was the paying the Hulls
from the Waters edge downwards with Stuff,
and laying the inside of a Sheathing-board (from
inch and quarter to three quarters thick) all
over with Tarr and Hair, to be brought over
the forementioned Stuff, and being well nailed,
Graving or Paying the outside of the said Board
all over with another Composition of Brim|stone,

Oyl, and other Ingredients, which is
called Wood-sheathing.
Concerning which, however united the O|pinion
of us. English Men may be thought to
have been touching the same, it seems to this
Company grounded not so much upon the re|al
Perfection thereof, as the Profit that attends
it to the Builders interested in the working of
it, and consequently, leaving them under no
temptation, either to look out for a better them|selves,
or give encouragement to any discove|ries
made towards it by others.
And that indeed the so universal Reception
given to Wood-sheathing, is rather due to this,
than its own real sufficiency, your Lordships
will be Judges of, from the following Notes.
1. That if not the most, at least the most es|sential
of all the Ingredients employed in that
method of Sheathing, are of Forreign growth;
which we make use of not so much for the sake
of the Nationality of its Argument, (though
yet that is such as the Parliaments of England
have ever laid great weight upon in all their
Deliberations upon Trade, and particularly in
the Act relating to this very Invention,) but
from a Consideration which the Books of the
Navy sufficiently confirm the force of, viz.
That being Forraign, such has sometimes been
the scarcity thereof here, (even when their use
has been most wanted,) that they have been
either not to be had at all, or at Prizes much
exceeding the ordinary Market.
2. That the said Wood-sheathing hath been
always observed and confessed to be very apt
to gather Filth, and of no less uneasieness when
fouled to be thoroughly cleansed again.
3. That from its roughness and the multi|tude
of Nail-heads standing out from the Ships
sides or otherwise, Ships sheathed with Wood
have ever been complained of, as lessened
thereby in that only quality upon which our
Friggats most value themselves, and have their
Service in preference to others calculated from,
namely, That of their Sailing; for proof of
which, your Lordships have not only the Evi|dence
lately mentioned of the Navy Officers,
choosing to send naked Ships to the Streights,
when with as little violence to practice and
order, they might have sent them so sheathed;
but that general application, which was here|tofore
made to his Royal Highness, then Lord
High Admiral of England, by the Flag-Officers
and Commanders of the Fleet, designed under
Sir Thomas Allen (as we remember) against the
Turks, advising, that as his Majesty would ex|pect
any success of the said Fleet against that
People, he would let his Ships go with all
their virtue of Sailing about them undiminish|ed
by sheathing, as being (from former Expe|rience
of the Turks out-doing us that way)
taught, that without this, nothing was to be
hoped for of Advantage to be gained upon
them; which Advice of theirs was urged so
pressingly, and justified so fully, that both his
Royal Highness, and the then Officers of the Na|vy

concurred with those of the Fleet, (in the
Council thereupon given his Majesty, and af|terwards
pursued) rather of exposing the Hulls
of his Ships to the worst Effects of the
Worm, than hazard the loss both of their whole
Service, and his own Honour by sheathing, and
thereby disabling them in this their best quali|ty
of Sailing.
Secondly, Which being so, and that therefore
(besides these plain and important Imperfecti|ons
in Wood-sheathing) the only Remedy hither|to
thought on, has been to deliver up his Maje|sty's
Ships to the mercy of the Worm, by sending
them abroad wholly unprovided of any Fence a|gainst
them: This Company takes leave in the
next place humbly to recommend to your Lord|ships
the requiring from the Officers of the Na|vy
an impartial Account of the condition where|in
the Ships of that Fleet of Sir Thomas Allen's
brought home their Hulls notwithstanding all
the mighty professions then made by their Com|manders
of the care that should be taken in the
frequent turning up of their Bottoms, and use
of the long Scrubbing-brushes, then first devised
and introduced into the Navy for the easier
reaching towards their Keeles in the making
of them clean.
And for whatever issue your Lordships are
to expect from the late Liberty taken by these
Gentlemen of doing the like on other Ships at
this day, though it be yet too soon for your
Lordships to expect any certain Account there|of,
as being a Matter not to be done before

they are brought in and searched; Yet we can|not
think it will be reckoned any ill measure
for your Lordships to frame your Expectations
by therein, to consider the single case of the
Rupert in her last Voyage to the Streights, un|der
Captain Herbert, which Ship in lieu of be|ing
according to the Kings Order sheathed
with Lead, was by the said Officers Advice,
and the Undertaking of her Commander for
the frequency of her cleaning, sent away na|ked
(saving in her Keel, which was Leaded)
with this success, that besides the Apprehensi|ons
Captain Herbert was under concerning her,
even while in the Streights, upon what was
then discovered relating to the Worm, putting
him upon thoughts (had it been practicable)
of shifting her Garble-strake there; The Offi|cers
of the Navy are well able to inform
your Lordships, that (notwithstanding all that
promised care of Captain Herbert, and their
own presumptions thereon) it will be no small
charge to his Majesty to make good the damage
she brought home by Worm-eating.
What then remains after this that has been
said, and lies so easily within your Lordships pro|ving,
touching the Imperfections of both these Me|thods
of Sheathing Ships with Wood, and expo|sing
them to Sea without any Sheathing at
all, but the waiting for some Fourth, not yet
heard of, or continuing this Third under de|bate,
of Sheathing with Lead, to which
nothing is so much as pretended to, in Ob|jection
by the Officers of the Navy them|selves,
but this of its supposed Influence
upon Iron-work, as very well knowing,

that no room is left for the least such Pretenc
upon any one head of what has been ever sug|gested
to the contrary, especially in those par|ticular
points of Imperfections, wherein that of
Wood-sheathing, and sending of Ships abroad
unsheathed, appears (as before) to remain yet
chargeable; England being never to be suppo|sed
unfurnished with Lead, as bearing it with|in
its own Bowels; Nor any Complaint hi|therto
heard of, either of its being in any de|gree
so apt to foul, or difficult to clean as Wood,
Nor lastly, so much as one suggestion ever
made of its injuring Ships in their quality of
Sailing; but so much the contrary, that we
are ready in all humility to make our Appeal
to his Majesty himself, whether the Harwich
sent in her Lead-sheathing, Anno 1677. under
Captain Killigrew to the Streights, and hurri|ed
out from Chatham under the disadvantage of
not being so much as Tallowed, suffered any
thing from her said sheathing, in her virtue of
Sailing; or did not outgo all (both Ships and
Yatchs) that were then attending the King with
her, in his passage to the Westward.
But of what satisfaction can this (say the
Officers of the Navy) be, if one Evil superi|our
to all those Good qualities (for so they
understand this about the Iron-work to be) re|mains
unremoved?
To which, (My Lords) we come now to
Answer, and in so doing to open to your
Lordships what this Company takes to be the
most natural, easie, and thorough Remedy thereto,
even though it were possible (as they believe,
and doubt not upon proof of what is here

















said of your Lordships believing also, that
it is not) that this suggestion of the noxious|ness
of Lead to Iron-work were true.
And this your Lordships may please to take
from us in these few following considerations.
1. That after all the noise that has been
made of the damage sustained by the King from
this untimely consumption of his Ships Rud|der-Irons,
his full charge for a whole set of
them for a Ship of each of those Rates upon
which Sheathing is ordinarily used, viz. from
a Third Rate downwards, will not one with
another exceed the values following, viz.



Rate.
First cost.
Value of Returns.
Clear charge.


For a Ship of the
3
15 10 0.
5 13 0.
9 17 0


4
9 18 0.
4 4 0.
5 14 0


5
6 4 0.
2 10 0.
3 8 0


6
4 10 0.
2 2 0.
2 8 0


2. That according to the Report of the Na|vy
Officers themselves, with the Schedule of
Complaints attending it, and what has been b|served
by us therein, it is evident that the
shortest Time to be supposed for the ordinary
duration of Rudder-Irons in Lead-sheathed Ships, is
two years and an half, or three years, with|in
which time no Ship of his Majesty's was
ever known, or can be supposed to want an
opportunity of Grounding or Docking.
3. That (besides the other great advantage

of cheapness which Lead-sheathing must be own|ed
to have above that of Wood) the Prices in
this Table (were they of ten times the value)
would not bring the charge of Rudder-Irons to
any equality of consideration with the Evils
lately recounted in both the other methods of
Sheathing with Wood, or not sheathing at all.
4. And that therefore in the last place, for|asmuch
as universal consent and practice al|lows
the laying them with Tarr and Hair
under Lead, to be a certain security to Ships
Iron-works under water against Rust, at least
for so much as concerns their Bolts: And that
therefore the only thing we seem now to be
in care for, is the supplying the Consumption
that may happen during the Voyage in their
Rudder-Irons, which (were fresh ones in the
way) no Ship (as is already shewn,) can at
her Grounding or Docking want opportunities
of doing by shifting them; what then (in one
word) can be more demonstrable than that a
spare Set thereof sent to Sea with every Lead-sheathed
Ship (answerable to what is daily done
in materials of much greater charge, and for
uses of less consequence) is a no less easie than
ready and Effectual Remedy to all the damage
that can be apprehended incident to a Ship up|on
this head of Rudder-Irons in any Voyage not
exceeding five or six years continuance.
Nor (may it please your Lordships) do we
offer this as a new Resort whereto this Report
of the Navy Officers may be thought to have
driven us at this day; Forasmuch as it is no
more than what in the same Terms this Com|pany

proposed in the year 1678, to the then
Lords of the Admiralty, and the Officers of the
Navy, when upon the like considerations then
urged, their Lordships were pleased not only
to approve it, but by their express Order of the
12th of April in that year, to require the said
Officers (amongst other things) to receive
from this Company such Rudder-Irons as should
be by them provided, upon a Proposition they
had then made of furnishing his Majesty's Lead-sheathed
Ships with that Commodity, not only
for their present use at the time of their Sheath|ing,
but for a Reserve to answer accidents du|ring
their Voyages.
Which Order (if executed) must have long
agoe with little charge, and less trouble, put
an end to this clamorous Evil, (wherever the
cause of it should at length have been found to
lye) and would (by preventing the great da|mages
his Majesty is supposed to have sustain|ed
from it,) have furnished the said Officers
with a much better Expedient of testifying
their regards to the King, and his Service:
Their Duty to your Lordships, and the Lords
your Predecessors; Their heedfulness to the
Established Methods of the Navy, and their
own parts declared therein: And lastly, their
good will to these the humble Endeavours and
early Proposals of this Company for the Service
of his Majesty on this occasion, than thus
by their own Failures, first not to prevent these
Damages, next to prolong them, and then
to complain of them.




COMPLAINTS.
An Account of the Defects of
his Majesties Ships which have
been sheathed with Lead.Navy Office 20. Dec. 1682.

Dread|nought,
SHeathed 1671, Tallowed at Portsmouth, 6
Iune 1677, and the Pintels and Gudgeons
of her Rudder-Irons (which were all new a|bout
a year and an half before, and the Ship
not out of Harbour since) very much eaten
and consumed, and not to be trusted at Sea,
unless for a short tripp, and the Swiftsures that
was graved at the same time,vide Answ. pag. 12. her Rudder-Irons
firm and sound, and not in the least consumed,
though much longer on. See Sir Iohn Kemp|thorns
Letter, Iune 1677.
She was again haled on Shore to clean, 8 Octo|ber,
1682.Obs. This Sheathing had continu|ed on eleven Years. and her Bolts found totally eaten away,
as well as the Spikes and Iron-works of the
Rudder, so that they were forced to Plugg up
the bolt-holes, and spile the Spike-holes, there
being nothing left in them but dirt, and new
Iron-work must be drove before she can go to
Sea. See Sir RB's Letter 8 Oct. 1682.


Lyon,
Sheathed 1672. in October 1677. the great|est
number of her Bolts under water (under

the Lead Sheathing) found very much corro|ded
and eaten,v. Answ. pag. 13. insomuch that some of them
were gotten out by the Caulkers with their
Spike-Irons. The Spikes and Nails also under
water under the Lead-sheathing almost eaten to
pieces, the like whereof the Officers at Ports|mouth
say, they never found in any Ship not
sheathed with Lead, although their Iron-work
had been drove twice as long. All her Bolts
drove new about five years before. See the Of|ficers
Certificate, 6 Octob. 1677.


Rose,
Sheathed 1674. In haling her on shore to
clean in 1682.v. Answ. pag. 14. Obs. This dif|ferent decay cannot hap|pen from the same Cause, viz. the Lead. sheathing. the' two lower Pintells and
Gudgeons of the Rudder-Irons quite eaten off
and the third almost off, so that the Rudder
was found to be unhung. See Sir R. B's. Letter
21 September, 1682.


Harwich
Sheathed 1675. upon the Careening abroad in
February 1675.  6. the Iron-work found much
eaten with Rust about the Stern, especially the
Rudder-Irons, imputed to the Copper Nails
that fasten the Lead-sheathing. See Sir Iohn
Narbrough's Letter 20. of February 1676. When
in the Dock, Anno 1677.v. Answ. pag. 11. her Rudder-Irons
Stirrups, Staples, c. found very much corroded
and consumed, and rendred unserviceable, and
the Nonsuch's Rudder-Irons, c. (being at the same
time in the Dock) very good and firm, although
she had them on several years before the Her|wich.
See Sir Iohn Kempthorns Letter, April 1677,
Upon her cleaning September 1682. all the heads
of the Bolts found eaten away on both sides,

and as well those as the Ragg-bolts eaten away
to nothing, and so also the Rudder Irons, so that
she must have Bolts drove on both sides before
she can go to Sea, and have new Rudder-Irons.
See Sir R. B's Letter, 24 September 1682.


James Gally.
Sheathed in October 1676. her bottom was
viewed in February 1677. in Livorne mould,
and the Lead found all cracked in every Seam
from one end to the other,But it seems not so as that any Worm en|tred, against which Shea|thing is only intended. as bad or worse
than the Eagle, when she came from Guinny,
and her Rudder-Irons eaten clear asunder, her
Rudder-Irons were there mended, and in Octo|ber
following her Rudder new hung at Tangier,
the Irons being all again eaten in pieces. See
Sir Iohn Wyburns Letter and Account: she was
repaired at Woolwich in December 1679.v. Ans. p. 15 and her
Lead-sheathing stript off, the same being crackt
in several places, and the Rudder-Irons being eat|en
by the Rust, were forced to be shifted. See
Mr. Shishes Letter December 15. 1682.


Charles Galley,
Sheathed 1676. Sir Iohn Narbrough in Iuly
1678, writes, That the Rudder-Irons were de|fective,
so that he must send her home the en|suing
Winter. See his Letter Iuly 30. 1678.
Upon stripping off her Lead-sheathieg, Anno
1680,v. Answ. pag. 15. her Rudder-Irons under water found so
much decayed, that she was supplyed with
new ones, likewise all the Bolt-heads under
water, in the but-ends of her Planks quite
eaten off, and most part of the heads of the
Ryder-bolts, and the Bolts in the Scarfs of
her Keel and Stern. See Mr. Shishes Letter
December 15. 1682.


Plymouth.
Sheathed 1677. Sir Io. Narbrough being in
her in Iuly, 1680. writes, that her Rudder-Irons
begun to be much eaten with rust,vid. Answ. pag. 11. so
that he believes he must be forced to send
her home that Winter. See his Letter, Iu|ly
30. 1680.


Fore|sight.
Sheathed 1674. upon stripping her Sheath|ing
off, all her Rudder-Irons under Water so
much decayed, that she was supplyed with
new ones, likewise all the Bolt-heads under
Water in the but-ends of her Plank quite
eaten off, and most part of the Heads of the
Ryder-bolts,vid. Answ. Pag. 30. and the Bolts in the Scarfs of the
Keel and Stern.


King-fisher,
Sheathed 1677. stript off in Nov. 1680. and
her Rudder-Irons under Water found so much
decayed, that she was supplyed with New
ones; likewise all the Bolt-heads under Wa|ter
in the but-ends of the Plank were quite
eaten off, and most part of the Heads of the
Ryder-bolts, and the Bolts in the Scarfs of the
Keel and Stem, all the Rings that were clench|ed
on the ends of her Bolts were eaten off,
and the ends, and the reaching of the Ship
crackt every seam of her from the rung-heads
upwards, so that upon a Survey of the Ship|wrights,
the Sheathing was ordred to be ta|ken
off. See Mr. Io. Shishes Letter, 15 Decemb.
1682.


Wool|wich.
Sheathed 1677. repaired in Iuly 1681. and
the sheathing taken off, by reason the Plank

was defective under Water, and the Rudder-Irons
so much eaten with rust, they were for|ced
to unhang the Rudder, and new hang it
again.


Assist|ance.
Sheathed, Octob. 1677. she had a new set of
Rudder-Irons 27 Months after the former, be|ing
very much eaten, and the Lead was forced
to be cut away in many places, for the seams
being crackt, she is now in want of another
sett of Rudder-Irons. See Mr. Jo. and Tho.
Shishes Letters, 15 Decemb. 1682.


Henriet|ta.
Sheathed in 1672. in her Voyage from Tunis
to Tripoly, her Rudder wrought it self out of
the Irons, hanging only by the uppermost Pin|tell,
the Irons were very much decayed, and
the ends of the Pintels eaten away,vide Answ. pag. 13. they made
a shift to hang it again, Flemish Fashion, secu|ring
it with a Top-chain; after that, when she
was at Martha, her Rudder was unhung again,
and the Irons shifted, and when she came to
Leghorn to carreen, the Rudder was had on
shoar, and fixt with new Irons, and 4 or 5
new Stirrups put to secure the false Keel: Up|on
the Ships being in the Dock at Chatham,
1677.Stript 1678. the Rudder-Irons under Water were
found very bad and much eaten, and wasted
away, but the Braces and Gudgeons veryAll must be equally de|cayed, if the Lead-sheath|ing were the Cause. good
and serviceable, most of her Bolts under Wa|ter
also found in a very bad Condition, being
likewise very much eaten and wasted. See
Certificate from the Officers at Chatham, Apr. 20.
1678.


Mary.
Sheathed 1672. in 1677. her Stirrups both
afore and abaft of the false Keel found quite
eaten and unserviceable,v. Mr. Med|bury's Let|ter. p. 78. as also the Staples
are quite decayed, the Pintells much eaten with
rust, and too small for the Gudgeons. See Offi|cers
at Portsm. Certificate, Apr. 20. 1682.


Note. There were only Eight of these Ships
complained of by the Navy-Officers,
when they made their Report 28 Octob.
1682. but they having afterward given
in this Scheam of Complaints to the
Commissioners of the Admiralty 20 Dec.
following, to do them right, this last
is Printed: To some of which no An|swer
is given, as wanting opportunity
to enquire, or not thinking it necessary,
the Answers to the rest, with what is
hereafter said in the Certificates, suffi|ciently
proving the constant inequality of
the Iron-works duration on all Ships, (some
of the Lead-sheathed Ships Iron-work
lasting much longer than others, and
also than others sheathed with Wood)
so that the Lead-sheathing can be no
ways chargeable with the decays in the
Iron-work.







The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
having read the foregoing Reply to the Officers
of the Navy's Report, thought fit by one of
them, a Member of the Privy Council, to lay
the same before that Board, who being attend|ed
by both sides, upon hearing were pleased to
make the Order following, viz.




At the Court at White-Hall,
Decemb. 22. 1682.
Present,
The KING's most Excellent Majesty
in Council.
IT is this day Ordered by his Ma|jesty
in Council, that the whole
Matter contained in the Report of
the Officers of the Navy to the Right
Honourable the Commissioners of the
Admiralty, this day read at the Board,
and the Answer thereto from Sir Phi|lip
Howard and Company, relating to
the Sheathing his Majesty's Ships with
Lead, together with the other Paper
then also delivered and read, from
the Officers of the Navy; and what
new Matter was further mentioned
by them in Discourse upon the same
Subject, be Referred to the said Com|missioners
for executing the Office of
Lord High Admiral of England; who

upon the full and distinct Examinati|on
of the same, and Hearing of all
Persons concerned therein, are to
make their Report upon each Article
thereof in Writing to this Board;
with particular regard had therein
to the shewing the differences of Charge
that has attended his Majesty, whe|ther
in Iron-work or otherwise upon
the Hulls and Rudders of the several
Ships that have been sheathed with
Lead, and those that within the same
time have been either Sheathed with
Wood, or sent to Sea Vnsheathed. And
if upon Examination it shall appear
that Lead-sheathedships do sustain great|er
damage in their Iron-works, than
those Sheathed with Wood, or Not
Sheathed at all, what the same is tru|ly
to be imputed to; whether to
their Lead, Nails, or what other Cause.
In all which the said Commissioners
are to report to this Board the Truth
of the Fact, as the same shall upon
Examination appear to them, with
their Opinion touching the same, and
what upon the whole Matter may
be most for His Majesty's Service to

be done therein, with relation to the
ceasing or continuing the said Me|thod
of Sheathing.
Francis Gwyn.



Hereupon Sir Philip Howard and Company
further applyed themselves to the Lords Com|missioners
of the Admiralty in their humble
Memorial following, viz.




To the Right Honourable,
The LORDS,
His MAJESTY's Commissioners,
For executing the Office of
Lord High Admiral of England
The Humble MEMORIAL of
Sir Philip Howard and Company,
Interested in the
Manufacture and Invention
OF
Milled-Lead.
Shewing,
THat His Majesty and my Lords of the
Council having (out of the same Consi|deration
of its Importance to the King, which led
your Lordships first to the laying it before them)
been pleased by their Order of 22 Decemb. last,
to Referr back to your Lordships the Business
in Controversie between the Officers of the
Navy and this Company touching Lead-sheath|ing:

These are humbly to acquaint your
Lordships that as we are, and shall at all times
be ready to answer any Commands which you
shall think fit to direct to this Company in re|lation
thereto; so do we hold our selves bound,
in Right no less to his Majesty and your Lord|ships
than our selves, to remove a Prejudice
which the said Officers did lately offer at the
raising (before his Majesty in Council) a|gainst
what we had then, and may yet have
further Occasion of saying in this Debate, by
a suggestion of our being governed by Consi|derations
of Self-interest, while themselves would
be thought removed above all suspicion of any
other End herein than that of His Majesties
Service.
In Answer whereto we shall only crave leave
to say, That as to that Uninterestedness so pre|tended
to by them, it is too manifest, that their
obtaining from your Lordships a suddain Con|demnation
of this Method of Lead-sheathing, is
the only Expedient they have for preventing
the Effects of that Enquiry (which the Wisdom
of His Majesty and the Lords of the Council
have been so pleased to recommend to your
Lordships) into the particulars of our Answer,
leading your Lordships to the several Failures
in Duty and breach of Orders reflected on
them by us in relation to this Affair, and the
Prejudices sustained therefrom by his Ma|jesty.
And for what concerns the Self-interest sug|gested
to lye on our side, we shall only Note,
















1. That under all the Discouragements and
Oppositions our Invention has for twelve
Years together been treated with by them, we
never have given them nor our selves the trou|ble
of making one Complaint to his Majesty
or your Lordships concerning them, saving
what has been extorted from us in our ne|cessary
Reply to their late Report to your Ho|nourable
Board on this Subject; nor in the
whole four Years last past (wherein they have
for ought appears both without, and contra|trary
to Order, taken upon them the Exercising,
even that, which is the very Matter of the pre|sent
Controversie, namely the Adviseableness
of laying aside the use of Lead-sheathing) have
we ever made one Application to them for re|moving
or so much as enquiring into the Rea|on
on their so doing.
2. That had there been the least sollicitude
on our parts after our private benefit, it would
have easily prompted us to a much greater re|servedness
of Style than your Lordships find us
using on this occasion towards the said Offi|cers,
upon whose good-will alone the success
of ours, and all other Contracts with the Na|vy,
is well known wholly to depend: Nor
does this Company need to appeal to any other
Evidence than your selves for the Fidelity of
their Proceeding in this Matter towards His
Majesty, in preference to any thoughts of pri|vate
Advantage, after that Declaration under
our Hands, wherewith we Prefaced our very
first Paper to your Lordships on this Occasion;

not only of our Consent but Desires, that No
Considerations relating to the Interest or Right of
this Company, might stand in the way of whatso|ever
His Majesty and your Lordships should think
most for his Service to determine concerning it.
3. That (besides the many other Advantages
arising to His Majesty from this Invention) the
saving of his Treasure will we doubt not in
your Enquiry be found concerned in a no less
Degree than that60 per Cent. was thought fit as encourage|ment enough to be mentioned, though Mr. Pepys who also penned this Memorial with Sir Ant. Dean and Mr. Hewer, found by their Calculations the King had and might save by the use of this Sheathing above 150 per Cent. besides the great benefit of securing the Hulls of his Ships against the Worm, without hinderance to their sailing: Their Calculations the Publisher hath in Mr. Hewer's Hand-writing by him. of 60 l. or a much greater
summe per Cent. through the whole of his Ex|pence
of Lead-sheathing compared with that of
Wood, or sending Ships to Sea Unsheathed:
Upon which Consideration, and of the good
Husbandry the present State of his Majesty's
Treasure, seems in so particular a measure at
this time to call for; as also for our fuller
Discharge against the Consequences of any Mi|stake
that may attend the issue of a Debate of
such Importance to the Royal Navy of England,
We do on his Majesty's-behalf humbly pray,
and must take leave to insist upon with your

Lordships, not only that the Contents of our
late Reply in this Cause may receive your due
Construction and Examination with respect
to what we have therein, and do still assert
touching the True Causes and Remedy of the
Evil in Controversie about Ships Iron-works:
But that whatsoever your Lordships shall in
Order to his Majesty's Service (which alone
we again desire your having any regard to)
find Cause of requiring further from the said
Officers on this Subject, may be mutually trans|acted
between us in Writing, and not other|wise:
In which we shall endeavour to acquit
our selves with all faithfulness and Duty to his
Majesty, and no less submission to your Lord|ships,
as becomes
My LORDS,
Your Lordships, c.



The Lords of the Admiralty's Commission
being determined, before they had proceed|ed
to make any Report herein, and King
Charles the second taking in to himself the
Office of Lord High Admiral of England, which
was transacted by his Brother, Mr. Pepys being
Secretary, and Sir Anth. Dean and Mr. Hewer
(the one always a professed Friend to the Thing,
and the other not only so, but to that time a
Partner also for a twelfth share in the Work) be|ing
made Commissioners of the Navy, the Mill'd-Lead
Company could not but expect their

Lead-sheathing would soon be restored by the
Power of these Gentlemen, they having through|ly
Examined the Matter, and informed them|selves
of the great Benefit and Advantage this
Sheathing had and might bring to his Maje|sty's
Service, as hath been shewn, and by the
Post they were in, it now becoming their Du|ty
also, so that they did not much press their
Work, waiting only to be called for, as
soon as it should be thought convenient; but
much time being lost under these Expectations,
at length Complaining of this Delay to their
late Partner, Mr. Hewer, he advised them (not
to Petition the King as they intended, but)
to present a New Proposal to the Board to do the
Work per Yard square, without any Reflection
or Notice of the former Proceedings, saying
they that had been against it, must needs be
convinced of their mis-information which had
caused the Prejudices they had formerly con|ceived
against Lead-sheathing, the whole Mat|ter
eing so clearly stated, and this Sheathing
so well vindicated in the Company's Reply
which they had had so much time better to
examine and consider of, and that they would
take this way of application to them well, and
we needed not to doubt the better and speedier
success. Wherefore the 20 Decemb. 1686. the
Company presented the Proposal following,
which they leave still before the Navy-Board,
in hopes at one time or other they will find
reason and leisure to take the same into fur|ther
consideration.




To the Honourable
The Principal
Officers and Commissioners
OF HIS
MAJESTY's NAVY.
A Proposal of Mr. Kent and Part|ners
concerned in the Work of
Mill'd-Lead, to Sheath his Ma|jesty's
Ships with the said Lead,
for preservation of their Plank
against the Worm, which way of
Sheathing is plainly much better
for Sayling, cheaper and more
durable than any other way hi|therto
used.
IT is humbly offered to your Consideration,
that when this way of Milling Lead for
Sheathing of Ships was first invented, it was
immediately communicaed to the late King,

and his present Majesty then Lord High Ad|miral
of England, and the Usefulness of the In|vention
by them well weighed and considered,
and thought to be of such consequence, that
his Majesty gave the Inventors encouragement
and advice to lay the same before the Parlia|ment,
where, ater a most strict scrutiny into
the Matter in both Houses, they obtained in
the Year 1670. an Act of Parliament, with
Terms in it highly expressing the good Opini|on
they had conceived of this Invention.
After which by his Majesty's particular di|rection
it was first tryed upon several of his
own Ships; but the interest several Persons
(trading in the Materials formerly used in
Sheathing) had to oppose this Invention, did
make them very iudustrious to raise Objecti|ons
against it, all which being throughly ex|amined
by his late Majesty, and a View by him
in Person made of the Ship Phoenix after two
Voyages to the Streights with the same Sheath|ing,
it pleased his Majesty by his Order of
20th. Decemb. 1673. to signifie his pleasure that
for the future this way of Sheathing and no
other should be used upon his Majesty's Ships,
by the then Lords of the Admiralty, in these
words, viz.

After our hearty Commendations; in pursuance
of his Majesty's Pleasure signified to us by
himself, at this Board; That in regard of the
many and good Proofs which had been given of
the usefulness of Sir Philip Howard and Ma|jor
Watson's Invention of Sheathing his Ma|jesty's
Ships with Lead, in preference to the

doing of it with the Materials, and in the
manner anciently used, and with respect had
no less to the charge thereof, than the effe|ctual
securing the Hulls of his Majesty's Ships
against the Worms, his Majesty's Ships may
for the time to come be sheathed in no other
manner than that of Lead, without special Or|der
given for the same from this Board: These
are to authorize you to cause this his Maje|sty's
pleasure erein to be duely complyed with.
And so we remain
Your Loving Friends,

Anglesey.
Ormond.
G. Carteret.


And after two Years further experience, the
then Navy-Board thought it for his Majesty's
Service to Contract with the Mill'd-Lead Part|ners
for the Materials to sheath his Ships at the
Rates expressed in their Articles of Agreement
during their whole term of their Act of Par|liament.
And thus stood the Matter 'till the
close of the Year 1675. at which time (as we
humbly conceive, by the Artifice of the inte|rested
Traders) was raised a Clamour never
heard of before, as if this way of Sheathing did
occasion a more than ordinary Decay of the
Rudder-Irons.
This immediately put the Partners upon a
strict enquiry into the Truth and validity of
these Objections, and it was not long e're they

fully discovered that this decay in the Iron-work
proceeded not from the contrariety of
the Nature of Lead with the matter of Iron,
but that the Iron-work lasted or decayed, as it
was better or worse mixt and wrought by
the Smith, for such different decays as are char|ged
could never proceed from one common
Cause: His late Majesty himself was convin|ced
that there was not such corrosive quality
in Lead,Mr. Boyle. having consulted the Person in Eng|land,
the most skilful in those matters.
Furthermore, Universal Practice both in his
Majesties Yards, and Merchant Builders has
and does at this day make Lead the common
security of Iron-work against Rust, not only by
covering therewith (upon all Ships unsheath|ed,
and designed for long Voyages) the Iron-work
about the Rudder, but by capping the heads
of their Bolts under water with pieces of Lead
sized to and nailed over the said Bolts.
Nor is this all, for at this day whatever
Merchant Man, or Man of War is appointed
for a Voyage, where the Worm eats, the back
of her Stem-post and beard of her Rudder are
sheathed with Copper or Lead, and this even
where the Ships also are sheathed with Wood,
the East: India Company it self, (upon whom
we may best depend for Cautions wherever
preservation of Ships is in question) not omit|ting
in that very case to sheath their Rudders
with Lead or Copper, which practice certainly
could never have prevailed with our Fathers,
and been followed with so continued a con|sent
to this very day by us, of the vicinity of
either of these Metals, assisted (as is by some

imagined,) by salt-water, had been ever found of
so pernicious and certain ill effect upon the very
matter they are employed to secure.
Nor does what is thus approved of in the gene|ral
and universal practice of England want its
Confirmation by the like of Forraign Nations,
to wit, the Dutch, Portuguese's, Spaniard; the
first of which like us do generally sheath their
Rudder-Irons, and the back of their posts with Lead
or Copper, upon all Ships bound in the way
of the Worm; and for the two latter, not on|ly
the Rudders, but the whole Bodies of their
Ships under water, even of the Gallions them|selves,
have of long time been, and are well
known at this day to be entirely sheathed with
Lead, which concurrence of these two latter
Nations, seems in this case so much more con|siderable
than any other, by how much not
only their Voyages are the longest, their ha|zards
therein from the Worm the greatest, and
Cargoes the most valuable of all that Naviga|tion
knows, but for that the Hulls of their
Ships abound the most with Iron-work, as
having all which in the fastening of our Plank
is performed with Wooden Trunnels, done by
them with large Spikes of Iron.
In fine, were this spoil of Iron-work charge|able
with nothing but what is contained in
the Lead and Nails, these pretended effects of
theirs would be constant and uniform in all Ships
alike sheathed; whereas nothing is more fre|quent
than the instances of their Inequality,
and this Company dare put the whole Credit
of their Cause upon that one Issue, viz. of
ever finding an equal Consumption of the Iron-work

under water, whether upon the same
or different Ships at any one time, or equal
distances of time: The complaint of Ships
that have passed this way of sheathing afford|ing
a most ample proof of this inequality, by
having some of them loaden with Complaints,
and every one different from the rest, and at
different times from it self, whilst we are yet
to be told whether the rest are not (as we
are sure by the long lasting of the Iron-work
some of them were) free from all ground of
this Complaint, and upon Information of se|veral
Masters of Ships and other Sea-faring
Men, even upon Ships that were sheathed with
Lead, or not sheathed at all, they have found
the Rudder-Irons of some to decay much soon|er
than others, which they alwayes imputed
to the Smiths different mixture, welding and
working of the Iron.
To justifie therefore the goodness and use|fulness
of this their Invention, the Partners
in the Year 1678. made a Proposal to the then
Navy Board, to furnish the Rudder-Irons for
the Ships they should sheath, in which they
would take care themselves of the good mix|ture,
welding and working thereof, which
Proposal was thought so reasonable that
upon it several repeated Orders to that
Board were made by the Lords of the Ad|miralty.
Thus stood the matter in the Year 1678.
about which time some differences arose a|mongst
the Partners themselves, which gave
an interruption to their Proceedings, and an
opportunity to those whose Interest it was

(by reason of their respective Trades) to de|cry
this Invention, though it was apparently of
so great advantage to the Kings service; but
at present all differences being reconciled,
and the Interest in the Act of Parliament fallen
into such hands as are both willing and able
to set it on foot, they thought it their Duty
to lay a new Proposal before your Honourable
Board, which they do the more gladly, for
that they know you all to be Persons through|ly
acquainted with, and skilful in these Mat|ters,
and most Zealous in the Profits and In|terests
of his Majesty.
They crave leave to begin with reminding
you of some Arguments, which no doubt have
formerly lain before some of you, of the
advantage that will accrue by the use of this
way of sheathing above that of Wood.
First, That the only competent and allow|ed
defence of Ships against the Worm, before
this of Lead-sheathing, was the paying the Hulls
from the waters edge downwards with Stuff,
and laying the inside of a sheathing board
(from inch and quarter to three quarters thick)
all over with Tarr and Hair to be brought
over the forementioned stuff; and (being well
nailed) graving or paying the outside of the
said Board all over with another compositi|on
of Brimstone, Oyl, and other Ingredients,
which is called Wood-sheathing.
Secondly, Concerning which, however uni|ted
the opinions of us English men may be
thought to have been touching the same, it

seems to this Company grounded not so much
upon the real perfection thereof, as the pro|fit
that attends it to the Builders interested in
the working of it, and consequently leaving
them under no temptation either to look out
for a better themselves, or give encourage|ment
to any discoveries made towards it by
others.
And that indeed the so universal reception
given to Wood-sheathing is rather due to this,
than its own real sufficiency, you will be Judg|es
of from the following Notes.
1. That if not the most, at least the most
essential of all the Ingredients, employ|ed
in that method of Sheathing are of
forraign growth, which they make use
of not so much for the sake of the Nati|onality
of its Argument, (though yet that
is such as the Parliaments of England
have ever laid great weight upon in all
their Deliberations upon Trade, and par|ticularly
in the Act relating to this very
Invention) but from a consideration, which
the Books of the Navy sufficiently confirm
the force of, viz, That being Forraign, such
has sometimes been the scarcity thereof
here, (even when their use has been the
most wanted,) that they have been either
not to be had at all, or at Prices much
exceeding the ordinary Market; where|as
the Materials used by the Coprtners
are of the Product of England, and so can
never be wanting.
2. That the Wood-sheathing hath been al|wayes
observed and confessed to be very
apt to gather filth, and of no less unea|siness
when foul'd to be throughly
cleansed again.
3. That from its roughness, and the mul|titude
of Nail-heads standing out from the
Ships side, or otherwise, and the thick|ness
of the sheathing it self, Ships sheathed
with Wood have ever been complained of
as lessened thereby in that only quality,
upon which our Friggats most value them|selves,
and have their service in preference
to others calculated from, namely, their
Sailing.
All these Arguments they humbly hope
have given you full satisfaction of the prefe|rence
this way of sheathing ought to have, and
likewise hope they have answered all Ob|jections
to it.
They crave leave therefore to begin their
new Proposal with these Assertions.
1. That this sheathing with Lead, at the
first hanging on, is, if at all, very incon|siderably
dearer than a good Streights
sheathing with Wood.
2. That the Wood-sheathing never lasts above
a Voyage or two, and when stript the
old sheathing is worth little or nothing.
3. That this Lead-sheathing with some small
repairs will preserve the Plank from the
Worm, (which is the true intent of sheath|ing
Ships) till it shall be required to be
stript off for Calking, or other reparati|on
of the Hull when that shall be neces|sary,
but will never need stripping for
any defect in the sheathing it self; and
when it shall be stript, the old sheathing
being Metal, will yield its value to melt
down again.

To reduce this Work to a certainty of
great and undeniable Benefit and
Advantage to his Majesty, they offer
as followeth.
1. THat the Ships sides being prepared (and
the Bolt-heads and Braces parcelled or
capt as they ought) to bring the sheathing on,
they will sheath the same with their Lead and
Nails according to the Pattern now produ|ced,
which is near 3. l. to the foot square,
in any of his Majesties Yards (convenient Room
being assigned them to store their Goods) and
defray all charge of Materials, Carriage,
Workmanship, and wast at the rate of 11. s.
9. d. per Yard square, which upon due enqui|ry
will appear to be very little more than a
good Streights sheathing, and not above half
so much as an East-India sheathing.
2. To keep the same in constant repair, they
offer to deliver on board convenient Stores of
Lead and Nails to supply Accidents if any
happen in a Voyage, for which the Carpenter
may be answerable, and as often as any of
the Ships they shall sheath shall return home
from their Voyages, any wise damaged in their
sheathing, they will be obliged upon notice
given when they are Dockt, to repair the
same, and so from time to time to keep the
said sheathing in good and constant repair at
the rate of 10. l. per Cent. per Annum. accord|ing
to each Ships first Charge of sheathing, as
long time as they shall desire to have the said
sheathing continued on to the time of stripping,
and then to allow for the old Lead 11. s. per
hundred weight, whereas the Wood-sheathing,
which seldom lasts above a Voyage, when
stript yields nothing.
If any doubt yet remains, that this sheath|ing
is the cause of a more than ordinary decay
in the Rudder-Irons, they do offer, if they
may have the making the Rudder-Irons them|selves
for such Ships they shall sheath, they
will undertake the same at the Kings Rates;
and to prevent all suspicion of hazard, while
Ships are in their Voyages, they will at first
sheathing provide two setts of Rudder-Irons
to each Ship, one to be in store alwayes on
Board to shift if occasion requires, and those
not to be paid for till it shall appear that the
first have lasted as long as the Rudder-Irons
of other Ships usually do; and when the Lead-sheathing

is thereby sufficiently vindicated from
the fear of being any wise destructive to the
Rudder-Irons, they may be made by the same
hands they now are, again.
All which is humbly submitted
to your Consideration.
20. December
1686.







LETTERS and CERTIFICATES
From the
KING's Master-Builders,
Carpenters, c.
On behalf of the
Lead-Sheathing.

Sir Anthony Dean's Letter to
Sir Francis Watson.
Ianuary 22. 1669.
SIR,
THe Patterns of Lead you shewed me of
4 l. to the Foot square, is absolutely
of great advantage to his Majesty, being
very fit for the Uses of the Navy, and will
serve for Furnaces, Sea-store, Caps for
Bolts, heads of Masts, and the like: And the
Pattern of 3 l. and under is very fit to nail
under Knees, Standards, Carved-work and
Double-work, and would not do amiss for

Sheathing, if Nails can be found to last,
which I thought convenient to be particu|lar
in mentioning as well the size and weight
as its Uses, to satisfie those who may be con|cerned.
Anthony Dean,
Master-Builder at Portsmouth.


Portsmouth.
THese are to Certifie whom it may concern,Mary. that
the Mary and Lyon having been both on
ground at Portsmouth,Ly we did view the Sheath|ing
upon the said Ships, which was done at Chat|ham
in the Year 1672. and do find it  on ex|ceeding
well, the Salt-water having not eaten ei|ther
the Lead or the Nails in the least as we can
discern.

Dan. Furzer,
Master-Builder.
Rog. Eastwood,
Assistant.

Feb. 2. 1673/4;.


Chatham.
THese may Certifie whom it may concrrn,Lyon. that
the Ships whose Names are mentioned in the
Margent,Henriet|ta. were sheathed with thin Lead at his
Majesty's Yard at Chatham, prepared and made
after the New Invention,Mary. the Mary having been
here in the Dock since she was Sheathed, her sheath|ing

lay all very firm, smooth, and good as when first
put on, and very clean; and I am of Opinion that
the Lead made after this new Inveution, being so
close pressed, smooth, and equal in all parts, it is
much more useful for Shipping, and cheaper than
the Lead cast after the usual manner, this Lead
after this new Invention being fit for all uses about
a Ship, it being made to weigh 3, 4, or 5 l. to the
Foot square.
Phin. Pett,
Master-Builder
at Chatham.
Chatham-Dock,
Feb. 25. 1673/4.


Woolwich.
WHereas his Majesties Ships the Phoenix
and Dreadnought were above three yearsPhoenix.
since sheathed by Major Watsons new Invention with
thin Lead,March 10. 1670/1. and at their Returns after several for|reign
Voyages being ordered into his Majesties Dock
at Woolwich, and committed to my care to search
the condition of their Hulls; upon view thereof I
do hereby certifie,Dread|nought. (notwithstanding the fears the
said Sheathings might have been prejudiced by
the Cables, lying on ground, or some other Acci|dent)
That their Sheathings did continue very
firm and fast,Iune 1671. without the least damage from the
first doing thereof, the Phoenix particularly ha|ving
then made two Voyages into the Streights,
was since sent a Voyage into Guinny without any
Amendment.
Furthermore,Bristol. His Majesties Ship the Bristol be|ing
in the beginning of April last ordered under
my Charge to be sheathed,Apr. 1674. I sheathed her with the
same sort of Lead and Nails in less than three
days time, and the whole charge thereof upon the
exactest Computation I could make, did amount to
258. l. 4. s. which is as little as she could possi|bly
cost for an ordinary sheathing of Boards of
1. inch, well nailed. This I could no less than
Certifie under my hand.
Phin. Pett,
Master-Builder
at Woolwich.
Iuly 2. 1674.


Sheerness.
THese are to Certifie,Henri|etta. That about nine or ten
dayes since his Majesties Ships the Henri|etta
and Phoenix, which are sheathed with Lead,
were haled on Shore at his Majesties Yard at
Sheerness,Phoenix. the said Ships coming in thither from
cruising in the Channel, the latter having made
her Voyage into the Streights; and that I found
the sheathing of the said Ships very firm and good,
not at all damnified by the ranging of the Cables
along the side, or by rubbing on the ground, or
otherwise.
Iohn Shish,
Master-Builder.
Octob. 2. 1674.



THese are to Certifie,Phoenix. That I was Carpenter
of his Majesties Ship the Phoenix, in her
Voyage from the West-Indies, or Barbadoes, in
the Year 1674. Captain Atkins Commander, as
we were coming home in a storm of Wind, reeving
our fore course the Rudder snapt off, the waters edge
being worm eaten quite through, the lower part tore
away all the eyes of the braces under water ex|cepting
one,The Rudder not being sheathed high enough, no fault in the Rudder Irons nor Lead-sheathing. and so sunk, the upper part hung fast,
which I hung over-board, and took off, unto which
I fastened Planks to make a Rudder as well as
I could; the reason of the Rudder being lost, was
by the Worm eating it in pieces.
Edward Ledger, Carpenter.


THese are to Certifie, That I Edw. Wright was
entred Cooper on board the Kingsfisher,Kings|fisher, about
four months before she was sheathed with Lead, and
that her Rudder Irons (as I was informed) was
put on her at Woodbridge about a year before,
the Ship having afterwards lain in Chatham Ri|ver
till I entred, and I was on board her above two
years and a half, at least two years in the Streights,
Captain Trotter Commander. That she had none
of her Rudder-Irons shifted all that time except
one Pintel, which was broke, and amended at Le|gorne,
and at her new Voyage when he left her
about a year and a half agoe, she shifted none of
her said Rudder-Irons. That in the said Voyage
they did many times clean the said Ship as there
was ccoasion, which kept clean much better than
a Wood-sheathing: And when they had occasion in

three or four months time or thereabouts, as they
had opportunity, they used to Careen her with her
Guns, and in half the time and trouble, with
bristle brushes, provided for that purpose, they used
to clean her as they had formerly done their board-sheathing,
with which Jo. Ward her Carpenter,
and Robert Bodenham her Boatswain, now in
the Streights, were so much pleased, that they
would often fall into commendation of that new way
of sheathing, and the easiness of keeping it clean,
and the great advantage thereby to the Ship in its
Sailing.
Edward Wright.
Novemb. 22. 1682.


WE, whose Names are underwritten,Assist|ance. Car|penters,
employed about the stripping the
Mill'd Lead-sheathing of the Assistance, at her com|ing
into Mr. Castles Dock at Deptford, to be
repaired in September 1686. do hereby Certifie
the said sheathing lay on very very well and whole,
from any galling by the Cables or rubbing off on
ground, preserved its Plank smooth and sound, from
any Worm eating as at first laying on, which was
about ten years since.

Will. Bowerman.
John Rumney.

Octob. 3. 1686.



A Letter from the Master-Builders As|sistant
at Deptford, formerly Ma|ster-Caulker
at Portsmouth.
SIR,
AFter my hearty Service presented to you,
These are to acquaint you that I had
answered your Letter e're this time,Mary. only I did
think it convenient to see how the Mary's Bolts
proved at Woolwich,Plymouth. which I now understand
are very bad; these Bolts have been drove 13
or 14 Years,Dread|nought. which could not be expected any
better than they be, but the Plank is very
good, and so was the Plymouth's and Dread|nought's,
and not the worse for the Worm ex|cept
where the Lead was off, and that not
worth speaking of, but all Ships (as far as I
see) the Plank proved as good as those which
were sheathed with Board: As to the Bolts
and Braces, I dare engage they may be secu|red
in parcelling of them, and the Ships which
were sheathed with Lead very tight, when the
work was very open under the sheathing.
Zach. Medbury.
Iuly 4. 1680.



A Letter from the Master-Builder of
Portsmouth to the Lord Churchil.
My LORD,
IN Answer to your Lordships Letter, my
Opinion of Lead-sheathing is, That it is
the finest and cleanest Sheathing in the world,
and as for the destruction of the Bolts; I say
when well parcelled, no defect can come
from the Lead-sheathing; for I have made it
my observation, That where the Bolt heads
are carefully parcelled (as they are or ought
to be in a Wood-sheathing) no defect is
found, but where that is neglected, the wa|ter
getting between the Bolt-head and the
Lead, there both the Lead and Iron are usu|ally
decayed: But I find that his Majesties
Ships in ten or twelve years are generally
Iron-sick, whether sheathed either way or not
sheathed at all, by reason of the builg water.
And as to the Rudder-Irons, I find that the Pin|tells
decay soonest, but that an unconstant
and unequal decay in the said Iron are in all
Ships, is most certain, sheathed or not, and
according to the goodness and well work|ing
of the Iron, some prove of longer du|rance
than other, the soon decay I cannot
impute to the Lead-sheathing, but if such de|cay
were, hanging the Rudder Flemish Fa|shion,
'tis easie to unhang the same, and up|on
such decay to hang on new ones, the Bra|ces
being much more durable than the Pin|tells:
And as Wood-sheathing requires to

be stript once in three years, where the
Worm eats, so my Opinion is, that a Lead-sheathing
ought to be stript once in seven
years, by reason of the Ochams decaying in
the Seams; (the which would lye on much
longer, and be firm, were it not for such
decay) and as to its fouling, it fouls nothing
near so soon as a Wood-sheathing, and when
foul is easily cleaned with brushes, or Scra|pers
if barnicled, with very little trouble,
it will also endure a handsome fire to dry
the same if occasion requires; and when
this Sheathing is stript, the Plank is no wise
damaged by the Worm as we ever found:
This I hope gives your Lordship full satis|faction
from
Your Lordships, c.
Isaac Betts.
Iuly 4. 1687.


A Letter from Sir Phineas Pet, Com|missioner
at Chatham, to my Lord
Churchil.
My LORD,
IN Answer to your Lordships Letter, de|siring
my opinion of the Lead-sheathing,
and the Complaints that some have made a|gainst
the Rudder-Irons and Bolts of seve|ral
of the Lead-sheathed Ships, I return your
Lordship this general Account following,
which I suppose will give your Lordship

full satisfaction. While I was his Majesties
Master Builder here at Chatham, it fell into
my way to sheath and strip divers of those
Ships, by which I had opportunity enough
to make full observations, as well in re|spect
of the Iron-work as sheathing; and I
must confess after I had seen some of those
Ships return from their Voyages, as the Ly|on,
Henrietta and Mary, with their sheathing
firm and sound, free from the Worm, and
very clean, I look'd upon this sheathing as
a very happy Invention for his Majesties
Service, to have his Friggats thus secured
from the Worm, without hinderance to their
Sailing, which a thick Wood-sheathing must
needs be; and by reason of its duration, the
charge that was saved in Graving, and the
value of the old sheathing (being Mettal)
when stript must needs be considerably cheap|er
to the King, and I am of the same Opi|nion
still, though I have heard divers Com|manders
and others say, this Sheathing is
an extraordinary decayer of the Iron-work,
which they may fancy by taking notice only
of some particular Ships that perhaps may
have had their Rudder-Irons last a shorter
time with a Lead-sheathing, than they have
observed some other Ships that have been
sheathed with Wood, being not acquainted
with the searching and repairs of Iron-work
in Ships of all kinds as Shipwrights are; for
this great inequality we constantly find in
the lasting of the Rudder-Irons, and other
Iron-work in all Ships, whether sheathed
either way, or not at all, may not be known

to them, which we always look upon to
come from the Smith, in the better or worse
mixing, welding, and working his Iron:
Nor can I imagine how the Lead-sheathing
should be any cause of the great decay in
Iron-work, for we use in Wood-sheathing
to Capp the Bolt-heads with Lead, and ma|ny
times to sheath the Rudder-Post, and
Beard of the Rudder with Lead. And for
the Nails, their Heads are so thin and small,
that I do not see how they should continue
so long in the sides of a Ship, (as some of
these Ships have been sheathed,) and at strip|ping
appear not at all to be diminished in their
substance, and yet communicate such a cor|roding
mischief to the Iron-work as some
would have it; but if such a thing were,
well parcelling the Bolts would secure them,
and the Rudder-Irons can decay in no Voy|age
so fast, but by having a fresh set always
on Board, opportunity may be found time
enough to shift them, which would very
well be contrived, rather than to lose so many
other great Benefits that Lead-sheathing
brings with it to his Majesties Service as
well as to the Publick. This is I think the
substance of what your Lordship would be
satisfied in; and if you desire any thing more
particularly, you may command
Your Lordships most, c.
Phin. Pett.
April 12. 1688.




PURSERS Certificates for
the Goodness of Sheathing-Lead
to line the Bread-rooms.

THese Certifie,R. Ca|therine. That the Bread-rooms of his Ma|jesties
Ship Royal Catherine being lined with
Lead, did very well preserve the Bisquet, insomuch
that during the term of her Voyage 1672 and 1673.
there was not any Bisquet damaged.
Jacob Bryan.


THese are to Certifie,Fairfax. That his Majesties Ship
the Fairfax Bread-rooms were lined with
Lead about two years since, and that the said Bread-rooms
was Bread for nine or ten years, which du|ring
the said time was not removed, or stirred, and
was at the expiration of the said time as good
as when it was first put in, and received no da|mage
by wet or damp to the prejudice of the Bread.
William Rivers.
Ian. 24. 1674.


SIR,
YOu having a desire to hear how the leading
of the Bread room of the St. David,St. Da|vid. was a

preservation of the Bread, I do assure you, that if it
had not been for the leading of it, it would not have
lasted half so long; for I was two years in the said
Ship, and the very last of our Bread did hold out
to be as good as the first.
Ian. 5. 1673/4
Wilm. New.


THese do Certifie whom it may concern, that the
Bread-room belonging to his Majesty's Ship
the Happy Return are lined with Lead,Happy Return. which
Lead hath for eight Months together preserved the
Bread from any Damage without being stirred, and
it was in as good Condition as at first putting in.
Feb. 23. 1673/4
Maur. Linch.


THese are to Certifie,. Prince. that the Bread-room of his
Majesty's Ship Royal Prince being lined with
Lead, did very well preserve the Bisquet, insomuch
that during the last Voyage betwixt 1 May, 1673.
and 24. Octob. following, there was not in the
term of the said Voyage any Bisquet damaged.
Triamer Pickstock.



THese are to Certifie, that the Bread-room of his
Majesty's Ship St. George,St. George being seeled with
Lead, did preserve and keep our Bread in very good
condition the whole time that she was at Sea.
Sept. 10. 1674.
David Willis.



Perhaps it may be acceptable to some Rea|ders,
to have a glancing and shorter View of
the Company's Answer to the Officers of the Na|vy's
Report and Complaints to the Lords Com|missioners
of the Admiralty against the Lead-sheathing;
and therefore it is thought fit that
the Reader be entertained therewith, as the
same was also drawn by the Pen of that inge|nious
Person Mr. Pepys, viz.


A
BRIEF
OF THE
Controversie
Depending between
The Officers of the NAVY,Novem. 30. 1682.
AND
Sir Philip Howard and Company,
TOUCHING
The late Invention and Practice
of Sheathing his Majesty's
Ships with LEAD.
SIr Philip Howard and Company, Interest|ed
in the Manufacture of Mill'd-Lead, and
Contraction for the same with the Offi|cers
of the Navy for the use of his Majesty, be|ing
surprized with a late Report to the Lords
of the Admiralty from the said Officers in pre|judice
of this Invention, did (in right to hi
Majesty and his Service, no less than to it and

themselves) present their Lordships this Day
with a Reply to that Report, containing an am|ple
Deduction and State of the whole Mat|ter,
whereof the following is an Abstract:

Shewing,
THat this Company becoming Masters of
the said Invention, Anno 1670, they in
the same Year submitted it (as a Matter of pub|lick
Import) to the Examination and Censure
of Parliament. Where after passing the most
solemn and strict Methods of Inquisition in
both Houses, it received their Approval and
Confirmation, by an Act granted to that Effect,
in Terms most Expressive of their satisfaction
in it, and Intentions of Encouragement to its
Inventors.
After which, it was by his Majesties Com|mand
immediately put in Execution, first up|on
the Phoenix, and then successively upon o|ther
of his Ships. But not without continued
Industry and Combinations employed against
it, by Persons interested so to do, until by a three
years proof of its Efficacy, in contradiction
to all that had been objected against it, and
more particularly from the satisfaction his Ma|jesty
received concerning it, in his personal
View and Observation o its success upon the
Phoenix; he was pleased to put an end to the same
in the Year 1673. by an Order from the then
Lords of the Admiralty, solemnly establishing
this Method of sheathing, in Exclusion to all
that had been till then used in the Navy.
Notwithstanding which, the said Officers
thought fit to take yet two Years more for its
Probation, (in all five Years) before they would
make it the King's, by entering into any Con|tract
for it with this Company: Which then
(viz. in the Year 1675.) they did, and that not
only with a Condition of securing the benefit
of it to his Majesty for Twenty Years to come,
(which was the whole Term the Company
had then remaining in it) but an express De|claration
of their entering into this Contract,
Upon sufficient experience had of the goodness and
usefulness of this Invention, both as to the Lead
and Nails.
All this neverthesess not sufficing against the
Private Interests concern'd to expose it; a
new Exception was soon after rais'd, upon
the score of a Pretended Discovery made of
some Occult Quality in the Lead, by which
the Rudder-Irons, and other Iron-works of his
Majesties Ships under water were said to be
in an unusual Degree eaten and corroded
with Rust.
Upon which his Majesty and the Lords of the
Admiralty did by several and repeated Orders
in the Months of April and May 1678. not on|ly
recommend and press upon the Officersof
the Navy, the making a strict Enquiry into
the General Truth, and Natural Ground of
the Evil so complain'd of; but upon a reason|able
suggection then made by this Company,
of its being rather chargeable upon some De|fect
in the Iron-work it self, than ought to be
apprehended from the Lead, They were plea|sed
to direct several Ships to be expresly fit|ted,

and other things done by the said Officers
in conjunction with this Company, in order
to the better discovery of the Truth in that
Particular; but without any regard shewn
either to those Orders, or to the Importance
of their Contents to his Majesty, by any thing
that appears to have been done towards it by
the said Officers, from that very day to the
Date of this Report in October last, wherein
(upon the single score of its suppos'd Influ|ence
upon Iron,) they take upon them peremp|torily
to Advise against the further use of
Lead-sheathing, without any other Evidence of
the Truth or Ground of that their Supposal,
than what is to be inferred from a Particular
thereto annex'd, of the Decays of Iron-work
observ'd upon some of the Lead-sheathed
Ships.
The invalidity of which Instances being se|verally
opened by this Company, with respect
no less to their Truth, Consistencies, and
Cogency, than to their Disproportion in Num|ber
to those of the like sheathing, against
which nothing of Complaint has been suggest|ed
by them; The Company proceeds to shew,
I. That the sheathing of Ships with Lead,
neither is nor can (as such) be the Cause of
any decay in Iron: And this,
1. From the Universal Consent of Persons
of the most allowed Knowledge in the Theory
and Operation of Metals.
2. From the Universal Practice (both An|cient
and Modern) of the Shipwrights of Eng|land,

in their special Application of Lead to
the preserving of Iron-work.
3. From the like Practice in Forraign Nations.
4. From their Observations touching the
unequal growth of Rust upon Iron-work, with|in
the same or different spaces of Time, and
on the same or different Ships, however
sheathed or unsheathed.
II. That the Real Causes to which alone this
extraordinary decay of the Iron-work is of right
to be imputed, are,
1. The want of due Inspection to the perfor|mance
of the Smiths Work.
2. An industrious Omission (in the particu|lar
Case of these Ships) of the Principal Point
of Care used both in his Majesties and Mer|chants
Service, in the preparing of all Ships
designed for sheathing.
3. An Unaccountable Continuance of the
sheathing upon the Bodies of these Ships, be|yond
what the Practice and Rules of the Na|vy,
in the case of any such Neglects can ju|stifie.
III. Lastly, That an Enquiry into the Books
of Iron-Work in his Majesties Yards, is the
only, and would long e're now (had this Com|pany's
Advice been pursued) have been found
an effectual and certain Expedient for the com|ing
to a right decision of this Question.
Which being said, and an Account given of
the several Obstructions and Discouragements,

which both his Majesties Service, and this Com|pany
have met with from the Officers of the
Navy, in all its Endeavours of bringing this
Matter to a Satisfactory Issue to his Majesty:
The Company concludes with shewing these
three things,
1. That sheathing with Wood (the only
security for Ships against the Worm, before
this of Lead) is, and has always been owned
to be, attended with several Circumstances
greatly Detrimental to his Majesty, both in
his Ships and Service.
2. That the only Expedient also, besides this
of Lead, for obviating those Evils in Wood-sheathing,
has been the flying to another Evil,
no less fit to be avoided than they, viz. That
of sending the Kings Ships into the Worms
way unsheathed.
3. Lastly, That therefore the only Me|thod
in reserve (yet known) for the serving
of his Majesty herein, is this of Lead. Against
which, none of the Evils in either of the for|mer,
or any other, are (after near Twelve years
Experience of it) so much as suggested by the
Officers of the Navy themselves at this Day,
saving this under dispute concerning Iron-work;
To which, (after all) the Company closes
with Proposing a most obvious, easie, next to
chargeable, and effectual Remedy.
For the Particulars of which, and each of
the foregoing Matters, reference is to be had
to their Original Paper, lying before his Ma|esty
and the Lords of the Admiralty; whereof
this is only an Abstract.




HAVING in the foregoing part of this
Discourse entertained the Reader with the
Transactions that have passed concerning the
Mill'd Lead used upon the sheathing, c. of
about twenty Ships of the Navy Royal, I shall
now set forth the great benefit and advantage
accrewing from the use of this sort of Lead for
the covering all manner of Buildings, and o|ther
purposes where Sheet-Lead is employed,
which the Mill'd Lead Company some time
ince also proposed to their Majesties Officers
for Buildings and Ordnance, at rates greatly
cheaper than what was or is paid (with re|spect
to the work done) for Cast-Lead, which
they had demonstrated to be much better as
well as much cheaper, in a sheet of Paper
Printed and Published some Years ago, for
general satisfaction, but could not prevail with
those Officers by all their Printing, Proofs, or
Proposals, it being against the Inclinations or
Profit of the Plumbers and their Friends, who
had Power or Interest enough to hinder the
admittance thereof into the Kings Works, which
being further proved by fresh Instances of
Experience from Coverings of Houses, c.
both wayes done since the Rebuilding of Lon|don,
lately also published, the same here follows
in terminis, for the better satisfaction of those
who have the disposal of their own Money.




AN
ADVERTISEMENT
To all who have Occasion to make Use of
Sheet-Lead.
ALL New Inventions (being proposed (as
better and cheaper) to lay aside some|thing
before used for the same purpose) must
expect to meet with great Opposition; for
some particular Persons, and some Trades
which consist of many Persons being concern'd
in Point of Interest, right or wrong, they will
decry that which is against their profit, and
procure as many others as they can to do so
too; this being the Case o the Plumbers with
those Concerned in the Milled-Lead, whoever
has Occasion to make use of Sheet-Lead ought
not to regard what interested Persons say on
either side, but to weigh and consider with
himself the Reasons offered, and to examine
the truth of what's said on both sides: The
Mill'd-Lead Company have Printed many of
their Reasons some time since, in a Paper at
large: amongst which, to say nothing of its
solidity, smoothness, c. the Equality of Mill'd
Lead alone is sufficient to prove it much bet|ter,

and (at the Companys Rates in propor|tion
to the least Inequality that can be granted
in Cast-Lead) much cheaper, which also may fur|ther
appear from the Considerations following.
1. It is agreed by all, that if the Plumber
could cast his Lead exactly Equal to the thin|nest
part thereof, it would be better than to
be thicker in one place than another, so that
the excess of thickness is not only unnecessa|rily
paid for, but it makes the Sheet worse,
and helps to crack and cockle the thinner parts,
by its stronger resisting the Sun-beams, and
other Accidents of Weather, which falling e|qually
on all parts alike, draws the thinner
parts, when the thicker stay behind, which
causes that Cockling and cracking therein:
Wherefore, if Mill'd Lead be thicker than the
thinnest part of a cast Sheet, it must be allow|ed
to be better, and to last longer, and a
less quantity of Lead being employed, it may
be cheaper to what degree in proportion to
Cast Lead the Customer shall judge it conve|nient
and sufficient for the purpose designed
to have the thickness of his Mill'd-Lead to be of.
2. The wasting and decay of Sheet-Lead be|ing
chiefly beneath by the heat and moisture
contracted between it and the plain it lyes
on (turning it into White-Lead,) that acci|dent
which the thinner as well as the thicker
parts are alike liable to, shews the great mischief
that attends a Cast-Lead covering in this re|spect
also.
3. These particulars as well as the Plumbers
vain pretence to near Equality, and endea|vour
to cast as equal as he can, shews the ex|cellency
of Equality in Sheet-Lead, and con|sequently
that it is so much the worse, by how
much it deviates from Equalily, and this Ine|quality
in a sheet of Lead being an Object of
Sense, any Man that has but his eyes in his
head may be as good a Judge thereof as the
best Architect, Surveyor or Plumber in Eng|land;
and if he please but to give himself
the trouble of viewing indifferently the Cover|ings
upon Houses in London, since the Rebuild|ing,
and cut a snip from the thickest and thin|nest
part of the edge of any Sheet he can come
at, he will generally find Cast-Lead to be a
third, or at least a fourth part thicker, nay,
many times above twice as thick in some pla|ces
as in others, and the Coverings for the
most part crackt, cockled and patcht with Sol|der,
if they have not been new laid, as many
have been since the Fire, particularly the Roy|al
Exchange and Cordwa|ners-Hall
new covered four
or five Years ago;Since the Rbuilding of the City, and the first Notice of Mill'd Lead, the Plumbers to make their Cover|ings seem cheaper, have generally cast much thinner than for|merly, which hath pro|duced these ill Effects in so short a time, tho in more ancient Cover|ings the same Inequali|ties and defects propor|tionably may be seen. the
Kings Head, a Confecti|oners
by Ludgate, part new
covered about seven Years
since, and the new as well
as the old crack'd, cock|led,
and patcht with Sol|der;
the Eagle and Child
in Tower-street, stript and
new laid in 1676. Mr.
Clark's House, next the

Bell in Fryday-street, and abundance more new
Covered, too long here to mention; and where
the old ones lye, this decay and patching gene|rally
appears: Whereas such Coverings as
have been laid with Mill'd-Lead, some not a|bove
6. l. to the Foot, ten or twelve Years
ago, lye as well as at first laying, and in all
probability will so continue many Years, as
to instance in a few: At Mr. Wdgstaffe's, next
the Hand and Pen in Rood-Lane, a Covering
about 30 Foot square, with Sheets the full
length; Mr. Miners's Buildings in the Inner Tem|ple,
with Sheets 22 Foot long, where a Cover|ing
of Cast-Lead by, at the same time laid,
being compared, the Defects complained of
will plainly appear, in this, while that conti|nues
as well as at first, at Mr. Graydon's House
in the Pell-mell, and divers others too long al|so
here to mention; besides many more in
Town, and some great Houses in the Coun|trey
done since, as Esq. Sanders's at Tooting, some
Sheets 34 Foot long; Esq. Tilney's new House
near Rotherwick in Bark-shire; Sir Iames Hayes's
at Bedgbury, and Esq. Vane's at Fairlaune in Kent,
c. of different kinds, worth viewing for
Beauty and Imitation.
4. There are besides the Inequality, certain
defects in Cast-lead that lye concealed within
the Sheet, not appearing on the superficies,
called by the Plumber Blow-holes and Sand-holes,
which often happens in Casting, and must help
forward the decay of those Coverings, which
the Mill discovers, such Holes being enlarged

as the Sheet lengthens in Milling, (and not clo|sed
up as they falsely suggest) and where these
Holes or Breaks are met with, the Sheet is cut,
if long enough for use; if not, all's returned
again to be new Cast, so that none but sound
Sheets can pass the Mill twenty or thirty times,
as every Sheet does before it is finished.
5. Let us suppose then the present price of
Mill'd-Lead to be 16 s. a hund. and Cast-Lead 14 s.
which is an eighth part less, whatever the Ine|quality
of a Cast-Sheet shall appear to be a|bove
an eighth part, which is not easily discern|ed,
so much must it be granted that Mill'd
Lead is cheaper; but if Mill'd Lead of 7 lib. to
the foot be admitted but to be as good as the
Plumbers pretended 9. l. it is cheaper at 16. s.
a hundred than his at 12 s. 6 d.
6. Wherefore since 7 lib. to the foot may
very well be allowed, to remove all Objecti|ons
at once which the Plumbers and their
Friends falsly charge the Mill'd-Lead with,
any Person (using the Plumber the Company
shall recommend or approve) that shall lay a
Covering with their Lead of 7 lib. to the
Foot square, they will undertake (and secure
him by good Covenants as Council shall advise)
to keep such Covering, not exceeding a 100 l.
value, in good and constant repair for a term
of 41 Years (to mention a time certain and
sufficient) for 5 s. a Year, and proportiona|bly
for a greater; and if any Sheet or Sheets
shall crack, or any wise prove defective in re|spect
of the Lead it self, they will be obliged

at their own Charge (Carriage only paid for)
to lay new Sheets in their room, without that
patching and botching with Solder that ap|pears
upon all the Cast-lead Coverings in Town,
that have not lain half so long, at a very great
Charge in Work and Solder, besides the Da|mage
the House must have sustained thereby.
 But because some Plumbers, and others
their Friends, do pretend greater Care and Improve|ment
in their Casting of late, and have offered to
lay Wagers that they can Cast a Sheet of their full
length equal within one pound in ten quite
through; Mr. Hale, a Partner and Manager of
the Work, is ready to take any such Wager; nay,
he will give them a pound and an half in ten,
and lay them the price of a Fodder of Lead, that all
the Plumbers in Town, and their Friends joyned to
their assistance, in the way they have hitherto used
of Casting upon Sand, they cannot do't; and is
ready to enter into fair Articles with any one that
shall make the Wager; though if some should be
found so dexterous as to cast one or two such Sheets
perhaps in half a dozen, it would not mend the mat|ter
for general use: Moreover, if this could be
done, even at the rate of a pound and an half in
ten, Mill'd-Lead is yet cheaper about Three per
Cent. For Ten bundaed weight of Cast lead would
cost 7. l. and Eight hundred and an half of Mill'd
Lead but 6 l. 16. s. As to the Plumbers pretence
of Casting broader, that's not yet (according to
the Proverb) as Broad as Long; for the Mill'd
Lead size of Three Foot and an half being broad
enough, and perhaps better than broader for gene|ral
use, and they able to make their Sheets above

twice as long as the Plumber can cast, if need
require, to save Drips, and comply with the
length of Coverings, this disadvantage is not
made good by any pretence of breadth soever;
which if greater breadths are necessary, as for Co|peras-works, c. may be supplyed with Mill'd
Lead, by burning a Seam joyning two Sheets to|gether.
This Mill'd Lead being to be had of any Thick|ness,
even from one pound in the Foot to twenty, or
more if desired, must for the Reasons aforesaid be
cheaper and better than Cast Lead, and will
serve for all uses that Cast Sheets are fit for, and
the thinner sorts for many more, any one may be
supplyed with able Workmen to lay the same on
Churches or other Buildings, or work it into
Cisterns, Fountains, Pipes, Vessels for Brewers,
Dyers, Coperas-works, Dairies, c. and Solder
at 6 d. a pound; also where Nailing is required
there sheathing Nails, made of a Mettal that
will not rust, corrode or decay the Lead, as
Iron does, may be had for 8 d.
a Hundred, at the Mill'd-Lead-Shop,
The Mill'd-Lead-Shop is since removed to the Mill'd-Lead-sign in Orange-street by Red-Lyon-Square, near Holborn, where Mr. Hale himself also now lives. the Sign of
the Mallard on the West-side
of Fleet-Channel, near Hol|born-brigde,
or by a Note
left for Mr. Hale al the Tem|ple
Coffee-house, that he may know where to speak
with the Parties, or send his Plumber to under|take
their Work.
There's nothing said herein relating to the Mill'd-Lead-Sheathing;
that having been discontinued in
the Navy (after about twenty Ships sheathed) requi|ring
a more large and particular Account what may

have been the Cause thereof, the Objections, Answers,
Proofs, and whole Proceedings in that matter, are
intended shortly to be Printed, which will sufici|ently
satisfie the unprejudiced, and justifie the pre|ference
of Lead-sheathing before that of Wood in
many particulars, besides Cheapness; which with
regard to its Duration, and the Value of the old
Sheathing when stript, will save the Owner above
Cent. per Cent. And all the noise that has been
about the Rudder-Irons decay, charged on that
Sheathing, proved to be frivolous, vain and ground|less.
All Merchants or others that shall buy any
considerable quantity, above a Tun at
least, upon discourse with the said Mr.
Hale, may have some Abatement even from
the present Prices, suitable to the quanti|ty
and payment.




LONDON, Printed for T. H. and are to be
had at Garraway's Coffee-house, the Tem|ple
Coffee-House, and the Mill'd-Lead
Shop above-mentioned. 1690.



Notwithstanding which, the Plumbers (to
prevent a Contract with the Commissioners
of the Navy, for which this Company had
then a Proposal lying before them to furnish
their Mill'd-Lead of all sizes of thickness and
thinness, as well for Sheet-Lead as Scup|pers,
c. into their Majesty's Yards) gave
in to them the Paper following: The Vanity
and Falshood of which Paper will plainly ap|pear
to the Reader from the Testimonies given
even by the Owners or Inhabitants themselves
of those Houses from whence they raise their
Instances of commending their Cast and decry|ing
the Mill'd-Lead, divers of which are
here also Printed at the Foot of their said
Paper, others being Houses never covered
with Mill'd-Lead at all, as the Lord Preston's,
or with Mill'd-Lead, as the Lord Crew's,
against which no ground for complaint of
the Lead, in which Houses Servant-women
only living, they could not give proper Cer|tificates
herein.




THE
Plumber's Proposal
TO THE
NAVY-BOARD.
Right Honourable,
UNderstanding that the Persons con|cerned
in the Mill'd-Lead have put
out Printed Papers in Vindication
of the Service of the said Lead, and have also
lately made Proposals to your Honours to
serve their Majesty's therewith, or any pri|vate
Persons for Covering of Houses, Gutters,
Pipes, Cisterns, Scuppers, Liquor-Backs, or
such like Work, which they pretend will be
cheaper and better than Cast-Lead:

May it please your Honours,
THe Mill'd Lead is no ways so serviceable
and cheap as the same is represented,
nor indeed scarce fit for any service, as is evi|dently
proved by daily experience in most
places where the same has been used; that af|ter

it hath lain a few Years, it hath crack'd,
flaw'd, and rose in ridges, so that the Persons
concerned, after having been at a considerable
Charge in the daily patching and mending of
it, have at last been forced to take it up, and
lay Cast-lead in the room of it, before such
time as the Houses or Places could be made
tight: of the truth of which, several Examples
can be given your Honours upon Oath, if re|quired.
That on the other side, the Cast-Lead doth
plainly make appear its durance and service,
for in several old Buildings about this City
and Westminster, where this Lead hath been
laid for a great term of years, yet remaineth
as firm and right as when first laid: And be|sides,
the same is cheaper and better to their
Majesty, or any private person, by 20 l. per
Cent. than the Mill'd-Lead is, according to
the Rates it is now sold, which together
with the strength and service is very consi|derable.
Also the Solder made and used by them of
the Mill'd Lead, is not fit for service, whereas
all Solder used by the Plumbers is by Essay
sealed according to the standing Rules of the
Company.
By what is here offered, is humbly desired
may be taken by your Honours, as proceeding
from Duty, and not in prejudice to the Per|sons
concerned in the Mill'd-Lead, for not|withstanding
the plausible pretences of the use|fulness
and service of the said Lead, and the
disparagement of the Cast-Lead, yet the
Plumbers have not made any like returns to

discredit the Mill'd-Lead, not for want of rea|sons,
but being assured that a short time would
sufficiently make appear the service and firm|ness
of the Cast-Lead, and the sleightness and
the charge of the other, which is now suffici|ently
evidenced, and is humbly submitted to
your Honours Considerations.

Places where the Mill'd-Lead hath
been used.
His Majesty's Horse-guard Houses at White-Hall.
The Lord Preston's House.
The Countess of Portland's.
The Lord Crew's in Soho-square.
Mr. Fox's in Arundel-street.
No such House to be found. Mr. Harris's in Norfolk-street.
Sir Iohn Iames's in Pell-Mell.
Dr. Chamberlain's in Essex-buildings.
Esq Sanders at Tooting.
Sir Ant. Deane's.

These and several others which have been
covered with Mill'd-Lead, have been taken up
and laid with Cast-Lead in a very short time
as may be made appear.
Ex. per W. Dale,
23 Aug. 1690.








COPIES
OF
Letters and Certificates,
Proving
The Plumber's foregoing Paper
TO BE
Scandalous and False.

Mr. Saunders's Letter.
Mr. Hale,
I Have thought upon the Paper you shew|ed
me, which you said the Plumbers pre|sented
to the Navy-Board, complaining of
mighty defects in your Mill'd-Lead, and men|tioning
a great many places where they say
they have been forced to strip it off, and new
cover with their Cast-Lead, and amongst the
rest my House at Tooting: I wonder much at

their Confidence and Folly, to say such things
that may be so easily contradicted: I assure
you my Covering at Tooting lyes very well,
and I do not doubt but it will so continue;
indeed I am very proud of it, and I do not
think there's a finer and better Covering in
England, at least not of Cast-Lead, for I
have Sheets thereon about twice as long as
I ever heard the Plumber pretended to Cast,
being 34 Foot long, and I was very well sa|tisfied
after a great deal of Discourse with
the Plumber before I began, that your Mill'd
Lead was cheaper in the whole Work, and
would prove much better, and being exactly
equal (which theirs is far from) would last
longer than theirs, and I see no cause yet to
alter my Opinion. Upon your request to
have something from me in Writing on this
Occasion, I could say no less, and suppose
this may suffice from
28 Aug. 1690.
SIR,
Your Humble Sevant,
Robert Sanders.



Dr. Chamberlain's Letter.
Mr. Hale,
WHen I last saw you, you shewed me a
Paper addressed by the Plumbers to
the Navy-Board, wonderfully decrying your
Milld-Lead, commending their own, and be|cause
that amongst several other places, which
they ay were covered with Mill'd-Lead, that
in a short time (being very defective) were
taken up, and new laid with Cast-Lead, they
mention mine in Essex-Buildings to have been
one; you then desired me to give two or
three lines in Writing of the truth thereof,
which I could not reasonably deny you; and
I do here assure you that the same Mill'd-Lead
which was first laid on about twelve
Years since upon two Platforms at my House
there, remains on still very well, free from
any such cracks or flaws and ridges they
complain of, which I have reason to believe
would not have continued so well, if they
had been covered with Cast-Lead; for that
the Cast-sheets which were laid upon the
Cornish next the Street before I came to the
House, were afterward in many places so
crack'd and cockled, that about eight Years
ago, as I remember, the Plumber took it up,
or great part of it, and new laid it again: I
considered also of the Charge of both wayes,
before I made use of the Mill'd-Lead, and was

then satisfied that the whole was cheaper to
me, and would prove better than if I had
laid it with Cast-Lead of the size the Plumber
proposed, and I continue of the same mind
still; all which I thought fit to say upon this
occasion, and leave it to you to make use
thereof as you please, and am
26 Aug. 1690.
SIR,
Your Humble Servant,
Hugh Chamberlain.


Mr. Hoy's Letter about Mr.
Fox's Lead-Covering.
Mr. Hale,
ACcording to your desire I waited upon
my Friend Mr. Fox, and acquainted him
that the Plumbers in a Memorial by them
presented to the Navy-Board, had alleadged
that several Houses (amongst which his House
in Surry-street was mentioned to be one) for|merly
covered with Mill'd-Lead, had been
since strip'd and covered with Cast-Lead; and
desiring to know the truth of it, he did assure
me that their Allegation was absolutely false
for that the Mill'd-Lead formerly laid on by
you, still remains there not stirred, which he

would have shewn me, but was then a little
indisposed, being but newly return'd from
Tunbridge; and the access to it being by an
Engine, which would have required his Com|pany,
I was unwilling to trouble him, but
will wait upon him again whenever you
desire:
Sept. 1. 1690.
SIR,
Your Servant,
Clement Hoy.


Mr. Letchmere's Letter.
Mr. Hale,
YOu shewed me a Paper which the Plum|bers
gave in to the Navy-Board, where|in
they much complain of the defects of the
Mill'd-Lead (boasting of the excellency and
durableness of their Cast-Lead) and say, that
where the Mill'd-Lead has lain a few Years,
it hath so crack'd, flaw'd, and rose in ridges,
that after the Owners have been at great
Charge in the daily patching and mending of
it, they have at last been forced to take it
up, and lay Cast-Lead in its room: But I
doubt these Plumbers mistake the one for the
other, for I know very well their Cast-Lead
had all these ill qualities they complain of;

for upon a House of mine, where Mr. Clark
now lives, next Door to the Bell in Fryday-street,
which was covered with Cast-Lead at
the first Building after the Fire: I do averr
that after such rising and cockling, and its
being patch'd almost all over, about eight
Years since the Tenant was forc'd to strip
it, and new lay it; and I well remember I
allowed 10 l. towards the charge, and I fear
in a few Years it will be in as bad a Condi|tion
as ever, for it is already patch'd in di|vers
places; and had I had the good Fortune
to have known time enough of your Mill'd-Lead,
I am very well satisfied from my own
Observation of such Places where I have since
known it laid, and the reason of the thing
it self, and the charge thereof (a Man
paying for no superfluous Lead, as in the
other you do) that I might have saved
Money, and have had a far better and more
durable Covering on my House than now I
have.
SIR, I am so well satisfied of the excellen|cy
of your Mill'd-Lead, and of the greatness
of its worth for all uses beyond Cast (which
is notwithstanding all the Care that can be
used in the Casting of it full of great uneven|ness
and other defects) that I could say much
more than I have on this Subject, but I al|ways
thought it a very impertinent thing to
spend too much time in arguing against Tran|substantiation,
it being maintained by the im|pudence
of a Party that resolve they will not
be convinc'd, and I take the only reason why
the Plumbers oppose your Mill'd-Lead to be

this, because their Interest is concerned, and
I think they are as much in the right in so
doing as those Persons are in the wrong, that
make use of their Cast-Lead when the other
may be had.
27 Aug. 1690.
SIR,
Your Humble Servant,
Tho. Lechmere.


Mr. Lightfoot, the Lady Port|land's
Steward's Certificate.
WHereas Mr. Hale did this day shew me a
Paper from the Company of Plumbers, di|rected
to the Honourable Commissioners of the Na|vy,
wheriin they had preferred Cast-lead far before
Mill'd-Lead, and withall had there inserted se|veral
Persons of Quality and others, among whom
was my Lady, the Countess of Portland's Name,
that her House had formerly been covered with
Mill'd-Lead, and since with Cast-Lead: Now
these are to Certifie, that my Lady, the Countess
of Portland's House neither was nor is covered
with Mill'd-Lead, but upon altering the form of
the Building, and making some additions thereto
about Eleven Years since, she covered the back part
with Cast-Lead, which still remains, but not with|out
yearly repairing, of late occasioned by cockling

and rising of the Lead into a ridge, which after|wards
cracks, and so are obliged to patch it with
Soldar, as in several Places we have since 'twas
laid on.
As Witness my Hand this 30th. day of
August. 1690.
Robert Lightfoot.


Mr. Martin's Letter.

YOu told me that some Plumber had late|ly
informed the Navy-Board that the
Mill'd-Lead Covering upon a House of mine
in Rood-lane was very much cockled and
crack'd, and that they had taken off some
part of it, and laid Cast-Lead in its room; of
the truth of which, you desiring a line or
two from me in Writing: I do assure you 'tis
no such thing, for the same Mill'd-Lead sheets,
near 30 Foot long, that was first laid on
about eleven Years agoe, lyes very well still,
without any ground or cause for such Com|plaint;
and I am so well satisfied with it,
that if I had the like, or any other Occasion
for Sheet-Lead, I should preferr the use of
your Mill'd-Lead much before that which is
only Cast.
Josh. Martin.
Sept. 15. 1690.

As to the Plumbers Skill and Conscience
they pretend about their Solder, notwith|standing
their hard Words and hard Mettal
they usually talk of therein to make it a My|stery;
all that are any wise conversant in Met|tals
know, that their Solder is only a Compo|sition
of Lead and Tyn in such proportions
that the same never stands them in above four|pence-half-penny
a Pound, and therefore well
may be afforded at their highest Essay for six
pence, so that the Mill'd-Lead Company are
under no Temptation of making it courser than
they; which however would be no damage to
the Customer, but an injury to themselves that
work it, a due proportion of Tin being only ne|cessary
to make their Solder work and run the
better before their Iron.




The Mill'd-Lead Company after their new Propo|sal
to the Navy-Board, presented also the Me|morial
following, to shew the preference of their
Mill'd-Lead for Scuppers, c.




To the Right Honourable,
The Principal
Officers and Commissioners
Of their
MAJESTIES NAVY.
MEMORIAL,
Humbly offered by the Mill'd-Lead
Company, proving that their
Mill'd-Lead Scuppers are better
than Cast-Lead, and at least
25 per Cent. cheaper.
THis Company having in Ianuary, 1678. made
a Proposal to this Board to make their Scup|pers
of Mill'd-Lead, one Mr. Parsons a Plumber
they then usually employed, opposed it; pre|tending,
that altho their Lead was not exactly
equal, yet the inequality was so inconsiderable,
that Mill'd-Lead Scuppers being then 4  in a
hundred more than theirs, they would be much
dearer to the King; whereupon the Board was

pleased to appoint a time for hearing both
sides; when the Plumber to make his Pre|tences
good, undertook his Scuppers should not
be above half a pound in ten heavier than the
size the Board should Order; they thereupon,
7 Ian. 1678. ordered each to make 36 Scup|pers
of three several sizes and thicknesses, viz.
8 l. 10 l. and 12 l. to the Foot square; both
sides soon after sent in their Scuppers to Dept|ford,
where being received into the Stores and
weighed, the Mill'd-Lead Scuppers appeared
to be conformable to the Order, and to weigh
but 8 c. 1 q. 26 l. whereas the Cast-Lead Scup|pers
weighed 12 c. 3 q. 10 l. above one third
more; which appearing so gross a difference
from what the Plumber undertook, and he pre|tending
Excuses and Servants carelesness:
The Board indulged him another Tryal up|on
72 Scuppers, when he took to his Assist|ance
one Mr. Whitehall, another Plumber that
usually also made Scuppers for the Navy, and
it cannot be imagined but that these Plum|bers
now used all their Skill and Care, which
notwithstanding all, though in many places
they appeared to be thinner than the Milled-Lead
of the sizes given, the weight of the
whole 72 came to 25 c. 1 q. 12 l. whereof
Parsons made 31, weighing 9 c. 3 q. 0 l.
and Whitehall 41, weighing 15 c. 2 q. 12 l.
whereas the 72 Mill'd-Lead Scuppers weighed
but 16 c. 3 q. 10 l. about the same proportion
the former were, which at the then Prizes of
22 s. for the Cast, and 26 s. per hund. for the
Mill'd-Lead Scuppers, was 27 per Cent. loss to
the King; after which the Company made ma|ny

more; however Demands have been dis|continued
since. This being a matter of Fact,
the truth of which may appear from the Store|keepers
Books at Deptford, this Company hopes
when you shall thus be put in mind of the
great and certain loss their Majesties have and
must sustain in this particular, demonstrated
by Tryals that have been so fairly and fully
made, your Honours will make no great diffi|culty
of restoring this part of their Work at
least to their Service.
May 19. 1690.

All which they humbly lay before this
Honourable Board, for their Con|sideration
upon the New Contract
proposed.




After all (and upon the Surveyors producing
to the Board a piece of Lead indifferently cut
out of a Cast-Sheet of 8 l. in the Foot square,
one with another, in Deptford-Yard, which they
owned to be not above 6 in some places) they
thought fit in Septemb. 1690. to Contract with
the Company to supply their Majesties Yards
with their Mill'd Sheet-Lead, of all sizes, of thick|ness
and thinness, at Rates agreed; but as to
the Scuppers, they were pleased to suspend any
Contract for them, 'till they should upon a fur|ther
Tryal (shortly to be made) be satisfied
that they also were better for their Majesties
Service than Scuppers made of Cast-Lead, say|ing
they had had no account of the Success of
the former Tryals.







A
TREATISE
OF
Naval Philosophy.
In Three Parts.
I. A Phisico-Mathematical Dis|course
of Ships and Sailing.
II. Of Naval Policy.
III. Of Naval Oeconomy or
Husbandry.






The First Part,

Contains the several Sorts and Closes
of Experiments under-mentioned, viz.
1. THE specifical weight of Water, and Tim|ber,
and Irons, as also the several Ma|terials
whereof Shipping is composed.
2. The absolute and comparative strength

of Wood, Metals, and Ropes, in their several di|mensions,
Figures and Quantities, and how
much the strength of the same is diminished by
Notches, Holes, and other Excavations, or increa|sed
by the Texture and grain of the said materials.
3. The motions, strength, and matter of the
Wind.
4. The motion, strength, course, and figure of
Waters, upon the surface thereof in Rivers,
Tide-ways, Currants, and Edies; as also in the
Ocean, whether the same be spontaneous, or by
agitation of the Wind.
5. Of the Tractive and Pulsive forces upon
swimming Bodies, in respect of strength, time,
proportional increase of swiftness, lines of Di|rection,
Superficies of Ressistance, Magnitude
of the movent bodies, and impression of force
in various Angles of Incidence and Reflecti|on.
6. Several Hydrostatical Experiments relating
to Pumps, and Leakage, according to several
parts of the Ship, and depth under water,
wherein the same may happen.
7. Experiment of spinning, twisting and wear|ing,
with reference to Sail-Cloath, Cables, and
all other sorts of Cordage.
8. Experiments upon Pitch, Tarr, Rosin,
Oyl, Brimstone, Tallow, Ocum-Leather, c. rela|ting
to the Sheathing, Caulking, and preserving
of Vessels, and their appurtenances from the
injuries of water, weather, worms and weeds,
and of their weight, Extention, Duration, c.
9. Of the choice seasoning and preparing of
Timber and Plank, Knees, and Trenails, as also
of Iron, Hemp, and other Materials used in
Shipping.
10. Of the particular power of Oars, Wheels,
Poles, draught of men, and Horses, with refe|rence
to their Actions upon Vessels, and of
reducing them all to one and the same Calcu|lation
and Principal.
11. Of founding and measuring the depth of
water, and of discovering the Nature of Ground
as to the hold-fast of Anchors, wear and tear of
Ground-Tackle, with what else belongs to
the artificial moving and riding of Ships upon
all occasions.
12. Magnetical, Hoxometrical, and Optical In|struments
and Experiments.
13. Nautical Geography and Astronomy.
14. Nautical Staticks, and Mechanicks, rela|ting
to Pullies and Crows, Handspecks, Screws,
Hances, Kildwedges, Nippets, Capsterns, Wind|lesses,
Slings, c. in order to the Landing,
Masting, Leading, Careening, and weighing up
of a Ship.
15. Of Gun-powder, the several sorts of
Metals for Guns and Shot; their several figures
and proportions, in order to the several Ef|fects
of Penetration, battering and direct shoot|ing.
16. Of several Observations upon loading
of a Ship with Lead, Wood, Cotton, Liquor in
Cask, Corn, Salt, Frail and Timber: And the
Accidents which usually fall out in each of the
said sorts of loading, with reference to the safe|ty
and well sailing of a Vessel.
The said first part containing also the Defi|nition
and division of a Ship in its several parts,
together with a Selection and Description of

the principal things and notions which are to
be considered in framing and fitting of a Ship
for the several uses unto which the same is
designed, in manner following.


1. A Ship is understood to be all from the
Keel to the Vane, and from the extremity of
the Boulsprit to the Lanthorn.
2. The said Ship is divided into Hull, Sails,
and her Burthen.
3. The Hull is considered but as one piece
of Timber, and carved out of one Logg, and is di|vided
into what is under the upper Deck, out of
which all waters is to be excluded. And what is
above the same, as Cabins, Round-house, Cud|die,
Fore-castle, Coaches, c. which may be ra|ther
esteemed as part of the burthen of a Ship,
than Essential part of the same.
4. The Hull under the said upper Deck is divi|ded
into the Cavity or Hold, whether the same
shall be subdivided by other Decks and Bulk|heads
or not, as also into the Shell of the said
Cavity: and thereby into the Additaments af|fixed
to the outside of the said Shell. Such are
the false Stemm, Gripe, Keel, Stern-post, and Dead-rising
up the Tuck, excluding the Rudder.
5. Upon the Shell of the Ship, or rather of
the said Cavity, there are to be considered the
several Lines under-mentioned, to be drawn par|rallel
to the Keel, (viz.)
1. The line unto which the Hull of the Ship
sinks upon her launching.
2. The line unto which the whole Ship sinks
when she is rigged, balasted, and fitted for the

best advantage of sailing, and mann'd with a
sufficient Complement for that purpose, victu|alled
with three months Victuals, and furnisht
with Defensive Arms.
3. The line unto which she sinks loaden as
a Merchant Man.
4. The line unto which she stoops upon a
Wind of either side.
5. The line of Horizontal-section where the
Gun Deck, and all other Decks and Orlop
ought to be placed, and the lines to which the
Ports between each Deck ought to be made.
In the next place is to be considered the three
perpendicular length-way sections following, viz.
1. The section of splitting the whole Ship,
Cabbin, and all other superstructures included
between the Plank-sheering, and the Keels, the
upper line of which section is called the Sheer
of the Ship.
2. Upon the general and most comprehen|sive
section I propound, that all the Horizon|tal
lines before mentioned may be mark'd toge|ther
with the bottom line of the Interval Cavi|ty
or Hold before mentioned.
Lastly, let there be a transverse section of the
Hull at the main bend, within which let two o|ther
parallel sections be described arising from
each extremity of the Keel.
Next to the several Lines and Sections before
mentioned, it will be necessary to take Notice
of the Center of Gravity and Magnitude, as well
of the whole Ship comprehended between the
Keel and the Vane, as of the several parts there|of,
viz. The Centers of Gravity and Magnitude

of that part which is under the water; as also
of that which is above the water in the Air
and Wind.
2. The same also to be observed when the
Ship swims upon an uneven and unlevel Keel
drooping forwards, or sending aft.
3. Consideration is to be had of that line
which by a Spindle passing and fixed into the
Ground, the Ship lying cross a Current when
no Wind at all is stirring, would be in Equi|librio;
also the like line passing through the su|pernatant
part of the Ship would also be in
Equilibrio, its broad side lying to the Wind
in dead water.
In the next place there ought to be consi|dered
the proportion between the way of the
Ship cut off at its greatest transverse section, and
the way of the same shaped from the same secti|on
forward in the usual manner, or to his best
advantage.
2. The proportion between the resistance,
between the perpendicular length-way section,
and outside of the Hull shaped as is usual.
3. Between the Horizontal Section at the water
line, and the bottom of a Ship in its usual shape.


CHAP. II.
BEing thus furnished with the sixteen sorts
of Experiments above mentioned, and with
the clear and definite understanding of the seve|ral
parts of the Ship, and of all the several Se|ctions,
Lines, Centers, and Proportions of resistance
above mentioned: We then proceed upon the

third Branch of the first General Part as fol|loweth.
(viz.) Suppose we have before us a
piece of Timber, of equal substance, of an in|definite
length, and square at both ends, we are
now to consider by what process to carve out
of the same the Hull of a Ship, which work will
contain the several Considerations following.
(1.) Of what length to cut the said Timber,
which at first we will suppose to be the length
of four sides of the square, intending hereafter
to debate whether the same ought at all to be
longer or shorter, and in what Cases.
(2.) Suppose the said Square be divided in|to
twelve parts, and that seven of them shall
be under water when the Ship is loaden.
(3.) Dividing the length line into twelve parts,
and at three of them let the two sides converge
into an Angle, whose sides let be portions of Cir|cles
unto which the remaining strait part may
be a contingent line, which Angle is the first
means of facilitating the Ships way through
the Water.
(4.) At four parts let the bottom superficies
converge into an Angle, with the Horizontal
Section above mentioned, viz. at the Ships
greatest draught of water.
(5.) At the said Section let the sides down|wards
converge into an Angle, consisting also
of Circular Lines. This last Angle is made for
the Ships ease of falling into the Sea, as the two
first were for its easier passing through it.
In the next place we must provide for the
coming of water to the Rudder, which is to
be performed by two other Angulations, viz.

from fifteen parts aft, let the sides of the Ship
converge into an Angle from the Horizontal
saction downwards, where the Ship draweth
least water at her Launching, which will be
the height of the Tuck, let the bottom superficies
be bent in a Circular line. And thus we have
in gross set down the five Incurvations of the
bottom and sides of our Logg, and how the
butt-ends thereof have been as it were abolish|ed
forward on for the easie passage of the Vessel
through the water, and aft for the quick and
effectual pulse of the water upon the Rudder.
In the next place we come to the like sha|ping
of the remaining part of the Logg, which
we intend shall swim above the water, which
is performed as followeth.
Let it be supposed that the Ship upon a
Wind, is to stoop upon a certain Angle, let
the supernatant sides of a Ship so much tumble
(as they call it) as that the said sides may
remain perpendicular when the Ship stoops, which
being done quite round the upper surface, the
remainder will be the shape and section of the
upper Deck.
Memorandum, That all the forementioned In|curvations
are to be trimmed and repaired by
reconciled lines.
In the next place we come to ollowing or
excavating of our Logg, which suppose (be|ginning
at the middle) we do (leaving equal
thickness) every where until the Logg become
so light that it swims at the line representing
the launching line, and consequently we have
now acquired the model of a Ship as it appear|eth
in her launching, except the Cabbins and

what is usually superstructed pon the upper Deck.
In the next place we are to consider how far ballast and
weight of rigging, c. will sink the said Ship: And second|ly,
how much deep the weight that must be added to fit
out a Man of War will depress her, for till then we can|not
rationally determine the place of the Gun-deck, where|fore
the next enquiry must be, what extent of Sail our Vessel
must carry, and consequently the length of the Masts and
Yards, and then of their thickness and weight; and from thence
the size of the rigging, and from thence the Wind-loft, and
from thence the Cables and Anohors, and from thence all the
Capsterns and Windless Boats, Bitts, Catheads and Davits.
In the next place we are to consider the quality, quantity
and weight of our ballast, so as the Ship may stoop but ac|cording
to our intention, and according to the strength of
our Masts and Shrowds.
Having thus found out our second Water-line, which
I call the sailing-line, as the first was called the launching-line:
Now we come to the third which is the line of War.
And this is to be discovered by computing the weight
first of the Ordnance, which suppose to be in a Man of
War, one 6th. part of what is between the Sailing-line,
and the line of Burthen, or fourth Line. Secondly, the weight
of Men with three months Victuals; in order thereunto we
must determine the number of Men for sailing from the
Spread of Canvas, and the number of Men for fighting from
the Amplitude of the Deck, and weight of the Ordnance.
Having found out the said Line, and considered the
distance of Trunnions of the Guns from the Gun-deck, and
the distance of the Muzzels of the Guns levelled from the
surface of the water, we come at length to determine the
place of the Gun-deck, and consequently of the other Deck.
Memorandum, That the superstructions upon the upper
Deck are not only for the Accommodation of Men, but also
fortifications of the Ship; forasmuch as the Guns in the

Fore-castle and steerage clear the Deck, as those of the Round
house do the Quarter deck.
Having found the dimensions of the Masts, we next come
to the place of them, viz. by what points of the Gun-deck
they must pass, and here we must consider the reasons of
their raking ast, as also of the steeving of the Boulsprit,
and withal the reasons of placing the Top-mast before or
behind the Main-mast, and of dividing each Mast into three
parts, and the proportion of the round Tops, main Stays, the
place and fitting of the Shrowd so as to make way for
the gibbing of the Yards, and setting of the Shrowds loose or
tort as the Condition of Sailing of the Vessel requires.


CHAP. III.
1. THe reason of Ships going against the Wind, and in
what proportion she maketh way between her be|ing
right afore the wind, and lying within five points of the
wind.
2. The whole Doctrine of Steering and Rudders.
3. The whole doctrine of Mooring and Anchors.
4. Of the Lee-boards, their use, dimension and place.
5. What Sails, Masts, Yards, and Rigging is fittest for
every size and sorts of Vessels, according to the Seas and
service whereunto it is to be applyed.
6. Of the Shape, Cutting, Sowing, and Setting in of Sails
into the Headropes and Boltropes; of the several substance
and thickness of Sails, and of the Effect and Welling them,
Easing of Shrowds, Looseness of Masts, and upper Masts.
7. Of the Effects of true Trim, shutting up the Ports,
general Quietness, firing of Stern-pieces, and the best course
upon a Chase.
8. How Top-sails, Stooping, Weather, or Leeward Helm;
as also how the Keel, Gripe, and Mizen Sail, may be

fitted to promote or hinder the Sailing upon occasion.
9. What makes a Ship Roll and laboursome in the Sea;
what makes her wear and stay well; and what makes her
ride hard or easie at an Anchor: what makes her pitch
and scend too much: what makes her fall easie or hard into
the Sea; what makes her Leeward or keep a good Wind.
10. Of the just proportion of Sails with more or less,
that which will make the Ship go worse; of Equations be|tween
the spread of Sails, and the Velocity of the Wind:
Of the utmost Velocity of a Ship with Wind and Tide: Of
the proportion of the counter-resistance of winds or tides;
why some Ships sail better with much, and some with
less proportionably.
11. How to compute the Impediment which Foulness
and Weeds do make in a Ships way, and in what pro|portion
Smoothness, Sope and Tallow doth quicken it.
12. How a Ship is to be fitted with Decks, to beat it
up to windward in foul weather, why the Fore-sail must
be less than the Main-sail.


CHAP. IV.
WE have hitherto supposed the Ship to be exactly
shaped inside and outside of one simple Logg
of Wood, which being impossible to do otherwise in
Speculation, it is necessary to come at length to the pra|ctical
part of Ship-Carpentry, which is the Art of imita|ting
the moddel afore-mentioned, and of composing a
Ship, not out of one but several thousand pieces of Wood
and Iron: Wherefore this Chapter shall comprehend as
followeth.
1. The History of the Practice of the best Ship|wrights
in England, Holland, and Portugal, in their building
Ships as aforesaid.
2. Supposing that a Ship commonly reckoned 150 Tun,
be a fit size to sail in round the World: And that the
just strength of every part of the same were certainly
known and determined, 'tis desired to know of what size
and scantling each correspondent Timber must be of, to
make a greater or lesser Vessel of equal strength, and
to compute the difference of strength between greater and
smaller Vessels of the common Built.
3. How to make practical Equations between the
strength of Timber and Irons, and between Trenailes and
Bolts, c.
4. Out of what Data arises the knowledge of the
strength of Knees, Bolts and Nails.
5. That vast Ships of 1500 Tuns, do require a different
way of Carpentry of Masts and Yards than what is used,
and particularly in no Case a Mast above 30 inches through
and above  the present length, is requisite.


CHAP. V.
1. WHat Alterations in Shipping, the use of the Com|pass
and Guns have produced, and consequently
how to conjecture what was the Shipping of the Ancients
in these Countreys.
2. How the difference of the Materials for Building,
the difference of Trades and Commodities, and the dif|ferences
of defensive and offensive Warfare, doth occasion
differences of Shipping in the several parts of the pre|sent
World.
3. The History of the Improvement of Shipping, sailing
upon a Wind, and Advance of the Shipping Trade for
the last Twenty years, by the Portugals, Genoveses, Eng|lish,
Netherlands, and the inhabitants of Baltick.
4. A Description of several Attempts which have been

made thee last twenty years for the improvement of Ship|ping,
with the respective success and Sailers of each.



The SECOND PART,
Being of
NAVAL POLICY.

CHAP. I.
THat the King of England, being not only by Right
and Custom Soveraign of the Narrow Seas, but ha|ving
also the best Means and most Concernment to be
more considerable at Sea, than any other Prince or State;
it is therefore his Interest to know and discover as fol|loweth.
1. How many Tunn of Shipping there be in the whole
Comercial World, from 15 to 1500 Tunns, as are able to
cross the Seas, and how many Ships there be of each
Century of times, with the said 15 Centuries.
2. How many Ordnance belong to them, and of what
weight.
3. How many Seamen there are in all, and particular|ly
of such as have served three years at Sea.
4. To have Lists of all the Ships and Seamen belong|ing
to any Ports or places within his own Dominions;
and a ready Method to know where they are at all times,
at home, or at Sea.
5. What Harbours and Ports there are in the whole Com|mercial
World; unto which Shipping does belong, and what

Ships they are able to receive, what are the special ad|vantages
and Inconveniences of each.
6. What is the Wages and Rate of Victuals for Seamen in
each state.
7. To have intelligence of all Privateers, Pickeroons,
and Pirates which are abroad at all times, and in a for|wardness
to go forth.
From hence only his Majesty can know how to propor|tion
his Navy, (that is to say) his Navy cannot or need not
consist of more Tunns of Shipping than are Seamen of his
Subjects, and one quarter more; I say, greater it cannot well
be, and it need not be much bigger than of so many Tunns
of Shipping; than any two of his Neighbour States have Man
to Man with preservation of their Trade: And the intelli|gence
last mentioned determins the number and sorts of Ships
which are to be always in readiness. Moreover, the Kings
Navy must be of Ships above 600 Tunns, but need not
have half so many lesser as will suffice in time of Exi|gence,
for such may be hired from Merchants.


CHAP. II.
1. OF the Advantages scituate upon the Sea and Navi|gable
water.
2. Of the benefit of a Shipping Trade in General.
3. Of the Fishing Trade, and how far the Subjects of the
King of England are able to mannage it, and what have
hitherto been the Impediments thereof.
4. Whether it were for the benefit of the Common|wealth,
that Coals were found near London: And that good
Tobacco and Sugars would grow in England, for as much as
a parcel of proper fitting ground of twelve mile square,
would bear as much of these Commodities as do now
come from America.
5. Of what benefit to the World is the Discovery of
new Countries, new Passages, new Mines of Gold, of Silver,
and of the Longitude it self.
6. What increase of Trade doth really signifie and import.
7. The effect of depending upon forraign Countries for
Hemps, Tarr, Masts, Rozin, and Sail-Cloath.
8. Of the whole Expence of a Fleet, how much of that
from forraign Countries, and how much is the Domesticks
in value.
9. The same English men who now work upon exported
Commodities, as woollen Manufactures, Lead, Tinn, c. did
go to Sea in Men of War. Quer. Whether they would not
take as much Commodities by way of Prize, as they now
receive in Exchange for their said Exportations.
10. Of the Decay of Timber in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
with the Causes and Consequences, and Remedies thereof.


CHAP. III.
1. WHether Landmen and not Seamen bred, be fitter
to Command at Sea.
2. Of all the Men in a Fleet of War, how many ought
to be perfect Seamen, how many of five lower degrees, and
how many may be Landmen.
3. How, in what time Land Soldiers, and other Trades|men
of labour may be made Auxiliary Seamen, and how
many such may be requisite in Cases ordinary and extraordi|nary,
and how the said Men may be encouraged and em|ployed
at Land to the publick benefit.
4. Of allowing encouragement to Impotent Seamen,
with the number of them, and how to assist such Sea|men
as are low of employment.




Of NAVAL
OECONOMY or HUSBANDRY.
The Third PART.
HAving determined the number of the Tuns of Ship|ping
of which the whole Navy is to consist, and how
many Ships in number they ought to be; as also how many
of each size and rate, and in what and how ma Harbou
they are to be kept, so as to be ready to put to Sea upon
any Occasion: it remains to set forth how the same may
be done wtth the least Charge, and with the least Expence
of forreign Commodities, to which purpose the following
particulars are to be considered.
1. Forasmuch as a Ship doth commonly Reign about
thirty years, it follows, that the 30th. part of Tunns 
Shipping, of which the whole Navy consists, must be 
built every year, the which may probably cost 15 l. 
Ann. with Gunners, Boatswains, and Carpenters stores.
2. The Charge of the English Navy in ordinary has by
experience amounted to 20 s. per Tunn, per Annum.
3. For charge of maintaining a Man of Warr at Sea, com|pleatly
fitted, victualled, and manned, with the expence, wear,
and tear of all manner of stores, doth amount to 24 l. per Ann.
4. There are Estimates by which Money must be provi|ded
for the use of the Navy, but by good husbandry the
Charge may be defrayed at a more easie Rate; wherefore
we shall in the next place describe Historically the present
way of managing his Majesties Navy in England, and after|wards
make some animadversions upon each of the three
great branches of that Expence, which is Wages, Victuals, and
Stores, subdividing each of them again into several other
branches as the Nature of the thing and Custom requires.
FINIS.







