




George Fox
Digg'd out of his
Burrovves,
Or an Offer of
DISPUTATION
On fourteen Proposalls made this last Summer 1672 (so call'd)
unto G. Fox then present on Rode-Island
in New-England, by R. W.
As also how (G. Fox slily departing) the Disputation went on
being managed three dayes at Newport on Rode-Island, and
one day at Providence, between Iohn Stubs, Iohn Burnet, and
William Edmondson on the one part, and R. W. on the other.
In which many Quotations out of G. Fox Ed. Burrowes Book
in Folio are alleadged.
WITH AN
APENDIX
Of some scores of G. F. his simple lame Answers to his Oppo|sites
in that Book, quoted and replyed to
By R. W. of Providence in N. E.
BOSTON
Printed by Iohn Foster, 1676.




TO
The KINGS MAIESTY
Charles the IId: c.
Whom the King of Heaven long
and eternally Preserve.
Royal Sir,
THE Most High hath adorned you with an High
Birth, with a gallant Temper, and Endowments of
Nature, with Princely Education, and rare Experi|ences
c. The Crown of all, the Sanctifier of
all must be L'esprit de Djeu, or else all that is under the
Sun in fumum abeunt.
Touching this most holy Spirit, and other heavenly Points
in difference between the Protestants and the Quakers, I
present your royal eye with a Lantskip of a Battle fought
this last Summer in your Majestyes New-England, between
some of the eminentest of the Quakers and my self, three
dayes at Newport on Rode-Island, and one at Providence on
the Main in the same Colony.

I am humbly bold to present it to your Royal Hand,
1. That your own precious Soul (infinitely more pre|cious
then thousands of Brittains or Worlds may see the
Grounds and Roots of these Protestant Disquisitions.
2. That your Majesty may see what your New-English
Subjects are doing under the gracious Wing of your won|derfull
Favour to us c
3. Because your Majestyes Name is often mentioned
and concerned in these Concertations.
4. Because it was affirmed by some of my Opposites in
publick, that there were scarce any of their Books came
forth, but the King had one: I thought it some obligation
on me, to present the Protestant Truth (thus publickly and
solemnly asserted) more justly then my Popish and Ar|minian
Opposites to offend your Royal eyes with Smoak out
of the Deep Pit.
Gracious Sir, I know your precious Spirits and Minutes
are exhausted in managing your Warrs abroad, and in
preserving your Dominions in Peace at home; I cannot
therefore hope for one glance of your eye upon any more
then this poor Epistle.
Charles the Great was one of the greatest Princes of that
name in the world. And Charles the fifth (both Emper|ours)
had his wonderfull Trick at Helm also; but both (and
all) turn into the Cabbin Pit of Rottenness. Charles the
5th. in his 58th. year, Charles the Great in his 72d. year:
But were every drop of water between your Old-England
and New, a million of years, yet Mors ultima linea, and tis
but Momentum unde pendet Eternitas.
By Gods most wise and righteous Permission, the Pope
and Quakers pretend their Enthusiasmes and Infallibilityes: I
know and have detected much of both of their Impostures,

and I beseech him who is the eternal Pater Luminum, to
preserve your Royal Spirit from both their Cheatings, that
is from the Oracles of Hell in their mouths.
And I humbly importune your Majestyes continued Grace
and Patience to this poor New-England, which (though a
miserable, cold, howling Wilderness, yet L'eternel hath
made it his Glory, your Majestyes Glory, and a Glory to the
English and Protestant Name: and if the most High please,
Old and New-England may flourish when the Pope and
Mahomet, Rome and Constantinople are in their Ashes.
Providence in N-England,
March 10th. 1672/3.
(ut Vulg,)
Your Majestyes most loyal
and affectionate Orator at
the Throne of Grace.
Roger Williams.



To the People called Quakers.
Friends  Country-men:
1. THe occasion of these Discourses you may see in
the first Page: the 14 Proposals in the second
Page, and the occasion of the Title in the 34.
2. The truth is (as Edmund Burroughs, and
others of you say of your selves) from my Childhood (now
above three-score years) the Father of Lights and Mercies
toucht my Soul with a love to himself, to his only be|gotten,
the true Lord Iesus, to his Holy Scriptures, c. his
infinite Wisdome hath given me to see the City, Court
and Country, the Schools and Universities of my Native
Country, to converse with some Turks, Iews, Papists, and
all sorts of Protestants, and by Books to know the Affairs
and Religions of all Countries, c.
3. My Conclusion is, that be of good chear thy sins are
forgiven thee, Mat. 9. is one of the joyfullest sounds that
ever came to poor sinful Ears: how to obtain this sound
from the mouth of that Mediatour that spoke it, is the
great dispute beween the Protestants and the bloody Whore
of Rome: this is also the great point between the true Pro|testants
and your selves: as also (in order to this) about
what man is (to the utmost) now by nature, what the true
Lord Jesus Christ is, and all other controversies (discussed
in this Book, not unworthy this your serious weighing (as
Mary did) in the hearts and spirits, c.
4. Bear with me while I say, that as the Iesuites pre|tend
to deifie the Pope, but it is known, the end is to deifie
themselves under the cloak of the Popes Name: so Satan

pretends to exalt and deifie you, under the name of God,
and Christ, and Spirit, c. but his end is as Peter tells us, to
exalt himself, and fill his hellish Paunch with Souls.
5. I endeavoured, but could not procure a Short-hand
writer, so that I am forced to recollect Transactions from
my Memory, and I believe (as in the holy presence of
God) that I have not failed to present the true substance
of passages without advantage to my self, or disadvantage
to my Opposites.
6. I have used some sharp Scripture Language, but not
(as commonly you do) passionately and unjustly: I some|times
call you Foxians, (as Nicolaitans from Nicholas) be|cause
G. Fox hath appeared the greatest Writer, and the
greatest Preacher amongst you, and the most deified that I
can hear of, sure it is that here he subtly run for it: he
ordered that my Letters to our Deputy Governour Cap|tain
Cranstone (in which my Proposals to G. F. were, should
not be delivered to the Deputy, until G. F. was some hours
under sayle, that he might say he never saw my Paper,
though it is as clear as noon-day that he knew all matters
by Copies, Letters and Relations, perfectly many dayes
before his departure.
7. My disadvantage (in our Contests (especially at New|port)
were great and many: for though I. Stubs. and I.
Burnet were more civil and ingenious: yet W. Edmondson
was nothing but a bundle of Ignorance, and Boisterousness,
he would speak first end all (though all three were con|stantly
on me at once) no man might speak at all in favour
of my Positions: any might freely speak against them:
they sat in the midst of the Governour  Magistrates (of
their Opinion) and the whole Assembly (of their way) W.
Edmundson (though I. Stubs twice said in publick, that I had
not inter-interrupted them) yet W. Edmundson would fre|quently
and insolently interrupt me: so that I was not only

forced to bear patiently (through Gods only help) but to
suppress my thoughts, which here I have added in some
places. 8. I know that a great weight of your Opinions
and Actings lye upon your believing your selves guided by
the immediate Spirit of God: but I believe that I have
proved that it is no more the holy Spirit of God, that
speaks and acts in you, then it was the true Samuel that
spake such heavenly words in the appearance of Sam.
Mantle amongst a cloud of other witnesses you shall never
perswade Souls (not bewitched) that the holy spirit of God
would perswade your Women and Maidens to appear in
publick (streets  assemblies) stark naked, c. of which I
have spoke more particularly in our disputations. 9. It is
hard to perswade a Fox or a Wolf that he is so, c. or
that he doth Rob or Steal, or Murther; it is hard to per|swade
a man while he dreams that he is in a Dream: yea
though he be a filthy Dreamer as Gods Spirit speaks: In
our Dreams we believe lyes and impossibilities to be true
as that we are many thousand miles of, that we talk with
dead men, c. that we are at Marriages or Burials and are
Kings and Queens. c.
10. All that I can hope for (without Gods wonderfull
mercy) is to give my Testimony in my generation: for (as
Solomon speaks of the Whore) few or none of you return.
Yet I know Gods foundation is sure he knows who are his
amongst you as amongst other perswasions. I have proved,
and will prove (if God please) that spiritual Pride, that is
Pride about spiritual matters, is the Root and Branch of
your whole Religion, and that the King Eternal, who did
cast out proud Angels out of his Palace, will hardly open
his Gates to proud and scornful Dust and Ashes:
Providence, March 10.
1672/3 (so called)
I am one of your best Friends, R. W.



To those many Learned and Pious Men, whom
G. Fox hath so sillily and scornfully answered
in his Book in Folio
Especially to those whose Names I have been bold to men|tion
in the Narrativt and Apendix,
Mr Richard Baxter, Mr Iohn Owen c.
Sirs,
THrough your sides the Devil by the Clawes of this
wily Fox, hath tore at the heart of the Son of God;
it is no wonder then if he tear at the Heart of his
Love-Letters, and Institutions, and the true Pro|fessors
of his name, who are innumerable in Abrahams Bo|some,
and the rest travelling uprightly thither.
For Brevity sake I was forced to omit many excellent
Passages, selected by Fox out of your Writings  to select
short Sentences of yours unto which he gives short Answers.
As to matters in Difference between yourselves and me, I
willingly omitted them, as knowing that many able and honest
Sea-men in their Observations of this Sun (one picture of
Christ Iesus) differ sometimes in their Reckonings, though
uprightly aiming at, and bound for one Port and Harbour.
Eternally praised be the Father of Lights, and mercyes,
that we are one in that most glorious ever fixed Cynosura
(about whom his true Prophets  Messengers ever have and
doe and shall move: and he holdeth them in his right hand.
I humbly beg of you. 1. That you will more and more
earnestly, candidly and christianly study the things that differ
without reflecting upon Credit, Maintenance, Liberty and Life
it self, remembring who it was that said it; He that loves
his life shall lose it. 2. More and more to study the Prophesies
and the Signs of the Times, You know when it was that sive

Bishops, twenty-two Ministers  almost three hunared other
precious Believers in the true Lord Iesus, were sacrificed in
the Flames, for his ever blessed sake, against that monstrous
Man of Sin and bloudy Whore of Rome. These Foxians
fancy is but a feather to to those high Pico's and Tenariffs, the
Pope and Mahomet whom some of you may live to see flung
into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.
Were it not that the infinite Compassions of Heaven had
made our gracious Sovereign the Breath of our Nostrills, the
fiery Fornace had certainly burnt seven times hotter against
Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah: Surely as for Conscience
sake we ought to obey, so sor Conscience sake we ought to be
Instant and Constant at the throne of Grace for his Royal
Preservation and Salvation.
Prov. March 10, 1672/3.
I am unworthy to be yours R. W.





A Narration of
A CONFERENCE
OR
DISPUTE,
This last August 1672 (so called) in the
Colony of Rode-Iland and Providence, Plantations in
N. ENGLAND, between Roger Williams of Provi|dence
(who Challenged Fox by writing (which fol|lowes)
and all his Friends then met on Rode-Iland,
(and G. Fox withdrawing) Iohn
Stubs, Iohn Burniat, and William
Edmundon (three of their ablest Apos|tles)
on the other, that is, (on the
pretended Quakers) Party.
HAving long heard of the great name of
G. Fox, (a man cried up by the Peo|ple
called Quakers) and having read
his book in Folio (some years since)
against,The Occa|sion of the Disputa|tion.
as I think above six score Books and Papers
(written by pious and able pens against them) and
now this Summer hearing of his coming into these

Parts of N England, and the poor cheated Souls the
Quakers with joy expecting his coming,G Fox his Book in Folio weighed. as the
coming of an Angel of light from Heaven: I read
over his Book afresh (as in the holy presence and
eye of God, (with a single Eye and Heart) and more
clearly finding his Answers so weak and silly, so
Anti-Christian and Blasphemous, and yet so Imperi|ous
and Scornfull, so Cursing and Censorious, [2]
Damning and Reprobating all that bow not down to
their new Upstart Image, my Spirit rose up within
me, and I believe the holy Spirit of God (in answer
to my poor Petitions and Meditations) resolved and
quickened my Spirit to the present Undertake and
Service. And therefore for his most holy Names
sake, and the name of his most holy only begotten,
the true Lord Iesus the God-Man and Mediator
c, And for the honour of the most holy Spirit
of God (so horribly torn in pieces by this foul Spi|rit
of the Quakers) For the vindicating of many of
the precious Truths of the old Christian purity, and
for the sake of so many precious Souls lying slain
and bleeding before me, I made this Offer follow|ing
to G. Fox, and any or all his Followers or As|sociates,
then together at New-port on Rode-Iland.
Tis true G. Fox, was at Providence some few dayes
before, and spake publickly; and it was free for
me publickly to have heard him, and opposed him;
But going the last year to one of their general Assem|blyes
at New-Port,A Spirit of Confusion in the Qua+kers Meet|ings.
and having begun to present to
them some Considerations about the True Christ and
the false, the True Spirit and the False and being cut
of in the midest, by sudden Prayer of one, and the

Singing of another, and then by the Prayer of
another and the sudden dissolving of the Assembly,
I resolved to try another way, and to offer a fair
and full Dispute, according to Ed. Burrowes (and
therein G Foxes) Offer in his large Epistle to Foxes
Book. To this Purpose I drew up my thoughts
into fourteen Propositions; and knowing that New-Port
was the chief Town on Rode-Iland and Provi|dence
on the Main, and that G. Fox had spake at
both places and bewitched many with his Sorceries, I
sent this Paper following to G. Fox at Newport, viz,



TO G. Fox or any other of my Countrey-men
at New-Port who say they are the Apostles
and Messengers of Christ Jesus,My Offer of Disp. on 14 Proposi|tions.
In humble Confi|dence
of the help of the Most High, I offer to
maintain in Publick, against all Comers, these
14 Propositions following, to wit, the first seven
at New-Port, and the other seven at Providence:
For the time When, I refer it to G. Fox and his
Friends at New-port.
Only I desire
1 To have three dayes Notice, before the day
you fix on.
2 That without Interruption (or many speak|ing
at once) the Conference may continue from
Nine in the morning till [3] about four in the
afternoon. and
3 That if either of the seven Propositions be
not finished in one day, the Conference may con|tinue
and goe on some few hours the next day.
4 That either of us Disputing shall have free

uninterrupted liberty to speak (in Answers and
Replyes) as much and as long as wee please, and
then give the Opposite the same Liberty.
That the whole may be managed with that In|genuity
and Humanity, as such an Exercise, by such
Persons in such Conditions, at such a Time, ought to
be managed and performed, the Propositions are
these that follow.
First That the People called Quakers are not true
Quakers according to the holy Scriptures.
2 That the Christ they profess is not the True
Lord Jesus Christ.
3 That the Spirit by which they are acted is not
the Spirit os God.
4 That they doe not own the holy Scriptures.
5 Their Principles and Professions, are full of
Contradictions and Hypocrisies.
6 That their Religion is not only an Heresy in the
matters of Worship, but also in the Doctrines of Re|pentance
Faith. c
7 Their Religion is but a confused mixture of Po|pery,
Armineanisme, Socineanisme, Judaisme c.
8 The People called Quakers (in effect) hold no God,
no Christ, no Spirit, no Angel, no Devil, no Res|urrection,
no Judgment, no Heaven, no Hell, but
what is in man.
9 All that their Religion requires (externall and
internall) to make Converts and Proselites, amounts to
no more than what a Reprobate may easily attain unto,
and perform.
10 That the Popes of Rome doe not swell with, and

exercise a greater Pride, then the Quakers Spirit hath
exprest, and doth aspire unto, although many truly humble
Soules may be captivated amongst them, as may be in
other Religions.
11 The Quakers Religion is more obstructive, and
destructive to the Conversion and Salvation of the
Souls of People, then most of the Religions this day ex|tant
in the world.
12 The Sufferings of the Quakers are no true evi|dence
of the Truth of their Religion.
13 That their many Books and writings are ex|tremely
Poor, Lame, Naked, and sweld up only with
high Titles and words of Boasting and Vapour.
[4] 14. That the Spirit of their Religion tends
mainly,
1 To reduce Persons from Civility to Barbarisme.
3 To an Arbetratry Goverment, and the Dictates
and Decrees of that sudden Spirit that acts them,
3 To a sudden cutting off of People, yea of Kings
and Princes opposing them.
4 To as fiery Persecutions for matters of Religion
and Conscience, as hath been or can be practised by any
Hunters or Persecutors in the world.
Under these forementioned Heads (if the Spirit of
the Quakers dare civilly to Argue) will be opened many
of the Popish, Protestant, Jewish and Quakers Po|sitions,
which cannot here be mentioned, in the Dispute
(if God please) they must be alleadged, and the Exami|nation
left to every persons Conscience, as they will
answer to God, (at their own Perills) in the great day
approaching.
Roger Williams.




THis Paper above-said I sent inclosed in a Let|ter
to my kind friend Capt. Cranston Deputy
Governour of the Colony, that being such a pub|lick
person, he might timely be informed of such
a publick Assembly, and as also might vouchsafe (as
afterwards he carefully did) to afford his Coun|tenance
and Assistance to such Peaceable and Pious
Exercises. But before the Boat went down with
the Letter aforesaid from Providence to Newport,
I sent a Copy of my Positions to a Neighbour I T.
whom I heard was inclining to them.The sirst usage to the Author  his Pro|posals.
He takes a
Copy of them and reads them in their Meeting, be|fore
Iohn Crosman Master of the Boat (one of
them also) who presently the same hour, called me
Blind Sot in the open Street, upbraiding me, how I
durst send my 14 Lyes to such a man as G. Fox
(one of them called him) the eternall Son of God;
so that before my Letter went to Newport (which
Crosman carried) by Letters,  Crosman his and
other Relations,The deceit fulness of Fox Foxians. all was known, even long before
my Letters were opened, or delivered to the Depu|ty
Governour: For in the Iunto of the Foxians at
Newport it was concluded for Infallible Reasons, that
His Holiness G. Fox should withdraw, seeing there
was such a Knot of the Apostles of Christ Jesus
now at Newport together, (especially Iohn Stubs, a
man knowing the Greek and Hebrew) Therefore that
it might appear that such a Nehemiah as he would
not fly, it was [5] agreed that my Letters should
not be delivered to the Deputy Governour, untill G.
Fox was gone; so that it might be truly said, that
he never saw the Paper which I sent unto him. I

had a touch of this Leger de main trick in our Dis|pute
at Newport,one of the subtil Tricks of this subtil Fox viz. to steal hand|somly from the Dispute  yet not to seem at all to run for it. and the Deputy Governour did pub|lickly
testifie that my Letters to him were dated
the 13 of Iuly (which he said he wondered at) but
were not brought to him untill the 26th of the said
Moneth, and untill G. Fox was some hours departed.
Iohn Burniat profest that that he knew noth|ing
of the detaining of the Letters, only he knew
that G. Fox never saw my Paper. G. F. supposed
I would be forced to be as plain in my Proofs as I
was in my Positions. He knew that I was furnished
with Artillery out of his own Writings. He saw
what Consequences would roll down the mountaines
upon him from his proud and Insolent, yet poor
and bald Writings; and how far some of his pres|ent
practices were fallen out with his Writings, and
therefore this old Fox thought it best to run for it,
and leave the work to his Iourney-men and Chap|lains
to perform in his absence for him.
Before I come to Transactions between those
three left behind him [Iohn Stubs, Iohn Burnet,
William Edmundson, and my self] I think fit to tell
the Reader what a preparatory Conflict the most holy
and only Wise Lord,A great private Conflict before my publick. was pleased to exercise me with,
before I came to the Publick.
My former antient Neighbour and friend I. T.
being bit by such infectious Teeth himself, fell on
me, as a man would fall upon a Toad or Serpent, and
sent me this following Letter, notwithstanding he
was but newly bitten by them; and for forty yeares
pretended no small love and respect to God and
me.

He first gave fire upon me in this following Letter.

Providence. 18. 5. 72.
Roger Williams
THy Scurrilous Paper in thy Propositions to
G. Fox.I T. his Letter to me upon the sight of my Propo|sitions to G. Fox. and others (who in scorn are called
Quakers) I advise thee to refrain any further pub|lishing
thereof, and as it is written keep thee
far from an evill matter, thy paper being full
fraught with impudent Lyes and Slanders, with
high flown airy imaginations, which if thou shouldst
live the dayes of Methuselah, thou couldst not per|form.
In Love to thy Person and Name, [6] which
ought to be precious, I advise thee not upon a sud|den
motion (as thou termest us to act by) but from
the spirit of Truth and tender love unto thy soul,
which Spirit by thy writing appears thou art a
stranger to. Consider thy latter end, least with
Cardinal Mazarin,A Note of Card Mazarin thou cry out in a dying hour
Oh my poor Soul, what will become of thee? whi|ther
art thou a going? And said if he should lon|ger
have lived, he would leave the Court, and be a
Capuchin. Time is precious, Repent, Repent,
and mind the manifestation of the Spirit, which is
given to every one to profit withall., and knocks at
the door of thy Heart, for entrance, which being
rejected will be thy Condemation. If thou reject|est
this my faithfull witness for the Lord, I then
say with John in the Revelation, let him that is
filthy be be filthy still, and so remaines.
thy friend and Neighbour I. T.


Having read this Letter, and knowing this my
Neighbour of late to have declined much from his
former profession of Godli, ness, and many wayes by
his Loosness had grieved my Soul, I wondered not
much at his Lines, (though now much unexpected
of him) as knowing the Quakers spirit, to be a
ready Ditch or Gulfe, that readily sucks and draws
into it Soules afrighted easily to skin over their
Sores; Proud and Self-conceited ones, who gladly
close with the Spirit of,Fuel for the Quak|ers Fire of Hell. and Children of Pride, and
Loose fading Professors, of which sort the Quakers
Meetings do much consist, as not being able to walk
close with God, not daring to turn wholy Profane,
or Atheists, and so daube up the breach with untem|pered
Morter (the wild and foolish notions of the
Devils Whisperings, under the cloak of the imme|diate
Inspirations of Gods holy and heavenly Spirit)
Many thoughts I had to pass by his Affronts, and
Insultations: But considering that it was not my
Name (not worth the while) but the most High,
Eternall Majesty; and his most holy Spirit thus fouly
pierced and debased, I return'd this Answer follow|ing.

My ancient loving Friend,My Ans|wer to the fore-going Letter from I. T.
IF you pluck out the eyes of your Understanding,
Profession, and Experience, yet (through the
mercy of the Father of Lights and Mercyes) I
cannot do so with mine. You tell me my Paper to
G. Fox, is Scurrilous, c. full fraught with [7]
Impudent Lyes and Slanders, c. And you say
you write in Love, from the Spirit of Truth, to

which (you say) I am a stranger. You mind mee
of Death c. and bid me Repent, Repent, or else
be filthy still, and be damned.
To which I will not Answer as G. Fox an|swered
H. Wrights Paper with a scornfull and
shamefull Silence. Thus I say in generall, you are
my Witness, that I have long said with David (and
I humbly hope have made it good) I hate and
abhor Lying, but thy Law do I love, for which I
have lost in my time something, c If I had not
loved his Law, and abhorred Lyes, I had long ere
this bowed down against my Conscience,Crying sins in N. Eng|land.
yea I had
fired the Countrey ahout this barbarous Land (as
some in this Colony have done) I had murthered
the Indians, and English by the Powder and
Liquor trade, to which you know I had Tempta|tion,
as much as your self, or any others in N. Eng|land,
but I loved the Name of God.
For your self, if the God of heaven have terri|fied
your Soul, (which I believe is the case of most
Quakers, and of the Devils themselves) and made
it tremble at the Wrath to come, you must not
think to run from his flaming Eyes and Hand (as
Adam) amongst the Thickets;The infin|ite Justice of God must be satisfied. you cannot talk of
Mercy without a way of Satisfaction to an insinite
Justice. (Who payes the Old Score)? It is im|possible
that all created Powers, in Heaven or
Earth, can discharge for one sinfull Thought.
There must be an Equivalent discharge, not by
filthy Rags, and menstruous Clouts of our own
Holiness; which must he thought of before we can
say, We can sin no more against God, than he

can sin against us; as you know who Blasphem|ously
and Horribly maintain it.
In your lines I pray you to Consider,
First. Your Irrationality, for how can you
imagine that a serious Christian, in humble Consi|dence
of the of the mercifull Presence, and gracious
Assistance of Gods holy Spirit,The Bruitish Simplicity of the Quakers Spirit. and of no little Af|sliction
and Suffering, should be so easily stird (as a
Rock with a Feather) by your bare crying Re|pent,
Repent or be Damned, hearken to the
Light within thee? c.
2. Can Reason imagine, that after much strug|ling
within my self, and the Birth of my Propo|sitions
and Resolutions, that I can so suddenly
strike Sail, and bear up, and immediately [8] Stifle,
and Smother, and Burn my Conceptions and Reso|lutions,
as soon as I hear your simple and childish
spirit Countermand me?
3. Is it not unmanly Childish and effeminate,
to cry out a Scurrilous paper, Lyes, Lyes, impu|dent
Slanders .c. and yet give me not one Reason
or one Scripture against any one of them? Is it
not too like the irrationall and brutish Answer of
Humphrey Norton (to a sober and Sollid Paper of
Thomas Olnys sen.) crying out, Lyes, Lyes, 224
Lyes, without any serious Examination of Par|ticulars?
2. I charge your Lines with Impiety,The Man|ifestation of the Spirit. 1. Cor. 12. where
you infer that the most holy Spirit (from that Scrip|ture
[The manifestation of the Spirit .c.) is
poured forth upon every Individuall person in the

World. Did the Oyl most precious and holy,
the holy Ointments and the Blood in the Law,
respect the whole world, or the Messiah the anoint|ed
and his Members (Christians or anointed also)?
Was not 1. Cor. 12. written to the Christians,
or Saints gathered into the Christian slock or Con|gregation
at Corinth, unto whome the Father of
Spirits (as in that place) vouchsafeth those three
heavenly Favours.
1. Gifts which he shews there to be different. 2.
Administrations, Ministeryes or Offices. 3. Op|erations,
Works or Successes, all wrought in the
Saints by the holy Spirit, for the Glory of the same
Father, Lord, and Spirit, the mutual comfort and
edifing of the Saints, yea and for the Convicting
and drawing of other poor Sinners, out of the World
to God.
The Lord mercifully awaken your Souls to the
Love of God, and the Love of his holy Truth, for
the not beleiving of which but the profane playing
with it,Gods won|derful Jus|tice.
the most high and righteous Judge of the
whole world (in a way of Iudicial Sentence) deliv|ers
up poor Souls to believe Lyes, and that so
strongly, as to give their bodyes to be burned for
them.
The Papists catch hold upon a Letter [This is
my body] You as simply as doe the Generalists
catch hold upon the Letter [All, every man that
comes into the world .c.The words All and every one, Con|sidered.]
whereas the Scope
and Connection in all writings, and in all mat|ters
in the world are rationally to be minded. The
Sence and Meaning is in all Speech and Writing,

(in our own and other Languages) the very
Speech or Writing it self. These Words [All
and every one] in our own and other Tongues,
[9] are often used figuratively: it is so all the
Scripture over, and thrice in one verse, Colloss. 1.
28. where Reason cannot imagine that Paul did
literally and individually admonish every man,
teach every man, and present every man that
comes into the world, perfect in Christ Jesus which
could not, cannot possibly be true without another
Sence and Exposition, then the words literally
hold out.
4, Again, you are dangerously bold to say that
you write from the Spirit of Truth, wherein you
Father these your childish Irrationalityes, your
profaning of the holy Majesty of God, his holy
Scriptures and writings, and your rash Judging
and Examining of others, upon the holy Spirit of
God: But I do humbly hope to evince, that the Spi|rit
you boast of, is so far from the Spirit of God,
that it falls beneath the foot of a sober and well
grounded Humanity. At present I only Instance
in that whorish and monstrous act of your Wo|men
and Maidens,The Im|pudency and Un|cleaness of the Qua|kers Spirit. stripping themselves stark naked,
by your Spirit, and with a face of brass coming into
the open streets, and publick Congregations of Men
and Youths. This Spirit (though defended by G.
Fox and others) is such a piece of unnaturall and
bruitish Impudence, that I cannot hear of the like
amongst Jews or Gentiles, yea not amongst the most
Savage, Base and Barbarous of them all (all Cir|cumstances
considered).

5. In the last place I observe your Fickleness
and Inconstancy, what, and how often have I heard
you speak of the Chief of the Quakers now at
Newport? How lately and how much have you
uttered of John Crosman his Cross and froward
spirit (even since he pretended the Spirit) yea how
inhumane and injurious to your self in the way
of his Calling? now all on a sudden (for I heard
but little untill I saw your Lines) you are got up
into the lofty Chair of Judging and ready to say,
God I thank thee I am not as this Publican, I
beseech the Lord to make you savingly to remember
that Word [God resisteth that is sets himself in
Hostility against the Proud, but he giveth Grace
unto the Lowly] so prayes.
your old unworthy Friend R. W.
Providence 18th. 5th. 72.

I had hoped that I had Conjur'd down (at least
for the present) that Waspish spirit, but he flyes out
against me (within a few dayes) in this second Let|ter
following.

10] Providence, 23. 5. 75.
ANcient Friend and Acquaintance,I. T. his second Letter to me. I read thy Note
four dayes after the subscribing it, that so thy
Councellors might throughly be informed of thy continued
Zeal in a dangerous Case. What I write to thee
in Love hath a contrary effect in thy Spirit, being so
prejudiced against us; according to the Proverb, Noth|ing
is well spoken, that is not well taken. Upon

Discourse thou didst say the Quakers could not be
believed on their Words or Writings, having a se|cret
Reservation within them, which gives me to con|clude,
that wee are Iudged before wee Speak. For
my charging upon thee Slanders and Lyes, Examine
but thy Positions, which will make manifest what I
say. As for the Terror which thou speakest of c.
I leave it to thee to consider what thou art about,
least thou be called to Account for it before thou art
ready. As for charging me with Irrationality for not
alleadging Scripture for what I write, yet I alleadged
three Scriptures, one of which thou wrestest, adding
what I wrote not, so that if I had urged more, I should
have had the like Catching: But we both must come to
give an Account of what is done in the Body. In this
my Letter thou mayest see my witnessing against most of
thy Slanderous Propositions. Concerning the Spirits
manifestations, 1 Cor. 12. 13. I freely consent that
they were the Saints by Calling, who are there Con|sidered.
As thou alleadgest the Papists Catch at a word
[This is my body] so we catch at a word [All] and
misapply Scripture; so that I perceive thou hast not a
Guide to thy mind, but utterest thine own Conceiv|ings.
John. 3. 16. The Promise is to them that Be|lieve,
and not to All.
Again, Thou findest fault with my rash judging thee,
and abusing Scripture: Take it to thy self, for the
word Damning, thou foistest in thy self, neither dare I
pass Sentence of Damnation upon any: For Iudgment
belongeth to the Lord, and we must stand or fall to our
own Master. As for my Fickleness and Inconstancy,
Lay thy hand upon thy mouth and Consider thy Wind|ings

and Turnings, in thy Iudgment and Practice, how
thankfull thou wast to J. Burnet, whome thou highly
commendest after thou camest home, and now reproachest
the Truth, which then thou assentest to: and in thy 14
Positions, thou hintest (by thy wicked Surmises) what
the sudden spirit of the Quakers is, to take away the
Lives of Kings, .c. but I told thee in my first Letter,
thou art a stranger to that holy Spirit we act by.
But further thy Malice appeareth in going to one
thou saidst, that [11] if the spirit of the Governour
were to cut of his head, he must doe it. Call to mind
what thou didst to thy peaceable Neighbours seeking
their Blood, crying out Treason, when the Court dis|cerned
thy Blood-thirsty spirit, which thy friends at
Newport were ashamed of, and thy Accusations proved
Invalid. How childish didst thou act to swear against
One, when another told thee of somewhat spoken to allay
thy fury against William Harris? Call to mind thy
Books written, and see thy Fickleness, wanting a Guid
to thy mind, being for and against Persecution. Thou
chargest me to have gotten into the Chair of Iudging:
thy two Scripts I return upon thy self, Physitian heal
thy self. The Wisdom of man puffeth up; but the
Wisdom of God humbleth, that God may be all in all.
I desire thee to look back to thy Lines, and where thou
mentionest the Satisfaction of infinite Justice: who
payes the old score?The high Opinion G Fox his Followers have of him yet he saild  run for it. .c. Also to consider my Irra|tionality,
that thy great Education, great Search .c.
as also thy great Travels and Struglings to bring forth
thy Positions, all being in thine own will, and in the
Apostacy wherin the great Whore hath made all Na|tions
drunk with her Fornications, which the Lord

will in his Time, consume with the breath of his mouth.
I know thou hast undertaken a great Burthen in Chal|lenging
G. Fox to answer thy Positions; I wish thee
to provide thy Armour of Proof, as Golias that de|fied
the Army of Israel. G. Fox is furnished with that
Armour that thou hast no skill to make use of; having
also the Sword of the Spirit to cut down all thy airy
Imaginations: Therefore cease from further troubling
thee: a Word to the Wise is Sufficient, if thou haue a
heart to make use of it.
thy Friend and Neigbour, I. T.


To this Second Letter I Replied in this following.
NEighbour, in this your second Letter (misdated
as well as mine) you pass by many Particulars
which I wrote concerning G. Fox, Hump. Norton,
your self, and the stripping your Women Stark na|ked
in publick, c. you insist upon my Irrationall
dealing.
2. For your charging my Positions to be Lyes,
and Impudent Slanders, without giving me one
Scripture or Reason to prove them so;Unreason|able kind of Reason|ing.
and here you
say [For my charging upon thee Lyes and Slanders,
examine but thy Positions, which will make manifest
what I say] But is this any more Rationall or Man|like?
or is it not bruitish to say, you are a Lyar be|cause
you are a Lyar; [12] Or you are a Lyar
because you say these Positions are true, and offer to
prove them. It is a Man-like spirit to lead a Beast
with an Halter, but a Man with Reason; but to lead
or drive a Man with an Halter or Cudgel, and not

with a Reason, (in Naturalls and Rationalls, most of
all in Spirittalls) is not the Spirit of God nor of
Humanity: For what will my Chargings, and Cen|sures
and Clamors, and Cursings, and Damnings
effect and beget upon a rationall Soul, without a
proof of Reason, but an Opinion of my wicked
false bruitish and irrationall spirit?
3. Tis true in your Exhortation to me, you bid
me hearken to the Manifestation of the Spirit which
is given to every man c. This I acknowledg
Scripture. You say I wrested and added to an other
Scripture, but you mention it not, so I am in the
dark what you mean. And for this of the Mani|festation
of the Spirit, your self now consent to me,
that it was spoken to the Saints or Christians at
Corinth, and therefore I spake true in saying, that
as to my Positions (by you call'd Impudent Lyes and
Slanders) you gave me not then, nor now any one
Scripture or Reason to prove any one of my Positions
to be so.
4. As to Iohn Burnet, I said before him and
afterwards, that he delivered many Truths: yet
withall,I can give many In|stances of their abus|ing the Ordinance and Name of the Spirit of Prayer for a sudden Silencing of their Opposites. I then at the same time (in their Publick
Assembly at Newport) I told them, that it lay upon
them to manifest to their own Souls and others, 1.
That their Christ was true 2. That their Spirit
was Gods, and the rather because they were charged
with denying the Institutions of Christ Iesus, and
with the setting up of many Will-worships, as
Preaching of Women c. And I went on purpose
to Discourse of these matters (this being the time
of their Generall Assembly, and a great Concourse) I

was stopt by the sudden praying of the Governour's
Wife, who also told me of her asking her husband
at home (meaning Christ which I had toucht upon)
I rose up and said, if a man had so alleadged, I
would have answered him: But I would not
Countenance so much the violation of Gods Or|der
in making a Reply to a Woman in Publick:
Hereupon I. Nicols stood up and said [In Christ
Iesus neither male or female c.] I was Replying to
him and to I. Burnets Speech also concerning their
Spirit, but I was stopt by Iohn Burnets sudden fall|ing
to Prayer, and dismissing the Assembly. I re|solved
(with Gods help) to be Patient and Civill,
and so I ceased, not seing a willingness in them for
me to proceed; which experience made me not to
trouble [13] G. Fox and the Assembly at Providence,
but rather to make a fair and Solemn offer of Dis|pute
about these matters: so that it is notorioufly
false, that I Owned or Countenanced any of their
Opinions.
5 You tell me of my foisting in that word
Damning, and I tell you that those words of Con|demnation
and Damnation are all one in your Greek
and Latine and English and other Languages: So
that in your telling me if I hearken not to you, it
will be my Condemnation, you (all one) tell mee it
will be my Damnation.
There are two Damnations, one which all Man|kind
is under, (He that believeth not is condemned
already) the other, that finall Sentence [Goe ye
Cursed] my Charity bids judge that you meant not
the latter: But my Knowledg tells me amongst

Iews and Turks, Papists and Protestants and Pagans
(with all of which I have conversed) I never met
with such a Judging Censuring Reviling spirit as is
the spirit of the Quakers.
6. As to my saying in my 14th Position, that
the spirit of the Quakers tends to a sudden Cutting
off of people, yea Kings and Princes: It lyes upon
me to prove it, and you do only upbraid me with
it but offer no disproof, nor can you or any other
evade it, when the Roots of Affairs and Actions are
dig'd up and examined.
7. Next you cry out against my Blood-thirsty
spirit in William Harris his Case: and I answer
that it is not the sign nor the part of Loyall and
gratefull subjects having received such wonderfull
Favours and Priviledges from so mighty a Mon|arch,
so to Slight and damn, to Null and make void
such Royall Grace and Favour.W. Harris his late Case of de|nying that the King hath pow|er to dis|pence with his Sub|jects in Religious matters. Is it not high and
monstrous abominable Presumption for any man to
quarrel with Soveraign Majesty for granting Favour
and Mercy to the Souls and Bodyes of their Sub|jects
(which he ought to doe, even in Conscience to
God) and for dispensing with Laws made for Super|stitions
and Oppressions. I think you have been an
Officer your self in a Corporation in England: I
question how you durst then (or durst now) omit
to take Cognizance of such Actings, against your
Corporations safety, and the Honour and royall su|pream
Authority of his Majesty.
I was in place and ingaged more than others to
maintain the righteous splendor of the Kings Crown
and Majesty and Prerogative, and the Colonyes safety

peace and Liberty, and yet I acted not without the
Counsel and Concurrence of all the rest of the
14] Magistrates who did no more but what be|longed
to our Duty and Alleagiance as faithfull
Officers to his Majesty and this Colony under him:
nor did we any more then Necessity and common
Prudence compeld us to, for who knoweth what
after Reckonings may befall us? Did not W. Har|ris
(when in place) more than justifie us, by judg|ing
himself bound to hurry your self, and about
twenty more to Newport, to answer for Contempt
of the Kings Authority, though but in an acci|dentall,
peaceable, and (by his Covetous violence)
occasioned Meeting. Was not Mr Clark (though
favourable to W. H.) so amazed at W. Harris his
desperate Presumptions, that he readily acted with
us in Examination and Commitment? Yea did not
W. Harris (upon the point) Confess that we could
not but Commit him, and therefore provided be|forehand
his Bedding, and other Conveniences for
a Prison?
8. It is not true that either in Word or Writing
I cryed out Treason against him. But it is notori|ously
known, that he and his Complices lay in Wait,
and at Catch at every word as Foxes and Lyons for
Mr Greens Blood and mine, as Traitors against King
Charles for our pleading the Colonyes proceeding
against W Harris in the time of the Parliament,
and Oliver Cromwell.
Oh Friend, whither will thy poor Soul next be
hurried?His Majes|tyes Decla|ration against W. Haris his presump|tious Attempt Is not the Gap and Gate now left open
for W. Harris or any man to Dispute openly against

the Kings Prerogative, and tell him that he knowes
not, nor his Councill nor Iudges the Laws? that he
cannot dispence with penall Laws on the Consciences
of his Subjects, Papists or Protestants, at Home or
Abroad? But see the Finger of the most High!
the Kings Majesty (as if he knew all our proceedings
against W. Harris his presumptions, debasing the
Kings Power and Prerogative) in the present junc|ture
of these Affairs, sent forth his Royall Declara|tion
to the World, asserting his Supream Power and
Authority in such matters, and by virtue of many
Statutes and Acts of Parliament.
9. In the last place, that your self and others
may admire your new spirit, how much, and how
often, and how long hath your own Mouth and
Hand (and Capt. Fenner and diverse with you) de|clared
and remonstranced to the Generall Assembly
against W. Harris (which Assembly therefore fined
him and outed him) as the restless Fire-brand of
Town and Colony and who hath with all his power
now kindled and blown this Fire between [15] Con|ecticut
Colony and our selves. Yet now in your, and
the Quakers bosom, must W. Harris be hug'd, as
an innocent and peaceable Soul, and the Kings faith|full
Officers reproached and threatned as Blood|thirsty
and cruel Oppressors.
10. You bid me mind my Books, and my being
for and against Persecution: But through Gods
mercy I can look at them with humble Thanksgiv|ing
and peace, without any recoiling thought to
Persecution (as you falsly intimate) from them.
11. As to G. Fox his Armour, Sword, and Cut|tings

with which you threaten me; I desire to
think as low of my self, .c. as you or G. Fox can
think high of himself. It is infinite mercy that I
live, and as a Living Dog may wait for Crums of
mercy, clearly to See, dearly to Love, uprightly
to Follow, and constantly to Maintain the eternall
Crown and Glory of the true Lord Iesus Christ, and
his most holy Spirit and Scriptures, with whose
gracious Assistanee I hope to prove that the Quakers
spirit, and Christ have no Communion.
Roger Williams.

THe Ingenious and upright Reader might now
well suppose that the Contest were over: but
it is not the Light of Truth or Reason or Scripture
or Experience, or the Testimony of the Prudent or
their own Consciences that will satisfie this white
Devill of this pretended Light and Spirit within
them, and therefore must I crave the Readers Pa|tience
while I produce I. T. his third and last Let|ter
to me and my Answer to it.

Neighbour,
COncerning the mistaking the Date of my Letter as
thou writest,I. T His third and last Letter to me. which could not be, seing I sent it
thee the same day I writ it, but thine, I heard of it
some dayes before I received it. As for my passing over
many particulars (which did not concern the matter in
handling) I willingly omitted them, discerning thy sub|til
spirit, in no respect answering by scripture or rea|son
my loving Admonitions to thee: But in thine own
words, is it not bruitish, irrationall, childish to affirm

we are worse then Barbarians, which thy sordid Po|sitions
do hold forth? How childish, yea how foolish
dost thou shew thy self in thy first Position, for G. Fox
to prove what he and all friends disown, and in scorn
thou callest Quakers. And in thy 12th Position dost
affirm, That our Sufferings are no Evidence of the
truth of our Religion, Thou mightest have spar'd thy
paines in bringing [16] forth this Brat,a Whore is as bold in her whore|doms, as a Chast Wise in her Ino|cency.
which is of
thine owne begetting: But we are sure it is an Evi|dence
against thee,  all other of thy Spirit, which
persecute, that they have drunk deep of the Cup of
Fornication, upon whom the Violls of Gods wrath are
powred forth in spirituall Fornications.
How darest thou find fault with me in not alleadging
scripture, nor reason in declaring against thy impious
Charges mentioned in thy railing  impious positions?
Would'st thou have me to take the matter in hand
(which thou challengest G. Fox to answer) to give like
a fool scripture  reason for what thou assignest another
to doe? Oh what Serpent-like spirit dost thou act by,
that dost not own my plain dealing with thee in owning
the scripture  wrestest  foistest in, as I meant not,
nor writ: If thy spirit were reall (as before men thy
words seem to import) thou wouldest not then shew a
smiling Countenance when War is in thine heart, in
witnessing against thy Neighbours secretly, against that
Golden rule, Doe as thou would'st be done by.
Thou countest it open violence for a Woman to speak in
the Church: but if thou knewest what Woman that
should not speake thou would'st have spared me these
lines writing,  have eased thy selfe of thy great
struglings  strivings within thee to bring forth on

Abortive. Thou chargest me in making a great Out|cry
against thy Blood-thirsty spirit, concerning W.
Harris, as though thou didest at no time cry out Treo|son
Treason. Answ. how dost thou shift of as one
that is guilty, and dare not mention the case I writ up|on,
shufling it to be his last imprisonment, which I know
not the ground of, but as I had it related by thee: But
the Circumstances considered, it cannot possibly be par|aleld
(as my Letter declareth) with this last Case of
W. Harris. First, thy taking Oath against my wife
upon an other mans word on purpose to allay thy furious
spirit against W. Harris, he not thinking thou wouldest
have prosecuted against her, as also against sixteen of
thy peaceable neighbours, Can thou deny that at that
Court thou cryed not out Treason Treason, making all
as guilty as W. Harris? Thou sayest I bid thee mind
thy Book written against Persecution, and yet thy self a
Persecutor of thy peaceable Neighbours even unto death.
Answ. How canst thou in peace (through the God of
peace, (as thou sayest) look upon thy wicked Travels to
murther the Innocent as thou didest at Newport, cry|ing
out Treason being President.
Also what I have spoken against W. Harris touch|ing
his firing the Town and Colony, I thought so,
and therefore contended against him, but I never sought
his life,If there were any Colour for any of these hor|rible Out|cryes, I should have heard of them from W. Edmunson who rak'd up all he could against me both in the Dispute at Newport and Provi|dence. note that R. W. Thou sayst [17] thou art not
conscious of any recoyling in thy spirit, so much as in a
thought. Here thou manifest's an impious spirit that
seekes to murther the Innocent: what Fury possesseth
thee to talk of the God of peace  yet retainest a
murtherous mind, not having repented of thy wick|ednesse,
how is thy heart hardned in seeking the lives of

such as thou thy self hast confest to be the Children of
God? Oh murtherous man that hath not any Re|morse
for thy long-liv'd Wickedness, I am sorry for
thee, though thou slight all my writings  counsells, 
take all in the worst sence; yet I beseech thee to con|sider
thy latter end,  my desire for thee is that the
Lord would awaken thy Soul  give thee Repentance
unto life.
In the last place thou writest how highly I esteem of
G. Fox. and thou desirest to think as low of thy self:
How will this agree with thy boasting of great Edu|cation,
great Experiences, great struglings and striv|ings
within to bring out thy Positions and Conclusions,
which all my loving Testimonyes against (as issuing from
a diabolicall spirit) did no more take place with, then a
Feather against a Rock. Call to mind the preaching
of Jonas to Ninive, yet forty dayes and Ninive shall
be destroyed (a short speech) yet they repented and the
Lord pardoned: And so I desire thou mayest repent and
find mercy with the God of mercy.
Thy Neighbour I. T.

THus Reader it pleased the Infinite Wisdom of
the most holy and only Wise, to pierce through
my heart with the thrusts and stabs of a of a foul|mouth'd
slanderous spirit, by the hands of long pro|fessed
friends and lovers, yet pretending the name
of God and of Scripture, as wel as my self. How
doth it behoove us then to make sure that we can
in truth say as Ieremiah, Lam. 3. Thou art my por|tion
saith my Soul O Lord; Thou and none else,
Thou alone without Health, Strength, Beauty, Hon|our,

Lands, Goods, Friends, .c. How should we
make sure that with Thomas, we may say unto the
Lord Jesus, my Lord and my God? for whose sake
we ought joyfully to bear what false Christs, false
spirits and their Souldiers can dart from Earth or
Hell against us.

My Answer was as followeth.
My Ans|wer to I T. his 3d Assault up|on me.
MY ancient Friend, it pleaseth the most High
to give to all mankind (his Children also and
them especially) many bitter Cups, and that often|times
by the hands of dear friends and [18] dear
Relations, that we might fall more in love with
himself then ever who isinfinitely more sweet, and
even Holiness and Power and Wisdom and Love
it self.
Your Lines (in this your third Fury against me)
being full of Bitterness in themselves, are more bit|ter
to my Spirit upon diverse accounts. But the
most High and only Wise will have it so, and your
judgment and Conscience (and mine) will have it
so, yet that will not acquit us, we both say we must
come to another Barr, and there stand or fall eter|nally.
In this, First. You tell me you willingly omit|ted
the Particulars I mentioned as not concerning
the matters in handling:A deceit|full way of Answ. I am not of your mind,
it is an Easie yet a Suspicious way of answering, and
implyes not only unwillingness, but a willing Ignor|ance
and Guilt also: For is it not concerning the
matter in hand (especially when so personally pro|voked)

to vindicate our selves and friends, our
Teachers and Apostles, our Spirits and Religion
also?
2. Next you blame my subtle spirit, for not
answering by Scripture or Reason your loving Ad|monitions:
I gave you my Reason, shewing how
simple it was for you to give fire upon me, and tell
me my Paper was Scurrilous, full fraught with im|pudent
Lyes and Slanders, and yet give me not one
Scripture nor Reason to prove any of them to be
so. 2. I shewed you how irrationall it was for
you to think, that I should so suddenly renounce
my understanding and Conscience and Positions upon
the sudden sound of your Outcry Repent, Repent.
3. You tell me it is childish,The hor|rid Naked|ness of the Q Women shews the worse then barbarous nakedness of their Spirits. bruitish and irra|tionall,
to say that you are worse then Barbarians:
Answ. I said not so in generall, you and all the
world ought to abhor the particular case, viz. the
stripping Naked of your Women and Maidens; a
case worse then Savage and Barbarous, only prac|tised
by the Bruites, and sometimes by Indians, and
Whores in their drink, when all Modesty and Rea|son
is overwhelmed with more then common
Drunkenness. Who can but abhor to think of
such whorish and monstrous Immodesty, such an
hellish Incentive to filthy Lusts, and that under the
most holy name of the Spirit of God.
4. As to my first Position, you now tell me that
it is childish and foolish for G. Fox to prove (I sup|pose
you mean,the name for me to desire G. Fox to prove)
what he and all friends disown,Quakers. and thou in scorn
callest Quakers: Answ. I know the Quakers

say [19] that name is given them in scorn, and
yet we also know it it hath its denomination from
those great bodily Shakings which have been be|lieved
to have come in mightily upon them by the
power of Devillish spirits (for many Reasons of
which afterward) However G. Fox in 370th. page
of his Book in Folio writes thus in the title of each
page [The Quakers answer. The Quakers Answer] I
know what may be said; and I know may be said
and justly to that excuse, and what shall be said in
the Dispute following.
5. As to my 12th. Position, of Suffering of the
Quakers,The Qua|kers Suffer|ings. and you say it is a Brat of mine own, and
that is an evidence against me, and all os my Per|secuting
Spirit. Answ. I shall (by Gods assistance
prove that you doe make it an Evidence of your
Religion, and then it must be your one Brat and
Bastard.
As to my persecuting spirit, the most High hath
been a holy witness to my Travels and losses and haz|ards
and other sufferings, in my vindicating and pro|curing
Soul-liberty: and I humbly hope in his mercy,
he will preserve me from being like many Quakers,
fouly fallen from their former Christan Religion
6. You say, How darest thou blame me for not
giving Scripture or Reason against thy railing and
impious Positions, when thou challengest and assignest
another to doe it G. Fox, .c. Answ. I only blamed
I. T. for being so fierce and furious, so hot and
hasty in crying out a scurrilous Paper fraught with
lyes and impudent slanders, and yet gave me not one
Scripture or Reason against any one of them: com|mon

Modesty and humane Sobriety would have
taught a little Patience, till G. Fox had answered,
or untill you had answered something of Scripture
or Reason your self.
7. Nextly you tell me of my Serpent-like spirit
in witnessing against my neighbour secretly: To
which I lay before the most High, I know not
what you intend 2. I know it not to be any
Crime (much less a serpent-like spirit as your rail|ing
pen phrases it) to give a true testimony, and wit|ness
in private and publick, even against the highest
and dearest, in the matters of God and Truth,
which ought to be only High and only Dear
unto us.
8. As to Womens preachingWomens Preaching. in the Church, you
tell me that I know not what that Woman is, Answ.
I know the allegoricall Interpretations given of
both those Scriptures, to the Corinths and Timothy,
But where the holy Scripture is plain, and agrees
20] even with Nature it self; where the holy Spirit
of God gives Reasons why Scripture should be fo
expounded (which is an extraordinary signification
of Gods soveraign will and pleasure) where else one
part must be Literall and an other part Allegoricall,
(which is most improper and not suiting to the
Majesty and Purity of Gods Spirit) what can be
soberly in the fear of God and with any sober rea|son
collected, but that the most High, the God of
Order (and all Order and Wisdom it self) is pleased
there to set down the Order of his Worship in the
Christian Congregations.
9. Concerning W Harris you tell me I shift

of the matter, for you meant not W Harris his last
Imprisonment: You prove it by my taking Oath
against your Wife upon an other mans word on
purpose to allay my furious spirit against W Har|ris.
These are your words, which may be taken
three wayes, but neither of them can I call to
mind: God knowes I truly desire to See, Lament
and forsake every Idle word or thought, which my
soul may be satisfied is so: for I dare not goe be|yond
(as you proudly doe) that Direction of the
Lord Iesus, dayly to cry [Forgive us our Trespasses]
I dare most confidently deny that simple Charge,
viz. that I should cry out Treason Treason, against
your Wife and others, labouring to bring them in|to
the same guilt with W. Harris. whose facts and
courses others (of no small Authority and Prudence
amongst us, with whome I advised) saw to be des|perate
high Treason against the Laws of our
Mother England, and of this Colony also. When
W Harris, sent his writings or Books to the Main
and to the Iland, against all Earthly Powers, Par|liaments,
Laws, Charters, Magistrates, Prisons, Pun|ishments,
Rates,W Harris his former practices against all Goverment but that of Saints as the Qua|kers now speak. yea and against all Kings, and
Princes, under that Notion that the People should
shortly cry out, no lords no masters; and had in open
Court protested, (before the whole Colony assem|bled)
that he would maintain his Writings with
his Blood. Was it my Fury (as you call it) or was
it not Honesty and Duty to God and the Colony and
the higher Powers then in England to act faithfully
and impartially in the place wherein I then stood
Centinell?

And it is not true that I sought his life as you
upbraid me, much less theirs, who purposely (as
the most high God is witness) were presented, that
some prudent course might be taken by the Court
for the preventing of their greater danger, and the
Colonyes also. By your reason the Kings Majesty,
his Iudges (yea all Iudges) [21] yea the King him|self,
yea the most High, and King of Kings shall be
condemned as Blood-thirsty, bloody seekers of the
lives (though of high handed wilfull and dangerous
Transgressors) as though Iustice and Mercy, true
Pitty and just Severity might not harmonize, and
make up the blessed concord of Peace together.
10. You mind me again of my Books against
Persecution, and yet my self a Persecutor of my
peacable Neighbours to the Death, murthering the
innocent, yea that I still retain a Murtherous mind,
and you cry out against me, Oh murtherous Man
.c. To which I say, I am not better than Da|vid,
nor (in this case) are you better than Shimei,
who rak't up Stones and Dirt, and flung them with
Railings at David, crying out Come out thou bloody
Man, and this in the name of the holy Spirit also.
As to W. H. I never appeared In Town or Colony
against him for any private matter (although many
wayes extraordinarily provoked and wronged by
him) but alwayes in Witness (as I humbly appeal
unto God) I say in witnessing against his running
down and destroying the Publick,My Right|eousness as to my deal|ing with W. H. (as at this day) for
his Private Covetous and Contentious Ends.
And for your self,The hor|rible Mur|thering of the Indians by Liquors which the Qu: have notorious|ly prac|tised.
who cry out so much of Blood
and Murther for my being impartiall to God, to the

King and the Countrey: I heartily wish that your
hands were washed from the bloody trade of
Liquours to the Indians, which even the Quakers
have practised, telling the Indians that the Quakers
only know God, and therefore would sell them
Powder and Liquors cheaper, and they would not
mix water with Rhum as others did: so that by
many sudden deaths, what by Consumptions and
Dropsies, the Barbarians have been murthered, hun|dreds,
if not thousands in the whole Countrey, and
more in this Colony than in any part of the Countrey
beside that I have heard of, against which I have
witnessed from Court to Court in vain.
11 You ask me how I can think as low of my
self, as you high of G. Fox, when I boast of Educa|tion
Experience .c.
I answer, I boast as Paul did, who confest him|self
the least of all Saints, and the chiefe of Sin|ners;
and yet reckons up the Priviledges end Fa|vours,
which God had vouchsafed to him, against
the foule Clamours of his malicious and envious
Opposites, the false Apostles.
12. You conclude with advising my Repentance,
and you propose to me the case of Nineve, telling
me that forty dayes is a short Speech.
22] Answ. I humbly beseech the Lord to help
you and me, humbly and faithfully to examine our
true laying of that Foundation of a true Repentance,
which is a totall turning of our Soul or Spirit unto
God; not out of Fear or self ends, as Dissemblers
do; but in Mariage-love with God that it might be
said unto us, thy Maker is thy Husband.

As to your special Hint to me of forty dayes, I
can say it (through infinite mercy) that more than
forty or fifty yeares, I have been acquainted with
Death, and have (not seldom) familiarly discoursed
with the Grave and Pit of Rottenness: I have de|sired
to be ready at a minutes warning, waiting for
a wind to transport me (as Paul speaks) unto Christ
Iesus in Abrahams Bosome which is best of all. I
pray you to know that I believe there is a black
Familiar that haunts the Quakers, it may be he
whispers to you that within forty dayes you shall
be ridd of me except I repent;They were the Dog-dayes when these hot and doged barkings were made at me. he may see into the
crazy temper of my house of Clay. (These Dog-dayes
not to continue and abide a little of that
time) Or God may suffer him by some immediate
Revelation to employ some malicious soul to Mur|ther
me, that this foul Lyar and Murtherer may
extoll and predicate himself in print by your Pens,
that he was a true Prophet, applauding and tri|umphing
in the righteous Judgment of God against
a Blasphemer of your gods and godesses. I believe
that every Hair of mine head, and every Minute of
my Life is in the mercifull hand of the Father of
Spirits. I doe not simply and blasphemously think
as G. F. that my Soul is a piece or part of God;Death and the Resur|rection.
nor can I (as the unbelieving Quakers) slight the
Rising of my body; Steven fell asleep, and so (among
Stones or whatever his holy Wisdom pleaseth) I
humbly hope shall I, and rise again in the Morning.
R. W.
Prouidence, July 30. 1672. (so called)


HItherto (gentle Reader) have been the Skir|mishings
of my Forlorn-Hope; I hasten now to
the relation of the main Battle, for after this my
third Letter and Answer, I heard no more of that
foul and slanderous spirit: I should rejoice to be in|strumentall
to his casting out of my ancient friend
I T. however he pluckt in his horns as G Fox him|self
did, and I have yet heard no further.
Within some few dayes after that our Deputy
Governour had [23] delivered my Paper to them,
the strange Quakers (as was agreed with G. Fox)
came to Providence.The first Interveni|ence at Provi|dence of the Qu. and my self. Iohn Stubs, Iohn Burnet, and
others, and came to my house six or seven together:
their Salutations were (like the meetings of their
dumb spirit) in silence. I bid them welcome .c.
Iohn Stubs began and said, they had received a
Paper from me, and they came to me to tell me,
that they accepted my Offer, and that they had
appointed (according to the liberty given them by
my self in my Paper) the 9th. of the present Au|gust
to be the day at Newport. I told them they
were welcome, and the more welcome because they
brought me tidings of their Resolution: for I longed
for Opportunityes of such Exercises, to which I
thought the most High invited us by our precious
Libertyes .c. I added that my Paper was in the
first place directed to G. Fox: but they suddenly
catcht at my word,G Fox his cunning Departure. and Iohn Burnet told me that
G. Fox was departed before my Letters were opened,
and that G. Fox never saw my Paper (and probably
as afterward in the dispute he spake honestlie not
knowing the Mistery) Iohn Stubs added that my

Paper gave liberty to G. Fox or his friends. I sai
therefore I would not fail (if God pleased) to meet
them at the place, and by nine in the morning, on
the day they had appointed.
They departed (after drink offered and accepted
by some) but the next morning being the first of
the Week I sent them word in writing, that diverse
of our Neighbours were grieved that the Confer|ence
should be carried away from Providence to
Newport wholly,My care of ingaging them to my whole Offer and of discus|sing the latter seven at Provi|dence.
(as some of them had also spoken)
I told them that the accepting of my Proffer ne|cessarily
included the Conference about the latter
seven at Providence: I told them their Consciences
and Credits lay on it, and therefore desired them to
six on a day for the dispute of the latter seven at
Providence before their departure hence. This Pa|per
was delivered to one of their Company in the
room where they were together, but whither on
purpose or (as tis possible) by mistake, they say the
Paper was lost: so receiving no Answer from them,
I late in the evening sent them another writing,
signifiing, that I could not hold my self ingaged to
meet them at Newport about the first seven, with|out
their promise of discussing the latter seven at
Providence. Then they wrote to me that I had
seemed willing, and that they had given notice, and
the Countrey would come in, therefore they
challenged me to appear and prove my malici|ous
[24] and bitter charges against them, and with|all
promised that upon the finishing of the first
seven at Newport, some of them would give me a
meeting a Providence .c. Upon the receipt of

this, I sent them a third writing signifiing that I
rested in their Promise, and therefore (if God
pleased) I would not fail to be with them at the time
and place appointed. And God graciously assisted
me in rowing all day with my old bones so that I
got to Newport toward the Midnight before the
morning appointed.
Then I sent them a fourth Paper (with a Copie
of my first that miscaried as they said) and signi|fied
to them, that it would be convenient to agree
about some Order of Transition, or passing from one
position to another: as also since they were many
and I but One, I presumed their Reason told them
that I expected but One at once, and that if
another desired to speak, the first should hold his
peace; as also I signified that some were scrupulous
of going into the Quakers Meeting-house,Scruples about meeting in the Qua|kers Meet|ing house at Newport and ther|fore
I desired some thoughts about it: they thought
it convenient to send H. Bull to request me to goe
to his house to them; I went; they urged the Ca|paciousness
and Conveniency of their house, and I
told such as scrupled, that it was one thing to
goe into a Iewish Synagogue, or a Popish Chappell to
worship, or countenance their Worships: another
thing to Profess and Contest against them, in which
respect Paul disputed many dayes in the Iewes
Synagogues against them, and I could freelie goe in|to
the Popes Chappel, to dispute against the Pope
and his Worship.
I knew our aged Governour Mr. Nich. Easton
 other Magistrates (of their judgment) would be
there,the way to Conquer.  so the Civill Peace maintained,  I had a

strange assurance given in to my spirit from God in
answer to my poor requests .c. viz, that by Mod|eration
and Patience I should conquer their Immod|erations
and impatiencies, I therefore thought it in
vain to spend time about a Moderatour: Tis true
they gave me no Answer either by Speech, or writ|ing
concerning their coming on me one at once,
but to their seeming great advantage they constantly
fell on me all at once, and one of them William Ed|mundson
with grievous Language and insulting.
When I came into the place aforesaid I found
three able and noted preachers amongst them,The Per|sons dis|puting with me. viz
Iohn Stubs, Iohn Burnet, William Edmunson sitting
together on an high Bench with some of the
Magistrates of their Judgment with them: I had
heard [25] that Iohn Stubs was learned in the He|brew
and the Greek (and I found him so) as for
Iohn Burnet I found him to be of a moderate Spirit,
and a very able Speaker.W Ed|mundson described. The third W. Edmund|son
was newly come (as was said) from Virginia, and
he proved the Chief Speaker, a man not so able nor
so moderate as the other two: For the two first
would speak Argument, and discuss and produce
Scripture: but William Edmundson was very ignor|ant
in the Scripture or any other Learning: He
had been a souldier in the late warres, a stout port|ly
man of a great voice, and fit to make a Braga|docia
(as he did) and a constant exercise meerly of
my Patience: he would often Vapour and preach
long, and when I had patiently waited till the Gust
was over, and began to speak, then would he stop
my mouth with a very unhandsome Clout of a

grievous Interruption: so that sometimes I was forc't
to play the Moderator, and to protest that such
practises were against the sober rules of Civillity
and Humanity. It pleased God to help me with
such Patience to weather them, that Iohn Stubs
openly confest twice,I Stubs his Inge|nuity.
that though some others had
given them some interruptions, yet that I had not
done it.
I took my Seat at the other end of the house
opposite to them,The be|ginning of the Dispute and began telling them that the
most High was my witness, that not out of any pre|judice
against, or disrespect to the persons of the
Quakers (many of whome I knew and did love and
honour) nor any foolish Passion of pride or bold|ness
(for I desired to be sensible of my many de|cayes
of my house of Clay, and other wayes) nor any
earthly or worldly ends I had that occasioned this
trouble to my self and them.
I was first commanded this work from Heaven:The Occa|sion of it.
Why should not this Argument be good for mee
and for others as well as the Quakers? they say their
commands are immediate (for Interpretations are
immediate) but I say they herein suffer Satan to
cheat them; for they say they pray, they fast, they
wait, they listen, they judge of the motions that
arise within them, and so have I done. The great
maker and searcher of all hearts knowes, that none
but his holy Majesty was privy to the Conception of
this business.
1. My end was,My ends. the vindicating his most holy
Name, which my Soul saw was trodden in the dirt
by Sathan clothed with Samuels Mantle, and the

bright garment of an Angel of Light, which once
he was, but pride deceived him.
26] 2. I had in mine eye the vindicating this
Colony for receiving of such persons whome others
would not, we suffer for their sakes, and are ac|counted
their Abettors: that therefore together
with the improvemeut of our Libertyes which the
God of Heaven, and our Kings Majesty have gra|ciously
given us, I might give a publick testimony
against their Opinions in such a way and Exercise,
I judged it incumbent upon my Spirit and Con|science
to doe it (in some regards) more than most
in the Colony. I may also truly say that
3. I had also in mine eye,Nicholas Davis drowned at Newport a little be|fore the Dispute. that this exercise
might occasion some Soul Consideration in many. I
told them that we had a dolefull Alarum and in|struction
lately, we were taught what Salvation and
saving was, in the late death and drowning of a per|son
so known to us (and all N. England) Nicholas
Davis. I told them our case, and the case of all
mankind is his (in Spirituall and Soul matters) Oh a
world for an Oar, a Rope, a Plank. Only it must
be to all of us our work, to try whether our
Saviour our Salvation be reall, and not failing in so
great a Straight.
Some of these blessed ends it hath pleased God
to propagate by this occasion all this Colony over,
and all of us round about have put forth our selves
in Disquisitions and Searchings after the true grounds
of the Christian Religion and Worship.
I had many thoughts of beginning such an exer|cise
with Prayer unto God for his Presence:What Prayer was used. but I

knew I could not joyn with them nor would they
owne my Prayers: I had thoughts (as Eliah among
the Baalites) to have prayed in the singular number:
But some Considerations made my spirit content
with this kind of Petition unto God: For not only
in my Closet and my heart, but publickly before
them all I said, I doe humbly hope and beg of God
the Father of Spirits so to order and direct our Spirits
in these our Agitations, that his holy name may receive
glory, and the Soules of all of us some Soul-profit and
Advantage.
I began with the first Position, which I think W.
Edmunson also read out of the Paper. viz.
That the People called Quakers are not true Quakers
according to the Scriptures.The first Position.
1. I said I knew they did not owne that name
Quakers, as imposed on them by God, or taken up
by themselves,The name Quakers. but given them in scorn and derision,
as G. Fox, Ed. Burrowes (and I had heard Iohn
Stubs who joined with them) declared, and that
27] one Gervace Bennet, a Iustice in Derby first
so called them in the year 1650 And yet I had
cause to judg that the name was given by Iustice
Bennet and others to them from that strange and
uncouth possessing of their bodyes. with quaking
and shaking of their Bodyes even in publick Assem|blyes
and Congregations, which extraordinary mo|tions
I judged to come upon them, not from the
holy Spirit and Power of God, but from the spirit
and power of Sathan for diverse Reasons.
First. Although they pretend that Moses and Da|vid
and Habbacouck and Daniel were Quakers, yet

as to the Christian Profession, and the dayes since
our gallant fore-Fathers in Germany (at Spiers) pro|tested
against the whore of Rome, and from that
Prostestation, by the Papists, they were called in
scorn and wrath the Protesters, or Protestants (about
150 years since) unto this day.The Rise of the word Protestant. I say as to the
Protestant Professors and Confessors, the Quakers
are but a new upstart party or Faction risen up
little above 20 yeares since in the northern parts
of England, Lancashire c. Tis true, tis probable
they are the Offspring of the Grindletonians in the
same Lancashire about two yeares before,The Grin|dletonians. who held
those two grand Points (though many wicked paths
of Doctrine aud Practice were amongst them) viz.
1. That God doth all. 2 They could not sin, taking
it according to the Letter. These Grindletonians
were the Offspring of the late Nicholaitans, (as all
of them are in truth justly so called) from Henery
Nichols who put forth his Books of the same Poi|son
in K. Iames his time, (which long since I read)
and were confuted by many, and by Mr Ainsworth
and Mr Robinson, precious and powerfull Witnesses
of Christ Jesus. H. Nichols aud his Nicholaitans
were the Litter of those Spirittualls and Libertines
which spread in Germany and France in Calvin's
dayes;The Lib|ertines.
against whome that heavenly soul, gave his
powerfull and heavenly witness in his Book against
the Libertines. These Libertines Satan raised up
about the Protestant Reformation from the ruines
and rubbish of the old Manicheans and Gnosticks,
and other blind Guides who swarmed in the first
third and fourth Christian Centuryes, until the Pope

swallowed up all the lesser Serpents, and so became
a Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns, forcing
all with fire and Fagot to deny Christ Iesus, and to
martch under Anti-Christ (the Anti-christ the man
of sin) his Colours.
Some of these Particulars I could not then ex|press,
but think [28] fit here to remember the for|mer
dayes, for Information of such as doe desire it.
These People came from Lancashire and other
northern parts to the Southward of England and to
London. I spake with some of their Chief then in
London, I knew it was the old proud spirit which
had appeared in so many foul lyes in their former
deceived and deceiving Leaders, and I was the more
confirmed in my thoughts when I saw their foul
spirit so transport them, not only in lying Doctrines,
but lying Quakings and Tremblings, lying preaching
through the Streets Repent, Repent: and lying and
abominable Nakedness of men and women, untill
their ugly Child and Daughter Rantisme rose from
their Bowels and practised Nakedness of men and
women in the Streets and in their religious Meet|ings,The Rant|ers are but the Quak|ers Daughter
as Adamites: when it is notorioufly known
they fell into many uncleannesses and Adulteryes. To
my face and to the world in print they maintaind,
there were no sins in them: Saying That the Saints
could not sin, and God did all and was all, and they
were as pure as Adam and God himself, this is known
by the Writings extant c.
2. Again I said unto my Antagonists that the
manner of these quakings and shakings were not as of
those quakings and tremblings of David, Moses, and

the Corinths receiving Titus with Trembling, or
the working out Salvation with Fear and Trembling:True Qua|king
for that may many wayes be proved to be the Soul
and Spirit, out of a holy Aw and Dread of the
Majesty of Heaven with whome we have to deal,
who only can pitty and help us in our deplorable
and forlorn conditions: Hee it is who worketh
the Will and the Deed, and therefore with deep
impressions of Aw and Dread we ought to attend
upon all his holy meanes appointed, wherein (as of
old in the Tabernacle and Temple) he hath prom|ised
to come to us. Beside, as it is naturall for the
Body to tremble when the mind doth, as we see in
many Persons in the beginning of a Battle, or go|ing
over a deep Water, or going to suffer Death,
or looking over a high Clift into the sea c. So
when the Bodies of those holy men, or any now
doe so tremble Experience proves it that it is no
ordinary motion, but extraordinary, and upon
extraordinary occasions, and those holy and hea|venly
Occasions, as may be instanced.
But the quaking and shaking motions of the
Quakers (as I shall prove) they proceeded not from
those holie Affections [29] proper to Gods Chil|dren,The horrid shaking of the Qua|kers.
so also they were horrid and monstrous cast|ing
their bodies into horrid and monstrous motions
and Gestures which mine eyes have seen: Besides
the abundance of notorious Instances, what strange
horrid motions are those which Theora Iohn (as he
madly calls himself) and Iohn Toldervy were tost
and tumbled up and down with? which cannot

be imagined to proceed from the holy Spirit of God,
but from Sathan to delude and cheat poor sinners
with.
To this purpose I told them at the first coming
of this spirit to London and Westminster, some Par|liament
men told me that themselves went to one
of the Quakers Meetings about Charing Cross, but
were so affrighted with the shaking of their own
bodies, and of their Chairs and Stooles under them,
that they could never again be got into their As|semblyes.
I added,Satans Counter|feit moti|ons. that such Shakings, Motions, Extasies,
c. were known to be the frequent workings of
Sathan upon his Servants in all ages, Such were
the furious motions of Baals Preists, the motions
of the Possessed mentioned in the Gospells, and other
Historyes, and known to be amongst the Barba|rians,The Qua|kers Answer.
our Neighbours about this time. Iohn Bur|net
and William Edmunson rose up and said that I
had laid many deep and heavy Charges upon the
people of the Lord, which I should never be able
to prove: I had denied them to be Christians,
and so had wronged the good Spirit of God in
them, and their Profession of worshipping God in
the Spirit: Yea I had taken away their being (as
men) out of the World, as a dangerous People to
Nations and Kingdomes Common-weales, yea to
Kings Princes, and so not fit to live amongst
men in the World. These Speeches were often
uttered and enlarged by one or other of them,
and that with Zeal (and Passion in W. Edmunson)
I waited patiently till these Gusts of their angry

Spirit was over, and then I told them I had not
wronged them in a tittle: But by the help of the
most High I would make all good against them,
 toen leave it to every mans and womens Soul
to judge at their own Perill.
About this time Iohn Stubs alleadged that of
Paul, Phil 2. Work out salvatson with fear and
Trembling.
I replyed I in no way opposed the awfull and
most serious impressions of Gods Majesty in all his
appearances  ordinances upon the Soules and Spi|rits,Quaking and Trembling
yea and Bodyes of Gods Children. [30] But
I denied that those places to the Corinthians and
Philippians concerned any such bodily shakings
and quakings as we now debated.
Beside I said if Quaking and Trembling were a
Command and an Ordinance,No Ordi|nance of God and institution of
God to be practised, then was it constantly to be
practised (as the Iewes say of Cain that the Mark
which God set upon him was a constant Trembling)
Or if not alwayes, yet alwayes in Worship, or if not al|wayes
in Worship yet at some certain times. But
the plain truth is,Counter|feit Qua|king and Trembling the Devill will be Gods Ape in
most things: He subornes and substitutes a bastard
Quaking and Trembling of the body in Imitation of
David, Moses c. on purpose to thrust out the true
Fear and Trembling which ought to be constantly
in us, raising up all our Affections and all within
us to a due sence of the Terror of the Lord, the
dreadfulness of our Danger, and the wonder of our
Deliverance (which we can never make too sure)
from sin and wrath to come to all eternity.

I also declared, that the most High and holy one,
was free as he pleased to cause the trembling of the
Soules of his People to over flow with influence upon
their Bodyes also, asin Moses, David, Daniel, Ha|bakkuk,
Paul, c. this is like to be in some extraor|dinary
cases and Conversions or turnings to God, as
Paul's was, and that especially in bringing of great
Sinners or old Sinners unto himself c.
There were some few Speeches, some from the
Governour and his Wife, and some few others that
spake, some in favor of, and some against the Qua|kers,
but neither did my Opposites nor I so far at|tend
them as to engage with them, excepting some
Turnes that were between William Edmunson, and
William Hitchcock (an Inhabitaut of Newport) who
(as others did) witnessed against their upbraiding
me with my age (Old man, Old man c.) as also
for their Interruptions.
Mine own Brother Mr Robert Williams, School-Master
in Newport, desired to speak: nor he nor
others dissenting from them could be permitted,
except they would set their hands to my Paper.A Paper put in of two great Considera|tions
My Brother (unknown to me) put in a paper to
them, which he took the liberty to read, desiring
that two things might be answered by the Quakers.
1. The matter of the true sence of Sin as Sin. 2.
Of the Materiallity of such a Person as the Lord
Iesus Christ, and the materiallity of his [31] Bloud|shedding.
This Paper they took but waved it. W.
Edmunson openly charged me with breach of Cove|nant,
viz. That if any would speak on my behalf,
they should set their hand to my Propositions. Tis

true it was desired by one of them at my house at
Providence, that if any joined with me, they should
subscribe to my Paper.The une|quall Termes of the Qua|kers en|joining Subscrip|tion.
But I answered that I was
alone in the Business, I had not consulted with any
others but the God of heaven himself: so that I
denied vehemently that there was any such agree|ment,
or any colour for it. Besides it was ridiculous
to put either such a Bar and Limit upon any mans
spirit, and least of all upon Gods Spirit, viz, that
no man should desire leave to object or querie c.
except first he would subscribe my Proposalls But
I took the boldness justly to charg them with pal|pable
and gross Partiality viz. that W. Hitchcock
and others, (opposing or dissenting) might not speak,
but W. Harris, W. Dyar or any favouring of them
might speak without exception, their open Par|tiality. because all that
speak for their ptetended light, it must be supposed
that they speak from the Spirit of God himself:
others out of Ignorance, Malice and Envy: this will
appear more afterward.
However, there were these few debates about the
liberty of speech in the Auditory and By-standers,
and the Quakers deniall and enjoining of Subscrip|tion:
yet the most High, Father of Spirits did so
compose all spirits, that it was wonderfull that such
Opposites should goe through such a work and Con|slict
all day untill night, without more Interruptions
and Disturbances.
I was ready and waited to put forth my third
Reason to prove they were not true Christian Qua|kers,
it was from Isai. 66. To this man will I look
that is poor and contrite, and trembleth at my Word. I

told them that G. Fox in his Book all along was so
far from trembling at the Word of God in the holy
Writings or Scriptures, that he could not endure
they should have that name,The Qua|kers evill spirit to|ward the holy Scrip|tures. or be once called the
Word of God, Tis true I know his pretence, that
Christ Iesus is called the Word of God, Rev. 19.
But I know tis true also that he grants the Scrip|tures
to be true, and inspired from the holy Spirit
of God, and to be Gods words, though not his Word.
Well, to pass by the simplicity of the Distinction,
and let us take what he grants, and is it not prodigi|ous
and monstrous Contempt that these holy Words,
this holy Book and Writing of God should be so
undervalued and slighted,The Light of each man in the World above the Scriptures. yea vilified [32] and nul|lified,
if compar'd with their pretended new found
Light within them, which was (say they) before the
Scriptures, and gave forth the Scriptures, and there|fore
was above the Scriptures and gave forth the
Scriptures, and therefore was above the Scriptures,
and therefore is not judged or tried by the Scrip|tures,
but they by it. Yea, and this light must be
in every one of mankind in the whole World:
Hence it was that these holy Writings were so
disused in their own private Readings, in their
Publick Worship,The Pope and the Quakers great affec|tion and ownness against the holy Scrip|tures.
and in their Families.
I told them God was little beholding to the Pope
and the Quakers for their humble Reverence and
great Affection to his holy Letters, Declarations and
Proclamations. The Pope had his Infallibility as
well as they, his immediate Inspirations as well
as they: They both owned, and yet did not owne
the holy Scriptures, the Pope and they only must

interpret Scriptures, they only give the Sence, they
only judge all Controversies: yea they dispence with
the Scriptures, and if they were quite lost and
burn'd and not a Copy of them left in the World,
yet there were no loss but a good Turn, a good Rid|dance,
for then the Pope and the Quakers Infallible
spirit and its immediate Inspirations, would be more
esteemed and set by.
I produced an Instance of one Thurston an Apos|tle
of theirs who came to Providence with extraor|dinary
long hair hanging over his shoulders;An In|stance of a long-haird profane Qua. slight|ing Nature and the Scriptures. It
was so long that an aged Soul (captivated for
present amongst them) the wife of C.S. demanded
of him why he ware it so long since Nature it
self did teach it to be a shame for a man to wear
long Hair, as the holy Scripture affirmed? He would
not say, He car'd not what Nature or the holy
Scriptures said, but he said as much in effect (as she
told me her self, and may with true fear and tremb|ling
still think on it) viz. when that God that bid
me wear it, bids me cut it off, the will I cut it off.
As if he would say, what tell you us of the teach|ings
of Nature (as we see in that monstrous case
of their womens Nakedness) or what tell you me of
Scripture? I have a Light within me that made
that Light, was before it, gave it forth,  is above
it. This mans hair was so offensive and odious,
that meeting of me, and saying, Fear the Lord God,
I could not but answer him in these words, viz.
What God dost thou mean a Ruffians God? alluding to
that of Paul to Titus, They profess to know God, but
in their Works they deny him.

33] I told them the rage of the Devill in all Ages
had been most fierce against these heavenly Records,
in which the most gracious God and King, out of
the infinite depths of his Wisdome and Goodness,
had provided for the Ages and Generations to come
the glorious Appearances of the eternall Invisible
King in the former Generations of mankind from
the Creation of the World, as also the Wonders yet
to be finished till time should be no more, all which
were in the holy Scriptures.
I remembred them of a profane bloudy Wretch
in Ireland who in the late horrid Massacre,An hori|ble In|stance in Ireland against the Holy Scrip|tures. hunting
(among other bloudie Wolves) after the Goods and
Lives of the Protestants, found a Bible, and with
Indignation (the same which I believe is in most
Papists and Quakers) he flung it into the Kennell, and
stampt upon it with his feet saying, A Plague of God
take this Book, this hath caused all the Quarrels
among us.
Whether I spake all these Particulars at one indi|viduall
time or Turn I cannot clearly remember,
only I am certain thus I spake and more.
My Opposites once and again had Turnes of
Speech, but still the only sum of all was, that they
owned the Scripture, but yet the Spirit that gave it
forth was above it, withall they urged that I could
not prove where in the Scripture, the Scripture was
called the Word of God.
I Answered,The Scrip|tures the word of God. That many things were infallibly
so, and true although not in so many Terms and
Words mentioned: But yet there were abundance
of Scriptures wherin the Prophets did expresly say,

Thus saith the Lord, The Word of the Lord came unto
me, and Hebr. 1. The Lord spake diverse wayes, and
at diverse times in the Prophets, but now he hath spoken
by his Son. Sure his Speech is his Word: Hence
the Word of God is the Word preached, as Paul, 2
Thess. 1. Not as the word of man, but as it is indeed
the Word of God, Act. 19 which preaching of the
Word  growing of the word were not compe|tent
and proper expressions to be affirmed of the
perfon of the Lord Iesus; especially I told them I
would use the words of the Lord Iesus when he
fought with the Devil that famous Combate, Math. 4.
No other Weapon did he use against him but 
It is written, and again, It is written, It is written,
here Christ Iesus quotes Dut 8. Man shall not live
by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of
the mouth of God: where Moses and Christ Iesus
affirm [34] that God hath many words, contrary to
what some Quakers hath affirmed to me saying, that
God hath no more words but one, and Christ Iesus here
affirmeth, That every appearance and providence
of God, is a word proceeding out of the mouth of
God, as well as this holy Scripture he alleadged.
Though yet it is true, that Christ Iesus is the Word,
or declared Mind of God, incomparably above all his
spoken or written or providentiall Words and Expres|sions:
He came out of the Bosome of the Eternal
Father, and brought the brightest Revelations of
his eternal God-head Councels, and therefore is
most justly and eminently stiled the Word of God.
I urged that the Word or Words of God were
Figurative Speeches, for properly God had no Mouth,

nor Tongue, nor Lips, nor Heart nor Brains c. but
as our Kings Majesty his Declaration touching Re|ligion,
his royal Charters, his Letters from Breda are
often insisted on and urged by the Quakers as the
word of a King, though his writings contain many
hundred words; so it is with the King of Heaven his
Scriptures and writings c.
I had oft occasion to mention G. Fox and Ed. Bur|rowes
their Book in Folio called The great Mystery
c. upon which W Edmundson reproved me for
speaking of G. Fox and E. Burrowes in scorn and
derision (so his words were) I guest he took me as
if I had scornfully intended G Fox in his Burrowes,The Occa|sion of the Title of this Book.
but I had openly purged my self, protesting before
the Lord, that I had no such thought, yet this Pas|sage
was the occasion of the Title of the Book: For
the finger of Gods most wise and holy Providence
is often wonderfully seen in small, unexpected  in|considerable
Turns and Occasions: In such poor
shells oftimes may be found the Kernels of rich
and usefull Observations. Sure (thought I) Gods
holy Finger is in it, that G. Fox and Ed. Burrowes
(Men so qualified and named) should so notori|oufly
conspire against the true Lord Iesus Christ in
their dark and subtle hellish Contrivings and Imagi|nations.
It was also Gods overruling hand that
VV. Edmundson should so upbraid me, and first put
the Conceit and thought of such a Consideration in|to
me, which I apprehended as Digitus Dei the
finger of God directing and pointing me to so pro|per
and pertinent an use and Application.
Thus the only Wise and Righteous King catcheth

the craftiest Foxes in their own Burrowes, and turns
their proud Surmises  Censures upon their own
Pates. This occasioneth me with Amaze- [35] ment
and Astonishment to cry out O God how deep are thy
Being, thy Attributes, thy Providences, thy Self and
all thy wayes beyond our thoughts and finding out!
To proceed, I had observed and prepared many
Quotations out of G. Fox his Book, but they desired
not to hear them read, as in the following dayes of
Conference they were read by my continual importu|nate
Urgings: I say at first I could not get opor|tunity
to insist upon some Particulars, a Tast whereof
I think now fit to present the Reader with.
In Page 155. of G. Foxes aforesaid Book he brings
in one I Stallam their Opposite saying [To say the
Light in every man gave forth Scripture, and will open
Scripture to us, is palpable Darkness, and contradicts
the Scripture] G. Fox answers, [All be in utter Dark|ness
and know not the Scripture, untill they come to the
Light that every man was in that gave forth Scripture,
for the Light lets them see to what it was spoken, and
Christ the end of them.
The english of that Answer is,G Fox his prodigious Folly and Impiety. That every man,
that is all Mankind Men and Women if they will,
can give forth Scriptures, or write holy Scriptures:
I know they call this Light, God, and Christ, and
Spirit, the Covenant of God, the Life, Truth and
Grace of God.Pertinent Queryes and unan|swerable. I asked them in publick [Since this
Light comes into this World in and with all Man|kind,
whether it comes into them at the Conception,
or at the Birth, or when else?
Whether it was in all Mankind before the coming

and death of Christ Iesus or whether to those that
are in the world since his coming, or both? Whe|ther
it be in the Understanding, Will, Memory, Affec|tions
in any of them severally, or lodgd in all of
them jointly? For it was a prodigious Fable to
imagine such a Sun to shine in every Room of an
house, and yet none of the Inhabitants, nor any that
come into the house discern and see it: Christ Ie|sus
saith, as the mouth is, the heart is, and before a
true turning unto God, we are in darkness, we are
darkness, we hate the light of God and endure not
to see it, but wish there were no God, no Father of
Lights to discover and plague us for our dark
Courses: yet our Hearts are so cunning and cheating
that they will tell us that we have Light and Christ
and God within us, and that we can speak and write
holy Scripture, not remembring that (as Christ Iesus
said of the Temple) our hearts are Dens of Thieves
and (like painted Tombs) full of dead mens bones
and rottenness, [36] untill a second Birth by the
VVord and Spirit of Christ Iesus.
Again, in the same Page G. Fox brings his Oppo|site
saying, [And to say every mans Light is the true
word of Prophecy is an old Fable, no man shall be
able to spell out a syllable of the Gospel by all that is
written in a mans Heart.] This subtle Fox answers,
[The Light that enlightens every man is Christ, and
the sure Word of Prophecy to him he shall find it]
In this Passage who can but see their horrible and
simple profaning and wresting of plain Scripture:
Is it not clear as day to him that is not willingly
blind, that this word of prophecy in Peter, is the

Word which the Prophets spake and writ of Christ
Iesus, unto whome the spirit of God in Peter sends
us, as being a more sure and convincing word to us
then that voice which Peter and Iohn affirmed that
they heard from heaven in the Mount of Transfigu|ration?
But thus profanely and simply do others of
them affirm this Light to be that Prophet which
Moses wrote of, Deut. 18. whereas the holy Spirit in
Stephen Acts 7. applyes expresly that Prophesie to
the person of the Lord Iesus, that God-man in one
person, whome Moses and Stephen preached the
great Messiah, or Christ the anointed Prophet, Priest
and King unto all that receive or believe in him.
Now diverse observing and publickly expressing
how unsuitable it was that three of the ablest
Speakers amongst them should Consult openly and
whisper and utter themselves one immediately after
each other,The tu|multuous spirit of the Quakers in Disputing. and somtimes all together as one man
against me: W. Edmondson answered and excused it
saying, that it was mine own Paper (which he often
produced) which exprest my Offer to make good
my Positions against all Comers: But I replyed
(once and again) That as God is a God of Order,
and doth all things in Number, Weight and Measure,
in most admirable Order and Method, so I had
thought that (according as I writ and spake to
them) they would have had so much Ingenuity to
conceive, that nor I nor any man was so simple as
to offer to Dispute with, to oppose and to answer
twenty or thirty or one hundred at once: But thus
like subtle and impudent Foxes and Iesuites they
pleaded and practised from the beginning of theTis hard to hold the Foxians or any guil|ty disputant to a fair Dispute.

Conference unto the end of the 4th day, resolving to
make use of and (like dying men by drowning) to
catch at any ridiculous Advantage though unchris|tian
and uncivill.
But the truth is, this and many other Discourage|ments
and Disadvantages and Difficultyes the Lord
Iesus graciously and faithfully [37] (For his name
sake) enabled me to cut through, otherwise I saw
the Debate would not have held on so many Hours
as it did Dayes, I knew they had as much mind to
this work (no nor any guilty Soul in the world) as
Bears to be tyed to a stake to be baited; and I must
humbly declare and predicate it (to the praise of
the Father of mercyes, and for the incouragement of
others to be Patient for Christ Iesus sake) that an
hand from heaven caried me through to the end of
each day, and to the end of the whole business.
Sometimes I offered to proceed to an other Point,
but all this first day was spent upon the first Point
of true and false Quakers: For though many upon
a sudden spake as Mr. Coddington Mr. Easton (then
Governour, who spake sharply) VVilliam Dyer,
VVilliam Harris and others against me, yet I
minded closely what my Antagonists vented, who
were placed on high in their Desk against me: Iohn
Stubs and Iohn Burnet were more sober and manly,
but VV. Edmundson (who was the junior of three)
would speak all like Solomons foolish woman, loud
and clamorous, simple and knowing nothing, being in
truth nothing but a flash of wit, a Face of Brass,
and a Tongue set on fire from the Hell of Lyes and
Fury.

One Instance here fell out, for when I urged that
it was not what man had within him already, and
brought into the world with him, that made a true
Quaker, but the Spirit of God accompanying and
blessing the Reading and Hearing of the writings
of God preached and opened: I said the Heart of man
was shut up lockt and barr'd up in willing Ignorance
and darkness until the finger of God in the use of
those and other blessed meanes, pick open in a more
gentle way, or break open by great afflictions and
and terrours the Soul and Spirit of man. I said
that Paul preached the word by the River side, but
the Lord opened the heart of Lydia: and while I
was saying that, It was not Paul nor Pauls Preach|ing
nor the word that he preachedat this word
VV. Edmondson clamour'd out, He speakes Blasphe|my:
But it pleased God to move the heart of our
Deputy-Governour Capt. Cranston justly and seasona|bly
to witness against this Interruption saying,W. Ed|mondsoo justly re|proved by the Depu|ty Gover|nor Capt. Cranston Let
him have liberty to make out his mind: So I proceeded
and said, it may be VV. Edmnndson is offended as
thinking I spoke against the word Christ; but Christ
Iesus knowes that I had no such thought, but of the
words which Paul spake. And I added that it was
not Lydia nor all her Light within her, nor Paul
nor [38] his Preaching, nor the word nor words
that he uttered, but the Finger of Gods Spirit (ac|cording
to Election) that set the word or words of
Paul home, opening her heart, and not every heart,
(shewing what free grace is against the Popish and
Arminian and Foxians exalting of Cursed Nature)
and then it was that she being by the Lord turned,

she turned to attend  apply to her soul the words
which were spoken by Paul, as a poor Rams-horn
made use of in the hand of God.
Toward the end of the day VV. Edmondson fell
into a long Invective, how I had falsly slandered
the People of God,The Fox|ians boast of their Number. not only in this place, but the
whole Body of the People of the Lord called Qua|kers
in all parts: For said he we are a great people,
many thousands in England, many thousands in
London, besides in Virginia and Barbadoes and other
places, and N-England. And he and they said, hast
thou any more to say to make out thy Lyes
against them.
I Answered (as at other times) that the Papists
the common Protestants, the Iews and the Mahumi|tans
and Pagans, c. fited the world with their
Numbers, and yet we jointly opposed them in Relig|ious
matters notwithstanding their innumerable num|bers:
And as for more proof that they were not
True Quakers, and so truly Feariug and Tremb|ling
before God, I told them I would produce an
Argument, that they were so far from being Christ|ians,
that they were a to be exploded and abhorred
of all Mankind, as being fallen beneath the com|mon
temper and nature of the Humanity of men
and women, yea of the Savage and Barbarous in
the world, viz. their stripping stark naked their
Men and Women and Maidens and passing along in
publick places and Streets unto the Assemblyes of
Men and Youths and so were beheld and gazed
upon by them! and this under a pretence of being
stirred up by God as a Service or Worship unto

God, as an act of Christian Religion proceeding from
the immediate moving of the most holy Spirit of
God, most glorious in purity, and purity and holi|ness
it self.
At first W. Edmundson seemed to make strange
of the matter as if it could not be proved that any
of their women should so appear in the Assemblyes
of People.Two of the Foxian women na|ked in New England. I told them the matter of fact was so
notorious that it would be loss of time and Impudence
to question it, being so fouly and openly practised
both in Old and New England.
39] Also I added further, that G. Bishop of Bris|tow,
one of themselves, in the second part of the
Persecutions of New-England, relates in print the
names of two women in N-England that did so
practice: and he complains of N-England Perse|cution
because those women suffered Whipping for
those actions by the Courts and Officers of N-Eng|land.
Iohn Burnet said that the People called Quakers,
were a People known to abhor all Impurity and
Uncleanness and the Appearance of it, and if any
of their women should so practice, they should
condemn it in them, yet nevertheless if it should
please the Lord God to stir up any of his Daughters
so to appear as a Sign and Testimony against the
Nakedness of others, they durst not condemn it.
Iohn Stubs said, that they did condemn all im|modest
Appearances in women, both in Behaviour
and Gestures. But if God stirred them up and com|manded
them to this service to discover the Naked|ness
of others, they could not but acknowledge

Gods hand, and submit to it: And he further added,
that it was a great Cross to a sober womans spirit
so to act, as well as an affliction and suffering to
her body.
Iohn Stubs likewise alleadged the Prophet Isaiah,
(as also did W. E.) and the Sign of the Prophet Eze|kiel:
and Iohn Stubs read the 20th of Isa. where
Isaiah was commanded to goe naked for a Sign to
the Egyptians and Ethyopians, to prophesie and de|nounce
that they also should go naked with their
buttocks uncovered as the words are: and this is
(said they) a proof that the People of the Lord
might be stirred up by God to such actions for Signs
unto others.Isai. 20 dis|cussed touching Nakedness
I Answered, that this was in the dayes of Fig|ures
and Signs, Shadows and Ceremonyes: And
though this was G. Fox his Answer (in his Book
which I had there by me) yet G. Fox throughout
all this his Book in Folio, turns of the Allegations
and Arguments of many of his Opposites with this
Answer, to wit, The Substance is come, the Body is
come, Christ the End of the Law, the End of the
Command, the End of the Scriptures, the End of the
Prophets, and of all Signs and Shadows and Figures.
2. Although it were so threatned that the Ethi|opians
and Egyptians should so goe totally and stark
Naked, and that Isaiah did so, which is much ques|tioned:
yet it is not to be questioned but that the
Egyptians and Ethiopians in their flight, would
cover [40] their Secret parts with the first cloaths
or raggs they could get, as it is no question but the
Prophet Isaiah did.

3. The difference of Nakedness of Mankind and
Womankind is very great in all Nations. The Sex
of Women is more fitted and framed by God for a
Covering, for Retiredness and keeping at home and
for Modesty and Bashfulness; nor do we ever read
that ever God commanded such a thing to Women,
or that ever it came into his heart, or that ever any
Godly Woman did so practice: there is no shadow
or colour of Proof from the holy Scripture, nor from
any Civill and sober People, no nor from the naked
Barbarians themselves, who though they suffer their
Male Children to go naked till about seven years old,
yet cover they their Females from their birth: Tis
true it is said in Brasil and other bruitish places
some Savage bruits go so, but they are Canibals,
Men-eaters, c. and other Barbarians do not so ex|cept
in Drunkenness and Madness.
They still answered, that they would not Coun|tenance
any such Practice but if the Lord God so
commanded his Sons and Daughters it must be
obeyed.
I demanded of them how it should be known
that it was the voice and command of God, the God
of Holiness,The true voice of God, and many false and pre|tended. and not the command of the unclean
spirit? for I told them that under that Cover that
one of them might be so commanded, and sent of
God in such a posture and behaviour amongst men,
why might not ten or twenty, yea all the women
in this present Assembly be so stirred up as it were
by the Spirit of God to the horror and amazement
of the whole Countrey yea of the whole World?
They seemed to me to be Confounded with this

Argumnet and weary to hear of it,Immeiate Inspira|tions and Revela|tions. and not willing to
speak to it: I therefore took occasion my self to say
that it was true in former Dispensations. The Com|mand
of God came to Abraham to kill his own
Child, his son Isaac, and this fact enjoined him did
seem as horrible unnatural and cruel, as this Naked|uess
of the Women unwomanly and unnatural. But,
1. It was in the day and dispensation of such
wonderfull Signs and figurative teachings unto men.
And 2. I said God did furnish them with a Spir|it
of discerning the true dream from the false, the
true voice from the false, the voice of God from the
voice of Sathan: But in our day wherein God had
altered his Dispensations and Revelations which
he [41] used to the Fathers, and had spoken to us
by his Son, and had left his mind both in the old
and new Scriptures or Writings: We have the ex|ample
and President of the Lord Iesus, that is, to
attend to the holy Scriptures only, and to use the
weapon of [It is written it is written] against Sa|thans
immediate Inspirations and temptations.
Here W. Edmondson fel into a great heat against
me and said that I spoke Blasphemy, in saying that
Abraham and the Saints then had a way and Spirit
of discerning the Spirits which we had not, imply|ing
that Gods Spirit was not the same: He added,
that I had kept them long and had proved nothing,
and yet we had not done with the first Position. I
replyed, that I had produced such Grounds as should
never be shaken, and that I presumed did appear to
the Consciences of many, and I heartily desired might
also appear unto their Spirits, Soules, and Consci|ences.

Some of the Auditors spake to this Purpose,
especially W. Hitchcocks who insisted upon the Wa|ter
Baptisme.
And thus by Gods Mercy and Patience the Dis|course
of the first day ended: which very day was
notable and significant as to the created Sun in the
Heavens,The Eclipse of the Sun in the midst of the first dayes Dis|putation.
who in the midst of our Contest was
eclipsed, and hid his Face remarkably, and preached
aloud to us, that although the true Lord Iesus Christ
the Sun of Righteousness do suffer (in his infinite
wisdom and and Patience) false Christs and false
Prophets and Herod and Pontius Pilate, and his ene|mies
of all sorts, Iewes and Gentiles, to cloud his
Face and Glory a little from the World and his own
People, yet he will break forth again in his eternal
brightness, splendor and glory.
When that heavenly young Martyr or Witness
of Iesus Christ William Hunter was burnt at Burnt|wood
in Essex it was a close and gloomy day,A Note of W. Hun|ter burnt in Essex at Burnt wood. but
this gallant young Champion of Iesus Christ cry|ing
out aloud at the stake, Son of God look on me,
Son of God shine upon me! immediately that most
wonderfull Light  Fire of Heaven the Sun tore
the clouds and brake forth and shined gloriously
aud remarkably upon the face of this blessed Wit|ness
at the suffering of the flames of fire, for Iesus
his truth sake against the whorshi Principles of both
the Papists  Quakers: and thus do the holy wri|tings
tel us, that this most glorious light the Sun of
Righteousness, visibly appeared in his glorious and
glorified Form and Shape to the visible eye of his
servant Steven while he patiently suffered for the

true Lord Iesus sake the murthering Stones to lay
him down to sleep.
42] THE second day of our Spiritual Contest 
Battle being come, (being the tenth of the
sixth Moneth August (so called) I heartily wished
that I might rather have kept my Bed then have
gone forth to a whole dayes fresh Dispute with such
(reputed) able and noted Champions. Not that the
most high Lord Iesus whose cause and Name I was
that day to manage, for the next point was about
the true Lord Iesus Christ) not that I say he faild
me in my Resolution to march on against Men and
Devils for his Name sake; nor that he faild me in
my cheerfull Confidence that he would carry me in
the everlasting armes of his Power and Goodness
through that dayes Conflict (as he had done the
day before) but that he was pleased to try me with
more than ordinary Weakness and mouldring of my
house of Clay,My great Indisposed|ness of body to the sec|ond dayes Contest. that so my strength might be in a
great respect immediately from Heaven, consider|ing
my great unfitness for this dayes Service: for
thus it was, My continued loud Speech all the day
before had left an impression of Hoarsness upon
me, and much rain falling that afternoon (after the
Eclipse) I took some wet in my feet that evening,
so that my Hoarseness increased, and all that day
my Head was afflicted with pain, and my voice with
a painfull Hoarsnefs. I lookt up to heaven,Prayer and Patience. and
desired to wait as a Begger at the Gate, and as a Dog
under the table of Mercy, and my Spirit was chear|fully
resolved not to give occasion of Reproaching

the name of God to them who (I knew) waited
and watched for it, nor any Disappointment to such
as were resolved to attend the Meeting.
This day I chose a middle Seat neerer to the Seat
of my three Antagonists I. Stubs, I. Burnet. W.
Edmondson that so I might be heard the better with
less straining of my Voice and Breast.
I began and stood up and said, the holy Scrip|tures
by the Prophet Ieremiah told us of certain
Bow-men,Spiritual Bow men  Gunners some that bent their Tongues as Bowes for
Lyes and complain'd that none were Valiant for
the Truth: I told my opposites that they and I
were met as Bow men, and I could heartily desire
that all our Arrowes might fly one way, to wit in
the defence of the true Lord Iesus Christ against
the false: But since I had charged them in my
second Position to have set up a false Christ in stead
of the true Lord Iesus I should address my self to
make probation of my second Position. Yet before
I enter upon it, I pray the Readers Patience to be
acquainted with some Particulars.
43] First. Though my head was ill, and my voice
 speech hoarse and painfull, yet the Lord gra|ciously
carried me through the the whole day with
little hindrance in my self, and little disadvantage to
the understanding of the Auditors.
Secondly.The second days Contest. This dayes Discourse was but acciden|tal
and additional; for they and I desired to have
finished the the whole first seven Positions in one
day at Newport, only in my paper I added, that if
the whole seven were not finished in one day, the
Conference might continue some few hours the next

day following: on this second day therefore was a
great Assembly, the Governour, Magistrates, Inhabi|tants
and strangers, Men and Women, c. And
this dayes Contest also held unto the Evening.
Thirdly. As I had beg'd of God a Spirit of Pa|tience
to bear all their Censures, Reproachings, Revil|ings,
Vapourings and Insultings, so it pleased God to
exercise me with one notorious though private,though private "Vizt." R. W. Ms. Ann.
That I was Drunk,A black and sence|less Impu|tation. and could not speak that day as I
had done the day before: But my Daughter Hart, at
whose house I lodged, and Iohn Trip sen. who lodged
with me can testifie that I complained of Illness,
and eat but a few spoonfulls of milk with Mr. Trip
at Breakfast: and though my daughter kindly
offered me a Dram for my Illness, but I refused it
knowing it might curdle the milk I had taken, and
so increase my cold and Obstruction:  this the
most holy God knowes, and these Witnesses know
was all I took that morning which might conduce
to that foul Slander, of being so Drunk that I
could not speak plainly that day.
Fourthly.The con|fused spirit of the Qua|kers. This day also I encountred with that
Disadvantage of all the three aforesaid Disputants
at once with all their might fighting for their Idolls
and Images against me: I spake of it, and so did
others again and again;In the copy of this book belonging to the Library of Brown University, are many manuscript erasures, corrections and annotations, in the well-known hand|writing of Roger Williams. They were possihly made with the intention of cor|recting a second edition of the book, if such had proved desirable. These alter|ations will all be noted in this reprint and will be designated as Roger Williams' Manuscript Annotations. But W. Edmundson still bruit|ishly

pleaded that it was mine own Offer to under|take
all Comers: I answered as before, that I took
them to be rational Men, and by all Comers not to un|derstand
ten or twenty or an hundred confusedly at
once, but in a fair and equal way, one after an other:
it was grievous  often exprest by some of the
Audience: But as beore on the first day I resolved
not to lose time, or suffer a Breach: and the Lord
was pleased to make my Yoke easie and Burthen light.
Now to the proof of my second Position which was,The secon Position.
That their Christ was not the true Lord Iesus Christ.
44] Here I prayed their patience to suffer me to
tell them that they were not Christians,Concerning true  false Christs nor Profes|sors
of Christian Religion: They might (with Iewes
 Turks  Papists) profess one God, yet Christians
they could not be: but as the true Lord Jesus told
us, many false Christ and false Prophets should come,
who like Mountebanks instead of true Physitians,Traitors  Rebells against the King eter|na  Murther|ers of him. and
false and counterfeit Money instead of true, should
with Satans power and policy pass up and down and
deceive Peoples and Nations, so I must affirm and
declare that for their parts they had cut of the head
of the Christian Religion, the true Lord Iesus
Christ, and they had set up a false Christ, a false
King, an Usurper in his stead, they had like Michal
put a wooden Image upon a pillow of goats hair in
Davids bed, but David himself was gone, the true
David, the true Lord Jesus Christ was not to be
found amongst them: this I spake expresly and
they did hear me awhile.
My proof was, First. Because the Description and
Character which the holy Scripture gives to the

true Lord Iesus, no way agrees with the Image
which they have set up. I told them that it was
known that the word Christ was a greek word sig|nifiing
anointed,The true Lord Iesus Christ as the word Messiah in the Hebrew
did. I said this true Lord Iesus was one Person
made up of two Natures, God and Man united into
one person, I said one Individual person, whatever
S Fisher blasphemously utters against it. That as
to his humane Nature or being Man, all the Figures
and Ceremonyes, al the Priests and Sacrifices pointed
to him as the great Prophet, the great anointed
King and Governour c.His hu|mane na|ture which G. Fox al night long so barks against.
2. As to his humane Nature and being a man
and One Man Moses and the Prophets wrote of him:
of his Mother a Virgin, of the place of his birth
Bethlehem, of his bringing up at Nazareth: of his
Scourging and other sufferings, drinking Vinegar and
Gall, the piercing of his hands and feet, the numb|ring
of him with Malefactors, the parting of his
Garments and casting Lots, his burying, rising and
Asscending c. and I said all those Prophesies and
many more were exastly, literally, and punctually
fulfilled in and upon that Individual Person: so that
I affirm, there is such an exact material and literal
Harmony between the Prophesies and the historical
Narration of his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection,
c. that he must needs be an Unbeliever, (Iew or
Gentile) that doth not acknowledge the admirable
Consent and Musick of [45] them in a literal and
historical Declaration.
On the other hand I affirmed their Christ was but
half a Christ,The Qua|kers Christ allegorical and meerly Fancy, de|stroying the History. a Light, an Image or Picture or Fancy

of a Christ made up of the Godhead and their flesh,
I said they had set up a Christ within them which
was but an Imagination, an Image, a Christ in the
mystical Notion: but in reality Nothing: For as the
Papists make use of the name Christ, and the Pope
saith he is Christs Vicar and Lieftenant, and he doth
all for Christ, and the Iesuites (soaring above all
Christians) pretend the name Iesus, and yet the Pro|testant
Witnesses have made it to appear that in many
respects the Papists are infinitely against both Christ
and Iesus, and so are not Christians but Antichrist|ians:
so I told them did they, they blew a Trumpet
for Christ Iesus, God in Man, the everlasting Father,
that we are bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh,
that he was so born at Bethlehem and dyed at Ierusa|lem
c, And yet all these fair Flourishes and Col|ours
are but as an English Flag in a Spanish or Dutch
or any other Enemies Bottome: For do not all their
Books declare that Christ is Spiritual, that Christ,
God and Man is within us, that his Birth, his Life, his
Death, his Burial, his Resurrection, his Ascension are
wrought within us, so that like the Oracles of Apollo,
and the Ecchoes of the Iesuites the Quakers say
Christ was born at Bethlehem and dyed at Ierusalem,
but intend in truth and reallity no other birth nor
life nor death c. but what may be extant and
wrought in the heart of man.
To this purpose I told them that Humphrey Nor|tonHum|phrey Nor+ton deales plainly against the Person of Christ
(one that blew the Trumpet and beat up the
Drums in the Name of Christ Iesus as loud as any
of them) expresly writes openly in his Book printed
at London after his return from hence, to wit, Is not

Christ God and is not God a Spirit? you look for a
Christ without you, from what coast or Countrey shall
he come? what Country-man is he? You stand gazing
up in the clouds after a man, but we stand by in white
chiding of you. So that if you fix now really and
truly upon a Man the Manhood and Humanity of
Christ, and that he did consist and still doth of body
and soul (as we doe) then you are gone from, (and
Christopher Houlder in his late Answer to Nathaniell
Morton) are gone from your former Religion,The Equivoca|tion of the Foxians. Tenents
and Principles, or else you are miserably bewilder'd
in your Souls and Consciences, and some of you
most fearfully equivocate, and others must be fear|fully
up to the ears in Boggs  Swamps not know|ing
what to hold between this Christ without, and
the [46] Christ within which you so much charge
upon all except they be Reprobates.
I told them I acknowledged Christ within as
much as any of them,  infinitely more, for I did
confess that every believing soul did bring home
and apply the power and virtue of Christs Birth,Eph 3. 10.
and Life and Death c.The true Union that is etween Christ Ie|sus  Be|lievers. according to that clear
Scripture Eph. 3. 10. That Christ may dwell in your
Hearts by Faith. I said there was a nearer union
between Christ Jesus and a Soul believing on him,
then between a Man and his Wife, and between the
Soul and the Body. That Union is Earthly and dis|solving:
but that between Christ Iesus and the Be|liever,
it is eternal in Gods Decrees and Councells,
it is temporary in Gods calling of his chosen out of
the World, to Repentance  belief in the Mediator

Christ Jesus, and it perpetuated and continues to
Eternity.
I told them that (as the holy Scripture saith)
they preached not Christ Iesus but Themselves, yea
they preached the Lord Iesus to be Themselves:
that whatever were their Pretencse (as the Papists)
of God  Christ  Holiness  Mortification, yet
they held not the Head (as the Scripture speaks) and
if their head be but a painted and an Imaginary
Head,The Qua|kers paint|ed Christ. they are but a painted and Imaginary Body.
Their Sun of Righteousness they talk of is but a
Sun painted upon a Sign or Wall which is not the
true Sun, but the picture of the Sun of Righteous|ness.
I told them they set up this Christ within, oppo|site
to Christ without, as Opposites  Contraryes,
Denying  Destroying one an other: for as it is with
a King and his Palace,Christ winhin and Christ without. if his person be without, his
person at that time is not within, though he be
within by his Right, Authority and Influence: if his
Person be within the Palace at that time it is not
without. But the most clear Truth is though
these subtle Foxians sometimes speak of a Christ
without that dyed at Ierusalem agreeing with the
Christ within, yet they presently declare their mean|ing
to be Mystical: For ask them but these two
Questions,Two Ques|tions to Quakers. and if they make any Answer you will see
the Cheat, the Equivocotion and the Mistery of Ini|quity
in it.
1. Do they not hold the Light within every
man to be All, to doe All and to suffer All within
which the Christ without, Is or Did or suffered
without.

2. Ask them now what is become of this Man,
this person that thus suffered at Ierusalem, and they
are forced to confess he [47] is within, and can give
no other account of him, as they answered to me at
Newport the last day of the Conference.
But to return, I told them what I said I would
prove out of their Writings, and especially out of
G. Fox attested by Ed Burrowes his large Epistle,
and as it was thought by Iohn Stubs present.
Iohn Burnet declared not, (nor any of them)
against what I spake: but said (as said the rest) if G.
Fox have spoken or written any thing that is not
right and truth, we profess not to follow him: and
they were willing I should produce out of G.
Fox his Book what I could that might make for
my proof, viz. That they did not profess the true
Christ.
I said G: Fox had pickt out some particular Lines,
Sayings  Sentences out of the Books and Writings
of his Opposites,G Fx his Book in Fo|lio pro|duced. Page 3. (it is not to be questioned but to
his utmost Advantage, as knowing best how to
Answer what he chose and cull'd out) and since they
were free and willing, I would produce some In|stances:
I took up the Book and read in the 3d. page,
where he brings in his Opposite Samuel Eaton saying
[The Saints have not Christ in the Flesh] G. F. his
Answer is [Contrary to Christ and the Apostles
Doctrine, who said they were of his Flesh, and of his
Bone, and should eat his Flesh, and they that eat his
Flesh have it in them.] Whence I affirmed that
Christ Jesus had such a Body as might be really and
materially in the Saints, and ii was clear that they

were one with the Papists in their Sayings and
Doctrines denying the Flesh, Body and Person of
Christ Jesus: For as the Papists in stead of a Sprit|ual
feeding upon his bloud and Merits,The Pa|pists  Quakers destroy the Person of Christ. they sub|stitute
and bring in a Real, Material and Carnal, in
their horrible and fantastical Transubstantiation; so
do the Quakers professing to eat Christ spiritually,
wholy destroy his material and fleshly being.
I proceeded saying, in the 4th Page G. Fox brings
in the same Opposite saying, The Saints do not see
Christ, the Heavens contain him. And G. F. Ans|wers
And the Apostle saith they sate with Christ
in heavenly places: so he is contrary to the Apostle,
and Christ was in them and walked in them, and God
dwelt in them and Christ in you except you be Repro|bates.
I said that as the Papists were up ridicu|lously
 odiously with Hoc est Corpus meum,The being of Christ in the Heavens This is
my Body c. so they with The Light within you, the
Light that enlightens every man, Christ within you
except you be Reprobates c.
48] For if the Heavens do contain that Man Christ
Jesus bodily, (as they grant in word) saying They
believed he dyed, rose, and ascended: then in that
same sence and respect the Saints cannot now sit
bodily with Christ in heavenly places, and there|fore
to alledge Christ within, and their sitting with
Christ in heavenly places, was but irrational Non|sence
and Jesuitical Equivocation:
The truth is they were gravel'd with these Con|siderations,
and they were willing that G Fox his
book and his Answers should answer for them,The Qua|kers endure not trying but are willingly ignorant. and
although the oppositions of G. Fox his Opposites

were mighty, and G Foxes were meer simple bark|ings
of dogs or foxes compar'd with the rational
and prudential Answers of a man, yet when I be|gan
to open and compare the Assertions of the
Opposite and Fox his answer, they would cry out
(especially W E. like a galled horse winching) Why
dost thou make thy Observations upon G. Fox his
words? G. Fox his words need not thy Expositions, let
G. Fox his words alone they are able to speak for them|selves.
I told them it was a senceless business for me to
alleadge, (and they to be willing I should) G. Fox
his sayings and his Answers, and we should not de|bate
and discuss the Sence, and I make out my Proof
out of G. Fox his words, and his Adversaryes com|par'd
together: when they had spoken they knew
their liberty to take of my Answers with their own,
and leave what was spoke to every ones Conscience
in the sight of God.
They were Obstinately (that is in Greek Hereti|cally)
resolved to avoid this Course,Willing Ignorance. therefore I was
glad to hale my Tacks Bolings close home, and
make my best of a bare Wind and now and then
loof up into the wind, and get liberty to say some|thing
and omit abundance of my Thoughts.
Once I was forced to say to W. Edmondson: Friend
yesterday you quoted the 9 of Nehem. how it pleased
God to send them his good Spirit to guide them: I
pray remember now a word in the 8 of Nehem.Nehem 8 they gave the Sence
They read and gave the Sence and caused the People
to understand the Reading. Without this searching
for the Sence and meaning, the Pith and Marrow of

the holy Scriptures, or any other Scriptures or Wri|tings
we make use of,The Qua|kers non|sensical Spirit. what are our Readings but
the Papists Latine, the reading Ministers, the prat|ling
of Children and Parrets? yet notwithstanding
all that I could say and urge, it is known to all
the Audience the Song was, let G. Fox words alone
to speak for themselves, if thou hast any [49] more to
bring forth let us have them: so that as before I
was forced to wave my Observations and Intentions,
and pass on to new Allegations: Though now I shall
crave liberty to touch and point at (as with the fin|ger)
the Opposites Assertions of Truth and G. Fox his
unsavoury and rotten Answers
In Page 8.Iohn Bun|yan Christs twofold Presence. He brings in Iohn Bunyan c. saying
[The Lord Iesus Christ is afar in his bodily presence]
and G. Fox answers, [And yet he saith the Lord is at
hand, and the Apostle said he was in them and Christ
said he would dwell with them] I here observe and
reply, the holy Scripture abundantly tells us of a
twofold presence of Christ, 1. His bodily visible
Presence, which Iohn Bunyan speaks of and the Qua|kers
in words grant. The 2. His Spirituall, in|visible
Presence, of which many Scriptures speak
and that most clearly. Eph. 3. 10. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by believing c. Concerning
this visible bodily presence, of which the Question
is. First. G. Fox his impertinent and silly Answer
is not to the Point no more then the East and the
West is to one point of the Compass.The Qua|kers Con|jure with Christs Body. 2. He fal|laciously,
(most unchristianly and impiously) denyes
the body of Christ Iesus to be any where, and as
Conjurers do (Hocas Pocas) that which all now see

is gone  vanished, so that with the ancient enemies
of Christ Humane Nature, the Manicheans, they say
and unsay and at last affirm a Christ only God and
Spirit dwelling in them, and in all mankind also.
About this time these subtle Foxes minded to
spin out Time, and wave the close Fight of exami|ning
Particulars concerning Christs humanity.The Qua|kers endure not Sences or Mean|ings just as the Papists and yet talk all of light G.
Fox his Book was brought forth (the same with
mine (Iohn Burinat took it and went along with me
in the Quotations, I read and alwayes endeavoured
to make my proof out of the Allegation: But W.
Edmundson kept strict watch and stood Centinel, that
no Observations of Sences or Meanings should pass,
resolving to keep out the Fire and Light of Christ
Jesus with Stand, or Ile let fly a Fire (from Hell)
upon you. Well, I knew what froward Children
and bruitish Spirits I dealt with,  resolved to go
softly and to speak softly, and as I could gain ground
by inches (at least) for liberty to give my witness for
the Lord Iesus.
In Page 9. He brings in Iohn Bunyan c. af|firming
that the Son of Mary,The old question of Christs Presence. God-Man is absent
from his Church, G. Fox answers, but never touch|ing
Scripture about it. [contrary to [50] Christs
words, I in them and they in me: and I will be with
you to the ends: and Christ the Head of the Church. 
where two or three are gathered c. and the Saints are
bone of his bone and flesh of his slesh.
I Reply, here half an eye may see as before, how
he gives no other Presence or Absence of a Christ
but invisible and Spiritual, and subtilly affirms that
Christ Iesus hath no bodily Presence at all, in the

sence which all Christians of what sort or Sect
soever (but these Iuglers (and themselves also in
word and horrible hypocrisie) do acknowledg and
profess,
In Page 10 He brings in the same Author saying
[Christ was not in his Disciples when he said I am the
Light of the world] G Fox answers.Fox  Bonnet no difference. [And so cor|rected
by Christ, I in you and you in me.
Pag. 12. He brings in the same Author, saying
[The Body of Christ is out of the sight of all his
Saints,] G. Fox Answers, (they sat with Christ in
Heavenly places, the Saints are Flesh of his Flesh,
and Bone of his Bone, were the Church which he
is head of his Body:)The Qua|kers pre|tend to own Christs Bloud  yet in truth allow him no Bloud to shed. In which I Answer, and all
his Book over (though he own a Christ without,
and that died at Ierusalem in word yet he allows in
effect no other Body to Christ Iesus but what is
Mistical and Spiritual: so that with notorious Iug|ling,
and Iesuitical Impudence, they would make
their simple Followers believe that they own such
a Christ as shed his Blood at Ierusalem, and yet leave
him in his Body no more Blood to shed then is in
a Spirit which hath no Bones, Flesh nor Blood to
shed at all.
Pag. 17. He brings in Enoch HowetEnoch Howet. Affirming
[That it is Blasphemy to say that Christ is in Man as
God Man,] G. Fox Answers (still like the Cuckow in
one silly Note) How are they of his Flesh and of his
Bones: And doth not the Scripture say, Christ in
you, and God will dwell in you, and walk in you,
and are not his Saints of his Flesh, and of his Bones,
and there is one sentence added, are they not par|takers
of the Divine Nature?

I Reply,The divine and humane nature of the Lord Iesus. this Participation of the Divine Nature
is (saith Peter) in the Saints by those precious
Promises, that is by receiving Christ Jesus, by be|lieving
in him according to that Ephes. 3. 10. (That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by Believing) not
that the Divine Being or Essence and Nature or God|head
is communicable to a finite Creature: from
hence these proud Simpletons fancie (and some have
been such bold Bayards as to say) they are Christ
and God, as much as he that died at Ierusalem,
Christed with Christ and Godded with God.
51] It is remarkable that Nicholas the DeaconNicholas the Dea|con and Nicholas Fathers of the old and new Nich|olaitans.
was the Father (as I believed)"believe." R. W. Ms. Ann. of the old Nicholai|tans
and Henery Nichols in King Iames his time the
Father of the new Nicholaitans in London and other
places,
crying up their perfection, their Spirituality
and Godhead, all leading from the purity of Gods
Worship and Authority of the Holy Scripture, and
at last to carnal Filthiness as the Daughters of these
the Ranters declare evidently.
This Humane Nature,So Cristo|pher Houlder he boggles at the word Manhood. humane Soul and Body
of Christ Jesus is so cross, opposite and contrary to
their new whimsical Christ Jesus (the Light within
them) that G. Fox in all this Book cannot endure to
hear of the word Humane, as being a new Name
and never heard of in the Scriptures.
As to the word Humane, such an odious Word
and Bugbear to G. Fox in all this Book:The word Humane considered I said in
publick; many Words truely and properly English
were well and commendably used that were not in

the Scripture in English: it is true the word Hu|mane
comes from the word in Latin Humanus, sig|nifying
partaining or belonging to Man: so a
Humane Soul or Body is no more but such a Soul
or Body as all Mankinde have.Used in the Scripture, 1 Cor 10. Hence I told them,
that the word Anthropinos peirasmos, 1. Cor. 10. (I
presumed Iohn Stubs knew) might have been
turned Humane, but is truely turned no Temptation
or Trial but such as is common to Men. This Fox
knows, that if Christ Jesus be granted to have
had such a Soul and Body as is Humane or Common
to Men, down falls their Dagon before the Chest or
Ark of God, viz. their Horrible, Monstrous Idol of
a Christ called Light within them.
We went on thus in alleadging Quotations,
though not in a close Examination of them which
they endured not, though ever and anon I made
some sallies out upon them and had some Skirmish|ings,
and sometimes sharp Disputes before I would
retreat from the Quotation.
In Pag. 282. He brings in Daniel Gaudry saying
[We shall not see Christ as he is until he comes to
Iudgement,Dan. Gru|dry Christ not seen as he is until the day of Iudgement and then and not before we shall see him] G. Fox Answers, (You where you are see him not:
nor know him as he is, we do believe you: but the
Saints the true Church whom he is the Head of,
in whom he is in the midst and in whom he is, c.
I was not desirous to trouble the Audience with
more Quotations, but they still urged, haste thou
any more, hast thou any more, c. upon their
provocation I Quoted many more (to [52] make
up an overwhelming Cloud of Witnesses against

these Protestant Iesuites and Iudasites, Betrayers of
the Son of God the true Lord Jesus Christ.
In Foxes Answer to his Opposite Daniel Caudry
it is clear that he affirms the contrary to his Oppo|site,
to wit, that Christ Jesus is as much now seen
visibly as ever he shall be seen: in which I believe
he speaks the heart of all the Antichristian Wolves
and Foxes who quake and tremble at the thought
of Christs return again to judgment:The perso|nal coming of the Lord Iesus. and therefore
these deluded and deluding Souls in their dark
Prisons of willing Blindness, and the hellish Chaines
of the pride and hardness and security of their
hearts, they dream they sit in Robes of Glory them|selves
 now keep open the high Court of eternal
Iudgment and pass Sentence upon this Christ with|out
as a poor Outside Christ and all that worship him.
2. I observe in Fox his answer that he can not
keep out of his Burrow of confounding a visible eye
and a Spiritual,A visible and in visi|ble eye and object. a visible and invisible seing: you
see him not saith he where you are, that is you
that look upon such a real person indeed, such an
one born living and dying as the History sets forth,
you cannot see him as he is, but we that look at
Christ Iesus and the history of him as Mystical, im|mediate,
invisible, though we use to please you child|ren
and fools with the words of Christ dying at Ieru|salem:
we see him he is in the midest of us: and
he is the invisible Head of the Church in God,
while you talk of Visibles and seing him as Visi|ble
c.
In Page 276. he brings in Richard Meyo saying,Christ ithin  Christ without.
that he did believe in a Christ that dyed at Ierusa|lem:

and that he doth not believe in a Christ within,
and preach Christ within, is a Reprobate. Colloss. 2.
2. Cor. 13. And he is not in a true Belief of Christ
without, that doth not believe in a Christ within,
but is in the Devils Belief, and believes as the Dev|ils
do.
In this his answer an humble Soul may see how
this subtle Traytor under the golden name of
Christ, and Christ within in the heart, he stabs at
the heart of the true Lord Iesus, who suffered for
poor Mankind in mans own nature at Ierusalem.
2. I observe his virulent and venemous Mind
and Pen stabbing damning and reprobating all that
truly believe in the true Lord Iesus,The Pa|pists and Quakers Christ is no where whome he con|fesseth
to have been a real man dying at Ierusalem,
c. except they can believe that he is now no
where to be found but in every mans heart that
cometh into the world, that is no where.
53]In Page 246. He brings in Christopher Wade
saying,Christoph Wade. [It is whimfical to say Christ God and Man,
Flesh and Spirit is in them] He answers, [Contrary
to the Apostles Doctrine who said they were of his flesh
and of his bone, and Christ in you, and he would walk
in them, and he that hath not the Spirit of Christ
is none of his, and they are of his slesh and of his bone,
and Christ in you the hope of Glory]
In the same Page he brings in the same Author
saying [Flesh and bone cannot be a measure in one and
a measure in an other] He Answers [wheras the
Apostle saith, we are of his Flesh and of his Bone,
here thou art contrary to the Apostle, and that was
more then one that had the Flesh of Christ, and his
Bone and his Spirit.

In Page 248. He brings in the same Author say|ing,
[It is a false thing to say Christ Person is in man]
He Answers, [which is as much as to say, none are of
his Flesh nor of his Bone nor eat nor had not his Sub|stance.
And Page 249 The Saints bodyes are not Christs
body. He Answers, How are they Christs? How
dwels he in them? and how are they of his Flesh and
of his Bone then? and how bruitish are you bcome in
Knowledge? hath he not bought them with a price,
and are they not his?
And in the same Page he brings in the same Au|thor
saying, that neither Gods Essence, nor Heaven, nor
Christs Person was in Peters holy body. He answers,
but the Apostle said God will dwell with you and walk
in you, and again, our conversation is in Heaven.
And once more in the same page There is not
whole Christ God and man in men. Answ. Then how
must men grow in the measure of the fullness of the
stature of Christ: and Christ and God will dwel in
man and walk in man, God that made all things, and
Christ by whome all things were made.
I Reply, this Author Christopher Wade I know
not many of his opposites (living and dead, whome
he here vapours to answer in his Book,The Au|thor whome G. Fox op|poseth and in Pride and mad|ness rageth against. I know
were worthy of Christian esteem and honour for
the grace and Knowledge of Christ Jesus in them,
and for other worthy respects: and whither this
Opposite or any other whome he pretends to puffe
at or Answer, have thought this audacious Quack|salver
worthy of any Reply, I know not: For cer|tainly
(as he commonly concludes his Answer in

his Book (Thy many notorious Lyes and Slanders and
Blasphemyes are not worth the mentioning: however
for the proof of my Position I am occasioned [54]
to follow this Fox into his holes and Burrowes, and
to hale him out before God, Angls and Men as a
most greedy audacious Fox and Wolfe, not sparing
the Son and Lamb of God, nor his precious Lambs
and Sheep.
Now to all these last Quotations, I say (as the
Opposites to Fox said) that this Notion of Christ
wit hin opposite to Christ without is a most Fran|tick
and Whimsical,The Qua|kers Christ but a whimsical Christ Gross and Blockish Fancy:
For though he grant Christ Jesus to be a Man
which died at Ierusalem, yet making him only Spi|ritual,
and such a Christ as is whole Christ, God
and Man in every man in the World, he makes
Christ Jesus to be but Whimsical Christ, and that
Man that died at Ierusalem but a Babylonian Fancy.
In Pag. 221. He brings in the Author to a Book
called Hosanna to the Son of David,Hosanna to the Son of David saying, [Christ
is without the Saints in respect of his Bodily presence,]
He Answereth, (They are of his Flesh and of his
Bone, and eat his Flesh and drink his Blood: and
how have the Saints his Mind and Spirit, and he
with them and they with him, and sit with him in
Heavenly places, and he is the Head of the Church:
how then is he absent? the"Ye" poor Apostates. R. W. Ms. Ann. poor Apostates from
him who feel not Christ with you, but he is with
the Saints, and they feel him.)
I Reply, I observe this Viperous Tongue saying to
the unknown, heavenly Author, and Fox his other

Oppositee [Ye poor Apostates c.] what is it but a
heighth of Devilish Pride going before destruction
and condemnation? this proud swelling Bladder
puft up with a Timpany of Wind and Vanity, what a
huge swelling shew he makes? what a breadth of
confident boldness and bruitish impudencie he car|ries
before him? what a gross, Frantick Papist is
he become, that cannot, will not distinguish be|tween
Christs Spiritual presence and his bodily?The Spirit of the Pa|pists  the Quakers but one. that
cannot, will not consider the difference between
Spirits and Bodies, a Spirit that hath no Flesh nor
Bones, and a Body which hath both, as Christ his
Body had? that cannot, will not distinguish between
their sinful Flesh and Bones, and the sinless Flesh and
Bones of that Man Christ Jesus? that cannot, will
not distinguish between God manifested in the Flesh
and Bones of that Man Christ Jesus, and manifested
in the Flesh and Bones of Believers in him: O most
Holy and Righteous are thy Judgements, O thou
most High Judge of the World, who art a devour|ing
fire and Justice it self, who thus castest down
the Proud and Self-conceited into the Dungeon of
such Black and Hellish Ignorance!
55] Pag. 217, Out of a Book mentioning the
Quakers Cause, saying, [To say Christ within is never
to mention Christ without] He Answers, There is
none knows Christ within, but he knows him with|out:
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever:
And there is none knows him but they know him
within, revealed of the Father, which is beyond
Flesh and Blood.
I Observe, This foolish Fox (for all his hiding

Craft) is here found out:The Qua|kers notori|ously dis|semble, for they do own and not own the Christ that dyed at Ierusa|lem.
He professeth (against
his Will and Heart) a Christ that died at Ierusalem,
and therefore is he forced to name a Christ with|out:
but when the Hole and Burrough is Digged the
Fox is found: For Examine what is this Christ
without? is he that litteral, real and material Per|son
the Son of Mary (as all professing Christs Name
generally agree? Is this he whom the Quakers ac|knowledge
to have lived and died at Ierusalem? and
do they intend a Material Crosse, a literal Death, a
literal and real Ierusalem? some of them will say yes,
but therein give the lye to others of themselves,
and also to the rest of their own story, in acknow|ledging
no other Christ but such as is in every man:
such a Christ as really and bodily died at Ierusalem,
they scorn and hate and fly from as the Devils did,
crying out, What have we to do with thee Iesus thou
Son of the most High God, art thou come to torment
us hesore the time? Hence the former Arch-deacon
or Arch-bishop of these parts Humphrey Norton: he
mocks at an outward Christ,Humph. Norton more plain in words then other Quakers. he asks what Coun|tryman
he was and shall be: He reproves the
Fools that have their Eyes abroad, and gazing after
a man into Heaven, he jeers at the Crosse, aud asks
what manner of wood it was made of, seeing
we must take it up dayly? And Fox saith, this Je|sus
Christ without and within, is Jesus Christ yester|day,
and to day, and the same for ever: therefore
in the Logick or Reason of this Bruite,Christ yes|terday and to day. Christ had no
body that was born at Bethlehem, or died at Ierusa|lem:
For he was born yesterday, and to day, and
he is born forever: he dyed yesterday, and he dies

to day, and he dies forever, which is a most Hea|venly
Truth relating to Gods purpose, Christs Merit,
and to Forefathers, our present times, and such as
yet must be born and follow after us.
But such Mystical and figurative Scriptures (which
are in themselves like Sampsons Lion and Riddle)
through Satans Policy, and the proud simplicity of
these simple Foxes, are made the common Holes and
Burroughs where you may be sure to find them:
just like the Iesuites (whose Cosens, if not Brethren
of one belly of Hell [56] they are) who usually
confound clear Scriptures with Spiritual and Mysti|cal
Illusions, and sly from Distinctions and open|ings
necessary in places more dark, figurative and
allegorical.
In pag. 211. He brings in Iohn Burton saying,
That the man that was crucified his body is now in the
presence of his Father, absent from his People as touch|ing
his bodily presence. He Answers. Doth not the
Apostle say he is the Head of the Church? and doth not
the Apostle say they are of his Flesh and Bone and sit
it heavenly places, with Christ, and Christ saith, they
must eat his flesh, and he is in them.
As I remember at the reading of this Quotation,
I urged that herein G. Fox did plainly deny (as in|deed
in all the rest I have quoted) Christ Jesus to
have had such a body as could be born of a wo|man,The Qua|kers endure not to be searched, temer of false and thievish spirits.
wrapped in swadling Cloathes, c. as could
be hungry, weary, sleep, discourse,Interline "be." R. W. Ms. Ann. apprehended, buf|feted,
whipped, nail'd to the Gallowes, die, be buried,

arise and ascend up visibly into these visible Heavens,
now in the presence of his Father, and absent from
his People on Earth, as touching his bodily pre|sence:
But one of my Opposites, (I think two of
them) bid me not wronge G. Fox by my Observa|tion,
for his words were not so. I Answ. In effect
and Substance they were, for G. Fox here, (and in
all his Answers) maintains the Negative to what his
Opposites Affirm.The Qua|kers  Apolloes Oracles the same. And 2. As to the grounds of his
deniall it is clear that sometimes they are most plain
and clear, and sometimes most subtle, and common|ly
such as will bear a twofold Sence, on which they
commonly ground some Iesuitical equivocation.
In Pag. 210. He brings in Iohn Burton saying,Iohn Burton.
Christ went away into Heaven from his Disciples, and
so not within them. He Answers, Did not he say that
he would come again to them? Did he not say he was in
them, I in you? And did not the Apostle say Christ
was in them except they were Reprobates? the hope of
Glory? was he not revealed to the Apostle and so
in him? and did not the Apostle Preach Christ
within, and you preach Christ without?
Again in the same Page [Those Believers that are
in the body at this day are absent from the Lord:]
He Answers again,If ever there Equivoca|ting Ies|uites in the world the Quakers are. Doth not the Aposte say Christ
is in them except they be Reprobates? and he is
in them the Hope of Glory? and they have fellow|ship
with God, and God will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and he that believes believes in him,
and Christ and so notabsent.
Again in the same Page, they say [He is absent
from them as touching his slesh, He Answers, Doth not

the Apostle say they [57] are of his Flesh and of his
Bone? and he that eates not his Flesh, hath no life
in him, and they sit in heavenly places with him, and
he that eates his flesh hath it in him.
And again in the same Page they say [There is
not any Heaven within into which the Man Christ is
ascended, or can any man contain a man four foot long?]
He Answers [Christ is a Mystery, and is he not to be
revealed within who is a Mystery? He who did de|scend
to be revealed and made manifest in his Saints
in slesh and Spirit, that did descend, which is now
manifested, that the World wonders at: that is as|cended
far above the Heavens, who is the Saints
life living Bread and Drink: and where ever used
the Ministers of Christ any such expression as thou
doth, which shews that Christ to thee is a Mystery?
Reply,The Qua|kers won|derful jug|ling about the true Christ In all these four Passages G. Fox expresly
denies that Christ is ascended into Heaven from his
Disciples: That Believers now in the Body are
absent from the Lord: that he is absent from Man
as touching his Flesh: that there is a Heaven into
which Christ is ascended: and that Christs Body is
not containable in a place according to his stature
and proportion.
2. In his Answers he notoriously jugles and equiv|ocates
as if he maintained Christ in Truth, he that
lived and died at Ierusalem, and visibly ascended
into Heaven though the whole scope and the plain
open faced meaning of his words, with loud cries
tend altogether to another business, to wit, to set up
himself by setting up the Image and Picture, this
Imaginary Christ which he calls the Light within
them.

The same Author saith, Pag. 206. [A false Christ
hath a new false Faith to apprehend this Crucified
Christ within,John Burton:] He Answers, [Which is contrary to the
Faith of the Apostles which Preached Christ that's
Crucified within and not another; Him that was raised
from the dead was risen that Lord Jesus Christ
within, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, by
whom the World was made glorified with the Father
before the World began: it was he that was manifest in
the Saints, that was, and is not another, for the other
is Antichrist.]
Again in the same Page, it is a Sceipture of the
Devils making to apprehend this Christ within:
He Answers, Now I say if there be any Christ but
he that was crucified within he is a false Christ,
and the Scripture holds forth this, and the Devil
never made it, but he and his Messengers are against
it: And he that hath not this Christ [58] that was
risen and Crucified within is a Reprobate though
Devills and Reprobates may talk of him without.
This Quotation was read again in their own
Book by Iohn Burnet, and they magnified the
Christ within,The Qua|kers Trai|tors  Re|bels against the true Lord Iesus but they would not suffer me to
observe the sence and argue from it, saying, G.
Foxes Words were plain concerning the true Christ;
And so indeed I say they are to any penitent Soul
truly (like Paul) unbottom'd from weak and filthy
self, and his own Dunghil Righteousness, and burn|ing
with sincere Affection to the true Lord Iesus:
For these subtle Foxes, and their Words discover (as
the Sun at noon day) that as plainly as ever Absa|lom,
Achitophel, Shimei, Sheba rose up in conspiracy

and Rebellion against David, c. as plainly as ever
Iudas and Peter (for a time) and Alexander the
Copper-smith, and Hymeneus, and Iulian the Apos|tate
denied Davids Antitype the true Lord Iesus: so
under the Cloak and Colour of Christ Crucified with|in,
do their Rebellious Traitors bear Arms against
the Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus: For although it be Scripture Phrase,
that we are Crucified, Dead and Buried, and Risen
with Christ: yet what a poor proof is this, that
Christ was Born and Crucified c. yesterday, and to
day within us, and there is no other Birth nor Life,
nor Death, nor Grave but what is within us, and all
are Reprobates and Devils that bow not down to this
painted devouring Monster.
Still my Opposites were catcht in their own
Craftiness they seemed well pleased that G. Fox
should be heard in his Answers to his Adversaries,I have known the poor Lob|sters catch the Foxes.
and I restrain'd and stopt from making out my
Proofs from the Sense, and Scope and Meaning: I
was yet glad that so much was discovered, that I
had (by Catches) liberty to give fire sometimes, and
intended to make use of this present Advantage
(which I from the first intended, when I saw I
should be stopt, and they would not afford me the
liberty I gave to them without the least Interrupt|ion)
as Iohn Stubs confessed.
Page 135. He brings in Thomas Moor saying
[Christ is absent from us while we are in this Mortal
Body] He Answers contrary to the Apostle, who
saith, the Life of Christ is manifested in their mortal
Flesh.]

And Page 136. The same Author saith [Christ is
distinct from every one of us, and without us in our par|ticular
persons,] He An- [59] swers, [The Apostle
said Christ was in them except thed were Reprobates:
and they were of his Flesh and of his Bone, and they
eat his Flesh and drank his Blood, then it was in them,
and he is distinct from none but Reprobates who hates
the Light.]
Reply, I wondred not so much at this Thunder,
and Fire,The won|derful blindness and hard|ness of my Antago|nists and stinking Brimstone from this Foxes
mouth, and that all are Reprobates with him that
bow not down to his Carved Image: but I wondred
at my Opposites, who declared (publickly as before)
that they would not follow G. Fox but in the
Truth, c. and yet when I read all their"the plain Evidences." R. W. Ms. Ann. plain
Evidences to them of Foxes denying the true Lord Ie|sus,
God and Man; and making only a Spiritual Christ,
a Mystical Inviible Iesus, c. that yet they should
be so blinded and hardened, as to cover, excuse and
plead for G. Fox in all particulars, and stop me from
drawing the Curtain and letting in the Light by
Opening and Arguing from the Sence and Meaning.
I do not remember that any one of my three
Opposites gave any positive answer to any of my
Observations on Foxes Principles, Answers, and
Evasions: All their work was to keep themselves
within their Trenches or Burroughs, and to cry out
[Thou must keep to Foxes Words] or, Wilt thou go on
to another?
In Page 71. He brings in Frances Higginson say|ing,Frances Higginson
[Christs Humane Nature] He Answers, [Where

doth the Scripture speak of Humane,The Qua|kers endure not the word Humane the Word Hu|mane
where is it written that we may search for it:
Now we do not deny that Christ (according to the Flesh)
was of Abraham, but not the word Humane: And
Christs Nature is not Humane which is Earthly, for
that is the first Adam.]
Reply. This ignorant and simple Cavil (as I
have before proved it to be from 1 Cor. 10.) is
often brought by G. Fox in this Book, in an horri|ble
equivocation to overthrow and destroy that
Humane Nature, that Flesh and Body of the Lord
Jesus, who yet had such a Body they say that died
at Ierusalem: These Traiterous Jesuits or Iudas|ites
tell us Humane is of the Earth or Earthly, and
that is the first Adam, but Christ Jesus is of the
Seed of Abraham according to the slesh, that is, in
their mental Reservation, according to their slesh,
God in their flesh, Christ in their flesh suffering at
a Mystical Ierusalem within them: They are Abra|hams
Seed, Isaaks Seed in whom all Nations (by
this Christ the Light within them) must be blessed:
And all that are not this Seed, this Flesh, [60] this
Christ (which they are) are in the Serpents Nature
and Reprobates.Acts 13. Opened of Christs Humanity. But amongst all the most full and
heavenly Scriptures for the Humane Nature of the
Lord Jesus: I shall touch but one at present, Act.
13. at Antioch, Barnabas and Paul in a Synagogue of
the Iews made the Humane Nature of the Lord
Jesus, (as also in other places) the great Subject of
their Discourse and Preaching: and concludes ver.
38. Be it known unto you therefore Men  Brethren,
that through this Man is Preached unto you the For|giveness

of sins, and by Him all that Believe are Iusti|fied
from all things from which you could not be justified
by the Law of Moses. By the meritorious Suffer|ings,
Death and Blood-shedding of this Jesus (lit|erally
in the History born at Bethlehem as the Quakers
say, c.) is only forgiveness of sin, and justification,
c. and not by a Chimical and Diabolical Christ and
Fancy within us, begot by the Devil on a proud
and lazie Ignorance: Let therefore (as it follows)
the Proud Despisers wonder and perish, believing
not in him the true Light of the World, the true
Brazen Serpent to all that look up unto him.
In Page 37. He brings in Thomas Collier saying,Tho. Col|lier
[If the very Christ God Man be within those called
Quakers he cannot come down from Heaven] He
Answers, [Here he stands against the promise of
Christ, that he shall come and dwell in you, and
walk in you: I will come again unto you. And he
hath revealed his Son in me saith the Apostle, and
know you not that Christ is in you except you be
Reprobates: and the Spirit of the Father speaks in
you, and see how contrary thou art to the Prophets,
Christ and the Apostles.
I urged that here G. Fox did plainly deny the
expected personal coming of the Lord Iesus:The second coming of the Lord Iesus but
they charged me to give none of my Sences and
Meanings to G. Fox his words: but now I have
leave (by Gods merciful hand) here to say, that
their Hypocrisie and Deceit (whereby they cheat
themselves and others) is so much the more gross
and abominable, because they pretend in words to
own Christ Jesus Humane descending, or Ascending

as a Man into Heaven, and Christs there abiding
until the time of the Restitution, and Christs return
the second time: They know also that all those
Scriptures they produce (as Christ in you except ye be
Reprobates, c.) concern an inward invisible and
Spiritual presence, and yet they bruitishly cry out
contrary to the Prophets, Christ,  the Apostles.
61] It comes to my mind that in reading  urging
some of these Passages concerning these Foxians
denying the Humane Nature and Person of the Lord
Iesus, one of my Opposites Iohn Stubs insisted upon
that 9. of Isaiah where Christ is called the Ever|lasting
Father:The Ever|lasting Fathr Christ Isu.  how and yet he said, He was the Son of
Man born of a Woman, c. I Answered, the Hebrew
word rendred by our Transators, the Everlasting
Father is Translated by some, the Father of an age,
or the Father of Ages, alluding to the great increase
and spreading of Christs Name, and the mighty
increase of his Spiritual Seed (as the Lord promised
to Abraham and Isaac) as the Stars of Heaven.
Iohn Stubs said the Hebrew word was [Abi Haad,
c.] and it was rendred Pater Eternitatis: I replied
that it was rendred (and that more near the He|brew)
Pater seculi, or seculorum: But I told him it
was not a seasonable time and place for him and
me to spend much time about the Translation of
the word:The Qua|kers won|derfully changed  yet but in Dissimula|tion as to learning  the Scriptures he said he had brought the Hebrew Bi|ble
with him, and it may be he understood the
Hebrew and the Greek and other Languages as well as
my self and better too: I was about to say that they
were wonderfully altered and changed from their
former principles and practises, for heretofore they

have professed to me that they had no need of
Books, no not of the Scripture it self, for they had
the Teacher within them that gave forth Scripture,
c. if now they were perswaded to study the Holy
Scripture and the Translation of it, and to examine
the Translations and the Copies of them, then they
did err and sin before, (which they say the Saints can|not)
in so wonderfully neglecting and slighting
them as useless and needless things.
Yea the truth is if their Light be so Alsufficient
as they make it, to bring them to Heaven, to guide
them immediately and infallibly c. what sim|plicity
is it in them to stoop to Pen and Ink, and
mens fallible Translations, yea, many wayes charged
with many failings.
I know their Pretences of becoming All to All
to win the more, and of removing the offence and
stumbling block, viz. as if they denied the Scrip|tures,
but the truth is, they look at the Holy Scrip|tures
still but as the Ceremonies which the Apostles
dispensed with for a season: they care no more for
the Scriptures then the Papists do, they are forced
to make use of them for an end, but all their hope
is in their Interpretations, which both Papists and
Qua- [62] kers bend their utmost to secure, viz. the
Priviledge of Interpretation, and chair of Infalli|bility
to themselves, or else down they tumble, for
most sure it is the Holy Scriptures, and both Papists
and Quakers are at irreconcilable difference, if the
one stand the other must fall for ever.
Although I desired to finish all the first seven
Positions that day, and offered once or twice to

proceed,W. Ed|mund. leaves the Dispute  is hurried into Preaching yet W. Edmundson (especially) upbraided
me that I kept them long, and that I proved
nothing, and upon a sudden a violent, tumultuous
disorderly Wind or Spirit filled all his Sails, so that
he rose up and fell into a downright Speech or Ser|mon
to the People and Auditory: and first he de|clared
how notoriously I had wronged them, in
laying and publishing so many false, and some of
them dangerous Charges against them. 2 And how
they had been so long patient towards me and suf|fer
me to produce so many Allegations out of G.
Fox his Book, and yet they speak nothing for me,
but G. Fox his words cleared him from all my un|just
challenges and charges. 3. He Appealed to
the People, how willing they had shewed them|selves
to own the Scriptures, and to have all their
Teahings and Differences tried by the Scriptures.
4. He fell upon the two Hinges of all the Qua|kers
common Discourses.
First, An Invective against the Priests, False
Teacher, False Apostles, who had got on the Sheeps
cloathing, and sold the words of Scripture for their
Game and Lucre and he amplified this much how
all their care and study was to get a good Living
or Benifice of 50. 6 100. or 200 pounds a year
(more or less) and he that complained how I took
up time, now (tediously) made us all to hear a Sto|ry,
which he said he knew himself of one of the
Priests that lived not many miles from the place
where W. Edmund.W. Ed|mund. his story concerning Benefices lived, who told with his own
Mouth unto William Edmund. viz. how that having
a good Benefice, another Priest of his acquaintance

came to visit him, whom he entertained kindly, and
this his Guest told him, that he was going to the
Bishop of Dublin, who was his Friend: and the
Priest the Host was afterward informed that this
treacherous and ungrateful Guest, did use all the
art he could with the Bishop of Durham (or Dublin)
to get his Friends (that had entertained him) his
Living from him.
2. The second part of his Sermon was (as usually
it is of all their Sermons) an extolling and magni|fying
of that Light which [63] he said had ap|peared
to him, which he advanced as the Principle
and the Foundation, the Light, c. he added how
they had left all the Glory and Pleasures of the
World for this Light:And his vain extol|ling of their Idol Light and how they had endured
and suffered much for Preaching this Light to un|godly
and ungrateful men, who had ill requited
them: for their Message and Work was only to
bring good News unto them, to tell them that they
should be free from sin and have Christ Jesus live
and dwell in them. I kept silence until this famous
Apostle and Preacher of Christ Iesus had done this
Speech or Sermon which he said he was moved in
his heart to make unto them  (as he often said) to
give an account of his Faith which he performed
with very great zeal and fervency, both of mind
and body.
I had thought then to have spoke,John Stubs his sermon but imme|diately
Io. Stubs stood up being moved (as he said)
to Declare his mind and Thoughts unto the peo|ple
also, and so he began a large Oration, Speech or
Sermon also (though not so long as William Ed|mundsons)

he declared how pleasant a thing the
Light was, and how pleasant a thing it was to be|hold
it? And he said, are you angry because we bring
you the Tidings of the Light? This was the principle,
this was the Foundation of all, the Light, c. He
added (for Iohn Stubs his was but a Repetition of
William Edmundsons his Sermon) that they had for|saken
all the Glory of Honours and Pleasures of
this World for this Light: and they had left their
Wives and Children, and exposed themselves to hard
Travels and to many Hardships and Sufferings for
the Light sake: I heard him also patiently and
gave him no Interruption (as he twice openly con|fest
that I had not interrupted them: but when he
had finished his Sermon and I had gained a little
calm and liberty of Speech, immediately before I
could finish one Sentence; that Pragmatical and In|sulting
Soul W. Edmundson stopt and Interrupted
me,The Qua|kers unru|ly and rash interrup|tions
so that I openly complained of incivility and
inhumanity: that hearing patiently their two Ser|mons,
they were set down, and common Reason
said that it was my turn to speak, and every body
desired what Answer I could frame to hear it, that
then I should be disturbed and stopt was no way be|fitting
the Societies of Civil and Morral men: I
then Answered,A short Answer to 2 Sermons that those very Sermons or Orations
which they had now made to the People were so
far beneath the merit of an Answer to them, that
they ministred and afforded to me a mighty and
invincible Argument, that the Spirit of God [64] was
not the Author of them: For we all knew that the
Spirit of God was most purely Rational, and a Spirit

of pure Order, and did not prompt or move men
to break Hedges and leap over one Ordinance into
another: We were engaged in a mutual Conference
and Disputation,The mo|tions of Gods spirit not those of the Qua|kers we were in the midst of it, how
came we then to fall into Popular Orations and
Sermons? is it comely when persons are Disputing
to fall upon our knees and Answer an Argument
with a Prayer (as it is a frequent practice with the
Quakers,) is it proper to break off Prayer and fall
to disputing, or out of Disputation into Preaching?
But I said my Opposites Spirit was far from the
Holy Spirit of God:Te Qua|kers not or|derly nor patient and his movings are far from
the Motions with which my Antagonists were acted,
for they had neither power to keep civil Order,
nor to be patient, for not being able to answer nor
bear my words W. Edmundson said expresly what
should we sit here and suffer him to vent his Blas|phemies
and Lies? he hath kept us here two dayes,
and have proved nothing, c.
I took a little boldness and told them, that if
Paul himself were present, or Iesus Christ himself
in their bodily presence which they confessed he
died in at Ierusalem, yet they would say unto them,
even unto Christ himself, thou hast falsely charged
but thou hast proved nothing: Paul himself should
be an Enemy, and Jesus Christ should be a Blas|phemer
and a Beelzebub because he brought glad
news of the Truth from Heaven to them.
I further said, that I had more to offer in the
name and in the cause of the true Lord Jesus
Christ, and after I had got liberty of speech, I said
that as they which denied the person of the true

Lord Jesus denied the true Lord Iesus himself,The Offices of Christ Iesus so
they which denied the Offices which God the
Father had invested him with and designed him to
fulfil, the denied the true Lord Iesus Christ.
They demanded of me wherein they denied the
offices of Christ Iesus: I Answered, I had many
things to declare in which they denied the Offices
of Christ Iesus (as well as the Papists for which we
seperated from them as Antichristans, not holding
the Head the true Lord Jesus the Sacrifice and Sacri|ficer,
the only Prophet, Apostle and Messenger, bring|ing
in the last times, the last Dispensation and Will of
his Father: contrary to the Papists who set up
(some of them) the Pope and (some of them) the
general counsel above the Lord Jesus declaring his
mind in the Holy Scriptures: and con- [65] trary
to the Quakers who set up a voice or motion within
them over topping and over pouring the voice of
Christ Jesus in the Scriptures, some of them main|taining
that this Light within them is that great
Prophet that was to come which Moses Prophesied
of, Deut. 18.
I said I would contract my thoughts,The King+ly office of the Lord Iesus. and speak at
present only a little of his Kingly power and Office,
and I plainly denounced that they were all notori|ously
guilty of High Treason against the King of
Kings, the Lord Jesus, yea as far as in them lay,
they robd him of his Crown, and Life and All.
In particular I told them I had abundant proof
there ready to bring forth from G. Foxes Book, that
he and his Associates denied (yea all of them) that
visible Kingdome and Church and Institutions which

he as King over all his Subjects hath Sovereign Right
unto, and most faithfully and wisely ordained to
continue until his coming again.
I told them that G. Fox his Book and all their
Books and Professions denied any visible Church
of Christ at all:The visi|ble Chris|tian Church  Ordi|nances. and though they maintained and
kept up Congregations (of pretended Christan) Wor|ships
and Worshippers (in a direct contradiction unto
their own Tenents, yet) they maintained the
Church was in God and so not visible: the Officers
of the Church were invisible and immediately
made by the immediate and invisible Spirit. The
Baptisme was within, and only the Baptisme of the
Spirit and of Fire: The Lords Supper appointed
by the Lord Jesus to be a Spiritual Feast remem|bring
him until his coming was with them nothing
else but Spiritual joy, which they have one in and
with another, which they have by the second com|ing
of the Lord Jesus to them, who they said was
come again to the Apostles the second time, and
unto themselves also.
Upon this (as I remember) there fell out some
words between my Opposites, and some of the
people called Baptists: But some of them (especi|ally
Iohn Stubs) demanded of me, why I thus
charged them and was my self so guilty, not liv|ing
in Church Ordinances my self.
I Answered,Touching the several Churches extant. that it was one thing to be in Arms
against the King of Kings and his visible Kingdome
and Administration of it,  to turn off all to Notions
and Fancies of an invisible Kingdome, and invisible
Officers and Worships as the Quakers did: Another

66] thing among so many pretenders to be the true
Christian Army and Officers of Christ Jesus) to be
in doubt unto which to associate and to list our
selves.
After all my search and examinations and con|siderations
I said,Churches nearest to Christ Iesus I do profess to believe, that some
come nearer to the first primitive Churches, and the
Institutions and Appointments of Christ Jesus then
others, as in many respects so in that gallant and
heavenly and fundamental Principle of the true
matter of a Christian Congregation, Flock or So|ciety,This was and I hope is the prin|ciple of the N English Church.
viz. Actual Believers, true Disciples  Con|verts
Living Stones, such as can give some account
how the Grace of God hath appeared unto them,
and wrought that Heavenly Change in them; I pro|fessed
that if my Soul could finde rest in joyning
unto any of the Churches professing Christ Jesus
now extant, I would readily and gladly do it, yea
unto themselves whom I now opposed.
But Thirdly. Not finding rest, they themselves
knew, there is a Time of purity and Primitive Sin|cerity:The vari|ous appear|ances of Christ Iesus
there is a time of Transgression  Apostacy,
there is a time of the coming out of the Babilo|nian
Apostacy  Wilderness: there is a time of
many Flocks pretending to be Christs and saying.
Loe here he is, c. and a Command of Christ Je|sus,
goe not into the Wilderness, goe not into the
private Chambers: There is a time when Christ
Iesus his Doves and Loves cry out to him, O thou
whome my Soul loveth, tell me where thou feedest, where
thou makest thy Flock to rest at noon; for why should I
be as one that turns aside to the Flocks of my Compan|ions?

I doe not remember that any Reply was made
to this by any of my Opposites, nor heard I any
more of this Objection.
I now praied there"their."R. W. Ms. Ann. patience to hear me a few
words: I said we had spent two whole dayes from
morning to night and had proceeded no further
then the Debates of the two first Positions,My offer in the end of the second dayes con|ference I told
them if they were free I would attend them again
in the Morning (being the first of the week) to fall
upon the proof of my other five positions remain|ing
for Newport: or if they were not willing to
that, I would (if God permitted) attend them there
on the second day called Munday, in the Morning to
proceed upon the rest.
W. Edmundson said, they had spent so much time
already upon but two of them:Lying pre|tenders to Gods service and both he and
Iohn Stubs said they had other business in hand
then to attend unto my false Charges which in all
67] this time I could not make out: they said
they must go about the work of the Lord to which
he had called them.
I told them I had used all diligence, I failed not
to meet them about the exact hour appointed, and
alwayes before the audience was come. I never
withdrew nor absented a Minute, but put my old
Carcase to constant pursuit of my promise which
lay on me to fulfil, and to make out my proofs,The Authors just Apolo|gie agaist the unjust clamors of the Qua|kers
although they had spoke never a word until I had
finished: I used all possible brevetie, and oft times
suppressed my thoughts pressing in upon me for

Utterance and Audience; I rather chose thus to
Apologize for my self, then down right to blame
them, on whom (they saw well enough) I laid the
blame of our long proceeding. I told them I had
spoken nothing to them but the Eternal truth of
God, which sooner or later would arrest them,
and using aloud the words of the Lord Jesus [viz.
The words that I have spoken shall judge you at the last
day.] I withdrew.
Within a quarter of an hour they sent one to
me to desire my coming in again to them, and
William Edmondson (commonly their proud mouth)
told me that I had deeply charged them and laid
many false Accusations upon them, and some of
them dangerous, both as they were Christians, and
as they were men: they had used long patience in
hearing of me, and yet because it should be seen
that they were willing to hear the utmost that I
had to say they would meet and spend a few hours
with me on the second Day following at nine in the
Morning, only they would not endure any long and
tedious Discourses.
I answered that their own souls knew,A mutual agreement for a third dayes con|ference. and the
Auditors knew I used to be brief: and if they had
pleased to have given me leave, I would have fin|ished
the whole seven by noon the first day: and I
would now promise them (by Gods help) to finish
what I had to say to the other five remaining in a
quarter of an hour, so that in five quarters of an
hour I would present them with what I had to say:
W. Edmundson said they would expect I should so do,
and all of them seemed well pleased that I offered

to dispatch each Position in a quarter of an hour;
I said they must not count me false  a Promise|breaker
if I was not exact to a quarter of an hour
possible I might be within a quarter, possible I
might something exceed it, but I hoped not to
exceed above a quarter.
W. Edmundson replied, Nay Roger thou must be
punctual if [68] thou wilt be a Christian: and in|deed
afterward at Providence he unjustly more then
once upbraided me saying,A quarter of an hour much can|vased. Is this your quarter of an
hour? I answered that Christians nor any prudent
man would be so curious and critical as to raise
Censures and Accusations upon the nicityes and un|certaintyes
of a few Minutes, for unless we had
Clocks and Watches and quarter-Glasses (as in some
Ships) it was impossible to be exactly punctual:
however by Gods help I said I would study such
Exactness, that I would rather omit much I had to
say then fail in my promise to them.
After this (as I heard) W Hitchcock of Newport
held dispute with them about Water-Baptisme, I
was withdrawn being evening and weary.
I was told by many of Providence, that I knew
them they would not stand a Disputation: or if
they did they would not continue without great
Advantages and be as slippery as Eeles, and break
off abruptly, as their spirit hurried them, I therefore
studiously endeavoured to tole and drive them to
the finishing of my remaining five at Newport,The Qua|kers spirit  policy and
the other seven at Providence. And thus by the
most wise and gracious hand of God we came to
the end of the second dayes work, and the second
Position and the end of the Week.

It was queried by some why (at Newport and
Providence afterward) they appointed the end of
the weeks for the Disputation? and why since it
was not finished they would not proceed on the
first day? It is not immaginable that they cordially
owne that day,The Qua|kers would not dispute on the first day and why. (for the Quakers work upon it) but
they wisely resolved to have the whole first day
with the People to make up their Breaches, stop
Leakes dress wounds that might be in the foregoing
Agitations against their Consciences  Credits. It
is dolefull that men of excellent parts, and of great
knowledge in the Scripture, should yet so ly under
a Sentence of Gospel justice, that they cannot but
deceive as they are deceived, that they cannot but be|lieve
Lyes and tell Lyes, horrible and blasphemous
Lyes, as confidently as the Purest Truths, and suck
in and, powre out the poyson of Dragons, the great
red Dragon, the Father of Lyes, instead of the sweet
Milk and Wine from the Breasts of the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, the son of God Christ Iesus.
69] THe third day of our Conference being come,The third dayes con|ference at New-port
being the second of the Week as was ap|pointed,
W. Edmundson began and said to this effect,
Roger, we have waited upon thee two dayes already
to hear what thou hadst to say to prove thy false
Charges against us: we are here according to prom|ise
to spend some hours about the rest of the seven
which yet remain: we must tel thee that we will
not give thee leave to make a long work of it: if
according to thy promise thou wilt dispatch each

af the other five in a quarter of an hour, we will
keep our promise and hear thee.
I knew it was in vain, (as in the other two dayes
past I found it) to insist upon their obstinately con|tinued
Advantage of three constantly engaged against
me (beside their accidental speakers who had lib|erty
when others were forbidden) I say notable and
Chief men in their way and Sect:A Letter sent in to all of us. and having just
then read a Letter as I sate there directed to my
self and all of us to be read in the Assembly, I be|gun
with presenting the Letter to them, and told
them that just now it was delivered to me c. I
knew not certainly from whome it came, nor of
one Tittle of the Contents of it: only I judged it
to be my Brother Robert Williams (School-Master
of Newport) his hand: I read the Superscription
and offered if they pleased to unseal and read it,
or I would deliver it into their hand so to doe.
W. Edmundson answered that they came not
thither to hear Papers, but to hear how I would
make out my false Charges against them and this
he speaking none would whist against it, and this
he did speak because my Brother beyond my ex|pectation
and thoughts spake some words the first
morning against their Insulting and domineering
over me, as also delivered a paper to them which
was with much adoe handed and delivered to them
but never read, containing these two great Points
in every true penitent Converts eye, viz. the sight
of Sin as Sin. And 2. The sight of the material
Lord Iesus as the true Messiah or anointed, these

were the two Daggers which they knew stab'd at
the heart of their feigned Christ and Light within
them.
I knew my Brother patiently waited there the
two first dayes,The Let|ter refused to be opened by the Qua|kers and was (with others) silenced: and
now I guessed he had sent them his mind and
would trouble them no more. I told them [70] the
whole Assembly had Interest in the Letter, as di|rected
to us to read to the rest.
W. Edmundson and the rest desired the Auditors
to speak if they desired to have it read: some of
the Quakers said it might be read when the business
was over: so I to make no breach put it up, and
in the end of the day offered it again, claiming
their Promise, but they regarded it not, so that
after the Conference ended (we of Providence being
called away by a Boat preparing to depart) I stept
to my Brothers house and acquainted him with
Passages, who said that not only the Superscription
was his hand but the Letter also, and I might open
and read it, and (if it might be) present it to the
intended Assembly at Providence: of which we shall
hear when it pleaseth the mercifull hand of the
Lord to bring us to those Transactions.The Sum of the Letter In short,
it was refused there also,  therefore I have judged
it fit, since it was so solemnly flung out both at
Providence and Newport that it should have as sol|emn
a Publication to the whole world,My self reproved in the Letter in 3 par|ticulars and the
rather because it is a witness of Truth as to the
two first dayes transactions, impartially reproving
my Opposites and me also where he conceived we
were failing: It is true I am not of my Brothers

Conscience as to the Discipline of Christ, viz. that I
ought to have admonished the Quakers in private,
before I had so publickly c. since they proclaimed
their sin like Sodom on the house top: and it is
preposterous to run from House-top-sins to closet
Concealments and Admonitions.
2. Nor can I own the Quakers in their wayes
and worships to be Servants of the Lord (as my
Brother calls them) any more then the greedy
Wolves, devouring the souls of the Ephesians, Act.
20. were the meek and innocent Lambs and sheep
of Christ.
3. Nor doe I think I charged them too deep
or too sharply,The dffer|ence of the Quakers as my Brother speaks: I knew the
Foxes and Wolves (the able Leaders amongst them)
do not run away with Pigs and Worldly Swine only,
but that some Lambs and Chickens of Christ Iesus
are carried away in their (Soul bloody) jaws also,
whom I beseech to remember themselves, and I
humbly beseech the God and Father of mercies
to pull them out, and help all that love his Name,
to help pull them out as Brands from the Eternal
Burnings.Sharpness sometimes a duty. As for the Wolves and Foxes the Blind
Leaders, the Chapmen that by feigned words make
Merchandize of Souls (2 Pet. 2.) their [71] mouths
must be stopped, and the Prey rescued from their
Jawes, and because we ought to save what is savea|ble,
and to recover poor sinners Leaders and Fol|lowers
from their corrupt and rotten Profession
we ought to use Sharpness, Tit. 1. Reprove them
sharply (Apotmoce, cuttingly) that they may be
found, or recover in the Faith of Iesus.

These three words I thought fit to say as to my
self, let the Quakers answer for themselves, who I
fear will answer to my Brother as they did to me
[Lyes, slanders, false Accusations, c.] However
the Reader is here presented with the Copy of it.

The Superscription.
To his Loving Friends Roger Williams
and the Quakers now assembled at
Newport deliver,
Humbly desiring the reading of it to publick
Audience for the Truths sake of Christ Jesus.The Letter it self.
LOving Friends, though the Lord in his Wisdome
hath denied me from Nature the gift of utterance,
yet in his infinite mercy he hath vouchsafed to me his
free gift as to writing, whereby the private motions
arising between God and my own Soul (without
knowledge unto any) may be declared, being moved here|unto
out of a sensible sadness, which is upon my Spirit
in beholding the Cloudings and Vailings of the most
precious Truths of my Lord and Master Jesus Christ:
But (Loving Friends) herein mistake me not at first:
This is no charge nor discharge, but an appearance
unto my Soul, even unto the moving of my Bowels with|in
me: For my Beloved at his putting in his hand at
the hole of the door, when all my Lovers, Priests and
Elders gave up the Ghost in the City: (for gladness) is
taken away, and joy out of the pleasant field, and in
the Vineyard there is no (true) singing, and the Tread|ers

tread out no (pure) Wine, for the Lord hath made
the Vintage shouting to cease: But to avoid Prolixity,
I write not to charge nor admonish, neither for con|tending
Argumentation, it being against my under|standing,
and as the taking of a Dog by the ear: But
incerely unto edification, in signifying the appearances
unto my Soul in what I have gotten from these your
so earnest and tedious Debates.
72] Therefore I am humkly bold to speak, unto all the
contending Disputants in the plainness of my heart.
And First unto the Complaining Disputant it ap|pears
unto my Soul, that you have not dealt as a faith|ful
Servant of the Lord Iesus, with your fellow Ser|vants,
for you should have admonished them both first
and second time in private, and if they would not have
heard you then to have told it to the Church, the great
Congregation of God.
2. It doth appear unto my Soul, that you have
assumed and presumed too much, being so large and
high proposals, which do appear unto me not as charges,
but in this first Appearance as Proposals, until they
are maintained as charges by sufficient proof, wherein
they may be molified: But in truth herein I am at a
stand, for against whom were the true Apostles more
bitter than against the False? which if the Defend|ants
be so (which in charity I have reason to hope other|wise)
your Conscience will be more cleared in your Lord
and Masters service: yet know there may be a zeal
without true knowledge, therefore let true zeal appear
that is not in persecution, but for the Glory of God and
truths sake, as it is in Ieus.
2. Unto the Defending Complainants (the loving

Quakers) which I pray take not as a charge, but as
appearances unto my Soul in that you never dealt faith|fully
in your Lord and Masters service, for both Com|plainants
and Defendants are all but Servants unto one
Lord and Master, and you must do that service which
is ordained by your Lord and Master to do in your seve|ral
stations (either in truth or falshood) there is no hind|ring
of it, and when you have done all you can, you are
but unprofitable Servants, falling short of your Lord
and Masters infinite Glory, and in the end of your ser|vice,
you shall as the Grasse wither, and as the Flower
fade, but unto our everlasting comforts the word of the
Lord shall stand and for ever.
First, That you have not done your Master faithful
service by assuming and presuming beyond the bounds of
Moderation and Christianity: but as I said before
take not these as charges, but as proceeding from your
own Expressions and Behaviours in your late actings
which have not been for that solid edification of the
Auditors which was expected but for defending and
advancing of self, which appeared:
1. By your limiting the Holy one of Israel, contrary
unto your Lord and Masters Commission.
2. By breaking an Apostolical Command (so far
as in you lay) as not to quench the Spirit.
73] 3. You have not dealt faithfully and Christian
like with your elder fellow servant, and then what
would you do with the Heir.
To the first appearance you would not begin before
you had stated by forced Covenant that none should
speak (though with leave in modesty and sobriety) but
those that would joyn issue with the complainant, and

that under hand writing.True lib|rety in|fringed And herein (loving friends)
you have infringed upon those great Liberties and Mer|cies
which God hath bestowed upon these parts, and
which you do enjoy, and cannot enjoy else where: And
will you now shut up your common Wine-presses that we
can have no fruit nor refreshing but what comes from
your private Presses? Know (Loving Friends) this
is a sad grievance that lies upon us. Ya, you do in|fringe
not only upon our Souls but upon our Temporal
Liberties.
For in our Courts of Iudicature there is a funda|mental
liberty stated for any to speak freely for Con|science
sake in any Cause in the Bounds of Sobriety
and Modesty. But this appears against the Rules and
Practises of all Christianity, not practised by the
Judicial Convocation, nor by the high Commission
Court in our Native Couutry, where often I have been,
and the Metropolitan with the rest of the Bishops in
Gravity and Christianity (though their pleadings were
by Proctors, yet) gave liberty especially for Relations
to speak: As in one Instance of a person whom you
all have heard of, when he was to come upon Exami|nation,
his wife being big with Childe came with him,
the Arch-Bishop (though otherwise he might be im|proper,
yet herein shewd great civility by considering
the Womans condition, and gave liberty for speaking to
the full, with replying no discomfortable Words, yea in
Christianity delayed further prosecution until she was
delivered, though afterwards they acted their improper
persecution.
But into what a condition shall we be brought (I
hope not into an high Commission nor Inquisition

Court) if this Imprimator goes on, that none shall
speak, no not so much as suffered to desire to speak,
though they are great with Childe with the Man
Christ Iesus: But I hope the People will see their
Liberties, and your selves know this was not the true
Apostles practises.
2. Your sad quenching of the Spirit when the mo|tion
of it arose in any for Soul-satisfaction in any to
speak,Quenching of the Spirit you would not suffer them to be expressed but
stifle them in their coming forth: O dear Friends con|sider,
you would not be so dealt with: For what did you
know but [74] the Lord might bring forth from any of
the Auditors for witnessing his Eternal Truth and
Glory? therefore as your Heavenly Master is bounti|fully
free, be not you Niggards in shutting up his Boun|ties
and suffring none to pass but through your own
Purses: I speak as the Apostle did after the manner of
men.
3. Your Indecorum Behaviours both in words and
gestures unto your elder Fellow-Servants  aged Fa|ther
complaining as not performing your duty as young
men according unto Rule of honouring gray hairsThe insulting Spirit of the Quakers
1. But by unseemly smiles of Derision, saying often
(for a time) Thou old Man, thou old Man, thereby
appearing to provoke to passion:
2. When that would not move his exceeding great
patience, then charging of him with Blasphemy, and to
prove his Blasphemy:
3. Again (not Apostle or Gospel like) seeking and
taking advantages against the Aged, and contrary to
Covenant by three or four baiting him at once, unto the
confounding of his memory, or stopping of his utterance,

under the pretence of challenging all comers (when
reasons considers of coming in Order) But your de|fence
was that you were but one Man, then you should
have been but one Mouth.
Again your improper charging of the complainant
with mispending of time,The true cause of our long dis|course at Newport when in Truth it was your
selves (in not suffering of him orderly to proceed) But
by your often Iterations, Tautologies, Indecorum
Behaviours and Expressions, with improper Preach|ments
at that time, and yet lay the defect upon the
aged, and would not be satisfied with his substantial
Proofs, divine Reasons and Argumental Demonstra|tions.
And herein your Conscience (if unsatisfied) had
liberty in timely Order, to have made your substantial
Desence, if patience had been suffered to have had her
perfect work. It is acknowledged by Auditors, that as
the Complainant brought substantial proof (for so far
as he proceeded) so you the Defendants also brought
substantial defence (in what was substantial) but now
who shall judge? ye will not suffer the Gospel rule,
that the standers by, the Spirits of the Prophets shall
judge. Then both of your own private Interpretations
doth aim to be judges, and so will be endless and true
judgeless: And by proceedings, the cause of Christ
Iesus (being now at stake) much dishonoured unto the
sadness of my Soul and unsatisfied Conscience, and also
the expectation of the Auditors which was for Soul-edi|fication
frustrated, and unto publick shame (as yet) only
self contendings hath the supream Appearance. There|fore
(Loving Friends) [75] pleading and defending
for your Lord and Masters sake, shew your selves
faithful Servants of Christ Iesus in all Humility,

self-denial, Love, Charity, Tenderness, in bowels of
compassion, in Gospel Peace and Unity: only unto
your Masters praise and Glory: that the Auditors
may receive the plain naked Truth of the Lord Ie|sus
unto their Souls Edification, even the real Truth
as it in Iesus, and not as words of man which is only
Vanity and vexation of Spirit under the Sun of
eternal and universal Righteousness, whose infinite
glory is witnessed by
Robert Willams.
Newport August. 6.
1672.

THis was that poor Letter (condemned unheard
by these high Saints who now keep Judge|ment
day) to the fire and everlasting silence: this
was the two edged Sword which smote in the hon|est
upright intentions of the Author every way
reproving me,The modesty of this letter reproving them, and yet having so
much Sugar with his Vinegar and Honey with his
bitter Powder, that had it been unseald and read
at Newport, or read at Providence, whose taste could
it have offended, but theirs only who like the men
of China, judge all the World to have no eyes but
themselves excepting the Men of Europe to whom
they will grant one eye, and that is more then our
proud Pharisees will do to any that bow not down
to their most grosse Phylacteries.
But from this finger of God this providential
Letter appearing upon the Wall before us: I return
to the work of the day, which was the Discussion

and Probation (on my part) of the other five Pro|posals
remaining.
I therefore (after the Letter was put up unread
into my pocket) requested their Patience,The third Position against the Quakers spirit Dis|cussed while I
produced my Proof of the third Position, which
was, viz. [That the Spirit by which they were acted
was not the true Spirit of God:] Tis true I had
many things in my mind and memory) some of
them I here express) but I was forced to pick and
chufe and lay by: for I told them that according
to my promise, and their expectation I would pre|sent
them with the Substance of my proof of this
Position in the compass of about a quarter of an
hour.
76] I reminded them first of the nature of the
Word Spirit in Latine Spiritus,The word spirit in Greek Pneuma,
in the Hebrew Ruch and Ruach, signifying some|times
Breath, sometimes Wind, and from thence
applied unto God himself, unto Angels, unto Men,
as denoting a spiritual, powerful, invisible fine Sub|stance
distinct from flesh and earthly Bodies:
Hence God was said to be a Spirit, not properly
but that his Being was pure, powerful, invisible, c.
1, Whether God was properly a Spirit (as the
Quaker affirmed) we had some controversie at
Providence of which hereafter.)
2. Concerning Spirits, I observed two great
Sects: 1 Those of the Pharisees (who were ac|counted
the most Orthodox, Sound and right, hold|ing
such a Spiritual Substance in Angels and Spirits
and a Resurrection. 2. The Sadduces which held
neither Angel, nor Spirit, nor Resurrection, as at this
day, c.

3. It is clear there is a two-fold Spirit: 1. Holy
and pure:The quality of Spirits such a Spirit is God himself, and the
Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father by the
Son, such are the Spirits of the Angels, the Spirits
of Gods Children in part, and the Spirits of just
men made perfect (the Quakers say here, we say in
the life coming.)
The other Spirit is a wicked Spirit, a lying and
a murtherous Spirit in Sathan and his Children, yet
often counterfeiting the Holy and pure Spirit, like
the Oile and Ointment which God prescribed and
forbad the like of it to be made on pain of death.
Therefore we are commanded not to believe every
Spirit, but to try even the very Spirits, not only of
men but of Doctrines, Churches, Religions,All spirits must be tried pretend|ing
the Name of God, (as do the Turks, Iews and
Christians) and of the Son of God, as do all the
Antichrists and Antichristians extant.
4. The Holy Spirit of God (being the seven
Lambs of Fire, the seven Eyes, and seven Horns, Rev.
5.) he is pleased to work variously.
First in an ordinary way of Regeneration and
Sanctification, c. common to all the lowest and
youngest of Gods Children, (Iohn 3. that which is
born of the Spirit is Spirit) Hence we read of the
Spirit of Prayer, and of Holiness wrought in the
Soul by the finger or power of God: so that the
knowledge of God, the fear, the love, the trusting
to and in God, the calling upon God is natural to
all Gods Children, Gal. 5. Abba Father, c.
77] The second is extraordinary and immediate,
such as was pour'd upon the Lord Jesus, Isai. 11.

such as Christ breathed upon the Apostles, and by
the Apostles hands upon others when they spake
with Tongues, fortelling things to come, and pen|ning
the Holy Scriptures or Records, as did the
Prophets of old, and the first Messengers the Apos|tles
of Christ Jesus.
I told them I had many things to say as to the
false Spirits of the false Christs, and false Prophets,
the Spirits of Devils as well as the Spirits of God
(in the Revelation) and the three wayes of deceit
mentioned, 1 Thess. 2. by Spirit, by Word, or by
Letter: but I would contract my self, I say that their
Spirit by which they were acted was not Gods
Spirit.
1. Because the Holy Spirit of God was given by
means,Gods Spirit given by Gods means but the Quakers pretended all along in
G. Fox and other Books, that their Spirit was im|mediate
or without means: I said in the 8th of the
Romans was a Golden Chain of Gods Order or Method
of Working from Predestination to Glorification: In
the 10th. to the Romans was a Golden Chain of the
Means appointed, c. How shall a Man be saved?
by calling upon God?The Spirit of God working by means How shall he call on him
except he believe in him? how shall a Man be|lieve
in him except he hear of him? how shall
a Man hear of him except some Preach? how shall
a Man Preach except he be sent, c, Hence Peter
Preaching Christ Jesus to the first Converts, they
were some thousands brought to Christ, when they
were pierced to the heart, and cried out what shall
we do? Peter sends them nor to a light within
them, but bids them Repent and be Baptized, Act.

14. Paul so spake that many believed,The Qua|kers at Newport appealed too pub|lickly Act. 16.
while Paul spake the Lord opened Lydias heart:
and I appealed to the Consciences of those called
Quakers at Newport there present, whether in a
contradiction this Spirit they now professed, de|scended
immediately upon them from God (as they
spake) or was not conveyed unto them by the Min|istry
of the former Preaching Quakers that came
unto them: so that these now are but the waterers
and confirmers of this Doctrine of the Spirit in
them.
2. As Believing and Conversion comes by hear|ing,
c. so these extraordinary gifts and powrings
forth of Gods Spirits was generally by means also:
Christ used Breathing upon the Apostles: the Spirit
of God descended, Act. 8. 19. in the laying on of
hands: in Peters Preaching, Acts. 10. the miracu|lous
Spirit of [78] Tongues and Prophecy descended
upon Cornelius and his company, and not before,
yea, and what is that waiting in silence used in pri|vate,
and in the publick Assemblies of the Quakers,
but a confessed means in which they wait for the
Spirit of God (as poor Souls they think) descending
on them.
I was then forced to omit the Allegations out of
G. Fox his book then by me and ready, but I will
now recite a few of them.
In page 6. of this Book in Folio, G. Fox brings
in Samuel EatonSamuel Eaton saying [The Prophets and Apostles
drew people to an outward Word] He Answers, Now
is that which lives and endures forever, outward?

and did not they bring them to Christ the power
of God, which is the end of words which is imme|diate.
Again in the same Page Samuel Eaton [Is not the
Gospel an External way] He Answers No, the Gos|pel
is a Living way which is revealed within, and
is the power of God to Salvation.
In the same Page Samuel Eaton [Are not they se|duced
who are drawn off from the External means by
which the Spirit is given and Faith wrought, to wait
for the receiving of the Spirit without any Word to
convey it to them, which Spirit when they have it is
not the Spirit of Truth but of delusion] For Answer,
[The Spirit and Faith is not conveyed to any Man
without the Word, and they are seduced which
rests in the External from the Eternal, and the
Spirit is not given by Eternal means, neither is
Faith wrought.]
I Reply, and observe how the wisdome of Men
is enmity against God, and how witty this Fox is
to catch himself and others in the Traps of eternal
Howling? how doth he here confound the audible
words or preachings of Gods mercy in Christ Jesus,
with the inaudible, invisible, mystical and meta|phorical
word, Christ Jesus himself.
2. Who sees not his gross and impudent denying
of the Spirit and Faith to be conveyed by means
from God unto us.
In Page 15. G. F. brings in Henoch HowetHenoch Hovet saying
[There is nothing in Man to be ministred to but man]
He Answers, How then ministred the Apostle to
the Spirit? and Christ spake to the Spirits in Prison:

and Tim. was to stir up the Gift that was in him
and the Spirit of the Father speaks within them:
and the Light shines in the Heart: and the Son
of God is revealed in me saith the Apostle: that
which may be known of God is manifest in man,
for God hath shewed it unto them, Rom. 1. and the
Apostle was [79] manifest to every ones Conscience
in the sight of God, and that was of God which
the Children disobeyed.
I Reply, 1. (As in his late Book exalting his
Heathen Light above the Holy Scriptures) he simply
and prophanely joyns the Philistian Priests, and
Egyptian Conjurers with Holy Iob and his Friends,
c. so here he confounds and jumbles together the
natural powers and faculties and Humane Light in
all Mankinde with the Grace and Spirit of God
both ordinary and extraordinary as may be seen at
the first view.
2. His Scope is (abominably and horribly,) to
make the holy Spirit of God capable of being
preached unto, to be converted and turned unto
God, yea to refuse and be damned, for it is not Man
he saith that is preached unto.
3. How Sottish and Blind doth this Deceiver pro|claim
himself in the Christian Doctrines of Preach|ing,G. Fox ignorant of the true spirit of God
Conversion, Faith and the Grace and Spirit of
God confounding Gold and Drosse, Pearls and Peb|bles,
Harps and Harrows (as all one) altogether.
In Page 136, 137. He brings in Thomas Moor,Tho. Moor.
saying [Nor are we to wait for a further Revelation
to be given forth then the Scripture for the Word of
God came not first immediately to the Gentiles but to

the Apostles:] He Answers, The Apostles that
Preached the Word of God, it was immediate
to whomsoever they preached it, for they had read
it immediately, for the Word it self is immediate
with more that follows to the same senceless and
absurd purpose.
Reply, As if all that receive G. Fox his Book
simply pretended to be from the Spirit of God re|ceive
it without G. Fox his Brain and Hand,The use of means and
Pen or Paper, Printing and Letters: or because a
King delivers his minde to his Secretary, and com|mands
him to Pen it in a Proclamation, Declaration,
c. therefore the Kings Word or Will comes to
every man immediately without any such means,
as the Secretaries composing his Clarks Transcrib|ing,
the use of Printing, Letters, Paper, c. to
talke after this sort, what is it but to talk Frantick
and Bedlam, and without the guidance of a com|mon
rational Spirit.
In Page 5. he brings in Samuel Eaton, saying
[Though all the Saints have the Spirit of Christ dwell|ing
in them, which is Eternal and Infallible, yet that
this Spirit should do all which Saints do, and should say
all that Saints say, and should judge for them, both per|sons
[80] and things after an infallible manner,Fox and the Qua|kers above all Kings and Princes, Popes  Emperors Saints and Angels and
that they should neither say nor do any thing by any
understanding of their own but the Spirit: all this we
deny] He Answers, [Which is contrary to the Apos|tle,
who saith, as many as are the Sons of God are
led by the Spirit of God: and Christ acts all in
them and for them: and the fruits of the Spirit,
c. and the Spiritual man judgeth all things: And

that is it which leads the Saints to divide and dis|cerne
all things both temporal and spiritual; the
spiritual Wisdome of God which gives them a
spiritual understanding, which men must rule
withal, but not with their own which comes to
nought: and you that have not that which is in|fallible
to judge in you, know not the Spirit of
Christ, neither can you judge of persons or things
that have not the infallible judgement, nor have
the Spiritual man: neither have you the Word of
God in your hearts, nor Christ which is eternal
and infallible all which the Quakers have to judge
persons and things.]
I Reply, Mahomet the Grand Segnior, or Elder,
and Prophet transcending Moses and Christ (as he
and his followers Mahumetans say) he pretended
that he had the mind of God by immediate Reve|lation,The Ma|humetans  Qua|kers con|sidered and found one
and that by Revelation of the Holy Spirit
in the shape of a Dove, he wrote the Minde, the
Word or Scriptures of God the Alcoran: But poor
silly Souls were Mahomet and all his Disciples com|pared
with the Seraphical Doctors, the Foxians, who
neither say nor do any thing with any understand|ing
of their own, but the immediate and infallible
Spirit of God says and does all in them: who are
fit to be Kings and Princes, Governours and Judges,
Masters of Ships and Families, c. indeed of any
place of power or trust, but these walking Gods,
and Christs, and Spirits, even the meanest of the
Quakers?The Qua|kers Gods upon Earth  all other Beasts Re|probates  Devils May not the meanest Youth or Wench,
if but a pretended Quaker (according to this rule or
rate of being immediately inspired in all they do

or say) transcend all other Teachers, Translators, In|terpreters,
Kings and Counsellors, Navigators, Histori|ans,
Geographers, Rulers and Iudges, c. It is true
that Thomas Munster and Becold, and Knipperdoling,
and Fifer pretending immediate Revelations, and so
have other Leaders of these Nicolaitans in France
and England, c. but none were so large and open
hearted as to communicate so freely and bounti|fully
to all their followers, the immediate Inspira|tions
of their pretended holy spirit, as these [81]
foolish and filthy Dreamers do: for so saith Fox
[All the Quakers say or do is by the infallible and
eternal Spirit] but how horribly their Spirits, Prin|ciples,
Divisions, Miscarriages (in many sinful prac|tises)
and Apostacies amongst themselves give the lye
and contradict this their infallibility is notoriously
proclaimed on the house top: and I may say some|thing
more to this Head afterward.
At present I return to my Antagonists, who (while
I was Arguing against their immediate Spirit) could
not hold until my quarter of an hour, and this Head
(about their Spirit) was finished but brake silence,
and they said (especially Iohn Stubs) doth not the
Scripture say,The lead|ing of the Spirits debated. if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ he is none of his: And as many as are led
by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of God, and
ye have an unction, and need not that any man teach
you, and you know all things?
I then answered that there was a leading of a
Beast by an Halter or Bridle, and there was a lead|ing
of a Man with a Reason when his understand|ing
and judgement is satisfied, and if so, I presumed

they intended, that the leading of the Spirit did
not lead them as Beasts,The tryal of Revela|tions but as Rational, satisfying
their Reasons and Judgements: and if so Reason
grants that there are false Spirits, lying Prophets,
Seducers and Deceivers, c. Reason therefore fur|ther
saith, that every Soul must be satisfied, whe|ther
this Leading, or Anointing, or Teaching of the
Spirit be by means of Praying,Reason sanctified and rightly improved Preaching, Reading,
Meditating, Conferring, c. or immediate without
the use of these: if motions without the use of
these be pretended Reasons tells us that a Rational
Soul must be able to try whether the Spirit pre|tending
to be true or lying Spirit, and that it
must have some Rule or Touch-stone to make their
Tryal by, that the Rule must be my own Reason,
or some Testimony of unquestionable Witnesses
satisfying my Reason, or some heavenly inspired
Scripture or Writing which my Reason tells me
came from God: Reason also tells each rational
creature, that it is very suspicious to be a false, lying
and develish motion, which slights the Holy Scrip|ture
and other holy means wherein the Holy Spirit,
Presence and Power of God hath appeared to Gods
People formerly Reason tells me, that if I finde
my self weak (as who doth not) to fight against the
Devil (the roaring Lion and old Serpent) and I am
bound to seek out for help, and what help more
powerful [82] and proper then that of the eternal
and all powerful Father of Spirits: and that it is
best to take Iames his Counsel, if any Man wants
wisdome let him ask of God who gives to all Men
liberally and upbraideth not: if so, then Reason

tells us, that except we suffer our selves to be led as
Beasts by Sathan (as the poor Quakers are) we must
come to the use of Means, or a mediate leading and
teaching, and then what is become of these hellish
fancies of only immediate Teachings and Inspira|tions?
I told them that beside this Counsel and Com|mand
of God in Iames, the Lord Jesus tells us by
an admirable similie, that the holy Spirit of God is
given in the use of means,The Spirit gotten of prayer Luk. 11. If you who are
evil give good gifts unto your Children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him? and that is Isa. 11. the Spirit of Wis|dome,
the Spirit of Knowledge, the fear of the
Lord and all Graces of the holy Spirit.The Qua|kers Spirit It is
clear that the Pen-men and holy Scribes of Gods
will unto us (in whom God did speak, and by whom
he wrote immediately and infallibly those blessed
chosen pens of his were not infallibly guided by
an immediate Spirit in all that they said and did
about this Scripture, as these poor Dreamers say of
themselves, and therefore must necessarily dash
against the Holy Scriptures, and all holy means
formerly used by the first Christians, yea and all
rational means to pieces; for all that they say or
do is the immediate Spirit, and Christ and God
himself as Fox here affirmeth.
I answered further,The omnis|ciency of the Qua|kers that if that Scripture alleadged
by Iohn Stubs [To know all things] be to be ex|pounded
litterally, and (as G. Fox in this Book)
viz. that the Saints know all things as God, then
why are not the Quakers Omnipotent and Al|mighty

as well as Omniscient:Their in humanity and cruelty yea as it is said of the
Pope, if he can deliver all Souls out of Purgatory
(if he please) without Money, surely he is very in|humane,
impious and cruel that he doth not: so I
said what impiety is it, what cruelty and inhumani|ty
is it in the Quakers said I, so insallibly knowing
all things as God, not to reveal unto Men, and
especially in their publick Assemblies so many
deep points of the Godhead, of Creation of the
Holy Three in Heaven and Earth, (which they con|fess)
and all the deep Mysteries and Prophecies in
the Holy Scripture especially in Iohn and Daniel
their Revelations, c. the Most Holy, Omniscient,
and Eternal Iehovah knows that the Pope and his
Purgatory, the Quakers and [83] their Omnisciency
are but Childrens and Frantick Persons Dreams and
Phantasies, and that the Saints knowing all things
is the same with their doing all things through
Christ which strengtheneth them that is not all
things litterally,Knowing and doing all things (for that were ridiculous and blas|phemous
to affirm it) but all things figuratively and
Comparatively, which his holy Wisdome thinks fit
to require them to know and do in order to his
Glory and their Salvation.
But Iohn Stubs insisted how they knew the Mysti|cal
number of 1260 dayes, the 42 Months, the Time
and Times and half a Time, and that the Woman was
come and coming out of the Wilderness in them,
and that now they were Preaching the Everlasting
Gospel to them that dwell upon the Earth.
I Replied, it is notorious how many excellent
men have been bewildred, and missed in the open|ing

of these Mysteries. I said that if their infalli|ble
and their all-knowing LightThe Light within. could open all
things and was now the Everlasting Gospel or Glad
News, the Word Eternal, c. and that it was not
only in the Quakers and their Saints, but in all
Mankind, I desired to know what they meant by
this Word within, whether they meant in the un|derstanding
(the eye of the Soul) or in the Will, or
in the Memory, or in the Affections, or in all of
these joyntly: for Light is only seen with the Eye,
not with the Tongue, nor Ear, nor Hand: it is
true in the 2 Cor. 4. it is said; that God hath shined in
our Hearts,2 Cor. 4 God hath shined in our hearts but there the heart must be understood
the Understanding the Minde which is properly
and nextly the seat of the Light and Knowledge
of God, and this shining (though Fox make it to
be natural or born with every Man) is said to be by
Pauls Preaching as is there abundantly proved
where it is as clear as the Noon day shining, that
God shined, Christ shined, and Paul shined before the
Light or Notice of the glad news of a Saviour come
to the heart or ears of poor Sinners, and so thereby
are turned from their natural hellish Darkness to a
Supernatural Heavenly Light.
Who knows not (with Ieremiah) the heart of
Man to be naturally dark,The dark|ness within deceitful, desperately
evil and wicked,  Gen. 6. the imaginations of the
heart of all men to be only Evil and that continually,
and that it may be said of all men (as it is said of
the holy God, in him is Light and no Darkness so)
in them is Darkness and no Light, so that to
hearken to, to turn to, to listen to any voice or

motion within in heavenly things, in matters of
supor- [84] natural light, is as proper as in matters
of law to go for Counsel to a cheating thief or
rogue, in matters of health, to a known cheating
Mountebank, as to turn within to a mans heart
which was the arrantest Iugler and Cheater in the
world.
At this word W. Edmundson cryed out, Blasphe|my,
He speaks Blasphemy. I conceived he meant I
called their immediate holy spirit which they pretend
to,An Evi|dence that the Qua|kers spirit and a de|ceitful Heart are one the arrantest Iugler  Cheater in the world:
My heart was warm, and my tongue breaking
silence, and longing to shew him his willing mis|take,
and that I mentioned not nor thought of the
Holy Spirit, but every mans own deceitful heart
(though clearly I have thought and proved their
holy Spirit is no other but Sathan himself and every
Mans own deceitful Heart: but I was prevented,
for some of the Auditory spake aloud that he mis|took
me, and amongst others our Deputy Governour
Capt. Cranston openly said that W. Edmundson mis|took
me,The testi|mony of the Deputy Governour Cpt. Cranston and others against W. E. slander|ous rash|ness, for I expresly said that the Heart of man
was the arrantest Iugler  Cheater in the world.
This did not satisfie W. Edmundson, but he re|plyed,
let the words be read then by him that took
them in short-hand: so they cal'd upon one of
theirs to read what he wrote: now I knowing
what short-hand could doe as well as most in Eng|land
from my Childhood, and that it is impossible for
any to write Verbatim so fast as I then spake with
vehemency, I concluded he had not exactly my
words: yet I am confident in a faction and partiality

he seemed to read some words favouring my call|ing
their spirit the arrantest Iugler and Cheater in
the word, extreamly contary to my certain knowl|edg
of my intentions, and of what I uttered, beside
the sdden and quick exception of our Deputy
Governour and others: but alas this was a small
business: but I was about to say (as before I did say)
from the holy Scripture Pro. 28. He that trusteth
to his own heart is a fool, and till a spirit of Regen|eration
and Conversion change the heart of man,
there is no other Christ nor Spirit within, but the
spirit of Sathan, which is the spirit by which the
Quakers are acted, and is the arrantest Iugler
Cheater in the world:The great Cheater who cheats all Cheat|ers. This Iugler is so cunning
that he out-jugles the Iuglers, he catcheth the
craftiest foxes that catch so many others, he takes
Captive and leads away in chains the Wise and
Prudent, the High and Mighty, til the holy Spirit
of Christ Iesus discover and break his snares and
lead him Captive also.
85] 2. I was adding another Argument from Isai.The great Magna Charta xi Ia. 59.
59. and I did mention the place where the great pro|mise,
Grant or Charter is given by God the Father
to Christ Iesus and his Posterity, viz. that his word
and his Spirit should be in Christs mouth, and in
the mouth of his Seed, and in the mouth of his
Seeds Seed from thenceforth and for ever.
I said that that blessed Son of God and Son of
Man the man Christ Jesus, lived and dyed a Batche|lour,
he never had any natural Seed or Issue: Be|lievers
are his Offspring, his Seed, his Children and
Grand-Children and so downward to as many as the

Lord shall call.The true Seed. And that Fox should not say the
Word and the Spirit are all one (as commonly G.
Fox doth) and that the Father and the Son are one
without Distinction (as boldly and Babilonically he
doth) Here is (most distinctly and exactly distin|guishing)
1 The Father promising. 2. The Son
the Mediator receiving this Promise. 3. The
Promise it self, which is of a Word to the Son
(though that blessed Son is also called the Word)
viz. of the revealed Doctrine, Will and Mind of
God recorded from and by the holy Scriptures, viz.
that this Word should be in his mouth and in the
mouth of all his Seed, or Christian Children after
him, especially his Messengers and Preachers to the
end and Consummation of all things.
I told them it was notoriously known how they
slighted this holy Charter, how they joyned not
the holy Word and Spirit together but trod upon
the Word of God under a cloak of advancing the
Spirit, c. But of this I shall speak in the next
Position following.
I was also mentioning a third Argument against
their spirit from the Irrationallity and Unruliness of
it, contrary to the Wisdome and Rationallity and
Order and Holiness of the holy Spirit of God: this
is apparent from their bitter Reviling, and often
senceless and frantick Reviling in some of them,
Devil, Devil, Devil. The devillish Inquisitors, Monks
and Fryers,The rail|ng spirit of the Quakers. c. exceed them not in spattering
out Diablo, Diablo against such as dare to op|pose
them: indeed they are both Possessed by one
spirit of blasphemous Railing and Reviling against

the Witnesses: far from the holy Spirit of the Gospel
who in Meekness instructeth those that oppose them|selves.
Was there ever fouler Language given by
any poor Oister-woman at Billingsgate than is given
by M. F.Their Cursing. [86] against Capt. Wiggan (to be seen in
print to the shame of the Quakers Spirit) of all
their womanhood? What is all their notorious
common censuring and cursing even of eminent
and learned and holy persons) for Cains, Iudases,
serpent Pharises, dumh Dogs, Witches, Blasphemers,
Reprobates, Devils, but a fruit of wicked and rotten
flesh, deny and defying the holy Spirit of God.
It is true the Holy Spirit of God in Scripture is
pleased to use Censures Curses but not to every
one,Mens and Womens Nakedness nor in such a manner as this foul-mouth'd
Spirit doth: I mentioned before their Impudency
(which stinks up to Heaven and cries for vengeance)
in the stripping stark naked of their Women, and
discovering of themselves in the Assembly of Men
and Youths, under the Cloak and Cover of the
Spirit of God: as also the unnatural Preaching of
their Women in publick Assemblies and Congregations,
contrary to so many Reasons from Nature and
Grace,Their Womens Preaching. so positively expressed by the Holy Spirit in
Scripture.
What Spirits are their Dumb Spirits in their
Dumbe Meetings but those foul dumbe Spirits
mentioned in that Gospel,Dumb Meetings. which the Lord Jesus
will cast out and tumble down to Hell (whence
they came) in his holy season.The mon|strous Sing|ing of the Quakers.
What is their monstrous way of Singing and
Toning and Humming many at once, as they often

do and notoriously did at Portsmouth on Rhode
Island this last year, when no man is edified, nor
understands what they say, and it may be not them|selves
(and this under colour of singing in the Spirit)
what is it I say but rendring their Tongues which
should be their Glory and the Glory of God, their
scorn and shame, and the holy Name of Gods
holy Spirit contemptible also.
4. I did also mention a fourth Reason against
their Spirit,The true Spirit wil|ling to be examined by the Scripture and every mans Con|sceence. and had prosecuted it but I knew that
(by reason of my Adversaries interposure) I had
exceeded my quarter of an hour: It was taken
from the Holy Spirit of God subjecting it self to
be tried, commanding all men to search the Rec|ords,
commending the Bereans for examining Pauls
Preaching and Spirit by the Holy Scriptures, and
this is the true meaning of the Spirit of the Pro|phets
are subject to the Prophets, not that a true
Prophet or Messenger of God can subject the truth
of God (which he believes so to be and will rather
suffer many deaths then relinquish) to be sentenced
by all the Prophets in the Church to be false, and
he acquiess or rest in, [87] or subject his Spirit and
Conscience to that Sentence: but that the true Pro|phets
of God are willing to have their Teachings
questioned, examined and made clear by the holy
Records to the Souls and Consciences of all men.The false and Iug|lers endure not search|ing.
Hence it pleaseth God to give Rules for the trial
and discerning between the true Spirit and the false,
1 Iob. 3.  4. chapters.
On the contrary, I would have shewed (which
indeed all men know) that the thief endured not

searching the galld Horse endures not rubbing, the
guilty Debtor endures not Reckoning, the false and
jugling Spirits escape in a Mist, and by the help of
dark Lanthorns, and under the covert of the night:
who may not see this in G. Fox. all along his Book,
running into the Thickets and Burroughs of Words
of divers significations, Scriptures notoriously wrested,
general,The Qua|kers cry is Light but they dare not come
to it. and sometimes uncouth and barbarous Lan|guage,
which hath been the trade of the false and
lying Murtherous Spirit in all ages, and will be un|til
that short time be finished wherein the Lord
will tread him under the Saints feet, and cast him
into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.
How oft have I been visited by the Quakers, cry|ing
Repent, Repent, hearken to the Light within thee,
c. And I never could perswade them to sit down
and examine their sayings by the Holy Scriptures,
but when their Cuckoes note and song was over,The two pretended Witnesses Reeve and Muggle|ton. and
their Fools Bolt shot, then fell they to Cursing and
pouring out the Thunder-bolts of Gods Iudgement:
and so be gone no less then Reve and Muggleton
(pretending to be Gods two last Prophets and Wit|nesses)
about twenty years since in London whose
Cursings were notorious.
But to return, while I was beginning to urge the
tryal of the Spirits, W. Edmundson said the Spirit of
God was above the Scriptures and not to be tryed by
them: for it gave out the Scriptures c. And I said
and say it is easie to boast of the Spirit,The Qua|kers would set the Spi|rit and Scripture at odds. but the true
Spirit (in a Sense) and the holy Scriptures are one,
as the Father and Son are one, and therefore can
not but be willing to be examined by the holy

Records, as every man or author will stand to his
own scripture, work or writing; for the Writers
were but Pens of Heaven writing, and used by the
hand of the holy Spirit. And I remember that I
said to W. Edmundson, Friend, You yesterday in
your long Sermon alleadged that holy Scripture viz,
Men will not come to the light, least they should be
reproved, [88] because their deeds are evil: This is
the true cause of your quarrel against the Scriptures,
and of exalting the Spirit above them that is upon
a true ballance, your own Spirit, yea the Spirit of
Sathan to be God, and Christ, and Spirit and all.
After some few interchanges and altercations,The 4th Position concerning the Scriptures. we
descended to the fourth Position, which they read
out of the Paper (as they did all the rest) which
was this, viz. That the People called Quakers did not
own the Holy Scriptures.
In one Copy it was written Really own, viz. They
did not really own the Holy Scriptures.
I said there was a twofold owning the Holy Scrip|tures
or the Writings of God as there is a twofold
owning the Scriptures or Writings of men,A twofold owning of any scrip|ture or Writing. the Pro|clamations
and Declarations of Kings and Princes:
The one is verbal and literal, viz. that such a writing
or Declaration, or Treatise is extant, and that it pro|ceeds
from the Kings Authority and Command.
The second is real and actual, when the Authority
of it is in all humble obedience submitted to and
obeyed: when the Justice and Equity, and the ex|cellency
and goodness, as well as the royal Authori|ty
is embraced and magnified.
I said the Iews owned verbally and wonderfully

that Writings of the Old Testament and the Papists
owned both old and new but it is known that in
many particulars they do in effect deny and damn
them. 1. They both set up their rotten Traditions,
their unwritten Verityes (as they speak) of equal
authority with, if not (in cases) above the holy
Scripture.The Iews and Papists and Qua|kers all of them in effect deny the holy Scriptures.
2. They set up the Papists by the authority of
the Council of Trent, a most defective Translation,
notoriously false in many places all over above the
first Copyes of the Hebrew and Greek whence all
Translations as Counterpanes and secondary Copyes
or Duplicates ought to flow.
3. The Papists set up the Pope as the only in|fallible
Judg  Interpreter in all Questions about the
Scriptures and the Jews make their Rabbies as so
many Popes also.
4. Their Interpretations are so forraign and
strange and many of them so absurd  mon|strous
from the genuine  proper Sence of the
Scriptures, and adulterated with Wresting and alle|gorizings
c. that is truly said of them that they
bring not their Doctrines, Disciplines and Conversa|tions
to the Scriptures but force the [89] holy Scrip|tures
of God to attend and wait upon their Abomi|nation
as a Negro Slave and Lacquey.
I said the Jews and Papists did not more disowne
the holy Scriptures upon the account of their Popes
and Traditions and Interpretations than the Quakers
did upon the account of their Light and Spirit and
Interpretations also.The Qua|kers slight|ing the holy Scriptures in many horrible Partic|lars. Who knows not that in the
beginning of their Profession, they generally fell

from the reading of them by themselves or in their
Families, or in their Publick Assemblyes, only crying
up the Light within, the Spirit within, the Scriptures
within, their Teacher within. They stil say The
Scripture was not the Word of God, the Scripture is
but a dead Letter, they have no need of Paper-Teachers
having the spirit that gave it forth? Yea
as the Papists say, if the Scriptures were lost and
burnt out of the world, the spirit within them
could give new Scriptures.
Tis true the Quakers in this Dispute professed to
be tryed by the Scriptures,A dissem|bling Show of Quakers respecting the Scriptures. which the first Quakers
among us wholly denied, but only by the Spirit
within them: But what avails this Confession? Is it
not but a subtle trick of Equivocation, when stil
they profess to owne G. Fox all along, and he pro|fesseth
the Soules of all men to be a part of God
and the divine Essence, and that their is no dis|tinction
between God, Christ, and Spirit and them|selves;
what should hinder but that the Scripture
is but a dead Letter, and (compared with their spirit)
a weak and needless Paper unto them that hath
such a light and Spirit within to guide them?
I told them before and now that there was an
Irish Papist in the late warrs that spoke the very
heart and soul of Iews,An Irish Papist con|fessing the Truth. Papists and Common Pro|testants,
and the Quakers themselves, as to the holy
Scriptures. In plundering and rifling a Protestants
house he found a Bible and flung it in the Kennel,
and kickt and trod upon it saying, The plague of God
take this Book, it is the cause of all these Quarrels.
My Opposite said they owned the Scriptures in

their place as a Declaration of the Saints Conditions,
 Iohn Burnet took a Bible and read publickly that
Passage in Luke 1. where Luke calls his Writing a
Declaration. I urged that this will of God. (for
this Declaration of what Christ said and did, and of
all the rest of the Scripture, was a Declaration and
Revelation of Gods Will to his People and to the
whole World) this written and revealed [90] will
of God I said was the Judge and Decider of all
Questions, the tryer of all Spirits, all Religions, all
Churches, all Doctrines, all Opinions, all Actions.
They answered they did owne the Scriptures, and
would be tryed by the Scriptures (which is a new
trick, meaning according to their own not to be
questioned Interpretations) I urged that they set up
their Spirit above the Scriptures, (fathering all their
Revilings Cursings and Abominations upon the
holy Spirit) I asked whether they owned the
Scripture as the square Rule or Guide according to
whose sentence all the Knowledge of God and of
our selves, the Knowledge of Gods Worship and
Service and our own Blessedness and Salvation was
to be determined, yea and the Spirit within them
to be tryed, determined, approved and condemned
also.
They still fled to this Burrough,The Scrip|tures miracu|lously pre|servd to be Gods standing outward Record  witness. the Spirit that
gave forth Scripture is greater then the Scripture:
the spirit is in us, that Spirit only opens the Scrip|ture:
the Spirit is immediate and infallible and
they only who have this Spirit know the Scrip|tures.
I answered that I maintained the inward
breathing of the holy Spirit more than themselves,

for I quoted before Luke 11. viz. that we ought in
all our Preachings, Hearings, Readings, Prayings,
c. to beg the help of the Spirit called the Finger
and Power of God: and yet I also maintained that
this Record, this Word Will or Mind of God writ|ten
and pen'd by chosen Pen-men as Pens in the
hand of his holy Spirit, and so miraculously pre|served
from the Rage of the Devils fiery Instru|ments,
Babilonian, Assyrian, Romane and Popish Ty|rants
and that much among the Jewes and Papists
(and much by their meanes also though they hate it)
I say this Record is the outward and external Light,
Lanthorn, Iudge, Guide, Rule by which God wit|nesseth
himself and his Truth in the World, com|forteth
and feedeth his saints in their Dispersions,
discovers and reforms the defects and wanderings of
his People (as in Iosiah his finding this Record,
and Ezekiel  Iohn eating the Book, out of which
the holy Spirit inspired them to prophesie to Kings
and Peoples c.
Tis true who doubts it but that God and the
Spirit were before the Scriptures, and so he was be|fore
the Creation, before Christ Jesus was born, and
his Redemption actually accomplished: are the
works of God therefore, and the several Dispensa|tions
and Institutions and Instruments of God in
their several times and [91] places of any whit less
power or esteem because the most holy God and his
most holy Spirit were before them? Iohn the Bap|tist
saith that Christ Jesus was preferred before him,
for he was before him and he was not worthy to
unloose the Shoe-latchet of Jesus the Lamb of

God; and yet for the fulfilling of all Righteousness
the Lord Iesus must come to Iohn to be baptized
of him, and the holy Spirit of Light will declare
himself to be true by the holy Scriptures, and dis|cover
all other Spirits to be spurious false and Bas|tards
and notwithstanding their cracking and prat|ing
of Light if they slight this outward standing
Record and Witness of God in the World it is be|cause
there is no light in them,
One of these two must be done either we must
subscribe to the Papists and by their pretended
Spirit and Church find out and authorize the Scrip|tures,The holy Scripture the only outward standing Rule  Record like the Records in the Tower
just as the Foxians say, or else we must with
Luther and his Associates, Calvin and his followers
maintain Learning study the Scriptures, search the
Originals, Copyes and Translations, and vindicate
their Purity and Perfection, their Authority and
sole external Direction how to judge of all pre|tending
Christs and Prophets and Doctrines  Churches
and Spirits.
While we were thus discoursing W. Edmundson
propounded this Similitude,The Holp Scriptures are Gods Love-let|ters if I should write a letter
to a friend and subscribe my name W. Edmundson,
doth it follow therefore that the Letter is W. Ed|mundsons?
I answer that the Quakers do affirm
that the Scripture is within them, what is the eng|lish
of that? but that the Light which they and
every man in the World hath within them (the
Christ the Spirit which every one hath) is Scrip|ture,
and in a sence I said it was a Truth that W. E.
his letter to his friend was W. Edm. not only a
Declaration of his word, mind or will to his Friend,

but in a respect his mind and will it self that he
sent in Writing to his Friend, and so the Scripture
in a Sence is Gods mind and Will to us.
Upon this occasion I told them that the Scrip|tures
were the Love Letters of Christ Iesus to his
Church, as the Love-Letters of some mighty Mon|arch
to his Betrothed Queen or Empress, they are
dear, not as common Paper and Ink, but as the
Good-Will, the dearest Love and heart of the King
and Emperour himself: and thus are holy Scrip|tures
highly prized and embraced, and laid up in
the heart and bosome of the true Children of God,
92] believed listned to, and followed as the voice of
Christ Iesus to his true sheep and Spouse: the
Bastard Children and the Wolves covered only with
the sheepskins: they have other Words, Letters
Spirits, 2 Thes. 2. whatever they prate of Scripture,
and speak brave swelling empty words as Iude
speaketh.
Tis true as G. Fox all along in his Book vapours
that the Spirit was before Scripture, and gave forth
Scripture: but I proved before, that their Spirit,
their Light, their Christ, were but hellish Dark|ness,
the spirit of Sathan, and a false lying Christ,
c. 2. The Dispensations of God were many and
divers (as before the Law and after (but in this last
and third dispensation, he hath spoken (that is his
word, mind and will whatever) the Quakers as well
childishly as Blasphemously prate to the contrary
by his Son:The admi|rable ex|cellency of the Scrip|ture And as the Son himself the Lord Je|sus
in his own person, when he personally main|tained
that famous combat with the Devil used no

other weapon but Prayer and Fasting and the Holy
Scripture, so he left written this holy patern and
example, that we through Patience and Comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope, Rom. 14. Lu|ther
being demanded how he gain'd such knowl|edge
and abilities in such blind Popish darkness,Luthers Light he
freely confessed that the holy Scripture was his
first help, the second Meditation, the third earnest
Prayer to God to vouchsafe his Spirit to bless the
two former unto him. The Lord Jesus therefore
not only ordained his Messenger or Preachers of
his glad Tydings to Iews and Gentiles,Ioh 20. 2. considered but his Pen|men
also, Ioh. 20. for those two great ends (as to
us) to wit,
1. These things are written that you may believe
that Jesus is the Christ (to wit, that that individual
person and man called Jesus was the Christ, the
Messiah so long promised and expected (contrary to
the Blasphemous Fancies of the Quakers.)
And 2. That Believing in him (that individual
person called Jesus, and not in a Fancy within) we
might have Life and Blessedness.
It is no wonder therefore, that the Devil (the
great Thief) as he compasseth Sea and Land with
the Pharisees, Iesuites and Quakers to make Prose|lytes,
so wherever he comes he labours to blow out
the Candle of the Holy Scripture.
It is the Spirit Breath or wind of the Devil in
the lips of Atheists, Iews, Papists, Quakers, Ranters,
c. that puffs and blows [93] against this Holy
Light (more precious infinitely then the Sun in the
Heaven:) it hath been most wonderfully to amaze|ment,

preserved like the Sun in the Firmanent, and
shines most gloriously again and again, after the
blackest and longest storm and night of Apostacies
and Persecution.
The Turkish Hystory tells us of a Woman appear|ing
in the Heavens with a Book open in her hand,A famous vision in Turkey
some of their Mahumetan Priests dared to say (for
which one greatly suffered) that the Woman was
the Christian Church, and the Book was their Bible
or Scriptures which threatned ruine to their Ma|homet
and Alcoran: Iohn was not commanded
(and in him the Protestant Witnesses) to stand still
and listen to a Light, to a motion or voice within,
but to eat up the little Book open (once again) in
the hands of Christ Jesus, Rev. 10. and after this
eaten up to prophesie to Peoples and Nations, to
Tongues and Kings.
Whether this Book be the Book of the Revela|tion
or the Book of the whole Bible or Scripture,The two Witnesses eat up the book of Script.
it is apparent that during the 42 Months of the
the Papal Reign and Darkness, Christ Iesus hath
given. Authority and power to his Witnesses to
search after the Holy Records in the Original, He|brew
and Greek Copies, and to bring them forth by
Translating and Preaching the Doctrine of them,
c. for which they have suffered Death and Burn|ing,Tindal the first heavenly Translator burned
as Tindal and many other excellent men of
God. The Walls of Rome, yea the Gates of Hell
have shaken and felt the might of this Heavenly
Artillery: It lies therefore the Devil and all his

Messengers in hand to break to pieces, or to nail
up their"nail up this." R. W. Ms. Ann. heavenly Ordinance.
It hath been observed that there never were any
(more than others) famous for Christanity,The Iews outward reverence to the Script. but
they first were famous for an admirable Love kin|dled
by God in their Hearts to the Holy Scriptures:
It is true the Iews (to whom the Oracles of God
were committed, to wit in the Old Testament: how
studious have they been in it, even to every Word,
and Letter? they accounted it a crime for any Book
to ly upon it, but this alwayes to lye uppermost.
My self have seen the Old Testament of the Iews
most curious writing whose price (in way of trade)
was threescore pound, which my Brother a Turkey-Merchant
had and shewed me: But I speak of an
inward love, a Soul-love, c. It is wonderful what
Luther relates of that blessed Duke of Saxony,The first Protestants affction to the Scripture whom [94] God stir'd up to favour and cherish
Luther, c viz. that he caused his six Pages each of
them to read to him daily everyone his hour in the
Holy Scripture. This was the affection in all the
first Witnesses the Waldensians, the Bohemians, the
English, French, Dutch, Scotch, c. who together
with the Scriptures had mighty Affection to the
study of the Hebrew and Greek in which golden
Cups and Bowles the King of Kings was pleased to
convey the Wine (like Ahashuerosh) of his Eternal
Majesty and Goodness to us.
It is wonderful to consider how much the study
of the Scriptures and of the Hebrew and Greek

Tongues confounded and put to flight the Papists,The Scrip|tures put both Pa|pists  Quakers to flight
and forced them to study the Scriptures and the
Tongues also, both which the barbarous dark Spirit
of the Quakers hate, as darkness hates the Light.
It is no wonder this Spirit of Lying cries out so
fiercely against the Schools of Learning in Old and
New England, it knows that the right and regular
propagation of natural, of civil, and especially of
Divine Knowledge scatters the thick Fogs of the
Quakers affected hellish ignorance.
The blessed Martyrs and Witnesses of Jesus in all
ages have been ravished with holy delights like Da|vid
in the holy Scripture, in Q Maries dayes, that
famous Ridley (called Bishop of London) he had got
most of the holy Epistles in Greek by heart,Christs Martyrs or Witnesses love to Scriptures even
before he left Pembrook Hall in Cambridge: and as
the fire of persecution grew hotter, so did those
blessed Witnesses (like Jesus with Moses and Elias,
and Paul at Troas) spend hours and nights in Prayer
and holy Conference upon the Scriptures, and those
things which the Lord Jesus should and hath now
accomplished according to the Scriptures.
It is true (in print) Iames Parnel spake like a
Papist an Atheist, and a Quaker of the holy Mar|tyrs
or Witnesses of Jesus Christ, and of the book
of Martyrs it self.Iames Parnel his horrible sin  Iudg|ment It is no wonder that the most
Righteous and jealous Lord left him not to dye the
common death of all Mankinde, but to Murther
himself by a proud presumptuous attempt of de|claring
himself to be Christ by fasting 40 dayes and
40 nights, I believe this to be a Truth from the
Testimonies I have seen of Parnels case (being my

self then in London) whatever, Fox  the Quakers
impudently affirm to the contrary.
95] It is true that Iames Parnel, and Fox, and all
of them sometimes miserably (and after the Devils
Method) make use of Scripture as a Shield or Buck|ler
to fence themselves against the Scripture,How the Quakers own Scrip|ture and
as a Sword to run through the Heart and Bowels
of the Scripture, the Saints, and Christ, and God
himself: they make use of it as Stirrops, and Lad|ders,
and Scaffolds for their counterfeit Christ (in
pretence but in reallity themselves) to mount up
into their Saddles and Thrones of the Eternal power
and Godhead that so the Earth may be theirs by
Authority:2. King. 17. the Samaritans feared the Lord and yet feared him not. So that as the Lord speaks of the
Iews Sacrifices that they were not his: and of Ie|hoiakim
that he did not know the Lord, Jer. 22. and
of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. that they did not eat
the Lords Supper though they did eat it: so I affirm
(from all the premises alleadged) the Quakers do
not own, that is truely and Christianly (as they say
Bon fide and in reality) but slight, and villifie, and
abominate, and nullifie the holy Scripture, that
their unwritten Lies and lying Spirits may be
exalted.
We have a great word in use amongst Merchants
and others, to wit the word [Effects] they desire to
see effects of money or Goods,The word Effects for want of a real
and effectual prizing and loving  obeying and
magnifying the holy Scriptures. The Iewes 
Pharises, the Papists and Quakers do not owne
the perfection  Authority of the holy Scriptures,
but set up their Traditions and Popes Councils 

Spirits above them, and therefore the Iewes  Pa|pists
and Quakers do not owne the holy Scriptures.
I freely acknowledge that many of these Partic|ulars
I could not then express because of my Con|finement
to a quarter of an hour, and sometimes
the Interposure of my Opposites.
I remember I urged that dead and rotten esteem
that both Papists and Quakers fling as dirt in the
face of the holy Scriptures,The Pa|pists and Quakers call the holy Script. a dead Letter. calling it a dead Letter,
a Nose of wax, a leaden Rule which may be pincht
and bow'd to every mans Opinion: But First, They
horribly bow and pinch that holy Scripture, 2. Cor. 3.
which meddles not with all the Scripture but with
the Covenant of the Law and Iustice, opposite to the
Covenant of Grace  Mercy,  calls the Law a
killing Letter compar'd with the Grace  Mercy
of an offended God now reconciled by Christ Iesus.
But Secondly, These poor Foxes fly to their Bur|roughs
and confound the matter of the Scripture or
Writing; being Paper [96] and ink, c. with the
contents the purport, and (as I may say) the matter
contained in the matter:The power of Writing in all Affairs. we use to say what have
you to shew for it? what evidences have you?
what Records, and sometimes when no Witnesses
are living or can be had, an old poor Record is pro|duced
which proves the life and spirit of the busi|ness:
what Simpletons do these (only) wise ones shew
themselves in affairs of men that know not, that
(as Solomon sayes of the Tongue, Life and Death is
in the power of the Tongue so) Life and Death is
in the power of a piece of Paper: what hath an
Executor (yea many thousand Executors to shew for

their Estates sometimes of hundreds, yea thousands
years but a little paper, and ink, and wax from the
Testators? what gives life to a condemned soul but
a Pardon or Reprieve in a piece of Paper? who
knowes not that a Writ or Paper signed by his
Majesty, the Lord Chancellour, the Lord ceief Iustice
hath Death in it, and fetcheth off the heads of
many, yea the highest Offenders?
The Quotations out of G. Fox which then I could
not insist on, I shall present a few and then pass on
to the fifth Position.
In the 47th. Pag. G. Fox brings in Ios. Miller say|ing,Josh. Miller. It is an Errour (if not damnable) to say Christ is
the meanes, and that there is no other meanes of Sal|vation.
He Answers, And Christ saith no man comes unto
the Father but by me: and he is able to the uttermost to
save? and he shall be my Salvation to the end of the
Earth saith the Lord: and saith the Apostle, God is in
Christ reconciling the World to himself, and he that
hath the Son hath Life, and the Father and the Son
are one, and there is no salvation in any other.
I reply: I shall now freely declare to the Sence
of this Allegation, though in the Dispute my Ad|versaryes
would not suffer me to meddle with the
Sence of G. Fox his words, contrary to our Coven|ant
in my Writing,The Qua|kers notor|ious Cove|nant-Breakers. viz. that each Party should
speak as long as they pleased, which Liberty they
enjoyed without my Interruption: and first I doe
not think that Ios. Millers words run so loosely in
his own Book: I do not think that a man of Wis|dom
would call it an error to say that Christ is the

meanes of Salvation: But to the second part, to
which G. Fox opposeth, I believe it is an Error, and
a damnable Error, and a Doctrine of Devils, to say
there is no other meanes of Salvation: for this
wretched Iugler subtilly confounds the Instrumental
Causes of Salvation with [97] the Efficient in God the
Father,Means of Salvation. and Meritorious in God the Son, Christ Je|sus.
'Tis true, there is no Redemption and Forgive|ness
of sin, but in his Blood, Ephes. 1. though I
know this Iugler (as before) means not a Christ,
nor his Blood, nor Death as we do mean, but
Imaginary within, c. And yet as Means and In|struments:
Christs Messengers are said to save them|selves
and others: The holy Scriptures are said to
make wise to Salvation: A man may be Gods means
or Hand to save his Wife and the Wife her Hus|band:
We are saved by hope saith Paul, and saved by
Baptisme saith Peter,A Union between the Meri|torious Cause and means, and the In|strumental and Effici|ent or worker. yea, Women are saved by
Child-bearing, as God blesseth those painful Curses
to be blessed means of bringing to, or growing up
in Christ the Saviour. All these subtly and wicked|ly
G. Fox sets at variance with the Meritorious Sal|vation
by Christ Jesus, between which there is an
Heavenly Union and Concord, as between a man sav|ing
his Brother by throwing a Rope, or Oar, or
Board unto him, c. or a Midwife saving both Wo|man
and her Birth in Child-bearing by the Means
of Women, and Helps which her Skil and Labour
administreth to her. To talk of this Immediate
Christ and Spirit without Scriptures, without Preach|ing,
and other holy means, is as silly, as Impious,

as Blockish, as Blasphemous, and as Bedlam, and
Frantick, as wicked and Anti-Christian.
Would not every body laugh at G. Fox, if he
should say, that because the Kings Majesty graciously
pardons Condemned Rebels at the Mediation of the
Prince his Son, therefore the Composing the writing,
the proclaiming of the pardon, the bring- of it to
the Rebels hands written and sealed with the Kings
broad Seal, are no means of their Salvation and
Deliverance?
In Pap. 221. he brings in the Author of Ho|sannah
to the Son of David,Hosanna to the Son of David. saying, [The sure Word
of Prophesie the Apostle speaks of, is the Prophesie of
Scriptures.]
He Answers, Doth the Scripture shine in a dark
place until the Day dawne? Are they them them
that must be taken heed unto as to a Light? Can
any see the Scripture, and know the Scripture, but
with the Light within? Can not a Cain, a Baalam,
a Core bring Scripture that is gone from the Spirit
of Prophesie within, and then put the Letter for it?
98] I Reply 1. I know that Fox makes their Idol
within called Light,The more sure Word of Pro|phesie. to be the more sure word of
Prophesie, and his usual proof is, [The Testimony of
Iesus is the Spirit of Prophesie,] But first, why must
all the Prophets or Messengers of God, who from
the beginning of the world were Gods mouth and
Pens, Concerning the Birth, Life, Death, Burial,
Resurrection, Ascention and coming to Judgement
of the Lord Jesus be here cast out from the Word
of Prophesie? Is it nothing, Luk. 1, that God
spake (surely Gods speaking is his word) God spake

by the mouth of his holy Prophets,Gods speaking by his Prophets is his Word. which have been
since the World began. And Heb. 1. God spake sun|dry
times and in divers manners in Time past unto the
Fathers, but how did God thus speake or utter his
word, but by the Prophets: And Rom. 16. But
now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the
Prophets, according to the Commandment, c.
Therefore how oft is it written concerning the
Lord Jesus. These things were done that the Scriptures
might be Fulfilled,] in which regard, (as to our satis|faction
and belief) the written word of Prophesie
of the Prophets are a more sure Word and Evi|dence
to us concerning the Lord Jesus then the
Miraculous Appearance from Heaven of Moses and
Elias, and the voice from Heaven of which Peter
here speaketh; though in it self a true Testimony,
yet not so sure, so firm and pregnant as the Word
that God spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets
from the beginning of the World, c. Hence the
Answer of Abraham, and indeed of Christ Jesus:
If they, hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they believe though one should rise from the Dead.
2. How sure is the Quakers Light,The mad|ness of leaving the Scrip|tures and turning to a Spirit within. their Word of
Prophesie? A sober mind can not but admire that
Face and Forehead of Brass and Adamant with
which God the Righteous Judge of the whole
hath plauged Satan and his Followers, so that they
blush not to prefer such a simple Image, a meer Ba|bie
and Childs Puppet of their Immediate Word of
Prophesie before the Word, the mind and will of
God by the mouth of all the Prophets?
For is it not known in the holy Scripture, in all

Histories, in all Ages, in all Nations, what Cursed
Opinions, horrible Uncleannesses, Bloody Murthers
and Slaughters have been Conceived and brought
forth from the Spirit within, and Revelati- [99] ons
from Divilish Lights and Spirits, and the horrible
End that generally the Authors and Promoters of
such Spirits and Inspirations have come to?
3. This Scripture,The workings of Satan by Spirits and Inspi|rations in all Ages. Revel. 19. The Testimony of
Iesus is the Spirit of Prophesie, what is it but Goli|ahs
Sword to fetch off the head of this proud Phi|listin,
for, doth not the Angels forbid Iohn worship|ping
of him upon this ground, viz. that the Angel
was his Fellow Broker, Fellow Servant, Fellow Wor|shipper,
Fellow Witness? Is not this the Argument
whereby he prohibits him, viz. that one Testimony
of Jesus was the work of Gods Spirit in the Angels,
in their way, as well as in Iohns and Peters in theirs,
c. and shall we say that the Angels too are
Quakers, and Christ hath enlightened them also, as
well as every man that comes, c And Revel. 22.
Doth not Christ threaten the Adders to, and Dimin|ishers
from the word of this Book of this Prophe|sie:
what Affinity hath a written Book a written
Prophesie with Immediate whisperings and Inspira|tions?
2. Why should G. Fox here mention Cain,The Devil and the Quakers alleadging Scriptures Balaam,
Core? what Scriptures could they bring? what Scrip|tures
were written in their times? I think it no
breach of Charity to guess that the Quakers and G.
Fox are so used to Cursing and Censuring their Op|posites
(at the first dash for Cains, Baalams, Cores,
that they could not well tell how to miss them:

Such persons no question, and the Foxians, and the
lying Spirit, the Old Fox and Serpent, bring Scrip|ture:
But doth the Divel cordially prize and love
the word of Prophesie, the Testimony and Witnesses
of Jesus? However he plainly here Confesseth that
the holy Scripture is so powerful that the very
Counterfeit, the picture and Name of it will do
him good Service, with such whom he desires to
cheat and Ruine. And yet secondly this shews the Qua|kers
horrible wickedness, that although they love the
holy Scripture (for the general of them) as well as
doth their lying Father, yet turn they the Truth of
God into a lye, and with the ugly Spider sucks that
which he turns into poyson, even from the same
Flowers of Paradice, the holy Scriptures, from
whence the hony Bees, the true Believers, suck the
pure hony of Eternal Truth and Comfort.
3. Again, what madness is it for this blind
Dreamer to ask his Opposite, whether the Scrip|ture
shines in a dark place until the [100] dawne?
 whether they must be taken heed unto as to a
Light? For, how often is the holy Scripture even the
very Law before the Gospel,No Light in the bold pretend|ers (to so much) the Quakers. or glad News was
preached, adorn'd and beautified with the Illustri|ous
Title of Light? and all the subtle Foxes in the
world must know that if they attend unto whis|perings
and peepings, Isai. 8. and leave the written
Law, the Word, and other Prophesies of Scripture,
or written Prophesies, Words and Oracles of God!
For all their Childish Vapourings and pratings of
their Light, the Eternal Father of Lights proclaims
them to be Children of howling darkness and that

there is no Light within them: I speak it with
horrour and Amazement, and also with sorrowful
Confidence that he that shall find a spark of true
Light either of the knowledge or grace of the
true Lord Jesus in this their Fantastick Light, he
shall find the Living among the Dead, he shall
prove the Prophets that spake, and the Lord God of
the Prophets whose word was spoke, to be Lyars,
for saying there is no Light within them.
But Fox again demands, (Can any know the Scrip|ture
but with the Light within?]The pure Scripture filthily abused. And I ask him
what Light have the Papists and Iews, and the
Divel himself, when they and he bring Scripture
to Christ himself? I know very well what he
means in his Iesuitical, Diabolical Reservations, by
the Light within and by knowing the Scripture, his
meaning is known and Common, viz. except he
be one of those dark Souls called Quakers: But
did not the Devil bring a pertinent Scripture and
promise to Christ Jesus as ever Papist or Quaker
could have alleadged, though pointed and directed
as are the Papists, Iews and Quakers Allegations to a
Venemous and poysonous End.
He brings in Henoch Howet saying,Pag 14: Henoch Howet. By the Weapon of the Scripture only Christ Conquer|ed the Devil- [The Scrip|ture
to be the only Weapon whereby Christ overthrew
the Devil.]
He Answers, who bruiseth his Head, and was
before Scripture was, yet the Scripture is for Cor|rection
and Doctrine, furnishing the man of God
in his place, and Christ the Seed was before the
Scripture was: And all them that hath Scripture
and not Christ cannot overcome the Devil, you and

the Papists doing his work: for they that over|come
him that is with the Power, and those have
the Scriptures of Truth, which the Devil is out of.
101] I Reply, How doth Christs bruising of Sa|tans
Head, and being before Scripture was, disprove
Fox his Opposites saying, viz. the only weapon
whereby Christ Jesus overcome the Devil was the
Scripture? what is this to the point of the Com|pass?
may not half and Eye see what a simple
Sophister this is, to make such Yawes as not to come
near the Ships Course and point in hand.
2. Who sees not Fox in his Burrough of the di|vers
Acceptation of the Word Christ? For in the
Sense of his Opposite that man Christ Jesus who
fought the Devil, and Fox Confesseth died at Ieru|salem:
was not before the Scriptures, But his Birth,
and Life, and Death, .. were Proppesied and de|clared
by the Scripture long before he was born.
3. As for this saying, [They that have the Scripture
and not Christ can not overcome the Devil] What
News doth Fox tell the World, which no Body
denies? and how doth this deny that Christ Jesus
overcome the Devil by the Scripture?
4. Is all Scripture or writing given by Inspira|tion
of God,The Scripture mosh fit and pro|per Wea|pon against the De. and is profitable (though Fox alleadg|eth
this Scripture by halves) for Correction and Doc|trine,
c. then it clearly follows, that as Christ
Jesus overcome the Devil by the Scripture, so by
the same Weapon this subtle Fox, and all other of
Satans Foxes must be Corrected, Confuted Catcht
and destroyed, (except they repent) for ever: But
what is this Confession that the Scripture is profitable

for Correction, c. but a kind of grant to his Op|posite
that Christ did overcome the Devil by this
Weapon, for he Confesseth it profitable for Cor|rection,
c. though yet all this running about in
and out into his holes in this Answer is a whisper|ing,The Dev|il a Fox too Crafty for all the Foxians.
and yet loud enough to be heard, viz. that
Christ did not overcome the Devil by the Scripture,
5. As for the Quakers Power here pretended in
Opposition to the Scripture, as being those that
have Scripture within them, and so overcome the
Devil? How doth the Devil deal as one that pre|tends
to Fight, with Children who lies down and
Cries as if those poor Childish Souls had Overcome
him? Thus sometimes a Devil of Drunkenness,
of Swearing, of Stealing runs away from the Ser|mons
of the Quakers, as a naughty Devil, sometimes
at the Chiding and Conjuring of a good Witch!
That he may get the faster hold by spiritual pride,
hypocrisie, [102] self Conceit, and Contradiction
to the Scripture, by will worship and Superstitious
Inventions against the holy Institutions and Com|mands
of the true Lord Jesus Christ.
Pag. 289. He brings in Francis Duke,Francis Duke. saying,
[When Christ told the Devil that man should not live
by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceedeth out
of the mouth of God, that was believing the Scripture:
And this Word of God in the Scripture was the Ground
of Christs Faith, and so to all that are his
He Answers, Many may have the Scripture and
never hear the voice of God, as the Jews in the
fifth of Iohn, and they said they believed the Scrip|tures
though they were out of the true belief:

But receiving the Word from God, is, as they that
gave forth the Scriptures: which man lives by and
not by bread alone, and so knows him who was
before Scripture was given forth: And for saying
that the Scripture was the Ground of Christs Faith,
he was afore the Scripture was writ, and so fulfils
their Words, and is the Author and the Finisher of
the Saints Faith, which was before the Scripture
was given forth, him by whom the World was
made, and is the Author of the Saints Faith,
that bruised the Serpent under his feet, which was
before the Scripture was.
1. I Reply,The Qua|kers Riei|culous for and in their Tau|tologies. How Notorious for Tautologies are
these brutish Clamours? Thrice in this small Ans|wer
have we of Christ, which was before Scripture
was, who was before Scripture was, c. shall we
believe their Notorious Lyes, viz. that the Light
within them gave forth Scripture, and that they
speak and write as they are moved by the most
holy and Infallible Spirit, when their writings are
so weak, lame and Childish, just like the talk of
Aged doting Women, and so full of Idle Repe|titions?
2. What Answer is this, how brutish and Im|pious,
viz. that a man may have the Scripture and
yet not be in the belief, therefore the Word of
God was not the Ground of Christs belief, so again,
the Devil and wicked men may have the Scripture,
and yet believe not in them, therefore Christ Jesus
and his saints believe them not neither: this Infer|ence
is clear, you say Christ was before Scripture
was, c.
I Reply, He was, and he was not,: But let Hea|ven
and Earth Hear and abhor the Sophistry of these
Deceivers,The Qua|kers mad Fancies as to Christ and the Scripture. they would fain [103] have no such
Christ as man, a Christ without, an out-side Christ,
but a Spirit and God only, and that in their Flesh:
yet again, (for shame of the world) they are forct
to Confess that there was such a man or person, c.
and yet to Cloak and Cover that Confession from
Crossing their Principle, they say; that before Scrip|ture
was Christ bruised the Serpents Head, that is
Christ that made the World, Christ the Light, the
Word,: But this again., we say is false also, for the
Promise is, Gen. 3. that the Seed of a Womau which
was Christ in his Manhood, born in the Fulness of
Time, Gal. 4.
And let G. Fox or any of their Iuglers Answer:
If they speak honestly, and (bona fide) if there was
really such a man called Jesus at Ierusalem, c. as
there was such a man called G. Fox lately in New-England,
was there not such a man called Jesus,
after the Scripture was written or penn'd?The Hu|manity of Christ. was dot
this man forty dayes tempted of the Devil, and did
not this man called Jesus Christ Overcome the
Devil by the Weapon of the writing or Scrip|ture:
and was not the holy Scripture the Ground
of his Faith, as he makes the Will or Word of
God declared in this holy Writing or Record the
Ground of his saints Faith also?
He brings in Iohn Timson saying,Pag 16. John Timson [The Scripture
is the Rule of Life.]
He Answers, Contrary to Christ, who said, the Spirit
should lead them into all Truth: And they that are the

Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God: and the
Churches was to hear what the spirit said, for the
spirit lead them to speak forth Scripture.
I Reply, If among the seven things that God
hates,The holy Scriptures the Rule he is an Abomination that soweth Discord,
what is he that would Oppose and set at Odds the
most holy spirit, against the holy scriptures Inspired
by him? and in Effect declares that Gods Children
are not to attend to the voice of God in these his
holy Inspired writings, but to a secret Voice or
whispering within them: Contrary to the scrip|tures
Voice both before and since Christs coming,
as I have and shall further manifest.
2. As to the spirits leading into all Truth, and
the sons of God are led by the spirit of God: Is
not Fox here in his Burrough, not distinguishing
between the Extraordinary leading of the holy
Apostles Appointed to be the Eye Witnysses of
Christs Death [104] and Resurrection, lead|ing of the Spir it. c. and the
first Messengers or Apostles to the Nations, in
which Respect, the one Author of those three Gifts,
Administrations, Operations, 1 Cor. 12. perempto|rily
asks the Question, Are all Apostles, are all Pro|phets,
have all the Gifts of Miracles? and yet all
Gods Children are Regenerated, are sanctifid, are
guided and built up an habitation of God through
the Spirit: and yet also the gracious presence and
working of the holy Spirit, may be hindred and
quenched, by neglecting of the holy Fuel of the holy
Scriptures and other holy means appointed. And
therefore the Lord Jesus Commands us to pray for
the Spirit:Gods Spi|rit given by means. and Daved cries out, Thy Spirit is good

lead me, c. and take not thy holy Spirit from me.
And this is the Devils (the Old Fox) his Devilish
Subtlety to make the Cloak of the Spirit Extraor|dinary
Assistance, and the Angels Extraordinary
protection, a ground of Christ Jesus, and his Servants
flinging themselves down from the Pinacle of the
Temple, and this I say from the God of Truth will
be the Breack neck of the People called Quakers,
(without Repentance) every Soul of them.
We now descend to the proof of the fifth Posi|tion
with their Consent,The fifth Position which was, their Princi|ples
and Professions are full of Contradiction and Hy|pocrisies.
I told them, that they knew well, that the Spirit
of God had given us abundant Warning against
false Gods, false Worships, false Christs, false Spirits,
false Prophets: He Commands us in Scripture not
to believe them,The dan|ger of be|ing de|ceived c. but to try them, to try all
things, as we do with Touchstones, and with Bal|lances,
yea, with Fire it self. For, some Counter|fiet
Coyne hath been so like pure gold, so double
guilt in the middle, and the Ring round about pure
gold,Depths of Hipocriy that it hath deceived the Touchstone. The
Devil himself as black a Fiend as he is, the Spirit of
Darkness, yet he knows how to wear Samuels Man|tle,
and the white Robe of an Angel of Light, c. I
told them it was Common for Spanish, Turkish, or
any other Enemy in Time of Warr to hang out
English Colours, the more easily to deceive  Catch
the poor Merchant man, and Iudas the Traitour
gave no other signe to the Iews in his betraying of
his Lord and Master, the Lord Jesus, but God save my
Master and a Kiss.

105In the copy in possession of Brown his autograph across the outside edge of University, Roger Williams has
placed this page.] Most of this I Remember I spake,Lies in Hipocri|sie. and then
I told them that Paul tels Timothy of some that
should speake Lyes in Hipocrisie: I told them of
these, there were two sorts.
1 Such as knowingly (for wicked and Devilish
Ends of Profit or Preferment) take the Leading Staff
in hand, as 'tis more then probable, that the Misleader
of so many Millions of Mahumetans did: and as
one of the Popes in Merriment to his Cardinals Con|fest
it, saying, Quantum Lucri fecimus ex hac Fabula
Christi?Two sorts of Soul Deceivers What gain have we made of this Fable
of Christ? Thus Iudas knowingly, for his Gain
sought Opportunities to betray Christ Jesus. Thus
the Schechemites (and Millions are their Successors as
they are to Nebuchadnezzars Idolaters) underwent
that painful and shameful Ordinance of Circumcision,
partly to please their Princes, and partly for that
hope as (Schechem told them) that all that Israel
had should be theirs.
A second Sort of Soul Deceivers that are, and yet
know not in their Consciences that they are blind
Guides or blind Followers, but for not loving Truth
God hath given them up to believe Lyes, for Truths:
false Christs and Spirits, for true Christs and Spirits;
yea, and with Paul to think that they verily ought
to do many things against Iesus of Nazareth, yea,
and as the Lord Jesus Positively Foretold they shall
think to do God Service to kill himself, in killing
his Servants.

I told them my Charity, bid me hope that the
Quakers and themselves present were not of the first,
but of the second sort, and I prayed them to be as
patient as they could while I must prove that their
Principles and Professions were full of Lyes and
Contradictions, and of Hipocrisies, and Dissimula|tions.
I wondred that my Opposites and Auditors bare
all this Load so silently? But at this word W. Ed|mundson
and the rest brake out saying, We regard
not what thou thinkest and sayest of us, nor do we
need thy Charity, but go on to thy proofs, c.
I then said,The Qua|kers of late have Changed much of their Spi|rit, or else more no|toriously Equivoca|tors. that their many Books, and G. Foxes
(that thereby me) and their Professions, did so ex|ceedingly
Clash one with another: and some of
their latter Books (as Christopher Houldsworths) and
some of theis latter Professions and Practices were
such that many of their Observes Conclude, that
either they had altered their Religion in many of
their Principles [106] and Practices, and were
turned from what they formerly held, and were
amongst us: Or else their Hipocrisies and Dissimu|lations
were more and more prodigiously Abomina|ble.The Jug|ling of the Quakers about Christ.
I came to Instances, and told them that when
they were Charged to deny that man Christ Jesus,
they profess and preach they are wronged, for they
believe in that Christ which was born of a Virgin,
and died at Ierusalem, and yet for all this, it is but
in Truth a Spiritual, and Mistical, and Allegorical
Christ, which under boord and in the bottom) which
they hold. For, in New-England (before G. Fox came)
H. Norton and others say, is not Christ God, and is
not God a Spirit, and is there not a Spiritual Virgin,

a Mistical Bethlehem, an Heavenly Ierusalem? And do
not G. Fox and Ed. Burroughs all along hold out
such a Christ, whose Body is not now to be found?
and such a man as is in every Saint, or Quaker? and
in every person in the world except he be a Repro|bate?
Again,About the Church and Ordi|nances. 2. They say, they hold the Christian Church,
the Christian Ordinances, the Christian Ministry, the
Christian Baptisme, Supper the Resurrection, the Iudge|ment,
the Life Everlasting, but search their Books,
Examine their preachings and professings, and you
shall see, and may admire their Juglings and Dis|simulations:
Do not Fox and Burroughs all along
disclaim any Church Ministers, Baptisme, c. but
what is Immediate and Invisible? Do they really own
any Supper but Christs inward Supping with them,
and they with him? Or any Resurrection but the
tising of their Bodies to perfect Holiness? or any
Iudgement and Eternal Life, but what they have now
attained, and are now passing Judgement upon the
world?
3. Again, though they do deny any Church but
Invisible, yet their Churches and Congregations are
known and Visible and stated (not attending Invisible
Motions) both first day and other dayes with prayers
and Preachings, and singings, and real joynings or
Addings to them  Castings out: These things ne|cessitty
forceth them to practice, or else they can|not
possibly keep together, although in Monstrous
Dissimulation they disclaim it.
4. They profess that their Saints have an Unction,Inward and out|ward Preachers.
yea, that every person in the world is so enlightned

by Christ Jesus, that he hath Christ and Spirit, and
the Kingdom of God in them, [107] (as the Phari|sees
had, and the very same the Saints have) and if
they will, they have Teaching enough to Justifie,
Sanctifie and save them: and yet again what a noise
is there in the Worid about the Quakers, Teachers,
He Apostles, and she Apostles, snch as the Lord Jesus
never sent either the Twelth or the Seventh, or their
Successors. How do they boast to be the only Min|isters
of Christ Jesus sent into Old England and
New-England, into Scotland and Ireland, yea, into
Italy and Turky, and other Nations as diligent and
zealous as the Pharisees to pervert and poyson Souls
with a false Conversion and Salvation.
5. You profess the Scriptures to be the words of
God,As to the Scriptures but not the Word of God, and yet now you
profess to be tryed by them: Anon again, you need
not the Scriptures, you have that Light and Spirit
within you that gave out the Scriptures, and if all
the Copies in the World were burnt yet you have
the Scriptures within you,G Fox his last Book Exalting the Hea|then therefore you not only
(as the Spirt of God saith) deceitfully handle the
Scriptures by deceitful Interpretations, but by de|ceitful
owning, and not owning, and as G. Fox in
his late Book in Exalting Heathens above Christians
owning them, and yet Exalting the Spirit in the
Philistian and Egiptian Sorcerers above them.
6. As to Magistrates, how full are their Books
and Sermons against Persecution and Persecutors,As to Mag|istrates
and yet how plainly do their Principles persecute
all others that subject not to their Light, when they
have attained such godly Magistrates as they arc (as

they speak) in the Light. I told them I was Con|cerned
to make this out more fully in the proof of
my Fourteenth Position, and therefore at present I
would trouble them but with one Quotation out of
G. Fox, Pag. 170. where I Read,Pag 170 John Stallam and Iohn Burnet
Read also, how G. Fox brings in Iohn Stallam say|ing,
[And the Magistrate is not to Level the Law with
the Light in every mans Conscibnce, Again,The Qua|kers Prin|ciples are for Perse|cution
if the
Magistrate be in the Light and discern the mind of
Christ, and discern his Law, is e to Compel all the Na|tion
and Common-wealth to come to the practice of his
Light?]
G. Fox Answers, the Magistrate of Christ, the
help, Government for him, he is in the Light and
power of Christ: and he is to subject all under the
power of Christ, into his Light, else he [108] is not
a faithful Magistrate: and his Laws are agreeable
and Answer according to that of God in every
man: when men act contrary to it they do evil, so
he is a Terrour to the Evil doers, discern the pre|cious
and the just from the vile, and this is a praise
to them hat do well.
I urged from hence, that the Quakers (and G, Fox
in his Book in many places) owne no Magistrates
but such as are godly that is in their dark Sence,The Qua|kers Zeal|ous Perse|cutors.
that be Magistrates for their Christ, be in the Light
and Power of Christ, for then say they, their Laws
are agreeable to that of God in every man.
2. These their Magistrates (in the Light) ought
to subject even the Consciences and Souls of
all that be under them, by Corporal punishments to
come under the Power of Christ into the Light.

3. This is Confirmed and sealed with a peremp|tory
Doom upon the neglecter and failer, viz. [Else
he is not a Faithful Magistrate.]
4. I observe the Reason and Equity which they
alleadge of this subjecting all Subjects to the Light
of Christ, because such Magistrates, Laws and Edicts
are witnessed by God in every man, and therefore
he sins against God himself who breaks such a Mag|istrates
Command, and therefore is justly punished, c.
Upon my urging of some of these particulars
some of them desired to hear the Quotation read
again:Yet will not own it. so Iohn Burnet read the whole passage again,
and said, that G. Foz spake not there of matters of
Religion and Conscience, nor of the Magistrates
compelling men to be of his Religion and Consci|ence,
but of punishing them for matters of wrong
between man and man, which are against the Light
in every mans Conscience, as Drunkenness, Whoredome,
Murther, Stealing, and the like.
I Replyed, the Terms were such both of the
Question by the Opposite, and the Answer by G.
Fox which argue and Comprehend the matters of
Religion and Conscience, viz. If the Magistrate be
in the Light, and discern the mind of Christ, c.
and G. Fox his Terms are the same about Christ
and the Light and bringing them subject to Christ.
2. It is not Imaginable, that the Opposer would
question whether the Civil Officer ought not to
punish such incivilities and [109] Incivilities and
Inhumanities as Drunkenness, Whoredome, Stealing,
Murther, c. Therefore G. Fox must intend that
their Magistrates for Christ must Fight for their

Christ against all their Opposites, though they cry
Persecutors, Persecutors, c.
In Pag. 221. G. Fox brings in the Author of the
Book called Hosanna to the Son of David,The Qua|kers Per|fection, and yet in Measure Pag. 221. Hosanna to the Son nf David. faying,
[They know not absosolute Perfection that are admitting
of Measures and Degrees, nor come to the Day and the
bright Morning Star, is not Risen.]
He Answers, did not the Apostle speak that they
were Children of the Day, and the night was over,
and knew the whole Body, and yet said, he would
not go beyond his Measure? And doth he not speak
of the Stature and Measure and Fulness of Christ?
and were they not come to Perfection, and spoke
wisdome among them that were perfect?
I Reply: As to their Monstrous pride I shall speak,
when I come to Compare the Pope and them in the
Tenth Position: At present I Ask them, whether
Paul speak of his Measure in Holiness and Grace,
or no? Some of them say that they are not only
perfect as God in Holiness, but also in Power Om|nipotent,The Old Romans with their Dii Min|ores or les|ser Gods and the Papists and Qua|kers all one.
Omnipresent, Omniscient, c. But if Paul be
not brought in to speak of such a Perfection in
Holiness as is in God, G. Fox beats the Air,  comes
not near the Question: to save their Doctrine of Per|fection
from being a perfect Contradiction  Lie,
and they would fain make themselves  others be|lieve
that they are as truly perfect in their Holi|ness
as God is, though their Holiness be not so much:
As if they were perfectly Gods, (though but little
Gods) as God himself being a great God,The Per|fection of the God|head and so are
forct to show their Contradictions, and wheel about
to Perfection of parts as a Child is mankind though

not a perfect man, and a drop of water is true wa|ter,
and may be as Salt as any drop in the Ocean:
having the Quality of, but not the Equality with the
Ocean As otherwise G Fox foolishly  blasphem|ouly
speaks of God in this Book, Moreover, since
these high minded Souls dare to say that they are
as pure as God, and (some say what they think)
that they can no more sin against God, then God
can sin against them, c. I Ask them whether
there be any Measures and Degrees in God? whether
his Perfection in Holiness be not Holiness it self?
Wisdom it self, goodness it self, unto which there
there can be no Addition or [110] growth as we
are Commanded to grow in the grace and knowledg
of Christ Iesus. To talk therefore of Measures
Perfections, is as silly as for G. Fox when he hath begun
to sow a Shoo, and hath as yet taken but a few stitches,
yet to boast Confidently that the Shoe is perfect.
We deny not,The Qua|kers Falla|cious Per|fection. but a Dram Cup may be as per|fectly
full of wine as a Pipe or Butt, and so Iohns
little Children as perfectly, that is, as truly Gods
Children, as his strong men or Old men: But to
say this Cup or Spoon is equal in quantity to a Pipe
or Tun, a Child is equal to a strong man, much
more for a poor Potsheard to say he is equal with his
Porter, and a Worm of the Earth equal to his Ma|ker,
what is it but a bloccish and blasphemous Fallacy
and Contradiction? and a wheeling about to a Per|fection
of parts which none deny.Hosanna to the Son of David.
In 222. He brings in the same Author saying, [Christ
is without his Saints in respect of his bodily presence.]
He Answers, How are they of his Flesh, and of

his Bone, and how do they eat his flesh, and drink
his Blood? And how have they his mind and Spirit?
And he with them, and they with him? and sit in
Heavenly Places: And he is the Head of his Church,
and how then is he absent? yea, poor Apostates from
him feels not Christ, but he is with the Saints, and
they feel him.
I Reply, and Ask, is this Eating of his Flesh,
and drinking of his Blood after a Corporal,G Fox his Falla-Presence of Christ Bodily
manner, visible and real as to other Senses Or is it
Miraculous and Spiritual? Or is it Spiritual Misti|cal
by Faith, and by believing as the Protestants say?
After the first Corporal way the very Papists affirm
not:Visible and Natu|ral or Mi|raculous and Super|natural Eating of Christ. After the second way you will not say it is:
Nor would you be thought to be so gross Papists
as to hold Transubstantiation? and therefore must
it be the third way whichis by believing: and then
you poor Iugling Souls, what is it to a Bodily pres|ence,
that you Eat him by believing?
2. Whereas you say, you fit with him in Heavenly
Places, you are one wh him, c. he is Head of the
Church, c. Here I must Ask you you hold him
to be such a Visible Head of the Church, as the Pope
saith He is, and if you say yea, I then Ask you where
will you direct us to such an Individual Man,Christ Head of the Church or
person as the Pope is, and may be directed to, as we
know from so great Art all the World over, If you
say No, what is this then to talk of a bodily [111
presence of Christ (which is the point) and then
Flap me in the mouth with a Fox Tail, and tell me
(in a Childish and Equivocating Contradiction) that
you mean not a Bodily presence but a Spiritual.

3. As for the poor Apostates, and your feeling of
Christ, which the poor Apostates do not.
I Reply, An Adulterous Wretch, Accused Ioseph
of Whoredome, who was a pattern of pure and holy
Chastity: For, whom do this Whorish Brood of Fox|ians
thus brand for Apostates, and sling among them
Firebrands, Arrows and Death? Are they not all
the Children of God that are, or ever were, or shall
be called? Are they not the Souls under the Altar
who have been slain Thousands and Ten Thousands
for the Testimony of Iesus against these horrid Delu|sions?His Bodily presence.
Are they not the very first Churches, and the
Apostles of Christ Jesus, from whom Christ in his
Bodily presence was departed, as he often Forewarned
them,The Qua|kers Count all Gods Children Apostates. and (as the holy Scriptures abundantly Re|cordeth)
is Fulfilled? For, see the Jugling of
these Deceivers, when this Bodily presence is Ex|amined,
they mean no such Individual Man and
person, but a mind and Spirit, and such a Christ as
hath no Individual Bodily Presence, as we and all
men have.
If G. Fox when he is in New-England should say
he is in London in his Bodily Presence, and that his
Friends feel (as he speak) his Bodily Presence there,G Fox his Juglings and dreams about the person of Christ because they feel his Love and his Affections in
their minds and Spirits: What Hocas Pocas and
Iugling Christianity is this? All the Saints and Chil|dren
of God must all be Apostates, fallen from God
and Christ, and Grace, that cannot Skill and Feel
this Horrible Egiptian Canting Language.
I will turn my Thoughts higher. O thou most
glorious Sun of Righteousness, Truth and Holiness

shine forth, and let it be seen, how the Devil called
the Lord Jesus Beelzehub: The Treacherous Revolt|ers
and Apostates from thee, they call thy self, and
thy Saints Revolters and Apostates. They boast
with the bloody Papists and other Traitorous Rebels
against thee,An Apos|trophe or Petion to the Lord Jesus of their Right and Interest in thee, of
their possessing and feeling of thee, feeling thy
Scriptures and thy Bodily presence within them: Oh
let thy glorious Light declare, who these poor Apos|tates
and Revol- [112] ters are, who break down thine
Altars, burn thy Temples, scoff at thine Institutions,
Cry up a false and Hellish Christ within them,
Christen him with the Name of Light, though he be
thy Conquered Slave the Devil, telling us he is thine
Angel of Light, who with his Counterfiet Souldiers of
Light, Crucisie thee and pierce thee, and mock and
Curse thee, (the only true Son of God and Son of
man) as ever Herod and Pilate, the Preists and Iudas,
the People and Souldiers did.
In Page 259,259 James Brown he brings in Iames Browne saying,
[the Kingdome that is in the Saints, is not in the
Pharisees.]
He Answers, [That is, in the Saints, is in the
Pharisees in a Measure, though it be but as a Grain
of Mustard Seed, which is like to Leaven little.]
I Reply, 1. What If I should send you to some of
your Margents,Christs Kingdom in, or among the Pharisees where the Greek word [Entos] is
rendred amongst you: that is, unto you, upon you,
as Luke 11. If I by the Finger of God cast out Dev|ils,
surely the Kingdome of God is Come upon you?
The Pharisees expected (and so did all the Iews,
and Christ Disciples were not free) I say look for a

glorious Temporal King that should make his Ingress
with Pomp, and [Meta pur oteresio] as the Scripture
speaks with Observation, but he came in as some
Kings in disguize, and (as they speak) Incognito, and
yet his Kingdome was among them, in the midst
of them, by his peronal presence, his power sulp each|ing,
and his glorious Miracles.
2 Since (in Opposition to Christs Visible King|dome
his Church) you predicate a Kingdome within,
Consisting of Righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
Spirit: do you think indeed that the Hipocritical
Cursed Pharisees were snch Righteous, peaceable and
joyful Souls as your selves: As sure as God is Light:
They and their Successors your selves, will find your
selves when you wake, in horrid Quaking, and except
you repent Hell Flames about your Ears, as the Lord
Jesus told those whited Walls and painted Sepulchres.
3. Must you take Measure of the Pharisees,Horrible and hipo|critical Chistiani|ty and
tell us that the Pharisees in a Measure as a grain of
Mustard Seed and Leaven are the same with your
selves? Do not you Cry out that you are perfect,
not in Measures and Degrees, but that you are all
one in Quality and Equality of Power and Glory with
God? and must [113] this must be the same with
Christ Jesus and his Saints, and you and the Phari|sees
all together? Can two walk together, live and
love together, board and bosome together and not be
agreed together, no other wayes then Light and
Darkness, Christ and Belial, Righteousness and un|righteousness?
What stinking work do these provd
Pharisees make of Christianity? How justly doth
the Son of God give them their proper Titles, Ye
Fools and Blind?

4. If it be the same Kingdome in Christ Jesus
and in Saints, and in the Pharisees, and every wicked
man in the world,A Mon|strous King and Kingdome of the Quakers. though but as a grain of Mustard
Seed, and Leaven, what is the Reason this Mustard
Seed grows not up, this Leaven spread not in them?
Can a Nation be subject to the King of England, of
Spain, or any osher Ptince or Monarch, and yet not
know how, nor have no knowledge nor feeling of it
at all? Can there be such a God, such a Spirit, such a
Fire? yea, but such a Mustard Seed, or Levven, such
a Teacher,Abomina|ble lyes in hipocrisie. and yet not grow, not prevail, not pros|per,
nor be perceived? ye Fools and Blind are all
your Mustard Trees stunted all the world over, no
Shelter for the Heavenly Birds, your pure flowre of
Holiness and sincerity, mixt and-blended with the
black Weeds, Cockle and darnel of open Idolatries and
prophaneness, and Pharisaisme, and Hipocrisie: What
abominable Contradictions and Lyes in Hipocrisie
are here? The Pharisees have Christ and his King|dome
of Righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spi|rit
within them,The Phar|isees and Quakers hipocrisie wonderful and yet live in pride and Covetous|ness,
and Extortion, and Excess, and Cruelty, and
Hipocrisie, and Blasphemy, and all this Rottenness
and Dead mens bones stinking and ruling all within,
notwithstanding all the white and paint, and garnish|ing
without your selves, (their Hipocritical Off spring)
have, and live in, you say, this Kingdome of Christ
Jesus, this Kingdome of Righteousness and Ioy in the
holy Spirit, as perfect and pure as God himself: all
one with us, Infinite in Majesty, Holiness, Power and
Glory, not only in Quality, but Equality, c. (as this
wretched G. Fox affirmeth) And yet within and

withont Idolatrous and Superstitious, Inhumane and
uncivil, passionate and sierce, Censorious and Cursing,
and most Impudent and worse then Barbarous, in
some of your Impudently, monstrous and avowed prac|tices
Having dispatched our Agitations about the fifth
Assertion, [114] and the Quotations out of G. Fox
which I could not then Insist on in publick,The sixth Position. I de|scended
to the sixth Position which was, viz. [The
Religion of the Quakers is not only an Heresie in the
matters of Gods holy worship, but also in the Doctrines
of Repentance, Faith, c.
This Assertion hath two main Branches: First,
that the Quakers Religion is an Heresie, and them|selves
Hereticks in the matters of Gods worship.The Her|esie of the Quakers.
2. Not only so, (about the Circumstances of
which Gods own dear Servants themselves greatly
differ) but also (which is more Lamentable and dan|gerous)
in the Doctrines of Repentance and Faith,
and the rest of the graces of Christ Jesus.
I told them first, that the word Hairesis Heresie,
in Greek, (from whence the word Hairetikos an
Heretick) signified an Opinion or Opinions, chosen
and stood in by one or more against the Christian
Religion. I said the matter migh be aggravated,
and a ugmented from the Greatness and Vitallity of
the matter of the Opinions, but the Formality and
Nature of it lay in the will and obstinacy thereof.
Iohn Stubs stood up and said, that Heresie was de|fined
by some to be an Opinion obstinately stood in
against the first Christian Purity:Heresy what I Answered, yea,
and the Opinion of some was, that Heresie was an

Error in the Foundation obstinately stood in: But
I said we had not time to enter upon a Dispute
about the word or thing at this time, the Substance
of my Affirmation was, that their Religion, Sect or
way was false, and gone from the Institution and
way of the Lord Jesus delivered by himself and his
Apostles, or Messengers:
1. As to worship, they denyed the Converting
and gathering of the Saints into visible Assemblies,
or Congregations: affirming the Chnrch to be In|visible,
the Ministers Invisible, the Baptisme and Sup|per
Invisible, c.
The second (which was aur Position) was in those
two great Fundamentals, the Beginning, or A. B. C.
of the Christian Religion,The Qua|kers Here|ticks against all the Christ|ian Princi|ples, and more Her|etical against the first Christian Religion then any Protestauts or Papists. viz Repentance from dead
works and Faith towards God: As for those two
Doctrines of laying on of hands, and of Baptismes
they concerned the Church, and worship, (concern|ing
the Circumstances of which God is pleased to
permit his [115] Children to be lovingly differing
and discussing; the other four Repentance, Faith,
Resurrection and Iudgement (in which generally
Gods Children agree) in these also as well as in the
matter of worship, these wandring Souls are Here|ticks,
that is, obstinately maintaining Notoriously
false and Anti-Christian Abominations, In so much
that the many Sects amongst the Protestants, yea,
and the Papists themselves do not so differ from a
true Protestant and true Christian as do these wilful,
ignorant, and wandring Souls.
1. Then as to Repentance,The Qua|kers Here|sy in mat|ter of Re|peutance. I said it was the first
heavenly and saving work of God upon the Soul,

wherein he turned back home again the whole
Soul unto himself, being revolted and run from
him into the Arms of Rebellion in the Fall of our
first Parents.
This was the great point preached by Moses and
the Prophets, and more expressly by Iohn the Bap|tist,
and by the Lord Jesus himself: and when he
sent abroad his Apostles or Messengers into all Na|tions,
they were to preach the Gospel or glad News
of the Forgiveness of sins according to Luke 24.This 24th. of Luke I earnekly Insisted on.
viz. that Repentance and Remission of sins should
be preached in his Name unto all Nations, begin|ning
at Ierusalem.
Here about I remember they told me that it was
known that they preached the Doctrine of Repent|ance
and of turning from all sin unto God, c.
I Answered, that the Papists and they made a
shew and Colour of Repentance, but it had not the
Life and Substance of Repentance in it: It was no
more but an empty Title and shadow of Repentance:The Pa|pists and Quakers Repent|ance.
we know the Papists define their Repentance by
these three. First, Contrition, Secondly, Confession,
and Thirdly, Satisfaction or Restitution.
But I said the Protestants protested against this
Repentance of the Papists, and so against the Qua|kers,
for, who knew not the sorrow and Confessions
of Saul, and Ahab, and Pharaoh; and the Philistins,
and Iudas, yea, and also the Restitution which Iudas
made, (not daring to keep in his hands that which
he had unjustly and wickedly gotten) and yet who
can truly ascribe unto these mens Repentance, the
Character and blessedness of a true Christian return|ing
and coming home to God.

2. I said it is known in daily practice, that when
some times [116] Notorious and openly Flagitious
Persons profess to be Quakers, (for all their craking
of fear and trembling and Quaking) there hath
appeared no Sense of godly sorrow, of godly Con|trition
and brokenness of heart in them, for their
sinful Nature and Life against so Infinitely pure an
Holiness and Majesty? but immediately (upon their
bowing down to Satan, and owning him as a Light,The Qua|kers Converts.
and Christ, and Spirit within them) they are, hav|ing
less Prophaneness now pure and holy as God is,
they can no more sin then Christ can! the Mistery
of godliness is God manifested in their Flesh, I know
some of them say they come to perfection by de|grees,
yet they say the least of their new-born Qua|kers
can not sin, and what is that but Perfection?
yea, they are Christ and God: and therefore why
should they give respect to any King, or Kings, c.
why should they not Thee and Thou the Aged,
Learned, holy, and High, why should they not sit
silent even scores and hundreths of them (possessed
with a dumb Spirit) as in a Form and Order of
Christian worship waiting for this Spirit, and then
be perfect Christians?
3. The Protestants both English, French and
Dutch, c. have manifested against the Papists, and
therein against the Quakers, that Repentance is a
turning of whole Soul from all sin as sin to all of
God as God:The Pro|testants true Re|pentance. from the sin of Nature, and that
Heart filthiness which we bring into the world with
us, and from whence, even from within, as Christ
Jesus tells us? what ever Satan and the poor Qua|kers

prate proceed our evil thoughts, Adulteries, Forni|cations,
Murthers, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness,
Deceit, Lasciviousness, an Evil Eye, Blasphemy, pride,
Foolishness, Mark 7, c.
4. I urged that their Proselites and Converts are
but like the Pharisees of old, though oftentimes
dearly bought by Sea and Land, I say, but trned
from one sin to another, from one Image to another,
from one Devil of Drunkenness of Swearng; c. to
a Devil of Pride, horrible pride, the worst of all prides
in Earth or Hell, to wit, a Spiritual Pride swelling
with the Dropsies and Tympanies of their Conceited
knowledge, Conceited Repentance, Conceited Faith, Love,
patience, joy, holiness, Iustification, Sanctification, Mor|tification
and Salvation.
2. How horribly do they despise the true broken
hearted Pub- [117] licans, who can see nothing but
sin and Damnation in themselves,The Qua|kets despi|ling and cry out for
mercy and Forgiveness? How do they Superciliously
and Pape-like belch out as from Hell, God I thank
thee that I am not like these Publicans?
3. How bitterly do they Instantly raile and re|vile,And Revili others.
Condemn and Curse, breathing out Fire of
Damnation as Fire and Brimstone from the Moun|tains
in Sicily, or else Hell it self against all that op|pose
them? as far from the Teaching of Christ and
his first Messngers as Lambs and Doves, are from the
Ravenous, popish and Devilish Lyons and Eagles.
4. To name no more at present, How doth the
Devil of worldliness and Covetousness domineer
over many of them?Their Covetous|ness. By a strict Profession all per|sons
are taken off from Drunkenness, Whoredome,

Swearing, c. und put on Theiftiness and Industry,
and if their hearts Centre and fix not on Christ Je|sus,
and the Heavenly Records of Christ, the Scrip|tures:
and on the Life to come, but upon Self, Ex|alting
self, a self Christ, and Spirit, and Heaven, and
Resurrection, c. which is the Truth and bottom
of the Quakers Religion, what can the most of
them run in but a Course of greedy gaping after,
and getting, and raking, and gathering the muck
and dung of this present Life?
It is true, that many that hold the same Fanciful
Notions with the Quakers, yet are of Ranting, jovial,
spending Spirits, but the Spirit that haunts the Qua|kers
most is a soure,A sowre Spirit is the Com|mon Spirit of the Quakers. proud, and Melancholy Devils,
and his Commission is to turn such persons into the
Gadarens Swine rooting up all that ever they come
at for their own Ends and Belly: How many are
the Instances even in this Colony in some especially,
as able and as active Souls as any in this Colony or
Country, and as guilty of murthering the Natives
by the Liqour Trade as any: and as suddenly and
strangely snatcht away by the hand of Gods Power
and Iustice, as any usually can be, but being departed
I will touch no more upon this string.
From their Doctrine of, and their Heresie or Ob|stinacy
in a false Repentance, I touch next npon
their false Faith:The Qua|kers False Faith. I said it was true they spoke much
of Faith and Justification, c. as the Papists did,
and as G. Fox in his Book (by me) did: yet if they
pleased, I would demonstrate by Instances out of
his Book all along that he Confounded and made
all one, both Faith and Ju- [118] stification, yea,

and Sanctification, and made believing in Christ Je|sus
but a meer Babel and Chaos of Nonsence and
Cnnfusion. For although (which is Foxes Common
Burrough) he that Faith hath Repentance, hath
Justification,G Fox his horrible Confound|ing of Faith and all other Chistian Virtues and Graces together. Sanctification, and all Christian graces,
yet to Confound and make them all one, is as to go
into a fair Garden, and say a Rose is every Flower
in the Garden: or to say, that the Letter A, or O
is every Letter in a Printers Box, or Book: Or to
say, that a Rebels receiving the Kings pardon, that is
the King himself: his receiving it is the pardon it
it self, that is the Rebels Conviction, Conversion, Con|demnation,
Execution, Resurrection, Acceptation, Ex|altation,
and Adoption into the Favour and Commu|nion
with the King for the Future. All this Mon|strons
and Nonsensical Language is the Tongue or
Speech of the Quakers, and G. Fox especially.
2. I told them that although (with the Quakers
and Papists) G. Fox talkt much of Faith in Christ:
yet I had proved and further should,True Faiah what it is that the Qua|kers
put out and obliterate the true Christ or Object
to be received and believed on, as before in the
matter of Faith, they put out the true living Eye
of Faith, and put in a painted, or Glass Eye in the
Room of it.
True Faith is a Receiving of Christ Jesus as my
only King, Priest and Prophet: It is a believing
on,The Qua|kers Tran|substatia|rion worse then the Fan|tastick or receiving of Christ distinct from God, Iohn
14. You believe in God, This true Lord Jesus
Christ the Quakers turn into a meer Fiction, Dream,
or Imaginary Christ in the mind of a man, or Wo|man:
a Popish Transubstantiated Christ, all Spirit

and no Body,Tranub|stantiation of the Pepists and so not consisting of Flesh and
Spirit: He hath no Flesh of his own, as you make
him: and yet Flesh of his own, because your Flesh
is his Flesh, and yet your Flesh you say also must dye
and rot, and never rise again, and so you have blown
up and Jugled away the Flesh of Christ Jesus, both
his and your own also altogether.
This is a Trick of the Father of Lyes, and Iuglings
beyond that Monstrous Fancy of the Papissts Tran|substantiation,
for although they turn the Bread into
the Flesh of Christ, yet they turn not the Bread of
Christ, nor the Flesh of Christ into their own
Flesh: The Quakers can give no Account what is
become of the Flesh or Body of that man Christ
Jesus, these Foxes have devoured the Lambs of God.
Miraculous and Monstrous is [119] the Papists blas|phemous
and Bloody Fancy of Transubstantiation, but
not more miraculous and monstrous, c. then that
of the Quakers, which granteth Christ Jesus to have
been born, lived and dyed as We, c and yet now
Transubstantiated into a Spirit, and the Quakers
Flesh. So that in the Upshot, the Christ in whom
they believe is vanished (by an Hellish Chimistry)
into themselves, and it is most certain, (the Lord
open in great mercy some of their Eyes to see it)
they do believe on themselves, and that lying Spirit
within them.
I remember, that hereabouts Iohn Burnet said, that
it was not true that they preached not true Repent|ance,John Bur|net his Sermon
and herein he fell into a Speech or Sermon to
the People, professing that the Quakers maintained
Repentance toward God and Faith in Christ and

Godliness, and Righteousness, c. and he continued
I Judge above half an hour, (though not so long
nor so furious as William Edmundson the day before.
I listned carefully and watcht his Ending (being
desirous to say something least another of them
should fall into a Sermon also and put me by) and
I speedily said (to this Effect) Friend you have here
delivered many holy Truths of God (at this there
was deep silence,And my Answer as if I had turn'd a Proselite at
least it pleased them to be applauded, I went on and
said concerning Repentance and turning from all
sin, of the Blood of Christ, and of being saved by
his Blood, of living soberly, Righteously, and godly in
this present World, c. but withal I said, they did
not reach me nor any thing that I had spoken as
proof against them, for I and all their Adversaries
the Protestants preached Repentance and Faith,
c. but theirs was an Anti-Christian Repentance,
and Faith,The Qua|kers and the Papists general Faith and Repent|ance c. because either not true Repentance
and Faith as Protestants argue against the Papists
and Quakers, or else in general Terms not distin|guishing
between true Repentance and false, and
shewing the difference between the true Faith and
the false: So that I said you might have preacht
this Sermon even in Rome before the Popes face in
his own Chappel, yea, the Pope and the Cardinals
and Friars,The Jug|lings of the Papists and Qua|kers and Iesuits deliver the same Doctrines
(in general Terms) daily: But as Thieves Iuglers,
and Counterfiets when they come to Examination,
their Impudent sayings and Swearings prove but
the paints of Whores and Har- [120] lots? So do
the Devilish Doctrines and Devilish Conceit and

Fancies of Papists, Quakers, and all Fantastick,
Formal, Carnal Protestants, who Cry Lord, Lord,
c. but are Answered by Christ Jesus with I know
ye not, Depart from me ye that work Iniquity.
I cannot Affirm that I spake all these Individual
words, nor have omitted ought that I or they spake:
yet I remember no more, though being Confined
(by their great desire and my self) to a puarter of
an hour, for each point I was forced as all may judge
to omit many Amplifications and Illustrations which
now I crave the Readers patience, while I present
him with some of them.
I intended to have Charged them with the false|ness
of their Hope,The Hope peace and Joy of the Quakers and Love, and Peace, and Joy
which they often Crake, (though they pretend quak|ing
and Trembling) their Heaven consisteth, and
all the Eternal Life to come, they look for, they
are now in present, full Possession of.
What Scripture is more common in the mouths
and pens of the Quakers,Christ the Hope of Glory then that of Paul to the
Colossians, Chap. 1. which is, Christ in you the Hope
of Glory: whereby they Insinuate two of their
grand Deceits and Lyes, First, that their is no other
Christ but what is in every man in the World.
Secondly, That there is no other Glory to be hoped
for in, or by, or with the Lord Jesus, but what the
Saints, that is the Quakers enjoy, and are already
possessedof within them in this Life.
To which I say, how many painted Anchors and
painted Hopes are there? How many Hopes as in
Iob like the Spiders web swept away to Eternity?

If there be e're a painted Anchor or e're a Spiders
web in the worldInterline "it is" after world. R. W. Ms. Ann. this of the Quakers.
Hope is one, as in time I may furthet demon|strate.
For, do they not overthrow the very Nature of
Hope which they prate of, and give the Spirit of
God Rom. 9. the Lye, which tells us that Hope is
not of things in possession, or which we see? doth
not Paul there tell us almost in plain Terms, that
it is simplicity and Non-Sense to talk concerning
Hope after such a Rate?The Sim|plicity as well as Impiety of the Qua|kers Hope Doth not 1 Pet. 1. tell
us of a Living Hope (opposite to painted and dead
Hopes) and this Living Hope called in other places
the Hope of Righteousness, the Hope of the Redemption
of our Bodies? the Hope as of Heirs for an Inheri|tance?
of the Glory that [121] shall be revealed in
us, which is a state of the manifestation of the
Sons of God, though saith Iohn, We are now the
Sons of God, 1 John 3. we know not what that is,
all that is now enjoyed is but as the first Fruits to
the Harvest, as the Spirit speaks.
2. Again, what Ignorance and simplicity is it to
call Christ or God, the Glory or the goodness, or
good things which we hope for, Literally and prop|erly
upon the Promise, and the Power, and good|ness
of God, no Christ Jesus? Can the Eternal God
in any Literal Sense be called the Hope of Israel,
Jer. 14. but in the same Figurative Sense whereby
Moses cals him Our Life and the Length of our Dayes?
and we in Common Speech call such a man, or his

Promise, or any Creatures dear to us, Our Hope, our
Love, our Ioy, c. that is the Ground or the Object of
our Hope c
Their great Blunderer Humphry Norton he deals
as plainly and roundly as G. Fox (his aemulous Corri|val)
falsly and fraudulently,Humpry Norton his Hope when that holy Scrip|ture
[If in this Life only we have Hope, c.] was
here objected to Humphry Norton, he clapt his hand
on his Breast saying. He had it there already, that
is opposing it to (and denying the Hope in) the
Life to come, especially, as to their Bodies which
are not raised up (they say) Spiritual Bodies, being
(though of late) more subtly and hipocritically all
one with those deceived Souls that said the Resur|rection
was past already. It is true, they will pre|tend
to owne the Scriptures, Christs humane Nature,
the Resurrection, and Judgement, and Faith, and
Hope, ahd Repentance, c. as true and sound as
any Protestant: but still it is no otherwise, but as
G. Fox and Ed. Burroughs say in this Book, that is,
(as I have and shall open) in a most Iugling and
deceitful Sense and meaning.The Qua|kers Hope of life to come
It is reported that some of them at their Death
have used those words [Lord Iesus receive my Spirit,]
some have Charitably thought that they intend
thereby their going presently into the presence of
Christ Jesus, but as the Truth and bottom, however
they blind the world, and the weakest of their Fol|lowers,
(until they be fit to wean and fall to strong
meat) others of them Covertly say  write, and
others of them more plainly say, viz. That they
believe no more Rising of their Bodies then the

rising of a Dog: and as to their Spirits they believe
Souls are [122] patts of God, and go unto God and
into God: and therefore their saying, Lord Iesus
receive my Spirit, is no more then Lord Jesus re|ceive
thy self, according to some of their plain Ex|pressions:
To whom should I pray? my self? to
whom should I give Thanks? my self? wherein
their woful, black, and filthy Spirit Contradicteth
it self amongst themselves, though they agree in
the Devils Bait,The Qua|kers bait by which Satan takes them (which Catcht himself, and with
which he Catcht our first Patents and all his Posteri|ty)
viz. Ye shall be as Gods, live as God, know as
God, be Gods and Christs for Evermore.
I shall now crave the Readers patience to hear
some few Quotations out of G. Fox,John Bunyan which my quar|ter
of an hour would not then permit) declaring
thir Apostacie and Heresie in the matters of Repent|ance,
Faith, c.
In Pag. 127. he brings in Iohn Bunyan saying,
[It is a Counterfietlng of the New Birth for men to
follow the Light wherewith men coming into the World
are enlightned.]
G. Fox Answereth, [which none comes to the New
Birth, but who comes to the Light, wherewith every man,
c. which believing in is a Child of the Light: believ|ing
and receiving comes to receive power to be the Sons
of God.]
I Reply,The new Birth of the Qua|kers none are truly Converted, born again,
c. but in a true Sense they come to Christ Jesus:
For the Scripture saith, he gives Repentance to Israel,
He is the Author and Finisher of our Faith: But that
Jesus Christ as God, (so the Quakers owne him) and

as man (for so they also owne him) should be in
every man, and Woman, and Child in the World,
I have proved and shall prove it to be a blockish and
Devilish Fancy.
2. If this Light, this Christ the Mediator be|tween
God and man be only a Spirit and not man,
why do the Scriptnre, why do the Quakere madly
say there was such a man, though they cannot tell
now what is become of him except he be (as they
say) within, c.
3. If this Light, this Christ, this Mediator be
in every man, what should be the Reason that so
many Thousands and Ten Thousand of Millions see
him not? Only a few persons Cursing and Reviling
all the rest, and that say all but the Quakers are de|ceived?
Can the Sun be in a Chamber and persons
not blind, but [123] seeing and awake, and using his
Light and yet not see it. Certainly it is but a painted
Sun that doth not shine equally on all, it is but a
painted Fire that doth not burn, and the Quakers are
but Pictures of Christians, and pictures of men to
argue aftet such a Rate, that Christ not only as
God, and Creatour should be in every man, but also
as the Mediator, as the Spirit, and yet not operate
according to the Nature of the Sun and Fire: It is
true, the Lord Jesus came into the dark world, and
their darkness comprehended him not to be He
that was to come, the true Messiah: but when Christ
Jesus as Mediator, the true or only Light shall
dwell in the Understanding and Will, and Memory,
and Affections of a man or Woman, and those per|sons
be savingly inlightened by him as you write,

and yet not Converted and saved by him, it can be
the Language of none but those that peep and mut|ter
Isai. 8. but have no true Light, but a false and
painted Light within them.
Lastly,The true and false new Birth. saith Fox this turning to the Light within
is the New Birth: But the Holy Record saith, that
till the preaching of the Word, or Gospel, or glad
News come to the mind of a man, (ordinarily by
the Ear, and hearing, and preaching, Rom. 10.)
there is no Faith, nor Covenant, nor Christ, nor God
in the Soul, Ephes. 2. and we are not only in dark|ness,
but darkness it self, Ephes. 5. and only by the
holy Word and Spirit preachedInterline "is" after preached. R. W. Ms. Ann. the blessing, Isai.
59., God shineth in our hearts, and not by any such
Immediate Fantastick Faith or Spirit, as the Anti
Christian Quakers dream of,The Qua|kers put out the Eyes of their own Experi|ence. yea, against the Light
of a twofold Experience in their own Souls.
1. That many of them being enlightened and
formerly Convicted by the reading or preaching of
the Doctrine, Word or Will of God revealed in
the holy Scripture.
2. That of their new Light (as they falsly and
foolishly prate) pretended to be brought unto their
Ears and knowledge by the means of these new
Apostles, Preachers, and Ministers, so pretended of
Christ Jesus.
When God hides (that is by Spiritual Iudgements)
the Light of Scripture, of the Spirit of Reason,
and of Experience, c. who can find it out? No
man, no nor Devil can subsist one minute with|out
the power of Christs Eternal Power and God-head:

[124] but when Christ Jesus comes into the
Soul as Mediator of the new Covenant, and be thus
idle and not operative in all mankinde in the
World, and not to Convert, and work belief in them,
which must be either because he cannot, or because
he will not, as the Leaper said, is as black and blas|phemous
a Fancy as any Atheistical or AntiChristian
Soul can harbour.
He brings in George Willington saying,Pag 44. George Willing|ton [He is Ius|tified
by Faith alone without good works] He Answers;
[What without Faith that works by Love.]
I Reply: In this passage, and in many others, this
subtle man clearly discovers what he makes true
Justifying Faith to be, viz. not one hair breadth
more then the Faith that may be to God in the
first Covenant, the Covenant of works, and a looking
to be Justified and saved be God for a mans own
Abilities, performances and Righteousness, far from
the Faith of the Gospel, which though good works
in Love follow it, yet not one good work in the
world goes before it: Nor one good work in the
world goes with it in the point of Justification,The Qua|kers meer Jewish and Popish or
pardon of our Transgressions: and therefore G.
Fox hath not only George Willington his Opposite,
but the express word and Declaration of the Spirit
of God saying, [Rom. 3. Therefore we Conclude that
a man is Iustified by Faith and not by the works of the
Law.]
Alas porr Bankrupts who owe more Infinitely to
God then we are worth:The dole|ful state of all men till mercy not justice pitty them who are over head and
Ears in Debt to God, to our own Souls, to Men and
Angels, and the whole Creation, having sinned against

Heaven, c. that have not one farthing toward the
discharge of so many Infinite Millions of Talents:
God of his rich Infinite mercy convinceth some of
the proud Sons and Daughters of men of their de|plorable
Condition, makes them cry for mercy, and
for Christ Jesus sake and Mediation, he freely Iusti|fies
and forgives them. Thus saith the Scripture
all along, and that our Faith, our believing or re|ceiving
of this grace though it be followed with
Mary Magdalens Love, contributes not one farthing
toward the payment of our Infinite Millions, no not
so much as one good Thought.
He brings in Ioseph Miller saying,Pag 47 Joseph Miller [It is an Er|rour
to say, we are Iustified by that which Christ doth
in us. He Answers, Contrary to the Apostle, who
saith, We are Iustified by Faith in his Blood: [125
And the Faith is in the Heart, and the Blood is in
the Heart that purifies it, and held in a pure Con|science:
And the Word of Faith is within, Rom. 10.
And Faith gives Victory over the World,The Qua|kers Justi|ficatson within us. and that
which gives Victory Justifies, And Christ is with|in
you who is Iustification, Sanctificotion and Re|demption:
either of them is found within, and thou
art in the Errour, and not fit to talk of these things
thou understandest not.
I Reply: Grant that in a true Respect and Sense,
Faith is within, and the Blood within, and the
Word of Faith within, and Christ within, and Ius|tification
and Sanctification within, will it therefore
follow I say,Fox his Babilonish tumbling of all in a Croud and Heap to|gether. will it therefore follow with any Colour
of Common Reason, that therefore in one and the
same Sense they are all within, and they are all

one, and they were not without before they were
within? I know this subtle Fox and he that helps
his deluded pate to bind up such a Bundle of wrested
Scriptures, would have it so, that he may jumble and
blend all together in a Babilonish Mystery, and subtly
deny the Truth of the holy Scriptures History.
It is true, Cheist dwels in our Hearts by believing,
Ephes. 3. and Consequently his Cross, yea, his Man|ger,
yea, his Blood, yea, his Grave are within, c.
But that Christ Literally shed his Blood within
us, as a Ransome to his Eather for the sins of the
whole world, is as Fine and bruitish a Fancy, as that
the Cross, the Spear, the Soulders, the High Priests,
Scribes and Pharisees and People, Pilate, the Romans,
Ierusalem, Iude,  the whole world (as some of them
have idly  ofteuprated) are Literally within us.
It is true in a Sense, the King and his pardon,
and Counsellours and Scribes, and writings, and Seals,
c. are all in a Rebels heart,Justifica|tion opened. as he believes and ap|plies
all these within him, and his belief works by
love: But if they be within otherwise then we Af|firm,
c. and as G. Fox would have it, then they
are not withont also, (which is the mark all these
Arrows from Hell fly at,) and Consequently Christ
Jesus and his Blood shedding, and a Literal Ierusa|lem,
and a true and real man Christ Jesus, and the
holy, real Literal Scriptures are blown up and van|ished
altogether.
Pag. 10. He brings in Iohn Bunyar saying, [It is
not Faith and works that justifies a man before God,
but it is Faith and good works which justifie in the
sight of men only, and such works will not [126] justifie in

the sight of God: and he saith, that works is only to
justifie their Faith to be true before men.]
G. Fox Answers, Abraham was not Justified only
to men by his Obedience,The Qua|kers Popish Jus|tification by works. but to God: And where
there is Faith there is Iustification which works by
Love: And the Saints Faith and works were not
only to Justifie them in the sight of men. For the
work of God is to do what he saith,  the will
which who doth not is not Justified by so doing,
but to be beaten with stripes: who seek to be Jus|tified
by their Faith and works in the sight of men
are dead, Faith and works both.
I Reply, He that reads this passage may without
doubting Conclude that G. Fox and his Foxians are
as perfect Pharisees (Iewish and Popish) as ever bur|roughed
in Rome or Ierusalem,The Pa|pists and Quakers see no need of Christ. maintaining a Cove|nant
of works, Justification by works, and renounc|ing
Christ Jesus his Blood and merits: For if Abra|ham
was Justified and received his pardon by his
Obedience to God what need was there for him
and us, to look out for a Surety, a Redeemer, a Media|tor
to pay his Blood for our Ransome, and to fetch
us out of the miserable state of Sin; Death, and
Hell, c.
2. Whereas G. Fox asketh what is the work of
God, but to do what he saith.
I Reply,The Pa|pists and Quakers know not the differ|ence be|tween the two Cove|nants 1. The work of God (according to
Christs Doctrine) is to believe on him whom God
sent. It is true, it is the Command of God to
keep his Commands, but since the deadly Fall of
man, none, not one being able, Rom. 3. (though Fox
deny it,) it is the work, the great work of God to fly

to that blessed Propitiation for poor sinners, (through|out
the world:) But G. Fox cannot distinguish be|tween
the Covenant of works, of Iustice, and of Debt,
and that of mercy, and of receiving all as a Beggar,
and Condemned Rebels, poor proud Souls they know
not any difference between the Blood of Christ
Iesus and their own Blood, as we shall see afterward.
3. Whereas he saith, that they do not Gods will
are not justified in so doing:
I Answer, therefore it follows ronndly as his Con|clusion,
that they that do Gods will are justified in
so doing: that is their sins are pardoned as David
and Paul by pardon of Sin describe justification,
127] Who sees not the subtlety of this Fox cheat|ing
himself and others with the divers signification
of this Latin word Iustification?Fox his playing with the word Justi|fication It is true, a man
can not be justified or defended for Thieving, Whor|ing,
Murthering, c. Doth it follow therefore, that
they that do not Steal, whore, murther, c. by this
abstaining from Sin, and by this their work they
obtein the pardon, and stand by this their work,
legally right and justified in the Court of Heaven!
I Conclude, that by these hints a broken hearted
sinner, who hath seen Sin as Sin, the sin of his Na|ture,
his chief sin, c. will see how far from the
Doctrine of true Repentance, true Faith, c these
mens Teachings be, and (for all their boasting) what
need they have to Examine themselves whether
they be in the Faith, and whether there be any other
Christ Iesus within them then a Countersiet and paint|ed
Messiah, and whether their Countersiet and painted
Faith, Repentance and Hope will yield them another
Fruit then a dolefully Counterfieted and perishing Sal|vation.

At last by Gods merciful held I come now (with
their glad Consent) to the seventh and last Position
propounded to be discust at Newport,The last of the seven Positions at New|port viz. that their
Religion was nothing else but a mixture of Popery,
Arminianisme, Socinianisme, Iudaisme, c.
Herein I knew I was not to exceed my quarter
glass, and there. fore I take liberty now a little to
inlarge, to remember the Reader of the old Pro|verb,
that where God hath his Church, the Devil will
have his Chappel. And that where Christ Iesus hath
his Field of good Seed,The Qua|ker Religion pieced up  many old Here|sies while the Servants sleep, the
Enemy will sow the Tares, of rotten Doctrines, and
rotten Professors, who like Windefals, and Revolting
Rebels fall from the holy Truths they have professed,
being loose aud weak believers or only affrighted
and Terrified Hipocrites, by Gods righteous Iudge|ment
delivered over to listen too, and believe Lyes
as the only heavenly Truths of Iesus.
I had purposed to have shewed how in matters
concerning God, the Son of God, the Spirit of God,
c. the Quakers have followed, the Cerdonians, the
Priscillians, the Valentinians, the old Gnosticks, and
Manicheans: but I Confined my self to the Terms
of the Position, and declared that the Quakers were
downright Papists in many points, some I then In|sisted
on, and the rest [128] intended, I shall now
mention. First, In magnifying the rotten strength
and Arm of dead and rotten Nature: when it is Ob|jected
to G. Fox in his book, that by Nature we are
all dead in sins and Trespasses:
G. Fox Answers, by d,viding all men into three
sorts: Some are born holy from the wombe, as Ier.

Some the Saints that is,Of Na|tures its Impurity only their Children born
holy without any sinful corruption. Thirdly, the
wicked who will not turn to the Light within them,
and they are only the Unbelievers dead in sin. But
the Protestants, David and his Followers Confess
their Natures, Births, and Conceptions to be all de|filed
with sin, and with a sinful proneness to all Ini|quity,
though miraculously some are Sanctified, or set
apart to God from the wombe as Ieremiah, Iohn the
Baptist, c. Some after a more peculiar and mi|raculous
manner, as the Lord Iesus: Some by New
Birth, and the wonderfal Supernatural Power of the
holy Spirie Changing, Regenerating, and as it were
New Creating the Soul and Spirit, in Everlasting,
Unchangeable Holiness and Righteousness after the
Image of his first and second Creatour.
It is true,The Pa|pists righter then the Quakers that the Papists come nearer the Truth
as to Birth, Corruption and Defilement then the Qua|kers,
acknowledging all,  be Conceived and born in
Sin, not that the Devil or the Papists care to ac|knowledge
this Truth, but that they may use it as a
Cridge over which they may pass to the Necessity of
Baptisme on pain of Damnation: on which they
may also build many other Superstitious Fanciee as
to the holy Ordinances.
But the Quakers, although they hold only their
own Children to be Conceived and born holy  with|out
Sin,The pow|er of Natue in Spirituals yet they jump into one step with the Pa|pists,
as to the Power of Nature in Spirituals, ane
that every man and woman in the world hath a
sufficient Light within him to see God and Christ,
c. and to turn themselves unto them to Eternal

Life. Contrary to the Protestants, who from the
holy Scriptures maintain mans Natural Blindness
and Darkness, Ephes. 5. Mans Natural Deadness,
Ephes. 2. and that our wisdome can not difcern any
Spiritual thing, that is, Spiritually, 1. Cor 2. That
our Quintessence of Nature, our very wisdome is En|mity
to God: He hates us as we hate him, and are
at deadly fewd and mortal Hatred like two men of
War [129] giving Fire one upon another, we re|solving
to sink by Ejods side,The way of Conver|sion both of the Pa|pists and the Qua|kers
rather then to yield to
God: but God in Infinite pitty, seeing our weakness
and madness, and certain Destruction hangs out a
white Flag and offers a Parly, on purpose to save us
from our desperate minde  Ruine, which by many
heavenly means of Free mercy he Effecteth? The
Papists speak more like Men, and at last yield that
men and Women have left them (since Adams Fall)
power to listen too, and obey Moral Perswasions,
and offers which God makes: The Quakers talk
only (like Bruits) of no means, no means but Im|mediate
Revelation of the Spirit: and yet in Con|tradiction
to themselves they make the Spirit an in|ward
means, and their Apostles or Messengers an
outward means, or else they make themselves idle
Embassodors, in vain and to no purpose. The Pro|testants
affirm from 2. Cor. 3. that we have not one
good Thought but from God,The way of the tre Pro|testants that it is God, not we,
that turns the will, Phil. 2. that when the Word of
Faith is preached, Rom. 10. and Faith or Belief is
wrought by hearing,: yet is it Gods free Grace that
makes the difference, 1 Cor. 4. when several Hear|ers
are Assembled, and God opens Lidiahs heart and

not others, Acts 16. the learned Academians mock, and
only Dionisius and Damaris,Acts 17. Rom. 9. 2. and a few believe, because
God sheweth mercy on whom he will, and whom he will,
he hardneth.
The Papists and Quakers both maintain that dole|fully,Falling from Grace
uncomfortable, and desperate Doctrine of falling
away from true and saving grace: The Truth is,
neither of them seem to know Experimentally what
true and saving grace is: It is true, they differ, the
Papists make Saving Grace the Property only of
the Regenerate: The Quakers say it is in every man
and Woman in the world, they have it, though
they know it not, and will not turn to it, and be|lieve
in it: yet both agree that they loose it, where|as
the true Protestants though they grant great Fail|ings
and Falls, and Desertions of Gods Children,
yet they hold the Seed of God,The true Protest|ants Doc|trine as to Falling away. the holy Spirit and
Word of God, Isai. 59. and 1 Cor. 3. that Incorrupt|ible,
Eternal Seed, of which they are begotten, nev|er
Final-[130]ly? nor Totally to be Ecclipsed, and
they justly account that Doctrine of Intercession, viz.
when Son-ship or Childship is cut off by Sin, and Re|newed
by Repentance, to be a simple Fantastical No|tion,
as if David were a Child of God to day, a
Child of the Devil to morrow, a Child of God
this hour, and a Child of the Devil the next, c.
only they fix this impiously upon mortal and great
sins only, as if Adam Eating of an Apple were not
sufficient to his and our Destruction, as well as Da|vids
sinning with Bathsheba and Uriah, c
3. I must be briefer, though not so brief as I was

forced to be in our publick probations:The Pa|pists and Quakers agree against the holy Scripture I told them
that the Papists and the Quakers were great Confede|rates
in their Endeavours to raze the Records of
Heaven, and to rob the Saints and the world of this
Inestimable Iewel and Treasure of the holy Scrip|tures.
1 The Papists own it not to be all the word or
will of God revealed, but that there be unwritten
Verities, that is, Gods mind revealed from Father to
Son, by Tradition.
The Quakers will not vouchsafe it the Name of
the word of God, out of a simple pretence, because
Christ is the word of God, that is, he isindeed the
chief manifestation of all the Appearances of God.
2. The Papists horribly abuse it, calling it a Nose
of wax, a Leaden Rule, a dead Letter, c. and so do the
Quakers triumphing over it with base Insultations,
as over a deed Letter, a Carkass. c.
3. The whole world of Papists assembled in
eighteen Years Labours, ( Chymical Laboratories at
Trent) at last thundred out their Anathamaes and
Curses against all that should not prefer the Vulgar
Latin Copies before the Hebrew Copies and the
Greek (in which it pleased the holy Spirit of God
first to write his mind and will or word unto us:)The Pa|pists and Quakers Enmity against the Hebrew ad Greek
And do not the Quakers as simply and bruitishly bind
themselves to the bare Letter of the Common Eng|lish?
Though they know the Hebrew and Greek Cop|ies
are the Foundation and Touchstone of all other
(though millions of) Translations: Though they
know there be more English Translations then one;
Though the English Translations wonderfully [135

differ; Though Ravius (that Famous Oriental Hebric|ian,
c.) proclaims above a Thousand Faults, and
some gross in our last Translation: though some of
them (as Iohn Stubs) boast of their humane Learn|ing
produced his Hebrew Bible in our Conference:
yet will these Ephesians cry out (like Frantick mad)
great is our Latin Translation, great is our English
Translation: Yea, one of them boasted to my self,
that the Spirit of God would teach them Scripture
without the Hebrew and the Greek, or the English
either.
4. The Papists set up a Judge in Controversies
above the holy Scriptures,The Pa|pists and Quakers Judge of Scripture who can dispense with
Scriptures and do all that God can do. And say not
the Quakers the same of their Spirit which is above
the Scriptures, for it gave forth the Scriptures, and
is in every man
5. The Papists though they will not deny to
make the Scriptures the Rule,Interpre|tation of Scripture and profess to be tried
by it, yet their Church, and the head of it the Pope
must Interpret: And do not the Quakers herein the
same concerning themselves, though some think
more bruitishly, for they will allow no Interpreta|tions,
nor meaning at all, but you must take the
words as the Translators have given them us (right
or wrong) and you must not enquire either into the
meaning of words, or the meaning of mind of God
in the place. Oh what a black, deaf and dumb, Lazie
Spirit hath possessed the Souls of these great pre|tenders
too and Monopolizers of the holy Spirit of
God, both Papists and Quakers?
6 The Papists generally use not, nor have the

holy Scripture, (no not in their Devotions) in their
own Tongue, but in the Latine, (the Whores Tongue
of Italy:) therefore no wonder they prize it not:
but even the Lights or Luminaries so pretending,
amongst them disuse it,The Pa|pists and Quakers slighting holy Scripture Care not for it, read it not,
c. many have it not: So that Luther tels us that
in Thirteen years or more he saw not a Bible in his
College at Erford, until by Gods merciful provi|dence
he came to see one, to his own  the Comfott
of Thousands, Luther tels us that at one great As|sembly
of the Emperour and Princes, the Protestants
of Germany had Conveyed a Bible on the Table:
The Cardinal being first come he opened the Book,
and read here and there in it, (it is like he had not
seen [132] it before in his Life,) In comes one of
the Popish Princes, and askt the Cardinals Eminency
what Book he had there?
He Answerred, I know not: but I am sure it is
agaiust us, and it is laid here for that purpose. Oh
the Infinite mercies of God to us in our times, and
our Infinite Debt to his Infinite goodness, and our
Infinite guilt in neglect of it:
The Quakers at first took off themselves,The Pa|pists and Quakers would be rid of the Scripture Families
and Assemblies from any use of it: Their Spirit they
Crake that made the Scriptures supplies all, c. The
Papists and Quakers both have said and printed, that
if the Scripture were consumed  quite taken out of
the world, there would be no Loss, so long as they
have the Spirit. The Truth is I could by Arguments
many make it appear that the Papists and Quakers
love the holy Scriptures no better than Goliah loved

Davids stone and sling? nor no better then the Devil
loved Christs Gegraptai, It is written: It is written:
for the Papists and the Quakers, and the Devil
knows that if the holy Scriptures be Exalted, as
the revealed will or word, or Declaration of the
mind of God, down-falls their pretences of Tradit|ions
and Revelations, whereby the Devil deceivs them|selves
and himself also.
4. The Papists and Quakers shake hands in the
most hellish Doctrine of Justification by what is
within us,The Pa|pists and Quakers unite against the Blood of the Lord Jesus by what Christ works within us, in short,
by what is called Sanctification put for Justification,
and the forgiveness of sin, in and for the merits of
the Lord Jesus freely imputed and given to us:
The Papists use the word Inherent Righteousness, but
the Quakers bogle at the word not finding it in the
English Bible, yet they agree that by the works of
Obedience, yea, and also by the Acts of their own
Inventions and Superstitions, they can make a pardon
under a hedge to themselves, and Crake that they
have received a pardon and Justification sealed un|der
the Broad Seal of Heaven to them, but it is
against the glory of the King of Heaven, and against
the glory of the Son of God, and his glorious Suffer|ings,
and their own Salvation.
5 The Quakers are Papists in that Spirit of In|fallibility
which they arrogate to themselves,The Infal|libility of Papists and Quakers pre|tending
that the holy, Spirit shall lead them into all
Truth, speak Immediately in [133] them, c. though
herein they differ, the Pope infallibly expounds
Scripture, but the Quakers speaks Scripture, and his
word is Gospel, c. yea, all men have this Spirit,

and need no Teacher, and yet what an horrible Con|tradictious
noise is there of the Quakers, Apostles,
Messengers, Ministers, Preachers He and she sent into
Old-England, and New-England, Scotland, Ireland,
Turky, Italy, to bid people hearken to the Imme|diate
Spirit within?
6. The Quakers are Papists in that high lofty Con|ceit
of their Perfection,The Qua|kers Po|pish Per|fection. when Calvins time this Spi|rit
came from Hell under the name of Spirituals,
and when of latter years in Lancashire under the
Name of Grindletonians, all their Religion turned
chiefly upon these two Hinges.
1. They could not sin, were perfect, c.
2. They did nothing, said nothing,The Po|pish Reve|lations of the Qua|kers but God and
the Spirit did all.
7. The Papists and Quakers are great Friends in
their Notions  practice of Revelations, Visions,
Dreams, Impulsions and Inspirations: He that hath
known so much as I have known of both their Spi|rits
this way, and hath read their Legends as I have
done, and can Instance in particulars as I can, will
say, it is a foul, Popish, Devilish Spirit that haunts
them (both under this fine pretence) to turn both off
from the words of Iesus,Popists and Qua|kers one in Ceremo|nies and Inventions Luke 10. How readest
thou?
8. What Cart Loads of Traditions and Ceremo|nies
have the Papists, and I believe if the Quakers have
opportunities and means (as the Papists have had)
they will not be behind them: what a noise is made
about uncovering or bowing the Head, Knee, for

Courses of wearing of Lace, (yea, Bands and Hat|bands
by some of them:] Of saying you or Thou, of
using Musick, Carving, painting, of sitting silent,
(some hundreths together) of sighing and shaking
of the Body? all which, as relating to Religion and
Christians: c they are but simple, Insignificant, and
Idle, popish Trash and Trumpery.
9. The Papists and Quakers are Bethren in Ini|quity
in their Affirmations that the Pope is not An|ti-Christ,
and that [135] the Church of Rome is not
the great Whore:The Qua|kers and Papists agree that that hge Pope is not Anti-Christ The Papists Affirme that Anti-Christ
is not yet come, and that he shall come just
in the end of the world, and shall finish all those
wonders in the Revelations in three years and a half:
The Quakers though they hold Papists and Protest|ants
(all except the Quakers (to be Anti-Christians;
( as Fox doth) cast back all the Prophesies of
false Christs, false Prophets, and Anti-Christ to the
time of the Apostles themselves: yet the great
Whore and the Devil, and sin, (upon the point) they
simply Confound and make all one; as may be seen
in Fox his Title to this great Book, and other of
his and their writings.
10. It may be wondred why the Popes when made
or created by an hmane  Devilish Fiat,The Qua|kers not owning freely their Names. they
change their Name, and why the Quakers guided
by the same Hellish Spirit and Fancy, are so dainty
and tender about owning their Old names: The
Histories say, the Original with the Popes was with
him who was Os porce, or Swines snout, by Name,
and was not thought fit being raised so high to bear

so low and fordid a Title. If it were so then, yet it is
nothing now but their horrible pride being in their
Conceits so high, so Infallible, so perfect, to scorn
to be like other men that are but Hogs Snouts, c.
11. The Papists and Quakers are led by one Spirit
of feigned holiness,The Qua|kers and Popish Monks and Munns all one. Devotion, monkish Solitariness,
c, Their Monks and Friers and Nunns must be
sequestred from the world, medle with no faecular
and worldly business, which is no more but the
Beggars Life, and therefore justly called Fratre
Mendicantes Begging Friars, and the Indians Life,
formerly the men laying all Labour upon the wo|men;
and all this is no more than hunger and Ease,
the Dogs Life also. It is true, the Apostles by a
true Light ought to have worldly maintenance, but
Paul wrought day and night with his hands, which
I never read of any of these lying Apostles, Qua|kers
in all their Travails to have done.
12. The Papists and Quakers tongues are both
spitting and belching out Fire from one Fire of
Hell:The Pa|pists and Qakers Cursing All that have [136] not the Church their
Mother, our Church say the Papists have no God
to their Father: the Protestants hope and speak
Charitably of the Salvation of many among the Pa|pists,
but the Papists have no Charity for any that
bow not to the Image: and the Quakers (as G. Fox
for the rest) Judge all that differ from Christ that
is themselves to be in the Delusion, in differing from
them, and if they dare to oppose them, Dogs, Ser|pents,
Reprobates, Vipers, Cains, Pharisees, Devils, c.

13. The Papists and Quakers are Firebrands both
in the matter of Persecution or hunting such as
differ from them.The Per|secuting Spirit of the Papists and Qua|kers It is known that the Papists cry
out that they persecute none but the Tares, (the Lot|tards,
the Hugenots, the Wolves, the Hereticks, c.)
That the Quakers as do all Papists and Protestants
cry out against all Persecution when it is their own
Cases, I say the Quakers most vehemently cry out
against violence, against Creatures, but against their
Corruptious and Corrupt Principles: And yet as for
the Papists let it be considered whether there be
any one Religious state known in the world that
Answers that woman drunk with the Blood of the
Saints, and Witnesses of Iesus Comparably so near
as doth the Estate of the Romish Church and Pro|fession.
And for the Quakers two things I say:
1: Their Tongues are the most Cutting and bit|ter
of any that I can hear of professing the Pro|testant
Reformation,The Qua|kers Tongue and hand. and it is certain, where the
Tongue is so, that the Heart is so first, and where
the Heart is so, the Tongue and Hand do never part
Company: and therefore they will be as bitter and
Cutting in Hand also, where God pleaseth to per|mit
a Sword to fall into it.
2. I have proved, and shall prove in this dis|course,
that G. Fox, Ed. Burroughs and Iohn Stubs,
c. maintain in their writings not only a Magistra|tical
Power in the Quakers, and in none else, rashly
not only to punish by the Material Sword Trans|gressions

against men, but also sins against [136
God, his Church, his Christ, his worship and Re|ligion.
2, As for the Agreement between the Arminians
and the Quakers, I told them that the Papists and
the Arminians, the Pelagians and Semipelagians, and
the Quakers were so Confederate and one, that in
naming one I named the other
1. As to the Power of Nature and Free Will
in heavenly and Spiritual matters
2. As to the loosing of true Saving Grace.
3. As to Election and predestination in time,The Qua|kers One|ness with the Ar|minians. upon
Obedience, Rejection and Reprobation. upon Rebellion
and Disobedience. Contrary to the true Protestant
Doctrine of a Certain Number of Gods Elect or
Chosen drawn by mercy, out of the Lumpe of Lost
Mankind according to Gods Appointment from
Eternity, by his Call in Time, by his holy Word
and Spirit: and all from this Grace and Spirit of
Regeneration, or New-Birth, it was not, it is not
possible that David or Peter, or any Child of God
be un-Childed, can Finally or Totally depart and Fall.
3. The Quakers are Brethren with Socinas and
the Socinians following him, in making Christ a
Type and Figure, a pattern and Example how Christ|ians
ought to walk.The Qua|kers and Socinians Oneness Not that the Blood which he
shed upon the Cross at Ierusalem was a sufficient
price and Satisfaction unto God for the sins of the
whole world.
Thus all the Quakers more Explicitly or Implici|tely
speak, and Humphry Norton in print, viz. Can
one mans Obedence and Suffering pay a price to God

for another mans sins? It is true, Socinus magnifies
the Free Grace of God in pardoning Sin, and send|ing
that man Christ Jesus to be a pattern and Lea|der.
to all that will follow him.
But they endure not to think that the Flesh and
Blood of one man being Finite should be able to
atisfie Gods Infinite Iustice, and to pay a price of
Infinite worth and Value. What is this but the Summe
and Sbstance of all the Quakers Teachings? For
although they preach Gods mercy and Grace, and
talk of such a Thing as the Blood of Christ Jesus:
Yet upon the point,Christ Je|sus but a Fancy with the Qua|kers that Body, that Blood, that
Death c. is nothing but a Fancy, and Christ Jesus
his Birth, his Life, his Dath, his Burial, his Resur|rection,
his Ascention, his [137] Return again to
Iudgement are all but a Mistical and Allegorical, and
not a Literal, Real and Substantial matter; And
when they are forced to Confess such a man to have
been (though the Term Humane, G. Fox doth bo|gle
and start as at a Rattle Snake) yet then examine
them (as I have done) what is become of him:
then he is vanished into a Spirit and Ghost, and there
was never any such thing as a Man you talkt of:
And this is a Devilish Iesuitical Trick the Quakers
have beyond the Socinians concerning the Body and
Sufferings of Christ Jesus.
I might here Insist upon the Quakers Notorious
Sabellianisme,The Sa|bellians and Qua|kers all one. taking clearly away (with Sabellius)
the distinction of the Father and the Son, and Con|founding
Father, Son and Spirii in One, as G. Fox
in all his Book doth. At present I Insist upon the
Position in my Paper, viz. that there is much Iudaisme
in the Quakers Religion.

1. In that great point of Righteousness, Reconcili|ation
with God, and pardon of Sin: They were
Zealous (as the Quakers are) in the works of Right|eousness,
thinking thereby to please and pacifie God,
and to satisfie his Justice, putting their own dirt
and dung, Swines Blood and Dogs necks upon Gods
Altar, instead of that One spotless Lamb of God,
that Man Christ Jesus who alone Expiateth, and
taketh away the sins of the World.
2. The Iews were Zealous for their Additions,
Traditions and Superstitious Inventions,The Qua|kers Ju|daisme. which (as the
Lord Jesus speaks) they peferred before he Com|mands
of God: as the washing of their hands, and
of their Bodies, and of Pots and Cups, and Beds,
and Platters, and other things upon a Conscientious
and Religious Account.
The Quakers (if they had their Scope) scorn to
come behind the Iews, or Papists for Ceremonies
and Traditions, which it was necessary for them
both to add (as Apples and Nuts, c. to still poor
Children from Crying after Gods Worship.
1. I named some of the Quakers Traditions and
Inventions in our publick Conference, (unto which I
shall now name [138] some more) I told them,The Qua|kers Tra|ditious and Ceremo|nies and
now do, of the Un-Christian and unnatural Inven|tion
of Women Ministers, Women Apostles, Women
Embassadors to all Nations: a business that all the
Apostolical first Christian practice, and all sober and
modest Humanity abhor to think of.
2. Their dumb and silent meetings (their dumb and
deaf Spirit) without Colour of Common Humanity or
precept or practice,Dumb Worship or promise of Christ to such a
worship.

3. Their bruitish Salutations of strangrs, yea, and
of acquaintance,Either none or Immodest Salutations Foes or Friends: It is true that
some of them will admit o those two words, How
do you, and Farewel, as if there were some holiness
in these two, and in none other, and they might prac|tice
this holiness toward the world, c.
4. Their New Way of feeling and grabling the
hand in an uncouth, strange and Immodest way, and
this instead of kissing, called the holy Kiss amongst
Christians, and a token of Love and Reverence to
men also in sober and Civilizd Nations.
5. Their bruitish Irreverence to all their Superi|ours
either in Age,The Qua|kers dis|respect to al Superi|ours. or in any other way of Prehemi|nence,
a most proud and monstrous Bestiality against so
many Commands and Examples of holy Scripture,
and against the very Light of Barbarous Nature it
self, for the Indians use both Reverent words and
Gestures towards their Sachims, Wiyouhs and Rulers.
Contrary to which, some of us have heard the Chil|dren
of the Quakers brought up and taught to say to
their Fathers George thou lyest: Mary thou lyest
to their Parents, a Language which deserved little less
then Death by the Law, which God delivered to
the Iewish Nation, and surely deserveth severe Pun|ishment
at this day.
6. Their Crying down of Musicians ond musick,The Qu|kers against Musick.
(so Excellent a gift of God) as a foolish and Devilish
practice, though confirmed by so many Reasons
from, and before Christs time in Scripture, and in
all sober Nature and Civility, though it is abused,
as all the gifts of God are.

7. Their own un-Christian,Fantastical singing Fantastical, absurd,
and unprofitable way of Toning and singing.
139] 8. Their Condemning of the Commendable
and Ingenious Arts of Carving,Carving, painting Embroydering, and
Painting, so approved of, and Commended by God
himself in Scripture, c.
9. Their Crying out against Ornaments of Gar|ments,Orna|ments
and otherwise, against that Order God hath
set in his works, and that Variety of his gifts for
necessity, for Conveniency, for delight, even to
Astonishment and Admiration in all his glorious
works.
All these particulars (and more) I had not time,
nor have I now to reckon up and amplifie, I re|member
no Material Exception, or Objections I had
from my Antagonists. Only Iohn Burnet spake
against my great charging of them, and William
Edmundson he thundred out continually how deep
my Charges were, and how weak my proofs, and
that I had proved nothing.
I told them that if Paul or Christ Jesus himself
were there in presence,The Con|clusion of the Con|ference at Newport they propably would be
Answered as I was, viz. that they made many deep
and false Charges against the people called Quakers,
but they could prove nothing: but I said, I submit|ted
the Examinatoon and Consideration of all pas|sages
unto every mans Conscience, and the praise
and Issue only unto God.
After some turns of this sort,The quickest and last turn about where Christ is c. I praid their
patience to Answer me one question, viz. where is
now that Man Christ Jesus which they had Con|fessed
to me was born at Bethlehem, and died at

Ierusalem, c. At this they were all a while silent,
and then Iohn Burnet Answered saying, he is where
the Scriptures say he is.
I Replied, where do the Scriptures say he is,
Iohn Burnet Replied, the Scripture say he is within:
I rejoyned to this purpose: Then must his Body
be Ubiquitary, (as the Transubstantiators and Con|substantiators
are forced to hold:) Then must he
have Infinite multitudes of Bodies, then must his
Monstrous Body or Bodies come from within his
Saints, yea from within all mankind to Judge|ment,
c.
Just here it pleased God so to Order it, that
from the Boat (ready to set Saile for Providence) I and
others were [140] called upon to depart:An Unex|pected yet Seasonable and true Testimony from Elizabeth Williams So I was
stepping down, the Lord opened the mouth of
Elizabeth Williams my Brothers wife, one of the
Society of the Baptists in Newport, who hearing
their Clamours, their only Refuge, he hath proved
nothing and said aloud: The man hath discharged
his Conscience: He hath fully proved what he
undertook to prove against you, and the words
that he hath spoken shall Judge you at the last
day. And thus the Father of Lights, the first and
last, the Alpha and Omega graciously carried me
through all alone these three dayes Contests, as in
a shadow of Death with these Deceived, and De|ceiving
Souls: through my Labours of making out
my proof the burthen whereof lay wholly upon
me though they had been silent, (through their

Censures Reproaches, Falling on me so many at
once, their Interruptions, and other Disadvantages
and Provocations, his holy Name be ever praised and
magnified.




141] Our Conferences and Disputes at
PROVIDENCE upon the seven other
Positions mentioned in my Paper sent to G.
Fox and his Associates.
_AFter we were thus (as above said) parted:
They Remembered their Promise to
me of discussing the other seven at
Providence, and accordingly Iohn Stubs
and William Edmundson sent me a Note
of their willingness to come to Providence the last
day of the next week being the 17th. day of the
sixth Moneth called August.The Con|ference at Provi|dence
I Returned them from the Shoar side another
Note signifying, that (if God permitted) I would
then and there be ready to Receive them.
That day it pleased the goodness and patience of
God to bring us to, and being met thus at Provi|dence,
I first presented them with the Letter which
was sent to them and me (God knows) without
my thought or knowledg, at Newport, in publick
Assembled. But there they thrice refused it, and
here at Providence William Edmundson Answers, that

they came not to Pro- [142] vidence to hear Papers,
but to hear me make out my Charges against them:
One of my Neighbours Thomas Olny Senior an able
and Leading man amongst the People called Baptists
at Providence,Passages about Reading the former Recited Letter. Thomas Olny moved also for the Reading of the Let|ter,
William Edmundson said to him who art thou?
Art not thou a Baptist? hast not thou seen it alrea|dy?
and further said to him, Thou art an Envious
and filthy man, upon no other Provocation but his
Rational desire the Letter might be Read. William
Edmondson thongh he had on either side of him an
able Iohn, viz. Iohn Stubs and Iohn Cartwright spake
all, and at last was forced to say that if the Letter
Contained matter tending to prove my Positions it
should be read. But in the End I put up my Let|ter
again, at the motion of Captain Holden of War|wick,
as I did at Newport, in the morning of our
third dayes Conference, for I observed that for all
their bruitish Clamour of Diana, their Light or dark
Lanthorn, hey could not endure to be Informed,
Admonished, Counselled, least of all Reproved by any:
and I also resolved to wait upon Gods mercy for a
Season of publishing it on the House Top, and there|fore
the Reader hath it Faithfully presented in the
Eighty seventh Page in the beginning of the third
dayes Conference at Newport,About a strange Query put to my Au|tagonist by Captain Green. this time stood up Cap|tain
Iohn Green of Warwick one of our Magistrates,
who observing the Insulting Carriage especially of
William Edmundson, he desired leave to propose one
Query, which being granted he said, he spake not
as a Magistrate with Authority, but as an Auditor
and sitter by, and he said, I desire o know whether

Mr. Williams be here as a Delinquent Charged to
Answer at the Barr, or as a Disputant upon equal
Terms.
This Query they waved as well as they could, and
I waved it also, and bore what seemed Intollerable
to some that we might not be discouraged to go on
in our business, about this time Mr. Caverly of
Warwick desiring leave to speak,A Mode|rator motioned. motioned for the
Choice of a Moderator between us, William Edmund|son
Answered that Roger Williams had himself pro- 143] vided
a Moderator, and he produced and Read
my Paper of Position,, wherein I desired that all
matters might be left to every mans Conscience and
Iudgement. c.
I knew with whom I had to deal, and therefore
purposely waved, what ever I thought they would
bogle at,  purposely gave them all possible Advan|tages,
c. and I humbly waited on God for patience
for his sake to bear with all Inconveniences, Insult|ings,
Interruptions, c. and then, I knew there would be
no great need of a Moderator.
Having thus cleard the way,The first of the Positions debated at Provi|dence I told them, I
would briefly fall on my proof of the first, of the
seventh Positions to be debated at Providence, Wil|liam
Edmundson took forth his Paper and Read it,
viz. [The People called Quakers in Effect hold no God,
no Christ, no Spirit, no Angel, no Devil, no Resurrection,
no Iudgement, no Heaven, no Hell, but what is in man.
I told them that it was true, that in words and
Terms they professed and maintained all these, as
other Protestants did, but if their writings were Ex|amined,
and especially this of G. Fox which I had

there by me it should appear that what they pro|fessed
in one place they overthrew in another: I
told them that they had there George Fox his Book
as well as I, and if Iohn Stubs would turn to them I
would name the Quoted Pages, and read them and
he might read them also.
I named Pag. 273. where George Fox brings in
Alexander Ross saying,Alexander Ross [It is horrible Blasphemy to
say the Scripture is not the Word of God, and to say
the Soul is a part of God.]
He Answers, [The Scriptures are the words of
God, Exodus 20. and the four Books of the Revela|tions,
but Christ is the word in whom they End.
And it is not Horrible Blasphemy to say that the Soul
is a part of God, for it comes out of him, and that
which comes out of him is of him, and Rejoyceth
in him,G Fox his Non-Sene I said here what George Fox meant by the
four Books of the Revelations, I knew not, and if
they did they should do well to declare.
145] But they past it by and so did I and I insisted
on the matter which was that G. Fox imagined such
a God and Godhead as is partible and divisible,Quakers blasphem|ous opinion about Goa and the Sovl which
might be divided into parts and pieces, and by this
strange communication of his Essence, made him
dissolvable, and so corruptible, c. against the Puri|ty
 Majesty  Eternity of God: For this renders
the Essence or Being of God capable of falling
from his purity as man hath done and doth, and
capable of punishment and condemnation in Hel-Fire
as the Soul of man is; all which and more
necessary Consequences of of that opinion are hor|rible
and blasphemous to imagine, much more to

be uttered of the eternal invisible and infinitely
and only Wise God.
Iohn Stubs here read the words of G. Fox and said,About Gods Breath.
the reason was to be weighed which G. Fox used
which was; For it came out of him, and that
which came out out of him is of him, and rejoy|ceth
in him. To this end he desired the word in
Gen. 2. might be viewed, which he turned to and
read, viz. God breathed into him the breath of life
and man became a living Soul.
About this time Sam. Gorton sen. desired to speak,
and said, If it be affirmed that God can be divided,
 that man was a Part of God, the God-head was
destroyed and the Soul of man, and upon this Basis
all the rest would follow which was asserted in this
Position. And whereas Iohn Stubs read it as it is in
our Translation, viz. God breathed into him the breath
of life, Mr. Gorton said it was Lives in the Margin,
the breath of Lives, which Iohn Stubs acknowledged.
It is frequent in their Books, (when they will
speak plainly) for them to confess that God breathed
forth himself into Adam, and that ther fore mans
Soul or Spirit is a part of the Divine Essence,The Qua|kers Gross conceit of soul  body that
the Soul is an increated substance: that as for the
Body, it comes from the Earth, and returns to the
Earth, and dust and rottenness, and however they
sometimes preach and print hat the Body shall rise
again, yet others again of them speak plainly, that
as the body of a dog or beast so it vanisheth: But
as for the Spirit, they say that returns to God, that
is into God. And although they talk to blind our
eyes of a Resurrection and Iudgment, and of Souls

being punished with the Devil and his Angels, yet
others of them affirm that all Souls return into God,
and that the soul of Iudas is now as happy in God
as the Soul of Peter, yea others of [146] them speak
plainly that they are Christ  God: therefore one
of them being desired to give thanks at dinner,
asked roundly, to whome should I give thanks? to my
self? and Calvin relates how (long ago) one Quiniti|nus
in his time a Leader this way,Their high blasphe|myes. being demanded
how he did? resolutely answered, How can Christ
doe but well? and yet at that time he was very sick.
About this time W. E. said, what dost thou tel
us of storyes what this man said and that man said
we will not believe thee! But just here rose up a
neighbour Ioseph Iinks, who said he had no preju|dice
against the Quakers, yet he could witness to
the truth of these speeches of the Quakers, for one
of them had spoke as much to his face lately at
Newport on Rhode-Island: but I still laboured to
keep down heat and therefore I told them I would
not trouble them with Proofs from elsewhere, but
from their own writings, and from that of G. Fox
there present, and therfore I prayed them to turn
to Pag. 39. where G. Fox brings in Magnus Bine
saying,Pag. 89. Magnus Bine. The Saints are neither in the fulness of the
God-head nor part, away with this Blasphemy which
saith this is, c. Fox answereth, The work of the
Ministry was to bring People to the Knowledg of
the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the unity of the
Faith, to the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ: and Christ will dwell in the Saints, and
God will dwell in them: and thou sayest they have

no part of the Fulness of the Godhead, and Iohn
saith, of his fulness have we all received, in whome
dwels the Godhead bodily, and ye be all in the Blas|phemy,
that be out of this part of the Fulness.
I said, that G. Fox rose up contrary to what Mag|nus
Bine affirmed, to wit, That the Saints are not in
the fulness of the Godhead.About the fulness of the God head. But W. E. bid me let
G. F. his words alone, his meaning alone, and keep
to the words. I told them the substance of my
proof lay there in the substance of G. Fox his answer
to his Adversaryes: I took Fox his own word for
the Quotation out of his Adversary, which may be
thought to be taken with as much Favor and ad|vantage
to himself as may be:Unreasona|ble Rea|soning. and therefore if
they stopt me from opening and comparing the
words in a rational and just way, they stopt me in
the bringing forth of my Proofs and Arguments.
I think here it was that W. E. said further, If
thou goest on to make out G. Fox his Sence and
meaning, we tell thee that we will stop thee, c.
147] But since our business is with G. Fox, as well
if not more than with W. E. especially because of
his Book, we shall now more freely inlarge upon the
words c. and Sence and Meaning also.
For the Fulness of the Godhead is one thing, and
another thing our (and all his works and Creatures)
partaking of that Fulness, in some mercifull like|ness
and coformity, as Moses and we behold his
Back or dark Resemblance, and by Relection, (as we
behold the Sun) take in some weak low thoughts
and conceits of the Eternal and Invisible incompre|hensible
and inconceivable Power and Godhead.

Thus to partake of some drops of the Ocean of
his Wisdom,The great temptation of knowing and holy
People. Power, Goodness, Holiness, c. is not to
become an Ocean of Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Holi|ness,
yea Wisdom it self, Power it self, Goodness it
self, Holiness it self as God is. This devilish Pride
was the Sin of the Devils, or wicked spirits, this was
the Sin of our first Parents unto which the Devil
beguiled them; and this is Sathans bait still to catch
all Wise  Rich  High, and especially Holy People
with, viz. to be as God, to be in the fulness of the
Godhead, to be God himself.
2. However this Iugler speaks here of the Ful|ness
of the Godhead bodily in Christ,The Qua|kers make themselvs God and Christ. yet if he be ex|amined
and searched it is clear that by Christ he
meanes the Body, the Quakers and every one of
their Bodyes is Christ in whome the Godhead dwels
bodily: and the great Mystery of which the Holy
Scripture speaketh, 1 Tim. 3. Is God manifest in
their flesh, and therefore Sam. Fisher useth in his
Writing, Christ Iesus) as Peter did in his denying
of him saying [that Person whome you call God-Man]
is as high Treason against the King of kings,
and King of Saints, as hath ordinarily been acted
since God most wonderfully gave life to a lump of
Clay, which now perks up to the eternal Power and
Godhead.
Pag. 90. G. Fox brings in the same Author say|ing,Magnus Bine.
There is a kind of Infiniteness in the Soul, and it
cannot be Infiniteness it self, He answers, Is not the
Soul without beginning, comeing from God and return|ing
into God again which hath it in his hand? which
hand goes against him that doth evill, which throws

down that which warrs against it, and Christ the
Power of God, the Bishop of the Soul which brings it
up into God, which comes out from God, hath this a be|ginning
and ending, and is not this infinite in it self, and
more than all the World?
148] I Reply,The Soul of man infinite in these few lines, let him that hath
his sences make common sence and English of some
of them.
However this is express that the Soul is without
beginning or ending, coming out of God, and re|turning
into God: [Hath this (saith Fox (a beginning
or ending, and is not this infinite in it self and more
than all the World]
I know I have had better Opinions and better
Reasons from these poor Natives of America then
this poor self conceited God and Christ. G. Fox ex|presseth
concerning the Soul and Spirit of Man:
what is here but a bruitish notion of the Spirit of
man, and a bruitish notion of the Eternal Power
and Godhead?
Among the six or seven Opinions of the Soul of
man, this is one (and one of the grossest) viz. that
Mans Soul is an efflux, efflation, that is a flowing
or breathing out of the Essence of eternal and in|finite
Godhead. This worst and most Blasphemous
Opinion of the rest, the old Serpent hath taught
these Foxians, in so much that these bewitched
Souls say and print,The Qua|kers are the old Mani|cheans that this World is God, and the
Godhead, manifest noChange "no" to "in," R. W. Ms. Ann. variety of appearances, and
returning all again into the center of the Godhead:

in which they shew horrible ignorance and Block|ishness
in heavenly or earthly matters:Municheus his 2 Principles for reason
tells us that Finites be innumberable and yet nu|merable
in time, but Infinite is but one. The Qua|kers
and Manicheans are but one in many particu|lars
Manicheus held two infinite powers or princes:
One infinitely good, the other infinitely as bad,
which they say is the reason (in some Disputes I
have had with them) why God nor the Devil, good
nor evil gets the final victory one over another in
this World. But this notion of two infinite or
boundless Beings, is soon found simple and bruitish
for an infinite or boundless Being, cannot possibly re|ceive
a Neighbour a Competitiour, or second infinite
or boundless, for then the second would terminate and
bound the first and it self also and so not one infinite
at all be granted. Beware of Dogs saith Paul  the
Holy Spirit saith (Cant. 2. beware of Foxes [take us the
foxes] sure it is:The infin|ite patience of God we are to sly from bruitish fellow|ship,
with them in these bruitish Fancyes, so also to
fly from these their brutish Barkings and Blasphe|mings
against the infinitely Glorious and incon|ceivable
Excellencies of God, and among the rest
his incomprehensible patience, which could not bear
such horrible provocations were not his patience
himself, infinite and incomprehen- [149] sible:
Alas poor lump of clay and dust and ashes: poor
finite vapours we are, that are so far from being in|finite
that (in a sence) we are infinitely Blocks and
Beasts, and not able to give a guess at what Infinity,
and an infinite Majesty and Godhead is.The Qua|kers obsti|nate in hor|rible fan|cies  Blasphe|mies
I quoted Pag. 67. where against Fr. Higinson he

saith [Again thou makest a great Puddir that one
should witnes he is equall with God] G. Fox answers
that the English Divines in their Catechisme say [that
Holy Ghost and the Son are equall in Power and Glory
with the Father] yet if any one come to witness the
Son of God revealed in him: or come to witness the
Holy Ghost in them as they that gave out Scrip|tures
to witness the mind of Christ and witness that
equality with the Father, that equality which you
speak of you Priests destroy, that which you have put
forth to the Nation, and cry out horrible Blasphemie.
I Reply, let these horrible Blasphemous lines be
examined, and when the black and hellish juyce is
prest out of them, will it not be this, viz. [The
Quakers say that they are equal in power and Glory
with God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit?
Pag. 182. I will adde to this Pag. 282. where G.
Fox brings in Daniel Gaudry saying,Daniel Caudry surely they can|not
be perfect here nor hereafter in equality but in quali|ty.
G. F. answers, Christ makes no distinction in his
words but saith, be ye perfect as your heavenly Fa|ther
is perfect, and be you Merciful as he is, and as he
is so are we in this world. c.
I Reply, whether it be G. Fox his Ignorance
of the difference between Quality and Equality, or
whether it be his flinty Impudence,The Qua|kers chal|lenge an equality with God. or both, sure I
am there is an horrible, monstrous Brat of hellish
Blasphemy hatcht amongst them, viz. that poor
dust and ashes may not only (by infinite Grace) be
like the King of Glory in Holiness, c. but he may
be (and the Quakers are) cheek by joll with him
as great a King, Prince and Monarch as he, equal

in Power, Wisdome, Goodness, Iustice, Holiness, Mer|cy,
and all these Eternal, Infinite and Incomprehen|sible.
G. Fox would not endure this in his own stinking
Dignity and Preheminence: for although he suffer
his Inferiour and petty Saints to be like him in (his
pretended Holiness, Goodness, c.) yet he is so great
a Diotrephes, and so jealous of his Crown, that
Humph. Norton himself must not dare to touch that
simple Bable, but himself and blind followers must
all adore the Godhead, and [150] none must dare
to be equal; or Corrival with him.
Unto this I adde, Pag. 248. where G. Fox. brings
in an unnamed Author saying. To say that God is
substantially in man, and essentially one with him, can
be no other but the Man of Sin, the Devil himself hath
transformed himself into an Angel of Light, and if
it were possible would deceive the very Elect. G. Fox.
Answers, That God will dwell in man, and the Saints
had unity with the Father and the Son c.
In which Answer it is plain, 1. That G. Fox
maintains that the Godhead is essentially and sub|stantially
in man.
2. That his Proof is only some Mystical and fig|urative
Expression, as viz. of Gods dwelling in Man,
and walking in man, c. whence he impiously 
ignorantly confounds that relative union by be|lieving
in the Son of God, into an Essential or
Union of Beings with the eternal Creator himself:
a Union of finite and temporal shadowes, with the
most Infinite and Eternal Creator; of visible and
vanishing and foolish dust, with the invisible

immortal and only wise God, which no truly hum|ble
Soul can but tremble to hear and think of.
It is clear in these Passages,The Qua|kess make themselves Faher, Son  Holy Spirit 1. That the Qua|kers
make themselves Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
2. They make no other work of Redemption on
Iustification, c. but what is wrought in their spi|rits,
minds and fancyes, called within them.
3. They make no other state of Heaven, Res|urrection,
Iudgment or Life to come, then is in them
and their Bodyes at present.
Now concerning their bold and blasphemous as|cending
into the Throne of God we shall hear a
little more in G. Fox making no Distinction be|tween
the Father and the Son, with that known
Heretick Sabellius. and 2. In his making no dis|tinction
between Christ Jesus himself, and his Saints
or Believers in him.
In Pag. 246. He brings in Christopher Wade say|ing,
God the Father never took upon him humane Na|ture.Christ. Wade
G F. answers, God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself And art ignorant of the great
mystery, God manifest in the slesh; and his name is called
the everlasting Father. As for the word Humane,
which is from the ground, it comes from thy own
Knowledge which is Earthly, And Christ took upon
him the seed of Abraham and David according to the
slesh, and this is Scripture-Language.
151] I reply,H. Nortou more plain then G F. in the former part of this Narra|tive
I have shewn how simple  irrational G. F. his
clamour is against that word Humane, and that the
bottome is their impious, unchristian and hypo|critical
denying of Christ Jesus to be a man, one

individual person as every man is: therefore Humph.
Norton (G. Fox his Corrival) is more plain and down
right, saying, is not Christ God, and is not God a
Spirit, and chiding us for gazing after a man, c.
I ad to the former page 293. where G. Fox
brings in one Fergison,Fergison. saying, that Christ and the
Father and the Spirit are not one, but are distinct, c.
G. Fox answers,G F against the mystery of Father Son and Spirit this is a denying of Christs Doc|trine,
who saith, I and my Father are one: and the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son:
and he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and they
are all one and not distinct, but one in unity: that
which comes out from him leads the Saints into
all Truth that ever was given them from the Spirit
of truth, and so up unto God the Father of truth,
and so goes back again from whence it came.
Again the same Author saith, it is Blasphemy to
say the Son is not distinct from the Father, c.
G. Fox Answers, the Father and the Son are one,
the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father:
so that which is in him is not distinct from him,
and they Blaspheme which say, the Son is not in
the Father, and deny Christs Doctrine.
I reply,The Quak blasphe|myes as to the most holy Spirit G. Fox all along his Book calls that blas|phemy
which the most holy and eternal Lord calls
heavenly Truth. He hath like some Witches and
other notorious wretches so inur'd himself to poyson,
that it is all one to him to swallow down the most
sensual and sensless Dreames, even concerning the
fearfull mysteryes of the Father, Son, and Holy Spi|rit,
when the holy Scripture tels us concerning these
Mysteryes, that in this life we know but in part, as
through a glass darkly c.

2. For his Proof, it is the Childs song in the streets,
they are one and therfore not distinct: I fear he
knows, but will not know the nature of several
respects and accounts, viz. that in one respect Christ
Iesus saith, I and my Father are one, and in another
respect my Father is greater then I; thus in one
sence a Father is one with his Children, an Hus|band
with his Wife, a Captain with his Souldiers, a
Skipper with his Sea-men, a King with his Subjects.
And yet in another respect, the Son is not the Fa|ther,
the Wife is [152] not the Husband, the Mas|ter
is not his Servants, the Captain is not his Soul|diers,
the Master is not his Sea-men, and the King
is not his subjects.
And thus though GF. and MF. be one in mar|iage,
and one in a spirit of notorious railing, yet
she her self will not say but she is the Woman and
he is the Man,Tee Qua|krs Chaos  babel. she the wife and he the husband,
and this Distinction God in Nature the Law of our
Countrey and all Nations will force them (will
they, nill they) to acknowledge: otherwise (like
the man possessed in the Gospel) I fear no Chains
of Humility nor Modesty would hold them from
throwing off all Chains of Conscience, and from
flinging all upon heaps of confusion without all
due respective respects and distinctions.
There are four great points of the Christian
Belief:The Quak. dig up the root of al Christiani|ty in the 4 great Doc|trines thereof.
1. The Doctrine of the Father, Son and Spirit,
and these they will not distinguish but make all
one, and all to be in man.

2. The Doctrine of the Fall, Redemption, Justi|fication,
Sanctification, c. and these are all in man
by their Tenents.
3. The Doctrine of the Church, the Officers,
Baptisme, the Lords Supper, and these (say they)
are all invisible, and within man.
4. The Resurrect on, eternal Judgement, Eter|nal
Life. Heaven and Hell, Angels, Devils,  these
their Professions and Printings proclaim to be in
Man also: yea, so within him that they are only
within him, and that withoutInterline "man" R. W. Ms. Ann. there is no God, no
Christ, no Heaven nor hell, c.
In Page 38. G. Fox brings in Tho. Collier,Tho Col|lier saying
[The Kingdome is not come, nor the refreshing from the
Spirit of the Lord.
G. F. Answers, which shews they are unconverted,
gadding here and there,: And Christ tells them the
Kingdome was in them. And they that are not turned to
the Light which comes from Christ the Refresher where|by
refreshing might come, and so are not come to Re|pentance
yet.
Reply, Who sees not that G. F. speaks not here
of the Kingdome of Christ (so often promised in
the future and to come, and the time of refreshing,
Act. 3.) but that he cuts off all future hopes and
expectations to come, and appropriates aud con|fines
and fixeth, and stakes down all to the present
moment of this vanishing life, and to what is (in
this moment) in the minds of Men and Women?
153] The Holy Scripture tells us, and Experience

tells us that Hypocrites have no solid peace and joy
here,The Quak. hold no Heaven nor Hell to come nor solid hope of joy or glory to come: and yet
(to still the deen and clamour of Conscience) ab|horring
the thought of a judgement and reckoning
to come, they foolishly and atheistically please them|selves
with a childish Dream of no Heaven nor re|freshing,
no Hell nor torment but what is now
within us.
Pag. 101 he brings in Iohn Clapham, saying [To
witness Heaven,John Clapham and Hell, and Resurrection within is
the Mystery of iniquity.] G. Fox Answers, [which
shews thou never knew Heaven in thy self nor hell
there, nor Christ the Resurrection and the Life, which
they are blessed that are made partakers of the first
Resurrection, on them the second Death shall have no
power, and the Scriptures do witness Heaven within,
and if Christ that was offered up, the Resurrection and
the life be not within thee thou art a Reprobate]
I Reply, If G. Fox would speak of Heaven, and
Angels, and Hell, and Devils, and of the Resurrec|tion
and Life to come, by way of allusion and sim|ilitude,
or by way of first Fruits or Tast of them,
he might profitably do it, but to speak of them in
opposition to a rising again, an Heaven, an Hell,
c. to come, what is it?
I say, what is it but to proclaim their Revolt
from, and their Rebellion against all the Christian
Faith and Religion, and their wonderful hardening
against whatever is yet to come, either here or in
the eternal State approaching?
Pag. 214. He brings in some (nameless, saying,
[To say Heaven and Glory is in man, which was be|fore

man was, they are sottish and blinde.] He Ans|wers,
[There's none have a Glory and a Heaven but
within them, which was before man had a Being.]
Unto this I adde, Thomas Pollard saying,The Pol|lard for a
perfection of Glory to be attained to on this side
the Grave, I utterly deny.]
G. Fox Answereth [Where Glory is (in the least de|gree)
it is in perfection,The epi|curian Phi|losophers  the Qua|kers one Sect. and who have not Glory, and
doth ot attain to Glory on this side the Grave they are
in a sad condition: for the Saints rejoyce with joy un|speakable
and full of Glory, c.]
I Reply, as the Swinish Epicures and Dives's of
this World, what ever they formally and loosely
profess) have no solid hope of peace and joy to
come after this life, and therefore (like Buit
Beasts) practically confess it saying, (in their hearts
and Life) [154] let us eat and drink for to mor|row
we shall dye: so do this cynical and doggid
kind of Philosophers (the Quakers) profess plainly
(though some would cover it) no hopes of a rising of
the Body but what they have here, no hopes of a
Heaven but what they have here, no hell but what
they (in their minds) have past through: no Judge|ment
but what (as Saints) they are now executing.
I know that some of the Quakers will not be|lieve
that G. Fox and others of them deny the
Resurrection, c. but (if they will not willingly
fishChange to "err."R. W. Ms. Ann.) let them read and consider these my Quota|tions
from G. Fox, Ed. Burrowes and Iohn Stubs
their Book in Folio, and let them also know that
whatever they profess against this that I have said,

that is but horrible Hypocrisie and Deceit, for they
would not in all our Disputations depart one hair
from those horrible and monstrous Blasphemies, and
bruitish Reasonings in G. Fox and Edward Burrowes.The 9th Position proved
We came to the ninth Proposal, the second in or|der
to be debated at Providence, viz [all that the
Quakers Religion requires externally and internally to
make Converts or Proselytes, amounts to no more then
what a Reprobate may easily attain to and perform.]
I did not (the Father of Spirits is my holy wit|ness)
sling this in as a Firebrand of Reprobation
against either Teachers or Followers called Qua|kers:
it is true they do so against all that ever were
not or are not or shall not be in their Opinion, but
my hope is, that many amongst these misled and
wandring Souls may come to Abrahams Bosome, c.
yet this I assert, that thousands and ten thousands
may be of their Religion, and may have gotten all
that their Religion requires or performs, yea, all
that their Principles call for outwardly or inwardly,
and yet not be accepted but rejected from the holy
and gracious presence of God.
I told them that I had this notion from a man
famous in his day (Mr. W. Perkins) who having
been a deboist young man in Cambridge after the
call of God to him he proved famous in Preaching
and Writing,M. Per|kins saying of the Pa|pists and mine of the Qua|kers. and (with a lame Club hand) he wrote
admirably against the Papists, and maintained that
all Popery preacht to the making of Converts or
Proselytes amounted to no more then what Repro|bates
may easily attain unto.
I say the same of common Protestants, and of the

Quakers, they may have a great measure of sorrow
for sin: great resolu- [155] tions, great Reforma|tions,
great Rejoycings, great and wonderful per|formances
endure great persecutions, endure burn|ing
of the Body in the Flames, and yet be far from
the true Protestant Religion either in the true Doc|trine
and Principles, or in the true life and practice
of it.
For the Foundation both of the Papists and Qua|kers
Faith is laid upon the Sand of Rotten Nature
which they (both) only adorn and trim as the dead
Carcasses and Coffins with Roses and Lillies and other
Flowers and Garlands,Neither Papists nor Quak skil ow to pay Gods justice their own penances satisfac|tions,
Alms, Prayers, Fastings, Suffrings, which are
but Womens filthy Clouts, and Dung of Men and
Beasts put into the ballance of Gods infinite Jus|tice,
instead of the infinite Righteousness and Satis|faction
of the Son of God: poor Souls, they know
not that the whole Creation (visible and invisible,
seen and unseen, known and unknown, cannot
reach Gods most holy and inconceivable justice, for
the least evil word or thought. Neither of these
(nor millions of Protestants, much less millions of
millions in one evil word or thought, then in all
the sorrows and calamities felt in this life, or justly
feared in the lie a coming.
With the Quakers 'tis known, that if a notorious
Drunkard,The Cha|racter of a Quaker c be convinced, and come to hearken
to a Spirit within him, to say, Thou and Thee, and
think himself equal and above all his former Su|periours,
c. he is Justified, he is Sanctified, and so

Holy that he cannot sin in Thoughts,Interline "or." R. W. Ms. Ann. Words, and
from this high Mount looks down on all others
(especially if opposite) as Pharisees, Publicans,
Cains, c. Thus they pretend Repentance, Faith,
and a change of heart because they have changed
their talk, their Garments, c. But,
1. I told them that true Repentance lay in a
discovery of sin as sin, as greater than the greatest
filthiness in the world: no poverty, no shame, no
loss like unto it, c.
2, In an utter inability to contribute one mite,What true turning to God is.
either from self,, or from the whole Creation to|ward
satisfaction to infinite Majesty and Justice for
the least evil thought or imagination.
3. That as blessed Iohn Bradford said to God:
Lord thou art Heaven, I am Hell, viz. that in the best
natural Soul in the World, there is nothing but a
Kennil, an Hogstie, a den of Atheisme, Murther, Theft,
Fornication, Adultery, and all kinde of Wickedness.
156] 4. That I have not so much in me as to de|sire
Deliverance, nor to be sensible of any need of it.
5. That it is only mercy and rich free Grace
that worketh in me or any Soul a Sence of my
Condition a Sence of Justice a Sence of Mercy.Iacobs Ladder of true Chris|tianity.
6. That it is Mercy only worketh a willingness,
a new desire, new Affections towards my Maker,
towards my Ransomer, who paid his Bloud, his
Heart-Bloud, the Bloud of God to ransome and re|deem
me.
7. That in this work, Mercy not only worketh

a Sence, a thirst after Pardon and Peace with my
Maker, but also after a Conformity and Likeness unto
God.
8. Because I cannot reach this, the Mercy and
Pitty of God worketh in my Soul a longing after
God, and after the turning of the whole Soul unto
God, and after those seven Evidences of true Re|pentance,
2. Cor. 7.
9. This is in true Christian Repentance and turn|ing
of the whole Soul unto God, viz. to receive
every thought, every motion, every desire upon the
account of Mercy and Pitty, as ever poor Dog re|ceived
Crum or Bone under the Table.
Much of this I spake publickly, as also that no
Papist nor Quaker by their grounds could get up
this Iacobs Ladder, much less upon those higher
grounds and steps of casting off Self, of doing all
purely for God, and in Gods eye: of meekness and
Mercy to other poor drowning Soules, of pure Love
to God for Himself for his Holiness,The Qua|kers nd most mens Shipwrack Mercy, Goodness,
yea for his Iustice: of quiet and patient and thank|full
resting in his holy Pleasure, whatever he take
from us or bring upon us.
I said and say, that neither the teachings of the
Papists or Quakers will help them to get up one
Step of this heavenly Ladder; for by the utmost
strength and activity of Nature no man can ad|vance
and climbe higher then to love God and Christ
and Heaven for it Self, and Self-ends, which is no
more but Flattering of God, base and dog-like
Fawning and Hypocrisie.
I cannot call to mind ought that was opposed by

my Antagonists against these Considerations:The Qua|kers Min|sters and heir Plea. but
Iohn Stubs said, Dost thou count our Religion an
easie Religion, for my part said he, we have not
found it so easie to forsake all the glory and plea|sure
of this world, to forsake wife and children c.
to goe about the work of the Lord in strange
Countreys, c.
157] And W. E. said thou sayest our Religion is
an easie Religion: For my part said he I have not
found it so,A close fight as to Religion I have not found it so easie to forsake
all the glory and honour and pleasures of this
World, and to expose our selves to hardships, to
forsake our Wives and Children, Friends and Rela|tions,
and to goe about in strange Countreys c.
And W. E. further said in that thou saist our Re|ligion
is an easie Religion, it is a plain evidence
that thou that talkest so much of Religion, and of
the Religion of the Quakers thou yet never knew|est
what Religion is, with more to this effect: and
they (according to their wild spirit) insisted vehem|ently
on the wronge which I did them, and the
People called Quakers: and that as for themselves
they were but a few, but the people called Quakers
were a great Body: they were many thousands all
over England, they were many thousands in Lon|don,
as also in Barbadoes, and New-England and
Virginia, and other places.
I replyed, that my time would not give me leave
as they knew, to say much to their greatness and
number,The easi|ness of the Quakers Religion yet I said their Religion like the Papists,
was easie and agreeable with Nature, they had the
wind and tyde of natural corruption to joyn with their
spirit, which knew this well enough.

1. It was easie to perswade the Quakers to change
one fowle Spirit and Devil for an other,One Devil changed for another, yea some|times one for seven a Devil
more gross and ugly, for a Devil more refined
painted and guilded: their pride in Cloathes and
fantastical Fshions, to pride in self conceit and fan|tastical
Opinions, their Drunkenness and Gluttony,
with Wine and Flesh to Intoxications, with high
and proud Vapours: How many millions travel on
the broad way to Destruction, and yet prate of a
strict and narrow Path? What wonderfull hard|ships
doe both Turks and Papists endure in their
religious Pennances? How doe they macerate and
whip themselves, even till the bloud of their tender
Women hath streamed down upon the ground from
them? Yea how zealously (in the cause of their
Religion) have the very Iewes themselves cast away
their Lives, as Spain and Portugal can witness.
Besides, I told them it was a poor lame thing to
talk of numbers when the Council of the only
Wise was so clearly revealed concerning his Little
Flock, opposed to the vast and monstrous Herds both
of civiliz'd and wild Nations.
158] I put them in mind of the innumerable
multitudes that followed after that stupendous
Cheater Mahomet,The Qua|kers simple boast of numbers even thirteen parts of the world,
divided into thirty, as very knowing Cosmographers
or Describers of the World have computed. And
if so be that the Pope, and Church of Rome be the
eight Head, the great Whore that sits upon many
Waters, Kingdomes and Nations, what a poor Slut is
the Quakers Fancy compar'd with the Baals Priests,

the Romish Proselites; the Beast whome the whole
world wonders after?
3. Again it is to me and may be to all men, won|derfull
that since the Religion of the Quakers is so
easie c. that ten thousands more of people in old
and new England, Scotland, Ireland and other parts,
have not lifted themselves under this new Mahomet,
pretending so much from the Dove from Heaven
as Mahomet did.
Tis true G. Fox and Foxians,The carnal weapons pretend the two
horns of the Lamb, and that their weapons are not
Iehues nor Baals Priests, but that they have for|saken
all Carnal Weapons: but this I shall shew to
be an horrible Lye when I come to the last Position.
The Devil and the Papists and the Quakers know
that the Quakers only want a Sword to subdue as
many Proselites as either Mahomet or the Pope hath
done. The Quakers some prate subtilly, others
childishly against Carnal Weapons, Carnal Weapons
c. but I shall shew (if God please) in my 14th.
and last Position, what a Devil of Pretence this is.
At present the Devil knowes they want but a
Sword (not Hearts nor Hands nor Principles)
whereby to subdue as may Proselytes as the Pope
or Mahomet hath, and literally and materially thrash
the Mountains with Flails of iron, and make the
Nations turn (in an easie Hypocrisie and Dissimula|tion)
Dissembling Quakers. I wonder and adore the
Councels of the Eternal, that any of these three
should be Cheated by this spirit.
First, Any of those truely fearing God; for their
Principles spirit and practices being so notoriously

opposite to the meek and patient Spirit of true
Purity and Holiness,The Qua|kers Spirit far from purity and Holiness. and evidencing them to be lead
by a dumb and dogged Spirit. 1. Their high and
shameless Pride and Vapouring is notoriously known,
of which in the next Position. 2. Their mouth
full of Cursing and Railing above any or all that
profess to march under the Christian Name and
159] Colours. 3. They spit not out their Venome so
fiercely against any as against the most conscienti|ous
Preachers and Professor of the Protestant Faith,
as appears all along in this railing of Fox in Folio
against them.
4. They easily fall in with openly profane and
ungodly persons, and with carnal and luke-warm
Laodiceans,The Spight og the Quakers Spirit who can swim with the tyde, sail with
every wind. If they can but say Thee and Thou c.
5. It is wonderfull how their spirit (professing to
be Protestants) can so wickedly strike in with the
bloudy spirit of the Papists, against the Witnesses
and Martyrs of Jesus, compiled by that heavenly
I. Fox. in the Book of Martyrs which this bloudy
spirit (in Iames Purnels Watcher) upbraidingly
calls [Your Record] as if it were none of theirs, nor
the bloudy Papists, against whose bloudy practises
under their Popes, and the old proud Romans, the
Romane Gods and Emperours, that heavenly Book
shews how those heavenly Martyrs or Witnesses over
came by the Bloud of the Lamb, the word of their
Testimony, and not loving of their Lives unto the
Death.
6. That most Savage and worse then Indian
Spirit of their stripping their women stark naked,

and so to enter into the streets and Assemblyes of
men and youths, which Piety Christianity and com|mon
Womanhood and Modesty abhor to think of.
Secondly. As I wonder how any godly Soul, so how
any Learned Soul, who hath studied the primitive
Copyes of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures,The ignor|ance of the Quakers can
yoke with such rude Bablings and Repetitions of
simple ignorant Praters. Tis true the Lord Jesus
and his Embassadors were not all traind up as Paul
was at the feet of Gamaleel, yet had they before the
whole World the miraculous effusions of Fiery
Tongues, and heavenly Oyl upon them, which these
poor Simpletons ridiculously like Puppets in a Shew
pretend too. Beside, the Commons among the first
Christians were as learned if not more then our
primest Academians, the Hebrew being their Mother
Tongue, and the Greek and Latine familiar, by the
Greek and Romane Conquests over them, all which
Helps the most of the Leaders of the Quakers want,
only pretending to understand supernatural and
miraculously (in a trice and immediately) what is
to be gotten by honest and faithful labour and
industry, the holy will and mind of God from the
true Original Copies.
160] Thirdly, I do admire that any sober, modest
Woman (made so by nature, and much more by
Grace (should ever dare to come into their Assem|blies:The abomi|nable Spi|rit of the Quakers nakedness
it is certain that the Ranters is a Sister or
Daughter of them: though they quarrel, and fight,
and scratch one the other: The Ranters more
plainly (according to their Principles make the Na|kedness
of Men and Women, a part of worship unto

God, unto which they say they are restored by Christ
Iesus the second Adam. This Adamites Fowle spi|rit
is no New-come spirit, I have know nit almost
sixty year, and what a motion was made and urged
by some (whome I can name) for Plantations in
warmer Countreyes, where they might practice that
Ordinance of God viz, Of Nakedness of men and
women in Gods worship.
These our Adamites are led by a more Savage
and Barbarous, and Monstrous Spirit, the which
under the vizird and mantle of Religion deceives
them, and of being a sign to others: And this
very bruitish practise have kept some Women (too
much inclin'd to them) from falling into their fil|thy
puddle, and of returning some which were left
by Gods Justice to go too far amongst them sure we
are the holy spirit of God (all along) abhors the
appearance of uncleanness,Quakers driven on by the old Spirit of the Adam|ites and commands the vail|ings
of Women (especially in Christian Meetings)
I have been too long upon the easiness of their
Religion, and of the agreement of it with corrupt
and rotten Nature which slides into it as easily as
Brooks and Rivers slide and run down into the
Ocean.
There be two other causes of falling into false
Religions or ways of worshipping God.
1. Hope of Gain, which was the Sechemites Bait:
(the sweet Musick propounded by Nebuchadnez|zar.)
c.
2. The fiery Furnace, c.
These moderate times have not driven the Qua|kers
to bow down to their Spirit for fear of perse|cution,

and the fiery Furnace but Sathan knew
well enough that the Corruption of Nature,The rising of the Quakers and
the hope of Gain and Glory would cheat to pur|pose
(as all may see it hath done:) Sathan knows
that some have a moving and travelling Spirit, and
cannot rest in a sedentary or quiet life:) Some are
of a rising, aspiring Spirit (though neither from
Birth nor Breeding, nor abilities) and therefore cry
down all Honour or respect to be given to any
(but themselves) some are false and [161] rotten in
their Profession, and ready to fall and tumble when
any strange wind of Temptation blowes upon them.
7. Some may be Sincere and upright to God in
the Root, but Weak, and not so rooted in the Holy
Scriptures, as the Disciples themselves, who won|dered
for a time what the Rising from the dead
should mean,Diverse Sorts suf|fered by God to fall into the Quak Ditch. and had need of their Lord and Mas|ters
Take heed and beware of the Leaven of the
Scribes, and Pharisees, and Sadduces, c. Some
truly fear God, but have neglected the purity and
chastity of Gods holy Worship, and have reserved in
a weak Conscience a liberty of playing the Whore
against a jealous God and Husband.
But generally they that are taken by the Quakers
Bait are such as never loved Christ Iesus in Sinceri|ty
as the Scripture speaketh, neither within nor
without, and therefore suckt in Nicolds and Nailors,
and Foxes dreames of a Christ, within them oppo|site
to Christ without:But especi|ally for Male and Fe|male Pro|testants. of a Christ a Light a Spirit
within, which had no Humane Body, or if he were
humane, or a man they know not now what is be|come
of him.

The Lord Iesus tels us that some will plead with
him at the last day, that they have heard him
Preach, that they have been at his Table, that they
have prophesied themselves, cast out Devils in his
Name, and in his Name done many Wonderfull
things:
should not this make every Soul that calls
it self Christian, startle and look about them, especi|ally
when they hear Christ Jesus say, depart from me
I know you not ye workers of Iniquity.
I told the Quakers that their Theora Iohn pretended
to write after the Spirits Dictate, a volume in He|brew,
Greek, Latine, Arminiack, c. which he con|fessed
he understood not: what if it should please
Gods infinite Wisdom, to suffer the Quakers or
others to speak and understand all Languages, to
work great Miracles, yet if they come under the
Note Christ gives them, of Workers of Iniquity,
they fulfill the termes of my Position, and prove but
False and Reprobate.
This is the true and infallible distinguishing
Character between the true Legitimate and the Bas|tard
and false Christian:The great distinguish|ing Cha|racter of true and false Pretenders The soul of the True
is broken for Sin, as Sin, as opposite to God, as fil|thy
in his eye: The soul of the False is broken for
Sin as bringing temporal Loss or shame, or pain,
and beside temporal, Eternal. The soul of the
true, is broke off from Sin, from the least Sin, [162
from the appearances of sin from the occasions of
Sin, from the thought of Sin as worse then all the
Afflictions of this life, or the Torments of Hell
to come. The soul of the False, hath secret Friend|ship
and Correspondence with Iniquity (as Church-Papists

with Popery c) in the secret chambers and
Closets of the heart, at which they willingly wink,
and to find it (when they are put to it, yea and seem
to doe it) they are willingly remiss and negligent.
Hence it was a famous Principle of the first New-English
Reformers, viz. to be Christianly carefull
that their Members gave Christian Evidence, (so far
as godly eyes of Charity could reach) of the truth
of their Conversion and turning unto God, which
for ought I know is not changed by their Suc|cessors.
It is dolefully true that many seemingly Elect,
prove Reprobate, and many truly Elect fall into many
great Sins and Sorrows. How black and dolefull
then is their Condition (such as the Papists the
Quakers and others) whose Religion Principles and
Practices, arise no higher then what a Reprobate
may attain unto.
We came to the tenth Position,The 3d Position debated at Provi|dence. (the third in or|der
to be discussed at Providence) which they read
out of their paper, viz. That the Popes of Rome do
not swel with; and exercise a greater pride then the
Quakers have exprest, and would aspire unto, although
many truly humble Souls may be captivated amongst
them.
I have here two mighty Fields to expatiate and
walk in,Two great Competi|tors the Popes and Foxians. viz. The pride of Christ Iesus his pre|tended
triple-crowned Vicar, and the pride of the
new Papists pretending to be Christ himself: of
which the holy Spirit speaketh, There is a Genera|tion,
oh how lofty are their eyes and their eye lids are
lifted up? In publick Discourse I knew I was but to

take a short turn of a quarter of an hour, I am
now at more liberty of inserting what I intended,
but was forced to abbridge wlth all possible brevity
at that time.
I told them there was a pride in outward and ex|ternal
things, in Parentage, in Person, in Beauty,
Strength, Wit, Aparrel, Houses, Money, Shipping,
Land, Cattle, Offices, Relations, c. this I now past
by: All these (like Diogenes on Platoes carpets) the
Quakers say they tread on c.
There was 2. the devils pride,Spiritual pride the devils pride and the devils Con|demnation,
a pride in Spiritual Knowledg, spiritual
Gifts, spiritual Priviledges and Excellencies: This
was the Devils Break-neck, and will be [163] of the
Popes and Quakers, and of all that aspire to the
Eternal power and Godhead; for God or they must
fall to all eternity.
I named then diverse Parallels between the Popes
and Quakers, I will now name all I can remember
I named, and will name some more at this present,
First, The Popes have exalted themselves above
all that is called God,The Popes  Qua|kers pride compared above all Civill powers, Kings
and Princes, riding upon their backs, disposing of
their Crowns, making them lead their horses, hold
their stirrups, kiss their toes, yea lye down under
their feet bodyes and souls, and submit their neck
to this abominable foot of pride, as the Scripture
calls it.
As to the Quakers they know it is not yet time
to put on the Lions and the Eagles, but the Sheeps
and the Foxes Skin: but no man need question that
if God should please to let loose the Quakers spirit

to the full length of its tedder,The Qua|kers hoast of their number. as he hath done
that of the Popes, the spirit of the Quakers would
scorn to come behind the pope: For who sees not
how at the first, fledging and creeping out of the
Shell how they boast and vapour of their numbers?
We (said W. E. to me in publick at Newport) are a
great People, many thousands in England, many
thousands in London, besides Virginia, Barbados,
N-England and other places: what would they say
and doe if they had the popes Universality, and
could boast of the many Waters, Peoples, Nations,
Tongues and Multitudes upon which the Whore
sitteth?
Beside, W. E. (a man fit to make a Bonefacius or
a Hildebrand) Iohn Stubs also though of a more
prudent and moderate spirit) was up with the same
boasting of their Numbers, and all of them are
ready to cry up their Diana whome all Asia and
the world worshippeth. But,
2. In their first creeping (like Hercules out of
the Cradle,The audn|cious  im|pious faecs of the Foxians how doth this Spirit dare the Spirits of
Kings, and Keyfars, and Popes themselves (under
the pretence of Translations and acceptations of
words) to Thou and Thee to the faces of mighty
Monarchs? with what Brasen Faces have they ad|drest
the Royal presence of our Gracious Dread Sove|raign,
without either bowing the knee, or baring
the Head (signs of English reverence and civility)
and this out of an horrible and lying pretence, that
Christs amity (even in Civil things) respecteth no
mans person, that they may trample as Gods on all
man-kinde, c.

164] 3. I can say what mine eyes and ears have
seen and heard,Pope Ed|mond com|manding  silenc|ing the Governour viz. our Honoured and Aged Mr.
Nicholas Easton, Governour of this Colony under his
Majesty, offering to speak once and twice in our late
Contests at Newport (and no question would have
spoke for the Quakers against me, yet) Pope Ed|mundson
put forth his hand imperiously toward the
Governour, saying, Whist, Whist, which whisting
and silencing Language if they use to their Friends
in Authority, what will they say or Thunder to
their Enemies if ever they get up into the Papal
Chair?
2. The Pope sits in the Temple of God,A second Paralel be|tween the Pope  Quakers as over
the Churches and Consciences of the Christian
Name and Worship, giving Canons and Decretals to
be observed by all Christian People on peril of loss
of Earth and Heaven, c.
And do not their"these" R. W. Ms. Ann. new Popes (not regarding as
the Apostles and Bereans the Holy Scripture) lay on
the common Quakers Consciences and Congrega|tions
their Decrees? tis true G. Fox in his Book in
Folio gives the immediate Spirit of Infallibility to
all his Saints: yet must they (in a ridiculous con|tradiction)
sit still possest with a Dumb Devil, ex|cept
some He or She Apostle come amongst them,
who send word of their coming to call the Coun|try
in many dayes before, and seem to have a Com|mand
of their Diabolical Spirit more then other
Quakers have, though they (as I said before) in a
ridiculous Contradiction) ascribe it unto all their
Saints and Quakers.

Thus did Humphrey Norton (a Pope) in his day in
these parts) overtopping and rating W. Brand at
Newport,The Pope and Qua|kers usurp over the Souls of all men he confirmed the Decree for the weekly
Meetings not only on the first dayes, but on the
week dayes at Newport and Providence: he ordered
their sitting and departing Dumb, unless a He or
She Apostle came amongst them, he left in writing
(which I can produce) an overthrow of all civil
Order and Government except in the hands of his
Saints, entituling his Paper thus, the Saints Law
and the Sinners Law as G. Fox. his decree under
the title of the Law.
G. Fox succeeds (as Pope) Humph.Humph Norton  G Fox compared. Norton in
these parts, and being angry with his Predecessour
(as some Popes have been) he lets loose the Dumb
Devil and gives Liberty to all to speak as the Spirit
gives them utterance: this shews what a lying Spi|rit
of Unity they boast of (such an one was in
Nailors business) though they most proudly deny
Unity to all but to themselves, as [165] the Papists
do: G. Fox. also gave forth his Decree of loosing
them from that bruitish and doggid Behaviour
which W. Brand and Humphrey Norton left them
in, and by Word and Example commanded them to
be more sociable and manlike, so that many of
them will speak in Salutations, and shew some
reverence by bowing the Heads,G F. a subtler Fox then. Hum. Norton. or uncovering it,
as Fox himself did after his Sermon at Providence,
uncovering his Head and bowing to the People,
and passing through the midst of them (his Hat in
his hand) with much respect and civility. And he
blames those (as I hear) which violently and madly

have flung themselves upon unnecessary temptations
and dangers: whence follows (in the eyes of the
whole World) that either the latter or the former
Spirit was not Gods, and perfect, and the Spirit of
Unity of which they childishly so crake and va|pour,
as the chiefest Flower in their Crown of
Pride.
3. The Pope lifts up himself as God over the
Holy Scriptures:A third parallel between the Pope  Quak. He is the sole Judge and Inter|preter
of them, and the sole decider of all contro|versies
in Religion about the expounding of them:
yea, he hath power to dispence with Peter and Paul,
c. yea, what Christ and God can do that gave
forth Scripture, that can the Pope their Lieutenant
do: hence all this Dispensations of Oaths, of Mar|riages,
c.
Do not the Quakers also tread this Holy Scripture,
this inestimable Jewel of Gods Writing and Book
under their proud feet,Both Pa|pists  Qukers their Pride above the Scriptures as formerly I noted upon
the fourth Position of their not owning the Holy
Scripture? Do they not (upon the point) say that
they made, they wrote and gave out the Holy
Scripture? and though in our late Conference they
said they would be tryed by the Scriptures, yet (as
the Papists) they admit no Interpreter but them|selves,
for the Spirit within them they say gave forth
the Scripture, and is above the Scripture, and both
they and the Papists have said that there would be
no losse if they were gone out of the World, for
the Papists say their Traditions, and their infallible
Spirit would supply the loss: and the Quakers say
the Scriptures is within them (in effect) they say

that all that they do and say is Scripture: so far
are both Papists  Quakers from a Christian and
Candid Profession of being tried by the Holy Scrip|ture:
that they most Horribly and most Hypo|critically
trample it under their proud feet.
166] 4. These Romanists or Proud ones (as the He|brew
signifies) both Papists Quakers most in|sultingly
lift up themselves against the Servants and
Children of God all the world over that bow not
down to their Images:The Pope aad Qua|kers horri|ble revilers Slander|ours  cursers of the Righte|ous be a Soul never so humble
and penitent, never so holy and mortified, believe
the Scriptures, c. and give his life for the truth of
of them, yet he is damned if he believes not the
Pope to be the head of the Church: and say not
the Quakers the same of all that believe not in their
pretended Lights: your Repentance is nothing,
your Holiness nothing, your Zeal, Praying, Preach|ing,
Fasting, Suffrings nothing: and they think
they have reason to say so, because you believe not in
the true Christ, and therefore you are in Cains Na|ture,
in the Satanical Delusion, Reprobates, c. so
that all the blessed Souls under the Alter calling
for vengeance against the shedders of their blood
the Roman Emperour, or since the Roman Popes, they
are all branded with a black cole of damned Souls
and Reprobates by G. Fox, because they professed,
preacht and died for a Christ without them though
that Christ without them dwelt in their hearts
(Ephes. 3.) by believing and for his sake they loved
not their lives to the Death.
I told them that the Pope and they were one in
the great point of the Infallibility:The 5. parallel they both pre|tended

the Spirit of God as did the Apostles, c.
but I have proved their pretence is as true as that
of Apollo's Worshippers, by whose Priests the Devil
gave Oracles (Extripode) from their threefold stool,The infal|libility of the Popes and Qua|kers Oracles
and that so subtilly and cunningly that whatever
Oracle or Voice it was, and whatever the event were
yet the Devil would save his own: Apollo should
be the true God of Wisdome, and Apollo's Priests
true Prophets.
At last when Christ came Apollo being consulted
and failing to give answer, the Devil was forced to
answer that there was an Hebrew Childe borne that
stopt his mouth: I am sure this Hebrew Childe (the
true Lord Jesus Christ) hath often also stopt the
mouthes (in one sense) of Pope  Quakers, for their
Predictions have not come to pass, (though some
which the Devil could guess at) have: and he will
shortly stop their mouths forever.
It was truely said of (that long eighteen years
hatching) Devilish Junto of Trent,The Holy Spirit in a Cloakbag at the Councel at Trent that the Holy
Ghost, (that is the Popes Holy Ghost) came every
week from the Pope at Rome, c. to his Legates at
Trent, in a Cloak-bag: and do not G. Fox his
Books [167] and all their writings declare for their
corrivality and competition with the Pope for this
their pretended Holy Ghost:The Pope and Quak the two great pre|tenders and corrivals for the pre|tended Holy Ghost do they not upbraid
all other Ministers and People for being out of the
infallible Spirit: Do they not say their Ministers
and their Commissions are invisible because imme|diate
and infallible? do they not assigne this to be
the cause of all the Sects and Divisions among the
Protestants, because they have not the infallible Spi|rit
as the Quakers have?

Here (as I remember) Iohn Stubs stood up and
alleadged that place in 1 Iohn 4. Hereby we know
that we dwell in him, because he hath given us of
his Spirit.
And again, you have the unction and know all
things. And W. Edmondson boastingly, and proud|ly
said, that they had the same immediate and in|fallible
Spirit which the Apostles had, and that
Iohn  Peter were but their elder Brethren.
Unto which I answer,The Quak pretending to be Apostles Peter I know, and Iohn I
know, but who are you? For 1. They were Eye-Witnesses
of the Lord Jesus his Life and Death and
Resurrection. 2. They were immediately endowed
with fiery Tongues, and fiery hands to preach in all
Languages, and to pen from Gods mouth his holy
word and Pleasure and to work real Miracles, not
metaphorical ones only (as G. Fox said at Provi|dence
the Quakers did,F F his Counter|feit mirr|cles that is open the eyes of the
Blind by Conversion c.) I added that it might
please the infinite Wisdom of God to send higher
Pretenders to Apostleship then the Quakers, who
should speak all TonguesInterline "and." R. W. Ms. Ann. doe Miracles: But as
Gods Servants had a Rule Isa. 8. the written Law
and Testimony, and were not to believe their
Dreames though they came to pass, Deut. 13. So
have Gods Servants now, viz. The Doctrine of
Christ Iesus both concerning Faith and Order, and
to strive earnestly for the Faith once delivered.
The Pope like Baalam sayes,A 6 Par|allel be|tween the Pope  the Quak. he is the Mouth of
God: whome he blesseth, they are blessed, and
whom he curseth c. therefore sendeth he his

Curses like Thunderbolts, yea among Kings  King|domes
in other Nations, and our own as K. Henery 8th.
K. Edward. 6th. Queen Elizabeth experimented c.
and is there any People bearing the name Christian, so
like the pope their Father as these, whose Mouth (saith
David) is full of Cursing and Bitterness, like Floods
out of the Dragons Mouth, and fire-brands arrowes
and Death crying out against the most Humble and
Con- [168] scientious Cain, Saul, Iudas, Viper, Serpent,
Reprobate Dragon, Devil (yea one of their Shee-Apos|tles,
Devil, Devil, Devil, all at once to one that op|posed
her amongst us) and such foul stinking expref|sions
(like the Quakers in London) about the Dung of
Mankinde, that modesty especially the bashfulness
and modesty of Women would have been far from.
A seventh is that great point of horrible Pride
in both Pope  Quakers,A 7 paral|lel between the Pope and Quakers exalting the Dung and
Dirt of their own Qualifications, Excellencies,
Graces, Labours, Fastings, Satisfactions, Believings,
Suffering as a price and satisfaction to Gods Justice,
as a Merit or Desert for the pardon of their sin, for
though they both Sophistically and Hypocritically
mention the Blood of Christ; yet they count the
business of this Christ (as the Pope said) but a Fable,
and indeed and truth through the Pride of their
high spirits they think God is beholding to them:
I have spoken to this already,8 Parallel as to the sinless con|dition of the Qua|kers and of that devilish
Pride of their being without sin: yet in this Doc|trine
of perfection the Quakers exceed the Doctrine
of the Papists: for generally the popes attribute this
purity but to some of their rare Saints. And 2.
Generally the Popes themselves confess themselves

to be sinners. 3. They give respect and civill hon|our
to all estates, although in Spirituals and Civills
too they overtop them: But the high and lofty
Devill of the Quakers pride transcends all this: G.
Fox makes all his Saints born of God, that (literally
expounded) they cannot commit sin; yea, G. Fox
tells us that the Saints (that is his Foxians) are as
holy and perfect as God, not only like to God in
quality, but in equality also. They have the ful|ness
of the Godhead in them bodily.G F his proud Blas|phemy as to God himself That the
mystery of godlinefs is God manifest in their flesh!
Hence he saith there is no distinction between God
and Christ, and the Spirit and themselves. Hence
it follows, that they are the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit (which by Devilish Chymistry) they can
prove: and that they are the Three that bare Rec|ord
in Heaven, and the Three that bare Record in
Earth: The Scripture is within them: They made
it, and all that they say and do is Scripture, what
they say God saith, what they advise God adviseth,
what they do God doth, c.
It is true, this is not believed (no not by some
Novices among them but this and more, many of
their lying Foul mouths  Books express, which may
make a Soul that is truly humble to quake and [169
rend his heart at such Blasphemy,H B the first Per|fctist in these parts, and most notorious
for Imper|fections. the first Perfectist
in these parts was one H. B. who came from Bos|ton
to Providence, who affirmed that what he spake
God spake, what counsel he gave God gave, c. It
pleased God to leave him (though a subtle man) to
ridiculous Folly amognst us, and at Barbadoes and
London since, to worse practices: as commonly God

punisheth such height of Pride even in this present
life before Death seize upon them.
I remember while we were declaring their proud
Disrespect to all men, Iohn Stubs said, That it was
their practice to pay tribute to Caesar, and to give
Honour to whome Honour belonged. And I ans|wered
to this effect, that it was against their Prin|ciples
and practices to shew respect to any mans
Person in the World. As for tribute they paid none
but what necessity and policy forced them to, and
notoriously backward here: But they knew that I
and G. Fox knew, and all the world might know
out of Fox his Writings, that the Quakers are the
Higher powers, the Dignityes, the Most High God,The differ|ence amongst the Qua|kers as to these things.
and ought to have all Honour and Tribute paid to
them by all the whole Creation. Tis true there
seems to be a Change and some relenting and Giv|ing
of the Weather in G. Fox his own practice of
Courtesie, and others from him: but while they
own what G. Fox hath written, and that he writ it
with a perfect spirit: I say untill they do make
some Recantation or Retractation: or shew the Rea|sons
why they doe not, H. Norton who keeps more
plainly to his Principles is to windward of them,
and the Foxians do but strip themselves naked to
be more derided and scorned as the more notorious
Iuglers and Dissemblers.
We came easily (with their Good-will) to the
4th.The 4th of the seven last Posi|tions. Position of the latter seven, which they read out
of the Paper (as willing to be out of ther pain) viz,
The Religion of the Quakers is more obstructive and
Destructive to the Conversion and Salvation of Soules

of People than most of Religions that are at this day
extant in the World.
I said for the proof of this it was requisite to take
a short view of Religions and Worships in the world.
We knew that the Sons of Men were justly divided
all the world over into two Sorts,
First,The In|dians Religion. The wild and Pagan, whome God hath
permitted to run about the world as wild Beasts all
this great fourth Part of the World, and in some
of the other three.
170] They acknowledge a great supream God
and Deity, Maker of all things, yet they acknowl|edge
(as other famous Civilized Nations formerly
have done) that there be many other Petty-Gods
and Deityes in Heaven and Earth, yea within their
own Bodies, yea whatever is extraordinary, excel|lent
or strange to them, they are presently apt to
ascribe a Deity unto it, though it be but Beast, Fowle
c.A Deity or higher Power ac|knowledged by Indians. and say it is a God. It is commonly known
that as their garments hang loose about their
Bodyes, so hangs their Religion about their Souls:
So that (to my knowledge) they are so far from
hindring any to come to God, that when they have
seen the grave and solemn Worship of the English,
they have often said of themselves and their own,
that they are all one Dogs in comparison of the
English.
The second sort of men are the Civill brought to
Cloaths, to Lawes c. from Barbarisme: these also
the infinite Wisdome of God have pleased to leave
to variety of wayes of Worshipping the Heavenly
Majesty,

Amongst others we find four most known and
eminent,
First,The four chief Re|ligions of the World. The Iewish Worship famous from Gods
own appointment by Moses c. 2. The Turkish,
famous for spreading from Mahomet to most of
thirteen parts of thirty in the World.
3. The Popish, famous for spreading over Eu|rope
and other western parts of the world. 4. The
Protestant famous for so wonderfull a Revolt and
Seperation from the Popish. All these four pro|fess
one God and supream Deity: but they differ in
two things, 1. In the Prophet or Meanes by whome
God speaks to man; the Iews cry up Moses, the
Turks Mahomet, the Papists the Pope, the Protest|ants
Christ Iesus in the Scriptures,
The second great difference is in the Form of
Worship, which every one of these four great Par|tyes
practice in various and different wayes as they
are perswaded.
Our selves the Protestants are divided into two
Partyes,
The first is entituled Episcopal and Presbyterian
in Parochyal or Parishional Assemblyes.
The second is Seperate from those National and
Parochyal Assemblyes, some more some less, and
those are now known to be First, the People called
Independants. 2. The people called Baptists.
We that pretend the Christian Name against the
Iewes and the [171] Mahumetans,The religi|ous Diffr|ences among the Protestants we mainly dif|fer,
1. In matter of Doctrine, as Repentance, Faith,
c. 2. Of Worship, Discipline c. And we gen|erally
agree, that as the Mahumetan and Iewish

Worship have little in them to tempt a Soul to
turn into them compar'd with the Christian, so those
Christians that differ each from other in point of
Doctrine and Worship both, as the Papists and the
Quakers doe to be farther from the truth of the
Profession of Christ Iesus, and more obstructive
and destructive to the Souls of men then the other
partyes; yea and the Papists not so much as the
Quakers, who wildly profess all Ordinances and
Ministers to be invisible, and yet are hypocritically
and ridiculously found to be as visible and open as
any.
If the true Foundations of Repentance and Faith
be cast down it is in vain to talk of saving of Soules,Fundamen|tal Differ|ences.
it is in vain to talk of Worshipping of God. The
Quakers (for all their craking of Quaking and Tremh|ling)
their way is more easie of Worshipping God,
and of bringing persons to their worship of God,
then the way of Iewes or Turks or Papists, who to
my knowledge take more paines in Religion then
do the common Protestants: I confess they all do
but paint and guild over natures old and rotten
Posts, only the real Protestants have and profess the
greatest care of any in the world for true Faith
and Repentance.
The Quakers came not neer that care of N-Eng|land
(I am sure at first) for the personal true Re|pentance
and Holiness of their Churchs and Congre|gations:
For it is notoriously known, that if per|sons
notoriously Deboist, come but to acknowledge
a God and Christ within them, that is in English,The Qua|kers easie Conversion and Churches, not compa|rable to the way of N-Eng|land. that
themselves are God and Christ, and can practice Thou

and Thee, and Cheek by Ioll with all their Betters,
and can rail at and curse all that oppose them, and
can come and bow down to a dumb Image and
Worship without any great business of Contrition and
Brokenness and Godly Sorrow, they are enrold and
canonized for Saints and Gods c. they are free
from Sin, born of God and cannot sin, they now
sit upon the twelve thrones and judge the unbeliev|ing
Iews and Gentiles in their heavenly places.
The wound lyes here (as it is with Papists, Ar|minians,
and indeed with all mankind) in the sooth|ing
up and flattering of rotten Nature, from whence
(from within the Lord Iesus tells us) proceed all
the rotten and hellish Speeches and Actions.
172] I told them it was in this case as it was with
Kings and Princes, there were two great Enemyes
that haunted the Pallaces of Kings and Princes. 1.
Traiterous Spyes c. 2. Traiterous Flatterers.
Just here it was (as I remember) that W. Ed|mundson
stopt me saying,Flatterers of Kings thou hast here been tell|ing
us Storyes of Turks and Iewes, but what is that
to thy Charge against us? we are none of those
that flatter Kings and Princes, we deal plainly with
all men.
I said they mistook me: for I did not say they
slattered Kings, I used a similitude only, viz. that as
Flatterers, c. of Kings and great men, were their
deadliest Foes, so such Religions and Doctrines as
most slatter and sooth up our rotten hearts and na|tures
they are most dangerous and destructive to us:
I intended to add that the Quakers pretended to be
as fine Flower sifted out from the common Protest|ants,

yea,The whor|ish Quak|ers, and whore of Rome. from the Independants  Baptists, that
Sathan was too subtle for the subtlest Foxes of them
all, for he knowes that by pretence he more easily
 dangerously conveys the Poyson of exalting cor|rupt
and cursed nature in the room of true Soul-sav|ing
Humiliation.
I did say as the Whore of Rome deceived whole
Towns, Cities, Nations and Kingdomes with her
glorious Trimmings, and her Golden Cup: so that
the Painted Quaker (as a Drunken Whore) should
follow the Drunken Whore of Rome) drunk with the
blood of Jesus, c.) for the obtaining of (the smoak
of a Tobacco-pipe) the Riches and Honour of this
World.
There are two sorts of godly Soules catcht up a
while by the Devils Craftiness.
1. Weak and unstable (for there are Children,
strong Men,  old Men in Christianity.)
2 The unwatchful and secure.The Devil a roaring Lion The holy wis|dome
of God discovers in Holy Scripture, what the
Devil, that Sathan an old Serpent is, viz. not only a
Roaring, but a vigilant Lyon. David (Gods beloved
as his Name is) he fails in his managing of Govern|ment,
therefore the Devil stirs up Ioab and Achito|phel
to help (the grand Rebel) his Son Absolom: and
afterwards Sheba, and all in wonderful Figures, in
all Ages, an in this our age and day.
A famous Iesuit prints it, that all the Religion
in the World lies in competition between the Ie|suits
and Puritants, c. About [173] this time Iohn
Stubs told me that they (and I say so do the
Iesuites pretend to do) had left the Glory and Plea|sure

of this world their Wives and Children, Friends
and Relations, to Preach the Everlasting Gospel;
For the Woman had been 1260 years 42 months in
the wilderness, and she was now come and coming
forth, and they were now preaching the everlasting
Gospel, and therefore they advised me to make
haste and dispatch and not to hinder the Lords
work.
I spake what then I thought fit,The Quak pretences to outgo all pre|tending Preachers and now adde
that the Pharisees, the Apostles, the Quakers and
Iesuites do compass Sea and Land: but the Phari|sees,
Iesuites and Quakers will be found at last to be
the Apostles Messengers, Heralds, Envoys, Embassa|dors,
and Emissaries of Sathan sent out from Hell
to predicate the goodness of rotten nature, hell and
damnation, and that false and hellish Gospel (or
good news) of poor rotten Natures Righteousness,
Satisfaction, Penances, and to the damning of
Souls, c.
The Devil knows that after the witnesses have
done their work against Antichrist,True Preachers or messen|gers and after their
slaughters! the Lord Jesus will send abroad his
Messengers to other Nations (Iews  Gentiles) and
New Ierusalem, or a new vision of peace shall then
come down from Heaven among the Sons of men:
but for the present he stirs up these Jesuites and
Quakers (with brave titles and pretences) like so
many Mahomets (under pretence of Diogenes tread|ing
on Platoes Carpets) to fish for the smoak of this
Worlds Sodome, and no doubt but the Quakers will
use the Sword as much as Mahomet or the Iesuites,

under the cloak and colours of love to Jesus and
saving of Souls.
I confess that Charity hopes and believes all
things, and yet I say, cursed is that charity that
puts out the eye of Reason, the eye of Experience,
the eye of true affection to Christ Jesus, his Father
and his Wife to the Souls of his followers, and the
Souls of poor sinners Iews  Gentiles.
As to the saving of Souls,The Earthly  Heavenly Sword it was a Thunder from
the heavenly mouth of Christ Jesus. They that
take the Sword shall perish by the Sword: as if he
should say, the Sword is not a saving but a destroying
Tool, in Soul-humbling, and Soul-saving: making
worlds of Hypocrites, but not true Protestants, true
Christians  Followers of the true Lord Jesus, and
of his Father, and of his Holy Spirit.
174] The Spirit say the Quakers, why thats our
Weapon! the Sword of the Spirit the Word of God,
why thats the word of God Christ Jesus our Wea|pon:
So saith G. Fox and all our Fantasticks out of
weakness and madness, not weighing what a person
the holy Records describe Christ Jesus to be,A great mystery amongst Papists and Protestants but
as foolish Children and Anticks in the Lord Mayors
shews, they cry out Christ and the Spirit only for a
shew and colour, I know it that the true Lord Je|sus
his holy Father, and Holy Spirit is as odious
both to Iesuits, and most Papists  Quakers as the
Devil, yea infinitely more then the Devil himself,
as with Gods help I have and shall make it as clear
as the Noon dayes Sun.
O you considering Protestants, see you not how
the Devil would rob you of that Sword with which

Christ Jesus overcame him [The Holy Scripture] un|der
the colour and cloak of the Spirit in the
mouths of the Quakers?A word to the Pro|testants how, if the Holy writings
must yet live, why he hath Fisher, and Stubs, and
Pennington, and Bishop, and others that skill Tongues,
and yet own the blockish Spirit of the Quakers: how
if you blame the Popish Devil for a Blockhead, he
can puff up his Bladders the Iesuites, to a late won|derful
swelling of Tongues and Histories, and all
kinds of Knowledge, as in Bellarmine and his Asso|ciate
and Followers and of late in those great Wri|ters
Petavius and Morinus.
The eternal Word,The mysti|cal Farmers and Son, and Sun of God the
true Lord Jesus will more and more discover who
are his true friends, his true Loves (that love Alex|ander
more than the King) that are true Christians,
true Iesuites, and that truly love and pity poor
Souls: he will discover who are the great Farmers,
who having a minde to the Farm themselves con|sult
and say, come, this is the Heir (that is Christ Je|sus
in his true Messengers) let us kill him: kill him
with Tongue, and Pen, and Sword, c. the Inheri|tance
of Heavenly and Earthly Glory shall then be
ours, c. and to this end only they talk of Souls, c.
We now descended to the fifth and sorrowful
point of suffering which they read,The 5th. of the last 7 positions viz. [That the
sufferings of the Quakers are no true evidence of the
Truth of their Religion.]
At the reading of this they told me, that although
their Sufferings were great in all places whither the
Lord had sent them, yet they made not their Suf|fering
an Evidence of the truth of their Religion,

therefore I might have been better advised then to
175] put this in among the rest of my Lyes and
Slanders as not considerable,The suf|frings of the Qua|kers
and now not worth the
mentioning, c.
I Answered, that I understood what they said, and
I undestood mine own affirmation also; and de|sired
their patience also while I offered my Proofs
to two Particulars,
1. That in their Books and Writings c. they do
make their Sufferings a great Evidence to them|selves
and others of the truth of their Way and
Spirit.
2. This their Suffering is not valid as to the
proof of their Religion, Way and Spirit to be of
God. So then they bid me prove it if I could.
I told them that I could find no Iewes,Pauls and the Quak suffrings no Pa|pists
no Protestants, that did so magnifie and so ex|actly
insist upon their Sufferings as the Quakers did.
Tis rue that Paul did more particularize his Suf|ferings
then other Saints in Scripture; but it was
also true that they were so exceeding great that
Paul seemed a None-Such; but beside that it was
upon some great Insultings of the False Apostles
against not only himself, but against the Truth of
Christ Jesus: neither of which is the Quakers case.
Beside, the Quakers Sufferings generally were not to
be compar'd with Pauls, and yet they set down such
exact accounts of every hour in prison every Stripe
in Whipping,The Quak. sufferings in Hystory of G. Bis|hop re|corded.
every pound lost: and this published
to the world in print, as if it were a Sign hung out
with this Inscription, Loe people these are the Evi|dences
of Gods holy Truths, and Gods holy Spirit, of

our Persecutors wickedness, and our Christian Faith
and Patience, who for his Truths sake can endure all
this. I said it was not rational to think, that men
professing such high Wisdome and Conscience, should
declare such Lysts and Catalogues of Sufferings (as
G. Bishop doth to the world, of the Quakers Suffer|ings
in N. England, in his first and second History)
only in a childish Vapour, Ostentation and Vain-Glory,
much less in hopes of Reparation or any
worldly advantage, either in England old or new,
Scotland or Virginia, c. and therfore Reason per|swades
that these Sufferings are held forth (as the
holy Spirit speaks of the Sufferings of the Thessa|lonians,
2. Thess. 2.) as a manifest Token of the
righteous judgment of God rendering Tribulation to
their Persecutors, and Rest to themselves suffering
for the Kingdome of God.
As I remember, Iohn Stubs said, they did not
boast of their [176] Sufferings, but bare them pa|tiently
for the Truths sake which they preached
and professed.
I said I did not charge them to say in express
terms, We have lost so much outward Gain, Favour,
Friendship, Worldly Advantage for the Name of
Christ within us, can you say the like for the Christ
without you? We have endured Imprisonments,
Whippings, c. have you done the like? only this
I say, that as all Religios Iewes, Papists, Protestants
c. are confirmed in their Perswations by their
Sufferings, and do predicate them to others as Ar|guments
and Signs of the truth of their Doctrines,
and of Gods presence and Assistance with them: so

do the Quakers and that with more Particular and
exact Accounts then most of all the rest have done.
I told them, I had observed much to this pur|pose
in G. Fox E. Burrowes in the Book by me.
They bid me alleadge what I could out of them:E. Bur|rowes his Epistle quoted.
I took up the Book, and they theirs, I directed
them to the 12th. Page of Ed. Burrowes his large
Epistle to G. Fox his Book in Folio where I read
this passage viz. And this we did with no small oppo|sition
and Danger: yea oftentimes we were in danger
of our Lives, through beating, abusing, punishing, hal|ing,
casting over walls, striking with staves  Cudgels,
and knocking down to the ground: Beside, Reproach|ing,
Scorning, Revilings, Hooting at, Scornings and
Slanderings, and all abuse that could be thought or
acted by evil hands and tongues, and oft carried before
Magistrates with grievous Threats, and sometimes put
in the Stocks, and whipped, and often imprisoned, and
many hard dealings against us, the worst that tongues
or hands could execute, sparing life. Of this all the
North Countreys can witness. And all these things
are sustained and suffered from People and Rulers be|cause
of our Faithfulness to the Lord, and for declar|ing
against the false Deceivers. For nothing save only
the hand of the Lord and his power, could have pre|served
us and carried us through all this: neither for
any Reward outward whatsoever, or advantage to our
selves would we have exposed our selves to suffrings,
violence and dangers which befel us daily. But the
Lord was our exceeding great reward through all these
things, and kept us in the hollow of his hand, and un|der
the shadow of his wings, and gave us dominion in

Spirit over all our enemies, and subdued them before us:
and though Rulers and People were combined against us,
and executed their violence and in- [177] justice against
us, yet the Lord made us to prosper and grow exceedingly
in Strength, Wisdome and Number, and the hearts of
the people inclined to us, and the Witness of God in
many stirred for us: for to that in all Consciences,
Words and wayes we did commend our selves to be known
and approved.
Hereto they suddenly said, What canst thou
make of this, but that Edward Burrowes said the
truth, that the Sufferings of the people called Qua|kers
were very great,  that he acknowledged the
powerfull hand of the Lord toward them in sup|porting
and delivering them: But this was far
from boasting or making it any Evidence of the
truth of their Religion and Principles.
I replyed, I prayed them to consider why pious
and conscientious Souls (as they would be reputed)
should give so large a Catalogue of their Sufferings.The Quo|tation weighed.
2. Profess it was only for their Faithfulness to the
Lord. 3. Declare that it was the hand of the Lord
that kept them, 4, That he only could do it: I
sayd the Weaving and inter-weaving of these Par|ticulars,
speak plainly that for their Faithfullness to
the Lord and his Truth in declaring and suffering
for it, the Lord had been faithfull to them in sup|porting
them and comforting them in all these Suf|ferrings
for his Name sake. Why should wise men
use all these words but to this end, of Evidencing
their Faithfulness to God, and Gods Faithfulness to
them.

After some words had about these kind of pas|sages
in Ed. Burrowes and other of their Writings,
I told them that we must come to that ancient and
true Maxime,What true Suffering is. Causa facit Martyrem, not the Suf|fering
of Burning it self that is the evidence of a
true matter. I therefore told them that as it was
in the case of SignsInterline "and" R. W. Ms. Ann. Wonders Deut. 13. though
they be Signs which false Prophets give, which
come to pass, yet God commands his Children not
to be moved from his written word, and his holy
revealed and recorded Ordinances and Institutions.
I told them that I had other places which I had
turned down in Edward Burrowes to produce; but
these I had suppressed in my thoughts for expedi|tion
sake, and would if they pleased pass on to my
proof of my next Position, to this they readily as|sented:
but being now out of my Shackles of a
quarter of an hour (to which I wink'd to draw
them on) I crave the Readers Patience and leave to
hear me say something now which then I could
not say.
178] First.True Scripture Language. To what I have said before of E.
Burrowes insisting so largly on the Sufferings of the
Quakers, and yet my Antagonists denying them to
make their Sufferings an Evidence of their Truth, I
present the Reader with a witness of G. Fox his
words in his Pag 64, [And there is a Proof to thee
that the Quakers are sent of God who speak to thee of
the Scripture right as they are] He that reads the
place shall see that G. Fox useth these words against
his Opposite Ieremiah Iewes, because that his Op|posite

had said, viz. That the Word of God was con|tained
in the Scripture: and G. Fox checks him for
it and saith if he had said [the word which it speaks
of] he had spoken right c. And this G. Fox
makes an Evidence of the Quakers being sent of
God, that they only can speak properly. How
much more is what I have produced (and have
much more to produce) a Proof that they do roll
their Souls upon their Sufferings as an Evidence and
Confirmation that they are sent of God?
2. It is wonderfull what the Iewes and Papists
have suffered for their Lyes and Blasphemyes:The won|derfull Sufferings of Here|ticks What
a wonderfull Story doth Manasseh Ben-Isrel relate
of a Noble man, a Portugal, turned Iew, burn'd
in Portugal for the Iewish Faith? What Devotion
and Zeal have many of the Popish Party shewn at
Tiburn? Sure it is that a natural Valour and Mag|nanimity,
a natural Melancholy and Stoutness, a natu|ral
Pride and Vain-Glory will give wings which fire
and Burning cannot scorch and conquer.
3. I doubt not but that tis possible for not only
Christians, but also Iewes and Papists c. like Paul
in his mad Conscience, to be zealous for his Con|science,
and to put others to death for their Con|sciences,
and yet neither of them to sin against their
Consciences, but ignorantly as Paul did.
4. I believe that not only Paul,Great fail|ings of Gods Chil|dren in this life. and such as he,
in Unbelief may so practice, but even the true
Saints and Children of God. He that shall ponder
the Fathers Poligamy, the best Kings of Iudah suf|fering
the High places, Davids slaying Uriah, Asahs
imprisoning the Prophet, Peters rash using the Sword,

Davids and Nathans unadvised Advise to build God
a Temple, the Disciples calling for Fire from Hea|ven,
and shall see cause to reprove the Quakers for
their rash damning of others from whome they
have suffered. For,
5. As tis possible for Gods own Children to hold,
and that [179] obstinately, false Principles, so it is
possible for other of Gods Children as obstinately
to afflict and punish those others to Death, and so
bring Affliction and Destruction one upon an other
which is that the Devil aimes at.
6. Because the Quakers do so abundantly glory
in their Sufferers, and (in comparison of them)
slight the Saints under the Altar (in our Book of
Martyrs, as Iames Parnel impiously calls it) casting
all that differ from them into the Satanical Delu|sion,
and Serpentine nature, as Fox doth, Pag. 5. and
253. and 99. Who forbids to receive into their
Houses, no not Kings and Princes, nor to bid them
God speed that are not in their Light.True and False Suf|ferers for the Name of Christ. I think it
fit to observe at this Turn some Differences between
true Sufferers and false, both pretending the Name
of Christ Iesus.
First, The Persons whome the heavenly man
Iohn Fox describes, they were men and women
known to be of holy and heavenly Spirits towards
God, and of low and meek Spirits towards all, yea
their very enemyes. I would I could say so of the
Quakers (though no question but a a gold Ring may
fall into the Channel,The Qua|kers de|scribed. andInterline "a." R. W. Ms. Ann. Iewel into the Dirt of
worldly and Antichristian errors) But for the Qua|kers

I have cause to fear that generally they are
Proud, ambitious, and Worldly-minded Wretches.
Some of them have literal Knowledge of the Scrip|ture,
and some stirring Affections with the stony
Ground, others with the thorny Ground have suf|fered
formerly, but the Cares and lusts of this
world have drild them into this way of Anti|christian
Worship. others are Fierce, Pragmatical
Discontented c. and they must travel and be Apos|tles
to preach and bring in Proselites.I Fox  G Fox their Martyrs the contra|ry causes of their Suf|ferings.
The Cause of Iohn Foxes and G. Foxes Martyrs
differ as much as Day from Night, and Light from
Darkness: For it is known that I. Fox his Mar|tyrs
or Witnesses (those blessed Souls under the Al|tar)
were slain for maintaining the Authority and
Purity of the Holy Scriptures as the revealed word
or will of the Eternal God against the Traditions
and Inventions of men.
But G. Foxes Sufferers have generally suffered for
their Childrens Baubles, fantastical Traditions and
Inventions, for setting up a Dream of a Light and
Christ within all Man kind, above the holy Scrip|tures,
above the Son of God, above all Earthly Dig|nityes,
and all their Betters: endeavouring (with the
Pope) to trample all souls and Bodyes under their
proud feet.
180] 3. The carriage of these two Sorts of Suf|ferers
differ as much as East from West, and Hea|ven
from Hell.
1. The ground of Iohns Sufferers was that
which Iohn so much writes of, viz. love to the Hea|venly
Bridegroom, without which Paul slights burn|ing

it self:Heavenly love car|ried on. G Foxes even felf, God and Christ  Spirit. this appears in their wonderfull Love
to the holy Scriptures, (the Love-Letters of Christ
Iesus) and unto all that loved Christ Iesus also. The
Quakers are known to be Fierce, Heady, Proud,
Self-conceited, Stout, Bold, and driven on by an
Audacious and Desperate Spirit (which G. Fox and
some subtle Foxes with him have of late blaed in
H. Norton c.) No question but some of them have
a notion of Wrath yet to come, and therefore
rather then to endure Hell Fire they will give up
their lives to the Flames, others of them fast 40
dayes,Virgin love to God, c. and yet be far from true Virgin Love to the
Son of God. A Virgin that loves a man for Him|self,
will not slight his Love-letters, nor his Near
Relations (least of all abhor them, and sink and
burn them as these Foxians doe.
2. The carriage of I. Foxes Witnesses, though (in
respect of Gods holy Truth) it was couragious and
gallant, yet their lowliness and humility did shine
forth gloriously also.
1. As to God, being more sensible of their sins
then of their sufferings: conessing with many
tears that although God did turn their sufferings
unto his Glory,The hu|mility of Christs sufferers and although ungodly men (like
Foxes and Wolves) hunted them like innocent
Lambs and Chickins) yet they had deserved and
calld for this Storm by their unthankfulness for
their former peace and liberties, by their drowsiness
and sleeping upon the Earthen bed of worldly
Profits and Pleasures.
Contrarily it is known to all, that although some|times
the Quakers will say we come in love to your

Souls yet (the Quakers are far from confessing their
sins,Devilish pride as having no more sin then God hath, and
(according to their Principles and some of them
say it) they can no more sin against God then God
can sin against them.
As to Men Christs sufferers were meek, patient;
respective, contented, thankful.
But as the Quakers hearts have an insensible
brawniness and hardness (like frozen Rivers come
over their hearts) in matters of God so as to men.
181] 1. Was there ever a People (Men and Wo|men
professing such an height of Christianity) so
fierce so heady, so high-minded and though gener|ally
not hardned) so censuring, reviling, cursing and
damning: and so savage and barbarous as in the
stark nakedness of men and women, c.
2. As to Revenge, how patient, and pitiful, and
praying for their Enemies were I. Foxes Martyrs
or Witnesses,The pre|dictions of the Qua|kers and G. Foxes, how spitting Fire 
Brimstone? (witness the second part of N. England
judged by G. Bishop) because Christ in them is
come to judgement) wherein he pronounceth De|struction
to Bodies and Souls of N. England men, say|ing
in his Epistle, that their judgement lingreth not,
nor doth their damnation slumber.
Tis true some of their Predictions have and may
come to pass as do many also of Conjurers  Witch|es,
for the Devil knows the Complexion of persons
and things, and what is like to come to pass (as in
Sauls case and in other events) and still the poor
Quakers (and other his Captive Slaves) with such
Bables as these. I told you what weather it would

be,A blessed saying of blessed Mr. Dod. I told you where the Wind would blow: I told
you what would come to pass,] and yet as blessed
Mr. I. Dod used to say, though the Devil was up
early, God was still up before him: for the Proverb is
here true, God hath sent curst Cows short Horns: his
infinite Wisdome, Power and Goodness is pleased
to put an Hook into the Jaws of Sathan: he shews
himself the pitisui sparer and preserver of men:
When the Devil is a Fisher longing for troubled and
bloody waters, yet God hath graciously proved
many of the bloody prophesies of his waspish Pro|phets
and Prophetesses, (as I can prove) to be lying
and false already.
We now descended to the thirteenth Proposal
(the sixth to be discus'd at Providence) which was
read by them,The 13 po|sition discusd. and is this, viz. [These many Books
and Writings are extreamly Poor, Lame, and Naked,
swelld up only with High Titles and Words of Boast|ing
and Vapour.]
I told them that I had not shun'd (as in the
presence of the most High) to read any of their
Books or Letters I could come at: but the truth is,
I could never pick out any Wheat (of solid, rational
and heavenly Truth) out of their heaps of Chaffe,
and Dreams, and Fancies of new Christs, new
Spirits, c.
It is true that W. Edmund. said, that the Word
of the Lord [182] was a Fire, and a Hammer, c.
But I said the word they meant was but a painted
Fire, and a painted Hammer, and that never broke
nor burned up sin as sin.
Let a man read the Works of the Papists, Lu|therans,

Arminians,The Qua|kers and other Au|thors compared and amongst our selves, the Epis|copal
and Presbyterian Writings: a man shall have
wherein to exercise his Judgement, Memory, c.
he shall have Scripture proposed, Arguments al|leadged,
yea he shall read Answers and Replies,
whereby to satisfie a rational Soul and Understanding.
But in the Quakers Books  Writings, Peter 
Iude tells us (what I have found) clouds high of an
imaginary Christ and Spirit: high swelling words,
strange from the Holy Scripture Language, and all
sober and Christian Writers and Speakers.
Let Io. Chandlers Writings, and the Writings of
Theora Iohn (that Monster of Delusion) be viewed,
whose bodily Raptures, and frantick Writings of
the Quakers Principles, and of the Iews (in Hebrew,
Greek, Latin  Arminiack Writings (which he con|fest
he understood not) and let the rest of their
Writings be brought to the Touch-stone, and see if
an honest Goldsmith can find ought else but the
Dross, Dreams and Fancies, in stead of the solid
Gold of Heavenly Scripture.
I have read Nichols, and Nailor, and Howgel and
Burrows, and Parnel, and Farnworth, and Fox, and
Dewsbury and Pennington,G. F. his Writing poor and lam. and Whitehead, and Bishop,
c. And I could readily and abundantly prove my
position out of all of them, but my desire and inten|tion
was (as by my Paper to G. Fox appears) to
have made it good to G. Fox himself, and to all
Christians, how poor and lame, and naked G. Fox
his writings are, who seems to be as Pighius and
Echius amongst the Papists, and as Bellarmine the
greatest Writer amongst them.

I told my Opposites I would therefore Answer
this Bellarmine,G F his book in fo|lio conside|red and I would not say Bellarmine thou
liest: but I would by Holy Scripture shew G. Fox
and his deluding Foxians, how the old Fox the old
Serpent was too crafty for them all, and had brought
them and their Followers to the brim of the Lake
that burns with fire and brimstone.
First. then I said, let who will that understands
true English, and are able to read and write true
English, (though he know no more) take G. Fox
his Folio Book in hand, and tell me whether [183
(through his whole Book) he writes like an Eng|lish-man:
And though he upbraids all his Op|posites
scornfully and ridiculously (as poor Children
that know not the Bible nor their Accidence in
saying you to a singular, c.) whether in many scores
of places in his Book he confounds not the singular
and the Plural: I confess when I urged this in pub|lick,
my Opposites desired of me no proof of this
out of Foxes Book and therefore (remembering my
quarter hour Glasse) I fpared Quotations, but now
(through Gods patience and my Readers) my Ted|der
being longer, I shall give one or two brief
Proofs and Instances.
In page 282. in G. Fox his second Answer he
saith, [You where you are sees him nor] where it
should be the Plural see him not, if this Proud
Bruit had known either his Accidence or the Bible.
In Page 300. he saith [The Scriptures is able to
make wise unto Salvation] which should be are
able, c.
In Page 16. [The Churches was to hear] for, were
to hear.

In Page 110.G F his ig|norance of common English [As thou doth] which should be, as
thou dost: And abundance more of this Boyes
English all his Book over, which I cannot im|pute
to his Northern Dialect (having been so long in
the South, and London, and read and answered (as
he dreams) so many English Books: nor to the
Printer (the faults of that kinde being so numer|ous)
but to the finger of the most High, and most
Holy, whose property it is, and therefore delights to
run thwart and cross the shins of proud and insult|ing
Souls and Spirits.
2. I observe throughout his Book a Devillish
Black Line of despising those that are Good (as the
Scripture speaketh) He counts none Godly but him|self
and his Foxians: yea there is no God, no Christ,
no Spirit, but what is in him and them feelingly,
though they say he is in every man and woman in
the world, and Christ Iesus the Sun of Righteousness,Horrible contradic|tion
and the Holy Spirit, and the Kingdome of God,
which they confess consists in Righteousness and
peace and joy in the Holy Spirits,"Holy Spirit." R. W. Ms. Ann. and yet (as they
impiously and simply speaks) these Inhabitants and
Hosts to all these Guests know nothing of their
lodging and dwelling within them.
G. Fox gives a shrewd suspition that he never knew
what the true fear,The ex|cellent men. and love, and peace, and joy of
God mean; if he did, is it possible that he could
puff at so many Writers (excellent for great Know|ledge
and godliness,Whom G F in his book in fo|lio tramp|leth n as Dishclouts Dogs  Devils denying any thing of God or
184] Christ, or Spirit, or Grace to be in them:

some of them (eminent servants of God) I have
known: of others of them I have smelt the sweet
Odour of an Heavenly report from the mouthes of
others and in their Writings.
But as G. Fox will be found to adore an Image
 Crucifix for the true Lord Jesus, so whatever he
say of others will his Faith, his Love, his Spirit of
Discerning, and Hope of Glory and Salvation prove
(without Repentance) dolefully false in the latter
end.
For, doth not this Proud Censor know that men
may be true Saints in their persons, and yet be sub|ject
to sudden Epileptical  Falling Fits? may not
David walk with God with a perfect heart, and yet
in the matters of Bathsheba and Uriah (and many
other particulars) fall down like a Jewel into the
Dirt? that Christ Jesus owns Peter and his Confes|sion,
c. and yet in another case, get thee behind me
Sathan? That Peter resolves to dye for Jesus, and
yet denies with Cursing and Swearing, that he never
knew him, and after Christs Resurrection and Ascen|tion,
even Peter plays the Hypocrite  Dissembler.
Yea did not the high Fathers in Godliness, fa|mous
Kings in Gods Church live long in the
incivility of many Wives, and the impiety of Wor|shipping
in the High places,A differ|ence of Sinners c. to what purpose
doth the Lord inspire his holy Pen-men to write
these holy Histories: was it to shame his Saints de|parted,
or to shame his own Holiness, and to cast a
stumbling block, and a protection for after sinners and
transgressors? or amongst other holy ends to teach
us (like Moses) to distinguish between an Egyptian

whom he slew and the Israelites whom he chid for
wronging each other,G. Fox no true Goldsmith. since they were their Bre|then;
so that he is a poor Christian Goldsmith, that
knows not to discern the Gold of Holiness, and the
Copper of Hypocrisie; yea, and to give the best
Gold in the World its due allowance, with which
it will pass currant in Earth and Heaven with God,
and such who truly know and love him.
But with G. Fox. in all this great Book, the most
humble and able, godly and conscientious are with
him but Vipers, Serpents, Cains, Iudasses, false Pro|phets,
Pharisees, dumb Dogs, Sorcerers, Witches, Re|probates,
Devils, c.
3. In this Book of G. Fox (all along) he denies
the Scripture to be the Word of God: and he said,
that every man in the world hath that Spirit that
gave forth Scriptures, and that all Saints are [185
acted by the same Spirit immediately that moved
the Prophets and Apostles and holy Pen-men of
the holy Scriptures, all tending to vilifie and nullifie
the Holy Scriptures.
Besides, his Impiety in these Assertions (which
half an eye of Mahumetans,Fox his subtilty and yet simplicity in granting the Script to be the words of God.  Iewes,  Papists, 
Protestants will see) I note his Simplicity (for a Fox
though he be crafty is but a Beast still) For out of
his Piety he grants the holy Scriptures through all
his Book to be the Words of God, though not the
Word of God: and for this his Grant he quotes
Exod. 20. God spake all these Words, and the four
Books of the Revelations, which I nor my Opposites
could tell in publick what to make of: But if they
are the Words of God, and fome of them fearfully

written by the inconceivable Finger of God once
and twice, then every particular word of these words
must needs be the Word or Will or mind of God
every grain of gold is gold, and every drop in the
Ocean is Water and Salt too, as I urged to them
before concerning every word that proceedeth out
of the mouth of God) else the Words of God when
brought to particular examination, they are not the
word of God, but of Angels or Men or Devills.
How sweet are (not Words but) right Words:
every man shall kiss his lips that gives a right An|swer,
how dirty then, how filthy and bloudy are
those Lips that in so many places, debating with so
many wise and learned and pious men, drop not
Honey and Milk, but Wormwood and Gall the Venome
and the Poyson of Asps to them that lick up such
deceitfull and destroying Doctrines.
4. In G. Fox his Book I observe that all along
he notoriously nibbles ar VVords and quarrels at
VVords, which he saith are not Scripture, as that
wicked word [Humane] relating to the Person of the
Son of God and man.
Also the word Trinity and Sacrament.The word Humane abominable above all words to the Qua|kers Oh how
zealous is this Fox for the purity of Language?
Why may not the word Humane be used as well as
the word Sabboth and Sabbaoth, and Bethlebem and
Ierusalem which are Hebrew words, and as well as
the words Baptisme and Iesus Christ which are
Greek words, Scribes and Scriptures and Pretorium
which are Latine words. That word Humane is
odious c. for Christ Iesus sake, and therefore the
more I love and honour it, as expressing the ap|pearance

of God in Flesh, in that personal, Indi|vidual
Flesh of Christ Iesus the [186] Mediator pe|tween
God and Man, the Man Christ Iesus.
5. I observe the loose and wild Spirit of G. Fox
in dealing with so many heavenly Champions, the
Leaps and Skips like a wild Satyre or Indian, catch|ing
and snapping at here and there a Sentence, like
Children skipping ore hard places and Chapters,
picking and culling out what is common and easie
with them to be paid of and answered.
6. Any sober Soul may read in most of their
Books,The simple tautologyes of the Quakers. and in G. Fox his Book such Tautologies and
needless Repetitions that may even Turn his Stom|ach,
and make him abhor to touch a Quakers Book
more. How many hundred times have you, Christ
is within you except you be Reprobates: Flesh of his
Flesh and Bone of his Bone c. and I presume
neer a thousand times if not a full thousand times
repeated [That lightens every man that comes into
the World, that lightens every man that comes into
the world] c. G. Fox had many Bullets flying about
his eares, and therefore at every turn (like a man
fighting for his life) he is forced to hold out a Pre|tence
a Buckler a Breast-plate, simply called Light,
and at every turn to cry Oh the Light, the Light that
enlightens every man that comes into the World.
7 Through all his Book like some great Com|manders
or Generals by Land or Sea,The inju|ing  wild im|periousness of G. Fox. yea like the
Emperors or Dictators among the Romanes, so doth
this wild devouring Soul give forth his high and
haughty Sentences: this proud Bladder is big with
Simon Magus his thoughts of being Some Body.
I shall preent one Instance,





Pag. 253.Hen. Haggar. His Opposite Henry Haggar saith, you
call [all men Dead and Carnall, in the Serpents na|ture
in what form soever they differ from you] this
proud Soul Answers, [All that be not in the Light that
enlightens every man that comes into the World, which
is the way to the Father, differeth from us, such be
dead, such be carnal in the nature: for none comes to
the life but who comes to the Light, in what form so|ever
they be, and such as differ from us differ from
Christ, for none comes from under the Satanical nature
but who comes to the Light] what Iulian the Apos|tate,Bloudy and devillish Pride of the Foxians.
what Duke D' Alva, what Wolsey could have
spoken more imperiously, insultingly  bloudily
then this wild Fox hath done against all the true
Servants  Witnesses of the Most High that ever
have been or shall be to the end of this world?
they differ from Fox  therefore are Devils c.
187] 8. I observe that G. Fox all along his Book
powres forth a flood of Fire  Brimstone against all
his Oppsites and tells us that it is not Railing c. for
(his chief Adversary) the holy Scripture gives In|stance
of Christ Jesus himself giving such Lan|guage;
and also it is no other then the Opposites to
the Quakers give unto them: but Godly and Sober
Souls will consider,
1. That Moses and the Prophets, and Christ Iesus
and his Apostles do not universally absolutely and
promiscuously fling out Fire-brands,Fox his horrihle railing. and shoot Ar|rowes
and Death into the Sides and Souls of all that
differ from them, as here G. Fox doth.
We may observe in the holy Scripture, that gen|erally
they were high handed hypocritical and hardned

Sinners against whome the holy Spirit thundred
out such Titles, threatnings and Judgments: But
Fox in this place makes no Distinction, but as bold|ly
as Blind Bayard saith all that differ from us c.
2. This is no rare business, but Fox and his Fox|ians
common Language and Barkings: Thou Cain,
thou Serpent, thou Devil, (Devil, Devil, Devil, as
one of their She-Apostles have said amongst us.
3. It is G. Fox his bruitish and ridiculous Song
in the close of his Answers (and sometimes in the
beginning) without any Truth, Humanity or Mod|esty,
to cry out saying [And as for the rest of thy
Lyes and Slanders,Fox his bruitish and ridicu|lous Song. they are not worth the mentioning]
when he hath pickt out a few Sentences or pieces of
Sentences (easie for himself to carpe at c.) his con|clusion
and Burthen of his bruitish ridiculous Song
is [As for the rest of thy Lyes and Slanders] instead
of holy Scripture, or solid Arguments with Ans|wers
to his Opposites Reasons and Replyes and Re|jonders
that an humble soul may see some footing
to rest on.
4. As we say in the death of the Martyrs or
Witnesses of Iesus,What Railing is it is not the Suffering, but the
Cause  Spirit  Cariage is to be considered: So
in bitter Language, it is not lawfull to call every
Prince or King, Fox, as Christ called Herod: nor
every Opposite Viper  Serpent, Fool and Blind and
whited painted Wall and Sepulchre c. They seemed
to speak Reason to Christ upon his Cross [Thou that
savest others, thou that destroyest the Temple c. come
down now save thy self] c. and yet Gods Spirit
calls this Reviling and Railing at him.

9. All may see what a simple Craking Sound of
vapouring and [188] boasting runs through all this
Foxes Book: Doubtless Sysera and his Mideanites,
Goliah and his Philistines, Rabshekah and his Assiri|ans
were types of these Children of Pride,Instances out of G. F. his Book whose
Vapours whose Prophesies (so me notoriously false,
already proved) whose promised Victoryes, Spoils,
Threatnings lye like black foul Blots of ink or
grease over all his Papers and the Papers of most
of them, far from that Closet Content and Sincerity
of the true Saints who are content with the eye
of God alone in secret.
10. For a more full proof of the Lameness and
Stark nakedness of their Writings, I shall select and
mention some Particulars out of this Grand Alco|ran
of G. Fox 1. His Opposites Words, then his
Answer. And, 3. My Replyes c.
Page 1. He brings in Sam. Eaton saying, [He
doth not believe that there is Substantial, Essential or
Personal Union between the Eternal Spirit and Be|lievers.]
G. Fox Answers [Though the Scripture saith the
Spirit dwells in the Saints,Sam. Eaton. 1 Cor. 6. And he that is
joyned to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Joh. 1. As though
the Saints had not Union with God which the Scrip|ture
say they have.]
I Reply: concerning the Essence or Being of the
Immortal, Invisible, Infinite, Eternal, Omnipotent,
and Omniscient, and only Wise: we know no more
then a Fly knows what a King is, and therefore 1
Tim. 9."1. Tim. 6." R. W. Ms. Ann. He dwells in the Light that no man can ap|proach

to: how fully doth the Holy Spirit in the
Book of Iob, and especially in that dreadful Word
or Voice of God in a Whirlwind knock out the
brains of all these proud Fancies? let this proud
Fox, or any of the stoutest Lions or Lionesses
amongst them, look but a few minutes upon the
glorious Sun in the Heavens, and then tell us how
their eyes do: and yet thus like proud and prat|ling
Children do they make a noise about their
Bibs, and Aprons, and Muckingers: and how they
are one with God his Being and Essence, c.
Is it not enough for Sun,Gods being out of our reach Moon and Stars, and
Men to be enlightned by his Infinity, but they
must be God himself, and Light it self, in the high|est
sence, because God is Light, c.
What impudence would it be in a Wife, because
she is one with her Husband in Relation, to say,
She is the Husband himself, and not to keep her
just distinction and distance? or in a Subject (be|cause
the Subjects and the King are Relatives, and
in a sence one) [189] therefore to say, that they are
the King himself.
Again, we know that the word Spirit is taken in
Holy Scripture for a Spiritual Nature. Hence it is
said that God is a Spirit, not that God is properly
a Spirit, no more then he is Light (though my
Opposites in our Dispute affirmed he was) but of
such a Heavenly and Spiritual Nature:The nature of Spirits For the
Devils also are Spirits, though defiled with sin and
wickedness: thus Ioh. 3. That which is born of the
Spirit is Spirit, not that Spirits beget Spirits, and

that a new Creature is a young holy Spirit or God
himself, as I told one of the chief of the Quakers
at Newport,
And that 1. Cor. 6. shews us in what respect he
that is joyned to the Lord is one Spirit: For know
you not (saith Paul) that your Bodies are the Temples
of the Holy Spirit:How God and Christ of is in us. and Ephes. 2. For an Habita|tion
of God through the Spirit.
Thus God dwelt in his Temple of old, as a Man
in his House and a King in his Palace: not that a
Mans House, or the Kings Palace is of his Sub|stance
or Essence no more then an house is of the
Suns Essence, c. and no more was Gods Temple
of old, nor his Temples his Saints now, after the
blockish and blasphemous nonsence of the Quaker.
In Page 2.Sam. Eaton He brings in Sam Eaton saying [The
Scripture is to be judge of Doctrines and Manners.]
G. Fox Answers [The Iews had not the infallible
Iudgement, that had Scripture but stood against Christ
the Light,The Scrip|ture the Rule. and judged him to be a Devil, that judge|ment
was not infallible, and that Doctrine and Man|ners
of theirs was not right which goes against Christ
the Light.]
I Reply, as the Sun in the Heavens is the Epi|tomy
or Center of all Natural Light, though some
eyes are sore, look a squint, or are stark blinde.
And as the Rule or Canon (though Fox simply
bogles at that as not a Scripture word) is the same,
for it is in the Greek, though millions know it not,
and millions (as the Pharises) pervert and mis|apply
it.
The Holy Scripture is granted by G. Fox to be

Gods Words (though in a subtle fancie,The Holy Scripture a Lanthorn not his
Word,) but if it be every word of their. Gods, then
is every Word as Dvid saith a Light to our feet, and
a Lanthorn to our Paths, though we despise it and
wilfully refuse it (as some sometimes do Lanthorns)
and wilfully stumble [190] into the Ditch Eternal,
and other poor Souls after us: Thus the Heavenly
Sun-Dial is one and constant in its guidance and
direction to us poor Travellers, though we neglect
to look on it, or be ignorant of the figures and
lines of it,Try all things and be willingly ignorant, c.
We are not only commanded to read and medi|tate
in the Holy Scriptures, and to search them as
the Bereans did, but we are commanded to try all
things, to try the very Spirits. The Papists slap us
in the mouth with the infallible Spirit of the Pope,
and that he is not to be judged: the Quakers say the
same of themselves, which is no more then as I
said in the Dispute (when W, Edmund. interrupted
me, crying out Blasphemy) for a Man to go for
Counsel to an arrant Cheater and Jugler (then
cheating most when he calls all others Cheaters.)
In Page 3.Sam Eaton He brings in the same Author saying
[That God did not intend immediate Teaching, nor to
give out an immediate voice in after ages, which should
direct and guid men in the way of Salvation.
He Answers, which is contrary to the Scripture,
which saith, All the people of the Lord shall be
taught of the Lord, and he that is of God heareth
Gods word, and that is immediate and living, and
doth endure for ever, there is no fallibility nor de|lusion
in the Revelation of God, but all fallibility
and delusion is out of it.

I Reply,Gods medi|ate teach|ings his word  voice mani|fold and specified. it is granted that God speaks medi|ately
unto us by the light of Nature within us;
doth not nature teach you that it is a shame for a
man to have long hair, c.
2. By his works of Creation.
3. His Providence without us in his mercies and
judgements, so that every drop of Rain and crumb
of Bread, and grain of Corn is Gods word and
witness:
And 4. The pains of the Body, and Dreams in
the night have much of Gods word and voice in
them, Iob 33. God speaks once and twice but man
hears it not and is not Gods speaking his Word?
And 5, All grant that the words of Scripture are
the words of God.
And 6. The teachings of men, Ephes. 4. are grant|ed
to be means, c. both for the gathering of the
Church, as Apostles, and for the Governing of the
Flocks, as Pastors and Shepherds, c.
191] 7. The Water, the Bread, the Wine, c. are
appointed by Christ Jesus to be means while pro|fession
of Christ Jesus is made on earth to hold
forth a remembrance of him until his second
coming.
8. The private Prayers and Fastings and Medi|tations
of the Saints day and night, are holy Meanes
in and by which the Eternal God speaks Peace, In|struction,
Reproof and Comfort to to them that fear
him.
9. Sometimes it pleaseth God by the Ministration
of his Ministring Spirits (the invisible Angels) to
work by unknown and unseen wayes to us: thus in

Pauls Light and Voice and Blindness,Pauls won|derful mediate and imme|diate con|version.
and the Iail|ors
Earthquake, but afterward in Ananias his send|ing
to Paul (as Peter to Cornelius) and Paul to the
Iailor, it pleased God to use his holy means and
instruments of Men to men (Gods sweet and fa|miliar
way to men: the immediate Teachings of
God by Dreams, by Vision, by Voices, by Motion, the
Holy Scripture mentions many before and since the
coming of the Lord Jesus, the Question is not
whether it may not please the most Holy and in|finite
Prerogative of the most High,Immediate teachings so to teach
where, and when, and whom he please.
But whether it be Christian obedience, or Dia|bolical
laziness to fling off all means (as Fox all
along teacheth) to sit still and listen to immediate
Teachings (that is say I to the Devils whisperings)
I believe the Papists and Quakers would give much
to be rid of the Scriptures: I know also, that not|withstanding
their pretence of Spirit, yet both of
them are forced to use means, Praying, Preaching,
Congregating, and (in stead of the holy means
by Gods Spirit) have appointed many Inventions
and Superstitions from a Satanical Spirit.
G. Fox saith, there is no Fallacy in the Revela|tion
of God?
Ans. True, but will he say these seven things:
1. That all the pretended Revelations are the
Revelations of God.
2. That Revelations may not pretend Angelical
Light,Revelati|ons con|sidered in 7 particu|lars and yet be Diabolical Darkness.
3. That we may receive any Revelations and

Teachings (as Children and Mad Folks do) without
chewing, and rational weighing  consideration.
4. That God hath not appointed his old Scrip|ture
and Writing [192] new since Christs coming
as a Standard, Rule or Touch stone to try all our own
and others Inspirations by?
5. That Mahomets Inspirations are not one of
the most prevailing Snares, Traps, and Engines,
whereby he hath catcht whole Nations and King|domes,
and the greatest part of this poor world at
this day.
6. That when God reveals his word or will in wri|ting
(which G. Fox grants to be the words of God,
and they are slighted) it is not common and most
righteous with God to deliver up proud lazy Souls
to strong Delusions to believe Lyes (as at this day
it is most wonderfull)
7. Whether there be any way in this world to
escape the snares of Sathans Whisperings but by
humble attending to the search and Meditation of
the heavenly Records,The great business of Revela|tions by humble cryes to the Fa|ther
of Spirits for his holy Spirit and help in all
the Meanes by himself appointed, in Love and
Pitty to the Souls of men.
A 4th.Sam Eaton Instance of G, Fox his lame stuff is in Pag.
4. Where he brings in the same Author Sam Eaton
saying, [The Gospel is the Letter, c.] He Answers,
[And the Apostle saith, it is the power of God c. and
the Letter kills, and many may have the Form but deny
the Power, and so stand against the Gospel which is
the Power of God.
I reply, we all know that the word Gsopel from

the old Saxon is as strange to us English,What is the Gospel as the word
Evangelium or Euangelion (the Latine and Greek)
are: but we all agree that it may be turned (accord|ing
to its meaning) Glad Newes. This wise cunning
man tels us the Glad Newes is not the Glad Newes'
Why so? Because it is the Power of God. who sees not
here the simple subtelty of this Deceiver? The Gospel
or Glad Newes preached is the power of God unto
Salvation to every one that believeth c. Rom. 1.
Therefore this Glad Newes told, written, printed,
preached, is not the Glad Newes: would he now
perswade himself and us that Moses and the Pro|phets
that wrote of this Glad Newes, and those four
heavenly Pen-men (or Pens) which by the finger of
God, (his immediate Spirit) wrote the History of
the Life and Death of the Lord Jesus, c. wrote
nothing of the Gospel or glad news, for the glad
news is the power of God.
2. I know the trick of these old Cheaters and
Juglers to hide [193] themselves, and their cheat|ing
in the Bushes and Thickets of words of di|verse
Significations,The horri|ble Cheat of the Foxians. or figurative Speeches, which all
honest Reason teacheth carefully to distinguish. I
know it is Fox his trick, and all their tricks in his
and their Writing, to make God and Christ and
Spirit  Gospel  Covenant  Iustification, (as be|fore
I proved) to be all that one cheating Fancy
called Light in them and in every one that cometh
into the World.Why the Gospel is called the Power of God. These bewitched souls will not
owne a figurative speech when it makes not for their
Idols. 3. Is it not that the Lord calls the preaching
of the Glad Newes the Power of God, because of

the wonderfull effect of it to him that believeth
this Glad Newes, which few or none believe, as be|ing
a foolish thing to believe (as the Iews and
thousands others say, to believe in a beggars brat,
laid in a Manager and a Gallowes-Bird c. 4. Paul
calls this Glad news,How it is called Pauls Gospel. his Gospel or Glad news, Rom.
2. Will the Foxians therefore say that either Paul
lyed, or else it is not Gods Gospel nor Christs, but
Pauls although it is most true that as Paul had
charge of it (as a Shepheard of another mans Flock,
or a Mariner of an other mans Ship) it may"by" R. W. Ms. Ann. be
common Phrase of Speech (though not literal but
figurative) be called Pauls (or any other Messengers
of Christ) Glad news or Gospel. 5. There is a wild
beast called a Fox,Three Foxes. a subtle and pernicious creature:
there was a famous heavenly Man, a famous writer
of the Book of Martyrs, Iohn Fox, and there is this
poor deluded  deluding Soul G. Fox, to whome I
am now replying, ought not these to be distin|guished?
Is there not such a mischievous subtle
Beast called the Fox because G. Fox bears (and that
most justly and by a finger of Gods providence bears
it) the wild Beasts name: or was not such a learned
 heavenly  wonderfully deligent  zealous man as
I. Fox,The Scrip|ture the word or glad news from Hea|ven written. because G. Fox bears that name also? 6.
But further, If the Glad news may not be called
the Glad news when tis Scripture (that is written) or
preached, then not Glad news when spoken. 7. The
Law denounceth Sentence of Death against a Trai|tor
c. this Sentence is written,  in a Sence may
be called a Killing Letter: the King pardons this

Traitor, and this Sentence of Pardon is written:
this gracious word of a King is not less his Word
because it is Written then it was when first spoken
by him; and this word or pleasure of the King
written may be called Gospel or Glad news, the
Glad news or Gospel of his Temporal Salvation:
will any sober man say as G. Fox impiously and
frantickly, that the writing of the Pardon and
the Broad-Seal is a Dead letter  a Killing letter c.
because Paper Parchment c. If G. Fox from hunt|ing
after Souls by Sea and Land, arrive at [194] any
Port in England and send a Letter Post to his Wife
 Friends, containing his many Deliverances, many
Experiences,Counter|feits de|stroy not true eirs and owners for ever. his safe Arrivail and his Purpose and
Hope shortly to see them: shall now this Glad news
(or Gospel) though but a few raggs made (Paper)
be stiled a Dead letter yea a Killing letter though it
contain nothing (as the Christian Gospel or Glad
news doth not) but glad news or Tidings. 8. Hence
it is that we read so often of Preaching the Gospel,
of Believing the Gospel, and that as before Paul calls
it his Glad news, or Gospel because it was his work
to tell it.
Yea but saith this Deceiver throughout his Book
A man may have the Letter and Form, without the
Power and Life. c. I Answer Who knows not
that? and that a Form  picture is not the man
himself? who knows not that Iudas notwithstand|ing
his pretended Love and Kissing of Christ Iesus
that yet he had not the Life  power of true Love
and heavenly affection: but doth it follow that liv|ing
and moving Bodyes have not Souls  Spirits

within them, because that pictures have not? That
none preach Christ Iesus truly because that G. Fox
preacheth an immaginary and Allegorical Christ,
in order to establish himself the only true Christ,
and the Eternal Son of God as many bewitched
Souls call him. 9. What is this but to cheat poor
Birds with the Chaff  Falacy of dividing the
Body from the Soul, the Letter from the Meaning,
the Instrument or Tool from the Workman or Hus|bandman
using it,A word to all Fox|ians. the Gospel or glad news from Be|lieving
of it. Ah poor cheated Souls (called Qua|kers
all of you) why do you willingly (out of pre|tended
Enlightnings Experiences) shut your eye of
common Sense and Reason, not daring to call good
news, good news, because some, or the most will not
Believe it? was it not so with the women preaching
or telling the good news or gospel, although few or
none were found to believe that Christ was risen?
10. The truth is (search your cheating Familiars
narrowly ) you will find that your selves and the
Papists would make an Holy Day of that Day, in
which all the Bibles in the world were burnt, that
you may establish your infallible spirits  Tra|ditions.
I know I wronge you not, I have too much
proof of it, which you would se if the heart were
not the arrantest Cheater in the World,Gods won|derful pre|servation of his word or wil to poor mankind and your
selves not willing to be cheated. Tis true Anti|ochus
attempted the burning of Moses and the Pro|phets
out of the world: some of the bloudy Empe|rours
followed on in Antiochus his bloudy Steps
raging against the Scriptures also, the Romane Popes

in theirs, and common reason may tell all men, and
the Quakers themselves, [195] that if the same
power come into their hands as Antiochus  the
Romane Emperours had the holy Scriptures shall not
if they can effect it trouble them or others one day
in the world longer. But of this more in the next
and last Position.
A 5th Instance is pag 10 where G. Fox brings in
Iohn Bunian saying,John Bunian. It is not Faith and works that
justifie in the sight of God, but it is Faith and good
works which justifie in the sight of men only. c.
He answers, Abraham was not justified to men only
by his Obedience, but to God, and where is Faith
there is Iustification,The great Position of Iustifica|tion. which works by Love: and
the Saints Faith  works were not only to justifie
them in the sight of men? for the Work of God is to
doe what he saith  his Will which who doth not
are not justified in so doing, but to be beaten with
Stripes: who seek to be justified by their Faith and
Works in the sight of men, are Dead Faith 
Works both.
I Reply, In this great business of justification 
Pardon of Sin (which Luther called the great Wall
of Seperation between us and the Papists) I humbly
hope to shew how lame this Fox is, and that he
 his Foxians agree with the Papists, Arminians,
Socinians against the true Protestants in this funda|mental
business. For what is Iustification but a
Pardon written and sealed and declared from the
King of Heaven to poor condemned Traitors.Iustifica|tion what it is
That this Pardon may be merited by any Price that
we or all the World can offer, is denied by true

Protestants, but affirmed (in effect) by the proud
unbroken Souls of Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and
these Foxians called Quakers. It is true after a con|demned
Soul hath received a Pardon or Iustification
from his King freely without Desert (upon the
Princes Mediation) he declares his loyal and thank|full
Obedience c. but is this his Pardon  Iusti|fication
as our subtle Simpletons imagine?
Again that Abraham was pardoned (or justified, it
is all one) for his Work sake as this blind Soul
aith, how doth Rom. 3, 4. and the Epistle to the Ga|lathians
cry out, and the experience of every true
broken Heart cry out Lyar against such proud and
Popish Blasphemies. Further, If all the Righteousness
of the best of men, that is their good Thoughts, good
Words, good Actions Aims: Prayers, Preachings,
Sufferings, be but as Womens Menstruous  filthy
Clouts, (as the Most High calls them) what Popish
and frantick Madness is it in Fox to talk of Iusti|fication
before God by works or by Obedience?
A 6th. Instance is Pag 16. where he brings in
Henoch Howet saying, It is an Expression of a dark de|luded
Mind to say that God is not distinguished from
the Saints. G. Fox Answ. But God and Christ is in
196] the Saints, and walks in them, and he is is a
Reprobate and out of the Apostles Doctrine. I re|ply
to this Canting Gypsie,The proud Quakers affirm no distinction between God 
themselves in Pag. 74. He denyes
the Position of Ralph Farmer, viz. That God the
Creator is eternally distinct from all Creatures, and
that Christ being God only in one Person, remains a
distinct person from all Men and Angels. Also in the
same Page, that God is distinct in his Being and Bles|sedness

from all Creatures. I Answer, is it not Suf|ficient
that poor Dust and Ashes, poor Chaff and
Stubble may be admitted to a Parly with the Hea|venly
Majesty, and receive Smiles of his Countenance,
in the Face of the only begotten Prince Media|tor?
to be cloathed with the Virgins diverse Col|lours,
and heavenly Affections, but with the Devil
and our first Parents, we must aspire to the throne
of the Incomprehensible Majesty and Godhead also?
Besides, Let mans Common Sence be Umpire, is there
no Distinction between Infinite and Finite? between
the Infinite Ocean of Majesty power, goodness, Wis|dom
c., and the poor Dross"Drops." R. W. Ms. Ann. of which Men 
Angles are Partakers? The King dwells in White-Hall
and in other of his Royal Palaces; is therefore
no Distinction between the King and his Houses,
though some may be braver then others: And yet
Fox saith his Opposite is a Reprobate. I ask why?
The only Reason Fox gives is, because he licks not
up the filthy and hellish poyson of Foxes childish and
hellish Blasphemy against the Eternal Godhead.
A 7th. Instance is Pag. 22. where he brings in
Ioseph Kellet saying, [They be all alienated from God,
and Enemies until Faith] G. Fox Answers,Ioseph Kellet [So they
have denied their School-Master, which is until faith
which will keep them out of the Alienation which is the
Law.
I Reply with Ioseph Kellet, (and the rest of those
excellent men whom Fox useth as Dishclouts that
by nature our Alienation from God is so great,Our natu|ral Aliena|tion from God that
the finest and sweetest nature in the World is so

alienated and opposite unto God, that it resolves like
some Ships (against a Turk or other Enemy) we re|solve
to kill or be killd, yea and to sink by his side
before we will yield to be taken by him: there|fore
doth the Holy Spirit so often speak of mans
hating of God and Gods hating of him, yea of
mans abhorring of God, and Gods abhorring of
him, and Rom. 8. that not only mans wisdome is at
enmity but enmity it self against God. Hence it
is, few Kings, few Counsellours, few Nobles, few
Schollars, few Merchants, c. (who use to be the
wisest of men) relish the Doctrine of the Manger
and the Gallowes for the more natural Wisdome the
more aversation from the foolishness of the glad
news to poor,Few ex|cellent men saved lost, drown'd and damn'd Mankind.
197] 2. Again, I say as Solomon, the legs of the
lame are not equal, c. for how doth it follow that
we deny the Law to be a School-master, pointing
unto Christ, because we deny the Law can bring us
to Christ, which is so indeed in the English, Gal. 3.
but is not fo in the Greek, yea, how could the Law
of Ceremonies, pointing out the Lamb of God, or
the Law of Do this and live, keep out of the Alien|ation,
do they (more then the Law of Creation)
leave any converting Impression from the Soul, un|til
Gods hand open a door of Believing?
The Dyal points to the Sun, c. but who re|ceives
benefit by it but he that skills it, and looks
upon it, c. and yet the Dyal is not the Sun, c.
but points as all the Proyhecies, Ceremonies, Com|mandmens,
(before his coming unto that God Man,
the Sun of Righteousness) Christ Jesus. As to

the rest of his Answer, viz, [Which will keep them
out of the Alienation which is the Law] it is a piece
of bruitish Nonsence (as are not a few more in his
Book) and it may be taken (like the Answer of the
Devil at Delphos) many wayes: for it may be
taken, that Faith will keep them out Alienation:
or, the School-Master will keep them out of the
Alienation: or whether the Alienation is the Law,
or Faith is the Law, is doubtful, and if his mean|ing
should be that thy"Ye." R. W. Ms. Ann. Law either of Ceremonies,Our alien|ation from God
c. should keep them from being Alienated from
God; and so being actually to God, how not only
will all the Holy Scriptures but all Mankinde, Iews
and Gentiles call him a simple ane destroying Lyar?
An eighth Instance of Foxes poor, lame Answer
is in Page 27.Richard Baxter where he brings in Richard Baxter,
saying [To say that any is perfect and without sin is
the Devil speaking in man:] G. Fox Answers, con|trary
to the language of the Apostles and Christ,
who bid them be perfect, and the Apostle spake
Wisdome, among them that be perfect: and aid
they were made free from sin, and it is the Devil
speaking in man that speaks for sin while Men are
upon the Earth, for the Devil holds him up that
makes men not perfect which Truth makes men
free again from the Devil,  speaks in Man, and
says be perfect.
I Reply,The mat|ters of per|fection (whether this willingly ignorant Soul knows
or no) I know that the Devil knows that there is a
Fallacie in this word Perfection. 1. Sometime in
Scripture, it signifies no more then Sincerity  Up|rightness,

(and so is translated) sometimes Compleat|ness
 Fulness in its kinde, though but in a small
Vessel; sometimes Fortified, Strong  Armed; and
sometimes the Fulness of the Godhead, to whose in|comprehensible
Ocean not one Drop can be given,
nor one Drop taken from him. In Mat. 5. Be ye
Perfect, c We are not exhorted [198] to be equal
with God in Holiness, for that is to be God our
selves, and being set down in the throne of the God|head,
to thrust the Eternal God out, for there can
be but one in the Throne of the Godhead: But
we are commanded to labour to be like unto God
who not only is kinde to his Friends but his Ene|mies
also: As when we are bid to be like the Sun
to shine upon the Bad as well as the Good: will a
sober Soul imagine that we are bid to be as Pure,
as Glorious, as Vast, as Swift as the Sun is: but the
Spirit tells us of a Generation that are pure in their
own eyes, and yet are not cleansed from their filthiness.
Yea, but saith Fox, Paul spake Wisdome amongst
them that were perfect,Phil. 3. about perfection Phil 3. I answer, what if
the Translators had turned that word among them
that be strong intelligent, capacious as the word
often, and there signifies, why doth Paul also speak|ing
of such a strength or capacity as the Saints may
attain to in this life profess that he was yet (as it
were but clambring up the Hill) this is the vote of
all the highest Saints in Scripture lamenting their
Brethren andErase "Brethren and." R. W. Ms. Ann. Inabilities, and the Battle between
the old Man and the new: Of which Battle G. Fox
and his Foxians know not: for Sathan having Pos|session

all is in peace. It hath been ever known
that all Gods Children are like high and glorious
Queens  Empresses who wittingly endure, not as
the Holy Scripture speaks) that such an ugly Fiend
as the Devil should touch them, no not in an evil
thought. 3. They are like Fields  Gardens in
which the Husbandman and Gardiner allows not,The estate of Gods Children upon Earth
nor endures not a Weed but with grief and endea|vour
of their extirpation. 4. And this is far from
being Proctors and Advocates for sin (as G. Fox
most simply and impudently urgeth) for the known
truth is, that Fox and his Foxians fall most foolish|ly
and fiercely upon such as profess most holiness,
most sincerity, and most Mortification, most love
to God, and his only begotten the Spirit of Holi|ness,
 the Holy Scriptures or written Will of God.
A ninth Instance is in page 28. where G. Fox.
tells how the same Author preached an external
word [Which the Scripture speaks not of,Richard Baxter but of the
word that lives, abides and endures for ever, and of
the Scriptures of Truth that cannot be broken: and of
Gods words and Christs words, and that is not exter|nal:
this is not agreeable to sound words that cannot
be condemned: but that is like his Doctrine that knows
not the Eternal: but the Ministers of Christ did not
tell of an external word, but you being made by the will
of man speaks to the People of an external word.]
I Reply, The word (whether external, internal,
or eternal) is a [199] similitude, for we know God
hath no Mouth, nor Tongue, nor Words as we
have: but as Kings, and Generals of Armies or
Navies, or any Commanders in chief signifie their

minds by Speech, by Writing, yea by sign (at a dis|tance)
this Word or will, which was before in the
Kings breast, and internal is now outward or ex|ternal.
Hence Christ Jesus above all other wayes
of Gods manifesting himself externally or out|wardly
is called the Word of God, and the Word
which was God. Hence in common speech we
call our Thoughts our selves [So I think, c. this is
my Word, my Vote, or Mind.]
And as it is the Field: If a General himself who
first gave the external Word from his own internal
Thoughts:The great consequence of a word if he forget the word in the night a
common Sentinel will make him stand, or fire up|on
him: and shall men be so careful in these tran|sitory
businesses, and shall we suffer open Enemies
to the true Lord Jesus presumptuously to pass with|out
the external word or mind of God, and auda|ciously
to deny such a word at all to be? When
Christ Jesus Luke 4 spake out of the Prophet Isaiah:
and when Paul disputed three Sabbath dayes out of
the Scriptures, and when Apollos mightily convinced
the Iews from the Scriptures that Jesus was the
Christ, did they not use external, audible Expound|ings
and Applyings of that written word or mind
of God as the external and outward manifestation
of his internal and eternal holy Pleasure.
A tenth Instance is in page 32.Ellis Bradshaw where G. Fox
brings in Ellis Bradshaw saying [The Quakers Spirit
doth teach them to honour no Man.] He Answers,
[That is a Lye: for it teacheth them to have all Men in
esteem, and to honour all men in the Lord; yet they
are convinced by the Law to be Transgressors if they
respect Mens persons as you doe]

I Reply, I have spoken of their proud and lofty
behaviour toward all men, the Highest, the Eldest,
the Holyest, upon the 10th. Position, of their Pride c.
and therefore briefly say, 1. That all men may see
how truely they honour and esteem all men in the
Lord, and what Lord and honour it is that they
mean: when G. F. his first word to his Opposite is
in that most provoking Term, viz. [That is a Lye]
in his very pleading and the very first words of it.The honor which the Quakers give to others
It is true Christ Jesus and his Servants the Prophets
and Apostles used sharp and bitter Reproofs, Simili|tudes
c. but thus suddenly at the first dash to
give fire Thou Lyest, That is a Lye c. It shews nei|ther
Religion nor Civility but a Barbarous Spirit, for
they that know the Barbarians know how com|mon
that word is in all their mouths. Tis true of
late divers of Fox his followers have followed him
in courtesie [200] looking toward you, taking you
by the hand, bowing and half uncovering the head
more or less c. But this is but a Revolt and Apos|tacy
from their first Rigid Spirit and Cariage as Hum|phrey
Norton rightly maintains against them. Yea.
2. it is against all Foxes and their first Writings,
and this very place of Iames here urged, viz. they
are convinced by the Law if they respect mens
Persons.
Again, tis true in Christ Jesus there is neither
Bond nor Free, Male nor Female, and consequently
no Master no Man, no Father no Child no King
no Subject, but all are one in Christ Jesus, and the
second Birth: as all are of one kinde in the first
Adam, and the first Birth.

1. Yet first how full is the Holy Scripture of
Commands and Examples of Gods Children,Civil respect giv|ing
respective Words and Titles, and Bowings, even
to persons that knew not God? 2. Fox grants dif|ference
of gifts, and saith that some (in compari|son
of others of them not so grown, c. are Elders,
 sure this is some respect of persons, according to
that of the 1 Cor. 12. Are all Apostles, are all Pro|phets,
are all Teachers, c. Therefore how ever
they Hypocritically lye, and pretend to honour all
men in the Lord: yet the most Holy and only
Wise knows how proudly, and simply, and barba|rously
they have run into uncivil and inhumane
Behaviours towards all their Superiours, the eldest
and highest, how that they have declared by prin|ciple
and practice, that there are no Men to be
respected in the World but themselves as being
Gods and Christs. Tis true our English Bibles and
Grammar (as Fox his great Learning often objects)
makes thou to a single person, and Thou in Holy
Scripture is used in a grave and respective way unto
Superiours, unto Kings, and Parents, and God him|self:
But 1. (As I have said) the Hebrew and the
Greek signifie no more Thou then You, and so may
be truely turned.Thou  Thee 2. Every Nation, every Shire,
every Calling have their particular Properties or
Idioms Speech, which are improper and ridicu|lous
with others: Hence these simple Reformers
are extreamly ridiculous in giving Thou and Thee
to every body, which our Nation commonly gives
to Familiars only; and they are extreamly and in|sufferably
proud and contemptuous unto all their Su|periours

in using Thou to every body which our
English Ideom or propriety of speech useth in way
of familiarity or of Anger,Incivilities ought to be moderately
punisht Scorn and Contempt.
I have therefore publickly declared my self, that a
due and moderate restraint and punishing of these
incivilities (though pretending Conscience) is as far
from Persecution (properly so called) as that it is a
Duty and Command of God unto all mankinde,
first in Families, and thence into all mankinde
Societies.
201] Having thus through Gods mercifull help
gone through the 13th Position in publick and this
private supply of some few Instances of their Lame
writings of out G. F, reserving the liberty (if God
please) of presenting the Reader with a further
Apendix or Addition of some few further Instances
out of G. Fox his Writings. I hasten to the 14
Proposition, the last of the seven at Providence.
They read it publickly, viz. the spirit of the Qua|kers
tends mainly to the reducing of Persons from Ci|vility
to Barbarisme,The 14. Position debated. to an Arbitrary Government, and
the Dictates and Decrees of that sudden Spirit that
acts them. 3. To a sudden cutting off of People yea
of Kings and Princes that oppose them. and 4. To as
fierce and fiery Persecution in matters of Conscience as
hath been, or can be practised by any Hunters or Per|secutors
in the World.
I told them I could adde more Branches to this
Head, as unto the peace and civil Societyes of Man|kind
in the world: but I remembred my promise
of Brevity, and W. E. was often remembring me
sayinge Is this thy Quarter of an hour? for I believe

they stood here upon Coals and were not willing
that I should insist upon it my full Quarter; and
they hasted me on to prove that their spirit tended
to Barbarisme: they said (one and an other) that
their spirit was an Holy Spirit,W E. c standing upon coals. the Spirit of God,
and the Grace of God had appeared to all men and
had taught them to deny all ungodliness and wordly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously  godly in this
present world.
I told them that in our Native Countrey, and in
all civilized Countreys, the civility, Courteous Speech
Courteous Salutation, and respective Behaviour was
generally practised, opposite to the cariage of Bar|barous
 Unciviliz'd People.Civility and Courtesie. This I said was accord|ing
to the command of the holy Spirit in Paul Eph
4. and in Peter, 1. Pet 3. Be pitifull, be Courteous,
c. Such a Spirit was Christ Jesus of, even to his
greatest Opposites, and to the greatest Sinners, inso|much
that for his Courtesie  Gentleness  Sociable|ness
with open Sinners, the dogged proud and sullen
Pharises counted him a Drunkard and Glutton, a
friend and Companion of Publicans and sinners. We
English were our selves at first wild and savage Bri|tains:
Gods mercy had civilized us, and we were
now come into a wild and savage Countrey, with|out
Manners, without Courtesie, so that generally
except you begin with a What Chear or some other
Salutation,N. Eng. one work to civilize a Barbarous People. you had as good meet an Horse or a Cow,
c. And hath not the Quaker pirit been such a
Spirit amongst us? have we not known persons
formerly loving, courteous c. and as soon as this
Spirit hath come upon them have not our eyes seen

them pass by their Familiars, their Kindred, [202
their Elders and Superiours, and though kindly
spoken to, not give a Word or a Look toward them?
as if they were not worthy of a word or a look from
such High Saints c.The Quakers monstrous Incivility. How like indeed have they
been to the Popish Saints in a Procession, they See not,
Hear not, Speak not c.? or like these very Bar|barians,
and therefore I said, 2. G. Fox in his book
affirms that the Conversation of these very Barbari|ans,
in many things were better then his Opposites
c. I mused in my self (being much acquainted
with the Natives) what G. Fox should mean, he not
having been in N. England when he wrote that pas|sage;
but since I have heard that the Quakers have
commended the spirit of the Indians, for they have
seen them come into English Houses and sit down
by the fire,The In|dians and Quakers of one Spirit. not speaking a word to any body: But
this cariage of the Indians proceeds from a bruitish
spirit, for generally they have boldly come in with|out
Knocking or asking of leave, and sit down with|out
any respect in word or gesture to the Gover|nour
or chief of the Family whosoever (just the
Quakers general fashion and Spirit)
Further I told them, that in some respect the
spirit and cariage of the Quakers was worse then
that of the Indians, for if they were sd by the
English in the high-way or coming into an House,
they are very ready to receive your Salutation kind|ly,
and return you another: But commonly we
know that it is not so with the Quakers bruitish spi|rit.
2. The Indians morning and evening, and
upon all meetings, they give a respective and

proper Salutation to their own Superiours, and some|times
in gesture as well as speech. 3. Although
the Indians are bruits in their Nakedness both men
and women, yet they never appear (no not in pri|vate
houses) stark naked as the Quaker men and
women doe: yea they so abhor such a bruitishness,
(except it be in their mad Drunkenness, for then
they will be stark naked) that as to their Female
kind, they will carefully from their birth keep on
some modest covering before them. W. E. rose up
and said they did abhor Uncleaness as well as our
selves or any, their women were sober, holy and
Modest, and would not endure (some of them) to
have a Toe to be seen naked: but he said if the
Lord God did stir up any of his Daughters to be a Sign
of the nakedness of others he believed it to be a
great Cross to a Modest womans Spirit,The Qua|kers again maintain their womens Nakedness. but the
Lord must be obeyed. Iohn Stubs immediately
seconded him, and quoted again the Command to
Isaiah, Chap. 20. to go naked,  he added, whereas
I said at Newport that it was in the time of Signs,
Types, Figures c. He would now prove that all
Signs were not abolished by the coming of Christ;
for Agabus Act. 20. took Pauls [203] girdle and
bound himself. I replyed that was indeed one of
my Replyes at Newport, and I was yet far from
binding the sweet Influences of the holy One by
Dreams, Visions, immediate Impulses Revelations,
Signs c. but withall I said that before the coming
of the Lord Iesus and at his coming was the time
and season of such Appearances from God:Signs and Figures discussed. now he
hath fully declared
his mind to us by the Personal

and most wonderfull coming of his Son out of his
Bosome: who had commanded his Pen-men to
write his Birth, his Life, his Life his Doctrine his
Miracles, his Death, Resurrection, Asscension and
promise of Return to us: he had also preserved
these holy Writings Records most wonderfully
that (Ioh 20) We might believe in him, follow him
and live with him. But 2. I said what did this
concern the monstrous stripping their women naked,
of which we never heard a tittle either at coming
of the Lord Jesus, or in those proper seasons of
such Administrations before his Appearance.The Qua|kers spirit enraged. Iohn
Stubs said he had been a Quaker 19 years and yet
had never seen a woman Naked, and some of the
Quakers said to me aloud, when didst thou see any of
our women Naked? and another of them said, We
did not think that thou wouldest have been such a wicked
man. These two (though of the Quakers spirit) yet
of long time had been Loving and respecttive to
me, but now they were enraged, so that I said unto
my Antagonists, seeing some Heat is risen about
these matters, I will if you please go on to the sec|ond
Branch of this 14th Position.The Qua|kers spirit tending to Arbetrary Govern|ment. I told them the
2d. Branch was,
That the Spirit of the Quakers tendeth to bring in
an Arbetrary Government. I said we all knew how
it had cost the blood of thousands ten Thousands
this matter of Goverment  Lawes: that the Most
High  only Wise choosing one People and Nation
of Israel to be his own, he wrote them Laws (some
with his own inconceivable finger written) and some
by Moses his inspired Pen-man, it pleased him not

to leave their Wisest and Holyest Kings  Gover|nours
without written known Lawes, with Rewards
and Penaltyes annexed. But I argued if that were
true that all the Quakers were guided in all they
said and did by the immediate Spirit of God (as I
proved Fox maintained) then if they obtain higher
or lower Governours of their Spirits, Surely it
shines cleer that there is no need of Laws for them
to rule  act by,The Qua|kers have no need of Scripture much less of the written Laws of men for they had no need of Scrip|ture,
and seing the Immediate Inspirations of God
would not suffer them to erre in Judgment, for as
they said of the holy Scripture, they had no need
of it, for they had the holy Scripture within them,
their Teacher within them, and all that they spake
was Scripture, and the voice of God, c. So I said
much more [204] might it be said of Mens Laws 
Writings; that surely they had no need of them: for
what could be more just and equal, more pure 
holy in all Cases Controversies  Businesses, then
the immediate Voice of God? W. E. said, what dost
thou fill peoples ears with strange Notions, as if the
People of God called Quakers were a lawless people
and would bring all Government and all Laws to
nothing? We are for righteous Goverment, and
righteous Lawes, we are not for any to rule by
Force, and more he spake to this purprse.
I Replyed,The Qua|kers  none else in the World fit for Gonrn|ment as they judge that he mistook me, by an Arbetrary
Goverment I did not intend a Goverment ruling by
Force (for there could be no Goverment in the
world without the Sword) but Arbitrary I said came
from Arbitrium which signified Will or pleasure:
and so my Argument was, that Persons immediately

speaking from God, it was impertinent and profane
to clog and cumber them with Lawes, for the
Voice of God (the Law of all Laws) proceeded
out of their mouth, then which there could be
none more Just, more Wise, more Holy.
Here stood up an Aged man (and as able as most
in the company, T. A.) though much of late ad|hering
to the Quakers and said, Methinks there is
Weight in Mr. VVilliams his Argument. He being
a noted man, and his voice very audible (and so
heard by all) VV. E. was forced to take notice of
his speech, and said, wherein is there any weight in
it? T. A. Answered, why if a Magistrate be im|mediately
inspired by God,T A his Testimony and speaks Gods Laws 
Sentence, sure there seems to be no need of any other
Laws. They saw they were in a Pound, and I per|ceived
it, and yet (not being willing to grate upon
them but) watching my time (as I was glad all
along) to pass handsomly from one Point unto
another, I said unto them: if they pleased I would
pass on to the Third Branch,The 3d. Branch viz. That the Qua|kers
Spirit tending to the sudden cutting off of People,
yea, Kings and Princes that oppose them. I here told
them that I must crave their patience whiles I must
profess my fears, least that Spirit by which they
were guided, might run them upon their own and
others temporal Destruction. I told them I thought
they had no such thing in their Thoughts or Eye
at present: but if power of the Sword come into
their hand, it was easie to imagine that whom
their Spirit (infallible) decreed to death, Peasant
or Prince, if it were possible, he must be executed,

c. W. Edm. said, Thou here makest a false and ly|ing
charge against the People of God, who are peacea|ble
and quiet and yielding to Magistrates, c. I
Replied, I charge them with no matter of Facts:
but I charge them and their Spirit with a tendency,
c. For why [205] might they not say, that Abra|ham,
with an impulse was killing Isaak, Moses the
Egyptian, Ehud killing Eglon the King of Moab,
Samuel hewing Agag the King of Amelech in pieces,
and Paul, Ananias and Saphira, c. and why not
Sathan stir up his Instruments to pretend the like
Spirit, as we know he hath done both in former
 latter days?
My Antagonists joyntly bid me shew when any
of the Quakers had done so:Immediate impulses I Answ. They spake
not to the point, c. for I did not charge them to
have done so, but that their Spirit tended to it: I
was saying that Faubord at Grindleton was killlng
his Son in imitation of Abraham, if his Sons cry|ing
out, and the breaking open of the House had
not prevented: and that Iames Parnel moved by
this Spirit to Fast forty dayes, c. perished the
eleventh day, c. but perceiving more than ordi|nary
heats, and that W. Edm. charged me that I
had a false heart of mine own, and would measure
others by my bushel: I told them of the wonder|ful
actings of Tho. Munster, and I. Becold, and Fifer
 Knipperdoling, c. in Germany, and of their Pre|tences,
Murthers, Poligamies, and all by the Spirit,
c.The Kings Grandfa|ther H. 4. of France murthered upon pre|tence of a vision of Angels I told them that our Royal Sovereign his
Grandfather Henry 4th of France (that famous and
wonderful Man) he was stab'd to death by a Frier

pretending a Vision of Angels on Christmas night,
who commanded him from God to dispatch and
kill the King, which he most desperately effected.
W. Edm. interrupted me, and spake (to this effect)
why should we suffer this man thus to wrong the
innocent people of God? we will measure him
with his own Bushel: For thy Book declares thy
approving of the killing of the Kings Father, and
said where is the Book? At which word W. Har|ris
(a Fire-brand of Town, and Colony  Country)
rose up, and carried a Book (which they said was
mine) to W. Edmundson:W. Edm.  W. Harris their mal+lice towards me I perceived that W. Edm.
W. H. who was for any Religion, and a malici|ous
mortal enemy to all good, had been a plotting:
and I said openly I knew what malicious bloody
counsel had been between W. Har. and themselves:
but they would finde themselves befooled, for there
was nothing in the matter but ridiculous malice:
for all of us knew that W. H. loved the Quakers
(whom now he fawn'd upon) no more then he did
the Baptists (whom he till now fawn'd on) but
would love any, as a Dog for his Bone, for Land,
which he had a long Suit for as was known to all
the Country and their cost. Hereupon Capt.
Green of Warwick (Magistrate) desired that such
matters might be forborn, and others spake to the
same purpose: and I, Stubs and others are said to
speak to W. Edm. to forbear, so that the Book was
laid aside and delivered again to that [206] malici|ous
bloody Soul W. Harris. I challenged them
again and again to read and improve what possibly
they could, which I knew was no more then fome

words applauding the Parliaments Iustice and Mer|cy:
which these Bloody Sophisters would (like Wolves
 Foxes construe as my approving the Kings Death,
which God knows I never approved to this day.
Upon this Occasion I may now inform the Reader,
how easily the malicious Spirit of W. Edm.W Harris his charac|ter and practise  W.
Har. met in one: formerly no man amongst us
had spoken more scornfully of the Quakers then W
Harris, now he extreamly, privately and publickly
fawns upon them, seeing them my Enemies, who
had ever been his Friend, and never his Enemy but
in his outragious practises against Town,  Colony 
Country. He was a Pretender in Old England, but
in New my experience hath told me, that he can
be one with the Quakers, yea Iesuits or Mahume|tans
for his own worldly ends and advantage. He
is long known to have put Scorns  Ieers upon the
eminent Inhabitants of Town and Country. He
hath been notorious for quarrelling, and challeng|ing,
and fighting, even when he pretended with
the Quakers against Carnal Weapons; so that there
stands upon Record in the Town-book of Provi|dence
an Act of Disfranchisement upon him, for fight|ing
and shedding Blood in the street,W H  the Q the higher powers as they simply affirm and for main|taining
and allowing it (for ought I know) to this
day. Then he turns Generallist, and writes against
all Magist-ates, Laws, Courts, Charters, Prisons,
Rates, c. pretending himself and his Saints to be
the Higher Powers (as now the Quakers do) and in
publick writings he stir'd up the People (most se|ditiously
and desperately threatning to begin with
the Massachusets) and to cry out no Lords, no Mas|ters,

as is yet to be seen in his Writing: this cost
my self and the Colony much trouble. Then (as
the Wind favoured his ends) no man more cries up
Magistrates: then not finding that pretence, nor
the People called Baptists (in whom he confided)
serving his ends. He flies to Connecticut Colony (then
and still in great Contest with us) in hopes to attain
his gaping about Land from them, if they prevail
over us: to this end he in publick Speech and
Writing applauds Connecticut Charter and damns
ours, and his Royal Majesties favour also for grant|ing
us favour (as to our Consciences) which he
largely endeavours by writing to prove the K. Ma|jesty
by Laws could not do. My self (being in place)
by Speech  Writing opposed him,  Mr. B. Ar|nold
then Governour, and Mr. Io. Clark Deputy
Governour, Capt. Cranstone and all the Magistrates,
he was Committed for speaking  writing against
his Majesties Honour, Prerogative,  Authority: He
207] lay some time in Prison until the General As|sembly,
where the Quaker (by his wicked, ungodly,
and disloyal plots) prevailing, he by their means
gets loose, and leaves open a door for any man to
challenge the Kings Majesty for being too Godly or
Christian, in being too favourable to the Souls of
his Subjects against his Laws, c.
I had thought to have declared thus much pub|lickly,W Edm. his igno|rant and impudent zeal and upbraid|ings
and how seasonably the Kings Declaration
came over against him: also how that one General
Assembly, and another, and another had been
troubled with him, c. and fined him, c. but now
my Lord Edmundson grew hot, and told me that I

had charged the People of the Lord with many
great and grievous Charges, which he said I could
not prove, yea, he said he would speak it before
the Lord, I had not proved one of them, and there|fore
he warned me, being an old Man, that I
should not carry such a Burden on my back to my
Grave, and (among other angry insultings) he said
he heard I had been a Magistrate, and said I was a
fit man to be a Magistrate that would so wrong|fully
charge the Innocent. Io. Stubs spake to the
same effect, and how I had hindred them from go|ing
about the work of the Lord: he said also, that
it was only the Light which they had spoke for,
and that some had interrupted them, but he con|fest
that Roger Williams himself had not done it:
I saw God in their Confession.
And for the last point and Branch of the 14 Po|sition,The point of perse|cution
viz. [Their Persecuting Spirit) having spoken
to it before, and finding them unwilling to men|tion
it, I urged it not, having (at Newport) shewed
from Page 170 of G. Fox his Book, [That the Mag|istrate
(that is the Magistrate in their Light) ought to
Subject the Nation to his Light, else he is not a faith|ful
Magistrate.] In page 90.  96. G. Fox. sets up his
Saints (as formerly.So many Quak. so many Popes W. Harris his Antagonists) to
be the higher Powers, as knowing who Worship
God aright, and who not, and only able to judge
of Powers, Magistrates, Kingdomes and Churches.
Herein W. H. and the Quakers are one,The pre|tended meekness of the Quakers. c. It is
true that W. Edm. declared that the People of God
were not to meddle with Carnal Weapons: as also
that before time, many of the People of God called

Quakers, had been Souldiers, Captains and Colonels,
yet now coming to the Light, they had laid down
their Carnal Weapons: but if Fox say true in his
Book, either they Mope or Equivocate: for Fox
speaks of the Magistrates for Christ in the afore|said
Page 170. he discerns who be Idolaters, who
not, which true Churches, which not, and are to
praise the VVell Doers, and terrifie the Evill Doers
with the Carnal and Material Sword, or else they
talk nothing.
208] But 2. If this Confession Profession of theirs
were not; yet if Chrst Jesus say true, viz. The
Tongue tells to all the World what the Heart is: was
there ever People professing the Name of Christ
Jesus (except the Papists) so Reproaching the Pro|testants,The tongue of the Quakers is the Vi|pers what will their hand be and amongst the Protestants was there any
ever so Reproaching Reviling the Professing and
Conscientious People as Quakers do: was there
ever any known (professing the fear of God in so
high a measure) so sharp and cutting in their
Tongues even to eminently, knowing and Consci|entious
persons, [Thou Lyar, thou Serpent, thou Cain,
thou Judas thou Hipocrite, thou Devil] c. Shall
we rationally question whether their hands (like
Simeons and Levyes) will not be as fierce and cruel,
if the most holy and only Wise permits Whips 
Halters,The Qua|kers com|mon lan|guage Swords  Fagots to fall into their Hands?
and what did Sam. Fisher,  Ed. Burrowes write
less to the Souldiers at Dunkirk, that if they re|ceived
the light they should on to Rome.
3. Have we not known the deceitfulness of
mens hearts fly out into greater matters then Per|secution?

Hazael earnestly asked whether the Pro|phet
thought him a Dog that he should doe such
matters c.The cheat|ing of mans heart Pendleton vow'd his Collops should
fry ere he would to Mass in Q Maryes dayes, and
yet to Mass he went and persecuted others also that
would not bow to the Image as he had done.
Just here Capt Green of Warwick desired leave
to speak to two things,
1. To immediate Revelations, such as Abraham
and Moses and Ehud had.
2. As to the Soul being a part of God:Capt Green his 2 points with my Antagonist I was
weary and withdrew, but afterward Capt. Green
told me that none of them were willing to speak
punctualy to either of these two, but rather de|sired
to wave them as a bstruse and high matters
and Mysteryes.
Then Pardon Tillinghast (a leading man among
the People called Baptists at Providence) he prest
against them the continuation of Christs Ordinances
untill he came.Pardon Tillinghast his dis|course with my Opposite The Quakers said Christ was come
again to his Disciples. He replyed, that after Christs
Ascention he spake of another Coming, his second
Coming, Heb 9. W. E. fel to Prayer, (as with me
he ftl to Preaching) Pardon Tillinghast (as himself
told me) declared to them, that he was free to dis|course
with them, but he was not free to joyn with
them in Worship: so he departed, and after W E.
his Prayer, the whole Assembly.
And thus it pleased the God and Father of Lights
and Mercyes to bring us to the end of this 4th
dayes Contest,The Con|clusion was ordered by the Father of Mercies with much peace and quietness which had not been if I had in|insulted  upbraided as W Edm. did. and the end of the whole matter,

in much Peace and Quietness, and the Consideration
of matters left to every mans Soul, and Conscience,
and so doe I this Narrative, which God knows is
the Sum and Substance of all our Transactions:
Unto his Eternal Majesty therefore I humbly
offer Eternal Praise, by and in the Eternal Son of
God, the true Lord Iesus Christ: whome I desire
joyfully to expect to return from Heaven, as liter|ally
and personally as all true Christians hold (Act.
1.) he is ascended.



AN
APENDIX
OR
Addition of Proofs unto my thirteenth Po|sition,
Viz.
That the Quakers Writings are Poor, Lame and
Naked (not able to defend themselves, nor comfort
the Souls of others with any solidity.)
I could produce most of their chief extant,More Proofs of the Qua|kers lame writings
but I have been occasioned to deal with G. Fox,
their great Goliah, in some Scores of Passages of
his Book in Folio, in the Narrative aforesaid.
Unto which I judge fit to adde the Scores
following, faithfully presenting his Opposites,
Words (as he quotes them) his Answers
and then my Reply: let him that
Readeth understand.

_I Have chosen out the short Assertions of G.
Fox his Opposites as he quotes them, and
his short Answer for brevity sake, c.
1. The first of this Addition I name,
is in pag. 6. of G. Fox his Folio Book, where he
brings in Samuel Eaton saying [The Apostle faying
to the Saints, You know all things, it is [2] an exces|sive
speech] G. Fox Answer [contrary to Iohn,1 John 2. You know all things. and
would make him a Lyar, the Minister of God: so
he is in the false spirit gone out into the World,
contrary to 1. Ioh. 2. Who know all things]
I Reply, 1. I cannot learn that they litterally
hold, that they know all things knowable as God
(though G. Fox writes that they know all things as
God (yet I can not think them so gross as to imagine
that they know all things, past present, and to
come, (as the Devil pretends he doth, and offers
to reveal so much to some Conjurers) but I judge
they must come to some figurative meaning, as
their opposite writeth.
For 2. What hinders (as before) but if the Qua|kers
be Omniscient, and know all things, but they
should be also Omnipotent and do all things, for so
Paul writes, Phil. 4. I can do all things: I know
they say, they are one with God and Christ, and
they know all things, and can do all things; and
yet this sense which litterally is so Proud and Blas|phemous,
must be made out by a meaning and by
a figure (which they cry out against in others.)
3. Therefore doth not the Spirit of God in Prov.
28.About knowing all things. open this to us, saying, Evil men understand not
Iudgement, but they that seek the Lord understand all

things: that is, God answers their Prayers, and ina|bles
them to know and do, all that he calls them
to, when the proud and scornful are rejected.
4. Therefore I believe it is that the most Holy
and most just and wise Lord leaves these poor proud
and scornful Souls to seek wisdome and not to find
it,The Qua|kers proud of knowl|edge yet knowing nothing. to be ignorant, knowing nothing, (as Gods Spirit
speaketh,) and to discover their Ignorance in so
many Fundamentals of Christianity, and in so many
practices immodest, irrational, and more then savage, as
I have proved against them.
2. In pag. 11. G. Fox brings in John Bunyan,
c. saying, [The Scripture plainly denies that Con|science
can justifie though it may condemn.Pag. 11. Joh Bun|yan. [He Answ.
[which is contrary to Scripture, where the Apostle
saith Rom. 2. their Consciences either accusing or ex|cusing.]Con|science condemn|ing not Justifying. And again, herein do I exercise my self to
have a Conscience void of offence toward God and to|ward
Men, and the Light condemns, which you
call Conscience, c.
I Reply,The Qua|kers con|fest their light to be Consci|ence. Conscience (in greek Latine and English,
c. signifies a Knowing together: a Relexion, or
looking back of a mans mind or Spirit upon it self,
in point of Iustification or pardon of sin [3] Con|science
looks upon a cursed rotten Nature, then
upon millions of sins of Omiion and Commission,
which how to satisfie an infinite Justice for, and to
attain a new heart and nature is the high business
and out of the reach or thought of that poor Con|science,The great Tryal of the 3 greatest actual Sin|ners that ever were
which every man Iew or Gentile Civilized,
or Pagan comes into the World with. In the great
Tryal of the three greatest sinners that ever were

in this World, the Devil, and the first Man, and
first Woman: two of them their Consciences con|demned
them, and they confest the Fact (though
with extenuation and Excuses) could this their
condemning Conscience (especially with mincing
of sin as all mens natural Consciences do) I say,
could this Conscience or Consession pardon their
sin, reniew their hearts and be their Justification
(or clearing) and Salvation?
Tis true Abimelechs Conscience justified him
from the Fact of lying with Abrahams Wife, as
well as Iosephs Conscience justified him from the
falsly imputed guilt of lying with his Mistress,The ex|cusing of Con|science or
attempting of it: But was this the Pardon of
Abimelechs sin, his Justification and Salvation after
the Canting Language of this poor Fox, and all the
Foxians that I have seen (and I have read all I
could come at c.)
Oh how little do these poor Beasts seek what in|finite
Justice, infinite Punishment, infinite Payment
is! what Conscience truly pacified is, upon the
Pardon of Sin, and true peace of Conscience
Sprinkled with the Blood of that only Lambe of
God Christ Jesus.
Amongst the Indians I have known some falsely
accused of stealing English Mens goods, of killing
English Mens Cattle, yea, of Murther; and I have
heard them say that Manit: that is God and their
own Souls know they are Innocent. This Inno|cency
who questions but that it is their plea and ex|cuse
and discharge from that guilt falsly charged on
them: If this be all that G. Fox saith! he beats

the Air and hath no Enemy: No, no, It is a Con|science
Justification within, a Christ shedding his
blood within; (in a subtle fly opposition to the par|don
without us from the K. of Heaven for the sake
of his Son without us) this is the business which
these Traitors to the K. of Heaven aim at: Now
they will be perfect and never more admit a sinful
thought; and this their present Honesty shall pay
the old score of a Cursed Na- [4] ture, and millions
of Treasons, and Rebellions in Commissions and
Omission against the God of Heaven.
It was a pertinent Similitude used before Q Eliz|abeth.A fit Sim|litude used before Q. Elizbeth concern|ing pardon of sin or Justifica|tion, which I had from one that heard it being near the Queen
A King sent for his Lord Deputy of a Pro|vince
to come home and give account c. The
guilty Deputy goes to a great friend desires his Com|pany,
c. he said, He was sent for also himself,
and feard his own Issue: He goes to others desires
their Company, c. They make excuse and pro|mise
to have him or the way, c. Then goes the
Deputy to an old friend, who promised to go with
him, and what he could speak for him: only, if
the K. asked, he must speak the Truth, and that will
be (said he) your Destruction, and therefore adviz'd
him to make the young Prince his Friend and Me|diator
for whose sake the King would deny no Fa|vour,
no pardon, no Honour, c.
The Application may be large and useful: but
in short,Con|science the greatest Friend or Foe. A Soul Summond to Death and Judge|ment,
looks to Relations, c. they all Answer, they
are in the same Case, c. It looks to Wordly Es|tate,
c: they tell us they will go with us as far as
the Grave and provide a Coffin, and a Sheet, and a
Burial, c.

3. The old friend is Conscience, who will go with
us, but can be a thousand witnesses against us, c.
It follows then clearly that the young Prince is the
true Lord Iesus Christ, not vanished away into a
Light in every dark dungeon in the World, but Con|science
saith he is litterally ascended up into Hea|ven,
and will as literally make his speedy Return
again to Iudgement.
The third Instance,Pag. 2. Jo. Bunyan, c. G. Fox pag. 12. brings in the
same Author, saying, [the Light doth not shine in
the Consciences of them that be lost.] The Answer,
[But Iohn saith, he Light shines in darkness but the
darkness cannot comprehend it, and there is that of
God in the Children of Disobedience and Reprobates,
as in Rom. 1. and 2. Chapters.] I Reply, G. Fox is
here in his Burrough, and takes not the word Light
in the same Sense his Opposite doth, (the Common
trick of Cheators): His Opposite takes it not for the
heavenly Lights Sun,The va|rious meanings of the word Light Moon, nor Earthly Light of
Fire, Candles, precious Stones, nor the Metaphorical
Light of mens minds differing them from Beasts,
Birds, Fishes: Nor the Light of peace joy and Pros|perity,
call'd in Scripture Light, c. Nor the
Light and Evidence of witness or Reason in Cases
depending: Nor the Light of the holy Scriptures,
and the preaching and offering of a [5] Saviour to
poor lost Sinners: But, for that awakening, saving
Light, convincing all mens Condition to be misera|ble
and damnable: of Grace and mercy offered and
applied to a Soul by the good News of a Saviour
someway heard of, and the holy Spirit the finger or
power of God.

G. Fox saith, this saving Light is in mankind:
only persons don't mind it, and so Christ Iesus is
Crucified, and slain in them, and God, and Christ,
and Spirit, and Light, c. are all captived, hindred
from working, yea, altogether killed  slain in them
because a Soul doth not mind them, and hearken
to Christ in them.
Ah poor simple bruitish Imagination that ever it
should enter into the thoughts of Men professing
to be Christians,Rom. 1.  2? Nor fa|vouring Christ in all mankind c. or of men professing to know
more than the Wolves and Foxes in the wilderness:
I have spoke to this before, therefore a word only
to G. Fox his proof, Rom. 1. and 2. Chapt. From
these two Chapters he proves that there is that of
God in the Children of Disobedience, and Reprobates,
who denies it. For there is something of God,
that is from the power and wisdome of God in the
Fallen Spirits the Devils themselves. But I know
by that of God, G. Fox means God himself (prest
down as a Cart with sheaves) the holy Seed Christ
Iesus, (under the Clods,) the holy Spirit in prison,
for the Soul is a part of the Essence or Being of God
himself.
But that there is here a word or title of Colour
to any of this dirt and filth flung in the face of the
Majestie of Heaven?
This Scripture speaks of the work (or working)
of the Law written in their hearts: but what is this
to a second writing of the holy Scriptures, or wri|ting
inspired into the heart by the most holy Spirit?
yea,Four wri|tings con|sidered what is this to a third writing of their Names
written in Heaven in the Lambs Book of Life? yea,

what is this to fourth writing, the writing of the
new Covenant Consisting of Sin and a new heart, a
heart of flesh, in which his Law is written as form|erly
in Tables of Stone, and yet we poor men of
Iabesh Gilead must leave the Testimony (as Gilead
imports) and suffer Nahush (the Serpent) to put out
our right eyes, and believe that every man hath the
new Covenant Christ Iesus and the Kingdom of God,
c. with the Pharisees in every mans heart and yet
he never knows of it?
4. Instance: In the same pag. 12 he brings in
the same Author, saying, [It is a Counterfeiting of
the new Birth for men to [6] follow the Light
wherewith men coming into the world are inlight|ned:
G. Fox Answ. [which none comes to the
new Birth but who come to the Light, which every
man, c. in which believing is a Child of the
Light, c.
I Reply:Several Exposit|ions of the Light in Jhon 1. G. Fox runs round agian and again,
like the windmil Sails: It is saith he, no Counter|feiting
of a new Birth, why, because it is no Coun|terfeiting:
[none comes to the new Birth but who
comes to the Light, c.]
As to the words in Iohn 1.Insert "W." R. W. Ms. Ann. Hitchcock at Newport
alleadged, that it was not in his Bible [enlightneeth
every man, but lighteth every man, c.] John Stubs
lockt in his greek Testament, and confest it was Pho|tizes
which is not inlightneth but Lighteth.
2. As to the Light, We know there are two
Opinions how Christ lighteth every man, c. First,
as God in the Creation. 2. As God man and Media|tour,

and that the Greeks word Erchomenon doth not
relate to the word [anthropon] the man or every
man that cometh into the world, but [phoce]
Light, and that it must be read in this Sense, viz
that Christ Iesus the true Light cometh into the
world lighteth every man that is in the world free|ly
that will receive him: Even as many (whom|soever)
look up to him, (as Iohn 3.) the stung Israel|ites
to the brazen Serpent: and that Christ Iesus is
the Light of the world,The World All Men And Every Man John 8. and 12. to as many
as receive him according to 1 Iohn 12. and that the
meer phrase imports no more then a Light held
forth to all in the world, as the Sun in the Heavens,
and Christs Followers, Math. 5. are called by Christ
Iesus the Light of the World. Thus the word all
and every man (as I hinted before) is used not abso|lutely,
but Comparatively, and is figuratively taken
in many places, and four"3 times." R. W. Ms. Ann. time in that one ver. 1
Col. 28. viz. warning every man and teaching every
man in all wisdome that we may present every man per|fect
in Christ Iesus, which literally cannot be true.
Now G. Fox runs into his Burrough of the many
significations of the word Light,Christ as Mediator enlightens none but the Elect. and the word all,
and the word inlightneth, willingly ignorant that
Christ Iesus as Mediator of the new Covenant inlight|ens
none but those whom his Father gives him:
unto whom he gives Repentance, to whom he opens
the door of Faith, and gives them to believe and
suffer, c.
So that G. Fox Confounds the Elect and the
World together and brings in a Counterfeit new

Birth, a Counterfeit Christ, and at last a Counter|feit
Salvation.
7] 5. Instance: G. Fox pag. 20. brings in Henock
Howet,Henoch Howet. saying, [It is a fancy to say the Covenant of
God is to all men in the world, and the grace of God
hath appeared to all men, c. He Answ. [contrary
to the Apostle, who saith, the grace of God which
brings Salvation hath appeared to all men:  contrary
to the Prophet, who saith, I will give him for a Light
unto the Gentiles, a Light to the people, Salvation to
the ends of the Earth, and a new Covenant to the house
of Israel and Iudah, and they that do not believe
this are Condemned:]
I Reply in these Considerations presented to the
Conscientious:
1. All mankind being fallen from God: He gra|ciously
gave the Word or call to Abraham, and made
Promises both to his Natural and Spiritual Seed,Jews  Gentiles
hence came the distinction of Jews, (or the Child|ren
of Abraham) and the Gentiles [as we English it.]
2. It pleased God to make two Convenants or Bar|gains
with mankind.The two great Bar|gains of God with mankind. 1. that of Justice and due
debt, to any man that yielded obedience in all
things, c. Rewards according too, yea, above de|sert.
This Bargain was made with our first Parents:
and with all mankind to this day, yea, even with
the most savage and barbarous. The second is of
mercy and pity, c. The Labans of the world
change Covenants and Bargains ten times, and still
for the worse, c. but the Father of mercies pity|ing
Mans Misery and Inability offers a New, and
Infinitely easier and sweeter Bargain upon the Terms
of only Mercy and free grace and pity.

3. It is one thing for God to offer this Covenant
or Bargain, [wherever the sound of this Gospel or
glad News comes] and another thing to embrace
and receive it as all the Elect of God do, and
another thing to work freely and give freely the
Means and Power to fulfil this Covenant: as God
doth by the Merits of his Sn, and his own power|ful
working of Repentance and belief in the hearts
of all his Chosen.
4. It is Common with the holy Spirit to speak
Figuratively in the holy Scripture.Scripture language To call the Sign
the thing signified, and the Instrument or Means, the
work done. Thus the Lamb is the Passover, the
Bread is Christs body, the Cup is his Blood: God and
Christ is called the Hope of his people, and Christ Ie|sus
the Mediator of the Covenant, called the Covenant
it self. The King pardons Rebels for his Sons sake,
his Son may in a Sense be said [8] [though not liter|ally]
to be the pardon it self: A man drives a Bargain
between two Chapmen that are absent and distant
drives on a marriage between a Man and a Woman
absent each from other, and may in a Figurative Sense
be called the Bargain or Covenant, and yet not literally
and properly as the poor Quakers would their Christ
to be.
5 The grace and mercy of God,God of|fers the Gospel divers wayes the Gospel or
glad News is many wayes offered: some are invited
gently to come to the heavenly Wedding and Sup|per:
other Messengers (more vehement) even force
persons in, and the Kingdome of Heaven is taken
by force; many seek to enter, many run; It is not
in him that willeth, nor runneth but in God that shew|eth

mercy, and the rest he justly hardeneth that
God may be All in All.
For as God walketh in the midst of his (most
wonderful) Creation,Two Feet and 2 Fin|gers of God with his two feet of Mercy
and Justice; so he hath his two fingers; and with
one he wrote the Covenant of Justice in the Tables
of Stone, and with th fingers of his Mercy and
Grace he freely writes his Mind and Will in the
Tables of Flesh and Hearts of his Chosen: Many
offers of Bargains and Marriages are made which
never are embraced c. but in the new-Covenant
God gives a new heart to his Chosen, and gives not,
and is not the Covenant to any but his Chosen all
the World over, even to the ends of the Earth.
6. For is it not a monstrous Dream of the Qua|kers,
to say, that God and Christ, Spirit and Cove|nant
is in all Mankinde, and that in a Gospel sence?
tis true as I said, if G. Fox mean that the Knowl|edge
of God in a sence is offered to each mans
Conscience in the World, though more expresly
and gloriously where he sends his Messengers, Wis|domes
Virgins, c. G. Fox beats the Fire,"Air," not "Fire." R. W. Ms. Ann. I oppose
him not, but to say the Covenant or Bargain  the
Mediatour of the new Bargain, and the Applyer
of it the Holy Spirit, is in every of Mankinde, and
if they will turn to it,  and yet persons know
no such thing, nor never heard of it, and none
ever had it so as to be saved by it but these Foxians;
is as wise as for a Man to have Fits of the Stone
or Gout,The Qua|kers mon|strous Marriages or a Woman have Pangs of Child|bearing,
and yet neither of them know any such

matter, no nor how she had any such Marriage
Covenant or Husband nor ever any Word or
Thought of it.
7. The Bottome is this, G. Fox cares not for the
Iews nor [9] Gentiles,G. Fox and the Quakers pretences of Soul kindness are Soul cruelties no more then the Fox cares
for Lambs and Chickins but to make a Prey of them,
he pretends Love to all Man-kinde and tells them
they have Christ and the New Covenant and the
Spirit within them; yea, he tells them, he means
not the Covenant of works, but the Covenant of
Grace, he means that Christ that dyed at Ierusalem,
but when it comes too, they mean no other Christ
but a Spirit (as Humphrey Norton more plainly then
Fox confesseth) and this Spirit will be found to be
an Evil Spirit by Gods most wonderful, wise and
righteous hand (as one saith) upon them.
A 7th Instance.Pag. 24. Joseph Kellet G. Fox brings in pag. 24. Ioseph
Kellet, c. saying, [The Scriptures are the means of
Faith,] He Answers, and have thrown out Christ
the Authour of it, and God the Giver, and the
Scripture is but a Declaration of the Saints Faith:
and men had Faith before the Scripture was, as In|stance
Abraham and Enoch.
I Reply, G. Fox Answers three things;
First, That his Opposites throw out God, if
they make the Scripture the means of Faith.
Secondly, He slights the Scripture with a But,
it is but a Declaration of the Saints Faith.
Thirdly, He slights the Novelty of it, saying,
There was Faith before there was Scripture.
I reply, I have had many Occasions to speak of
the Scriptures already, I shall therefore briefly say,

it is wonderful what an aking Tooth against the
Holy Writings of God: The old Serpent and all
the Wolves and Foxes of this World have had, who
hath more or less damned and cursed it, and longed
to have it out of the World.
The Iews, the Turks, the Papists, the Common
Protestants, the Quakers, c make use of it for
their ends; but none can rightly use it, but as a
blessed Candle, Lanthorn or Torch sent down from
Heaven into this dark Dungeon of the World, to
guid us out unto the Saving Knowledge of God,
and Eternal Bleedness with him.
For how doth this follow,God is glorious in the means ap|pointeth. that if God hath ap|pointed
the Holy Writings as means that God and
Christ are thrown out; can there not be an Har|mony
between the first and all subordinate Causes?
Did Moses throw out God because he took the Rod
in his hand, when he wrought all those Wonders?
Did Solomon [10] throw out God because he used
(as Moses about the Tabernacle) so many means in
rearing that Wondrous and Glorious Temple?The Qua|kers sim|ple and wild bold|ness with the eterna power  Godhead Or
did Samson throw out God when he made use of
the Jaw-bone of an Asse, c. Or Christ Iesus
throw out his Father, when he made use of Clay
and Spittle? O what a throwing Spirit is this wild
Fox, and his wild Foxians of; who toss and throw
the Eternal, Immortal and Invisible God, and his
only begotten Son in their wild Fancies, as if they
were the Wool and Feathers of Lambs and Chick|ens
which these Foxians have devoured.
Secondly, How is it that G. Fox here saith, That
the Scripture is but a Declaration of the Saints Faith?

For, is it not a Writing or Record of Heaven:
1. Of the Being and Names of the Eternal
Power and Godhead.
2. Of his Glorious and Incomprehensible Works,The won|derful Revela|tions of  in the Script.
Creating and Forming the Heavens and all that is
in them; the Earth, and all that is therein, the
Sea, and all that is therein out of nothing; which
Mystery the Quakers have only from the Scripture.
3 Of the special and more particular framing of
Men and Women above all his visible Creatures:
4. Of the Fall of Mankinde from their glorious
and first Making and Creation, which some talk
idly to be every day.
5. Of the gracious Promise of the Father of
Mercies, of a Redeemer and Restorer of undone
mankinde.
1. By his Threatning to the Devil, and promise
to the Woman of a Saviour, to be born in time of
a Woman.
2 By Erecting such a state of Israel (prevailers
with God) with all their Typical Lands, Governours,
Worships, Wars, Captivities, Deliverances, c.
3. Fulfilling of that Promise in the Wonderful
Birth, Life Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Burial, Res|urrection
and Assention of the Son of God, the
Man Christ Jesus, c.
4. The Estate of the Believers in him after his
Assention, called the Primitive Church.
6 Of the great change since his coming, in the
rising of his many Enemies, or Antichrists especi|ally,
of one with seven heads and ten Horns, and
of another with two horns, c.

7 Of the Protestant rising and witnessing against
these Devilish Heads and Horns of which the Reve|lations
speak, and of [11] the burning up of the
Whore and of all Christs Enemies and Antichrists.
8. Of the never-ending Joyes of the Righteous
after this life, and the everlasting Worm and Fire
of the ungodly, which shall never dye nor be
quenched until the Eternal Power and Godhead
(revealed in the Holy Scriptures) come to a Period
and Dissolution.
It may be G. Fox will say, we Quakers grant all
this?
I Answer, I question whether you speak bona fide,
and in Truth without I suitical or Foxian Equivo|cations.
For 1.Wonder|ful Guids What means this But [The Scripture is
But a Declaration of the Saints Faith] O blinde
Guids that undertake (as in Lincolnshire, c.) to
guide men through the Washes upon Life and
Death, where K. Iohn of Englands Treasure and
Supply perished; to guid Souls through Hells Eter|nal
Washes! what is your But, but the Iews, and
Papists, and Quakers cry Crucifie him, Hang up
Christ Jesus, burn up the Scriptures, and all Bibles,
Old and New-Tements, c?
2. What is this Saints Faith? You acknowledge
none but the Faith of the wild Souls called Qua|kers
or Foxians! we poor Iews, and Papists, and
Protestants, though we own the Scriptures, some a
part, and the rest all, yet we are all but Infidels,
Devils, c.
3. What is this Faith,Wonder|ful faith of the Qua|kers this Saints Faith, this Foxes

and the Quakers Faith? is it any thing else but (as
before I have said) but a meer Babel or Confusion of
God and Faith, Christ and Faith, Spirit and Faith,
Light and Faith, Iustification and Faith, Sanctification
and Faith, Salvation and Faith, c. and this in every
one of Mankinde in the World, if they will be|lieve
it, c.
The third Branch of G. Fox his Answer is, [Men
had Faith before the Scriptures were.]
I Answer, Neither Abraham nor ever any Man
had Faith before it pleased the Eternal and Invisible
Deity to disclose himself by Word,Gods seve|ral wayes of reveal|ing him|self or Sight, or
Dream, or Motion, or Writing, as Heb. 1. at seve|ral
times and wayes it pleased him to speak, and last
of all by the best and clearest of all, his only Be|gotten
Christ Jesus.
2. When it hath pleased the incomprehensible
Majesty to Command his Appearances by Words,
Visions,The mad fancies of the Qua|kers as to the Holy Scriptures Dreams, c. [12] to be written to stand
upon File and Record, (for all Generations) shall we
be such Fools and Franticks as to say it was his
Word when God spake it to, and in his Prophets:
but now it is written, it is but pen, ink and paper, it
is but a dead Letter, it is not Gods word, God hath
but One Word, Christ. The Scripture is his Words,
c. Oh the audacious brockishness of the foul Spirit
in these wild Foxians: They dare not (though what
dares not their hellish Spirit against the K. of Hea|ven
yet) they dare not (they do not deny but predi|cate)
that the Kings Letters from Breda are the
Kings Word,The word of a King and the word of God that the Kings Speeches and Declara|tions
are his royal Word: shall a Bargain, a Covenant,

a marriage, a Last Will, be our mind, our will, our
Word, when it is spoken! But when it is written,
fairly drawn, and engrossed, subscribed and sealed
unto before many Witnesses attesting, then it is not
our word, mind, or will, but words, c, The bot|tom
and Truth is: The Spirit by which the Qua|kers
are acted would be glad that there were not
such a person called the Word of God, nor such a
writing declaring so sweetly, so plainly, so fully, and
so heavenly of him:
8. Instance:Pag. 25. Joseph Kellet c. In the 25. pag. G. Fox brings in
the same Author, saying, [that the Power which
justles out the Form is an Error:] He Answ. which
was the Apostles work to bring of the Form into
the Power, the substance Christ which was not an
Error, but you bring in the Error, keep people in
the Form out of the Power, and not in the Apos|tles
work:]
I Reply: G. Fox is in his Burrough of the vari|ous
Sense of the word Form:The word Form de|bated It hath respect to
Nature, to Art, to Civil, Natural, and Divine mat|ters:
Shall I now (like a Fool and a mad man)
Cry down all Natural, Civil and Divine Beings?
Are not all the internal and external Forms, shapes,
or Beings of the Creatures in Heaven, Earth, and
Sea, of Angels, Sun, Moon, c. Men, Birds, Beasts,
Fishes,, admirably glorious and stupendious? G. Fox
runs to the Picture, or Forms of these Forms, and
saith childishly, that the Form or picture without
the Life is nothing: who knows not that, that as to
Life it is good as nothing.
1. But to come to worship, was there not a Form,

or manner of Circumsion, the Passover, the Taber|nacle,
the Temple, c.
2. Did ever the Servants of God when they in|veighed
against the Customariness, the Carelessness,
the pictures, and the meer [13] Formality of the
Worshippers (Jews or Christians) inveigh against
the worship it self, and the Appointments of God
and of his Son Christ Jesus.
3. Did the Servants of God ever labour to bring
and hale off Gods people from the worship it self,Gods Or|diances and Institu|tions but
only from the dead and meerly formal using of them,
until the time appointed by God himself for their
withdrawings, disappearing and abrogation. What
a shameless falshood is it that any of Gods Messen|gers
brought Gods people off from those heavenly
Fabricks which God erected by their Ministry or
Service all the World over?
4. May not Gods Messengers now Cry out against
the apish Imitations  Formalities of the Papists (so
horribly and bloodily) abusing Prayer, preaching,
Baptisme, the Lords Supper, Excommunication, c.
but (like the Assyrians or Babilonians, Psal. 74. All
these Christian Appointments must be broken and
tumbled down with Axes and Hammers. c.
5. This is Treason and Rebellion in any Athe|ists
or whomsoever,The Qua|kers gross Hypocri|sie but more abominable Hipo|critical
in these Pharisaical Foxians, who Cry out
against the apish Imitators, and yet themselves prac|tice,
preaching, praying, Congregations, or Churches,
singings, Conventings, and (implicite though real) Ad|dings
to Castings out, c Full well (as the Lord

Iesus speaks) abrogating the word and Appoint|ments
of God, that they may set up and establish
their own Traditions, c.
6. Tis true, the Protestants have made separation
from the Church of Rome, as whorish and Bloody:
in order to the Return to the first Primitive purity,
from which the whore of Rome hath departed.
7. G. Fox Cries out against all Scripture and
Common Sense, against all Forms, that is, wayes and
manners of Gods Worship: Cries up a Christ with|in,
Scripture within, Church within, Ministers within,
Baptisme and Supper within, yet practice they most
of these [so many as their Idol requires] and will
serve his turn) as outwardly and visibly as any in
the world.
8. I know it is the observation of one of G. Fox
his Opposites [a man of excellent knowledge,A passage of Mr. Baxters weighed piety
 industry, M Baxter] viz. that the Churches of
the Independents, Baptists have been the source
and Spring whence have flown the Generation of
the Quakers. For my self I have observed the
contrary in these parts, [14] and that [although some
rotten Professors, or weak Souls though true] have
been bewitched by those Soul-witches yet generally
[where they have any Liberty] the National Church
fills up their nubers:Whence the Qua|kers Pros|elites do arife. My Reason I gave them
in publick, when W. Edm. Boasted of their Num|bers,
viz. their Religion is so easie, never coming
near the Roots of rotten Nature, but so wonderfully
agreeing with it, and changing one Devil for
another, as I have before instanced, so that I told them
I adored the Infinite Power, wisdome and goodness of

God, that they were not ten thousand fold more, and
I say Millions more, then they are: For, I can de|monstrate
that if G: Fox (for all their hypocritical
prating against Carnal Weapons) get a Sword (as
Mahomet did) most of the Popish, and Protestant
and pagan World, will easily be brought to dance
after him.
9. As to the point of Separation: I pray Mr.
Baxter and others of G. Foxes learned and godly
opposites who are yet (in their Judgement and
Conscience perswaded to the National Worships]
to hear me patiently four words.
1. I pray them to remember what the word
Nazarite is in English. The word Nazareth and the
word [Iesus of Nazareth] and in plain English.Add "y^e saviour of y^e separate."R. W. Ms. Ann.
2. Was there ever Child of God in this world
but he was a Nazarate, separate from worldly per|sons,
worldly practice and worldly worships, as he
comes to see them, c. and endureth not that the evil
one should touch him?
3. Is not Gods name Iealous in this end of the
World, not the west-world, as well as since he first
proclaimed it in the East.
4. Hath not his Jealousie raged against the Iew|ish
whoremongers,Considera|tion touch|ing sepa|rate Churches who defiled his first Bed, and will
he wink at the Christian Adulterers and Adulteresses
either in Worship or Conversation?
5. With what good Conscience can I (a national
Protestant) separate from my Father the Pope and
my mother the Church of Rome, and my Brethren
and Sisters the Papists, and yet it must not be

Christian for other Souls to see further degrees of
that Separation necessary, and I must bring up the
foot of every mans Light, and Sight, and Conscience
to my Laste.
6. This is the main ground of my Controversy
with the proud Quakers, they stir up in their Illu|minations
in themselves, and [15] Condemnations
against others,The Qua|kers Con|verts but they magnify (with the Papists
and Arminians) Cursed, rotten Nature: their Con|verts
and Proselites have but a painted, formal Re|pentance,
Faith, c. Only if they can come to
their Church, c. and Thou and thee, and disres|pct
all Superiours then are they high Saints, can|not
Sin, c.
7. This (as before I hinted) was the heavenly
Principle of those many precious and gallant Wor|thies,N. E. glo|ry the very top bough of it
the Leaders and Corner Stones of these New-England
Colonies, viz. they desired to worship God
in purity according to those perswasions in their
Consciences, which they believed God had lighted
up.
8. They desired such for their Fellow Worshippers
as they (upon a Christian account) could have evi|dence
that to be true and real Worshippers of God
in Spirit and Truth also.
But I forget this is but an Appendix, and there|fore
I return to another Instance of G. Fox his
poor. and lame, and naked Answers, c.
A 9th. Instance, is pag. 32. where G. Fox brings
in Ellis Bradshaw,Ellis Brad|shaw saying, [The Spirit of God doth
not teach to judge before the time] and he adds that
others of them say [The Saints shall not Iudge while

they be upon the Earth.] To which he Answers,
[But the Spirit did teach the Apostle to judge, and his
Time was come; And he tells some that they were of
old ordained for Condemnation, and their Damnation
slumbred not, and they went on to Eternal Judge|ment,
and it is high Time not to judge.]
I Reply, Some of this his Answer, is some of his
wonted Nonsence, or the Printers oversight, c.
But to the point the great Jugler hath taught G.
Fox and his Foxians a trick to outface Death and
Indgement. They now keep the great Sessions and
call all the world to their Bar and Judgement.
Thus did the poor cheated Souls in London lately
Reeves and Mugleton thunder out their eternal Sen|tence
of Damnation upon the Souls and bodies of
their Oppoites,The two pretended last wit|nesses Reves and Muggle|ton  that with such Seriousness, Confi|dence
 Majesty, that I have known sollid Christ|ians
put into a fright by them.
It is true there is a lawful judging not according
to rashness or pride (as the Quakers is) but accord|ing
to righteous Judgement.
It is true,The Jugling of the Qua|kers to make themselves eternal Judgs the spiritual man judgeth and discerneth
all things, that is, looks into the Causes and Natures
of things, Times and persons: But what is this to
the Natural Death of all mankind. [16] Heb. 9?
I know the Foxians would turn this Scripture, and
that golden Chain, Heb. 6. the first Christian Princi|ples
and the Eternal Judgement into Mysteries, and
that they now Judge the Secrets of Men, Rom. 2.
by Pauls Gospel: (therefore by looking on a man
they can discern the inward parts, and what each
person is:) For the Lord is now come saith Enoch

and Iude in ten thousands of his Saints, and now is the
Day appointed in which God judgeth the World by that
man Christ Iesus [which man they are] of which
the word of God hath approved, in that they are
raised from the Dead in Souls and Bodies to keep
the Eternal Iudgement: This Mystery many of their
young Scholars and many that are truely fearing
God amongst them will not believe. But they
spare not to owne their high Court of Iustice [when
they were put to it] by Speech and writing, and
were it not for some obstacles (especially two) this
were a fine Colour for their Courts, like a Com|pany
of drunken Sots that kept a Court in Hart|ford-Shire,A danger|ous coun|terfeit Court. and feigned themselves Judges, and Jus|tices,
and Officers,  had almost brought themselves
all to the Gallows, c. by hanging up one man un|til
he began to look black, and some of them be|gan
to fear their own Necks, and to repent of their
rash madness.
The first Obstacle against this their pretended
high Court of Justice,Two great Bars to the Quakers high Court of eternal Judg. is their own Confession, viz.
Christ Iesus was real a Man as any of us, and so con|tinues,
except they can give an account of what is
become of him, which at Newport they could not do.
The second is, their own Spirit and Practises,
which I have proved to be so far from Iude and
Enochs 10000 Saints, that their Pride and Scornful|ness,
their Rash, Revilings and Railings, their Rash
Cursings and Judgings, their Superstitious and New
Inventions, their Blasphemies and Hypocrisies, their
Inhumanities and Impudencies, such as render them
so far from being the high Saints and Judges of the

World, that they fall under the Judgement of all
sober end modest persons.
The 10. Iustance, is in pag. 38. where he brings
in Tho. Collier, saying, [All that hath been, are, or
shall be Converted since the Gospel Ministration are
Converted by the Apostles words] He Answers:P. 38. T. Collier So
he hath thrown out the Spirit which doth regene|rate,
and Christ the way to the Father, the Word
that Sanctifi- [17] eth, and Christ the power of
God to Salvation: who said that they would not
come to him that they might be converted, so if
they get all the Apostles Words and come not to
Christ they are not Converted, and none are Con|verted
by the Apostles Words, but who comes to
the Life that the Words come from.
I reply, and ask G. Fox what colour of Truth or
Modesty is in his Inference, viz. That if God please
to appoint the Words his first Apostles used, to be still
the means of Conversion to he end of the World, that
then he hath thrown out himself, c.
For 1. Is not this Gods Covenant with Christ
and all Christians, that his Word and Spirit should
be in their Mouhs to all Generations: wo be then
to these wild frantick Inserences which disjoyn and
separate what the most powerful, most wise and
holy hath joyned together.
2. For, may there not be as before many Agents
Imployed by one glorious Efficient:G. Fox his throw|ing God overboard and his own Rea|son and Sense also. as in Moses
building the Tabernacle, Solomon the Temple:
Kings in their Royal Navies and Armies, Fights and
Battels; is Moses here thrown out, Solomon thrown
out, and Kings thrown out c? when Abraham sent

his Servants or Kings their Embassadours to Espouse
Brides to their Sons and Heirs, must Abraham and
all wise Princes be thrown out, c. Doth not
rather this mad Soul throw out Moses and Solomon,
and Abraham, and all Kings and great Efficients or
first Causes, yea, and his own Brains (in a mad,
proud Frolick) all overboard together?
3. For, doth not Paul tell the Corinthians, that
they were Gods Husbandry and Gods Buildings; in|ferring
that under God (not throwing him out) he
was a prime Husbandman, yea, (as himself saith
further) a Master Builder; yea, doth not Paul tell the
same Corinthians,The Har|mony be|tween God and his Mes|sengers. that they were the Messengers,
were co workers or Labourers together with God.
Hence Paul Preaching, the Lord opened the Heart
of Lydia and Philip Preaching, the Lord opened
the heart of the Eunuch, and Panl so speaking,
Joh,"Acts," not "Joh. 14."R. W. Ms. Ann. 14. and Barrabas, that a great Multitude
both of Iews and Greeks believed.
4. It is true that without God and Christ,God doth all, yet his meanes must be used by which he is pleased to work. Pauls
Planting, and Apollos Watering is nothing, who de|nies
this? but therefore shall not Paul Plant and
Apollo Water, though much in vain, as it was with
the Lord Jesus, his own heavenly Preaching and
amazing Miracles.
18] 5. Do these Foxians themselves throw out
God and Christ when (as they say) they use the
Apostles words, to gather Stones, and build up the
Church of God; do they not say as much for their
new fresh Foxian as ever was spoken of the Apos|tles,

or any pretending to succeed them? I could
give many Instances.
6. There have been many Conversions to the
Christian Name in these parts of the World called
Christendome.
These the Papists brag to have effected in all the
four parts of the World,The Pa|pists brag of their Conver|sions. both in the East and West-Indies,
Asia and America, as also in Africa and especi|ally
in Europe, where thei Man of sin chiefly
resideth: these Conversions have been wrought
sometimes in parts and by degrees, and sometimes
of the whole Nations, and this sometimes by the
Sword, sometimes by the Marriages of Princes, all
which are easily effected; because (as in the Sheche|mites
and Samaritains case) whose Peoples, Nations,
Tongues and Multitudes will easily turn to the
Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns; and that
very formidable Beast also for Fear, and Gain, and
Hope, c. will easily suffer the Whore of Rome to
ride him.
7. From these Peoples, Tongues, and Nations,
c. it hath pleased the most Holy and only Wise,The Pro|testant Conver|sions
to gather out a Peaple to Himself by his Heavenly
Witnesses; the Waldenses in France, the Wickcle|vists
in England, the Hussites in Bohemia, the Luther|ans
in Germany, the Calvanists in France c. out of
the bloody Romish Whores Dominions (144000.
Virgin Protestants thirsting after the Blood of
Christ Jesus only for Salvation)
8. The Father of Spirits hath stirred up some
Witnesses in all Protestant Nations, to preach against
a Formal, National or Parochial Conversion, to

witness against the Formality and Prophaness of
the Common Protestants, (all one in Life and some|times
worse then the Papists,) and to bring thou|sands
and ten thousands (even the one hundred, forty
four thousand Virgins) to endeavour after purity of
heart and Life,The Je|uits and Puritans the two great Corrivals purity of Doctrine, purity of wor|ship,
purity of Churches, c. These the Jesuits
call Puritans, and Confess that they only among the
Protestants, (as themselves among the Papists) are
fit to be thought on as to pretence of the Christian
Name and Religion.
9. At the coming of the Lord Jesus there were
two great Com- [19] petitours for preaching,The two great Corrivals in Christs time. First,
the Pharisees who by Laud and Sea sent abroad
their Emissaries to make Converts to the God of
the Jews and their own Traditions, Secondly, The
Apostles or Messengers of Christ Jesus sent abroad
with the glad news of a new Bargain or Covenant
of God with the Sons of men, viz. this second
sort; It pleased the God of Heaven [not to be
thrown out as this Fox frantickly barks] but to go
out wonderfully miraculously, yea, also with the
private labours and preachings of private Christians
scattered by Persecution, as the holy Scripture
recordeth.
10. For the slighting of this inestimable Pearl
of this glad News,The Jes|uits and the Qua|kers the two great Corrivals abroad. or Gospel published by God to
the World by writing, preaching, professing, Suf|fering,
c. It hath pleased his Infinite Justice to
plough"plague," not "plough." R. W. Ms. Ann. the World with Popery, a Religion [a
bastard Christianity,] suited [as the Quakers is] to

rotten nature, and fit to carry the world after them
as Mahomet and the Pope have done.
11. In this day the two greatest wonders in the
world [pretending to be Christs Messengers or
Apostles to the Nations] are the Jesuits and the
Quakers: Their Faces look divers, but they both
carry Firebrands in their Tails to burn up the holy
Scripture, all truly holy Christians, yet"yea," not "yet." R. W. Ms. Ann. all the
world before them. Gods Infinite wisdome hath
suffered them to be like Absolom beautiful,False Apostles figured by Absolom. and
plausible, and fit to play Soul Thieves and steal
away the hearts of thousands and ten thousands
from the true David the Lord Jesus Christ.
Beside, they are so fortified with the Faces of
Men and hair of Women like the Locusts, Rev. 9.
such pretences,The holy Scriptures the great Box both to Jesuits and Qua|kers. such Illuminations and Appear|ances,
such Assurances and Confidences, such feel|ings
of Experiences, that it is Gods Infinite Power
and wisdome, and goodness, to preserve the holy
Scripture a standing Record of what the first Mes|sengers
and first Churches and first Doctrine and
Christians were: or else, the world would fall down
and adore the Images which the Lord hath suffered
the Devil in them to set up.
12. I know the Counsels of the Father of Lights
are very deep, yea the Revelation needs a Revela|tion,Great Conver|sion of Jews and Gentiles yet expected.
the Prophecies and Canticles, and Daniel need
Heavenly Messengers, and the most holy Spirit or
finger of God to untie such knots: Sure it is that
Millions [20] of Jews and Gentiles must yet en|quire
with tears of blood after the Blood of a

Saviour: Sure they shall not awake out of their
pits of Rottenness, without some means  Mes|sengers
sent from Heaven to rouze and wakn them:
Sure their shall be no other words in their Mouths
then what were in the mouths of the first Messen|gers
according to the Prayer of the Lord Jesus on
his Death bed to his Father, through whose Word
all that have believed the report ever since have
believed, Ioh. 17 and with which blessed word the
Spirit of God will be in the mouths of all true
Christians,The true Apostles and Fox and his lying ones Compared Isai. 59. 20. c. Surely the true Mes|sengers
of Jesus will say no other word then what
Moses and the Prophets foretold and wrought, Act.
26. therefore Fox and his Foxians that tells us they
have all by the Spirit and need no Record, are
Thieves and Robbers, whom, Moses, and the Pro|phets,
and Paul, and the Apostles abhor'd to think of.
A 11. Instance,I. Deacon. is in Pag. 40. where G. Fox brings
in I. Deacon, saying [The enjoyment of Immortulity
is not till they have put off the Body.]
He Answers, [Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine,
who saith, Immortality was brought to light through
the Gospel: this was when they were upon the
Earth, and the Word of God was in them which
was Immortal.]
1. I Reply First, G. Fox affirms an Immortality
(that is a not dying of the Soul and Body) As for
the Soul,The Qua|kers dream about not dying or Immor|tality. all true Protestants affirm that the Soul
once raised up to Spiritual Life never dyes, no
more than Christ Jesus, Rom. 6. as for the Body
Papists and Protestants, and the Quakers and all the
World grants, that all Flesh is as grass, c. and the

Sentence of Death, by sickness, Age or Casualty is
impartially executed upon the Foxians as well as
other Cttel: As to the Soul, who of sober Pa|pists
or Protestants questions the Immortality of it:
and of the Body also, in joy or Sorrow to Eternity.
As for the Body the Quakers say when the Soul
is gone into God, yea, the Soul of Iudas as well as
the Soul of Peter as some of them say, and all of
them by Argument will be forced to say, the Body
returns to Earth and Rottenness, never more to be
raised, and no more then Bodies of the Beasts,
Birds and Fishes, (though we know who holds the
Bodies of Beasts, Birds and Fishes shall live again
as the Soul mortalists do) what is it then [21] that
G. Fox sputters out for Immortality, or a not dying
in this Life? If he speak of the Soul who denies
it? If of the Body he speaks a Beastly Contradic|tion
to the doleful Sense of all mankind, and their
own also, who die and rot as well as them.
2. It is true, 1 Tim. 6. God only hath Immortality
dwelling in the Light which no man can approach unto,
what ever these Foxians bruitishly fancy of no dis|tinction
between God and themselves their Light
and his.The Doc|trine of Immortal|ity.
It is true, yet also that Iesus Christ, 2 Tim
1. hath brought Life and Immortality to Light
through the Gospel. But what is this but the joyful
Condition of the Souls  Bodies of the godly?
their Souls and Bodies raised up with Jesus to a
Spiritual holy Life in this World, their Souls going
to Jesus, and their Bodies sleeping in Iesus, and the
rising of their Bodies and uniting to their Spirits
in a Life Eternal?

3. As to this Immortality of G. Fox: all that can
be known of his mind is old H. Nichols and the Ni|colaitans
mad fictions and fancies of their becoming
God and Christ.A Chari|table hope of some Quakers. I hope charitably of many of
them, that run in their Simplicity, Ignorance and
weakness with a true Love to the true Lord Jesus
as some did with AbsalomPut "as some did with Absolom," in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann. who truly loved David
but as for Absolom himself the Polititians, the sub|tle
Plotters, and Ahitophels who love not the true
Lord Jesus in sincerity, I fear instead of their fan|cied
Immortality before the Grave they will meet
with a dreadful Mortality, or death of Soul and
Body to Eternity.
A 12. Instance is, Pag. 47. where he brings in
Ioseph Miller,Joseph Miller, saying, [The wise heathen Philosophers
had a greater Measure of Light in them (which is
the first Adam) then I can think any man hath now]
G. Fox Answ. which shews, that he knows nothing
of Christ the second Adam, the quickning Spirit. He
knows no New Creature, for who are in Christ are
new Creatures, nor none of Christ the Covenant of
God, of Light, of Life, of Peace, who was glorified
with the Father before the World began, which is be|yond
the first Adam, and hath shut himself forth,
not to be as high as his heathen Philosophers.
And many witness Christ in them in this Age, as
in the dayes of the Apostles, which is above the
heathen Philosophers.]
I Reply,The An|cient Phi|losophers Consid|ered. 1. I know it pleased God (in all Ages)
to stir up the Spirits of some Men (as the Philoso|phers
amongst the Greeks [22] Socrates, Plato,

Aristotle) to improve that excellent Light of Rea|son
which he had given them as Men, and in so
great a measure above other men.
2. This wily Fox he runs to his hole and Con|founds
this Common Light of Reason, with Christ
and God himself, who also are called Light by Simi|lies
from the Creature.
3. The Question then follows: If this Light of
Knowledge were Christ, as God, and King, and
Mediatour: why is it that none of these excellent
Men knew nothing of God, nor Christ, nor Spirit,
(Name nor Thing) but only of the first Creation:The madness of George Fox his Fancy about them.
Can such a Court be kept, a Palace furnished, and
such Royal and heavenly Guests be entertaind, and
no Body know any thing of it, nor themselves neither;
when Christ Jesus came into Ierusalem (though but
in a poor Contemptible way) all Iorusalem was moved
at his coming: and shall this most glorious King (now
Infininitely more glorious) make his Ingress into the
Souls of such wise and Excellent Men, and neither
they, nor others hear of it until just now, (twenty
years since) Some cheated Souls dream of it.
4. The utmost of Reason in these Excellent
Men, it is known I say; that the Activity of the
highest Reason in this World falls short in two
grand particulars.The fail|ing of the highest Reason in this world in many, especially in two particulars
1. As to the Creatures: For some of them must
needs fall short, when Plato granted a Creation,
and a kind of Father, Son and Holy Spirit in the
Creation of it, Aristotle pretends to see further then
his Mr. Plato and all his Arguments. and asserts the
World to have no Beginning, nor Ending, c.

Some of them maintaind the Soul of man to be
procreated by the Parents: others (as the Quakers)
that it was part of the Divine Essence, others that
it is created and infused by God, c. Some that the
Center of the World is the Terrestrial Globe,The drep knowledge of some. and that
the Sun and heavenly Bodies move about it, others,
that the Ceuter of the world is the Sun, and that
this Terrestrial Globe moves about the Sun, and many
other such, natural Mysteries.
2. However that Paul tells us Rom, 1. That by
the Creation some come to know there is an Eter|nal
Power and Godhead, yet 1 Cor. 1. he tells us that
the World by wisdome knew not God, which must be
expounded (or else swallow a Contradiction as the
Quakers guise is) viz. that by the highth of their
wisdome [23] they could not see God so as to make
him alone their Summum bonum and Blessedness,The greater depth of the Crea|tor him|self, the Trinity, the Fall, Redemp|tion Incar|nation, Resurrec|tion, c. so as
to glorify him as God: So, as the holy Scriptures
and the most holy Son of God from his Bosome
hath revealed him, so that in the highth of Rea|sons
Reasonings the Spirit of God concludes, that
the natural man can not reach or perceive the things
of God, (and yet this foolish Man makes every mans
heart in the World the Court of Heaven) a thing
which every Kingdom and all men may abhor to
think of, but men are vain in all their Reasonings,
and their foolish heart is darkned, yea, their wisdome
is Enmity, hating God himself, as the Scripture con|cludes,
c.
It is true: We re read of Noah Ark, of Moses
his Tabernacle, Solomon his Temple, and we see
many glorious Fabricks and Works of the Sons of

men in his world,The Ex|cellent Gifts of Nature reach not heavenly and Spi|ritual things Spi|ritually. which argue excellent Gifts of
God to them, both of wisdome, Prudence, Fortitude,
Patience, Temperance, c. but do they all amount
in the Total to more then Natural parts, good Edu|cation,
and Industrious diligence can reach too? What
are all these to the enlightning of my Soul, with
my natural undone and damned Condition? to a
sight of Sin as Sin? to a sight of my utter Inability
to pay (or all the whole Creation for me) one far|thing
to Gods Justice, or to work my desire to have
any thing to do with him? What are these to the
changing of, and a total turning of my whole Soul
unto God? to an humble sight of my Infinite ne|cessity
of the alone Sufficiency and Excellency of
the Lord Jesus the great and only Mediatour, and
of my becoming one with him in Loves Eternal?
Beside, what a single"Simple" not "single." R. W. Ms. Ann. Consequence doth this
high Illuminiated Doctor give to his Opposite, viz.
that because I magnify the Gifts of God to many
(yea, thousands of Excellent Men whom I, nor G.
Fox are worthy to hold the Candle to) therefore I
shut my self out from Christ and those wise men
too: It may be his Opposite had somewhat more
in his Assertion, but this is all this high wise man
in his own eyes prints and Answers to:
Who knows not how full the World is of admira|ble
Men and Women that are not Christians? And
yet what a base esteem hath this proud Spirit of
all men, yea of all Christians too that dance not
after his foolish pipe, c.
A 13th. Instance, I mention (though Instances

are as Leprosie spread over his whole Book) is in
pag. 48. where he brings in the [24] same Ioseph
Miller saying,Joseph Miller [The Prophets are more certain then any
other Revelation.] He Answers, [was not the Son of
God revealed, the end of the Prophets? Did not God re|veal
him which came in the Volume of the Book to
do the will of God? And so the Prophets, and the
Law, and Types, and shadows, which they that had the
Law, and Types, and shadows, knew not the Son of
God that was revealed, that was their End spoken of
in the Prophets, end Epistles, who is now revealed.
I Reply, G. Fox (to pass by his un-English Non|sence
obvious to any that understand publick wri|tings)
I say G. Fox either ignorantly or willingly
knows not that the Question is not here,The Pro|phets wit|ness of Christ how stronger then the Apostles, their own Speeches: were whether
Christ be the End of the Law and the Prophets, in
a true sense: or whether Christ was not more re|vealed
at his coming in the Flesh, then before in
the Prophecies, c. But, whether the written
word of the Prophets, of which Peter speaks and I
have spoke before be not a more sure word of Com|mand
and Comfort to us then any now to be ex|pected,
yea, then that Revelation which we have
upon that holy Testimony of Peter and Iohn them|selves?
As it is with an Anchor strong enough to ride a
Ship in most weathers, yet some are as the Seamen
spake second and third Bowers,Bebaiote|ron Iogon a more sure Word. and one the best and
Sheet Anchor: and as it is in Witnesses some speak
the Truth and Substance of the matter: and yet
others speak more plainly and fully, c. So
speaks Gods Spirit in Peter of the Infinite Fulness

of the Prophecies of Scriptures, or the written
foretellings and utterings concerning Jesus Christ.The Word of God Con|sidered.
Thus the God of Heaven most holy and only
wise stoops to our weakness, and calls his mind
his word, his works his word, his Providences of
mercy or Judgement, his Word, the Lord Jesus his
only begotten his word, his writings his Word; and
this in a way of Condescention to our Capacity,
seeing that all the World over Kings and Rulers,
Fathers, Masters of Families, of Ships, c. give the
word, that is the manifestation of their mind and
will,The Srip|ture or written Testimo|nie.
and this as the Spring in Clocks and watches
turn about all other wheels and motions. Hence
it is, that if ancient Records and Deeds with Hands
and Seals be produced at the Bar of Trial, all
mouths are stopt at such Evidences. Thus the
Word of God in the mouths of the Prophets writ|ten
for after Generations,Much more their feigned Spirit of Prophecy the Qua|kers prate of is (Comparatively) beyond
the Report of Peter [25] and Iohn themselves is in
all Religions.Erase "is in all Religions." R. W. Ms. Ann. The Iews have their Talmud, the
Turks their Alcheron, the Pope his Decretans, and
the Protestants the Written Word, or Scriptures.
When therefore a Pardon is written and Sealed
with the Board Seal of a King or State, what a
fancy is it for a condemned Wretch to hearken first
to a Pardon revealed within:The Qua|kers San|dy Quick|sauds
to a voice within, to
a King within, to a Writing within, a Seal within,
and so slighting the true pardon in the Kings way
to be conveyed from without to the Mind and Spi|rit
within, to lose his Pardon and Deliverance as
thousands of such poor cheated Souls must do.

A 14 Instance G Fox brings in Pag. 49. his Op|posite
Ralph Hall saying [It is against the Light of
Nature for Women to Preach:P. 47. Preaching of Wo|men Ralph Hall c.
G. Fox Answers Contrary to the Apostles Doc|trine
and the mind of God and the Prophets, who
said, God would pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh,
and his Sons and Daughters should Prophesie: So that
he is a limiter of the Holy one, a quencher of the
Spirit, and in the Darkness, and this is above the
Light of Nature.
I Reply, First, What is the Light of Nature, but
the Light in which every man comes into the
World with (as the Foxians speak) a Light differing
from that Light which Beasts,The light of Nature discussed wilde and tame, and
Birds, and Fishes have: AndInsert "there is."R. W. Ms. Ann. a Second Light dif|fering
from what isErase "Super." R. W. Ms. Ann. Supernatural, as that Light re|vealed
from Heaven in the Holy Scriptures, and
infused into the Souls of Men by the Holy Spirit
or Power of God.
2. What is the Light of Nature in Man, but
that Order which the most Glorious Former of all
things hath set (like Wheeles in Clocks or Watches)
a going in all his Creatures?
Some have observed that in the Insensible Crea|tures
to which the most High hath only giving
Beings,Male and Female that there may be observed a Male and
Female amongst them.
This is more observable in Vegetables or grow|ing
Creatures, as in Plants, Trees, Herbs, Flow|ers,
c.

More yet in Sensitives, as Birds, Beasts, Fishes.
Most of all in Rationals: Men and Women,
whom the most High hath so wonderfully dis|tinguished.
It is true, that in Religious and Christian Mat|ters,
there is no [26] respect of persons with God,
as of Man before the Woman: otherwise than to
order Natural and Civil.
The Woman is Predestinated, is Called,Men and Women compared is Justi|fied,
is Glorified, and wears that Golden Chain as
well as the Wisest and Strongest of Mankinde.
And it is true, the Wisdome of God perfers some
Women before thousands of Men, in their being
born of Nobles, in excellent parts (as is observable
in the Lady Iane, and Queen Elizabeth, c.) in some
special favour,The kind|ness of God to women as Christ Jesus first appearing to
Mary Magdalen and other Women, and sending
them to carry the first Tydings or Gospel of his
Resurrection to his Apostles: yea, in effusions or
powrings forth of an extraordinary measure of his
Spirit before Christs coming, as on Miriam, Debo|rah,
Anna, Huldah, c. and at his coming (accord|ing
to Ioels Prophesie) on his Daughters as well as
his Sons (so that as my opposites alledged to me in
publick: Philip the Evangelist had four Daughters
thus extraordinarily endwed) yet this favour of
God toward Women destroys not the order which
the God of Order or Nature hath set in those
Bounds, and Limits, and Distinctions between the
Male and Female, the Man and Woman: though
the Holy Scripture were silent, yet Reason and Ex|perience
tell us, that the Woman is the weaker

Vessel,Womens unfitness for manly employ|ments that she is more fitted to keep and order the
House and Children, c. that the Lord hath given
a covering of longer Hair to Women as a sign or
teacher of covering Modesty and Bashfulness, Si|lence
and Retiredness: and therefore not so fitted
for Manly Actions and Employments.
Therefore because of Ioels Prophesie, or because
we must not limit or quench the Spirit, as G. Fox
saith, there is no ground in Gods ordinary course
of Nature to permit Women to pretend to be
Apostles or Messengers to the Nation, or Preach|ers
and Teachers in the Publick Assemblies.
1. Because we finde no such Commission given
by Christ Jesus or any such Practice amongst the
first Believers.
2. The Lord hath set (as Seamen speak) a pre|venter
to such an unnatural boldness by express
Prohibitions,And for being Preachers and pos|tles especi|ally. with the Reasons and Grounds to the
Corinthians and to Timothy: and to answer those
Scriptures with a flam, viz. that Eve the Trans|gressor,
and Women that be Tatlers are forbidden,
and the Woman Iezebel, [27] c. is all one to tell
us, that Paul was not a Man, nor Timothy a Man,
nor the Teachers Men, nor Corinth a City, but all
signifie Metaphorical and Mystical Business.
3. Why may not Women much more be Lord
Majors and Bailiffs, and Sherriffs, and Iustices, and
Constables, Captains, Colonels, Generals and Command|ers
by Sea and Land.Change the period to "?."R. W. Ms. Ann.
4. That Reason the Spirit gives to the Corinthi|ans,
for the vailing of Women in publick Assem|blies,

makes much more for their vailing and silence
in matters of Prophesying, Preaching and Praying,
viz. Because of the Angels: I know not any fair
and sober Exposition of this Scripture (except as
the blind Quakers who swallow down a fly  Cam|el
too) but that of the Heavenly Angels and Spirits
attending on and guarding the Assemblies of true
Christians, and rejoycing in the comliness, order
and beauty of their publick Administrations.
Some few years since there came to my House
two Maries, it is said they came from London: they
bid me Repent and Hearken to the Light within
me,A memo|rable and doleful story I prayd them o sit down, that we might qui|etly
reason together, they would not; then stand|ing,
I askt them the ground of their such Travel
and Employment, they alledged Ioels Prophesie; I
answered, that was fulfilled, that was not every dayes
work; besides their business was not Prophetical
but Apostolical, c. they regarded not my Answers
nor Admonitions, but powred the Curses and Judge|ments
of God against me, and hurried away; to
Barbadoes they went, and (being War time, the
Ship bound for England) they were set upon by
the Dutch, and though these Women animated the
Seamen to fight, and Prophesied that not an hair of
their head should perish, yet they two were both slain,
as afterward came certain Tydings of the whole
matter.
I own that it may please the Father of Spirits in
cases extraordinary,What teaching the Lord requires of Women he may please to alter his com|mon
course of Naue (as in Abrahams case with
Isaak) but we must not tempt God; but if God

hath powred forth the gifts of Knowledge and Ut|terance
upon some Women more then other, they
have three large fields to walk in mentioned by the
Holy Scripture, viz. of their instructing their Chil|dren,
c. 2. As occasion justly calls them from
home, of instructing other women especially the
younger. 3. Of confessing boldly the Name and
Truth of Christ Jesus, [28] when he suffers Ty|rants
to bring Persecution on them, c.
A 15th. Instance is in pag. 56. where George Fox
brings in Thomas Higinson,Tho. Hig|ginson
saying, [The sight of the
Godhead without Faith in Christ is the Foundation of
all false worships.]
He Answers, Can any see the Godhead? have a
siht of the Godhead and ot see Christ, and have
Faith in Christ? And who hath Faith in Christ,
do they not see the Fulness of the Godhead dwels in
him, Christ? And was not their mind turneh from
that of God in them (which declared the Invisible
things of him from the Creation of his Eternal Power
and Godhead) which the Apostle found fault withal
Let all Examine and Judge, and read the Scrip|ture,
Rom. 1. and try.]
I Reply, In former years I have Conversed
with all the Indians of this New-England by Land
and Seas,The knowledge of God by nature and I have read the 1. of the Romans
often, and now once again at G: Fox his motion,
and I find that First, there is generally in all man|kind
in the World a Conviction of an Invisible,
Omnipotent, and Eternal Power and Godhead.
2. That this Conviction doth arise from the Crea|tion,
(though some of the wisest of the World as

Aristotle, c. though Confessing a Godhead yet)
hold the world an Eternal Deity it self, and never
to have been created.
3. I find not that ever any man or men (by all
their natural Light or wit,The con|victions of nature which the 4 Quakers so foolish|ly talk of or Christ within,) could
find out how the World or himself, Man or Wo|man
were created: Though Iames Nailour told us
in print, that if never a Letter of Scriptre had
been written, yet their Spirit could tell them all
things.
4. I find all men confess, that the will or Word,
or mind of God is pure, and as they could come to
know, it is to be adored, kept, and observed: and
that it was ever, and is wickedness to Sin against it.
5. All mankind having the Law or without it
are perswaded that some actions are naught, and
against Gods will, as to steal, to Murther, c.
6. None (for all the Light and Spirit in every
one) could ever find out how Sin how Sorrow and
Death came into the World: Nor how such Incli|nations
and Dispositions to Sin came into them|selves, c.
7. I find in all mankind a Conviction that God
is just and [29] powerful, and doth bring plagues
and punishments upon persons, and Nations for
those gross Sins of Adultery, Murther, c.
8. I could never lean (for all that Christ in every
man Fox sings of) that ever any man living,The loss of all men as to God  hraven|ly things or all
the Counsels of men could ever know or learn four
things, but as revealed by God, by extraordinary
wayes, of Dreams, Visions, c. or the ordinary of
his holy Records, and the Doctrine of them opened,

preached, c. 1. How to pacifie Gods Justice? 2.
How to resist the Devils Tyranny: 3. How to wor|ship
God? 4. How to get true Blessedness here, and
in the World to come?
9. Hence (according to Foxes Opposite) all man|kind
have invented so many false Gods,Men natu|rally frame a God as the Devils do but cannot love him. false worships,
c. all the world over, yet out of no more Love to
God then the Lamb bears to a Lyon: but out of
Fear, as the old saying is, primos in Orbe Deos, c.
Fear made the first Gods. Hence the Philistins
sends the God of Israel a present and offering with
Ark or Chest: Hence the Samaritans (with the
Sechemites) for fear of Lyons or hope of gain will
be of any worship or Religion, as most this day in
the world will be, yea, all and every Soul except to
whom (in and from the holy Scriptures) the holy
Spirit reveals that Incomprehensible Mystery of a
Mediatour.
A 16th. Instance of Foxes lame writings, is pag.
56. where he brings in the same Author saying,
[The Iustification and Redemption by obeying the Light
within, is the Mystery of Iniquity]
He Answers, [He that believeth is justified from all
things, and comes not into Condemnation: and he hath
the wietnss in himself: and that lets him see the Re|deemer,
the Saviour, the Light which walking in it he
is cleansed from all Sin, and so no Mystery of Iniquity
For the Mystery of Iniquity is out of the Light. None
sees Iustification and Redemption, but with the Light
within which comes from Christ who hath enlightened
him.]

I Reply, This is subtle, but being examined it
will be a mystery of hellish Iniquity, and lighter
then vanity it self.
For 1. He usually,Babilonian Jugling,  Egyptian canting and here (as before I have
opened) confounds Justification and Light, and
Christ, and Faith, and obedience, (after his Baby|lonish
wont) all in a Juglers box within together:
So that the English of Faith is Christ, Obedience
is Christ, Justification is Christ, Light is Christ,
c. It is true, sometimes it pleased Gods Spirit to
speak figuratively, and to [30] call Christ some|times
our Justification, and sometimes a Curse for
us:Christs Name horribly prophaned Sometimes Sanctification, and sometimes Sin
for us: But it is a mystery or subtle trick of Hell
to call Faith Obedience, and Obedience to the
Light Justification and Redemption, and yet mean
Christ. So that Fox his words may be in plain
English thus rendred, [None sees Christ and Christ but
with the Christ within, which comes from Christ who
hath Christed him.]
The true Sense, (as Mony) Answers all things,
but it is a Mystery of Iniquity to darken any, much
more heavenly matters with Confounding and not
distingushing aright when matters are in Exami|nation.
2. It is another Gospel (or glad News) yet not
another, but is a dream and dead picture of an
Image or Idol to put in our Obedience and work|ing,
though I know they Father this Bastard upon
the most holy God himself, saying, it is his Obedi|ence,
his Righteousness,  his working, in the Room
of the Death and blood shedding, the Sufferings
and merits of the Lord Jesus.

3. It is a Mystery of IniquityThe Old and new Bargain to Love. (subtly and yet
churlishly and selfishly with Laban) to change wa|ges
and the Covenant or Bargain so often: to pre|tend
(with the Papists) great abhorring of the
Iewish worship and Iewish Covenant, the Bargain
of, Do this and live, the Bargain of saving our selves,
c.The great Delusion of Qua|kers as to pardon of Sin and Righteous|ness. and the Bargain of flying out of our selves and
only to Gods mercy in the Mediation of Christ
Jesus: And then again to render our selves to be
so holy, so righteous, so obedient, so loving, so
Chast, so meek, so patient, so Temperate, that in
thought word or deed we Sin not, and this our
Holiness is Christ, and God, and Spirit, and Justi|fication,
c.
I know the writers of the Quakers make this
high Obedience to be the Crown of some high
Saints amongst them as the Papists do, and that
others come not so high, are taken by the sleshly
Spirit, and repent, and Confess, and be more watch|ful
as they say, in a Contradiction of I. Naylor, but
this is Contradiction to their general grant, viz
that every Saint, every one, even the least that is
born again, he can not Sin: and I know also that they
have a foolish Salve or plaister for this sore too,The Qua|kers be|wildred as to Per|fection.
and
Contradict their denying of meanings given to the
Scripture, and come to the meanings of the Pro|testants
saying, they cannot Sin willingly, and so,
and so; And yet again, (in a horrible Mystery of
31] Iniquity) they exclaim against the Protestants
for saying, a Child of God can not fall from true
grace Finally or Totally.
4. Here is a Mystery of hellish Iniquity, in that

they Confess such a man Christ to have been,The Qua|kerr devi|lish Chimistry and
his blood sheddingInsert "according to."R. W. Ms. Ann. the Types and real predictions
and figures of him, a real Death, Resurrection and
Assention, and yet upon the point (by a Devilish
Chymistry) evaporate all these, and leave nothing
but a Christ within, as God and as Man, whose
Name is now Light, and our Obedience to the
motions of this Light within this is Justification,
Righteousness, Salvation, God, Christ, Perfection,
perfect holiness, c.
5. It is a Hellish Mystery of the Devil to Cozen
poor Souls with a Notion of the Difficulty and
height of their Profession, and of worshipping God
in Spirit and Truth,The feined ardness, but the real easi|ness of the Qua|kers Spirit. which they say no Body in
the World do but they, c. and yet the Truth is
as I told them in publick, there is an Image in the
Bed, but David was gone, yea, and that their Re|ligion
was one of the easiest Religions in the world.
For, as I have seen pluck but forth a small pin or
peg in a Harpsycon, and that wonderful Instrument
will delight your Ear and mind with curious and
various Tunes of Musick:The won|derful Harpsicon So if once a poor Soul
gives way an Inch, and sets in one thought of
yielding to the voice of a Spirit within them, they
are filled and ravished with curious Notions of Jus|tification,
Holiness, God and Christ, and Spirit
within them, they can now Thou the King himself,
they need no Scriptures,The vain dreams of the Qua|kers and their fools Paradice. nor Teachers: and thus
as in a dream their great Debts of Thousands and
Millions are paid and discharged. The Cage door
flies open, and they are delivered as a Bird, c.

from Sin and Devil, and Hell, c. yea, Rapt up into
Paradice, and see, and hear, and speak unutterable
Ioyes, c. I Confess as I said in the Case of the
two hundred following Absolom, I hope there is many
a precious Soul sincerely aiming at God, and as
precious Diamonds and Jewels fallen in the dirt,
c. As I hope in the Parishes of Protestants and
Papists also, who being only ignorant as the Disci|ples
were of main points of Christianity, yet aim
uprightly at God, truly love him, and labour to in|crease
in the knowledge and grace of Christ Iesus.
A 17th. Inst. is in ag. 63. where G. Fox brings in
his Adversary Ieremiah Ives saying,Jeremiah Jves [There may be a
Light to Convince of Sin, and yet not within man.] He
Answers, there is no people [32] Convinced of Sin,
but they are Convinced within themselves and with
the Light within them: It is the Light which
makes manifest to a man when he is Convinced:
It Answers to something, and reacheth to some|thing
in their particulars, though the words be
spoken without them from the Light.
I Reply, First, it is a doleful Business to read and
hear how Satan (in his Chains of Darkness) yet hath
Liberty to appear abroad as an Angel of Light from
Heaven,The Devil in Samu|els Mantle thus vapouring and swaggering under the
Cloak and Colours of Light, the Light which is
Christ, the Light by which all things were made, the
Light that was glorified with the Father before the
World was,An Angel of Light but a Dra|gon and Devil of darkness. the Light that enlightens every man that
comes into the World: the Light within you, c. the
Light which will guide you up to God, up to Christ,
up to Salvation and Eternal Life, and yet all this

vapourings and Crakings are but Cheatings from the
God of this World whose eyes being beat out by
Gods most righteous Sentence, he labours to keep
all in blindness, or to beat out the eyes of those
whom God hath truly enlightned.
2. As I have said before, and I said truly, the
word Light is a Similitude from Light and darkness
though my Opposites in the dispute affirmed, that
God was Light in a proper and not figurative Sense,
and it signifies and intends Truth of all Sorts, whe|ther
Natural,Truth and Light the same thing. Moral or Heavenly: The natural
Truth or Light is received within by a natural
Light or understandings: The Civil and moral
Light or Truth suits and agrees with those moral
and Civil Convictions of the natural Light and
understanding? Hither to Natures Light will reach.
But when we mount up to Divine and Supernatu|ral
Truth, here these very Foxians Confess that the
Natural Man perceiveth not the things of God: Only
they say, that beside Natural Light, Natural Reason,
c. there is the holy Seed God and Christ, c.
within every Son, and to this Spirit and Seed in
Prison they preach, and Fox in our discourses al|leadgeth
and affirmeth God (in every man) to be a
Cart loaden with sheaves, prest under, and as it were
in Prison, c. blasphemous wretches if they keep
not, but go beyond Similitudes and Comparative Ex|pressionsInsert "used by y^e Lord."R. W. Ms. Ann.
to make s poor worms creep up to
Heaven.
3. All Light, or Truth Natural, Civil, or Divine
it comes from without, and is received by the In|ternal

Faculty according [33] to the Capacity,The way of Truth or Lights goings. Na|ture and measure of it. All Truth or falshood,
Light or darkness is first espied by the watch or
Sentinel, Fancy or Comprehension, c. From thence
it is conveyed to the Court of Guard, where Cap|tain
Reason or his Lieutenant, common Sense and
Experience taketh Examination, and Memory
keeps a Record of proceedings which go on by
degreen to Actions, c.
4. When I say it comes from without, I intend
not that Truth or Light comes any other way from
without,Where no Receiver no Thief. as by force and ravishment, c. I say anyChange "any"to "no." R. W. Ms. Ann.
other way then there is a door  Room and Re|ceptive
Faculty within willing to receive, and to
make it welcome: This G. Fox urgeth there must
be a receiver, and something that Answers. I Ans|wer,
Natural Truth, or morals, Civil matters are
soon received by all Natural and Moral Under|standings,Natural Under|standing in Men and Beasts.
yea, in natural Commands and Threat|nings,
Beasts and Birds are admirably capacious and
observant. But when we speak of Supernatural
Heavenly and Eternal matters, of Spiritual things to
be discerned Spiritually: What a difference is there
as between Heaven and Earth, and Infinitely greater?
When the Lord Iesus asked his Disciples how
many loavs they had,An In|stance of a meerly Rational and an heavenly Power and Faculty. their Natural Faculty or Reason
could give an Answer: When he asked them whom
do Men say that I the Son of man am? This was a
Divine and Supernatural Question, and for the outside
and Truth of the Fact, the Devils could Answer as
well as the Disciples, not only that same said he,

was Elias, Iohn Baptist, c. but that he was the
Son of God: All this exceeds not Natural first
Birth Powers or Faculties: But to give a believing
and an affectionate Answer as Peter did, this re|quires
a Faculty and Power which Flesh and Blood
could not reach too,Change "too" to "to."R. W. Ms. Ann. but the Spirit or secret working
Power of God in the means wrought Peters heart
and the Disciples hearts, and to this day all Believers
Hearts to receive and welcome all truly Divine and
Heavenly Doctrines.
Whereas therefoe G. Fox talks of something
within which is preached to: I may Answer as they
do,A close Compan|ion be|tween all Faculties and Objects. viz. that the natural man perceivs no spiritual
matter, but when he is born again then he acts and
works, and it is most certain, that as an House re|ceivs
his Master, as Candle kisseth Candle, the
Clasp the Hook, the mortise the Tenant, so do
Natural or Spiritual Faculties receive Natural [34
or Spiritual Faculties receive Natural or Supernatu|ral
Motions and Impressions.
The Protestants say, that before it pleaseth God
by some word read, preached, c. to set up a Can|dle
of wisdome in the Souls, and to work a spiritual
favour in the Soul, all heavenly matters are nau|seous
and odious, though as pleasant, profitable and
honourable, to self Ends they are welcome all the
word over, yet as spiritual and heavenly abominable?
G. Fox saith there is a something,Nothing truly Spi|ritual in Nature as now de|generate. a Seed, though
but as a Grain of mustard Seed, a Seed of God, of
Christ, of the Spirit, to which Christ the Word is
preached, and which maketh Answer: Hence (hor|ribly

abusing Scripture phrazes) they so often say
God is all (within and without:) Hence they main|tain,
c. though men be dark and dead, yet Christ
within is Light and alive in them, and them only.
Hence appears G. Fox his lying Cheats of a Suf|ficient
Light withi to lead to God and to Salvation,
a Teacher within all Sufficient, for then no need,
yea, it is a simple Superfluity, c. to hold a Candle
of outword words to awaken and enlighten such a
glorious all-Sufficient Sun within.
5. I ask where this something, this something of
God,About the light shin|ing in darkness. (yea, God and Christ and SpiritAdds "is" after "Spirit." R. W. Ms. Ann.) If he Ans|wer,
in the understanding he grants it, thatInsert "it."R. W. Ms. Ann. is dark,
and perceives no heavenly matters, c. If in the
Heart and Affections he Confessieth, all there, is
hard and dead: only he saith, the Light shineth in
the darkness, c. Implying that in the dark under|standing
there is some heavenly Light: in the
hearts hardness there is some softness, and the Light
shineth in darkness, c.
I Answer, Christ Iesus te Sun of Righteousness
arose with saving Rayes or wings of Salvation, but
the blind Iews could not own him for the Expected
Messiah, what is this G. Fox his something? a Light
of Christ inlightning every man that comes into the
World, though the man see it not.
2. What is this to all the Generations of the
World about four thousand years before Christ came,
and was in that visible person as Iohn saith of him,
that lightens every man that comes, c. what is this

to a mixture of Light and darkness in the same
faculty, the eye blind and yet seeing, the man dead
and yet alive? It is true the Lambs wife confesseth
that her Heart was awae [35] while she slept. But
what is this to the heart being dead and no Life
at all and yet waking?
6. The Conclusion is (as before I hinted) and
they Confess, when God in his own Means ordina|rily
works the will to hear,Gods grr|cious workings with and in the Souls of men. to turn, to believe, to
pray, he then graciously works the work for us,
and being thus turned with Ephraim, we mourn and
lament, and say, what have we done? when he turns
our wilderness (wholly a wilderness) into a Garden,
then we bring forth his sweet Fruits, Flowers and
Spices: when he turns the Wolf into a Lamb, then
we are meek and Innocent, and patient: but to
talk of preaching to the Spirits in Prison, yea, of
the Seed of God and the Spirit of God in prison,
when the Lord speaks of his warning and moving
men by Noahs preaching in the old World,A wonder|ful Par|rots Religion. as may
be evidently evinced,) is like the prophane teach|ing
of Parrots to prate of Grace and Heaven, like
that admirable Parrot in France, who could say her
Pater noster, her Creed, and Ten Commandments,
and yet knew as much of grace and the workings
of God in the Soul, as her Popish Teachers, c.
An 18th. Instance of G. Fox, his lame and cheat|ing
Answers is in pag. 64. where he brings in the
same Author Ieremiah Ives saying,Jeremiah Ives [It is a known
Error to say, that a man was in Hell and in Heaven.]
He Answers, who in this shews his Ignorance of
Scripture, for it gives Testimony of men that did

witness that they had been in Hell, in the Nether|most
Hell, and witnessed again they were in Heaven,
and sate in heavenly places in Christ Iesus, and such
were in Heaven, as is spoken of in the Revelations.
I Reply, G. Fox and millions more talk of
Heaven and Hell as the Notable Parrot (above
said)Infert "so did." R. W. Ms. Ann. our Fore-Fathers,Heaven and Hell to come.  some from the Scrip|ture,
and some out of Reasons Light talkt of places
of Ioy Eternal for the Righteous, and of misery
Eternal for the bad and wicked. But the new Light
from Christ Jesus and his pen-men is the clearest
that ever shined in this world, especially, that fa|mous
Parable or Word proceeding out of the
mouth of Christ Jesus, Luke 16. that of Dives and
Lazarus declaring (in substance) the state of the
Life, to Come, and of the two great Parties of the
poor afflicted Righteous, and the wicked living in
pleasures, c.
G. Fox is in his Burrough of the various significa|tion
of the words Heaven and Hell: He knows
that a state of Sorrow and [36] Bitterness is called
Hell.Fox his Hell and Heaven. That a state of Death and the grave is set
out by the word Hell in the same Hebrew phrase:
And to either of these he wickedly applies the
thirstErase "thirst." R. W. Ms. Ann. State, of which the Lord Jesus 1. so clearly
speaks: viz. The State of the ungodly after this
Life, in the Life and World to come.
2, Again, he knows the visible State of the true
Profession of Christ Jesus is called Heaven.
3. Such as have Interest in Christ Jesus have sit|ten

down with him in those Heavenly Mansions and
glories into which he is entred bodily and gone to
prepare for their Reception and coming.
4. The third Heaven (the place of Pauls Rapture
and Vision) the place of Joy, and Blessedness and
Glory, when these Heavens and Earth are burnt up
and consumed.
It is like G. Fox hath been occasioned to these
thoughts by the Papists Fables about Heaven and
Hell,The Papists Queries about Hell and Purgatory, and their curious Questions as
whether the Torment of Hell be as real and ter|rible
as this Elementary and Kitching Fire: Whe|ther
the pain of Hell transcend not all pains of
Childbirth, Stone, gout, Collick, Burning? c. Whe|ther
it be possible for a Creature to Continue in
such Torments perpetually without Intermission?The Scrip|ture, Hell and Hea|ven but Fables with G. Fox and other Po|pish Foxes
Whether there shall not be some end after some
millions of years as well as of the pains of Purga|tory:
G. Fox knows how the Papists get a world of
Mony by these Notions of Heaven and Hell which
the Atheistical Foxes amongst them count but Fa|bles,
(as the Pope speaks of Christ) The Devils have
a more real Faith or Belief of these things and
tremble: They cried out to the Lord Jesus, why art
thou come to torment us before the Time? c. But G.
Fox not believing (as they think) these Fables, he
fancies that Hell is some apprehensions in the mind
of wrath to come, and that is Hell and wrath it
self, and having had slashes of Pride and Peace in
their minds, these are the Joyes of Heaven, whereas
the Lord Jesus tells us, that beside the hundred

fold of Spiritual Ioyes (viz a hundred Fathers,The Hea|ven and Hell to come. Mo|thers,
c.) there remains for his Followers in the
World to come Eternal Life.
They are but short Flashes of Hell and Heaven
which some of these poor Cheated Souls dream of:
I know they allow time more or less before they
come into the perfect and heavenly State of Ne|cessity.
Erase "of necessity."R. W. Ms. Ann.
Death prevents some from coming to it,
and makes the reign of the rest whom Satan has
ticed into these [37] proud Vanities but short,The Foxes mad Fancy of the Soul and next Life. as
Experience hath declared: only they have a mad
Fancy of their Souls going into God, and becom|ing
more God, and yet this some of them grant
to the Souls of all men, to Iudas as well as Peter.
The true Protestant believes these three things,
First, that there is a State Eternal of Joy to the
Righteous bodies and Souls after this Life:The Pro|testants Faith as to the Life to come. and a
State of Eternal Misery of Soul and Body to the
ungodly: Although the exact knowledge of par|ticulars
exceed the present sight of our mortal eyes,
the hearing of our Ears, and the Capacity of our
Hearts, c.
2. The first Fruits and a Tast both of the hea|venly
Ioyes and the Torments of the damned are given
by God in this Life, to the first, in that Solid Peace
and Ioy which they have in God: To the other in
that Horror and Despair, and Enmity against God, c.
3. Three Sorts of men especially will seekErase "k" in "seek."R. W. Ms. Ann. there
is an Hell to come,Three Sorts will find Hell above other Sinners. First, The

Volnptuous and Luxurious,above others. whose God is theii Belly,
and their Sences, c. Ars. potenter.Erase "Ars. potenter." R. W. Ms. Ann.
2. The Devourers of the Poor and helpless, po|tenter,Erase "potenter."R. W. Ms. Ann.
c.
3. The proud puft up with foolish Confidences, bold|ly
Crying, Lord open to us, for we, c. also the Con|trary
to these three I might inlarge on, and not
Impertinently, but let him that readeth understand, is
inChange "is in" to "y^n." R. W. Ms. Ann. pag. 64. whereErase "where." R. W. Ms. Ann. G. Fox brings in Ieremiah Ives
saying,Jeremiah Ives. [The Phariseel were far enough from having
the Kingdom of Heaven within them] He Answers
contrary to Christs words, who said it was within
them.
I Reply, G. Fox his Tutor and Teacher within
him knows, that the Kingdom of God and the King|dom
of Huaven signifie but one, and not divers
things: and yet also he knows that both of them
signifie (in a Christian Sense) First,The King|dom of God signi|fying divers things. the Kingdome of
Government of God and Christ in the Soul. Secondly,
The Government of God in his holy Providence in
the World. 3. His Government in the Congregation or
Churches of his Saints called out the World.
Fourthly, the glorious State to come afr this Life:
He knowes that his Iourney man G. Fox isErase the parenthesis, and insert "a." R. W. Ms. Ann. (fit In|strument
to destroy all these, and to erect (in their
stead) a dull, proud, dogged Confusion, or Babel within,
under the Name of God, Christ, Spirit, Light, Faith,
Righteousness, Resurrection.

The Lord Jesus knowing that not the Pharsees
alone c. but the Iews generally also, and his own
Christian Followers were leavened [38] with a world|ly
notion,The false and true Messiah. viz. thar their Messiah should be a glo|rious
temporal King, that he should make his En|trance,
and Exalt his Throne with great Pompe,
Solemnity, c. The Lord Jesus tells them their
mistake and saith,The King|dome of God with|in you. that his Kingdome was not such a
Kingdome, but that it was within them: Of which
words I find three Expositions. First, that the
Kingdome of Heaven is a Spiritual, inward and Soul
Kingdome,Three Exposi|tions. concerning God and the Soul, and Spirit|ual
matters, according to the saying of Christ Jesus,
my Kingdome is not of this World, c.
2. From the word Entos within you, or amongst
you, as certainly it was then amongst the Iews, and
in the midst of them in their Temple Streets and
Houses, Hearts and mouths by the most wonderful
speakings of the Lord Jesus, as never man spake
amongst them, and the wonderful power and gracious
works which never man wrought amongst them,
nor in the whole World beside
3. The Kingdome of God, that is God and
Christ, and the Spirit were literally in the Pharisees,
and so Consequently in every hypocrite in the
World, and every wicked and prophane Sinner,
though they know it not, yea in all Creatures.
But this is against a former, fair Exposition from
the Greek word Entos,The Qua|kers Ex|position. which cannot be refused
(since so agreeing with the Truth) except Reasons
more prevalent, c.
2. The Spirit of God asks, what agreement be|tween

Christ and Belial, Light and Darkness, Righte|ousness
 unrighteousness? c.
And whereas it is most Improperly and Impious|ly
Objected, that the Light shines in darkness, c. I
have said,The Light shining in darkness. that it can not be in the same Subject or
part predominate, the mind, or will, or Affections:
but the Light is at the window, and the Eye, and the
knock at the door, (by all the wayes and means by
which God visits poor men) but the Eye, the door
is shut, c. and the man within is not only asleep,
but dead and rotten in Natures silthiness, and actual
Transgressions and Abominations.
3. It is against all Colour of Reason to Imagine
that the Lord Jesus should tell the Iews, the Phari|sees,
and the rest of his bloody Enemies, who some
weakly, some maliciously opposed his Kingdome,
and coming to Rule by his Grace over them, viz.
that his grace was King within them, what ever
their Heart or Tongues said, or Hands hid, c.
4. It is notoriously contrary to what G. Fox, and
his so often [39] Clamour that the Kingdome of God
consists in, or its Nature is in Righteousness, and Peace
and Ioy in the holy Spirit: as opposite to the King|dome
in the Pharisees, and all Hipocrites and pro|phane, c. as Hell to Heaven.
5. The thing is so notoriously childish and ri|diculous,The grace of God is offered to all, but em|braced by few that are freely chosen
c. that a King should affirm he was an
actual King in his Enemies Country, where the
whole is up in Arms against him: Or for a Lamb
to say, he was amongst the Wolves and held his
Government in them: Or that a man pretending
Love to a Woman in way of marriage should

boldly affirm,The fran|tick fancy of Christs Kingdome in his Enemie hearts. (though she abhord to hear of the
motion yet) that he was in her Heart and Affec|tions,
as an Husband, Lord, c. It is true, the mo|tions
of War and Love are made and offerd from
the King warring, and the man suing, but that their
motions and Commands (that is Government and
Kingdome) should be in them is nothing but im|pious
and impudent, and childish prating.
The 20th Instance,Thomas Weld. is in pag. 75. where G. Fox
brings in Thomas Weld, c. saying, [How clear the
Scripture is, that Faith comes by hearing, and not by
minding the Light within] He Answers,Faith how wrought. Doth any
man know Christ but by the Light within? And
is not Christ the Word? And can any see without
Christ the Word? Doth it not make anifest?
Nay, doth it not give the Light of the knowledge
of God in the face of Iesus Christ? read 2 Cor. 4. 1.
from whence Faith comes, and so Fith comes by
minding the Light within, Christ the Author of
it,A distract|ed old woman a picture of the Qua|kers. and brings to look at him, and hear him.
I Reply, mine eyes have seen a poor distracted aged
woman walking in State, boasting of her Majesty, Iew|els,
and Crown, with a Straw in her hand for her Scep|ter,
c. and thus doth this poor mad Soul walk even
like Nebuchadnezzar upon his Babel. All is Christ, and
he is Christ, Christ is Faith and all, c  therefore
1. He slights this so known and unquestiona|ble
Record,Rom. 10. The admi|rable Chain of Diamonds. Faith comes by hearing, and that heaven|ly
Chain of Diamonds, Rom. 10. concerning true
Salvation, true worshipping, true praying, true be|lieving,
true preaching, true sending, which holy
writing or Record Fox dares not seriously and

impartially, and in the fear of the most High con|sider,
as to the various means and wayes of Gods
sending unto man.
2. For all G. Fox his Scepter of Straw, his mad
fancy of a [40] Light that works Faith, c. I ask
what Faith is, and if it be not First, a believing the
Gospel,True Faith what or Glad News to be true. Secondly, a receivi|ving
of it and believing in it mine own particular.
As First, that a pardon is certainly come, Secondly,
that my Name is in it, my deliverance and Salvation
is wrapt up in it The great King of Heaven (like
Ahashuerosh) his Ange is evr: now he hath
thoughts of marriage Loves and Ioyes, and Sec|ondly,
I (though a poor Captive Iew, poor Esther)
I am she his Eye hath fixt on, and his Soul de|lights
in:
3dly, I askt what preaching is, but the publishing
or divulging, telling or declaring what the Word
or mind,Heb. 1. Act. 26. or will of the King Eternal is, which he
hath revealed or declared to the Patriarchs Moses
and the rest of his Prophets, or Messengers from the
beginning of the World: And what said the Apos|tles
or Messengers of Christ Jesus declare, but what
Moses and the Prophets did say should come to pass?
Act. 26. which all was Scripture? Was not this
Proclamation of Good News,The four sort of Hearers. or a pardon to be made
over all the World, and the first proclaiming of it
to be at Ierusalem, Luke 24. And was there not
to be four sorts of Hearers of this glad News.
4. That receive and believe with a false and
overly, and loose, and sandy Belief: A fourth, only
with a deep and rockie Belief, closing and uniting

to God? Thus the men of Samaria told the wo|man
that they did not believe because of her word,
(that must be taken Comparatively, for the Hearing
from her this glad News, was. he first means of their
believing) but because they had heard Christ them|selves.
5. I know these poor Foxians do hear a kind of
Motion within them,The Qua|kers how cheated by Sathan as Queen Mary was of her Concep|tion. but it is but as poor women that
go with false Conceptions with Tympanies of wind
and water, or with the mola that will resemble the
Motion of a true Child: but after all their thoughts
and fancies by day and night after all their seeming
feellings perswasions, Experiences, and preparations,
this false Conception, false Faith, false Christ, false
Light shall vanish in shame and grief, as did Queen
Maries after the Thanksgivings and Ringings for her
deliverance.
6. For my self I dare these self Confidents to par|ticularize
any one Scripture where the Spirit of
God directs any poor Soul to listen and hearken to
a Light and voice within him,Challenges to the Foxians. affirming that [41
this is the Hearing by which Faith is wrought? I
dare them to clear Candidly and solidly, this, 10. to
the Rom. wherein (as in the 8th is the Golden Chain
of Election, c.) so in this 10th Chap. the Golden
Chain of the means of praying, preaching, c.
3. I ask for some sollid Instances where Souls have
been truly Converted (the whole Soul unto God)
by any such Notion, and not by some External
means and outward hearing of this glad News and
Gospel?
4. I ask if it be not a ridiculous Contradiction

in them to fill the World with the sound of their
new and only preachers He Apostles and she Apos|tles,
c.
5. I ask if this Light within (without and oppo|site
to the hearing without which is the question)
be the means of Faith,Pauls famous Case how is it possible, that so
many serious Enquiring men in all Ages should
not perceive a breath of this wind, no not in their
own bosomes? and that famous Paul should be Con|scientiously
and fully perswaded that he ought to
do many things against Christ Jesus, c.
If it be said, Paul had not only the Light within him,
but he had heard of the Doctrine of Christ and of
his Followers: he heard Stephens Sermon, and yet he
believed not: and therefore it is Grace doth all. I
Answer, this is something, but reacheth not home,
for, if all the men in the world have this Light
(which is sfficient without hearing) why should
not some, (especially the wise and Enquirours, c.)
perceive it or something of it, as Paul did not, un|til
he had heard something, (and because God had
a purpose to make Extraordinary use of him, an
Extraordinary hand from Heaven humbling and
preparing him to publish or preach unto the Na|tions.
The 21 Instance,80 Tko. Pollard. is in pag. 80. where G. Fox
brings in Tho. Pollard, saying, [To say the Officers of
the Church are Invisible, It is plain of their Father
the Devil] He Answers, The Holy Ghost made
the Officers of the Church Overseers, and that
made the Officers the Overseers to be Invisible, for
they saw with an Invisible Eye, and so they was in

the Spirit which is Invisible, and not in the Flesh:
else they could not be Overseers in the Church of
God,The Fox like and dog like Impuden|cy of G. Fox c. and you are the visible apostatiz'd from them.
I Reply, This is one of the most impudent Foole|ries
that either Fox, or (as the Proverb is) any Dog
could be impudent in: For First,
42] 1. He acknowledgeth a publick Assembly of
Christians; as well as of other pretending Worsh p|pers,
Turks, Iews, c. Also he acknowledgeth the
Ministers, Officers, and Overseers of their Assem|blies.
2. His Reason is notoriously silly and impudent,
viz.The visi|bility of Christs Church and her Officers. because the Church is in God, and the Over|seers
are made by the holy Spirit: For are the se|cret
works of God alwayes secret, and never revealed?
The Child in the Wombe, the precious Stones, and
Minerals when brought forth, are no more Invisi|ble
then the Sun in the Firmament.
3. The Christian profeion and professours, how|ever
they were wrought and prepared, and by di|vers
means by Gods Spirits: yet the Lord Jesus
compares them to the most visible Conspicuous and
glorious things and persons. To the Sun and Moon
in the Heavens, and the Heavens and Stars also, to
Mountains, and Cities on those Hills or Mountains:
To Kings, To their houses and Palaces, yea, to
Armes with Banners, c.
4. Although the Lord Major of London, and the
several Officers of the City are not made and or|dained
in the public Streets, nor Generals and other
Officers appointed by his Majesty, c. are they not

therefore visible, because their making and appoint|ing
was not Solemnized and performed in Cheap|side,
c.
5. It is most true and most sweet, that the Church
is in God,The Church in God. c. and is it not also true, that in one
Sense, we live in God and move in God, have our Be|ing
in God, and yet the whole Creation is gloriously
visible in another Sence, the Saints, their Assemblies
and Officers are in God visible to the world abund|antly,
though in an heavenly and spiritual Sence,
transcending the Being of the first Creation.
6. G. Fox denies not, but that although the first
Churches were in God, and the Officers of the
Church, and some of them were appointed imme|diately,
yet they were visible and audible by those
with whom they Conversed:
7. Yea,G Fox a most visi|ble and idle prater of Invisi|bilities. G. Fox and his Foxians, for all their be|ing
in God, and some of their proud and silly Ans|werings
in Courts, that they live in God, and dwell
in God, yet they disowne not their own visible
Congregatings and Assemblings, their visible Teachers,
Overseers, or Bishops, their visible and audible per|formances
and Worships, praying, preaching, singing,
c. and wy then doth this [43] poor notoriously
visible Cheatour thus prate of Invisibilities especially
in times of peace and not in Elias Case?
The 22 Instance is in pag 84. where G. Fox brings
in his opposite Magnus Byne; saying, [The Scriptures
may be understood by the help of Tongues.Magnus Byne.] He Ans|wers,
[All Scripture was given forth by Inspiration,
and so without the same Inspiration, it is not under|stood
again, Pilate had the Tongues, yet did not under|stand

the Scripture, nor Christ the Substance of it:
And this you have set up since the Apostacy, your
Tongues, you Raveners from the Spirit.]
I Reply, First, I make use of G. Fox his Confes|sion,
viz. that all Scripture is inspired,God hath many words. c. therefore
say I, he Consesseth that every word, Syllable and
Tittle in that Scripture or writing, is the Word, or
immediate revealed will of God: against his and his
Foxians common Song: hath God any more words
but one?
2. As to the Scriptures,The un|derstand|ing of the Scripture threefold. the understanding of
them is threefold.
First, Literal: who understands not, Thou shalt
not kill, Thou shalt not Steal? c.
The second is Metaphorical, as I am the Dore, I
am the Bread, c.
The third is saving and Spiritual, when it pleas|eth
God to set home the heavenly Commands Promi|ss,
c. in particular, Soul Application.
3. I observe the End of G. Fox (and especially of
the old Serpent and Fox that acts him.The Dev|ils End in Cavilling against the Scripture Tongues, yet J. Stbs va|pourd that he under|stood as many Tongues as I, and may be more.) It is to de|stroy
the coming of Gods holy Records and writings
to poor lost men to their Salvation, that he may
foist and whisp in what his hellish malice pleaseth
to their Damnation: For if no knowledge of the
Tongues in which the most wise and most holy
Lord pend his Letters or writing to us, then no
preaching of the Doctrine in them to the world
witout some new miraculous way, then no translating
and reading of them, which is, that the Devil in
all Ages and at this day aims at with all his might.
4. I therefore charge upon this proud Ignoramus,

and all his blind Disciples and Followers the horri|ble
Crime of Unthankfulness,The hor|rible In|gratitude of the Foxians. and Ingratitude: for
were it not for Tindal, burnt to ashes, and other
heavenly Spirits set on work from Heaven to dig
out the knowledge of the Hebrew and the Greek,The Transltion of the Scripture.
and to turn it into French, Dutch, English, and now
praised be God into the very [44] Indian Language
of this Country, how would these Seraphical Doc|tors
know whether there were such a Creation of
Heavens and Earth, or of man and his wife, which
we now so talk of?
I put this question once to a Soul in this Coun|try,The Qua|kers Spirit for all pre|tences a lazie Spirit
who told me although they had no English
Scripture, Gods Spirit would teach them Greek and
Hebrew: but I can declare to any that ask me the
dreadful End of that party.
5. I Charge upon this Foxian party the horrible
Crime of a proud Laziness for not studying the
Original Languages themselves; It is a shameful
Trade and deceitful, when persons have mony in
their hands, to take up all on trust! I have known
very Eminent Men and Women Independants and Bap|tists,
give themselves up to serious study of the He|brew
Language: I never knew any of the Foxian
Spirits so inclind, but according to the Lazie fool
under the Fig-Tree which I have seen in an Em|bleme
almost threescore year since, they lie down
and cry.
Sweet Figs drop down in yielding wse
For Lazie will not let me rise.
6. I Judge that G. Fox and his wild Spirit can

not prove that Pilate had the Hebrew Greek and
Latin,The three Languages upon the Cross of Christ. for though he caused by an heavenly fin|ger
of God such a Title to be set up in the three
then most known Languages Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, yet he himself might have no knowledge of
any more then the Latin, which was his Mother
Romane Tongue: As a Book seller may deal in Books
of Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Dutch, Italian,
Spanish, c. and yet understand no more then his
Mother English.
7. I know the Devil abounds with Tongues, and
can speak all Languages,The Dev|ils skill in Languages and Sub|tlety in Revela|tions. and I know, and have seen
his Inspirations, and three thousands verses in shw
very heavenly, inspir'd by him, in an English wo|man
of this Country, who had no such skill, ex
tempore. They were taken and written from her
mouth, and I have read them: and do believe from
many Reasons which I have to shew they were
from Satan, yet I know also that Ignorance is shame|ful,
and that it pleased God miraculously to infuse
the knowledge of Tongues to his first Apostles, or
Messengers, to the Nations, and what he will fur|ther
do in this kind, [45] before this Worlds glass
is out who can tell? only I am sure these Foxians
talk (like little Children in their grave Consulta|tions)
without the least knowledge at all (genrally)
of any thing, but their mother English, and yet as
proudly and imperiously vapouring and triumphing,Theora John
c. like Theora Iohn proclaming to the World his
mad Quaking Revelations, Inspirations, writing of
Languages, many which he Confest, he understood
not, but Mysteries, Mysteries.

8. G. Fox is no wiser in affirming that Tongues
came in place of the Spirit since the Apostacy.The Lord raiseth his Witnesses against Ba|bel by his Spirit and blessing upon Tongues and Trans|lations. For
before the Apostacy the Lord furnished his Servants
with understanding of several Languages miracu|lously:
with the Apostasie, those heavenly miraculous
gifts ceased: In the Apostacy the Father of Spirits
gave to his two witnesses power, Authority  Ability
to prophesy, preach, declare  witness to the Truths
of Jesus against the Popish Inventions: with the ris|ing
of Luther, Calvin, c. The Lord raised up the
study of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues in many
heavenly Witnesses, who brought to Light the truth
of the first Copies in Opposition to the Corrupt
Latin Translation (bruitishly settled under a Curse
by the Counsel at Trent):The Pa|pists for|mer Ignor|ance  now their abuse of knowledge This mighty work of the
Lord in his Protestant Witnsses drove the Popish
Foxes into their holes, and hath driven (for shame) the
Iesuits to study the Hebrew and Greek, and by a
new Stratagem partly made up of the pretence of
their Spirit and partly of the pretence of Corrupt|ions
and Variations in the Copies) to assault the
Camp of the Protestant Witnesses.
9. I despise not, yea, I praise God for, and honour
the helps and helpers we have in English: yea, I
would not discourage the weakest English man or
woman (in Christian humility) to sound forth the
praises of God in writing,English helps a great mercy. speaking and printing in
English what they have Experimented of the Son
of God, No, though they should not write or print,
or speak true English, as G Fox hath not done:
But when they lift up their Horns on high (or their
bruitish Ears as Foxes do, in stead of Horns) then I

must tell G. Fox, that although he prat le amongst
the English,A close Query and they be cheated with his dying
Spirit: yet if he go to other Nations, (as they sim|ply
pretend to do to Turks and Pope) they must
either be furnished with the Gift of Tongues mi|raculously,
or they must fling of their lazie Devil,
and study the Tongues of those Nations to whom
they carry their (pretended) glad News or Gospel.
46] The 23. Instance: G. Fox in pag. 86. brings in
the same Author, saying, [Notwithstanding thy pas|sing
through the first and second Resurrection (as thou
saith) there remains a Torment so thee at the last day
and Woe.]
He Answers, They are blessed that have part in
the first Resurrection:86, Mag|nus Byne The second Death have no
power over them, but are made free from Wrath
that is to come, and are passed from Death to Life,
and are translated into the Kingdome of the Son
of God, and are in union with the Son of God and
the Father both; and so thou utterest forth Lies.
I Reply, G. Fox here Arrogates to himself and
his Foxians.
1. A Passing through the first and second Resur|rection.The first and second Resurrec|tion.
2. He triumpheth in their Blessedness pronounced
to their first Resurrection, viz. of Communion with
God and Freedome from Wrath to come:
1. The Truth is G. Fox is in his Burrough of
Words of divers ignifications: He wrests and
winds what is for his wicked ends, but you shall
never take him in Distinguishing and Defineing what
the first and second Death is, and what is the first
and second Resurrection.

2. The Truth is, as soon as they hearken to this
familiar Spirit, they are so Elevated, that they be in
the heavenly glory, the Resurrection is past, and (with
K. Agags dream) the Bitterness of Death and Wrath
is past for ever with them.
3. But no such grapes will be gathered of these
Thorns,The great Expecta|tion of all the four great Re|ligions. nor Figs of these Thistles: For if we talk
of escaping wrath to come, and of enjoying Bles|sedness:
we must prove to others, as well as to our
selves, that the Expectation of the Iews, and Mahu|metans
expecting a Carnal Blessedness to come, is
false: We mst prove the Papists and Common Pro|testants
(for all their Prayers and Alms, c.) are
under that Sentence, Depart from me ye workers of
Iniquity.
4. The Lord Jesus being questioned about the
great point of Salvation:The great point of Salvation. he seems to Answer two
things.
1. That the most will hang their Souls upon
the Hedge, and venture like the high ways and hedges.
2. Others will fear and look after Redemption,
Deliverance, Salvation, c. and of these two sorts.
First,Two great Sorts of minders Eternal Life. Some that will endeavour and seek to en|ter
I Judge both [47] of Pagans and Mahumetans,
and Iews, and Papists and Protestants, and shall not
be able.
The second is of such as sensible of the Nar|rowness
of the way, straightness of the dore, and
the Infinite necessity incumbing, and the Infinite Ex|cellency
inviting, fling away Preferments, Profits, and
Pleasures, and choose to enjoy the Mediator, as lost
and damned in our selves, and follow him from his

Cradle and Manger to his Cross and Gallows, and la|bouring
to draw other poor drowning Souls out of
the pit of Eternal Rottenness, howling with us.
5. The Spirit of God tells us of three sorts of
perisht Souls.Three great sorts of Me
First, Those without Law, of which are Millions
of Millions innumerable.
Secondly, Such as had the Law or Word, or will
of God revealed to them in the Covenant of works,
Obedience or Iustice, of which sort wereInsert "and are," R. W. Ms. Ann. Millions of
Millions also.
A third is of such to whom Infinite pity hath
vouchsafed the joyful Tidings of the Son of God,
his Mediation, Interposition, and Intercession.And "lost in themselves but saved by grace," R. W. Ms. Ann.
Amongst these the Papists,Jesuits and Puritans the two great An|tagonists. and the Protesters
against the Papists are chief: of the Papists the
Iesuits: of the Protestant (thereso called) Puritans
run for it: of these the Quakers pretend the high|est,
but no otherwise then, O thou Capernaum, which
art Exalted,  Exaltest thy self unto Heaven, thou
shalt be brought down to Hell, c. For Tyre and Sidon,
Sodom, and Gomorrah, c. the poor Iews and Ma|humetans,
yea, the Papists and common Protestants
shall have an easier Cup to drink off then the Fox|ians,
c, that are so high,  pure, and lofty, and yet
abound with Luciferian filthiness.
The 24. Instance, is in pag. 89. where G. Fox
brings in the same Author, saying, [The Saints are
neither in the Fulness of the Godhead,pag. 89. Magnus Bine. nor in part:
Away with this Blasphemy that saith this is] He

Answers,The Qua|kers in the Fulness of the God|head of their hel|lish mouths and pens ay be be|lieved [The work of the Ministry was to bring peo|ple
to the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect
man, to the Unity of the Faith, to the measure and
stature of the Fulness of Christ and Christ will dwell in
the Saints; and God will dwell in them;] And thou
saith, They have no part of the Fulness of the God|head,
and Iohn saith, of his Fulness have we all re|ceived,
in whom dwells the Godhead bodily, and ye be
all in the Blasphemy that be out of this part of
the Fulness.
I Reply, It was doubtless an horrible Crime which
the Jews though maliciously and falsly Objected.
48] 1. Against the Lord Jesus, viz. that be being
a man should make himself God. What shall we
say to these bruitish and blasphemous Foxians, vile
worms of the Earth, yesterday creeping out of their
holes, slaves and Hellhounds, as we all b Nature
are, so horribly to set their faces as David speaks
again the Heavens, vapouring themselves to be in
the Godhead, yea, in the Fulness of the Godhead,
and that also bodily, so that what was applicable and
proper to the Body of the Son of God, is proper
and applicable unto them, his Body in whom the Ful|ness
of the Godhead dwells bodily.
2. See the horrible Egyptian Darkness the Lord
hath justly poured upon these feigned Goshenites.
They exclaim against us for using that Title God|man,The Qua|kers grutch Christ the Title of God-man
and ask where we find such a phraze in Scrip|ture:
And yet they rest not in that Title Emanuel
God with us: nor the Fulness of the Godhead bodi|ly
in Christ, but Sacrilegious Robbers (in Effect)

arrogate the Title, and thing to themselves to be
God-men and God-women, the Godhead dwelling
in them bodily.
3. Whereas G. Fox here saith, the work of the
Ministry was to bring men to a perfect man, c.Ephes. 4. The work of Christs Ministers.
I Answer, He grossly abuseth that heavenly
Ephes. 4. which concerneth the Fulness and per|fection
of all the Elect of God, the whole Body, the
Church of the first-Born, applying it unto every par|ticular
deluded Convert of theirs, as being as per|fect,
as holy, as much God as Christ Jesus, God
blessed for ever himself.
4. I may use the Exprobations of Moses against
Korah, Dathan and Abiram. Is it not enough for you,
c. but will you seek the Priesthood also. Is it not
enough that the most High Potter made us Men
and Women and not Serpents and Toads,The hor|rible pride and Haughti|ness of the Quakers. c. not
Pagans, Turks, Iews, Papists, c. but English Protes|tants,
c. but we will be also Infinites, Eternals,
Omnipotents  Omniscients? Will not the Infinite
favour of Leave to drink of some heavenly drops
of the Infinite Inconceivable Ocean of his Goodness,
satisfie and content us, but we will be Gods, with
the Devil and our first Parents: We will be the
Inconceivable Ocean it self. Is it not enough for a
Proud Rebel to be fetcht from the Gallows by a
smile of his Prince, but he must be the Prince and
King himself.
5. The Pagans of the World as they are wild to
all Civility,The In|dians base esteem of the God|head. so to all Divinity and heavenly matters:
They apprehend a Doity, [49] as a Lyon, Whale,
Dragon, Giant, Tyrant; they feignedly will strive to

pacifie him, to make use of his help in Sickness, in
Wars, in Plagues and Droughts: but they will call
Men and Women Gods too, yea Dogs and Geese,
yea any Creature Manittoo, God, that is, or doth
any thing strange unto them: And thus the Meli|tans
presently cried out of Paul, that he was a God,
And the Gods are come down to us in the likeness of
Men, c.
6. Therefore doth it please the most High and
only Wise to meet often with the Pharaoh's the
Absolom's the Nebuchadezzars,God and the great Adversary to all Proud spirits. the Hamans the
Herods of this World, yea, with whole Nations,
Cities Armies and Navies for their Pride, as he did
with Sodom, in signal and remarkable strokes and
Judgements: yea, with his Iobs, and Hezechiah,'s
and Paul's in danger to be puffed up, in voices and
questions out of the Whirlwind, till we more and
more come to see how perfect we are in Dirt, and
Stink, and Filth of Death and Hell crawling like
Monsters of Pride and self-conceitedness upon this
Earth his Glorious Footstool.
The 25. Instance is in Pag. 90. He brings in the
same Author saying, [There is a kinde of Infinite|ness
in the Soul, and it cannot be Infiniteness it self.]
He Answers:The Soul of men horribly abused Is not the Soul without beginning
coming from God, and returning into God again,
who hath it in his hand, which Hand goes against
him that doth Evil, which throws down that which
wars against it: and Christ the power of God the
bestChange "best" to "rest." R. W. Ms. Ann. of the Soul, which brings it up into God,

which came out from him; hath this a beginning
or ending? and is not this Infinite in it self, and
more than all the World?
I Reply, More briely, (having spoken of the
Soul before) That the Soul or Spirit of a Man
should be boundless or without limits, without be|ginning
or ending, is a Blasphemous Monster begot|ten
of Hellish Pride the Father, and Hellish Ignor|ance
the Mother: for Infinity and Infiniteness in
that sence can be no other but the Infinite and
Eternal Power and Godhead transcending the Ca|pacity
or Men or Angels to receive it or conceive
the nature of it.
2. It is true in a secondary way (a posteriori) as
they say the Spirits of Angels and men are as a Lamp
lighted by the most high and In- [50] finite Maj|esty
never to go out or be extinguished in joy or
sorrow, This Notion dazles the most sober and
steady Eye and Braine; but who can finde a Cen|tre
or Clod of standing from whence to entertain a
thought of no Beginning; no created finite power
can reach to what Infinity is.
3. We see the mighty Kings and Emperours,
their mighty Armies and Navies have Bounds as
the-roaring Waves of the Ocean have: the most
Glorious Sun and Heavenly Bodies have their limi|ted
Motions:The changes of all things created and their Periods the Dayes and Nights, the Summer and
Winter, the Light and Darkness know their periods
of beginning and ending c. All have their hith|erto
and no further set by the Infinite, Eternal
Arm,  no further. But all the stars of heaven, the
drops of the Ocean, the Sand on the Sea shore, the

Leaves and Grass of the whole World are all too
short to reach to the thought of one Minute of that
which properly is Gods only propriety, to wit, In|finity.
4. Among all the Opinions of the Souls Being
and Rise, this of Infinity making it God himself,
commits two horrible Murthers:Add "in its tendency though not in effect." R. W. s. Ann.
First,Two hor|rible Mur|thers attempts It Murthers and destroys the Soul.
And Secondly, The Infinite God himself.
For the Soul of Man by such a world of wo|ful
experience being so subject to change, to sins
and sorrows of all sorts. If this should be the In|finity
of the Soul and so of God himslf, there
would be no Infinity at all so stopt, so limited by
sins and sorrows.
5. We use to say (hyperbollically) that such and
such a doing is Infinite Pride, but surely it is won|derful
and devilish lifting up of the mind of a poor
Earthen Pot, though never so high, so wise, so
learned, so holy to entertain thoughts of being the
Eternal and boundless Infinite power and Godhead.
The blessed Lord proclaime his Infinite Power,
his Infinite Wisdome, his Infinite Greatness, and
Goodness, and Patience to poor sinners (as he did
unto Iob out of the Whirlwind) and then for all
Iobs Perfection and their own, (which so simply as
well as proudly they prate of) they will with Iob
see cause to abhor themselves in Dust and Ashes.
6 Such is the inconceivable Infinity in God be|yond
the reach of all Creatures, that he is not
only Infinite but Infinity it self, [51] Eternity it

self, Omnipotency it self, Wisdome it self, Good|ness
it self, Justice it self in all their eminences and
perfections.
7. Therefore notwithstanding most gracious and
most glorious Appearances to, and influences from
Infinity, upon poor finite Worms below, sure it is
not so sober a Language as that of Birds and Beasts,
who keep their Native Tongues and Tones: Only
men honoured with so high Naturals above their
Fellow potts,Mans doleful Degenera|cy
the Irrationals, and in many respects
above other Rationals; yea, in pretence and some
really dignified with Spirituals in the Minde, Will
and Affections by Priviledges, by Promises. Man|kinde
I say so honoured and degenerating, we are
not only like to, but Infinitely (as I may say) worse
then the wildest Beast that perish.
The 26. Instance is in Pag. 93. where G. Fox
brings in Robert Simson,Robert Simson the body of Christs Church c. saying. [The mystical
Body may be sometimes subject to Distempers, and Hu|mors,
and Wants.]
He Answers, Are you Judges? can you judge of
the Mystical Body which the Saints are Baptized
into? is there Humors, Wants and Distempers in
the Body which the Saints are Baptized into? is
not the Wants, Humors, Distempers in your Body?
do you here in this divide the word aright, distin|gush
things in the Ground, and speak aright of
things, and yet you would not be judged, and say,
Iudge not: and is not Mystical Spiritual?
I Reply, In our late Dispute at Providence, Io.
Stubs and W. Edm affirmed that God was a Spirit

litterally and properly, in which for all his boast of
Learning, it may be as he said, above my self,Put "it may be as he said above myself," in parenthesis, R. W. Ms. Ann. he
shewed but little Philosophy or Divinity: and Wil|liam
Ed. affimed that properly and really that Scrip|ture
of Wolves coming in Sheeps cloathing, was to be
understood litterally without meaning and exposi|tions;
but sober men and aware know how to un|fold
Parables, and Similitudes,The Para|bles  Fig|urative Speeches of Holy Scripture and Metaphors, and
Allegories: they know God is called a Son, and a
Rock, and a Father, and a Husband; c. and so is
Christ Jesus, and they know how such Similies are
to be expounded.
They know that Believers in Christ Jesus are
called a Body, an House, a Flock, a Friend, a Cen|ter,
an Army, and ye are no such properly and lit|terally
but by similitude.
2. The Papists tell us of an Universal, or (as the
Greek) a [52] Catholick Body of Christians: Amongst
them are two great Factions. The one maintaing
this Catholick Church to meet in the Representative
of an Occumenical or General Council of the whole
World: The other in the Assembly or Conclave of
the Pope and his Cardinals: and in the Pope him|self,
while he sits in Peters Infallible Chair.
The Protestants build also a Catholick or Univer|sal
Body of true Believers in Jesus,The Pro|testant Churches scattered over
the World, c. the more Reformed affirme this
Unversal and Catholick Church to be visible in the
Assemblies and Congregations of Christian Worship|pers
separate from the Church of Rome and her
Abominations.

The Devil seeing the Protestant Witnesses con|tending
about the matter and Form of the true
Churches and Congregations, He (by Gods most
holy and wise permission) sends out his old and
known Spirit of pure Invisibles,The Qua|kers and Ieuits Spirit pure Immediate, pure
Worshippers in Spirit and Truth, c. This Spirit
being Cozen German to, or sworn Brother in hellish
equivocation with the Iesuits, when it serves their
turn maintain a Church Invisible, and Ministers and
Officers Invisible: and yet when it serves their turn
practice (as well as Papists or Protestants) visible
Churches and Congregations, visible and audible Apos|tles,
preachers, Ministers, with audible preachings,
prayings, singings, Admissions, Excommunications, (more
or less professed and Explicite.
The Qukaers Churches they are (as they childish|ly
vapour) Bodies without wants or distempers,The Foxian Churches fair
as the Sun, clear as the Moon, terrible as an Army, c.
1. But thisAdd "is." R. W. Ms. Ann. contrary to the nature of all our
Natural Bodies,All bodies liable to Distem|pers
which turning upon the two hinges
of Sins and Sorrows, are full of wants and distem|pers,
until the dashing of all in pieces by sudden
or lingring Deaths.
2. Contrary to all Figurative or Metaphorical
Bodies, domestick in Families, Political in Cities, Na|tions,
Armies, Navies, c.
3. Contrary to Experience of the Bodies or
Churches of Worshippers in the Scripture Iewish
or Christian, who gave up the Ghost, through dis|tempers)
into the hands of Mahumet, who brags he
hath Conquered Moses at Ierusalem, and Iesus at
Constantinople. c.

4. Contrary to the Experience of the World in
their daily observing of the Quakers Bodies and
Worships. (beside the Char- [53] ges against them
for their wild Doctrines and Disciplines) what
known Divisions and Passions about I Nailors and
others Cases? what Envyings Cursings, Aposta|cies,
and moral Idolatry, as that of Covetousness
in this Colony known notoriously?
But since G. Fox speaks so Rationally to his Op|posite,The sen|dency of the Quak. Spirit
Do you distinguish things in the Ground?
I shall remember them of the fairness of my four|teenth
Position against them, viz. that according to
the Principles, Roots and grounds of things I have
fairly Collected, that the Spirit of the Quakers tends
to Incivility and Barbarisme, and to sudden Assaci|nations,
murthers and Persecutions. c.
The Eternal Father of mercies (I believe that I
have, and can further make it good:) stops mil|lions
of mischiefs in the world daily, which the
Natures, grounds and Principles of men (and the
Quakers Spirit also) nowChange "now" to "tend." R. W. Ms. Ann. to overrun and over|whelm
the World withal.
A 27 th. Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is in
pag. 103.Jonathan Clapham, cs where he brings in Ionathan Clapham,
saying, [Men may be called of Men Masters, and it is
but a Cavil to deny it, and they may deny to be called
Fathers as well as Masters] He Answers, Thou hast
in this denied that Doctrine of Christ, and slights
it, who saith, Be not ye of Men called Masters, for
you have all one Master which is Christ, and you all

are Brethren, and thou hast show'd thy self out of
the Brother-hood. And there is a Birth to be born
which can call no man Father upon Earth which
thou art ignorant of.
I Reply, 1. Amongst other foolish passions and
Affections haunting all men, and the Quakers es|pecially,
these two are notorious, viz. pride and a
lazie Ignorance: Those two are the Sire and Dam
of most of these wild monsters.
2. For doth not this proud man know how many
of his excellent Opposites have laid open their
Foxians scornful pride in robbing all mankind of
many due respects and favorable glaunces of Gods
care, of order, and prudent distinctions and differ|ences
amongst the Sons of men in Families, Cities,
Nations, Armies, Navies, c.
3. Sure he can not but remember, and his own
and all the Light in the Quakers (if seriously mind|ed)
will tell them, that [54] in robbing all the
world of their several due moderate, and sober Ti|tles
and Respects, they do but by a jugling Hocas
pocas;The Pope and Qua|kers com|pared. a back dore, c. rob all others of their points,
Ribbons, and Laces, wherewithal only to adorn and
trim, and trick their foolish selves: Just as the
Popish party practice to cry up their Pope, servus
servorum Dei, and yet be Domine fac totum your ho|liness,
c. and yet the Pope and Papists herein out
shoot the Quakers, for the Papists give all men their
Civil and Courteous different Respects, and Ac|knowledgements,
which the dogged and scornful
Quakers, are far from their Spirit being prouder
then the Papists,

4. G. Fox knows how others of his Adversaries
have in print told him that the English word [Mas|ter]
Answers to many words in the Greek [Kathe|gerese
Didarkalos, c.] and that these words Rahbi
and Pateer,Of Fathers and Mas|ters. all shew that the Lord Jesus only Con|demned
the Pharisaical, Popish, and Foxian Itch of
being called Masters, Fathers, Leaders, Teachers in
Religion, undervaluing and slighting others, c.
Thus amongst the Papists their Magister noster,The Po|pish prior|ity an the Foxian is of and in their Doc|tors. their
Patres, c. their Irrefragable, Seraphical and An|gelical
Doctors: thus among the Foxians, Iames
Naylor, Hosanna, c. and G. Fox (at this Town of
Providence) called the Eternal Son of God. Christ
Iesus.
5. Half a Humane and sober Eye may see that in
all his Declamations against the Pharisaical, or Po|pish,
or Foxian Rabbies, the Lord Jesus I say, comes
not near in a Title, the Civil and Natural Respects
of Inferiours,Meer Civ|il Respects to Heads of Families, Cities, King|domes,
c. all of which, the very nature of man
being von politikonChange "von politikon" to "animal politicon." R. W. Ms. Ann. a sociable Creature, and the
holy Scripture is all over (from end to end) full of
most frequent Examples, yea, Commands, and
practices.
6. How Childishly doth Fox Answer his Opposite,
viz that although it be unlawful to call Master, yet
it is not unlawful to call Father,The Qua|kers Mas|ters and Fathers for there is a
Birth which his Opposite is ignorant of, c. I ask if
G. Fox mean not their Immediate Birth of Light
(which for a Cover) they call Spirit and Christ, c.
in Opposition to that true Christian Regeneration and

Change,True Re|generation which it pleaseth God ordinarily to Effect
by means, as Paul said, though you have ten thous|and
Teachers, yet I have begotten you, c, Sure it
is, their Immediate denies the mediate.
55] 7. Where there no Ordinary means appointed
by God for Natural or Spiritual procreation: yet
how simple is that Consequence, that because God
is an Extraordinay Father, therefore I may call
men Fathers but not Masters! when God is both
Father and Master, and both Titles are forbidden in
a true Sense, by one and the same heavenly Breath,
at the same time.
A 28 h. Instance,106. Wil|liam Thomas. is pag. 106. where G. Fox brings
in W. Thomas, saying, [Men are saved, but not by
Christ within us.]
He Answers, [How is mans Salvaion wrought out
but by Christ within? How is the Iustification fels
but by Christ wit in? And the Seeds we manifest that
suffered without is made manifest within, there is Re|demption
and Life: He that hath the Son of God hath
Life, Redemption to God out of the first Adam, and
who feels Christ within, feels Salvation, and who doth
not, are Reprobates, though they may talk of him.]
I Reply, This subtle Fox is in his Burrough Con|founding
(under the Terms Christ) the person of
Christ,The per|son of Christ and the Grace of Christ distingu|ished. and the Love, and Spirit, and Grace or Fa|vour
of Christ, as if they were all one: As if
where the Name and Authority, and writing of G.
Fox comes, there of necessity must G. Fox in person
be: Or, to rise higher, wherever the Name and
Authority, of a King, General, or Admiral is, there
must their persons also be.

This Popish Ubiquitary Fancy all sober Reasons
have long since laught at,Christs perso. and justly, as being most
Fancyfull and Frantick: what,
2. What is this,Not Ubi|quirary. but to make the Kings of men,
yea, the King of Kings poor Mechanicks, yea, lower,
that can do nothing by any Means, Servants, Min|isters,
Legates, Embassadours, c. except they be per|sonaly
present?
3. The Spirit of God resolves the Question, Ephes
3. He dwels in the Heart by Faith, or believing in
him,Faith not Christ himself. and Gal. 2. I live by believing, or Faith in the
Son of God: This Faith is given of God to some
and not to others: This Faith or Belief is wrought
by Christ Jesus, and inshed by him, and may with
as good Sense be called Christ himself, as a shoo
which G. Fox hath begun and finished be called G
Fox himself.
4. With what Colour of Reason or Sense is it
that if I believe King Charles the second to be the
King of English Men and my King,K. Charles King ye not per|sonally present in all his Do|minions I must of ne|cessity
(because of my belief which He by gra|cious [56
means hath wrought in me) I believe that K.
Charles is personally present, Ubiquitarily present
in person in all his Dominions and all the world
over where ever his Loving Subjects have their
Residence?
5. I grant if we as some Quakers and Humphry
Norton by Name resolve Christ only into a Spirit,Humph. Norton yields Christ ubiquitary
and God only he is Ubiquitary: But as man, why
may not the General of an Army say, to his whole
Army, and every Individual Souldier, as Paul to the
Corinthians, though I am absent in Body yet am I present

in Spirit, Christ Jesus is in his Command, and Cou|rage
and Example in every Regiment, every Squad|ron,
every Band and Troop, and every Souldier of
the mny Millions that have, and shall believe in
him, and that in a Sense,Add "by faith." R. W. Ms. Ann. both as God and man.
6. The Hinge and pinch of the Difference lies in
the Opposition,Which word  the word humane they startle a which the Quakers make against the
Manhood of Christ Jesus to be yet Extant, many of
them alleadging: why stand you gazing, Acts 1, c.
as if it were but gazing after a Manhood and all
now were Spirit and Light within.
7. Who ever questiond,Christ Je|sus in the Soul makes it a palace for 3 Kings c. but that the Spirit or
power of Christ Jesus worketh in the Souls of his
Elect the great saving change or regeneration,
gives Repentance, opens the heart to Believe, and
makes the heart of this Believer a Palace for three
Kings, yet but one, the Father, the Son and the
Spirit, in Holiness, Love, Meekness, Patience, c.
and all theseChange "these" to "their." R. W. Ms. Ann. Royal Attendants.
8. Who questions but Christ Jesus (as the Sun in
these Heavens) inluenceth all parts of the World
in several respects,The varie|ty of Christs workings  appear|ances and nothing is hid from his heat,
He is felt in the bruised Reed and smoaking Flax;
in the poor in Spirit, in the hungry and thirsty
after Righteousness: sometimes in the hope of
Glory to come, yea, in present joy unutterable and
glorious; Sometimes the Lambs Wife is visibly
asleep though her heart wakes, sometimes she is
Alarmed by his knocking and is sluggishly unwil|ling

to open to him, sometimes she rises and opens
but he is gone, and she seeks for him by day and
night and cannot find him.
9. There is also a false feeling of Christ Jesus
(as I spake before of a false Conception in a Wo|man)
How many are bold to cry Lord,False Con|ceptions Lord open;
for we have prophesied in thy Name, c and yet I will
not say as G. Fox. here saith, of his Feeling that all
that have not my feeling or working of Christ are
Reprobates: yet [57] this I say as Solomon, A
Whore is Loud and Clamorous (not so the Chaste, and
Sober, and Modest Women) and the Devil spake as
Holy and Heavenly words as Angels could have
spoken, yet it was but the Divil in Samuels Mantle.
The 29th. Instance is in pag. 117. where he brings
in Giles Fermin saying,Giles Fermin [Paul Swore after Christ, and
the Angels Swore, I wonder Paul should so forget him|self
and sin so fearfully in Swearing, so the Quakers
Light that denies Swearing, is of Satan and not the
Light of Christ.]
He Answers, Christ the Light (which Satan is
out of) which is the Oath of God, ends all Oathes,
Sworn by Prophets or Angels whatsoever; and who
Swares be fallen into the Condemnation of the
Devil: And it is no where said that the Apostle
Swore, but such as thou art matters not what thou
speak; so that Spirit that Preacheth for Swearing
is not the Spirit of Christ but is the Spirit of Anti-Christ,
c.
I Reply, first G. Fox dares not deny but that the
Angel and Paul Swore after Christ, only he keeps

his old Song, viz That Christ put an end to Swear|ing,
and that it is not said that Paul Swore.
But 1. He waves that Sweareng of the Angel,Paul  the Angels Swearing
or Christ himself, Rev. 10. for there he knows the
very term of Swearing is used.
2. As to Paul, if the attestation of the Name of
God be the formality of an Oath, then if ever any
Man Swore in this World Paul did, saying to the
Corinthians, I call God to Record on my Soul, that to
spare you I came not as yet to Corinth, c.
Secondly, It is true that all Nations have used to
Swear by,Of Swear|ing in General or Appeal to the Gods they owned and
worshipped. It is true also, that they have used to
put Creatures into the room of God, and Swear by
them as the Iews did; and som write out of a
Superstitious Reverence in forbearing the Name of
God, and indeed the Reasons Christ Jesus gives,
Mat. 5. look that way.
Thirdly. It is true also that for abuse of Swearing
by, and Prophaning the Holy Name of God, a
whole Land may mourn as Ieremiah speaketh.
Fourthly There seems to be a very fair colour put
on a universal Prohibition of Swearing by Christ
Jesus, and by his Apostle Iames, Swear not, c.
58] This ConjurorChage "conjuror" to "conjecture." R. W. Ms. Ann. hath taken with many pre|cious
Servants of God former and latter, even with
many of those called the Fathers, and with those
Famous Protesters against the whore of Rome, the
Waldenses, and with Famous Usher, who doth more
then seem to vindicate their not Swearing when
Convented and Examined by the Popish Inquiitors.Famous Usher.

5. Notwithstanding this, and more which may
be granted, and though I should humbly motion to
all higher Powers for Christian tenderness,Modera|tion as to Swearing. (as to the
holy Majesty of Heaven his Name, and to the Souls
of any making Scruple:) yet I must proclaim
against G. Fox, his lame and simple Return to the
Objection of his Opposite concerning Paul and the
Angel.
For, why may not Paul and all the Apostles, and
Christ and all the Angels of Heaven, and all the
Saints of God upon the Earth (in the words of
Paul) call God to Record upon their Souls, that
this, or this was the Cause and Truth, c. Con|sidering
1. That neither the most holy God nor the Lord
Jesus (who I think is the Swearing Angel Rev. 10.)
nor the heavenly Spirits, the Angels, nor Paul, nor
any of Christs Apostles, or Messegers would have
practiced a Ceremony, or a Shadow (like Circumcision
or the Passover) at theChange "the" to "y^t." R. W. Ms. Ann. time of the Day, c.
2. Swearing or appealing unto God immediately
in Oaths or Vows,Swearing no Cere|mony. or Lots, or Fastings, though higher
and above the practice of ordinary Invocations, Sup|plications,
Thanksgivings, c. were never accounted
Ceremonies or Types of Substances to come, but Real
and Substantial Services and Addresses unto the most
holy and most high Creatour written in the hearts of
all mankind before ever Ceremony or Moses was
born, and therefore as the fear of God is put for
the whole worship of God, so also is swearing in
the holy Scripture: and we may as well deny all

worship and Service visible,The fear of God and Swaring by him put by God for his whole worship. and all External Acts of
Homage and Devotion of the Body unto God, yea,
and all the fear of God is thereErase "is there." R. W. Ms. Ann. in the mind, Soul
and Spirit, or in any External Obeysance or Reve|rence,
as this Service and worship of calling upon
God, and appealing to his holy Majesty, as Witness
and Iudge in some Cases, c
3. Whereupon it follows, that this high point of
Gods worship is as real,Swearing as real a worship of God as Prayer, preaching, Baptisme, Lords Supper, c. as moral, as holy, and perpetu|al
as Prayer it self, as preaching, yea, as Baptisme,
and the Lords Supper, and no more Ceremonial,
though I know the Foxians make Baptisme and the
59] Lords Supper but Ceremonies for a time, and ere
long if they continue to hearken to Samuel within
them, they will account Prayer and Preaching
(whether Apostolical or Pastoral) but Types and Sha|dows
also.
4. It is a most simple and un-Christian and Athe|istical
whimsie that Christ was the end of Oaths,Christ not the abol|isher of Oaths the
end of the Prophets, the end of the Scripture,
the end of Reghteousness, (in their Sense) though
as Mediatour he was the End or Perfection of, and
fulfilling of the Law of God, which never Soul
beside the Lord Jesus ever kept in thought, word
and deed, what ever the proud Pharisees and Pa|pists,
and Foxians prate, c.
5. It is a gross Fancy to imagine that the Lord
Jesus in the 5 of Math. gave new Commands,The fifth of Ma|thew. or
Contradicted the holy pleasure of his Father con|cerning
Revenge, Adultery, Oaths, Prayers, Fastings,

but opened his Fathers Law in the purity and Spi|rituality
of it against the rotten Expositions, Tra|ditions
and practices of the Pharisees.
6. In particular, let all the Reasons be expended
and carefully weighed, which the Lord Jesus so
wonderfully, exactly gives why they should not swear
by Ierusalem, nor the Temple, nor their Head, nor
any Oath, to wit of such a Nature, and half a sober
eye may see that the Lord Jesus intends only to re|duce
them to an holy Swearing, only by God, in
Gods way, c. and in their Common Converse, to
use yea, and nay, c.
7. I have read a sober and man like Answer of F.
H. called a Quaker against A. S. called a Doctour,The Qua|kers plain|ly Confess Swearing in Cases lawful
concerning Oaths, not like G. Fox his bruitish bark|ings
against all his Opposites and any that prateChange "prate" to "please." R. W. Ms. Ann.
may see F. H. yields to A. S. that himself, (and I
presume he speaks the mind of all the Quakers)
could yield to give a Testmony in weighty Cases,
by the Name and in the Name of God, as in the
presence of God, and attest or call God to witness,
c. And he saith, that they had offered so to give
a Testimony, and that his Opposite Doctour Snal|wood,
and I think Bishop Gauden so called, assented
that this was Substantial and Formal Swearing: only
the Ceremonies were enjoyned by Law, to which
the Quaker could not yield, but suffer as indeed they
have done upon this Account most lamentably in
London and Bristol, and all England over.
8. I have much to add both as to that Fancy of
Christs end- [60] ing Oaths as Ceremonies,Cases of Swearing and of

Cases that have beallen my self in the Chancery in
England, c. and of the loss of great Sums which
I chose to bear through the Lords help, then yield
to the Formality (then and still in use) in Gods
worship, though I offered to Swear as F. H. men|tions
they have done, and the Judges told me they
would rest in my Testimony and way of Swearing,
but they could not dispence with me without an
Act of Parliament.
I believe this highly concerns the high Assembly
of Parliament and all Law makers,Sin estab|lished by Law, is Sin multi|plied and multi|plied, Judgement here and
for ever. to search well
and to appoint a Committee of Searchers to Ex|amine,
if the Laws upon new appearances from
Heaven have not need of rectifying and some of
cancelling for sin against God or the Souls of men
established by Law, is like Iereboams making Is|rael
to sin, and most commonly after much patience
of God brings double punishment in the end.
The 30th. Instance where G. Fox brings in Tho
Moor saying [It is not properly nor in a full sense that
God is manifest in the Flesh of his Saints.]30. Tho|mas Moor.
He Answers, The Saints are the Temple of God,
and God dwells in them, and they come to witness
the Flesh of Christ. And they glorifie him in
their Souls and bodies: And the Lord is glorified
in their bringing forth much fruit. And the wit|ness
is the Seed, the one offering for sin to be man|ifest
within, and such are not Reprobates, yet wit|ness
the one offering Christ Jesus, and them that
have not Him within, they are Reprobates.
I Reply, a great Designe of the Devil in all Ages

hath been to Cavil at,The Dev|ils great work in
all Ages. and hinder Gods love t
mankind: Hence he plotted and effected Mans
Fall from God: God Infinite in wisdome and mer|cy,
out-shoots and out-plots him, and designes a
Reconciliation and a Marriage between the Son of
God the Prince of Life, and lost mankind: He
promised his coming in our Flesh; prefigured Him,
prophesied of Him, and in the Fulness of Time sent
Him, c.
Against this Lord Jesus, this old Serpent hisseth
and rageth before his Birth, at his Birth, after
his Birth, and in all Ages ever since, as fearing the
crushing of his Brains, and the downfall of his
Throne,Sathans Emissaries to destroy Christ Jesus. if the Kingdome of the Lord Jesus stand:
Hence not long after Christs Assention, he stirred
up many Anti Christs, [61] Simon Magus and his
Followers, the Arrians, the Gnosticks, Cerdonians,
Manicheans, c. the great Anti-Christ of Rome, and
since the Reformation, the new Manicheans, those
in Luthers and Calvins time called the Spirituals
and Libertines, and in our times the Adamites, the
Ranters,The per|son of Christ Je|sus the Devils great Eye sore. the Quakers, and all in order to his Dra|gons
war against the person of the Arch-Angel,
Michael the word of God, the Individual person,
the Man Christ Jesus, and after him all that should
dare to follow him.
Some (as the Arians, c.) have denied him to be
so, but Man, and not God; some (as the Manicheans,
c.) deny his Manhood, affirming him to be God,
and a Spirit, but, with Christs manhood and the Scrip|tures,
the Devil and the Papists, and the Quakers,
(for most of them) could with all their hearts make

an Everlasting parting: The Devils andChange "and" to "end." R. W. Ms. Ann. is to de|stroy
this Saviour and Salvation to poor lost man:
The Quakers pretend their end to be the Exaling
and glorifying of God in the Flesh of his Saints,The Man|icheans the great Opposers of Christs Manhood.
therefore some of these Manicheans render his Birth,
Life and Death to be only Imaginary, and Allegori|cal:
a Figure of what should be done in, and by
Christians: others of them say it is real, but he
only lived and died for an Example, others, that he
was really so born, he so lived and died, but he is
now only within, c. and after his Flesh no
Inquiry.
G. Fox here plays upon the various meaning of
the word Flesh. Also he plays upon those holy
Scriptures, viz. God is glorified in the Souls and Bo|dies
of his Saints, c.
This subtle Ionadab he knows also,That In|dividual Man Christ Je|sus must have the prehemi|nence of the only Messiah and Medi|ator. that the Pro|testants
maintain that the Godhead and the Spirit
of God so dwels not in the Souls and Bodies of his
Servants as in that Soul and Body of the Lord
Jesus. It is true he was notErase "not." R. W. Ms Ann. born of a Woman,
but against their wills they are forc't to Confess
that he was not born of a Wife, but a Virgin,
though many Fancies are Coyned about that: They
Confess that no man was Father of his fleshly Na|ture:The God|head of Christs Body after a Trans|cendent way.
He knows also that the Protestants hold that
the Godhead dwels in him, and dwels in him as the
great Mediator and Propitiation surety and Under|taker,
so as not in any of the Bodies, or all the

Bodies of his Saints, besides, and after a more high
Transcendent, and Inconceivable manner.
G. Fox knows that his Opposite intends such a
manifestation of God in the Flesh that renders
theChange "the" to "y^t." R. W. Ms. Ann. one single person Christ [62] Jesus the Head of
his Church, c. And that they hold that there is as
much difference between that one Individual person
Christ Iesus the Head and his Followers, as between
our Heads and our Bodies, the King himself and
his Body or Subjects, yea, every one singly in par|ticular:
yea, as between the Foundation and all the
building thereon raised.
Now how poor and lame is it, that because the
Saints are Gods Temple,The six great points. therefore they must be
God himself: because 1 Tim. 3. Christ dwels in his
Saints by believing, Ephes. 3. therefore they are
Christ himself:Dreadful|ly inverted upon the Quakers. Because God in an holy Sense, be|came
Flesh: Therefore our Flesh is God and Christ,
therefore will they find those heavenly particulars,
1 Tim. 3. affimed of that man Christ Jesus to be
inverted and dreadfully turned upon their proud
and divilish Flesh in this manner, viz. The Devil
is manifest in their Flesh, Condemned of the holy
Spirit of God: Abhord of the heavenly Angels:
The world shall abhor their memory, and except
Repentance, they shall descend with all the Ene|mies
of the true Lord Jesus into the Lake that
burns with unquenchable Fire and Brimstone.
The 31st. Instance is in pag. 136. where G. Fox

brings in the same Authour saying,136 Tho|mas Moor [Christ is dis|tinct
from every one of us, and without us, and our
particular persons.]
He Answers, [The Apostle saith Christ was in them,
except they were Reprobates, and they were slesh of
his slesh, and of his Bone, and eat his flesh, and drank
his Blood, then it was within them, and he is distinct
from none but Reprobates who hate the Light.]
I Reply, 1. This and the former look face upon
face as in a Glasse, and yet G. Fox herein carries
two faces under one hood: A Face for God, and a
Face for the Devil; one Face for Christ another
for Antichrist. For is it not known by all, that
there be divers wayes of eating Christs Flesh and
drinking his Blood? Although there be a Mystical
and Spiritual feeding upon Christ Jesus his Love,
his Passions,Eating Christs Flesh ad drinking his Blood. his Merits, c. which we maintain
against the bloody Transubstantiators of Rome and
Hell, yet can ought but Hellish Bewitching and
Impudence conclude, that litterally the Flesh pro|fiteth
nothing, and therefore their Flesh is as good
as the Flesh of Christ, and their Blood (as some of
63] the Quakers have Printed) is of as much virtue
as the Blood shed of the Man Christ Jesus: Hence
so many of them contend that Gods Blood,The Fox|ians horri|ble pride exalting themselves to be God and Christ Act. 20.
and Gods Flesh Redeems us, c. and their Blood
and Sufferings are Gods Flesh and Blood Redeem|ing,
Saving, c, I know what one of their chief
said [He is a Fool that speaks all at once] and I know
also, that in the Bottome (which their Herods andErase "Herods and." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Apostles know better then I) these Foxians are God,

and Christ, and Spirit, and Resurrection, and Life,
and Heaven, c.
2. But for true Believers in Jesus it is enough
for them to believe,Christs coming again to them. Ioh. 16. That for a little while
he must leave them, and after a little while he
would come again to them, even the same Man that
left them, that God man, and the Man Christ Iesus.
1. I know these poor Foxians say, that he did
come again to them, and I know also that a Man
may feel this Lye with a pair of Mittins: For
IChange "I" to "We." R. W. Ms. Ann. know that the Comforter came not to them upon
his Resurrection (for then he was forty dayes with
them) but after his Assention.
2. Who knows not that the Foxians maintain
Christs second coming to be Spiritual, and count
all gazing Fools that look after a Man, for he is
come anto them in Spirit, and in them he main|tains
his great Assizes, and now passeth Judgement
upon all the Children of Men by them.
3. If these poor filthy Dreamers lived without
Food and Evacuations, without Physick (which
some of them cry down, and no Physick but Faith)
without Procreation,The Fox|ians natu|ral and spiritual Defile|ments therefore not God but filthy Dreams. and bringing forth of Chil|dren
without the filthiness and stinks of Nature;
yea without the many thousands of Holy Words,
and Thoughts, and Actions omitted, and the many
thousand passionate, impertinent, unreasonable dis|contented
Words and Actions, c. then might we
say as the men of Iconium (touching Paul and Bar|nabas)
The Gods are come to us in the likeness of Men,
till then we must look upon the Foxians (eating so

Christ his flesh, c. until they become Christ him|self,)
as Simple, and Monstrous, and Blasphemous
as the Papists in their Foolish, Monstrous and
Bloody Transubstantiations.
4. Alas!The Fox|ians in Calvins time. these are old tricks plaid by the Mani|cheans
in former times, by Quintinus and Pocqueius,
c. in Luther and Calvins time: Did not some
thousands of this frantick spirit [64] then, say, is
Christ in us? how is he Distinct from us? what need
you ask me how I do? can Christ be sick? can
Christ do but well? speaking of themselves: But
I observe Gods strokes in the World most just 
wonderful upon three sorts of persons 1. Voluptu|ous.Gods strokes in this world wonderful upon three sorts.
2. Oppressors and Tyrants. 3. Ringleaders of
Blasphemies,Change "Blasphemies" to "Blasphemous." R. W. Ms. Ann. Opinions. Let every Soul consider: I
can give abundance of Instances of former and
later times had I here time and season for it, and
were not all Hystories full, c.
The 32d. Instance is in Pag. 186. where G. Fox
brings in Samuel Hamond saying [What warrant
have you to go out to the Quakers?186. Sam|ue Ham|mond. shall a Man go hear
the Iews and Popish Masse because Paul bids try all
things? No, No.]
G. Fox Answers [Paul bids us quench not the
Spirit, and where the Spirit is not quenched they
may try Papists, Iews, Protestants, who quench not
the Spirit: But who quench the Spirit and draws
people from the Light within, they draw from that
they should see withal, then you stuff them up with
old Authors and lying stories, as you permit abroad.

I Reply, 1. And ask of G. Fox and all his Fox|ians:About true bearing.
Have the Papists the Iews or any Idolaters
the Holy Spirit of God amongst them, whom we
may go to hear God speaking in his own holy
Promise, Ordinance and Appointment unto us?
2. May I hear a Papist, or Iew, or any other
False Worshippers or Idolaters to try them when I
am convinced and satisfied already that they speak
not by the Holy Spirit, c.
3. May I go to Worship God with them who
either (as I believe) Worship a False God, or Wor|ship
the true and living God, in Wayes and Wor|ships
of Mens Inventions and Appointments?
4. May I hear a false Prophet, or be present at
any false worship, but with actual reproving of
them, and labouring to reduce them to the true
God and his most holy Institutions and Appoint|ments?
Upon this Reason I went to the General Assmbly
of the Quakers at Newport the last year, I queried
with them about the true Christ, and the true Spirit:
but I was stopt by a sudden Spirit of Prayer in a
Woman, and the unseasonable Spirit of Prayer in a
man, which forced me to stop, and occasioned me
to take this [65] way of offering an appointed and
solemn discourse and disputation with them.
5. I ask, may any Soul out of Curiosity go to
hear a strange Preacher, in whom I have not Faith,
that he is sent from God, c. especially, if there
be not a free liberty for my Queries and Objections,
and searchings as the Bereans did?
6. Are there not two great Cautions given, us by

the Spirit of God! Take heed whom you hear: Take
heed how you hear, and both of these in reference to
Gods worship and mine own Salvation?
7. What do these Foxians mean by the Spirits
quenching?What the quenching of the Spirit is. Can the Spirit of God be really quenched,
or put out, any more then the Sun in the Heavens
by all the water in the Ocean? Is the Spirit of
God Metaphorically quenched any other ways then
by withdrawing the means or fuel which were to
keep the Fire burning that came down from Hea|ven
upon the Altar? why then do these proud, lazie
Souls so horribly slight reading, studying Books, yea,
Gods Book, as one of their chief said to me, (laying
his hand upon the Bible of Iunius, c. art not
thou past these yet? And why do they worship a
dumb Devil in their dumb meetings, and stand still
and listen, and lie upon their beds of laziness for
Revelations and Notions, c.
8. As for G. Fox his scornful sling against old
Authors,Old Authors. what is it but pride and Ingratitude: pride
to undervale, much more to scorn my Progenitors
and Ancestors: Ingratitude to God for so many helps,
c. and to them who have laboured and broke the
Ice, and left their Labours behind them for the
benefit of after Commers: yea, what Injustice, when
I disregard and slight their writings, and reproach
them, calling them Old Authors, compared with
their new Fancies, as W. Edmundson did me fre|quently
at Newport, Old Man, Old Man, c.
The 33 Instance is in Pag, 206, where he brings
in Iohn Burton,John Burton. sading, [It is a Scripture of the Dev|ils
making, to apprehend Christ within.]

He Answers, If there be any other Christ but
he, who was Crucified within, he is the false Christ,
and the Scriptures hold forth this, and the Devil
never made it, but he and his Messengers are against
it. And he that hath not this Christ that was
risen and [66] Crucified within is a Reprobate,
though Devils and Reprobaes may talk of him
without.
I Reply, This is the great dispute between the
Christians and the Pagans,The goat dispute about the true Christ. the Christians and the
Iews, the Christians and the Mahumetans, and the
Christians among themselves so called, viz. Who is
the great Prophet?
2. To what purpose should I alleadge the whole
history of the Birth, Life, Death, c. of the Lord
Jesus, since the Quakers acknowledge all true, c.?
3. Why should I alleadge the Sermons and
Preachings, and Writings of the Apostles or Messen|gers
of Christ Iesus after his Ascention, all harmoni|zing
with the four Evangelists, writing his Life and
Death, c.
4. Certain it is,Christ without and within that he that shall turn over all the
former Relations and Histories, and all the writings
and Sermons of the Apostles since, and predicate a
Christ that was risen within, Crucified within, (in
Opposition to that Iesus of Nazareth without) he must
have the Forehead of a Reprobate and Devil, (as G.
Fox phrazeth it)
5. G. Fox knows the Protestants predicate (in
Life and Death) the believing in Christ Jesus so
born,The Pro|testants belief of Christ. so living and dying: And the applying of the
price of his Death and merits unto God for Propiti|tion:

And the Applying of the Promise and new
Covenant and Bargain in that Blood for a new Heart,
a new Spirit, c.
6. What shall then become of G. Fox, his be|lieving
in a Christ that was Risen and Crucified
within, in Opposition to this Lord Jesus so Promised,
so Prophesied of, so prefigured, so brought forth, so
living and dying, so preached, so believed on, and what
a Forehead of Hell must he have that calls all those
Reprobates and Devils that talk of Christ without?
The 34th Instance is in pag. 214. where G,Churches in Wales. Fox
brings in the Elders and Messengers of several
Churches of Ilston, Abergevenny, c. saying, [We
are Conceived in Sin and brought forth in Iniquity, c.]
He Answers, [David doth not say, you who were
Conceived in Sin, but I, and W. saith, Iohn was sanc|tified
from the Wombe, and the Scriptures speaks of
such as were sanctified from the Wombe, and Children
that were clean. And so you do not speak as Elders
and [67] Messengers of true Churches, or Men dividing
the Word aright, but you are one against another,
though you are all against them you call Quakers, that
be in the Truth.]
I Reply, 1. In theChange "the" to "this" R. W. Ms. Ann. passage G. Fox discovers to
any Intelligent and Savoury Spirit, not only a weak
and deluded Soul,The first Cry of every Chid of God. but a Popish and Arminian poyson
about the Estate of all mankinde in their first Birth,
a strong presumption that he never felt what the
woful Estate of all mankinde by Nature is, and

what to Cry out in his own particular, with David,
I was Conceived in Sin and brought forth in Iniquity,
which Cry is one of the first Soul Cries of every
Child of God.
2. About 120 years since the Father of Spirits
stird up the Spirit of his Famous Servant Calvin to
batter down the Babel of a Franciscan Frantick,Whence Devils and wicked men come.
who maintained, that God from the first Created
both Devils and wicked men in the same Condition
of wickedness wherein we now find them: Con|trary
to the holy Scriptures Testimony (as that Ex|cellent
Soul proved) declaring their pure Creation,
their Fall, and their respective future Estate and con|dition
to Eternity.
3. In the Reign of our late Royal Sovereign K.
Iames it pleased God to let loose this Devil of Pela|gius,The low Countries hazard by the Pela|gians.
who rowzed up the wits of Arminius and his
Followers in the low Countries, (during their twelve
years Truce with Spain) so that the Civil Discord
about this point and other Pelagian and Semi-pelagian
Doctrines had almost ruined Holland, c. but that
the Lord mightily assisted them. First, By the
personal presence and Forces of the Prince of
Orange, and Secondly, By the Famous Assembly and
Disputes of the Synod at Dort.
4. To follow the Fox into his Burrough,Davids Concep|tions vin|dicated from G. Foxes Aspersions what if
David say not you but I? why should the Papists
and Arminians, or Foxians have a more holy Birth
then David? Wherein could holy David, Father Iesse
and his mother be charged? Is not the English of
the word Devil Accuser, Reproacher, Slanderer, Is
not Nature that Law and Order which the most

Infinite Creator hath set, in the propagation of all
his Creatures, though the choicest of them Man
be degenerated into the soure Vine,What Na|ture is at first a sweet
Vine, Nature or Gods Order goes on, though man|kinde
be Corrupted from the Womb, and the Imag|ination
of the Thoughts of mans Heart be only evil and
that continually, Gen. 6. and millions of [68] Ex|periences
all the world over Confirm it what the
Trade of all mankinde is from the Birth. The
Spots of the Leopard, and the Blackness of the Ne|ger
comes not by Accident, c.
6. The perversness and Crookedness of the mo|tions
of Nature may continue, though Nature and
the Course of it run on, as we see in Rivers turn'd
out of their Chanels, in Clocks and Watches, and
Dal, and Lutes, and Harps when out of Tune
they give their Natural and Artificial (though dis|tempered)
Sounds and operations.
7. Beside the holy Testimony of Moses, Gen. 6,
and David, Psal. 51. and the Lord Jesus declaring
what the heart of man is, Mark 7. How doth Paul,
Rom. 5. and 7. declare the Entrance of Sin by the
first Man, until by the second Man Sin and Death,
and Hell be Conquered, and at last Sin in Gods
Children fully dissolved, and abolished?
8. I end this passage with Appellation to all that
knw what Children are all the world over,The pure|ness of the sweetest Infants. the
sweetest and the fairest born of the holiest and sweet|est
Parents, how froward, how proud, how Revenge|ful
against their Fathers, Mothers, and most tender
Nurses.
1. These rotten and crooked Dispositions in every

Childe bring forth wilde Asses fruits in Youth, of
Rebellion against Superiours,The rot|tenness of
nature and of wicked desires
of Wine and Women, and fighting and pleasures
in persons of greater growth, this rotten Nature
appears in their rooting (like Swine) for earthly
profits, or preferments, or fighting like Lions  Ty|gers
in Wars and Law-conttntions, and oppressing
of Inferiors, especially if they dare to reprove or
witness their Idolatries, Superstitions and Abomi|nations.
2. The experience of all the Saints of God in
the Holy Scripture,The ex|periences of Gods Saints in Scripture who maintained a Battel be|tween
the Flesh and Spirit all their dayes, accord|to
Gal. 5. A Battel within them, sometimes the
Spirit (or new Man, the new Creature, or the Grace
of Christ) prevailing, sometimes the Corruption or
Rottenness of Nature (like the two Houses of
Saul and David) the old Man getting the victory,
as we see generally in Abraham, Isaak, Iacob, Mo|ses,
Aaron, Eli, Samuel, David, Solomon, c. till we
come down to the highest Saints Paul and Peter:
the one shamefully again and again vanquished,
and the other (Paul) crying [69] out, that the good
he would do he did not, and yet when he did evil he
had two men within him, the Law of his Spirit
Heavenly, and the Law of sin which dwelt within
him, tc. they that know not and feel not this, they
are either dead or rotten, and so feel nothing, or if
there be any life of God in them, and yet say in the
litteral sense they sin not, their weakness is such,
that like very low and far gone weak bodies their

Filth and Excrements come from them, but they
know nothing of it, nor will believe or acknowl|edge
any such matter.
The 35. Instance is in Pag. 217. where G. Fox
brings in Iohn Iackson saying,217 Ioh Iackson [False Prophets and
Christs, and Deceivers, many should come (if it were
possible) to deceive the very Elect.]
He Answers, [Yes, Christ said they should come
to the Apostles, which before their Decease they
did come, and went forth from them, which Christ
said should inwardly Ravin, and get the sheeps
cloathing: which since the dayes of the Apostles
all the World went after them, as thou maiest read
in the Revelations: and now are People but coming
from them to the Rock, and now shall the Ever|lasting
Gospel be preached to them that dwell upon
the Earth, over the heads of the Beast and their
false Prophet, and they shall be taken, and the
Lambe, and the Saints shall have the victory.
I Reply, 1. As that great Fox, the Pope of Rome
and his Foxians (the Worshppers of that Beast)
maintain that Antichrist is not yet come,The great and little Foxes. that so he
may scape a scouring, or rather a burning or dash|ing
in pieces, so doth our little Fox, G. Fox and his
Foxians cry out another Lurry, [Antichrist why he
is come and gone long ago, c.] As if false Christs
might not be then and now too: as if there were
no more greedy Wolves to be found then in Act.
20 and no more Sheep-skins for them in Matthew,
7. c.
The Spirit of God proclaims, 1 Cor. 11. that

there must be Heresies, and Peter tells us 2 Pet. 2.
that there must be false Teachers, false Prophets, and
Damnable Heresies, for the trial of the sincere, c.
And were all the Foxes hunted out and destroyed
in the Apostles dayes, and none left since Iohns
time to our times to be hunted after and digd out
of their Burroughs.
70] Are there none sound, sincere, and chaste to
be tried at this day to the Lord Jesus the Heavenly
Bridegroom, and to his Eternal King and Father,
God blessed to Eternity.Ends with a "?" not a "period." R. W. Ms. Ann.
2. The Protestants maintain that the Pope or
Papacy is the great Antichrist, the Man of Sin,
with seven heads and ten horns, c. why should not
the Devil be able to raise besides the Pope,The Her|esies of several Ages. the Cere|donians,
Valentinnians and the Arians, Manicheans,
Gnosticks, c. and since, or at the beginning of the
Reformation, the Quintinians, and Munsterian Mou|sters?
why should he not be able to raise in our
time the Nicholaitans and Foxians.
3. It is true that in the times of warm peace,
c. many Vermine breed,Concern|ing false Christs c. whom the cold winter
of Persecution utterly destroyes. I know also that in
the late times of Freedome to mens Opinions in
England, Many Opinions and promoters of them
arose: Sharp times God hath to make discovery, I
know some say that Iudas, and Theudas, and Bar|chochas,
and Rabbi-Iudah, c. were the false Christs
the Lord Jesus spake of: I know also that amongst
the Professours of the Christian Name, false Christs

and false Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, c. must
pretend to the Christian Name, also.
4. I know some affirm that though the Pope
be Antichrist, yet that he that letted was not the
Roman Emperour until he was taken out of the
way,Concern|ing him who letted Antichrists rising but that he that letted was the Holy Spirit to
which the Quakers now pretend, which Spirit be|ing
taken away the Popes arose: But in the dayes
of Iohn when those gifts did most flourish, yet then
there were many Antichrists, and the gift of the
Holy Spirit did not hinder their rising; so that all
ages are full of false Teachers.
5. What Ignorance doth this little Fox, yet
great Boaster discover in saying [Now are People
coming forth from them, c.] doth he proudly look
over all those Glorious Protestant Witnesses of Je|sus,
before and since Luther, whose Names many
of them, God commanded that Heavenly I. Fox to
make Record of.
6. Do the Foxians just now about twenty years
preach the everlasting Gospel:The ever|lasting
Gospel Now saith W. Edm.
in our discourse we preach the everlasting Gospel to
you, that you shall be free from sin, c. But Gods
Spirit tells us in Peter and Iude of pretenders to
liberty, while themselves are the Servants of Cor|ruption
or Rottenness.
71] 7. Both Jews and Gentiles have done by the
Name of Christ as the Jews and Romans with
Christ Jesus before they murthered him: they
mockd him, c. and then Murthered him; that
so they might be the Heir and Messiah themselves:
Just as the great Fox the pope and these little

Foxians pretend to be the sole great Heir apparent
to the Crown of Heaven, and all other Rebels and
Reprobates against and from their Heavenly Majes|ties.
The 36. Instance,John Jackson is in page 218. Where G, Fox
brings in the same Author saying, [I hope you will
not condemn the Generation of the Righteous because
they are vot perfect.]
He Answers, That which condemneth is Right|eous;
it condemns that which is not perfect, and
the Generation is Righteous and not to be con|demned.
I Reply, He Answers four things: First, that
which Condemns is righteous. Secondly, That
which is Righteous Condemns that which is not
perfect.The hor|rible pride of the Foxians Thirdly, That which is righteous is per|fect.
Fourthly, The Generation is Righteous (that
is them selves being perfect) and not to be Con|demned,
the Summe of his Answer is, Himself and
his Foxians are Gods, as pure, holy, as God is,
and therefore now keep the Eternal Sessions and
Assizes at the Tribunal of their high Court, must all
the Generations of the World receive their Eter|nal
Doom and Sentence, I know they know this is
the bottom.
1. But stay, this Fox is in his Burrough of Equivo|cation:
for Iudgement is twofold: First, Iudgement
Righteous:False ap|pearances Secondly, According to Appearance, as
the Lord Jesus distinguisheth: How many are
declared by Appearances to their Eyes, CloudedInsert "with." R. W. Ms. Ann.

pride, malice, Envy, Lasciviousness, Covetousness, Am|bition,
c. And therefore away with the Son of
God, hang him, and give us Barrabas, though a
Boutefeau and Murtherer, c.
2. It is not true, that all that is not perfect (in
the Foxians Sense) is not Righteous:The word perfect in the greek and Heqrew For 1. (as hath
been before observed) the words Tam and Tomjin in
Hebrew, and Telos and Teleios, and Teleion in the
Greek, have divers significations, and accordingly,
must be, and are translated and expounded, Con|trary
to the proud Ignorance of these Cheators.
2. The Generation of all Gods Children (in all
the holy Scrip- [72] ture) have ever acknowledged
their weakness, folly, pride, and many Transgres|sions,
with true Quaking and brokenness, and bitter
weeping, c:
3. In a true Sense,The Saints pardon of Sin and Justifica|tion perfect. that which is Righteous is per|fect
Iustification or Remission of Sin for Christ Jesus
sake is perfect, it admits (as they say of no magis mi|nus)
more or less, the truely humble Ethiopian is as
truly and perfectly pardoned and Iustified as David
himself, and the blessed Mother of the Lord Jesus,
the Virgin Mary.
4. We maintain, though pardon of Sin and Jus|tification,
and Acceptation with God before An|gels,
Men and Devils be perfect, and though a poor
Child of God be born of God,The Saints bat|tel and daily Combate be past from Death
to Life, can not Sin in a Sense, nor suffer the Devil
to touch him: yet there remains till Death a Com|bate
to be fought between the Law of the Spirit,
and Law of the members, the old Man and the new
Man, the Flesh and the Spirit, c.

5. Hence (in an holy Sense) Paul saith, it is not
I,Heavenly Piradoxes but Sin that dwels in me, that is in my Flesh wherein
dwels no good thing, So that David might say in one
Sense, It was not I that committed Adultery, and
Murther, and Peter say, It was not I that denied my
Master with Swearing and Cursing, c. but the rotten
old man and Sin dwelling in me.
He that knows not to untie these Knots,Devilsh Tnents of the Spi|rituals in Calvins time. and yet
prates of Righteousness and perfection: He is
proud and foolish, and ignorant, and he will proud|ly
and foolishly sooner or later commit these five
great evils.
1. He will not discern what the Generation of the
Righteous is.
2. He will say Sin is nothing but Imagination.
3. He will cast wickedness upon God, and say
God doth all, and what God doth that is good,
therefore no Sin.
4. He must call David and Peter fools for Con|fessing
their Guilt and weeping bitterly, c.
5. That it is in vain to watch against Sin, and to
cry Lord lead us not into Temptation, c.
In the last place I Affirm (and have made it good)
that the Generation of the Papists and Quakers:
though so pure in their own eyes,The Pa|pist and Quakers perfection yet they are not
cleansed from their filthiness: The Papists are justly
charged with Superstition and Idolatry  with
drinking the Blood of Saints. And have not the
Generation of the Quakers: [73] their Images and
Idols also, (as I have manifested) their pride and
Ignorance  Idleness in not using means, and their
passionate Railings and Cursings? and I believe if

their Spirit get a Sword (what ere they ignorantly
prate) they will drink the Blood of all their Enemies
as Hereticks, Idolaters, Reprobates, and Devils.
The 37th. Instance is in Pag. 220. wherein G. Fox
brings in the Author of Hosanna to the Son of Da|vid,220 Ho|sanna to the Son of David
saying, [Man is not able to discern the things of
God till he be born again.]
He Answers, the Scripture speaks of discerning
the Eternal Power and Godhead, and that was a thing
of the Spirit of God: and the Apostle saith not
that they were born again: And yet I say that none
knows the things of God but the Spirit of God, and that
which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God hath shewd it to them: For that of God
in them was of the Spirit, who is the God of the Spi|rits
of all Flesh, which brings them to discern the
Eternal Power and Godhead.
1 Reply, 1. With Amazement at the dreadful
Justice of God hardening this daring Soul for play|ing
away his own Light and the Name of God,G Fox his Judgment from God
and the Light which the Lord hath sent him from
so many Excellent pens out of which he hath raked
nothing but handfuls of Reproaches to fling in the
Faces of his best Friends, and turned Truth into
Lyes, and poyson to murther himself and others.
2. It is clear, that (as in all Answers to the Quo|tations
of his Opposites which he picks out) that he
holds the Contrary to his Opposite, so here viz. That
a man may be able to discern the things of God
before he be born again.
3. He proves his point from two Scriptures,

Rom. 1. Cor. 2. As to the first, I will not repeat
what I have before written as to the Nature of the
holy Spirit, his Godhead, his Operations, seven Eyes,
seven Horns, and seven Lamps, his Common work|ings
in all men! his special working in the Elect,
Regenerating, Iustifying, Sanctifying, quickning, Com|forting,:
c. Nor will I repeat matters concerning
the power of Nature in the Philosophers, and all
mankinde: Only from this Rom. 1. I observe,
1. That the Eternal Power and Godhead cannot be
seen by mortal Eyes.
2. We may reach some mental Light of this Eter|nal
Power [74] and Godhead, by a serious pondering
of his works.
3. All mankinde are bound by the Law of their
Nature to put forth their utmost in searching after
God.Kom. 1. Discussed as to the Eternal Power and Godhead.
4. We may gain a great sight of the Godhead,
and yet not see him nor glorifie him, that is love
him as Paul, 1 Cor. 8.
5. Natural men until changed and born again of
Gods power and Spirit, doe but prate (as the Devils
do and tremble) their imaginations are vain, and their
foolish hearts are darkened.
6. Yet this sight of God which men and Devils
may get of God by their own Remainders of nat|ural
Abilities will leave them without excuse what|ever
Papists,The natu|ral power of men and Devils. Arminians and Quakers talk of Gods
requiring no more then he gives, for in Justice
God is not bound to give Sampson his Locks or his
Eyes when he hath willingly suffered Dalilah and
by her the Philistims to cut them off, and pluck
them out.

2. Beside our wils and wisdome are now become
Enmity against God, and no man spends equal Care
and pains for God, until Gods Spirit in free grace
chnge and quicken him with what he does for
these temporary Dreams and Shadows.
The second Scripture is 1 Cor. 2. viz. But God
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit:1 Cor. 2. as to Gods Spirit discussed. For the
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of
God: For what man knows the things of a man save
the Spirit of a man, c. now we have not received
the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we may know the things which are freely
given to us of God.
In ver. 6. the Spirit of God speaks of a twofold wis|dome,
first, the wisdome of this world, and the Princi|plesChange "Principles" to "Princes." R. W. Ms. Ann.
of this world which come to nought.Wisdome. Secondly,
the wisdome of God in a Mystery, even the hidden
wisdome which God ordained before the world unto our
glory.: Again, ver. 12. God tells us of two Spirits:
The Spirit of the world, Secondly, The Spirit of
God. Now this woful Cheator finding the word Spirit,
Confounds as his Course is all together, and because
Gods Spirit regenerates the Corintians, and opens
to them a glimpse of the Godheads power and wis|dom,
and Goodness by Pauls preaching, and opens
their hearts to it therefore he must also enlighten
the world with the same Light, whereas that which
is born of the Spirit is Spirit,The Case of G Fox and most of his Fox|ians. and that of Flesh is
Flesh; This Change and renewing of the Spirit by
the Holy Spirit, I fear G. Fox and most of his Fox|ians
never Experimened, [74] though they enjoy in

common a Light of Nature, though God hath en|dowed
him and many of them with excellent Nat|ural
Parts: yea, with a Light from the holy Scrip|ture:
yea, with a Light of Experience and common Mo|tions
from Gods holy Spirit, and have been lifted
up by their own thoughts and others (as Capernaum)
up to the Heaven! and therefore my Soul fears (as to
most of them) that God will bring them down to Hell
with the greater Condemnation.
The 38th Instance is in Pag. 222. where he brings
in the same Author saying,222. Ho|sanna to the Son of David [Salvation and Faith are
the gifts of God distinct from Christ]
He Answers, They are all of him, and from him,
and with him, And how is he the Author of Faith in
whom it ends, and from whence it comes.]
I Reply, as Potiphars wife cries out against Io|seph:Christs Name hotribly abused
and pretends Chastity, so doth this subtle
Whoremonger, pretending that all is pure Christ: the
Light is Christ, their Hope is Christ, their Faith, their
Spirit is Christ himself, yea, the Saints are Christ:
No distinction between Christ and them, for they
are all of him, from him, and with him?
In short,Colossians 1. Con|sidered. I pray the Reader to mind with me the
first Chapter to the Colossians, where ver. 1. The Spi|rit
of God declares how Gods Children (poor slaves
at first in Sathans Clutches) are Translated from the
Kingdome of Darkness into the Kingdome of his dear
Son:The Na|ture and admirable Mistery and Excel|len-of Christ Jesus In whom we have Redemption through his Blood,
even the Forgiveness of Sins. I know the Foxians
turn Christ, yea, his Blood also into a Spirit, a God.
How admirably doth the holy Spirit of God de|clare

the Godhead, or Divinity of Christ Jesus and
his Manhood or Humanity, unto ver. 21? out of
both which I shall select two or three Attributes
of the Lord Jesus.
1. The State of Christianity, amongst many other
high Expressions in the Scripture, is here called the
Kingdome of Gods dear Son, which argues a distinct|ion
from all other Kingdomes, and a distinction
from his Saints, as a King is not his Subjects, nor
their Gifts and Honours, and Estates, and peace, and
Ioy though given by him to them,, and procured
by his great wisdome and love for them.
Oh poor Ungrateful Monsters, not content to be
taken from [76] the Kingdome, from the Dungeon,
of Darkness and Hell, and that by the Ransome and
price paid and Blood and Death of his only Beloved
the Prince of Life, but we must be the King of
Heaven and Prince of Life our selves.
2. I observe,The Blood of Christ. The Blood of God. The Instrumental and purchasing
Cause or price, is said to be his Blood, which argues
the Infinite value of his Sufferings, in which Res|pect
only it is called the Blood of God: I know the
slight esteem that some of these Foxians have of the
Blood of the Lord Iesus saying, that wicked men the
Souldiers shed it; that it was spilt upon the ground,
that there was no difference between that Blood and
the Blood of another Saint: That by Gods blood is
only meant godly and heavenly power, and Spirit by
which God applies Mercy and pardon, Iustification,
Righteousness, c.
I have read the Blasphemous Discanting of the
Iesuit concerning Maries white Milk,The Blood of Christ des|pised by Papists and Quakers. and Christs

Crimson Blood,  in the close, his preferring the
Milk of the Mother before the Sons Blood.
I have heard also the foolish Blasphemy of one
of my own Neighbours, saying. That the Blood of
the Quakers, and by name of W. B. was Saving
and Salvation to the World.
3. But I pass on, The Lord Jesus is here called
the Image of the invisible God:Christ the picture of God. If this should res|pect
the Godhead only, which is invisible, how
could Christ be a visible Picture of Invisibility? If
the Manhood only? is God a Man, and Man his
Image or Picture, as the old Heretick, and late in
London, Reeves and Mugleton fancied.
The Truth is, as Christs Blood is but figuratively
for an Antitipe and fulfilling of all the Figures
foregoing him,Christ God and Man. and for all his Sufferings, and many
Blood-sheddings both of Minde and Body, so this
Image or Picture, this Blessed Lamb of God, con|sisting
of the Godhead, wonderfully assuming such
a none such Manhood, both which the Papists and
Quakers are forced to confess, I say, it is clear he
was the brightest Image or Picture of God to the
World that ever God appeared in, and therefore
called the Word of God the fullest and loudest of
all the Words of God in which ever he spake, c.
4. Many more I might insist on, but I must ab|breviate,
and only mention ver. 18. where the Lord
Jesus is made the Pallace of [77] the Godhead,Christ Fulness filling all.
that in him as the Head of the Body, his Church,
should all fulness dwell, reconciling and making peace,
through the Blood of his Crosse, c. Iohn tells us,
that of this fulness in him, we receive: all the

World receives the Mercy and Patience of God by
him; all his Followers receive his Grace and Spir|it,
Converting, Sanctifying, Comforting, c. so that
his most holy and glorious Manhood, visible
amongst us,A wonder|ful Con|duit. c. was as a fair and spacious, beauti|ful
Conduit, into which the eternal and inconceiv|able
Counsels of the eternal Power and Godhead
flowed, and from whom by all those blessed means
and Ordinances, as by so many Cocks turned and
let loose, flow and run into poor empty Souls as
Pails and Tankards all sorts of mercies to the whole
World, and especially to the Elect, and Chosen,
his Church and Body that believe in him:The proud phrenzie of the Quakers. what
poor Children and Frantick Souls are we then that
cry out (poor Pots, and Pails, and Tankards) that
we are the Conduit it self; yea, we the Well-head,
Fountain and Spring, and (as this frantick Fox in
his Book once and again affirms) no distinction be|tween
God  Christ  his Saints, yea, though he
often acknowledge that Christ is the Author and
Finisher of Faith; So that the Gift of God, the
words of God, which are his Tokens, Love Tokens,
and Love Letters, they are God and Christ, them|selves
the heavenly Father, and his Son the heavenly
Bridegroom.
John the Baptist cried out to all such proud Souls,
I am not He, I am not worthy to untie his Shoe Latch|et:
He it is that Baptizeth with Fire: He is the
Lamb of God,The Pa|pists and Quakers Christ c. He, even that man upon whom he
saw the Spirit descending like a Dove, c. and blessed
Paul with Iob, abhors himself, and counts his Holy
Life, his Prayers, his Fastings, his Righteousness

Dung and Dirt compared with that of Christ Iesus, in
Opposition to that of the Law, c. In which mud
still the most zealous Papists and Quakers stick, and
talk idly of their fulfilling of the Law now, by
Christs Righteousness, Grace and Spirit in them,
which they will at last find to be no more but the
first Bargain or Covenant, let them pride themselves
never so much in their filthy menstrous Clouts and
Rags of Holiness, that is their Christ within them.
The 39th. Instance is in Pag. 223. where he
brings in the same Author saying,223 Ho|sanna to the Son of David [The Light which
discovers Sin and Iniquity [77] in Mans Heart is not
Christ the dore] He Answers, [The first Adam was
the Dore whreon all Sin and Transgression entred:
Christ the Light, the second Adam which doth inlight|en
every man, c. saith, I am the Dore, the Way, and
the Life, which finish Sin and Transgression, and brings
in Everlasting Righteousness, and the way of DifeChange "Dife" to "Life," R. W. Ms. Ann. out
of Death, which Light discovers Sin]
I Reply, Edmund Burroughs in his large Epistle to
G. Fox thi hs Book, he tells us that this Light
(which they thus boast of) shews mans threefold
Estate,The Estate of mankinde before Transgression: in Transgression and
what he is by being saved out of Transgression: It
is true, Christ Jesus doth this by many gracious
means, but not Immediately, nor to every man that
comes into the world: For the World lies in wick|edness
and Darkness. We are not only bleeding in our
wounds, but we are lost in the Wilderness: We are
stark dead in Sin, and know no more that we are

dead then a dead man knows of his Condition:
what do then these poor deluded Souls tell us of a
Light and Christ within every man in the world
discovering his pure Estate, his foul Estate, and his
raised Estate, which no man or woman in this world
that I have read or heard of by Nature had any
Spark or shine of such a Light: no nor these
proud Ignorants neither, but they have read or
heard of these things (more or less) from the holy
Scriptures and Records.
2. It is granted,Convict|ions of Nature one thing, Conver|sion another that Natures Light discovers a
God, some sins a Judgement, as we see in Indians:
Education and preaching discovers more, as in Saul,
Achitophel, Iudas: The Word and Afflictions makes
Pharoah cry out I have sinned: Miracles make Nebu|chadnezzar
and Darius cry out There is no God so
great as Daniels, and to make dreadful Laws against
blasphemers of him, though themselves continue
in their old Idolatries: yea, doubtless Natures Light
is able (in self deceitfulness) wonderfully to Coun|terfiet
true heavenly Light, and the Devil seem an
Angel or Messenger of Light from Heaven!
3. What is this to a saving Conviction which Gods
Spirit worketh in those that shall be saved,Saving Convict|ions when
they cry out as the wounded Iews, what shall we do
to be saved? and as the Gaolour, what shall I do to
be saved?: until this saving Sense of my Condition,
and Gods Justice, what is Christ, a Physitian, a Sa|viour,
a Redeemer, Bread, Water, Wine and oil to
me? All is needless, yea, loathsome, (though an
bony Comb) to a full Soul: what talk [78] you of a
pardon to an honest man? or if a Rope or Barr to
save a secure Epicure in his downe Bed?

4. Again,The State of Adam in his Fall how poor a plea is this, Adam was the
dore to sin, therefore Christ is the dore to the dis|covery
of sin? For, look upon Adam in his Fall. 1.
He saw his sin? 2. He had horrour of Conscience:
3. He run from God. 4. He hides himself. 5. He
He fals to mincing end excusing his sin. All this
is revealed to us, and not a word yet heard of,
Christ the promised Seed, or a Light, Christ Jesus to
Convince him of sin: That was another work, a
saving work, which we may hope the Spirit of God
wrought in him upon the preaching of Christ Je|sus,
the promised Seed nd Mediatour to come.
5. I know the Song of the great deluder is: Turn
to the Light,Sathans Cunning with the
Quakers hearken to the Light; thou seest it
chides thee for thy Stealing, for thy lying, c. Is
not this the Christ, c. listen to him, be still, sink
down, obey him, he will teach thee  save thee,
c. But the Bottom is, the English and meaning is,
hearken to Sathan, the God of this world, be ruled
and taught, and guided by him,: The Scripture is
but a dead Letter, the true Christ is within thee, he
will turn thee from these sins, and make thee per|fect
as God is perfect,Christs coming c. Christ is come now in
us the second Time without sin to Salvation. He is
come in us (Ten thousand of his Saints) to Judge|ment:
He within thee is the word of God, the
Christ of God, the Light of God, the Spirit of
God, God himself, and He seeks Worshippers in
Spirit and Truth, for the visible things are tem|poral,
c
6. But what is there in all this, but the noise of

Fenny bitter in hollow Canes,Two com|mon Traps and Engines of Sathan in cheat|ing the Foxians c? What is here but
that common Businesses may reach to?
1. The Conscience of good and evil which every
favage Indian in the world hath.
2. The whisperings, the blndings and cheatings of
the Devil, in Samuels mantle, pretending vowing and
Swearing to be the word of the Lord to be Christ
Jesus, yea,  that to your feeling c.
7. But what are these to Christ Jesus, a dore of
Hope to poor, wounded, and damned sinners? God by
his Law and Justice, by outward hearing or reading,
and inward Convictions of Natural Conscience hath
passed Sentence of Eternal Death and Hell on them:When Christ is welcome
They feel it they cry out now the Gospel or glad
news of a Saviour, a Jesus is Hony in the mouth, c.
Now Luke 4. he [80] heals the broken heart, he sets
free the Prisoners, ho gives Light to them that see
themselves blind, and Cry to him as the blind man
did, Christ medles not with sound persons who
have no need of his Bloud, Righteousness, and Mer|its,
c.
The 40 Instance is in Pag. 224. where G. Fox
brings in Ellis Bradshaw,Ellis Bradshaw saying, [There is more words
then one]
He Answers, God is the word, and the Scrip|tures
are the words which Christ fulfil.
I Reply, 1. As the designe of the bloudy Pope and
Iesuits are to kindle wars between the Protestants,
that the Protestants may do the Papists work and
save labour and Charges, and so the Pope and his
bloudy Whore of Rome may march away securely by

the Light of the Protestants fires. So deals the
Devil the old Serpent with Christ Jesus, and the holy
Scripture or Records which are but One,Two great designs of Sathan in a Sense,
as the Sun and the Sun-dial: His end is to tear down
the Sun dial the Scriptures, under pretence that the
Sun is within them, and they need no Dials and
Clocks, no visible thing that are temporal, c. and so
to destroy the person and Commands of the Lord Je|sus,
as visible and sleshly pretending all to be Light
and Spirit.
2. The words in the Hebrew Aamar and Dabar,The Word and Words of God
as also the Greek, Logos and Rema signifie a word,
and divers other matters, as I told my Antagonists
in the dispute.
1. In both these Languages, and divers other Lan|guages
it signifies the will and pleasure of the Mind
given forth by Command, or Decres, or Proclamation
made by word, or writing from Kings and States,
and Commanders of Armies, Navies, c.
2. In a Metaphor or Figure it is attributed to
God, though he have no word properly, having no
mouth, no Tongue, no Braine, c. but as Nurses
he deals with us poor Infants and sucklings, c.
3. It is another Metaphor or Figure to say God
is the word for God is no more a word, then he is
a Man or a Spirit, or a Sun, or Shield, or a House,
or a Fountain, or a Shepard litterally c. For as a
word or Expression proceeds from the mind 
thoughts within: so are the Thoughts and mind of
God declared many wayes, but chiefly by that man
Christ Jesus called the Word.
3. The Inconceivable Godhead being pleased to

vouch-safe in Infinite Goodness some back parts
and glimpses of his Infinite glori- [81] rious Majes|ty
in the Framing of this world, and in the restor|ing
of this world, by making a Marriage between
his Son and mankind! all his words and Expres|sions
tend mightily to advance this marriage and
great manifestation,Whether God have any more wordsthen one. or Word of God.
4. I was once asked by a poor Foxian, whether
God had any more words but one?
I Answered, (and do now) that God hath a great
many words or Expressions of his mind and Coun|sels
unto Men and Angels: and so G. Fox, and all
the Foxians Confess the Scriptures to be the Words
of God, and therein Confess that all, and every word
of Scripture is a word of God.
The Truth is, when God gives forth a word or
Command by Angels, by Men, and by other of his
Armies, (wherein his Infinite Power and Providence
daily appeareth) his word runneth very swiftly, as
we see when the word is given in a Kingdome,
Navy or Army, (as in Ahashueros his one hundred
and twenty seven Provinces: c.) He sends out his
word, that is, his mind or pleasure, and melteth
them, Psal. 147.
5. So that I Affirm,Infinite millions of millions of Gods word. that the two great Lights
of Heaven, the Sun and Moon, and all the lesser Lights
the Stars are Words and Preachings, and preachers of
God to us: Every wind and Cloud, and drop of
Rain and Hail, every Flake of Snow, every Leaf,
every Grass, every drop of water in the Ocean, and
Rivers, yea, every Grain of Corn, and Sand on the
Shore, is a Voice or word and witness of God
unto us.

6. Hence (as in that Admirable 107 Psalm,The Voice of Gods works and Provi|dences c.
Every Turn of the holy hand of God in Ruling and
Over-ruling all things in the world upon the two
great Hinges of Mercy and Iudgement, Psal, 110.
are but so many Voices or words of God, God speaks
once and twice, Job. 33. but man hears it not, in Vis|ions,
in Dreams, in Health, and Sickness, in Ease, and
pain, in wants, in plenty, in dangers and Deliverances,
Crosses, Losses, c.
7. That the Hebrew is most full, viz. that God
spake by his Prophets (or Preachers, or declarers of
his will) divers wayes and divers times,Gods Spirit in his word but now he
hath spoken by his Son: From the beginning of the
world, Luke 1. he hath spoken of the coming of
this Son by the mouths of all his Prophets even from
the beginning of the World. Therefore though God
have many Sons,Christ the word of God yet Christ Jesus (that man Christ
Jesus) among the many millions of [82] Sons is
stiled the only Begotten Son of God, the Head of
all the Elect, purchased to God out of every Na|tion
by his Blood, c. so by the same excellency
and eminency (above all the manifestations and
appearances of God to the World) no word or ap|pearances
of God is comparable to that appearance
of God in Christ Jesus, and therefore called the
Word of God as the greatest appearance of the
eternal Power and Godhead.
8. Hence it follows, that these poor Foxians are
so much the more shameless and monstrous,The shameless wicked|ness of the Quakers against the Scriptures  Christ himself not
only in robbing the Scriptures of their most Hea|venly
and common Title of the Word of God,
common to all Gods appearances, but also in turn|ing

this Word of God Christ Jesus into a Spirit
without any body: but what is gone for ever from
us, and by their parting him (his God-head from
his Man-hood) into a Fancie, a Dream, a meer
Whimsie, and Devellish Imagination.
9 When we deal with Indians about Religion,The way of dealing with Indians
our work is to prove unto them by Reason, that the
Bible is Gods Word, for by Nature they are much
affected with a kind of Deity to be in Writing:
That all their Revelations, and Visions, and Dreams
(in which the Devil wonderfully abuseth them) are
False and Cheating.
That this Scripture or Writing we pretend to,They see infinite Reason in the holy Scriptures is
from God by their own experience, because it
agrees with their own Consciences, reproving them
for those sins their Souls say they are guilty of:
That the terrible Majesty of Gods Justice in pun|ishing
Sinners so shines in it, and also his infinite
goodness and mercy in finding out such a way of
Mediation, and such a Mediator that their Souls
cannot but adore Infinite Justice and Mercy in it.
That the Holy power of God so appears in it in
working upon the Souls of Millions, turning them
from Dogs, and Swine, and Wolves, and Lions,
and Sheep, and Lambs, and Doves, c. in Love,
Meekness, Patience, c.
That it could be none but an Omnipotent Arm
that hath preserved the Holy Scripture so many
thousand years (some part of it) through so many
wonderful changes,The pre|servation of the Scripture through so many Bloody Hunt|ings
of Kings, Emperours, Popes; and this more sub|tile

Hunting of these Foxians, to run it out of this
World, and by seeming to embrace it to destroy
and kill it.
83] The 41. Instance is in Page 228.Tho. Weld Where G.
Fox brings in Thomas Weld, saying, [There lies a
Mystery of Iniquity, for to say the World calls them
so, by such and such Names or gives them their Chris|tian
Name.]
He Answers, [There are Names given by the Hea|then,
the Heathen outward which men are called:
There is a new Name which the World knows not
written in the Book of Life: Here is the new Man
known after God in Righteousness and true Holiness;
Now who is the New Man, and this new Name? the
World may call him by the old, so it is not a mys|tery
of iniquity to say the World calls him so.]
I Reply,As to Christen Names,  Names to Children 1. As to Christian or Christen Names or
Things bearing or pretending to bear the Name,
Authority or an Uniting of Christ Jesus (as we
know the word Christian signifies) it is incumbent
on every Christian Soul to search into the Root,
and Rise, and Practise, and Warrant of them with
holy fear and trembling in the presence of God.
2. But to the mystery of Iniquity here insinua|ted
against them, Is it not a proud trick of a Phari|see
thus to scorn the poor Heathens and Publicans,The Foxians scornful pride
as not worthy to know the Foxians high Names, or
take up such sacred Names and Mysteries upon
their Lips? yea, is it not a ridiculous Fancie thus
to prate, and (like Pharisees to scold about washing
of Hands, and Pots, and Cups, therein placing in|vented
Holiness, c.

For,Who are G. Fox his Heathen 1. VVhat are the Heathen, this Heathenish
Soul here strikes at? doth he mean the wilde Sav|ages,
who give Names to their Children, and oft
times full of Reason and Significance, c. Or doth
he account all Nations Savages and Barbarians that
give Names to their Children, and consequently
themselves Savages and Barbarians also, for they
give Names unto their Children also.
2. It is true that by the word Heathen (the Goj
in the Hebrew and Ethne in the Greek) the Nations
or Gentiles were signified as distinct from the Holy
Nation or Church of God the Iews,The Words Heathen but so it is
not common in our English Phraze, to call all the
Nations Heathen that are not of the Iewish Nation.
3. Did not the Saints before the coming of Christ
give Names to their Children? did not Leah and
Rachael (by Iacobs leave) give all those significant
Names unto the twelve Patriarchs? and [84] have
not the Saints of God (as well as all Nations) still
so practised?
4. Doth Christian Regeneration or New Birth de|stroy
Natural Births or Marriages, or Procreations, or
Names, and Educations? (Only as Diamonds in Gold-Rings,
and Aples of gold in pictures of silver) Christi|anity
beautifies and adorns all these, Natural and
Civil Actions, with an heavenly Spirit,Insert "." R. W. Ms. Ann. Carriage in
Earthly matters.
5 Can there be any Instances given of any Ser|vants
of God before or since the coming of Christ
Jesus,Christ de|stroys not but beau|fies Civility disowning or slighting the Names which
their Parents had given them: yea, though there

were some seeming honour to false Gods in them,
Fortunatus, Apollo, Phebe, c.
6. Why may we not (though we are forChange "for" to "but." R. W. Ms. Ann. his
Heathens) call the Foxians by the same Names by
which they call themselves? for, in this great Book
we find G. Fox and Edmund Burrough subscribed?
It is a Query why they so plainly subscribe and yet de|fend
them that do not, Have they a Priviledge? Or
do they thus quarrel with us, (poor Heathens) about
straws or things Indifferent? and yet so weighty as
the New Name, and new man created in holiness, c?
7. But what is this new Creature and new Name
they speak of?The new Man and new Name How shall the world call them by
it if they know it not? Such are their Nonsensical
Fancies of giving no Respect to any in word or ges|tures:
Such are their Fantastical Conceited Answers,
when being asked where they dwell, they Answer,
they dwell in God, and where they live, they Ans|wer,
They live in God, c,
8. Are not these Foxians a kin to the Popes in
this Fancy also, when raised to the Devils Pina|cle,The Popes flingig to the world their old Names.
to the Popedome, they throw down their old
Names to the world, and though they be as subtle
as Foxes, yet now they will be called Leones Lions,
though they be as fierce and Cruel as Lyons, they
will now be called Clement and though they be as
Impious as swine, even as Os pores, they must be
called pius.
In the last place, as the Pope cast away his net
which he used as the Remembrance of the Fish|erman
Peter when he had catcht the Popedome, so

G. Fox having made his Fortune as it is prophane|ly
called,G. Fox his great change. having attaind a great Marriage: His
new Carriage and Courtesie, and Civility condemns
Humphry Nortons [85] and his own former Rigidity
as I am sure they will do most of themPlace "most of them" in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann. for world|ly
Advantages, For, as they abuse that Scripture,Eccles. 11.
The World is in their Heart. I may truly use it and
affirme the world and the pride and Advantage of
it, though they deny it as the Pope and Cardinals
and Iesuits doPlace "as the Pope and Cardinals and Iesuits do" in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann. is in their Heart, and is the Body
and Soul, the Root and Branch of all their whole
Religion.
The 42 Instance is in pag. 243. where G. Fox
brings in Richard Sherlock saying [We must not look
for an Immediate Extraordinary and miraculous Teach|ing
from the Lord.243. Rich. and Sherlock.]
He Answers, Yet he saith all men are taught of
God, what Confusion is here? The grace of God
which bringeth Salvation hath appeared unto all men
and this he calls an outward Teaching by the Lord
Jesus Christ. Is that which brings Salvation out|ward:
All in the Truth may judge this and try thy
Spirit: And the Teachings of the Lord is not me|diate,
but Extraordinary above all yours, which are
men got up since the dayes of the Apostles.
I Reply, 1. Although I have spoken before of
their Immediate Inspirations: yet seeing how greed|ily
and boastingly this deluded Soul with scorn and

Contempt of all his Opposites, sucks in the poyson
of Devilsh Inspirations in stead of the pure wine
and milk of Christian Truth, and milks out this poy|son
into the mouths of his poor bewitched Followers,
I shall add a few words.
G. Fox here affirmeth that the Teachings of the
Lord are not mediate,The Teachings of God. but Immediate, Extraordinary
and miraculous, Contrary to the whole stream of
Scripture and Experience.
1. Contrary to the Ordinary and daily, and mighty
preaching of the whole Creation: Psal. 9. The
Heavens, c.
2. Contrary to the Teachings of God in every
mans Nature, and making, being taught of God,
above Gods Teaching, the Fowls of the Air and
Beasts of the Field: Doth not Nature teach you, 1
Cor. 11. as to long hair.
3. Contrary to Abrahams Teaching of his Child|ren,
and the Command of God to all Parents.
4. Contrary to Ordinary Teachings of the Priests
and Levites Commanded by God, in so much that
Christ Jesus Commanded the Scribes and Pharisees
sitting in Moses Chair to be heard and attended.
5. Contrary to the Ordinary and Constant feeding
by Sheep- [89] herds and Teachers in the Christian
Flocks and Assemblies.
6. Contrary to the Teachings of the holy writings
or Scripture written by Immediate breathing of God,
for our Instruction and Consolation, c.
Ob. Yea, but saith this great wrester of holy
writings: They shall be all taught of God.
I Answer, 1. Who, or how shall they be all taught

of God? that teaching in the Hebrew applied from
the newErase "new." R. W. Ms. Ann. Prophets, Isaiah and Ieremiah is the teach|ing
of the new Covenant, and that is the promise of
Grace and Mercy to so many as are predestinate and
called, c.
2. That is no Immediate, Extraordinary, and mi|raculous
business, for this is common to all that re|pent
or turn to God.
3. Many had, and may have the speaking with
Tongues, and working with Miracles, and yet not
know what the teaching of the Spirit in a new
Birth is.
4. In the Ordinary Teaching to Conversion, the
Lord owns his Servants as Fellow Labourers, Work|ers,
Builders, Husbandmen, Fathers, c. wherein he
is pleased to open the hearts of oneChange "one" to "many." R. W. Ms. Ann. Thousand and
Ten Thousand as he did in the first preachings of that
glad News, and I hope will do so again.
5. The great Promise to Christ Jesus and his
Seed is,Outward means. that there shall be a gracious Continuance in
Christs mouth,  the mouth of his Seed, of both the
word, (that is preached) and the holy Spirit more
or less) accompanying and Teaching, Isa. 59.
6. What is there in G. Fox his wild Notion,
[Can that which brings Salvation be outward?] Against
all the Proofs before I mentioned, and so many
others concerning the Foolishness of Preaching, c.
Object. He saith, The grace of God teacheth every
man to deny ungodly Lusts, c. And I ask,
1. If every man in the world hath this Imme|mediate

work on them? what's the Reason we find
none in the world (no not the wisest) until they
have the Scripture, or the Doctrine thereof some
way opened to them, that have been able to give
us the least Tidings of any such business.
2. What's the Reason that so few in the world
have any shew of Repentance, c. much less a
sound and and saving turning of the whole Soul
unto God?
87] Why do the Quakers make such adoe about
their Apostles Men and Women as if that glorious
Light the Father, Son and Spirit in every man were
not able to teach Effectually (by his Extraordinary
and miraculous power) without their outward speak|ing
to the Seed, that is to God within them?
4. If they themselves teach by such an Extraor|dinary
and miraculous power as the Prophets of old,Miracles.
and the Apostles of Christ Jesus did, what should
be the Cause why we see no such miraculous deeds
done by any of them? The Truth is, God is pleased
to chain up Sathan: otherwise, the Foxians would
have their longing (which it may be some shall
after them) But if they shall be permitted by God
and assisted by the Devil to do as the Magicians
did: yet if their Doctrine be other then what is
written (as I have abundantly proved it to be) while
they cry out Light, Light, there is none as Isaiah
speaketh, not a Spark of Light within them.
The 43. Instance is in Pag. 247. where G. Fox
brings in Christopher Wade saying,247. Christo|pher Wade [The written

Word is the Sword of the Spirit:] And he makes
another Rule beside the ScripturePlace "beside the Scripture." in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann. false.
He Answers, which we say is the Spirit which
gave them forth, whereby Peace is known upon
the Israel of God: And the Pharisees had the Scrip|ture
but had not the Sword of the Spirit, the Scrip|tures
testifies of the Sword of the Spirit.
I Reply, 1. With all humble Reverence to the
most holy Spirit of God, who is God himself. I
affirme, the Spirit or God can not here be the Sword
intended.
For 1.The Sword of the Spirit. This Spiritual Furniture being a Similitude
taken from warlike and Military Provision and Ar|tillery
from Head to Foot, the Helmet, Breastplate,
the Shield, the girdle, the Shoes, and every one ap|plied
to gifts and means flowing from Gods Spirit,
as Faith, Hope, Sincerity, c. it were most im|proper
then to bring in God or the Spirit to be the
Sword, or any of the other pieces.
2. For there is no more Reason to make the
Spirit or God to be the Sword, then the Shield or
any other piece.
3. It seems too low to the holy Spirit and God
to be here in this Similitude, resembled to a Sword
or Instrument in the hands of men to be drawn and
brandished and fought withal for Offence and De|fence
at mens pleasure, though in some SenceInsert "from." R. W. Ms. Ann. God.
88] 4. This was the Sword, the only Sword, is
called a Sword with which the Lord Jesus fought
and vanquished the Devil, Gegraptas, Gegraptai:

It is written, it is written, and we may well say of
it as David of the Sword of Goliah, by which Da|vid
nt off his head, there is none to that, c.
The holy Spirit, Christ and God are Authors of
all these heavenly Gifts and Graces,Not the Spirit himself. the Beginner and
Finisher of Faith, and therefore not Faith nor Hope,
nor any other piece of the Artillery themselves, no
more then the Armorer is the Helmet, or the Cutler
the Sword, c.
6. In Revel. 1. Christ and the Sword with two
Edges (which cometh forth of his mouth) are dis|tinct,
and can not be the same, as G. Fox usually
Confounds and mixeth all together. Hence the
the Word of Christ, Col. 3. can not be Christ him|self,
but that which cometh from him and tendeth
to him.
7. These great Interpreters are Confounded in
themselves, for here in Ephes. 4. the Spirit must
be the Sword and Word of God, But in Heb. 4.
Christ must be the Sword, with two Edges, being the
Word of God, and not the Spirit: So like Iuglers do
they shift from one hand to another, to Confound and
beguile the Beholders.
Object. But the Spirit saith G. Fox was before
the Scripture, and gave forth the Scripture.
I Answer, what then, G. Fox is before his Book,
and gave it forth, is it not therefore G. Fox his
word  writing but G. Fox himself?The Im|mediate Inspira|tion of the Spirit Or is it not
the Kings Majesty before his Declaration, or Procla|mation
to the world? Is it not therefore the Kings
word, or is it the King himself? This Immediate
Inspiration of the holy Scripture from the Spirit

makes it a Word so powerful, a Magazine Store|house
so full of Treasury, so rich a Standard, Touch|stone
or Weights so perfect, for the trial of all Spir|its,
all writings, all Doctrines, all Religions, Wor|ships,
Actions, c.
Object. But the Pharisees saith G. Fox had the
Scripture, but they had not the Sword of Gods
Spirit:
I Answer, The Iews had, and have, and so the
Turks have had much of it,The Scripture horribly abused the Papists and the
Quakers, and other Blasphemors, yea, and the Dev|ils
themselves may have the Scripture, the word of
God in their Hands and mouths: for may not a
true Sword, a choice Sword be in a mad mans hand,
whereby he may [89] mischief and wound, and
kill himself and others: Hence men make mer|chandize
of it, sophisticate and Adulterate, and turn
it into a Lie, c.
On the other hand, the Spirit of God is promis|ed
to Gods Children: Gods Spirit and Word are
promised to go together in the mouths of all true
Christians, Isa. 55. this holy Spirit is to be praid
for, Luke 11. and is therefore powerfully present with
Gods true Messengers, while they Translate, Ex|pound,
Preach as Paul did, Acts 26. No other things
but what Moses and the Prophets wrote of.
The 44th. Instance is in Pag. 253. where he
quotes Henry Haggar,253. Hen|ry Haggar saying, [You call all men dead
and Carnal in the Serpents Nature, in what Form so|ever
if they differ from you] G. Fox Answers, [All
that be not in the Light that inlightneth every man

that cometh into the world which is the way to the
Father, differeth from us: such be dead, such be Car|nal
in the Seepents Nature; For none comes to the
Life, but who comes to the Light, in what Form so
ever they be: And such as differ from us differ from
Christ: For none come from under the Serpents head
and Nature, but who comes to the Light.
I Reply, 1. As David said of some whose Teeth
were as Swords, and Solomn saith,The Pa|pists and Quakers of a dam|ning and damne Spirit. there is a Genera|tion
c. of such whose Teeth are as Swords, and if
ever there were a Generation of such in the world
the Papists and these Foxians are the Generations
here intended: For it is in vain to tell them of
Christ the Foundation, and of building Wood, Hay,
Stubble, c. If you come not roundly to the Pope
with the Papists: Or to the Light within, c. noth|ing
remains but Fire and Brimstone, Damnation, c.
2. It is true, in some of their writings, and in
Edmund Burroughs himself there seems to be some
charitable hopes of some having something of Sin|cerity
in them, and of breathing after the Lord,
but I observe they fall in with G. Fox again, viz.
except that those persons owne their IdolsErase "s" in "Idols." R. W. Ms. Ann. called
Light within them.
3. The Protestants overcome the Papists not only
by Scripture and Argument,The true Protestants
Charity. but in Charity also,
for they profess to have Hope of many among the
Papists, as they do also of many amongst the Qua|kers,
But the Papist and Quaker like Fire-ships burn
and blow up all, that bow not down to theis
Image, c.

90] 4. How far are these from the Spirit of
Christ Jesus toward the poor Woman,The Qua|kers far from the Spirit of Christ Jesus. the Syrophe|nician,
who by her worship was a dog, (and he told
her so) yet believing in him and content to gather
up Crumbs (as a Dog) under his Table, he grants her
Suit, and magnifies her personal Excellency! Thus
dealt he with the Centurion and Cornelius, and with
every poor Reed if truly bruised for Sin, and every
Lock of smoaking Flax reaking in truth of Love
to God, and the Lord Jesus.
He proclaims the Kingdome of Heaven to the
poor in Spirit,The meek and merci|ful Spirit of Jesus. who see themselves dead and lost, and
damned, and seeing no help, no Grace, (not a penny
nor a patch of any good in them but) waiting as
Beggars at the gate, the beautiful and glorious gate
of mercy.
He proclaims Blessedness and Promises to the bleat|ing
Lambs as the fruitful Sheep to the Infants and
new born Babes,The dif|fereut state of Gods
Children. that hunger and thirst for the milk of
Righteousness, that by the Patience and Comfort
held forth in the writings or Records they may
have hope, although yet they cannot be Consident
of any work of God in them, and are not so bold
to Confess Christ Jesus openly, and kiss him in the
Streets, but steal to him by night as Nicodemus, and
Ioseph, until they saw him bleeding on the Gallows.
He bare with his Disciples though foolish and slow
of Heart, hard-hearted, ignorant of his Death and
Resurrection, and loath to hear of such metters.
The 45th. Instance is in Pag. 259. where he
quotes Iohn Brown saying,259. John Brown [And them that bring

people to look at the Light within them, are as Korah,
Dathan and Abriam.]
G. Fox Answers, [All that go from the Light with|in
them, are as Korah, Dathan, and Abiram amongst
the Lords Prophets, Exalting themselves and Perse|cuting.]
1. I Reply, and Examine unto whom this Fa|mous
History may most properly be Applicable, for
sure it was a Type and word of God.
1. Then,Number 16. Ko|rah, Da|than and Abirams Revolt ap|plied to the pre|tended Quakers. that which the Spirit of God chargeth
upon Korah, is a rising up, a Revolt and Rebellion
against the Lord, his Appointments and Ministers
or Officers, Moses and Aaron, c.
I know G. Fox chargeth this upon all that pre|tend
to any Ministry and Ministration, and have not
the Immediate Spirit of [91] God as the Apostles
had but as (he speaks simply) are Ravened from it,
and are still Apostates, c.
But I Answer,The Pro|testant Re|ligion Re|volted from by the Quakers the Protestant Religion is a Religion
protesting against the abominations of that bloody man
of Sin the Pope both in his Doctrines and Worships
and Conversations: These Protesters have been since
the Waldenses, in France and Germany, and low Coun|tries,
and England, Scotland, Denmark, Swedland,
Polonia, Transylvania, Norway, Ireland, c. Con|flicting,
Contending with their Tongues, their pens,
and their Blood against the Bloody Whore and Church
of Rome, according to many passages in the Revela|tions,
most wonderfully and miraculously fulfilled upon
them.
From these all their holy Doctrines and Endea|vours
after Gods pure worship are the Quakers

Revolted and set up a Flag of Defiance against all
but pretended Immediately Inspired persons, Invisible
Worships, and Ministers, and a sullen, proud, and
dogged Conversation, (for the general of them.)
2. As Absoloms and Shebahs Conspiracies were
notable and Signal against King David,Conspira|tors agaiust the Priest|ly, Pro|phetical, and Kingly Office and Power of Christ Jesus the Pro|phetical
and Kingly Type of the Lord Jesus, so was
Korahs and his Conspirators very Considerable and
Eminent against Moses and Aaron Types of the
Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly Office of the blessed
Lord Iesus Christ: It is said, Numb. 16. that Korah
the Levite, and Dathan and Abiram the Sons of Reu|ben,
and two hundred and fifty Princes and Notable
Men of Fame in the Assembly thus kindled the Coals
of this proud Conspiracy, which had broke forth
into devouring Flames, except that the Sheepherd of
Israel (who never slumbers nor sleeps) had most gra|ciously
and wonderfully watcht for the timeous and
early Extinguishing of it.
As to the pretending Quakers,The con|spiracy of the Qua|kers it is known that
they are not Sons of Obscurity, (as Bull and Far|minton,
Reeves and Mugleton) but for Estate and
parts, for Education and Learning, some of themPlace "some of them," in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann. for
pretences of Piety,Against
Christ
Jesus. Conscience, patience, Zeal and
Mortification, yea, and also for their Numbers, all
which they predicate in their Books, and in my
dispute with them with loud Trumpets) they are
known to be Considerable, and as like to spread as
did the Arrians Papists or Mahometans.
3. Korah and Dathan, c. they were by Gods
righteous Judgement so fixed, and setled, and hard|ned

in their Perswasion [92] and Confidence, that
they Contemned all Moses meekness, and Answered
stoutly, We will not come up, when he Cited them
before the Lord:Korah and the Qua|kers Con|fidence  fierceness. yea, say they, wilt thou pluck out
the Eyes of these men, and they daringly and des|perately
brought their Censers to offer Incense and
Worship to God: as may be applied to these proud
and Confident, and desperate Foxians.
4. Their Charge was notoriously false against
Moses,And lying Charges. as the Charge of the Quakers against such
blessed Instruments which God hath used like Mo|ses
to bring the Protestants out of the Egypt of Po|pery:) viz. a Charge of Pride and Ambition, wilt
thou make thy self a Prince over us? a Charge of
which the Foxians are notoriously guilty.
5. I observe their horrible Ingratitude both unto
the most holy God himself,Ingrati|tude. and unto Moses and
Aaron, Gods Servants, by whom he had wrought so
many wonders for this people in so many wonder|ful
and miraculous Directions, Preservations and De|liverances.
6. Their Impatiencci and Unbelief,Impa|tience. c. Thou hast
not yet brought us unto a Land flowing with milk and
hony, as if God and Moses had only fed them with
Sugred and honied Words, and no Effects and per|formances.
7. I observe their subtle and false pretences and
Suggestions: Is no all the Lords people holy every
one of them, and the Lord is amongst them, just
the Quakers Language, who so advance every one
of the people of the Lord: (as they call their
Proselites) viz. that they are just now born of God,

and Literally, can not Sin, are Immediately Inspired,
need no Teachers, no Scriptures, c.
8. I observe, and I humbly beg of the Father of
mercies to cause these poor Foxians to observe the
Conspiracy of the two Elements,The Won|derful Judge|ments of God upon the Kora|thites in this world Earth, and Fire to
Consume and devour these Famous proud Conspira|tors:
I spare Applications, begging mercy from the
Father of Lights and mercies, for their Humiliations
and Salvation: Only I Remember, that every Plant
the Heavenly Father hath not planted flourisheth it
never so green, so high, so long, shall be plucked up,
and cast into the Fire, c.
The 46th. Instance is in pag. 262. Where he
brings in George Iohnson sying,62 George Johnson. [The Americans
were never ordained for Grace and Salvation, and the
Grace of God never appeared to the Americans.]
93] G. Fox Answers, which is contrary to the
Scriptures, which saith, the grace of God which
brings Salvation hath appeared to all men, c. and I
will give him for a Light, and for a Covenant to the
Gentiles, a new Covenant to the House of Israel and
Iudah, and that he may be my Salvation to the ends of
the Earth; and many in America have received Truth
and Salvation.
I Reply,Thoughts about America 1. To the Covenant or Bargain of God
with Man, first and secondly I have spoke, as also
to the figurative calling of Christ Jesus the Cove|nant
to Iews and Gentiles, and that this blind Soul
taking it litterally, he runs upon the Rocks of the
Arminian general Redemption, and the Universal|ists
general Salvation, and that with a known Con|tradiction

against their own Foundation of none
having any benefit of Christ, that own not their
Light, c. as also with a known Contradiction to
all Expeiience, which saith, the whole World lies
in Wickedness, and this America in Barbarisme, and
Barbarous Wickedness of all sorts.
2. I have said Christ is the Light,Now Christ a Light  Cove|nant. the Covenant,
the Brazen Serpent, the Bridegroom held forth as
the Sun in the Heavens to all the World: So
Christians are the Salt, the Light of the World,
and the Church the Pillar and Firmament of Truth,
holding it out to all the World; is therefore all
the World seasoned, enlightened, converted, saved.
yea, doth he not only deny the Americans, but the
Europeans, Asians, and Africans also any Salvation
(though never so holy Professour of Christ) except
they bow down to their new black Image of Light
within them?
3. It was a large effusion of the Holy Spirit of
God upon so many precious Leaders and Followers,N Eng|lands Plantaaion
who ventured their All to New-England upon many
Heavenly Grounds, three especially.
First, The enjoyment of God according to their
Consciences.
Secondly, Of holding out Light to Americans.
Thirdly, The advancing of the English Name and
Plantations.
These three ends the most High and Holy God
hath graciously helpt his poor Protestants in a Wil|derness
to Endeavour to promote,The In|dians of N. Eng|land c.
And as to these Barbarians, the Holy God knows
some pains I took uprightly in the Main Land and

Islands of New-England to dig into their Barbarous,
Rockie Speech, and to speak some- [94] thing of
God unto their Souls;The In|dians of New England and surely God hath stirred
up the Spirit of my ancient dear Friend Mr. Eliot
to gain their Language, to Translate them the Bi|ble,
and many other wayes to bring the sound of a
Saviour amongst them, which I humbly beg of
God to perfect and finish for the Glory of his
Great Name, c.
4. What G. Fox means by saying some in Ameri|ca
have received Truth and Salvation I can but
guess at; It is known he owns nothing of God in
Indians or English, until they bow down to their
Idol, and that he intends none but such English in
America as he and others have Poysoned and Be|witched
with Helish Sorceries.
5. This last Year a Paper was sent me from the
Quakers,The Qua|kers desire of per|verting the In|dians. desiring me to turn it into Indian, that so
it might be Printed in England, and so dispersed
amongst them: it contained two things:
First, That they had a Light within them which
told them that it was evil to Steal, c.
Secondly, That if they did hearken to this Light,
it would lead them to God, c.
I returned the Paper, and my refusing in Wri|ting,
affirming it not to be Truth, c. and I ques|tioned
the Quakers themselves for a false Christ,
false Light and Spirit, which they would infect the
Indians with.
The 47th Instance is in pag. 263. Where he

quotes Iohn Owen,John Owen 263 saying, [All Truth concerning
God and our selves is to be learned from the Holy Scrip|ture,
the Word of God]
G. Fox Answers, There was Truth learned be|fore
the Scriptures were written, and the Scriptures
of Truth are the Words of God, which ends in
Christ the Word, and there is no Truths learned
but as the Spirit doth lead into all Truth: And
many has the Scriptures but know not Christ and
the Truth, c. so he hath thrown out Christ and the
Spirit.
I Reply, 1. I have more then once before Ans|wered
this Childish Answer. There was Truth, (and
the Spirit, and Christ, and Light) before Scripture,
as also that which no true Protestant denies, viz.
that the Scriptures, nor preaching, nor Baptisme,
nor the Supper, nor Afflictions avail except the
Spirit (the Fin- [85] ger or Power of God) set them
home upon us: As also that many have the Scrip|tures
yet know not Christ, which who questions?
So that his Answers are so loose and Childish that
none but Fools and Children, and Frantick persons
can find any Savour and tast in them.
2. I therefore further Answer to this Quotation,Owens writings about the Scripture Excellent|ly learned and Spi|ritual and Invincible
pray the Reader to read some former passages, but
especially, those publick discourses of this excel|lently
learned and pious Author, wherein he hath
admirably (both in Latin and English) maintained
the Authority and perfection of this Inestimable Iew|el,
the holy Scripture: both against Atheists and
Papists, and Iews, and Quakers, c. and proved (as
clear as at Noon-day) the holy Scriptures, and

every Tittle of them to be the holy Word, or Will,
or Declaration of the holy mind of God.
The 48th Instance is in Pag. 264. where he brings
in Samuel Palmer,264 Sam|uel Palmer saying, [The State of the Soul in
this Life is threefold Creation, Corruption and Re|generation.]
G. Fox Answers, [In Regeneration the Life is
changed from the Life which is in the Fall, So Re|generation
and Corruption is not one in the new Life]
I Reply, who saith they be? who saith that Re|generation
and Corruption are one in the new Life?Mans threefold Condition in this Life
what a foul Trick is this of a false man to impute
that to his Opposite which he abhorreth? I guess,
or he means that in Regeneration, there is perfec|tion
and no Sin, or Corruption left, c. Hence
the plea of some of their Spirits for Adams naked|ness
being come to the State of Innocency: Hence
the poor frantick Souls cry out that the Protestants
preach for Sin, for Tearme of Life, c,
I Answer,The Dev|il too Crafty for the Foxians questionless the Devil deals with the
Foxians as the Pirat doth with Ships, he makes no
Opposition against such he hath taken, and is pos|sessed
of: So that no question but the Quakers may
be freed from many Transgressions and Tempta|tions
to them, which others are assaulted with.
2. These poor Souls foolishly and extream sim|ply
Answer Pauls Complaints and Cryes and be|wailing
himself, Rom. 7. with Pauls giving thanks
for his sudden victory in the last words, as if just
then the Battel had turnd, and Paul had not spoke
of the Constant Battel and Warfare, which all the
Saints of God (in about four thousand years toge|ther

throughout the holy Scripture) [96] Experi|mented:
Noah, Abraham, David, Peter, Iohn, Bar|nabas,
c.
3. It is a mistery which neither Iews nor Turks,
Atheists or Papists,A great mistery. or Quakers know, viz. how the
Seed of all grace may be in the new born, and yet
the Seed also of all sin (except the sin against the
holy Spirit) remaining in them: Therefore when
they hear of the Falls of the Saints in Scripture,
and so great? Some question the Truth of the
Scripture:The Qua|kers devil|ish pride. others make a sport of them, and pre|tend
a Cloak for their sins, saying, none are perfect,
why may we not as well as they? Others, (as the
Foxians say,) We are come to a more perfect and
pure Estate then Paul at first was in: or Iohn, who
saith, If we Confess our Sin: or Iames, who saith, In
many things we offend all: or the Father that cried,
help my Unbelief, c. But the Papists and Quakers
are so perfect and Superperfect, that though they be
full of pride, Ambition, Unbelief, Unthankfulness,
Intemperancy, Covetousness, full of rash Anger, bitter
Railings, and dreadful Blasphemies against Heaven,
yet they can with the Whore wipe their mouths,
and say they are pure from all uncleanness.
The 49th. Instance of G. Fox his lame writings is in
Pag. 275. where he quotes Richard Meyo,275. Ric|ard Meyo. say|ing,
[To say the Gospel is the Power of God is but a
Metaphorical Speech.]
G. Fox Answers, [The Apostle doth not say so, for
the Apostle saith, the Gospel is the Power of God
unto Salvation to every one that believes, in plain words,
Rom. 1.

I Reply, 1. (As before, and as thousands know)
that the word Gospel is in all Languages glad News,
the same which the Angel brought to the Sheep|herds
of a Saviour born, and laid in a manger at
Bethlehem, this is the News, the placid good News,
though set forth and beautified in the holy Scrip|ture
with variety of Figures and Metaphors.
2. The great Fox the Devil who thirsts after the
Blood of the Quakers,The Dev|ils bloody Craft. and of all mens Souls, he
whispers, viz. the Gospel is Christ, it is the Spirit,
the Light, and God himself, why talk you of a
written Gospel? of a preached Gospel the Scrip|tures
are within you, the Gospel is within you,
Translations Interpretations within you: why
gaze you upon pen and Ink, and after a man. c.
3. As if the glad Tidings or Gospel to a dying
man of a par- [97] don,  of Life, c. sounding
to his Ear, were not by the External Dore of his
Ear conveyed (by that Dore) to the inward dore and
Closet of his mind?The Kings Declara|tion of mercy and Liberty. who but Frantick Souls in Bed|lam
will say, what need you mind the Kings Decla|rations
or Proclamations of pardon or Liberty? The
King himself is the Gospel, the Declaration, and the
Librty, the King is within you, the Gospel or glad
News is within you?
4. The Devil hates the glad News of Christ Je|sus
as much as Darkness hateth Light,The Dev|ils two sorts of Souldiers Anti-Christian|isme. therefore
he hath two sorts of Souldiers.
1. Some that say, what tell you us of Reading
and praying, and preaching, mind the Kernel with|in,
while the second sort are all for the outside,
which without the In-side are but Shels, and Husks,
and Shadows.

5. How commonly doth the holy Spirit in the
Scriptures speak Ridles and Figures,The Fig|ures in Scripture. that they that
see not may see, and they that say they see (Papists,
Quakers, c. may be blinded) why is the Lamb
called the Passover, Christ the Temple, the Cup his
Blood, the Bread his Body, c.
There were many hundreds brought before King
Henry and Queen Mary, after him, c. for Insur|rections
with Haltars about their Necks: These
Princes (and others) pronounced their inward mind
by word External, the Heralds and Proclamations,
and Trumpets were in a Figurative Sense all glad
News and Gospel, and yet the substance of the glad
News or Gospel was the pardon offered and vouch|safed
to them?
6. Mine Eyes have seen a Condemned Soul
turned off at the Gallows: a Post comes galloping
all drive,A lively picture of the Gos|pel. waving his hat, which being espied, Exe|cution
is staid: the people cried a pardon, the
Post cried a Reprieve: The Sheriff cried neither no
Reprieve, c. until he saw the Kings hand or Au|thority
from him, the Post delivers to the Sheriff a
bit of paper, which the Sheriff reading He Com|manded
the Halter to be taken off, and the Prisoner
to be delivered to the Post: the Prisoner with joy|ful
lips bid Death and his Fellow Sufferers Farewel,
and with joyful Legs leaps up behind the welcome
Messenger of his Deliverance, for, afterward he had
his pardon under the broad Seal of England. I ask
here how many passages and particulars may Figu|ratively
be stiled Glad News, or the Gospel to this
dying man.

7. I ask whether the glad News or Gospel
which this Post, [98] Messenger or Preacher brought,
might not Figuratively be called his Gospel or glad
News,Why it is called Pauls Gospel. as Paul Rom. 2. calls it his Gospel, and 2.
Cor. 4. our Gospel if hid, it is hid to them that be
lost? It is hid two wayes.
1. When not by writing or preaching it is
preached or declared (as it is not as yet discovered
to innumerable millions in the world.)How it is
hid.
2. When the Power or Spirit of God opens not
(as he did Lidiahs) the Ears and Hearts and Spirits
of men to embrace the Gospel, or glad News of a
Saviour to them: and this outward and inward
hearing of this glad News, it is the Devils and the
Iews, and all Atheists, and (these refined Atheists)
the Quakers work to hinder.
The 50th Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is
in Pag. 282. where he brings in Daniel Cawdry
saying,282. Dan|iel Gaw|dry. [The Saints were come to the Spirits of just
men made perfect, but not on the Earth.
G. Fox Answers, [The just mens Spirits that led
them to give forth the Scripture was the Spirit of God,
and that was perfect, and was while they were upon the
Earth: The Saints were come to, (which was Christ
the End of all words) and so to God the Iudge of all
the world.]
I Reply, I have spoke before, that Spirits are In|visible
Beings, both good and bad, Contrary to the
Sadduces, who held neither.
First,The Vari|ty of Spirits. That, of good Spirits there are three sorts.
1. The Increated God himself: 2. The Spirit of

God called (because of his manifold operations) the
seven Spirits of God, c
2. Those Invisible, holy Messengers, or Angels,
called Ministring Spirits, and Flaming Attendants
upon Christ and his, Heb: Opposite to these are
the unclean Spirits spirits of Devils, c.
3. The Spirits of men, first, saints, as Mary sings,
my Spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour, c. and
opposite to these are the Spirits of the wicked as
Peter tels us of the Spirits of the wicked,Why it is said the Spirits made per|fect. of the
old world now in prison, c.
2. I observe that in this Heb. 12. the Spirit of
God speaks not of the Bodies of the Saints neither
Conjoynd, nor a-part. Nor secondly of the Righte|ous,
made perfect, but the Spirits of First, the
Righteous: Therefore it seems to hold forth not a
perfect State of the Saints in this Life, Consisting
of Spirits and Bodies, [99] which our proud Boast|ers
say of themselves, nor that they are perfect:
Nor secondly, of the Estate of the Saints in the
world to come, where all true Protestants hold, that
the Bodies and Souls of the Saints shall be perfected,
and Everlastingly (and as to us now) Inconceivably
glorified.
But the Estate of the Souls or Spirits of the
Elect, who are (as some Translate) perfected, some
Consummated or finished, some grounded, or now
(Everlastngly Established, while their visible part,
the Body sleeps in Iesus until the joyful Resurrection.
2. Thus it appears the rather to be, because we
find in all the holy Records the Spirits, Souls, and
Bodies of the highest Saints in this world defective
and subject to great failings, c.

3. It is said, 1 Pet. 3. the Spirits in prison, not the
Bodies nor the wicked, but those Spirits of the
wicked which believed not Noahs preaching, c.
4. Doth the Scripture speak of the Spirit of God
here at all?The Devil would be rid of Scripture and all Learning. but of the Spirits of men; or of
those Penmen of the holy Scriptures, or of any
present state of perfection in this Life at all, which
might occasion his Answer?
5. What Truth or pertinency is in those words,
Christ the end of all words: Doth he mean that now
there ought to be no more words or writings? or
that Christ ends all Scripture Words, and there is
no further use of them? so they hold out, and yet
they say and practice the Contrary. The Truth is,
their horrible unclean and foul Spirit would fain be
rid of all Scripture Words, and all Learning also,
c. that he may bring the more of miserable man|kinde
(under the cheating sound of Light] into his
Eternal Darkness.
The 51th. Instance is in Pag. 325. where he
quotes Timothy Trevis,325 Tim|othy Trevis. saying, God hath ordained to
Eternal Life all that shall be saved, before they had a
Being in this World: But none comes to possession of
this Salvation, but through Obedience of the Spirit.
G. Fox Answers, [The ground of mans belief and
obedience is Christ, who doth inlighten him to the intent
that he might believe and obey the Truth, and who
knows the Seed, knows the Election before the World
was made.]
I Reply, 1. If he means that Christ is the Ground
or Author, the Giver of Repentance and Faith to

all the Elect whom God [100] the Father hath
given him, we say so, c. But if he put in their
Invented Light in the Room of Gods Election and
Predestination,G. Fox destroys the work|ing of the Father and the Son. as the Efficient and first Cause, and of
Christ as the Mediator and Meritorious Cause accord|ing
to the golden Chain, Rom. 8. and Ephes. 1. and
the fifth Chap. He speaks blasphemously of God,
and of the Son of God, and of the glorious work
of their Redemption, and poor mankinds Salvation.
2 He is now in the Burrough of the Arminians,G. Fox and the Arminians one as to predestina|tion.
who destroy Gods Election before the world was,
and say, that when a man believes he is Elected,
when he is predestinate, or (being obedient) is In|constant,
he is then Reprobated.
1 Contrary to all the precious beds of Flowers and
Spices in the Garden of the Scripture, which these
rooting Swine getting in, they root and tear up all
the ways and methods of Gods Councels and Sal|vations.
2 Contrary to the wit and skill of men, who
framing a Book, an House, a Ship, a Navie, an Ar|my,Mans wisdome about his Earthly business
or any Sublunary matters, have all in their
Thoughts, Minds, and Councels before they begin
their Enterprize, they provide their Materials, their
Agents, their means they fit all to their Ends, though
all may faile, all mens Affairs being but Vanity and
Vexations. But to whom shall we liken the Eter|nal
and Infinite Majsty, to whom all his works and
Events are known (in a most Inconceivable way as to
us) even from Eternity to Eternity, his Iustice, his
Goodness, his Power, all being Infinite.
3. As to the Seed and Election: We know they

make themselves,The Mis|tery of the Quakers Seed. the seed and the Election: sec|ondly,
They make Christ the seed, that is, (in the
End) themselves. And thirdly, They make God
and the Spirit of God the seed, the seed in every
man which is preached to, by them the Imprisoned
Seed, and when one turns Quaker, then God comes
out of Prison: The Truth is, they make no dis|tinction
between God and Christ, and Spirit, and
themselves, as Fox in this Book as before plainly
tels us, but when this pretended seed of God, or
God himself is hearkened to, then the soul so
hearkning, is become Goddified, and God with
God, whose Infinite Being and Essence these poor,
proud Bruits,The Foxi|ans gross Ignorance of the Godhead have not so much sight of as the
Devils have, who cried out to Jesus, I know thee
whom thou art the holy One of God, knowing that
God and the Son of God were Infinitely distinct in
them- [101] selves, and all Created Beings: Yet
such is the Inconceivable wrath and Iustice of the
Eternal God upon these fallen Spirits who kept
not their first Habitation (as the pretended Quakers
many of them have not done) that (as Pharaoh)
they can not but lye and slander, and kill till the time
of their Torment come.
The 52d. Instance of G. Fox his slight dealing is
in Pag. 326. where he brings in the same Author,326 Tim|othy Trevis.
saying, [The manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man in the Church to profit withal, and not to
every man in the World.]
G. Fox Answers, [The manifestation is given to
every man to profit withal without distinction, I will

pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh: For the Spirit of
Truth shall lead the Saints into all Truth: And he
shall reprove the World, and that which doth reprove
the World is manifest to the World.]
I Reply, I spake to this Text before, in Answer
to the Letter of my Neighbour I. T. (as is to be
seen in the Letters before our Disputes) who de|clared
himself satisfied with my Answers,The mani|festation of the Spirit discussed. but G.
Fox (like a Cow with a Kettle on her head, giving
every one warning to stand clear) he boldly sland|ersChange "slanders" to "blunders." R. W. Ms. Ann.
on, and tumbles Heaven, Earth and Hell
together, c.
1. This 1 Cor. 12. expresly declares three things.
1. That it pleased God to appoint in his Christ|ian
Church and Worship the Ministry of Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, c. according to Rom. 12
Ephes. 4, c.
2. He bestoweth several Gifts and Endowments
on such persons whom he pleaseth to call unto such
Ministrations.
3. He vouchsafeth to give a gracious Concurrent
Operation of his Spirit unto these his Gifts  Min|istrations,The Gar|den of Christs Church and the Wilder|ness, c. of the World differ as Heaven and Earth
what now is this gracious promise of the
Father of Lights to the Garden of his Church 
Saints, the howling Desart of the whole world, from
whence the Garden is taken in, inclosed and sepa|rate?
Because a Queen is a Woman, must therefore
all the Honours and kindneffes of a glorions Prince
due to his Royal Consort be dispensed in Common
to all the Women in his Kingdome or Dominions?
The Garment in which the Queen is brought, is a

Garment of Needle work, richly and most curiouly
embroydered with the graces and Operations of the
holy Spirit, doth it therefore follow, that those
Heavenly Embroyderies, c. belong to every nnclean
and Lousie Begger?
102] Yea, but this prophane Mouth hath some|thing
to say for it self, three things he saith full of
Prophaneness and Simplicity.
1. I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh.
But, 1. Was this (as he speaks) without all dis|tinction
done actually? was it, Universally so with
all the Individuals of mankind in the world at
that time?
2. Was not there a wonderful Wall of separation
between the Iews and all other Nations,The par|tition Wall between Jews and Gentiles. which the
Lord promised by the Prophets to break down, and
at the coming of the Lord Jesus, and ever since
hath more and more broke down and abolished?
Is not Gideons Floor which was dry (the poor Gen|tiles
and we English among them) now wet with the
Dews of Heaven, while the poor Iews (which were
only wet at first) are dry and barren?
3. What is that Extraordinary Promise of Gods
Extraordinary pouring out of his Spirit, in Fiery
Tongues and Prophesyings, fitting some to go unto
all Nations to carry the glad News or Gospel, had
others and all Believers those Gifts [least of all
with any shew of Reason] belong they to all the
Men and Women in the world, who have never
seen and heard of any Glimpse of the Sun of
Righteousness.
4. Again, I observe how vainly and wickedly

this deluded and deluding Soul cheats himself,G. Fox his not cleav|ing the Hoof though full of Scrip|ture. and
others with this Tearme, All Flesh, Every man, All
the World, and so with the Terms Light, Christ,
Spirit, his proud Fancy playeth, c. not dividing the
Hoof by just and holy distinguishing a Crime that
he often upbraids his Opposites most odiously with
in his Book, not dividing, c. but is most notori|ously
guilty as ever was filthy Camel in this world,
or any of the unclean Beasts, c.
G. Fox his second Answer here is, [The Spirit of
God shall lead the Saints into all Truth.]G. Fox his won|derful Confusion. I observe
here how like a Skittish Jade this wild Soul runs
in and out, and cannot keep to one steady Affirma|tion:
Before he brings in the Spirit of God poured
out upon the Common of the World, now he
brings in the spirits leading the saints, Gods Garden
and Paradice: Yet again, in his next words he con|cludes
every man in the World to have the spirit
because saith he, [The spirit reproves the World, and
that which doth Reprove the World is manifest to the
World.]
I Answer, The holy spirit testifies that he is the
Comforter of the saints, but a Reprover of the World,
that he Comforts the [103] Saints in the Promi|ses,
 Assurances, c. that he Reproves the world
in his Threatenings and Judgments.The Spi|rit of God and the world are extream Contraries That the
world knows not, sees not the Spirit, but mocks at,
receives it not, but banisheth, imprisoneth, murthe|reth
such in whom the true Spirit of God appear|eth:
Hence it is, that because of this Spirit of God
in any soul, three are against two,  two must be
against three in the same house, the Parents against

the Children, and the Children betray their Parents
unto Death: yea, two in a Bed, and two in a Belly,
and yet he whom Gods Spirit chooseth,Prophners of the holy Spirit. shall be
mockt and murthered by the other, and yet this
lying Peor tells us that all the world (without dis|tinction)
have the manifestation of the Spirit of
God to prosit withal.
5. There have been persons professing the Order
of the holy Ghost, yet far from the favour of the
holy Spirit, there hath been a great Ship in the
world full of Sailors and Souldiers,G. Fox, c. resist|ing and fighting against the holy Spirit. called the holy
Ghost, and yet scarce one man in it known to have
any Acquaintance with Gods Spirit: Alas, what
are the Babilonish Orders of these pretenders to the
Holy Ghost or Spirit? what are they but a poor
Ship full of Resisters of Gods Spirit, and Enemies
to the greatest Enjoyers of him in the World, the
true Protestant Witnesses, whom they professedly
oppose under the Name of Professors, I hope as I
have often said, that many of them are of the two
hundred that followed Absolom in honesty and sim|plicity.
6. But,The striv|ing of Gods Spirit. Oh what Reproofs of Gods Spirit hath
G. Fox and others of their Leaders had in, and by
so many excellent Opposites and Scriptures, and
Arguments, which G. Fox here proudly tramples
under his prophane feet, without any savour of the
holy Spirit of God!
It is true, it pleaseth God as I said, to strive with
men by preachings, by writings, by their own
Readings, by publick Iudgments and private, and
also by publick mercies and private, for Acts 14.

every Drop of Rain is Gods voice, word or witness,
c, but what is this Common grace to that Regene|rating
and changing Spirit,The free and pow|erful working of Gods spirit. John 3. to the opening
of Lidiahs, and so of all saints hearts by his free
and holy spirit or Finger? what is this to the same
Power that raised Christ Jesus from the Dead,
Ephes. 1. that raiseth any poor sinner unto a new
and holy, and spiritual Condtion?
104] 7. Excellent and most heavenly is that sim|ilitude,
Cant. 1. Because of the savour of thy good
Ointments therefore do the Virgins love thee: Oh how
many prate of this spirit or Ointment, and yet hate
the true Lord Jesus, hate his Love Letters, the holy
scriptures, and would be glad to see them in a Bone
fire, hate his poor true Quakers that desire to fear
before him, and tremble at his Word, and to mourn
that having received such manifestations of the
holy spirit of God they have profited others so lit|tle,
and glorified God in their Generations?
8. I might Insist upon the End which G, Fox
insisteth on,The whole world un|profitable. viz. to profit withal, and ask why Da|vid,
Psal. 53. Complains that all the Children of
men not one excepted, are unprofitable, good for
nothing, yea, abominable, that is, to spiritual mat|ters,
heavenly things, the world to come: All even
the sweetest Natures, the fairest, the wittiest, the
wisest, the learnedst, the devoutest, untill the spirit
of God come and truly change the heart and whole
Frame of Nature. Till then, we as profitable as
Hogs, as Moles in a Garden, as Water or Fire break|ing
into a ship, and as devouring Foxes amongst the
true Lambs and Chickens of Christ Iesus.

The 53d Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is
in pag. 328:328 Hugh Archbal where he quotes Hugh Archbal, saying,
[Christ doth enlighten none but them that do receive
him.]
He Answers, Contrary to John 3. which speak|eth
of them that hate the Light, and are enlight|ened,
and will not come to it, because the Light
will reprove them: so he that hates the Light is
enlightned, and will not receive Christ.
I Reply, though I have spoken much of the
Light and of receiving Christ Jesus, c, yet since
this proud Boaster drags his Opposites out of Scot|land
also: I pray the Readers patience while I tell
him of a manifold Light which the Holy spirit
mentions under a Metaphor or Figure of Light.
1. The Natural perceiving of Natural things,The mani|fold Light mentioned in the Holy Scripture as
Christ Jesus saith: The Light of the Body is the Eye.
2. The Light of peace and joy, whether Corpo|ral
or spiritual, Temporal, or Eternal: The Iews in
Hamans down-Fall, and their own Deliverance had
Light and Joy, c. and Light is sown for the Right|eous,
c.
105] 3. The common offers of the Gospel as
Light, whence some have observed that the word
(so cried up in Iohn 1.) is not inlightneth but light|eth:
but the word Photizei may signifie both, and
yet be no more then the Common offer, preaching
and sound of the glad News, or Gospel: The peo|ple
that sate in Darkness saw great Light, c, As
the Light of a candle coming in lightens or enlight|ens
the Walls and Room but being taken away
again leaves no Impression or change upon the Wall,

or as the Sun shining or guilding the Earth being
clouded leaves no Impression of shining on the
Earth behind it:The Com|mon offers of mercy. So is it with the Common offers
of Trading or marriages in the world, and so of the
heavenly Offers of Merchandize and Heavenly Mar|riage, c.
4. There is yet a higher Light which some are
affected, Tinctur'd and enlightened, and yet not the
true and saving Light: that in Heb. 6. where some
persons (as the pretended Quakers and G. Fox especi|ally)
have seen much of the Nature of God, his
holiness, his Iustice, c. and had a Tast of the Ioyes
of the next world, but proudly turned from the holy
Scripture, from the true Lord Jesus, and the true,
holy, enlightning, humbling and saving Spirit of God.
5. The true Lighting or Enlightning of which
the holy Scripture speaketh,The true Illumina|tion. is that of 2 Cor. 4 (a
place fouly and simply abused by G. Fox to prove
the Light in every man) where Paul shews, how
by the preaching of the glad News or Gospel God
had shined in their hearts, (not in the hearts of all
the men in the world, nor in the hearts of all the
Corinthians) and had given them a sight of the glory
of God in the Face, or from the Reflexion or means
of the face of the Mediator,As the first Chris|tians were called. the man Christ Jesus.
Hence all those Heavenly Appellations or phrazes, or
Names, Children of the Day: Illuminated, or In|lightned
Ones, You were Darkness, but now you are
(not only Inlightened, but) Light in the Lord, that is,
become, (not as Fox pretends Christs and Gods and
no distinction) but of a bright Spiritual Nature,
longing humbly and mournfully in the use of the

holy Scripture, and all other means) more to come
out of Darkness into the Light of holiness and
likeness unto God.
Object. G. Fox alleadgeth Iohn 3. They which
hated the Light were inlightned:
I Answer, No question, but with the general
Offer of mercy, [106] as of the Candle or Sun to
the Eyes of a blind man, which is yet their Con|demnation,The two|fold suc|cess of the Gospel.
because if they had power, yet their
wills and Lusts, and Resolutions refuse and abhor it,
and abhor their eyes should be opened to see it.
Whereas the Gospel or glad News is published or
preached, there is a twofold Effect of it: as Acts
13. and Acts 17. and Acts 28. and through all Ex|perience
in all Ages and in all parts of the world
some mock, some demur, some persecute others, the
Spirit or Power of God opens their hearts to fear,
to believe, to submit, and in Gods time to rejoyce
for ever in a Saviour.
The 54th Instance is in Pag. 330. where G. Fox
brings in Iames Dorram,330. James Dorram. saying [The Believer is not
in sin as the Unbeliever is, he sins not as the Unbeliever
doth: and in another place he saith, the Law is the
same to the Believer that it is to the Unbeliever.
G. Fox Answers, Here any may read thy Con|fusion,
but I say unto thee He that believeth doth
not commit Sin, but the unbelief is Sin, Rom. 11.
20. And Christ is the End of the Law to every one
that believes for Righteousness sake, Roms 10. 4. and
yet thou puts both Believers and unbelievers under
the power of the Law.

I Reply,The sight of sin as Sin. The Devils (no question) know Sin, they
see Sin, but not in the true glass of the holy Scrip|ture:
They see sin as Saul and Iudas, c. in the
fire of the Coal, as dreadful in the punishment,
but not in the blackness of the Coale, as against
their new Life and Nature, and the purity of the
Eternal, who hath begotten them unto holiness.
The Robber and Murtherer bewails his offence at
the Gallows, though yet his heart is not changed,
but, (could he) he would murther the Judge, and
all that had a hand in his Condemnation and Exe|cution.
The Drunkard hates his Sin as a Tyrant
over him, only as it brings Discredit to him, so is
it with the unclean person, and every other sinner.
But it is not so with the Regenerate or new Born,
who can no more (unless deceived and Circum|vented)
touch Sin,The Sins of the Re|generate. then the Devil the Father of it,
nor then Fire can delight in Water, nor Light in
Darkness.
3. It is true, that 7 of the Romans is contended
for by the Papists and Arminians, and in a great
measure by the Quakers, [107] to Contain not the
Combate of the Saints, but of the unregenerate
within themselves: But the true Protestants have
proved from the Scripture, and the Experience of
all true Saints that sin and grace, Flesh and Spirit,
the Law of the Spirit,Whit the Combate between the Flesh and Spirit in Rom. 7. and the Law of sin may,
and do continue Combating in the Regenerate,
or New born, Contrary to that proud perfection of
Papists and Foxians in this Life, is more clear then
Pauls Argumentation, and upon that his Conclusion,
viz. That with his mind, that is, his Spirit, will,

Affections, (renewed by Gods Spirit) he served the
Law of God: But with his Flesh, which must be
his sinful Desires and Dispositions yet remaining in
him, he served the Law of Sin? This was the Rea|son
of his Cry, O wretched man, c. and G. Fox
his silly shifts saying, that in the End of the Chap|ter,
Paul was perfect, and gave thanks for victory,
it is like that Fantastical saying, of the Generalists,
being forced to Coness Repentance necessary to
Salvation, viz. [In a moment in the Twinkling of an
Eye] wofully abusing that holy Scripture about the
Resurrection.
4. The same 7 of the Romans,The Sin of the Regen|erate as a wound and Cap|tivity. and other holy
Scriptures, and Experience prove that the Sin of
the Regenerate, whether of Ignorance, as the Fa|thers,
many wives, c. or of unwatchfulness as Da|vid
and Peter's c. It is as an honest man taken
prisoner, or as Souldiers and Seamen wounded and
carried Captive, or as a Virgin by force deslowred,
and crying out, whom therefore both Law and
Reason, and the holy Scripture in a holy Figure
declare to be clear and Innocent.
5. Hence Paul shews the Sincerity of the Chast
Will and Affections unto the Heavenly Bridegroom,The Souls delight in God, and Hatred to Sin
saying, I delight in the Law of God, in the inner man:
Delight we know is the Top and Flowre, and Cream
of all the Affections, and the siercest hatred flies in
the Face of that which takes away our delight
from us. The wicked may desire, and may act
heavenly things for his own self Ends, for his Cred|it,
his profit, his Salvation, but he can not make
God to be himself, and delight in God.

6. What Confusion is it to affirm that the Saints
of God though they see Christ fulfilling the Law
of works for them,Sincerity the Crown of the true Quakers which none in the world could
ever do but He, yet they ought to strive after per|fect
holiness and Righteousness, to love the Lord
with all their Heart, soul, might, strength, c. as a
Child going after his Father, the Scholar or mai|den
following their Copies and Samplers [108
though they never come near the full Exactness
and perfection of them.
The 55th Instance of G. Fox his simple and soul
Answer is in Pag. 338. where he brings in Iohn
Nasmith from Scotland,338 John Nasmith saying, [Tha the Evil Spir|its
are both sinful and Reasonable.]
He Answers, This is a lye, for Reasonable is not
sinful, and unreasonable is sinful? 1 Thes. 3. they
have not the Faith. And if the Evil Spirit be Rea|sonable
and the Good Reasonable, they are both
one: who is then unreasonable, thou puts no differ|ence
between the precious and the vile? Thou
hast the mark of a blinde guide and of a false Pro|phet
in thy Forehead.
1. I Reply and observe First, the filthy rash Fury
of his mind and Pen: Beginning with that's a lye,
and after a silly Line and Answer: Thou hast the
Marck of a Blind guide and of a false Prophet in thy
Forehead.
2. This proud Pharisee will appear to be a Sad|ducee
also, and to hold no Angels nor Spirits: It is
true, as they pretend to owne Scripture and a Christ,
and Resurrection, They with Iesuitical Equivocations
name Angels and Spirits, but the bottom as some

of them,The Fox|ians are both Pharisees and Sadduces. and that in print discover is, they hold
there is but one Spirit, which is in All, and into
which All Return, and the Soul of Iudas is as hap|py
as the Soul of Peter.
3. G. Fox runs into his Burrough of the various
significations of the word Reasonable. A man is a
Reasonable Creature as Opposite to Wolves and Foxes,
c. and yet he may be unreasonable in in his Act|ings,An Item to G. Fox.
as Wolves and Foxes, who though unreasona|ble
in their Natures, yet are not sinful, though a
plague to man since his Fall. Oh happy were it
for G. Fox that he had been of the wild Foxes in
the Woods, and had not been so sinful, by so hor|ribly
abusing so great a Talent of Wit and Reason
which the Father of Lights hath given him.
4. We know the Admirable Wit and Reason as
well as the Power of those unclean Spirits, the
Lord Jesus cast out,The Na|ture of the Devils they did believe and Confess
the Lord Jesus, and made their Request unto him:
This their knowledge and Ability is from God,
though their sinful hardness by Gods just Sentence,
runs them upon such mad and desperate Courses, as
it is with the Sons of men, when the most holy and
Righteous Judge delivers them up to the Councels
109] and Projects of their proud and deceitful Hearts
and Spirits:
The 56th. Instance is in Pag. 345. where he
brings in Henry Foreside (from Scotland,)345 Hen. Foreside. saying,
[Concerning those words of Ezekiel 18. 28. If the
Righteous turn away from his Righteousness, his for|mer
Righteousness shall be no more remembred, and he

said the meaning of that Scripture was: They thought
they had been Righteous, but were not, but supposed it
had been so.]
He Answers,Ezek. 18 Consider|ed [Herein thou art a Minister of un|righteousness
thou goest about to make God a Lyar, and
the Prophets, and perverts the Scripture: For if he
forsakes his Righteousness and commits Sin and Iniquity,
and Trespasses he shall dye and not live in the Right|eousness:
But if he o sakes his Sins, Trespasses and
Transgressions, in the Righteousness that he hath done
and doth, he shall live: So Gods wayes are equal, Ezek,
18.] And thou sayes, they thought they had been
Righteous, but it was not so: And the Lord by the
Prophet saith it was so, that they should live in their
Righteousness and die if they did depart from it and
Transgressed: Here thou art a diminisher from the
Prophets and Apostles words, whose Name is di|minished
out of the Book of Life, read Rev. 22. 19
I Reply, The Question is about Falling away from
saving grace and Righteousness,The Spirit of Falling from Grace. wherein it is no|torious,
(as I have formerly proved) that the Qua|kers
joyn their Forces to the Standards of the
Papists and Arminians, though herein the Armini|ans
(though highly abusing an high wit as the
Papists and Quakers do) yet are they not so guilty
and Insufferable as the Papists and Foxians are, be|cause
they pretend not to such an Infallible Chair
as the Papists and Quakers do,The Pa|pists, Ar|minians and Fox+ians one in this point. which is the more
wonderful and monstrous, because the Papists are
forced to grant that the Head of their Church the
Pope may Himself fall away and be a Reprobate,
and the Foxians are forced to Confess as much, even

of divers of their Heads and Teachers, some get|ting
Saving Grace again, as they say, and some
never. The Quakers yet are more gross in this
point, because they maintain that the least that
hearken to the Light are born again. That they
which are born again cannot Sin, that they which
can not Sin are pure as God is pure, and therefore
they Falling away from them, they must necessarily
hold that which is blasphemous of all to be ab|horred,
that God himself may fall from Grace also,
and is kept down as the [110] as this barking Fox
speaks, as a Cart laden with sheaves (perverting the
Scripture) by wickedness  wicked spirits which
are too hard for God and Christ, and Spirit in all
the Men and Women in the world, that do not
hearken to their feigned Light, and let loose the
Imprisoned Cart and Seed, c.
Wee may make a stand here and observe three
things.Whab Grace it is that Pa|pists Ar|minians and Fox|ians Fall from.
1. The horrible abuse of Gods Excellent Gifts of
Reason and Acuteness, which these men so grossly
desile in handling the Misteries and Parables of
the holy Scripture.
2. Gods Infinite Patience in bearing with such a
rotten stinking thing as man is.Necessary Observa|tions.
3. What kind of Grace it is that so easily per|sons
Fall away away from, and part withal.
2. As to Ezek. 18. How doth it follow, that be|cause
the word Righteousness in which Fox in his
wonted Burrough,The Word Righteous|ness of many sig|nifications signifies divers things, that there|fore
in this first place it must signify the Imputed
Righteousness of God in Christ, from which a

man really Invested with it may really, Totally and
Finally depart. And Secondly the Sanctifying
Righteousness of Christ Jesus adorning a poor sin|ner
Justified and pardoned, and of that true Right|eousness,
a truly sanctified Soul and member of
Christ Jesus may make shipwrack. But is there
not beside these a very thirdly, Indian Rigteousness,
when a Barbarian is Innocent and free from Crimes
falsly charged on him?
4. Is there not a Civil Righteousness when men
are free from Gross and Barbarous Courses, and live
Civilly, soberly and justly among their Neighbors?
5 Yea, is there not a Pharisaical Righteousness
which Paul prided himself in, viz that concerning
the Law he was blameless, and yet saith the Lord
Jesus, Except your Righteousness go beyond this Right|eousness,
you shall not enter into the Kingdome of
Heaven
6. Again, Is there not a Righteousness of the
foolish Virgins, who hath a shew and Lamp of Pro|fession,
and make as brave a shew in building as the
house upon the Rock, it may be fairer) and yet no
true work of Conversion of the Soul to God,God's Covenant with the first man. nor
the Oyle of Gods Spirit in the heart for all their
boasting of it. The most High and holy will be
clear when he is Judged. Adam shall live if he
keep his Bargain: and so shall all his Posterity if
they keep the first Covenant.
111] If any shall say God knows the Bargain is
too hard for us: Our first Father did not, how
shall we? c.
I Answer, what will become then of the Papists

and Quakers, who say, they can, and the Papists
more also then God commandeth?
2. Christ did not mock, but meekly and savingly
teach the young man, when he Answered, If thou
wilt enter into Life keep the Commandments: nor doth
he mock the Iews, dealing with them upon the
Terms of Iustice: Obey and live, Transgress and die.
It is a pertinent question, why was the holy Law
of God written and given so many hundreds of
years after man was Fallen and not able to keep his
Bargain:The Law given so many hun|dreth of years after mans Fall. The Spirit of God Gal. 3, tels us that
four hundred and Thirty Years after the Promise to
Abraham, the Law was written by Gods own Im|mediate
Finger to shew unto man his Sin, and Judge|ments,
and need of a Mediator promised.
3. As to G. Fox Cursing his Adversary as a
Diminisher from the holy Scripture.
I Answer,G. Fox making use of the Scripture to Curse his Opposites. Doth this Face of Brass, who hath so
horribly slighted the holy Scripture: now adore
them? Is he now zealous for them, and against the
violation of them? Doth he regard the adding to,
or Detracting from them, or the Plagues and
Curses therein denounced against the Adders to, or
Detracters from them? Doth he not throughout
all his Book, and all of them in word and writing
deny the holy Scripture to be the word of God,
and only that Frantick Light or Christ, (imagined
by them to be in all mankinde) to be the only
Word of God?Their horrible Contempt of Scripture. yea, is it of any use or more availe
to them that have the Scripture in their heart, as
they say then a dead Letter, and an Old Almanack,
c. O hear O Heavens and give Ear O Earth, did

ever the Devil vomit out more poyson (against God
and the Souls of men by the mouths and pens of
Iews or Turks, or Anti-Christans,) then these Fox|ians
do in their undermining the holy Scriptures?
Some know it not: Some of them speak Reverent|ly
of it: The very Papists Confess it to be the very
word or Speech of God: But the Devil and the
Quakers abhor to hear them Verbum Dei the Word
of God.
These bewitched Soules affirme they have a higher
Teacher, yea, [112] every man in the world hath
him in them, then the Scriptures are and yet they
say in horrible simplicity and hypocrisy that they
are the Words of God.
The 58th: Instance of G. Fox his slight Answer,
as in Pag. 356, where he brings in a Book from
Holland,456 A Book from Hollaed saying, [That God hath put out the Remem|brance
of your Sins, and of your Corruptions within
you, wherein you must fight all your Life Time.
G. Fox, whilst the Sins you are fighting withal
are not blotted out in your own particulars, this is
not the Life of the Saints:G. Fox his proud Ignorance They are not fighting
all their Life Time, but come to the Kingdome of
God witnessing sin and Iniquity blotted out, and the
Everlasting Covenant of Peace and Life with God
I Reply, This subtle Mountebank having gotten a
Scaffold, he acts Tricks wonderful in the Eyes of
the simple, yet as in all his Books he shews no
knowledge of the Hebrew and the Greek (whence
our English Scripture comes as a Daughter from the
Mother) so falls he short of most English writers,

who scorns to disgrace their Mother English (by so
much bastard and false English) as this poor Mounte|bank
hath done in all his Books.
If ever any poor empty Soul have talkt of God
without God.An Impi|ous unsa|vonry Spirit against the godly of all Nations Of a Christ, and the holy Spirit
within, without them: or any true Savour of them:
of the holy writings of God without any true
Reverence and love to them! Of Light without
any Spark of true Illuminations! of sin, without
any true Sence of the Exceeding Sinfulness of it!
This Empty Cask this loud Boaster and Censurer is
one of them.
1. His Answer saith three things in Effect.
1, That no sin is blotted out until there be no
more Root nor Seed of it in the Soul to fight against.The Phar|isees Per|fection
I Reply, to this I have spoke much before, and
shewed how clear it is against so much holy Scrip|ture:
against the Counsels and purposes of God as
to his holy ordering of this present world,2 Pet. 22 and his
Saints in it: and against the Constant Experience
of all those high Saints in Scripture, and of all that
ever went before us: All which shews the Devilish
pride of these high Pharisees
2. He adds, saying, the Saints are not fighting all
their Life Time.
I Reply,The Saints Continual warfere if there be no Enemies no danger of
Fleshly Lusts warring against our Souls, as Peter speaks.
113] 2. Why then doth the holy Spirit speak of
the Combate of the Flesh and Spirit, Gal. 5. and
that Paul did not the things that he would, and did the
Evil he would not,  of his being taken Prisoner?
3. Why then doth Gods Spirit furnish us with

all that Heavenly Artillery, Ephes. 6. 1. And Com|mands
his Servants (even Timothy) to flie youthful
Lusts, if he were past wounding by them?
4. And to stand upon the Guard and watch
against Gluttonly and Drunkenness, and worldly Cares,
which would lull the Souls of the Disciples asleep,
except they kept the better watch c. Luke 21.
5. And why then doth the Lord Jesus Command
us to pray daily against Temptations,Scriptural dangers and spiritual Watch. yea, and to pray
daily for the pardon of sin, if his Followers be for ever
escaped out of the reach of Sinful thoughts, words
and actions, and many thousand sinful Omissions?
6. What was the Reason of the Cemmand of
Christ Jesus to the Churches to watch,Christs Discipline with his Saints and Churches. to Overcome,
to repent, threatning them with discharging, and
Excommunication which we see dolefully Effected
upon the Asian Professors, and which was followed
with a rich blessing upon that Ordinance, Exe|cuted
upon the Incestuous Corinthian, which brought
forth those seven Heavenly Fruits, both in him and
that Church also, 2 Cor. 7.
G. Fox his third Answer is, [The Saints are come
to the Kingdome of God witnessing Sin and Iniquity
blotted out, and the Everlasting Covenant of Peace and
Life with God.]
But 1. Take these words in his Sense, viz. that
all that are in their Fancied Kingdome are thus free
from Sin, and come to this Peace and Joy: why
then do themselves still Confess themselves to be
subject to quaking and trembling, as if they were at
the black and burning Foot of Mount Sinai, where
indeed they are, and not upon the bright and shining
Hill of Zion.

2. Is not this Contrary to the Covenant of God
with David,The Qua|kers dole|ful mistake concerning Solomon, and (in the Anti
Type) with all Christians, viz. that if they Sin he
will Chastise them with the Rods of men, but not
take away his mercy, as he took it from Saul, c.
3. Is there not a false Peace, a false Ioy as well
as a false quaking, a false Repentance, a false morti|fication,
and Sanctificatio, and in Conclusion, a
false Salvation: and therefore the Lord Jesus tels
us of the high pretenders, Math. 7. yet by him Ever|lastingly
rejected.
114] The 59th Instance is in Pag. 365. where G.
Fox brings in Robert Tuchin,365. Rob|ert Tu|chin, c. c. saying, [The most
Faithful Messengers of Christ have acknowledged that
they have come short of their duty.]
G. Fox Answers, [They that are Faithful Messen|gers
of Christ have the Answer well done thou good and
Faithful Servant: where did John, or Paul, or Peter
acknowledge that they came short of their duty: Hath
not thou slandred the Servants of the Lord, thinking
them to be like yourselves, and falsly accusing them
that you may seem Iustified, who are false Messengers
and come in his Name, when you have no Commission
from him: and you come short of every good work: But
thus it is not with Christs true Messengers, for they
fulfil his Will that sent them. It is the Lord that
worketh in them, whose thy are, and whose duty they
perform by his Spirit]
I Reply,G Fox prouder and prouder, wo se and worse to the End of his Book this deluded Soul (as it is written) must
grow worse and worse (except the Lord wonderfully
awaken him) to all Eternity: Instead of seeing any
failing against God and Christ, the Spirit and Ser|vants

of God, c. he claps his wings upon his
Dunghil, and vapours, that in all these Transactions
he hath not faild, no not in a sinful word or Thought.
1. But he must remember that such was the In|finite,
Incomprehensible Purity and Iustice, and wis|dome
of God,The Fall of Angels. that the Heavens were not pure in his
sight, and he laid Folly to the Charge of his Angels,
and I am sure, their Natures, their Endowments,
their Employments, G. Fox comes short of, and yet
they came short of their duty, and are now fast in
Chains of Darkness, expecting Iudgement and Tor|ment
to come,
2. I presume G. Fox will grant that our first Pa|rents
were Innocent and perfect, as highly Gifted and
as highly Employed as ever G. Fox is like to be,Fall of Man. and
yet they came short, and We all by them fallen
short of the Glory and love of God into the Dung|hill
of Hellish Darkness.
3. After the Promised Restoration by the Son of
God what Excellent Gifts had Noah, Abraham, Lot,
Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, Moses, Aaron, Sampson, Iepthe,
Gideon, Eli, Samuel, Nathan, Solomon, Asa, Iehosha|phat,
Hezekiah, Iosiah, and many other glorious
Saints, what wonderful Assistance and Extraordinary
Appearances of God had they in their high Services
for God, and yet how grealy: (some of them
wonderfully fouly) did they come short of their
115] duty? I remember I was once asked by one
of these high Boasters whether I would deny the
Scripture:Davids sin. viz that said, David did not sin but in
the Case of Uriah: unto which I know many full
Answers may be given. Here only I observe how

ready these (willingly Ignorant) Souls are to Catch
at any Word that may Fortifie their proud Fancy,Sacrifice for Sins of Ignorance
though against many other Scriptures and unques|tionable
Examples, c.
4. Until the coming of Christ Jesus we know
the Command of the most holy God to private
persons, to the Princes, to the Priests, to the whole
Assembly to offer up Sacrifice and Expiation for all
sorts of failings, yea, for Sins of Ignorance, yea, and
for their coming short in their holy offerings:
Hence David cries out, Psal. 143. Enter not into
Iudgement or Reckoning with thy Servant, c. and
Psal. 19. Cleanse thou me from secret sins, for who
knows how oft he offendeth?
5. I know G. Fox useth to say all these were
Types and Christ is the body, .
I Answer, There are more Anti-Types then the
person of Christ, for the Quakers themselves, they
make themselves Kings and Priests, and the Tem|ple
as well as Christ, c.
But come to the time of the Lord Jesus,Great failing of Christs Disciples and
look upon the Famous first Apostles, who had freely
left all to follow him, who enjoyed his personal
preaching and praying, his wonderful Miracles, his
Heavenly Converse, his holy and Powerful Spirit in
their own preaching, healing all Diseases, raising
the dead, casting out Devils, c. and yet how doth
the Lord Jesus frequently and sharply chide them
for their coming short of their duty, for their Ig|norance,
negligence, unbelief, forgetfulness, Inhu|manity,
Ambition, c.
6. Yea, as to those three whom G. Fox boasts of,

Iohn,Paul, John and Peter, and all come short. Paul and Peter: Doth not Iohn cry out, 1
Iohn 2. If we Confess our ins, he is Faithful and just
to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness?
Doth not Paul Confess and bewail his coming short,
when he cries out, that the good he would do he did
not, but did the Evil he would not, and with his flesh
did serve the Law of sin, though it was not Paul
that sinned, but sin that dwelled in him? A Mistery
which I more then fear the most High hath hid|den
from this poor Foxes Eye.
And as to Peter, to say nothing of his stupendi|ous
failing of his [116] Master, c. even after his
awakening, after the Lords rising, and Peters seeing
and talking with him, his bold profession and preach|ing
of him to the Conversion of hundreds and
thousands:Peters great fail|ings form|er and latter writ|ten for our Instruction yet how is he charged by Paul for com|ing
short of his Duty, for Gross Weakness and (in
a kind) Hipocrisy and Dissimulation? so that such a
cloud of witnesses o'rewhelming these new Gods,
(Papists and Quakers) how Righteous is it with God
to make their Faces ashamed with the filth of their
own nakedness, in the highth of the pride of their
conceited Deities.
The 60 Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is
in pag. 372. where he brings in Thomas Hodges,372. Thomas Hodges.
saying, [The Scripture speaks of God after the man|ner
of men.]
He Answers, The Scripture speaks of God after
the manner of the Spirit and to the Spirit, where|by
men may receive him, and know him by the
Spirit which natural men can not.

1. I Reply,G Fox hath affirmed the Con|trary to all the Heavenly Assertions of his Opposites which I have produced. This bewitched and bewitching Soul
hath all along his Book been picking out sweet
Flowers out of his Opposites Gardens, from whence
he hath suckt, turned the sweet juice of Heavenly
Truths into the poyson and Venome of his proud
Conceits. So here he denies this Heavenly Mystery
of Gods revealing himself to us after the way and
manner of men, having Head, and Hair, and Eyes,
and mouth, c. wherein his Incomprehensible
Goodness is pleased to stoop to us (even the high|est
and proudest Souls) as Nurses do to Children,
or as Physitians to weak and Crazy and distempered
persons.
2. But what shall we say to all those holy Scrip|tures,
which not only liken God to a man, a man
of war,God sets forth to us in Scripture by Natural and Arti|ficial things. a Sheepherd, a Warfaring man, an Husband
man, c. but also to a Shield, and other Insensibles,
Natural or Artificial, as a Sun, a Tree, a Rock, an
House, a Fort, a High Tower, c. When God
revealed himself to Abraham, Gen. 15. I am thy
Shield, c. will this foul mouth say that this simili|tude
of a Shield was not a Familiar Metaphor, or
Figure, wherein God speaks to Abrahams weak Ca|pacity?
Or will he say, that God speaking so to
Abraham, spake not also in the way the Spirit, Or
that God is Literally a Shield?
3. It was a late Speech of one of the best Phi|losophers,
and of the best Christians that Old Eng|land
or New ever had: Then shall we know (to
wit in the next life,The great Question what God is. in the Heavenly State to [117
Come) how to answer that great Question, What is
God? But this poor wild Asses Colt, G. Fox he can

resolve the Question: he can gather up the Ocean
in the hollow of his hand, he can weigh the Ever|lasting
Mountains and Winds in Scales, and Inclose
not only the Sun, c. but also the Incomprehensible
Sun of Glory and Purity within his Iuglers Box, c.
4. For,The Devil Gods Ape in Inspira|tions. what would this little Thief and Fox, or
the great Thief and Fox the Devil have, but blow
out the Candle and Torch, and Sun of the holy Books
and Records, that so the Father of Lies and Murthers
may be heard, (as he hath been heard in the Gre|cian
Oracles in Mahomet, and the Mahumetans, in
the Pope and the Papists) so by his whisperings in
the Foxians, as if he were the most holy Spirit of
the Eternal God himself, Immortal, Invisible, and
only Wise.
5. For, is it not the Devils Trade to play the
subtle Hunter, (as do also his Iourney-men who ly in
wait to catch men) and to trim his Pits and Gins,The Sub|tlety of the Devil and his Agents in Ctching of men.
and Snares, with green leaves and Boughs, and Twigs,
viz: fair pretences of the Spirit, the Spirit, the Im|mediate
Spirit, the Infallible Spirit, the Teachings of
the Spirit, the manner of the Spirit, speaking to
the Spirit, and Christ within you, Christ within you
except you be Reprobates, Christ within you the hope of
Glory, c. These are fair Leaves, and sweet, hea|venly
green Boughs, on which the Old Serpent twin|eth,
and from whence he uttereth even Scripture
it self, and the sweet Names God and Christ, and
Spirit, in a frantick purpose to stab (for he knows
he can not) the holy Scriptures, and God, and Christ,
and Spirit also:
6. More particularly, what doth he mean, that

God speaks not to us after the manner of men,What G. Fox means by the ma|ner of the Spirit. but
by the way of the Spirit, after the manner of the
Spirit? He grants that the holy Scriptures were
given forth from the Immediate Inspration of the
Spirit: He knows that we maintain from Isai. 59.
the great Promise of the Word and Spirit together,
to the mouth of Christ Jesus and his Seed, and his
Seeds Seed. And also that we affirme that no Read|ing,
no Hearing, no Meditation, no Afflictions, c.
can do a Soul any good, until God by the Power
or Finger of his own self, or Spirit, makes the
means Powerful and Effectual.
All this serves not, but that which Sathan drives
at, and which alone must serve his Ends is, Immedi|ate,
Immediate Inspiration with a damning, or chang|ing
the means by the most Holy, and only Wise God
Appointed.
118] 7. It is one of the Proverbs of the Ancients
Sus Minervam docet.G. Fox his proud Simplicity The Sow teacheth the God|dess
of Wisdome. It is most Infallibly true here,
this filthy Sow (that seems to be washt from Com|mon
vices and yet wallows in the mud Dunghils
of Mystical Filthiness) He must teach wisdome
it self how to speak, and appoint him his way, and
(by wresting and racing out what he can the Holy
Records) how to reveal himself unto the Sons of men.The Mon|strous Ridle of the Foxians Spirit.
8. It is pertinent to Consider the ground of this
his only owning the manner of the Spirit, viz.
[This Immediate Spirit speaks to the Spirit within.]
What is the English of this Ridle [The Immediate
Spirit within speaks to the Spirit within,] But their
Spirit will tell us that God and Christ, and Spirit,

and Light, and New Covenant, and Faith, and Ho|liness,
c. are all in prison within, in every man,
until the Immediate Spirit without means perswade
a person to hearken within to him as to Christ,
Light and Spirit, which will bring him to God and
Christ, (round in a Conjuring Circle Christ brings to
Christ, the Spirit brings to the Spirit,) which though
it be true, after Conversion and in growth and In|crease
of the Grace and Knowledge of Christ by
the use of means appointed by Christ Jesus, yet I
deny it ever to be done in the first turning of the
Heart and working of Faith, that is by any such
Immediate Spirit, and Christ and God in every of
mankind before, or since the coming of Christ
Jesus, especially, for they say, that he is the true
Light (of which Iohn spake, then Come, to In|lighten
the World, c.
9. I Conclude this Instance and the whole with
a Relection upon Gods wonderful dealing with Iob:
In the 1. Chap. the Lord boasts of his servant Iob
to the Devil to be a perfect man, (as the Foxians
often urge this place) But God Schoold him for
his pride and Impatience,Job a per|fect man yet abhors himself for his filthiness. c. by Elihu, and by his
own Voice out of a Whirlwind: and now Iob Con|fesseth
his Pride and Ignorance, and professeth his
Risolution to prate no more, c. but to abhor him|self
(that is, as some loathsome Thing) in Dust and
Ashes, G. Fox in this his Book abhors the Term of
Dust and Ashes, as being Elevatedabove Abraham
Iob (punies to him) with high Fancies of his
Immortality, though we see they dy,  stink  Rot
as well as others.

But if God please to shew him, and me, truly
what Sin is, What Gods Justice is, what an Infinite
price must pay for the least Evil Thought and Natu|ral
Disposition,The Au|thors humble desire for himself and G. Fox on the Old Score: [119] If God
please by any of those many gracious means he
useth to Imprint these  other such Heavenly
Considertions upon our Souls! We shall then for
all our pretences cry out with Peter, depart from me
for I am a sinful man O Lord: and with Iob, Once
have I spoken, yea, twice, c. but no more, c. I
abhor myself as a loathsome, Rotten, stinking Carrion
in Dust and Ashes. But alas I fear G. Fox is so
taken up with his sitting with Christ in Heavenly
Places, with Immediate Dictates of his supposed
holy Spirit:The Au|thors fear as to G. Fox his
case That Gods speaking thus to his poor
Worms after the way of Men, and by these out|ward
means stinks in his Nostrils; which if so, and
so Irrecoverably, I desire, and desire all that love
God and their own Salvations, to flee from him as
from Korahs Pride and Korahs Plagues, for his Viol
is pouring on him in spiritual Indgements, and shall
be pouring on him in spiritual and Corporal Tor|ments
to all Eternity.
FINIS.




