






Look not without on Votes alone
But see whats hid in Flesh and Bone.




Ecce Homo; THE Little PARLIAMENT unbowelled: WITH, The substance, quality, and disposition of the outward Mem|bers; and inward faculties, vertues, and properties.
The glory of the good ones, and sad condition of rotten Back-sliders.
1 COR. 10. 15.
I speak as to wise men: judge Yee what I say.
LONDON. Printed by JANE COE, and are to be sould at her house without Creeple-Gate: 1644.




TO The Honourable and truely Pious, WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire Speaker of the Honou|rable House of Commons, in Parliament assembled.
Renowned Patriot;
_WHen I consider those admired gifts wher|with your honor is so excellently qua|lified: I censure it too much abrupt|nesse to present such worth with so meane a tallent; yet having had the happinesse to be an eye-witnesse of your love and countenance to Reli|gion and piety: And knowing how

ignorant many are, not only of God, but themselves too; who may be bettered (if God please to give a blessing to this my labour) by the use hereof; I humbly crave leave to beg this favour to patronize my poore endeavours, published for the meditation of those who know better, and instruction of those that know lesse: That all who use it, may savingly know God, and themselves; which for you and all Gods people, is the prayers of
Your humble Servant,
Henry VValker.



The Contents of the Chap|ters contained in this Booke.

CHAP. I. Seweth what the soul is.
Chap. 2. Sheweth whence the souls come when and how they enter into the bodies.
Chap. 3. Sheweth the purity of the soul.
Cha. 4. Sheweth how the soul is defiled with |ginall sin.
Chap. 5. Sheweth how the Sensative part of the soule.
Chap. 6. The powers of the souls essence.
Chap. 7. The fuclties of the soul.
Chap. 8. That when the body dieth, the soul neither sleepeth nor perisheth, but goeth immediate|ly, either to joy or torment.
Chap. 9. Souls remain where they are sent till the Resurrection.
Chap. 10. The inward faculties, and vertues of the body.
Chap. 11. Of the vitall spirits.
Chap. 12. Of the periurbations, and passions of the minde.
Chap. 13. Of the particular faculties of the mind.
Chap. 14. The distinction of the faculties of the soul, from the faculties of the minde.
Chap. 15. The leading of the flesh, or spirit one by the other.
Chap. 16. Of the resurrection,
Chap. 17. Of Hell.
Chap. 18. Of Heaven.






A SECRET Disclosed.

CHAP. I. Sheweth what the soul of man is.
I. SOme Pithago|ras. define the soul to be the Spirit of life, created after the Image of God, and inspired into the body of man. II. Others say it is an under|standing spirit, the second part of the substance of man, which doth not perish, when it departeth from the body, but is immortall. III. But the true description of the soul (ac|cording to the diffinition of great

learned men) is this; Namely, that the soule of man is a spirituall sub|stance, Alley. s. 13. aelec. 2 infused of God into the body of man, that being joyned thereto, may give it life, direct, and rule it, and being separated from the body, doth not perish, but live immortally, and eternally.
. The soul is a very substantiallactanti. opifiia ei. essence, and not a qualitie.
A qualitie without a substance, isArgu. not sensible of joy or torment. But the soul of man is in it self sensible of joy or sorrow.
Ergo. The soul of man is a veryExample. substantiall essence. The soul of theLuk. 16. Luke. 23. Apo. 6. rich glutton was tormented in Hell. The soul of the theef was with Christ in Paradice. The souls under the Altar did cry aloud.
2. This substance of the soul isAugustin. de quanti|at. animae. cap. 1. not of these usuall and known natures, which we touch, and perceive, with these senses of the body, which are corporall, but a spirituall substance.
That substance which consistethArgu. neither of earth, water, ayr, nor fire, neither of any of them severally, of part of them, or of them all joyned

together, doth consist, not of a cor|porall, but of a spirituall substance. But the substance of the soul dothCassiod Austine consist, neither of earth, air, fire, nor water; of any of them, nor of all of them.
Ergo: The soul of man is not a cor|porall,Exampl but a spirituall substance.
God breathed the soul of Adam in|toGen. 2. 7 1 Cor. 1 4 his body. First, God made Adam a naturall body; then gave him a spi|rituall soul. The body was a type of Adam, the soul a type of Christ: therefore, when the body, the earthly part of man dyeth: the soul which is spirituall, dieth not, but departethGen. 35.  pointeth it.
3. The soul of man, is of God in|fused into the body, and not received by generation from the parents.
That which we received from ourArgume parents, we received by generation from them; but we received not ourD. Wille Synops. souls by generation from our paretns, but from God who gave them.
Ergo. We received not our souls from our parents, but from God.
God  saith Zechariah) formed

the spirit of man within him: Ourb. 12 9. l. 12. 17. parents are the fathers of our bodies, but God is himself, the father of our souls; therefore, when we die, thele. 12 7. soul perisheth not with the body in death, but returneth to God that gave it.


CHAP. II. Sheweth whence the souls come, when, and how, they enter into the bodies.
I. SOme have thought, that the soullato. rigen. doth slide from Heaven. II. O|thers have thought, that the soul hath, anichies, riscilians. its originall from the proper substance of God. III. Some do beleeve, that all the souls being once made toge|ther, are reserved in the treasure-house of God, and so sent into the bodies after the perfection thereof. IIII. O|thers do suppose, that as the bodyertullian,  West-Church. Herome cometh of the body, so the soul (also) springeth of the soul. V. Others have declared, that the souls of men, are daily made of God, and so sent into the bodies. VI. Lastly, others of bet|ter

approved judgements in this par|ticular: affirm, the soul to be madeB Alley, Prael. 2.  the soul. Resp. 3. by God of nothing, and to be powred of God into the body, when that the fruit is made perfect in the mothers womb, with shape, and all otherPsal. 33. 1 Iob 10. parts. It is the Lord that fashioneth the soul of man in him, and preser|veth man by it.


CHAP. III. Sheweth the puritie of the soul.
THe soul is created of God, pure, and holy; as God createth it, in its own simple nature, in respect of God.
What God createth to praise hisArgu|ment. name, he createth pure, and holy, Isai. 43. 7.
But God createth the soul of man to praise his name, Psal. 119. 175.
Ergo. God createth the soul of manConcluson. pure, and holy: Therefore, saith Au|stine, Anima recens creata, ab omniDe natur grat. co pelag. l 3. c. 10. delicto immunis: The soul newly crea|ted, is void of all offence; that is, in respect of God.



CHAP. IV. Sheweth how the soul is defiled by originall sin.
THe soul of man, beingr ceated in the. Wille. nops. l. 864. middest of the body, in an unclean and polluted place doth forthwith (being coopled to the body) begin to be uncleane, because the body in which it is created, is defiled by propogation from our parents throug originall sin.
Though the body bee defiled by propogation from our parents, through sin, yet doth not sin spring|from the body, but from the soul; Matth. 15. 8. so that the soul is pro|perlylat. 15. 18. . VVillet, l. 1107. the principall agent in sin, and the body the instrument of the soul.
The purest rain water that comesimile. from heaven, no sooner falls upon the earth (on a durty place) but it becomes forthwith, the moisture of that durt, and with it polluted. So doth the soul of man, which God from heaven places in the body, a durty defiled place, it is no sooner

coopled therewith, but becomes forthwith to be unclean.
The reward of sin is death.Rom. 6. 2
But sin is not in the body till theArgum soul come.
Ergo, The soul that sinneth withEphes. 1 the body is guilty of death.
Object. If sin be an adjunct of theObjctio soul, not of the body, so that it is not in the body before the soul come, and that the soul is created of God, pure and nspotted, and so placed in the body, where shall we place originall sin.
Answer. Originall sin, is neitherAnswer proper to the body, nor to the soul,D. Will originall sin quest. but is, Hominis peccatum, a sin of the whole man, neither the body must be respected alone, nor the soul alone, but as they do joyntly make one man, and so enter into one condi|tion, and are partakers each of others woe, or welfare.



CHAP. V. Sheweth the sensative part of the soule.
THe sensative part of the soule is that which is touched with the sence, either of Joy, or grriefe.
This joy of the soul cannot be hin|dred by man, where it is, it is not inohn 29. 22. sal. 73. 21. mans power to take it away. Ioh. 26. 22. So also, neither can all the com|forts in the world; ease a soule that is grieved, except the soul it self be touched with the sence of joy.
This joy or grief, doth arise in thehe cause f ioy r Griefe. soul: First, from the sence of its pre|sent condition: Secondly, In respect of its future expectation.
1. From the sense of the present condition of the soul, doth arise either joy or griefe; Thus:
The soul of man doth either rejoycePet. 1. 1. 10. 26. 15. (in the sensative part thereof) under some present concived good; or else grieveth under some present conceived evill,  that may be, when the Imagi|nation

of the soul, being fixed onDeut. 31. 12 Ro. 2. 15. something which it hath or want|eth, the judgement doth either like or detest it, and so accordingly, doth rejoyce or grieve in the enjoying, or want thereof. As for example.
A man that is Rich, imagineth1 Exam|ple. with himselfe what good is in Rich|es, if the judgement liketh that estate which he enjoyes? then is his soul joyful in the enjoying thereof, for the present.
Again, A man whose minde is on2 Exam|ple. pleasure: the judgement liketh it, and therefore rejoyseth in enjoying it, and grieveth, in being abridged from it
Again, A man whose imaginations3 Exam|ple. are towards God, the judgement be|ing cleere, and seeing the good that is in God, the soul doth rejoyce to worship him and is grieved because of sin: but if the imaginations deceive the heart: and the judgement be cor|rupted, so that he cannot see any sweetnesse therein, then doth Gods worship become a burthen to the soule.
2. This joy or grief doth arise inPsal. 32. 10. the soul from the sence of its future

expectation. When the mind is set on1 Tim. 6. 19. something that shall befall man, the Imagination conciveth it either to be good or evill and thereupon doth ei|ther fear it, or with hope desire it, which breedeth either joy, or grie in the soul.
As when the minde is set on Jesus1 Exam|ple. Christ, desiring salvation through him, the Imagination conceiveth it to be good or evil, so to do and accordingly as we minde created comforts, or  ourselves on Christ as our chiefest good, so fear doth greive, or hope re|joyce our soules.
A man that seeketh felicity from the2 Exam|ple. creature, if the judgement conceive it to be evil, then though the heart of man be delighted therewith, yet doth not the soul desire it, but is grieved thereat, but if the Imagination con|ceive it to be good then doth the soul desire it, hope for it, and rejoyce in the thought thereof. When the soul3 Exam|ple. desires Christ, apprehending the glory that is in him, here is rejoycing. Hen is the soul, (even in this life) delight in the hope of its glory in heaven, Conclusi|on. tormented with fear of its horror i hell.



CHAP. VI.

Of the powers of the souls essence.
THe soul of man, being really oneB. Alley on the Tri|aity. praecel. 3. thing, hath three powers, Memo|riam, Intllectum,  Voluntatem: Me|morie, understanding, and will, which three make one essent all soul, but in property, they are distinct: For the propertie of the memorie, as to re|member; the understrnding to per|ceive, and understand: The will to chuse; out of the memory springeth intelligence, and out of both, the will. Herein the soul may appear to be cre|ated after the Image of God, because the Deity hath three persons: the Fa|ther, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which three constitute one essenciall God, yet every person hath this pro|perty. From the Father, cometh the Son, and from both the Holy Ghost.


CHAP. VII. Treateth of the faculties of the soul.
THe faculties of the soul are those inward gifts, which God hath framed in it, for the helpe of it self? As the Lord hath given the body members; so hath he given the soul faculties. With the Judement we al|low or disallow; With the under|standingActs. 8. 33. Iob. 23. 2 Cor. 7. 15. Isa. 26. 8. we perceive and apprehend. With the Affection we love and de|light in things. The desire seeketh

and waiteth for what it doth effectMath. 18. 14. 2 Cor. 7. 7. with the Will we chuse to follow what we desire: With the minde we are servent in seeking what we chuse. By the memory we retain in mind, c1 Cor. 1 5 2 Isa. 59. 8.
The Iudgement being rightly in|formed we walk in peace, and serve God with comfort, but when the Iudgement is corrupted: all joy is gone.
The understanding being inlighte|ned,2 Pet 2. 12, 13, 14. we abhor sin, but when the un|derstanding is darkned, wee are be|guiled with sin.
The Affection being set upon a goodCollo. 3. 2, 3, 6. object, bringeth life; but being set on earthly things makes us in danger of the wrath of God, c.
Thus as the mouth receiving poi|son;Ephes. 2. 3. The hand receiving a vveapon; The feet leading into the sea, c. Is the way to destroy the body, So to have the Desire, Minde, Affection, c. set on worldly things is the way to destroyPsal. 37. 4 11. 2 Chron. 29. 3. Isa 11 10. 1 Cor. 3. 16 Gal 4. 7. both soul and dody. But being set on God, on heavenly things: they make the soul glorious; The body the tem|ple of the glorious Spirit, and both soul and body, Heir of eternall glory, through Christ Jesus.



CHAP. VIII. Sheweth, that when the body dy+eth, the soul neither sleepeth, nor perisheth, but immediately is re|ceived either to ioy or torment.
1 SOme say, that it is the doctrineIren of Heretickes, to perswade themselves, that they shall scend in|to Heaven, and to be inhanced to the sight of Father, before the generall resurrection of the dead.Sad.
2. Others do imagine that the soul perisheth, when the body dies.
3. But the Sripture proveth plain|ly1 Cor. 13. Luke 23. 43 1 Cor. 15. Eccle. 12. 7. Luke. 16. Policarpus. Eclesia hist. l. 4. that the soul being loosed from ihe body, doth forthwith, either ascend to glory, or descend to tormment, not that the soul receiveth the perfection of its estate till the Resurrection, yet doth the soul enjoy either reall blisse, or miserie, when the bodie dies, in part, which after the day of resurecti|on, shall be absolute, both of soul and body. The bodie indeed dieth, as Paul saith, because of sin, but the soulRom. 8. 10. dieth not. Rom. 8.



CHAP. IX. Sheweth that the soules remain where they are sent till the Re|surrection.
1 SOme beleeve that the souls of persons deceased have often times apeared.
2 Others have declared, that Sa|crifices,Rabas. Ar. Bis. of Magun. Bellarmin. and prayers of the living have much profited the soules of men th were dead.
3. The Lord doth forbid to aske, or to seek any truth of the Spirits  the dead. The Prophets do send Deut. 18. Esay 8. from such Oracles, to the Law and Te|stimony of Gods Word. The Evan|gelistsLuk. 16. teach us in the Gospel, th those that are dead rise not again i apparitions.
Obeict. But many, partly by AObjection Magicke, have been raised, as Samuel1 Sam. 28. 1 Sam. 28.
Answ. Chrisostome answereth thiAnswer. objection very fully. The questioOn Matth. being asked? What shall we say  those voyces which say, I am such  soul: He answers. That voice (sait he which speaketh these things) is no

the soul of any parson departed, but it is the Devill, which doth faine these things to deceive the hearers; SuchB. Alle|miel. on apparition. words are to be Counted Old wives tales, and foolish fables of Children, for the soul separate from the body, faith B. Alley, doth not wander in this world, for the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God; and the souls of sinners after their departure are presently carried to their place of torment.
Obiect. But the souls of some haveObiection returned again into their bodies; after departure, and they have lived on earth again, As Lasarus, Iohn. 11.Iohn 11.
To this objection, Tertul: makesAnswer. answer (saying) Although the powerLib de anima. of God, hath called again certain souls into their bodies: in token of his might and right; This was done in example of the Resurrection, when the power of God, whether by the Prophets, or by Christ, or else by the Apostles, did render soules, then into their bodies: it is declared by the sensible, and sufficient truth, that this is the very form of the truth, that thou maist iudg every incorporat apparition of the dead to be deceits,  delusions.



CHAP. X. Treateth of the inward vertues and faculties of the bodie.
THe inward vertues; and faculties ofGalen l. de facultat natural. the body are such which stirre up the powers to action: Which are of three sorts.
The first, cometh from the brain,p. Lowe. discourse. and sedeth the sence and moving into all the body through the muscles, and nerves, by motion, which feed|eth all the senses, outwardly, and the imagination reason and memory, in|wardly.
The second carrieth life through all the body; which either dilateth the hart, and arteries, from whence mirt and love ariseth, or else doth constrain and binde the arteries, and heart, from whence ariseth, melancholy sadnesse, and revenge.
The third cometh from the liver, and sendeth the nourishment through all the body; which doth 1. attract tha which is proper. 2. retain that which is dawn. 3. digest that which is retaine  expell that which is hurtfull, (as Low saith.)



CHAP. XI. Treateth of the vitall spiritg of the body.
THe substance of the spirits in mansLowe p. 2 body, is the most pure; and thin|nest of the blood, which passeth through all the body, to the effect, the members may do their proper actions, abounding most in the heart, arteries, braines, and nerves, whichAndreas d lortaine. are of three sorts.
The first remineth in the braine, which passeth from thence to the ears  other parts, but chiefly to the eyes: Therefore these who are linde have their other vertues more strong.Democri|tus, and o|ther philo|sephers have pu out their eyes, to the end their un|derstrnding might be more cleer.
The second is that which is in the heart, and Arteries; and is made of the evaporations of the blood, and of the aire, laboured in the ligs, by the force of vitall heat, and thereafter is diffused through the members, for the Conservation of the naturall heate.
The third is that which is ingen|dred

in the liver, and vaines, and there remaineth, while theliver maketh the blood; and other naturall opera|tions.
The use of it is, to helpe the con|concoction; As saith Lowe.


CHAP. XII. Treateth of the perturbations, and passions of the minds.
THe minde being governed by rea|son,Aristole. is preserved from extremity in passion. But being without reason, such passions, and perturbations, do arise, which bringeth great mutations, into the naturall heate, in so much that (as some have written) ma|nyHipocrates. Epist. 6. Galen. 2. de sum. caus. c. 5. method. . Hnricus Ranzaurus, de cons. Va|leud. dye by the passions, and per|turbations of the minde.
This is caused when the passions of the midne, doth either dilate, or com|primce the heart, for the vitall spi|rits, and cast forth, by the great dila|tion of the heart, as also retained by the great Compression thereof.
As for example: Joy, Hope, Love,Example. c. These being out of reason, do (through the passion of the minde) so dilate the heart: that they cast forth the spirits. And sadnesse, fear, envie, c. do recall the vitall spirits in|wardly, to the center of the body, whence many times ensueth death.


CHAP. XII. Treateth of the particular passions of the minde.
THe particular passions of the minde are many: but chiefly these, Mirth, Sadnesse, Fear, anger, Shame|fastnesse, Envy, Hatred, Hope, Love, c.
I. Mirth, or Joy, is an affection of the minde, of a thing good, and plea|sant, by the which the blood, and spi|rits are pleasantly spread, for the pre|sent, by the dilation of the heart, but if it be great, and last any long space, death often ensueth, because the heart is altogether destitute of blood.
As Aristole reporteth such a vvo|man so died. Pollicritia A writer of playes, who because he overcame one in dis|pute fell in to such an extratordinary ioy, that he died vvith the passion thereof! Vlerius Maximus, VVriteth of two women, Chilon, and Diogora, vvho died for ioy, for th the happy returne of their sons from the VVarres, who had overcome their enemies, lib. 9. chap. 12. Gallius re|porteth of one Diogoras, vvho vvhen he did see his 3. som crowned at Olimpus, for their vertue, died for ioy, em|bracing them in the presence of the whole people. Phillipedes, and many others, who have died through extremity of joy.
2. Sadnesse is an affection, that dothHen. Ram. de cons|ualetud. revoke the naturall heate inwardly, to the Center of the body; which in time presseth the heart, and drieth up the body: hindreth the government of the spirit vitall: which is sometimes so weakne, that it is not able to go with the blood, through the rest of the body, so wasteth the body, in such sort, that it becommeth attrified, andWe have many exam|ples, hereof daily. Cornelius Agrippa de accul. philosilius c. 63. leane, wherupon death often in|sueth.
3. Feare, is a motion which revo|keth the spirits to the heart the Cen|ter of the body; whereby the naturall heat, is suffocated, causing trembling, which sometimes causeth many

women to that are with childe fall in labour: somtimes Divers learned men do affitme, that men have growen white in 25. yeers, only by the aprehension, and fear of death. Antonius Beneven. writeth, of a body that dyeth for feare, by seeing a vision, as he thought, of two men, clad in black, when he was going to Schole, the which boy, through the extreame passion of fear, died eight dayes after about the same time, De abdi|tis mor. causis. through feare, death ensueth to men, or wo|men.
4. Anger is a sudden revocation orOr an ar|dent heate, or ebulla|tion of blood, in the heart, with desire of of revenge. calling backe of the spirits, to the ex|ternall parts, with an appetite of re|venge. It inflameth the whole habi|tude of the body, the spirits and blood are troubled, as also the braines, it bindeth the heart, and lights. Where|of Dangerous siknesses are often cau|sed, and sometimes death ensueth.
5. Shamefastnesse is a motion whereby one knoweth, or suspecteth some notise to bee taken of one for the same fault; for which he would be be angry with himselfe.
In this passion, the blood first re|turnethPlinie tel|leth that one Diodo|rus, Profe|sor of Dia|lectick, having  uestion propounded unto him, and not answering as he should, died for shame. Valerus Maximus reporteth, that Homer died for ame because he could not answer a question propounded to him by ceain Fishers. in (saith Haly Abbas) and sodainly cometh out again, which maketh the Cheeks often very redde lib. 5. Of this passion some dy: As Diod; Homer, and others.
6. Envy is a heavy oppression of the heart, angry at some conceived good thing an other doth enjoy.
7. Hatred is an old malicious habi|tude, bred of anger, by the which the heart would revenge the injurie.
8. Hope is a motion by the which the heart desireth the good ure, it openeth and dilateth the heart
9. Love is a fervent motion, by the which the heart desireth , and endeavoureth to draw unto it, a con|ceived good, assuredly, and apparantly (as Lowe saith.)Lovve.



CHAP XIV. Sheweth how the faculties of the soul, are distinguished from the facul|ties of the minde.
THe soul is not of any corporallRom. 8. substance, but spirituall, as hath beene shewed before; therefore the pure faculties of the soule must needs be spirituall also.
The faculties of the minde of theNot the mind which is of the fa|culty of the soul, but that which is of the bo|die. internall part of the body of man, is of a naturall disposition, as the body it self is; whole greatest  chiefest guide is at the highest, but reason.
Therefore as God that is spirituall, is infinitely more glorious in his di|vine essence, then can be conceived inLuke 5. 21. 1. Cor. 2. . Vers. 9. mans reason; so is the faculties of the soul of a farre higher nature then the faculties of the minde can reach.
That of the soul is spirituall, that of the minde is carnall.Rom 8. .



CHAP. XV. Sheweth, how the flesh is led by the spirit, or the spirit by the flesh.
VVHen all the faculties of the soul,Rom. 8. 5. and all the powers of the body, do minde fleshly things; then is the soulled by the flesh; but when all the faculties of the minde are set on spiri|tuall things, then are the powers of the flesh led by the spirit. As for example;Example. If the divell present a man with some object of sin, as Lust, Covetousnesse, Pride, Envie, Murther, tc. If the love hereof be so great and earnest that this man runs headlong to the act hereof without consideration; then doth he so bind the faculties of the soul, that he ca|ptivates them under the bondage of the flesh; but if he resist these sins to which he is entised, by advising and deeply considering in his soul the evill there|of, then is the flesh overcome, and led by the spirit.
These combates between the fleshGal. 5. 17. 2 Cor. 10. and the spirit are dive as; but according to the love or hatred we ear to the

thing about which we strive, so will the minde be affected or disaffected therewith, and advance the prosecu|tion thereof accordingly, whither it be les aly or spirituall.
When a man doth apprehend some|thingExample. in his thoughts, being moved thereto either by outward sence, or in|ward motion, when the will is ready presently either to chuse or refuse it; this ariseth from the flesh; but when the understanding brings it first to the judgement, and comparing it with the role of Gods word, without any af|fection o the thing, other then the Word doth approve, or disapprove thereof; and so doth will, desire, and seek after it; this is of the spirit.


CHAP. XVI. Treateth of the Resurrection of the Body.
IT is to be understood, that there is1 Cor. 15. 44 a naturall body, and there is a spi|rituall body, as Paul saith: The natu|rall body is the first, which we haveby generation from our parents; The spirituall body, is that which is la  so by Christ  when we are first estated in grace in this world; but the bodies of the eect shall be mae so when they scend into heaven; for this corruptible body of flesh and bloud, cannot inherit the Kingdome of heaven.
When the elect dye, their naturall bodies are as seed wn in the ground, but at the resurrection they shall be raised in their spirituall boes, with|out  imperfections or any deformity they shall hav their sen| made pure, and be raisd with an heavenly and spirituall bod; cpable of inheriting heaven, and ith Christ shall asd to imortal joy to all Eternity.
Every De civitate Dei, lib part that is in  bodie o Gods Elect, shall rse without all de|formity  superfluity whasoever, as Augustine saith; That the  so of|ten , and the  so often paired, shall not with deformity come again o their places, when the body riseth at the day of judgement; and where the Lord saithLuk. 21.18, one haire of our head
shall not psh, Math. 10.3it is not soken of the length of our hairs, but of the number of them; for all the hairs of our head are numbred.
The age and quantity of the bodies, when they shall rise again, saith Au|stine, shall be in that measure, in the measure of perfect state of youth, even in the measure of the age of the ful|sse of Christ; that is, the age to which Christ came; All shall rise a|gain (as the  have written)Master of  in the age in which Christ dyed and rose again, in  oever they die.


CHAP. XVII.  of Hell.
HEll signifieth a Pit, a grave,B. Alle  on Hell death it se, the stae of the dead, hell, and the place of the damned spirits.
1. Hell signifieth a grave,Ionah. 3 having relation to the body.
2. Hell signifieth
 the horriblePsal. 11 Iames 3. dis|maying of the minde, and feeling of the wrath of God; with a taste (as it were) of the feeling of the infernall
paines for sin, having relation to the minde.
3. Hell signifieth the place of thePsal. 4. 17. Math. 10. 28 damned spirits, having relation to soul and body.
Concerning the locall place of theLuk. 10. 15. Pro 27. 20 Mark. 8. 12. damned, it is farre from heaven; a place where is nothing but horrour and misery, but whether it be on the earth, in the earth, in the ayre, or anyObjction. other place, it is not revealed; there|fore I shall answer with Socrates, whoSocrates. being demanded of a certain person what was done in hell? deriing the curiositie of the question, he answered, that he never went thither, nor com|muned with any that returned from thence.


CHAP. XVIII. Treateth of Heaven.
THe Scholasticall Divines do say, that Heaven is taken three mannerB. Alle Misc. coeli. of wayes;

1. It signifieth those things that be under the soul.
2. Those things that be in the soul.
3. Those things that be above the soul.

1. Those things that be under the soul, are such things as the corporall eyes behold beyond, or above the fa|culty of nature; that is to be aliena|ted from the corporall sences: As  was when he saw theDan 5 and writing upon the wall. This is the first Heaven.
2. Those things that be in the soul, are such things as cause the soul to be list up, and taken by imagination or spirit, to know or see any thing su|pernaturally; As Peter was wraptAct. 10. and taken, when he saw the sheet sent sent down from heaven. This is to be wrapt and taken unto the second Heaven.
3 Those things that be above the soul, are such things as are intelligible; and the nature of them not to be under|stod, by any sence or phantasie, when they are, or have been seen, and thus Paul was rapt, and taken unto the2 Cor. 2. 2. third heaven, because he was so alie|nated from his sences, and so inhansed above all Corporall thngs and visions, that he saw things Intelligible, simply, purely and plainly, even after that manner as the Angels, and the souls

separated from the bodie do see,  (that which is more) did see God by Essence, as Austin doth expressely . 1 write: to avoide curiosity. In a word (and so to conclude) Christ saith to. 14. his Disciples; Let not your hearts be troubled: ye beleeve in God, beleeve, also in e, in my Fathers house are many dwelling places, if it were not so, I would have told you I go to pre|pare a place for you; and though I go to prepare a place for you I will come again,  receive you unto my self, that where I am there may ye be also. Ther|fore instead of curiosy, let us rather labour to be Christs Disciples, that these promises may belong to us, that so we may not bee too curious to search for the shadow, but may finde Christ Jesus the Life, the Truth, and the Way: and by him salvation. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honour, and glory fo ever, Amen.

FINIS





