




THE THEORIKE AND PRACTIKE OF MODERNE WARRES, Discoursed in Dialogue vvise.
VVHEREIN IS DECLARED THE NEGLECT OF Martiall discipline: the inconuenience thereof: the imperfections of manie training Captaines: a redresse by due regard had: the fittest weapons for our Moderne VVarre: the vse of the same: the parts of a perfect souldier in generall and in particular: the Officers in degrees, with their seuerall duties: the imbattailing of men in formes now most in vse: with figures and Tables to the same: with sundrie other martiall points. VVritten by ROBERT BARRET.
Comprehended in sixe Bookes.
Ozar morir, da la vida.

ANCHORA SPEI
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for VVilliam Ponsonby. 1598.




HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
VNG IE SERVIRAY
blazon or coat of arms




TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, HENRIE EARLE OF PEMBROKE, LORD HARBERT OF Cardiffe, Marmion, and Saint Quintin, Lord President of her Ma|iesties Councell established in the Principalitie and dominions of VVales, and the Marches of the same; of the most noble order of the Garter, knight; Lord Lieutenant within the Principalitie and dominions of South VVales and North VVales, and the Marches thereto adioyning; and of the Counties of VVilt and Sommerset, c.
_RIght Honourable, hauing spent the most part of my time in the profession of Armes, and that among forraine nations, as the French, the Dutch, the Italian, and Spaniard, I haue bene moued by sundry my friends, to set downe in writing such Martial points, as I haue noted, gathered, or learned from them, where|by, such young Gentlemen, and others, my willing countrie men, as haue not, as yet, entred within the boundes of Mars his bloudy field, may, at the last, ga|ther some instructions, to be the readier at the Alarme giuen: the which seemeth not farre off. And sith my principall scope and purpose hath bene, to open these discourses to the behoofe of the yonger and vnexperi|mented sort, I haue therfore emboldened my selfe, with your good Honours consent, and fauour, to dedicate them vnto that Noble yong Lord your sonne, as a mat|ter (were it handled by a more perfect souldier then my

selfe) befitting his Lordship, as well for the Martial ver|tues already shining in him, as for the sympathie that his honorable birth and Nobility hath with this sub|iect which we treate of, being warre and Armes. Thus humbly crauing your good honours consent, I beseech the Almighty for euer to blesse you with all honour and felicity.
Your Honours humblie at commaund, ROBERT BARRET.



TO THE RIGHT NOBLE YOVNG LORD, VVILLIAM, LORD HARBERT of Cardiffe, sonne and Heyre apparant to the right Honorable Earle of Pembroke. Robert Barret wisheth increase of all Honour and vertue.
_MOst Noble young Lord, and of honourable expectation, although your yong yeares, haue scarse arriued yet to the bearing of Armes, neuerthelesse on the assured hope conceiued of your honorable parts, as so nobly each way descended, (whose vertue hath alwayes shined to the glorie of your name and house) I haue emboldened my selfe to offer vn|to your Lordships view and protection, these Military dis|courses, penned vpon occasion of conference had with sun|dry Gentlemen, and by them wished to be published. Ma|ny good reasons haue moued me to dedicate them vnto your Lordship, as well in respect of your owne vertues (resembling altogether that Noble Earle of Pembroke, your Graund|father, and that worthie Sir Phillip Sidney your Vncle) as also in respect of the great and waightie Commandes which your Right Honourable father doth worthily hold ouer vs, in these our Westerne parts and VVales, vnder our dread Soueraigne. Such as they are, I humbly beseech your Lord|ship to accept, as from a souldier, who humbly offereth him|selfe and his seruice vnto your selfe, next vnto my good Queene and deare Countrie.
Your Lordships humbly at command ROBERT BARRET.




TO ALL MEN OF WARRE IN GENERALL.
_HOnourable souldiers, and braue men of warre, of what degree soeuer, I am assured there is none of you that will spurne at these my paynes taken, as penned, not to instruct the experimented and Mar|tiall sort, such as you are, but the vnexpert and yong Gentlemen, which haue not yet entred commons in Mars his Campe. For what good is herein contained, shall redound to your glorie and fame in generall: and what faults and errors be herein committed, must rest vpon me, beare them off as I may. Let vs loue one another, that God may loue vs all, and giue vs true Martiall valour to the seruice and defence of our dread Soueraigne and deare Countrie.
Yours in all loue, ROBERT BARRET.


TO ALL GALLANT MINDED GENTLEMEN, and my good countrie men in generall.
_GAllant minded young Gentlemen, and good countriemen in generall, which haue not yet marched vnder Mars his Colours, nor knowne the parts incident to his followers, for your instru|ctions haue these discourses bene principally penned: the which although they be but rough,  not polished with schoole termes, yet happily not so barraine, but you may reape some good fruit from them, being read, and noted with due regard to your behoofe (perhaps) in these behouefull times. I am not ignorant that sundry haue treated vpon the like subiect, and all to good end: but yet they obserue not all one method, neither I my self (happily) such as euery one wold wish. It is somewhat hard to please few, but harder to please many, and none can please all: although mine intent hath bene (as others no doubt, the like) both to please and profit the most. These appro|ching times do require such vnpleasant matter, yet the necessitie is such: and therefore to be regarded. Accept it friendly, as I haue penned it willingly, so shall I hold my selfe both rewarded and satisfied.
Your well wisher ROBERT BARRET.



William Sa. in praise of the Author and his worke.

THose that in quiet states do sing of warre,
Or write instructions for the Martiall crue,
Must neuer thinke t' escape the enuious iarre
Of those, who wealth, not honour still pursue.
For they do feare least souldiers growing strong,
Commaund the pelfe which they haue gathered long.


Then worthy Barret, honourd maist thou be,
That dreadlesse all the teene of base conceipts,
Hast writ a worke, shall still eternize thee,
In spite of enuie with her slie deceipts:
For thou that oft in battell bold hast stood,
Hast now done that, shall do thy countrie good.


For which his paynes let this suffice, to shew
The loue one souldier ought to beare another,
Kindly imbrace his worke, for well you know,
A souldiers merits, doth exceede all other:
And say with me, as iustly say you may;
His trauels do deserue our prayse for ay.

VVilliam Sa. Gentleman.





THE FIRST BOOKE OF WARRE DISCOVRSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.

The first Dialogue:

VVherein is reasoned of the Neglect of Martiall Discipline, and inconueniences thereof: the comparison of VVeapons ancient and moderne, with their different Executions: the imperfections of many training Captaines: the perfect training of men, to great effect: the due sortment of VVeapons now vsed: the contempt of Souldiers, and causes thereof.


Gentleman.
_GOod Captaine, I pray, if your leysure will permit, let vs haue your companie some few dayes, familiarlie to dis|course with you vpon such matter as time, cause, and oc|casion shall minister: for since the rumour of this trou|blesome world towards,The cause of the beginning of these Discourses. I meane, besides the brables of Ireland, the great preparations of the ambitious Spani|ard, pretended as is thought against vs, both my selfe,  other country Gentlemen, vnexperimented in such mar|tiall causes, haue not a litle mused thereupon: and so much the more, by reason of the straite charges and commands directed from her Maiestie, and her honourable priuie Counsell vnto vs of euerie Shire, to make good prouision of furniture, and our people to be well trained: the which see|meth not done without some great occasions knowne, or matters greatly suspe|cted: What thinke you of it?


Captaine.
Sir, I will drawe my leisure and poore skill to the vttermost, to satis|fie, in what I can, your curteous request. And first, concerning mine opinion touching the ambitious and proud minded Spaniard,The Spaniard, as well by his owne imperious incli|nation, as by the Pope  Clergies suggestion,  in|stigation of En|glish and Irish Papistes, hath these thirty years imagined Eng|lands subuersion. Example, in An|no 1588. I say; that besides her Ma|iestie and her honourable Counsell, it is not vnknowne vnto a number of honest gentlemen and souldiers of our nation, that the Spaniard hath aboue these thir|tie yeares, as well by his owne naturall imperious inclination, as by the Satani|call suggestion of the Romain Pope and Clergie, and continuall instigation of our English and Irish Papists, both desired, pretended and practised the vtter ruine, subuersion and conquest of our religion, state, and realme: the experiment whereof in Anno 1588. last, with his Inuincible Nauie, so by him tearmed, at|tempting our seas and coasts, we haue yet fresh in memorie: whereof wee may well say: Deus pro nobis pugnabat.



Gent.
But doe you thinke that he will yet attempt the like, considering his foyles, and losses then receiued?


Captaine.
The Spaniard to be suspected for many reasons.Why sir, doe you thinke that so mightie a Prince, so proud and am|bitious a Nation, possessing so many mightie kingdomes, such inestimable In|dies, such plentie of wealth, such readie subiects, such skilfull warriours, such braue Conductors, such store of shipping, and hauing such an egger on as is the pestiferous Pope, will not yet attempt what he can, were it but to recouer his honour and reputation lost in the last action?


Gent.
Yet many men hardly to be per|swaded.Truely Captaine, a number of vs countrie Gentlemen can hardly be so perswaded, and especially our common countrie people.


Captaine.
Indeede I doe not greatly maruell thereat, considering our long continued peace vnder our gracious Soueraignes raigne (whom God long main|taine ouer vs) wherein we haue not knowne what the name of warre hath meant, much lesse the effects therof:Peace breedes se|curitie; securitie, carelesse mindes: carelesse mindes, contempt of war: contempt of war, vnmartial minds. Men hauing li|ued long in peace, seldome suspect warre.
Securitas parit periculum.
By neglect of mar+tiall disciplin, ma|ny kingdomes sub|uerted.
Examples.
Good to shake off securitie, and be carefull for our safetie. For long peace hath bred Securitie; securitie, care|lesse mindes; carelesse mindes: contempt of warre; contempt of warre, the dispising of souldiarie and Martiall discipline; the dispising of Martiall discipline, vnwilling mindes I feare me: so that it can hardly be beaten into our braines, I meane a number of vs, that we which so long haue found the fruites of peace, should euer feele the effects of warre. To proue that long peace, and neglect of Martiall disci|pline hath metamorphosed manly mindes, nay whole States and kingdomes; let vs consider the Macedonians prowesse, the Grecians policie, the Romaines va|lour, the Carthaginians stratagems, so long as they maintained Martiall discipline, ruled each the Monarchie in their times: but discipline neglected, disorders grew on, new Martialists sprung vp, and ouerturned their wealth, state, and kingdomes, with a finall ruine of their names and Nations.
I speake not this, but for example, to put vs the more in mind to shake off secu|ritie, to mistrust the worst, to make vs more readie and willing to be trayned in Martiall poyntes, not grudging at the charge, but frankely to offer it, to fit vs with furniture, and desirous to be instructed in the knowledge and managing of each armes in their kind; whereby if so proud an enemie should attempt anie thing against vs, we might be readie, with resolute mindes, to beard him to the vttermost. I could say much more, but this may suffice to a willing minde to conceiue.


Gent.
Inueterat opinio~ not easie to be al|tered, touching blacke bils and bowes.You haue touched many pointes vnder a few termes, but (Captaine) all this and much more will hardly perswade our rurall sort; and I thinke many of vs Gentlemen not farre better minded: for in executing her Maiesties co~mands, for trayning our men, prouiding of armour, I heare many say, what neede so much a do, and great charge in Calliuer, Musket, Pyke and Corselet? our aun|cestors won many battels with bowes, blacke Billes, and Iackes. But what thinke you of that?


Captaine.
Time altereth the order of warre, with new inuen|tions daily.
The fiery weapons Canon  musket.Sir, then was then, and now is now; the wars are much altered since the fierie weapons first came vp: the Cannon, the Musket, the Caliuer and Pistoll. Although some haue attempted stifly to maintaine the sufficiencie of Bowes, yet daily experience doth and will shew vs the contrarie. And for that their reasons haue bene answered by others, I leaue at this instant to speake thereof.


Gent.
Why, do you not like of our old archerie of England?



Capt.
I do not altogether disalow them;The reputation of Archerie much blemished, since the inuention of fierie weapons. true it is, they may serue to some sorts of seruice, but to no such effect as any of the fierie weapons.


Gent.
Will not a thousand bowes handled by good bowmen, do as good ser|uice, as a thousand hargubuze or muskets, especially amongst horsemen?


Capt.
No, were there such bowmen as were in the old time, yet could there be no comparison.


Gent.
Your reasons.


Capt.
First, you must confesse that one of your best Archers can hardly shoot any good sheffe arrow aboue twelue score off, to performe any great executio~, ex|cept vpon a naked ma~,Bowes farre in|feriour vnto Cal|liuer or Musket. or horse. A good Calliuer charged with good powder and bullet, and discharged at point blanck by any reasonable shot, will, at that distance, performe afar better execution, yea, to passe any armour, except it be of prooffe,  much more neare the marke the~ your Archer shal: And the said Calliuer at ran|don will reach  performe twentie, or foure and twentie score off, whereunto you haue few archers will come neare. And if you reply, that a good archer will shoot many shots to one;The readinesse of the one and the other: with their different execu|tions.
Archers may shoot in vllie. The execution of the bow not com|parable to the musket. Truly no, your archer shall hardly get one in fiue of a ready shot, nay happely scarce one; besides, considering the execution of the one and the other, there is great oddes, and no comparison at all.


Gent.
But our bowmen may shoot by vollies, as thicke as hayle in the ayre.


Capt.
They may shoot thicke, but to small performance, except (as I said) vpon naked men or horse. But should there be led but eight hundred perfect hargubu|ziers, or sixe hundred good musketiers against your thousand bowmen, I thinke your bowmen would be forced to forsake their ground, all premisses considered: and moreouer a vollie of musket or hargubuze goeth with more terrour, fury, and execution, then doth your vollie of arrowes. And againe, against a resolute troupe of horse, either Pistoletiers, Hargulatiers or Lanciers, they will sta~d lesse time (ex|cept they be well fro~ted with hedge, ditch or tre~ch; or seconded with a strong sta~d of pikes,) then either Hargubuze or Musket, considering the execution of the one  the other.The weapon not of deadly execu|tion, little to be feared.
Bow men haue most vse in open field, and in set battels shot are vsed in all ser|uices. And what souldier is he, that commeth against a weapon where|in there is little hazard of life, which will not more resolutely charge, then against a weapon, whose execution he knoweth to be present death? Many more reasons might be alledged for the sufficiencie of the one, and the insufficiencie of the other, but others haue answered the same already, besides the proofe which dayly experience bringeth: and thus you heare mine opinion of your Bowes; desiring you (Gentlemen and others) not to conceiue sinisterly of me for this mine opinion, as not held of me for any dislike I haue of our old Archery of England: but that common experience hath made it most manifest in these our later warres: well wishing in my hart (had it bene Gods good will) that this in|fernall fierie engine had neuer bin found out. Then might we boldly haue compa|red (as our auncestors did) with the proudest Archers in the world.
But you must note this by the way,The fierie weapo~ without practise dangerous to the handler. that the fierie shot, either on horsebacke, or foote, being not in hands of the skilfull, may do vnto themselues more hurt then good: wherefore the same is often to be practised, that men may grow per|fect and skilfull therein.


Gent.
Well, to stand in argument I will not, for I haue seene little triall either

of the one or the other. But what thinke you of our abundance of blacke Billes which we thinke to be the next naturall weapon for the Englishman?


Capt.
True it is, that in time past our nation hath performed round slaughter. worke therewith: but the warres and weapons are now altered from them dayes, and we must accommodate our selues to the now vsed weapons,To accommodate our selues to the now vsed wea|pons, ordr, and times. order, and time, to answere our enimies with the semblable, else happely shall we finde ourselues short of our reckening, with our all-too late repentance. But might I haue, in stead of these blacke Bills and Iacks, so many good armed Pikes, I meane good Corslelts furnisht, I would thinke my selfe farre better either to offend or defend.


Gent.
Why, would you not allow short weapon in the field?


Capt.
Not many short weapon in the field.
When to be vsed.Truly no, not many, yet would I not exclude them all. For I know them necessarie for many peeces of seruice; as to performe executio~ if the enemie break, or flie; to mingle with shot to back them if neede be; to passe with Conuoyes,  to stand by your Artillerie; to creepe along trenches, and enter into mynes, where the Pike would be ouerlong;Target of Proof. but best for the myne or breach is the Target of prooffe,Pikes, most hono|rable weapon in the field. short sword, and Pistoll: but for the plaine field, neither blacke bill, Hal|bard, nor Partizan comparable to the Pike.


Gent.
In a set battaile would you not haue Bills or Halbards for the guard of your Colours?


Capt.
Short weapon a|bout the Ensigne not so aailable as the Pike.
The Reasons.As few as might be for in their steds farre better were so many armed Pikes, in mine opinion, considering that in set Battailes when men come to the shock, or push of the Pike, they sarrie close together, and the first three, fiue, or se|uen rankes do beare the chiefe brunt; and entred so farre, men buckle Pell-Mell, close together, by which time commonlie the one side reculeth or swayeth, and a battell once reculing doth not lightlie hold long, so that ere the Center of the Bat|taill be touched one side must fall to disaray; men once disordered, they commonly fall to rout, the rout is pursued with slaughter and ruine. Against horse the like reasons are to be made: thus either to offend or defend, farre better is the Pike, then either Bill, or Halbard. And to conclude, the strength of the Battaile is the armed Pike,The armed Pike, the stre~gth of the battaile. so they be equally sorted with Harquebuze and Musket.


Gent.
What meane you by equally sorted?


Capt.
The equall sort|ment of weapons, offensiue and defensiue.
Countrey people loth to bee at charge.I meane as much to offend, as to defend: To offend I would wish to euery hundred men 25 Muskets,  25 Calliuers at the least, 40 armed Piks, 7 or 8 Hal|bards, and 2 or 3 Targets of proofe to defend, and so of all other numbers.


Gent.
Your proportion I like well, but our countrey people are loth to be at the charges of so many costly weapons, although her Maiestie and her honorable priuie Counsell, haue giuen orders and directions for the same.


Capt.
Our daungerous time to be regar|ded.
Men liuing long in securitie, ama|zed in altera|tions.I perceiue it to be so, whereat I grieue not a litle, considering, how dan|gerous is the time; how malicious, strong,  politike is the enimie; how carelesse, yea senslesse are we; and how vnwilling to our owne weale? But should these your secure men once heare the Alarme of the enemie, (from the which God defend vs,) then should you soone see them alter their copies, chaunge their colours, forget their great bragges of blacke Bills and Bowes, and stand at their wittes ende what course to take; and should they yet recall their courage, and plucke vp their spirites, and dare to looke the enimie in the face, what guides (I pray) haue they?Want of good guides. It is not enough to say downe with them, downe with them,

Lay on Billes and Bowes:Actions not effe|cted with words, but with condu|ction, order men with sutable weapons. they should encounter strong squares of armed Pikes, gallant squadrons of Muskets, braue troupes of shot, conducted by skilfull Lea|ders: then should they soone see the difference of weapons; the danger of the one, the litle doubt of the other, with repentance (perhaps) for not taking them to other weapons in time. Thus much I speak to our inueterate conceiers of bowes and blacke billes.


Gent.
But we haue trayned companies, and selected bandes, to answere our enemies with like weapons.Selected bandes.


Capt.
True it is,Companies well trayned to great  good purpose. The daunger of ignorant leaders and trayners. there haue beene good orders set downe for the same, and no doubt, well performed in many partes of our countrie: but I my selfe haue seene many simple Leaders, simple in deede to traine, much lesse to bring men to fight: for where the blind leades the blind, both fall into the ditch.


Gent.
You meane this by our countrie Gentlemen and Citizens, who haue the trayning of their shires and townes, and neuer came in warres, but her Maiestie and Councell haue so appointed it for many good respects.


Capt.
I know it very well, for many good respects, but I am well assured that her Maiestie would well like of such countrie or citizen Captaines,Trayning Cap|taines very skil|full, ought to prouide good officers. as would be carefull to prouide themselues of good Officers; such as haue seene warres, and borne office in the same, I meane honest and valiant men, not tapsterly praters, and ale-bench braggers, who know no point of souldierie in the world. And if your Captaines were each furnished with one or two such good officers, I meane honest men, and of experience, no doubt, but they might then doe farre better then they now doe; and by such they might learne many good pointes of seruice, to their good, and their companies good instructions; yet not so much as thereby to become sufficient Captaines.


Gent.
Our Captaines haue Bookes of Warre,Bookes of warre. whereby they may learne more in one daies reading, then you haue in a whole yeares seruice; and then no great neede of such, which were but charge to small purpose.


Captaine.
Truely good Sir, pardon me, you speake according to your skill; Now to aunswere you,Three sorts of warre writers. I say: Such bookes haue beene written by men of sun|drie humours, sundrie qualities, and sundrie professions. As some haue beene penned by learned men,1 as Politicians, Geometricians, and Mathematicians, which neuer saw any warres;2 Some by men of small learning, but by their practise and long continuance in warres; Some againe haue beene penned by men both of good learning and long experience in warres:3 the last of these are to bee best approued,The last st ap|proued.
Comparison. as all men of iudgement must confesse. Now, the vnsouldier-learned, to the vnlettered souldier may be paralleld or comparaisoned, as the Phisition Theorike to the grosse practitioner, and vnto the learned souldier, as the Theorike onely vnto the Theorike and Practike ioyntly in a perfect Phisi|tion. And this is my opinion of the diuersitie of warre-writers, of all which I sup|pose the last to be chiefely followed.Reading Captains three sorts. Well, now to your reading Captaines: ma|ny of them that reade,1 do neither vnderstand the Methode nor meaning of the writer;2 many do vnderstand the Methode, and not the meaning; and some againe (as men of quicker conceipt,3 most fit for warres) do vnderstand both Methode  meaning:The best waing experience, farre from a worthy Captains. yet by want of experience  practise, they are farre from a perfect soul|dier, and more from a worthie Captaine. The proofe of this is soone seene, for of

your first sort,Example of the first sort. bring one of them into the field with a hundred men, he will ne|uer ranke them aright without helpe; and (God knoweth) with what puzzeling and toyle: there is the end of his seruice, yea and thinkes he hath done well too. Now let one of your second sort come into the field with the like number,Example of the second sort. he will ranke them three and three, but at euery third ranke he must call to his boy, holae sirra, where is my Booke? and hauing all ranked them, then marcheth he on faire, and farre wyde from a souldiers march: then commeth he to cast them into a ring, about, about, about, till he hath inclosed himselfe in the Center; now there is he puzzelled, hola maister stand still vntill I haue looked in my Booke: by this time there is a faire ring broken.Example of the third sort. Lastly, let your thirde quicke conceipted man come into the field with his companie, he rankes them by three, fiue, or seuen in a ranke: Pikes, halfe in front, halfe in traines; Colours and browne Billes in the middest; deuides his shot, halfe in vaward, halfe in rereward, and marcheth on in some prettie good sort, casteth his Ring, and happily commeth out againe; but two to one he misseth his counter-ring. Well, this is well, say our Citizens and countrie people. But how farre all these Captaines are wide to shew their souldiers the right vse of each weapon, a man of meane iudgement may perceiue, much lesse to bring them to the face of the enemie without a manifest daunger,Daungerous for vnexperimented Captains to bring men to fight. or wilfull ouerthrowe: Examples hereof I might recite enow, but I pray God, if euer it come to the proofe, we leaue not too many examples our selues. For there be many points in a souldier, and more in a Captaine, which can not be attayned by reading,Many points to be in a souldier, and more in a Captaine, not at|tained by rea|ding, but by ex|perience, and that de veras.
Orderly trayning by good Trainers to good purpose. Points wherein a souldier is to be fully instructed. but by practise and experience; and that de Veras, as the Spa|niard sayth, in earnest; and not de Burla, in ieast. True it is, the trayning of men, is to good and very great purpose, especially were it done in such sufficient sort, and by such sufficient Trayners, as the waightinesse of the cause requireth: wherein each souldier should perfectly learne his march; knowe the seuerall sounds of the Drumme, to keepe his place and array in good order; when to march; when and how to charge; when to retire; when to stand; how to handle the weapon committed vnto him; with a number of other points, most needfull in these times to be throughly knowne vnto your trayned men, yea, and to others also, were it possible.


Gent.
Trulie (Captaine) you deale somewhat roundly with our Citizen and countrie Captaines, scarce worth thanks at their hands.


Capt.
Sir, I wold be loth to offend any; but being dema~ded, I must needs speak the truth, so neare as I can: for according to my opinion and skill, I haue answe|red your questions:Questions  de|mands do draw out semblable answers.
Carefull  dili|gent men to be commended.
Men of sundry constitutions fit for sundry pur|poses.
Natural instinct doth worke won|derfull effects in all kind of pro|fessions. giuing you to vnderstand, that my opinion is not so of all: for I do know many sufficient Gentlemen and Citizens most willing to the seruice, who are highly to be commended for their good care and diligence therein: yet doubtlesse they will be to seeke in many points, if it should come to the proofe. True it is, all men are not of one constitution of body, humours, and spirits: for some men are fit for warres, some for peace, some for the countrie, some for the citie, some for learning, some for manuall crafts, some to gouerne, some to bee gouerned, some able to conduct a Companie, but not a Regiment; some a Re|giment, but not a Royall Campe: of which last sort verie few are to be found. To conclude, Naturall inclination doth worke wonderfull effects in all kind of Pro|fessions; for some men (being naturally humoured thereunto) do prooue better

souldiours in fiue yeares experience, then some others in fifteene: and it is much, yea, it importeth all almost, to be often in Action. For a man haunting long the warres,To be often in a|ction breedeth knowledge. Comparison. Litle reputation of Souldiers in our age with vs. and seeing litle execution, is as one that vseth often the Fence-schooles, but neuer taketh weapon in hand. And if anie of my speeches may seeme vnto some, to exceede the bounds of Decorum, I haue bene vrged thereunto by the litle reputation had of Souldiers amongst vs: for surely, such as haue followed the warres are despised almost of euerie man, vntill a verie pinch of need doth come; then haue we faire speeches; good countenances for a litle time; but the action once ended, and the feare past, frownes do follow and cold rewards: so that the profession of Armes hath amongst vs, of all others, bene least esteemed in these our later dayes;The reasons. the reason is, we haue had litle need of warres, and consequently litle vse, whereby we are growne ignorant in the Arte.


Gent.
Then I perceiue,Experience cou|pled with natu|rall instinct, most perfect.
The bad reputa|tion of Souldiers springeth much from their owne disorders.
The disorders of men of warre proceeding from two causes.

1. The bad electio~.
2. The litle disci|pline.

Fauorite electio~s. Experience makes men perfect, but most perfectest, if with Experience be coupled the naturall instinct you speake of: but me thinks, that the bad reputation we haue had of Souldiers in our age, springeth not of the litle vse we haue had of warres, so much, as from the disorder of such as haue pro|fessed the same.


Capt.
I must confesse there hath bene, and is many times, great disorders committed by some professours and followers of warres; the which, in mine o|pinion, proceedeth from two causes: the one from the bad choise of some Cap|taines, Souldiers and Officers, made at the first, by those who had commission or authoritie for the same: next, by reason of the litle discipline vsed amongst those so chosen; for many haue bin chosen by fauor, friendship, or affectio~, litle respe|cting their experience, vertues, or vices; whereby most commonly, the fawning flatterer, the audacious prater, the subtill make-shift, is preferred before the si|lent man, the approoued person, or the plaine dealing fellow. Then such being chosen and preferred, how do you thinke the conduction shold be good? Againe, the Companies that are commonlie leuied,Faults co~mitted by the Iustices of peace in leuying of Souldiers. are drawne forth by the Iustices of peace, who to disburden their towne or shire of corrupt weeds, as they tearme it, do picke out the scumme of their countrie, thinking such men sufficient for the warres: what wrong thereby is done to the seruice, the issues of manie acti|ons do often times manifest. Now, such choise made both of souldiers and Cap|taines, what good can be expected from them? For litle amendment groweth where lewd Libertie beareth sway:Litle amendment groweth where lewd liberty bea|reth sway. for warres disorderlie vsed, is the Chaos of con|fusion; and warres well conducted and disciplined, is the Harmonie of Iustice.


Gent.
I pray (good Captaine) sith you haue thus farre waded into the matter, let vs intreat you to shew vs the parts of a Souldier, the vse of his weapon, and the order of your moderne warre.


Capt.
These three matters handled would aske a great volume, farre aboue my reach:All warres are either offensiue or defensiue.
Maintained, managed and conducted by mo|ney, men and armes, by policie, order, and by good Chiefs. neuerthesse, to satisfie in part your curteous demaund, I will do my best. Then thus I beginne to reason: First, Warres are of two sorts, either offensiue, or defensiue; maintained and perfourmed with men, armour and money; managed with Policie, Order and Stratagems; conducted and perfected by a singular Generall, braue Commanders, and resolute Souldiers. To begin therefore from the lowest degree vnto the highest, I will declare vnto you what parts I could wish in euerie degree, and what order in the same, following herein for the

the most part, the Italian and Spaniard, by whom the best discipline of warre in our dayes hath bene vsed, and supplying where they are defectiue.


Gent.
What Nation, thinke you, do prooue best Souldiers? for we are of opi|nion, that there is no Souldier to the Englishman.


Capt.
Trulie, for strength, valour, and courage, I suppose vs comparable to a|ny nation whatsoeuer:The English for valour and cou|rage comparable to anie.
It is the nature of euerie nation to thinke best of themselues.
Vegetius opinio~s  reasons, what climate breeds the best souldiers. but surely for subtill policie and martiall discipline, especi|ally in this our latter age, some other nations do exceed vs. And it is the nature of euerie nation to esteeme and thinke best of themselues: but Vegetius holdeth opinion, the man borne vnder the temperate Zone and climate, to be fittest for warres: For (saith he) the Souldier of the Septentrionall or North Climate, by reason of his wide distance from the Sunne, doth abound in hot bloud, and is of good courage, and great strength: entring into battell without feare, but rash and inconsiderate in the same: voyd of consideration and counsell in most of his actions. And on the contrarie, the Meridionall man, by reason of the neerenesse of the Sunne, the which they haue almost for their Zenith, are fearefull and faint-hearted, and verie loth to enter into battell, except constrained and vrged ther|unto; but withall, verie subtill, warie and sharpe-witted: therefore (saith he) Men of the middle Climate, participating of both the extreames, are best for the warres; as men hardie, quicke, of great direction and counsell, well proportio|ned, and of reasonable good disposition and health. But I suppose, that of either nation by militarie discipline and practise,Men born vnder any climate may proue good soul|diers by experie~ce and discipline. may prooue good and excellent Warriours.


Gent.
But yet, me thinks, that men of great stature are of greatest strength, and so most terrible to the enemie, and fittest for the warres.


Cap.
True, in the first ranks tall men do make a faire shew, but now the artil|lerie and fierie weapon hath greatly diminished their authoritie: yet before this infernall engine was vsed in the world, the opinions of the most famous Cap|taines were different herein:Sundry opinions what statured me~ be most fit for warres.
The meane, best allowed.
To bee serued with our owne nation is best for vs. for Alexander esteemed men of litle stature, for most valiant and hardie: Pyrrhus, per contra, liked the goodlie, tall and large proporti|oned men: but Iulius Caesar, as more considerate and wise, rather chose men of meane stature, as naturallie strong, of determinate minds and courage, and ca|pable of counsell and prudence. But we must be serued with our owne nation, out of the which ought to be chosen the most discreet, godlie, and vertuous Captains, and Officers of most experience, annexed with vertue, and Souldiers of honest be|hauiour and conditions, which (by skilfull Captaines) may soone be brought to be readie men.



THE SECOND DIALOGVE; WHEREIN IS declared the generall parts,The parts of a Souldier in gene|ral, his valorous determination grounded.

1. Vpon defense of true religion.
2. For the honour of his Prince.
3. For the safetie of his country.
4 To learne dili|gently the Arte he professeth, which is warre.

Many men of base birth by va|lour and vertue attained high de|gree.
Maximinus. wished to be in a Souldier.

Gentleman.
_WEll now, I pray you declare the generall parts of a Souldier.


Capt.
It is necessarie that he which entreth into this action, that hee ground his valorous determination vpon foure principles. First, vpon defence of true Religion: secondly, the honour of his Prince: thirdly, the safetie of his countrie: fourthly, diligently to

learne the Art he professeth, which is warre, whereby many men of low degree and base linage haue attained vnto great dignitie, credit, and fame: as Caius Ma|rius, borne of poore parents in a village of the Arpines, came to be a famous com|mander of the Romanes: Valentinian, a poore mans sonne of Sybaly in Hungaria, a Romane Emperour: Maximinus, borne in a base towne of Thracia, vnto the like dignitie: and Nicholas Pichinnino, the sonne of a Butcher, to be Captaine gene|rall of Philip Vicount Duke of Millans army, and other Potentats of Italy. Many o|thers might be remembred, both English, French, Italian, and Spanish, borne of low degree, which by their value, vertue, prudence, and conduction, mounted to such high Types of honour.
Now he that taketh this resolution,He ought to be diligent, careful, vigilant, and obe|dient: and aboue all to feare God. To chuse honest Camaradas. ought to be diligent, carefull, vigilant, and obedient, and aboue all, to haue the feare of God. To chuse to his Camaradas and companions men well acquainted, and of honest conditions; no factioners nor mutiners, whose company is more dangerous then the diuell himselfe. With his Camaradas, hee is to demeane himselfe, sober, quiet, and friendly: rather seuere then lauish in speeches: for licentious talkers do easily loose their friendes, their estimation and owne quietnesse.
Let him bee mindfull to serue God; for although all professions are thereto bound, yet none more deeply then the valiant souldier, whose actions are euery houre in danger of death: and without doubt, he that so doth, fighteth with more bold resolution and courage, and is thereby brought through manifold daungers, and vnto vnexpectable euents.
Let him bee no blasphemer,No blasphemer. nor swearer: for besides that such a one is infa|mous to the world, he is assured to be punished by Gods diuine iustice, whereof many examples haue bene seene.
Let him abstaine fro~ dice,No idle game|sters. cards,  idle games; for common gamsters, although they haue many other good parts in them, yet are they not esteemed according to their better parts, but rather discredited, getting enemies, questions, and brawles, with many other inconueniences that followes.
Let him not be ouer curious in his fare and diet, but content himselfe with such prouisions as be prouided in the campe.Not curious in fare.
To eschue drun|kennesse.
In any wise let him eschue the beastly vice of drunkennesse; for crammed pan|ches and drunken nowls are apt to nothing but to be sluggish, slothfull, and drow|sie, and in their drunken pangs to haue their throates cut. Examples whereof there are too many extant; as of Tomyris Queene of the Scythians, who ouerthrew Cirus, with his three hundred thousand Persians, in their beastly drunkennesse;  of Spargapises the said Tomyris son, who being first entrapped  foundred with the like vice of drunkennesse, was first by the same Cyrus defeated and taken; with ma|ny moe such examples.Gluttons  dru~|kard, brede ma|ny disorders. Besides, the souldier giuen to this vice of gluttony and drunkennesse, doth disturbe all townes, villages, and all lodgements wheresoeuer he commeth with his vnruly hurly burly and robberies, neuer contenting himself with the ability of his poore host; whereby great scandales do arise, causing many times many Townes, Cities and whole prouinces to reuolt from their Princes, caused by the disorder of such insatiable drunkards and gluttons. The which in|solencies are carefully to be preuented,Examples of pu|nishment. Decimare.  seuerely punished; as did Iulius Caesar at the siege of Placentia in Lombardie, Dezimare or tenth the ninth Legion by sound

of the horne (an ignominious chastisement) for spoyling,  robbing certaine villa|ges of his friendes. And the Emperour Aurelius did seuerely punish such souldiers as did take any thing from their hoste perforce: with much more seuerity did Aufi|dius Cassius reforme the robberies  spoiles done by his disordered co~panies.Aufidius. And Pescennius Niger did condemne vnto death, a whole Camarada of Soldiers, for ta|king a cocke from their hoste where they lodged, perforce: And great Tamberlan punished so seuerely one of his souldiers for such like offence, that the rigor there|of did so correct and discipline his campe, that where his army lodged three dayes together in one place, a tree ful laden with fruit, would at their departure remaine whole,Temperance, and Abstinence. and vntouched. On the contrary, the vertue of abstinence and tempe|rance hath bene such, and so great in some, as it hath rested a perpetuall fame, and praise to their names; and haue thereby atchiued great and honourable en|terprizes.
Chaste  honest.Moreouer let our souldier be chaste and honest in his liuing, refraining sensua|lity with all possible instancie, auoyding all occasions which might moue him to that vice: for those that do giue themselues thereunto, do commonly become cowards in their determinations, with litle felicitie, or good happe in their at|tempts. For they become lasey,Excesse of lechery breeds cowards minds and disea|sed bodies. Examples. sickly, and feeble, and chiefly, such as do cary wo|men with them, hauing most ordinarily their ends accompanied with dishonor and shame, and their effeminacy many times the hinderance of great actions: As it chanced vnto the imperiall campe, after their famous sacke of Rome, whereat they lost their Generall Burbon, so that the Prince of Orange, and other Imperiall Captaines, durst not meete nor stop the passage of Monsieur de Lautrech, Generall of the French army, which marched towards Naples, to regaine that kingdome, by reason that they sawe their souldiers so estranged from their former valour, as men corrupt and effeminate with the vices of the city:  as it fell out with Han|nibals army at Capua; which in short time, of valiant, became vile: of bolde and venturous, cowards and dastards: of carefull and vigilant, sluggards, slow and carelesse: whereby Marcus Marcellus made it knowne vnto the world, that Hanniball might bee conquered. The which vice ought with all rigour to bee chastened.
Decent in apparel. Ouer curious in attire is signe of a Carpet knight, a humour vnfit for warre.He ought to be very moderate, and not ouer garish in his apparell and garments: for it is a principle, found true by experience, that he that is curious in his gate and attire, is neuer like to proue a perfect souldier; for they require different humours, to the deepe skill in warre, and the daintie curiositie of Carpet knights. Exam|ples of garish campes, easily defeated, many might be produced, but time permit|teth me not: but the beauty and brauery of a souldier is his bright and glittring ar|mour, not gaudy attire, and peacockes plumes.
Yet places and times vnmeete to be respected.I do not thereby inferre, that a souldier comming to his Princes court, or in o|ther places absent from the warres, should not go more gallantly attired, accor|ding to the place and quality of his person.
Louing and obe|dient vnto his Captaine.He shall beare a great loue and true affection vnto his Captaine, and obay him, and the other officers of the campe, with great respect: for the very day that hee first entreth to be a soldier, he doth secretly sweare, and promise to serue his Prince, by obeying his officers: for the true order of warre is a very resemblance of true re|ligion, ordained of God, which bindeth the souldier to obserue Iustice, Loyaltie,

constancie,Iustice, loyaltie, constan, pati|ence, silence and obedience. patience, and silence, and aboue all, obedience; through the which is easily attained the perfection in armes, and meanes to atchiue great enterprises though neuer so difficult: as Plato saith verie well, that loue and obedience is signe of a generous minde, not subiect vnto passions and vnrulie fits; for he that wanteth the vertue of obedience and patience,Not subiect vnto passions.
Disobedie~ce bree|deth many mis|chiefes.
Not to attempt any thing with|out his Captaines consent. though otherwise neuer so valiant a souldier, is vnworthy the name. For no greater mischiefe can befall a campe then disobedi|ence, nor from whence greater damages do proceede: too many examples thereof do abound. Therefore a good souldier ought not go against the determinations of his Generall, no nor to passe out of the tre~ches, although it were with inte~t to shew his valour in some singular combat, or in any particular challe~ge, without his Ge|nerals licence (for he is not now his own man, but the Princes, who doth giue him pay) remembring the rigorous punishment which Manlius Torquatus did exe|cute vpon his own sonne Titus Manlius,Example of rigo|rous punishment for disobedience. commaunding his head to be stricken off in his own presence, for hauing passed his commaund in sallying forth to fight with Genutius Metius Captaine of the Tusculans, who gaue him the defie  challenge; nothing auailing the poore Gentleman, in hauing ouercome and slaine his enemy, nor the whole armies supplications, and intreaties. The like rigour vsed Posthumius Tiburtus against his sonne Aulus Posthumius, at his returne from his conquered enemie.


Gent.
Put if his Prince maketh warres against other Christians, as commonly it falleth out, is it no grudge to the souldiers conscience to fight against them?


Capt.
I suppose none,The souldier is bound to obey his Prince, without examining the cause of the war. for the souldier is bound to serue his Prince, and to de|fend his desseignes; and it toucheth him not, much to examine whether the warre be iust or iniust, not being against Gods true religion: but in such a case, I would wish men to be well aduised.
Our souldier ought patiently to suffer the aduersities and trauels that do fall out in the courses and chances of warre also,Patie~tly to suffer the aduersities of warre. shewing tokens of true vertue, not to be ouergreedy and hasty for his pay, although he stand in great need thereof, but rather with chearefull countenance, shew his constancy, eschewing by all meanes possible, rebellions and mutinies, which often vpon such cases do succeede, and in no case be partaker with mutiners, for alwayes the end of such, is sharpe and shamefull death: examples whereof are rife in euery nation.
If in encounters and battels where he shall happen to be,Carefull execu|tion ere he fall to the spoile.
An vnsouldierly part to be scra|ping and spoiling. the enemies happe to be ouercome, let him set all his care and diligence in execution of the victory with his weapon, and not in the spoile of apparell, robes, and trash: least he be ac|counted an vnruly scraper, as too many now a dayes be: for many disorders doe happen by the disorder of couetous spoilers, many times to the dishonour of the action, and losse of their liues.
The like consideration he ought to haue in the expugnation of any fort,To pursue the vi|ctorie throughly. Not cruell vpon cold bloud. city or towne. He shall pursue the victorie euen vntill the enemy be wholie yeelded, and rendred, and licence graunted to fall vnto the sacke and spoile: wherein he shall de|porte himselfe neither cruell nor couetous, as a number of bad and gracelesse fel|lowes doe, which without respect of God or man, do leaue no kinde of rauening crueltie vncommitted,Fauourable and mercifull to the humble vanqui|shed. with brutall rauishment both of women and maides, and with mercilesse murdering of poore innocents yeelded: rather in such cases shall he shew himselfe fauourable and mercifull to the humble vanquished, procuring

to defend them, and especially silly women and maidens: for God, no doubt, will be well pleased in so doing.
To chuse the wea|pon wherein be most dlighteth. The pike and corslet most hono|rale weapon for the footman.
The muskt of most execution of any fury manuall weapon.
To practise all weapons.
The sword and target important to many effects.Let him make choise of the armes which he meanes to vse, and whereunto he indeth himselfe most affected and fit, and to exercise all sorts of weapons; as is v|sed in the schooles of the Ianizzaries Turkes. The pike and corselet is of most e|stimation with footmen, for being a weapon of most firmenesse in the field, wher|with all squares of men are formed, as a most sure defence against the fury of horsemen. Of fierie manuall weapons, the musket is of most execution and force; next to them, the calliuers; those to enuiron the pikes, and to be deuided into ma|ny small troupes and bands, do serue to best purpose.
Let him practise each sort of weapon, although he professe the Pike, Calliuer or Musket, and particularly the sword and target; the which in mine opinion is ve|rie important to many effectes, where men ioyne close together: and moreouer they be very necessarie, to view, and reknowledge batteries, to begin assaults, to make an entrance, to giue a Camisada,  to many other purposes presented in wars.
To learne the se|uerll sound of the drumme.Also must he learne the seuerall soundes of the Drum, whereby to obey to that which is commaunded (for the Drum is the Commaunders voice,) giuing due at|tention to vnderstand the same, and carefully to note and marke the signes made by the Captaine and officers, without pratling to his next companions; for it is one of the greatest faults that a souldier can commit, and a signe of great ligeritie and lightnesse.
It is also a great point in a souldier to be skilfull in swimming:To be skilfull in swimming. as at imbark|ments, disimbarkments, and passing ouer riuers, and sundry other occasions inci|dent to warres.
Couragious and resolute in encou~|ters.In skirmishes and encounters, he should be valiant and resolute, for the soul|dier that is timerous, can neuer incline his heart to any haughtie enterprise, nor a fearefull fainting stomacke neither dareth to attend, nor attempt any hote charge, which for viletie and feare, is noted with shame and infamie amongst all warre|like nations.
Vigilant and carefull at senti|nell.
Not to disrme himselfe vntill he see his ensigne vn|armed in corps de gard.Hee shall bee very carefull to bee alwayes vigilant, and readie, being placed for Sentinell or in the Corps de gard: where hee shall not put off his armour vntill his Ensigne-bearer bee first vnarmed, on whome he ought to haue his eyes fixed, to imitate, as he should vpon his Colours to follow in the field. The faults herein committed, are seuerely to be punished: for in Sentinels consisteth the security of the campe. The Romaines punished Caius Sulpitius with rigorous death, for his negligence herein, throwing him headlong downe from the high Capitoll rocks, what night the Gaules attempted the surprising thereof, which Marcus Manlius manfully defended.
Loyall to his Prince.Hee shall keepe vnspotted his fidelity to his Prince, and although there befall him many disgustos, and insufferable toyles, yet shall he not passe to the enemies campe, for not to be tatched a traytor, a foule and odious offence, rigorously to be punished amongst all nations, from all ages and times; and neuer yet traytor to his Prince made euer any good end, whereof too many examples do abound; The treason may be liked, but the traytor neuer beloued nor trusted.
No shifter from Company to Com|pany.He shall continue and assist in the company where he first began, without shif|ting from company to company: for vsing the contrary, he shall be esteemed a

wauering companion of small consideration and constancie.
In his eating and drinking hee shall not be curious to keepe any precise houres,Not curious of houres for eating: but to preuent time. more then the time will permit; yet let him procure to preuent time herein: for a man hungry and ouerwatched, shall weakely performe his seruice in the field.
When he shall lie in Campe or garrison,To practise war|like exercises in vacant time. let him at vacant times occupie himselfe in warlike exercises, wherein vertue excelleth fortune: as in leaping, running, wrastling, tossing the Pike, pitching the Barre, throwing the Sledge, and in the practise of all sortes of weapons, which he shall vse for his recrea|tion: vnto the which exercises, I wish Captaines should inure their compa|nies, as did King Pyrrhus his souldiers, rewarding such as excelled herein.
It shall be wonderfull auaileable for him to reade Histories,To delight in rea|ding of histories. The profits pro|ceeding thereof. for nothing doth more reuiue the spirits, and sharpen and perfectionate the wits of man. There|in shall he finde the erecting, the gouernement, the alteration or fall of Mo|narchies, Kingdomes, and Common-wealthes: the courses and changes of times, and ages; the conductions, and stratagemes of battels wonne and lost; the carriage of braue men, and basenesse of bad persons; the vertue and fame of the valiant, the shame and infamie of the vile: the vse of auncient discipline, and manner of our Moderne warres. In fine, there shall he behold the state of Peace and Warre.
And for as much as no man can reduce those things vnto perfection where|of he is ignorant,Carefull to marke the courses kept by his superior officers. and knoweth not the Arte, let him diligently marke, consi|der, and remember the orders which the higher Officers doe obserue, in fra|ming their Squadrons of Infanterie and Cauallerie, and the place of the great Artilerie in the march, field and Campe; and the plot of the alodgement ac|cording to the disposition of the ground where the Campe shall then be, with the manner of the intrenching, with the placing of the Ordinance, and defences for the same.
And if he find himselfe at the siege of any strong place, towne or fortresse, let him diligently view the situation, and the order that is taken for the batterie thereof: and if happily he be within a fort of defence; let him well marke the course that is taken for the defending thereof. Thus viewing, considering, con|ceiuing, and obseruing all these aforesaide points, and manie more vsed in mi|litarie actions, and that which toucheth euery officer in particular, euen from the Caporall to the Captaine generall, to the end he may be throughly perfect in the Arte he professeth;The profession of armes foundation of Nobilitie. thereby to aduance and vantage himselfe, sith it is the verie source, mother, and foundation of Nobilitie: reason therefore it is, that it be perfectly vnderstood of the professours and followers thereof, seeing that all practices of mechanicall Artes do follow the same order and course to come to the cunning of their craft.


Gent.
Good Captaine,So many good parts hardly to be found in one . you haue largely discoursed vpon the points and parts in generall, which ought to bee in a souldier; and mee thinkes so many good parts are hardly to be found in one man.


Capt.
True it is,Euery honoura|ble souldier ought to endeuour him|selfe to attain wha he can. and very rare in deede: yet euery honorable souldier, that re|solueth to follow warres, ought, with all his endeuour, to trie to attaine to all those good partes, according to his capacitie and wit: and although his abilitie

be not able to attaine all;Some better then few, few better then none at all. yet vnto some: some better then fewe, fewe better then none at all; the first to be honoured, the next to be accepted, the third to be reiected.
Many good parts  a souldier, got|ten by experience, and perfected with learning.Thus may you see how many good partes are requisite to a perfect souldier; not learned by hearesay, nor gayned with ease: but with care, diligence, industrie, valour, practise and continuance; and most of all perfected with learning, annexed with long exercise and vse.


Gent.
Then I see you would haue a souldier to be learned withall, which you seemed to dislike in our booke Captaine at the first.


Capt.
You mistake me farre, for I euer allow and honour the learned souldier: for what famous Commaunders haue there yet bene,Most famous Commaunders were learned. vnlearned and without let|ters? Themistocles, Alcibiades, Alexander, Caesar, Scipio, with all the rout of the braue Romane Commaunders, and as many braue men as euer were since, were men learned, and read. Thus I rest for this time, till a new day to beginne.


The end of the first Booke.



THE SECOND BOOKE OF WARRE DISCOVRSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.

The first Dialogue:

VVherein is declared the particular parts of sundrie Martiall Officers, from the Caporall to the Captaine of Infanterie.


Gentleman.
_CVrteous Captaine, your yesterdayes Discourses, haue gi|uen vs such content, that we are now inflamed to know fur|ther herein. Wherefore I beseech you to proceede with your Martiall matters, describing vnto vs each office in par|ticular, whereunto my selfe, and these other Gentlemen will giue our diligent attention.


Capt.
The orders obserued by Antiquitie I let passe, fal|ling in few tearmes, to our Moderne customes, wherein you shall vnderstand,All Campes for|med of men, wea|pons, munition, and good Chiefes. that all Campes are framed of Men, Weapons, Munition, and good Chieftaines, wherein there is some difference in euery Nation; but the course which herein I meane to follow, shal be most after the Italian  Spaniard, who haue had the chiefe managing of warres in Europe these 50. or 60. yeares; and with whom I haue most frequented and serued.
A Royall campe therefore, being leuied and gathered, the Prince with his Councell of warre,The Co~maunders of a campe in de|grees.
Armie is deuided into sundry Re|giments.
The Regime~t in|to sundry bandes. The officers of a Regiment.
The number of a Band. appointeth a most sufficient Generall, then a Campe-master generall, a Captaine generall of the Cauallerie, a Captaine generall of the Ar|tillerie: the Campe is deuided into sundry Tertios or Regiments; ouer euery re|giment a Campe-maister or Colonell; the Campe-maister deuides his regime~t into companies, ouer euery company a Captaine, also euery Regiment hath his Sergeant Maior, and ouer the whole armie a Sergeant Maior Generall.
Touching the number of a seuerall Company, some thinke 100. some 150. suf|ficient; but whether it be of 100.150.200.300. or more, or a Regiment of such seuerall companies, being fitted with Captaines and Officers of sufficiencie, it importeth not much: for some Captaines can better gouerne 300. then some o|thers 150.
Now the Captaine, hauing his co~pany appointed which he is to direct, gouern and co~maund,The Captaine and his officers of a Companie. he chuseth his Lieutenant, Ensigne, Sergeant, Drumme, Phifes,  Cabos de squadra, or Caporals, and Cabos de camera. Now for sundry  often occa|sions offred in warre, the which must be encountred with order, policy  gouern|me~t of nu~bers, more or lesse, it is necessary to deuide the co~panies into Squadras, as

well pikes as shot, conteyning each Squadron twentie fiue men: and ouer each squadron a Cabo de squadra, with which office I meane to beginne.


The Caporall his election and office.

Capt.
The parts to be in a Caporall.When the Captaine electeth his Caporals, he ought to do it with such consideration, that amongst his souldiers, one, chosen to this office, none should excell him in valour, vertue, experience, and diligence; yea and in age also, to the end he might be respected with more loue and reuerence: so that he deport him selfe among them,To be with his souldiers, as a fa|ther with his children. as a father with his children, his conditions being a patterne vnto them, asswaging and ending their debates and quarrels, reducing them vnto amitie, with louing one another, in such sort that they may all be of one will, de|sire, and ligue.
Let him learne perfectly euery souldiers name, and to know the qualitie  va|lour of euery one in particular,To cause them to keepe their armes neat and cleane, and to shew them the vse thereof.
The glittering shew of armors is the reioycing of a campe.
He shal perswade them to all clean|linesse and hone|stie,  disswade them from vice.  be earnest with them to keepe their armor neat, cleane and bright, and often to practise the weapon they carrie, he himselfe en|signing and teaching the Bisognios and rawe men: for, besides that it concerneth euery one in particular for his owne defence, and thereby the better to know his valour and skill, nothing doth more reioyce and glorifie a Campe, then the glitte|ring shew and shining of their armour.
He shall perswade them to goe neat and cleane in their apparell, but with mo|destie and profite. He shall reprehend them for swearing and lewd speeches: and shall not permit them any prohibited games, the which he must doe with such sa|gacitie and warie meanes, that they result not against him, and so reiect and con|temne his reputation, thereby loosing their loue and his former respect, for the punishment remaineth not in his hands, nor in any other inferiour Officer, but it appertaineth to the Campe-maister or Lord high Marshall.
To be obedient vnto his superior officers.
Being at any peace of seruice with his Squa|dra alone, his care and autho|ritie great.
His care at the Corps de guard.In presence of his superior Officers, he is to obserue array, order,  obedience, as the rest of the souldiers doe, but being with his Squadron alone in any skance, trench, Ambuscado, or abroad at the watch, or to such other effects, he beareth at that time his Captains authoritie: as, being at watch or guard in any open place, he is to enscance and fortifie as commodity and the place will permit, to resist the attempt of the enemie, being by them charged, ordering and appointing all his companie to stand with their weapon readie bent, still, without rumor, and reso|lute to defende. And being at watch in the Corps de guard, let him prouide fire, cole, and wood, to make light as well by day as by night, especially, if his Squa|dron be shot, to spare the ouer much wasting of match, whereof he must see they be well prouided, as also of powder and bullet, and concerneth to him the distri|bution of the same amongst them.
His care, office,  duty in ward, watch, and Sen|tinell.Being appointed to ward or watch, let him prouide to be first refreshed with vi|ctuals, and his Camarada also: then enter thereunto orderly, from whence nei|ther he, nor any of his Squadron, is to depart vpon paine of life, vntill the Serge|ant doe call and commaund him from the same.
The care, order, and regard in placing watch and Sentinell.In placing of the Sentinels, there are so many aduertisements to be giuen, as there are differences of situations and places; and therefore it is to be remitted to the discretion of the Scout-maister (if there be any) or vnto the care of the diligent Sergeant, carefull Caporall, or other such officer, to set them in such sort, and

with such disposition of the ground and place, and distance, that they may before the enemy arriue, giue aduiseme~t in sufficient time to the Corps de guard, wher|by they may be readie with weapon readie bent.In places of suspi+tion and danger, to place men of best importance. And therefore in such places of suspect and daunger, there ought to be placed souldiers of importance and care, and men of best credit, sith it concerneth the securitie of the Campe, which re|maineth quiet, reposed, and at rest, trusting vnto the care and diligence of these Sentinels, vnto the which an order is to be giuen, how to behaue themselues, in any alarmes presented, giuing them the Word deliuered by the Sergeant. And if the place be obscure, and full of couert, he shall set abroad certaine forlorne Sentinels without the Word, single, and if occasion require, double; a shot and a pyke, to giue knowledge of the alarme. This is sometimes done with a whistle or hysse, for not to disturbe the campe without great neede or good oc|casion. His principall care is,To visite and re|uisite often the watch. to visite and reuisite them, as well by day as by night, making his Contraround with great care and diligence, and to be readie at eue|rie call and neede.
He is to repart the victuals,To repart the vi|ctuall with equi|tie and right. deliuered by the Sergeant for his Squadron, with liberalitie and equalitie vnto euery Camarada, without partialitie to any; and shall procure that in their lodgings they accommodate themselues together as true companions, and loyall friendes; he himselfe being so vnto all, both in deed and word, for the better to keepe them at commaund and obedience, the which doth most import to the well effecting of any act, and so shall he accomplish what is encharged and commanded him as a prudent Officer.


Gent.
Then, is the word to be giuen to euery seuerall Sentinell, sauing to the forlorne Sentinels, as it appeareth by you, or vnto the Caporals onely as I haue heard say?


Capt.
Amongst the Spanish companies of their old Regiments, where their souldiers be experimented,The word not to be trusted vnto raw souldiers  bisognios. trustie  carefull, it is so vsed; but amongst new com|panies, the Caporals onely haue the Word, who are to be readie vpon euery call of the Sentinels, to see the occasion, and to take the Word: the which is so done with great consideration, for many inconueniences and disorders which rawe Bisognios will commit: and therfore those Posts or Sentinels which had the word, being relieued  changed, are presently by the Sergeant or Officer, carried vnto the Corps de gard;  not suffred to depart thence vntill the watch be discharged.


Gent.
In what order is he to take the word?


Capt.
Being a shot, he ought to haue his peece readie charged  primed, and to cocke his burning match,The order how the Sentinell is to receiue the word of such as come neare him. and so to present his peece; and being a pikeman, to tertiar or charge his pike, and no further off then that with so low a voice as they may vnderstand one another, to demaund the Word, as in the Sergeant Maiors office I will more at large declare.
Now euery Caporall or Cabo de esquadra deuides his Squadra into two equall partes;Camarada, what. naming eyther of them a Camarada: contayning each twelue souldiers, or any other number, according to the proportion of his Squadra. And ouer euery Camarada,Capo de Camara. or such number of souldiers, is there appointed a Cabo de Ca|mara, being the most sufficientest souldier of the saide Camarada. The which Capos de Camara, are assistents vnto the Caporall, for the good direction and gouernement of his Squadron, and are necessarie Officers for the speedie em|battelling

or changing of proportions of any number of men, as hereafter shall be declared.



The Sergeant of a Band, his election and office.

Capt.
In the election of the Sergeant, there is greater co~sideration to be had, for that in him consisteth the principall parts of the obseruation of Military disci|pline.In the Sergeant of a Band there ought to be mili|tarie discipline. Skilfull, valiant, quicke. And for that the execution of the superior officers orders and commands, doe concerne his charge and dutie, it importeth much, that he be a skilfull and valiant souldier, and well experimented in martiall matters; and (I say) of so great importance, that more tollerable it were, all the other officers of the com|panie (yea were it the Captaine himselfe) to be rawe men and Bisognios, with litle experience and skill, and the Sergeant not so; who of necessitie ought to be an ex|pert souldier, and of great spirit and diligence.
Requisite that e be somewhat learned and seene in Arith|metike, to know how to sort his weapons, and to frame his squa|dron the sooner. To draw each sort of weapon by themselues.It is requisite that he be somewhat learned, both to write and reade, and to cypher, whereby to keepe a roll or list of all the souldiers of his co~pany, with their seuerall weapons, and haue them in memory by names of the Camaradas, and to know distinctly how many armed Corslets, and vnarmed pikes, with the short weapons, what number of Shot, Musket and Calliuer; to set with diligence at an instant all his companie in order, as occasion shall cause, and the place require wherein he shall be. And to the end that he doe it not confusedly, let him drawe each sort of weapons by themselues, wherby to set them in order with more con|sideration, dispatch and ease; placing the most expert souldiers and best armed, in the front, rereguard, and flankes, where greatest occasion shall require. For it toucheth him to see that his companie be well ranked,The best armed in front, flankes, and rereward. in equall distance, and in good array, with their armour and weapon fitted, and vsed in their due nature; the which he must doe, with great forecast, cheerefull speeches, and courte|ous wordes, binding them thereby to loue him, to regarde him, to respect him; instructing the Drummes and Phifes their seuerall soundes, as howe to sound a Call,To instruct the drumme the se|uerall sounds. a Troupe, a March swift or slowe, an Alarme, a Charge, a Re|treit, c.
The manner to ranke a seuerall Band.Sundry orders are vsed in ranking and placing each sort of weapon in a single companie, but the best obserued is this; the Muskets first and Calliuers in fore|ward  rereward equally deuided, the Pykes in like sort with their armed corslets in front, rereward, and flankes, contayning in the Center their Ensigne, with their armed Halberds: to be ranked by 3.5. or 7, as the Sergeant shall thinke good. But to enter into skirmishes, or to frame any Squadrons, let him obserue the or|der appointed by his Sergeant Maior, shewing himselfe diligent and readie therein; in so doing he gayneth honour, reputation, and credite: and doing the contrarie, infamie, dishonour, and shame, breeding cause of disorder, and loo|sing of time.
To deuide the squadron for se|uerall seruices.It is his office to order and deuide the Squadrons, assigning which shall be for the Corps de guard, which for the walles, which for the streetes of the quar|ter where they are lodged, and which are to accompanie the Colours; and he shall not suffer any souldier to come thither without his Armes fully furni|shed.To appoint them to their seuerall seruice. Hee is also to appoint which shall goe to the Scout-watch, and those

which shall worke in the Ra~pier  Trenches. If any quarrels or brawles do arise amo~gst the company, it is his part to apprehe~d the offenders, yet in such sort, that he dismeasure himselfe with none, but execute the same with great moderation.
It is also his office to set  remoue the watches,To set  remoue the watches.
To giue the word with all secrecy  circumspectio~ conducting them to the place where they are to remain, counselling the Caporals what they are to do, commu|nicating his opinion in placing the Sentinels: and to giue them the Word with all circumspection and secrecie, as was deliuered to him by the Sergeant Maior.
And although it toucheth the Caporals to knowe the prouisions which the Souldiers haue of powder,To be careful for the souldiers pro|uision. shot, and match, and other munitions and armes, yet the Superintendencie thereof resteth in him: for, besides that it importeth the Princes commodity, the bad distribution thereof doth hazard manie times the safetie of the whole Armie, comming to faile and want in time of necessitie.
When occasion is offered, he is to fight as well as the rest, chusing his place, which shall seeme him fit to returne to his office, and accomplish the dutie of a true and perfect Souldier: therefore hee shall go alwayes gallantly armed with a faire Millan Corslet and Burgonet, and his weapon a Halbard or Parti|zan, but by reason of his continuall motion,The proper ar|ming of a Serga~t not ouer heauie: his Halbard borne after him vnto his lodging, thereby to be the better respected and knowne.
If there want victuals to bee sould in the Campe,His care is to prouide and call for victuals fr the souldiers. it toucheth him to pro|cure from the Armies store, to the end that his Companie fall not into want: the which being procured, he shall distribute the same vnto the Caporals, who are especially to diuide it amongst the Camaradas. The like he is to do for match, powder, and shot, and other conuenient things, that his Companie may bee well ordered, and well prouided.
In the absence of his Captaine he is to vse the like obedience vnto his Lieu|tenant,In absence of the Captaine to be o|bedient to the Lieutenant. or Ensigne, who remaine in his roome to gouerne the Companie: and particularlie he ought to carie great respect vnto the Sergeant Maior, readilie accomplishing all his orders and commaunds, and verie often to come in his presence, reknowledging him for his superiour officer, well remembring and marking what he shall ordaine and command in all occasions offered: consi|dering the desseignes and courses that are taken,By dilige~ce, pains  industry to climbe to higher degree. to the end that by such sembla|ble instructions and examples, and by his good diligence and valour, he may de|serue and ascend to higher degree and place.



The Ensigne-bearer or Alferes, his election and office.
In the choise of the Ensigne bearer, the Captaine is to haue manie  great considerations,The parts requi|red to be in an Ensigne-bearer. for that it is not onlie enough for such a one to be a good Soul|dier, bolde and valiant, but to be his equall (if it may be) in valour, discretion  counsell, because many times, in his, and his Lieutenants absence, the gouerne|ment of the Companie doth belong to this Officer.The Ensign is the foundatio~ of the company, and in whom consisteth the honour and reputatio~ of Cap|taine  soldiers. And for as much as the Ensigne is the verie foundation of the Companie, and therein consisteth the honour,  his,  his souldiers reputation, it is necessarie, that he vnto who~ this of|fice is incommended  committed haue in him the parts of a perfect Castellano, or Captaine of a castle, in noblenesse  estimatio~ of honor, to know how to keepe

it,The Ensign-bea|rer to die in de|fence of his En|signe.
The Ensigne for the field the smal+ler, for garrison, then the bigger. and die in the defence thereof, neuer abandoning the same, as many valiant  honourable Ensigne-bearers haue done, to their immortall praise and fame.
When a Companie is newly leuied and erected, the Captaine causeth his En|signe to be made of what colour it seemeth him best: and if the seruice be for the field, he maketh it somewhat lesse, the lighter and easier to be handled; but in Garrisons it is made somewhat larger, because it is most often camped vpon the wall.

Gent.
Why are they called Ensignes, and from whence came that name?


Cap.
The ancient Romanes reparted the people of their Armies into Legions, Cohorts, Centuries, and Maniples: and to be seuerallie knowne, they caried vp|on speares or pikes ends, the figures of Eagles, Dragons, and such like; and some the pictures of their Emperour, and called the same Signa: whereupon the Itali|an and French calleth them Insignes:Wherfore called Ensignes.
Why called Ban|ners: why called Colours. but the Spaniard nameth them Vanderas, from the Almaine word Vanderen: and we English-men do call them of late Co|lours, by reason of the variety of colours they be made of; whereby they bee the better noted and knowne to the companie.
Now, the Ensigne made and finished,  fastened vnto a speare-headed staffe, sharpe pointed with iron, the Captaine with his own hands deliuereth it vnto his Ensigne-bearer, encharging him the custodie  defence therof, with a solemne oth,The Ensignes de|liuered to the Ensigne-bearer by the Captaine with great solem+nity and oath.
After any singu|lar peece of ser|uice, it is the En|signe bearers due yet by gift of the Captaine.
The Ensigne bea|rer to go gallant|ly armed. to be true to his Prince and Captaine; accompanied with manie honoura|ble words, the which he is bound to returne to the Captaine, if the Companie be dissolued or casht, before any notable peece of seruice perfourmed, either at breach, batterie, encounter, or battell, wherein he hath valiantly fought, and ho|nourably defended the same; for from thence forward it is the Alferes due, as de|serued for his manhood  valour: but yet to receiue the same from the Captaine as an honourable gift.
He shall alwaies go gallant  well armed, with a faire Corslet, Burgonet, short sword and meane dagger, which are his proper arming, with a faire Halberd, when he beareth not his Colours, borne after him to his lodging, or elsewhere, thereby to be the better respected and knowne.
To shew himself terrible to the E|nemie.He must shew himselfe dreadfull and terrible to the Enemie with his drawne sword in his right hande, and in his left the Ensigne brauely displayed and vaunced.
In cases where he is obliged and bound to fight, and to follow with the soul|diers; as when the Enemie shall haue broken the Squadron,The times and cases when the Ensigne-bearer is to fight. euen vnto his Front and ranke, or if to run in array, and in the scaling  assaults of batteries or walles, or in such other conflicts, he must push and thrust with the point of his Ensigne: and therefore let him procure to haue to his Camaradas most valiant and ex|pert Souldiers: for although that euerie Souldier of the companie be bound to his succour, defence and aide, for their common honour, yet those that are most obliged, will most aduenture themselues therein; as well appeared at the as|sault of the citie of Aphrica in Barbarie, in Charles the fift his time, when Iohn de Vega Viceroy of Sicilia, and the Lord Garcia de Toledo gained it: where the En|signe-bearer of Captaine Moreruela (being his brother) being ouerthrowne and sore wounded,Examples. was by the Sergeant, (who was also brother vnto them) seconded and succoured, causing him to retire, himselfe remaining with the Ensigne; and

passing forward with the same, like a valiant souldier, was slaine; the Captaine seeing him fall, tooke vp the Ensigne, perfourming the Ensigne-bearers office  dutie, vntill the place was entred: wherein he was so sore hurt and wounded, that few dayes after he died thereof, and his Alferes also: so three braue brethren valiantly died in the defence of one Ensigne. Some such examples haue we had amongst the braue souldiers of our Nation to their renowne and fame.


Gent.
If in fight the Ensigne be broken,The Ensigne broken or torne in fight, no dishonor to the Ensigne bearer, if he retaine the truncke in his hand.
In march how he is to behaue him|selfe. and the Enemie do carie away a part thereof, doth the Ensigne-bearer lose thereby his reputation?


Capt.
No, not a iot: so that hee keepeth the verie trunke of the staffe in his hand.
When the Companie doth march, the Ensigne-bearer may carie his Co|lours resting vpon his shoulder, eyther open or folded vp: but making a stand or Alto, he is bound by dutie to aduance the Ensigne, and not to campear it, or pitch it on the ground: for that is the tricke of a Bisognio, and doth repugne the authoritie and grauitie of his office.
In fights,In fights, in en|counter, in mu|sters, and in his Generals presence how he is to be|haue himselfe. In presence of the Prince, how. The Ensignes place in a squa|dron or battell, the right and is the place of pre|heminence. in encounters, in musters, and in presence of the Lord Generall, he must cary his Colours displayed,  passing by him he must aduance it, only bow|ing the point somewhat downward without any more ceremonies: but if he passe by the king or Prince, he shall withall bow somewhat one of his knees, as a diffe|rence from the Generall.
In Ordinances, or framed battels, alwayes the Ensignes do march in one large or long ranke iointly, in the middest of the Squadron, the most place of honour is the left and right out-sides, the Ensigne on the right hand carying the prehe|minence, who giueth direction and order to the rest in this sort: if hee beareth his Ensigne on his shoulder loose, so are all the rest to carie theirs; and if fardled vp, all they are to do in the like order: and so imitating him in all other maners and shewes:The Abandera|dos. and if he deliuereth his vnto his Abanderado, and take the Halberd, the rest are to do the like: and the selfe same orders are to be obserued by the A|uanderados: for it is an vnseemly shew to see in a ranke of Ensignes, different or|ders one from another.
The Abanderados are vsed to be souldiers, and some do set their owne ser|uants to that office. These ought to go well apparelled and well armed: for I haue seene sometimes amongst the Spaniards, the Alferes themselues to passe into o|ther ranks to fight, leauing the Ensigne with the Abanderado: but I like it not; for it is not lawfull for the Ensigne-bearer to leaue his Colours,Not lawfull for the Ensigne-bea|rer to enter into fight, but with the Ensigne in his hand.
The Ensigne to be accompanied with a Corps d|garde in his lodging. neither to fight but with the same in his hand, and that vpon such occasions, as before I haue de|clared; no, though it were to shew his valour and prowesse.
In the lodging the Ensigne shold be accompanied with a Corps de garde, al|though it be in place of quiet, and out of all suspition, as well for the authoritie and reputation of the same, as to auoyd manie inconueniences which happen to succeed through mutinies, brawles and frayes. It is also conuenient that the En|signe-bearer haue alwayes with him a Drum, to call his companie together, and for such occasions as shall be offered: for the Ensignes should be of such venera|tion, and haue bene so respected of the Souldiers,The veneration and respect of the Ensigne. that there hath seldome bene seene any one flying to the sanctuarie thereof (auoyding the Souldiers furie) to bee pursued or hurt, esteeming their Ensigne a thing inuiolable: as it fell out in

Brescia, when the mutinous souldiers wold haue slain the Lord Lewes Yearts, their Generall, who flying to the Ensigne, it was enough to cause them to leaue off so shamefull and so abhominable attempt.
The souldiers not to disarme them|selues vntill the Ensigne-bearer be first vnarmed and Ensigne placed vp.
When the Ensign-bearer is to dis|arme.When the Souldiers do enter into any Corps de gard, either in Castle, towne, fortresse, or campe, they ought not to disarme themselues vntil they see their Al|feres first vnarmed, vpon whom they should haue their eyes fixed, to imitate, as they haue vpon the Ensigne he beareth to follow: wherefore the Ensigne-bearer is not to disarme vntil the gates of the Fort or place of defence wherein they are, be first shut;  if it be in campe or field, when it seemeth that he may safely do it,  not otherwise: to the end that the souldiers take not example from him of vn|soldiarie negligence and slouth, but rather of all vigilancy, care and paine.


Gent.
You haue largely set downe the aduertisements touching this Officer, wherein you haue notified many martiall points, vnknowne to vs: therfore I pray proceed to the Lieutenants office and dutie.


Capt.
This Officer amongst the Spanish companies is not vsed: but amongst vs, the Italians French, therfore I will touch somewhat of him by the way.



The Lieutenant his office and duty.
He therefore that is chosen to this office, ought to be a man of great experi|ence, fidelity and valour, who in the absence of his Captaine, carieth his roome, charge and command;The parts that ught to be in a Lieutenant.
Not to arrogate ouer much autho+ritie to himselfe, vnto whom the souldiers and vnder-officers are to obey, for the time, as vnto the Captaine himselfe: notwithstanding he must vse it with such discretion and moderation, that he arrogate not too much vnto himselfe; but at his Captaines returne he shall with all loue, truth, and dutie, enforme him of all things and matters passed.
If any questions and ciuill debates do arise amongst the souldiers of his band, he is to pacifie, iudge and determine the same with grauity and good speeches: whereby he shall binde them more firmely vnto him in obedience and loue:To pacifie and determine the souldiers brables with grauity and good speeches.
To cause offen|ders to bee appre|hended.
To see the com|pany furnished with all necessa|ries.
To counsell, ayde  assist the Ser|geant in his office
To passe with the company to the Corps de gard.
To visite and re|uisite the watch. and when as he cannot concert and agree them, he is to referre them ouer vnto his Captaine; but the most faultie and offenders hee may cause to be apprehended, and send them to the Colonell or Marshall.
It is his charge and office to see that the Company be prouided of all necessa|ries, aduertising the Caporals to see well to their charges, and aduising the Ser|geant to be diligent, carefull, and ready in his office, wherein he shall ayd, help  assist him, both in ordering the company, and in setting the watch, the which he is precisely bound to perform himself, in the Sergea~ts absence or time of infirmity.
He is to passe with the Companie vnto the Corps de garde, to see the watch and Sentinels set, and often times to visite and reuisite the same; and to perswade the souldiers to respect, with obedience, their Sergeant and Caporals: wherefore it importeth him to be well spoken, discreet and wise, to moue  perswade them with sound reasons, to the obseruation and obedience of Militarie discipline, dis|burdening thereby his Captaine of manie and sundrie toiles.
To see the souldi|ers appointed to their lodgings.It toucheth him also to see the souldiers appointed to their lodgings, giuing order for the same vnto the Harbenger, and how he shall distribute the baggage and cariage amongst the particular souldiers, and the sicke men carefullie to bee looked vnto, not suffering these Harbengers or Furriers to rob, purloine, and

filch as they are wont to do, whereby great scandals do arise, as at the rising of the Vlishingers, and in sundrie other places hath appeared.
His place of march (his Captaine being present) is in the Rere-ward of all the company,His place of march. but after any fight or skirmish, in retiring  marching out of the field, he is to passe before, and the Captaine in the rere-ward. Now, for as much as by that, as shall be declared in the ordinarie Captaines office, may easily bee vnder|stood the dutie of this officer, hauing the whole company in charge, it seemeth me to haue said at this present, sufficient herein.


The Captaine of Infanterie, his election and office.
First,Captaines chosen by the counsell of warre  state, or by Vize-royes of prouinces. at the leuying and erecting of new Companies, in Spaine, the Captaines of Infanterie are appointed by the Counsell of state  warre, and when places be void in the garrisons  Campe, new Captaines are placed by the Generals and Vize royes in their seueral gouernme~ts: but with vs the Lords of the priuy Coun|cell do commonly appoint them.

Gent.
Truly, the electio~ made by such personages must needs be good  sure.


Capt.
It shold seem so indeed: neuerthelesse it hath bene seen many times, that both some Generals,Litle considera|tion vsed many times in bestow|ing their charges. Inconueniences arising from fa|uorite elections. Vize royes,  Counsellers also haue missed in the conside|ration therof, bestowing those charges vpon their followers,  Court-familiars and fauorites, whereby hath risen dammage to the Prince,  discredit to the acti|on: for by means of such fauorit-elections, many valiant  skilful souldiers do re|maine without charge, fit for their skil and valour; wherby (remayning in seruice) they obey not their such chosen officers, neither do they attempt such honorable enterprises as often times are offered,The expert soul|dier loth to obey the vnexpert Captaine. seeing that they are neither to be honored, nor rewarded for the same, seeing that men of litle good sort, Bisognios, and of small skill and experience, are only by fauour, preferred before them vnto those charges, due to them by right; which is the cause that Military discipline is fallen to decay, and standeth in great need of reformation.


Gent.
How might that be?


Capt.
Mary (in mine opinion) with the Princes  Potentates due reputation,Good order for reformation. fauour  regard: the which may easily be done thus. When any new Companies are leuied and raysed, then not to giue the conduction and charge of them, for af|fection and fauour, vnto such as lie fawning in the Court for the same, but to giue order vnto their Generals, Vize-royes and Colonels, assisting in their Camps, and in the gouernment of their seuerall Prouinces, to send them lysts or rolles of the most ancient,Captaines to be chosen out of the best approued Lieutenants.
None to be cap|taines except first a Lieutenant.
None Lieutenant but first an En|signe.
None Ensigne but first a Ser|geant. most skilfull and best renowned Lieutenants that they haue, and out of those to elect and choose Captaines; and of those which before were En|signes, to chuse for Lieutenants: and Sergeant to be Ensigne-bearers; and Capo|rals to be Sergeants; and of the best approued souldiers to chuse for Caporals. And the verie same orders should the Vize-royes and Generals obserue,  not to elect him for Captaine who neuer was Lieutenant; nor him for Lieutenant, who neuer was Ensigne:  that the Treasurers of the Campes and Nauies should not set downe place to an Ensigne-bearer, who neuer was Sergeant; nor to a Sergea~t, which neuer was Caporall: and that this order among the~ all should be inuiola|bly obserued  kept: by this order shold the co~panies be perfect  wel disciplined

conseruing great quiet and good order amongst them; the souldiers vsing great obedience to their officers, seeing themselues commanded by such skilfull mai|sters, and euery man will in his roome  place,Hope of prefer|ment makes men obedient  dili|gent. vse his diligence, skill, valour, and endeuour, hoping thereby to ascend to the degrees of others before him.


Gent.
But with vs in England, where (thanks be to God) we haue had litle oc|casion of warres, this order would hardly be obserued, considering the litle choise we haue of men of such sort.


Capt.
True it is, we haue small choise in deed: neuerthelesse, there bee manie braue men of our nation which haue long followed the warres,Many haue spent their patrimony in wars, but few enriched therby. both in the Low countries, France, and other places, many of them spending their wealth and pa|trimonie in the same, and men of good sufficiencie, were they imployed, yet rest they obscure and without charge many of them,Fauorite election is a crosse to olde souldiers. by reason of the fauorite election afore named. What courage then to follow warres?


Gent.
But many of your French and Low-countrie seruitors do hold too high an opinion of themselues,A fond conceit of some seruitours.
A worse mind of some common souldiers.
The first to be disliked, as men inconsiderate.
The second as me~ nither fit for peace nor warre.
The more honest minds lesse apt to beg or craue. thinking that for a few yeares seruice in forraine parts, they merite an euerlasting reward and pay: and your common souldiers, the acti|on once ended, do scorne to returne to their former occupations and trades.


Cap.
Both those sorts do I deepely condemne with you; the first, as men fondly conceited  inconsiderate; the second, as men neither good for peace nor warre. But we must not say they be all such, neither many such, I hope; for I do know ma|ny others braue and honest men, that liue contented with their lot, though in meane estate, not begging nor crauing with bolde and shamelesse faces, (for the more honester mind, the lesse apt to beg and craue) but applying themselues to some honest course and trade, to maintaine their poore liuing; well knowing that The warres once ended, the Princes purse not able, neither necessarie to maintaine all idle:The wars ended the Princes purse not to maintaine all idle. neuerthelesse, the warres againe reuiued, As readie to serue, as the proudest he. And again, I do know manie others, men of honest minds, and of good courage, who hauing long followed the warres, and of good proofe in the same, being out of action by the aforesaid occasions, and hauing no trade, few friends, and lesse means, do passe (God knoweth) but barely, a thing to be pittied, and wished to be considered. Now out of these (I suppose) ought our Captaines and Officers to be chosen,Men hauing long followed the warres,  of good proof in the same, most fit to bee chosen for Cap|taines. in these dangerous seasons, with some reasonable allowance toward their maintenance, leuied by such meanes, as should be found most fit by her Maiesties honorable Counsell; and subiects and commons most willing to the same: which, no doubt, would prooue to wonderfull great effect, especially to our true training and bringing men to be ready: for, Captained as we are, our blind ignorance may chance breed our owne woe.


Gent.
Such choise (in mine opinion) were good indeed, to bring our people to more perfection in soldiarie points, especially to bring them to the face of the enemy to fight: but we haue Muster-masters appointed in euerie Shiere, men of seruice and skill, both to instruct our Captaines, and to traine our souldiers, who haue pay allowed them for the same.


Capt.
Muster-maisters what they ought to be.Sith the other cannot be, surely this course is good: prouided that these Muster-masters be such men as I speak of; I mean expert, valiant, skilfull, discreet,  especially dilige~t men; but if they want those parts, As good neuer a whit, as ne|uer the better: wherfore I could hartily wish (considering this fickle  dangerous

 Lieutenants of euery shire, and Captaines and Gentlemen of the  prouide them of some good Officers at the least: not onely to fur|  selues with good armour and furniture, but also to cause all others,  to carrie the charge thereof, to prouide them in like sort, chaunging those roued blacke Billes and Bowes into good Muskets,In stead of bow and bills good pikes  muskets. Pikes and Corslets, not uring any for friendship or affection, nor wincking at faults, I know not for what small causes,A caneat for Captaines and Muster-maisters but to see it performed. Wishing also our trayning Cap|taines, and Muster-maisters, to looke well to their charge and dutie; and besides their diligent trayning, to see each fault amended, and that in due time, for their owne credits sake.


Gent.
What course would you wish to be taken, for the redresse and reforma|tion hereof, men hauing already prouided bowes and billes?


Capt.
Marrie thus:What order for conuerting billes and bowes into pikes  muskets. Looke in euery Parish, how many men might be found able to beare the charge of an Armed Pike, which is with a Corslet complet, let them be charged therewith; the charge at the most will not amount vnto aboue fortie shillings: a small summe to a man of any wealth, considering it is for the de|fence of lands,A good conside|ration. goods, libertie, life and all.


Gent.
But happely they will grudge thereat, as a great charge.


Capt.
The more pitie and shame: For how many men able to beare the charge thereof,A bad sort of people. shall you see in a lewd Ale house, tauerne, and bowling Alley, to lose twise that value in one day or night, at cardes, dice, or other vnthristie game,To grudge at a good action, signe of a beastly mind. and neuer grudge thereat? But their grudging at so good an action, sheweth their ignorance, and base beastly mindes: but grudge or grudge not, prouide it they should, had I the commission: for the vrgentnesse of the cause doeth deepely require it.A miserable minde. And againe how many of these grumbling snudges shall you see which repine at a peny for so good an action, yet can finde poundes by hundreds to buy their poore neighbours out of their liuings, goods and all; men of bad consideration and worse conscience.Good courses. Next, such men as should be found able to beare the charge of a Musket, should prouide one in like sort, which with 30 or 40 shillings charge would be well performed: and where one man were not sufficient thereunto, ioyne a couple; where not two, ioyne three; where not three, ioyne foure; so making a common purse to buy the same: for I could wish the most weapon in the field to be Pike and Musket.Pike and musket the most weapon in the field. Againe, such as haue Calliuers imposed vpo~ them already, if they be found men able for more, (for we must stretch our abilitie in this case) turne them to a Musket on Gods name, pas|sing ouer the charge of the Calliuer vnto another lesse able; then such as shal thus be found, see they prouide it good and sufficient;  not such rotten stuffe as com|monly I see. Now for such as haue bowes and bils imposed vpon them already: let them alter the weapons, prouiding in their stead good Pikes  Muskets:  where one is not found sufficient, ioyne two or three, as I sayd before.


Gent.
What, would you haue them cast away their bowes and billes, hauing bene charged with the same already?


Capt.
Not so,Bowes and billes yet seruiceable in some sort. they may serue yet to many purposes. For all those weapons (be|fore spoken of) prouided, shall serue but for your trayned men: and your bills and bowes, which euery man, or most men can handle, shall, (if neede require) be put in place of seruice befitting them weapons.



Gent.
What order would you wish for match, powder and shot, would you haue the burthen thereof vpon such as do find the peece?


Capt.
An order for pow+der  match for training dayes.No, not all the charge: but I would wish a generall seazement to be made vpon euery parish, for as much as shold suffice for officers wages, match,  pow|der for one trayning day, to be deliuered vnto the Captaine, or some other officer for that purpose, to prouide the same ready, to see it iustly distributed,  wel spent in the training (with as litle waste as might be) and so from training to training, as the seruice shall continue.


Gent.
And for the generall store, what say you of that?


Capt.
A great care to be had for the ge|nerall store.I hope there is sufficient care had therof already: if not, I could wish such as haue the commission  charge thereof to looke well thereunto, hauing a due regard to the waightinesse of the cause; and to see that the moneys collected for that purpose be substantially and throughly bestowed in pikes and corslets, mus|kets, caliuers, match, powder, lead, and all other things there unto appertaining; that in the time of seruice nothing be found wanting: for wants in time and pinch of seruice haue hindered great actions,Want of necessa|ries in time of seruice, hath hin|dred gret acti|ons. as I my selfe  others haue seene: besee|ching our good Lord God, so to stirre vp the hearts of our high Commanders (as I trust he doth) to haue great care and due regard to the most necessary prouision of such munitions, sith our moderne wars depe~d much vpon the same. But I haue long digressed fro~ the officer I had in hand, vnto who~ I think it is time to returne.


Gent.
It was of the election of a Captaine of foot-bands; but of the parts of his charge and dutie you haue not yet touched.


Capt.
Whom to bee cho|sen for a Captain of footbands.Then, a Captaine of Infanterie, or foot-band, should haue in him all the parts (before rehearsed) of a perfect souldier, hauing worthilie passed through all the aforesad degrees of seruice: as first to haue bene a Caporall, from a Caporal to a Sergeant, from a Sergea~t to an Ensigne, from an Ensigne-bearer to a Lieute|nant, and from a Lieutenant to this office;  one who in all those offices hath well performed his parts and duty, to the end he may the better know how to co~mand and order euery one in his degree.The parts to be desired in a Cap|taine. And particularly it is to be respected, that he be a man that feareth God, vertuous, wise, politicke, valiant, careful, vigilant, and (as a thing of great importance) well experimented in martiall affaires: for disor|derly shall he gouerne in warres,Disorderly shall he gouerne in warres, who was neuer skilful in the arte. which neuer was skilfull in the Arte.


Gent.
So many good parts in one subiect are hard to be found.


Capt.
Yet some such men there are; and where there are not all those parts, let the choise be made of such, in whom most are to be found.


Gen.
Being chosen, and his charge appointed him, what is then required?


Cap.
The captains care in the election of his officers.To know how to chuse necessary officers for the gouernment of his com|pany, and to see they may be such, as their degrees and places should require; for in this election he shall greatly shew his skill, prudence, and wisdome; the which parts if he himselfe haue, he will chuse men like vnto himselfe; if not, then per con|tra, as it hath bene seene many times;Similis similem sibi quaerit. yea and those places to haue bene sould, and chopped and changed for money.


Gent.
What number would you haue a foot-company to containe?


Capt.
Some man may be sufficient to gouerne three hundred, some two hun|dred, some one hundred, as I haue said before.


Gent.
How would you haue a Companie sorted with weapons?



Capt.
To euery 100 men I wold wish 40 pikes, 10 halbards, of which nu~ber 2 or 3 to be targets of proof,The due sorting of weapons. 25 muskets,  25 calliuers,  so to the higher nu~bers.


Gent.
Thus you would haue as many pikes with halbards, as you haue of shot: but I haue heard some say, that they wold two thirds of shot to one third of pikes.


Capt.
True, prouided that there be the ful number of muskets, or rather more; for I would be as well prouided to defend, as to offend.


Gent.
What importeth so great a number of muskets?


Capt.
Much,The aduantage of musket. considering the wonderfull execution of that weapon: for one good musket may be accounted for two calliuers.


Gent.
But the musket is a heauie cariage, and painfull to be handled; not fit but for strong and mighty men.


Capt.
You would not be of that mind, had you euer seene any good seruice, e|specially amongst the Spaniards, who vse them almost generally: and I am assured that for courage and strength, we are comparable, yea do excell them: but manie of vs want their practise,Skill  obedie~ce. yea and happily their obedience. Now considering that the musket hath his rest, the heauinesse thereof is many times eased: and againe, for the handling,Practise maketh perfect. Practise maketh perfect, as in all other weapons.


Gen.
What officers think you necessary for a Co~pany of three hundred men?


Cap.
One Lieutenant,Necessary officers to a band of three hundred men. one Ensigne-bearer, two Sergeants, twelue Caporals, af|ter the reckening of 25 souldiers to euerie squadron (the Captaine squadron ac|counted for one,) one harbinger or furrier, one Chyrurgian skilfull in his arte,  his seruant. three Drummes, and as many Phifes.


Gent.
The Company newly leuied, and officers chosen, what is the Captaine to do first before he march with the same?


Capt.
Hauing prouided his Colours,The Ensigne to be incommended to the Ensigne-bearer. he shall with solemnity inco~mend it vn|to his Alferes or Ensigne-bearer, as before is declared, and then shall diuide his souldiers into squadrons, chusing for his owne squadron the most experimented men, and of best sort.


Gent.
Wherfore doth the Captaine chuse a squadron to himselfe, being com|mander of the whole Companie?


Capt.
Because it is a matter of much importance, and necessarie, in respect that this squadron standeth in such predicament,The Captains Squadron. that any Gentleman, though neuer so illustrious; and any Alferes, Lieutenant or Sergeant may serue as soldier in the same,No blemish vnto any Gentleman, to serue as a com|mon souldier in the Captaines squadron.
Aduantaged in Payes. without any disparagement or blemish to their reputation, although they themselues haue had men vnder their charge; for such ought to be aduantaged in their payes,  the Captaine to respect and esteeme them as his owne person, and counsell and consult with them, chusing officers out of them when any do want. And if any peece of seruice be presented, wherein hee shall be occasioned to vse some part of his company, he chuseth of those, such as he shall think good,  in|co~mendeth the action vnto them:  to giue breathing vnto men of lesse account in encounters  skirmishes which are offred: , euen for very shame of them, the co~mon souldiers (knowing they shal be marked  noted) will fight more resolute and ready. Besides, men of such sort are a great beauty to the band, being com|monly better armed then the rest.
He is the~ to procure what he can,To instruct and procure his soldi|ers to the feare of God. that his souldiers be good Christians,  men fearing God (for God knoweth, there be a nu~ber neither regarding their creation

nor Christianity.) For no action is either good, or like to be, where this foundati|on is not first laid.
To appease de|bates.
To reprehend  punsh dish nest liuers.
Few bd do cor|rupt a number of good.
To exercise them often to their Armes.If there be any banding, secting or passionating amongst them, he is to appease  compound the same:  those that do liue dishonest infamous, or tatched with foule crimes, let him first charitablie reprehend them; whereupon, if they amend not, yet more seuerely; if not then, and all necessarie preuentions vsed, let them be cashed out of the band; for a few bad do soone corrupt a number of good.
He must diligently vse his soldiers to the often exercise of their Armes, seeing them well furnished therewith, shewing them the vse of euerie kind of weapon: and what orders they are to obserue at encounters and battels, according to the nature of their opposite enemy: for there is a difference between the Germane, the French,Different nations different ntures. To practise all military exerci|ses.
The Captaine e|quall with his sol|diers in all perill and paine. the Italian, and Spaniard, being nations of different humors, natures, cou|rage, policie,  conduction. Also that he see them practise all other exercises ne|cessary for wars, so that nothing be done disorderly in the Co~pany: carefully in all actions obseruing military discipline: being equal with his souldiers in al perils  paines, which is a great encouragement to the souldiers,  an encreasing of their loue towards their Captaine  not to send them out like headlesse men, himselfe remaining behind safe vnder couert, as such sometimes haue bene seene.
To muster and traine often. The order to be obserued in tray|ning.He shall often times muster, shew, and traine his Companie, causing them to march in good order, keeping well their arayes, in march, countermarch, in ring, in S.D or G. formes, all which are framed by the only order of marching: and bring them into squadrons of battels of sundry sorts and formes, shewing them how to march orderly therein, how to charge either against horse or foot, how to retire with their faces still toward the enemie: and how to turne their faces, ma|king front of either flanke or traine, and to wheele about, if occasion should serue, but a thing hard, and not easie to be perfourmed: how to disband, and how to fal into troupes. By these meanes he shall know his Companie the better, be better reputed of,Men ready for a|ction to great im|portance. and make his men more apt and ready for action: a thing very impor|tant for a Captaine.
Great care to keep aray in marching.When hee marcheth with his Company, he must be carefull that his souldiers breake not out of ranke, although it be in their own countrie, or in country of our friends, out of danger or suspect of the enemie, to the end that they neither rifle, spoile,Disorderly beha|uior of ad soul|diers breedeth many mischiefes nor rob houses, gardens, or orchards, and other places of corne  fruites; for therby do rise and result many times great scandals and tumults amongst the naturals of the country wherein they march,  is cause that they are but badlie ntertained at their lodgings: wherin he is to haue great care  vigilancy, that his soldiers grow not licencious vpon their poore hosts, neither offer them abuse for their meat and prouision, but be contented with such as is giuen them, according to the abilitie of their poore hostes,Disorders to be punished. chastening with great seuerity the offenders herein: for in so doing he shall acquist  gaine the name  reputation of a Chri|stianlike, vertuous  discreet Captaine: but Captaines doing the contrarie, suffe|ring their souldiers to grow ouer licentious and lewd,The tolleratio~ of euils breedes ma|ny inconuenie~ces. haue procured to the~selues  their companies great hatred, infamies  grudgings, with their throats many times cut by the country Boores: examples hereof too too many, both in France and the Low-countries.
Now his band being of compound weapons, hee himselfe may vse and carie

either Calliuer,What weapon the Captaine is to vse Musket or Pike, as he shall fancie most, but the Pike is most honourable, deuiding his shotte into fore-ward and rere-ward of the pikes, contayning in their center the Ensigne and Halbards. But if the band be al pikes, or all shot alone, (which order I haue seene obserued amongst the Spaniards) then being pikes, he is by dutie to carie a pike, himselfe armed in a Corslet com|plete, wherein he shall be curious to haue them gallant and good; which will cause his Company to imitate him therein. But if his Companie be all shot, then is he in like sort bound by dutie to carie a peece, either Musket or Calli|uer, gallantly furnished,Vnsoldiarly trick of a training captaine. and neatlie kept. And not in musters and traynings to carie neither long-sword, neither Halbard, neither leading-staffe, neither halfe-pike, neither yet a page going before him; for it is a Bisognios tricke, ill be|seeming a perfect Captaine.The captaine be|ing set to defende any place, what he is to do.
If he be commaunded with his Company to the defence and guard of any place; he is to repaire, to rampiere, to entrench, and to fortifie himselfe there|in, with all speed, care, diligence, and forecast: and defend the same with reso|lute valour, as diuerse valiant Captaines haue done, both in time past, and also in our age, whose fame in histories, is, and euer will bee fresh, in despight of enuie.
If the Armie be encamped;Commanded to any peece of ser|uice, what he is to do. and being commanded vnto any peece of ser|uice, he must shew therein great valour, vigilancie and care, animating his souldiers, and consulting with his officers and most experimented men of his Companie, and after determination had, to shew himselfe couragious and re|solute. But let him well beware that he attempt nothing inconsiderate and rash, as manie ignorant men haue done,To attempt no|thing inconside|rate and rash. to their owne and companies confusion. For those that go without preuention, preconsideration, and forecast of such successes  casualties as may befall, do in the very action find the~selues puzzeled, amazed, and at their wits end, with their ouerthrow in fine. Therfore to auoid such incon|ueniences,  hazards, let the Captaine be wel assured to obserue the orders  in|structions giuen him by the higher Co~manders,To obserue the orders giuen by his commander. if manifest occasion be not seen that in obseruing the same, great dammage may ensue, or good occasion be lost.
It importeth him also much to be a good Oratour, and to haue a sweet vaine in speech,To be a good Ora|tour, and to what purpose. and all other Commanders and officers in like sort, that haue people in charge, to perswade, moue, or disswade their souldiers, as occasions shall serue; to perswade to good actions; to disswade from bad factions; to commend valour and vertue; to reprehend faults and vices, and things done without order and dis|cipline; to encourage, moue and stirre vp mens minds to battels  braue encoun|ters, and to induce men by good speeches to endure patiently, and with constant hearts the toyles, wants, and discommodities, which commonly are presented in casualties of warre, wherby they arise not in mutinies, nor into such other disso|lutions, by reason of impatiencie in semblable aduersities.
A point of great vertue it is in a Captain, not to be ouer couetous and greedy, but franke and liberall amongst his souldiers and followers, succouring them to his best abilitie in their necessities  needs;A captaine not to be ouer coue|tous, but carefull for his souldiers. procuring that they be orderly paid, and not basely to wrong them, in detaining, deceiuing and robbing them of their payes, as some bad Captaines haue bene wont to do, who with litle honestie, and lesse feare of God, haue made a practise thereof: such vnworthy Captaines the Lord Generall ought seuerely to punish.
Item, such day as his Company hath the gard, he must send his Sergea~t to take the Word from the Sergeant Maior, or some other such personage who hath or|der for the same,To take the word with the which Word he is to gouerne his watch and Sentinels for that night: for therein consisteth the security of the Campe.
In visiting the Sentinels  Corps de gard he must vse great care  diligence: and see that his souldiers and officers do precisely performe what toucheth them therein,Carefull to visite the Sentinels. according to the order he shall haue receiued from his superiour Com|manders: and cause that his Company be alwaies prouided with candles  tor|ches,  such other lights,To be prouided of lights for the night time.
To be obedient  diligent about his superour commandrs. for the redresse of many casualties cha~cing in the night.
He shall obey the ordinances of the Sergeant Maior, and other his superiour officers with great good will  diligence, respecting the~,  accompanying them, the more to moue them to loue and affect him: and shall procure to learne from the~ the orders  courses they shall take in prosecuting the warre: for it is a great vertue to be curious to know that which toucheth his profession:  it importeth him much to vnderstand it perfectlie, wherby he may find himselfe furnished with more considerations, and more ready for matters co~mitted vnto him, thereby to aduance himself in his Princes seruice, and in credit and reputation to his owne person, bearing with a magnanimous and equall mind, as well his aduerse, as his prosperous fortune, a rare and principall vertue.
Necessarie cari|age and baggage in marching. But not ouer pe|stersome.At marching vnto any place with his companie, let him procure that they bee prouided of necessarie baggage: but yet with such moderation, that in no sort he suffer his souldiers to be pestered and cumbred; but as light as may bee, but with their armour  weapon, to the end, that if occasion be offered to encounter with the enemie, they may finde themselues more ready  determinate to gaine boo|ties from them, then carefull to conserue their owne trash and baggage: not per|mitting any souldier to haue any horse, but some fewe and particular of his most expert men,Few horses to be permitted in foot|bands.
The Captaine is most ordinarily to lodge among his souldiers.
Not to be ouer curious in his di|et and fare.
Examples.
To entreat his souldiers with gentle words  good works.
A good Captaine is as a father to his souldiers, and they as children vnto him.
Souldiers louing their captains wil aduenture their liues for their common honor. the which may serue in steede of light horses, to discouer and take knowledge, and to send aduises, if need should require.
In his alodgements, he shold most ordinarily lodge amongst, or neere his soul|diers, giuing them examples with his vertues and good behauiour, being compa|nion with them in hardnes of liuing, not procuring to himself dainties  curious meats, imitating herein Cato Vticensis, and George Castriot Lord of Albania, Han|nibal, Scipio, Caesar, and others.
In fine he shal entreat his souldiers with gentle words  good works, accoun|ting them as his sonnes and children, whereby they may loue him,  respect him as their father; and being thus linked, he shall enterprise no act, wherein they will not follow him with great loue, willingnesse and valour, boldly aduenturing their liues for their common honour, gaining to himselfe thereby great fame  repu|tation with the Generall and the whole Armie; therby binding his Prince to re|ward him according to his valour, vertue and deserts.


Gent.
You haue declared many good parts belonging to a Captaine: I would that our Captaines were halfe so well furnished.


Capt.
I would they had all these good parts, and manie more, if more might be: then should we haue lesse cause to make reckening of our enemies.



The end of the second Booke.



THE THIRD BOOKE OF WARRE DISCOVRSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.

The first Dialogue:

VVherein is declared the order of a Romane Legion, with their deuisions: and the manner of the Grecians Phalanx: also a forme of trayning to be practised and vsed amongst vs, with the vse and handling of each weapon in their kinde: and other militarie points.


Gentleman.
_FRiendly Captaine, your yesterdayes Discourses, haue so de|lighted, contented and enflamed both my selfe, and these o|ther Gentlemen, that we must needs entreat you to proceed, and to speake somewhat of the higher Officers of the field: wherefore I pray satisfie vs herein.


Capt.
Gentlemen, I would those parts of skill were in me to answere your requestes, and to satisfie your expectations. Neuerthelesse seeing you are so well bent, and inclined to the vnderstanding of Militarie courses; I will, to my best abilitie and knowledge, declare vnto you such matters as I haue found by mine owne experience, eyther learned from the directions of braue Commaunders vnder whom I haue serued, or gathered out of the best authors which haue written vpon this subiect VVarre. Indeede at the beginning of these our speeches, I did not then thinke to haue marched so farre into this Martiall field,Discontinuance breedeth forget|fulnesse. for my fiue or sixe yeares discontinuance from action, had almost driuen all the courses, order and methode thereof out of my mind and memorie: but your curious demaundes and questions, haue both drawen me on, sharpened my wit, and refresht my memorie: wherein if I haue erred, or may misse hereafter (as no man but erreth, some more, some lesse) I submit my selfe to the censure and correction of men more experimented, and of better parts then my selfe.


Gent.
Truely Captaine, you say very well; and I would we had many of no meaner partes, nor of no worse meaning then your selfe, in mine opinion; then no doubt, but our common souldiers should be better instructed, and be better dealt withall, then they now are by some of their Captains. But letting these mat|ters passe; I pray what order would you wish to be obserued in the trayning of our souldiers here with vs in the countrie, sith we are commanded to traine, and as yet I see litle good order obserued in the same.


Capt.
Touching the true and orderly trayning of your people in this our Mo|derne

Militia, I haue in generall roued ouer some part thereof alreadie; but not so particularly as such an action would require: wherein I could heartily wish, that, as neere as possible we might, we should reduce ourselues with such armes as we now vse, vnto the forme, manner, and course of the auncient Romanes in their Militia and discipline of warre,The militarie discipline of the Romanes to be followed. although ages, seasons, and inuentions, haue altered much and many weapons by them vsed.


Gent.
I pray what order did the Romanes obserue in their warres? and how were they armed?


Capt.
The Romanes deuided their foot people of warre into men armed with heauie armour, (or, as we may tearme it, armor complete) and into light armed men.Grauis arma|tura of the Ro|manes.
Velites of the Ro|manes, and their armings. Those which were light armed, they called by one common name, Velites; vnder which word they vnderstood all such as carried slinges, darts, bowes, crosse-bowes, and such like: the greatest part of whom, were armed with a skull or close Cellat for the head; and had, besides their other weapons, a shield or Target vp|on their left arme to defend and couer themselues, and did fight or skirmish in straggling sort, a good distance from those that were armed with heauie or com|plete armour in Squadron. Vnto those may we well compare our shot, especially them of the forlorne hope, or Enfans Perdus, as the French doe terme them. Their people armed with heauie or complete armour,The arming of those of grauis armatura. had first a Cellat or Bur|gonet, which couered their head, and reached ouer their shoulders: then for their bodie a Cuyrasse, whose flappes or tasses couered their thighes, euen down to the knees; their legges and armes were armed with Greaues and Vambraces: and for their defence they carried a shield of foure foote long, and two foot and a halfe broad, bound about with a band of yron; and for weapon they had a sword, not ouer long, girt vnto their left side,  a short dagger vpon their right; and in their hand a Iauelin or Dart, which they called Pilum, the which at the beginning of their fight they did lance or dart at the enemie: vnto these may we compare our Corslets and Pykes, whereof we frame our battels or battaillions: and our armed halbards, partizans, and other short weapon. Commonly a Romane army con|sisted of two Romane Legions,A Romane armie. which was a Consuls armie, and of two Auxiliarie legions, which were of their friends or confederates.
Their Legion consisted at the first, but of three thousand footmen, and three hundred horse;Romane legion Cohot, Centurie, Maniple. but afterwards encreased vnto 5.6 or 8000. foote. Their legion they deuided into Cohortes, Maniples, and Centuries. Euery legion of 6000. foote, was deuided into ten Cohorts, at 600. to euery Cohort, and euery Cohort into sixe Centuries, after 100. men to euery Centurie: and euery Centurie into foure Maniples, after 25. souldiers vnto euery Maniple, or into fiue Maniples, at 20. souldiers to euery Maniple.A legion distin|guished into 3. Hastati, Princi|pes, Triarij. Their order of placing. Moreouer, euery legion was deuided into 3. partes, or orders of battels, into Hastati, Principes, and Triarij. The Hastati were set in the front of their armie, in order of Squadrons thicke and sure; behinde them were placed the Principes, but with the order of their Squadrons more rare and thinner. After these againe were ranged the Triarij, but with the order of their Squadrons, much more thinner then the Principes.
Now their slingers, darters, archers, or crosse-bowes, and such light armed, were placed without these Battels,Velitat, their places to fight. or Squadrons on the flanks and front, between the horsemen and their armed battell: as we do, or ought to do (in mine opinion)

our shot, some filers of Pykes, Halberds, and such other short weapon.


Gent.
What sort of men thinke you fittest to be chosen for souldiers, and to be trayned; and what order in their trayning?


Capt.
I suppose,Whom fittest to be chosen for souldiers. Signes by the phisiognomie. men of the better sort, from the age of eighteene yeares vn|to thirtie yeares, are fittest to be chosen. Now the signes whereby to coniecture the persons most apt for warres, by the Phisiognomie, and proportion of bodie, are these: The eyes quicke, liuely  piercing; the head and countenance vpright; the breast broad and strong; the shoulders large; the armes long; the fingers strong and synowie; the belly thinne; the ribbes large; the thigh bigge; the legge full, and the foote leane and drie: for whosoeuer is of this disposition, and with these conditions, cannot chuse but be nimble and strong, which are two quali|ties, chiefly to be required in a souldier.
I could wish that those Bandes which are appointed to be trayned (for of the Officers I haue spoken before) should be by their Captaine,New souldiers to be often trai|ned. Muster-maister, and other Officers, trayned at the least once euery moneth, or oftener, as the wea|ther and season will permit: and euery Caporall, with his Cabos de Camera, to traine and instruct their Esquadra, especially of shot, once euery weeke, or once euery fortnight at the least: ensigning them the vse of their weapon, and order of sleight skirmish:Practise bree|deth readinesse. For often practise maketh men readie, especially and shot, the which without readinesse and skill is a weapon of litle aduantage; and in the hands of perfect souldiers, is a weapon of great aduantage, and of wonderfull execution.
Now the seuerall companies, hauing bene well applyed and taught for a time by their Captaine and other officers,Sundry compa|nies to ioyne to|gether. I would wish, should once euery three monethes, meete and ioine some foure or fiue companies together, in some con|uenient place, then and there to bring them into such formes as should be need|full for so many companies. And once a yeare at the least, all the companies of the whole shire to meete in some most conuenient place together, then and there to be instructed in the orders how to march,
1. To march
2. To encampe.
3. To fight.
 how to encampe, and how to fight: deuiding them into so many parts or battaillions, as vnto their chiefe Officer shall seeme good.


Gent.
What course would you wish the Captaine of a single companie to ob|serue in the trayning of his souldiers?


Capt.
First hauing his companie leauied and chosen of the better sort of peo|ple, as is said,Rules to be obser|ued by a carefull Captaine. let your rawe Captaine, (for so I terme those which neuer were in action) prouide himselfe, if possible he may, of a good Lieutenant, and a suffici|ent Sergeant, and a skilfull Drummer. Then let his people be suted with such sort of weapon as is appointed. The which I would wish to be (as I haue said before) to euery hundred of men, 25. muskets, 25. Calliuers, and 40. or more of pikes and corslets, and the rest, short weapon; as halberds, swordes and targets, and such like.
Now hauing suted euery man with a conuenient weapon, I would wish your Muster-maister, if your Captaine haue not the skil (for your Muster-master ought to be a man of experience) first to declare vnto them the partes that ought to be in a souldier in generall,Militarie points to be ensigned new souldiers. as before is declared; then to ensigne them the right carriage of their armes and weapon: then to knowe the seuerall soundes of the

Drumme: next to learne to keepe his ranke and file orderly; and so to march ey|ther swift or slowe, step by step with the sound of the Drumme; then how to keep their array, being cast into a ring, or any other forme; with the comming out a|gaine, and returning into a counter-ring; and out of the same into a march, and counter-march: then how to make their Alto or stand, and how to double their rankes, vntill they bring themselues into a iust square of men, if their numbers will permit it; and how to double their les, eyther vpon the left or right hand, and so to fall off againe, both from file and ranke: and being in squadron, how to turne their faces on either, or any part, making front on any flank or traine, as oc|casion shall be offered. Then the perfect vse and managing of euerie weapon in his due nature and kind:A good Captaine will soone make ready souldiers. and so by a continuall vse they may (by good instru|cters) become soone to be ready souldiers.


Gent.
Here be manie good parts vnder a few words; but they are too briefe for me to vnderstand: wherefore I pray dilate more at large thereof: and first, what meane you by the cariage of his weapon?


Cap.
The art of warre better deliuered by act the~ words.To discourse vpo~ al these points particularly, it wold be ouer long:  might better be shewed in act the~ in words: yet to satisfie you somewhat herein, I will speak of the particulars here  there, as I shal be occasioned,  shal cal the~ to me|mory. First therfore,The Harquebu|zier his armings and weapons. the soldier that is appointed to cary a calliuer, is first to be en|signed how to cary his peece vpon his left shoulder, with his flaske at his girdle, or ha~ging by at Port-flask, or Flask-leather vpo~ the right thigh,  vpo~ the left side of his girdle, to haue his touchboxe fastened by the string, hanging downe somwhat long by the strings, sufficient to be taken, and to prime his peece with touch-pow|der: and on his right side a Bullet bagge or purse of canuas, or leather for bullets. Also some three or foure yards of match, in seuerall peeces hanging at his girdle, with one peece of match of a yard long in his left hand, holden fast by the third finger of the same hand, hauing the one or both the endes of the same, lighted, or fired.To charge. Also to be prouided of a priming iron or wyer, of a steele and flint stone, to strike fire vpon any suddaine occasion, either to spare the burning of match, or to fire their matches if the same do chance to go out. Then how to charge his peece, either with his flask or bandelier,  the~ to let slip the bullet down into the barrell after the powder, and to ramme the same with paper, tow or such like, thrusting the same downe with the scouring stick, if time will permit: or else (a more readier way) thus; After that the bullet is slipped downe vnto the powder, to put after the same some two or three cornes of powder, which will wedge fast the bullet. This being done,To cocke the match. let him hold his Calliuer with his left hand, (as in his charging hee ought to do the like) griping the same by the stocke, somewhat neare vnder the cock, betwixt his thombe and foure fingers; then, holding the nose of his peece somwhat vpward (for not to enda~ger his fellows) to take the one end of his lighted match, with his forefinger, midle finger,  tho~be of his right ha~d,  so to cock the same, hauing a regard that it may fall due within the pan: finally if it be a crooked stock peece, to set the same vnto the left side of his breast, retiring his right foot some halfe step behind the left, or aduancing the left foot some halfe pace before the right,To leuell. and so to take his due leuel:  holding the hindermost part of the stocke betwixt the thombe and fore-finger of his right hand,  with the other three fin|gers to draw to the serre,To discharge.  so to discharge his peece with agility hauing done the

which,To retire. To recharge. to retire souldier-like, and charge againe, giuing place to his next fellow, or seconder. But being a straight stocked peece (the which I hold for the better) he is to place the same vpon the right side of his breast, fast against his shoulder, leuelling and discharging, as aforesaid. And for other armes he is to be fitted with a short sword, and meane dagger, and a Spanish morion. Now the musketier is to cary his musket vpon his left or right shoulder;The musketier his arming and his forke weapon. for it importeth not much on whether, so they obserue the order of the first rancke, with his Forke or rest in his left hand, fastned about his hand wrest or little finger by a string, hauing his flask and touchbox fitted as before is sayd, or hauing a bandalier, the same to be ouer the left shoulder,To charge. and vnder the right arme. Now to charge the same, he must hold his musket with his left hand, hauing his rest trayling by the string, and put the but end of the stocke vpon the ground, then with his flaske or ban|dalier to charge his peece with powder, slipping downe the bullet into the barrell after the same, and to fasten it with two or three cornes of powder, as is aforesayd; then to clappe the musket into his forke, planting the lower end or pike of the rest into the ground neare vnto his left foote, and resting the but ende of the stocke vpon his left thigh,To cocke his match. then to prime his pan with touch powder. And ha|uing his match ready, as before is sayd, to take the peece of match that hangeth by the midle or third finger of his left hand, betwixt the thombe and fore finger of his right hand, and with his middle finger to measure at what length to cocke the same,To leuell. to fall with a proportioned length into the pan. The which being done, let him retire his right foote somwhat backe, and stand firme vpon the same: and holding fast both the musket and rest with his left hand, to raise the but end of his musket from his thigh vnto his breast, and to fasten the same firme and close vnto his right shoulder and brest,To discharge. holding fast the sayd hinder part of the stocke betwixt his right thombe and fore finger, drawing downe the serre with the other three fingers, and so taking due leuell to discharge. Hauing perfor|med the which, let him vncocke his match, clap his musket vpon his shoulder with a halfe turne, and so retire, trailing his rest or forke by the stringe, and giuing place to others,To retire. To recharge. go charge again: finally for other armes, a reasonable short sword, a meane dagger; with no morion, but a faire hat and feather.


Gent.
Thus I perceiue your fiery shot haue many busie skils, without know|ledge of all the which it is hard to become a perfect shot.


Capt.
True;Aduise. and therefore often to be practised: But here let the muster-maister and trayning Captaine be well aduised not to suffer their shot to cary any bullet about them, in time of their trainings, and fained skirmishes, for feare of danger, that might thereby ensue among themselues. But now and then after their training,How to bring the bisognios fir s to the bullet. to take euery shot single, and to see him charge his peece orderly with pouder and bullet as aforesaid; and hauing a great but erected to that pur|pose (the which ought to be in euery hundred or Baily-wicke) to cause them to leuell, and discharge at the blancke thereof, orderly one after another: encoura|ging those which do make the fairest shot.
Now for the Pike,The piker his ar|mings and wea|pon which the Spaniards do tearme Sen~ora y Reyna de las armas, the Queene and mistresse of weapons. The souldier which carieth the same, is to bee well armed with a good corslet, furnished with his gorget, Morion, tasses, pouldrons, vambraces, and gauntlets also; to be armed as he ought to be; whatso|euer

opinion other men may hold to the contrary, supposing a bare payre of Cuy|rasses onely sufficient: but I am of opinion, that the armed Picquier ought to bee armed in all points (as I haue said) for defence: and then to offend, to be weapo|ned with a good Pike of ground Ashe,The pike of 17. or 18. foote. of seuenteen or eighteen foote long at the least, well and strongly headed, with the cheekes three foote long, or there a|bout: and for other weapon,The dagger. to weare a good short sword and dagger: for the dagger is a weapon of great aduantage in Pell mell.
Obiection.And if it be replied, that the souldier so heauie armed, is not for any great march,Answer. or speedy execution; I say, that among well ordered Regiments, there are also yet some vnarmed pikes, that is without any corslet, or, at the most, the bare cuyrats onely and morion, the which the Italians do call Picche secche. Now these are reserued  imployed in such peeces of light seruice.Picha secha. And the Picquier, either armed or vnarmed is to be shewed and taught the carriage and vse of his pike;The carrying and handling of the pike. as first to tertiar or carry the same orderly vpon his shoulder, holding the same with his foure fingers vpon the vpper part of the staffe,  his thombe vnder the staffe, neare vnto his shoulder, basing downe the blunt end thereof, to aduaunce the point, and poizing the pike with an equall poize vpon his thombe and shoulder, alwayes in march keeping the lower end of his pike on the one side of his fore|mans legge still aduertising that in march the pike is to be carried vpon the right shoulder, of euery souldier throughout euery file, sauing the vtmost file on the left side of the arrayes or ordinances, which are to carry their pikes vpon their left shoulders onely, alwayes regarding how those of the foremost rankes doe carry their weapon, the rest to do the same throughout euery ranke and file following: for order and forme do require the same.To make Alto, to arbolare, or ad|uaunce.
To reare. Next hee is to be taught how to plant his pike on the ground, at any stand or Alto: then how to arbolare or aduaunce his pike, that is; to reare his pike vpright against his right shoulder and with his right hand stretched downe vnto his thigh, to hold the same neare vnto the but-end be|twixt his foure fingers and his thombe, stretching his forefinger downeward vn|to the but-end of his pike, and so aduaunce the same vpright  high against his right shoulder, resting and staying the same with his right hand against his right thigh and knee,When to ad|uaunce. as before is sayd. Now this is to be done at such times, as being brought into a Ring, and serreyng close shoulder to shoulder, then to aduaunce their piks in this sort at the enclosing thereof,  so to continue vntill they fall out of the ring againe into a larger march. Also the same is vsed by some, at their arri|uing vnto the corps de guard, at the setting of the watch before their chief Com|mander or officer; euen as the first ranke shall arriue into the corps de guard, some ten or twelue pases from the place of their stand; to arbolare their pikes; and so rancke after ranck, carrying them in the same order vntill they come vnto their place of station, there to make Alto, and to plant their pikes vpon the ground, as the squadron is formed.To present, To charge. But principally, the souldiers marching in squadron, and vpon point to come to the push of the pike with their foote enemy, then are they first to aduaunce their pikes, as is said, bearing the same orderly with the right hand against the right thigh, and the left hand aboue neare about the shoul|der, and so to charge vpon the left hand and push,To push. standing firme and sure vpon the left foote. But if the squadron be charged with any troupes of the enemies horse,To cowch. then must the Picquiers cowch their pikes fast vnder the right foote, hol|ding

the same  the left hand, and bow downe the point thereof against the breast of the hore,To Couch. hauing his right hand ready to draw his sword, if occasion shall be offered.
Now how necessary and auayleable this continuall vse and practise is, may easi|ly be gathered from the sundry victories of the auncient Romanes. Who both in their Campes and Garrisons had their Tesserarios (which were as our Sergeant Maiors) to ensigne and teach their people of warre the vse and managing of their armes,The Romains Tesserarios their training. at all idle and vacant times. The old souldier, sometimes once in a day, and the Tirones, which we terme Bisognios, or new souldiers, twise in the day, or as occasion serued: so were their people alwayes ready and perfect. And againe they did not onely practise them in the knowledge of their weapons, but many times also did conduct their Companies for their recreation into the field, there causing them to run,Vertuous exercis to leape, to iumpe, to wrastle, to throw the sledge, to pitch the barre, and such like exercises; and sometimes also to learne to swim, as a qua|litie very befitting a souldier. Moreouer, they did many times cause their souldi|ers, as well foote as horse,To march out fai|ned skirmish. to march armed at all points, euen as it were to serue a|gainst their enemie, once or twise in a moneth, euery man carrying his owne pro|uision and victuals, and giuing and receiuing the charge, euen as in hostile fight: and this did they for the space of ten miles, fiue out, and fiue home. Thus with these exercises they brought their people to be able, quicke, and ready to serue v|pon all occasions, and did more good seruice with twentie thousand of such so trained and practised,Ready men, ad|uantagious. then with thirtie or fortie thousand of raw and vntrained men: But to haue a souldier to be very perfect, and a good executioner indeede, it is needfull to haue bin in some good peeces of seruice,  to haue seene men to fall on both sides,To be a good exe|cutioner must haue seene seruice.
To tosse the pike. which doth flesh  harden a souldier very much. Finally the good Picquier ought to learne to tosse his pike well, with the due handling of the same, and to be skilfull therein; sith it is the weapon he professeth: for 100 of ready pikemen, are better then 200 that know not the vse of the weapon. Now the halbarders ought to be fully armed with a corslet as is the Picquier; but in mar|ching he is alwayes to beare the same on the right shoulder,The halberd. holding the lower end thereof, with his right hand almost close to his right thigh and knee.


Gent.
You haue well discoursed touching the caryage and handling of the calliuer, musket, pike, and halbard. But now, I pray what meane you by doubling your ranke and file?


Capt.
By ranke I meane euery row, or order of men, standing shoulder by shoulder,Ranke what it is. File what it is. either in march or squadron, reaching a long from the one side of the squadron vnto the other. And by file, I vnderstand all the line, order, or row of all the souldiers standing consequently one after another, from front to the traine, either in march or squadron. Now, the doubling of ranke or file is thus. First suppose your company to be of 100 pikes (as for the shot we will speake of here|after) and you would bring them into a iust square of men:The doubling of ranke and file. first search out the Cubike roote of your number, and it is 10; then (after the first order) you shall cause them by the sound of the drum,By single file. to embattell, to march vp in single files, at 10 men in euery file,  the head man of euery 10 to be a Caporal or Cabo de Ca|mera; and as the first 10 is come vp vnto the place where you meane to frame your squadro~, cause them to make Alto; then cal vp the second file, at 10 per file, causing

them to march vp close pouldron to pouldron of the first te~, and there to firme  stand: then the third file, then the fourth and so consequently the rest, vntill your squadron be formed: your ensigne marching vp in the middle file, as in this fi|gure may appeare.

Here you see them drawne vp in single files, at 10 men in euery file: and so your squadron is framed, 10 files, and 10 rankes or 10 in flanke, and 10 in front.

An other order is thus: you may march them vp in 2, 3, 4, or 5, files at once, and 10 rankes (for the number euen or od importeth nothing) if at 2 files at once,By maniple or many files. then are they marched vp and framed at fiue commings vp: if at 3 files at once, then at three marchings vp at 3 files per Maniple, which make 9 files, and 1 single file, at 10 men per file: which maketh your iust square of men. Now if you will march them vp, by 4 files at once, they are 2 marchings or Maniples, at 4 files, 10 rankes, and one Maniple, at 2 files per Maniple, and so againe is your squadron for|med. And againe if you would march them vp by 5 files at once, and 10 rankes, they come vp in 2 Maniples, and so is your squadron iustly framed.
How to double the rank.Your squadron being thus framed  set, at 10 rankes,  10 files, the~ to double the rankes, you shall cause vpon an other sound of the drum, those of the second ranke, to step in betwixt them of the first ranke, beginning either vpon the left or right hand first, as you will: and the 4 ranke to double the 3, and againe the 6 ranke to double the 5, and the 8 ranke to double the 7, and finally the 10 to double the 9, so shall your battell or squadron come to be 20 in breadth, and 5 in length or depth; or 20 files and 5 rankes, which is in forme of a battell of double front as by these figures appeareth.


Here you see the rankes doubled into 20 files and 5 rankes. Then cause them vpon another sound of the drumme,To fall off. to fall of, or backe againe into their former places: and so to double againe vpon the other hand, and fall off againe. Now, to double the file;To double the file. cause the second file to double the first either vpon the left or right hand, as it shall please you to begin, and the fourth file to double the third, and the sixt the fift, and the eight the seuenth, and the tenth file to double the ninth, as in these figures following may appeare.


And here you may see the file doubled, reduced into fiue files, at 20 men per file, vpon the right hand: the like you shal cause them to do vpon the left hand: ha|uing first caused them to fall off from their file, bringing them into their former square againe.
Then shall you go vnto the traine of your battell or squadron, and vpon ano|ther sound of the drumme,To turne their faces and make front of any part you shall command all your souldiers to turne their faces vpon a sudden towards you: then causing them to double both ranke  file that way, as you did the other way before: thus with a litle paines taking and pra|ctise, you shall soone bring your souldiers to be ready and skilfull in these altera|tions of formes, and many more. The like may be done with any other greater numbers, either in battels or battallion, or by making the front of any flanke.


Gent.
But to what end serueth all this?


Capt.
Marie, to many good purposes: For the first order of doubling the ranks (besides the readinesse it breedeth in the souldiers) doth serue to alter vpon a sud|den your grand square of men,Doubling of ranks and files serueth to sundry purposes. into a square of ground, or into a battell of dou|ble front, and to many other purposes, in framing of many small battallions one grand square. And againe, the second order in doubling of the files, doth serue to many such other purposes: as if vpon a sudden your foot enemy shall come to charge you vpon the flanke, then by doubling their files, and suddenly turning their faces vpon the enemie, they shall make of flanke the front, and so bee ready with double hands, either to receiue or giue the charge. For those battels of square of ground, or battels of double fronts, do bring many hands to fight at once: being verie aduantagious for footmen against footmen, as reason and ex|perience proueth and sheweth.
And againe, if you draw or diuide your battell or battallions into maniples, to march through straights or narrow passages,To passe straights this order of doubling the files is verie ready and auaileable, as thus. If your battel or squadron be of 5184 pikes, whose square roote is 72: now your passage will permit but 8 men to march in front; then must you diuide your square root 72 by 8, so commeth it to be 9 ma|niples of 8 men in rank or breadth. And say yet againe, that the straight or passage doth fall yet more narrow, or straighten lesse, then to containe 8 men in front, the~ cause euery maniple, at the verie entring of the straight, to double their files, and so of 8 you shall make 4 files per maniple: the which being shouldred vp close to|gether, will containe no more roome in breadth then the 8 did before. And ha|uing passed the straight, cause them to fall into their former proportion, and so maniple after maniple in passing the straight.


Gen.
But if the squadron or maniple were of od nu~bers, it wold not so fal out.


Capt.
Od files or ranks.That importeth not: for the od file or rank which resteth vndoubled, may in passing of the straight, close vp shoulder to shoulder vnto the rest, obseruing their proper stations in files; and if the passage will not permit that, then to fall backe after the traine of their maniple,  hauing passed the straight, to sleeue vp in file, pouldron to pouldron of their fellowes, and so to fall into their former pro|portion. The like of any other od numbers may be done with very great facility.
Now, for as much as I entend to frame both figures and tables of sundry sorts of battels and battallions, in our discourse following I will at this instant bee the more briefe; supposing this, at this present to suffice. For he which conceiueth and

vnderstandeth this well, may do the like with any other numbers great or small.


Gent.
And what course do you appoint the shot belonging to those numbers of pikes, to obserue in these alterations of proportion?


Capt.
The shot appertaining vnto euerie such number,Shot, how to be practised. may be practised in the like or semblable sort, either alone by themselues, or placed in two grand sleeues along by the flanks of their squadron or battallions.Example. As for example: If vnto the former number of 100 pikes, there were proportioned  suted 100 shot, calliuer and musket, these would I draw out into 5 per rank, which would make 20 ranks. Those 20 ranks would I cut off or deuide in the middest, so should I haue 10 ranks for to sleeue the one flanke of the battallion, and 10 ranks for the other flanke, at 5 men per ranke, or 5 files in euery ranke, which is all one. These 2 sleeues being placed, may be doubled with the pikes by ranke or file, for practise sake only. But if you were engaged to fight with the enemie, I would wish all great sleeues of shot to be deuided into many small troupes, the one still to second another: as hereaf|ter shall be declared  shewed. And lo here another order: the 2 grand sleeues be|ing al musketiers, as the battell or battallio~ doth aduance  march on toward the enemy,Musketiers, how to discharge vpon a march.  comming once within reach of the musket, then the first ranks of these sleeues of muskets many discharge in marching in this sort. The first ranks step|ping some two or three paces forward,  there those of the right sleeue to step one halfe pace toward the right ha~d,  those of the left sleeue, one half pase toward the left hand, hauing in the meane space made themselues ready, and cocked their matches, then with readinesse  expedition all those of the~ first ranks, their mus|kets being vpon their rests or forks, to discharge at once, and keep their station,  charge againe, permitting other rankes to proceed before them. Then presently those of the second ranke to step vp iust before the first rank, as the battell or bat|tallion marcheth, and so to discharge as their former fellowes had done before:  then the 3. rank before the 2.  the 4. before the 3. and so all the other ranks con|sequently with this kind of double march: and at the traine of the last rank, those of the first to follow vp againe:How to discharge vpon a counter|march. and so consequently the rest. But if it chance their squadron of pikes to be distressed,  forced to retire, they are to discharge at the e|nemy, retiring backe, vpon a countermarch, as these figures following shal plain|lie denote vnto you the maner and order.

The First Figure.



The second Figure with the Muskets discharging in marchings.


The third Figure vpon the retrait, the shot discharging vpon a Counter-march.

Musketiers wheeled into a halfe moone to discharge in vollie.There is yet another order of discharging of troupes of Muskets in vollie, the which I haue seene vsed by the Italian and Spaniard, thus. Your Musketiers be|ing deuided into sundrie troupes, of 30, 40 or 50 in a troupe, the one to se|cond the other: then the two first troupes standing vpon the two angles of your squadron or battell, may bee drawne vp by two officers, by three, foure or fiue at the most in a ranke: and the said officers being at a sufficient di|stance to discharge, shall cause the Musketiers to close somewhat neere, shoulder to shoulder, and so wheeling them about in figure of a halfe Moone, shall at their due semi-circle, or halfe compasse, cause the Mus|ketiers

to make Alto; and clapping their muskets on their rests, close one by an others shoulder, and each one hauing a care to his forefellowes, they shall at one instant, discharge altogether at one vollie vpon the enemy, and so retire, giuing place to other troupes: the maner and forme whereof shall by these figures fol|lowing appeare.

Troupes or squadras of muskets at 50. per troupe 5. in ranke.



Gent.
Your calliuers or small shot, would you haue them to discharge in these maners and orders before spoken of and figured?


Capt.
No;Calliuers deuided into small troupes to discharge by file. but I would with the calliuers or small shot to be deuided into sun|dry small troupes, of 20, 30, 40 or 50 in a troupe; and by their seuerall officers to be led vp, and to skirmish in single file, discharging readily one after another in file, and so wheeling about vpon the left hand, to retire, giuing place vnto o|thers to second them, and to fall into their forme of troupe againe; and then re|charging aduisedly to be ready to come vp to second others, as their turne com|meth; of which maner of small troupes, shall often in our discourses following, be denoted and shewed. Now to conclude these orders of training, I will set downe one point more to be obserued by one single company, or two, or three companies ioyntly comming into the Corps de gard to their watch, reseruing many other particular matters vntil I come to treat of the office of the Sergeant Maior, where many Militarie points shall be at large discoursed. You must note that euery single company marching  training alone,The arraunging of a small compa|ny to march. their pikes are first ranked by 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 or more in a rancke, according to their number (the number of euen or od, in ranke importeth nothing, as I sayd before) hauing their ensigne, and halbards contained within the center or middle ranke of their pikes. Then the shot is to be ranked altogether with the like number of men in a ranke, and

then to cut them off, or deuide them at the middle ranke; leading the one halfe of them vnto the forefront of the pikes,Order to be ob|serued entring in|to the Corps de gard. and there to place them in euen files with the pikes, and the other halfe is to be brought vnto the traine of the pikes, and there filed in like maner, alwayes regarding to place the muskets of the first halfe of your shot, in the formost rankes, and those of the other halfe, in the hindermost ranke. Now thus marching on, and comming to the place of Corps de gard, the shot of the vantgard are to make Alto, or stand, then the pikes to march vp by, them; and the first ranke of pikes comming vnto the formost ranke of the shot, to make Alto also, and then the pikes to double their rankes, as before is declared, to bring themselues into squadron, euen ranke for ranke with the shot. This being done, then the other shot of the rereward is to march vp vpo~ the other hand of the pikes, ranke for ranke with the said square of pikes: and so is your squadron or battallion formed as by these figures following may appeare; where I suppose one or two companies together in march,The march. containing in all 100 pikes, and halberds,  100 shot, they march on 5 per ranke; the shot of the vantgard makes their stand, then do the pikes march vp by them,  comming vnto their formost ranke of the shot do stand also; and there double their rankes, so are they 10 rankes, and ten files: lastly commeth vp the shot of the arereward  garnisheth the other flanke, euen ranke with ranke, and so is the squadron framed and garnished with shot.


Thus me thinks that I haue sufficiently intreated of this order of training, as for other sortes of imbattailing we will hereafter speake of, as occasion shall be offered.



THE SECOND DIALOGVE.

VVherein is declared of quadrat battels, both of men and ground: opinions tocuhing the mingling of short weapons with the pikes, and lyning of battells with the same confuted: the framing of battels of pikes in three sorts: the placing of shot about the batell, with the places of the horse and artillery.


Gentleman.
_TThen I pray passe to your other officers of warre.


Capt.
There be many petie officers vsed amongst vs, as Clarke of the band, Drummer, Forrage maister, Scout maister, Trench ma|ister, Quarter maister, Caporals of the field,  such like, of whom I will speake particularly nothing; but including them vnder the charge of other superior officers: of the which I will begin with the duty of a Sergeant Maior, whose office is of such importance, care, industry and skill, espe|cially in day of battell, that I must be constrained before I enter into the parts of his office, to describe the orders of fights and battels most vsed in these our mo|derne wars, as a thing most pertinent vnto the aforesaid officer, touching the sun|dry formes of battels vsed by antiquity; wherein (in mine opinion) the Romaines did most excell: I will speake, at this instant, litle more then what is sayd be|fore, considering that ages, times, occurrents, inuentions and customes haue altred, and dayly doth, what antiquity thought best and best assured.
The formes of battels in our time are not many, yet euery man almost hath a seuerall opinion thereof; but common reason and experience hath made most men confesse and agree, that of all formes the square battell, be it either of square of men, or square of ground, is the most assured, most strong, and most apt to bee reduced into any other forme.


Gent.
What meane you by this word Battell?


Cap.
By the word Battell, I vnderstand in this place a whole vnited body of souldiers well disciplined, all armed with pikes, to fight in day of battell, an act of armes, with good hope of victory, the which for more security hath the front, the traine, and the two flankes of complet corslets, to the end that being assayled or charged, they may make the face or front of any or euery side or part; and vali|antly receiue the charge, and may also charge and breake the enemy, and at|taine the victory.The caallery  shot, not contai|ned within the body of the bat|tell. Now in this body I vnderstand neither the shot, nor cauallery, the which are to haue an other order to another end.


Gent.
Are these battels framed in one sort onely, or in more, or in many, or in how many; or what maner I pray are they made?


Capt
Your curious demand deserueth answer, I tolde you before that many sorts of battels haue beene framed by valiant and expert Captaines: but the best approued, and most vsed now, is the square battell, be it either of men or ground.



Gent.
I would gladly know the reason why they make their battels square; and what is meant by square of men and square of ground.


Capt.
The reason why battells are fra|med in quadrat proportion.Battels are made square,  so vsed, for that they are apt to frame the Front of euery side or part, which could not be if they were Triangles, or of any other forme vsed by antiquitie. And it doth much import that the Front be gaillard and strong: for the front once broken, the battell stands in hazard. And againe, to ser|rie or close Pouldron to Pouldron the square forme is best: for that they close e|quallie together,  strengthen the front to the victorie. And this shall suffice tou|ching the Quadrat.Square of men,  square of ground, what it is. Now, concerning the difference of square of men, and square of ground, I say: that the square of men is, when there be so many men in front as in flanke, or so many in length as in breadth; and this sort of battell com|meth to bee in ground two times, and one third more long then broade, and a Quadrat of ground will bee of men two times and one third more broade then long.


Gent.
In how many maners may these square battels be made?


Capt.
Were the Companies all of pikes, with corslets complet and not mixt with bare pikes, (which is not lightly to bee found) the framing of any of these sorts of battels would be very ready and easie, and might be soone brought into any proportion without confusion: the which being of pikes armed and vnar|med, will require more care,Battells consisting of armed and vn|armed pikes, fra|med in three ma|ner of wayes. labour, and paines, to the framing thereof. Now therefore I say, in three sorts or maners, most auaileable and most commo|diously are battels framed in these dayes, consisting of armed and vnar|med pikes.
1 The first manner is when an army doth march with the one halfe of the armed pikes in the foreward, and the other halfe in the reareward of the vn|armed pikes. Now in the body of this battell I vnderstand no short weapon, (but reserue them to another place and vnto another purpose, as before I haue sayd, and will heareafter speake more thereof) but all pikes, for the battell thereby wold be more readily framed, more brauer in sight, and more stronger to fight, in mine opinion.
2 The second fashion is, when the army marcheth company by company, with their armed pikes in the foreward and reareward of euerie particular com|panie.
3 The third order is, when an armie marcheth Maniple by Maniple, with the armed pikes in the Front and traine of euery particular Maniple. And besides this, when the armed pikes which do serue to arme the two flankes, do march the one part before,  the other part behind, and these also are called Maniples: for a Maniple is here called so many rankes throughout the battell, as the battell is in length,Maniple, what it is. at so many per ranke as they march in ordinance or array. And although the armed pikes which doe march at the head or taile of the arrayes of Maniples to arme the two sides, if it happen at any time that they march not to the full length of the battell, yet neuerthelesse when they be put vnto their office to arme the two sides, although they be not in length to the length of the battell, at so many in rank as is appointed to arme the two flankes, yet are they called Ma|niples also. And againe, any part of shot or pikes, that be drawne a part, to be set to defend any straight, or to scarmush, may also bee called a Maniple: but

being shot,Shot in troupe. are fitter called troupes, after the french word.
Now of these sundry sorts of imbattailling of men, as well of proportions of e|quality as of inequality, and of battallions of the same nature, as well euen as odde battallions, seruing to the framing of crosse battels with such other like, I will frame certaine calculations or tables, the which shall serue to sundry numbers of men  orders, according to the iudgement of the skilfull souldier, which shall be in the last booke of these discourses.


Gent.
But me thinkes you are not much affected to haue any halberdes or billes in your battell, which is contrary to our opinion and custome: for we call them the gard of the ensignes, and slaughter of the field.


Capt.
Truly,Halberds and short weapon no liked of in the bo|dy of the battell. The reasons why. I would not wish any such weapon in the body of a standing battell, if we might be prouided otherwise of pikes: my reasons are these. For the pikes being Terciard or charged ouer hand to encounter a battell of foot|men, or couched vnder the foote to receiue any troupes of horse, do one of them fall so proportionally within or after another; euen as their rankes of men are di|stant in their seuerall stations, the second following the first, the third the second, and the fourth following the third, and so consequently euery ranke se|conding one another, that it seemeth it were as good for a man to come vpon a brasen wall (if they stand resolute) as vpon such a battell of pikes, except they should be marched or encountred with the like weapons and proportions. Now if this be the best course to receiue or charge footmen, then no doubt (not be|ing thus mingled with short weapons) it must needes be the best battell to re|ceiue a charge of horse.


Gent.
Although you disalow and disproue to haue your battell of pikes mingled with short weapon; yet would you not alow them about the ensignes in the center of the battell?


Capt
For what purpose in the center of the battell?


Gent.
To defend the ensignes with hand blowes.


Cap.
I suppose it an error.Halberds not liked of about the co|lours.
The reasons why. For who doth not know that if the enemy be like to be victor, the armed pikes will yeeld backward as they feele themselues distressed, so as when the pikes are in such maner crashed and clustred together, that they can no longer charge and push with their pikes, then will the throng or presse in the center be so great, that the halberds and bils shall haue little roome to strike; nay short swords will hardly haue rome at that instant either to thrust or to strike. I would thinke daggers would do more execution at that time, and in that presse vntill one side fall to flight:Daggers auail|able in pell mell. Short weapon in a stand of pikes vn|seemeli. so I see no reason at all for halberds or bills to haue place in a battell or stand of pikes: Besides the vnseemely shew they make either by themselues in the center, or mingled among pikes.


Gent.
So I perceiue you would quight exclude all halberds and bils out of your battell, and so not at all to be vsed.


Capt.
Conclude not so short vpon me, because I giue them no place within the body of the battell. For if you remember, in our former discourses, at the e|quall sortment of weapons, I allowed to euery hundred of men 8 or 10 halberds. The which bils and halberds with other short weapons as swords and targets,Short weapon their places of best seruice. and long swords, and such like, shall serue as in a place of best seruice for them, to mingle with your naked troupes of shot, and also (placed with some pikes) for

the gard of the cariage and munition and ordinance, or for execution if the ene|my begin to breake and slye, with sundry such seruices not contained in the bo|dy of the battell.


Gent.
Well, you haue satisfied vs herein; but what thinke you of sundry other opinions touching the lining of battels with shot or bowes?


Capt.
Lyning of battels with shot or bowes disliked.
Lyning of shot in single ranke.Touching such lining I will shew you mine opinion against them. Now first for that kind of lining which is vsed in placing a pike and a shot, I am sure that the shot cannot be so hurtfull to the enemy, as they will weaken the battell: my reason is this. No army, I am certaine, shall be so ordered, that the battell shall be left bare without his troupes of shot before, to keepe the enemy doing in skir|mish, vntill the battels be ready to ioyne, and charge or couch their pikes: at that instant haue the shot, that line the battell, their time to serue, euen as the pikes are couched,The reasons. and not before. Now let men of consideration and experience iudge, whether it be possible for them to discharge aboue one shot a peece, and that not aboue three rankes of them; and thereupon, whether those shot can at that time of seruice be such a strength to the battel, as if an armed pike were in the roome. I do suppose the battell would be much stronger, if the shot were rid from thence, and pikes in their places. Then it falleth out, that this kind of lining is not good.Lyning with shot in another sort more tollerable. Now, touching another kind of lining with shot, which is 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7, rankes of pikes; and then 3, 4, or 5 rankes of shot, and then pikes, and then shot a|gaine. In deede this kind of lining is the most tollerable, and yet not without his discommodities: for if such a battell ioyne with a battell of foote, the shot cannot play vntill the rankes of pikes before them are broken; which cannot be, but that their owne men and their enemy shall be mingled pell mell one among ano|ther. Then tell me by reason, how those shot can serue that are the lining, but they must needes kill as well their owne men, as their enemy, being thus min|gled at all aduentures. And if this be the end of their seruice (as indeede it is) by a forced necessity to kill without choise, then must it needes follow, that they are rather hurtfull then seruiceable in that place: farre better therefore pikes in their romes.
Lyning with bowes, a comber|some tying wea|pon.And now for your lining with bowes, a combersome tying weapon in a throng of men; it must needes bee concluded by reason, that where calliuers, which are no tying weapons, are yet vnprofitable, in that place how can bowes, to which it requireth such elbow rome, and are so troublesome, be any wayes in that sort commodious or to be allowed?


Gen.
Your reasons and conclusions haue wonderfull well liked vs; wherefore now I pray returne againe to your framing of battels of pikes only, without short weapons.


Capt.
I told you before, that battels are made most auaileably, and most commodiously, in three maner of wayes: shewing you euery seuerall order, and that when time shoulde permit, I would frame tables for the easie ordering of each.


Gent.
But shall your tables serue for the framing of one whole bodie of a bat|tell, or for more?


Capt.
Tables to be fra|med, and to what end.These tables shall serue to make either one, two, or three battels of an army, or so many as shall be requisite and needefull, either to offend the enemy

or to defend; and also according to the situation of the ground, and shall serue on|ly to haue in a readinesse and memory, all that which a battell well ordered would require, according to the ground where it shall be; so that there shall neede no more but to commaund the men to be marshalled into the order that shall bee appointed to the framing of the battell, according to the situation of the ground. But first I will set you downe orderly a table of proportionall numbers, in such proportion as one would make the breadth of the battell to haue vnto the length, and so many will set downe of proportionall numbers, as shall suffice to make euery sort of battell,Proportinall numbers euin to the setting of battels.
Proportions of e|quality. that may be more large then long, or equall; as hereafter shall appeare. And now of proportionall numbers, I will begin to speake of those which be in proportion of equality: as 1 to 1, 2 to 2, 3 to 3, 4 to 4, and 5 to 5, and 6 to 6, and so of more; prouided they bee of equall comparison the one to the other. But yet to frame a battell, those shall be taken which be in least propor|tion, as 1 to 1, and those numbers which are of equall comparison, as 1 to 1, doe serue onely to make the battell quadrat of number of men: that is, so many men in breadth as in depth of the battell. But when you will make a battell that may be of more men in breadth then in depth, then shall you take the numbers which be in proportion of inequality, so much as you wold haue the battell to be of more men in breadth then in depth;Proportions of in|equality. as 3 to 2, or 5 to 3, or 7 to 4, and such like, as shall be found in these tables following of numbers compared the one to the other in inequality: beginning with those of the least proportion.



A table of proportions, of so much as you would haue the battell to containe in breadth of number of men vnto the length.

Proportion of Equalitie.
As 1 to 1, that is, the battell to containe so many men in breadth as in length.


Proportions of Inequalitie.
That is, the battell to be more broade then long, or more in front then in flanke.
As 2 to 1, that is, the battell twice so broade as long.
3 to 1, that is, three times so broade as long.
4 to 1, that is, foure times so broade as long.
5 to 1, that is, fiue times so broade as long,
6 to 1, that is, sixe times so broade as long.









To bring these fractions into whole numbers of proportion, you must worke thus: Multiply the whole number by the denominator of the fraction, and adding thereunto the numerator of the said fraction, the proportio~ is found: as for exam|ple, to haue the battell to containe two times, and a third more broade then long I seeke in the table 2  whereof the whole number is 2, and the fraction is . Now multiply the whole number 2, by the fractions denominator 3, and it maketh 6, whereunto ad the fractions numerator, which is 1, and it amounteth 7, so is 2  in proportion as 7 is to 3, and so must you worke any the like numbers.
In all these aforesayd proportions, to make the battels of proportion of equali|ty, that is as broade as it is deepe, or of inequality, which is more in breadth then in depth, both these wayes is to bee vnderstood of men, and not of ground; for of the proportions of ground I will speake hereafter.These proportions of men and not of ground.


Gent.
Me thinks I vnderstand touching the proportions of equality, and ine|quality,  that is so broade as deepe, or more in breadth then in depth, vnderstan|ding of men, both of the one manner, and the other; but I would gladly (Cap|taine) that you would shew it vs by example, for so we shall the better conceiue of the matter.


Capt.
I will most willingly: Therefore to begin, I will set downe to make a square battell of number of men, that is, so many men in front as in flanke: And let our whole number be 5000 men, of armed pikes, and single pikes one with ano|ther. Now to frame this quadrat battell, you shall take in the aforesaid tables, the numbers of proportions of equality, which are as 1 to 1. Then must you set downe your rule in this sort:The rule to frame a square battell of men. Setting downe first the proportion of equality for the first and second number, and the number of men for the third number, thus 1 prime, 1 second, 5000 third. This being done, multiplie the 3 number which is 5000, the number of men by 1, the second number, and it maketh still 5000, (for 1 doth neither multiplie nor deuide) then deuide the said first multiplied number 5000 by 1 the first number, and it maketh yet 5000. Now out of that 5000, you shall take the quadrat roote, which is 70. So 70 rankes of men shall your battell containe, both in breadth and length; and there will remaine 100 men. For 70 multiplied into itselfe resulteth 4900, the which deducted out of 5000, there resteth 100 men, the which 100 men deuide by 70, so will there arise one more ranke of men, and yet will there remaine 30 men ouer, the which one ranke shall be ioyned vnto the 70 rankes aforesayd, so are they 71 in breadth and 70 in length: but to the end you may better vnderstand me, I will go shewing the same by figures, whereof this shall be the first.


And the 30 men which do remaine out of the body of the battell, they shall be reserued for other purposes.
And this square battell of number of men may be done in a more shorter and readier way,A more exquisit way to frame any square battell of men.  thus. Take the quadrat roote of 5000 simply, which is 70, and with this 70 deuide the 5000 men, so will there come 71 for the breadth of the bat|tel, and there will remaine 30 men. And thus your battell will containe 70 rankes in length, and 71 men per ranke in breadth, with 30 men remayning as afore|sayd. Now although the battell be more broade then long, or more men in front then in flanke by one ranke, yet is it neuerthelesse, after the order of warre, called a square battell of men.
The table drawne aforesayd for the proportion of equality, that is, that the battell do containe so many men in breadth as in length, shall serue also to shew the order which is to bee obserued in the battels that are to be be made of more men in front then in flanke, that is, in proportion of inequality, as hereafter I will shew you, giuing you to vnderstand that all the figures shall haue their scala de|uided into pases,Geometricall scale. foote. and euery geometricall pase into 5 foote, of the which measure of feete I haue here vnder set downe the fourth part, which is three inches, for that

euery foote is deuided into 12 inches, to the end you may conceiue what quantity of ground euery battell of pikes would require, allowing for euery mans station set in aray to fight, 3 foote in front, that is, from pouldron to pouldron, and 7 foote in flanke, that is 3 foote before, and 3 foote behind, for the vse of his weapon, and one foote for his owne station.




Gent
By this your example you haue satisfied me wonderous well, in giuing me to vnderstand how to set a battell quadrat of any number of men, which is so many men in front as in flanke: yet would I desire to know how to arme or impale this battell with armed pikes, both front, tayle, and the two flankes, considering that few armies haue all their pikemen furnished with corslets complete.


Capt.
True, there are few armies that haue scarse the one halfe of their pikemen armed with corslets, which is a great part of the strength and beauty of the battell, therefore we must seeke a course how to impale any battell with such armed pikes as they haue:To empale the battell with your armed pikes the rule. to do the which these rules following shall serue to impale any bat|tell, as well of proportion of inequality, as of equality, the foreward, the reareward, and the two flankes, with pikes and armed corslets. Now I suppose the whole num|ber of pikes to be 5000, as well armed as vnarmed, whereof there be 2000 armed pikes with corslets; the sayd 2000 I will repart into two equall parts, by 2, or taking the  of 2000, which is 1000: and with this 1000, will I impale the two flankes, and with the other 1000 will I arme the front and traine of the battell. Now first to arme the two flankes of the battell with 1000 armed pikes, I will deuide 1000 by 70, which is the depth or flanke of the battell, and the product will be 14 rankes of pikes to arme the flankes of the battell, with 20 pikes of surplussage: the 14 rankes shalbe halfed, or deuided into halues, which is 7 rankes; with the which 7 rankes I will arme the one side, and with the other 7 rankes the other side of the battell, or more or lesse vnto any side, as occasion or neede shall require: as in this figure following shall appeare.


And the 20 armed pikes which before remained,The Romaines.  shall be added vnto the other 1000 which are to arme the front and rearegard of the battell, so they are 1020 pikes armed: with these 1020 armed pikes, shall the front and rereward be armed thus; first deduct the 14 rankes, which went to arme the two flankes of 70 men in length, out of 71, which is the breadth of the battell, so resteth 57 rankes for the breadth: with this 57 deuide the 1020 armed pikes, and there will come foorth 17 rankes of armed pikes, to arme the head and tayle of the battell: and of these 17 rankes you shall set 9 rankes in the front, and 8 rankes in the reareward; with more or lesse on either, as neede and cause shall require: as by this 3 figure following shall appeare.


Thus this square battell of men commeth to be in length 70 rankes, at 71 men per ranke in front with 9 rankes of armed pikes in the vaward, and 8 rankes in the reareward: and with 7 ranks of armed pikes at each side in length, as you see. And remaining 51 armed pikes out of the impalement, the which you may place at the angles or corners of the vnarmed pikes, as ye see in the 4 figure, or where you shall thinke fittest for the defence and strength of the battell; and not to leaue them out, (for being part of the square) as you did the 30 pikes which before re|mained

at the enlarging of so many men in ranke in the first figure. The which 51 armed pikes are now placed in the angles of the battell, as in the 4 figure before may appeare: that is, with 7 rankes at 2 men per ranke in the fore angles, and 6. rankes at 2 men per ranke in the reareward angles.


Gent.
O how it delighteth me to haue learned of you, how to arme or impale a battell. But now would I faine know if there be this number of men in the bat|tell by you supposed, with the 30 at first remaining.


Capt.
To know if there be in this battell the number of 5000 men, with the 30 which aduaunced at the first framing of the battell,The proofe.  do thus: multiplie the length by the breadth, that is 70 by 71 men,  it amounteth 4970 men; vnto the which adioyne the 30 which remained, so will they amount vnto 5000 pikemen, armed and vnarmed, as before was set downe, to set the said battell, in the first figure, which is your demaund.


Gent.
This is verie easie; but now would I faine know, if they haue the propor|tion of equalitie.


Capt.
That you shall know thus: deuide the breadth by the length, as to repart 71 by 70, the product is 1. And although that 1 do remaine of the breadth, yet it is called a square battell neuerthelesse.


Gent.
Captaine, I am well satisfied in vnderstanding the proportion that a battell hath in breadth to the length: but now would I gladly know how long and large is this square battell of men, I meane how much ground it will occupie?


Capt.
First you must vnderstand (as I told you before) that euery man martial|led in battell array to fight,A rule to know what qua~titie of ground any bat|tell will require, each armed mans station 3 foote in breadth 7 foote for length.  will require in his station, 3 foot of ground in breadth, that is from shoulder to shoulder, and 7 foote of ground for length, that is 3 foot for before him, 3 foote for behind him, and 1. foote of ground for his own station. This being noted: then must you multiplie the 71 rankes of men in front by 3 foote, and they will amount vnto 213 foote, and the 213 foote shall be deuided by 5 foote, accounting 5 foote to a pase, and the geometricall pase to conteine 2 or|dinary going steps or pases of a man: so will there come forth 42 pases and 3 foot. By this reckening will the battell conteine 42 pases and 3 foote.
And now to know the length thereof in ground, you shall multiplie the 70. rankes of length of the battell, by 7 foote, so will there come 490 foote, the which 490 foote you must deuide by 5 foote (which is a pase)  there ariseth 98 pases;  so doth the battell conteine in length 98 pases of ground. Thus the square battell of number of men commeth to conteine more ground in length then in breadth about 2 twise  third, as you haue seene in the 3 and 4 figures of the square bat|tell of men. Thus you haue vnderstood of a battell, square of number of men, with their armed pikes in front, in traine, and the two flankes: which is in such order as the said battell should be framed vpon the point to fight.


Gent.
I haue very well vnderstood the order that should be kept, to know how broad and long is the battell of ground: but I beseech you to shew me now, the order to be obserued in the framing of the said battels, so that there should neede no more but the Sergeant Maior, to appoint the souldiers the order they should keepe, for to frame and order the said battell with speede and in readinesse.


Capt.
A rule to frame these battels with speed.Truly, your demaund is good, sith that speedinesse is the proper and pe|culiar part of the arming of these battels. To do the which you shall worke thus: The armed pikes which are in the 2 flankes shall be accommodated and placed in

the front and in traine of the battell, as in the calculation of the 3 and 4 figure, whereas there be 70. rankes, at 14 men per ranke, that is 7 men in ranke for the ar|ming of euery flanke, then multiplying 70 by 14, do amount 980 armed men; and 980. armed men you shall deuide by 57. which is the rest of the breadth of the battell, (being of vnarmed pikes)  there resulteth 17 rankes, at 57 armed men per ranke. Of the which 17 rankes, at 57 men by ranke, there shall be adioyned 9 rankes vnto the front, and 8 rankes vnto the traine of the battell, with the other 9 and 8 ranks, which were before of armed pikes at the front and traine: So the bat|tell shall be in length or by flancke 87 rankes, at 57 men per ranke in front, with 18 rankes of armed pikes at the foreward, and 16 rankes of armed pikes in the reareward, as in this figure following shall appeare.


What to do with the remaines.And the 11 armed Pikes which remained at the last deuision, when it shalbe time to arme the two flankes of the battell with speed, then vnto one of the two flanks shall they be added, which is vnto that flanke where the same shall bee found wanting.


Gent.
Me thinks that I vnderstand sufficiently, how to arme and set a battell with celeritie and speed at euerie occasion as shall be offered, and also the order to be obserued in setting a battell of equalitie, which is as manie men in breadth as in length: but now I would gladly learne how to frame a battell of inequality, which is of more men in breadth then in length?


Capt.
Rules to frame all battels in pro|portion of ine|quality, or two fold battels.Sir, knowing how to frame the calculation of the proportion of equali|tie, that is, as many men in breadth as in length of a battell, it shall be verie easie for you to do that of inequalitie; which is a battell more broade then long: yet ne|uerthelesse will I giue you the instruction of the proportion of inequalitie. Now put the case, that you will frame a battell of proportion of inequalitie, which is of more men in breadth then in length, and that your number be 5000 men, of ar|med and vnarmed Pikes, as afore is sayd of the Square battell of men. And put the case that you will frame this battell  times more in breadth then in length (for this proportion is more vsed then any other in warres) for that this is the pro|portion which commeth to make a battell quadrat of ground, wherein most men are brought at once to fight in front. And to make this battell you shall take in the table 2 and  which is in proportion as 7 to 3: and these two numbers are to be set downe for the first, and second thing. Now to haue the length of the battel, the second number is set downe for the second thing, and the number of men which you wil haue to be embattailed for the third as hereunder appeareth. Then proceed as is done in framing the Square battell of men.The Rule.  . Then multiply and deuide as before is said. The same order is to be obserued in euery other proportion of battels, which you would make of more men in breadth then in length, tearmed by some Englishmen, Bastard square, Brode square, and Base square, or by some others, Twise fold Battels. To worke the which, now multiply 5000 the third, by 3 the second, and they make 15000: and this 15000 shall be deuided by 7 the first, whereof the product is 2142, and 6 men remaining, of which 6 make no accompt. Now of 2142 extract the quadrat roote, which is 46 and 26 yet remaining, of which 26 make no reckening also, as before is said: and, this 46 (the roote of 2142) is the length of the battell. Now, the breadth or front thereof shall be found by deuiding the 5000 men by 46 the length of the battell, and there will come 108 men in ranke for breadth of the battell, and 32 men re|maining, the which 32 men shall stand out of the battell, as before is said in the Square battell of men. Thus shall this battell containe in flanke 46 rankes, and in front 108 men per ranke, as in this sixt figure will appeare. And there will re|maine 32 men, which are not contained within the bodie of the battell.

The sixt figure. Bode 108 men in ranke.



Gent.
Now hauing vnderstood how to frame this battaile of proportion of in|equalitie, which is of more men in breadth then in length, in euerie proportion with facilitie, shew me how to arme the same with armed pikes.


Capt.
To arme this battell of inequalitie, that is, more men in front then in flanke, I wil shew you verie easily. Let vs suppose to arme this battel round about, the front,The order how to empale with ar|med pikes the bat|tels in proportio~s of inequalitie. the traine, and the two sides proportionally, according to the propor|tion that the breadth of the said battell hath vnto the length of the same, which is, as 7 vnto 3. Adde the said 7 vnto 3, and it is 10: so shall it be as 10 to 3. Then see in 5000 men, how many be armed with corslets, and I set that there be 2000, as before is said in arming the Quadrat battell of number of men. Now shall you part these 2000 armed pikes into two proportionall parts, as 10 to 3, the one part to arme the two flanks, the other to arme the vaward and rereward of the battell; then place downe your rule in this sort. If 10 require  what 3/2000. Now multiplie 3 the second with 2000 the third, and it resulteth 6000: and this 6000 deuide by 10 the first, so will there come 600 armed men; and these 600 armed men shal be to arme the two sides: and deducting 600 out of 2000, there resteth 1400 ar|med men, the which are to arme the front and reregard of the battell. Now must these 600 armed men be reparted by the length of the battell, that is, by 46. so will there come 13 in ranke for the length. And of these 13 rankes, you shall place 7 per ranke on the one side,  6 per ranke on the other side of the battel in length, as in the figure on the next page appeareth.
Remaines. And there remaineth 2 ar|med


men, the which shall be ioyned with the 1400 armed men, and it maketh 1402,  with these 1402 shall the vaward and rereward of the battell be armed. Now for to arme this fro~t  traine of the battell, there shall first be de|ducted 13 rankes of armed men of the length, out of 108 ranks, the breadth of the bat|tell, and there will remaine 95, and the 1402 armed men shall be deuided by this 95, and there will come 14 ranks at 95 men per ranke of ar|med men. Now of these 14 rankes there shall be placed 7 rankes at the front, and 7 on the rereward of the battell. So the battell shall containe in length or by flanke 46 rankes at 108 men by ranke in front, with 7 armed men per ranke on the one side, and 6 armed men per ranke on the other side of the battell in flanke, and 72 armed men remaining, the which you shall place where you shall thinke best, as here appeareth in figure.


Now the 72 men remaining, I haue placed in the 4 angles, as in this 8 figure aboue appeareth:


Gen.
I perceiue how to arme a battell of proportio~ of inequalitie, the vaward, the reareward,  the two sides: But (I pray) tell me, the battell being thus framed, how I may know whether this battell hath this proportion of his breadth to his length, that is 2 times and  more broade then long or as 7 to 3.


Capt.
To know if the length to the breadth of the battell hath his proportion,The proofes. as 7 to 3, you shall deuide 108 the breadth, by 46 the length, the product wil be 2, and 16 remaining, which is about  of 46 a litle more.


Gent.
But how shall I proue, that in this battell of inequalitie there be the 5000 men conteined?


Capt.
Thus: multiplie the breadth of the battell 108, by 46 the length, and they will amount 4968, vnto the which adde the 32 men which remained, and the summe is 5000.


Gent.
Now I beseech you to declare vnto me the length  breadth of ground, that the battell of inequalitie doth occupie.


Capt.
Marrie,The rule to know the quantitie of ground this bat|tell conteineth. thus: It shall be supposed to allow 3 foote in breadth, and 7 foote in length for euery souldier, or litle more or lesse, as shall be thought good: Now multiplying 3 foote with 108 men, the breadth of the battell, it will amount 324 foote, and 324 foote shall be deuided by 5 (accounting 5 foote to a pase) thereof will come 64 pases and , which is 4 foote, and that is the breadth of the battell.
And to know the length of the battell, multiplie 46 rankes of length by 7 foote, there will come 322 foote: and deuide the sayd 322 by 5, there will come 64 pases and , which is 2 foote, for the length of the battell: which will bee neare about the length of proportion: and this is the perfect battell of ground.


Gent.
I pray, let me aske you, In what manner might I accommodate the cal|culation of the battell, to the end that it might be done with dispatch and rea|dinesse, as you haue shewed me before in the Quadrate battell of number of men?


Capt.
To doe this:The rule to ac|commodate this calculation with speed.  Where to place the remaines. deduct 13 rankes of armed men which are in the two flankes in length, out of 108 men in breadth, there will rest 95 per ranke in breadth of the battell. Then shall be sought in 13 men by ranke in length, how many armed men by multiplying 46 of length, by 13 rankes, will amount 598, and 598 shall be deuided by 95 the product will be 6 rankes of men, at 95 per ranke of armed men, and 28 armed men remaining: And of these 6 rankes of armed men, there shall be put 3 at the head, and 3 at the taile of the battell, with the other 7 rankes which were there before: And so the battell shall con|teine in length 52 rankes, at 95 men per ranke in breadth, with 10 rankes at the head, and 10 rankes at the taile of armed men, as I will shew you in this 9 fi|gure following: and there remaines 28 armed men, the which at the time that this battell is made, shalbe placed in one of the flankes, for there they want, as be|fore is said in the account of the 5 figure of the Square battell of men.



Gent.
I rest so well satisfied with


your good discourses and de|monstrations, that I finde my selfe more and more desirous to demaund of you other particu|larities: wherefore I pray you to shewe mee the manner to march, and set a battell with speed, occasio~ offering to fight.


Capt.
Willingly, as farre as my small skill wil extend. Ther|fore touching the order of mar|ching, and out of the order of the said marching, to set a bat|tell with speed; I say that there are three manners obserued in the making therof: of the which before that I declare their or|ders one by one, I will with bre|uitie repeate all that which be|fore I shewed you.
Repetitions of the former.I haue told you before, how to make the Calculation of battels, as well of the squares of men, as of Proportio~s of inequalitie, containing more men in breadth then length (termed by vs En|glishmen Bastard squares, Broade squares, and Base squares.) And I haue told you of the proportion of the breadth vnto the length: and moreouer, how brode and long will the said battels containe in ground: the which instructions will serue to frame any other battell, that may be more brode then long in any other propor|tion, with the helpe of the Tables which before I haue shewed you: for in the same may be found euerie proportion that shall be needfull, to frame any battell which may be more brode then long in number of men, or equall.
Now wil I shew you the maner how to frame a battell with speed; and this shal be by the instructions of the tables before giuen.Out of 3 maner of marchings to frame a battell with speed. The first maner. And this battell shal be speedily set after the order of the three maners of marching, as at the beginning I told you. The first maner is, when the companies do march with one part of the armed Pikes at the foreward, and an other part at the rereward of the vnarmed Pikes, as I will shew you in the tenth figure.
In this case, hauing the Table in memorie, onely there resteth to commit vnto two expert officers (as Caporals of the field, or such like) at the time of setting the battell, that the one go vnto the head and the other vnto the traine of the Orde|nances or Arrayes: and let him that stands at the head, cause or commaund to turne or wheele either from the right hand, or from the left (as shal be most con|uenient) 95 rankes, at 10 armed men per ranke, and hauing finished, to set the 95 rankes at 10 armed men per ranke, he shall cause them to turne their fa|ces from that part whither the Ordinances or Arrayes do looke, as you shal see designed in the eleuenth figure on the page next following.


Then besides this, let him place 32 rankes of the arraies of the vnarmed pikes at the backes of the armed pikes, so many as they be rankes in length in the battell of the vnarmed pikes, as in the 8 table before figured appeareth; afterward let him go from hand to hand, drawing out of the arraies 32 rankes of vnarmed pikes, and set them one by another shoulder to shoulder, as I haue demonstrated in the 12 figure, and as I will shew you in this 13 figure.


And as the Arraies of the vn|armed


Pikes shall be placed shoulder to shoulder one of another, at the backes of the first 10 rankes of the armed Pikes; then the Officer which sta~deth with the armed pikes for the traine, shall drawe forth 95 rankes, at 10 men per ranke of armed pikes, and place them with their shoul|ders to the backes of the vn|armed pikes, as in this 14 figure shall appeare.
This being done, let the


Officer of the Vanguarde draw out three rankes of the armed pikes, and arme the one flanke at 7 men in ranke; and he that is at the Reregard, let him take 3 ranke of his armed pikes,  arme the other flanke, at 6 men in ranke, as in this fif|teenth figure appeareth.
And there remaines 72 ar|med


men: the which shall be placed in the angles of the Battell, in such order as I shewed you in the decla|ration of the fourth figure; and as here againe in this sixteenth figure shall ap|peare.
Or otherwise acco~modate


those 72 armed men afore|said (being of the number contained within the bodie of the battel) thus: let there of them be made 2 rankes, to set vnto the one or vnto the other flanke of the bat|tel, where you shal see most need  occasion, for the de|fence and strength thereof. But now they shalbe placed one ranke vppon the one flanke, and another vppon the other flanke of the bat|tell; as here in this seuen|teenth figure shall plainly appeare.
And there will yet remaine 8 armed men, to place where you shall thinke good. Aduertising you, that if you should haue set the 72 armed men which be|fore remained, at the head or tayle of the battell, it would not haue reached vnto one whole or full ranke vnto the breadth of the battell: for an intire ranke of the

inner part of the battell in breadth is 95 men, that is, so many as the breadth of the vnarmed pikes do containe. Thus the battell declared by the aforesayd 17 figure will be in length 46 rankes, at 108 men per ranke in breadth, with the 7 rankes of armed pikes in the front, and 7 rankes in the reareward, and with 8 men per ranke of armed pikes on the one flanke, and 7 men by ranke of armed pikes on the o|ther flanke, as in the aforesayd 17 figure appeareth, with the 8 men which remai|ned, placed in the body of the battell.


Gent.
Assuredly (Captaine) this order seemeth wonderfull good. But now vnto the other two orders which you spake of.


Cap.
Touching the second maner of framing of battels. First the calculation or table of the battell must be had in memory (as before is sayd) in what proportion the said battell would be framed, and the army marching company by company, as I will shew you in the 18 figure: euery captaine shall be commanded by the Ser|geant maior, to make so many rankes of their pikes as the length of the battell shall containe, as in the 18 and 19 figures shall appeare. Now let vs suppose the sayd battell to containe in length 52 rankes, with 10 rankes of armed pikes at the head, and as many at the trayne, as is shewed in the declaration of the ninth and 14 figures, and that euery Captaine doe make 52 rankes, with 10 armed pikes before, and 10 behind, as in the 18 figure is shewed. And if a|ny Captaine be found which hath not to accomplish that number, let him ioyne with another Captaine, and betwixt them both let them make vp that number of 52 rankes. This being done, Captaine by Captaine shall set their rankes shoul|der to shoulder the one of the other, and shall so frame the battell 52 rankes in length, with 10 armed pikes by ranke before, and 10 behind. After that shall bee framed the battell, as I will shew you in this 20 figure following. This being done, one of the 4 Caporals of the field, shall go vnto the head, and another vnto the reareward: then he which is at the head, shall take away from the front of the battell 3 rankes of armed pikes, and arme therewith one of the flankes at 7 men per ranke in length, adioyning vnto them the 28 armed pikes, which he lacketh to furnish out the length of 46 rankes at 7 men per ranke, as is said in the declara|tion of the 9 figure.
And the other Caporall or officer, which is at the traine of the battell. He also shall take away or draw foorth from the traine 3 rankes of armed pikes, and arme with them the other side or flanke, at 6 men per ranke, in length of 46 rankes. So shall the battell bee formed 46 rankes long, at 108 men per ranke in front or breadth, with 7 ranks of armed pikes in fro~t,  as many in traine,  with 7 armed men per ranke on the one flanke,  with 6 men by ranke, on the other flanke armed pikes: as I shewed in the 8 figure of the table and also in the 21 figure following.
And there will remaine out of the body of the battell 32 men, and they shall bee placed as I sayd in the last of the third order, at the beginning: moreouer there remaines 72 armed men.
You must note and conceiue, that in the 18 figure, where the companies do march one after another by fiue in a ranke, and in the 19 figure, where they do come vp shoulder to shoulder to the framing of the battell, as may appeare, although the full number of companies do not there appeare, as is requisit: yet it is to be conceiued that they do consequently one follow another, but want of rome in paper cutteth them off.


And the 72 armed pikes remaining, which are of the number contained with|in the body of the battell, shall be placed either in the foure corners of the vnar|med pikes, as in the 16 figure may be seene; or else in each of the two sides or flankes, as in the 17 figure appeareth, where there is one ranke adioyned vnto the one flanke, and another vnto the other flanke; or else you may arme and strength with the same 72 armed pikes, any one of the flankes, as neede or occasion shall require.


Gent.
You haue described the first and second order of imbattailing excellent well, in mine opinion, therefore (I pray) proceede to the third.


Capt.
The maner of the third order is thus,The third order by marching ma|niple by maniple. When the armie is caused to march Maniple by Maniple, with their armed pikes in vantgard and rearegard of euery particular Maniples; and with one Maniple all of armed pikes, which mar|cheth in the vantgard of the Maniples which haue their vnarmed pikes in their middle or center: the which Maniples of all armed pikes, is that which serueth to arme the one flanke of the battell. Besides this, there marcheth another Maniple of all armed pikes, after all the Maniples; and this Maniple serueth to arme the o|ther flanke of the battell. And the Maniples must march the one after the other, as in the figure appeareth.
Now, there resteth how to bring those into Maniples of this last order, which do march in the full length of the battell, with their armed pikes in front and traine; the which shalbe done in this sort. Let it be supposed (as the 17 figure of the second order doth shew) that there shall be drawne foorth 15 men in ranke of armed pikes in length of the battel, which serue to arme the two flanks, out of 108 men per ranke, the breadth of the battell, there resteth 93 men per ranke for breadth or front. And these 93 must be diuided into so manie parts, as one would that the Maniples should march in ordinance or arraies, the one after another, as the way will permit.
Now say that I will haue the Maniples to march by 5 in a ranke, then must I deuide the 93 (the breadth of the battell) by 5, whereof commeth Maniples 18, which shall containe in length rankes 46 at 5 men in a ranke; and one Maniple remaining at 3 men per ranke; the which Maniple is also 46 rankes in length, at 3 men in rankes. Notwithstanding it shall march (in marching) at 5 men in ranke after all the Maniples aforesayd. And the 18 Maniples doe march with 7 rankes of armed pikes before, and 7 rankes after: and the Maniple of 3 per ranke, shall, at the time of setting the battell, distend to the shoulders of the o|ther Maniples at 3 per ranke, with 7 rankes, armed pikes in front, and 7 rankes ar|med pikes in trayne. And the other two Maniples of armed pikes, which serue to arme the two flankes, the one marcheth in the vantgard, and the other in the reare|ward of the Maniples which haue their vnarmed pikes in the middle (yet at 5 in ranke) as appeareth in the 22 figure, and at the instant that the battell is to be set, the Sergeant Maior shall accommodate and fasten the Maniples of all armed pikes, that marcheth in the foreward of all the Maniples, into 46 rankes, at 8 men armed per ranke, and the other Maniples shall follow from hand to hand, poul|dron to pouldron, the one to the other, as the 23 figure and 24 declareth, begin|ning with the armed Maniple, which armeth the flanke at 8 men in ranke by length. These Maniples thus brought shoulder to shoulder, one to the other, then




shall follow that Maniple of and per ranke (the which yet marcheth at 5 per ranke in array) and shall distend vnto the shoulders of the other Maniple, at 3 per ranke, with 7 armed pikes in front, and 7 in traine. After all this shall follow the other Maniple of all armed pikes, and shall stretch foorth vnto 7 in a ranke vnto the shoulder of the other Maniples, to arme the other flanke of the battell. And thus is the battel framed 46 rankes in length, at 108 men by ranke in breadth, with 7 rankes of armed pikes in front, and 7 in traine, and with 8 armed pikes in ranke, on the one flanke, and 7 in a ranke on the other flanke, of armed pikes, as in the 24 and 25 figures: and there remaines 32 armed pikes, the which shall be pla|ced as I said before, in the last maner of the third order.
Aduertising you,Aduertisement. that although I haue giuen order and examples to arme the front, traine, and both flankes of the battell, in forme and manner as I haue set downe in the 24 and 25 figures, with placing the armed pikes which remained out of them which armed the front, traine, and both the flankes of the battell, in the angles  flankes of the sayd battell, as by their seuerall figures may be seene; yet, notwithstanding the aforesayd examples, they may be placed where most neede and occasion shall serue to strengthen the battell, either in front, in traine, or in any flanke. So may you also, as occasion shall require, set more armed pikes vpon any part, for the more strength and securitie of the battell. And this much may suffice,Fierie weapons. touching the body of a formed battell. Next ensueth, the fierie wea|pons, Muskets and Caliuers, how they should be placed.


Gent.
I pray let vs vnderstand the order of them also.


Capt.
As the armed pike is the stre~gth of the battell,The armed pike is the strength of the battell, so is the shot the furie of the field. Shot and pikes of necessitie to be coupled.
The one without the other of no great force. so without question, is the shot the furie of the field: but the one without the other is weakened the better halfe of their strength. Therefore of necessitie (according to the course of warres in these dayes) the one is to be coupled  matched with the other, in such conue|nient proportion, that the aduantage of the one may helpe the disauantage of the other. For a stand of pikes, though neuer so well armed, being charged  assailed with the like, or a lesse number of shot, by euery mans iudgement would haue the worse,  not able to abide the field, vnlesse they had shot, to answer their enemies shot. In like sort, any troupe of shot, though neuer so braue  expert, being in o|pen field, hauing no stand of pikes, or such other weapo~, nor hedge, ditch, trench, or rampier, to relieue and succour them, could not long endure the force of horse, especially Launciers.The sortement of these weapons, offensiue and de|fensiue. Now the due sortement and matching of these weapons to offend, and defend, and to aide one another, as aboue is sayd, of the best experi|mented is accounted thus: Vnto euery 100 men, to haue one third pikes (with some few short weapon) and two thirds Calliuers.
But were the one halfe (or more) of your shot, Muskets, as the Spanyardes most commonly now vse, and so to be wished with vs also, then lesse number of shot would serue and more of pikes,The aduantage of musket. (as I sayd at the beginning of our discourses.) For euery Musket, considering the wonderfull execution of that weapon, may be va|lued for two Caliuers. Touching the placing of these fierie weapons about the body of the battell, there hath bene, and yet is, sundry opinions. Of some of them I haue already spoken in these discourses, namely, of lyning of battels with shot, or short weapon, by me disliked; hauing there declared my reasons for the same.
But before I come to the placing and ordering of shot (for being a weapon not skilfully and warily vsed, is of more daunger to our selues then to the enemy

sometimes) I will put you in minde of one notable ouersight in our shot (espe|cially of the crooked stockt Calliuer;notable ouer|sight of our shot in charging and discharging their peeces.) For many souldiers ouer-curiously carrying and conueying their peece with the nose downeward, and striuing to be seene nymble and quicke in discharging, (not considering that one shot well bestowed, auayleth many vnaduisedly spent,) haue let slipt the bullet out of their peeces bar|rell vpon the ground, before the discharging thereof. Whereby it commeth to passe many times, that an hundred shot, hauing in skirmish discharged their peece three or foure times a peece, against two hundred of the enemies, and scarce slaine two of them. A great indiscretion,  to be better regarded and amended; the which may easily be done thus,A redresse and easie way, how to fasten the bullet. either after hauing charged and slipt the bul|let out of his mouth into the barrell of the peece, by mounting the nose thereof somewhat vpward, holding his peece firmely with his left hand, or else by stop|ping after the bullet, which is easily done, onely by putting two or three cornes of powder into the peece after the bullet.
How some do vse to place their shot about the battell of pikes.In placing the shot about the battell, some do vse to flanke the two sides of the battell with sleeues of shot, by 11, 13, 15, or 17 in a ranke, or more or lesse, as they shall thinke good; and place the sayd sleeues of shot, 10 or 12 foote distant from the armed pikes; and the rest of their shot in 4 great troupes at the angles of the battell, without the sayd sleeues, seruing for hornes or wings vnto the battell, and the horsemen to be placed without them againe, as in these figures follow|ing appeareth.


A better order to diuide your shot into troupes.But (in mine opinion) this order is not so good, as if the shot were deuided in|to sundry small troupes, trouping round about the battell the one to second the other: placed in forme as hereafter shall follow thus. First, your graund square (or more battailions if you will) being set,To girdle the sta~d of pikes with shot. then impale or girdle the same round about with shot, by 3, 5, or 7, or more, in a rank (according to the proportio~ of the battell, neare adioyning vnto the armed pikes, to be by them guarded from the

horse,The shot in small troupes, one to se|cond an other. if neede were; The rest of the shot deuide into many small troupes by 30 40, or 50 in a troupe, to troupe round about the battell, with some reasonable di|stance from the same, to maintaine skirmish or fight which way soeuer the ene|mie approch: Prouided that the same troupes be still maintained, one to second another, that the battell may be by them shadowed, to the end that the skirmishes or troupes of the enemies may not haue that aduantage, to play with their shot vpon your battell: for hee is but a foolish shot, that shooteth at, or among light skirmishers, where he may discharge vpon the body of his enemies battell, which standes thick together,The armed pikes once ouerthrowen the battell stands in hazard. and is a fayre marke to shoot at; for the armed pikes once ouerthrowen, which is the strength of the field, the victorie by all likelyhood is like to ensue.
The empalement, especially in the front, I would wish to be Muskets, some 3 or 5 in a ranke, according to the greatnesse of the battell; and those not to dis|charge,The girdling shot to discharge at 20 pasesff, and not farther. vntill the battels approch within 20 pases distant, and then throughly to discharge in vollie vpon the face of the enemy: the which cannot chuse, but must slay many, and wound a number in the enemies front; the effect whereof shall breede great encouragement vnto you, and disencouragement, and weakening to the enemy. You may also (if you please) place at euery corner of your battel a squa|dron of Muskets, neare vnto the girdling shot, at 50 Muskets in each squadron, or as occasion shall require; who, vpon the enemies battell approching, wheeling a litle about, in forme of a halfe Moone, shall discharge their volly all at once, vpon the body of the enemies battell. What execution the Musket performeth, such as haue bene in good actions doe know very well; and scarcely to be beleeued of those which neuer saw any seruice. The figure of this battell, empaled with shot, cornered with Muskets, and trouped round about with the rest of their shot, win|ged with horse, as men at armes (if they haue any) and Launciers, and light horse, with the place of the field ordinance, and forlorne skirmishers, shall hereafter ensue, on the other side of the leafe.

The imbattailing of 5200 pikes, armed and vnarmed, short weapon 1300, muskets 3250, calliuers 3250. And of  armes, 400: and Launces 1000, and 600 hargulutiers, with 14 field peeces.

And if you would fight with the same number of men in sundry battallions of the same kind; deuiding them into 3 battallions, distinguished by vangard, battell, and reareward, worke thus: first deuide your grand number of men, which is 4968, by 3 and the product will be 1656 men for euery battallion. Now, to frame their battallions in the same proportion that your grand square was of, which was, as 7 to 3, couch downe your number thus: 731656. Multiply, and deuide, and the product will come foorth 709, of the which extract the cubike roote, which is 26 men for the length or depth of the battallion; by this 26 de|uide the number of men for your battallion being 1656, and the product will bee 63 men, for the breadth or front of each battallion. Now the order to march these battallions vp to fight (wherein must be considered the ground, and diuerse other aduantages) the one to second the other, behold here in figure, where the vangard (being formost) hauing encountred the enemy, and finding themselues weake, re|tireth orderly, and the battell aduanceth, who ioyning with the vangard, do both together giue a second charge,  being yet distressed, the reareward marcheth vp close by the battell,  renew the fight a fresh; of the which order of battell, and bat|tallions, there shall be both figures  tables extant in our last booke. The shot  horse belonging to these numbers, are to be deuided, and placed by the Campe-Maister Generall, and Sergeant Maior Generall, on grounds of most aduantage.


or if it be thought good, the vantgard may be pla|ced in the middle, the battell on the right wing, and the reareward on the left wing; as the ground, occasion, and the commanders opinion shall con|curre, and euery battallion to haue his proporti|onall shot deuided into sundrie troupes, the one to second another, as before appeareth.
A particular de|caration of the former battell in figure.In the before figured battell, I haue placed and set downe the shot, and short weapons, belonging vnto the proportion of the said battell, as here following shall particularly be declared.
First, the battell or bodie of pikes, armed  vnarmed (containing in number 4968,The battell or bo|dy of pikes. as in the figure before appeareth) I haue framed in proportion of inequa|litie, being 2 times more in breadth then in length in number of men (called commonly a broad square) which is in proportion as 7 to 3, which proportion co|uereth the due quadrate of ground,Impaled with armed pikes. as before I haue at large recited, being impa|led round about with 7 rankes of armed pikes, at 108 men per ranke in front, and 46 rankes in flanke. For the furnishing of which battell with shot, and short wea|pon, in due proportion to the same, I haue presupposed this course and order fol|lowing; after the rate to euery 100 men;The sortement of the weapons. 40 pikes, 10, halberds and short wea|pon, 25 Muskets,  25 Calliuers. Which battell conteineth pikes 5200, (where|of is within the body of the battell, 4968 pikes) halberds and short weapon 1300, Muskets 3250, Calliuers, 3250; being in all 13000 men sorted and suted with weapons as appeareth, and seuerally placed to fight (as I suppose) to most aduan|tage, thus.

First the body of the battell containeth pikes 4968 armed and vnarmed; be|ing 108 in front, and 46 rankes in flanke; the which body is inuironed or gird|led with Muskets at 5 in ranke round:
Girdled with muskets.1640
4 Squadro~s of Muskets, at the angles of the battel, at 50 per squadron.
0200
30 Troupes of shot, on the one flanke, at 30 in a troupe, amounteth.
Shot in troupes.0900
30 Troupes of shot on the other flanke, at 30 in a troupe, amounteth
0900
17 Troupes of shot, in the forlorne hope, at 30 in a troupe, amounteth
0510
46 Troupes of shot, in the reareguarde, at 30 in a troupe, amounteth
1380
Summe totall of the shot bestowed about the battell.
5530
More shot is bestowed about the guarde of one part of the artilliarie
0350
More shot placed in guarde of the other part of the artilliarie
0350
Finally there is shot left to guarde the munition, summe
0270
Thus you see the whole number bestowed, amounts
6500


Halbards and short weapon 1300 bestowed as followeth.
06 Troupes short weapo~, mingled with the shot on the one flank at 30.
0180
06 Troupes short weapon, mingled with shot, on the other flanke at 30.
0180
05 Troups short weapo~, mingled the forlorne hope, shot at 30 in tr. 0.
Halbardes and short weapons.0150
08 Troups short weapo~, mingled with the shot in the reareguard. at 30.
0240
More short weapon with the one part of the artillerie to guard
0200
More short weapon with the other part of the artillerie
0200
Finally the rest of halbardes and short weapon, are with the munition
0150
Thus also is bestowed the whole number of short weapon
1300

The remaines of the pikes where placed.Finally, there remained 232 pikes, the which are placed in two squadrons, with the rest of the halbardes and short weapon, containing in each squadron 116 pikes and 200 short weapon as in their seuerall figures may appeare. Aduertising moreouer,To draw some pikes out of the center of the bat|tell. that out of the body of the battell may be drawen some small number of pikes, to be employed with the other pikes and halbardes, at the guarde of the artillerie and munition: which roome shall serue for Drummes, Phiphes, Chirur|gians, and hurt men: where also is the place of the Generall, if he thinke good;

But with this prouiso, that you draw not so many pikes fro~ the heart of your bat|tell, that you leaue the same heartlesse.
To conclude; The said battell is winged with 2 squadrons of men at armes;Men at armes. at 200 in each squadron, with 2 troupes of Launciers,Launciers. at 500 in euery troupe; and with 2 troupes of hargulutiers,Hargulutiers. and other shot on horsebacke, at 300 horse in eue|ry troupe. And before them againe is placed 14 peeces of field ordinaunce,Great ordinance. in two parts, hauing by them their guardes of shot and pikes, as appeareth.
Thus haue you here seene in figure the embattailling, and bestowing of 5200 pikes,The number of each. 6500 shot, and 1300 short weapon: and of 400 men at armes, and 1000 Launciers, and 600 hargoletiers, imbattailled and placed, and ready engaged to fight, as particularly aboue appeareth.


Gent.
Truly, for mine owne part I haue litle skill to iudge, but in mine opinion, this seemeth wonderfull strong for one battell: but me thinkes, you haue framed your battell of more men in breadth then in length.


Capt.
So it is;The broad square battell bring the most hands at once to fight in front. For I haue set 108 men in breadth, and 46 rankes in length: the reasons thereof I shewed you before: for by this meanes there commeth more hands at once to fight in front, and the flankes notwithstanding sufficient strong, especially hauing any aduantage by the seat, which battell commeth to be an e|quall square of ground, and a broad square of men, in proportion of inequalitie, as 7 is to 3,The square of ground. that is two times, and a third of men more broad then long.
But for these formes of battels, as they bring most hands to fight at once; so are they not equally strong on each side, as is the iust square of men: wherefore it behoueth the leaders thereof,A care to be had to the situation of ground. to haue a care to the situation of the ground, and to procure (as neere as they can) that the enemie may charge but in the front, so shall they be wonderfull strong either against horse or foote. And to encounter any foote enemie (for no great force of enemies horse may be brought into one Ile, I suppose) no forme more strong then this, for one onely battell.


Gent.
Why, are there vsed more battels then one in one fight?


Capt.
Yea truly,Venturous to set al our fortune vpo~ the brunt of one sole battell.
So is it dangerous for vnexpert men to fight in sundry battallions.
Men come not often to hand blowes, as in old time, the shot so imployeth the field. and with great reason and aduauntage, were men experte and skilfull. For as it is venturous to set ones fortune vpon the brunt of one sole bat|tell, so is it daungerous to frame many batallions, except men be very skilfull and well practised therein, by reason of the difficultie in seconding one another. And againe it is rarely seene in our dayes, that men come often to hand-blowes, as in old time they did: For now in this age, the shot so employeth and busieth the field (being well backed with a resolute stand of pikes) that the most valiantest and skilfullest therein do commonly import the victorie, or the best, at the least wise, before men come to many hand-blowes.


Gent.
But your battell thus framed, and engaged to fight, what order take you therein then?


Capt.
It is hard for any man to giue any direct course,Hard to ascer|taine any course of fight before the enemies order be knowen  seene. Occurrants of warre be mani|fold and strange. before the enemie bee knowen and seene. For the occurants of warre bee so manifold and strange, that sometimes vpon a moment, the first resolutions and courses taken are to be alte|red: as was well to be seene in our actions with the Spanyardes in anno 1588 at sea. Where our first determinations and appointed orders, were vpon our ioy|ning with the enemie quite altered, and chaunged; and so changing dayly, as oc|casions were offered. And in land seruice more occurrantes do befall hourely,

which hereafter we will speake of.
The shot on horse backe co~monly be|gn the first skir|mishes.
At the field ordi|nance doe com|monly begin the first puzzeling. The forlorne hope to disband, and hauing skir|mished to retire to the flankes. One troupe of shot to second an ether.But now partly to answere your demaund: First the enemie discouered, appro|ching, and engaging vs to fight, happely some skirmishes may be begun by the hargoletiers and light horse; but the battels approching and comming within shot, the field ordinance, on both sides (if there be any) begin to go off, at which artillerie the first puzzelling doth commonly begin, each part attempting to sur|prise the others ordinance: then the loose shot in the forelorne hope on both sides begin to disband and fall to flat skirmish: their office performed, hauing bene well bearded, they retire to the flankes and reareward of the battell, from whence they are supplied and continually seconded with other fresh troupes, so still maintaining fight, till the horse do offer to charge, the which are commonly en|countred with horse againe: if not, then the shot retire behind their stand of pikes, and are then also aided with their halberdes and short weapon, and some halfe pikes mingled among them;The squadrons of muskets when to discharge. The couching of the pikes. vpon whose charging, the Muskets of impaling and the squadrons at the angles doe roundly bestow their vollie in the face of the enemie, then the pikes are couched fast vnder the right foote, guarding the gird|ling shot vnder their succour; the which girdling shot, are to kneele vpon their right knee vnder the couched pikes,  closing close together do sta~d with resolute hart, hand, and body, holding the pike at a reasonable distance, in the left hand,  their swordes ready drawen in their right hand of the first 3, or 4, rankes, being sure to stand firme, and couching their pikes point to the breast of the horse, for that is the place of most aduantage.A square of pikes handled by reso|lute men, not easie to be broken by horse. A squadron of pikes thus couched and hand|led by resolute and honest men, I cannot see how any troupe of horse dare venture vpon them: and if they do, yet not able to breake farre in, if men stand resolute: so of force must they retire with losse and disaduantage. But if they be encountred with equall numbers,Against foote to charge ouer|hand.
Valour and skill is second meanes of victorie, but God the chiefe  first.
The duties of di|ligent officers in time of battell. proportions, and force of pikemen, then (if they will) they aduance their pikes vntill they come to the push, then with charging ouer hand to thrust and push couragious and valiantly; at which time valour and skill is shewed, as second meanes of victorie, but God the first cause and giuer of all.


Gent.
In few wordes you haue finished a battell: But your leaders and Com|manders, how are they this while employed?


Capt.
Euery one according to his office  place, to encourage  animate the souldiers, to redresse with speed any disorders happening in their own troupes, to espie the disorders or negligence of the enemy, taking aduantage vpo~ such occa|sion: with sundry other points, which in their seuerall duties shall be declared.



The second Dialogue, wherein is declared the order of many ancient formes of imbattailing.

Gentleman.
YOu spake of more sortes of battels, I pray therefore declare vnto vs their orders, how many, in what formes, and to what vses.


Capt.
Although I haue before somwhat touched the same, not minding to medle farther then with our fights now most accustomed,The iust square of men best al|lowed, out of the which all other proportions may be reduced. yet neuerthelesse drawen on by your good and curious demaundes, I will, the best I can, particular|ly describe them. Therefore, as I haue before declared of all formes of battels now in our age most in vse, best approued, and best allowed of, is the iust square

of men, as equally strong on euery side, and most fit, and best assured for the open field; and out of which quadrate all other formes may easily be reduced. Next vn|to that,The quadrat of ground. and most aduantagious (indeede) to fight, is the quadrate of ground by good regard had, wherein many hands are brought at one time to fight. Of both the which formes I haue before largely discoursed, as well the manner how to frame them, as their due sortement with weapons, and shot to the same; I will now speake somewhat of the rest, of the which there are many sorts seruing in old time vnto many purposes (but now with vs quite out of vse) as the Diamant battell,Sundry ancient formes of battels now out of vse. the VVedge battell or Triangle, the Sheers battell, the Saw battell, the Moone battell, the S+DG battels and the Crosse battell, with such like, and chiefly the battell compounded of sundrie battallions; the which last recited, of all others, I thinke to be the most strong and aduantagious,The daunger of raw men, were men expert, skilfull, and ready: but raw, as in our dayes they be, very difficult and dangerous to be handled.
The nearest therefore vnto the square of men,The Diamant battell.
The framing thereof out of the graund square. is the Diamant battell; vnto the framing whereof, out of the said square, there needeth no more, but whereas the leader stood before on the square of the battell, let him appoint another to go to the next corner or angle thereof, and willing the pikes to turne their faces vpon him, and they shall straight, out of the square, march into a Diamant proportion: which forme when you are disposed to alter, do no more but appoint the leader to the square, where he first stood, commaunding the pikes to turne their faces v|pon him, and they shall forthwith march into a square battell againe. The facili|tie is great both herein and in all others, and that without any confusion, as by their seuerall figures following shall appeare; the which I haue framed of 25 let|ters, the better to giue you to vnderstand.


And againe out of the Diamant forme may be reduced two triangles, by cut|ting or diuiding the same in the middest at the two flat angles, as in this figure of a Diamant forme may appeare by the prickes running along:  of 2 triangles may be framed a Sheeres battell and of 3 or 4 triangles may in like sort be framed the Saw battell, by ioyning the angles together as in their figures following shall ap|peare.
Here you see the square reduced into a Diamant forme, with onely turning their faces vnto the right angle E, as aboue appeareth,  so marching on, do fall into a perfect Diamant forme, with two sharpe angles, and two flat. But in their march they will stretch ouer-long, each man from his leadesman, so will it be of

no force to fight, by reason of their raritie  thin standing, as in the former figure may appeare by F.B.  by L.G.C.  by G.M.H.D.  by VV.R.N.N.E, the two sharp angles;A more stronger framin of the Diamant battell. and so of the rest. To reforme the which fault; First commaund your men to stand in the forme they are; then causing the two sides of the first angle E to stand yet firme, and commaund euery one of the rest (except the said two sides) to march on, one after another, vntill he come to finde himselfe in a due distance, each after his leadsman: thus F. shall march vp towardes B. vntill he finde A. to be his left-side fellow, the~ there to rest: the~ againe G. shall proceede towards C. vntill B. be his side fellow, L following him vntill F. be his side fellow, then shall H. passe forward toward D. vntill he finde C. to be his side fellow, M. following, H. Q. fol|lowing M. Then shall I. step vp betweene D. K, and N. following I, R. follow|ing N, and VV. following R. Likewise O, shall go nearer vnto K. vntill he finde P. his right side fellow, and N. on his left side: S. shall follow O, and X. shall follow S: then shall T. proceede towardes P, and Y. follow T. Lastly Z. shall step vp betweene . and Y: So is there framed a perfect triangle or wedge battell; as in this figure fol|lowing shall appeare.


Here haue you seene, how out of a square of men hath bin first reduced a Dia|mant battell simple; and out of the Diamant a triangle or wedge battell in perfect order to fight, which is with 1. man in the first ranke, 3 in the second, and 5 in the third ranke,  so consequently augmenting 2 in euery ranke, with the Ensigne in the middest. Now, by this order out of 2 iust squares of men, are reduced 2 trian|gles; and of two perfect Triangles,Out of 2 iust squares of men is framed 2 trian|gles.
Of 2 triangles is framed a Dia|mant. is formed a Perfect Diamant battel, by ioyning the two rereward parts together. But first out of the one Triangle must be drawen the last ranke of all, the which may be placed at the latter point of the Diamant battell, or else as the Sergea~t Maior shall thinke good. The figures of both which squadrons reduced into Diamant formes, and from Diamants into 2 Triangles, lastly adioyning the 2 Triangle backe parts together, is formed a perfect Diamant battell fit to fight; as by their seuerall figures here following may be seene.

The square.
These two squadrons shal be reduced into 2 triangles, in manner as aforesaid, which will be in forme following.

The triangle.
In these 6 former figures, I haue declared the order how, out of 2 squadrons of men, to bring them into 2 Diamant formes simple, and out of 2 Diamant formes single, to reduce them into 2 perfect Triangles, by causing all their middle ranks to march vp, vntill they find their leadsman before them in their due distance: the which 2 Triangles, being thus perfected (as in the 4 and 5 figure may appeare) and ioyning the two backe parts together, do make this perfect Diamant forme to fight, as here by the 2 figures following shall appeare. But of the second fi|gure

I haue drawen the latter ranke of one of the Triangles, being nine men, and placed them at one of the corners.


Now, touching the Sheeres battell, the same is to be made of 4 battallions of equal proportio~, working, as before you did with the Diamant  Triangle battels: the which 4 battallions being reduced (as before is sayd) into 2 triangles, and ioy|ning their two corners together, is framed the Sheeres battell, as here you see.
The Sheeres bat|tell.

Loe here the Sheere battell framed of 4 battallions; to backe the which you must draw vp 2, 3 or 4 rankes of pikes according to the proportion of the battell, and place them on the backe part thereof, as you see aboue designed by this let|ter O, where I haue backed the same with 2 rankes, at 18 men in a ranke. And also the same order is to be obserued in the Saw battell, as after appeareth. Next is the Saw battell, which containeth 3 sharpe angles framed of 6 battallions, in such order as the Wedge,  Sheeres battels before wrought, as here in the figure fol|lowing is designed.

The Saw battell.
Thus you see this Saw battell framed and reduced out of 6 square battallions. But there is another order yet to frame these Diamant,An other order yet to frame their battels. Triangle, Saw, and Sheere battels, which is thus: Place in the first angle or ranke, one man; in the se|cond ranke 3 men, in the third ranke, 5 men, and in the fourth ranke 7 men; and so consequently adding vnto euery ranke 2 men, vntill you haue finished your bat|tell into such proportion as you shall thinke good.
Now, there haue I spent more time in those trifling formes and vnused propor|tions then I needed, but only to giue you content, and to the end to shew, that he, which is a Sergeant Maior,A Sergeant ma|ior ought not to be ignorant of any formes of embattailing as well ancient as moderne. ought not to be ignorant in any manner of proporti|ons, as well ancient as moderne; whereby he may be both able, skilfull and ready to frame, alter, and change his proportions, as occasion shall be offered, and that with facilitie and speed.


Gent.
To what intent and purpose were these proportions of Diamant, Tri|angle, Sheeres, and Saw battels first deuised?


Capt.
The Triangle and Diamant battels were inuented by antiquitie to en|counter the square,To what purpose these termes were first deui|sed. the Sheeres battell to encounter the Triangle or Wedge bat|tell, and the Saw battell to encounter the Sheeres battell. All the which are in small vse in our dayes.


Gent.
Will you speake nothing of the Crosse battell, so much commended by some men; nor of the battell compounded of sundry battallions?


Capt.
The Crosse battels haue bene most vsed by the Swedens,The crosse bat|tell, and order thereof. and high Ger|maines. The forme whereof, be it in sundry battallions seuerally appointed, or in one whole and entire battell all together ioyned, is no doubt, of maruellous great strength and verie excellent conueyance: by reason of the sundry places of safegard and defence ministred to the shot and hurt persons therein. It is commonly framed of 5 battallions or squadrons, 4 in crosse wise, and one in the middle: the which middle battallion may conteine your Ensignes and short weapons: but if it be framed of 4 battallions, with the center vnfilled, then may the center containe the impedimentes and baggage of the armie.


A declaration of these Crosse bat|tels.I haue here figured a Crosse battell compounded of 5 battallions, the middle battallion conteineth the Ensignes and short weapons without their shot. And in the second figure I haue set downe the sayd Crosse battell, with their shot be|stowed, in the 4 voyde angles or corners, in 4 other battallions or squadrons, as may appeare. Now for as much as I intend to frame certaine Tables to the for|ming of euery sort  maner of all these foresayd battels  battallions of all num|bers of me~, from the smallest number vnto 10000 pikes, I will leaue at this instant to speake any more therof: hoping this already spoken to be sufficient for any wil|ling minded Gentlemen, which haue not yet seene wars,  desirous to vnderstand some points of martiall matters: for vnto those do I write,  not vnto the expert souldier, whose skill and experience, annexed with learning I honour and reue|rence.Speculatio~ with|out practise, but halfe the Arte. For surely speculation without Practise, is but halfe of the Arte, but both ioynt|ly together maketh the same perfect.


Gent.
Although we haue bin tedious vnto you, yet I pray let vs intreat you, to shew vs the order of the battell compounded of many battallions.


Capt.
To deuide a small power into many parts, dangerous.To deuide a small power into many parts, were but dangerous: but ha|uing a sufficient and competent armie, the maner is now a dayes to deuide them but into 3, distinguished into Vantgard, Battell  Rereward; yet, if men were per|fect and ready, a sufficient armie might well be reparted into sundry battallions, contained in two or three fro~ts, neare after the ancient Romanes, the one to supply and second the other a matter of great importance, especially if it shold come to campall fight, by reason of the diuerse breathings and succouring one another; a thing seldome seene in our age.


Gent.
What meane you by a sufficient and competent armie.


Capt.
Not a handfull of men of three or foure thousand, as we vse now a dayes: But I vnderstand that a sufficient and able armie should conteine 12000 pikes and short weapons or there abouts,What to be a suf|ficient armie. and as many shot; making 24000 in both and also 6000 horse.


Gent.
How would you repart these 12000 pikes and short weapon into 3 battallions, distinguished into vantgard, battell, and reareward: or into more bat|tallions.

I pray shew vnto vs the order thereof in figures.


Capt.
Of these 12000 pikes and short weapon, behold here in figure 11000 of them (for there is 1000 reserued for other purposes) deuided, first into 3 bat|tels, or squares of men, and then againe into 9 battallions, and lastly into 12, as by their seuerall figures shall appeare.

The figure of 11000 pikes, reparted into 3 battels.
Into three bat|tels.

The figure of 11000 pikes deuided into 9 battallions.

Into twelue bat|tallions.
The figure of 11000 pikes, reparted into 12 battallions.



Gent.
Vantgard.The first or vantgard of the 11000 pikes reparted into 3 battels, contai|neth 4900 piquiers, whose square roote is 70, which is 70 rankes, and 70 men per ranke, or 70 in front, and 70 in flanke, or 70 ranks and 70 files: all which is all one. In the second of those 3 battels, distinguished by name of battell, is contained 3969 pikes whose square roote is 63 containing so many men in front and flanke.Battell. the third of those battels, tearmed by the name of reareward, doth con|taine 1936 pikes, Lastly,Reareward the cubike roote whereof is 44, and so many it containeth in front and flanke: being all square battels of men.
Now in the marching of these battels vp to fight, there is great and many con|siderations to be had;Many considera|tions in bringing men to fight. both for the wind, the sunne, and aduantage of ground, and also the quantity and quality of the enemy: as whether he do exceede more in foote, then in horse; and also their maner and forme of embattailing. All which considerations, and many more, must proceede from the good capacity, sound in|tendement, and militarie skill of our Generall, and other commanders of our ar|my; vnto whom if it shall so seeme necessary, and occasion so require, first to leade the va~tgard alone to fight, the same is afterward to be seconded by the battel, mar|ching vp by the right or left flanke of the vantgard, and ioyning with whom, may renew the fight a fresh. And then if it fall out, that they should be againe distres|sed, the rereward is then to march vp vpon either the right or left side, as cause shall most require, and so ioyning with the other two, to renew againe their en|counter and fight, wherein both skill valour, and vertue must be shewed.
A consideration.And whereas I haue in those battels proportioned 70 men to the depth of the vangard, and but 63 to the battell, and 44 to the rereward, the which drawne

vp together in that proportion should badly correspond by reason of their diffe|rent depthes, or flankes; it must be therefore considered, that the first shocke and brunt is commonly the hardest, and no doubt but many men of the first ranks must fall at their seuerall encounters: and comming so to passe (as of necessity it would) then these different proportions should soone come to be different; as a|ny iudicious men may conceiue.
Secondly,A declaration of the 9 battallions. the said number of the 3 battels are deuided into 9 battallions of the same kind and nature that their grand battels were of, whereof there is made 3 fronts, in the first front is contained 4 battallions or squadrons, with their seue|rall spaces betwixt. The second front or supply is framed of 3 battallions, with their seuerall spaces betwixt. And the third front or last hope and succour con|taineth 2 battallions. The which 2 battallions I haue placed vpon the two out angles of the 3 middle battallions; and in the voide spaces betwixt, is placed the impediments and baggage of the army. The seuerall breadth, depthes, and num|bers of euery of these battallions, are set downe in their seuerall figures.


Gent.
To what purpose serueth the voyde spaces betwixt euery battell?


Capt.
The voide spaces may serue for the troupes of shot to sallie out of skir|mish with the enemy,The voide spaces to what purpose. and to retire againe, and also for the 3 battallions of the se|cond front, to march vp and passe betwixt them, for the battallions of the first front hauing encountred the enemy, and feeling themselues distressed, are warily and orderly to retire with their faces and weapon point bent vpon the ene|mie. At which retiring the Battallions of the second front, are to aduance fore|ward, and to passe in betwixt the voide spaces of the first 4 battallions, and so all ioyning valiantly together with the first,Sundry charges and fresh heads. to make a fresh head, and to begin a se|cond fight. And being then againe distressed, they are all orderly to retire, as is sayd. Then lastly the two battallions of the 3 front, are to aduance the one vp by the one side of the other battallions, and the other vp by the other side of them; or as occasion shall most require: and then finally all ioyntly together to giue a third and finall fight. By which order it should seeme, fortune to abandon them thrice before that they should be quighte vanquished.
And last of all,A declaration of the 12 battal|lions. the former 3 battels are reparted into 12 battallions of the same kind, distinguished into 3 fronts. The first front whereof containeth 5 battallions, of 961 men in each battallion, whose square roote is 31 with their seuerall spa|ces betwixt. The second front is framed of 4 battallions, of 961 men each, whose square roote is still 31, with seuerall spaces betwixt euery battallion. And the third front is formed of 3 battailions, containing in each 625 men, whose square roote is 25 for front and flanke. The which three fronts of battallions, are order|ly to aduance, to charge, to retire, and to recharge, as in the former discourse is described.


Gent.
The shot belonging vnto the said numbers, where are they to be placed and emploied?


Capt.
The shot appertaining vnto euery of these battels and battallions ought to be deuided (in mine opinion) into sundry small troupes; trouping about the said battels and battallions to maintaine skirmish, and some to be placed vpon bankes,The shot parted into sundry troupes. ditches, and ground of aduantage (the situation yeelding such) according to the direction of the Sergeant Maior generall: and the cauallery a reasonable

distance without the out angles of the battels or battalions,The cauallery. in troupes and squa|drons, seruing as wings to the same, and vpon groundes of aduantage and places fit for their seruice, with good regard had, that they passe not on the front of your battallions, for danger of disordering your owne squadrons vpon their retrait, as in folio 72 is described.


Gent.
What quantitie of ground shall these battels and battallions require?


Capt.
The quantity of ground for each souldiers sta|tion.I haue sayd before, that vnto euery picquier at the time of ioyning the charge, is to be allowed for his station in front or breadth, that is, from shoulder to shoulder, at the least 3 foote; and for depth, that is, for before and after 7 foote at the least, for his owne station, and for the vse of this weapon. And the voide spaces betwixt the battallions are to containe in breadth as much as do the bat|tallions of the second front, within the which they are to aduance and passe: so is it easily to be calculated, what quantity of ground such order of battels and bat|tallions will require. Moreouer it must be considered, that there must be a con|uenient space of ground remaine betweene the traine of the first order of bat|tallions, and the front of the second order, and in like sort from the traine of the second order, vnto the front of the third order: as some 20, or 25 pases betwixt each, or such as the ground will permit, or occasion require.


Gent.
What place is the generall and other chiefe commanders to keepe in these orders of fightes: or are they to be on horsebacke or on foote?


Capt.
The Lord generall is to be well mounted, and the Campe-Maister Ge|nerall, and Sergeant Maior Generall, are to bee mounted on good geldings, Andadoras and not Corradoras.What comman|der and officers to be mounted. Whereby they may speedily passe from place to place, especially the Campe-maister and Sergeant Maior generall, to execute the Lord Generals commands, to keepe the squadrons in order, and to redresse the disordered: as in such occurrants shall be requisite.
The Generall his place, is commonly in the space vpon the front of the second order of the battallions:The Generall his place. from whence he may most conueniently send his directi|ons and orders: to do the which, besides the Campe-maister and Sergeant Maior Generall,  his Trumpet, and chiefe Drummer, he is to haue attendant vpon him certaine expert gentlemen both on horsebacke and on foote.
The Colonels of euery foote regiment, are with their companies to serue on foote, being arraunged to fight: their due place is the right angle of the first ranke of their squadro~s,The Colonels.  their Lieutenants in the left angle of the same ranks, the Cap|taines and other inferiour officers, in ranke also, as their place requireth; as more at large in their seuerall duties is declared.
But in case that a Colonell were in any peece of seruice with his regiment a|lone, then is hee to employ the place and office of a Generall, for the present ser|uice. The Ensignes are to be placed in the centre, or neare the center, towards the formost rankes of euery battell or battallion, and to stand in ranke also. Finally of these 12000 pikes and short weapon, there is reserued out, about 1000 to serue to other purposes: as to gard the artillery, munition, and impediments, and such other peeces of seruice.
Another order to deuide an army into sundry small squadrons. There is yet another order of deuiding an army into sundry small battallions, or squadrons of one kind, each squadron containing 100 pikes, 10 in front, and 10

deepe, embattailed by single files, of 10 men in euery file, the order and manner whereof is in folio 38, 42, 43, particularly described.


Gent
I pray, how should a regiment or many, or an army be martialled or em|battailled after this maner?The maner.


Capt.
If you wold haue all your army deuided into battallions or squadrons of that kind, then are the Colonels of euery particular regiment, to cause the com|panies of their regiment to embattel themselues, vpon a sound of the drumme, in such smal battallions or squadrons of 100 pikes, in euery squadron 10 in front, and 10 deepe, as in folio 38, 39, and 4 may appeare.
And suppose that the 24000 footmen were reparted into 20 regiments, after 1200 into euery regiment: of the which 1200 men there is 600 picquiers, those 600 picquiers are to be embattailed into 6 small squadrons of 100 in each squa|dron, at 10 in front and 10 deepe. Being thus embattailed into sundry small squa|drons of one kind, they may with great facility be brought into any proportion you will, as by these figures following may appeare. Where you see embattailed the picquiers of three regiments seueral into their smal squadrons, of 100 in each squadron, at 10 in front, and 10 deepe, all in one front.


In the first figure you may behold 3 regiments embattailed into 18 small squa|drons; in the second figure behold the same reduced into a battell of double front, or into a due square of ground, which is twice so many men in front as in flanke: and in the 3 figure, you may see the said 3 regiments brought into a iust square of men; that is, as many men in breadth as in depth: the order whereof is thus.
The first regiment being embattailed into 6 small squadrons, and placed in one equall front, the second regiment (being embattailed in the like maner) is to march vp vnto the traine of the first 6 squadrons, there ioyning squadron with squadron, and answering file with file. After them againe is the other last 6 squa|drons to march vp vnto the traine of those 6 middle squadrons, and placed euen squadron with squadron and file with file: so that of these three regiments there is made one body of a battell of broade front, or due square of ground, which is twice so many men in breadth as in depth, as by the second figure may appeare.
The order.Finally, if you shold be occasioned to reduce the said three regiments into one grand battell of equall proportion, or due square of men: then place 4 of these small squadrons in one front, on whose traine 4 other squadrons, are to march vp; and then againe 4 others, and lastly the last foure squadrons; so that squadron with squadron, and file with file, may equally answere one another, as in the third figure may appeare. Where, of 16 of these small squadrons is framed a battell in proportion of equality: which is so many men in depth as in front: and there re|maineth out two small squadrons, the which are to serue to other purposes, either for a supplie, or to other seruices.
Thus haue you seene these three regiments embattailed and brought into sun|dry proportions.An army may be framed of sundry small squadrons. Likewise in the same maner may a whole army be ranged and ordered by good conductors, into sundry battallions, and distinguished, either into one, two, or three fronts: as the iust occasions, and the iudicious intendement of the good commander shall concurre and find conuenient.


Gent.
By describing vnto vs these seuerall orders of reparting an army into sun|dry battallions  squadrons, ye haue contented vs wonderfull well:  it seemeth (in mine opinion) much aduantagious, being discretly and orderly handled. But how should the shot, due vnto those regiments, be placed and ordered?


Cap.
The shot belonging vnto these regiments, deuided into sundry battels, battallions and squadrons, should be reparted into sundry small troupes, of 50 in each troupe, at 5 in front, and 10 in depth, or more, or lesse, as occasion shall pro|cure; the ordering and placing of which shot doth appeare, in folio 42 43,  73,  is in many other places described; so that one troupe may alwayes be ready to se|cond another, and to giue breathing one to another.


Gent.
But what haue you next to speake more of, before you returne to the office of the Sergeant Maior: by reason of whose office you haue made these sun|dry demonstrations of diuerse and many sorts of battels, and battallions, as a mat|ter most pertinent vnto the said Sergeant Maior his office.


Cap.
I should now set downe the tables of all these sundry proportions: as first of battels in proportion of equality;Of tables to be framed. which is the iust square of men; their order of ranking; their deuiding into Maniples, and so marching vp shoulder to shoul|der, to bring them into their former order of battell, with the marching vp of

their remainers: their due numbers of girdling shot, and the deuiding of the said battels into sundry battallions of the same kind: then againe, the tables of battels in proportion of inequalitie,Euen. which is more in breadth then depth: with their de|uisions into battallions of that sort, and the table of euen battallions for crosse battels, and of other proportions, with the quantity of ground that euery of them would require; but time permitteth me not: reseruing the same vnto the last booke of these our military discourses.
But I must now speake something by the way, of marching our battell through straightes, and being passed, how to fall againe into the former pro|portions.
When you come to any straight,To march an ar|my thorough straightes. it must be considered of what widenesse the passages are, and how many men may go in front easily thorow the same; and then may you accordingly, at your discretion, chuse whether you will draw your battell out into the former Maniples, that the same marched in before their com|ming into battell (as in the seuerall tables thereof shall be shewed) or into more Maniples or parts, if thereunto you shall be compelled by the narrownesse of the place:Drawne into Maniples. which likewise being so wide, that fewer Maniples then you marched vp before, will serue for their diuision, you may accordingly also draw them out into 3, 5, 7, or 9, Maniples, as the nature of the straight, and your iudgement con|curring together shall thinke meete.The Ensigne to be contained in the middle Maniple. Alwayes prouided, that the ensignes be contained in the middle Maniple: and hauing passed the straightes, you may a|gaine draw them vp shoulder to shoulder, as in the order of marching in Mani|ples, is before in folio 62, 63, 66, and 68 declared; whereby easily and without con|fusion they shall foorthwith fall in their former proportion. But as concerning your shot,The shot, in troupes most ser|uiceable. you shall not neede (except the straight be very narrow) to draw them out into any such parts, without it be those in the girdling, which as they stand in proportion in the battell, must be drawne out into Maniples with the pikes, for if mine opinion might be receiued touching the other shot, I would alwayes aduise, that the residue should euer more remaine in many small troupes, not aboue 40, or 50 shot, at the most in a troupe, as before I haue shewed, for that by experience I know the same to be of greatest force, and readinesse for seruice: be it therefore in plaine or straight, or how soeuer, the more troupes your shot be seuered into, the better shall the enemy still be applied;The one to second another. besides the seconding the one of the o|ther with such quicke dispatch, shall cause that after the first troupes haue once discharged, they retiring themselues behind all the rest, shall be sure against they come vp againe to haue leasure enough to charge sufficiently and surely, that few shot shall be spent in vaine, as they do when great numbers be clustred together.
Now,If the enemy co~|straine to fight in the straight them to quarter your Army. if it should fortune (as most commonly it chaunceth) that the enemy should fight with you in the straight, then must you not draw your battell into those Maniples or parts, but consider whether the straight be such, as will suffice you to go thorough, holding the same proportion that you haue. If not, then con|sider whether squaring the battell into 4 parts,To quarter the battell into sun|dry battallions. you may with so many battallions passe to encounter with the enemy, if so you cannot, it seemeth vnto me the redi|est and safest way, to deuide your battell into more battallions, as for example: first to proportion them out into 4 or 6, if those bee not conuenient, then into 8, if you

thinke that will not serue, then into 12 or 16 battallions, or as the passage will permit, which thing may more easily be brought to passe, if the body of your bat|tell do consist of pikes only, which, were the same of compound weapons, could in no wise bee so odainely done, without great confusion; as a man of any iudgement may conceiue: and as by these figures following shall plainely appeare.
Not to enter vn|aduisedly into any straighs.But before the arriuall vnto such straights and passages, the wise Commander is carefully to consider, and to send sundry scoutes abroade to discouer: and also shall cause (if possible he may) the summities, higher grounds, craggy rockes, thickets, woods, and other places of aduantage, to be first possessed by his owne people, sending to that effect, shot, halfe pikes, and such like.

The figures of quartering a battell.




In deuiding and quartering of all which, as may appeare, the place of the Ensi|gnes is still crossed, to redresse the which the Sergeant Maior or Colonell, may place them where he thinketh fittest: drawing out, where euery Ensigne shall stand, one pike; and replace the same pike in the first roome of the Ensigne which at the out drawing of the Ensigne remained voide.


The end of the third booke.



THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF WARRE DISCOVRSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.

The first Dialogue:

VVherein is declared the election, office, and dutie of a Sergeant Maior, with sundry points of Militarie discipline, c. and marching of the Armie.


Gentleman.
_TRuly (Captaine) this order for passing of Straights, doth co~|tent me wonderfull well: and me thinkes, hauing ready men, and good officers, verie easie and readie to be perfourmed. But now (I pray) if there restes no more to be spoken herein, begin to shew vs the choosing  office of a Sergeant Maior, which in day of battel, seemeth an office of great importa~ce.


Capt.
I did at the begininng of my second booke, declare vnto you, that a Prince leuying an Armie royall, doth by his Councel (or Coun|cell of warre,The chiefe Com|maunders of an Armie.
Deuided into Re|giments.
The officers of the Regiment.
Deuided into Companies.
The officers of a Companie.
Sergeant Maior of a Regiment.
A Sergeant Ma|ior generall. if there be any such in the realme) appoint first a most sufficient Ge|nerall, then a Camp-maister generall, a Captaine generall of the Cauallery, and a Captaine generall of the Artillerie. The Armie is deuided into sundrie Tertios or Regiments; ouer euery Regiment, a Camp-maister or Colonell. The Colo|lonell deuides his Regiment into sundrie bandes or companies, and ouer euerie companie a Captaine: euery Captaine hath his Lieutenant, his Alferes or En|signebearer, his Sergeants, his Caporals, and his Drummes and Phifes. Also eue|rie Regiment hath his Sergeant Maior; and ouer the whole Campe or Armie, a Sergeant Maior generall: of which Officer I meane now to treate.


The election and office of a Sergeant Maior.
The election of the Sergeant Maior, is made by the Generall, out of such as the Colonels do name vnto him.A Sergeant Ma|ior is the generall Minister of a whole Regiment. His office consists in marching, in imbattailing,  encamping. His office is, to be the generall minister or offi|cer of a whole Regiment of sundrie companies, and Superintendent of all the Sergeants of the same. By whose hand and industrie, the Camp-maister or Colo|nell, doth giue and appoint the orders conuenient to the due gouernement of his Regiment or Armie: as in marching, in encamping, and imbattailing, and in such other matters concerning hereunto: whereby may be gathered the partes, the qualities, the valour, the great skill, experience and diligence, which ought to be in him, who is chosen to this degree of office; being of such importance, that in

the time of the Greekes and Romaines, this office was credited vnto none; but the Generals them selues did execute the same in their owne person.
The Sergeant Maiors office is of much higher degree,The Sergeant Maior of higher degree then any ordinarie Cap|taine. then any ordinarie Captaine: for euery Captaine doth receiue his directions from the Sergeant Ma|ior; and the Sergeant Maior from the Colonell or Generall, or from the King or Emperour himselfe, if he bee in field. For hee is barred no gate nor entrie, but is freely suffred to enter,Great regard to be had in the ele|ction of this offi|cer.
Skill and natu|rall instinct. euen into the Generals tent, or Kings chamber. There|fore there ought great regard to be had, in the election of this officer. Which be|ing done in a person of insufficie~cie, doth many times cause great inconueniences to arise: and the person so chosen, for want of skill and naturall instinct, not know|ing how to vphold his due authoritie, grauitie, and power, doth lose oftentimes his due respect and reuerence of the Captaines, and other officers: whereby it had bene better for him to haue remained a Captaine of a single companie, then to haue risen to this degree of office, being not fit, for skill and nature thereunto.

Gent.
Then I perceiue that you would wish him that should vse the place of this office, besides his experience and skill, to be also of a naturall inclination be|fitting the same.


Capt.
So is my meaning: For besides his long experience and practise in warres, he ought yet to haue a certaine naturall instinct befitting this office: for as much as the most of his actions are to be handled in the face and view of the enemie,His actions are handled for the most, in the view and face of the enemie. The partes to be required in a Sergeant Ma|ior. To espie aduan|tages. Not to let slip good occasions offred. and in place of greatest perill; as ready at euery instant to redresse eue|ry disorder. He ought besides his long experience, to be valiant, learned, quicke witted, and ready conceited, wise, discreet, and ready both to see, and foresee, as well their owne, as the enemies orders or disorders; preuenting, redressing, and taking aduantage, as time and occurrants shall be offred, not letting slip any occa|sion offred.


Gent.
Is the Sergeant Maior to haue any particular companie to himselfe, as the other Captaines of Infanterie haue?


Capt.
No truly, and that for many good respectes: For in the absence of the Colonell, he hath the commaunde of the whole Regiment, among the Spanish Tertios.


Gent.
You said that the office of the Sergeant Maior did co~sist in three things; that is, in the good order of marching, in the sure manner of encamping, and in the perfect formes of imbattailing: wherefore I pray discourse more at large thereof vnto vs.


Capt.
Truly (Gentlemen) if you remember, I haue before at large declared touching the embattailing of men,To kw to frame his squa|dron, to march with the same, to bring the~ to fight. A squadro~ what it is.
To be victorious or inuincible.
The armie bst ordered and di|sciplined, is like to be Lord of the victorie. the ordering of squadrons, their deuiding in|to Maniples, and the formes of sundry kinde of battels with vs most in vse: but yet to giue you content, I will repeate some part thereof againe. Wherefore it concerneth this officer to know how to frame his squadrons, to march with the same, and bring them to fight. Now, a squadron of men is, (as before I sayd in folio 45.) A congregatio~ of souldiers orderly ranged  set, by the which is pretended to giue vnto euery one such place and roome, as they may fight without hindering one another, and to vnite all their forces together, in such sort that they may attaine to their prin|cipall intents and end, which is to be victorious or inuincible. So that we ought to thinke that the armie which is best ordered and disciplined, although of lesser

numbers,Vegetius his rea|sons. is like to be, by all reason, Lord of the victorie: as Vegetius declareth ve|ry well, giuing the reason why the ancient Romanes became conquerours of most nations of the world; saying that in greatnesse they were not like to the Almaines, neither comparable in number to the French, neither so subtill as the Aphricanes, nor so strong as the Spanyardes,The aduantage of practise and good discipline. nor so furious as the Brittanes, nor so wise as the Grecians, yet did they make easie, and answer all these disaduantages and difficul|ties, by onely maintaining their people well exercised in armes, and practise of warre, and keeping them well disciplined and reformed in manners. And for as much as squadrons and battels be formed of numbers of souldiers, more or lesse, according to the greatnesse of the armie, it is necessarie that this officer doe per|fectly know,It is necessarie to haue n writing the iust number of euery companie and their sortme~t of weapons. To haue alwayes an Idea in the head of sundrie formes of battels. To be skilfull in Arithmetike. and haue in writing, the iust number of euery companie; as how ma|ny pikes, how many halbardes, and how many shot, and before occasion or ne|cessitie befall, do make a common habite in his head and memory, framing there|in many  variable formes of those which are now most in vse, as the iust square of men, and quadrate of ground, and the battels of many sortes of proportions of inequalitie, with all the others whereof before I haue written. To do the which, it is most needefull that he be very skilfull in Arithmetike, for without the same, he should hardly performe his office: and not onely to know how to embattell the companies of his owne Regiment, but of many Regiments together, and of any number:A battell framed of sundrie Ter|tios by the Duke de Alua at Lis|bona. The Tertios of Naples, Sicilia  Lombardie. Spanish Tertios. for that many times the Generall doth commaund to frame a battell of sundry Regiments together; as did the old Duke de Alua at the taking of Lisbo|na, and conquering of Portugall. Who commaunded, that of the Tertios of Naples, Lombardie, and Sicilia, there should be one battell made and framed; and of the Tertios of Don Rodrigo Sapata, and Don Gabriell Ninio, an other, and of the Ter|tio of Don Luys Henriques, another squadron: and that out of all the sixe Tertios there should be drawen 2100 shot, to serue to other purposes. And for as much as the Sergeant Maior was not very skilfull and ready herein,The Sergeant Maior by want of skill, much puzzeled. they found them selues much puzzelled in doing thereof; and fell into many faultes, in presence of their Generall and Princes: and in generall iudgement of the whole Campe wherein I then serued.


Gent.
Truly it was a matter well worth the noting, but is there more sortes of imbattailing then those you haue spoken of before?


Capt.
I haue already spoken of the most; yet of diuerse nations vsed diuersely; of all which formes I would haue the Sergeant Maior to be skilled and seene, al|though the conduction of our warres now a dayes,Our warres now a dayes do consist more in surprises, as|saults, and batte|ries, then in main fight. doth consist more in surpri|ses, assaults, and batteries, then open field fight, and although the best now in vse, are but two or three, viz. the first square of men, and the square of ground, and their diuision into battallions of that kind, according to the weapons wherewith|all we now fight.


Gent.
Which of these do you hold for most assured and strong?


Capt.
I hold them all for sufficient strong, but the difference which may hap|pen,The difference to be iudged by the situation of the ground and occa|sions to fight. Iust square of men. is to be iudged according to the situation and disposition of the ground, and occasions to fight, and by the order that the campe shall obserue. For in some oc|casions the square of men would be best, as in open field, without aduantage of hedge, ditch, water, marish or wood, or where the enemie is strong in horse, to charge on euerie side: the which iust square of men, in euerie part is found to be

equally strong, and apt euery way to receiue the charge: the which could not be so,attell in broad front. were the battell ouerlong afront,  narrow in flank, as is the bastard, broad, or base square; but yet in other occasions, where these aduantages are to be found, it were better to fight in broad front, for that thereby, many hands do come to fight at once together in the vantguard, and with more difficultie to be compassed by the enemie, hauing any of the aduantages before spoken of to friend: but most co~monly, if necessitie, occasion, or situation do not constraine otherwise, the qua|drat of ground is best, and most vsed, as best proportioned with equall strength in vantguard and reareward (especially against footemen) and also flanked suffici|ently strong: and which of all other doth occupie least quantitie of ground.


Gent.
What meane you by Bastard square, Broad square, and Base square.


Capt.
The Bastard square,What is mea~t by bastard square, broad square,  base square. is the battell which conteineth almost twise so many men in front, as in flanke, in proportion as 1  is to 1: the Broad square is the bat|tell which conteineth more, or as much, as twise so many men in front, as in flank, as is 2 to 1, or 2 , which is as 7 to 3: and the Base square, is the battell which con|taineth almost thrise, or 3 times more in breadth then in depth, which proportion is as 8 to 2, or 3 to 1, or such other proportions of inequalitie, as fol. 51.


Gent.
You haue before declared at large the maner how to frame all these sorts of battels: therfore it is needelesse to demaund it againe; whereby I perceiue how necessary it is for the Sergeant Maior to be both learned and skilfull in Arithme|ticke: but doth it import any thing, whether the ranks be of eue~ number or odde?


Capt.
No truly,The rankes euen or odde impor|teth litle. but a custome vsed amongst vs, without any ground: for battels are to be set according to the number of men, and the same to be framed as the si|tuation of the ground will permit; therfore the number of Par or Impar doth litle import to the strengthening of the battell: but the due proportioning thereof ac|cording to the quantitie of your men, to be accommodated to the ground, or si|tuation; and aboue all,The braue con|duction of the Commaunders, and the resolute valour of the souldiers, is the firmenesse of the battell. the braue conduction of the Commaunders and the reso|lute valour of the souldiers, is the strength and firmenesse of the battell.


Gent.
What order is to be taken in setting of battels with speede and facilitie, that the confusion of the souldiers disturbe not the same, especially where men be vnruly, euery one thrusting himselfe into the first rankes of the foreward, in such disorder many times, that neither the Sergeant Maior nor Colonels themselues shall be able to frame a battell in good sort?


Capt.
The care to redresse this inconuenience toucheth the Sergeant Maior;A politicke order to be obserued, in setting a battell when the souldi|ers be vnruly. and therefore he ought to giue aduise and warning vnto euery companie before they come to this point, that they beware of such confusion, disorder, and disobe|dience; notifying vnto them that the Ensigne or Ensignes which were of the ward that day, should frame the first rankes of the vantgard; and the Ensignes or Com|panies that had the ward last before, should successiuely follow; and those which were afterward to haue the ward, to succeede them againe, and then next such as first were gathered to the squadrons.
Moreouer giuing aduisement to the officers, that they suffer none of the soul|diers of their bande to come without their armour,No souldier to come with his armour by peece-meale or broken. by peece-meale and vnfur|nisht: for by such faults, although that by the aforesaid reasons, the vantguard ap|pertaineth vnto them, yet they loose their preheminence, for comming so ill ar|med; and iustly may others, better armed, be placed in their roomes.



Gent.
And if (perhappes) vpon the Alarme giuen (as commonly it falleth out) all the Companies in Armes, doe ioyne and gather together, vnto the Corps de guarde or place of assemblie, in such a case, what is the Sergeant Maior to do?


Capt.
An order to frame a squadro~, of vnruly souli+ers vpon the A|larme giuen, or suddenly.
A fine checke of vnruly souldiers.He shall frame together that confused and disordered body, placing the Captaines before: and shall draw his battell from out one of the flankes, or out of the rereward, as he shall finde it most commodious: the which he shall doe with great facilitie, and thereby shall defraude those that were cause of such confusion: and it shall serue vnto two good effectes: the one, he shall frame his battell with speede, and the other, he shall by this meanes chasten the vnruly and disobedi|ent, by leauing them in the rereward, who seeing this order taken by the Sergeant Maior, will euer afterwardes, be more obedient and tractable to be set in order.


Gent.
But the battell or squadron of pikes being set, in what order is the same garnished with shot, and how many and great shall the sleeues thereof be, and how farre distant placed from the pikes? for I haue heard different opinions therein; whereof, although you haue sayd somwhat already, yet I pray, let vs heare something more of the same.


Capt.
No souldier is ignorant, that the squadron of pikes being set, is to be impaled or girdled with shot,The de  natu|rall girdling with shot. as many rankes of shot, as pikes. But the due and naturall girdling indeede, ought to be no more shot in ranke, then that the pike may well couer and defend, especially where the enemie doth abound in Caual|lerie. And so vnder the defence and fauour of the pike, there cannot conuenient|ly stand aboue one ranke of three shot at the most, and so many (in mine opinion) should the girdling conteine: the which girdling shot, kneeling vpon one knee, vnder the couert of the couched pikes, should, at the charging of the horsemen, discharge their vollie in their face and bosome,When and how to discharge their vollie. which would bee no small gal|ling vnto them. But when this daunger of horse is not to be feared, then the im|palement may be made of more shot in a ranke, at the discretion of the Sergeant Maior, according to the quantitie of shot contained in his companies, and the rest of the shot to be deuided into sundry small troupes (as I sayd before) to troupe round about the battell,Shot in sundrie small troupes trouping round about the battell. Euery troupe to be led forth to skirmish by their Caporall.
Squadrons of muskets, at the angles of the bat|tell. with some reasonable distance from the same: the which manner of small troupes, I esteeme to be farre better then the sleeues con|teining great numbers, and more ready to be brought to skirmish, euery seuerall troupe to be led forth by his Caporall, and some Captaines to ouersee the whole.
Moreouer, I would thinke good, at euery angle of the battell to be placed a good squadron of Muskets, which should serue to flanker it euery way, euen as the Caualleros or Trauassos do the curtaine of a fort: so that a well framed battell or squadron of pikes, well impaled with shot, and anguled with squadrons of Mus|kets, seemeth a Castell with his curtaines Caualleros, and ditches: the manner whereof being framed of expert  resolute men, is of wonderfull force, the which was well to be seene in the iorney of Carua~ in Barbarie, where Don Aluaro de Sandy, with 4000 Spanyardes,A braue retraict of Don Aluaro de Sandy made in Barbary, with 4000. foote a|gainst 20000. horse. foote souldiers of great valour, made a braue famous re|traict, the space of 4. or 5. myles in a champion field, being be set and charged by Cydearfa, king of the Moores, with aboue twentie thousand horse, at the least fiue or six times, with the losse of onely 80 men of his; and the slaughter of seuen or eight hundred of the enemy. Which is a gallant example what braue footemen may do, being conducted by a good chiefe.



Gent.
Your orders and reasons doe like me very well: but yet of one thing I stand in some doubt, and would gladly bee resolued therein, which is, that our bandes and companies of infanterie, haue commonly two thirds of shot, vnto one third of pikes, so that the battell empaled, sleeued and anguled with shot, there will yet abound and remaine good store of shot neuerthelesse. Now where should those be bestowed, to bee safe from the fury of horse, if the enemy should therein greatly abound?


Capt.
Your question is good, and I my selfe haue bethought me many times thereupon: wherefore if your ground be such that the enemies horse may charge you but vpon two parts at the most at once, then may the shot retire safely on the contrary parts: but if you be imbattailled in open Campania, without any aduan|tage for you, and your enemy very strong in horse, and you few horse or none to reanswere them,An order for the safegard of shot in open campania, where the enemy aboundeth in horse. then (in mine opinion) the surest way is thus (as I sayd be|fore) in speaking of lining of battels with shot, first to place 5, 6, and 7 rankes of armed pikes, or more, and girdle them with 5 rankes of shot, close vnder the gard and shelter of the pikes, on the out side: then againe within those first rankes of pikes, 3, 4, or 5 rankes of shot, then certaine rankes of pikes, and then shot a|gaine; and so consequently, as your numbers and occasions shall require, as in this figure appeareth.

The figure of such a battell of mixt weapons.
Here is to be noted that in such cases where your battel may be charged on euery part or side, that then those rankes in flanke which haue a wider distance then those men which are in front, doe march vp closer together, whereby they may make the front of equall strength and distance, of station euery way.
In this figure first you see placed the girdling shot 5 in a ranke, vnder the gard and succour of the pikes,Declaration of the figure. then 9 rankes of pikes, then certaine rankes of shot, and then pikes againe; and so consequently to the center, where is placed the ensignes, and short weapon, and munition. The girdling shot vpon the very charging of the enemies horse, and at the couching of their pikes, may (kneeling vpon one knee, the better to be vnder the couert of the pikes) discharge in the bosome of the enemy, not aboue twentie pases of: and then the pikes being couched, the o|ther rankes of shot, contained within them, are to discharge close ouer the heades of the couched pikes before them, and so successiuely as the other pikes shall bee couched the shot contained within them shall discharge. So thus (in my conceipt) would this order containe in safetie, the most part of your shot, and bee sufficient strong, and a great gauling vnto horse.


Gent.
This order I thinke to be good, where the enemy aboundeth in num|ber of horse. But now I pray tell vs what order is the Sergeant Maior to take and obserue, when these companies do march?


Capt
Herein consisteth great skill,Great skill and care in the mar|ching of an Army. care, direction, and discipline; for gene|rally men be loth and vnwilling to be tied to any strict and painefull order, espe|cially Besonnios, wanting practise and patience; for vpon euery light occasion, they will breake and disaray, as when they come to any straight or vnplained way, or when they feele themselues a litle wearied or chafed with heate, running on euery side disorderly to seeke water,The disorders of souldiers do ma|ny times grow through remis|nesse and negli|gence of officers. What the Ser|geant Maior is to do, being in the open field with the army. Vantgard, bat|tell, and reare|ward. which often times hath bene cause of many defeat|ments. And many times againe vpon small occasions doe they dismande them|selues, the cause thereof growing from the ouer remisnesse and negligence of the officers, in not correcting at first, such disorders with rigour and seuerity, as the vrgentnesse of the cause would require, and for that they want the care and di|ligence to redresse such mismeanours, as hereafter I will speake of, declaring first what the Sergeant Maior is to doe, being in Campania: which is to go take the or|ders to be obserued from the Generall, and to know whether his tertio or regi|ment is that day to haue the vantgard, battell, or reareward; the which he is to do the night before that the army is to march, although that the General many times for many good respects, will not make the same knowne, vntill the very houre of marching.
And this shall he do chiefly that day, which toucheth his regiment to haue the vantgard. And therefore it is alwayes important for him to know the wayes most commodious,To know the wayes most sal|libe, for the souldiers to march. and most salliable for the souldiers and companies out of the campe: for many Sergeant Maiors hauing erred herein, haue found themselues puzzelled, confused, and ashamed in presence of their Generals, guiding their regiments by wayes pestered with cartes, wagons, and baggage of the campe. And at other times for conducting them through passages so difficult and com|bersome, that they haue bene constrained to breake their arraies. For at the re|mouing of a campe, the prauncing and neighing of horses on euery side, and the crossing of cartes,Great noise and rumor in remo|uing of a campe. baggage and carriages, and the noise of drummes and trum|pets, is such and so great, that (if he be not very preconsiderate in the same, and know well the way, where hee is to conduct his companies) he runneth many times into those inconueniences: and chiefly when the campe doth dislodge by night, or in dayes mistie and darke, for then is the daunger most to bee doubted:

therfore it importeth much, that the Sergeant Maior be very skilfull in the regi|on and countrey where they are to passe,To be skilfull in the countrey where they are to march.
Sundry conside|rations. and to know the distances from place to place, and the qualities of the wayes and passages, with their straights, and inclo|sures, their hils, vallies, riuers, brookes, lakes, moores, meddowes, fields, open or enclosed, forests, woods, thickets, or whether the countrey be stony, plaine field, or ditched, and all difference of situations of grounds, as well of the hils, and high mountaines, as of the plaine and champain; to the end, that he may consider, fore|see, preuent,To what end. and prepare for euery place where the enemy may annoy him. For many times one regiment is to march alone, and then doth it touch the Sergeant Maior to haue the care and speculation hereof, as it doth the Campe-Maister Ge|nerall when the whole army marcheth, for that it befall him not, as it did vnto the Romaines in the Furcas Caudinas and vnto many other through the like misre|gard.Examples of the Romaines at Furcas Caudinas. To procure faith|full and trusty guides.
Hannibal decei|ued. And for more security hereof, they are to procure faithful and trusty guides, and skilful way leaders, to the end not to be beguiled and abused, as Hannibal was, when he warred in Italy against the Romaines, who willing to leade his army vnto Cassinum, was led and guided vnto Casilinum, to be put into the hands of Quintus Fabius Maximus, Generall of the Romaines his enemies.
Now the order being knowne,To cause the drum maior to sound the recoa or remouing.
The Captaines of footmen.
To assemble the companies in the place of armes, and there to frame his squa|drons.
The Sergeants of bandes, what to doe.
To deuide the battell into Ma|niples, if the pas|sage be narrow. and the way reknowledged, and the houre of re|mouing at hand, he is to commaunde the drumme maior to sound the call Recoia or assembling, and euery Captaine of infantery to cause their baggage to be trus|sed vp and laden, and shall straight wayes draw foorth his ensignes out of their quarter into the place of armes, and there shall frame his battell or squadron, re|parting their Captaines into such places as concerneth them that day, and shall dispose and appoint the Sergeants of ordinary bandes in such sort, that euery one may know what part he hath to gouerne and set in order. And for as much as it is seldome seene, that the wayes, fieldes, and passages be so large, that the whole battell may march all in front, he is to frame his ordinances arraies or Maniples no greater, then that the same may march commodiously and at ease thorough the same, the order whereof I haue at large declared in folio 62, 67, 68 and 92: al|wayes prouided, that he quarter or deuide not his battell (if the passage will so permit) into no lesse then the third part of the front thereof, as thus, if the front be of 27 pikes, the Maniples or ordinance shall be of 9, and if 21 in front, then the deuision or quartering shall be of 7 in front, and so of other numbers: for he is to conduct his companies so well disciplined and ordered, that occasion being of|fered, hee may with speede and readinesse frame and set his battell, or bat|tallions, reparting the Captaines and officers in places most conuenient, as be|fore is sayd.


Gent.
But tell vs how is he to repart them, and who shall go in the vantgard; which in the battell, and who in the reareward; and in what part shall the Colours be placed, that this readinesse and quicke dispatch, might be performed in setting the battell as you speake of?


Capt.
The order I haue partly spoken of before;The order in marching of vant|gards, battell, and rea reward. but to giue you content, I will repeate it againe: therefore me thinkes that the order to be obserued therein, is thus. That the shot of the forlorne hope, and the shot of the right flanke (be|ing deuided into many small troupes as I said) should march before, then next, the girdling shot, of the said right side; after them should follow the ordinances and Maniples of pikes, in such sort  order as before is declared:  to the end that

the ensignes go not crossed either in one sort or other,The ensignes where to be pla|ced fittst. he is to place them alone af|ter another, within so many rankes of pikes, so that when soeuer he brings his Maniples vp together pouldron to pouldron, to the framing of his battell, they may still remaine in their conuenient places, which is in the center.
Then after the pikes shall follow the girdling shot of the left flanke, and last of all in the reareward shall follow the troupes of shot belonging to the left flanke, and reareward, and hauing passed the straight, and the squadron formed, then may they repaire each girdling shot,Hauing passed the straight to march vp poul|dron to pouldron againe. and troupes to their due and conueni|ent roomes, as before; of which orders of Maniples, and quartering of battels, I haue before declared at large.


Gent.
Is there any meaning or misterie in marching the left or right side shot before in the vantgard.


Capt.
None truly, that I know of, more then that in all our actions we ought to incline what we can vnto perfection: and as the right hand is the more perfect and noble,In all our acti|ons to incline to perfection. from thence it is reason, that wee begin to frame our battels, and in that place also to begin to disseuer them.


Gent.
The munition, and baggage belonging to the Companies, where are they to goe, to cause least hinderance, and to passe in most security?


Capt.
The consideration that is to bee had when an army doth march, is, that if the enemy be knowne to be on head the vantgard, vpon the way you are to passe, then let the munition and baggage be placed in the reareward;Considerations to be had where the munition is to march. and per contra, if the enemy be found to be in the reareward, then passe your baggage to the for|ward: and if on the right side, then conuay it to the left; and if on the left side, then transport it vnto the right, with the like consideration, and in this sort shall the campe be alwayes a wall and defence vnto the munition and baggage. And if in marching the enemy do offer to fight, the munition by this meanes, shall be no let or hinderance at all. And besides all this, there ought to be sent abroade cer|taine Hargulutiers or light horse,Certaine light horsemen to be sent out to scout before the muni|tion.
In countries se|cure from the e|nemy, the muni|tion is to passe before with a sufficient card. The reasons. to scoute before the munition and carriage, to preuent the suddain incursions of the enemies stragling horse. The same order ought also to be obserued in the marching of one regiment alone. But in case that there were no enemy, and they might march through places plaine, safe, and secure, the munition and cariage ought alwayes to passe in the foreward, with a sufficie~t gard of pikes, shot, and short weapons;  that for good respect,  because it is very commodious for the souldiers, that when they come well wearied to their quarter, they may find their tents ready pitched, and many times their forrage pro|uided, and not to stay attending and expecting the same, comming many times, wet, dirtie, ouer tired, and halfe dead with hunger: and again if by hap any of the ca|riages do fal, the owners of the baggage may help to redresse, wherby to saue their baggage and furniture: which could not be done if it marched in the reareward.


Gent.
But if it should happen, that in none of these sayd parts, the baggage might march in safety (as in Barbarie, or other Champaine countrey, where the enemies number consisteth most of horse)  we not hauing sufficient numbers to answer them, what is then to be done, where the enemy may charge on euery side?


Cap.
In parts of dan|ger the munition is to march in the center, or among the squadrons.Then in the center of the battell, or betwixt the squadrons, with their conuenient gard, as before is sayd: for besides that little which the souldier hath, and carrieth the same there, it is reason he defend and keepe it; so in the like sort he is to procure that the enemy detrusse him not thereof, neither the enemy to glory

that perforce he hath dispoiled vs of any thing,Better to loose the munition then to hazard the whole army. The munition forsaken some|times for policie sake.
Example at the battel of Vicentia in Italy. for the great part of reputation which is lost thereby: but if the same may not bee conserued without manifest danger, and the squadrons thereby to bee disaraied, then ought it to bee forsaken and left: the which many braue commanders haue not onely done, but some haue left their carriage to the enemy of purpose, to the ende that by rifling the same they might fall into some disorder; by which meanes and pollicy they might the sooner defeat them, and obtaine the victory: as did Prospero Colonna and the Mar|quis de Pescara at the battel of Vicentia in Italy, whereat the Venetians, and the Cap|taine: Marquis Aluiano were broken and ouerthrowne.


Gent.
The foote souldiers horses and their boyes, where are they to go when they them selues mount on horse backe, and their boyes do cary their weapon and armour in their Maisters roomes?


Capt.
I would wish as few horses as might be with the foote companies, but on|ly for some officers and sick persons:As few horses as might be to be permitted in foote companies.
Noe foote soul|dier to passe out of the campe on horsebacke.
Where the foote souldiers horses are to go.
The orders to be obserued when the foot souldi|ers do mount on horsebacke. but for such as be, it is manifestly knowne, that it is forbidden by al good discipline of war, that no foot soldier do passe out of the campe or alodgement on horsebacke, neither on horsebacke to enter into the same, but alwaies at sallying he acccompany his colours, at the least a mile, and be|fore the arriual to their allodgement, the like. To do the which, their horses may go by one side of the battell, if the way will permit it; and if not, then at the traine therof, vntil they haue licence granted to mount; and yet not that to be permitted, vntill their foot Captaine be first mounted; and then may they mount on horse|backe, and put them selues in order with the Captaine or officer that is to con|duct them, and to this effect should the Sergeant Maior name and appoint some one. And if they be of the shot of the vantgard, then are they to follow their vant|gard troupes of shot; and if pike men, then to follow their arraies or Maniples of pikes: and in like sort shall the Hargabuziers of the reareward do, placing them|selues in the traine of their troupes, and shall set their boyes and pages with their armes in their roomes and places, to the end that if occasion be offered, euery mounted souldier may alight, and steppe to his roome and place, without disor|dering their ordinance or arrayes at all. In the like sort shall such foote souldiers as haue boyes carrying their armes, do: and when occasion is for the souldier to take him to his armes,The boyes to be shifted out of the battell. hauing receiued the same from the boyes, let the boyes be shif|ted out of the battell: for I hold it not for good, as I haue seene some Sergeant Maiors, to place those boyes neare vnto their Ensignes, either before or after them: for by this meanes may the battell bee disordered and broken, and none of those which mounted on horsebacke, can readily find their due roomes and places. A thing which the Sergeant Maior should greatly regard, to keepe his companies alwayes in good order.


Gent.
In their marching should not the souldiers make stayings and pausings, to ease and rest themselues.


Capt.
It is very necessary that they make some Altoes or standes to ease them,To make sundry altoes or stand, to ease and refresh the souldiers. and that they might refresh themselues with such short victuals as they beare along with them, and by a litle reposing, they may breath and ease them of the wearinesse of the way, and so conserue themselues in good order. For although the souldier be neuer so much practised and inured, and though the shot may suf|fer the wayes trauell without any great pawsing, yet the pikemen, as men laden

with their armour, are not able to endure the same, especially in dayes of scor|ching heate,Carefull to make the Altoes or sta~ds in places conue|nient and fit. without daunger of sicknesse, or brusing of their bodies. Therefore the Campe-maister or Sergeant Maior ought to be very considerate and carefull, to cause the standes to be made, as the commoditie shall be offred, and necessitie require it, to the end, no disgrace might befall them. And for that it hath bene somtimes seene, that the Sergeant Maiors taking litle regard here unto, haue con|ducted their Regiments very disorderly,Disorderly con|duction causes of ouerthrowes. making a long trace file or lyne (as it were) of them: the vantguard distant from the rereward at the least three or foure myles; in such sort, that by much lesser numbers then the numbers of their owne companies, they may many times, be beaten and ouerthrowne: as it chaunced vnto the French armie in Lombardie, being defeated by Antonio de Leyua, gouer|nour there, for the Emperour Charles, at their marching towards Viagrass, their Commaunder,Example at Via grassa in Lom|bardie, when the Cou~tie Sanpaule was taken.
To make alwayes the standes neare fresh waters, and to be carefull that the souldiers straggle not. the Countie Sanpaule being taken: for hauing passed too forward with his vantguard, leauing behind him more then was conuenient, the Countie Guido de Rangon with the ariereward, who had the charge thereof. The Sergeant Maior is therfore to be carefull, to make alwayes his standes and Altoes neare vn|to some good waters, the officers taking great care  watchfulnesse, that in those stoppes and stayings, the souldiers dismeanour not themselues, nor range not disorderly vnto the next adioyning places, nor runne into orchardes, nor gardens to rifle and spoyle, for it is contrary to good militarie discipline.


Gent.
When the campe doth march, passeth the Sergeant Maior on foote or on horsebacke?


Capt.
The Sergeant Maior is alwayes to passe on horse|backe,  to what effectes.
If he meete the Generall, not to alight from his horse.On horsebacke; For vnto this officer onely is his horse allowed him, and at all times to ride, and into euery part, and vpon any occasion, and to trauerse and passe through the Arrayes of the battell, visiting, prouiding, and ordering all things concerning the same; and also to take the word from the Generall: and being on horsebacke, if he chaunce to meete him, he is not to alight, as some vn|skilfull Sergeant Maiors are wont to do. For the sollicitude, care, and readinesse, apperteining to this office, is such, and so great, that it requireth he enioy such a prehemine~ce.Nor yet to dis|mount from his horse in the day of battell, and wherefore. Neither yet in the day of battell ought he to dismount, nor enter in|to ra~ke with the other Captaines, as some will seeme to say; for in the fight he ser|ueth but for one, but being on horsebacke, he may value for many, in viewing, re|uiewing, ordering  redressing many  sundry occurra~ts, which in such times are offered, importing many times the good successe of the victorie,  therfore he is to go armed but lightly,His armour light with a short tru~|chion in his hand. No afront to the souldier, deser|uing it, to be cor|rected by the Ser|geant Maior. with a short baston or trunchion in his hand, which shall serue him to apart horses, cariages  baggage, which oftentimes do disturbe  hinder the squadrons,  to shew and point with the same some things that he co~|maundeth, and orders that he ordaineth to be done, and sometimes to correct therewith the disobedience of vnruly souldiers: whereat no man ought to be of|fended, or take it for any affront, sith it is done for corrections sake.


Gent.
In what part ought the Sergeant Maior to stand or go, when the armie doth march?


Capt.
The ordinarie place of the Colonell is the vanguard; and so the Serge|ant Maior,Where the Ser|geant Maior is to passe, whe~ the ar|my doth march. being his officer, by whom he sendeth his Commaundes vnto the Cap|taines, Ensignes, and Officers, ought alwayes to be neare vnto his person.


Gent.
But if the enemy be knowen to be behind or after your rereward?



Capt.
In such case he shall remaine in the rereward,But if the enemie be knowen to be in the rereward he is to passe in the rereward.
To reprehend the faults of the Ser|geants.
If the arrayes be broke~ to be ready to redresse them. No Captaines or other vnder offi|cers to passe the word, stand; but the Sergea~t Ma|ior, or other supe|rior officer.
The Camp-mai|ster as head of the Regiment, the Sergeant Maior as guide of the battell.
The foot souldiers to alight fro~ their horses a myle ere they come to their lodging.
The place of a|lodgement to be first viewed by the Sergea~t Ma|ior.
At their arriuall to frame his squadrons in the place of armes. Orders to be ob|serued at the a|lodgement.
The place of armes to be kept all free and vn|pestered. but to assist there in such sort, as he forget not to make the Alto or stand sometimes, and to stay vntill he hath passed through all the arrayes of the marching squadrons or armie. And if he finde that the Sergeants do not their duties, in keeping the souldiers in good order and array, he shall seuerely reprehend them for the same, being a thing of such importance, and that no negligence be found in conseruing due order and array, so that none might be broken if possible it were. And if the arrayes be bro|ken, as somtimes it happeneth by reason of the straight passages, it behoueth him to be very ready  vigilant to redresse them againe, and if to do the same it should neede to make a stand, an officer is presently to be sent to the Sergeant Maior: and neither Captaine, Alferes, nor any other officer to passe the word, stand, either to this effect or any other, as it oftentimes falleth out, crying stand, or march, from hand to hand, vnlesse the necessitie be so vrgent, as not permitting time to signi|fie the same vnto the Camp-maister or Sergeant Maior. For by reason of this a|buse of euery officer to passe and giue the word, vpon euery small occasion there do succeede many inconueniences, and is as much as to vsurpe the prehemine~ce, which onely is due to the Camp-master, as head of the Regiment, and vnto the Sergeant Maior, as guide of the battell. And therefore it is very necessarie, that the souldier or officer which so shall do, to be well punished for the same. And the Sergeant Maior is to be carefull, that the Captaines and souldiers which are on horsebacke, do alight,  set themselues into the arrayes, a good myle before they come vnto their allodgement, the which ought to be first viewed by himselfe, or his coadiutor, somewhat before the companies do arriue, and at their arriuing to frame his battell in the place thereof, and not to suffer any souldier to passe vn|to his quarter, or to dismaunde himselfe in the order, vntill the whole Regiment be all entred; and he, or his coadiutor in his name, comming vnto the compa|nies, do licence them to their lodgings and quarter.
The which ensignes are placed in the front of the quarter of euery company, all in one ranke, and from thence downeward the souldiers to be lodged. And the Sergeant Maior shall not permit nor suffer any cariage or baggage to be put before them, nor pestered within the place of armes, neither any fire to be there made, nor any other impediments; for from thence forward, it is onely a place of armes or assembly, and is to bee left free and vnpestered for onely the battell when it is to be set.




THE SECOND DIALOGVE.

VVherein is declared, of the encamping of an army: the placing of the corps de guardes, scoutes and Sentinels:The Sergeant Maior what he is to do, at the first encampe|ment of the ar|my.
First to draw forth a corps de|guard some 80 pases without the ring of the em|campement. their seuerall duties: the order of visiting and reuisiting the Sentinels, and their relieuing and changing: the order of giuing and taking the word, with sundry other martiall points, appertaining to such cases.


Gentleman.
_IN lodging and emcamping the regiments or army, the which being set|led, the Sergeant Maior, what is he then to do?


Capt.
Presently to draw forth a corps de guard, about threescore or fourescore pases from the face of the encamping, of some fiue and twenty or

thirtie souldiers, and those are to bee of one of the companies which was of the watch the night before, sith that vntill a fresh watch doe enter, and the 24 houres bee fully accomplished, it appertaineth vnto them that entred therein before, except a whole company be set there by day to the ward; and in such case it belongeth to the companies of shot,The orders to be obserued. if there be any particular shot companies in the campe. And this Corps de guarde which is to bee drawne out, is to be set in the selfe same place where the company of the watch is to bee placed at night.
To reknowledge the quarters and to reforme all in|combrances.This being done, hee is to reknowledge his quarters very well, and to see if there be any neede to raze plaine any places, that the souldiers may commodi|ously sallie foorth to the Alarme for it falleth out many times, that the compa|nies be lodged in orchards, gardens, vine-yards, and among bushes, from whence they cannot come but with some difficulty, the which he is to redresse; and to make plaine and easie any thing that may empeach and hinder the speedy setting of the battell, and framing of the squadrons; which as well for this purpose, as for the for|tifying of the campe, and leuelling the wayes and passages for the artillery, with such other seruices,Pioners to a|mend comber|some waies. there is alwayes in the campe certaine companies of pioners, the iurisdiction of whom doth belong vnto the Generall of the artillery, or to the Campe-maister Generall, vnto whom he is to repaire, to prouide him with speede of such as shall be needefull.
To go to the Campe-maister generall or his marshall, to re|ceiue orders from him to sundry purposes; as for the watch, the ward, gard for the munition, to scout, and disco|uer, who to pro|uide wood, and to assist in tren|ching.
Being with his owne regiment alone, what he is to do.
The Sentinels how to be placed. To consult with other officers.And if the whole army be there, he is to go vnto the Camp-maister Generall, and know of him how many ensignes of his regiment are to be put to the watch, and in what place or part, and what companies are to gard the munition, and in other most conuenie~t places for the seruice  security of the campe;  such as are to go abroade to discouer, and to scout, and who are to prouide wood, water, and other necessaries; and what companies are to assist in making the trenches, and bulwarkes, and other fortifications, reparting the same workes amongst all the bandes of his regiment (for vnworthy is he the name of a souldier, which will not put to his helping hand in such cases) in sort that euery one haue their share of the labour in order. But if he be with his owne regiment alone, it then concer|neth him to reknowledge, foresee, and to prouide and giue order for all: and to place the Sentinels in such order and distance, that no man may passe out, nor en|ter into the quarters of the alodgement without their view and sight. And if his regiment be ioyntly with the other regiments or tertios of the same nation, or of another, he is to conioyne with the other Sergeant Maiors, and consult, counsell, and concurre with them touching the placing of the gards and Sentinels: so that there may be found no negligence nor imperfection, sith all this office consisteth in care, vigilancie, readinesse, and order.
To go to the Ge|nerall for the word, and orders to be obserued.It concerneth him also, to go vnto the Generall for the word, and to receiue the order and course to be followed the next day, and to go presently vnto the Campe-maister to shew him thereof: although that sometimes the Campe-maisters or Colonels themselues doe take the word and order from the Generall, and giue the same vnto the Sergeant Maiors, yet properly the doing therof doth appertaine to the Sergeant Maior his office.
To haue great care in placing the watches and gards.And as touching the watches and gards, he ought to haue great consideration, not to place them, if the enemy be at hand, before the entring in of the night: for

he ought to preue~t, if possible it might be, that the enemy perceiue not where he setteth his watches and Sentinels.
And when it were time hee shall call together the company or companies,To fore aduer|tise the souldiers by the drumme maior.
To reknowledge and view the pla|ces of gard and Sentinels.
To appoint them the order in go|ing the roundes
To visit and re|uisit all the a|foresaid or|ders.
To reprehend the faultie.
The negligence of Commanders breedes contempt in souldiers.
The encampe|ment to be en|trenched.
Where the corps de guard to be set. Naturall fence, good. which should bee of the watch; the which are to be aduertised thereof from the morning, by the Drumme Maior of the regiment, and he is then to set them in their places, the which as I said, ought to be reknowledged and viewed, and shewed vnto the Sergeants of such companies where they are to place their Sentinels, and he is to appoint them what order they are to keepe in going their roundes: alwayes reseruing a particular care, to visite and reuisit all the before appointed matters and orders.
And if he shall find any negligence or carelesnesse in such officers, he is to re|prehend and chasten them with such seuerity as the case and cause shall require, for in the not executing the same, he becommeth to be contemned, vnrespected, and his commandes and orders misprised: and so by consequence to introduce a very corrupt discipline.


Gent.
What distance from the quarters and campe should the gards and wat|ches be placed and set.


Capt.
In encamping an army, it is accustomed most commonly to entrench round about the quarters thereof, for more security and strength to the allodge|ment: and when it is so, the companies which haue the ward, are alwayes to sal|lie to gard the trenches, which is the wall of the campe. But in case there bee no trenches, the Corps de gard (in mine opinion) is not to be placed aboue 70, or 80, pases distance (as I haue said before) from the front of the allodgements in his place of armes; yet somtimes there be found ditches, bottoms, and vallies so strong, that it shall be good for the gards to be placed there, although they be far|ther distant off,Great silence is to bee kept in the body of the watch. then I speake of; for such strengths by nature do serue and stand in steede of ditches and trenches. But not finding such naturall fences, the wat|ches are to be placed, as before I haue sayd. For thus, as well for the security of the quarters, as for (if neede should require) to succour those companies, it is better they be placed neare then farre off. And it is to be noted, as a thing of great importance, that great silence be kept in the body of the watch, at the least all ru|mour and lowd noises are to be excluded,The Sentinels what distance a|sunder, and from the Corps de guard. and in their conuersations to talke mo|destly, stilly, and with low voices.


Gent.
And the Sentinels, what distance should they stand from the Corps de guard?


Capt.
About thirtie pases,The Sentinels the wall of the campe, therefore neare together. litle more or lesse.


Gent.
And how farre the one from the other?


Capt.
There ought to be no more distance betwixt them, then that they may easily discerne one an other, how darke soeuer the night be. For the Sentinels, be|ing the wall of the campe,  which do serue that no body may enter in, nor passe out thereof,Sentinels better double the~ single. without being seene and discouered, now if they should be placed too wide a distance off, that would not follow, which is pretended.


Gent.
And those Sentinels are they to be single?The Sentinell vi|gilant, silent and carefull.


Capt.
No, but double, for foure eyes may see and discerne better then two, and because, if sleepe do assaile them, or could, the one (opprest with sleep) might walke, and the other stand vigilant at the watch, with all stilnesse and silence, and

without talking, with open eyes, and ready listening eares; for many times it chan|ceth to heare that, which the obscurenesse of the night will not suffer to see: and if they do perceiue,In hearing or seeing any thing what the Senti|nell is to do. heare, or see any thing, whereof they ought to giue aduise to the officers, let the one go thither, and the other stay, and not to leaue the Sentinell post forsaken: and therefore, for these and such like causes, it is much more safer, requisite,The single Senti|nels, where. and needefull that they be double. But those which are set yet 30 pases farther, are to be single, which of some are improperly called forlorne Sentinels, not hauing the word, as the doubles haue, the which are to be placed in the same distance,His dutie what to do. as are the first, and commaund and order giuen, that in descrying any thing, they are to retire to the post of the double Sentinels, and giuing aduise and notice of what they heard or saw, are to returne to their places, without giuing the Alarme:Not to giue A|larme, but vpon reasonable cause. When to giue the Alarme.
Feare and ima|ginations do di|sturbe me~s senses. but in case that there were any notable number of horse or foote dis|couered, in retiring vnto the double Sentinels,  all three perceiuing the same for certaine, and affirming it, then the Alarme is to be striken, and in other sort, not: For many times, vnto one man alone, feare or imagination doth cause few peo|ple to seeme many, and many things to seeme to be, which are not indeede: and at no time, is the Alarme to be striken in the campe without good and vrgent cause. For remedie whereof it is a matter of great importance, that the Sergeant Maior,To visite and re|uisite the Senti|nels, at sundry houres in the night, to good ef|fectes. euery night, at different houres, doe ordinarily visite and reuisite the wat|ches and Sentinels, as well to see that they obserue and performe his orders and commaundes, as to the ende that the officers and souldiers, vnderstanding his courses taken, be more vigilant and carefull in their watches, fearing to be punish|ed if they incurre into any defaults and negligences.


Gent.
What call you the forlorne Sentinell, sith you say, they are improperly so termed?The proper for|lorne Sentinell, what it is.


Capt.
The proper forlorne Sentinell is that, which is set, either on horse-backe or foote, as necessitie shall require, neare vnto the enemies campe; to the end, to espie and giue aduise if any companies or troupes shall sallie thereout, or if the campe do remoue secretly. And this such Sentinell is to be placed in some part so neare vnto the enemie, that being discryed and seene, he shall with great diffi|cultie retire and escape:An example. and is neuer set but vpon necessitie of such like aduises: As when Frauncis the French king, did relieue and victuall Landresie, which the Emperour Charles held besieged, who determined to giue him battell the next day before he were departed; and so Don Fernando de Gonzaga, who was Gene|rall, commaunded Captaine Salazar that he should that night put himselfe neare vnto the enemies campe, therby to vnderstand their desseignes and intents: but he missed to effect the same.The forlorne Se~|tinell, not to haue the word but a different Conter|signe. So the French retired in safetie and wel without any per|ceiuing thereof. And thus these Sentinels haue not the word that is kept in our camp, for the inco~uenience that might hap, if being take~ by the enemy,  corrup|ted with rewards or otherwise, they thereby might know our word: but he ought to haue a differe~t contersigne, that when he returnes, he may be knowne thereby.


Gent.
What order is obserued in the day of the Word?


Capt.
The order to be obserued in the day of the word.I haue already told you, that the Sergeant Maior doth take the same from the Generall, and giueth it vnto the Sergeants, and they vnto the Caporals and Sentinels: but with this consideration, that the Sergeant Maior giue not the same vnto the Sergeants, being in Campania, vntill the very instant that they set the Sentinels and watch: And if they be in towne of garrison, Citadell, or For|tresse

of defence, not vntill the shutting in of the gates, and the Sergeants  Ca|porals not to giue it vnto the Sentinels, vntill the very point of their placing at their standes or postes.With some the word doth passe no further then the Caporals. Dangerous to trust the word with raw soul|diers.


Gent.
You say here, that the Se~tinels should haue the Word; but I haue heard say, that among our English seruitours in the Low Countreis, the Word passeth no further then the Caporals; and the Sentinels not to haue the Word at all.


Capt.
Indeede among raw souldiers there is good reason for the same, for the sundry inconuenie~ces that might otherwise follow thereon. But with the Spanish Tercios, where they be experimented men, aswell in militarie actions, as in firme loyaltie to their king, this order hath bene obserued, as I speake of.


Gent.
Then the Caporall hauing the Word, and the Sentinell, not: what is the Sentinell to do, when occasion is to demaund the Word?The Sentinell not hauing the word, what to do.


Capt.
The Sentinell finding any occasion, is to cause the partie to stand, and presently with an audible voyce to call his Caporall; who with speede, from the Corps de guard, repaireth to the Se~tinels post,  there himself taketh the Word.


Gent.
What order is obserued among the officers and souldiers in taking the Word the one from the other? being a thing of such importance, we would glad|ly know it.


Capt.
When any Officer or Captaine of the Round,The order to be obserued in ta|king the word, by the officers, and souldiers the one from the other. The shot; how? The pike; in what manner?
The officer or Rounde; ought to giue the word vnto the Senti|nell first.
The souldier set at Sentinell, not bound to reknow|ledge any person, without giuing the word.
The word is the meane in warre to exclude all de|ceipts.
The sight and hearing, easily deceiued, especi|ally by night. Example.
A fowle errour. will, vpon any occasion, draw neare vnto the Sentinell, the Sentinell, being a shot, ought to cock his bur|ning match, hauing the peece charged and primed, and so to present it, and be|ing a pike man to Terciar or charge his pike, and no farther off, then that with so low a voyce, as they may but vnderstand one another, to demaund the Word, and in like order and consideration ought the officer or Round to giue it vnto the Se~|tinell, when he commeth to visite it; the which Sentinell, ought by no meanes to suffer any person to come neare vnto him, except he giue him first the Word, no although he knew him to be his Captaine or Sergeant Maior, or Camp-maister: for the souldier being set at the Sentinell is not bound to acknowledge any per|son, for to permit him to approch vnto him, but such as shall giue him the Word which was giuen by the Generall, and so to the guardes, by the mouth of the Ser|geant Maior: which is the eanes and instrument vsed in warres, to exclude all suspectes,  decits: For we see, the sight and hearing is easily deceiued, although it be by day, then how much more by night; as was well to be seene by Publius Considius one of Caesars Captaines, a man esteemed for valiant and skilfull (as one who had serued in the armies of Lucius Sylla, and Marcus Crassus) whom Caesar sending to reknowledge and view the campe of the Heluetians his enemies, with certaine spies,  to see if Titus Labienus had gained  possessed a hill, whereunto Caesar had sent him, he missed  erred so much in the reknowledging thereof, that he came running vnto Caesar,  told him, that the hil, which he had co~manded Ti|tus Labienus to gaine, was already possessed by the enemy, being quite the con|trary; which caused that Caesar failed to defeat the enemy that day. And therefore in cases of such importance, there ought great care and consideration to be had.
And againe the officer or Round, whe~ he goeth visiting the post or Sentinels, if he find them ready  vigilant (being that which is expected) he hath no neede to approach alwayes vnto them,The Round fin|ding the Senti|nell vigila~t, neede not alwayes ap|proch neare him. but to passe along and visite the rest: and if he finde them all with this watchfulnesse  ready, let him returne to his Corps de guard.



Gent.
I haue heard say, that the Sentinell ought not to suffer any person to passe by without giuing him the word; and me thinks that you say, that the officer or Round, finding the Sentinell waking  vigilant, and hauing seene them, may re|turne to his Corps de guard without giuing the Word.


Capt.
The Sentinell ought to suffer none to passe in or out of the campe without giuing the word.
The officer or Round.The obligation and duty of the Sentinell is, not to permit any person to passe in or out from the campe, without giuing him first the word, neither yet to come neare where he standeth: but if the officer or Round do passe through the Sentinels within distance of 8 or 10 pases, it is sufficient that hee speake, and passe by, and is not bound to giue the Word. But if in case they were to come from out of the campe, he is in no wise to suffer them to come neare to reknowledge him, although it were at the abouesaid distance without giuing him the Word: and if happely such person will not giue it,Refusing to giue the word, he may discharge as at an enemy.
How to deale with such as come into the campe. he may discharge at him, as at his enemy. And although he giue him the Word, he is not to permit him to enter freely in|to the campe, but to accompany him vnto the double Sentinels,  consigne him vnto them, for that one of the~ may forthwith, conuey him to the Corpo de guardia, and there deliuer him to the Sergeant, or Alferes, or to the Captaine of the com|panie, who are bound to giue present aduise thereof vnto the Sergeant Maior, vn|to whom it concerneth to conuey him to the Camp-maister, or Generall, if the case so require.


Gent.
Whe~ the Alarme is giuen, what the Se~tinels are to do.When the Alarme is giuen, are all the Sentinels to retire to their Corps de guards.


Capt.
No sir; for they neuer should forsake their postes without licence of their officer, and that they doe withdraw them, except those which do giue the Alarme; who seeing so great a furie of the enemies to come vpon them, which they are not able to withstand, that then indeede they ought to retire to their Corps de guards?


Gent.
In such occasions doe all the Ensignes, which are at the watch make a squadron together,Whe~ the Alarme is giue~, what or|der is to be taken with the ensignes or companies.
The Generals guard, and guard of the munition, not to stirre.
To frame the squadrons with all diligence.
To enquire the cause of the A|larme.
To aduertise the Generall and Camp-maister thereof.
The co~panies set in squadron not to disseuer with|out licence from the Generall.
To returne the Sentinels to their postes, or stations. or euery one apart?


Capt.
They all ioyne together in that Corps de guard, which standeth most co~|modious for a place of armes, the which the Sergeant Maior ought to shew them before hand; whither also the rest, which are in their quarters, should repaire; but not those which are guarde to the General, nor those that do guard the munitio~, nor out of the place of armes, or at the guarde of the quarters, for those are not to leaue their postes or stations; but of the others the Sergeant Maior shal frame his battell or squadron with all possible speede  diligence: and then shall presently enquire the cause of the Alarme, the which being knowne, he shall presently by his officers, giue aduise vnto the Regiments next vnto him, and aboue all, he is to aduertise his Camp-maister and Generall; without order from whom, the com|panies already set in battell may not returne to their quarters and guardes. And so the Sergeant Maior, after they be fully satisfied  assured that they may disba~d and breake vp, hee ought to demaund licence of the Generall for the same, and shall returne to set his postes as before they were. And if he shall perceiue it to be needfull to reenforce and strengthen his guardes, he ought to do it with more or lesse numbers, as the necessitie shall require it.


Gent.
I haue heard that some Sergeant Maiors do draw out of their principall Corps de guards where their ensignes  companies do stand,  the first Se~tinels,

other small Corps de gards;To draw out of the grand Corps de guard, other small Corps de guards.
The small Corps de guard to what effect. but I know not to what end?


Capt.
That Sergeant Maior doth not amisse: for that Corps de guard is of those souldiers which are for the Sentinels, and Round that night; for that the officer, when he is to relieue and change them, may find them more ready. And these Corps de guardes do serue also, that the Sentinels may haue succour neare at hand, if neede should require: and againe, they helpe also to keepe the guardes more vigilant, and the souldiers more ready to the seruice of their ensignes.



THE THIRD DIALOGVE.

VVherein is declared, some orders to be obserued by the Sergeant Maior, in the very fact of armes: and in surprises and Camisadas, and Ambuscados: and to be a ge|nerall procurer of the souldiers good.


Gentleman.
_WHat orders is the Sergeant Maior to obserue, in the times of fight with the enemy?


Capt.
The Sergeant Maior cannot keepe any certaine rule therein, considering the diuersitie of chaunces, stratagems and po|licies, which in euery moment do happen in warre.
But in the action of battell, he is to see, and to foresee (as before I sayd) as well their owne, as their enemies orders, and disorders; to redresse with all valour, rea|dinesse, and skill,What the Ser|geant Maior is to do in the fact of battell. what is needfull in his owne squadrons, and to espie euery aduan|tage vpon the enemy: and valiantly to animate, order and encourage his soul|diers to valour, vertue and honour; and that with couragious and honourable words: and if by fortune any of his squadrons be disordered and broken, he must with all speedinesse, courage, and skill redresse the same.


Gent.
But if any men in the rankes of his squadrons be hurt or slaine, either by the enemies great shot, or otherwise, so that wanting there those men which so are slaine or hurt, how are these rankes to be refurnished, so that it may be done without confusion?


Capt.
The order of the Romanes,The Romaines order was to fight in battallions. The Greekes did fight in Phalan|gia, or square. Men slaine or hurt in the first rankes, how to re|forme the rankes. The fore rankes to be alwayes kept full. as I haue already sayd, was to fight in order of battallions, the one to second the other, which is a very strong order of fight, were men expert and skilfull therein: And the manner of the Greekes was in Pha|langia; which is a iust square of men, whom we do therein imitate: which manner of square of men is, each man standing consequently in ranke, and in file one after other: so that if any of the first files or rankes be slaine or hurt, the next soldier suc|ceeding the same man hurt or slaine, is to step vp into his place  roome, and the next after to follow him; and so successiuely one to follow another, euen vnto the center or traine of the squadron: in such sort that alwayes the formost rankes be fully furnished.


Gent.
And what is to be done with those hurt and slaine men, for me thinkes they should be looked vnto.officers appointed to withdraw hurt and slaine men out of the battell.


Capt.
The Spaniardes haue a laudable custome, which is, that they haue cer|taine men appointed of purpose, to retract and draw foorth of the squadrons, such men as be hurt, and to bring them vnto the chirurgians: and for such as bee

slaine right out, to conuay them away, so that their slaine numbers is neuer light|ly knowne to the enemy. Which order I would wish to be receiued and obserued amongst vs.


Gent.
What other parts are there yet in him to be required?


Capt.
To be skilfull in giuing a Cami|sada.
Example.
To conduct the souldiers with great silence vnto the Cami|sada.
To inuest their shirtes.
To performe with resolution, and all celerity.
In such diffi|cult attempts the Sergeant Maior to be con|ductor.
Example.
In Ambuscados the souldiors to be silent and ready.
To charge sud|denly.
The Sergeant Maior to be soli|citous with the generall for ar|mour, and other necessaries for his regiment.
How the same to be reparted.
To be the vni|uersall procurer of the souldiers good.
Hurt or sicke men to be con|ueyed to the hos|pitals.
All vnder offi|cers to assist the Sergeant Maior.
The carriage-maisters.
The Harbin|gers.
The Sergeants.
Lieutenant and Alferes.
Drumme Maior.
Caporals of the field.
The Sergeant Maiors Coadiu|tors.Moreouer the Sergeant Maior ought to be very expert, and to be very skilfull, and well aduised, in the course which is to be kept in giuing a camisada: as that was, which was giuen vnto the Prince of Oranges army by the Spaniards, when he came to relieue graue Lodwike his brother, being besieged within Mouns in Henault, by Duke d'Alua, which was such, that he was faine to raise his campe, and retire toward Germany. Now in such cases, the Sergeant Maior must con|duct his souldiers with great silence, euen to the place of the enemies campe, and there shall he commaund them to put their shirtes vpon their armour, at one in|stant making ready to effect their desseignes, whereunto they shall passe with all speede and resolution, before that the enemy may be aduertized thereof by their Sentinels. And also when other great occasions are offered, where it is needefull to carry the souldiers with great silence, secrecie, and stilnesse, he is to be their guide; as did the Sergeant Maior Valleio, when Mondragon with his regiment pas|sed ouer the riuer Schalt, to succour their friends besieges in Targoes.
And in Ambuscados, which are to be done in places of couert; as woods, thic|kets, hollow wayes, or hils, he is to be carefull that the souldiers be silent and with|out noise, for not to be discouered, vntill their espials and watches, appointed for that purpose, doe giue them the signe of the conuenient time of their sodaine charge vpon the enemy.
Also it is the Sergeant Maiors part to be sollicitous and diligent with the prince or Captaine Generall of the army, and the other superiour officers, for the proui|ding of armour, and other necessaries for the companies of his regiment, and for the other munitions of powder, match, lead, and victuals: the which he shal cause to be reparted vnto the Sergeants of the bands, to be by them deliuered vnto the Caporals, who are to distribute the same among the companies.
And to conclude, he ought to be the vniuersall procurer of the souldiers good, procuring their payes, and that they be succoured in their necessities and wants. And if there be any hurt men or sicke, hee is to procure that they may be caried with all care, vnto the hospitals or such places deputed for the same, prouiding them of cariages, necessaries, and guides if neede require. To do all the which he hath all the officers of the regiment for helpers and ministers; which are to as|sist and obey him, For the cariage-maister is to furnish him with cartes, and cari|ages as shall be needefull, and the furrier maior, to prouide and bring munition at the day of battell: and the Sergeants to assist him, to set the squadrons and to keepe the companies in order and array: and the ensignes and Lieutenants to giue and notifie the orders and commandes to the gards for the seruice of the companies: and the drumme maior to proclaime and sound the generall com|mandes, bandos, and lawes of the field, and to giue warning vnto the Captaines, and companies, which are to haue the watch: and the Caporals of the field, being his Coadiutors, to assist and helpe him in all matters, and actions generall tou|ching his office, with whom he is to consult, and communicate his proper autho|rity vnto the best experimented of them (with leaue of his superiour comman|ders)

and vnto which Coadiutor the Captaines and officers ought to be obe|dient,The Sergeant Maiors Coad|iutor. as vnto the Sergeant Maior him selfe, receiuing also from him their or|der and commaundes: and therefore it behoueth that he be a verie sufficient per|son, of good deserts, and knowen to bee such; to the ende, that the respect which is borne to him for his office sake, be not lost, if the partes requisite in such a personage be not found in him. It toucheth not onely the Sergeant Maior to be a generall maister of all Militarie discipline,The Sergeant Maior a general maister of all mi|litarie discipline. A procurer of the souldiers soules health in general. Banishing all pub+like crimes, and commo~ offenders. and the vniuersall procurer of all necessarie things for the souldiers bodies (as I haue sayd) but he is also pre|cisely bound to be the procurer of their soules health, by punishing and ba|nishing all publike crimes and sinnes out of euerie Band and Companie, as leud keepers of common women, theeues, pilferers, disordered persons, and drunkardes, bawdes and brawlers, and all such as liue infamousely, and aboue all to be verie carefull not to suffer anie blasphemer, yea, if it were possible, not to haue anie swearing by the name of God, sith that with all these sinnes the di|uine Maiestie is highly offended: which if herein he haue the care that is requi|red, he shall not faile to be well reputed,The reward of a good officer, both in heauen and earth. fauoured and esteemed of the Prince, vnder whose ensignes he warreth, and also bee blessed of God, both in heauen and earth.



THE FOWERTH DIALOGVE.

VVherein is treated of the office, dutie and partes of a Sergeant Maior, entring with his regiment into a fortresse or towne of garrison, to keepe the same: and the orders therein to be obserued, both of officers and souldiers.


Gentleman.
_GOod Captaine, you haue verie well and largely declared the office, parts and duties of a Sergeant Maior, lying in the field and Campe; wherefore I pray let vs now intreate you to shew the parts of his office entring with his regiment into a fortresse or towne of garri|son, to defend and keepe the same.


Capt.
Hauing found you so kind and curteous (Gentlemen) I can do no lesse but endeuour my selfe to content you in what I may:The Sergeant Maior entring with his regime~t into any Fort or towne of strength to keepe the same, what he is to do.

1. To reknowledge the place well.
2. The places ne|cessarie for the Corps de guards, Sentinels, and Rounds.
3. The place of assembly.

To deuide the co~panies, and the or|ders to be obser|ued he must giue in writing vnto euer Captaine. and therfore I say, that when anie regiment doth enter into anie fortresse, towne, or castell, to reside there for the defence thereof, the Sergeant Maior is presently to reknowledge and viewe euery part of the same, both within and without, and to consider the parts most necessarie where to place the Corps de guards, and to set the Sentinels: and also to marke the most conuenientest places for the Rounds to passe, and to see the place or places of assembly or Armes, whereunto the Captaines and Companies are to gather and assemble, if in case anie alarmes be giuen: and this being done, he is presently to deuide the Companies according as he shall see it most conue|nient for the guard and custodie of the place. And of this repartition (communi|cating it first vnto his Colonell) he is to giue an order and instruction in writing, firmed with his hand vnto the Captaines and Ensignes of euerie Companie, reseruing a copy thereof himselfe, to the ende that no officer might with reason excuse himselfe, if hee should chance to commit any fault or negligence in any

thing touching the guard of that which was commaunded him, seeing it was deli|uered him in writing.
Great care to bee had in deuiding the guardes.And because there is great consideration and care to bee had in deuiding the guardes of a Fort, Hould, and Towne of defence, chiefly if any enemy army be expected to the same, notwithstanding that in all other times this care and foresight is to be obserued in this function:No companie to haue any one place assigned them to kepe customably.
The reasons.
In the euening to assemble the companies of the watch.
To draw lots, or cast dice for the quarters.
No companie nor squadras to know their quarter vntill the very houre of seting the watch.
To consider whe|ther the places for the Corps de guard be commo|dious.
Reparations to be done.
Garrits, and watch houses.
The walkes for the Roundes to be made commodi|ous. he should in no case assigne vnto eue|ry company the part of the wall or bulwarke which they are ordinarily to keepe: for the most often that townes haue beene taken by practize, tracto, or treason, the principall cause hath beene, that the Sentinell or officer, which so selleth the place, hath knowne the part and quarter where ordinarily hee was to guard and watch, whereof wee haue many examples: and therefore hee ought to as|semble, and gather into the place euery euening, the companies which are to bee that night of the watch, and that they draw lots, or cast the dice for the quar|ters which shall concerne them to keepe: and the troupes or squadraes, and Sentinels shall obserue the same order: in such sort that neither any companie, may foreknow his quarter, nor yet the squadra, what part of the wall doth ap|pertaine vnto them, vntill the very houre that the watches be set, and placed in the same.
Now this partition being made (as is sayd) hee is to consider very well, whether the Corps de guard, where the company or companies are to enter into and stand, be fit and commodious; and also those of the gates and caualleros. And if they haue neede of repairing, let him cause it foorthwith to be done, and also the garrits and watch houses, where the posts and Sentinels are to be placed, and whether they bee sufficient to defend and keepe out the raine: and this to be done at the charge of the city or towne, as is accustomed. And if the Rounds cannot commodiously passe round about the wals, he is to cause it to be accom|modated foorthwith. And must see, that there be sufficient store of torches, cres|sets, linkes, and lanthornes, as well to be kept in the Corps de guard, as for the roundes and counter roundes. In placing the companies which are to haue the watch,To prouide store of torches and lights for the night.
To set the watch an houre before night.
No souldier suf|fered to disarme himselfe vntill the shutting in of the gates.
The souldiers not to disarme vntil the Alferes be vnarmed. the Sergeant Maiors do vse different orders; for some do set them in the morning, and others in the euening; sooner, or later, as they shall thinke good. But in mine opinion, if necessitie did not otherwise constraine, I would alwayes set them (especially in sommer time) an houre before the sunne setting, as well for that the souldier should come supped, and so should haue no occasion there|fore to go out of the watch, as for that vntill the shutting in of the gates, no soldier should be permitted to disarme himselfe, giuing them to vnderstand how foule it is, and ill beseeming the profession of a souldier, that no sooner they are entred into the Corps de guard, but that their Corslets be hanged vp vpon the wals: yea and some doe vse it in the Campe, hauing the enemies army at hand, the which fault is intollerable, and they ought not to do it, vntill they see their Alferes disar|med first, on whom they ought to fixe their eyes, to imitate, as they do on their en|signes in the field,The orders to be obserued at the opening of the gates. to follow.
At the opening of the Gates, the Sergeant Maior ought to appoint the Sergea~t or Sergeants, that be of the gard, that they be present at the shutting  opening of the same, and the souldiers alwayes to betake them to their armes, not suffe|ring anie to carrie cloake, mantle or such like thing, to trouble them at that in|stant,

and that there first passe foorth at the wicket (which serueth for that pur|pose) fiue or sixe souldiers, who shall discouer, take knowledge, and viewe, se|uentie or eightie pases out abroad into the fields: and finding all things safe and secure,Not suffering the people to passe out or in by throngs. the gates shall be opened, first suffering the in-people to passe foorth, and that not by throngs, as commonly is vsed, but by litle and litle orderly; especially if there be cariages, cartes, or baggage: and vntill all those be passed out, he shall suffer none to enter in, neither permit them to approch nigh vnto the gates. And the issuing out of the people being ended, with the like regard and order ought the out-people to enter; alwayes hauing in the Corps de guard of the gate, both by day and night, two Sentinels, one at the weapons, and the other in the field; and that euerie one of these should haue a Spontone,The Sentinell to haue a Spontone. or a long sharpe iron, to the end, that when any waine, wagon, or cart, laden with hay or such like, doe passe by, he may therewith thrust the same thorough, to know if there be any deceipt therein hidden. For a Garrison may easily be deceiued by such guiles and strata|gemes. Like as Caesar de Napolie did attempt at Turine,Example of a practise. although he effected it not, being preuented by the aduise and diligence of a Smith, an inhabiter of that place.
He is to cause wood to be prouided for all the guardes,To prouide wood for the corps de guard.
Places to be pro|uided in the corps de guard to acco~|modate the armes although that cold weather constraine it not, for that to light their matches it is alwayes needfull to haue fire. And that in the Corps de guard there be place commodious to hang vp their Corslets, and to accommodate their peeces in good order: seeing not one|ly that it is necessarie, that the souldiers may with speede and readinesse betake them to their Armes, if in case the Alarme be striken, but also to auoyd all con|fusion, and also for the adorning of the Corps de guard.
And when the Ensignes or companies shall enter for guard or watch into the place, the Sergeant Maior is to be present, and he ought not to suffer then anie gaming Tables;Not to suffer any gaming tables the watch entring in|to the place.
To receiue their colors with great respect and reue|rence.
To keepe good ac|count of the num|ber of the soldiers. but the souldiers to receiue in their Colours with great respect and reuerence, sith they represent the authoritie Royall: and in doing the con|trarie, it repugneth all good Militarie discipline. And he is to keepe a good ac|count and reckening with the souldiers that serue in euerie Companie, according to the muster that they made, whereof he is to haue fede and certificate from the Pay-maister or Treasurer, and knowing thereby, that they bring to the guard and watch, much lesser number of people then they receiue pay for, he ought to take a reckening of the officers of the Companies, and for being carelesse herein, ma|nie souldiers do serue manie times but badly. And he ought not to suffer, that in their entring in or going out from the watch,To haue regard that their Armes be complete and good, and incon|uenient order. there want anie peece of their Cor|slets, or Morian to the shot, neither that they serue with rustie armour, nor of the antique fashion; neither that anie Pike do want his head, cheekes, or arming; for that in hauing them, it doth not onely beautifie the squadron, but it maketh it to seeme more then it is,All apparitions yeelding terror to the enemy, to be esteemed. which is a circumstance of great importance, sith all the apparitions which may yeeld terror to the enemie, are to be esteemed, and much accounted of.


Gent.
In what order do the Ensignes enter into the place?


Capt.
Vnto the Corps de guard,The orders to be obserued by the companies entring into the Corps de guard. the shot goeth alwayes in the Vantgard, and there arriuing, do open, making a lane or streete, betwixt the which the Pikes do enter, and march in their Arrayes: and (in mine opinion) they should not

carrie them aduanced vp,Another order set downe in folio 46. as I haue many times seene vsed, but they should passe in betwixt the shot, with their pikes on their shoulders, marching as they come; and at their ariuing, vnto the head of the shot where the Captaine standeth, without opening or disaraying, and then aduance their pikes, abiding in their rankes, and so from hand to hand, each ranke to do the like: and then the shot at that arriuing and rearing of their pikes, shall draw neare and empale the first rankes on each side, and so consequently the rest, vnto the end of this order; in such sort that the squadron may remaine formed and garnished.Two companies entring at once into the Corps de guard. And if by chance two companies do come at once into the place, as many times it chanceth, then ought they ioyntly to forme the squadron, with their shot on each flanke, and the corslets not to breake their arrayes, aduertising that alwayes the ensignes be in the center thereof.


Gent.
And the companies which stand at the ward, what are they to do when the others do enter?


Capt.
They must attend ready armed and armes in hand, standing vpon one side of the Corps de guard,The companies which were at the watch, what to doe. vntill that those companies which do enter, haue fi|nished their squadron; and then do they march in order towards their lodging, accompanying first their Coulours home.
And the Sergeant Maior is to bee carefull, to visite euery day the Corps de guards,The Sergeant Maior is to visite the Corps de guard. whereby he shall cause, that neither the souldiers nor officers do absent themselues from their watch, and that there be no brawles nor brables therein. And it doth import much, that hee doe the like in the Roundes and counter Roundes.
Vnruly souldiers to be punished.And if any should dismeanor himselfe, breeding question or braule, either in word or deede, he is seuerely to be punished, for the great inconueniences that may ensue thereupon, being so many men together with weapon in hand.
And he is to prouide that the Roundes and counter Roundes be of more or lesse men,The Roundes and counter Roundes. or more or lesse continued, according as neede shall require: but they neuer should returne to their Colours from whence they departed, vntill they haue furnished their quarter,Their dutes and charge. the which they ought to bestow and spend in gi|uing turnes about the wals,  veiwing the vigilance and carefulnesse of the Sen|tinels: and the like ought those to doe, which doe goe their Roundes in the towne.


Gent.
When the Roundes and counter Roundes do meete, as well in the campe as in a Castle,, who is to giue the Word one to the other first?


Capt.
The counter Roundes are most commonly of officers, and therefore by reason and dutie the Round is to giue place,The Round is to giue the Word first vnto the counter Round. and to giue the Word first vnto the counter Round. But for as much as Captaines themselues do vse to round in the ordenary quarters, it is conuenient, to the end that none may iustly be a|grieued, and to disbarre all oddes and inconueniences, that the Sergeant Maior (as a person, vnto whose charge and office is the disposing and appointing of the guards,The Sergeant Maior is to giue order for this point. Roundes, and counter Roundes) do giue order vnto the companies in what manner they are to behaue themselues in this particular point: which shall be, that alwayes the Round to giue place, and giue the Word vnto the counter Round: and thence foorth shall appoint the counter Roundes to be of officers of

the companies, as is accustomed.
And in case that in the one and the other there be officers, or that both be of souldiers, it is great reason that the Round do yeelde and giue the Word first, for that the counter Rounds be of more preheminence:The counter Rounds duty and charge. the which are not only or|dained to do the same which do the Roundes: which is to see vnto the care and vigilancie of the guardes and Sentinels, but they are also ordained to see if the Roundes do faile in their duties:The Gouernour and Sergeant Maior rounding extraordinarily is to giue the Word first vnto the Round.
The Round is to giue the Word first vnto the Sentinell, and to take account of a such as they shall meete.
If any passe out of the forest by night, to giue ad|uertisment ther|of.
The guard not to retire by day till an officer come to remoue them.
To visit and re|visit al things of|ten and as diffe|rent houres.
To reprehend with grauity and curteous spee|ches. But this is to be vnderstood in case that the supra Roundes be as ordenary as the Roundes: for that when the Colonell or Gouer|nour of the fort, or the Sergeant Maior doe extraordinarily visite and Round, as they are wont to doe, then is it their part to giue the Word vnto the Round: the which being not aduertised that they be any supra Round, he is bound to giue the Word vnto none but only vnto the Sentinell: and all those which he shall meete, he ought to view, and take account of them, of that which they doe, and whither they go; apprehending such as he shall find faulty, or any other suspected person that he shall fortune to meete. And if by chaunce there passe any body by night out of the fort or garrison, as commonly it happeneth, it is needefull to aduer|tise the Sergeant Maior thereof, who should thereupon take order to change the Word which the watch had, for the inconuenience that might happen for not doing the same.


Gent.
And the guardes by day, may they retire without farther order?


Capt.
No truly, vntill the Sergeant Maior, or his Coadiutor, do come to with|draw them in such manner as they were set, placing the guardes that are to re|maine there by day. And for as much as I haue spoken very much touching this officer, I will conclude with saying, that he ought to visite and reuisite at diuerse and different houres, all things that he hath prouided, after their well ordering; and see how they be performed, reprehending and punishing what he shall find worthy punishment. But he ought to do this in good and curteous sort, and so|ber manner, knowing how to commaund with sweete and gentle words, ha|uing a naturall grace thereunto, and grauity, whereby to be obeyed, in such sort, that when hee would determine to execute his desseignes, and his superiours charges and commandes, all the souldiers and officers might beare him that due respect and obedience,The drumme is the voice of the commander.
To prouide good Drummers. which should bee needefull to bring the same to effect. Finally, let the Sergeant Maior be very carefull to prouide good drum|mers, and men skilfull in their art, especially their Drumme Maiors; for the drumme is the voice of the commander in the field: and besides their skill with the drumme, to be men of good capacity and iudgement; also to speake sundry languages, being behouefull for many important occasions wherein they are to be emploied.


Gent.
Captaine,Many good parts ought to be in the prsonage of a Sergeant Maior. you haue throughly discoursed touching the office of a Ser|geant Maior; whereby is to be vnderstood how many great and good parts ought to be in the personage called to this martiall function. Now I pray tell what de|gree of office commeth next.




THE FIRST DIALOGVE.

VVherein is declared the Election, Office, parts and duties of a Camp maister or Colo|nell, and from whence these names Colonell, and Camp-maister did spring, with some discourse touching the nature of the Spaniardes.


The Camp-maister or Colonell, his Election and Office.

Gentlemen.
_THe next officer, in superiour degree, is the Camp-maister or Colo|nell. The election of this officer is made by the Prince, with the aduise of his Councell of state and warre. His office is, to be Com|maunder and Chiefteine ouer the Captaines, and all the other of|ficers of his Tertio or Regiment:The Colonell his office and Com|mande is ouer the Captaines and souldiers of his regiment. hauing iurisdiction  dominion ouer them all. Whereby may be inferred and gathered the partes and qualities which ought to be in him, and the great skill and experience in warre; as one who ought to exceede them all, for to know how to commaunde, rule, and gouerne them, with authoritie, prudence and valour. And for as much as in many occur|rants and occasions, growing and presented in warres, he ought to know how to performe the parts and office of a Lord high Generall,Principall partes in a Colonell. being alone with the com|panies of his owne Regiment, as when his Generall commaundeth him to the batterie, or siege of any fort or Citie, or to defend any towne or fortresse, or to warre in open Campania, to giue battell to the enemie, to make incursions, to re|tire and withdraw skirmishers, to frame bridges ouer riuers, to fortifie himselfe in campe, to conduct artillerie, and many other peeces of seruice to be performed with a band of three or foure thousand men: whereof there are many rare exam|ples, extant of many braue Colonels, who haue shewed themselues singular here|in, both English,Exa~ple of braue Colonels Lucius Martius.
The two Scipios slaine.
Asdruball the Carthagian. French, and Spanish, in our late and moderne warres, brauely behauing themselues, as did Lucius Martius, a Romane Knight, when hee gathe|red together the relictes of the defeated armies of the two Scipios, hauing had those their two Consuls slaine by Asdruball the Carthagian in a campall bat|tell. Therefore, I say, for as much as by that which is already spoken, may be vn|derstood, that he, which is a Campe-maister should be endued and graced with the like good partes and skill,To conduct, to fight and gouerne well. for to conduct, fight, and gouerne well, as a Cap|taine Generall, I will leaue to recite now, vntill I come to declare the partes and qualities due to be found in a High Generall of an armie Royall; and from thence shall be considered what concerneth this officer, and so will I at this present, speake onely of such things as hee ought to prouide for the good conduction and gouernement of the companies of his Regiment.
In the time of the Emperour Charles the fift, Frauncis the French king, and Henrie the eight,Colonels with vs, which the Spa|nyardes do call Maestres de Ca~|po, and wherefore so called. king of England, those were intituled Colonels, or, as some will, Coronels, which the Spaniardes do call Maesters de Campo: being yet called Colo|nels, by the Italians, the French, the Germaines, and by vs Englishmen, so called: by the Spaniardes, Maestres de Campo, for hauing, quited and depriued them the preheminence which they had to elect Captaines and Sergeant Maiors, the Lord

high Generals reseruing the same vnto themselues, leauing vnto them no more but the commaunde, and authoritie in the administration of iustice, and in the effectes of warre. For commonly the Captainries are appointed by the Prince or Generall:The Colonell ele|cteth to himselfe a Lieutenant, and Alferes, a Serge|ant, and Capo|rals.
Fro~ good  skil|ful officers, ensu|eth the obseruing of good orders. the Colonell electing vnto himselfe a most sufficient Lieutenant and Alferes, a Sergeant, and Caporals, all men of due sufficiencie, to the ende that his Captaines may imitate him therein; for that, that it importeth much to haue good and skilfull officers, sith from them doth grow the obseruing of good or|ders, and vnto the armie the due vse and exercise of armes, with the perfection of discipline, and all good partes to the perfection of infanterie, with incourage|ment to the souldiers, that with them the Colonell may attaine honor, glory, and fame by his actions, and militarie courses.


Gent.
Thus it seemeth that this name of Camp-maister is but moderne.The name of Co|lonell or Camp-maister, but mo|derne.


Capt.
True; Neither the name of Colonell very auncient.


Gent.
Then, how were those called before time, which had the gouernement of souldiers in armies?


Capt.
They were called Duces (guides) of which amongst the Romanes there were three sortes,By the Romans called Duces, dif|ferenced into 3. parts.

1. Duces Milita|res.
2. Duces Prouin|ciales.
3. Duces Limita|ni.
 or differences viz. Duces Militares, Duces Prouinciales, and Duces Limitanei; intituling those, Duces Militares, which went ordinarily with the armies: hauing each, vnder their charge and rule, one thousand men or more, as haue now our Ca~p-maisters or Colonels, or rather our Generals. The other, in|tituled Duces Prouinciales, were those which had all the souldiers of one Prouince, vnder their commaund and charge; as haue the Camp-maisters of the Tertios of Naples, Sicilia, Lombardie. The third, called Duces Limitanei, were those which had vnder their charge and gouernement, all the men of warre on the frontiers to the enemies, as had our Lord Marchers in England.


Gent.
Thus the titles of Dukes sprong first from the warres.


Capt.
So did the titles of Earles,The titles of Dukes, Earles, Marquises, and Knights, sprang from the warres. The Colonels co~|panie preceedeth all others of his regiment.
The Coronell ought to be a per|fect souldier.
Being such, the o|ther officers will more punctuallie performe their dutie. Marquises and Knights. But now to returne to our matter. The Colonels companie or bande, doth preceede all the other companies of his Regiment, both in place and in all other occasions. And now for to know how to commaund and gouerne all the officers of his band, and of all the other co~panies in his regiment, he ought most perfectly to vnderstand that which toucheth euery particular officer, euen from the Capo de squadra, vnto the Sergeant Maior: and it would bee a matter of great importance, to haue exerci|sed, and to haue risen vp through all these offices, the better how to know, and perfectionate his owne: for by knowing this, the Captaine, the Sergeant Maior and all the rest, will walke more warily, and passe more punctually in the accom|plishing of all their charges and duties, knowing that they haue a commaunder so skilfull, which quickly will perceiue, either their vertues or vices: perswading them to the one,  disswading the~ from the other: the which in actions of warre do either greatly helpe,The squadra of the Colonel, band ought to be soul|diers of experie~ce and valour and be aduantaged in their payes. To consult with his officers,  old souldiers. or greatly hinder.
In the squadra which belongeth to himselfe, out of his owne companie there ought to bee souldiers of great experience and valour, which should be aduan|taged in their payes, and whom he must esteeme and make great account of, con|sulting often with them,  with his Captaines  officers of best cariage,  most experience in his companies: For many times a priuate souldier of experience and iudgement, will giue better reasons, counsell and aduise, then many other of

higher degree: which often hath bene proued, and examples extant.
To procure tht all militarie di|scipline be duly obserued.
The duties of his officers and soul|diers one to ano|ther.He ought to procure that all militarie discipline be duly obserued and that his Captaines,  the other officers vnder his charge, do obey, respect,  honor him, sith they are bound thereunto, as vnto the person of their proper Generall, in all things concerning the seruice of their Prince: and that the souldiers doe obey their Captaines  officers with great humilitie,  reknowledgement, and in like sort that the officers do commaund and gouerne them with co~uenient speeches, and good entertainement and curtesie. And it shall also much auaile him to know the names of his Captaines,To know readily the names of his Captaines and officers. Lieutenants, Alferes, Sergeants  Caporals, and of all the particular souldiers, if it were possible; for in the pinches of warre, it is to great effect, to call a Captaine, officer, or souldier by his proper name.
The Sergeant Maior is obliged (as I haue before declared) to receiue his orders  directions from his Colonell, and with his opinion and appointment, to aug|ment or diminish the guards. But this to be vnderstood, when there is no Camp-maister Generall in the armie,The Camp-mai|ster general with vs the Lord high Marshall, his preheminence in field.
In the admini|stration of iustice to gouerne with all equitie and right.
Parts of his of|fice. whose proper office this is, whom he ought to re|spect and obey, and to accomplish all orders by him appointed, touching his charge.
In the administratio~ of iustice, he is to gouerne with great discretio~  wisdome, executing it with all equitie and right, that his souldiers thereby may both loue him  feare him; for it co~cerneth the Maister of the Campe, to apprehe~de, to dis|charge,  to punish,  also of life  death, in all delicts  cases deseruing such pu|nishments; and in things and matters committed against the commaunds, lawes, and bandos of the high Generall of the infanterie; and in whose absence he may co~maund orders  make lawes, and punish those that go against them, and obey them not; For, for the execution of iustice he hath his appointed officers, with their payes for the same; and also he doth iudge and determine their ciuill diffe|rences  debates, which shall arise among the officers and souldiers of his regi|ment. And if any do find themselues aggrieued with his sentences,Appellatio~s to be made to the high Generall. they may ap|peale vnto the Lord high Generall or Camp-maister Generall, that being vniust, they may reuoke them; and if not, then commaund them to be executed. And in all these matters touching the administration of iustice, if the Colonell gene|rall, or Lord high Marshall (being there any such) wil intermeddle therin, he may; and, as superior and preheminent in office, he may commaund, ordaine, do, and vndo; diminish or augment the authoritie and preheminence vnto the Colonell. It concerneth him also to haue regard to the place of victuals or market,His charge ouer the victuallers or victuals. that there be no deceipt vsed against the souldiers;  he is to set the price, waight,  measure of all that is sold,  to put good guardes to see that the marchants  vi|ctuallers may keepe their stuffe and wares in securitie and safe; and for the same, do the marchants and victuallers pay euery Saterday, for euery staule or booth, some six pence a peece or more; all this, being with his regiment alone, where there is no Camp-maister Generall; vnto whose office this doth properly apper|taine. He is to be carefull and diligent with the Lord high Generall for his soul|diers payes:To be carefull for the souldiers payes. and see they be prouided of armour, necessaries and needfull muni|tions, and the same to be distributed, as before I haue set downe: and this he is to do with such earnest diligence and affection, that he may oblige them all to ac|knowledge and confesse him for their true father, and faithfull Commaunder.
Among the Spanish co~panies in Italy,To be made ac|quainted with all new souldiers en|tertained into any ande. it is accustomed that no Captaine do en|tertaine any souldier into his band, but that the Maestre de Campo do first see and approue him, especially of a straunge nation, being not a particular and well knowne personage; for many inconueniences, that may follow thereon.


Gent.
But I haue heard say,The Spaniards will not permit any souldier of a straunger na|tion to beare of|fice among them. that the Spaniard permitteth none of a strange na|tion; though of neuer so good parts and seruice, to ascend vnto any degree of office among them: which is contrary to vs: for our Princes, in time past, haue re|ceiued, esteemed, and aduaunced, many straungers, being personages of vertue, valour, and desert.


Capt.
So did the Spaniardes in time past, in the times of their kings of Castillia and Aragon, in their sharpe warres amongst themselues, and against the Moores, wherein many of our nation did singular themselues,  from whom are descen|ded many of the chiefe houses of Spaine.The Spaniardes pride  ambitio~ grew principally since the discoue|rie of the Indies. But since their wonderfull discouerie of the Indias, by Columba an Italian; their maruellous conquestes therein; their in|estimable treasures, long since brought home, and continually receiued from the~ce; their long co~tinuance in warres, being nuzzelled therein by Charles the fift; the braue Prouinces of Italie and Flanders by him annexed vnto their crown;Fauours of for|tune. with sundry such fauours of fortune, hath inflamed them with such imperious minds,  possest them with such proude and high conceipts, with such iealousie of their honours, as they terme it; and inuested them with such an habite of scorne and pride, that it is a wonder if they permit any honorable Gentleman of a straunge nation, though endued with neuer so many good parts, and serued them neuer so well; to ascend vnto any high degree of commaund amongst them, their enuie is such.Their enuie to the Prince of Parma.
God may suffer them for the sins of some nations. For let vs but throughly marke  consider the actions of the braue Prince of Parma, done in their seruice, yet by them enuied, obscured, and slaundered what they may, and you may easily perceiue the veritie hereof. But what will be the end of their ambition and pride I know not. It may be that God suffereth the~, for the sinnes of some nations, as by Flaunders and France may appeare, and also by their attempts against vs.A good conside|ration. But who can tell, whether the Lord vsing them for a minister, as the louing father doth the rod, to correct his beloued children; who, after correction or amendement, casteth the rod into the fire. God graunt vs the spirite of true repentance, the which if we haue, we litle neede to feare the smart of this odious rod. Yet this much I say againe for the Spaniard, that any braue Gentleman, seruing valiantly amongst them, in place of a priuate souldier, shall be esteemed, beloued, and fauoured of them, so he aspire not to commaund: a great signe of ingratefull mindes:Euery braue ma~ of warre beareth a tatch of ambi|tion.
Enuie and feare|full iealousie euer rise in the world. for who knoweth not, that euery braue man of warre beareth a tatch of ambition, and of aspiring minde, deeming their vertue valour, and seruice to deserue degree of charge: a thing not to be misliked, in mine opinion, so it be procured by lawfull and honest meanes. But enuy  fearefull iea|lousie, is now ouer rife in the world, raigning commonly amongst men, not of the best deserts, fearing a companion with them in office.


Gent.
Me thinkes,The proud Spa|niardes Mappa Mundi to be Crossed. you haue shewed vs the proud Spaniardes Mappa Mundi; wherefore it were good for vs to crosselyne him what we may.


Capt.
Proud Spaniard indeede, and ambitious also; his minde neuer resting like Siziphus rowling stone. But it was not so, two or three hundred yeares agone: for then were they poore, and contented to liue quietly with their neighbours,

and glad of their good wils,Pouertie breeds humilitie; humi|litie breeds cre|dit; credit breeds aduauncement, aduauncement brings wealth; wealth breeds pride; pride sprouts ambition; ambition begets enuie; enuie bro|cheth warres; warres brings po|uertie; pouertie brings peace.
A pretie confes|sion of a Biscayn Spaniard.
The Indian gold the sew of the warre. for pouertie made them humble; their humilitie brought them fauour and credit, credite wrought their aduauncement; aduaun|cement heapt by fortune, brought wealth; wealth bred their pride; their pride sprouted ambition; their ambition begat enuie; and their enuie engendred warres; warres may breed pouertie, and pouertie breedeth peace. Hereupon will I reporte you certaine speeches passed betwixt my selfe, and a young Biscain Spa|niard, of whom I had the examinatio~, with others his companions, not long since, at Laugharns, a sea coast towne in Southwales. After hauing answered vnto such points and interrogatories, as were vnto him propounded in presence of the Lieutenant of that Shire and other Gentlemen, I demaunded of him againe tou|ching his kings Armadas, and preparation for warres. Captaine (saith he) our king hath ships but vnwilling mariners, his preparation of the last Summer is now dissolued: his home bound Indies fleet being safely arriued; and his out bound sent away; After this safe arriuall of this his Indian fleet, bringing the sinew of his warres, what he will do, I know not,  euery spring there is speeches of warre; but I perceiue small performance and effecting; and but bad successe yet, especi|ally against your nation. But how soeuer the game goeth, we, the poore do smart, and I wish the ill yeare to his Eggars and setters on; the Pope, his Clergie, and some his warre Commaunders; who, the warres being ended, should happely liue but hardly;The Spaniards ambitio~ warreth vpon all Christen|dome.
The Indias fay|ling, the Spani|ard soone a beg|gar.
A good suspition. what nation is there, which our ambitio~ hath not warred on? The Italian, the French, the Flemming, and you the English; of the poore Indians I speake nothing, which feedeth him with wealth, which were they cut from him, or should they rebell, or should his fleets fayle him but two or three yeares toge|ther, he were in hazard to be a beggar. He aspireth all, and aymeth a conquest of his neighbour nations: but God knoweth which of them may arise in the end, and be our confusion: for my Genius suspecteth somewhat; and this was the effect of his speeches.


Gent.
His speeches were to be mused at, if he spake bona fide.


Capt.
Bona fide, or not: but such were his speeches. Well now it is time for me to returne to our Colonell, from whom I haue long bene absent, by reason of your demaund.
The Colonell is to carrie a great re|spect to his high Generall.
To be a faithfull counsellour.
His proper ar|ming.
To be most com|monly on horse backe. He is greatly to respect and honour his Lord high Generall, obeying and per|forming his commaunds and orders with great care and diligence, procuring to keepe himselfe alwayes in his grace and fauour, being a faithfull counsellour vn|to him: and to execute his Commissions (hauing first throughly conceiued and vnderstood them) with great, valour, and readinesse. His arming is the proper ar|ming of a Captaine, but to be alwayes, or most commonly on horsebacke, pro|uiding and ordering all things most necessary and conuenient for the good go|uernement of his companies. But if his Regiment should sallie out to battell, and all his Captaines placed in ranke,To dismount on foote his regime~t sallying out to battell. hee shall then dismount, and shall guide his companies on foote, for the honour and estimation of the infanterie: as well was shewed at the great muster of all the Spanish armie before king Philip and his Queene at Vadaioz, at the conquest of Portugall: And for as much, as the other parts which may seeme to concerne a worthy Colonell, may be considered, when we come to speake of a Captaine Generall touching his office and charge, I will conclude, concerning this officer, with the wordes of Cicero in his Oration Pro

Lege Manilia:The parts to be in a great Comman|der in warre. declaring the partes of a great Commaunder in warre: which is, great experience in martiall actions; deepe knowledge in histories; a life not spot|ted with notable crimes; to be magnanimous and valiant; and to be beloued, fea|red, and followed of his souldiers: and finally to haue fortune to friend.



The end of the fourth Booke.


THE FIFTH BOOKE OF WARRE DISCOVRSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.

The first Dialogue:

VVherein is declared the election and office of a Captaine generall of the Ar|tillerie, or Maister of the Ordinance: vvith certaine discourses touching fortifications, as well naturall as artificiall: and the confines of kingdomes or realmes, as well Maritime as Inland: the difficultie of their defences, to barre a strong enemie the entrie: with other particular points touching Fortes and fortified Townes.


The Generall of the Artillerie, or Maister of the Ordinance, his election and office.

Captaine.
_THE place and office of the Generall of the Artillerie, or Maister of the Ordinance,What personage to be chosen to be Maister of the Ordinance. is appointed by the Prince. His function is of great qualitie and trust, for the reputation had of the same, and for the effects which the same performeth: and therefore is alwayes encommended and bestowed vpon personages of great grauitie and authority, and of great pru|dence, valour and experience: for besides the gouernement which he hath of the Artillerie of the Armie, when the same encampeth: it tou|cheth him,His dutie both a|brode  at home. by reason and course of warre, to prouide for all the sorts  strengths of the realme; and to appoint the orders for their fortification and defence.


Gent.
These things are no doubt of great consideration, therefore we would

willingly heare what courses might be taken for the fortifying and defence of a realme, to withstand the enemies attempts.


Capt.
The strength of euery King or Prince, consisteth in the quantitie and quality of his subiects, and in the good quality of his dominion and countrie.


Gent.
I pray shew vs more particularly hereof.


Capt.
I say (gentlemen) that those Princes and Republikes are iudged most mighty, which in their kingdomes and states, doe maintaine, 1 good religion, 2 good lawes,Those kingdomes most strong, which do maintaine good religion, good lawes, and good armes.
All prouinces strong by nature, by art, or by both. Strong by nature, how.
Strong by art, how. 3 and good armes; and who doe enioy holsome ayre, 2 fertill ground, and 3 naturall strength, with such other desirable commodities; where|fore to explane the matter more, you are to vnderstand, that all kingdomes or prouinces are strong either by nature, or by art, or by both.
They are strong by nature, when they are enuironed with the seas round a|bout, or part thereof, or backed with lakes, mountaines, riuers, or desertes. And those are strong by art, which in their frontiers, and in places most conuenient, haue townes, castels, and fortresses, fortified by art.


Gent.
It seemeth by this, that the Captaine Generall of the Artillery ought to be very skilfull in artificiall fortifications, I pray therefore declare vnto vs, the considerations to be had in fortifying a place or realme.


Capt.
All confines are either Mediterraneall, or Maritime, or both the one and the other;All confines are either Mediter|raniall or Ma|ritime or both. Considerations. and either they are in mountainous places, or in plaine champain, or do participate of the one, and the other. If they be Mediterraneall, it must bee viewed and considered on what part the enemy might enter to offend the coun|trie, and what passages he might haue most commodious to conduct his Army, with his munitions and impediments. And it is to bee considered also, on what partes he may most easily make his inrodes, and retire againe with safety, and whether there be any situation, which being fortified by the enemy, might molest and annoy the countrey adioyning.
Maritime Con|fines.If the confines of the kingdome bee Maritime or sea coast, all the coastes and compases are to be viewed and remarked; and to see and consider, whether there be any gulfe, shore, baye, creeke, hauen, port, or any riuer mouth, whereinto the enemy entring with his nauie, and there landing, might annoy and assayle a countrie.Nota. For sea coasts, although they be in some respects strong, yet are they to be entred by a nauie by sea, and do hold the defendant in great suspence and care, not knowing where, or in what part, such nauy will arriue; and so is he driuen to greater charge, being constrained to keepe garrisons in euery suspected place.
And yet it is not inough to keepe good strengths in places most necessarie, and well prouided, for that many times there is found a shore, a baye, a creeke, or riuer mouth, not before esteemed or thought vpon, whereunto the enemy arri|uing and entring with a mighty nauy,A principall note Example of the Spanish nauy,  armes in Portu|gall. and there fortifying himselfe vpon some strong and fit situation, doth put the countrey and kingdome in great perill and daunger. As was seene by the Spanish nauy and army, at the conquest of the Por|tugall kingdome, who touched at the head of Caxcais, and landed in a place neuer thought vpon by the Portingall, so they found themselues deceiued, thin|king that the disembarkment should haue beene betwixt the city and San Gillians Castle, where they stood fortified in their trenches, with determination to de|fend

the landing.Sundry landings of Sir Francis Drake, in the In|dias and in the parts of Spaine. Sea coasts to be defended with di|fficulty and cost. And the sundry braue la~dings of Sir Francis Drake in the Indias, and in many partes of Spaine and Portugall (at most of the which I my selfe haue bin) do verifie the same: wherby it is manifestly to be gathered, that sea coast coun|tries are to be defended with great difficulty, cost, and charge, and with doubtfull successe, yea although that they haue many places strong by nature. And for as much as there be diuerse and variable qualities of confines, and no certaine rule to be giuen thereupon, nor what distance there should be from frontier to fron|tier, it must be presupposed that the confines of a kingdome,The confines of a kingdome resem|bled to the circuit of a city. doth hold some correspondency with the circuit of a city: in the fortification whereof, the bul|warkes are the most important members, the which are set in the place where they may most offend the enemy, and also defend themselues, and the city; regard|ing therein due distance, in such sort that the one may defend the other, with their Artillery and small shot, and in like manner the Curtines betwixt bulwarke and bulwarke; with other aduertisements therein to be considered. And euen so the sortes to be made in the frontiers,The fortes of confines what proportion to hold. are to hold the like proportion, and corres|pondency with the confines of the countrie, as do the bulwarks with the courtines of a city; the one being placed so neare vnto the other, that they may assist and suc|cour one another, and in such partes as may most damnifie the enemy, and best defend themselues.
The places most apt to receiue offence by the enemy, being found out, and also to offend him,Places apt to re|ceiue offence by the enemy, are first to be forti|fied. it is necessary to fortifie the same, as well the sea coasts as the in|land, with strong fortifications, castles, and bulwarkes taking wonderfull adui|sement, and carefull consideration in chusing the situations thereof, whether it be on plaines, or hils, or Maritime; or consisting of all three, vnderstanding onely the compasse or circuit of the fort, with a certaine conuenient space round a|bout the same.
Of situations in plaines,How situation in plaines are stro~g. Holland and Zealand. those are strong, which are enuironed with deepe lakes, great moores, and high water shores, and bankes, and those which may bee sunke vnder water in time of necessitie, as in Holland and Zealand, and these which haue a Campania raza, or plaine Champain, sufficient distant from all things that might ouer-commaund the same, as is the Castle of Millan and Antwerpe, and such like.
Of situation vpon a hill,Castels of Millan and Antwerpe. Situation vpon a hill, how it is strong. that is strong which standeth in the most highest part thereof, all vnderlayed with naturall rockes round about, not hauing neare it a|ny superiour nor equall mount: for in effect all situations which haue a difficult accesse are strong, when they cannot be offended from other adioyning mounts; and much more stronger, if not minable; as is the fort of San Sebastian in Guipus|cua, and that of Denia in Valencia, with sundry others the like: for mining is the greatest offence that such fortes can receiue.
The Maritime situations are strong,Maritime situa|tions, how they are strong.
Saint Gillians Castell.
Pennion of Veles. when they be compassed with the sea, as is the litle fort at Plimouth, or partly compassed with the sea, and the rest deuided from the maine, by great and deepe ditches, as is the Castle of San Gyllians by Lisbona; or built vpon some toppe of a rocke, with the aboue sayd commodi|ties; as is the Pennion of Veles Malaga within the straightes of Gribratar in Spaine,How all strong places are expug|ned. and such others.
All strong places are expugned either by force or battery and armes, or by

treason, or by surprize, or by long besieging, but we are now to treate of no more, but of the manifest expugnation wherewith holds and fortes are wonne, which is, by battery, by assault, by scaling, by vndermining, and such like.
Citties are made strong by nature and industrie; of that by nature, we haue al|ready spoken in the strength of situations.
Cities made stro~g by nature and in|dustry.
Strong by indus|try, how.
By matter.
By forme.Cities by industry are strong, by the forme and by the matter.
Strong by the matter, when they haue thicke walles, great Terraplenes, and broade and deepe ditches.
By the forme they are strong, when it is framed such, that when the most far|thest off that may be, and from most parts and quarters, it may offend the enemy with Cannon and fiery shot.
Circular figure.Of this sort are those, which do most neare aproach vnto the Circular figure; but with good regard of the due largenes of the Curtines, and the equall distance of bulwarke to bulwarke.
Fortes of 5, 6, 7, 8, or 10 Angles. The 4 anguled the worst.
Small places of themselues, but weake.
Ouer large not long defencible.There entreth amongst these all Fortes and strong Townes, consisting of fiue, sixe, seuen, eight or ten Angles; and Curtaines, by direct line, and how many more Angles, so much the better, the foure Anguled of all others is the worst.
And it is to be noted, that very small places are of themselues but weake, be|cause they cannot so sufficiently resist any excessiue battery, and other offences, as great places may, which haue roome capable inough to raise defences, and ne|cessary Rampartes against any great force: neither yet ought they to be so large, that the circuit therof would require a whole army to defend it.
Fortifications of Cities and Castles is grounded prin|cipally against the offence of ar|tillery.
Artillery is deui|ded into sizes royall and lesser.The fortifications of Cities and Castels is grounded principally against the offence of artillery, and is also defended with the same.
And it is to be noted, that the artillery is deuided and differenced, into great|nesse or Sizes royall, and into lesser sizes.
Of the Size royal, is that peece which shooteth a bullet from seuenteene pound waight vpward; as is the Culuerine, the quarter Cannon, the demy Cannon, the Cannon and double Cannon; the Pedrera, Basilisco, and such like. And for the lesser size and difference, is to be vnderstood all peeces that shoot bullet of waight from seuenteene pound downeward, as is the demy Culuerine, the Saker, the Minion, the Falcon, the Falconet, euen to the Rabinet, and Hargubuze a Croek.
What artillery most offensiue to fortresses and strong places.The artillery from whence a City, Fortresse or Fort, may receiue most offence and dammage, is that of the greatest size, and greatnesse: for of the lesser size there is no great doubt to be had, sith that the demy Culuerine can do no great offence nor dammage, and from that size downeward: and therefore the Bulwarkes, Ter|raplenes, and Parapets, are to be made in such sort and strength, as they may be able to resist and beare of the blow and gulpe of the artillery of the greatest size: and Mattockes, shouels and spades are fit instruments and tooles to the same.
Strong places to be coupled with their conuenient members.
The members of all strong places are.Resolution taken of the forme of the City, Fortresse, or fort, be it either of 5, 6, 7, or 10 Angles, or of how many soeuer, it is necessarie to couple the same with their conuenient members, to make it of proportionall strength; which are these following.


Bulwarkes.
Bulwarkes.The Bulwarkes are made vpon the Angles or corners of the forme of the City or Fort, and of such size and measure as shall seeme due and conuenient vnto the

skilfull engyner; and they ought to be made obtuse or blunt, and not sharpe: for so they are more strong and capable.
The parts of a Bulwarke are the Trauesses or flankers;The parts of a Bulwarke. the Orecchion or Pome, or gard, or shoulder; the front or Curtaine; the Counter front or Spurres; the Pestiles or Parapets; the place or roome for the artillery in the vnder Trauesse or flanker,  in the vpper; the entrances into the one and the other, and into the place aboue.
The Bulwarkes, as I sayd, are placed vpon the Angles, and from any part (you will) of the Angle is taken 120,The placing of Bulwarkes and order how. or 130 foote, for the places of the Artillery both aboue  beneath, and for his Parapets  place of the same Bulwark, and at the end of this said number is taken the Trauesse vnto the right Angle aboue the Curtine of the sayd measure; from the head of the which measure,  from the point of the first Trauesse next adioyning, is drawne an indefinitiue line;  doing the like from the other part of the Angle and from the other Trauesse, these two straight lines shall come to be cut, in the which cutting shall the Angle of the Bulwarke be.
And it is to be noted, that it shall be better that the Curtines of the Bulwarke, do stand in such sort, that they may bee touched or beaten from the first Can|nonera,The Curtine. from whose flanker or Trauesse it taketh his defence and the point may be taken somwhat more distant from the flanker in a large Curtine; and according as one wold make the Bulwarke great or little, so the measures must be encreased or diminished with conueniencie.
It is necessary to make in the Bulwarkes certaine issues or sallies, the which are made on the part that looketh toward the flanker or Trauesse:  the Bulwark ha|uing an Orecchion,Issues, or Sallies. they are made in the first Trauesse, vnder the first Cannonera or Canno~ roome: and at the least it ought to haue one, for that they be very neces|sary for the defence of the ditch, and to put people out thereat. And for the better to giue you to vnderstand, I should draw a Plat or figure of the Bulwarke, but time now permitteth me not.
The Tronera or which standeth next vnto the Orecchion ought to defend the front of the Bulwarke, and part of the ditch, although the first may de|fend the whole,The Tronera, o  therfore the point or front of the Orecchion shall alwayes ende with two blunt or obtuse Angles, and shall be somwhat more narrow in the said front or end, th in then beginning neare vnto the Tronera.
The Pendent or bending of the Parapet should be somwhat round or slope, to the end that the shot of the artillery,The Pendent of the Parapets. beating thereupon, might glance vp, for not to annoy those that stand at the defence, which would if they are made straight vpon a right line:  from the sayd Parapet shall be discouered the couert way a long the edge or border of the ditch. The Counterfortes, and the other ap|pertenances of the Bulwarke haue also their measures and proportions; the which I leaue to repeate to auoide prolixitie; and because they may be more or lesse, ac|cording to the desseigns and Plats of the perfe Inginers.


The Cauallero within side, adioyning to the Curtine.
The Caualleres within side adioyning to the Curtine,Caualliere. are builded in the middest of them; and from such Caualleres are the Curtins or walls of the Bulwarke de|fended, and also the field. And for this cause are the Bulwarkes wont to be made more sharpe, and lesse strong, and they are to be more higher then the Curtines, and open toward the field.



Caualliere a Cauallio.Cauallere a Cauallo, called a Platforme or bastard.
The Platformes or Cauallers without the Curtines, are in like sort built about the midle of the wall, and without, as are the bulwarkes, and his height is of the highnesse of the wall. These against a good battery are but weake, for that one of their flankers is easily beaten downe, and so the city more easie to be annoyed; and haue no more but one Cannonera, with his place high  low, which defendeth the great curitne  the curtin of the bulwarke: the angle is made in respect of the two bulwarkes. This sort of platformes is made vpon necessitie, betwixt the two bul|warkes, by reason that the wals or curtines are ouer long, and aboue due measure: it were better to seeke some other remedy, and not to vse this sort of flankers; for they be weake and dangerous.


The Caualleres within side, and distant from the Curtines.
Cauallero, or a mount within side distant from the curtine.The Cauallers aparted from the wals, are built in places which haue any high ground without, and opposite, which may discouer and annoy the city; and on such part where the enemy may come in couert, eue~ vnto the ditch, without being seene or annoyed: they are to be made of such height, as may suffice to see ouer the seat that it wold discouer; and are made so broade and large, as may be capable for the artillery, which is pretended to be there planted, and the thicknesse of the Parapets, as shold be sufficient; for they come first to be battered with the enemies artillery: and are to bee builded so farre distant from the walles, that the ruines, when they be battered come not to annoy the souldiers, that stand at the defence. These Caualleres ought in no wise to be made within the bulwarkes, for so it wold occupy the place that should serue to defend them; but to be built in some place behind them, or on some other part; they haue also their Scarphe or Alambor, and are to be open on that part next vnto the towne, with their entrances good and sure from any offence that might come from without.


The Tenazas, or
The Tenaza, orThe Tenazas are made in place of the platformes, being set within the wall; and also are built in hilly situations, vpon, or toward the turning of the valley: and are the best manner of flankers, for it is nothing else but a Curtine defended with his bulwarkes.


The Tizeras, Dientes, and Casamats.
Tizeras, and Casamats, orThe Dientes and Tizeras, and other simple flankers, are to be accommoda|ted in situations or seates strong by nature; for they come euill to purpose on plaine grounds, not in place that may be battered: and therefore the curtines which be defended with such manner of Trauesses ought to bee short; for hauing but one flanker they are but badly defended. Their measure or sizes are bigger or lesser, according to the quality of the seat where they be set.
Casamats were wont to be made in steede and place, where we now plant our

Platformes, but so low that they arriued not vnto the alture of the ditch. They are vnprofitable, for they are soone ouer couered with the ruine that falles from the battery, and smothered with the smoke of their owne Ordenance: for they bee all close and couered, and do giue meanes vnto the enemy to aproach neare vnto the walles, with trenches, or such like aprochings.


The gates of the City, or Fortresse.
The gates or portes are to bee placed in partes most commodious for the ser|uice of the city,The gates. both in peace and warre, conuenient to receiue in, or put out peo|ple, necessary, and most safe and sure from all manner of offences, and so low that the ditch may hide and couer them. The gate must haue his draw-bridge made of timber, and his rastell or drawer of strong timber or iron; and must also haue his Serracenesca or Percluys.
The way which commeth from without, should not come direct vpon the gate,The way from without. to the ende it be not easily discouered into the field; but of sufficient wide|nesse, for the passages of cartes, waynes, and artillery; and of a moderate highnes.


The Terraplene, and place or broade way behind the same; and the spaces of Retreats.
The Terraplene,The Terraplene. the only remedy against the fury of the artillery, is to bee made within, or close behind the wall, and within the bulwarke and caualleros. It ought to be framed in such manner, that the wall being fallen, the same may re|maine and stand like a mighty mount against the enemy: and should be made of such fast and massie earth, that it crumble, slippe, nor rowle not, and so fall downe; as did a fortification made at Carthagena in Spaine, for being made of running sand. The height and breadth thereof ought to be such as the commo|dity and seat will require.
Toward the City on the inner part, it ought to decline and bend downe by little and little, for the easie ascending to the defence of the wall; not onely for the loose souldiers,An open way at the foote of the Terraplene. but also for a formed squadron, and the artillery. There should be within at the very foote of the Terraplene, an open way round about the city, and withall, behind the same, certaine conuenient spaces and roomes to con|taine squadrons of soldiers for to succour  relieue those that stand at the defence of the walles, and also to make retraites into, when necessity should constraine.


The ditch small or great.
The ditch is made on the out side round about the wall,The ditches. and ought to be made so deepe, and cast vp so high, that it should couer the wall, at the least vnto the Cordone, and no more but to the beginning of the Parapete; for that, for to bat|ter the wall, the enemy would be constrained to mount vp: and should be of such widenesse, that it might not be well passed ouer with bridges, ladders, or other engines, and difficult to be filled with any matter. It should haue in the middest a little ditch or gutter, which shall serue as well to receiue the waters, as to assure

them somewhat from the myne; and also to giue some hinderance to the enemy, when either perforce, or by surprise, or by treason, they should enter into the ditch. At the end of the ditch there should be made a close way or passage, by the which the souldiers might secretly sallie to annoy the enemy; and to defend the ditch; and themselues to be defended from the wall: and round about the ditch there should be another like vault or priuie way.


The Campania raza, or plaine Champain, without the towne.
Campania raza.The Campania or field without the Citie ought to be razed or plained a thou|sand pases round about, beginning from the border or ring of the ditch; or at the least of sixe hundred pases: and there should remaine neither ditches, wals, gar|dens, orchards, nor buildings, nor boundes, nor by-pathes, nor hollow wayes, nor any thing else that might yeeld meanes vnto the enemy to approch the Citie, without being endangered: rasing downe in like sort, all other things that might serue for Cauallero or Mount, to aduantage the enemy to the batterie.
All these things are the members of a fortification, the which how much more fit, and proportionally they be placed about the body and circuite of a Citie, so much doth it make the same more strong and beautifull.




THE SECOND DIALOGVE.

VVherein is entreated of the refortifying of any old Castels, Townes, or Cities, with the considerations to be had in the same: fit for the safetie and defence thereof.


Gentleman.
Refortifying of old places of strength._YOu haue declared of most things necessary to any new fortificati|ons: but now, because more commonly old Castels and Cities be repaired and refortified, then new forts erected; I pray, what or|der is there to be taken in such refortifications?


Capt.
Situations of Ci|ties and fortres|ses.All Cities, Townes, Fortresses or Castels, do stand ei|ther on a plaine or on a hill, or on the sea shoare (as before is sayd) or else partici|pating of all three: now whether it be on maritime confines, or in land boundes, before that one come to raze downe the old wals, and to build vp new, these mat|ters following are first to be co~sidered, as well for the situation without as within.


Annotations of the out situations.
Annotations of the out situatio~s.It must be remarked and considered if the Citie or situation without be vpon a hill, or on plaine, or participating of both; and of what sort is the one and the o|other, of these qualities: if there runne any riuer along by the Citie or neare it, of what quantitie or greatnesse it is, and toward what part it runneth:  if it haue any lake or poole adioyning neare vnto it, of what greatnesse it is, or of what store of water; or if there be about it any litle hils or bankes which might endammage the place: or if there be any valleis, bottoms, or hollow wayes, where the enemy might be hidde~, and come to annoy the Citie; of what qualities the mount or hill

is, whereupon it is seated, either if of hard stone, or of soft, frangible, and easie. Now if it be in a plaine, there must be considered (aboue the aboue said) how the ditch standeth, how the field, and how the riuers runne.
It is also to be noted,Annotations. that if in any of these situations there be neare adioyning any woods, vineyards, orchardes, garde~s, tuffe of trees, houses, Churches, Mona|steries, or other edifices, considering whether they be such as may annoy the ene|my, or render him any commoditie, whereby he may easily harme the Citie.
If the seat of the citie, fort, or fortresse, be maritime, or sea coast,  must be considered the qualitie of that sea, and of the hauen or port, and of what depth it is, whether it hath any litle Isle or rocke neare vnto it, the which the enemy en|ioying may offend and annoy you, and whether it hath any shoare, bay, recepta|cle, or place of refuge, or any riuer-mouth, where the enemies fleet riding easily at an anker, might hinder  empeach, their succour by sea, and continually mo|lest them: what distance there is from the wall vnto the sea, and whether it bee such that the enemy may aduantage himselfe therewith:  all the abouesayd con|siderations touching the situations of sea or land, noting the same with great care, heede, and forecast.


Annotations of the seate within the Citie, Fort, or Castell.
The same care and regard is to be had within the place,Annotations within the place. and to reknowledge euery part thereof particularly; beginning with the forme, and then the height and thicknesse of the wall, and the qualitie thereof: moreouer it is to be viewed in what part it is most weake and feeble; what flankers it hath; what Terraplene; how high, and how thicke; what space betwixt the same and the habitations and dwellings: what gates, how framed and seated: what ditch; how broad, and how deepe: whether dry, or with water: what entries, or sallies: of the waters without the place, Citie, or Castell, or within; whether by open Canales, or by couered Aquaductes: whether the most habitations of the Citie be on high aboue the al|ture of the wals, or equall with them, or whether the wals doe surmount the Ci|tie: and finally all other considerations, worthy to be noted.
These considerations duly had,  resolution taken, then a plat must be drawen with conuenient rules and measures to reduce the sayd Citie,A plat to be drawen. Towne, or Fort, to the best forme that may be, with as litle ruine  defacing of houses or churches as may possible be, placing the bulwarks, the Caualleros,  the Tenazas,  other edi|fices conuenient to their seates, sometimes shortning, sometimes enlarging the place; profiting the~selues with the old buildings (being good thereunto) taking a|way the litle Turrets which sta~d betwixt the trauesses; reducing the wall vnto the due altitude, putting the Terraplene a litle distant from the same, for not to beare it downe; helping it with fagots, bauens, and such other stuffe.
The ditch should be made with all his appertenances, and conuenient mea|sures.
And for as much as old Townes, Cities, and Fortes, being of diuerse formes, some round, some of sharpe angles, and some of obtuse angles, or right, with their Curtines either long, or short out of measure, it would be impossible to giue any particular rule for euery one: therefore it were good and necessary that the

skillfull Enginer should aduantage himselfe with the already sayd rules and mea|sures commodious,Skilfull Enginer. and with his owne good wit and iudgement: for so may there be fortified any place vpon any manner of seat: onely he ought be aduised to pro|fite him with the old to spare his maisters purse what he may, but yet without o|uermuch damnifying and weakening the fortification.
To fortifie the feeblest partes first.Resolution taken vpon the desseigne or modell of the forme and greatnesse that the Citie or fortresse is to haue, hee must begin to fortifie the feeblest place first, and the aptest to be offended, foreseeing, and prouiding, that before he ouer|throw any of the old, that that which hee buildeth a new, may stand in defence. There shall be made gates, and sallies, and their streetes both within and with|out: and the space or way behind the terraplene; and round about without shall all things be made plaine and disencombred: and with other appertinances, as be|fore is declared.

Gent.
There be some Cities  townes compassed about with such altures or heights, that the souldiers cannot wel stand at the defence thereof, without being enda~maged either in front, in flanke, or at the backe: what remedy is there for that?



Remedie and defence of a place, annoyed with diuerse altitudes.

Capt.
Places annoyed by diuerse al|tures, the reme|dies.The best  most secure remedy shall be to take in the sayd heights with the wals of the citie or place: but when, for good respects it cannot so be done, the wall should be withdrawe~ inward so far, that the offences co~ming fro~ such mou~t, being so farre distant, might come to be of litle effect or force: and when none of these two things may be done, then being in front it is necessary to fortifie in con|tra such a stepdame, that might be able to resist all rigour offred from the same, placing against it a strong and gallant point of bulwarke,A point of bul|warke. if the seat will permit it; in such sort that from such a stepdame, the Cannoneras of the flankers, which are to guarde this bulwarke, may not bee embocked or stopped vp: for it must be procured, what possible one may, that the Cannoneries be not offended and an|noyed. And if there ca~not be placed a good point of a bulwarke, then build there a Tenaza,Tenaza, what it is. that is, to wit, one Curtine with two bulwarkes, making them well proportioned, and to purpose; and much more higher then accustomed, with a Cauallero,Cauallero, or mount. or mount to the same in place most conuenient, which may ouer|top, or at the least be equall to such an annoying height: Or a Cauallero without, with such Parapets and capacitie, as should be conuenient vnto so great an an|noyance. And if the vpper partes may be yet endammaged, then raise the wals so high, that they may be shadowed with an archrooffe couered with good earth and turfe: and if this yet suffice not to shadow the defendants, although that the Parapets bee more high then accustomed, raise them yet so much higher, as might suffice;The canoneries. and make the Cannoneries that they may shoot from aboue some|what downeward, to the ende they may not be annoyed by such a stepdame; and make the Terraplene within full of steps or gresses, for the defendants to passe vp to defend, and to descend at neede or time to be shadowed.
Trees to be plan|ted vpon the ter|raplene.Vpon these Terraplenes should trees be planted, if the ground will beare it, and that well and thicke; for, besides that they doe their part in shadowing, they will

helpe also to fasten the earth; and will serue to make fagots, and other conueni|ent reparations. The ditch should be made somewhat deepe then ordinary, with his litle ditch or gutter in the middest, and with his wels for the countermines.
When the defendants might be annoyed on any flanke,Flankers. defending any Cur|tine, then should there be made flankers  Caualleros all alo~g such Curtines on the inner side,  of such height as they may couer the said Curtine, with their en|trances from the one to the other, which might giue commoditie to the souldiers to go and passe to the defence.Remedie against the backe part of|fences. Being offended on the backe part; the remedy is, to make the like Parapet as is on the fore part of the Curtine: and in any manner or sort, trees be aduantageous on euery Terraplene, sith they do shaddow, that the enemy cannot discouer what is done within. And moreouer they do helpe to the vse of fortification, as well with fagots, as with other needfull timber; and do de|fend  beare off the inconuenience of blustring stormes and winds, from the in|habitants within.
These,Three manner of offendings.
An ouer com|maunding noe is a stepdame to a fortresse. and such others are the remedies to be obserued against the abouesayd three manners of offendings. But if all these three might be remedied, by taking the said mount or stepdame that offendes  damnifieth the place; or to apart fro~ it as wide as were needfull, I suppose that that were the best: for otherwise, the time permitting it, and the qualitie of these confines, it would be better to chuse another seate for a new fortification, lest that by a long and gallant assailling, it fall at last into the enemies hands.
It is not onely sufficie~t, that the Citie, Castell, or Fort, be well fortified in ma|ner as abouesaid,A sufficient gar|rison of defence. What considera|tions to be had  what prouisions to be made.
Needefull imple|ments, at batte|ries offensiue and defensiue. or in any other better, if also it be not sufficie~tly furnished with a conuenient garrison for defence thereof: for so were it like a body without a soule; and besides this, if it haue not prouision of all sorts of victuals, artillerie and munition, and of all other armes offensiue and defensiue, in good and sufficient qua~titie: and of shouels, spades, mattocks, pickaxes, hatchets, axes, sawes, wedges, hammers, iron-sledges, barres of iron, nayles, ropes, c. and other necessaries to worke in earth, or in the wals, or in stone, or in timber, and also in water; maunds, baskets, hampiers, and small hand-panniers, hand-barrowes, and wheele-bar|rowes to carrie earth; barrels, tubbes, sacks, boordes, planckes, beames, postes, rafters, stakes, watlings, gabbions, and all other things needfull, at batteries, and besieging; without the which it is impossible to rampire, repaire, and to retrench against batteries, assaults, and other offences of the enemy. All the which belong vnto the office,All the which belonging to the office of the ma|ster of the Ordi|nance. care and dutie of the Generall of the Artillerie, to see them proui|ded in euery towne of garrison and fortresse of defence within the Realme, which stands for the defence and safetie of the same.


Gent.
These fortifications you speake of, are very costly, and not to be perfor|med but by a mightie Prince; therefore is there no other meane of fortifying of lesse charge, then bricke, or stone and lyme?


Capt.
Yes truly,Fortifications of earth and turfe of great strength against the can|non with small charge.
Obiection. in mine opinion; The which is done onely with good earth and turfe, without any stone worke at all (or litle at least) framed in manner and forme as these aforesaid: and as I suppose, of as good or better effect, against the Cannon, the~ the other, by reason of the great ruines that the other maketh, at any forcible batterie, and so more easie to be assaulted: although it may be obiected, that these fortifications of earth are of lesse during and small continuance, espe|cially

where the same is enuironed with wet ditches, and those of running water. True;Answer. but the repairing thereof is of litle charge, time  labour, in respect of the charge, time and labour of the other; which is not performed (if the place be of anie greatnesse) but with expence of Millions: as may appeare by Antwerpe  the Citadell thereof, the Castell of Millan, the Citadell of Turine, and the Cita|dell of Mets in Lorraine, with sundry others the like. On the contrary, let vs marke and note a number of other places fortified with earth and turfe onely, as is the great towne of Gaunt, and as was Oudenard, Sluce and Mastricht, and sundry other places in the Low countries, which haue endured such gallant batteries  fierce assaults, sufficient to wearie a great Prince his power and purse, and sundry other goodly Cities in East Germanie, which I haue seene fortified in no other sort: and from thence may be gathered (comparing the charge of the one  the other, and the effectes in fine to be as one) that the fortifications of earth may serue to good purpose, and of continuance sufficient.




THE THIRD DIALOGVE.

VVherein is set downe the particular officers belonging to the great Artillerie, vnder the commaund and charge of the Maister of the Ordenance: the boates for bridges, and the Artillerie, with all the appertenances to the same, needfull to an Armie royall.


Gentleman.
_TOuching fortifications of either sort, and of the alterations and refortifying of old towns  Castels, we haue vnderstood sufficie~tly: but when there is anie Armie leuied, what charge hath he therein?


Capt.
An armie leuied, the charge of the Maister of the Ordinance.When there is an Armie newly leuied and framed, the Captaine generall of the Artillerie, or Maister of the Ordinance, as we call him, hath vnder his charge the Artillerie thereof, with munitions con|uenient of all sorts, kinds and qualities; and armour and weapons for the people of warre, a swell foote as horse: and vnder his commaund they are kept, deliuered, ordered and distributed.Cariages  peo|ple belonging to the Maister of the Ordinance. And to carrie the same, he conducteth vnder pay, horses, oxen, carts, waines, carters, wainemen, enginers, gunners, carpenters, smiths, fou~|ders, armorers, mariners, calkers, pioners, labourers,  other people of such ser|uice, which both ordinarie  extraordinarie, are wont, and ought to be vnder his charge and gouernement, for the seruice, vse and conseruation of the Artillerie, and of the Armour,Bridges built vpo~ boates. and of all sorts of Munition: and for bridges, barks  boats, and other Addresses and engines, which are vsed and needfull to be framed to passe riuers, and other passages, according as cause and occasion shal be offered. And for the administration and seruices of all the which rehearsed things, to assist and helpe him, he hath these officers following, among the Spaniards.


Officers.The Officers which do assist the Maister of the Ordinance, are these.
Clarke of the Ordinance.The Clarke of the Artillerie or Ordinance, who keepeth account of the payes, and other charges made in the same, by Libranzas or tickets, from the Maister of the Ordinance, and an officer vnder him.
The Paymaister of the said Artillerie,Pay-maister. Purueyer gene|rall. and his officer.
The Comittie, or Purueyour generall, who hath charge to prouide all Basti|ments, prouision, and other necessarie things for the people attending vpon the Artillerie.
Fowre Lieutenants to the said Maister of the Ordinance.Lieutenants. Maiordomes, and their seuerall charges.
Fowre Maiordomes or Stewards; who haue the charge of the said Artillerie,  of the munition, and things thereunto appertaining, whereof they are to giue ac|compt: the one taking the charge of the mounted Ordinance, and the shot and powder of the Cannon, c. The other, of the powder for the small shot, match, lead, pikes, launces, murrions, corslets, muskets, calliuers, and of the artificiall fires, or fireworkes, with their appertenances. And the other two, of all the other things necessarie, and otherwise belonging vnto the said Artillerie; and of all the tooles for the Pioners, and of all sorts of iron-workes, and nailes of all sorts, with all necessaries that belong vnto the cariages of the Ordinance, and carts and wa|gons for the same: as, wheeles, axeltrees, ladles, sponges, rammers, linepinnes, leauers, wedges, and all such other implements, as do appertaine vnto the sayd Artillerie; and wine, and vineger to coole the Ordinance, sope, candles, cordage of all sorts, with lanternes, crescets, iron chaines, and such other things: all the which are to be distributed by order of the Maister of the Ordinance. This office of fowre Maiordomes may be resumed by one, being a verie sufficient man, ha|uing three officers vnder him.
A Furrier Maior of the Artillerie,An Harbinger Maior.
A Chancellor,  other persons at|tending. and one other to repart the prouisions.
A Chaunceller. 30 Gentlemen of the Artillerie, which do attend vpon the per|son of the Generall of the Ordinance. 30 Hargulutiers or hargubuze on horse|backe, attending also vpon him: 8 Halbardiers for his guard: two or three Inter|preters attending vpon his person;Other people be|longing to the Commaunder. a Minister or Preacher, a Phisition, a maister Chirurgian and his seruant, a Trumpeter, two or three Enginers or more, two or three Refiners of powder, or as neede shall require.
With euery peece of Ordinance that is in the campe,Gunners  other Officers. there ought to go two or three Gunners. Besides there must be, Mine maisters, Smithes, Cowpers or Car|penters, and Wheelewrights, to make wheeles, axeltrees, and coffers, belonging to the Artillerie, some fifteene or twentie, according to the number of the Or|dinance.


Boates and Bridges.
To passe the Armie ouer deepe riuers,Boates  barges' whereon to frame bridges.
Solima~ the great Turke. they vse to carrie great boates and bar|ges of a yard deepe by the board; whereupon they frame Bridges made of strong timber and plankes, as did Soliman the great Turke to passe his Armie ouer the riuer Drauo or Drylo in Dalmatia, whe~ he went to expugne Ciguet, where he died. And had Don Sebastian, that vnfortunate king of Portugall, caried such boates, and bridges with him,Don Sebastian king of Portugal. at his vnluckie iourney into Barbarie, to haue passed with them ouer the riuer Lucus, and marched towards Alarache, and not thrust him|selfe so farre into the countrey as he did, happily he and his Armie had not bene so fowlly ouerthrowne as they were.God suffering a Prince to run to ruine, bereaues him sence  wits. But when God will suffer a Prince to fall to his foyle, he shall neuer ascertaine nor hit vpon anie good direction and counsell, but runneth headlong vnto his wracke and perdition.
The Prince of Parma his bridge made ouer the ri|uer Chaldis.The Prince of Parma made the like bridge ouer the riuer of Antwerpe, but of more wonder and strength, seruing vnto two great purposes: the one, to stop the passage that no shipping with victuals might come vp to Antwerpe, then by him beleaguered, and the other, to passe his campe out of Brabant into Flanders at his pleasure.
Boates for the bridge how manyThey are vsed to carry for these bridges, some 20, 30, or 40 boates, according to the greatnesse of the riuer, to cary and conduct the which, these people  officers ensuing are needefull.
A Captaine of the boates, with officers and mari|ners.A Captaine of the boates, a maister workeman to ioyne them together, 20 mariners and calkers, or more or lesse as shall be needfull to the number of the boates, sixe horsemen to conduct them when they passe by land; eight men who haue in their charge the iron workes, cables, anchors, and grappling, foure men to annoynt and greaze the axletrees of the carriages and cartes in going; one smith and his man, a wheele-wright and his man.
All these people doth the Captaine of the barks command and conduct, and see to them that they haue their tooles necessary, and about them, and to prouide them cartes, waines, or wagons to cary them.
Moreouer there ought to be in the camp ten or twelue smiths, as well to make and mend Irons needfull, as to shoe horses, and such like seruices.

Gent.
What number and sort of Artillery is vsed to bee caried with an Army Royall?


Capt.
Such as shall be thought necessary, according to the greatnesse of the en|terprize, and the Princes pleasure: but such as are vsed to be carried in such iornies by the French, Italian, and Spaniard, I will as neare as I can shew you.



The Artillery more or lesse, that is vsed to be conducted with an Army.
The Artillery v|sed to be condu|cted with an Ar|my, and the neces|saries thereunto belonging.30 Cannons for battery, that shoote bullet from 44, 50, 60, and some 70 pound weight; from 6, to 10 inches in height.
20 demy Cannons, from 24 pound bullet, to 30 pound.
20 Culuerins, from 16 pound, to 20 pound bullet.
15 demy Culuerines; 20 Falcons: 25 Falconets; and 12 Sakers.
5000 Quintals or Centenaires of Cannon powder, to remaine in the place of garrison of most respect, oxe hide to couer the powder in cariage; 600 quintals of hargubuze powder, and a number of lether bagges or satchels, to cary powder behind men on horsebacke, and when any battery is set.
9 or 10 thousand Cannon shot, 7 or 8 thousand demy Cannon shot, 3 or 4 thou|sand Culuerine shot, 3 thousand demy Culuerine shot, 2 thousand Falcon shot, 2 or 3 thousand bullets of lead for Falconets, 6000 shot of diuerse sizes. All these shot and bullets must be carried in coffers, and strong maunds made of oziers or mats, 300 Centenaires of lead, 500 Centenaires of match, 2000 iron shouels, 7 or 8 thousand mattocks, 4 or 5 thousand pickaxes, 2000 axes and hatchets to cut wood, 1500 wood hookes, and tooles to make faggots: the greatest part of all these iron tooles are to haue handles, and healues. There must also bee tables, plankes,  boordes,  good store of such other timber for many necessary causes:

great store of hand maundes, and baskets to cary earth to the bastion,  gabions; sea compases also, and 4000 great iron nayles for the cariages of the Artillery, and of other midle and lesser sizes: foure great sawes, and many small; eight great iron sledges to breake rockes and great stones, to make the way plaine for the cariages: 20 iron crowes, and iron barres as many: 150 quintals of iron: 50 quin|tals of steele: 20 augers of the great sort, middle, and lesser sort; two talladores or, which are engines to mount and dismount ordinance: and many spare chargers or ladles of brasse, and many rammers, sponges, and such like, for double Cannon, Cannon, Culuerine, demy Culuerine, Saker, Minion, Falcon, c.
Good store of nayles of sundry sorts, as well for the wheeles of the Artillery, as for sundry other purposes; many chaines of iron to draw the artillery; store of iron cloutes for the axletrees, with some iron bands for the wheeles; two Romanas which is a certaine skale or beame to weigh powder, match, c. All tooles apper|taining vnto a smiths forge.
Horse nayles and horse shoes of all sizes; good store of Cotton match for the lint stockes; cordage of sundry sorts; smal cables for the artillery; certaine cariages, or beds for the Artillery; and spare wheeles to the same: with axletrees, and such like: certaine cartes and wheeles extraordinary to cary the munition.
Eight great coffers, whereof 2 to be full of tallow candles, for the Carpenters and other officers to worke by night, and 2 with lanternes, and 2 with cere-clothes and the other 2 with torches and wax candles, and such other lights: 150 kinder|kins and barrels to cary the small cordage, and small iron ware, and greasing for the axeltrees, 50 kintals of soape, tarre,  soft grease to annoint the axletrees of the cariages of the ordinance; 60 bundels of scaling ladders,  3000 muskets and caliuers in store.
Moreouer there must be caried with them to make artificial fiers, some quanti|ty of Sal niter, or peter, as we terme it, Brimstone, sal guma, camphora, pitch, rozine, turpentine, tarre, cole of young hasell, or willow, aqua vitae, liquid vernize, tutia, ar|senike, alexandrina non praeparata, linsseede oyle, common lampe oyle, Cal viua, quick-siluer, waxe, strong vinegar, and salt-peter three or foure times refined: of all these no great quantity, for they be costly, and seldome vsed.

Gent.
Truly it is a wonder, to heare and consider what a number of diuerse  sundry things do of necessitie,The charge of great ordinance is wonderfull. appertaine vnto this great ordinance, and the num|ber of officers and people to gouerne the same: the horses and oxen to draw the~: such store of cartes, waines, and wagons to carry the munition: which must needes be a wonderfull charge vnto a Prince, which either voluntary or constrained, doth vse many of them, as of necessity any Prince maintaining war, either offensiue or defensiue, must needes do.


Capt.
Therefore haue I made this large relation,The Spaniard in continuall action. Without the In|dias the Spanish king soone a beg|ger. rather to let you vnderstand the excessiue charge that a prince is at in managing of war, the~ of necessity to be inser+ted in this place: especially being in continual actio~, as the Spaniard is: wherefore I say, as did the yong Biscaino one of his subiects, being in examinatio~ with me as before I told you, that without the Indies, the spanish king were soone a begger. And much more wold you wonder, shold I make a particular recital of the charge he is, and hath bin at, in the long warres of the Low countries; in his preparation for the co~quest of Portugall; in his fleete  action vnto Tercera Iland; in his proud

atte~pt against vs; In his brables in Britayn; besides the incredible nu~ber of his pis|tolets continually flying in (almost) euery nation,The Spanish gold infecteth good princes subiects. to infect, corrupt, and pierce the mindes, hearts, and soules of good Princes subiectes, to their Princes annoy|ance, and their owne confusion in fine. Italy, Fraunce, and Flanders, too full of his pencionary troupes: I pray God, that other nations tast not of his infection.




THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.

Declaring the number of beastes to draw each peece of Ordinance: what people, and officers to attend them: the duty of the Maister-gunner, and others vnder him. I|tem sundry other parts and duties belonging to the Captaine Generall of the Ar|tillery, as at battery and such like, the quantity of powder, correspondent to euery seuerall peece: with other martiall annotations.


Gentleman.
_WHat number of oxen and horses are necessary to draw euery par|ticular peece of great Ordinance?


Capt.
Horses to draw a Cannon of the greatest size, c. Horses to draw a Culuerine.To draw a Cannon of the greatest size, they vse to put 24 horses or oxen in faire weather, and in soule 30. And for a demy Cannon 18 or 20. And to draw a Culuerine in faire weather, 24,  in foule weather accordingly. To draw a Saker 12 or 14 beasts; and for a Falcon 8 beastes, c.
A good cart, waine, or wagon, will cary 60 Cannon shot, and of others after that rate,Carriage of Can|non shot and o|ther munition. and are drawne with 6, or 8 horses: and after the same order and waight, go the other carts and cariages with powder, leade, match, iron, iron-tooles, ar|mour, and all other munition. One cart to cary a bridge barke: and all these things considered, the Captaine Generall of the Artillery taketh vp all these cartes and beasts at the Prince prices, being in their owne dominions; and in other countries as he may get them for pay.


Gent.
Then being in others countrie, what order is to be obserued herein?


Capt.
Order for beasts and Carriages.The Maister of the ordinance agreeth and bargaineth with some cer|taine persons who do offer themselues to serue in the actions with a thousand horse or two, as did one Andrew Dun, in the seruice of Charles the fift, in his warres of Gelderland and Fraunce.


Gent.
What people and officers are necessary to attend vpon, and to conduct these cartes and carriages?


Capt.
The officers and people for the car|riages.First the principall person ouer all the said horses, with 2 halberdiers attending vpon him, a clarke to take the account and muster of all these cariages, with his halberdier attendant, a Harbenger, and a Mayorall, which goeth with euery thousand beasts, a Cill Maister, or Lieutenant to the Mayorall, ouer euery 200 horses or beasts; a Prouost ouer the horses which draw the Artillery, two Car|penters, and two ferriers or smithes.


Gent.
There would neede a great number of people and strength to lade and vnlade all these cariages; and to helpe about the Ordinance?


Capt.
Pioners, vnder the Maister of the ordinance,  to what purposes.True, and therefore the Generall of the Artillery hath vnder his charge, a great number of labourers or Pioners, which of necessity must be had in a camp, and follow an Army, to make trenches, Rampiers, Minings, Countermines,

ditches, caues; to make plaine the wayes for the army to march; to accommodate the passages for the Artillery to passe; to raise mounts to plant ordinance vp|on; to place and fill the gabbions; to digge earth for the same; to vndermine wals, and townes, and to raze those of any gained places downe; to cut timber to forti|fie withall; to digge wells for water, and great pits to bury and to cast therein, the garbedge, filthinesse, and offalls of the campe; and seruing to a number of such necessary vses.
Ouer the sayd Pioners there are Captaines appointed to gouerne them,Captaines ouer the Pioners. which should be men very expert in fortifications, trenching, mining, counter mining, and in all sorts of engines concerning a campe, and battery actions: and there|fore besides their experience, they ought to be learned and well skilled in all ma|ner of fortifications, both in campe, towne, or fortresse. These Pioners do go be|fore the campe with a sufficient band of souldiers for their guard,The Pioners guarded by soul|diers.
The Pioners tooles. carrying with them mattockes, spades, shouells, pikaxes, crowes of iron, barrells, baskets, hampiers, and such other tooles; and ouer euery three or foure hundred Pioners a Captaine.
The gunners ought to haue ouer them a Maister-gunner, to rule and com|maund them,A maister gun|ner ouer all the gunners. and to see that they do their duties, and to be men sufficient in their art. He ought also to see all things prouided and necessary for the Artillery, as carriage, axletrees, wheeles, ladles, spunges, rammers, iron crowes, leauers, sho|uells, mattocks,His office and charge for neces|sary tooles. gabions, baskets, ropes, chaines, coynes for the breetch of eue|ry peece, to coyne it vp or downe: powder both serpentine and corne powder; cotton match, lintstockes, priming irons, their rules or instruments to take the le|uell, Taladros that is, engines to mount and dismount the ordinance; shot of all sorts and sizes, and heights; cartages of all sizes; trunckes, arrowes and balles of wild-fire, and stuffe to make the same, with all things necessary to his charge, office, and art; giuing still his diligent attendance vpon the Maister of the ordinance, to know his orders and commands, executing the same with all diligent care and fidelity.
It behoueth the Generall of the Artillery to procure and see all these aforesaid matters prouided,The maister of the ordinance his principall care and charge. and good orders kept in the same, as superiour commander therof;  that there be sufficie~t prouisions of al kind of munitions  armes, as well defensiue as offensiue, both for the infantery and Cauallery,  that there be won|derfull care had in the conseruing of the same, giuing order and charge thereof, vnto the Mayordomes; the which they are to distribute and deliuer out by Libra|zas, or Tickets, from the sayd Generall of the Artillery, or else not.
The Gentlemen of the Artillery attending vpon his person,Gentlelmen of the Artillery. ought to be men of great sufficiency to execute any orders by him co~manded, being men very dis|creete and modest; for many inconueniences do follow, being grosse headed and disordered persons
The Captaine Generall of the Artillery,Particular parts of the Maister of the ordinance. besides the afore recited parts, ought to bee learned, and well read in histories, and stratagems of warre; seene in specu|lation of Geometrie  Mathematikes, with the practike therof; to know grounds  distances, waights, measures, qualities and the effects of the Artillery; to iudge where is the most conuenient part of any place to be battered;Sundry good con|siderations. how to conuay his ordinance thither; the place where to plant them,  the planting of the same, for to

take any co~moditie that might helpe the defendants: and regard that the enemy may not surprise his Ordinance; fencing them with gabbio~s, maunds,  trenches, and guarded with appointed troupes of shot, pikes, and short weapons; hauing a respect first to dismount the enemies Artillerie, that might in any manner annoy the campe; then to bend his batteries from two or three plantings, vpon most places of aduantage, as cause shall require, to ruinate their Curtine, and make good breaches: lastly, well regarding, that before any assault be giuen, to cut off all flankers, and trauesses of annoyance.
Skilfull in my|nings.He ought also himselfe to be skilfull in myning, and counter-myning, and in all artificial fire workes, and shooting in great Ordinance, not giuing ouermuch cre|dite vnto others, vnlesse they be men well knowen to be of experience and skill.


Gent.
Then it seemeth, he should be a Maister-gunner also.


Capt.
To be skilfull in shooting of great ordinance, and their particulari|ties.It is most requisite that he be well skilled in the arte, being maister ouer all; the which may easily be attained, hauing good speculation therein, annexed with some practise, knowing the names of euery particular peece, and their seue|rall waights, lengths, bignesse, and boares of the cylinder, their true dispart, the height and poize of euery their bullet, the quantitie of powder seruing to euery one, their distance at point blanke, their best vantage at Randon, their seuerall raunges, the goodnesse and difference of powder, the simples and compounds thereof, the ladles, sponges, and rammers befitting euery one, the making of all these, with a number of other points belonging to the arte.


Gent.
What powder doth each peece require, according to his shot?


Capt.
It consisteth much in the goodnesse or badnesse of the powder; for the powder being good the lesse will serue, is sooner fiered, doth better execution,  heateth not the peece so much.The quantitie of powder to seue|rall peeces, and their bullets. Cannon, Demy-Cannon. Culuerine. The co~mo~ vse is vnto euery double Canno~, of 58, 64, or 70 pound Bullet, to allow in powder the  of the waight of the shot: and to euery Demy-Cannon after the same rate: as for example; a Cannon of 64 pound shot, to allow 41 pound of powder for his due charge, and so of the rest: and to euery whole Culuerine, and demy Culuerine (being peeces double fortified with mettall) to allow them in powder the  of the waight of the bullet: as for ex|ample; a Culuerine of 20 pound waight bullet, to giue of good corne powder 16 pound for his charge. And vnto the Saker, Mynion, and Falcon, somewhat better allowance;The Ladles. as almost to the waight of their bullet. The Ladle twise equally filled, to all these abouesaid peeces, is their due charge in powder. With the artil|lerie and munition there is alwayes a Corps de guard, both of Infanterie  Ca|uallerie. The charge of the placing  setting of them belongeth vnto the Camp-maister Generall, called with vs the High Marshall of the field.
The election of the officers.The election of all the aforesaid officers, and Gentlemen of the artillerie, En|giners,  Pioners belongeth vnto this Maister of the Ordinance, except the trea|surer, and Pay-maister; whom either the Prince or the Lord high Generall doth name  appoint:To haue wary  carefull people a|bout the Ordi|nance. but besides this aforesaid guard of foot  horse, it behoueth the Miaster of the Ordinance to set other carefull and warie people both to gard them and view them, that the Ordinance be not nayled, nor the munition fiered; as did a paisant, issuing out of Verona (being besieged by two great armies, of the Vene|tians and Frauncis the French king, and Marc Antonio Colonna defendant within) and set fire to the munitions of the Venetians campe.
The Captaine Generall of the Artillerie doth cause to bee payed all the offi|cers,The Maister of the ordinance his care for payment of his people.
Their respect to him. Gentlemen, Enginers, and Pioners, which go vnder his conduction: and they ought to obey him, reuerence and respect him as their superiour, punishing their offences as they be committed, as well in peace as in warre: and commending and rewarding such as haue valiantly and vertuously demeaned themselues; so shall he be beloued, obeyed, and honored.


Gent.
Truly this office is of great and honorable charge, and many businesses belonging to the same.


Capt.
So it is indeede; and therefore encommended and bestowed vpon per|sonages of great qualitie, learning, wisedome and experience in martiall affaires: and one who is alwayes of the counsell of warre.


The Captaine Generall of the Cauallery his Ele|ction, charge, and office.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE.

VVherein is reasoned of the Election, charge, and dutie of this officer: the comparison of the Infanterie with the Cauallerie, with examples of both: and of certaine peeces of seruice to be performed with the horse.


Gentleman.
_I Pray now to the Captaine Generall of the horse.


Capt.
The Captaine Generall of the Cauallerie,Captaine Gene|rall of the horse is elected by the Prince.
To be a perso|nage of honour and title. is commonly chosen  appointed by the Prince;  for being a charge of so high authority  prehemine~ce, it is alwayes encommended  bestowed vpon a personage of honour  title, or some very honorable Gen|tleman, who hath had great experience  practise in warre: considering the great and waightie occasions that commonly therein are offred to be performed and effected with the Cauallerie: and so he that is chosen to this charge, ought to haue in him, all, or the most of the good parts to be expected in a High Lord Ge|nerall of an Armie, the which may be considered when I come to speake of that officer: referring the same vntill then, except some particular points, which may fall out in questions by the way.


Gent.
Then shall we gladly heare them,  remarke them also; but which thinke you to be of most vtilitie in the warres, either the Cauallerie or Infanterie?


Capt.
In mine opinion the Infanterie is to be preferred, being well instructed and disciplined in their Arte.


Gent.
But I haue heard the contrarie opinion, in approuing the horse; saying, that they are the reputation of the Prince and armie.


Capt.
I hold partly the same estimation of them:The comparison betwixt orse  foote. but yet I would gladly haue mine opinion excused: that they are not comparable to deale with resolute foote, except vpon great and manifest aduantage, and in place and ground of very great fauour for them:The footemen preferred. For a resolute stand of pikes, with their conuenient troupes of shot, will giue them sore stops, and returnes with dishonour; as hath plainly ap|peared

by the memorable battels of our famous kings of England, obtained with their foot co~panies against the proud Cheualry of France,Agincourt field. as at Agincourt field,  at sundry other their honorable battels. Yea  many times it hath bin seene, that shot companies, alone, being helped by some adua~tage, to put them to the foyle, as did the Marquise de Pescara,Marquise de Pescara. with 800 shot onely, breake, foyle, and disorder Charles de la Noye, then vice Roy of Naples, with all his Cauallerie at the battell of Pauia.Battell of Pauia. Countie Carma|gnola against the Switzers. Another exa~ple we haue of the Countie Francisco Carmagnolla (being Cap|taine Generall of Philip Vicou~t Duke of Myllan his armie) going with six thousand horse against the Switzers, was by them repulsed by the valour and length of their pikes, who hauing regathered his disordered troupes, considering from whence their disaduantage grew, turned head againe vpon the enemy; and he himselfe, and his companies dismounted on foote, and with their Launces in hand framed a foote squadron, and charged the enemy a fresh, and so brake, and ouerthrew them, in number aboue fifteen thousand; who by force of horse could not bee re|moued: imitating herein Marcus Valerius Coruinus,Marcus Valeri|us Coruinus, in the Punike war. who being Consull,  Cap|taine against the Samnites in the first Punik warre, and in their last battell, not able to breake on the~ by reason of their lo~g pikes wherewith they defended the~selues, commaunded his horsemen to dismount, and on foote armed as they were, with their Lances to fight with the enemie, whereby he ouerthrew them  put them to flight; with the victorie and their baggage remaining in his hands. And againe in the battell that Constantine Roxianus, Captaine Generall to Sigismund, king of Polonia, had with Basilius the great Duke of Muscouia, by the riuer Brisna, who sur|mounted him much in horse, three thousand footemen onely, which he had in his armie, wan him that day the honour and victorie. Many examples more might be recited, both ancient and moderne, but I rest with these; remembring that among the ancient Romanes,Among the an|cient Romanes the footemen of more estimation then the horseme~. their foot was alwayes of more estimation then their horse, holding a true opinion, that the infanterie well disciplined, is the sinew of the warre, the fortresse of the Realme, and the wals of the Citie.


Gent.
But I haue heard say, that in these warres of Netherland, after that the Gran Commandador dyed,  that the states reuolted, with determination to cleare their countrey quite of the Spaniardes,Don Alonzo de Vargas. that Don Alonzo de Vargas, who had then the Spanish Cauallerie in charge, did great exploits therewith, in encounters which he had with the state, foote and horse.


Capt.
The difference betweene old ex|perimented soul|diers and new raw men.It is true; But you must consider that those were old and experimented souldiers, resling vpon a valiant resolution; the others, Bisonnis and raw people, raised vp vpon a suddain conceipt: in which actions is maruellously to be marked the difference betweene men of experience and Bisonnios, the braue carriage of the one, and the bad conduction of the others; as appeared in the reencounter at Tilmont,At Tilmont re|incounter.
Sack of Antwerp Example. and at the succouring of Captaine Mountsdock, being taken by them of Mastrich: and most notably in the sack of Antwerpe, where not to the number of 5000. Spaniardes, inclosed within their Citadell, gaue the ouerthrow and foyle, vnto aboue 16000. of the Antwerpians, brauely armed, encamped within their owne towne. In like sort, at the ouerthrow of Gibleo; where not aboue 600. horse of Don Iohn de Austria his troupes,The ouerthrow of Gibleio. defeated aboue 15000. of the states, most strange and wonderfull; onely for want of good leaders, and good conductours; the enemy espying the aduantage of their simple conduction and ouersight. But

you must vnderstand, that in the most of these actions they were alwayes well bac|ked with braue companies on foote: but had they bene matched with equall ene|mies, these their matters of maruell had neuer bene chronicled.
Marry I say,The Cauallerie very necessary for many peeces of seruice. that the Cauallerie is precisely very necessary for many peeces of seruice: as to make incursions, to pursue the flying enemy, as in the battell where the Duke of Saxonies troupes were broken, and himselfe taken neare the ri|uer Albis. And againe, to giue a suddein charge vpon the enemies flankes, or rere|ward; and to espie aduantage if the enemy disaray, as before is said in the battell of Gibleio: and againe, to scoute, to discouer, to guarde any conuoy, or to surprise any conuoy;Captain Arrio at Pauia. and to relieue with money any besieged place; as did Captaine Arrio those that were besieged in Pauia: to carrie victuals or munition for a neede and pinch to a distressed Scance: to passe ouer riuers, and to stop the furie of the cur|rant, to render the passage more easie for the footemen; as was seene in the pas|sing through the riuer Albis.Conradus the Emperour passed the riuer Mean|drus. And when the Emperour Conradus passed with his armie ouer the riuer Meandrus, and there defeated a great number of Turkes:  also to shock with the enemies horse, to make Caualgadas, or great marches, for any sudden surprisall or Camizado, each horse carrying, for neede, a footeman behind: and to gaine, with speede, any straight or passage, to scoure the coastes, to espie the enemies desseignes and courses, to conduct, or to spoyle forrage; with many other peeces of seruice accidentall in warre.



THE SECOND DIALOGVE.

VVherein is declared the difference, and armings of the Cauallerie; with the proper seruice pertaining to each difference: the partes to bee expected in such as serue on horsebacke.


Gentleman.
_HOw is your Cauallerie differenced and armed?The Cauallerie differenced into three sortes.

1. Men at armes.
2. Demy Lances.
3. Shot on horse|backe.



Capt.
In these our dayes, the Cauallerie is most commonly diffe|renced in three sortes: Into men at Armes, or Companies of Ordi|nance termed by some; but now litle in vse: Into demy Lances, now called Lanciers, and into shot on horseback, named Hargulutiers or Hargubuziers, or Carbins, Petranels, and Pistolliers.
The Man at Armes is armed complete,The Man at Armes his ar|ming, weapon and mounture. with his cuyrasses of proose, his close helmet with a beuer, a gorget, strong pouldrons, vambraces, gauntlets  taisses; a strong Lance well headed with steele, an arming sword; and at his sadle bow, a mace, well mounted vpon a strong  couragious horse, hauing a deepe  strong sadle, with the two cuissets of Pistoll proose, his horse barded with a sufficient Pe|ctron, crinier  chieffront c. a strong bridle, double rayned, wherof one to be of wyer were not amisse against the blow of a sword.Men at Armes are commonly men of itle and qualitie. These Men at Armes were wo~t to haue fiue or six horses attendant vpo~ each one. In this Co~panie of Ordinance, are few, but men of qualitie  Gentles of good birth: the charge thereof is great.
Vnto euery Companie of these doth belong,One trumpet, one Ensigne, one Gui|don,  one Cor|net. one Trumpet, one Ensigne, one Guidon, and one Cornet: the Ensigne ouer the Men at Armes, the Cornet ouer the Lanciers, and the Guidon ouer the shot on horsebacke. Now by reason of

their heauie arming, their marches are but slow; and not lightly marching except the campe dislodge: and then to keepe an equall place with the foote campe, deui|ded into good squadrons vpon either side of the battell,Deuided into squadron. with a co~uenient distance from the same: for being too neare, many inconueniences doe many times hap|pen, especially hauing charged or encountred the enemy; and driuen to retire, do hazard many times to disaray their owne battell.Their partes of seruice. Their seruice is commonly, es|pying aduantage to breake vpon the squadrons of pikes, to encounter the ene|mies horse, and to relieue their owne light horse, if by hap they bee put to a re|trait. But a good squadron of pikes,The honourable valour of pikes footemen. of resolute men, well empaled and girdled with musket, doth greatly discredit their auncient reputation now in these our dayes.
The arming of the Lanciers.The arming of the Lanciers, is a good paire of cuirats, the fore part of Pistoll proofe, a strong cask with his open visier, of like proofe, two l'ames of his poul|drons, two or three of his taisses of Pistoll proofe also, the rest, his pouldro~s, vam|braces, gauntlets,His weapons. taisses and cuissets, as light as may be: a strong Lance well poin|ted, a good curtilace, and short dagger, and a Pistoll at his saddle bow in a case of leather:His mnting. a stro~g saddle with his two cuissets for the knees; and well mounted vpon a strong horse vnbarded, and their cassackes of the colour of the Ensigne.
Lanciers, for many peeces of seruice farre bet|ter then men at armes.
The partes of a a Luir.
Their place of .
Their Cornet. Their pales of seruice.I suppose these Lanciers, for most peeces of seruice, farre better then men at armes, especially as our warres are now conducted. They ought to know how to manage well a horse, runne a good carrier, breake surely a Lance, to bee ready with their arming sword and pistoll. Their place of march  seruice is before the men at armes a good distance, in troupes or squadrons, with their Cornet in the middest, or within the third ranke before. They serue to many purposes, and to most peeces of seruice, as well to breake on a squadron of pikes, first shaken or disarayed by shot, as to encounter the enemies horse, to backe  succour the Pe|tranels and Hargulutiers being distressed, to conduct their owne, and to detrusse the enemies conuoy in companie with the Carbines and other shot, to surprise the enemies troupes vpon any aduantage spied: and in generall, good for most peeces of seruice fit for horse; whereunto the men at armes are both too heauie and vnapt.
The Petranell and Pistlier his arming.The Petranell and Pistolier is armed with a good paire of Cuyrats of pistoll proofe, and open Burganet, as is the Lancier, a paire of well arming pouldrons, one gauntlet for the ridle hand, no vambraces, but in steede thereof some other easie arming, and lighter mounted then the Lancier is, with a good saddle and bridle according;His weapon. then weaponed with a good short sword and dagger, a Petra|nell peece, which is with a snap-hance, or, one long pistoll, as the French now vse the~, fastened in a case of leather, at the saddle bow, or else a paire of pistols in one case as do the Rytters;Their seruice. their seruice is (as before of the Lanciers) in most peeces of nimble seruice; and are of most annoyance vnto the pikes, being not well guar|ded with shot.Their place of march. Their place of march is next before the Lanciers and so in their ser|uices, by whom they are seconded, marching in troupes like sleeues of shot, se|conding one another in order. They must bee skilfull to manage their horse; to learne him to trot,The partes of the Pistolier. to stop well, to wheele readily, for their actions are not vpon the spurre, as the Lanciers are, but to skirmish brauely vpon the face of the ene|my, discharging,  wheeling about, one troupe seconding another; and to breake

in also if occasion be offered. They are very good against foote shot, if they be not friended with hedge, ditch, or some such place of aduantage: in their middle troupes is the Guidon placed.The place of their guidon.
The shot on horse+backe, his furni|ture and weapon.
Finally the Hargulutiers, Carbines, or Hargubuziers on horsebacke not ar|med at all, or else with light arming: and they haue a good Hargubuze, or a Pe|tranell, or horsemans peece, as some call it, with a good short sword and dagger well girt vnto him,His mounting. mounted vpon a pretie light horse, such as be our Northerne nagges, befitted with a saddle, bridle and furniture correspondent, with a neces|sarie flaske and touch-boxe for his peece, and a purse at his girdle, with bullets, and his other necessaries.Their partes of seruice. These and the other shot on horsebacke do serue prin|cipally for great Caualgadas, they serue to watch, to ward, to discouer, to scoute, to forrage, to skirmish, for Ambuscados, for gaining of a straight, hilles, and ground of aduantage, to be put for a forlorne. Sentinell, to discouer the enemies proceedings,They may alight on foote, and doe the dutie of foote shot. to spoyle forrages, and to assaile troupes at their lodgings, either in villages, straights, or fields; and if occasion serue, they may alight and serue on foote, either to assaile a straight, to surprise a barrier, to performe an Ambuscado, and in such points of sudden seruice, doe the dutie of foote shot, wherein they may do many good peeces of seruice to the enemies annoyance: who, if the ene|my bring shot to displace them, they may dislodge, if they find the party vnequall, and betake them to their horse.In good condu|ctions, alwayes seconded with the Pistoliers, or Lanciers.
Their partes in|cident And in good conductions they are alwayes secon|ded with armed Pistols or Lances: for they are not lightly turned out to any peece of seruice vpon armed men, without being accompanied with Lances, or cuyrats on horsebacke, I meane armed petranels or pistoliers. They ought to bee very nimble both to mount on horsebacke, and to dismount; to manage their horse euery manner of way; to be very ready and quicke with their peece, discharging on euery part,To performe 3. actes at one in|stant. as cause shall require, inuring their horse both to the crack and fire; and learne to performe three actes at one instant, his bridle hand, his peece, and his spurres: wherein consisteth fine skill, with viuacitie of spirite, attained by often vse and practise. For they are the forlorne skirmishers on horsebacke, who hauing performed their dutie doe retire behind their Lanciers and armed pistols. And it is not inough to know how to ride a horse well,He ought to be a good horseman and a good shot. and vnpractised in his peece; neither is it inough to bee skilfull in his peece, and ignorant in his horse: but the one must bee coupled with the other to make a perfect Hargulutier.The fierie weapo~ in the vnskilfull is daungerous to themselues. Generall partes for horsemen. For the fierie weapons being in hands of vnexpert men, either on horsebacke or foot, is of all other the most daungerous to themselues; and being in the hands of per|fect souldiers, is a weapon of most execution and aduantage. To conclude, all these aforesaid mounted people, ought to be seene  haue some skill in diseases of horses, and to know remedies for the same: and if neede require, to set a shoe also. All their baggage doth passe with the munition and baggage of the campe.


Gent.
How are these troupes sorted?


Capt.
The discipline now vsed doth require vnto euery fiue hundred Lances and armed Cuyrats,The due sortme~t of horsemen. one hundred, or one hundred and fiftie of these aforesayd light horse.


Gent.
What course doth this Generall of the horse take with his troupes, in field, campe or garrison?


Capt.
First he taketh a roll of the bands committed to his charge (euen as doth

a Colonell of Infanterie with his) with the names of their Captaines,The Generall of the horsemen, his courses taken in field, campe, or garrison. viewing well their mounting and arming, to see it be sufficient: and his seuerall sortes of horsemen disposed in seuerall troupes, as I sayd before; in the morning when the trumpet soundeth to make ready the horse, hee shall repaire to the Lord Gene|rals tent, to know his pleasure: the which being knowne, he bringeth forth the Generals Ensigne or standard, whereunto his Captaines doe repaire with their companies in a readinesse, whom he ranketh in good troupes, each sort by them selues, with their Cornets and Guidons in middest of their troupes. And as oc|casion shall be offered, to send them abroad, he shall appoint such as shall watch, scoute and discouer, and others to relieue them againe, committing them to the Scout-maister.
When the high Marshall goeth to view the ground.
When the armie entreth into the campe, his dutie what to do.When the Camp-maister Generall goeth to view the ground to encampe vp|on, the Generall of the horse sendeth sufficient troupes to attend vpon him.
When the armie entreth into the campe, he shall with all his Cauallerie, re|maine mounted in the field, vntill the Infanterie be all encamped,  then to enter orderly with his horse troupes, and repaire vnto their allodgements, vsing there|in indifferencie to each band in their kinde; giuing order vnto his Scoutes that they come not out of the field, vntill the trumpets sound to the watch at night, and Corps de guardes set, and Sentinels brought forth of the campe and placed at their postes.
To guarde the forragers.He must appoint horses to attend on the Forragers, to guard and defend them till they returne with their forrage.
To guarde con|uoies.He must also appoint a conuenient conuoy of horse to guard the victuallers of the campe, as well from the enemy, as from vnruly souldiers.
In skirmishes  encounters one troupe to second another.In the order of his skirmishes, encounters, and charges, he must giue order, one troupe to second another, that if the first bee repulsed, being well seconded, they may haue time to regather themselues into order againe, sparing his armed me~ fro~ such skirmishes,  his La~ciers what he may, reseruing them to encounter with their equals, or breake vpon the enemies battell, as occasion is offered: but alwayes hauing a carefull regard,A good Cauat. that his bands charge not too neare the front of their owne foote squadrons, for feare of inconuenience that might ensue; as it fell out at the ouerthrow of Gibleio:To espie aduan|tages, and to take them. but rather espying what aduantage he may, to charge the enemy in flanke or in rereward. For it is a great point of a man of warre to finde the occasion, and to take it when it comes.


Gent.
But hath he the chiefe ordering of the squadrons of horse in battell, in march, and in allodgement?


Capt.
The chiefe orde|ring of the squa|drons.No, not the chiefe in those points, for that belongeth to the Lord high Marshall, or Camp-maister Generall, whose office is herein, as the Sergeant Ma|ior Generall with foote companies.





The Campe-maister Generall or high Marshall, his Election, charge, and office.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE.

VVherein is set foorth the parts to be expected in a Lord high Marshall: his autho|ritie in an Army, and in the administration of iustice, both ciuill, and criminall: what officers attend vpon him: with certaine Martiall orders, and lawes, c.


Captaine.
_THe office of the Campe-maister Generall, or Lord high Marshall, the Prince with great consideration and aduise,The high Mar|shall of the field, his parts and du|tie. doth encharge vp|on a personage of great prudence and industrie, and of great expe|rience and skill in martiall causes; for that the administration of iu|stice, both ciuill and criminall, belongeth vnto his charge: and also the encamping of the Army, and the fortifying the same with trenches, Corps de guards, Sentinels,  other military appertinances; and doth assure with good guards and scoutes all such as bring any maner of victuals vnto the campe, set|ting a rate and price vpon all such vendible victuall. And in the day of battell he doth preceede,His superin|tendencie in the day of battell. and principally assist with all the Sergeant Maiors of the Army, to the disposing, ordering,  framing of all the battels, squadrons,  troupes, both of horse and foote appointed to fight, ordaining and commanding what therein is to be done and executed: vnto whom they and all the Colonels ought to be o|bedient and to follow.


Gent.
It seemeth to me by that which you haue said, that in the Lord high Mar|shall consisteth the most importancy of all the directions, and gouernement of the campe.


Capt.
So doth it indeede: and therefore it much behoueth, that he which is to performe this functio~,Skilfull in all of|fices of warre. be a perso~ singularly wel skilled in all offices of war,  one who hath passed them through euery office himselfe by degrees, (if such a one might be found) the better to know what toucheth euery one in particular.


Gent.
What authority and power hath he in the administration of iustice?


Capt.
Such (as I told you before) as haue the Colonels: to command, to appre|hend, to discharge, and to punish both corporally, and with paine of death, all de|lictes and cases,His authority in the administrati|on of iustice. as shall deserue such semblable punishment; and on those that shall commit any thing against the bandos, orders, and commands of the Lord high Generall, and other superiour officers: and hath the chiefe hearing and determining of all ciuill causes and questions arising among the people of warre; and of the appellations which are interposed from of the Sentences that were pronounced by the Colonels, as high and supreame Iusticer of all the Army.


Gent.
What officers hath the Campe-maister General, or Lord high Marshal for the execution of iustice?The officers to the high Mar|shall.


Capt
Among the Spaniardes, he hath an Auditor, with his two Clarkes, his

Alguazils, his iaylor,  executioner,  his Prouost Marshal ouer the whole ca~pe; with 20 or 30 Gentlemen to accompany him, and a Beadle to punish Infraganti the offences committed against the Bandos, lawes, and orders of the Campe.


Gent.
What orders and lawes are these?


Capt.
Military lawes and orders.The orders are many, and of diuerse nations vsed diuersly, made by the high Generall and his Counsell of warre: but I take for military lawes all those which doe charge, binde, and commaunde the souldier vpon paine of life, to liue honestly, to annoy no person without the leaue of his Generall or superiour Commander; that he obserue fidelity vnto his Prince, that he vse his armes in their due nature and kind; and in summe, that he obey his superiour officers, vnder whose charge hee sweareth to serue faithfully, and vnto whom hee is souldi|er. The which points and articles are so generall, and do comprehend so many within them, that it were needefull to recite some part of them particularly; and chiefly such as condemne vnto death: whereof such as I can remember  ga|ther together, I will declare vnto you.
Martiall lawes.1 First, whosoeuer committeth or conspireth any treason against his Prince or Generall, in what sort soeuer.
2 And he that giueth any counsell, succour or ayde vnto his Princes enemies.
3 Item, whosoeuer vseth any conference with the enemy without expresse li|cence from his Generall, or from one of the other two high Commanders.
4 Item, whosoeuer reuealeth their counsell and secrets vnto the enemy; yea, or vnto any other of their own, chiefly if by the discouering thereof, any mischiefe might ensue.
5 Item, who so sendeth vnto the enemy either letter or message, without licence of the Generall, or his Lieutenant.
6 Item, whosoeuer giueth not present aduertisement vnto his superiour, of what soeuer he shall vnderstand and know, concerning the honour and benefit of his Prince, or his Princes hinderance.
7 Item, whosoeuer runneth from his owne campe, or retireth to the enemy, or is receiued vnder their defence and guard.
8 Item, whosoeuer being taken by the enemy, and escapeth not, if conueniently he might, except he hath giuen his faith to be true prisoner, the which he ought to obserue and hold.
9 Item, whosoeuer rendreth vp vnto the enemy any towne, fort, or fortresse committed to his custody, except he be more then constrained thereunto: and ha|uing not performed therein the part of a good souldier, and an honest man.
10 Item, whosoeuer lifteth vp his hand against the person of his superiour, or against a Colonell, or other officer, with intent to offend him.
11 Item, whosoeuer putteth his hand vpon any head member or officer of any regiment, or band whatsoeuer, especially when the said Commanders, or other of|ficer be in the execution of their office, except that the abouesayd do wonderfully outrage and abuse him, and strike, and beate him without good cause, and that to defend his life, being thereby in manifest perill.
12 Item whosoeuer shall kill his souldier vpon his owne fantasie, without iust cause, or kill any other of the Campe, otherwise then in his owne defence.
13 Item, who soeuer shall raise any mutinie, or disobey the sounds of trumpet

or Drum in time of seruice, especially when they are made vpon paine of death.
14 Item, who soeuer shall breake truce, or peace, not hauing commission so to do, from him that hath authoritie for the same.
15 Item, who soeuer shall wilfully set fire in any house, or in any Church, or in any other thing, without commaundement of his Colonell.
16 Item, who soeuer shall rauish any woman or maide perforce.
17 Item, who soeuer shall spoile anie Church without his Generals licence.
18 Item, who soeuer shall enroll himselfe in two bands at once, or passe twise in one Muster, or passe from Band to Band without licence of his chiefe Officers; for the Captaine hath no such authoritie.
19 Item, what Captaine soeuer shall entertaine any soldier departing from a|nie other Band without leaue, or shall entice or procure any souldier so to do.
20 Item, who soeuer shall not follow his Ensigne wheresoeuer it passeth; or any other guide being commaunded thereunto.
21 Item, whosoeuer shall abandon his Ensigne, or forsake the place he is to keepe, being in battell, without commaundement so to do.
22 Item, whosoeuer shall not be found in the place where he was appointed and set, but shall abandon the same.
23 Item, whosoeuer shall reueale the Watch-word vnto the enemy, or vnto any other, whereby any daunger might ensue vnto the campe.
24 Item, whosoeuer shall be found seeping at his post or Sentinell.
25 Item, whosoeuer shall abandon the place where he shall be set by his Ser|geant or other officer, whether it be in watch, ward, Sentinell, or scoute, or in any other part, except he be remoued by him which there placed him, or other that he knoweth hath the charge and authoritie thereof.
26 Item, whosoeuer being at Scoute or Sentinell, within or without the ca~pe, and not found in his post, in case the enemy should assaile the Campe, and notice not giuen thereof through his default and negligence.
27 Ite~, whosoeuer is appointed to defend a breach, battery, trench, or straight, and doth quite abandon the same, although constrained by the enemie.
28 Item, whosoeuer, at the entrie of any Citie, Town or Fort, taken by force of armes, shall fall to the sacke and spoile, and shall not follow his Colours, whither soeuer it bendeth, without forsaking it at any time, vntill the victorie be fully at|chieued, and the Generall commaundeth vnto the sacke by sound of Drumme or Trumpet; the which being not proclaimed and licenced, euery one ought to withhold their hands, and refraine from falling to the spoile and pillage: vpon the like paine.
29 Item, whosoeuer shall not do his endeuour and best to regaine and recouer his Colours, if by hap it fall into the enemies hands; and when it cannot be reco|uered, it is needfull to vse some rigor vpon such souldiers, as cowardly suffered the same to be so lost.
30 Item, whosoeuer shall flie from the Battell, being there ranked and placed, or march slow or fearefully, being vpon point to fight; or shew any other base cowardise in what bad sort soeuer.
31 Item, whosoeuer shall faine himself sicke vpon the point of fight, or slippe a side when any action is to be performed.
32 Item, whosoeuer shall see his Commander or Superiour officer in danger of the enemy, and shall not presently assist  succour him to the best of his power.
33 Item, whosoeuer shall rifle or dispoile any victualler (except of the enemy) or any which bringeth any munitions or prouisions for the campe.
34 Item, whosoeuer shall disualedge or spoile any of the Princes friends, or rob, or steale any thing, especially armes and horses.
35 Item, whosoeuer shall ransacke, rifle, or ill entreat the people of the coun|trey where the warre is made, either in goods or person, except it be proclamed rebell to the Prince.
36 Item, whosoeuer is found disgarnished of his Armes, wherewithall he first entred into the roll, chiefly if he hath lost the same in gaming or by cowardly fly|ing away, and abandoning his weapon: or by any other such base default of his: and the same law is to be vnderstood of any horseman that shall play away his horse or furniture; or loose the same through vilty or negligence, to be constrained to re|store the like, or the value, as is accustomed.
37 Item, whosoeuer shal stragle, wa~der, or range fro~ the circuit of his quarter, or regiment aboue a 100 pases, without licence of one of his Superiour officers.
38 Item, whosoeuer shall receiue any stranger or any other suspected person into his lodging or quarter, without hauing first presented him before his General or Superiour, and shall haue licence of his Superiour so to do.
39 Item, whosoeuer shall raise any question, brable, or braule in the watch, or Ambuscado, or in scoute, or Sentinel, or in any other effect, where silence, secrecy, and couert is to be required.
40 Item, whosoeuer shall be found first to iniury any other either in word or deede, for that quarrels do spring from iniuries, and from quarrels and braules, great disorders in a campe.
41 Item, whosoeuer shall run to any braule or fray, furnished with any other armes, more then his sword and dagger, except he be a Captaine, or any other of|ficer in the campe.
42 Item, whosoeuer shall offer himselfe to reuenge any iniury, either present|ly offred, or of long time before, rather by any other way, then by course of order and reason: yet is it not hereby forbidden, but that the Combat may be demanded, of body to body, if the difference may not otherwise be accommodated: which is a point reserued only to the Generall.
43 Item, whosoeuer shall offer any thrust, or blow, or push against his aduer|sary, with whom he hath debate, either in iest or earnest, or in any other sort, if an other cry Hola, or hold, with intent to depart them, except it be in Combat, where no man shall be so hardy as so to cry or say, were it not the Generall himselfe.
44 Item, whosoeuer shall take away the mony that another hath rightly won in game, or put his hand thereupon without leaue of him, who so hath gained it. But it seemeth good vnto me, to the end to do well, and to auoide, and withstand many inconueniences growing by game, vtterly to forbid the same.
45 Item whosoeuer shall vse any shifting, or cosenage, or packing, or any ma|ner of false play, or any maner of false dice, whereby any may be defrauded.
46 Item, whosoeuer shall put himself to passe on before the battell, whether it be to arriue first at his lodging, or to any other such effect, or shall disband and range from one place to another, whilest the battell or army doth march.
47 Item, whosoeuer shall set a tallage, rate, or ransome vpon his host where he doth lodge, or other, being no prisoner in due course of warre: and being taken prisoner by iust course of warre, that then such ransome shall not exceed the Ca|pitulation made and agreed vpon by the Commanders of the two Armies, if any such be made: and if not, that then it be done with as much fauour as may be.
48 Item, whosoeuer shall enter into any Campe, Castell, or Fort of warre, o|therwise then by the ordinary ports and issues, or shall passe out, either ouer, or vnder the wals, it is a capitall offence.
49 Item, whosoeuer shall prolong the retrait after that the drumme or trum|pet hath sounded the same: whether it be at any sallies made out of any city or fortresse, or in skirmish, or in any other encounter.
50 Item, whosoeuer speaketh lowd, or maketh any noise, or rumour, whilest he is in skirmish, battell, or otherwise, where silence is to be vsed, except they be Co~|manders and Officers.
51 Ite~, whosoeuer shal passe one whole day, without carying or vsing his assigned weapo~, some part therof; except he be otherwise imployed in the Princes seruice.
52 Item, whosoeuer shall do any thing whatsoeuer, or in whatsoeuer maner, that might preiudice his Princes seruice, or be hurtfull to his fellowes.
53 Item, whosoeuer shall blaspheme the name of the eternall God, by vile othes, or otherwise.
Finally many other lawes and articles are to be inserted,All martiall lawes to be writ|ten in tables, and fixed vp for euery man to reade. as the Generall and Commanders shall deuise and appoint, according to the causes and occurrants: both the which, and all these, I would wish to be written in some faire table, and fixed fast at the entrance of euery Coronels pauillion, for euery ma~ to view, reade, and vnderstand,An army with|out good orders soone growes to confusion. besides the open proclaming of the same. All the which, and ma|ny others, are to be commanded to be obserued and kept, to the end that good or|der and reformation be had in the Camp; the which without the same, wold soone grow to confusion.


Gent.
Doubtlesse (Captaine) he which is chosen to be Maester del Campo Ge|nerall, or Lord high Marshall of the field, ought to be a man of great wit, experi|ence, grauity, and knowledge, sith so many things do concerne him to direct, go|uerne, and administer: and principally the allodgeing or encamping of the Ar|my; the which seemeth to be a matter of great importance and skill.


Capt.
No greater matter of charge that I know of, in the warre; for besides that it requireth great practise and experience to discerne what part is fittest for the Cauallerie,The encamping of an Army, a thing of great importance. Great considera|tions. and what place for the Infanterie, and in what quarters the Artil|lery ought to be planted,  in what parts the Corps de guard, scouts,  Sentinels: yet without comparison, it behoueth him much more to haue the reason, iudge|me~t,  skill to discerne whether the situatio~ hath the parts and co~modities to be required;Situation and grounds a princi|pall point.  whether it be pitcht in a place fit  conuenient to defend the~ fro~ the attempts of the enemy:  that the prouisions  victuals may safely passe  come vnto the campe, with a number of such other points; to effect the which it is very important and necessary, that he be wel skilled and practised in the country where he warreth,Skilfull in the Countrie. Well seene in Geography. Plats and Maps.  that he be very wel seene  skilfull in the Geography thereof, ha|uing the same perfectly drawne in plats and Mappes, with their Cities, Townes, villages, forts, fortresses, farmes, and Countrie houses, and the distance fro~ one to


our instructions: for God knoweth what world may fall out yet ere we dye.


Capt.
Well (Gentlemen) sith you do still egge and draw me on, with your cu|rious demaundes, I will shew you (the best I can) the orders obserued by the best Italian and Spanish Encampers.
Briefe repetition.You know that I haue shewed you before, of the generall and particular parts of a souldier, their seuerall offices, euen fro~ the Caporall vnto his Camp-maister generall: the number of a band, their due sortment  difference of weapons, and their seuerall vses: the orders of training, marching, and embattailling in sundry manners now most in vse; the seuerall parts and dutie of euery officer in degree, with a number of other points which now I remember not. Now lastly to your demaund touching the marching and allodgement of a campe, I say: That when an Armie marcheth neare vnto the enemies Army, it is needfull that there be had many and great considerations:Many and great considerations in the marching of an Armie. as first when the one Armie is not of equall force vnto the other, or when one is not disposed to come to the fact of battell, for not to put, by one onely battell into the hands of fortune all a mans habilitie  whole rest in fine, as many misaduised men haue done; therefore to prolong time, and to shunne the doubtfull fact of armes, it were needfull to make choise to march (if possible you may) through mountaine groundes and hillie, and with such ad|uantage of seate and ground, that the enemy may not with any reason of aduan|tage, assault you: But when this may not be yet eschued, at the least it is to bee procured to be done to the best aduantages, and (as it were) with a certaine hope of victory; the which may partly bee performed when you know how to profit your selfe with the aduantage that the situation will affoord. And in your mar|ching, I would wish you to send some part of your light horse so neare vnto the enemy, as continually you haue notice of all their orders and courses. True it is, that when you are in a countrey, where this aduantage of hils is not to be found, and must of necessitie march through plaines and champaine fields, and haue the enemy neare at hand, it were then very hard to shunne and auoide battell, the which I would rather wish to be done, then otherwise, especially if your Army do surmount your enemy in Cauallerie, for in such cases the battell is not to be refu|sed, your strength consisting most in horse, the which by good conduction, giueth a great part to the victory.
To march vpon grounds of ad|uantage, as did Fabius Maxi|mus.
Charles the fift.This manner of marching vpon grounds of aduantage, we reade antiquitie to haue vsed; as did Fabius Maximus, when he encamped a long time with the Ro|mane Armie, against the conquerour Hanniball:  in our time, as did Charles the fift in Germanie, against the Protestants Army: both the which, by reason of the situations and seates, did many times encampe and lodge with their armies, not distant one from the other, aboue a Culuerine shot: the which might possible be, by reason of the hilles and mountaine seates abounding in them places. But this is seldome seene in the plaines,Considerations to be had, the Army marching in plaines  cham|paines. and champain grounds; in the which it is need|full for him that shunneth the battell, to march and passe, at the least, eight or ten myles distant from the enemy: and must thinke to fortifie at euery allodgement, in such sort and manner, that neither horse nor foote, in any array of battell, may not, but with great difficultie, charge or enter vpon you; the which is suffi|cient with a campall fortification, or running campe, as some terme it; and chief|ly because it ought to be done with great speede and diligence, the which encam|ping,

when it shall seeme you good to continue, may bee reduced into such strength, as might seeme sufficient.
And in the marching which the armie shall make through plaines and cham|pain fieldes,Points of aduan|tage. when it commeth to passe to haue either any litle riuer, wood, or groue to couer one flanke of the campe, all diligence is to bee vsed to gaine such sayd aduantage: for it will be a matter of great importance. Alwayes hauing a re|gard, that the artillerie, munition, and other impediments doe alwayes passe on the contrary side from the enemy: and also that the squadrons of men at armes,Men at armes  Lanciers to fla~ke the arrayes.  Lanciers do flanke the arrayes and battallions next toward the enemy, in sort and maner conuenient. And moreouer a laudable custome it is, to deuide the campe into three squadrons or battels;The marching armie deuided into vantguard, battell and rere|ward.
Their orders. that is, in vantguard, battell and rereward, and euery day to change the point, making the vantguard, battell; and the battell rere|ward; and the rereward, vantguard: and that euery one of these partes may haue their due proportions and numbers of Cauallerie and shot, distinguished in their conuenient places; aduertising with great diligence and care, that there bee not mingled any vnprofitable people among the Ordinances and squadrons of the Infanterie;Vnprofitable people to be shif|ted out of the squadron. and that euery battell be placed in their due appointed places and di|stances, vnder their Ensignes and colours; in such sort that all the troupes of Ca|uallerie be quite cleared of vnprofitable horses, and other impediments, wherein the Germaines horsemen do keepe great order,Vnprofitable horses and impe|diments cleared. Part of the light horses to be conti|nually abroad. care, and diligence; very necessa|rie to be imitated. It is a very good custome besides, that part of the light horse be continually abroad at discouery  scout; and to watch after euery action that the enemies Armie doth, that you may bee alwayes aduertised thereof: so that, if occasion bee, you may haue time, space, and commoditie to prepare to the encounter and battell. Touching the order of marching the campe, there can bee no particular rules set downe,Referring to the third and fourth booke. more then I haue before spoken of in the third and fourth booke (where I haue entreated of the framing of squadrons, marching an Armie, and of deuiding the same into Maniples, comming vnto any straight passage or narrow wayes) because it must be accommodated according to the situation and qualitie of the countrey wherein you march.
Let vs now therefore passe on to speake of the allodgement of a campe;Partes to be con|sidered in the al|lodgement of a campe.
The situation, i plaines.
Considerations. and of the seates, and the forme, and of the greatnesse, and of the commodities, and of the fortifying the same; and of the orders to be therein obserued. And first tou|ching the situation, I say; that being in a plaine or champain field, farre distant from mounts and hilles, it is then necessary to haue either riuers, or such qua~titie of waters, as may commodiously serue the whole campe, both horse  foote: with aduisement that there may be had, from the next adioyning woods, timber of all sortes, for the vse and needes of the campe: the like consideration is also to bee had for forrage for the horses, as things not to be carried alwayes after a campe: and to do it (when these commodities may bee had) with such sure fortifications, that the enemy may not annoy you.
The circuite  greatnesse of the campe,The circuit of the campe. ought not to be such, that might hin|der, in any occasion offered, to succour, keepe and defend the same, as is conue|nient and needfull; neither yet that it be of such straightnesse, and narrownesse, that the Armie cannot haue all his commodities, eases, and places necessarie to frame their squadrons, and set themselues in battell ray: and common places for

victuallers, pioners, and others following the campe.
The formes.And touching the forme, it shall be such and in such order, as shall appeare by the plats and draughtes; accommodating the same vnto the situations and groundes: as moreouer shall be seene euery quarter with their places and streets to issue forth, and with the place of the Generals lodging. And all these things shall be set downe in the most plainest and best order that we can.
Mountaine si|tuations.
Considerations.And when in like sort it shall happen and occurre to encampe vpon any moun|taine situation or hill: or may be variably set, as in a valley, neare broken rockes, riuers, woodes, or hollow wayes, and such like, if the Camp-maister Generall be a skilfull man of warre (as he ought to be) and perfect in encamping an Army, he may aduantage himselfe greatly therewith: and shall with litle arte, most strongly fortifie his campe or allodgement.To beware to en|campe in place subiect to any hill.
Daungerous. But aboue all he must be well adui|sed that hee encampe not in any place subiect vnto any hill or mount, or any al|ture that may ouerlooke the campe, and so from thence batter the Curtines of the rampiers; for being so occupied by the enemy, the Generall should bee forced to dislodge, and happely constrained to fight to his great disaduantage: as it was like to fall out vnto Frauncis the French king,Example by Fra~|cis the French king at Cambre|sie. when hee was encamped at Cam|bresie, vpon the borders of Picardie, for leauing a litle hill vnpossest, vpon the one side of his encampement, the which discouered ouer all his campe, and lay right ouer against the Curtines thereof:Charles the fift. and the Emperour Charles, comming thither with his Armie, the sayd place being espied and reknowledged by his Captaines, was by them encouraged, that, although the houre were late, and his people much wearied with long marching, yet were it not good to lose, and let slippe the occasion to gaine so aduantagious a seate: But this profitable  prudent aduise, was, by some others of great authoritie, contradicted, saying; that the morning ensuing, the same might bee better performed. The which fell not so out; for the king being aduised of this errour, sent that night his Italian Infanterie to take and fortifie the same hill: which did frustrate the Emperours desseignes.
There are many and sundry aduertisements to be yet giuen, touching the marching, and encamping of an Armie, but, for not to be tedious, I passe them ouer;The Cauallerie in their allodge|ment to be defen|ded by the In|fanterie. onely aduertising that the Cauallerie, in their quarters and allodgement, would be defended and shadowed by the Infanterie, as much as reasonably might be; for that, vpon any sudden alarme giuen, the horse are farre more vnready then the foote, and do require a longer time in arming, and ordering; and of the footemen, the shot to be sooner ready then the pikes, and therefore in the en|camping, the due consideration of each of these is to be had: as I haue in my plat of encamping, in fol. 157. set downe.




THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.

VVherein is set downe the forme, order, and Arithmeticall rules, for an encampe|ment, both horse and foote, with the quantitie of ground for euery man and horse, his roome and station, and the plats to the same, c.


Captaine.
_NOw for the better declaration of these allodgements and en|camping, we will giue an example with his figure. To en|campe therefore an Armie in Campania, with his due mea|sures, well proportioned, according vnto the seate and place, it is necessarie to know the superficies or face of the quarters of the Cauallerie and Infanterie, with their due places and streets, and other things necessary to the seruice of the campe.
And for example;An encampement of 36000. figh|ting men. Let vs suppose to make an encampement of 36000 figh|ting men: that is to say; 1000 men at armes; 3000 Lanciers, and 2000 light horse and Hargulutiers: and of footemen 15000 shot, 12000 pikes, and 3000 short weapons.8. allodgements to a man at armes.
4. allodgement to a Lancier.
Euery allodge|ment, 50 super|ficiall foote, is 10 in length, 5 breadth. Vnto euery man at Armes, we will allow 8 lodgings, and vnto euery Lancier and Hargulutier we will allow 4 lodgings: and vnto euery roome or lodging, as well of Lanciers and light horse, as men at Armes, we will giue 50 superficiall foote of ground, which shalbe 5 foot in breadth, and 10 foote in length, as in this figure may appeare.


And vnto euery foote souldier,Euery foote mans allodgement 64 superficiall foote. with his furniture, we will allow 64 superfi|ciall foote of ground for his lodging: which shall be 8 foote in length, and 8 foote in breadth, as appeareth by this figure.


This being knowne, you shall then in the most commodious place about the

middest of the ground where you meane to encampe,The Generalls standard. set vp the Generals stan|derd, and about the same, stake out a square plat of ground of fiftie or threescore pases square, for the Generals pauillion and place. Then shall be lined out two straight streetes, which shall come to cut or crosse one another at right angles in the middest of the Generals place;The principall streets. the which are called the principall streets, or Captaine wayes, extending East and West, and North and South, or as the seate and region will permit. At the head of euerie one of the which, shall be a guard and watch toward the enemie,At euery streetes end, a guard. and an issuing out of the Campe. The which two long streetes, crossed at right angles, as is aforesaid, commeth to quar|ter your encamping ground into foure equall parts, the center whereof shall be the Generals pauillion and place, and the other allodgements and quarters to be distinguished as in the Plat following shall at large and particularly appeare.The Generals pauillion.







The first plat of encampment.
An encampment of 30000 footemen, and 6000 horseme, allodged and fortified in an open Campania: hauing a riuer running on the one side.

Sorted 15000 shot.
Sorted 12000 pikes.
Sorted 03000 short weapons.
summe 30000 footemen.


Sorted 1000 men at armes.
Sorted 3000 Launciers.
Sorted 2000 Light horse shot.
summe 6000 horsemen.



In this first figured plat of encampement of 30000 footmen and 6000 horsemen, distinguished and quartered as particularly aboue appeareth, I haue seated the Generall with some other chiefe Com|manders, in the center of all the men of warre, as by their seuerall descriptions may be seene. I haue moreouer distinguished the said camp into the vsual names of Vauward, Battel,  Rereward, the pikes and shot, marked with the letter A, do belong to the Vauward, vnto whom do answere the Launciers, marked with the sayd letter A. And those marked with the letter B; do betoken the battell; vnto them do answer the men at armes, marked with B, also. And those marked with the letter C, are for the rere|gard, vnto whom do answer the light horse or Carbins, signed with the like letter C. The farther decla|ration, practike rule, and order of the said encampement, shall on the next side following be at large declared and shewne.



The second figure of encampment.
This figure denoteth an incamping in a valley betwixt 2 hils, with a small riuer running in the midst: the one of the sayd hils being neare vnto the campe, is to be fortified as appeareth: and the other being a suffi|cient distance off; not.


You are to vnderstand that in this figured incampement, the letter A doth signifie the places of armes of the quarters of the Cauallery and Infantery, with the Generall his place in the middest; and also the place of Armes generall: and all the streets and spaces betwixt the trenches and the lodgings or quarters. The letter B doth signifie the quarters of the Launciers, and light horse: the letter C, the quarters of the men at Armes: the letter D denoteth the quarter of the Infantery, pikes, and shot: the letter E, the place of munition of the Artillery: the letter F, the allodgements of the chiefe officers, and Noblemen: the letter G, the marketplace; the place of munition of victuals: the letter I doth signifie the roomes for the pi~oners, artificers, and the cattell that is to be slaughtered for the vse of the campe (with this prouiso, that there be none slaughtered within the trenches, nor any garbage, nor other filth there to be suffered.) Finally the letter K denoteth the fort vpon the hill, or little mount.







Capt.
In the first of these two figured plats of encampement of 30000 foote|men, and 6000 horsemen,A declaration of the former en|campement. The Generals place. The Lord Mar|shals allodge|ment.
The Treasurers allodgement.
The place of mu|nition.
The place of market. distinguished as there appeareth; I haue dissigned for the Generals pauillion and place, 80 pases square, comprehending therein the breadth of the two maine streets, of 20 pases each in breadth. Vpon one quar|ter of the Generals place, is lodged the Lord Marshall and his retinew; vpon ano|ther quarter is lodged the Treasurer, with extraordinary Gentlemen and Embas|sadors: vpon another quarter is the munition of victuals; and vpon the last quar|ter, is made the place of market: euery of these 4 quarters, and places containing their narrow front, butting vpon the maine street South  North,  East  West, 45 pases and in length 63 pases, fronting along the small crosse streets. Round a|bout three of the said quarters, is drawne a smal streete, of 10 pases broade, and on the other part is a streete running, of 15 pases broade: without the which streets, vpon the one side of the Generals place, and the other two places of the Lord Mar|shall, and munition of victuals,The 1000 men at armes quarter I haue quartered the 1000 men at armes in 4 little quarterets containing in euery quarteret 250 men at armes: allowing for euery man at armes 6 allodgements, and 2 allodgements for his place of armes, which are 8 allodgements; containing euery allodgement 50 superficiall foote of ground,The rule to worke it. that is, 10 foote in length, and 5 for breadth. Now, the working thereof is thus: multiply the 1000 men at armes by 8 allodgements, it maketh 8000 al|lodgements, the which 8000 multiply againe by 50 foote superficiall, which is allowed for euery allodgement, and it maketh 400000 superficiall foote; the which 400000,25 foote do make a superfici|all pase of 5 foote. deuide by 25, it commeth out to be 16000 pases superficiall, for 25 superficiall foote, do make a superficiall pase. So the 1000 men at armes doe require, 16000 pases superficiall for their quarters, and place of armes. Now to deuide these 1000 men at armes into 4 litle quarterets, each quarteret co~taining 250 men at armes, deuide the 16000 pases superficiall by 4, and the product will be 4000 superficiall pases for euery quarteret, whose square roote is 63, for the square of each quarteret, being quartered one way, with the great maine streete of 20 pases broade, Their place of armes.  The light horse|mens quarter. and the other way with a lesser streete of 10 pases broade. Now to know the square side of all these 4 quarterets, extract the quadrat root of the 16000 superficiall pases, being 126 pases, and that is the due square of euery side. Finally to know what square of ground, the place of armes for these thousand men at armes shall containe, multiply the 1000 men at armes by two allodge|ments of euery man, and it amounteth 2000 allodgements: then againe mul|tiply these 2000 by 50 foote superficiall for each allodgement, and it maketh 100000 superficiall foote, this 100000 superficiall foote, deuide by 25, to bring them into superficiall pases, and it produceth 4000 pases superficiall; of this 4000 pases superficiall take the quadrat roote, which commeth out to be 63 pases square, little more.
Thus the place of armes of these 4 little quarterets, co~taining in them all 1000 men at armes, doth containe 63 pases square, besides the breadth of the two streets, which crosse the quarters, not comprehended therein. Vpon the other side of the Generals place, and also without the two other places of market, and Noblemens lodgings, Southward, I haue dissigned the 2000 light horse, or Car|bins, deuided from the same by a street of 10 pases broade: vnto euery light horse I haue allowed 3 allodgements, and one allodgement for his place of armes, which doe make 4 allodgements for euery lighthorse. Now to multiply the

2000 light horse by 4, and it produceth 8000 allodgements: then I multiply a|gaine the 8000 by 50 foote, and it amounteth vnto 40000 foote superficiall; then to bring the~ into superficiall pases, I deuide the 4000000 foot by 25 (for 25 super|ficiall foot, do make a superficiall pase) and the product will be 16000 superficiall pases, for their quarters and places of armes. Now, to repart these 2000 light-horse into 4 litle quarterets, ech quarteret co~taining 500 light-horse, I deuide the 16000 pases superficiall by 4, and the product is 4000 superficiall pases, for eue|ry quarteret, the square roote whereof is 63, being quartered one way with the great maine streete of 20 pases broade, running North and South, and the other way with a lesser streete of 10 pases broade, running East and West. Now againe, to know the square side of all these 4 quarterets; take the quadrat roote of the 16000 superficiall pases, which is 126 and little more, and that is the due square of euery side of all the 4 quarterets, not comprehending the breadth of the 2 streets which crosse the same therin; and the  of 126, which is 63, is the iust square side of euery one of the 4 little quarterets. And now lastly to know what quantity of ground the place of armes for these 2000 light horse will require,Their place of armes. I multiply the 2000 light horse by 1 allodgement, which is 50 superficiall foote, and it ma|keth 100000 superficiall foote, the which 100000 I deuide by 25, so it commeth out to be 4000 superficiall pases, the quadrat roote whereof is 63 and a litle more, and so much containeth their place of armes, besides the breadth of the aforesayd two crosse streets, the which do enlarge their place of armes by so much. Thus are the men at armes lodged vpon one side of the Generals place, and the light horse vpon the other side, as in the plat plainely appeareth.
Next, vpon the West part of the Generals place, and without the two quarters or lodgings of the Marshall and Treasurer, with a streete of 10 pases broade be|twixt, I haue lodged the 3000 launciers in 6 little quarterets,The 3000 lan|ciers quartered into 6 quarterts. containing each 500 launciers; vnto euery launcier I haue giuen 3 allodgements of 50 superficiall foote per allodgement, and 1 allodgement for his place of armes; the which are in all 4 allodgements to euery Lancier. Now, I multiply the 3000 launciers by 4 allodgements,  it amounteth 12000 allodgements, the which 12000 I multiply againe by 50 foote superficiall, and it maketh 600000 superficiall foote, the which 600000 superficiall foote to bring them into pases, I repart by 25, and it produceth 24000 superficiall pases. Now this 24000 superficiall pases, I deuide againe by 6 (for that I allodge the 3000 lanciers in 6 quarterets) and the product will bee 4000 superficiall pases for euery quarteret, the quadrat roote whereof being 63 little more, is the due square of pases euery way, of euery one of these 6 quarterets:Their place of armes.  then againe I repart the 6000 lanciers by 6, and there co~meth forth 500 launciers to bee allodged in euery quarteret. Now to giue vnto these 3000 launciers their conuenient places of armes, I allow vnto euery 1000 launciers their place of armes co~tained betwixt two quarterets, allowing for the same vnto euery Launcier one allodgement of 50 superficiall foote; to doe the which, I multiply the 1000 launciers (which are contained within each two quarterets) by 50 foote superficiall, being the content of one allodgement, and it amounteth 50000 superficiall foote, the which 50000 superficiall foote, to bring them into pases, I deuide by 25, and it produceth 2000 superficiall pases; the quadrat roote whereof being 45 pases little lesse, is the due square of the place of armes allowed

for 1000 lanciers, allodged within two quarterets (as in the plat appeareth) be|sides the breadth of the streets which do deuide the same, by so much enlarging euery place of armes. Thus the 3000 launciers are deuided and allodged into 6 quarterets  vnto euery two quarterets is apointed their place of armes, as in the first plat of encampment may appeare.
Next vpon the out sides of these 6 quarterets of launciers,A streete of 15 pases broade. and about the men at armes, and the place of victuals and market place, and lastly about the Carbines or lighthorse, haue I drawne and staked out a streete of 15 pases broade, to sepe|rate the horse companies from the foote, as by a red line there drawne will ap|peare. Then round about this said streete,The 3000 foote|mens allodge|ment. The rule. haue I quartered  allodged the 30000 footemen into 30 quarterets, distinguished by streets of 10 pases broade, contai|ning in each 1000 footemen, and vnto euery two quarterets their place of armes. Now to do the which, I haue giuen vnto euery footman for his allodgement 64 superficiall foote of ground, and vnto euery one 32 superficiall foote of ground for his place of armes, both the which summes do make 96 superficiall foote of ground for euery foote souldier with the place of armes. This being done, I multiply the 30000 footemen by 96 superficiall foote, and it commeth vnto 2880000 superficiall foote of ground for the quarters of these 30000 footemen, the which 2880000 superficiall foote, I deuide by 25 to bring them into superfi|ciall pases (for 25 superficiall foote do make a superficiall pase) and it produceth 115200 superficiall pases. Now, for as much as I doe bestow and place these 30000 footemen, round about the Generals Pauillion and place, and wthout the ring of the horsemens quarters (for the more surer guard of the Generall, and better defence of the horsemen, who are longer time in arming then are the footemen, if the enemy should offer any suddaine attempt) and for that I thinke good to deuide them into 30 quarterets;Reparted into 30 quarterets. I doe repart the sayd 115200 superficiall pases by 30, and the product will be 3840 superficiall pases for euery quarteret; the square roote whereof being 62 pases (litle lesse) is euery quarteret of 1000 foote|men, square by euery side.
Now to giue vnto euery two quarterets their place of armes, containing each quarteret 1000 footemen,Their places of Armes. is in both 2000 men, allowing to euery foote souldier 32 superficiall foote for his place of armes, I doe multiply the 2000 men by 32, and it amounteth vnto 64000 superficiall foote; then to bring them into pases, I deuide the 64000 pases by 25, and there commeth out 2560 superficiall pases, whose quadrat roote is 50 and little more, the which 50 pases is the due square of euery side of the place of armes belonging vnto 2 quarterets, besides the breadth of the streete which deuideth the sayd two quarterets; for by so much the more is the place of armes enlarged. Thus are the 30000 footemen lodged, and deui|ded into 30 quarterets, containing each quarteret 1000 men; and euery square side of the sayd quarteret, doth containe 62 pases; and vnto euery 2 quarterets, is giuen their place of armes, extending each way 50 pases, besides the breadth of the streets that cutteth the same in the middest, whereby the places of armes be so much enlarged.
And because that the shot are more ready then the pikes, I haue placed almost all the shot in the ring of almost all the outmost quarterets,The placing of the shot. to bee ready to skirmish with the enemy (if he should attempt any thing) whilest the other

foote and horse do arme themselues: the which shot being in all 15000, I haue distributed thus. In the 4 quarterets which are vpon the 4 angles of the allodge|ments, I haue placed 750 shot,  into euery one of the other outermost quarters there is set 500 shot, being 20 outmost quarters, besides the 4 angles; so there is bestowed about the ring of the allodgements 10000 shot: more in the 4 corner quarterets 3000 shot; and the other 2000 shot are placed in the 4 other inmost quarterets, amongst the halberds and short weapons: finally, all the pikes are pla|ced in the quarterets within the shot; as in the first plat of an encampement doth particularly appeare.
Munition of the Artillery.Moreouer, vpon the North east angle of the encampement, I haue desseigned the place of munition of the Artillery, of 160 pases square; and on the South east corner of the encampement,Places for victu|alers. is there left 2 other smaler places of 65 pases broade, and 160 pases long, seruing for victualers, butchers, cookes, bakers, and such like: and without them againe, is there another long place for horses, oxen, and cattell seruing the campe: and vpon the South side of the encampement are lodged, the wagoners, carters, laborers,  some pioners:  again vpo~ the North side of the en|campement,Places of the wagoners. Place for the gunners and arti|ficers, and pioners Place of armes generall. and by the place of munition of the Artillery, is placed first, the gun|ners, and some officers of the Ordinance, and then the carpenters, wheel-wrights, smiths, labourers, and some pioners, as there seuerally appeareth. And betwixt the place of munition of the Ordinance,  the victualers place in the midle front of the encampement, due east is placed the place of Armes general, containing in breadth 280 pases, and 160 pases in length, East and West, and vpon the after front of this place of Armes generall is placed, armourers, cutlers, and such like, and at the one front of the 2 places of the victualers, cookes, and bakers, are placed taylors,Diuision of the encampement. The artillery pla|ced. shomakers, and such like. Moreouer the encampement is deuided East, and West with 9 streets, and it is deuided North and South, with 6 streets, of which, the 2 maine streets do containe in breadth 20 pases, and the 4 others (li|ned with red, East,  West, North, and South) 15 pases broade a peece, and the rest (being small streets) of 10 pases broade euery one. Finally, the ordinance is placed, about 60 pases distant from the ring of the encampement, with a good vaumure cast vp before them; and the Artillery planted vpon the same. Last of all, is there a running trenche cast round about the Campe,A running trench. about 80, or 100 pases distant without the vaumure of the Ordinance. All the which matters do particu|larly appeare in the aforesayd plat of encampement: but if this Campe were to continue any long time vpon some seat or place, then must it be more stro~ger for|tified, with deeper ditches, stronger bulwarkes, and scances, thicker terraplenes, higher caualleros and mounts, to scoure with the Ordinance round about the Campe, or otherwise fortified in such strong sort, as the prudent Camp-maister, with his skilfull enginers shall thinke good and deuise. The lodgings and tentes of the Chiefe Commanders both of horse and foote,Lodging of the commanders. may be seated on the front of euery their places of armes. To conclude I giue aduertisement of one thing worthy noting: that there bee no slaughter house kept within the Ring of the Campe,No slaughter house kept within the ring of the campe. Good considerati|ons. or any garbadge left; or any other thing of annoyance or stinke, and also that you encampe in no infectious place, least the corrupted ayre do infect your people; as it did the French Kings campe before Naples.
This aforesayd calculation,By these rules wel conceiued, may a|ny encampement be made, and as|signed. methode, and rule of encamping, will serue for example for another sort of encamping vpon any situation, of what num|ber of men soeuer. But it must bee thoroughly conceiued, practised often, and the due measures well considered: and hauing all the aforesayd points per|fectly in sence and memory, there may bee made any encamping verie readily; with the due proportion and measures of the quarters, places, streets, and all o|ther parts necessary to the same encampement, vpon what situation soeuer it be: as by the aforesayd writings, rules, methode, and desseignes, may bee vnderstood and learned,



THE FIFT DIALOGVE.

VVherein is discoursed touching the remouing of a Campe; and of the care and dili|gence to be had therein.


Gentleman.
_TRuly (Captaine) you haue made a long discourse of the encamping of an Army: and I neuer thought it had bin a matter of such skill and readinesse, whereby I perceiue, it is not the least point of your Mar|tiall matters.


Capt.
No truly, but rather one of the greatest, and a point of great consideration,The encampment is a point of great consideration. care, and skill, and it importeth much for a Campe-maister Gene|rall to be most expert therein: for by bad regard, and litle skill, the whole campe may come to be in hazard.


Gent.
But I pray you what order is obserued in remouing of a campe,  with|drawing from the enemy?The remouing of a campe.


Capt.
The marching and the encamping of an army being a continuate thing, the dislodging or remouing of a Campe must needes be a consequence. There|fore I will with as much breuitie, as I may conueniently, declare vnto you what I conceiue thereof; and that which hath bin seene in our time touching the same. Presupposing therefore, that there be two enemy Armies, encamped within sight one of another, or at the least not farre distant asunder, and because it is a most important matter, to know how many and sundry operations a braue man of warre or good chiefe may do, yet herein there is many considerations to be had. For although to retire by night,Remouing by night. and to remoue away from the enemy, doth seeme to be the surest remedy that can be found, me thinkes, notwithstanding that the same is not sufficient inough to attaine an intention with securitie, if the said reti|rer be not befriended, either with the situation, or with some other parts and con|ditions of the countrey whether he meaneth to retire. And comming vnto the particulars, I say; that when a campe remoueth and dislodgeth by night, it is need|full to vse all possible silence and diligence,Silence and dili|gence. the which if it be not assisted with the seate, and qualities of the countrey, it is not yet inough; as hee which is to march thorough a plaine and champain countrey,  in open places, and not hauing (vp|on any occasion offered by the enemy) some woods, valley, riuer, rocks, or such like, thorough the which me~ may hardly passe; but being so (as I say) it may the~ suffice

to hold skirmish: for that the enemies horse approching may be thereby hin|dred and kept backe; but otherwise one shold be constrained to fight against ones will, with great disorder, especially carrying along the Artillery and other impe|diments of the campe,To obserue good array. the which with reason is not to bee left in pray to the e|nemy. And in like sorte it is not conuenient to march the Army out of his ordinary pace, for if a man bee ouer sollicitous and hastie therein, it would easily conioyne an euill opinion vnto the souldiers former conceipt, growne by such dislodging and retiring: a matter truly of great daunger to cause an vnremediable disorder to ensue, as many times it hath bin seene come to passe, whereas the army that pursueth the enemy,The pursuer. hath not those impediments and diffi|culties: for they may leaue all impediments behind. And if the pursuer do march with speede, it is done with more desire and courage; the chieftaines vsing braue and honourable words, as in such cases be conuenient, and therefore (in mine o|pinion) the dislodging by night is not very secure,Ayded by ad|uantage. Example. vnlesse it bee (as I sayd) be|friended and ayded with some seate of aduantage: as it chaunced vnto the afore|sayd Francis the French King, when at Cambresy, he retired from the Emperour by night, that by the benefit of a great wood he might saue his Army: and hauing passed thorough the same, when the enemies horse ouertooke him, where hee made a stand; and where as well by reason of the aduantage of that wood, as by the commoditie of the seate where he stood, he might well and boldly fight with the enemy, as by experience of them of the Emperours part was seene: who ouer greedily pursuing the enemy, issued out of the wood, euen vpon his troupes, where the most part of them were slaine, or taken prisoners.
Example.The very same case happened also vnto the protestants Army in Germany, when they would remoue and withdraw themselues from the Emperours campe, being both the Campes neare encamped together, that dislodging by night, they had not farre to march, to enter into a very strong valley, where they could not, but with the enemies great disaduantage, bee charged and set vpon: and for that there was in the same valley a little hill, the same was presently possest by the pro|testants, and planted with good store of field ordinance, and with strong troupes of foote and horse, and in such sort occupied, that what with this preparation, and with that which they made in a neare adioyning wood, planting the same full of small shot; the Emperours power could not pursue them, as they had pretended. For as soone as they were approched neare vnto them, they saw that they were retired vnto a place both by art and nature most strong: and therefore were let passe without any more annoyance. Wherefore I say, that with the fauour of the seate, and quality of the countrey, the dislodgement may be thus assured; as by the aboue recited examples may appeare.Better to dislodge by night then by day. And alwayes it is farre better to dislodge by night then by day, for to gaine at the least, the distance of ground, to conduct the Campe to place of security and strength:Considerations. for the remouing by day, without the great helpe and securitie of the seate, most commonly is very daungerous; except the Remouer should farre abound in Cauallery; and therefore the Campe, which is inferiour in horse, ought to distant himselfe, as farre as he can, from the enemy; for not, by such accidents, to be constrained either to fight vpon disaduan|tage, or commit some other foule disorder.
Conclusion.Thus haue I at large (and more large then I meant) declared vnto you, the of|fice

and parts of a Campe-maister Generall, with the orders to be obserued in marching, in encamping, and in remouing of a Campe, with rules and instructi|ons to effect the same: the which being well conceiued, considered, and regar|ded, may serue in time of seruice, to great good and importance.


Gent.
Truly (Captaine) you haue taken paines herein, and haue touched ma|ny good points worthy noting; especially should warres fall vpon vs: from the which God defend vs. But haue you yet any other officer to treat of, vntill you come to the Lord high Generall?




The Election, office, charge and dutie of the High treasurer of an Armie.

Captaine.
_THe High Treasurer of the Armie,Treasurer of the Armie. is commonly chosen and appoin|ted by the Prince; and is in the number of the principall officers that are in the campe, and alwayes one of the Councell of warre, by rea|son of the great affaires committed to his charge  handling,Money, the si|new of warre. which is, the kings monyes and Treasure, being the sinewes of the warre: and without the same it were impossible for an Army long to hold and continue,The parts of his office. hauing to deale with a strong and obstinate enemy. This high Treasurer hath the bestowing of the kings money, in diuerse and sundry vses; and all to conduct the warre to a good end. Moreouer, he is to receiue the tributes, taxes, and tailliages of the Cities, Townes, or Countries, where the conquest is made (if there be any such) and also doth receiue the money which the Collegates do contribute, being any such ligue, and if they contribute money, and not people of warre.
He hath in like sort the superintendencie of the victualling of the campe: and is to haue a great care to giue content (to the vttermost of his power) as well to the small, as to the great,  to see that as well the poore Pioner, as the commaun|ding Colonell be satisfied and payed their payes  duties, at due  conuenient termes, if he will that his Prince bee well serued, and the souldiers to obey their Commanders and Captaines: and to liue in honest and commendable sort, as dis|ciplined people of warre ought to doe:An Armie with|out pay cannot long subsist. otherwise, if the pay be wanting and not performed, I cannot see how a campe can long stand on firme foote; or the soul|dier passe and liue without robbing, rifling, and spoyling, and to commit a thou|sand excesses: neither can I perceiue how any good order may be obserued, if ne|cessitie constraine men to commit these faultes. Yet I will not hereby inferre, but that in times of these wantes and necessities,Patience a rare vertue. men ought, with all possibilitie, to haue patience, for it is a wonderfull vertue in a souldier, at such an instant pinch: and to absteine from committing these excesses, although their pay be long on comming. For I know very well, that monyes cannot alwayes be prouided, and come at the due time appointed, by reason of sundry impediments that may hin|der the same:Nothing more vniust then to make men liue by windie wordes and ayre.  then ought the honest souldier to haue patie~ce. But if the pay stay ouer long, there is nothing more vniust then to make me~ to liue by windy words  ayre: therfore in such meane while they ought, either to distribute le~dings or a certaine quantitie of victuals dayly,  also something to cloath men,  other ne|cessaries,

expecting vntill the pay do come: or else they must be suffered to liue at their owne discretion; that is, to take where and what they may finde: which is a thing not to be permitted, but in cases of great extremitie, and in cases, where all other remedies be past:Dangerous li|berty breedeth in|sole~cie, a vice not easily reuoked. for this dangerous libertie is occasion that souldiers will fall into such an insolencie, that it would be almost impossible to reduce them againe into their first esse, or being, the which is of lesser losse and daunger then to suffer them to dye with famine, or to see the campe dissolued: one of the which would of necessitie ensue, were there not present remedie imployed: and then the fault is not to bee imputed to the Commaunders and Captaines.An obiection. Some man happely will say that the Chieftaines may with sweet wordes and perswasions entertaine, and qualifie the souldiers. I confesse the same: but that is but for a small time: and that too, no longer then that the souldiers do giue credit vnto their per|swasions: But when that they shall once perceiue that they are led forth with wordes,The answer. and fed with wind from day to day, then is there no remedie to deteine them long, but that they will murmur and grudge in diuerse and sundry sortes; and happely runne into riot, seeing themselues deceiued by their Commanders, vnto whom, from thence euer after they will giue but slender credite and beliefe: and may happely be an occasion, that they will another time distrust them, yea, although that they tell them the truth; or at such time of importance as should be greatly needfull to performe any honorable action: therefore, one of the prin|cipallest things that a Commaunder ought to haue in recommendation,A great Com|maunder not to vse many false speeches vnto his souldiers. is not to vse false speeches to his souldiers, if the falsitie may afterwardes be discoue|red. And although that herein there ought to be had great consideration and re|gard, yet now a dayes, some will (forsooth) that fables do passe for currant payes; and Captaines wordes,A bad opinion. to serue souldiers foode; whereby the credite of Com|maunders is greatly diminished amongst men of warre: and in conclusion, this is a willing to couer officers faultes, who happely haue spent and employed the money in some their other priuate commoditie.


Gent.
Souldiers sent in|to Ireland. Soldiers returning out of Ireland.Doubtlesse there be many amisses that do passe in the world: for we haue of late sent soldiers ouer into Ireland at sundry times, and as often as we send, we finde others to returne againe from thence as fast, being able, sound and suffici|ent men, yea more likely men then those that we sent thither: and in conference with them, we heare but hard speeches, and truly were they true, a thing to be pittied,A matter to be ooked vnto, and to be redressed. and to be more narrowly looked vnto, by such as haue authoritie for the same: we are dayly at charge, and often sending forth aydes, the which doubt|lesse, I thinke to be most necessarie, yea were it much more, then it is, considering the great occasions and dayly occurrants: but yet me thinkes it very strange, that strong and sufficient men shold so flocke from thence, ere the action were perfor|med, and new Bisognios sent in their roomes; which seemeth that there is some misterie therein.


Capt.
No doubt, but there be some faults in all parts of the world, and happe|ly among officers, who, although they see, yet will they winke, and beare one with another: but greatly to be wished, where amisses be, reformation to be had.


Gent.
Some Lawyers opinion touching Captaines and souldiers.Truely I haue heard some learned men, and good Lawyers say: that the most of you Captaines are but hungry fellowes, which breedeth many inconue|niences: and therefore (say they) it were farre more necessary that the Gentlemen

of euery countrey or shire should haue the conduction and leading of their owne countreymen and neighbours, where by great amitie and good orders would grow, and more willingly fighting vnder their such countrey Captaines, then vn|der a straunger whom they know not.


Capt.
Those speeches and wished order in some respectes were very good:An answer. but where haue we in euery shire such Ge~tlemen of experience  skill, fit to co~duct  lead men, especially against a braue  politicke enemy: for few we haue that haue seene seruice, especially Countrey gentlemen which neuer went fro~ home:  how dangerous it is for an ignorant man to performe the parts of a perfect Captaine, I haue at large in our first booke discoursed. Indeed were it in a royall campe, well furnished with a number of good and braue Commanders, and skilfull officers, such countrey Captaines were more tollerable: but in other peeces of seruice, where many times, a priuate Captaine with a band or two of men, must per|forme the good parts of a Colonell, or other great Commander, then I say, such your named Captaines were daungerous. Reasons I might shew sufficient, but we should then prolong time ouer much.


Gent.
But they say,An obiection. that many of your Captaines, are as skillesse as a raw coun|trey Gentleman: and therefore of the two euills it were better to chuse the least.


Capt.
This point hath already bin discoursed vpo~ in our first booke,The answer.  in mine opinion, the causes thereof shewen: But let me tell your greedy maister Lawyers one thing, in fauour of poore souldiers: that it is not so light a matter to skirmish among the musket bullet, as it is to brawle at Westminster barre: nor so easie to come to the push of the pike, as to pen out a Lawing plea: nor so pleasant to passe amid the hizzing bullets as to walke in Westminster Hall with hands full of gold: nor so iocande to heare the bouncing of the Cannon; as to hearken to the cry of the crowching Clyents: nor so delicate to lye in open Campania; as to wallow at home in a bed of downe: neither yet were the glittering of armour so gladsome an obiect to their eyes, as the gobbes of gold by heapes in their studies; with ma|ny other points of warre not so toothsome as they suppose: I doe not hereby in|ferre against Law, nor Lawyers, for I wot well, a common wealth cannot stand without order and iustice: but giuing such to vnderstand, as hold to hard a con|ceit of souldiers, that the conductio~ of warre is not of so small waight, as they sup|pose: and happely should they euer come into any hot peece of seruice, at their re|turne home they would sing another song.
But let vs returne to the particular parts of our Treasurer of warre.Particular part of a Treasurer of warre. I say, that this officer is of great reputation; and the payment of Colonels, Captaines and other officers of warre, are committed to his charge. First he ought at the begin|ning of the actions to receiue from the Lord Generall the true number both of horsemen and footemen conteined within the Armie: and to haue a booke made by perfect computation, how much is due euery month to euery Colonell, Cap|taine and all other officers, as well for them, as for their Companies.
His proportion of pay he ought to make it well knowen to the Generall: wher|by the Generall might, in due time, procure prouision of money fro~ the Prince, both for the souldiers payes, and other necessaries.
He must conferre also with the Maister of the victuals to know how the store is furnished, that conuenient prouision may be made in time. The like care must

he haue with the Maister of the Ordinance for the supplying his store of muni|tion, as occasions and seruices of importance shall require.
He must know also of the Muster-maister, how the bands be furnished; what souldiers be dead or slaine; when, and how many; and how, and when supplied: deliuering pay to euery Colonell and Captaine accordingly, keeping the war|rants or notes of their hands for his discharge, and to aduise well the Muster-mai|ster to haue a good regard to the false Musters that many times be made, to the hinderance of the action, and abusing of the Prince: a fault ouer much vsed, and litle regarded.
He is moreouer to conferre with the Captaine Generall of the Artillerie, which is our Maister of the Ordinance, to know whether hee hath any billes from the Colonels and Captaines for powder and other munition receiued; that the same may be deducted at the day of pay.


Gent.
What officers do assist or belong vnto him?


Capt.
There be sundry other officers, which are as it were appendent vnto him; as the Purueyor Generall, the Maister of the victuall, and the Pay-maister, with their Clarkes and Officers; of whom I leaue to discourse, for that their of|fices are well knowen and more desired:Officers common|ly grow rich. for that in our dayes they are very bad cookes that know not how to lick their owne fingers, and once an officer, and by consequence, a rich man. To conclude, not onely vnto this officer, but vnto all o|thers almost, is Arithmetike a great ease and helpe, not onely to digest their ac|counts in good order, but also a ready performance of the same.



The Office and parts of the Lord High Generall of the Armie.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE.

VVherein is set foorth the partes to be expected in so high a Commander: the foure principall qualities which the Romanes considered in the Comman|ders of their armies; how needefull it is to haue graue and experimented of|ficers in the Campe.


Captaine.
The Lord high Generall._THe Generall, the Prince with the aduise of his prudent Councell, doth elect, chuse, and appoint: and being an office of highest degree and greatest charge in the field, it ought to be encommended vnto a personage indued with partes befitting the function. Therefore, as he is the Officer highest in degree, so ought he, not only to know per|fectly the partes of euery other officer,Generall partes. but also to excell them all, in religion, wisedome, experience, policie, grauitie, secrecie, counsell, modestie, tempe|rance, valour, magnanimitie, vigilancie, care, constancie, liberalitie, and reso|lution; with all other good partes incident to a perfect man of warre: and how much all these good partes (and many more) ought to be in the personage elected to this high and carefull dignitie, by our former discourses you may easily con|ceiue and gather; to the ende that he, being their Chieftaine and head, may not

onely know how to gouerne them both in generall and in particular, in all Mar|tiall actions:A lanterne of vertue, for the Armie to imi|tate.
A good chief will chuse good Cap|taines and offi|cers: good Cap|taines will breede good souldiers. It is hard for one man to haue all good partes.but also in his vertuous life and cariage, be a patterne, light,  lan|terne vnto the whole Armie, to imitate: for in our old prouerbe we say: such hunt, such hound, such maister, such man: and so by consequence, such Chiefe, such followers. For most commonly a wise, valiant and vertuous Generall, will chuse wise, valiant,  vertuous Captaines, and officers: good  vertuous Cap|taines, will, as neare as they can, chuse honest, sober, and vertuous souldiers, or at the least, reforme their faults, and do their best to bring them to the due forme of Militarie discipline. And as it is very hard for euery Commaunder to haue all the good partes incident to his function, yet such as are indued with many, or the most of these partes, are best to be esteemed; and so consequently the rest. For the accidents of warre are so diuerse and manifold,The accidents of warre are di|uerse; sometimes altering mens humours. that it altereth many times the humours of men: except being endued with constancie and magnanimitie; which singular vertues few men possesse: but greatly to bee wished in all high Commaunders.
Now to discourse and reason in particular vpon the partes due to a Generall, our discourses would bee ouer long; wherefore I will name the foure principall, which the ancient Greekes and Romanes did consider in such personages as they elected to bee conductors of their Armies:The foure princi|pall vertues con|sidered by the Romanes. 1 2 3 4 which were, 1 to be very expert and skilfull in the Art of warre, 2 to be valiant and magnanimous, 3 to bee of great grauitie and authoritie; and 4 to be fortunate in their successes: the which parts me thinkes, a Prince ought to regard  consider, in the election of his Generall.


Gent.
These partes and qualities do seeme to be very good indeede; but yet, I pray, declare more particularly thereof, that we may the better vnderstand the same.


Capt.
I say (Gentlemen) that those Republikes would haue their Captaines Generall to haue great experience in Martiall actions,Experience ought to be in Martiall men. whereby they might pru|dently commaund and gouerne therein; and therefore did they alwayes elect and chuse personages of great experience and practise, and of ripe yeares and iudge|ment vnto this office: yea with such consideration  care, that of the Romanes, af|ter that the two Scipios were slaine,The 2. Scipios. Asdruball. and their Armies ouerthrowen, by Asdruball the Carthagenian in Spayne; none of their best experimented durst take vpon him the former charge,Scipio Africa|nus. but onely young Scipio, called afterward Africanus, being sonne to one of the slaine Consuls, although contradicted by sundry Se|nators, and chiefly by Quintus Fabius Maximus,Quintus Fabius Maximus. alledging his young yeares, who onely offered himselfe, and resolutely tooke vpon him the determination to go to that Prouince, and accepted the defence of the same: shewing himselfe therein the most valiant and noblest Gentleman then left in the Romaine Repu|blike, and one that had bene nuzled vp in warre euen from a child; but not aboue 28. yeares of age; which caused the Senators (as I sayd) to misdoubt, that by rea|son of his young yeares, he should want the due skill, experience, and prudence, conuenient for the gouernement of the Romaine Armie.


Gent.
But yet there haue bene many Princes in the world, who being of young age began to gouerne,Alexander Ma|gnus commaun|ded being young. and conduct their Armies: as Alexander being but a ve|ry youth, conquered all Asia, and put all the whole world in a maze.


Capt.
It is true, that many times for precise and forcible causes, it is necessary

that Kings and Princes should bee present with their owne Armies in person, although their age  experience be not great.Young Princes in warres ought to haue graue  experimented Captaines. Examples. But when this commeth to passe, they commonly carrie with them, most ancient, graue and experimented Cap|taines: as did Alexander, of the best and of most authoritie, which Philip, his fa|ther had for his Conductours and Counsellours of warre: and many other of all nations haue done the like, as in our time did king Philip of Spayne, whe~ he made Don Iohn de Austria his Captaine Generall,Don Iohn de Austria. hee chose and appointed for his assi|ster, Counsellour, and Lieutenant, Don Luis de Zuniga the grand Commendador of Castille: and many of our English kings haue done the like; as did the famous con|querour Edward the third,Edward the 3. the Prince of Wales.
The battell of Poytiers.
Iohn king of France and Phi|lip his sonne.
Don Sebastian king of Portu|gall. who sent with his eldest sonne the braue Prince of Wales, for Coadiutors, Counsellours, and Captaines, the valiant Earles of War|wick, Suffolk, Salisbury and Oxenford; at their honorable iourney into France, where at the battell of Poytiers they ouerthrew the whole power of France, and tooke their king Iohn with his sonne Philip, and a great number of the French no|bilitie prisoners.


Gent.
Then how fortuned it that Don Sebastian king of Portugall, carried not such experienced personages about him, at his disastred iourney made into Barba|ry, being himselfe so young, and without experience of warre?


Capt.
Insufferable na|ture of man.You must note therein the proud and insufferable nature of mans mind; especially of them two Prouinces, Spayne and Portugall, which will not willingly endure any stranger to carrie any office and dignitie amongst them:The Spanyardes will not endure any stranger to be a Commander a|mong them. and men of experience and conduction hee had none in his owne Realme, by reason of his long continued peace.


Gent.
Yet me thinkes, that his determination was great and honorable.


Capt.
It was so great, as was well seene by the successe he had: and truly none can denie but that he carried a braue minde,The rashnesse of youth and want of skill. and an high conceit: but yet by rea|son of his young age, and lesse skill, he wanted conuenient prudence to the con|duction of so honorable an action: for his presumption and boldnesse aboun|ded, to his owne, and his peoples ouerthrow, which hath growen to a by word a|mong the Spaniards, to the Portugals reproch; saying; Pocos, y locos, y mal auentu|rados. But I trust in God, that if it please him to blesse vs no worse then hither un|to he hath done,The Spaniardes ambition. and to giue vs mindes and prudence to preuent their mischiefes in time, we shall one day yet say by them, Muchos, presuntuosos, y mal disgracia|dos: for surely their pretences and desseignes are most ambitious and cruell a|gainst all Christian Princes and Countries, especially against vs, vpon whom they watch but time and opportunitie to poure out their whole pots of poyson: wherefore it standeth vs vpon,It standeth vs vpon to haue an eye thereunto. all true and valiant English harts, to arme our selues first with the feare, and honour of God; then with prudence, magnanimi|tie, courage  valorous resolution against this proud nation, the Popes mynions; Spaniardes I meane. But indeede, had Don Sebastian bene of such Martiall pru|dence, and valour in the same,Charles the fift. Henry the fift. Edward the 3. Henrie the 3 king of Fraunce. Prince of Ora~ge. as was his grand father Charles the fift: or was Hen|rie the fift, Edward the third: and other noble kings of England and France, or as Henrie the third now king of France and Nauarre, and as was George Scanderbeg, and the last Prince of Orange, with sundry such others, hee would haue imita|ted them: who, in all their actions did annexe and couple vnto them, ancient and experimented Captaines, although they were most braue men themselues:

as did Charles the fift chuse for his Generall at his enterprise vpon Tunez, A|lonzo de Aualos,Alonso de Aualos. Ferdinando de Toledo. Marquis de Guasto; and in Germany he chose Ferdinando de Tole|do, Duke of Alua: and so did sundry of the other aboue named Princes, the like.



THE SECOND DIALOGVE.

VVherein is discoursed of militarie valour: and the sundry parts therof: as mili|tary prudence, with sundry stratagems of warre: with many other martiall points.


Gentleman.
_WEll now, sith you haue declared vnto vs the first point, and qua|lity of a Generall (which is experience) I pray proceede to the rest.


Capt.
The second I spake of, was to haue militarie valour and prudence.


Gent.
How is this military valour to be vnderstood?


Capt.
Military valour,Military valour, what it is. is to be vnderstood with vs, as true Magnanimitie with the Latinists: which is, besides his care in the actions of warre; he is to haue in|dustrie to practise them, and readinesse to effect them, and constancy and true fortitude of mind in all perillous and daungerous successes,Parts of magna|nimity.
Battell of Cress. Agincourt field Henry king of Fraunce and Nauarre against the Duke de Mayne. as had Edward the third at the battel of Cressy, and his son, the braue Prince of Wales, at the battel of Poitiers; and as had our noble Henry the fift at Agincourt field: and as had of late, this present king of Fraunce and Nauarre, in his honourable battell, against his re|bell, the Duke de Mayne, with all his braue assistants, vpon an Ashwednesday, be|ing the fourth of March in Anno. 1590. By whose magnanimity and martiall valour (next vnder God) was the victory most honourably atchieued, euen at such time of extremity, as his troupes were disarayed and ready to flie; who most magnanimously, in the very pinch and point of that disaray, rushed boldly a|mongst them, saying; C'est moy, mes enfants, Voyez, icy vostre Roy. It is I my childre~, loe here your King: whereby they were so comforted, and encouraged, that they regathered themselues, made a fresh head, and conquered in fine their con|quering enemies.
This fortitude, moreouer doth wonderfully ayde and helpe to the ouerthrow|ing and quenching of all disordinate appetites:Fortitude of mind. and to the end you may the better vnderstand me, I will declare the parts more particularly. To little purpose were it for a Captaine Generall to be experienced,Experience mani|fested by valiant actions. as before I haue sayd, if his experi|ence and skill did not manifest the same with his valiant actions: and to put the same in execution, it is necessary that he be carefull, vigilant, and diligent in all the matters which hee is to attempt, and put in practise, and moreouer to haue a naturall instinct and humour befitting the same:A naturall in|stinct to know the qualities of the enemy. as particularly to know the qualities of the enemies Commander; whether he be ouer bold, rash, and inconsiderate, or timerous, sober, and reposed in his actions: and whether he bee

subtill,Great points to be considered. politike, and diligent, or blunt, base minded, and sluggish: whether he be a man desirous to come to fact of armes, or a man of delay, auoyding the same: al|so to know what counsellours, conductors, and officers he hath, and in fine of what determinations: whether his enemies Army bee of new reared people and Bisognios, or of practised, skilfull, and auncient bandes, and of what nation they be: what desseignes and intents they hold, and vnto what end they aspire: and also to consider and paralleill his owne forces with the strength and powers of the aduersary: helping himselfe in most of these matters, with good and trustie espi|als, and those to be well rewarded and payed,Good and trustie espials. the which many times are as souer|aigne Antidotes against the poysonous practises of the enemy: as the most brauest and skilfullest Commanders of the world haue vsed: as did Lewes the eleuenth, king of raunce,Lewes the 11 king of Fraunce Phillip Duke of Burgundy.
Phillip king of Spaine. against Phillip, Duke of Burgundy, and as did Charles the fift, a|gainst the Protestants in Germany: and as now doth king Phillip of Spaine, too too much in all nations; and (no doubt) other Princes do practise the same: whereby many desseignes bee often discouered, and thereby preuented without fact of armes, onely with military prudence: the which may be effected and done with continuall diligence,Military pru|dence. and ceaselesse care. For a braue mind and of high con|ceit, ought neuer to bee tired in toyling after vertue, and to attaine with cost of trauell the glorious issues of his deepe desseignes: as did our famous King, Henry the eight, and others his predecessors, in their honourable attempts and atchiue|ments in Fraunce: and as did Charles the fift in his actions in Germany and Italy:  as did Alexander, Iulius Caesar, Hanniball, and Scipio, with many others more in their honourable enterprises and conquests.
And for asmuch, as from such military care and diligence, there is to be expec|ted good successe,From military care and dilige~ce do spring good successes. Examples. it is conuenient that the Captaine Generall bee very industri|ous, to know howe to inuente newe occasions of warre, to entertaine the e|nemy with long delay, if the case so require it; imitating Quintus Fabius Maximus, when he warred against Hanniball. And many times to corrupt with money; as did Lewes the second king of Fraunce often practise; and as did Monsier dela Tres|moille, Monsieur de Leuy and Triuultio, Generals to Lewes the twelth King of Fraunce, when hee corrupted with money the Switzers which serued vnder the pay of Lodowik Sforza, Duke of Millan, vpon whom they layed hands, and vilely deliuered him to his enemies, the French: and as did the Prince of Parma, with the traytors, Yorke, and Stanley, and the betraying and deliuery of Sutphen vnto the Spaniards. And as principally doth King Phillip of Spain corrupt with his gol|den Pistolets the most parts of Europe;Phillips golden pistolets corrupt most parts of Christendome. Gonzalo Ferna|des. according to their grand Captaine, Gonsalo Fernandes, saying: that Princes, Generals, and great Commanders, ought by one meanes, or other seeke to ouercome, and gaine their purposes: bee it by right or by wrong, a Spanish principle.
Moreouer he may by cunning meanes, and fained letters, cause the enemies Captaines to be suspected,Satagems by fained letters. Burbon riaul|tio. and blemished; as did Burbon and Tryuultio, the King of Fraunce his Generals, being besieged, and very hardly distressed within Myllau, by the Emperour Maximilian, who sent of politike purpose, a seruant of Triuul|tios (who spake the Switzer tong perfectly well) with fained letters vnto the Cap|taines of that nation, then seruing in Maximilians Campe, thereby to cause them to be suspected and doubted,Maximilian. the which faining messenger being taken by

the Sentinels and watches, cunningly (like Synon at Troy) humbly beseeched them his life and pardon, and that he would deliuer them certaine things which he had to deliuer vnto the Colonels and Captaines of the Switzers: the which be|ing graunted him,The Switzers. he drew out of his shoe the deuised letter, which he carried to cause a suspition to grow vpon these Captaines: the which being seene and read by the Emperour, holding for certaine their contents to be true, and mistrusting some treason,Ldowike Sfor|za. as they had before vsed vnto Lodowik Sforza, raised presently his campe, and withdrew himselfe, with lesse constancy and credit, then to his honor and reputation was conuenient.
Also he ought to haue great industry and skill to know how to encampe his Army,Industrie and skill to encampe, and to dislodge the enemy. and to dislodge the enemy, cutting him from victuals and other commo|dities; with blocking vp of all passages and straights about the besieged place, and to reknowledge and consider all the places of most strength and commoditie: wherefore it is needefull that he bee both learned and skilled in Geographie, as well of the countrey  prouince where he warreth, as of al other parts in generall; well informing himselfe of the situations and dispositions of the same,To haue good in|telligence. of what temperature they be, of what firtilite they are, of what thinges they abound, and of what things they want, what maner of people do inhabite the~,  those of what co~ditions  maner of life; what religio~ they hold, with what lawes they be gouer|ned, what Princes do rule them, and what power and valour they are of. All the which considerations, and many more stratagems are to be attained with lear|ning,  often reading of histories; as by all braue Commanders which euer were yet, may well be vnderstood, and therefore let no man thinke, but that a souldier ought to be learned and read,Learning ioyned with experience maketh a perfect man of warre. the which conioyned with experience, makes him a perfect man of warre: and without this learning and reading a souldier may haunt many yeares the warres, and neuer attaine to the deepe points of soldierie, the which by much reading and fewer yeares of experience, may be farre better perfected:Lucullus the Ro|maine. as was seene by Lucullus the Romaine commander, and many others of other nations.
And also to haue the more particular skill and knowledge herein,Drawne plats, and mapps, with descriptions. it importeth much to haue drawne plats, mappes, and models of euery seuerall prouince, countrey, and region, with the descriptions of their mountaines, valleys, hils, champain fields, forrests, woods, riuers, brookes, fennes, lakes, pastures, and ara|ble grounds, and whether their fields be open or inclosed, narrow or large; what straights and passages difficult to passe, what strong places and castels, what townes, cities, and boroughs, what Noble mens places, and houses of pleasure, and what distance there is betwixt place,  place; wherby to giue assured directi|ons and traces vnto euery action they pretend and attempt; as did many of our fa|mous Commanders in their honourable warres in Fraunce and Scotland, and as did the Marquis de Pescara and Antonio de Leyua,The Marquis de Pescara and Antonio de Leyua.
Industry, policy, and courage. and other imperiall Captaines in their warres with the French, in the prouinces of Naples, Lombardy, and Pie|mont, who with a farre lesser number, badly payed, and worse preparations of war, with only industry, courage, pollicy,  boldnesse, came to atchieue many en|terprises, and to great encounters, layed many Ambuscados, and gaue many surpri|ses and Camisadas to the enemy, therereby gaining both honour and victory: as was seene in the battell of Pauia,The battell of Pauia. where Francis the French King was taken pri|soner,

and his Army quite ouerthrowne, with the states that he held in Italy. The like did many of our braue English Kings in France, Scotland and other places, namely at the battell of Poytiers, Agincourt fielde, and else where, where with a small number of English souldiers, the whole strength and cheualry of Fraunce was ouerthrowne, slayne, and taken prisoners, onely by valour and martiall in|dustry. All the which was performed with wonderfull diligence, speede, secre|cy, and resolution, which bee matters of great importance in the conduction of warre.


Gent.
Few numbers ex|perienced brauely conducted, do at|chiue great enter|prises.How say you, that it is a very important thing to execute the effect of warre with great speede and diligence, sith you said but euen now, that it was a great point to know how to entertaine the enemy with delayes, as did Quintus Fa|bius with Hannyball?


Capt.
Policy preferred before rigour of warre.
Battels subiect to a thousand ha|zards.It is true, that in good martiall discipline, that Generall is more to bee accounted of, and esteemed, which knoweth how to ouercome with policy, wise|dome, stratagems, and prudence, then with dint of sword and rigour of weapons. For battels are subiect vnto a thousand hazards, and perils, as to the temerity and rashnesse of heady Captaines and souldiers, and vnto the cowardize sometimes of some particulars; with a number of such accidentall fortunes: and therefore in effect, prudence and patience, and not pride and rashnesse, do produce good and happy euents in warre:Octauius Augu|stus. and therefore the Emperour Octauius Augustus did more esteeme the kingdome of Mauritania, then all the other prouinces which he pos|sest, for that he had gayned the same without bloud, and the king of Naples Don Alonso,Don Alonso king of Naples.
The Duke de Aniou.
A wise saying. being chalenged by his Competitor and enemy, the Duke of Aniou to come to battell, he refused the same, saying; that it was the part of a good Cap|taine to knowe howe to gayne, and not to come to battell at the enemies ap|petite.
But this is principally to be vnderstood, when a Prince is set vpon and distressed in his own cou~try, as was then the said king Don Alonso,  the case being such, let no Prince nor Generall vse the temeritie and rashnesse, as did Lewes the King of Hungaria,Rashnesse of Lewes king of Hungaria. who ioyned in battell vnaduisedly with Solyman the great Turke, being badly counselled thereunto by the Archbishop Tomeres, being farre inferiour to his enemy in numbers: yea, although he were equall, yet were it better to weary him with delayes, and cause him by such lingerings to be weary of the acti|on; and so retire in fine. And therefore to this ende the Signory of Venice will haue their Generals to be rather warie and long delayers,To weary with delayes, rather then to be rash and furious. The Venetians order.
Successes of bat|tels are doubtful. Iulius Caesars saying.
A good note. then rash and furious warriours, not sparing any cost to prolong the same, alwaies auoyding the doubt|full and vncertaine successes of battell, yea although they hold for certaine to gaine; if it be thought to cost much bloud, yet better to be refused: as Iulius Cae|sar declared very well, saying: that hee ought to bee accompted an vniust Cap|taine if he did not more esteeme the safety of his Army, and the life of his souldi|ers, then his owne proper commodity and life. For those which do measure the hope of the victory, without the due consideration of the profit or losse, that succeedes the same, doe desire vaine and disordinate things, and do find many times the euents and issues contrary to their thoughts: as it chaunced vnto the French at the battell of Poytiers,Examples. where although they were in full hope of victo|ry, yet they lost therein a number of their nobility, with their King and his sonne

taken prisoners: and againe, as it befell the sayd French at the battell of Rauenna, where although they remained victors,Battell at Rauen|na. Monsieur de|foyx. yet they lost Monsieur de Foyx their Ge|nerall, and many of his braue Captaines, whereby those which remained were constrained to retire, and passe ouer the Alpes, with more then good speede. Therefore to entertaine the enemy with long delayes, without bringing ones selfe into the daunger of fact of armes, and to be at choise to accept or refuse the bat|tell, if it be presented,Many policies to be vsed to delay the fact of bat|tell.
Speede and dili|gence in many peeces of seruice. Ambuscados, Ca|misadas, Incursi|ons, skirmishes. there is to be vsed many policies, deuises, and stratagems, and to attempt the venturous effects (of necessity) speede, and diligence is to be required; as in lodging Ambuscados, to giue Camisadas, to sallie in skirmish, and to make incursions and great Caualgados to surprise victuals and conuoies, to pre|uent their allodgements, to possesse straights and passages, to cut them from vic|tuals, and such like peeces of seruice: and especially if there be two of the ene|mies powers seperated the one from the other, and being necessary to fight with them before they come to ioyne; then I say, is wonderfull dispatch, speede and se|crete conduction to be required:Claudius Nero defeated Asdru|ball Barquinus. The Duke of Bauier.
Frederick the Em|perour. as did Claudius Nero a Romaine Captaine, when he defeated and slew Asdruball Barquinus, who was come out of Spaine into Italy to ioyne with his brother Hannyball. The like did the Duke of Bauier, before that fresh aydes were come to ioyne with his enemy, the Emperor Frederik. And as did the Duke of Alua, holding Graue Lodwike besieged within Monts in Hen|nault, who vnderstanding, and seeing his brother the Prince of Orange, com|ming with a strong power to relieue him, the very same night that he approched neare, gaue him a most furious Camisado, and slew many of his people, whereby he was enforced the next day to returne without effecting his intent.Celeritie and quicke dispatch in conquest of a countrey.
Portugall warres. And in the conquest of any country, city, or prouince, there is also great celerity and quicke dispatch to be vsed by the Captaines, and Generals; as was performed by the Duke de Alua, and the Marquis Sancta Cruz in their Portugall wars, preuenting by their martiall prudence, many difficulties, not otherwise easie to be dispatched, if the Portugals had had more wit, valour, and counsell, then they had. And howe much this celerity in some cases doth auaile, may well be seene by the braue ex|ploites of Sir Francis Drake,Sir Francis Drake and Captaine Carliel in the In|dias. and Captaine Caerleil, at Sant Domingo, Carthagena, and Nombre de Dios, with other parts of the Indies. Sundry other examples might be recited of actions performed with celeritie, and secrecy: and for not applying quickenesse  celerity in the execution, many times actions haue bin greatly hin|dered, and great inconueniences haue ensued: as it happened vnto Hanniball; who hauing the victory and conquest of all Italy in his handes after the battell of Can|nas,Hanniball at the battell of Cannas. lost all those aduantages, only for not pursuing the aforesayd victory. But yet in all these occurrants and occasions,Great care to be had to conserue the Army.
Desperate as|sault, the spoyling of braue men. there is great care and consideration to be had, to conserue the Army what possible may be, and not to hazard the souldiers with daungerous assaultes; for commonly in such attempts the brauest men go to wracke, as was well to be seene among the Spaniards in the expugnation of Ha|erlem, Mastricht, Sluce, and other fortes of the low countries. And therefore Sci|pio the younger, when being perswaded by some of his Captaines to take Numan|tia by battery and assault, he aunswered them, saying: that he esteemed more the sauing of one Romaines life, then the killing of all those within Numantia; conside|ring that the best men are commonly lost in such attempts.
Constant in pe|rils.A Generall ought also to bee very constant in hazardes and perils; for many times it happeneth, that the determinations which men do take in pleasant mo|tions, and with great vigour of minde, before the very daunger; but the perill being once presented, and when it is most neede to put the businesse in execu|tion, then being amazed and striken with chilly feare, doe they leaue off the at|temptes, and dishonorably retire; and will by no meanes be reencouraged there|unto: as did
To contemne any daunger for to conserue our ho|nour.And hee is to bee accounted an excellent Generall, which contemneth and des|piseth all imminent daungers, in respect to conserue his reputation and honour: as many of our famous kings of England haue done, in their owne persons, and as many times Henry,Exa~ples of braue men. now present king of Fraunce and Nauarre, hath done in ma|ny encounters which he hath had: and as did the Countie Lodron, when Castra|neo the Emperour Ferdinando his Generall forsooke the Army vnder his charge in Hungaria, and fled away with the most part of the horsemen, for feare of the Turkes; the sayd Countie Lodron being with those footemen which remained, was by them most humbly entreated to be their Conductor and Generall in that disastred successe, seeing that he, which was their Generall and Commander had so shamefully forsaken them: the which the sayd Countie accepted with great modestie, vsing vnto them many graue speeches, and honorable wordes, with abhorring the fowle flying away of his companion, and encouraging them braue|ly to defend themselues, with their manfull resisting of their enemies, without imagining or thinking vpon any thing else, then valiantly to fight, and couragi|ously to ouercome. Then an ancient Almaine souldier, seeing this Countie so full of spirite, and constant, sayd in gracious maner thus vnto him; My Lord, let it not seeme vnto you so great a wonder the flying away of our Generall, seeing that he was mounted vpon so gallant a courser, as he was; which seemed that hee expe|cted to see how his horse would runne. Now, the Countie vnderstanding the craftie meaning of this old souldier, dismounted with all dexteritie from his horse, and drawing out his curtilax, cut off his horse legges, saying vnto them with a chearefull countenaunce;Honorable wordes. My good companions, and deare countreymen, this day will I be both Captaine and souldier, and will fight on foote euen as you doe; Performe you the partes of valiant men, for not to deceiue mine opinion of you;  gaine ye the victory, or dye most honorably with reuenging your deathes; and finishing this warre with your end and mine.
Not to be ouer|come with disor|dinate lustes.Now to conclude with this militarie vertue: Great Commaunders and Cap|taines Generals, should not suffer themselues to bee ouerruled with disordinate lustes,One foule vice may obscure ma|ny vertues. and appetites: for in a noble personage one onely vice is inough to ob|scure and blemish a number of good vertues, as was seene by Alexander, and Phi|lip his father, by the fowle excesse of wine drinking; and by many others stained with such other vices.Vertue exalteth the possessors thereof. And per contra, one singular vertue did wonderfully grace and exalte the possessors thereof: and if it finde foundation of Nobilitie and Il|lustrious Bloud, it frameth thereupon the fabrica and building of a most excellent Personage: and if it finde no such foundation, yet it layeth sufficient foundation of it selfe: which hath bene seene in many Captaines, who from base degree and state, haue ascended to bee great Commaunders and Princes, by their wise and vertuous cariage, and by their modestie in maners, and by their singular absti|nence;

whereof we haue many and singular examples of sundry vertuous men: as of Francis Sforza,Francis Sforza. Duke of Millan, who imitating Scipio Aphricanus, would not once touch or abuse a most bewtifull yong mayden, which was taken by his soul|diers in the Castell of Casa noua, and presented vnto him, whom he receiued into his pauillion; being a matter of more importance to suppresse the vices insulting in the minde,The good life of the Generall a pa|terne to reforme their Campe. then to encounter a mightie enemy. And by this example of him selfe, might this Generall, and many other such, which haue bene in the world, reforme their Campes; not permitting their souldiers and people of warre, to grow licentious, and to soyle themselues in vices, sith that nothing doth make them more effeminate,Vitious sensuali|tie effeminates the minde. and more vnprofitable for warre then the same: as well appeared in the expugnation and sacke of Numantia, being there ouerthrowen so many Conductors and Consuls,Example at Nu|mantia. Scipio Aemilia|nus reformed his Campe. without performing any thing: for being the Romaine Armie so corrupted with vices, vntill Scipio Aemilianus came to com|maund; who reformed the same, and banished all light women and bad house|wiues out of his campe, and caused his souldiers to forsake and shake off all kinde of curiositie and daintinesse, compelling them to eate their meate standing, and continually to practise their weapons: the which reformations were of such im|portancie and effect, that within a short time after, those of Numantiae sallying forth to skirmish, with their accustomed confidence and courage, they were con|strained to retire, and turne their heeles: whom, at their returne into the Citie, being reprehended  blamed by their Generall, for so flying from the Romanes, whom they had so often before time beaten, they answered him, saying; that the Romane souldiers were the very same,How much im|porteth a good Commaunder. but that their Commaunder was another, and a man of more valour and better gouernement then those before passed.



THE THIRD DIALOGVE.

VVherein is discoursed of the other two vertues, Authoritie, and Fortune; and their due significations: and in fine, what Counsellours are to bee chosen, and coupled vnto the Lord high Generall of an Armie Royall: with other points.


Gentleman.
_NOw, sith you haue at large declared vnto vs the partes, appertei|ning vnto Militarie valour, and vertue; I pray proceede vnto the o|ther qualities of a Generall.


Capt.
The two remaining be,Authoritie and fortune do follow militarie valour and vertue. Authoritie,  Fortune; the which doe imitate and follow the others, as the shaddow doth the body. For a vertue (as I haue before declared) doth put in execution and practise the Militarie preceptes: and the wise Captaine Generall doth thereof make an ha|bite; whereby ariseth and springeth (of necessitie) the fame of his valour and ho|norable actes; the which doth accredite him, and encrease to him authoritie.


Gent.
I vnderstood that the authoritie in a Captaine Generall, was, to be no|bly borne, and descended of illustrious bloud.


Capt.
It importeth him much to bee such; the better to be respected and fol|lowed

of those noble men and gentlemen,It importeth much in warres to be borne of il|lustrious bloud which doe follow the warres: for per|adue~ture they would not so incline vnto him, nor obey him with such subiection, if he were not such: therefore how much nobler the personage of a Generall is, so much the more is hee obliged to adorne and furnish himselfe with the good partes and vertues which before I haue spoken of: for high title and fauour ma|keth not a man wise, prudent, and vertuous, if he be not such of himselfe. For by these vertues;Seueritie and li|beralitie, two firme pillers of a Generall.  by his seuere punishing of the bad,  by his liberall rewarding of the good, which be two of the firmest pillers that a Generall can hold, he shall as|cend vnto the top of true perfection.


Gent.
Doe you say, that a Generall is to punish with seueritie: and alwayes I haue vnderstood, that it is more securitie for Princes, to be beloued for their cle|mencie, then to be feared for their rigour?


Capt.
Cleme~cie toward the enemy, hum|bly yeelded.I vnderstand that in Martiall causes, clemencie is to be vsed towardes the enemy humbly yeelded: For, for to conquere it is a humane thing, but to pardon and forgiue, is a thing diuine. And in truth, none can bee termed a true victorie, if the same be not accompanied with some clemencie: and therefore Francis the French king,Francis the Fre~ch king. after the battell of Pauia, was wont to say, That kingdomes might be conque|red by force, and gained and conserued by riches, but the good fortune thereof, when it seemed most prosperous, turned her taile at pleasure (and in one moment in a maner) turned topsie turuie all that she had exalted in many yeares space. But the preparati|ons, occasions, and meanes how to vse this clemencie, and mercy, and thereby to aduaunce mens noble fames, is not a thing which euery Prince attaineth, and he may bee accounted in euery point happy who hath the same, and knoweth rightly how to vse it,Example of cle|mencie and pit|tie. as did our famous king Edward the third, and his victorious sonne Edward Prince of Wales, vnto king Iohn of France, and Philip his sonne, af|ter the memorable battell of Poitiers; and as did Philip Duke of Millan, vnto Don Alonso of Naples; and the Soldan Saladine, vnto the Christian women in Hierusa|lem. For although the generous and haughty mindes do reioyce in victories, they do yet neuerthelesse grieue at others calamities: and therefore Alexander wept for Darius: and Iulius Caesar for Pompeius: and Marcellus for Syracusa: and Scipio for Numantia.
The rigour of iustice on whom, and where to be vsed. A Generall to be both beloued and feared. HanniballBut the rigour of iustice ought to be exercised vpon the owne souldiers of the campe, and people of warre, their offences deseruing it: for in true discipline of warrre, one is not to offend twise. And it importeth much for a Captaine Gene|rall to be both beloued and feared; as was Hanniball, who being but a particular Ge~tleman of Carthage, without any other Signiories or state,  had for his great enemies, the most principall Senators of the same Republike, and the Armie vn|der his charge being of sundry nations, yet is it not in writing that euer there was seene any mutinie amongst his souldiers, nor any disagreeing in so many yeares as he warred in Spaine, France, and Italie; by reason that he chastened with rigour the delictes and offences committed by his people of warre, and rewarded their noble actes with great liberalitie and kindnesse; and payed them their due payes alwayes in good time.


Gent.
Without doubt Hanniball must needes be well serued and obeyed, if he payed his souldiers so royally and well.


Capt.
I finde no foundation more sure and firme then to doe the same, to the

end to haue an Armie well conducted and gouerned.Souldiers well payed, a sure foundation to good conduction. For, if the souldiers be not payed, of necessitie they must be suffered to robbe, spoyle, raunge, and ransack, whereby to sustaine themselues, as too too much hath bene seene in these ciuill warres of France and Flanders:Want of pay breedes many in|conueniences. the which, if they were well and duly payed, then all these inconueniences should cease; and would serue with more warinesse and care, as men bound thereunto, and would feare punishment, if they should by hap offend.
Now,Good fortune proceedes, from experience, forti|tude, and from authoritie. felicitie and good fortune, proceedes from knowledge, from fortitude, and from authoritie. For the Generall which knoweth what hee hath to doe, by skill and experience, and hath Militarie valour, to enterprise, and to execute with consideration and authoritie, that thereby his souldiers may both beleeue him, and follow him; such a one, without question, shall haue good successe: which is the very true felicitie and good fortune it selfe.


Gent.
I neuer vnderstood, till now, that felicitie and good fortune did consist in science and knowledge: for I haue alwayes heard say; that fortune did most fa|uour men of least wisedome, and in fine, fooles.


Capt.
Such was the opinion amongst the Stoicke Philosophers; co~ceiuing that as there was one Prima causa,The Stoickes opi|nion of fortune. eternall, omnipotent, and of infinite wisedome, knowen and discerned by the order and harmonie of his workes: so in like sort, was there another causa, imprudent, foolish, and inconsiderate; whose operati|ons were without order, or reason, or any wisedome at all; for that, with an irra|tionall affection, it both gaue, and depriued men, of riches, dignitie and honour: the which they termed and intituled by the name of fortune; seeing her to bee a friend of men which did their matters,There is no other fortune, but the prouide~ce of God. fort; which is to say, a casu, by chaunce, without conduction either of reason or prudence. But in very truth there is none other fortune but the prouidence of God, and the valour and abilitie of man: neither any other thing that maketh men disastred,  that things succeede them not, according to their desires, but onely the want of skill to practise their actions in due times; and with such conuenient meanes as the cases would require.


Gent.
Truly, me thinkes, that if a Generall should obserue the rules by you declared of these foure principall parts and qualities: he should not fayle of good successe in the most of his actions.


Capt.
So thinke I also:The Generall ought to bee skil|full in all the of|fices of warre. presupposing therewithall that hee ought to know, and vnderstand all that which I haue spoken of the other officers of warre (and of much more yet vnspoken of) sith that they are his inferiours; to the end that he may perfectly know, how to commaund and gouerne them: for vnworthily shall hee commaund and gouerne in warres, which is ignorant and vnskilfull in the preceptes and rules thereof.


Gent.
What more yet concerneth his office?


Capt.
Marry,To chuse good Counsellors and men of experie~ce. to chuse vnto himselfe good Counsellours to assist him in his good gouernement: for much more needefull are the Counsels of men, wise and experimented in Martiall causes, then armour and weapons: for the greater mat|ters are better effected with the intendement, then atchieued with the sword, many times.


Gent.
But are not the personages knowne, who are to be of the Counsell of warre, by reason of their offices.



Capt.
The Counsellours in warre ordina|rily knowen.Yea sir: for ordinarily these following, bee of the same: First the Cap|taine Generall of the men at armes, lances, and light horse; 2 the Captaine Gene|rall of the artillery, or Maister of the Ordinance: 3 the Camp-maister Generall, or Lord high Marshall. 4 the Colonels of the Infanterie; and 5 also the Treasurer of warre.Respect to be had to graue and an|cient souldiers. But there is (moreouer) respect to bee had vnto other graue personages; and in the election of those, the Generall ought to haue great consideration, and insight: for deepe, daungerous, and difficult matters, are to be consulted, dis|puted, and reasoned with perfect intendements,  cleare iudgements. And ther|fore there is not to be admitted vnto the same,Men of meane iudgement and common sense, not to be permit|ted to be Coun|sellours. A particular care. men of meane iudgements and of common sense: for those that are the Counsellours to a Prince, ought to be perso|nages of great mindes, high conceites,  of equall intendement with the Prince. And that which he is particularly to consider of them, is, to see that they be per|fect souldiers, and of great experience, and men of valorous determinations: but not rash, headie, and harebrainde: for those Counsels are sufficient honourable, which render securitie vnto doubtfull affaires. And on the contrary, those are most affro~tous,  miserable; whe~ being enterprised with temeritie, onely to shew a vaine presumption, and rigorous boldnesse of minde, they are wont to disturbe the good courses of the honorable enterprises, and of the victories whereof great hope is to be had. And because it is a most ordinarie thing amongst Counsellors to contradict one another, and to diminish one anothers authoritie, he must bee very carefull to foresee and procure,To procure a ge|nerall loue a|mongst them. Hatred  feare, are two bad Counsellors in warre. that they be all louing friendes together: for that, the most part of the securitie of the campe consists in their vnitie, con|cord, and loue: and that they all may loue him with entire affection: for hatred and feare be two bad Counsellors in warre.
This (Gentlemen) is all that I am able to say touching the officers and high Commaunders in warres: what other stratagems and policies of warre are, the Generall, and other high Conductors of enterprises, may by their owne Marti|all prudence, and naturall instinct, inuent and put in practise, according to the occurrants and accidents of warre: for dayly new courses and inuentions are found out: to answer the which new stratagemes are deuised,  sic vicissitudo rerum.




The end of the fift Booke.



THE SIXT BOOKE OF WARRE DISCOVRSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.

The first Dialogue:

VVherein is briefly touched of the orders of our now vsed fights: the great com|modity of due and skilfull trayning: the tables for the embattailing of men in graund square of men: and into battallions of the same kind: with pro|portioned figures to the same: and arithmeticall rules to the working there|of: and a declaration of euery the sayd tables.


Gentleman.
_WEll (Captaine) sith you haue in your former fiue bookes at large discoursed touching most martiall pointes; as well of souldiers, offices, officers, and Commanders, as also of most sorts of imbattailing of men, now most in vse; wherein you haue satisfied vs wonderfull well: yet, I pray (according to your promise) will you now describe vnto vs their seuerall tables,A farther request for figures and tables of battels. and figures to the same: whereby we (which are not skilled) may reape some knowledge from thence: and so shall haue good cause to yeelde you thankes for your great paines.


Capt.
Although that I haue in our former discourses, declared (at large) of most sorts of imbattailing, both auncient and moderne; yet for better declaration and vnderstanding of the tables following, I must of necessity repeate a great part thereof againe.Errors found in battell. Touching errors found in battels (according to mine opinion) by reason of sundry compound weapons within the body of the same, I haue spoken already.What kind of bat|tels may be held for good and firme. Wherefore now let vs consider, and declare, what kind of battels (by rea|son) may bee held for good and firme, considering our now vsed fights, and the weapons most befitting the same,  suted in so good sort as may become able to abide or performe a victory, whereunto they are appointed. Principally therfore if you will rest vpon one sole and entire battell, whether the same be square of me~, or square of ground,To frame the squadron of pikes only. To empale with shot. Shot deuided in|to small troupes. or any other proportion, or forme, as hearst, crosse battell, or tryangle: the which two first (as I haue erst before sayd) do at this present day re|maine chiefly in vse among vs: or deuide your army into many battallions of that kind, which your graund battell shall be formed of: then set your squadron of bat|tell or battallions round about vnder the guard of the pikes, with such number of shot, as shall be best fitting vnto the proportion of the same, according to the Ser|geant Maior his appointment; either by 3, 5, or 7 shot in a ranke: and the rest to be reparted into many small troupes, of 30, 40, or 50 in a troupe; trouping round a|bout

the battel, with a reasonable distance from the same, to maintaine skirmish, which way soeuer the enemie approcheth. Prouiding that the same troupes be still maintained, one to second another, that the battell may be by them shadow|ed, to the end that the enemies troupes or skirmishers may not haue that aduan|tage to discharge vpon the body of your battell.
The short weapo~ to be mingled with the troupes of shot.Now among these your troupes of shot, it shall be very behouefull to mingle some of your short weapons, as halbards, bils, swords and targets, halfe pikes, and such like: for there shall your short weapon do best seruice, mixed with your na|ked shot, to backe them, if they should happen to be distressed by the enemy.
Your battell thus framed, girdled, and enuironed with shot in troupes, the which troupes,Troupes of shot one to second an other. seconding one another, shall still keepe your battell shadowed, as in the figures of all their kinds, set downe before their seuerall tables, shall plainely appeare: alwayes regarding that your girdling shot do neuer discharge vntill the enemy commeth within 20,The girdling shot when to discharge or 30, pases of them at the least; and then to discharge roundly vpon the face and body of the enemy. The which being performed, if they be encountred with foote, they are speedily to retire vnto either flanke of the battell, or sleeued in betwixt the pikes, or if encountred with horse, to bend downe vpon one knee, vnder the guard and succour of the pike.
The rare victo|ries of the Ro|maines.Now hauing deepely considered the rare victories and great conquests of the auncient Romaines, atchieued (in mine opinion) by their due obseruing of true martiall discipline, and great readinesse in their politike and suddaine alterations of their proportions, wherewith to encounter their enemies, I find therein a most notable patterne of a right excellent Chiefetaine. The very circumspection of whom, by a most wonderfull regard, was cause vnto them, of so many, and such honourable victories:The readinesse of souldiers to be transported into any forme. wherein the continuall readinesse of their souldiers and people of war, to be transported (with all facilitie) into euerie forme, vpon anie oc|casion: and the skilfull direction of their Captaines was such therin, as to so victo|rious a people seemed to be most correspondent and conuenient. The which true discipline, obedience, skill, and readinesse, were it vsed (and more then it is) in this our age, I thinke warres would carry a farre better conduction then they now do.
The profit of true trayning.This kind of readinesse in souldiers, and the indeuour of a continuall vse vnto them in the same, especially in the time of their trainings (the which I could wish to be put in practise with vs by skilfull trainers) vpon what chaunce soeuer shold happen, hath no doubt, seemed vnto many, to be of no small importance and force; and the rather do I so iudge, for that hauing sounded the depth and com|modity thereof, I find the contrary negligence to beare with it a note of most great imperfection. The disposition whereof, leauing vnto the knowledge and regard of euery good and expert Captaine,Out of the grand square of men all battels to be redu|ced. and for that I haue at large discoursed thereof already in my third booke of these military discourses, I will at this pre|sent content my selfe, to shew vnto you the seuerall tables and figures of all these battels and battallions, with the arithmeticall rules to frame the same; and how that out of the grand square of men, may all these battallions and battels be re|duced, and that without any great confusion. The practike rules whereof I haue, as I sayd, at large set downe in these our former discourses, as in the third booke may appeare:In the third booke. moreouer I haue in sundry other places particularly declared and

the orders of the embattailing of men now most in vse, with their order of impa|ling with armed pikes, their diuisions into Maniples, and the ready reframing of them againe into their grand square, as at large in the sayd third booke appeareth in many and diuerse places.
Finally in the aforesaid third booke, in folio 89, and 90, and in the fourth booke in folio 99, I haue described the order to draw your army through straights, and difficult passages, by quartering the same into such proportions as the straights will permit: especially if the enemy do constraine you to fight in the same, as most commonly it falleth out:In the fift booke. also in the fift booke, in folio 157 is dessigned a plat of encampement, with the arithmeticall rules of the same: in the consideration of all which, the value, and waight of this readinesse, may vnto the diligent re|garders (perchance) in their seuerall descriptions, giue some manifest appeara~ce.


A declaration of the tables of battels and battallions with the arith|meticall rules to worke the same.
In these tables following,The tables to 10000 armed pikes. I haue begun with the nu~ber of 10000 armed pikes; besides the shot and short weapons, correspondent to these proportions, where|of I haue before sufficiently spoken in many places: for the diuision of which number of armed pikes,The rules for the deuisions of the numbers. with all numbers downe ward, I haue reduced into cer|taine tables the proportions of diuerse battels, beginning with the square of men from the said number of 10000 pikes downward, and the same not decreasing, by 50 or 100 but by roote, as first beginning with the square roote of 10000, which is 100. The which multiplied into it selfe, maketh the said 10000: and so from the roote 100 vnto 099, and then 098, next 097, and so from roote to roote orderly, vnto the last square roote, which is 1.
In which tables I haue directed the order of marching of an army, as the pas|sage or way will permit:The order in marching. whether you shall march 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17 in a ranke, and how many rankes they shall be. To do the which, worke thus. Deuide the whole nu~ber of men by so many in rank,The rules to the same. as you will haue them to march in; as by 3, 5, 7, c. The number here I haue supposed to be 10000 men, the which 10000 to haue them to march at 3 men per ranke, I do deuide 3, and it produceth 3333 rankes, and 1 man remaining, as in the margine appeareth. And if you wold haue them to march by 5, 7, 9, or any other number, per ranke, worke as you haue done with the number 3.
Then how to deuide the battell into Maniples or parts,To deuide it into Maniples. and so to march them vpon the way as strongly as the passage will permit; and how the Maniples com|ming vp shoulder to sholder, each weapo~ ioyneth with his like, making again the former square battell of men,The rule to do it. with the remaines that make not vp a iust Maniple or part: and also how to march those sayd remaines that they may come vp shoulder to shoulder, with the rest of the Maniples, to make vp a iust square. To do the which, worke thus: deuide the roote of your grand number of men by so many as you would haue them to march in a Maniple, and the product will be the number of Maniples, with the remaines (if any such there bee) as for ex|ample, the square roote of 10000, is 100, the which 100 men, I do deuide by 3 and it produceth 33 Maniples, and one ranke remaining, the which 1 ranke is 100 men, the which 100 men, marching vp by 1 in a ranke, comming vp shoulder to shoulder with the grand square, maketh iust the same proportion of the grand square; as in the Tables plainly may appeare: So may you worke by 5, 7, 9, 11,

or any other number, to bring them into Maniples with their remaines. But here you shall note,A Maniple what it signifi|eth. that a Maniple, doth signifie so many men in ranke quite through your grand square or battell, as you are disposed, or be constrained to deuide the sayd grand square into, whereby to passe through any straight or passage,  then comming vp shoulder to shoulder, do make your former square of men againe.
Finally in the first table of the said square of men, in proportion of equalitie, there is set down readily how many shot will girdle or impale the battell of pikes,Shot to girdle the battell. in what forme soeuer you dispose the same, whether it be by 3, 5, 7, or 9 shot in a ranke, which is as many as you shall neede to girdle withall, in mine opinion: and if you are to encounter or be charged with horse, I suppose 3 to be sufficient. To do the which,The rule to the same. worke you thus: First multiplie your quadrate roote, or square of men, by so many as you meane or bee disposed to girdle the same withall, the product whereof will amount to the girdling shot for the one side or quarter; then againe multiplie the said product by 4, for the 4 squares of the battell, and the product thereof serueth for the girdling of the sayd 4 square sides. Now there will want to fill the 4 angles or corners, the which you must consider whe|ther you doe impale by 3, 5, 7 or 9: then to multiplie euery angle by so many per ranke, as you doe impale by: as for example: the square roote of 10000 is 100; the sayd 100 I do multiplie by 3, (for so many doe I set to impale by) and it maketh 300 for the one square side of the battell; the which 300 I doe againe multiplie by 4, for all the 4 square sides of the battell, and it amounteth vnto 1200 shot: then for the foure corners or angles (considering that I do impale by 3) first I multiplie the sayd three by it selfe, and it maketh 9 for one angle: and then quadruple the sayd 9, it maketh 36, the which 36 being added vnto the aforesayd 1200, and it a|mounteth in all vnto 1236 shot for the full impalement of your squadron of 100 square roote of men. And so may you do with any other number, as in the tables will appeare more at large.
Likewise on the left side of euery leafe of the sayd tables, hauing first turned the same ouer, you shall haue opposite or against the number or battell, which standeth euermore on the right side of the sayd leafe, the same battell deuided in|to 3,To deuide the grand square in|to battallions. The order to find in the tables how the battallions be set. 5, or 7 battallions; the number of which battallions in each of them contei|ned, you shall finde by drawing your finger euermore on the first Columne of euery leafe on the right side,  where you finde the number of the said battallio~s, there shall you see in that distinctio~ betwixt two long rules, how euery battallion shall bee set, which two long rules are the second Columne of the tables: As for example: the grand battell of 10000 pikes, placed on the right side of the leafe in the first Table, as in folio 16 may be seene, the sayd grand battell you shall finde deuided into 3, 5 or 7 battallions, by turning ouer the leafe looking vpon the left side therof, in the same folio 190. Now to know the square root of euery of these battallions, draw your finger continually down the first Columne of euery right side of the leafe, vntill you come to finde the due number of the sayd battallions, which is, first 348, c. the which nu~ber being found in the first Columne in folio 191, euen there in the second Columne you shall see the square roote thereof to be 59, and so must you do by the rest of the battallions.
The order obser|ued in the tables following.In the first Columne of the left side of euery leafe, is placed the grand square or battell of men: in the second Collumne is set the same battell deuided into 3. battallions: in the third Columne is the number of euery of their seuerall battal|lions,

and in the fourth Columne is the remaines of the sayd battallions, which is, how much they are lesse then the grand square of men: and also in the said fourth Columne, if they do abound the number of the grand square, it shall be there set downe, alwayes marked with this word (ouer) adioyning vnto it, which word when you do finde, then suppose that the battallions are more then the grand bat|tell, by so many as that number containeth. The like order is to be obserued in the diuision of them into fiue battallions, or into seuen battallions.
As for the reducing or inducing of all battels and battallions out of,Of reducing or inducing battels or battallions out of, or into the grand square of men. or into the grand square of men, I haue before in folio 77, 78, 79, and so forth, at large de|clared; as of the battell in Diamant proportio~, of the Triangle, of the Sheeres bat|tell and Saw battell,  of the Crosse battell,  battell co~pounded of many battal|lio~s, vnto the which I referre me: onely hereafter will I set down the figure  Ta|bles of all, or the most of these,  the order to be obserued in the same: as I will at the beginning of euery Table declare: but first I will shew you the declaration of euery Columne of the Tables, as here is described.

A declaration of the vse of the Columnes, and numbers expressed in the Tables following.
1 The number of 1 in the first columne, containeth therein the number of the armed pikes of the grand battell of men.
2 The number of 2 ouer the second columne, containeth in that part, the due number of the square roote of the battell.
3 The number of 3 in the third columne, hath in it, the order of marching, as the ground will permit, be it by 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17, in ranke.
4 The number of 4 containeth in that columne, the number of rankes, either by 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17 men in a ranke.
5 The number of 5 hath in that columne, the remainders of that which maketh not vp a iust number of rankes.
6 The number of 6 sheweth in that columne, the number of the Maniples or parts of each battell: whether they march by 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17, in a ranke, the which mar|ching vp shoulder to shoulder, do make the square battell of men, with the ensignes in the middle Maniple or part.
7 The number of 7 in the seuenth columne, signifieth the surplussage of armed pikes, that maketh not a iust Maniple.
8 The number of 8 in the eight columne, denoteth the whole ouerplus of the armed pikes that make not vp a full Maniple.
9 The number of 9 in that columne, sheweth how many shall march in a ranke of the ouer plus, that made not vp a iust Maniple or part, which so marching vp shoulder to shoul|der with the rest of the Maniples or parts, maketh vp the iust square of men.
10 The number of 10 in that columne, sheweth how to girdle or impale your battell with shot, whether it be by 3, 5, 7, or 9. which is sufficient to girdle any battell.
11 The number of 11 carrieth in that columne, what number of shot euery kinde of im|battelling or girdling will occupie in each seuerall battell, whether the same be by 3, 5, 7, or 9 in ranke of shot.


A declaration of the Tables of the Battallions.
1 The nu~ber of 1 in the first columne, signifieth the whole nu~ber of the grand battell.
2 The number of 2 hath in that collumne the diuision, be it by 3, 5, or 7.
3 The nu~ber of 3 hath in that columne, the nu~ber contained in euery seuerall battallio~.
4 The number of 4 hath in that columne the remaines or ouerplus.


The figure of the square battell of men.

In this figure of a square battell of men, there is contained 10000 armed Pikes,

at 100 rankes, and 100 men by ranke: girdled round about with seuen rankes of shot. The rest of the shot and short weapon, are bestowed in 165 small troupes, containing 50 in euerie troupe, trouping round about the battell, so shadowing the same, and readie for skirmish, on what part soeuer the enemie should offer fight: the rest of the shot and short weapon with some pikes, are for the guard of the Artillerie and Munition.

The figure of the grand square of 10000 Pikes, deuided into 3 battallions.


The figure of the grand square reduced into 5 Battallions.


The figure of the 7 Battallions reduced out of the grand square of men.



The Tables of Battels in proportion of equalitie as, is 1, to 1.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


10000
100
3
3333
1
33
1
100
1
3
1236


5
2000
0
20
0
0
0
5
2100


7
1428
4
14
2
200
2
7
2996


9
1111
1
11
1
100
1
9
3924


100
11
909
1
9
1
100
1




13
768
1
7
9
900
9




15
666
10
6
10
1000
10




17
588
1
5
15
1500
5




9801
99
3
3267
0
33
0
0
0
3
1224


5
1960
4
19
4
396
4
5
200


7
1400
1
14
1
99
1
7
2968


9
1089
0
19
0
0
0
9
3888


99
11
891
0
9
0
0
0




13
752
12
7
8
792
8




15
653
6
6
9
891
9




17
576
9
5
14
1384
14




9604
98
3
3201
1
32
2
196
2
3
1212


5
1920
4
19
3
294
3
5
2060


7
1372
0
14
0
0
0
7
2940


9
1063
1
10
8
784
8
9
3852


98
11
873
1
8
10
986
10




13
738
10
7
7
866
7




15
640
4
6
8
784
8




17
564
0
5
13
1274
13




9409
97
3
3136
1
32
1
97
1
3
1200


5
1881
4
19
2
194
2
5
2040


7
1344
1
13
6
582
6
7
2912


9
1045
4
10
7
679
7
9
3816


97
11
855
4
8
9
873
9




13
723
10
7
6
502
6




15
627
4
6
7
699
7




17
553
8
5
12
1164
12




9216
96
3
3072
0
32
0
0
0
3
1180


5
1843
1
19
1
96
1
5
2020


7
1316
4
13
5
480
5
7
2884


9
1024
0
10
6
576
6
9
2780


96
11
837
9
8
8
768
8




13
708
12
7
5
580
5




15
614
6
6
6
576
6




17
542
2
5
11
1057
11




9025
95
3
3008
1
31
2
190
2
3
1176


5
1801
0
19
0
0
0
5
2000


7
1289
2
13
4
30
4
7
2756


9
1002
7
10
5
475
5
9
3744


95
11
824
5
8
7
665
7




13
694
3
7
4
380
4




15
601
10
6
5
475
5




17
530
15
5
10
950
10




Number of pikes to be imbattailled.
The quadrate roote.
To march in ranke.
Rankes how many.
Remainder of men.
Maniples of pikes.
Rankes of remainder.
The whole ouerplus of pikes, after the Manip.
How many pikes in ranke to march vp.
Number of shot to im|pale.
The whole number of shot that do impale.




The Table of Battallions of the grand square of men.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4
2
3
4


10000
3
3481 3249 3299
21
5
2340 2025 1936 1936 1764
35
7
1444 1444 1444 1444 1444 1369 1369
0


9801
3
3600 3600 2601
0
5
2500 2500 1600 1600 1600
1
7
2025 2025 1296 1296 1296 961 900
2


9604
3
3249 3136 3136
83
5
2025 2025 1849 1849 1849
7
7
1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369
17


9409
3
3136 3136 3136
1
5
1936 1936 1849 1849 1849

7
1369 1369 1369 1369 1296 1296 1296
45


9216
3
3249 3249 2704
14
5
2116 2116 2116 1444 1444
10
7
1369 1369 1369 1296 1296 1296 1296
25


9025
3
3025 3025 2916

5
1764 1764 1764 1849 1849

7
1369 1369 1369 1225 1225 1225 1225





The Table of Battels in proportions of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


8836
94
3
2945
1
31
1
94
1
3
1164


5
1767
1
18
4
376
4
5
1980


7
1262
2
13
3
242
3
7
2828


9
981
7
10
4
376
4
9
3708


94
11
803
3
8
6
564
6




13
679
9
7
3
282
3




15
589
1
6
4
376
4




17
519
13
5
9
846
9




8649
93
3
2883
0
31
0
0
0
3
1151


5
1729
4
18
3
279
3
5
1960


7
1235
4
13
2
186
2
7
2800


9
961
0
10
3
279
3
9
3627


93
11
786
3
8
5
465
5
11



13
665
4
7
2
186
2




15
576
9
6
3
279
3




17
508
13
5
8
744
8




8464
92
3
2821
1
30
2
184
2
3
1140


5
1672
4
18
2
184
2
5
1940


7
1209
1
13
1
92
1
7
2772


9
940
4
10
2
184
2
9
3636


92
11
769
5
8
4
368
4




13
651
1
7
1
92
1




15
564
4
6
2
184
2




17
486
2
5
7
644
7




8281
91
3
2760
1
30
1
91
1
3
1128


5
1656
1
18
1
91
1
5
1920


7
1187
0
13
0
0
0
7
2744


9
920
1
10
1
91
1
9
3600


91
11
752
9
8
3
273
3




13
637
0
7
0
0
0




15
552
1
6
1
91
1




17
487
2
5
6
546
6




8100
90
3
2780
0
30
0
0
0
3
1116


5
1420
0
18
0
0
0
5
1900


7
1157
1
12
6
540
6
7
2716


9
900
0
10
0
0
0
9
3564


90
11
736
4
8
2
180
2




13
623
1
6
12
1080
12




15
540
00
6
0
000
0




17
499
13
5
5
450
5




7921
89
3
2640
1
29
2
178
2
3
1104


5
1584
1
17
4
356
4
5
1880


7
1131
4
12
5
445
5
7
2688


9
880
1
9
8
712
8
9
3528


89
11
720
1
8
1
89
8




13
609
4
6
11
979
11




15
529
13
5
14
1246
14




17
465
16
5
4
356
4






The Table of Battallion to the grand square of men.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4
2
3
4


8836
3
3025 3025 2704

5
1764 1764 1764 1764 1764
62
7
1296 1296 1296 1225 1225 1225 1225
48


8649
3
2916 2916 2809
8
5
1764 1764 1764 1681 1681
5
7
1296 1296 1296 1296 1156 1156 1156
7


8464
3
2809 2809 2809
37
5
1849 1849 1849 1444 1444
29
7
1296 1296 1296 1296 1089 1089 1089
13


8281
3
3249 2500 2500
32
5
1681 1681 1681 1600 1600
38
7
1296 1296 1296 1024 1024 1024 1296



8100
3
2704 2704 2704
12
5
1936 1936 1936 1156 1156

7
1156 1156 1156 1156 1156 1156 1156
8


7921
3
2809 2809 2304

5
1600 1600 1600 1600 1520

7
1156 1156 1156 1156 1089 1089 1089
27




The Tables of Battels in proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


7744
88
3
2581
1
29
1
88
1
3
1092


5
1548
4
17
3
264
3
5
1860


7
1106
2
12
4
352
4
7
2260


9
860
4
9
7
616
7
9
3492


88
11
704
0
8
0
0
0




13
595
9
6
10
80
10




15
516
4
5
13
1144
13




17
455
9
5
3
264
3




7569
87
3
2523
0
29
0
0
0
3
1080


5
1513
4
27
2
174
2
5
1840


7
1081
2
12
3
261
3
7
2632


9
841
0
9
6
522
6
9
3456


87
11
688
1
7
10
870
10




13
582
3
6
9
783
9




15
501
14
5
12
1044
12




17
445
4
5
2
174
2




7396
86
3
2465
1
28
2
172
2
3
1068


5
1479
1
17
1
86
1
5
1820


7
1056
2
12
2
172
2
7
2604


9
821
7
9
5
430
5
9
3420


86
11
672
4
7
9
774
9




13
568
12
6
8
688
8




15
493
1
5
11
946
11




17
431
9
5
1
86
1




7225
85
3
2408
1
28
1
85
1
3
1056


5
1445
0
17
0
0
0
5
1800


7
1032
1
12
1
85
1
7
2576


9
802
7
9
4
420
4
9
3384


85
11
656
9
7
8
680
8




13
555
10
6
7
585
7




15
481
10
5
10
850
10




17
425
0
5
0
0
0




7056
84
3
2352
0
28
0
0
0
3
1044


5
1411
1
16
4
336
4
5
1780


7
1008
0
12
0
0
0
7
2548


9
784
0
9
3
552
3
9
3348


84
11
641
5
7
7
595
7
11



13
542
10
6
6
504
6




15
470
6
5
9
756
9




17
415
1
4
16
1244
16




6889
83
3
2292
1
27
2
166
2
3
1032


5
1377
4
16
3
244
3
5
1760


7
984
1
11
6
498
6
7
2520


9
765
4
9
2
166
2
9
3312


83
11
626
3
7
6
504
6




13
529
12
6
5
415
5




15
459
4
5
8
664
8




17
405
4
4
15
1245
15






The Table of Battallions of the battels of equall proportion.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4
2
3
4


7744
3
2401 2401 2916
26
5
1530 1530 1530 1530 1601
23
7
1156 1156 1089 1089 1089 1089 1089
13


7569
3
2704 2704 2116
45
5
1601 1601 1601 1369 1369
18
7
1089 1089 1089 1089 1089 1089 1024
11


7396
3
2500 2500 2401
5
5
1444 1444 1444 1530 1530
4
7
1089 1089 1089 1024 1024 1024 1024
33


7225
3
2681 2681 1936
7
5
1444 1444 1444 1444 1444
5
7
1089 1089 1089 1089 961 961 961
14


7056
3
2916 2916 1089
35
5
1444 1444 1369 1369 1369
61
7
1024 1024 1024 1024 1024 1024 900
12


6889
3
2916 2916 1024
33
5
1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369
44
7
1024 1024 1024 961 900 900 1024
32




The Table of Battels in proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


6724
82
3
2241
1
27
1
82
1
3
1020


5
1344
4
16
2
164
2
5
1740


7
960
4
11
5
410
5
7
2492


9
747
1
9
1
82
1
9
3276


82
11
611
3
7
5
410
5




13
517
3
6
4
328
4




15
448
4
5
7
574
7




17
395
9
4
14
1148
14




6561
81
3
2187
0
27
0
0
0
3
1008


5
1312
1
16
1
81
1
5
1728


7
937
2
11
4
324
4
7
2464


9
729
0
9
0
0
0
9
3240


81
11
596
5
7
4
324
4




13
504
9
6
3
243
3




15
437
6
5
6
486
6




17
385
16
4
13
1053
13




6400
80
3
2133
1
26
2
160
2
3
996


5
1280
0
16
0
0
0
5
1700



914
2
11
3
240
3
7
2436


9
711
1
8
8
640
8
9
3204


80
11
581
9
7
3
240
3




13
492
4
6
2
160
2




15
428
4
5
5
400
5




17
376
8
4
12
960
12




6241
79
3
2080
1
26
1
79
1
3
984


5
1248
1
15
4
316
4
5
1680


7
891
4
11
2
158
2
7
2408


9
693
4
8
7
553
7
9
316


79
11
567
4
7
2
158
2




13
480
1
6
1
79
1




15
416
1
5
4
316
4




17
367
2
4
11
869
11




6084
78
3
2028
0
26
0
0
0
3
972


5
1216
4
15
3
234
3
5
1660


7
869
1
11
1
78
1
7
2380


9
676
0
8
6
468
6
9
3132


78
11
553
1
7
1
78
1




13
468
0
6
0
0
0




15
405
9
5
3
234
3




17
322
10
4
10
780
10




5929
77
3
1976
1
25
2
154
2
3
960


5
1185
4
15
2
154
2
5
1640


7
847
0
11
0
0
0
7
2332


9
658
7
8
5
385
5
9
3096


77
11
539
0
7
0
0
0




13
456
1
5
12
924
12




15
395
4
5
2
154
2




17
348
13
4
9
693
9






The Table of Battallions of the battels of equall proportion.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4
2
3
4


6724
3
2209 2209 2304
24
5
1369 1369 1369 1296 1296
25
7
961 961 961 961 961 961 961
3


6561
3
2401 2401 1764
5
5
1369 1369 1369 1225 1225
4
7
961 961 961 961 900 900 900
17


6400
3
2116 2116 2116
12
5
1296 1296 1296 1296 1225
9
7
900 900 900 900 900 900 961
19


6241
3
2116 2116 2025

5
1296 1296 1296 1156 1156
41
7
900 900 900 900 900 900 841



6084
3
2025 2025 2025
9
5
1025 1025 1025 1025 1156
28
7
900 900 900 900 900 784 784
20


5929
3
2304 2304 1296
25
5
1156 1156 1156 1225 1225
11
7
900 900 900 900 784 784 729
32




The Table of Battels in proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


5776
76
3
1295
1
25
1
76
1
3
948


5
1155
1
15
1
76
1
5
1620


7
825
1
10
6
456
6
7
2324


9
641
7
9
4
304
4
9
3060


76
11
525
1
6
10
760
10




13
444
4
5
11
830
11




15
384
8
5
1
76
1




17
339
13
4
8
608
8




5625
75
3
1875
0
25
0
0
0
3
936


5
1125
0
15
0
0
0
5
1600


7
803
4
10
5
375
5
7
2276


9
625
0
8
3
225
3
9
3024


75
11
511
4
6
9
675
9




13
432
9
5
10
750
10




15
375
0
5
0
0
0




17
30
15
4
7
525
7




5476
74
3
1825
1
24
2
148
2
3
924


5
1095
1
14
4
296
4
5
1580


7
753
5
10
4
296
4
7
2248


9
608
4
8
2
148
2
9
2988


74
11
497
9
6
8
592
8




13
421
3
5
9
666
9




15
365
1
4
14
1036
14




17
322
2
4
6
456
6




5329
73
3
1776
1
24
1
73
1
3
912


5
1065
4
14
3
219
3
5
1560


7
761
2
10
3
219
3
7
2240


9
592
1
8
1
73
1
9
2952


73
11
484
8
6
7
511
7




13
409
12
5
8
584
8




15
355
4
4
13
949
13




17
313
8
4
5
365





5184
72
3
1728
0
24
0
0
0
3
900


5
1036
4
14
2
144
2
5
1540


7
740
4
10
2
144
2
7
2192


9
567
0
8
0
0
0
9
2910


72
11
471
3
6
6
432
6




13
398
10
5
7
504
7




15
345
9
4
12
864
12




17
304
16
4
4
288
4




5041
71
3
1680
1
22
2
142
2
3
888


5
1008
1
14
1
71
1
5
1520


7
720
1
10
1
71
1
7
2184


9
560
1
7
8
568
8
9
2888


71
11
458
3
6
5
355
5




13
387
10
5
6
426
6




15
336
1
4
11
781
11




17
296
9
4
3
213
3






The Table of Battallions of the battels of equall proportion.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4
2
3
4


5776
3
2304 2304 1156
12
5
1156 1156 1155 1156 1156
4
7
841 841 841 841 841 784 784
3


5625
3
2304 2304 1024
ouer 7
5
1089 1089 1089 1156 1156
46
7
784 784 784 784 784 841 841
23


5476
3
1764 1764 1936
12
5
1089 1089 1089 1089 1089
33
7
784 784 784 784 784 784 784
12


5329
3
1764 1764 1764
33
5
1089 1089 1089 1024 1024

7
784 784 784 784 729 729 729
2


5184
3
1936 1600 1600
48
5
1024 1024 1024 1024 1089
1
7
784 729 729 729 729 729 729
26


5041
3
1681 1681 1681
2
5
1024 1024 1024 961 961
47
7
729 729 729 729 729 729 676
9




The Table of Battels of proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


4900
70
3
1633
1
23
1
70
1
3
876


5
980
0
14
0
0
0
5
1500


7
700
0
10
0
0
0
7
2136


9
544
4
7
7
490
7
9
2844


70
11
445
5
6
4
280
4




13
376
12
5
5
350
5




15
326
10
4
10
700
10




17
288
4
4
2
140
2




4761
69
3
1587
0
23
0
0
0
3
864


5
952
1
13
4
276
4
5
1480


7
680
1
9
6
414
6
7
2118


9
551
2
7
6
414
6
9
2808


69
11
432
9
6
3
207
3




13
366
3
5
4
276
4




15
316
6
4
9
621
9




17
280
1
4
1
69
1




464
68
3
2541
1
22
2
136
2
3
52


5
924
4
13
3
204
3
5
1480


7
632
0
9
5
340
5
7
2090


9
513
7
7
5
340
5
9
2772


68
11
420
4
6
2
136
2




13
355
9
5
3
204
3




15
308
4
4
8
544
8




17
272
0
4
0
0
0




4489
67
3
1496
1
22
1
67
1
3
840


5
897
4
13
2
134
2
5
1440


7
641
2
9
4
268
4
7
2062


9
498
7
7
4
268
4
9
2736


67
11
408
1
6
1
67
1




13
345
4
5
2
134
2




15
299
4
4
7
469
7




17
264
1
3
16
1072
16




4356
66
3
1452
0
22
0
0
0
3
820


5
871
1
13
1
66
1
5
1420


7
622
2
9
3
198
3
7
2034


9
472
8
7
3
198
3
9
2700


66
11
396
0
6
0
0
0




13
355
1
5
1
66
1




15
290
6
4
6
396
6




17
256
4
3
15
990
15




4225
65
3
1408
1
21
2
130
2
3
816


5
845
0
13
0
0
0
5
1400


7
603
4
9
2
130
2
7
2006


9
469
4
7
2
130
2
9
2664


65
11
384
1
5
10
650
10




13
325
0
5
0
0
0




15
281
10
4
5
325
5




17
248
9
3
14
910
14






The Table of Battallions of the battels of euen square.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4
2
3
4


4900
3
1600 1600 1681
19
5
1024 1024 1024 900 900
28
7
729 729 729 729 676 625
7


4761
3
1520 1520 1520
20
5
961 961 961 961 900
28
7
676 676 676 676 676 676 676
29


4624
3
1521 1521 1521
34
5
961 961 900 900 900
2
7
676 676 676 676 676 625 625



4489
3
1444 1444 1600
1
5
900 900 900 900 841
48
7
676 676 625 625 625 625 625
12


4356
3
1444 1444 1444
24
5
961 961 961 739 739
5
7
625 625 625 625 625 625 625
19


4252
3
1369 1369 1369
43
5
841 841 841 841 841
20
7
625 625 625 625 625 676 676
3




The Table of Battels in proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


4096
64
3
1365
1
21
1
64
1
3
804


5
819
1
12
4
256
4
5
1380


7
585
1
9
1
64
1
7
1976


9
455
1
7
1
64
1
9
2628


64
11
372
4
5
9
576
9




13
315
1
4
12
768
12




15
273
1
4
4
256
4




17
240
16
3
13
832
13




3969
63
3
1323
0
21
0
0
0
3
792


5
0791
4
12
3
189
3
5
1360


7
567
0
9
0
0
0
7
1946


9
441
2
7
0
0
0
9
2592


63
11
360
9
5
8
504
8




13
305
4
4
11
693
11




15
264
9
4
3
189
3




17
223
8
3
12
756
12




3844
62
3
1281
1
20
2
124
2
3
780


5
768
4
12
2
124
2
5
1340


7
549
1
8
6
372
6
7
1918


9
427
1
6
8
496
8
9
2556


62
11
349
5
5
7
434
7




13
295
9
4
10
620
10




15
256
4
4
2
124
2




17
226
2
3
11
682
11




3721
61
3
1240
1
20
1
61
1
3
768


5
744
1
12
1
61
1
5
1320


7
531
4
8
5
305
5
7
1904


9
413
4
6
7
427
7
9
2520


61
11
338
3
5
6
366
6




13
286
3
4
9
549
9




15
248
1
4
1
61
1




17
218
3
3
10
610
10




3600
60
3
1200
0
20
0
0
0
3
756


5
720
0
12
0
0
0
5
1300


7
514
2
8
4
240
4
7
1862


60
9
400
0
6
6
360
6




11
327
3
5
5
300
5




3481
59
3
1160
1
19
2
118
2
3
744


5
696
1
11
4
236
4
5
1280


7
497
2
8
3
177
3
7
1834


59
9
386
7
6
4
296
4




11
316
5
5
4
236
5




3369
58
3
1121
1
19
1
58
1
3
732


5
672
4
11
3
174
3
5
1260


7
480
4
8
2
116
2
7
1806


58
9
373
7
6
4
232
4




11
305
9
5
3
174
3




3249
57
3
083
0
19
0
0
0
3
720


5
649
4
11
2
114
2
5
1240


7
401
1
8
1
57
1
7
1778


57
9
378
3
6
3
171
3




11
295
4
5
2
114
2






The Tables of Battallions to the battels of euen squares.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4
2
3
4


4096
3
1369 1369 1369
11
5
784 841 841 841 784
5
7
576 576 576 576 576 576 625
15


3969
3
1225 1369 1369
6
5
784 784 784 784 841
8
7
576 576 576 576 576 529 529
31


3844
3
1296 1296 1225
27
5
784 784 784 739 739
14
7
576 576 576 529 529 529 529



3721
3
1225 1225 1225
46
5
739 739 739 739 739
26
7
529 529 529 529 529 529 529
18


3600
3
1225 1225 1156
6
5
739 739 739 676 676
31
7
529 529 529 529 529 484 484
13


3481
3
1156 1156 1156
13
5
676 676 676 676 739
35





3364
3
1089 1089 1156
9
5
676 676 625 625 625
35





3249
3
1089 1089 1089
1
5
676 676 625 625 625
11







The Table of Battels in proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


3136
56
3
1045
1
18
2
112
2
3
708


5
627
1
11
1
56
1
5
1240


56
7
448
0
8
0
0
0
7
1750


9
344
4
6
2
112
2




11
285
1
5
1
56
1




3925
55
3
1008
1
18
1
55
1
3
696


5
605
0
11
0
0
0
5
1220


55
7
432
1
7
6
330
6
7
1722


9
336
1
6
1
55
1




11
275
0
5
0
0
0




2916
54
3
972
0
18
0
0
0
3
684


5
583
1
10
4
216
4
5
1200


54
7
416
4
7
5
270
5
7
1694


9
334
0
6
0
0
0




11
265
1
4
10
540
10




2809
53
3
936
1
17
2
106
2
3
672


5
561
4
10
3
159
3
5
1180


53
7
401
2
7
4
212
4
7
1666


9
312
1
5
8
424
8




11
255
4
4
9
477
9




2704
52
3
901
1
17
1
52
1
3
660


5
540
4
10
2
104
2
5
1160


52
7
386
2
7
3
156
3
7
1638


9
300
4
5
7
364
7
9
2164


11
245
9
4
8
416
8




2601
51
3
867
0
17
0
0
0
3
648


5
520
1
10
1
51
1
5
1140


51
7
371
4
7
2
102
2
7
1610


9
289
0
5
6
306
6




11
236
5
4
7
357
7




2500
50
3
833
1
16
2
100
2
3
636


5
500
0
10
0
0
0
5
1120


50
7
359
1
7
1
50
1
7
1582


9
277
7
5
5
250
5




11
227
3
4
6
300
6




2401
49
3
800
1
16
1
49
1
3
624


5
480
1
9
4
196
4
5
1100


49
7
343
0
7
0
0
0
7
2554


9
266
7
5
4
196
4




11
218
3
4
5
245
5




2304
48
3
786
0
16
0
0
0
3
612


5
460
4
9
3
144
3
5
1080


48
7
329
1
6
6
288
6
7
1526


2209
47
3
736
1
15
2
94
2
3
600


5
441
4
9
2
94
2
5
1060


47
7
315
4
6
5
235
5
7
1498


2116
46
3
705
1
15
1
46
1
3
588


46
5
425
1
9
1
46
1
5
1040


7
302
2
6
4
184
4
7
1470




The Tables of Battallions of the battels of euen squares of men.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4


3136
3
1024 1024 1089

5
625 625 625 625 625 625



3025
3
1024 1024 961

5
625 625 625 576 576



2916
3
1024 961 900
14
5
576 576 576 576 576



2809
3
961 961 900
13
5
576 576 576 529 529



2704
3
900 900 900
4
5
529 529 529 529 576



2601
3
900 841 841
19
5
529 529 529 529 484



2500
3
841 841 784
34
5
529 529 529 441 441
31


2401
3
841 784 784
8
5
484 484 484 484 441
24


2304
3
784 784 739
3
5




2209
3
739 739 739
8





2116
3
739 739 625
13







The Table of Battels in proportion of equalities.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


2025
45
3
675
0
15
0
0
0
3
576


5
405
0
9
0
0
0
5
1000


45
7
289
2
6
3
135
3




1936
44
3
646
1
1
2
88
2
3
564


5
387
1
8
4
176
4
5
980


44
7
276
4
6
2
88
2




1849
43
3
516
1
14
1
43
1
3
555


5
369
4
8
3
129
3
5
980


43
7
264
1
6
1
43
1




1764
42
3
588
0
14
0
0
0
3
540


5
352
4
8
2
84
2
5
940


42
7
252
0
6
0
0
0




1681
41
3
560
1
13
2
82
2
3
528


5
356
1
8
1
41
1
5
940


41
7
240
1
5
6
246
6




1600
40
3
53
1
13
1
40
1
3
510


5
320
0

0
0
0
5
900


40
7
228
4
5
5
200
5
0
4


1521
39
3
316
0
13
0
006
0
3
504


5
306
0
7
4
156
4
5
880


39
7
218
4
5
4
156
4
7



1444
38
3
481
1
12
2
76
2
3
492


5
288
4
7
3
114
3
5
860


38
7
206
2
5
3
114
3




1369
37
3
456
1
12
1
37
1
3
480


5
273
4
7
2
74
2
5
840


37
7
194
3
5
2
74
2




1296
36
3
432
0
12
0
0
0
3
468


5
259
1
7
1
36
1
5
820


56
7
185
1
5
1
36
1




1225
35
3
408
1
1
2
70
2
3
456


5
245
0
7
0
0
0
5
800


35
7
175
0
5
0
0
0
0



1156
34
3
385
1
11
1
34
1
3
444


5
231
1
6
4
136
4
5
780


34
7
163
5
4
6
204
6




1089
33
3
363
0
11
0
0
0
3
432


5
217
4
6
3
99
3
5
760


33
7
155
4
4
5
165
5




1024
32
3
341
1
10
2
64
2
3
420


5
204
4
6
2
64
2
5
740


32
7
146
2
4
4
128
4
7



961
31
3
320
1
10
1
31
1
3
408



192
1
6
1
31
1
5
720


31
7
137
2
4
3
93
3




900
30

300
0
10
0
0
0
3
396



180
0
6
0
0
0
5
700


30
7
128
4
4
2
60
2






The Tables of Battallions to the battels of euen squares of men.

1
2
3
4


2025
3
676 676 676
3


1936
3
625 625 676
10


1849
3
625 625 676
23


1764
3
576 576 576
38


1681
3
576 576 529



1600
3
529 529 529
13


1521
3
529 529 441
23


1444
3
484 484 484
81


1369
3
441 441 484
65


1296
3
441 441 400
14


1225
3
441 400 361
23


1156
3
400 400 324
32


1089
3
361 361 361
6


1024
3
361 324 324
16


961
3
324 324 289
24


900
3
324 289 289
2




The Table of Battels in proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


841
29
3
280
1
9
2
58
2
3
384


29
5
168
1
5
4
116
4
5
680


7
120
1
4
1
29
1




784
28
3
261
1
9
1
28
1
3
372


5
156
4
5
3
84
3
5
660


28
7
112
0
4
0
0
0
0



729
27
3
243
0
9
0
0
0
3
360


27
5
145
4
5
2
54
2
5
640


676
26
3
225
1
8
2
52
2
3
348


26
5
135
1
5
1
26
1
5
620


625
25
3
208
1
8
1
25
1
3
336


25
5
125
0
5
0
0
0
5
600


576
24
3
192
0
8
0
0
0
3
324


24
5
115
1
4
4
96
4
5
580


529
23
3
176
1
7
2
46
2
3
312


23
5
105
4
4
3
69
4
5



484
22
3
161
1
7
1
22
1
3
300


22
5
96
3
4
2
44
2




441
21
3
147
0
7
0
0
0
3
288


21
5
88
1
4
1
21
1




400
20
3
133
1
6
2
40
2
3
276


20
5
80
0
4
0
0
0




361
19
3
120
1
6
1
19
1
3
264


19
5
72
1
3
4
76
4
0



324
18
3
108
0
6
0
0
0
3
252


18
5
64
4
3
3
54
3




289
17
3
96
1
5
2
34
2
3
240


17
5
57
4
3
2
34
2




256
16
3
85
1
5
1
16
1
3
228


16
5
51
1
3
1
16
1




225
15
3
75
0
5
0
0
0
3
216


15
5
45
0
3
0
0
0




196
14
3
65
1
4
2
28
2
3
204


14
5
39
1
2
4
56
4




169
13
3
56
1
4
1
13
1
3
192


13
5
33
4
2
3
39
3




144
12
3
48
0
4
0
0
0
3
180


12
5
28
4
2
2
24
2




141
11
3
40
1
3
2
22
2
3
168


11
5
24
1
2
1
11
1




100
10
3
33
1
3
1
10
1
3
156


10
5
20
0
2
0
0
0
0



81
9
3
27
0
3
0
0
0
3
144


9
5
16
1
1
4
36
4




64
8
3
21
1
2
2
16
2




8
5
12
4
1
3
24
3




49
7
3
16
1
2
1
7
1




7
5
9
4
1
2
14
2






The Table of Battallions, reduced out of the grand square of men.

1
2
3
4


841
3
289 289 256
7


784
3
256 256 256
16


729
3
256 256 225
8


676
3
225 225 225
1


625
3
225 196 196
8


576
3
196 196 196
15


529
3
196 169 169
5


484
3
169 144 144
17


441
3
144 144 144
9


400
3
144 144 121
9


361
3
121 121 121
2


324
3
121 100 100
3


289
3
100 100 81
8


256
3
81 81 81
13


225
3
81 81 64
1


196
3
64 64 64
4


169
3
64 64 49
8


144
3
49 49 49
3


121
3
49 36 36
6


100
3
36 36 25
3

The end of the Table of Battallions reduced out of the battels of g. and squares of men: vpon the right side of euery leafe.



The Table of Battels in proportion of equalitie.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


36
6
3
12
0
2
0
0
0




6
5
7
1
1
1
6
1




25
5
3
8
1
1







5
5
5
0
0







16
4
3
5
1
0







4
5
3
1
1
1
4
1




9
3
3
3
0








3
5
1
4
36
4






4
2
3
1
1








2
5
0
0








2
1
0










1
0










The whole number of armed pikes.
The quadrate, or square roote.
Per ranke to march by:
Rankes how many.
Remaines of rankes.
Maniples, or partes.
Remaines of pikes by ranke.
The whole ouer plus of remaines.
How many to march in rankes of remaine.
The rankes to impale by.
The number of shot that impale.

Here endeth the Tables of Battels in proportion of equalitie, or the Battels of due square of men: that is, how many rankes, so many men by ranke; or how ma|ny rankes, so many files.



Hereafter ensueth the Tables and figures of two fold Battels; called broad squares or hearst Battels: with the Battallions of that kinde.
_IN these Tables ensuing, I haue set downe the order and setting of sundry Battels in proportio~ of inequalitie, as 2, vnto 1, that is, twise so many men in front as in flanke, the which sort of Battels do come to co~taine neare a iust square or quadrate of ground, which the bat|tels of proportio~ of equalitie (that is so many me~ in flank as in front) doe not: for they containe in ground, twise and more the quantitie of ground, in flanke or length that they doe in front or breadth; the reason and order thereof I haue in my 3. booke, in fol. 45, 46 c.  50 at large declared,  so co~tinuing, shew|ing therein, rules Arithmeticall to set all such sortes of Battels,  their impale|ment with armed pikes; and diuisions into Maniples: here onely contenting my selfe with setting forth the figures and Tables of the sayd Battels in proportion of inequalitie; and how they are to be ordered into ranks for marching,  into Mani|ples, and girdling with shot, as before in the Tables of squares of me~, or Battels in proportion of equalitie, is at large set downe and declared. And also on the left side of euery leafe is set downe the said Battels or broad squares, deuided into sun|dry battallions of that kinde, as into 3 or 5 battallions: the number of which bat|tallions in each of them contained, you shall finde euermore in the first Columne of euery leafe on the right side;  where you find the number of your battallions, there shall you see, betwixt two long rules in that distinction (placed in the 2 Co|lumne) how euery battallion shall be set in front  flanke, which is the iust square roote of euery battallion. Finally, I haue here before you set downe first, the figure of the sayd broad square of men, or Battell in proportion of inequalitie, as 2 vnto 1, which commeth to containe, neare the iust quadrat of ground, girdled round about with 7 rankes of shot; and the rest of the shot, and short weapon due to this number and proportion of pikes, are deuided into sundry troupes of 50, in euery troupe, trouping round about the maine Battell; as I haue done before in the fi|gure of the iust square of men. I haue here also desseigned in figure the said broad square or hearst Battell, deuided into sundry battallions of that kinde, as first into 3 battallions, then into 5 battallions, as in page 212 may appeare: each battal|lion is girdled with 3 rankes of shot; the rest of the shot and short weapon belon|ging vnto the sayd numbers, may bee placed in sundry small troupes, as is in the broad square, trouping round about the same: or as the Sergeant Maior shall o|therwise thinke good: or as the ground will permit, or occasions offered to fight.



The figure of a Broad square Battell, trouped round about with shot.


The figure of 3 Battallions, reduced out of the Broade square.


The figure of fiue Battallions, reduced out of the Broade square.



The Table of Broad square, or twyfold Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


10082
71
3
3360
2
47
1
71
1
3
1314


5
2016
3
28
2
142
2
5
2230


142
7
1440
3
20
2
142
2
7
3178


9
1120
3
15
7
497
7
9
4158


11
916
7
12
10
710
10




9800
70
3
3266
2
46
2
140
2
3
1296


5
1980
0
28
0
0
0
5
2200


140
7
1400
0
20
0
0
0
7
3136


9
1088
8
15
5
350
5
9
4104


11
890
10
12
8
560
12




9522
69
3
3174
0
46
0
0
0
3
1278


5
1904
2
27
3
207
3
5
2170


138
7
1360
2
19
5
345
5
7
3094


9
1058
0
15
3
207
3
9
4050


11
865
7
12
6
414
6
11
5038


9248
68
3
3082
2
45
1
68
1
3
120


5
1849
3
27
1
68
1
5
2140


136
7
1321
1
19
3
204
3
7
3052


9
1027
0
15
1
68
1
9
3996


11
840
8
12
4
272
4




8978
67
3
2992
2
44
2
134
2
3
1242


5
1795
3
26
4
268
4
5
2110


134
7
1282
4
19
1
67
1
7
3010


9
977
5
14
8
546
8
9
3942


11
816
2
12
2
134
2




8712
66
3
2904
0
44
0
0
0
3
1224


5
1742
2
26
2
132
2
5
2080


132
7
1230
2
1
6
396
6
7
2968


9
968
0
14
6
396
6
9
3088


11
792
0
12
0
0
0




8450
65
3
2815
2
43
1
65
1
3
1206


5
1690
0
26
0
0
0
5
2050


130
7
1207
1
18
4
260
4
7
2926


9
938
8
14
4
260
4
9
3834


11
768
2
11
9
585
9




8192
64
3
2730
2
42
2
128
2
3
1188


5
1638
2
25
3
192
3
5
2020


128
7
1170
2
18
2
128
2
7
2884


9
910
2
14
2
128
2
9
3780


11
744
8
11
7
449
7




7938
63
3
2646
0
42
0
0
0
3
1170


5
1580
3
25
1
63
1
5
1990


126
7
1134
0
18
0
0
0
7
2842


9
882
0
14
0
0
0
9
2726


11
721
7
11
5
315
5




7688
62
3
2562
2
41
1
62
1
3
1152


5
1537
3
24
4
248
4
5
1960


124
7
1098
2
17
5
310
5
7
2800


9
854
2
13
7
434
7
9
3670


11
698
10
11
3
186
3






The Tables of Battallions reduced out of the Broad squares.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4


10082
3
3362 3362 3362
3
5
1922 1922 1922 1922 2312
83


9800
3
3200 3200 3362
38
5
2048 2048 2048 1800 1800
56


9522
3
3200 3200 3042
78
5
1922 1922 1922 1922 1800
34


9248
3
3042 3042 3200
36
5
1800 1800 1800 1922 1922
4


8978
3
3042 3042 2888
6
5
1922 1922 1922 1922 1250
40


8712
3
2888 2888 2888
48
5
1800 1800 1800 1800 1458
54


8450
3
2888 2738 2738
86
5
1682 1682 1682 1682 1682
40


8192
3
2738 2738 2738
ouer 22
5
1682 1682 1682 1568 1568
10


7938
3
2738 2592 2592
16
5
1568 1568 1568 1568 1568
16


7688
3
2592 2592 2450
64
5
1568 1568 1568 1568 1352
69




The Table of Broad square of men, or twofold Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


7442
61
3
2480
2
40
2
122
2
3
1134


5
1488
2
24
2
122
2
5
1930


122
7
1063
1
17
3
183
3
7
2758


9
826
8
13
5
305
5
9
3616


11
676
6
11
1
61
1




7200
60
3
2400
0
40
0
0
0
3
1116


5
1440
0
24
0
0
0
5
1900


120
7
1028
4
17
1
60
1
7
2716


9
800
0
13
3
180
3
9
3562


11
654
6
10
10
600
10




6962
59
3
2320
2
39
1
59
1
3
1098


5
1392
2
2
3
177
3
5
1870


118
7
994
4
16
6
354
6
7
2674


9
773
5
13
1
59
1
9
3508


11
632
10
10
8
472
8




6728
58
3
2242
2
38
2
116
2
3
1080


5
1345
3
23
1
58
1
5
1840


116
7
961
1
16
4
232
4
7
2632


9
742
5
12
8
464
8
9
3454


11
611
7
10
6
348
6




6498
57
3
2166
0
38
0
0
0
3
1062


5
1299
3
22
4
228
4
5
1810


114
7
928
2
16
2
114
2
7
2590


9
722
0
12
6
342
6
9
3400


11
590
8
10
4
228
4




6272
56
3
2090
2
37
1
56
1
3
1044


5
1254
2
22
2
112
2
5
1780


112
7
896
0
16
0
0
0
7
2548


9
696
8
12
4
224
4
9
3346


11
570
2
10
2
112
2




6050
55
3
2016
2
36
2
110
2
3
1026


5
1210
0
22
0
0
0
5
1750


110
7
864
2
15
5
275
5
7
2506


9
672
2
12
2
110
2
9
3292


11
550
0
10
0
0
0




5832
54
3
1944
0
36
0
0
0
3
1008


5
1166
2
21
3
162
3
5
1720


108
7
833
1
15
3
162
3
7
2464


9
648
0
12
0
0
0
9
3238


11
530
2
9
9
486
9
11



5618
53
3
1872
2
35
1
53
1
3
990


5
1123
3
21
1
53
1
5
1690


106
7
802
4
15
1
53
1
7
2422


9
624
2
11
7
371
7
9
3184


11
510
8
9
7
371
7




5408
52
3
1802
2
34
2
104
2
3
972


5
1081
3
20
4
208
4
5
1660


104
7
727
4
14
6
312
6
7
2380


9
600
8
11
5
260
5
9
3130


11
491
7
9
5
260
5






The Table of Battallions reduced out of Broad squares or hearsts.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4


7442
3
2738 2592 2048
64
5
1458 1458 1458 1458 1568



7200
3
2450 2450 2312
12
5
1458 1458 1458 1458 1352
16


6962
3
2312 2312 2312
26
5
1352 1352 1352 1458 1458
10


6728
3
2312 2312 2178
60
5
1352 1352 1352 1352 1250
70


6498
3
2450 2450 1568
30
5
1352 1352 1250 1250 1250
49


6272
3
2178 2048 2048
2
5
1250 1250 1250 1250 1250
22


6050
3
2048 2048 1920
42
5
1250 1250 1250 1152 1152
4


5832
3
2048 2048 1682
54
5
1152 1152 1152 1152 1152
72


5618
3
2048 2048 1458
64
5
1152 1152 1152 1058 1058
46


5408
3
1800 1800 1800
8
5
1058 1058 1058 1058 1152
27




The Table of Broad squares, or twyfold Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


5202
51
3
1734
0
34
0
0
0
3
954


5
1040
2
20
2
102
2
5
1630


102
7
743
1
14
4
204
4
7
2338


9
578
0
11
3
153
3
9
3076


11
472
10
9
3
153
3




5000
50
3
1666
2
33
1
50
1
3
936


5
1000
0
20
0
0
0
5
1600


100
7
714
2
14
2
100
2
7
2296


9
555
5
11
1
50
1
9
3022


11
490
10
9
1
50
1




4812
49
3
1604
0
32
2
98
2
3
918


5
962
2
19
3
147
3
5
1570


98
7
687
3
14
0
0
0
7
2254


9
534
6
10
8
292
8
9
2964


11
437
5
8
10
390
10




4508
48
3
1502
2
32
0
0
0
3
900


5
901
3
19
1
48
1
5
1540


96
7
644
0
13
5
240
5
7
2212


9
500
8
10
6
288
6
9
2914


11
409
9
8
8
384
8




4418
47
3
1472
2
31
1
47
1
3
882


5
888
3
18
4
188
4
5
1510


94
7
631
1
13
3
141
3
7
2170


9
490
8
10
4
188
4
9
2860


11
401
7
8
6
288
6




4232
46
3
1410
2
30
2
92
2
3
864


5
846
2
18
2
92
2
5
1480


92
7
604
4
13
1
46
1
7
2128


9
470
2
10
2
92
2
9
2806


11
384
8
8
4
184
4




4050
45
3
1350
0
30
0
0
0
3
846


5
810
0
18
0
0
0
5
1450


90
7
578
4
12
6
150
6
7
2086


9
450
0
10
0
0
0
9
2752


11
368
2
8
2
90
2




3872
44
3
1290
2
29
1
44
1
3
828


5
774
2
17
3
152
3
5
1420


88
7
553
1
12
4
176
4
7
2044


9
430
2
9
7
298
7
9
2698


11
352
0
8
0
0
0




3698
43
3
1232
2
28
2
86
2
3
810


5
739
3
17
1
43
1
5
1390


86
7
528
2
12
2
86
2
7
2002


9
410
8
9
5
215
5
9
2644


11
336
2
7
9
387
9




3528
42
3
1176
0
28
0
0
0
3
792


5
705
3
16
4
168
4
5
1360


84
7
504
0
12
0
0
0
7
1960


9
393
0
9
3
126
3
9
2590


11
320
8
7
7
294
7






The Table of Battallions reduced out of Broad squares.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4


5202
3
1682 1682 1800
38
5
1058 1058 1058 1058 968
2


5000
3
1800 1800 1352
24
5
1058 968 968 968 968
70


4812
3
1568 1568 1682
6
5
968 968 968 968 882
58


4508
3
1568 1568 1352
20
5
882 882 882 882 968
12


4418
3
1458 1458 1458
18
5
882 882 882 882 882
8


4232
3
1458 1458 1250
66
5
800 800 800 882 882
68


4050
3
1250 1250 1568
18
5
800 800 800 800 800
50


3872
3
1250 1250 1352
20
5
800 800 800 722 722
28


3698
3
1352 1352 968
26
5
722 722 722 720 800
10


3528
3
1250 1250 968
60
5
722 722 722 722 648
8




The Table of Broad squares, or Hearst Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


3362
41
3
1120
2
27
1
41
1
3
774


5
672
2
16
2
82
2
5
1330


82
7
480
2
11
5
205
5
7
1918


9
372
5
9
1
41
1
9
2536


11
305
7
7
5
205
5




3200
40
3
1066
2
26
2
80
2
3
756


5
640
0
16
0
0
0
5
1300


80
7
457
1
11
3
120
3
7
1876


9
355
5
8
8
320
8
9
2482


11
290
10
7
3
120
3




3042
39
3
1014
0
26
0
0
0
3
738


5
608
2
15
3
117
3
5
1270


78
7
434
4
11
1
39
1
7
1830


9
338
0
8
6
234
6
9
2428


11
276
6
7
1
39
1




2888
38
3
962
2
25
1
38
1
3
720


5
577
3
15
1
38
1
5
1240


76
7
412
4
10
6
468
6
7
1792


9
320
8
8
4
312
4
9
2374


11
262
6
6
10
380
10




2738
37
3
912
2
24
2
74
2
3
702


5
547
3
14
4
148
4
5
1212


74
7
390
8
10
4
148
4
7
1750



304
2
8
2
74
2
9
2320


11
248
10
6
8
296
8




2592
36
3
864
0
24
0
0
0
3
684


5
518
2
14
2
72
2
5
1180


72
7
372
2
10
2
72
2
7
1708


9
288
0
8
0
0
0
9
2266


11
235
7
6
6
216
6




2450
35
3
810
2
23
1
35
1
3
666


5
490
0
14
0
0
0
5
1150


70
7
350
0
10
0
0
0
7
1666


9
272
2
7
7
245
7
9
2212


11
222
8
6
4
140
4




2312
34
3
770
2
22
2
68
2
3
642


5
462
2
13
3
102
3
5
1120


68
7
330
2
9
5
170
5
7
1624


9
256
8
7
5
170
5
9
2158


11
210
2
6
2
68
2




2178
33
3
726
0
22
0
0
0
3
624


5
437
3
1
1
33
1
5
1090


66
7
311
1
9
3
99
3
7
1572


9
248
0
7
3
99
3
9
2104


11
198
0
6
0
0
0




2048
32
3
682
2
21
1
3

3
606


5
409
3
12
4
128
4
5
1060


64
7
292
4
9
1
32
1
7
1530


9
227
5
7
1
32
1
9
2050


11
186
2
6
9
288
9






The Table of Battallions reduced out of the Broad squares.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4


3362
3
1058 1058 1250
4
5
722 648 648 648 648
48


3200
3
1058 1058 1058
26
5
648 648 648 648 578
30


3042
3
1058 968 968
42
5
648 648 578 578 578
12


2888
3
968 968 968
16
5
578 578 578 578 578
2


2738
3
968 882 882
6
5
578 578 512 512 512
16


2592
3
968 800 800
24
5
512 512 512 512 512
32


2450
3
800 800 800
50
5
512 512 512 450 450
14


2312
3
800 800 722
ouer 10
5
450 450 450 400 592



2178
3
722 722 722
12
5
450 450 450 392 392
44


2048
3
722 648 648
30
5
392 392 392 392 450
30




The Table of Broad squares, or Hearst Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


1922
31
3
640
2
20
2
62
2
3
588


5
384
2
12
2
62
2
5
1030


7
274
4
8
6
186
6
7
1488


62
9
214
4
6
8
248
8
9
1996


11
174
8
5
7
217
7




1800
30
3
600
0
20
0
0
0
3
570


5
360
0
12
0
0
0
5
1000


7
257
1
8
4
120
4
7
1446


60
9
200
0
6
6
180
6
9
1942


11
163
7
5
5
150
5




1682
29
3
527
1
19
1
29
1
3
552



5
316
2
11
3
87
3
5
970


58
7
226
0
8
2
58
2
7
1404


1568
2
3
522
2
18
2
56
2
3
534



5
313
5
11
1
28
1
5
490


56
7
244
0
8
0
0
0
7
1362


1458
27
3
486
0
18
0
0
0
3
516



5
291
3
10
4
108
4
5
910


54
7
208
2
7
5
135
5
7
1320


1352
26
3
450
2
17
1
26
1
3
498



5
270
2
10
2
52
2
5
880


52
7
193
1
7
3
78
3
7
1278


1250
25
3
416
2
16
2
50
2
3
480



5
250
0
10
0
0
0
5
850


50
7
178
4
7
1
25
1
7
1236


1152
24
3
384
0
16
0
0
0
3
462



5
230
2
9
3
72
3
5
820


48
7
168
4
6
6
144
6
7
1194


1058
23
3
352
2
15
1
23
1
3
444



5
211
3
9
1
23
1
5
790


46
7
151
1
6
4
92
4
7
1152


968
22
3
322
2
14
2
44
2
3
426



5
193
3
8
4
88
4
5
760


44
7
138
2
6
2
44
2




882
21
3
294
0
14
0
0
0
3
408



5
176
2
8
2
42
2
5
730


42
7
126
0
6
0
0
0




800
20
3
266
2
13
1
20
1
3
390



5
160
0
8
0
0
0
5
700


40
7
114
2

5
100
5




722
19
3
240
2
12
2
38
2
3
372



5
144
2
7
3
57
3
5
670


38
7
103
1
5
3
57
3




648
18
3
212
2
12
0
0
0
3
354



5
192
3
7
1
18
1
5
640


36
7
92
4
5
1
18
1




578
17
3
192
2
11
1
17
1
3
336



5
115
3
6
4
68
4
5
620


34
7
82
4
4
6
102
6






The Table of Battallions reduced out of the Broad squares.

1
2
3
4
2
3
4


1922
3
648 648 578
48
5
392 392 392 392 338
16


1800
3
578 578 648
4
5
392 392 338 338 338
2


1682
3
578 578 512
14





1568
3
512 512 512
32





1458
3
512 450 450
46





1352
3
450 450 450
2





1250
3
450 450 338
12





1152
3
392 392 338
30





1058
3
392 338 338
10





968
3
338 338 288
4





882
3
338 338 200
6





800
3
288 288 200
24





722
3
242 242 242
4





648
3
200 200 242
6





587
3
200 162 200
10





512
3
144 200 162
6





450
3
162 162 98
18





392
3
162 162 72
4







The Table of Broad squares, or two fold Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


512
16
3
170
2
10
2
32
2
3
318



5
102
2
6
2
32
2




22
7
73
1
4
4
64
4




450
15
3
150
0
10
0
0
0
3
300



5
90
0
6
0
0
0




30
7
64
2
4
2
30
2




392
14
3
130
2
9
1
14
1
3
280



5
78
2
5
3
42
5
5
520


28
7
56
0
4
0
0
0




338
13
3
112
2
8
2
26
2
3
264



5
67
3
5
1
13
1
0
490


26
7
48
2
3
5
65
5




288
12
3
9
2
8
0
0
0
3
246



5
57
3
4
4
48
4




24
7
41
1
3
3
36
3




242
11
3
80
2
7
1
11
1
3
228



5
48
2
4
2
22
2




22
7
34
4
3
1
11
1




200
10
3
66
2
6
2
20
2
3
210



5
40
0
4
0
0
0




20
7
28
4
2
6
60
6




162
9
3
54
0
6
0
0
0
3
192



5
32
2
3
3
27
3




18
7
23
1
2
4
36
4




128
8
3
48
0
5
1
8
1
3
174



5
28
4
3
1
8
1




16
7
20
4
2
2
16
2




98
7
3
36
0
4
2
14
2
3
156



5
21
3
2
4
28
4




14
7
15
3
2
0
0
0




72
6
3
24
0
4
0
0
0





5
14
2
2
2
12
2




12
7
10
2
1
5
30
5




50
5
3
16
2
3
1
5
1





5
10
0
2
0
0
0




10
7
7
1
1
3
15
3




32
4
3
10
2
2
2
8
2





5
6
2
1
3
12
3




8
7
4
4
1
1
4
1




18
3
3
6
0
2
0
0
6





5
3
1
1
3
1





6
7
2
4
0
0
0





8
2
3
2
2
1
2
4
2





5
1
3
0
0
0





4
7
1
0
0
0
0





The number of pikes to be im|battailed.
The nu~ber of me~ in flanke  front.
How many me~ to march in ranke.
The number of ra~ks, how many.
The remaines of men out of rank.
The Maniples or parts.
The remaines of ma|niples or parts.
The whole num|ber of remaines of Maniples.
The marching of re|maines of Maniples.
The nu~ber to im|pale or girdle by.
The whole nu~ber contained in the girdling shot.






Hereafter shall follow the figures and tables of sundry euen Battallions, to sundry vses, c.
_HEre next will I set down the Tables and figures of sundry euen Bat|tallions, as by 3, 5, or 7. euen battallio~s: the which are very strong of themselues; yet neuerthelesse may you chuse whether you will fight in the same order of battallions, or, by marching them vp shoulder to shoulder, bring the~ into a two, or threefold battell, at your owne discretion, or as occasion shall best serue. The number of which seue|rall battallions you shall finde (as I sayd before) placed in the Tables of squares of men, or battels in proportio~s of equalitie, on the right side of euery leafe, by draw|ing your finger downe the first columne of the same, and then considering what number of pikes you haue whereof to deuide your battallions, you shall finde in the 4 columne of your euen battallions, the same number set downe, or a number vnder the same, which (I thinke good) you rather chuse then the iust number, be|cause you may then cast out some remaines to imploy otherwise; for better it is to leaue then to lacke. As for example; here in these Tables of euen battallions, first there is set downe 3 euen battallions containing in each 49 pikes, which be|ing summed together doe make 174 as appeareth in page. 225. Now turne vnto the first table of battels in proportion of equalitie, or euen squares of men,  loo|king in the first columne of the right side thereof, there shal you find in page 207 the said number of 49, whose square roote is 7: for 7 multiplied in it self is 49:  7 men  7 ra~ks is the square of euery of the said 3 Battallio~s. And in this sort shal you find the order  setting of all the other Battallions, and of all the other num|bers: as in these figures next ensuing of 3 Battallions, co~taining in each 3364 me~, whose square roote is 58, so is each Battallion of 58 rankes,  58 men per ranke: and the whole summe of all these 3 Battallions do amount 10092 pikes, as appea|reth in these Tables following in page. 225.

The figure of three Battallions.



The Table of three euen Battallions.

1
2
3
4
5


7/7
49
3
49 49 49
174


8/8
64
3
64 64 64
192


9/9
81
3
81 81 81
143


10/10
100
3
100 100 100
300


11/11
121
3
121 121 121
363


12/12
144
3
144 144 144
432


13/13
169
3
169 169 169
507


14/14
196
3
196 196 196
588


15/15
225
3
225 225 225
675


16/16
256
3
256 256 256
768


17/17
289
3
289 289 289
867


18/18
324
3
324 324 324
972


19/19
361
3
361 361 361
1083


20/20
400
3
400 400 400
1200


21/21
441
3
441 441 441
1323


22/22
484
3
484 484 484
1442


23/23
529
3
529 529 529
1587


24/24
576
3
576 576 576
1728


25/25
625
3
625 625 625
1875


1
2
3
4
5


26/26
676
3
676 676 676
2028


27/27
739
3
739 739 739
2217


28/28
784
3
784 784 784
2352


29/29
841
3
841 841 841
2523


30/30
900
3
900 900 900
2700


31/31
961
3
961 961 961
2823


32/32
1024
3
1024 1024 1024
3072


33/33
1089
3
1089 1089 1089
3267


34/34
1156
3
1156 1156 1156
3468


35/35
1225
3
1225 1225 1225
3676


36/36
1296
3
1296 1296 1296
3888


37/37
1369
3
1369 1369 1369
4107


38/38
1444
3
1444 1444 1444
4332


39/39
1521
3
1521 1521 1521
4563


40/40
1600
3
1600 1600 1600
4800


41/41
1681
3
1681 1681 1681
5043


42/42
1764
3
1764 1764 1764
5292


43/43
1849
3
1849 1849 1849
5547


44/44
1936
3
1936 1936 1936
5808






The Table of three euen Battallions.

1
2
3
4
5


45/45
2025
3
2025 2025 2025
6075


46/46
2116
3
2116 2116 2116
6348


47/47
2209
3
2209 2209 2209
6627


48/48
2304
3
2304 2304 2304
6912


49/49
2401
3
2401 2401 2401
7203


50/50
2500
3
2500 2500 2500
7500


51/51
2601
3
2601 2601 2601
7803


1
2
3
4
5


52/52
2704
3
2704 2704 2704
8112


53/53
2809
3
2809 2809 2809
8427


54/54
2916
3
2916 2916 2916
8748


55/55
3025
3
3025 3025 3025
9075


56/56
3136
3
3136 3136 3136
9408


57/57
3249
3
3249 3249 3249
9747


58/58
3364
3
3364 3364 3364
10092


Here after do ensue the figures and Tables of 5 euen Battallions; beginning at the roote of 100, which is 10, and so continuing.

The figure of fiue Battallions.



The Table of fiue Battallions.

1
2
3
4
5


10/10
100
5
100 100 100 100 100
500


11/11
121
5
121 121 121 121 121
605


12/12
144
5
144 144 144 144 144
720


13/13
169
5
169 169 169 169 169
845


14/14
196
5
196 196 196 196 196
980


15/15
225
5
225 225 225 225 225
1125


16/16
256
5
256 256 256 256 256
1280


17/17
289
5
289 289 289 289 289
1445


18/18
324

324 324 324 324 324
1620


19/19
361
5
361 361 361 361 361
1805


20/20
400
5
400 400 400 400 400
2000


21/21
441
5
441 441 441 441 441
2205


1
2
3
4
5


22/22
484
5
484 484 484 484 484
2420


23/23
529
5
529 529 529 529 529
2643


24/24
576
5
576 576 576 576 576
2880


25/25
625
5
625 625 625 625 625
3125


26/26
676
5
676 676 676 676 676
3380


27/27
739
5
739 739 739 739 739
3685


28/28
784
5
784 784 784 784 784
3920


29/29
841
5
841 841 841 841 841
4205


30/30
900
5
900 900 900 900 900
4500


31/31
961
5
961 961 961 961 961
4805


32/32
1024
5
1024 1024 1024 1024 1024
5120


33/33
1089
5
1089 1089 1089 1089 1089
5445




The Table of fiue Battallions.

1
2
3
4
5


34/34
1156
5
1156 1156 1156 1156 1156
5780


35/35
1225
5
1225 1225 1225 1225 1225
6125


36/36
1296
5
1296 1296 1296 1296 1296
6450


37/37
1369
5
1369 1369 1369 1369 1369
6845


38/38
1444
5
1444 1444 1444 1444 1444
7220


39/39
1521
5
1521 1521 1521 1521 1521
7605


1
2
3
4
5


40/40
1600
5
1600 1600 1600 1600 1600
8000


41/41
1681
5
1681 1681 1681 1681 1681
8405


42/42
1764
5
1764 1764 1764 1764 1764
8820


43/43
1849
5
1849 1849 1849 1849 1849
7245


44/44
1936
5
1936 1936 1936 1936 1936
9680


45/45
2025
5
2025 2025 2025 2025 2025
10125


Next after do follow the Tables and figures of 7 euen Battallions, beginning at the roote of 100, which is 10, and so continuing vnto 10108.

The figures of seuen euen Battallions.

As for the shot proportionable vnto euery seuerall Battallion, you may bestow them in small troupes round about euery of them, or otherwise as the ground  occasions shall yeeld best aduantage: the one alwayes to second an other: as also may the seuerall Battallions by good conduction do the like.


The Table of seuen euen Battallions.

1
2
3
4


10/10
100
7
700


11/11
121
7
847


12/12
144
7
1008


13/13
169
7
1183


14/14
196
7
1373


15/15
225
7
1575


16/16
256
7
1792


17/17
289
7
1923


18/18
324
7
2268


19/19
361
7
2527


20/20
400

2800


21/21
441
7
3087


22/22
484
7
3388


23/23
529
7
3703


24/24
576
7
4032


The quadrat roote.
The number of euery seue|rall Battallion.
Btllions how many.
The whole number of the seuen Battallions.


1
2
3
4


25/25
625
7
4375


26/26
676
7
4732


27/27
739
7
5173


28/28
784
7
5488


29/29
841
7
5887


30/30
900
7
6300


31/31
961
7
6727


32/32
1024
7
7168


33/33
1089
7
7623


34/34
1156
7
8092


35/35
1225
7
8575


36/36
1296
7
9072


37/37
1369
7
9583


38/38
1444
7
10108








The quadrat roote.
The number of each Bat+tallion.
Battallions how many.
The whole number of the Battallions.


In these Tables of 7 euen Battallions, I haue not set downe the 7 Battallions se|uerally, as I haue done in the Tables of 5 and 3 Battallions: for it were superflu|ous; seeing that the seuerall number of euery one of them is to be seene in the 2 Columne.



The figures and tables of sundry Battallions for Crosse battels.
I Haue here ensuing figured  layd down diuerse euen Battallions, by 4, 8, 12, or 16, to make a Crosse battell without filling the center, so as euery 4 battallions do make a Crosse battel with center vnfilled: 8 maketh 2 Crosse battels; 12 ma|keth 3, and 16 maketh 4, without filling the center of either of them. Also there is for 5 battallions, to make a Crosse battell with the center filled, 10 to make 2, and 15 to make 3, and 20 to make 4, euen from the root of 5, which multiplied in it self maketh 25; and so vpwards vnto 1000, as by these figures  tables folowing may appeare. Where in the first columne is set downe the square root of euery se|uerall battallion: in the 2 columne, the number contained in euery-seuerall bat|tallion: in the 3 columne, whether they be set by 4 battallions, with the center vn|filled; or by 5 battallions with the center filled: and in the 4 columne, the whole nu~ber contained in the whole Crosse battel. In the 5 columne, there is 8 to make 2 Crosse battels, with the center vnfilled; and 10 make 2 Crosse battels, with the center filled. In the 6 columne, the nu~ber contained in the said crosse battels. In the 7 columne is 12 to make 3, with center vnfilled; and 15 to make 3 with the center filled. In the 8 columne, the number contained in each. And in the 9 co|lumne is set downe 16 to make 4 Crosse battels with center vnfilled; and 20 to make 4 Crosse battels with center filled. The 10 columne signifieth the number of each of them Crosse battels. Note, that in the said void spaces of the 4 angles of each of these Crosse battels, is to be placed the shot belonging to the sayd Crosse battels, as in the two other small figures may appeare.

The figures of Crosse battels, with center vnfilled and filled.



The Table of Battallions for Crosse Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10


5
25
4
100
8
200
12
300
16
400


5
5
125
10
250
15
375
20
500


6
36
4
144
8
288
12
432
16
576


6
5
180
10
360
15
540
20
720


7
49
4
196
8
392
12
588
16
784


7
5
245
10
490
15
735
20
980


8
64
4
256
8
512
12
768
16
1024


8
5
320
10
640
15
960
20
1280


9
81
4
324
8
648
12
972
16
1296


9
5
405
10
810
15
1215
20
1610


10
100
4
400
8
800
12
1200
16
1600


10
5
500
10
1000
15
1500
20
2000


11
121
4
484
8
968
12
1452
16
1936


11
5
605
10
1210
15
1715
20
2420


12
144
4
576
8
1142
12
1618
16
2304


12
5
720
10
1440
15
2160
20
2880


13
169
4
676
8
1352
12
2308
16
2704


13
5
845
10
1690
15
2535
20
3380


14
196
4
784
8
1568
12
2352
16
3136


14
5
980
10
1960
15
2940
20
3920


15
225
4
900
8
1800
12
2700
16
3600


15
5
1125
10
2250
15
3375
20
4500


16
256
4
1284
8
2048
12
3072
16
4096


16
5
1280
10
2560
15
3840
20
5120


17
289
4
1156
8
2312
12
3468
16
4624


17
5
1445
10
2890
15
4335
20
5780


18
324
4
1296
8
2592
12
3888
16
5184


18
5
1620
10
3240
15
4860
20
6480


19
361
4
1444
8
2888
12
4332
16
5776


19
5
1804
10
3610
15
5415
20
7220


20
400
4
1600
8
3200
12
4800




20
5
2000
10
4000
15
6000




21
441
4
1764
8
3528
12
5292




21
5
2205
10
4410
15
6615




22
484
4
1936
8
3872
12
5808




22
5
2420
10
4840
15
7260




23
529
4
2116
8
4232
12
6340




23
5
2645
10
5290
15
7935




24
576
4
2304
8
4608
12
6912




24
5
2880
10
5760
15
8640




25
625
4
2500
8
5000
12
7500




25
5
3125
10
6250
15
9375




26
676
4
2704
8
5408
12
8112




26
5
3380
10
6760
15
10140




27
739
4
2956
8
5912
12
8864




27
5
3695
10
7390
15
10185




28
784
4
3136
8
6272
12
9408




28
5
3920
10
7840
15
11760






The Table of Battallions for Crosse Battels.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10


29
841
4
3364
8
6728
12
10092




29
5
4205
10
8410
15





30
900
4
3600
8
7200






30
5
4500
10
9000






31
961
4
3844
8
7688






31
5
4805
10
9610






32
1024
4
4096
8
8192






32
5
5120
10
10240






33
1089
4
4356
8
8712






33
5
5445
10







34
1156
4
4624
8
9248






34
5
5780








35
1225
4
4900
8
9800






35
5
6125








36
1296
4
5184
8
10368






36
5
6480








37
1369
4
5476








37
5
6845








38
1444
4
5776








38
5
7220








39
1521
4
6084








39
5
7605








40
1600
4
6400








40
5
8000








41
1681
4
6724








41
5
8405








42
1764
4
7056








42
5
8820








43
1849
4
7396








43
5
9245








44
1936
4
7744








44
5
9680








45
2025
4
8100








45
5
10125








46
2116
4
8464








46
5









47
2209
4
8836








47
5









48
2304
4
9216








48
2401
5









49
4
9604








49
2500
5









50
4
10000








50

5













THE SECOND DIALOGVE.

VVherein is set foorth the order and rules by going pases, to know any seate or peece of ground: and how to embattell men thereupon, either horse or foote, according to the proportion of the same: with the Arithmeticall rules to the working thereof: with sundrie other martiall points.


Captaine.
_NOw haue I (Gentlemen) finished the figures and tables of most sorts of battels and battallions treated of in these our discourses: wherein,No man but er|reth, some more, some lesse. if I haue erred (for no man but erreth, some more, some lesse, in most of our opinions and actions) I submit my labour to the courteous censure and reformation of all martiall men bet|ter experimented then my selfe, crauing of all others an indifferent iudgement; considering my intent and purpose herein, is not to instruct the experimented souldier; but to shew vnto the vnskilled and willing minded Gentlemen, the most points vsed (or well wished to be vsed) and obserued, in these our moderne warres; penned like a souldier, and not like a scholler: and so I pray you ac|cept it.


Gent.
Truly (Captaine) wee are to giue you thanks for your great care and paines taken herein, especially sith you haue, at our entreatie, and for our instru|ction done the same. And surely in mine opinion, these figures and tables may giue a wo~derful instructio~  perceiuerance vnto such, as are not thoroughly expe|rimented in most of your martial actions:  may also greatly aide  helpe all such martial officers as be not perfectly skilled inthe art of arithmetik; which art I per|ceiue to be more important for a souldier, then many men would iudge or deeme. And although you haue beene a long time busied in these discourses, at our request, yet let vs entreate you to aunswere some more questions and de|maundes, which yet we haue in mind to propound,Our age incli|neth to warre. for that we would willingly be instructed, in as much as should seeme needfull to a souldier; for we gather by your discourses, that this our age would so require it.
First, therefore we would gladly know the order to bee obserued to measure, only with going pases, a plat or peece of ground to martiall your men to fight, or set a battell thereupon.


Capt.
Your demaund is good and necessary.To accustome the going pase to the geometricall pase of 5 foote to the pase.
The foote deui|ded into twelue inches. Therefore whosoeuer would with going pases measure a peece of ground to embattell vpon, it is needfull that the skilfull souldier doe acquaint himselfe very well with pasing the measure, which is called a geometricall pase: the which measure is deuided into 5 foote of length, and euery foote deuided into 12 inches, as here is to be seene designed the fourth part of a foot; which is 3 inches (the foote being of 12 inches) as here vnder appeareth.


This being done,To practise the geometricall go|ing pases. the good souldier is to put often such measure in practise, with his ordinarie going pases: for that he may thereby readily know, how many of this pases will make the length of this pase, after the rate of 5 foot to the pase: and so shall he easily know, if vpon such seate or ground there might be em|battailed such a number of men, or such a number of horse, in squadron; know|ing the length and breadth which is to be allowed to the said men and horse. And I will suppose to giue to euerie pikeman,Euery pikeman in aray to fight, will require 3 foote of ground in breadth, and 7 foote for length. Euery horse|man 5 foote in breadth, and ten foote in length. The profit to practise the going pases geometri|call. standing in battell aray, three foote of ground (at the least) for breadth, and 7 foote of ground for length: and vnto eue|rie horse, 5 foote in breadth, and 10 foote in length, or more or lesse, so much as shall seeme good to the skilfull souldier. And this practise of going pases shall not onely be auaileable to the good souldier or Sergeant Maior, for the know|ledge of anie seate or peece of ground to embattell anie number of men vpon; but also to know how to march through anie straights or passages, and also to en|campe an Armie: giuing vnto euerie regiment of horse and foote their due quarter, with their proportionall places: and to know moreouer, the whole compasse or circumference of such encamping; as in our fift booke, folio 155 c. is at large described. Now therefore, let vs set downe, to arme a peece of ground, or to know what number of men may stand vpon the same in battell array, ha|uing first made familiar, and bene well practised with his going pases to the pro|portion of the pase of 5 foote of measure; and so that two of his going pases may make one pase of measure of 5 foote:Two going pases to make a geome|tricall pase. and let vs suppose, that such a peece of ground doth containe in length 100 going pases; which, after two going pases to one pase of measure, do make 50 pases of measure: and is in breadth 80 going pa|ses, which are pases of measure 40, as here in this figure shall appeare.
The pase of ground.

And now to arme and embattell the said seate or peece of ground, with pikes armed, and vnarmed. To do this you must first consider how many pikes, armed, and vnarmed,To embattell the sayd peece of ground. will serue to arme or embattell vpon the sayd peece of ground, in this sort: multiply the 50 pases of length, and the 40 pases of breadth, by 5 foote, (the length of the propounded measure) and there will come foorth 250 foote for the length,The rule arith|meticall. and 200 for the breadth. And now willing to make the head or

front of the battell, vpon the length of the sayd seate, or peece of ground, deuide the 250 by 3 foote, which is supposed to allow to euery pikeman for his station in breadth, and it produceth 83 men in ranke for breadth, and 1 foote of ground remaining, the which we make no account of. And of the 200 foote of breadth of ground will we make the ranks in length, by deuiding the said 200 by 7 foot, as is set downe, to giue vnto euery pikeman of the breadth for his station of ground, and it produceth 28 rankes of men. So to arme or embattell the sayd seate or ground, it will require 28 rankes, at 83 men by ranke, betwixt pikes armed and vnarmed, if you haue not all armed pikes (the which were farre better if it might so be) as in this figure here following shall appeare.

The embattelling the same with pikes.
And now to know how many pikes,The arithmetical rules.  will serue for this peece of ground or how many it will containe in all, you must multiply the 28 rankes by 83 men, and it a|mounteth vnto 2324 pikes, armed and vnarmed: the which number of pikes will serue to embattell vpon the sayd seate or peece of ground. And in this sort may you worke with any other seate or peece of ground, and number of men.
And now againe (not hauing all your number of pikes with armed corslets) if you would arme the sayd seate with an equall proportion of armed pikes,To empale the battell with ar|med pikes.
The arithmetical rule. in front, flankes, and rereward: and suppose that in the sayd number of 2324 pikes, there be 1200 armed pikes: and to arme the front, flankes, and traine proportio|nally with the sayd armed pikes, you shall worke in this order: summe together the length and breadth of the sayd battell, that is, 28 with 83, and it amounteth 111. Now set downe your rule in this sort:if 1/1112/283/1200. And then multiplying the 28 second with 1200 third, and it commeth to 33600, and this 33600, shall bee deuided by 111, prima, and it produceth 302 and 78 remaining whereof 100 make noe account. Nowe this 302 shall bee deducted out of 1200, and there will remaine 898 armed pikes; and these 898 shall arme the front and traine of your battell: and the 302 shall serue to arme the two flankes of the sayd battell; and then deuiding the 302 by 28, the length or flankes of your battell, and it produceth 10 men per ranke of armed pikes to arme the two sides or flankes: of the which 10 there shall be 5 rankes placed on the one flanke, and 5 rankes on the other flanke: as in the figure in the next page appeareth.

The empalement in flankes. 
And there remaineth 22 armed pikes, the which 22 shall be added vnto 898, and it maketh 920 armed pikes: and with these 920 armed pikes, you shall arme the front and trayne of the sayd battell, by deuiding the 920 by the breadth: but you must first deduct the 10 men per ranke, which serued to arme the two flankes, out of 83 the breadth, and there will remaine 73 men per ranke for the inner breadth or front of the battell: now deuide the 920 armed pikes by 73, and it will come to be 12 ranks of armed pikes,The rule. and 44 remaining: and of these 12 ranks, there shall be set 6 rankes in the front of the battell, and 6 rankes in the rereward of the battell; as in this figure you may perceiue.

The impalemt in fle, fro, and rereward.
And againe, if with these 1200 armed pikes, you would arme the one, or two parts of the battell more strong then the rest, and where you do most suspect the enemy; and that the other part or parts shall be secure and fenced with the nature of the seate or ground;The rule. then the 10 men per ranke, which armed the two flankes, shall be placed on the one side or flanke onely, where you shall see most occasion: and the like shall bee done with the 12 rankes of armed men, which armed the front and trayne, placing them either all in front, or all in trayne, as shall bee found most needful, where the enemy is most to be suspected, as in the figure fol|lowing shall appeare.

The empalement in front and on one flanke.
And moreouer, if with the sayd 1200 armed pikes, you would arme the front of your battell only,The rule. then deuide the 1200 pikes by 83, the number of men in front, and there will come foorth to be 14 rankes of armed pikes for the front, or head of the battell only, as in this figure following may be seene.

The front armed onely.
And there remaineth 38 armed pikes, the which shall be placed, where the Ser|geant Maior shall thinke most conuenient, within the body of the battell.


Gent.
We haue sufficiently vnderstood the order how to arme or embattell a peece of ground with pikes onely: wherefore I pray, shew vs now how to embat|tell the same seate or ground with shot or horsemen.


Capt.
Sir, to arme or imbattell a seate or peece of ground with shot, or horse, you must multiply the length of the sayd seate,To arme the sayd peece of ground with shot or hors|men. and also the breadth of the same by 5 foote: putting downe (as is aforesayd) for the length, 50 pases, and for the readth 40 pases:  it produceth for the length 250 foote,  for the breadth, 200 foote.The rule. And now to know how many ranks, and how many shot per ranke will serue for this ground, you shall deuide the 250, and also the 200 foote by 4 foote, as be|fore is said,4 foote for length, and 4 foote for breadth to euery shot fr his stati|on of ground. to allow for euery hargubuzier his station of ground, 4 foote for length, and 4 foote for breadth. Then reparting 250 foote by 4, it produceth 50, not reckening the ouerplus: and willing to make the head of front or your battell vpon the longest breadth or part of the seate of ground, your front will come to containe 62 shot in front, and 50 rankes in flanke, as here in the figure following may appeare.
Armed with shot.

The number of shot contained.And now to know how many shot this peece of ground shall containe in this sort, multiply the 50 rankes by 62 shot, and it maketh 3100 shot, which 100 shot,To embattell the same with troops of horsemen. serueth to arme the sayd peece of ground, as appeareth. And againe the like is to be done if you would embattell the sayd seate or ground with troupes of horsemen: hauing first reduced the length and breadth of the sayd seate or ground into feete, as before I haue declared, and this aforesaid seate containeth 250 foote in length,The rule. and 200 foote in bredth. And now if you will set the front of your horse battell vpon the length of the sayd ground, which is 250 foote, then deuide the 250 by 5 foote of breadth (as before is sayd to allow for euery horse his station in breadth of ground 5 foote) and it produceth 50 horses in ranke; and then to know how many rankes they will bee, deuide the 20 foote, by 10 foote (as aboue is allowed for the length in ground of euery horse his station, or roome) and it produceth 20 rankes, at 50 horsemen per ranke, as in the figure following shall appeare.


And finally to know how many horsemen (after the former calculation) will serue to imbattell vpon the sayd seate of ground, you shall multiply the 50 horse by 20 rankes,The number of horsemen. they will make 1000 horse and the sayd 1000 horse will ariue or im|battel the sayd plat or peece of ground, at 20 rankes and 50 horse per ranke. And in the like sort may any other peece of ground bee (after this ma|ner) imbattelled or armed, with either pikes, shot, or horse. And to conclude, hauing these rules perfectly in memory, and being well practised with your going pases, you may imbattell any number of men according to the seate or ground, with either foote, or horse; or with both, as occasion shall serue, and the quality of

fight require. And thus I thinke, I haue satisfied your requestes, and aunswered your demaunds.


Gent.
Truly so you haue; to our great contentation, and good instructions; and to your great trauell and paines: for the which wee rest greatly beholding and much bound vnto you: but (if I remember my selfe well) you haue ouer pas|sed some orders of imbattailings; whereof you made some mention before: as the Diamant, the Wedge, the Sheeres, and Saw battels: and also of the Snayle forme, the S, D, or G, battels.


Capt.
I haue abstained to speake much of these sorts of battels, because I sup|pose them to be battels of small force for any maine fight, especially as our wars are now conducted. And for the Diamant, the Wedge, the Sheeres, and Saw bat|tels, I haue sayd sufficiently of them already in my third booke, folio 77, 78, 79, and so continuing: supposing these before set downe sufficient. And if occasion fall out for the vse of the others, the very Nouices in military profession do know, that without any difficulty at all, they may easily be framed, and that sud|dainely out of the very order of marching.The benefit of practise and rea|dinesse. But in the others you may behold how with skilfull and orderly practise, the benefit of this readinesse shall quickly distinguish and manifest vnto vs, the parts incident vnto a right perfect souldier: which for 3 principall reasons I haue the rather deemed to be amongst vs most necessarily required.The parts inci|dent to a perfect souldier, to be most necessary for 3 reasons. The one is, for that the often exercise thereof inureth a souldier to such perfection as is required; another is, for that it is not meete the enemy should at any time stand assured, in what order we will fight, to the ende that he should not reape such aduantage from vs, as to frame a battell correspon|dent to any of our certaine proportions: and the third is, that according to the ground, straights, or passages, we may reduce our battell or battallions to the con|uenient proportion thereof.


Gent.
These (in mine opinion) are good considerations and reasons; but yet (good Captaine) ere you conclude all, let vs vnderstand of you what orders are obserued in Cytadels, Castles, and Forts of defence, hauing garrisons in the same.


Capt.
What I haue seene obserued in places of strength in other countries, I will shew you in our next Dialogue following.



The Election, charge, office and dutie of a Castellano, or Captaine of a Citadell, Castell, Fortresse, or fortified towne, or any other such place of defence.

THE THIRD DIALOGVE.

VVherein is set foorth the parts to be required in a Captaine of a Castell: his loy|alty, duty, and charge: his care in time conuenient, for all necessaries and munitions: the duty of the souldiers in the defence therof: the order in set|ting the watch, and placing the Sentinels; with relieuing of the same: with the shutting in of the gates, and their opening againe.


Captaine.
_THe guard and keeping of Citadels, Castels, Fortresses, strong Townes and Fortes, are (or ought to be) bestowed vpon such per|sonages, whose vertue,Vpon whom the guard of Castels ought to be besto|wed valour, experience, wisdome, constancy, and (aboue all) loyaltie, shall merite and best befit the same. And therefore (in mine opinion) the guard and custody of such places, ought to be bestowed and incommended vpon such Captaines and old seruitors, as haue in martiall affaires and actions, spent the greatest part of their time: and whose vertue, valour, magnanimitie, resolution, and (as I sayd) aboue all, loyalty, hath in all the courses of their military life bin well proued, shewed, and made manifest to the world.


Gent.
Fauor and affect|tion in our age carieth all.Truly (in mine opinion) it should bee so indeede, but yet we see that in our age such choyses are not so made, but rather fauour and affection commonly carieth all: to the preiudice (no doubt) of many approued old souldiers, and men best befitting the place.


Capt.
Well, how they are bestowed and incommended, I haue not now to speake; but how (in mine opinion) they should be, and vpon what sort of men, I haue already sayd: which would be no small encouragement vnto all braue min|ded men,Rewarde for ser|uice a great en|couragement to soldiers. which follow warres, to singular themselues therein; seeing and know|ing that their vertues, valour, and good cariage in seruice, should in the end be re|garded, commended, and rewarded.


Gent.
But I pray what particular parts would you wish to be in one chosen to this charge and office?


Capt.
First, I could wish that such should be personages issuing from Gentle and Noble bloud;Parts to bee desi|red in a Cap|taine of a Castell or fortresse. or men whose noble actions, and vertues haue enobled them|selues: of both the which sorts, there might be many examples recited, but time permitteth me not. And besides the former nobility, the Captaine of such a Castell or Fort, ought to be loyall, valiant, vigilant, ready, resolute, and experi|mented

in all occurrants of warre; whereby he might both foresee the enemies desseignes, preuent their pretences, and resolutely resist their attempts, and to be most valiant, resolute, and constant in the very points and pinches of furious bat|teries, fierce assaults, and daungerous mineworkes: whereby the souldiers imita|ting their Captaine,The souldiers to imitate the Cap|taine. shall shew themselues the like: by the which valour, con|stancy, and vertue, both of Captaine and souldiers, many places of defence, ha|uing bin made open by battery,The honour of braue men. and attempted by fierce assaults, haue neuer|thelesse beene wonderfully and valiantly defended and kept, to their immortall praise, and their Princes profit and honour. And on the contrary, if the Cap|taine be carelesse,The shame of owards. cowardly, insolent, disloyall, and trayterous, the end of his acti|ons are dishonour, shame, and confusion vnto himselfe, and great losse and hinderance vnto his Prince; of both which sorts many examples might be produ|ced, to the prayse and honour of the first, and to the dishonour and shame of the last.


Gent.
But if the Captaine should bee disloyall, and practise any secret treason with the enemy, are the souldiers to obey his orders and commaundes, percei|uing and suspecting the same.


Capt.
No,How farre the souldier is bound to obay the Cap|taine. in no maner or sort, for although the souldier be bound to obey his Captaine in all military courses and commaundes (as Lieutenant then to his Prince) so long as hee remaineth in the fidelity and true loyalty vnto his Prince; yet hauing once falsified his faith, and lost his loyalty; and thereby turned from a true subiect,The traytor is be|come souldier to the enemy, and enemy to the Princes souldiers a traytor to his Prince  country; they are in no respect, to follow or obay him: for at the very point of his first conceipt of treason, he is no more the Kings liege officer, nor the true Captaine or Commander of his souldiers, but is become a souldier to the enemie, and an enemy to the Princes souldiers.


Gent.
But what are they to doe, when they shall see their ensigne to march out before them by their Captaines order and commaund, to surrender vp the place.


Capt.
As they are not bound to any Captaine except they see his authoritie and warrant from their Prince or Generall;The Captaine be|ing disloyal what the souldiers are to doe. so being in garrison in any Castell or place of defence, and their Captaine commanding them to issue out, and so to for|sake the place, they are not to obey him therein, without seeing an expresse order from their Prince or General to that effect: for it is no sufficent excuse for them to say, that they were deceiued by him, vnto whom they were bound to follow and obey, seeing the place to be forsaken, without dismantelling and razing downe the same; and the enemy attending his entrance thereinto; then and in such ca|ses should the honest souldier refuse the same, electing and chusing another chiefe to gouerne and rule them vntill they haue giuen aduise thereof vnto their Prince or Generall; valiantly resisting all attempts offered by the enemy.


Gent.
If by chaunce vpon any battery or assault giuen,The Captaine  coward, what the souldier is to do. their Captaine through pusillanimitie and cowardize, should commaund the souldiers to retire, willing them that they should reserue themselues to serue their Prince in other actions, giuing order to withdraw them within the Citadel, Fort, or Keepe, or vn|to any other place, where they might thinke to saue their liues without fight or blowes; and so yeelding in fine to the enemie: what are they in such case to doe?



Capt.
When souldiers are to retire.If the Captaine do certainely perceiue  see that they stand ouer any dan|gerous mines, or in place ouer open to the fury of the battring Artillery; and vpon these occasions should commaund and constraine them to retire and withdraw themselues, they ought herein to beleeue, to follow, and to obey him: but if they should perfectly know and perceiue, that, onely for cowardize and basenesse of mind,When not to re|tire. and not constrained thereunto by force of the enemies weapon, he should commaund them to such retiring, in such a case, they ought not onely, not to o|bey him, but to turne their weapons vpon him, as against a bad officer, and an e|uill seruant of their Prince, and to expect and hope (by valiantly defending the place or breach, like braue men of warre) for better fortune, then they should find within the Keepe of the Castell or such other place of retraite: and doing otherwise, they are sure to be esteemed infamous, and not worthy to cary armes. For many times it hath bene seene, that many batteries, and forts and many ships and gallions of warre, haue beene lost and taken by the enemies, thorough onely the cold, and fearefull fighting of the defendants: and many againe haue beene as valiantly defended and kept, by a few braue and resolute defen|dants; that the enemie hath beene constrained to retire, with dishonour, losse, and shame.


Gent.
Good Captaines and souldiers ought to be estee|med and honou|red.Such Captaines and souldiers as haue thus behaued themselues valiant and resolute, no doubt but the Prince doth, or ought to esteeme of them, to honor them, and to reward them: but the timerous and cowardly Captaines, and fain|ting defendants, how is the Prince or Generall to deale with them?


Capt.
Mary to dispose of them according to the quality of their offence, at the least to depose them from their charge and place;How the bad to be dealt withall. commaunding them to serue as common souldiers, vntill they attaine vnto more valour and skill, fit for a valiant Captaine,Examples. as did the Dictator Lucius Quintius Cincinatus, depose from the Con|sulship, Lucius Minutius, for his cold and cowardly cariage against Clodius Gracchus, Captaine of the Egues and Vulcies (a people bordering vpon Rome.) For a valiant  resolute Captaine ought neuer to surrender the place committed vnto his defence and charge,A valiant Cap|taine ought ne|uer to yeeld ex|cept all remedies be past.
Vpon honorable conditions.
Sir Roger Williams Sir Thomas Bas|keruile. though thereunto constrained by woundes, wants, or such like crosse accidents of warre, except all hope of reliefe be past, and extremi|ties do abound: no, nor then neither but with honourable conditions, as did Sir Roger VVilliams, and Sir Thomas Baskeruile, with other braue English souldiers and Captaines, at the besieging of Sluys, by the great power of the Prince of Parma.
And it importeth much, that the souldiers also, which are to be chosen and appointed for the guard and defence of any fortresse,Souldiers for de|fence of a Castell to be men of ex|perience. Disloyall souldi|ers the losse of many places. towne, or Castell, should be men of good experience in warres, wise, sober, valiant; and aboue all, to haue no signe nor tatch of disloyalty or treason. For many times disloyall souldiers haue bin cause of the losse and ruine of many strong places, yea in despight of their Commanders and Captaines teeth.
And to the end that his souldiers commit no such foule disloyalties, or any dis|ordered mutinies,The Captaine to entreate his soul|diers kindly. it behoueth the Captaine to entreate them well, and with all humanity and kindnesse; thereby binding them rather to loose their liues in defence of his reputation and honor, then to commit any vilety or treason, as ma|ny times hath bin seene.
Also the Captaine of a Castell or Fortresse,To be carefull for all necessary pro|uisions. ought to prouide and procure all things necessary and fit for defence of the place, as wel for the munition  artille|ry, as for all prouision of victuals conuenient for their maintenance and foode: al|wayes soliciting his Prince for the same;  that in good  conuenient times, that nothing be found wanting in time of neede  seruice:Wants in time of neede do hinder great actions. through which negligence, many times sundry strong Forts haue bin lost,  many braue actio~s ouerthrowne; whereof we haue too many examples extant before our eyes.
Moreouer it behoueth the Captaine not to be ouer credulous:Not to be ouer credulous. Captaine Sansier deceiued. for many haue bin deceiued by cou~terfeit letters  false messages, as was Captaine Sansier, who being at the guard  defence of San Desyre for Francis the French king,  being beleaguerd by the Emperor Charles the fift, by meanes of counterfeit letters, sur|rendred vp the place, to the dammage of his king, and to his owne reproch  dis|honour.Marquis de Guasto, to Carolus Drusio at Mon|deuy. The like stratageme was practised by the Marquis de Guasto vnto Carolus Drusio, Captaine of Mondeuy in Piemont; surrendring thereby the place commit|ted to his charge.


Gent.
If the Captaine do chance to dy, or be slaine in the defence of this Castel, what orders are the souldiers to obserue in their gouernement thereof, vntil their Prince do giue other order and commaund?


Capt.
The souldiers in garrison within such Fortresse or place of defence, are to elect  chuse the most sufficient  principallest man amongst them (except there be any Lieutenant,The Captaine slayne or dye, the souldiers what to doe. son, or other kinsman of the sayd Captaine, vnto who~ by right the same doth appertaine)  such one preferred before the rest, him to sweare, ac|cording to the custome, to be loyal  true,  to do his best to defend the same fro~ the enemies:  also to render the same again vnto the Prince or Lord therof, whe~+soeuer it shall be demanded. The like order is to be taken by the Captaine of the Castel, towne, or Fortresse, with his Lieutenant, if at any time, vpon occasion, he is to depart out of his place of charge.


Gent.
And if it fortune that the Captaine be taken by the enemy at any sallying forth;  the enemy would constraine him to deliuer vp the sayd place, is the Lieu|tenant and souldiers bound to obey him, if he require the same?


Capt.
No truly, although they should see the enemies to kill  murder him for the same:The Captaine be|ing taken, the sol|diers what to do. or their fidelity  alleageance is no more due vnto him, being taken,  held prisoner, as it was whilest he was free, but vnto their Prince, who oweth the Castell.




THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.

VVherin is declared and recited the orders obserued by the Spaniards, in the Ci|tadels of Millan and Antwerp: their order of watches, guards and Sen|tinels: their sundry visitings and reuisitings; and relieuings at sundry times: the parts and duties of the officers therein: their singular care in the good guarding thereof, with sundrie other Martiall points, neces|sarie to be noted.


Gentleman.
_WHat orders are obserued in the guards and keeping of such Castels Forts, and places of defence?


Capt.
They are not alike in euery Fort or place; neither is there the like garrison and places of guard in one, as is in another: there|fore I cannot precisely satisfie you herein: for I haue seene very little in any of our English townes of strength and Fortresses, for that wee haue very few (Barwicke onely excepted:Barwike.) but to giue you some content, I will de|clare vnto you the orders obserued by the Spaniards in the Castell of Millan, which is one of the principallest Forts in Europe.The Castell of Millan.


The guardes and order of watches obserued in the Castell of Millan.
30 postes, and their orders.There is ordinarily in the Castell of Millan 30 postes, or places of guard, whereof the first 15 from 4 to 4 souldiers in each, are in the three Rauellins, and in the Tenaza or Keepe, which stands without the body of the Castell; for being places of most importance and trauailes: and the other 15 are within; from 3 to 3 souldiers, euery night deuiding euery of them into three quarters, and euery day, as hereafter followeth.
One souldier at Sentinell. Their order at night.In these 30 postes doth euery day remaine one souldier at the Sentinell; and those that do remaine ouer, are reparted and placed into the 3 Corps de guards of the gates: euery night there entreth foure Caporals into the watch: the one go|eth into the Tenaza, with the souldiers which are to enter into the same; and there doth continue and assist vntill the next morning, hauing first the order giuen him, what he is to doe, if the Alarme be giuen or striken.
The other three do remaine within the body or place of the Castell, and are de|uided into their quarters. The first, in the time of winter maketh his Rou~ds  cou~|ter Roundes for sixe houres,The Rounds and counter Rounds. with 4 souldiers in Round and contra Round. The second roundeth the Modorra, or second watch, for fiue houres; with other 4 souldiers in Round and counter Round. And the third doth Round from that ex|pired time, vntill day light or dawning, with other foure souldiers in like sort, in Round and contra Round: in such maner and sort, that the Sentinels, as well with|in, as without, are visited at the least, ten or twelue times euery houre a peece.
4 Gunners in the Rauellines.There entreth into the Rauellynes 4 Gunners for watch; the rest do remaine

within the body of the Castell.Watch vpon the wall. One of the chiefe officers doth keepe his watch euery night vpon the walles, and there are the Castellane, his Lieutenant, Cap|taine, Alferez and Sergeant. And neuerthelesse that which toucheth them by du|ty, they do euery one giue a turne vpon the walles once euery night, in such sort, that of all these the Sentinels are visited ordinarily euery night. Two houres be|fore the shutting in of the euening,Setting of watch. doth the Sergeant set the watch; and vntill the gates be shut fast, doth no souldier within the Castell know where he is to be placed, or his post; and in setting the same, hee goeth with those that are to re|maine in the Tenaza and Rauelines: and with these there goeth sixteene other souldiers with two Caporals,Locking of the gates. accompanying and attending vpon the keyes wherewith the porter doth locke the gates, and draw-bridges, and the Sergeant doth taste and proue with his hand, euery locke so locked and shut.
The principall gates and draw-bridges of the Castell,The principall gates and draw-bridges shut. are drawne vp, and shut in at the edge of the euening; and the Alferez doth feele and proue them, and the Lieutenant, and Captaine standeth present to see the same so done: and hauing locked and shut all fast and sure, all these three officers, with the Sergeant and twentie souldiers do go cary the keyes vnto the Castellanes lodging,The keyes. or vnto the Lieutenants lodging, if the Castellane himselfe bee not within the Castell. The Sergeant receiueth and taketh the word from the Castellane or his Lieutenant,The watch word. and giueth the same vnto the other officers and Caporals which are of the watch, and then presently vnto all the other Sentinels, which are first vpon the walles within the body of the Castell:To those in the Rauellins the word not giuen at all. and vnto those which watch without in the Raue|lines and Tenaza, the word is not giuen at all. After that the gates of the Castel be shut in, there goeth a Cabo de squadra or Caporal, with two other soldiers round a|bout to view and reknowledge the same; and to know and see what strangers there remaine within;The gates being shut in, to reknow|ledge the place. as in the tauerns and victualing houses, in the butchery, in the bakery,  among the Gun-makers, the Gun-powder-makers,  Armourers and such like. And of all such as he findeth there, he giueth account and notice vnto the Captaine, or Alferez, or Sergeant; and these againe do aduertise the Castel|lane, and in his absence the Lieutenant. And in the day time a Gunner with an o|ther officer, goeth to reknowledge and view all the Artillery of the Castell, as wel those within, as those without in the Rauelines.
In the morning after that the drumme hath striken the Aluarado, or breaking vp or discharging of the watch,The discharging of the watch in the morning. the Alferes, with twenty souldiers and foure Ca|porals goeth vnto the lodging of the Castellane to receiue the keyes, and then go|eth to open the Tenaza, and Rauelines: and then commeth the Corps de guard of the principall gate, and ringeth a little bell to call together and assemble those that are at the watch: and after being together, they do open the Castell gates, with all the watch and other officers present in this maner.
The Castellanes Lieutenant remaineth at the first gate, in the inner part there|of, with one troupe or part of the souldiers, and the rest of the guard being issued out, they shut the same againe, and goe to open the second gate, where a Cap|taine and Sergeant with another troupe of souldiers do stay and remaine, and then the guard of the third gate being issued out with the Alferez, they shut also the second; and doe open none of these, neither do the souldiers disarme them|selues,

vntill the place of the Castell be very well reknowledged and thoroughly viewed.
Orders obserued in the day time at first gate the.In the first gate of the principall bridge, there remaines in the day time 50 souldiers at the ward, with a Caporall, who taketh account and charge of the opening and shutting thereof; and there is ioyntly with them the Alferez, who keepeth account and reckening with those which enter in from abrode: and if it be any stranger that commeth for some affaires or businesse into the Castel, there goeth with euery such, one souldier of the guard, notwithstanding that they haue passed thorough the hands of the Lieutenant, or in his absence through the hands of the Captaine of Infantery.
At the middle gate.At the middle gate there is another Corps de guard, containing other 30 souldiers, with two Caporals, and with these doth continually assist the Lieute|nant of the Castell, a Captaine of infantery, and a Sergeant. And there is the as|sembly and concourse of all the souldiers; so that besides those which be of the watch, there is continually 70 or 80 other souldiers, or more.
At the inneo gate.At the gate within the Castell there is 16 souldiers, and with them one Capo|porall.
Betwixt ten and eleuen of the clocke in the day time they shut the gates, to go vnto their dinner,Their dinner time. and then there goeth vpon the walles, eight souldiers with an officer, which do go the Round and Contra Round, whilest the rest bee at dinner.
The souldiers do remaine at their dinner time one houre, and in opening the Castell gates againe,Changing their wardes. they chaunge the postes or wardes vntill three of the clocke; and at that houre againe they go and chaunge them a fresh, vntill it bee night.
And in the opening of the gates after dinner, they obserue the same order as they did in the morning. They haue a consideration and reguard, if the day do in|crease or diminish,Order after din|ner. as concerning the deuiding of the houres, and in opening and shutting the gates, according to the same order.
There hangeth at euery post or watch turret vpon the walles, a little bell at each,A little bell at euery watch tur|ret. of seuerall soundes, wherewith the Sentinels do answer one another euery quarter or halfe houre.
All the day there goeth continually two souldiers the Round and Contra ound;The order of Round and con|tra Round in th day.
A regard to the Artillery. the which do chaunge, and are relieued by their quarters (as are in like sort the Sentinels vpon the walles) hauing a care and reguard vnto the Artillery, and to see if any persons not belonging to the Castell, doth come vp vpon the same, without licence of the Castellane, or his Lieutenant: and finding any such person in such manner, they giue knowledge thereof vnto the Castellane or vnto his officers, to the end that the cause might be knowne why any such doth mount vp vnto the walles.
Euery one of the Caporals that are within the Castell, hath his quarter assig|ned him with his squadra,Quarters assig|ned. and euery night doth visite the souldiers in the same; and see whether they haue their bullets, powder, match, and all other armes in a readinesse; and whether any souldier do lodge or sleepe without the Castell by night, without leaue and licence of his superior officer.
And euery morning before the opening of the gates,Before the ope|ning of the gate, the Caporals du|ty. the said Caporals do giue an account particularly vnto the Captaine of al the faults in this sort committed the which are punished according to the orders that be prouided and made for euery matter concerning the sayd Castell.
Also the higher officers and Caporals haue their quarters deuided  appoin|ted,Their order if the Alarme be giuen. where euery one doth know whither to repaire with the soldiers of his charge, if the Alarme be giuen.
Euery Saturday doth an officer with sixe souldiers go and visite and reknow|ledge all the Contra Mines.To reknowledge the Contra mines.
The Castellane, one key, the Lieu|tenant another
The Castellane hath one key of the chest, where all the keyes are locked, and the Lieutenant keepeth another, to the end that if any suddaine occasion be of|fered, repaire might be made vnto him which is next at hand: these keyes are not the ordinary keyes.
And thus, all these things being knowne and well considered, any Castellane, or Captaine of any Fortresse or place of defence, may alter, adde, or diminish that which vnto him shall seeme good, for the good gouernement and defence of his place of charge.




The Conclusion.
Thus hauing finished in fine these Military discourses, wherein I haue marched farther then I meant at the first, drawne on (Gentlemen) by your diuerse and curi|ous demaundes, and what reformations I haue herein desired, or what amisses  errors I haue herein committed, I yeelde the same to be considered and refor|med, by the wisedome of those whose experience, authority, and good indeuour may be answerable to the performance therof: desiring that the same may be dee|med as proceeding from a soldier, who more of zeale then of any desire to offend, hath penned these rough discourses: wishing that himselfe, and all others, may take occasion thereby to amend what is in euery of vs amisse. Beseeching our heauenly Chieftaine,Iehouah, our heauenly Chief|taine. Iehouah, thas as herein, so in all other inconueniences, any waie hindering the florishing state of our Noble Common-weale, the necessitie of this,  euery other action may take such roote in the beholders thereof, as that, with such conuenient regard as they ought, they will endeuour, euery man in his degree, the redresse and wished reformation of the same; with the due regard of our daungerous times: each honest man (of what degree soeuer) inuesting himselfe with the honourable habite of the true feare of God, vnfained loy|alty to our good Queene and Prince, perfect fidelity to our countrie, and syn|cere loue and affection to our wiues, children, and friends: and finally respect|ing the generall reputation and honour of our Realme and nation.


The end of the sixt and last booke.





A Table, shevving the signification of sundry forraine words, vsed in these discourses.
_GEntle Reader, for as much as in these Military discourses, I haue vsed some words and termes, somwhat straunge vnto such as haue not frequented forraine warres, nor haue anie great insight in forraine languages, I haue therefore thought good both to declare the signification of such words, and al|so to shew my reasons for vsing the same.
First you are to vnderstand that most of our termes now vsed in warres are deriued from straungers; as the French, the Italian, the Spaniard and the Dutch; wherin euery one almost haue their seuerall pronuntiation; therefore I hold it good, to vse such war termes and words, as we do borrow from straungers (as most languages doe borrow some, more or lesse, one of another) neare after the same nature, orthographie  accent, as those nations do, from whom they are deriued: and not to pronounce and vse them o|uer corruptly, as we commonly doe. As for example. The word Caporall, which is a meere Italian, and also vsed by the French, we corruptly do both write and pro|nounce Corporall: for Caporall doth signifie the head and chiefe of a squadra, or small company of souldiers: and is an officer ensigning and gouerning (in his degree) the sayd company: and is in Spanish more aptly called Cabo de esquadra which is the head of a small squadra of 20 or 25 souldiers. And againe, wee vse both to pronounce and write, Core de guard; which by the French is written Corps de guard, and by the Italian and Spaniard, Corpo de guardia; which signi|fieth the body of a watch: the which French or Italian word I haue rather vsed in my writing, then our corrupt English terme. Moreouer wee both pronounce and write the word Canuasada, the which (in truth) ought to be written and pro|nounced Camisada, being a Spanish tearme; and doth signifie the inuesting a shirt ouer the soldiers apparell or armour; the which is vsed in the night time when any suddaine exploit or peece of seruice is to be put in practise vpon the e|nemy, vnexpected or vnseene: to the end, that in the darkenesse of the night, the attempters may thereby the better one know and discerne another. These few words and termes, I suppose sufficient for my reasons. And for the signification of all other straunge and forraine words by me vsed, I will here following parti|cularly set downe, in order of alphabet, as I shall call them to memory.


A
Abanderado, is a souldier vvhich carrieth the Ensigne in steede of the Ensigne-bearer some|times.
Al'arma, is a vvord vsed among men of vvarre, at times of the enemies suddaine approching, and at their discouerie, and doth signifie, to armes or weapons.
Alferez, is a Spanish vvord, and signifieth the Ensigne bearer.
Alguazil, a Spanish vvord, is an officer attendant on the Campe-maister Generall, to apprehend offenders, and to see execution done.
Alerta, an Italian vvord vsed vnto the souldiers, vvhen there is any suspition of the enemy; and signifieth to be vvatchfull, carefull and ready
Alvarado, a Spanish vvord, and is the discharging of the morning vvatch, by the sound of the drumme.
Ambuscado, a Spanish vvord, and signifieth any troupe or company of soldiers either foot or horse, lodged secretly in some couert, as in vvoods, hollow vvayes, behind bankes, or such like; to entrappe the enemy secretly attending his comming.
Aquaducts, are conduits to cary or conuay vvater into any Citie, Castell, or Citadell.
Armada, a Spanish vvord, is a Nauy of ships for vvarre, or one great ship of vvarre.
Artillaria, a forraine vvord, and is that vvhich vve call the great Ordinance.




B
Bando, a Spanish vvord, and signifieth, an act, or law made by the Generall and Counsell of war, in the Campe, and published by sound of the drumme or trumpet vnto the souldiers.
Bisognio or Bisonnio, a Spanish or Italian vvord, and is, as vve terme it, a raw souldier, vnex|pert in his weapon, and other Military points.
Burgonet, a French vvord, is a certaine kind of head-peece, either for foote or horsemen, couering the head, and part of the face and cheke.




C
Cabo de esquadra or Caporall, a Spanish vvord, is the head or chiefe vnder the Captaine of a small number of souldiers, in number 20 or 25, or more or lesse, according as the company is deuided into.
Caporal, the Italian vvord, is as Cabo de esquadra in Spanish.
Cabo de Camara, a Spanish vvord, is a souldier vnder the Caporall, and is the chiefe ouer euery 10 or 12 souldiers.
Camarada, a Spanish vvord, is a small number of 11 or 12 soldiers, and is the one halfe of a squa|dra, being vnited together in their lodging, and diet, and friendship, the chiefe man of whom is the Cabo de Camara.
Camisada, a Spanish vvord, and doth signifie the inuesting or putting on of a shirt ouer the souldi|ers apparell or armour; the vvhich is vsed in the night time, vvhen any suddaine exploit or peece of seruice is to be put in practise vpon the enemy, vnexpected or vnseene, to the ende that the attempters may thereby the better one know and discerne another.
Campania, an Italian vvord, and is a field.
Campania Raza, an open field vvithout hedge, ditch, or other incombrance, razed playne.
Campe-maister, in Spanish Maestro del Campo, is a Colonell: being the chiefe Commander or officer ouer one Regiment or Tertio.
Camp maister Generall, in Spanish, Maestre del Campo Generall, is a great Commander, and is with vs the high Marshall of the field.
Castellano, is the Captaine or Commander of a Citadell, or Castel, as in Millan, Antwerp, Metz, and such other places.
Cannonera, a Spanish word, and is the place or roome where the Cannon is placed in a bulwarke.
Casamatta, a Spanish word, and doth signifie a slaughter-house, and is a place built low vnder the wall or bulwarke, not arriuing vnto the height of the ditch, seruing to scowre the ditch, annoying the enemy when he entreth into the ditch to skale the wall.
Cauagleria, an Italian woord, and is the Companies of souldiers seruing on horsebacke, of what sort soeuer.
Cauaglere, an Italian word, and signifieth a Gentleman seruing on horsebacke, but in fortificati|ons, a Caualiere is a mount or platforme of earth, built and raised high, either within or without the wall for to plant great Ordinance vpon.
Caualliere  Cauallio, is a high mount or platforme of earth raised very high, so that the Artillery vpon the same, may shoote ouer the walles and bulwarkes, to scoure and cleare the fields all about.
Centre, a French vvord, is the middle of a battell, or other things.
Centinell, a Spanish vvord, and signifieth the souldier vvhich is set to vvatch at a station or post, a certaine distance from the Corps de guard, or in a certaine litle garret or vvatch house vpon the vvalles, or at certaine places in the field without the ring of the Campe.
Centuria, vvas amongst the Romaines, a companie of Souldiers to the number of 100: whose Captaine vvas called Centurio.
Cohort, was, amongest the Romaines, the 10 part of a Legion.
Chieffront, a French vvord, is the arming for the forehead of the horse.
Conuoye, a French vvord, is a certaine guard of souldiers, sent to conduct and guard, victuall, victualers, marchants, munition, and such like, from one place vnto another.
Contra Round, an Italian vvord, is a certaine number of commanders and officers going, visiting the Corps de guard, vvatches, Sentinels, and also the Roundes, to see if they performe their duties and be vigilant and carefull.
Colonell or Coronell, a french vvord, is the commander of a regiment of certaine companies of souldiers, called with the Spaniards Maestre del Campo.
Contrafront, or spurre, is the inner part of the vvall of a bulwarke.
Citadella, an Italian vvord, is a Castell or spacious fort, built, not onely to defend the City, but also to keepe the same in awe and subiection, as that at Antwerp, Millan, and Na|ples, c.
Cornet, a French vvord, is the ensigne vvhich is caried by the Launciers.
Corps de guard, a French vvord, is the body of a vvatch, of a certaine number of souldiers set for such purposes.
Corslet, a French vvord, is the armour of a foote souldier, complete.
Criniere, a French vvord, is the armings of the horse mane or necke.
Cuisset, is the armings of a horseman, for his thigh vnto the knees.
Cuyratz, a French vvord, is the arming of the body, the breast part and backe part only, either of horseman or footman.
Colours, a vvord vsed by vs, for the Ensigne, being of variable colours.
Curtine, a French vvord, is the long vvall running leuell from bulwarke to bulwarke.




D E
Enginero, a Spanish vvord, is one skilfull in fortifications, and other machines and stratagems for warre.
Escalada, a Spanish vocable, and is the skaling of a wall or fort with ladders.
Esquadra, a Spanish vvord, is a certaine part of a company of souldiers of some 20 or 25 souldiers vvhose chiefe is che Caporall.




F
Fila, an Italian vvord, is the order, row, or line of all such souldiers as do stand or march conse|quently on after another, in ordinance or aray of battell, extending from the front vnto the traine of the battell.
Flancque, a French vvord, is the side of any squadron of men.
Fronte, a French vvord, is the face or forepart of a squadron or battell.
Front, is also the forepart of a vvall or bulwarke.
Forlorne Sentinell, a compound vvord of Dutch and French: and is a souldier either horseman

or footeman, set to vvatch and espie the enemies desseignes, neare vnto the enemy, and with|out the vvord: for sundry consideratins.




G
Garrita, a Spanish vvord, is a little vvatch house or towre, for the souldier to stand in at Sen|tinell, seated vpon the walles.
Grueues, a French vvord, is the arming for the legges, from the knees downeward.
Guantlet, a French vocable, is the arming or gloue to the hand.
Guidon, a French vvord, is the ensigne vvhich is borne vvith the shot on hosebacke.




H
Hargubuzier a French vvord, and is the souldier, carying and vsing a peece called a calliuer or Hargubuz.
Harguluttier, an Italian and French vvord, and is the souldier seruing on horsebacke, vnar|med, vsing a calliuer with a snap hance.




I
Infanteria, an Italian vvord, is all sort of foote souldiers.




K L
Launcier, a French vvord, is a souldier on horsebacke, armed and vsing a Launce for his chiefe vveapon, but not so heauily armed, as is the man at armes, and therefore of some called a Demilance.
Legion, amongst the auncient Romaines, vvas certaine companies of their people of vvarre: con|sisting of 5 or 6000 footemen, and 300 horsemen.




M
Maniple, is a part of so many rankes and files of souldiers thoroughout a battell or squadron of pikes, drawne foorth to march thorough any straight or narrow passage.
Maestre del Campo, vvith the Spaniards, is as our Coronell vvith vs.
Mayordome, is vvith the Italian and Spaniard, the steward of a house; but in vvar he is the stew|ard and Guardian of the munition for vvarre.
Moderne warre, is the new order of vvarre vsed in our age,
Miditerraneall, is Inland countrie, or countries distant from the sea.
Maritime, is sea coast countrie, or countries adioyning vnto the sea.




N O
Orecch one, an Italian vocable, is the part of a bulwarke vvhich is called by some, the pome, guard, or shoulder.




P
Parapet, an Italian vvord, is the vpper part of the vvall, vvhich shadoweth the souldiers from the sight and annoyances of the enemy.
Pendent, is the bending or slopenesse of the Parapet outward.
Pelmell, a French word, and signifieth the mingling of men together, buckling by the bosome one with another.
Percluis, a French word, is the grate, either of iron or wood, framed within a gate or port of a citie or Castell, to be let fall or slipped downe, to barre the enemies entrance.
Pectron, a French word: is the arming of the brest of the horse.
Place of armes generall: is the place of assemblie, where the people of warre are ranged in order of battell.
Phalanx, a Greeke word: an order of imbattelling of men in one graund square, vsed by the Gre|cians.
Pietranelli, an Italian word, and is the souldiers seruing on horsebacke, well armed with a paire of Cuyrasses, and weaponed with a fire-locke peece or snap-hance.
Pistollier, a French word; and is the souldier on horse backe, armed as the Pietranell, weaponed with a pistoll.
Pouldron, a French word, and is the shoulder arming.
Posta, a Spanish word, and is the place or station where the Sentinell souldier is set to stand at guard and watch.




Q
Quarter, is the part of a Campe, whereon any companies, or numbers of horsemen or footemen be quartered and lodged.
Quarteret, is the diminutiue of quarter.




R
Ranke, is the row, order or aray of soldiers standing shoulder by shoulder, extending from flanke to flanke throughout the battell or ordinance.
Rauelline, or Tenaza, a Spanish word: and is the vttermost boundes of the wals of the Castell or skances without the walles.
Rampier, a French word, and is a fortification or wall of earth.
Regiment, a Dutch word, is a number of sundry companies vnder the charge of a Colonell.
Recoia, a Spanish word: and signifieth the call or assembling of the souldiers together into the place of armes, by the sound of the drumme.
Ronda, an Italian and Spanish word: and is a company of certaine souldiers and officers, which do go visiting the Corps de guards, Sentinels and watches at sundry houres in the night, to cause them obserue order: and to see whether they be vigilant and ready.
Roupt, a French word; and signifieth the breaking of a squadron, troupe, or battell, and turning to flight.




S
Sallie, a French word: and is an issuing foorth of men to skirmish or fight: and is also a secret issue for the souldiers to passe out of a wall, bulwarke, or fort.
Srere, a French word: and is when the souldiers in squadron do ioyne and locke close together, thereby to become the more strong.
Serracenesca, a Spanish word: and is the percluis or grate of a gate.
Skance, a Dutch word: and is a small fortresse built of turffe and earth, commonly vsed in the low countries.
Scalada, a Spanish word, is a skaling of a wall with ladders.
Spontone, an Italian word: is a small long instrument of iron, sharpe at the ende, to thrust thorough anie loade of haie, straw, or such like, to proue if any souldiers lie hidden within the same.
Squadra, a Spanish word: and is a certaine part of a company of some 20, or 25 souldiers, whose chiefe is the Caporall.
Squadron, a Spanish word, and is a great number of souldiers pikemen reduced in arraies to march and also is a certaine companie of musketiers framed in order to march of fight, and is also a certaine number of men, aranged in order to march, or charge.




T
Taladro, a Spanish word, and is an instrument or engine to mount any peece of ordinance vp into

Cariage.
Taisses, a French vvord, and is the arming of the thighes, annexed vnto the forepart of the Corslet.
Terraplene, an Italian vvord, and is the earth that is rampired and filled vp vnto the inside of any vvall or bulwarke.
Tertio, a Spanish vvord, and is a Regiment of souldiers.
Tertiare, a Spanish vvord, and is to third the pike, either to beare the same vpon his shoulder, or to charge the same euer hand.
Trauessa, a Spanish vvord, and is a flanker of a wall.
Tragon, is the reareward of the squadron, or battell.
Trench, a French vvord, is the ditch about the vvall.
Tenaza, a Spanish vvord, is a little hold or Keepe made of one Curtine or Bulwarke.




V
Vanbraces, a French vvord, and is the armings for the arme from the pouldrons downeward to the hand vvrest,
Vanguard, a French vvord, and signifieth the forepart of the battell.
Vollie, a French vvord, and is vvhen any kind of shot do discharge altogether.




W
The Word, vvhich vve call the vvatch Word, and is by the French called Mot de guet, and by the Spaniard En nombre: vvich is a vvord or name deliuered by the Generall or other high Commander, to be giuen vnto other officers and souldiers, standing Sentinell at their postes, vvhereby their vvatches are nightly gouerned, c.


Toute Puissance, honneur, glorie  louange, so it  nostre bon Dieu eternel.
FINIS.




BARRET
Nella . . . . . la .
Nella fidelta finiro la vita.






