





Gather my Saints together vnto mee. Psal 50. 5.
THE
GLORY
OF
THEIR
TIMES
OR
The Liues of y^e Primitiue Fathers.
Co~tayning their Chiefest Actions,
workes, Sentences, and
Deaths.
Aske thy father, and hee will shew thee,
Aske thy Elders, and they will tell thee. Deu. 32. 7.
LONDON.
Printed by I: Okes. and are to be sold
in Pauls Church-yard at the
white Lyon.
1640.
G Glouer. fecit.





To the Reader on the Religious and
Illustrious Lives of the Pri|mitive
Fathers.
_THe publication of a Book doth
draw on much expectation;
but this Worke doth not only
satisfie the Readers curiosity,
but even draw him to won|der
and admiration. For was
not the Creation of Heaven
and Earth most wonderfull and glorious? For
when there was nothing but rudis indigestaque
moles quam dixere Chaos, a rude lumpe void of
forme, then God made the Sun, Moon, and Stars
also, and set them in the Firmament to give light
upon the Earth, and this natural Light the World
enjoyed in the beginning: but afterward out of
the Chaos of blind Ignorance, God to the
Worlds greater amazement created and ordai|ned
the Firmament of Religion, and placed there|in
the Sun of Righteousnesse our Saviour Jesus
Christ then clouded under Types and Figures,
and also the Moon which was the Primitive
Church round about which the Fathers shined

like Stars of severall magnitudes; but all gli|stering
with light of Life and Learning. Here
is a poesie gathered out of old Gardens, not decayed nor
withered with Time or Age, but as
fresh and fragrant as from the newest stocke:
This savoury meat hath God brought to hand:
Here is swee out of the strong; let your soule
taste it, and then blesse God for sending such
able men into his Harvest, in the innocencie of
the Church, and in the time of the hottest perse|cutions:
These were Gods Champions on earth,
who did fight his battails, and defend his cause:
even reproving Kings and Princes for his sake:
These were called Fathers of honour, and there|fore
let us honour them, because they honoured
God; and though we cannot imitate them so neere
in their lives; as wee ought, yet let us strive to
imitate them as neere as we can in our minds, and
let us follow thousands of Martyrs, through tem|porall
death, to eternall life: and with Nazian|zen
give our selves wholly to the performances of
all Christian duties: For these Primitive Fathers
they all gloried and tooke delight in their suffe|rings;
and bid large profers for Heaven, come
what torment could come, even the losse of their
lives; for by their humility and patience, they
both triumphed over Tyranny and Death, and
now have obtained for their reward the eternall
Crown of Glory, which they enjoy and weare.
When any of these Holy Fathers met at Gene|rall
Councels concerning any weighty cause about
setling Religion, or suppressing of any Heresie

sprung in the Church: with what devotion re|verence
did they meet? not trusting in their own
knowledge, sharpnesse of wit, strength of brain,
deepnesse of judgement, as it were in an arme of
flesh: they knew that there was a Divine power
who ruled and governed all their actions and in|tentions;
they trusted in Him that hath the Key of
David, opening and no man shutting, and prayed
to the Lord the Father of our Lord Jesus, to di|rect
their cogitations, this was the way they took
and persevered in: And should such good men
as these bee forgotten, such Pillars of Truth
as these not seene and made manifest: pity it were
that their worth should be obscured, or that the
grave should bury their deserts: All which time
hath now brought to light,Most of their Effigies were obtained, as they are placed before their Works  some out of divers Books of holy Orders, where they be figured for Saints, o|thers out of severall Li|braries  pla|ces of Anti|quitie: but look not so much upon the outward figure of their bodies as the inward figure of their minds. and collected together
in one Volume: the use and fruit of which I
wish to every Christian man.
This Work being then a Constellation of Divine
Lights, that were visibly seene in the East and
Westerne Horizon of the Church, and are here
set in their severall places and Centuries of
yeares wherein they lived: shewing not onely their
mortall aspect by curious and lively brasse Sculp|tures
representing their Effigies and Countenan|ces,
but also the divine influences of their souls
in their lives, actions, and divine sentences; for
their Seraphick Contemplations were full of
sublime and sweete expressions; that as their fa|ces
were full of Reverend lines of gravity, so did
their Writings abound with sententious lines of
Piety. Insomuch that these words may justly be

subscribed under their severall Pictures. Exempla
plus dictis valent; facta mea non dicta vos
Christianos milites sequi volo, nec disciplinam
modo, sed exemplum etiam  me petere: Ex|amples
prevaile more than Precepts. I would
have all Christian Souldiers follow my steps, in
works as well as words, and in your lives make
me your Rule and Example: for, Omnia prosper
Deum sequentibus eveniunt, adversa spernenti|bus,
for Gods servants and followers are always
fortunate and blessed, but his foes miserable and
wretched. In a word, the faces of the holy Pri|mitive
Fathers, are here the object of your sight,
their Graces of your knowledge and understan|ding,
their Sentences may serve for your minds
illustration and illumination, and their Lives for
your practice, conversation and imitation, and
in all, they have been and are accounted, sacra Ec|clesiae
Lumina, holy Lights of the Church shining
once on Earth, and now in Heaven; and therefore
all that would become Stars in glory after this life,
let them imitate these resplendent Stars of Grace,
that hereafter they may shine in glory with Christ
Jesus the Sonne of Righteousnesse in his Fathers
Kingdome for ever. Amen.
Typographus



The Names of all the Primitive
Fathers contained in this Booke.

Philo Iudeus.
Ann.
Mundi 4024.
Iosephus. 4057


Ann. Christi
Ignatius. 71
Polycarpus. 71
Dionysius. 71


Saeculum secundum
ab anno 100, ad
200.
Iustinus Mart. 150
Irenaeus. 170


Ab 200, ad 300.
Tertullianus. 204
Clemens Alexandri|nus.
204
Origenes Adamanti|s. 226
Gregorius Thaum. 233
St. Cyprianus. 250
Arnobius. 285
Lactantius Firmia|nus.
290


Ab anno 300,
ad 400.
Eusebius Caesari. 329
St. Athanasius. 340
Hilarius Pictav. 355
Cyrillus Hieros. 365
Ephrem Syrus. 365
Basilius Mag. 370
Gregorius Nazan|zenus.
370
Epiphanius. 370
S. Ambrosius. 374

Gregorius Nyssenus. 380
Theodoretus. 389
S. Hieronymus. 390
S. Chrysostomus 398


Ab anno 400,
ad 500.
S. Augustinus. 420
Cyrillus Alexan. 430
Petrus Chrysologus. 440
Prosper Aquitan. 445


Ab anno 500,
ad 600.
Fulgentius. 529


Ab anno 600
ad 700.
S. Gregorius Mag|nus.
604.
Isidorus Hispal. 630


Ab anno 700,
ad 800.
Beda venerabilis. 731
Iohannes Damasce|nus.
731


Ab anno 800,
ad 900.
Nicephorus. 828


Ab anno 900, ad
1000, ad 1100.
Theophylactus. 1071
Anselmus Cant. 1081


Ab anno 1100,
ad 1200.
Rupertus Tuitien|sis.
1119
S. Bernardus. 1130
Petrus Lombardus.
1145


Ab anno 1200,
ad 1300.
Alexander Hales
1245
Bonaventura. 1265
Thomas Aquinas.
1265






An. Mundi 4024. Philo Iudaeus.

PHILO IVDAEVS.

_THis Philo was a Iew of Alex|andria,
of the stocke of the
priests, and hee is deservedly
placed among the Ecclesiasti|call
Writers, because that in
his workes hee sets forth
the prayses of the Christians.
He was sent Embassador by the Iews his Coun|trimen
to Rome, to plead for his whole Nation,
and to qualifie Caius the Emperours anger, who
was possessed against the Iews for divers crimes
and enormities which they had committed;
hoping by his endevour and wisdome to set
them right againe in the Emperours good opi|nion:

so testifies Photius, and Saint Ierome, and
Suidas, and Eusebius: hee flourished in the fifti|eth
yeere after Christs Incarnation, in the
Reigne of Nero the Emperour, the occasion
that he was sent to Rome was thus, whereas be|tweene
the Iews and Graecians, inhabiting Alex|andria,
there fell a great sedition, three choice
men of either side was set apart to plead their
matters and grievances before Caius. Appian
then being the chief for the Graecians, objected
many and enormous crimes against the Iews a|mongst
others that they would not, neither did
give that due honour and obedience to the Ro|man
Emperour, which they ought: for whereas
through all the Roman Provinces, there were
Temples and Altars built to Caius, that hee as
well as other Gods might be worshipped: these
Iews onely of all others denied to performe any
such respect; neither would they sweare by the
Name of Caesar: Hereupon this Philo the bro|ther
of Alexander Alabarchus, being an excellent
and wise philosopher, and an excellent man for
all sorts of Learning, and knew well how to
guide his passion, that nothing could move
him to wroth; in despight of Appion, and all
those that strove to exasperate Caius against
him and the Iews, fitted himselfe to cleere his
Nation of those foule aspersions: but Caesar
would not heare him, but commanded him (in
a great fury) to depart his presence: whereupon
Philo turning himselfe to his Countrimen that
came along with him from their Nation, as

Associates, spake thus to them, Now let us be of
good courage, and undaunted hearts, for though
the Emperour be against us; yet God that rules
him, is for us. This Iosephus testifies of him in
his eighth Booke and tenth Chapter of his An|tiquities
of the Iews. And thus saith a learned
man of him:
That the noble and couragious heart hath
still this property, to be alwayes doing things
honest and vertuous; not onely for his own par|ticular,
but for his Countries good, though it
be with losse of credit, or exile, and with the
frowne of princes; for true worth indeed de|pendeth
of Vertue; and all other things are of
Fortune. For that man, that is truly magnani|mous,
and of a great spirit, (as was this Philo)
doth continually carry himselfe upright under
any burden, be it never so weighty: and nothing
doth happen amisse or displeasing unto him, be
it never so difficult and hard to be borne: for a
Wise man knoweth his owne forces, and with
his vertue he vanquisheth all sudden accidents.
This Philo was eloquent of speech, rich in
sentences, deep and profound in the explication
of the sacred Scriptures: hee was excellent as|well
in the Pythagorean, Platonicke, as in the
philosophy of Aristotle, insomuch that he was
counted one that excell'd others. So also was
he renowmed for his skill in the Greeke, that he
was held the chiefe of his time. Hence the pro|verbe
came: Aut Plato Philonizat, aut
Philo Platonizat: Either Plato imitates Philo,

or Philo Plato, because of their congruity in
writing.
The Romans in Claudius Reigne did so ad|mire
his Works, that they esteemed them wor|thy
to be kept safe in a publike Library, as Mo|numents
of his famous Learning, hee was ad|mirable
for his threefold explanation of Scrip|ture,
by the Literall, Morall, and Allegoricall
sence, so that most of the Ancient Doctours of
the Church have imitated him, and have cald
him the Inventor, as Sixtus Senensis doth re|late
Possevi.
As hee was also famous for his Learning, so
for his parentage being of great descent, and
executed Offices of the chiefest esteeme with
credit and fidelity: and it is reported of all, that
Caius the Emperour, because in the Iewish Tem|ples,
hee was not worshipped by these Titles,
JOVI ILLUSTRI NOVO CAIO, and
being incensed by Appion against the Iewes, but
specially against this Philo, that hee intended to
have slain him; but failing in that, hee did with
extreme violence persecute and afflict the Iewes
every where; but chiefly those that lived in A|lexandria:
This Philo, notwithstanding, being
of an admirable courage and vivacitie, did pub|likely
deny that ever such prophanenesse and
grosse Idolatry should be practised among the
Servants of God, especially themselves who had
fled thither for the Truth.
And that you may fully see what a rare In|strument
this Philo was for al sorts of Learning,

either Philosophicall or Theologicall: Let his
Mysticall Expositions of Moses Writings ex|presse
it. Hee did throughly, saith one, Search
the Entrails and Bowels of them: by which
leaving the literall sence, hee directed men to a
higher end, , even
to gaine eternall life, and the perfection of all
Vertue. Nay, saith Iosephus: Philo was so ex|cellent
in his studies for copiousnesse of Inven|tion,
for gravity of Expressions, for giving
light to dark words, that all the Ancients gave
him credit for Wit and Learning, so that many
did follow his foot-steps: as Clemens, Gregory,
Nazianzen: and among the Latine Fathers,
Saint Ambrose, who confesseth, that he exchan|ged,
nay, borrowed many excellent things of
Philo. There are some Fathers that have bla|med
him a little for his too too inquisitive
braine, and doe conclude that Hee and Origen
were in some things fabulous and ridiculous,
but all wise men know, that the greatest Lights
of the Church have had some blemishes. Ber|nardus
non videt omnia.
Therefore, as a Wiseman saith, Let no man
upbraid another man with his misery; for weak|nesse
and infirmities is common to all mortall
men; and no man knows how soone hee may be
over-taken and have his failings; for it is an in|jury
to laugh at anothers infirmities: when
the best of men are incident to the like im|perfections.
But this Philo was also well skild in Histories,

wherein hee showes not onely a rare commen|dation
of Vertues, but declares himselfe a sharp
hater of Vices: so that even they which spake
against him for some of his Allegories, give
him a joint praise for his Historicall parts and
knowledege; the time and place wherein hee li|ved
was full of Learning; hee did live in the
Reignes of Tiberius, Caius and Claudius: And
so having done so much, hee departed this hu|mane
life, about the 50 yeere after Christ. His
usuall saying was, That there is nothing better for
a man then to be borne, nor anything better for
him than to die soone and quickly; For Death is
the medicine of all evils incident to man.
Haec legere potes in praef. Ioseph.

His Works
1 Of the life of a Wise
man.
2 Of ordering our
Life.
3 Of the Confusion of
Languages.
4 Of the nature of
foure footed Beasts,
three Books.
5 Of things subject
to sense.
6 Of Learning.
7 Of the Possessours
of Divine Things.
8 Of the Division of
unequall things.
9 Of the three Ver|tues
or Graces.
10 Of Nature and In|vention.
11 Of Covenants.
12 Of the successe of
Generation.
13 Of the change of
names.
14 Of the Giants.
15 Of the five Bookes
of Moses.
16 Of Dreams.
17 Of the Tabernacle.
18 Of a Contemplative
Life.

19 Of Husbandry.
20 Of Drunkennesse.
21 Of Sacrifices.
22 Of Providence.
23 Of Idaea's.
24 Of Alexander.
25 Of Creatures.
26 That every unwise
man is but a slave.
These Trithemius, fol. 4


There are more of his Works extant.
2 Books of Allegories.
3 Of the Cherubims.
4 Of the Sacrifice of
Cain and Abel.
Of the confusion of Lan|guages.
Of Gods Immutability.
Of Abrahams Iourny|ing.
Of Fortitude.
Of the Decalogue.
Of speciall Laws.
Of Circumcision.
Of Monarchie.
Of the Honor of Priests.
That an honest man is a
friend of Nobilitie.
Of Rewards and punish|ments.
Of Cursings.
Of his Embassage to
Caius.

These are all sufficient Witnesses of this
Mans pains and labour.



An. Mundi 4057. Flavius Iosephus.

FLAVIVS IOSEPHVS.

_HE was of no mean parentage,Ruffi. c 9. Niceph. c. 18. lib. 2. Euseb l. 3. c. 9. or De|scent;
but of an ancient stock of the
Priests: and of that Line which
was the chiefe of the foure and
twenty, and by his Mothers side was of the
Bloud Royall, shee being of the Family of the
Asamonaeans, who a long time not onely held
the Priesthood of that Nation, but the King|dome,
his great Grand-father was called Symon
Psellus, at what time Hircanus the sonne of Sy|mon
the High-priest,Ioseph. p. 989. the first of that name held
the Priesthood, hee was borne the first yeare of
Caius Caesar, and had three sonnes, Hircanus the
eldest, Iustus and Agrippa: in Vespasians Time

this Genealogie and Succession was truly kept
in publike Tables: as his parents were great and
Noble, so their Integrity and uprightnesse was
well knowne to all Ierusalem, hee was bred up
from his Childhood in good Discipline, and
had an excellent memory, and quick understan|ding:
so that the High-priest and Elders of the
City much regarded him: hee passed through
all the three Sects of Pharisees, Sadduces, and
Essenes: and did most approve the life of the
Pharisees, and did in his strictnesse of life imitate
one Banus, who liv'd solitarily by fruites and
herbes: At two and twenty yeares, he professed
himselfe a Pharisie, which is much like to the
Stoicks amongst the Graecians, and presently
tooke a Voyage to Rome, to plead the cause of
some honest and good men, who for little or
no cause were bound and carried before the
Emperour. In his Voyage the Ship was cast
away, yet he with others, by Gods blessing, with
swimming, saved their lives, and did appeare
at Rome, and got speciall familiarity with Ali|turus
a Iew, who was in great esteeme with the
Emperour; by whose helpe hee got to be made
knowne to Poppaea, the Wife of the Emperour,
and so freed those Priests from their bonds, and
further dangers, and was rewarded by her with
great gifts, and so returned home againe.
Hee was in his outward behaviour and man|ners
courteous and  of humanity: And in
his speeches affble and friendly to all, making
himselfe pleasing and agreeable to most men, as

much as in him lay: and acquainted himselfe
only with such as were good and vertuous; for
in so doing he shunned the hatred of one, and
was sure to get the favour of the other: For
Wisemen accustome themselves gladly and wil|lingly
to indure things with patience, to the in|tent,
they may the better do it, when they shall
be forced to sufferance.
He was in his time a famous Warriour,In vita Ios. 1029. and
performed great Exploits, hee was taken priso|ner
alive at the siege of Iotopata, and was kept
with great care and command, by a company of
Souldiers.
In the time of his imprisonment, which was
but short, being about five dayes, hee did write
many things concerning the government of
man in affliction: And as a Wise man saith,
which is not impertinent; That afflictions on
earth are as so many good guides and Compa|nions
unto the godly, which, though of them|selves
unworthy, yet make their cause the bet|ter,
who aime at a higher end then the blinded
eyes of the ignorant can behold: and become
the Masters of their own hopes: before others
perceive them in trouble: For saith hee, The
Heavens are their only prospect, where they be|hold
the Creatour of Nature, in his height of
Wonder; and themselves are the Mine into
which they dive, to finde reason triumphant,
by which they discerne their insurrective passi|ons
and afflictions.
And as another saith, That it is good for a

man to live in the greatest assurance that hee can
possibly: howbeit, if hee be constrained to ha|zard
and adventure himselfe, it is more fit that
he contend and strive with it honestly, then to
shun and flie from it shamefully: considering
that all men are destinated to die: but Nature
hath only ordained and framed them that are
vertuous and wise, to die valiantly and couragi|ously;
and to beare afflictions patiently.
Vespasianus did much honour and respect him
for his Learning and Knowledge, and at his
command hee married a certaine Captive Vir|gin
of Caesarea, but lived not long with her, for
she went with the troops to Alexandria, and he
himselfe married another, and so with Titus was
sent to Hierusalem, where he was in great danger
of the Iews; for they esteemed him no better
then a Traitour and a Betrayer of their Nation:
but Titus slighted these clamours of the Vulgar:
but the City being taken, Titus gave him leave
to chuse something that might be beneficial for
him: but hee not desiring to be made rich with
the spoils of his Countrey, desired nothing but
the freedome of his body, and his Writings;
both which the Emperour did grant unto him.
Hee preferred study and knowledge before ho|nour
and riches; for he knew that the one soone
fadeth, and the other abideth for ever: For hee
held amongst all goods and pleasure of this life,
only wisdome was immortall: And we common|ly
see, that those to whom Riches most befall,
doe find sooner the end of their living, then of

their longing: Which consideration, hath caused
most wise men to vent these or the like speeches
concerning the infelicity of coveting Riches
before Knowledge: How miserable saith one,
should I bee, if I were the most richest of the
the world; with what a great burthen of evils
should I be over-whelmed? Why then should
a man torment himselfe for a thing that he must
necessarily leave? And why is hee not rather
content quietly with that which is needfull;
chiefly considering, that the fairest kinde of
wealth is for a man to be content in what estate
soever, that is, not to be too poore, nor yet too
farre off from poverty?
Hee set free abundance of his Kindred and
Friends which were fled into the Temple, and
did save them and theirs from the violence of
the Souldiers, to the number of a hundred and
fifty persons: so hee was sent by Titus with Ce|realis
with a thousand Horse to Tekoah, and
saved many of his Friends and Countrymen
by the way from misery and slavery, and got
some of them to bee released from their tor|ments.
Titus did so love him, that he gave him
great Possessions and Revenues, and tooke him
as his Companion when hee went for Rome.
Where hee was received with a great deale of
Honour, not only of Titus, but of Vespasianus
himselfe, and Domitianus and his Empresse; and
had an Annuall pension very large, given him by
the Emperour, and it was not taken from him
during life: he lived in Titus his owne Court in

great esteeme, but not without the envy of his
own Nation: his second Wife was of Creta a
Iewesse, and nobly descended, by whom hee had
two sonnes.
Nay, even Domitianus himselfe continued
favourable unto him, and punished with death
some of his Accusers.
Hee was excellent for Philosophy and Rheto|rick,Trithem. de Scrip. Ecc. fol. 5. l. 1.
and a famous Historiographer for his
time: he was for the excellencie of his Wit and
Learning, and singular uprightnesse of life much
admired of the Senate and People of Rome;
though being a Iew, yet hee did highly prayse
Christians,Ant. Iud. l. 18. and gave a famous Testimony of our
Lord Iesus Christ, as you may read in his Works
His Workes were so prized, that they with
great care were put into the publike Library by
the Romans, and hee after his death had a Statue
of Brasse set up for him by the Senate, and peo|ple
of Rome.
His life was long and full of paine and labour,
for hee lived under Vespasian and Titus, even to
the times of Trajan, in the hundred yeere after
Christ.
Eusebius is large in his praise, and so is Ruf|finus
and Hierome, and Nicephorus also, and
others, and amongst all the turmoils of warre
and destruction of his Country, hee set time to
write worthy things, which the Church of God
even to this day doe greatly esteeme for their
reality, fidelity, and truth, and here are regi|stred,
as Eusebius hath exprest them.


1 Of the Jews Anti|quities
20 Books.
2 Of the Wars of the
Jews in seven Books,
which hee not onely
writ in Greeke, but
also in his owne Lan|guage.
3 Against Appion the
Grammarian, two
accurate Books.
Of the force of Rheto|rick
one Book.

So after all things enjoying the love both of
the Emperour and Citizens of Rome, he depar|ted
this fraile and transitory life, and had so|lemne
Funerall Rites performed for him, and
was generally lamented of all good men.



An. Christi 71. S. Ignatius

S. IGNATIVS.

_IN the writing of this Fathers life, I
cannot but reverence his Antiquitie
and admire his Christian fortitude,
he is of such ancient extraction, that
he was one of those that enjoyed that for which
Saint Augustine wished, that is, to have seene the
Lord Iesus in the flesh, and though he did not as
old Simeon take him up in his armes, yet he be|held
him with his eyes, and embraced him with
his heart, and at last for his Name sake, endured
constant Martyrdome, and indeed it was a great
happinesse to behold Christ, who was the hope
of all: and therefore he himselfe spoke it, that
even Kings and Prophets have desired to see the

same. This great Star of the Church, is by other
Reverend Fathers reputed to have been twelve
yeeres old when our Saviour suffered. Hee was
the third Bishop of Antioch after Saint Peter,Eus. Eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 30.
or as Eusebius saith, the second. A man singular
for his Pietie, renowmed for his Love and
Zeale.
Dionysius the Areopagite, Saint Bernard, and
others report a famous saying of Saint Ignatius;
which hee uttered with sighes, and is extant in
his Epistle to the Romans, and it is this, ,
Amor meus crucifixus est, That is,
My Love is crucified. Either understanding by
the word Love, his Saviour Christ, whom hee
so dearly loved: or, else meaning that all his
Affections of this World were crucified, that is,
dead in him, according to that of Saint Pal,
Galat. 6. 14. The world is crucified unto mee,
and I unto the world. And no question, but
that our Saviour was planted deeply in his soul,
and for certainty, that he did see Christ after his
Resurrection, take his own words. Ego ver 
post resurrectionem in carne um vidi,In Ep. ad Smy.  ad Polycarp.  credo
quia sit: And truly I did see after his Resurrecti|on
in the flesh, and I do believe that it is He: and
hee sets down the time and persons, when and
before whom it was: Et quando venit ad Petrum
 adeos qui cum Petro erant. It was when hee
came to Peter, and to those that then were with
him, hee said, Touch and see, for a spirit hath not
flesh and bones as you see mee have, and they
touched him and believed: so that his own words

are sufficient proofs, but yet it is the consent of
all the Church Historians, as Eusebius and Saint
Ierome testifie,Ruffin. cap. 36. and Ruffinus.
As hee was led through Asia, with great cir|cumspection
by ten Souldiers, hee strived to do
good in all places whither hee came, for it may
be said of him as of the Apostles, That they
went about and confirmed the Churches: even
so this godly Ignatius with holy Discourses and
pious exhortations, did establish the Churches
in his Travels, and chiefly, (because at this time
Heresies began to be broached) hee gave them
speciall warning that they should beware and
shun them, keeping the Gospell of Jsus Christ
which they had received with simplicitie and
sincerity.Eusb Eccles Hist li. 3. c. 30. And that they should Mordicus adhae|rescere
Traditioni Apostolorum: Cleave close
to the doctrine and tradition of the Apostles,
which that it might be truly kept for ever,Biblioth. p|tam, Tom. . pag. 76. hee
thought it fit to be written out, he is stiled Di|vinus
Ignatius, Inclytissimus  ferventissimus
Martyr, that is, Divine Ignatius, a most famous
and fervent Martyr. Nay, Nicephorus goes be|yond
that title, and cals him ,
one that saw God, and one that was carried of
God:Niceph. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 35 For when he was a Child, Nicephorus re|ports
that our Saviour would take him up, and
shew him to his Disciples. And it may be that
this was one of the little Children that were
brought to Christ to touch them, and why not
that Childe, that Jesus took and set in the midst
of them, to learne them Humility? hee long

time lived with the Apostle,Niceph. Hist. lib. 13. cap. 8. and succeeded Euo|dius
(whom Saint Paul mentions) in the Bisho|prick
of Antioch, on a time in a Trance he saw
a Vision of Angels praising the blessed Trinitie
in distinct courses alternis Carminibus,Socrat. l. 6. . 9. by
singing of Verses by turnes. Whereupon he did
bring into the Church of Antioch, the forme of
Antiphonies or Anthemes, and from that, the o|ther
Churches even to this day do observe them.
Hee sate Bishop of Antioch nine yeeres, in
which time he did maynly build up the Church
of his Saviour, being alwayes wondrous strict
in reproving Superstition and Idolatry, in so
much that hee did not spare to reprehend the
superstition of the Emperour Trajan himselfe,
who then was at Antioch,Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 2.  19. and for that very
cause commanded him to be carried to Rome, to
be torne and devoured of Lions Well, when
he had visited the Churches of Smyrna, hee did
discourse with, and sent Letters to Ephesus, and
Magnesia, Troas, Philadelphiae, Rome, and to Po|lycarpus
himselfe. And this Polycarpe doh praise
them, for he gives this testimony of them, com|plectuntur
enim fidem, patientiam  aedificatio|nem
omnem quae ad Christum pertinet, That they
include and learne Faith, Patience, and edifying
in all things that make to the gaining of Christ:
and herefore worthy to be had in special esteem
in the Churches, nay, to be publikely and pri|vaely
read and remembred, he makes mention
of Onesimus in his Epistle to the Ephesians. In
his Epistle to the Magnesians, hee speaks of Da|mas

then Bishop there, in his Epistle to the Tral|lians,
hee mentions Polybius who then governed
it, hee intreats the faithfull that were at Rome,
not to be moved at his sufferings, nor to be sha|ken
from the faith, which hee had received, for
hee was ready and joyfull to suffer much for
the Name of Iesus:Euseb. li 3 and so the Church Histo|rians
have kept that Epistle to the Romans, with
great care: and Eusebius mentions it, nay, re|cords
it, and so doth La Bigne in his Bibliotheca
Patrum, and so Saint Ierome. Eusebius saith it
begins in these words, Ex Syri Romam versus
iter Instituens, terr, mari, noctu, interdiu cum
bestiis confligo, decem Leopardis colligatus, c.
that is, As I came out of Syria, towards Rome,
both by Sea and Land, both night and day I
fight with Beasts, and am chained amongst ten
Leopards, which were the ten Souldiers that did
bring me to Rome by Trajans command, who
though I do many benefits for them, yet are
they more inhumane and fierce, but I am daily
better learned by their injuries. I could wish
that I could see those beasts that must teare mee,
I would speake fairely to them to dispatch mee
quickly, which if they shall refuse to doe, I will
incite them: Pardon mee, for now I begin to be
Christs Disciple, All things are of no esteeme
in comparison of him, Neither feare I what man
can do unto mee. Ignis, Crux, Bestiarum confli|ctationes,
ossium distractiones, conisiones mem|brorum,
totius corporis tanquam farinae molitae
attritiones, omnia denique suppliciorum genera 

Diabolo excogitata in me coacerventur, si Iesum
Christum duntaxat adipiscar. Fire, Crosse, break|ing
of my bones, quartering of my members,
crushing of my bodie, and all the tortures that
inhumane man can invent; and all the tor|ments
of death and the Devill, come what will,
or can come, so I may enjoy my Lord Jesus
and his Kingdome for ever, when this life is
ended.
What a proffer did this good old man bid
for Heaven, what a victory was this (to his
prayse be it spoken) to get this victory of him|selfe,
having so many enemies, as the World, the
Devil, and the Flesh, and inticements of friends,
which were as so many blocks laid in his way,
hindering, as it were, his passage to Heaven?
When the time of this Ignatius his Maryr|dome
drew nigh, He used a saying, which Saint
Ierome in his Catalogue of Ecclesiasticall Wri|ters,
and Saint Irenaeus lib. 5. c. 28.Iren. l. 5 c. 28. do both re|member:
and it is in the same Epistle: namely,
this; Frumentum Deisum; dentibus ferarum mo|lar,
ut mundu Dei panis inveniar. You may
render it in English, thus: Now I am but Gods
Corne: when the wilde beasts shall have grinded
mee to powder with their teeth, I shall be his
white-bread.
He used also to say, (and no doubt, but hee
found it true,) Nihil praestantius est pace Christi;
as Damascen relates in the first Booke of his Pa|rallels,
and 8 Chapter, There is nothing better
then the peace of a good Conscience, then the

peace of Christ. For his Humilitie, it was much,
for hee thought it no disparagement to learn of
any that could instruct him, for hee went to
schoole to learn,In vita Ignat. pag. 91. when hee was thirty yeeres of
age: Likewise hee thought himselfe so unwor|thy
to bee buried in any sanctified place; that
hee chose rather to bee buried on a dunghill,
or some common fields: Such was his humility,
that hee ever thought meanly of himselfe; and
always subjected his own spirit to the practice of
Vertue. This Vertue amongst all others, though
the lowest, yet holds the preheminence; this
Vertue is the safest, because it is alwayes at An|chor:
for it endues the minde of Man with
divine Knowledge, and ingraiates him with his
God: And certainly that man lives with most
content in his calling, that strives to live within
the compasse of it.
Polycarpe said to his Schollers, bee yee
perswaded, by the example of Ignatius, Rufus,
and Zozimus, or else by the Apostles themselves
to hold fast the faith, for these by that means are
with the Lord. Hee suffered under Trajan at
Rome, Anno Christi 102, the remainder of his
bones which were left by the wild beasts, were
sumptuously interred by Theodosius.

Saint Ignatius his Sayings.

Of good and wicked men.
They are like true  counterfeit mony:In Epist. ad magnes. pag.  the one

seemes to be good, and is not; the other both
seemes and is: strive therefore both to be and to
beare Gods Image: for though the other seems
good, yet prove naught in the fire of triall.


Of the good Persecution.
The Lions teeth are but like a Mill,In vita sancti Ignatii prope finem. which
though it bruiseth, yet wasteth not the good
wheat, onely prepares and fits it to be made
pure bread: let mee be broken by them, so I be
made pure Manchet for Heaven.


Of unitie in Prayer.
Let it be performed in one place,In Epist ad Magnes. p. 55. in one form,
in one minde, with the same Hope, same Faith,
and same Charitie in Christ Iesus, who doth o|therwise,
is seduced with vain Opinions.


Of Education of Children.
Parents ought to afford these foure things to
their Children,Epist. ad Phi|ladelph. p. 96. Discipline, Admonition, learning
Gods Word, and Arts: all these preserve them
from idlenesse and folly, gives them wisdome,
and learnes them subjection and obedience to
their Superiours.


Of Patience, its excellency.
Other graces are parts of a Christians armour,In Epist. ad Po|lycarp. p. 209.

as the Shield of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit,
the Helmet of Salvation, but Patience is the Pa|noply,
or whole armour of the Man of GOD:
the Enemy foiles us without it, but we foile him
by it.


Of Graces in the Soule.
Grace flowing from the blessed Spirit of God,Epist. ad Ma|riam Cassbi. pag. 3.
makes the Soule like a Fountain whose water is
pure, wholsome and cleere; for Grace cleanseth,
saveth and beautifieth the whole man.



Ignatius wrote these Epistles following.

1 To Saint John the
Apostle.
2 To the Virgin Mary.
3 At Smyrna, to the E|phesians.
4 To the Magnesians.
5 To the Trallians.
6 To the Romans.
7 At Troas to the Phi|ladelphians.
8 To the Smyrneans,
by Burgus.
9 To Polycarpus Bi|shop
of Smyrna.
10 At Philippi to the
Tarsenses.
11 To the Antioche|nians.
12 To Hero the Dea|con.
13 To the Philippians
of Baptisme, by Eu|phranius
the Reader.





An. Christi 71. Polycarpus.

S. POLYCARPVS.

_THis Polycarpus was Disciple to Saint
Iohn,Niceph. cap. 30  35. lib 3. Euseb. Ecc. hst l. 4. c. 13. Ruffi. cap. 50. and Bishop of Smyrna, when
Anicetus governed the Roman
Church, in the Reigne of M. Anto|ninus,
and Lucius Aurelius, Commodus being
Proconsul. This Polycarpe came to Rome, and
had great conference with Anicetus about the
Celebration of Easter, as Irenaeus doth testifie,
and in his third Book against Heresies, he speaks
largely in his prayse and commendation. This
Polycarpe was instituted by the Apostles them|selves,
and had great familiarity with them
which had seene the Lord Jesus in the flesh: hee
was sent into Asia, and there was made Bishop,

and lived a long while to a very ripe age, so that
the Almond-tree did flourish in his gray haires.
Hee was wonderfull in esteeme and repute for
his reverend gravity, and chiefly because hee
taught nothing but what hee learned of the A|postles
themselves, and what the Catholike
Church delivered, and such points onely as were
really true and orthodox. And this all the Chur|ches
of Asia manifest, and all the Bishops which
succeeded him in that great dignitie. Hee was
not as Valentinus or Marcion, but testis fidelis
veritatis constansque, a faithfull and a constant
witnesse to the truth; nay, by his powerfull wis|dome
and singular piety, he recall'd and did re|duce
many from Heresie and Errour.
It is reported for certain, that Iohn the Lords
Disciple, and he, going to a Bath at Ephesus, and
espying Cerinthus an Heretick in it, that he said
(fugiamus ocyus) c. Let us depart for feare
lest the Bath wherein the Lords Adversary is,
doe suddenly dispatch us: which indeed he had
just cause to feare; forasmuch as the places
where wicked men are, in a manner seeme to
detest their wickednesse: so that one of the Fa|thers
made hast out of the house of a wicked
man, and soon after it fell to the ground. Thus
this holy man Polycarpus shewed a great zeale 
vigor of spirit for the defence of the truth. And
indeed, those Primitive Fathers were very cir|cumspect
and cautious how they kept company
with those whom they thought not to be sound
in the faith, imitating that rule of Saint Paul,

An Heretick after the first and second admonition
shunne, knowing that such an one is fallen away,
being condemned in his own conscience.
It is to be wondred, to thinke how constant
and couragious these Primitive Fathers were in
their sufferings. For they were not disheartned
when their bowels were ript up, when they rubd
with shels and rough stones, when their very
heart-strings were crackt in the fire, when there
were beasts appointed to teare them, nay, (per
quodcunque supplieiorum genus) whatsoever
punishment was laid upon them, they did re|joyce
in the middest of them, and so did this
Polycarpus, and Germanicus, and Ignatius.
This blessed Martyr, when the Heathens did
cry out, quaeratur Polycarpus, kept his counte|nance
and resolution so firme, that it bred
amazement in his Friends, who would have had
him gone out of the City into some place, to
avoid the fury of his Adversaries, but hee
continued in devout prayers night and day, for
the Church of God, and for its peace: hee did
foretell to his Friend, that hee should die in the
flames for the Lord Jesus, when as they that
came to apprehend, were entred something
neere the place where hee was, his Friends
advised him to depart, which hee easily might
have done, but would not, and said, Domine,
fiat voluntas tua, Lord, let thy will be done.
And so came to them, whose countenance
when they beheld they were abashed much, but
he commanded meat to be set before them, and

intreated them to eat heartily, and desired them
to give him respite but for one houre onely, in
which he prayed most fervently, for the pardon
of all his sinnes, and for the Catholike Church,
and so was upon a solemne day brought into the
Citie. Herod being Prefect, disswaded him not
to suffer that death, but to recant, and to enjoy
life and liberty; he constantly after a little pause
told him plaine, hee would not yield to his sug|gestions:
which when they saw, they drove him
in a Chariot with violence to the place of Mar|tyrdome,
and broke his leg in the journey: but
comming before the Proconsul, he did aske him
whether he was Polycarpus or not? to whom he
answered resolutely that hee was: then hee bad
him deny Christ and sweare by the Emperour:
to whm Polycarpe replyed, Octoginta sex annos
illi jam inservivi, c. I have served him these
eighty six yeares, and all this time hee never did
mee any hurt, how can I then speake ill of my
King who hath kept me afe so long a time, and
cleerly did professe himselfe to be a Christian: hen
the Proconsull told that hee had beasts in
readinesse to devoure him; and Polycarpus an|swered,
Bring them, for I am ready: then the
Proconsull said to him, that he would tame him
in the flames: but Polycarpus told him that they
were but momentany, and that he neither feared
beasts, nor fire, nor any other punishment. S
when they did see that hee would not be fright|ed,
they all with fury cryed out: Iste Asiae Do|ctor,
Christianorum pater, deorum nostrorum

eversor. This is the Doctor of Asia, this is the
Father of Christians, this is hee that speaks
against our gods, and will not worship them.
So the fire being made, hee was cast into it; but
it was a strange thing, that the fire would not
burne him, but hee gave a smell as if of sweete
Odours and Confections, till at last they ranne
him through the bowels with a sword, and there
issued our so great a quantity of bloud, that it
amazed them all, and extinguished the flame.
Such was his holy detestation of Hereticks
and Enemies to the Religion of Christ,Polycarpus. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. that
when Marcion an Arch-heretick, but one of his
acquaintance, met him in the street at Rome, and
wondring that he took no notice of him, said
unto him, Dost thou not know mee Polycarpus?
yea, said he, I know thee well, thou art the eldest
sonne unto the Devill.
When the Proconsul had urged Polycarpus, as
much as in him lay to deny Christ, Hee made
this answer to him, as before; I have served him
eighty six yeeres, and hee hath not once hurt mee,
and shall I now deny him?
And when hee was come to the place of his
Martyrdome, the stake being fastned in the
ground, and the wood ready to be kindled; they
began to tie him to the stake with iron chains;
and he required to stand untied, saying; Let mee
alone, (I pray you) for hee that gave mee strength
to come to this fire, will also give mee patience to
abide in the same without your tying. Indeed
that man which is accustomed to patience,

will never quit or forsake any place for any pain
or trouble whatsoever: for the paines and per|plexities
that good and vertuous men doe en|dure
and suffer, doe, as it were, prick them for|wards
to have a more earnest desire to loath, and
to leave this wretched and sinfull World; whose
sweetest pleasures (as the wise man sayth,)
are as sower Grapes; whose greatest
Honours are fading and false flourishes;
whose profits and riches are but poysoned baits
to intrap men: therefore happy are they that
have a good and a quiet soule, for it is given
them from above.
For if we consider man according to the life,
we shall find him full of vanity, weaknesse, in|constancy,
misery, and presumption: a fruitfull
Argument to divert him from all singularity.
And he that will avoyde trouble and sorrow,
must apply his mind to wisedome.
This Polycarpus wrote many things, most of
which are kept in the Vatican. There is extant
an Epistle of his to the Philippians.



An. Christi. 71. Sanctus Dionysius Areopagita

S. DIONISIVS AREOPAGITA.

_BEsides those of the Latine, many of the
Greek writers have written this Diony|sius
actions, as Aristarchus a Chrono|loger,
and Methodius Bishop of Constantinople,
Metaphrastes, and Suidas; amongst the Latine
Authors, Hilduinus at the request of Ludovicus
Pius the Emperour Ado, Mathaeus Galenus, and
others, as, Cardinall Baronius in his first and
second Tome of his Ecclesiastical Annalls; but
both the one and the other, wheresoever they
mention him, stile him, Hominem sapientissi|mum,
Episcopum sanctissimum, Martyrem illu|strissimum,
idest, A most wise man, an holy
Bishop, and a most famous Martyr.

This Dionysius was borne at Athens the most
famous City of all Greece, the mother of all
Arts and Sciences. His parents were eminent,
rich, and civill of life, given much to hospitality,
and wonderous liberall. This Dionysius giving
himselfe to study prov'd himselfe so learned
that hee was accounted among the chiefe of
Athens. He travelled into Egypt for the more
commodiousnesse of studie,Pariss. 1555. also for to get the
skill of Astronomy: at the age of twenty five yeers
whilst hee liv'd at Heliopolis with Apollophanes
the Philosopher;Dionysius was 25 yeers old at the death of our Saviour, and lived a long time after with the Apostles: as himselfe re|cords in the 1 Epistle to A|pollophanes. hee saw that generall Eclipse
of the Sunne at our Saviours Passion which did
envelope the earth in darknes for three houres:
which he said was not naturall: and this as one
amazed hee spoke of it: Aut Deus naturae pati|tur,
autmundi Machina dissolvetur, (id est) either
the God of nature doth now suffer, or the frame
of the whole world shall be dissolved. Michaell
Syngellus,Michael Syn|gellus in Enco|mio S. Dionysi. priest in Ierusalem, reporteth that he
heard his father say, that he heard this Dionysius
speake of that Eclipse in these words, Igno|tus
in carne patitur Deus, cujus gratia re|rum
Vniversitas densa hac caligine obfcurata est
atque concussa, (id est) God unknowne in the
flesh did suffer; for whose sake the Uniuerse
was struck and covered with thicke darknesse.
And this Dionysius in an Epistle written to Po|lycarpus,S. Dionys. in Ep. ad Polyca
being asked what this great Ecclipse
might portend, said, that it shewed a change
and a great alteration, and that hee did seriously
observe the day and the houre.

This Saint Denis tooke to Wife one Damaris
a grave Matron,Chrysost. Tom. 5. lib. 4. de sa|cerd. as Saint Ambrose and Saint
Chrysostome doe well note, hee lived in the man|agement
of State Affaires, and administred Ju|stice
with admirable discretion, and most men
wondred at him for his prudence and Philo|sophy.
At the same time, Saint Paul the Doctor of the
Gentiles came to Athens, and taught them there
true divine Philosophy, driving away, and over|throwing
all the Sects of vain philosophy, as of
the Epicures, Stoicks, Academicks, Peripateticks,
who at the time resided in Athens, and were
highly esteemed of: but when Saint Paul was
entred into the Citie, hee saw an Altar with this
Inscription; Ignoto Deo: From which Saint
Paul as a wise and prudent Preacher, took occa|sion
to preach to them the true God, who is the
Creator of all things.
There was in the same City a high and emi|nent
place of Judicature whereon 12 Judges
sate to censure Malefactors and Offenders,Why called Areopagite? and
thereupon that place was called Arepagus, or
Mars his Hill; and those that were appointed
Iudges to sit in that place were for their severi|ty
and integrity called Areopagites. It so fell out
that Saint Paul preaching of the true God, as
also of the Resurrection, and the Iudgement of
the World, was accounted by all those great phi|losophers
as a wicked and sacrilegious person:
and so being brought to this place before the
Iudges, he did with that Divine Eloquence, and

with such forcible Arguments convince those
Philosophers:Dionysius and his wife La maris cover|ted by St. Paul to the true Faith. and by the great blessing of God
did convert this Dionysius President and chiefe
of the Judges, with Damaris his Wife, who used
Saint Paul courteously: and were instructed by
him in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ:
at the knowledge of this the whole City of
Athens was amazed, because that this Dionysius
was reputed of all men to be a most wise and
judicious man; but Dionysius was not ashamed
of a Master to become a Scholer, and exprest to
the whole Church, how that he magnified this
divine Learning, and sacred knowledge of Christ.
Now though hee was thus converted to the
Faith, yet he kept the name of Areopagite, and
within three yeeres prov'd an admirable profi|cient
to propagate the Gospel of our Saviour
And so staying a good while in Athens, he did
with great labour and wisdome preach the Word
of God. For he as a wise Harvest-man brought
in many sheaves of corne into Gods Store-house,
the Church,Dionysius journey to visit St. Paul at Ephesus. and so he went to Ephesus, to visit S.
Paul, and see S. Iohn now returned out of Path|mos
from Banishment, by whose perswasion, Cle|mens
then governing the Church of Rome, this
Dionysius repaired to Rome, ( having done his
spirituall worke at Athens) and left one Publius
to look to that Flocke, Hee was by the said Cle|ment
authorized to goe into France, to preach
the Word there, and to give knowledge of
salvation to that Nation; and France was at that
time a fit place to plant the Gospel in; but the

first Labourers were martyred, that were sent
thither, hereupon, this Dionysius took his fel|low-labourers
in this journey, and work, one
Rusticus a priest, Eleutherius a Deacon, and Eu|genius,
 some others Eugenius he sent to Spain,
who setling at Toledo, was there first Archbishop,
afterwards going into France, was martyred.
Dionysius comming into France, esteemed that
Paris would be the fittest place to reside in; and
there hee found himselfe not frustrated of his
expectation, for in a short space, hee brought
many sheep into the fold of Christ; not onely
in Paris, but also in many other places, and those
that were converted were not of the meaner
sort, but many rich, noble and great persons,
who being converted overthrew the Temples
of their false gods, and erected new places for
Divine Worship.
But the common enemy of the Church of
Christ, seeing and observing this happy pro|gresse,
that this Kingdome would be weakned,
if this doctrine was maintained: Whereupon
hee began to contrive plots and malicious pro|jects,
how to hinder the work of this Dionysius.
And thereupon put it into the mindes of those
Idolatrous priests by their malice to hasten his
death; but marke the over-ruling hand of
God, although many were sent armed secretly
to dispatch him; yet there was such a gracious
lustre and radiancie in his countenance and gra|vity:
that some of their hearts failed them when
they beheld him, and they repented of their

intent, and many others were cast into a sud|den
feare, and fled from the performance. See
but how strong God is over the actions of wic|kedmen,
who though they would, yet cannot
act any thing beyond Gods divine disposall.
As there is nothing so sacred, but there will
be still found in all ages sacrilegious hands to
attempt and touch it: And though there be not
wanting multitudes of men, whose tongues and
hands have no other imployment, but to defile,
and diminish so much as in them lyeth, the ho|nour
of God, and of good men; yet for all
that, the vertuous mans minde is not a whit
daunted or lesse assured then before. And most
men know, that the vertue and vigour of him
who in fighting hath vanquished his enemy, is
alwayes greater then his, who did never try the
combat at all. Even so may wee think and say of
the vertuous, constant and well disposed person:
who, like to good metall, the more he is fired,
the more hee is fined; the more hee is hated and
opposed, the more is he approved: For wrongs
and attempts may well try him, touch him, or
prick him; but they cannot imprint in him any
false stampe: Many out of envy and malicious
disposition, may attempt and set upon a just and
upright man, and assaile him both by words and
actions, yet not injure him; for in that case hee
is like a brazen wall, which the darts of the wic|ked
cannot pierce through; but rather rebound
on their owne breasts. And though that such
mischievous and malicious men levell right at

him to hit, and to hurt him with their harmfull
shafts; yet doe they come short of their aymes:
for either they hit him not; or if they doe, they
hurt him not at all. Therefore let all good and
vertuous men be qualified and comforted, and
with patience and peaceable playsters; such as
are joy, exultation, and delight: for these will
bring him unto greater content, then humanitie
can imagine.
But suddenly after, Hescennius Sisinnius the
Praefect, gave command that Dionysius with his
fellows should be apprehended: and when hee
was taken, Sisinnius had much talke with him;
and did much reprove him and blame him, for
that hee had preached against the worship of
their Gods; and because by his Sermons, their
gods had lost their former honour and worship;
and seriously charged him to confesse his errour,
and to stop up that breach which hee had made,
to leave off those novelties, and unheard of
doctrines grounded upon no sufficient warrant,
or solidities, that so the people by this recanta|tion
might see how vainly they were seduced;
and so returne to their ancient Rites and Cu|stomes
againe. To whom Dionysius answered,
(not without a great deale of Constancie and
Zeal mixed with Wisdom and Divine Eloquence)
how that they were no gods whom they wor|shipped,
and how that they were but Idols, the
worke of mens hands, and that it was meere
folly, ignorance and Idolatry to adore them;
and added that there was but one God, which

he preached: at which words spoken with so
deepe a resolution; Sisinnius was wondrously
incensed and angry, and commanded him to be
laid upon an hurdle, and a gentle fire to be put
under to roast him. Hildrinus relates that hee
was cast to wilde beasts that were kept hungry,Hildrin. in ejus vita c. 32.
but they would not teare him, and how hee was
throwne into an Oven made hot, but the fire
did not seise upon him: but hee was the second
time with his fellow-labourers brought before
Sisinnius, and they were publikely beaten with
cruell and many blows by the Officers. But the
Judge perceiving their valour and unmoveable
courage, that they were not at all daunted with
thes dealings: He standing up, commanded in
a rage, that seeing they had contemned their
gods, derided the Emperours Edicts, that they
had wrought by Magicke and other unlawfull
Arts (as with Miracles) to delude the people,
that they had seduced the people, and had drawn
them from their obedience to the Emperour,
to their faction and part, that although these
things came upon them for their faults; and
that they might be punished by the Emperour,
for suffeing such Seducers to remayne in the
Confines of his Empire, commanded them
foth-with to be beheaded. At which this Saint
Dionysius, Rusticus, and Eleutherius were not
any whit terrified, but with joy and mirth an|swered,
that all they who worshipped such gods
were like them, and would perish even as the
dung of the earth. But as for us (said Dionysius)

Come life or death, we will worship the God of Hea|ven
and earth.
At these words of these holy men, the Judges
anger was kindled like fire, and gave strict
charge that their execution should not be de|ferr'd;
and so they were haled out of the Citie
to the top of an high Mountaine, and delivered
to the Officers and Executioners to be tormen|ted,
which was accomplished with all the cruel|ty
that could be; at the time of Dionysius his
beheading, he devoutly lifting up his hands and
eyes to the God of Heaven expressed himselfe
in this prayer.
DOmine, Deus omnipotens, Filiunigenite, 
Sancte Spiritus, Sancta Trinitas, principio
carens,  in quem non cadit divisio, suscipe ser|vorum
tuorum in pace animas, quoniam propter
te morte afficimur.
Which deserves to be registred in letters of
Gold. I have thus Englished it.
O Lord, God Almighty, thou onely begotten
Sonne, and holy Spirit; O Sacred rinity,
which art without beginning, in whom is no divi|sion:
Receive the souls of thy servants in peace,
who are put to death for thy Cause and Gospell:
to which Rusticus and Eleutherius answered,
Amen.
Which prayer being ended, at the command

of the Ruler, they were beheaded with a sword
that was made dull, that so their paine in their
Martyrdome might be the greater.
These worthy Martyrs suffered the eighth of
the Ides of October, in the Reigne of the Em|perour
Hadrianus; in the 110 yeere of Diony|sius
his age. It is true that Metaphrastes, Hil|drinus,
Hincmarus the Bishop of Rhemes, and
others doe say that hee suffered under the Em|peror
Domitian in the ninety first yeere of his
age: but they are deceived, for Dionysius in a
certaine Epistle which hee writ to Iohn being
banished into Pathmos, in which he saith that he
did foresee that he should be released from that
misery and should return into Asia, and that by
Gods providence they should see one another
face to face: which proved true; when as the
bloody Decrees of Domitianus were cald in and
revoked, and those which were exiled for the
name of Jesus were recalled: And againe the
same Dionysius speaks of an Epistle which Saint
Ignatius writ to the Romans though then dead,
who as is manifest, suffered martyrdome under
Trajan whom Nerva succeeded. Mihael Syngel|lus
reports it, that Dionysius lived til the latter
time of the Emperour Trajan his reigne, but the
ancient Martyrologies affirme that Saint Denis
suffered martyrdome under Hadrianus, as Car|dinall
Baronius hath well and judiciously ob|serued
it.Baron. Tom. 2. pag. 37. And so secondly we may conclude
safely, that Denis lived one hundred and ten
yeers.

His writings are extant, yet not without some
scruple or doubting, howbeit those of the best
judgment give good reason why they are his.
I will not rehearse any of those great Miracles
which the papists doe ascribe to him, however
I must not neglect to recite unto you his works
being so loftie and divine, and relishing of a
Spirit which was ruled by the Dictate of the
Holy Ghost. And indeed I could bee large if I
should but recite the Testimonies of all Eccle|siasticall
Writers who have commended this
godly martyr: Bellarmine saith that hee used
often that saying of Ignatius of Christ,Bell. in scrip. Eccles. p. 29. Amor
meus crufixus est, that is to say, My love and de|light
is crucified.
His Sentences follow. And his Works as Car|dinall
Bellarmine hath registred them.
He used to say that hee desired of God but two
things,Dion, Ar. Ep. ad Polycarp. first to know the truth himselfe, Second|ly
to preach it as he should to others.
No lesse observable was his speech to Timo|thy:Dion. in Ep. ad Tim.
Hadst thou seene the Saints agonies at that
time (as I did, speaking of their cruell persecuti|ons
of him) thou couldst not but weep, consi|dering
the sentence denounced against them;
that Peter was crucified, and Paul beheaded; that
multitudes of the common Rabble smiting
them, did spit in their faces: and it is worthy
the remembring, that at their parting, after they
had received the sentence of death from the
Magisrate, Paul said to Peter: Peace be
with thee, thou Foundation of the Church, and

Shepherd of Christs Lambs and Sheep; And Peter
to Paul, Go in peace, thou Preacher of good things,
thou Mediator and Captain of our Salvation, and
chiefest Labourer in the Lords Harvest: But at
their departure, (saith he) did follow my Ma|ster
Paul.
And in the same Epistle: Observe a Miracle
(my brother Timothy) not to be slightly passed
over. I who was present at their parting; after
their death, saw them hand in hand entring in|to
the gates of the Citie, clothed with a gar|ment
of light, and wearing on their heads glo|rious
Crowns.

1 Of the Celestiall Hie|rarchie
1 Book.
2 Of the Ecclesiasticall
Hierarchie 1 Book.
3 Of Divine Names 1.
4 Of Mysticall Divini|ty
1.
5 Epistles to Caius 4.
6 To Dorotheus 1.
7 To Sosipater 1.
8 To Polycarpus 1.
9 To Demophilus 1.
10 To Titus 1.
11 To Apollophanes 1
12 To John the Apo|stle
1.

To confirme that these Works were his, it
is sufficient, that they were allowed of Saint
Gregory the Great, in his 33 Homily on the
Gospels; and not only of him, but of divers
others who have writ of him: as St. Maximus,
and others.



An. Christi 150. Iustinus Martyr.

IVSTINVS MARTER.

_LOoke upon this effigies, and you be|hold
an acute Philosopher, a Ju|dicious
Divine, a constant Martyr,
a stout shield of the Christian Faith:
an Elegant, ancient, and eloquent Writer, in
the defence of the Truth: Whom many of the
Fathers have highly esteemed and deepely prai|sed,Photius in Bib. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l 4. cap. 11 Hiero. in illa Eccles. Scripto. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 3. contra 46. Haeresin Tatianorum.
as Photius in his Book entituled the Library,
and Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History. S. Ierom
likewise reckons him none of the meanest a|mongst
those famous Champions of the Church:
so Epiphanius terms him, Vir, sanctus,  Dei, a
man, an holy man, and a lover of God. Anasta|sius,
Paulus Orosius in his seventh Book and fifth

Chapter, and Plinius secundus in his Epistles
in the tenth booke. But Photius doth amongst
the rest, give and afford him a large Eulogie:Photii Bib. fol. 303. it
begins in these words, Est autem vir ille ad Phi|losophiae
tum nostrae tum potissimum prophanae
summum evectus fastigium, c. which is, That
this man came to a great height, not onely of
our philosophy, but also of that which is coun|ted
prophane, flowing in the copiousnesse and
abundance of all sorts of learning and histories,
and knew very well how to beautifie and adorn
his words with Rhetoricall expressions. Hence
was it that hee was so able to deliver his mind
in apt termes and significant phrases, so that
those things that came from him were wonder|full
emphaticall, patheticall, and significant; and
work'd much upon the souls of his Auditors.
Hee was sonne to Prisus Bacchius, hee was
borne in a certain little Towne in the province
of Palestine called Naples. But hee tooke great
delight in Rome, and therefore hee chose that to
be the seat of his residence, where both in speech,
life, and habit, he professed himselfe a Philoso|pher:
but he made his philosophy subservient to
his sacred studie of divinity, and would say, He
kept it for use, and that in his studies he found
great profit by it. Tritenhemius the famous Ab|bat
of Spanheim in his collections of the ancient
fathers doth give this Iustin Martyr a very
good report, for he cals him, Christi amatorem
 cultorem insignem, a great lover and worship|per
of Christ Jesus.

Cardinall Bellarmine and Baronius doe both
highly prayse and exoll him for his Learning in
their Writings, especially Baronius in his An|nals
doth commend him, because Hee was the
first Champion that set himself against the dan|gerous
Heretick Marcion. His words are these,
Caeterum non defuerunt,aro. Aral. Tom. 2. fol 118 Sect. 15. qui statim adversus
Marcionis venena pararent antidotum: praestilit
id quidem omnium primus Iustinus Martyr: that
is, There wanted not those that presently pre|pared
antidotes against the poyson and venome
of arcion; but the first that undertooke the
cause was Iustin Martyr. Nay, hee not onely
prayses him for that, according to his due
merit, but also for his valour and prudence in
discovering the Heresie of the Valentinians:Baron. Tom. 2. p. 111. he
cites Tertullian adversus Valent cap. 4. 5. to utter
these words, Viri sanctitate  praestantia In|signes,
Haeresiarcharum contemporales instructis|simis
voluminibus,  prodiderunt  retarda|runt,
ut Iustinus Martyr: There were men
famous for sanctity, worth and excellencie, who
by their dexterous Writings, supprest the Here|sie
of Valentinus, as Iustin Martyr: so that it
easily doth appeare, that he did not onely suffer
much for his Saviours cause, but also did much
study and accustome himself to defend it against
all oppositions in his time. For custome is a se|cond
nature: and when the soule takes delight in
any vertue, it is gain'd upon by an usuall and
customary iteration.
He began to flourish in the Reigne of Anto|ninus

Pius, and in the time of Telesphorus, as
doth appeare by his Apologie, which hee dedi|cates
to the same Emperour, wherein hee grie|vously
complains against the Prconsul in Asia,
because he did with such extream crueltie, perse|cute
the poore Christians with the sword, as
was thought, against the minde of that good
Emperour, who was calme and gentle towards
them,Baron. Tom. . pag. 107. and would not suffer them to read any
Books of the Prophets which spoke of Christ,
upon pain of death: But this Iustin Martyr lays
him open to the Emperour, and saith, it was,
Opera  instinctu malorum Daemonum,Iustin in Apol a Anto|num. ut per
timorem homines ab ill is absterrerentur: By the
helpe nd instinct of the Devils, to skarre and
affright men from reading such Books as would
learn them goodnesse and happinesse.
Hee got much reute by being so constant a|gainst
Idltry and Superstition,This Iust Mar|tyr flourished in the yeer of our Lord, 103. and by perswa|ding
the Gentiles to leave it, as a vaine and un|profitable
service, and declared unto them the
excelency, and benefit of the true worship of
God, so that hee did cause many to come out
of that miserable condition, and cherefully
to embrace the Faith of our Saviour Christ
crucified.
But to conclude, the Bibliotheca veterum Pa|trum,
doth sufficiently speake for him, and re|gister
his worth, and parts, to succeeding Ages.
One of the first after the apostles times, whose
writings wee enjoy was Iustin Martyr,Biblioth. Pat. Tom. 2 pag 1 who flo|rished
in the time of Antoninus Pius, and his

successors, Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus.
And in his apology to the senate and people of
Rome he writes, that there were from the nati|vity
of Christ 150 yeares to his daies. Hee did
not live free from malicious men: But the chiefe
of all his adversaries and accusers, Qui carbone
notandus, was Crefcens a Cynick Philosopher,
but no ways deserving the name, who was a man
of a corrupted life, and wholly addicted and
given up to Luxury and Gluttony, and many
other vices: hee was the incarnate Devill, that
never left off his accusation of this worthy In|strument,
and at last by his malice and envy, got
opportunity against him, because he was a faith|full
Christian.
It is observed, that the envious man doth not
beare envy so much to the persons of those
whom they envy, as they do to the good things
which are in them. Envy, indeed, is the Mistris
of injustice, and it inciteth both the thought and
the hand to all kinde of ill and wicked actions:
for when the condition of another man is just,
upright, and cheerfull; then is envy most plot|ting
and contriving, sad and sorrowfull. And
whosoever beareth envy to any good man, and
doing well, it may well be said of him: That
he is not only envious to the Common-wealth,
but to himselfe also, and in the end will be his
own destruction.
It is a principall point of wisedome, truly to
know how to esteeme of life; for hee that estee|meth
and loveth his life for the love of it selfe,

he lives not but to live: But a wise man lives no
longer, then that his life may be worth more
then his death; A great part of life is lost to
those that d ill; a greater to those that doe no|thing;
and all, to those that do that they should
not do: But the actions of a well grounded and
advised man tend alwayes to some certain and
good end; and what he purposeth, hee bringeth
to perfection; because his intendments end
in performances of good and vertuous con|clusions.
This Iustin Martyr used to say of the Chri|stians
in his time;Ep. ad Diogne|tum. that which the soule is in the
body, that are Christians in the World: for as the
soule is in the body, but not of the body; so do
Christians dwell in the World, but are no part
of it.
He had divers other Sayings;Apud Anton. Melissam, lib. 1. sem. especially these
two: First, It is best of all not to sinne; it is next
to that, to amend upon the punishment: Second|ly,
That it is the greatest slavery in the World, to
be subject to ones own passions.
But moderate passions are the most affable ex|pressions
of humanity: passions must not be too
fierie, nor yet too dull; but there ought to be a
mean betwixt both: For the first are like Horses
that endanger those that ride them; and the
later prove a trouble to the Guide: The one will
not be backt by any, and the other will be abu|sed
by any: a good temper is a sure expression
of a well composed Soule. Therefore the onely
way to live worthily, and die with prayse; is to

be noble in our actions, honest in our intentions,
and temperate in our tongues.
But this envy, though of a long continuance,
no whit daunted Iustin, for hee did suffer his
Martyrd me cheerfully, and willingly surren|dred
his soule into his Saviours protection;
Saying,He was behea|ded in the yeere 149, or 150. My life is neere finished; and while I li|ved,
I made my chiefest study, the only trumpet
of his glory.

These Works are knowne to be his.
1 A Dialogue with
Triphon the Jew.
2 An Apologie to the
Roman Senate.
3 An Apologie to
Antoninus Pius.
4 An Oration to the
Gentiles.
5 Of Monarchy.
6 An exposition of
Faith and the true
confession of it.
7 An Epistle to Zeno
and Serenus.
8 An Epistle to Di|ognetus.
9 A Booke of Que|stions
from Christi|ans
to the Gentiles,
with Answers.
10 An explication of
those questions which
the Gentiles pro|pounded
to the
Christians.
11 Some Answers to
some necessary Que|stions.
12 A reproofe of cer|taine
Sentences of
Aristotle.

More questions to the Gentiles about God,
and the Resurrection of the Dead. These be
averr'd to be his by Eusebius, Nicephorus, Zozo|mn,
Baronius, Bellarmine, and Bibliotheca Pa|trum,
Perionius, and Tritenhemius, and also by
Robert Stephan in his last Edition.



An. Christi 170. Sanctus Irenaeus.

S. IRENAEVS.

_IT is hard to finde out the Country,
parents, the time of the birth, and
the habitation of Irenaeus, in his
yong yeeres. But it is certaine, hee
was Bishop of Lions,Cap. 3. Epist. . and a famous Writer and
Martyr: Oumenius saith, he was a Frenchman;
but most do take him to be of Asia, a Grecian,
not a Latine, as Cardinall Bellarmine and others,
because he was a constant Auditor to Polycarpus
Bishop of Smyrna; and his name doth denote
him a Grecian, and his Writings were Greeke,
not Latine, if we will give credit to Iustin Mar|tyr,
Eusebius, Basil, Epiphanius, Ierome, Theodo|ret,
Melissus, Anastatius, and Damascen. His

exquisite skill and dexterity in searching into
the secrets of Heresies doth sufficiently mani|fest,
that hee was excellent for Philosophy. For
usually Heresies have had their springing from
Philosophy, his acute and witty Disputations
with them, and his cleere refutation of them do
speake his learning; besides the Order and Me|thod
hee uses, with the Prefaces before his
Books, besides his demonstrating how that He|resies
have not onely oppositions and some con|tradictions
in themselves, but that they do plain|ly
thwart and crosse the truth of all Churches,
and the Writings of the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists, which hee proves in his first and
foure last Books; but the nineteenth Chapter of
his second Booke, manifests his generality of
Learning: First, by refuting all their sophisti|cated
arguments and ungrounded positions,
which hee proves to be onely fetcht out of the
Fables of Poets and Philosophers, herein shew|ing
that hee had well vers'd himselfe in Thales,
Anaximander, Anaxagoras, Democritus, Em|pedocles,
Plato, and Aristotle: so also in most
Tragick, Comick, and Lyrick Poets; Seeing in
the confutation of them in the defence of their
Heresies, He doth fitly and wittily use their Ex|clamations,Lib. advers. Valent. cap. 5.
Proverbs, and Examples; hence is it
that Tertullian doth stile him, Omnium Doctri|narum
curiosissimum Exploratorem, that is, the
exquisitest or curiousest searcher out of all 
of Learning.
And God having laid him out for a famous

Instrument in his Church, Irenaeus sets himselfe
seriously and ardently to the study of the sacred
Scriptures, and did take wonderfull paines and
delight in that studie: and for his better helpe
this way, he put himselfe to Polycarpus, to be his
Scholler, which had not onely heard Saint Iohn,
but most of the Apostles, which had seen Christ
in the flesh; and no question, it was a great joy
to that old Father, to see that hee should have
Children who would be constant professours of
the Faith in Christ Iesus:Euseb. Eccles. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 19. and Eusebius gives
him that prayse, that he did truly observe all the
sweet speeches that fell from Polycarpus lips, and
omitted nothing that hee spake of Christ his
Actions, Miracles, or Passion.
Nay, hee was not onely with Polycarpe, but
also with Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, and Iohn
Bishop of Ephesus, and Aristion, with other
who were all excellently Learned and Aposto|licall
men, and he did eagerly desire the compa|ny
of such as had conversed with the Apostles,
for so he made himselfe the abler to contradict
all Gainsayers: so that Saint Hierome and Saint
Epiphanius terme him the true Register of the
Apostles actions.Epiph.  Hierom. in cap. 36. .
He came to be Governour of the Church of
Lions in France, or rather indeed setled the
Gospel there,Lib. 1. cap. 9. Lib. 1. cap. 25. for hee saith, that inter Celtas
commorabatur, and that Rhodanensem Regionem
incolebat, that is, that he abode among the Cel|tae,
and dwelt in the Countrey not farre from
Roan: and hither he was sent a Beato Polycarpo,

by blessed Polycarpe, if you will believe Grego|rius
Turonensis.
Here with what faith and diligence, paines
and carefulnesse, with what issue and happy suc|cesse
you may easily judge, for he did constantly
preach, and carefully, and reverently deliver the
Eucharist to the people committed to his
charge: take his owne words: Oportet nos Deo
oblationem facere,Lib. 4. cap. 34.  in omnibus gratos inveniri
fabricatori nostro Deo, in sententi pur, 
fide sine Hypocrisi; in spe firm, in dilectione
frventi: that is, That it behoves us to offer our
selves to God, and in all things to be thankfull
to our Maker, who is God, with a pure mind
and purpose, with faith, without hypocrisie,
with stedfast hope, and in ervent Love and
Charity: and so for his delivering the Sacra|ment,
Quemadmodum qui est  terra panis, perci|piens
invocationem Dei (en consecratio) jam non
communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus re|bus
constans, terrena  coelesti,  gratias agimus
Dominationi ejus, that is, For as ordinary bread
after prayer, and consecration, is not any longer
common bread, but is the Eucharist consisting
of two parts earthly and heavenly, and so wee
praise God. And againe, Populo dedit Verbum,
praeceptum faciendarum oblationum.Lib. 5. cap. 2. The Word
did command us to offer Sacrifices to God; not
that he needed them, but that hee would be ser|ved
by us, and therefore hee would have us to
bring our Oblations daily to the Altar.
This Reverend old man became famous at

Lions, and brought by his preaching and holi|nesse
of life most of that Citie from Gentilisme,
to the knowledge and service of the true God:Lib. 1 cap 29. Hist. Frnc.
but the common enemy of Mankinde, envied
his great successe, and so troubled the peace of
the Church with a double mischiefe; for hee
brought in a most cruell persecution against the
Church of Vienna, and Lions, which agreed
with those of Asia and Phrygia, in the same
oints of faith; and also stirred up a spirit of
Errour and Lying in some Heretikes, as Monta|us,
Theodotus and Alcibiades, and Maximil|,
by both which hee disturbed the Christians,
and the peace of the Church: the French here|upon
take care for the Brethren, and therefore
sent large Epistles of things done amongst
them, as also the Tenents of Montanus into
Asia,Euseb. Hist. Ec|cles. lib. 5. c. 1. 2, 3. with their judgments upon them (as Euse|bius
testifies) and not onely so, but dispatched
likewise Letters to Eleutherius, then Bishop of
Rome, whom they desired heartily to keepe the
Church in unitie. Now whom could they finde
and chuse out to be imployed in this weighty
imployment for holinesse and gravity, and since|ritie,
praeter unum Irenaeum; but onely this one
Irenaeus, whom they knew would undergoe all
travaile, labour, and danger, for Christ and the
Churches good: so Photinus and other chief
men of the French Churches, with some Mar|tyrs
that were imprisoned, asked him to goe
Embassadour to Rome, about some questions of
the Church, and so into Asia; which he willingly

performed,In Catalogo Scrip. Eccles. as Hierome testifies, and presents to
Eleutherius the letters in his name, certifies the
Bishop of the doubts, he desires his approbation
 confirmation of the judgment of the French,
concerning the Montanists, and so having all
things to his harts desire at Rome, he very readily
prepares for Asia his own Country, where he did
by his owne presence and doctrine, afford much
comfort to those distracted and afflicted Chur|ches,
by declaring to them the Conformity of
the Westerne Churches, and the See Apostoli|call
of Rome; and mainly setled in points of
Faith (God then giving great successe to his la|bours)
he was present at Caesarea in Palestine, at
the Councel, where he spoke couragiously, and
learnedly in the matters of Faith,Lib. 11. Spec. Hist. cap. 124. as Nauclerus,
Vincentius, Bellovacensis, and Hugo Floriacensis
have recorded.
Cardinall Baronius doth deny,Euseb. l. 5. c. 4. that this Ire|naeus
went into Asia, because that neither Euse|bius,
nor Ierom do mention it; and because Euse|bius
doth speak of his Embassage to Eleutherius
to Rome: indeed to speake strictly, what time he
spent, and how long it was ere hee did returne
to Lions, cannot be distinctly known; but cer|tain
it is, that when Photinus was ninety yeeres
old, and when hee with divers other Martyrs
departed this life, that Saint Irenaeus returning
from his Embassage was chosen Bishop of Lions.
His enterance into it was full of danger, un|quiet
and troublesome, because the Emperour
was then cruell to the Christians, and had not

called in the Edicts of Ner for the fourth perse|cution;
but even in this dangerous time, Irenaeus
was valiant, and laboured exceedingly by prayer,
by preaching, instructing, arguing,  reproving
with patience and wisedome: hee seeketh the
lost strengthneth the weak, recals the wandring,
binds up the broken-hearted, and settles those
that were strong: take Tertullians words of
him, Tanta vitae integritate et doctrin sinceri|tate
gregi is praesidet, c. He governed the flock
of Christ with such integrity of life, and sinceri|ty
of Doctrine,Tertu in A|polog. that  suis amatur, ab exteris
suspiciatu. His own lov'd him exceedingly, and
others feared him, but God sent peace to the
Church in the end of the reigne of Marcus An|toninus
Verus, who was moved by the Apolo|gies
of Melito, Apollinarius, Athenagoras, and
by the teares and grones of Christians, but
chiefly by Gods mercy, to yeeld quiet rest to the
Church; as also because that rain was procured
by the prayers of the Christians, so that they
lived securely, and held Councels, and did preach
freely in his reigne as also in the reigne of Com|modus
who succeeded Antoninus.
But divers weedes sprung up againe to di|sturb
the Church of Lions and Rome,Iren. lib. cap. 8.  9. and the
Easterne parts; Lions was troubled with the
Valentinians, and Gnosticks; Rome, it was mo|lested
with Blastus and Florinus; and the East|ern
Church was disquieted with a great deal of
contention about the celebration of Easter: but
against all these did this Irenaeus proceed; he set|led

Lions, refuted Blastus and Florinus follies,
and was mightily studious to settle the Churches
about Easters celebration. He lived in Antonius,
Commodus, and Severus Reignes; being about
182 yeeres after Christ, but this Severus being
a cruel man against the Christians, rais'd the fifth
persecution against them, wherein many Mar|tyrs
were crowned. But most of all, it raged at
Lions, in so much that the blood of slaughtered
Christians ran down the streets,Greg. Turo. lib. cap. 29. so that their
names could not be told, nor numbred, but God
hath written them in the Book of Life: at last,
this blessed Saint was by the slaughter-man laid
out to death with the greatest part of that Ci|tie,
on the fourth of the Calends of Iuly, as Tri|themius
about the sixtieth yeere of his age, o|ther
say the ninetieth. There is great dispute
among Historians, about the yeere of our Lord,
in which he died; but it is certaine, that he with
divers others were set betweene two Hils, there
being a Crosse on the one, and an Idoll on the
other, being put to choice, which way he would
goe, either to the Crosse and so suffer, or to the
Idoll and live; Hee and all they chose to suffer
Martyrdome, and so were all put to death.
His bones as relicks, were reserved with great
care, and laid in rest untill the yeare 1562. they
were digd up in that furious and raging cruelty
of the Hierognosticks, who neither spared dead
nor living, nor Temples, Altars, nor any holy
things, but spoiled all, and cast part of his
bones into the River; and his skull was kicked

about the streets as a Ball; but a Christian Chi|rurgion
stole it up, and kept it two yeers, untill
Charles the ninth got the City again, and resto|red
to Christians their former liberty: who
hearing where his skull was, came, and decent|ly
with great respect buried it,Trithemius in vit Irenaei. and caused it to
be registred in their common Register of the
Citie.
His Sentences I have here placed, with his
Works.
Hee used to compare the Hereticks and Schis|maticks
of his time to Aesops dog,Iren. l. 2. c. 12. that lost the
substance of Religion, by too earnest gaping
after the shadow.
In a just consideration of the glories and ho|nours
of this transitory World,Lib. 2. c. 6. What profit is
there (saith hee) in that honour which is so short
liv'd, as that perchance it was not yesterday, nei|ther
will be too morrow? For such men that la|bour
for it, are but like froth, which though it be
uppermost, yet is unprofitablest.

1 Against the Gen|tiles,
1 booke.
2 Of Discipline 1 book
3 Of Schisme to Bla|stus
1 book.
4 Against Heresies 5
books.
5 Of the Monarchie
of God.
6 Of Ogdoades.
7 Of Easter to Victor.
8 Of the Apostolicall
preaching.




An. Christi 204. Quinctus Septimius Florens Tertullia|nus.

TERTVLLIAN.

_THis Tertullian flourished in the
Reigne of Severus the Emperour,Bellr. descrip. Eccles.
and lived till the reign of Antoninus
Caracalla, as himselfe witnesseth, in
his first book against Marcion, as also in other
places. Pamelius who wrote his life, sayes, That
it was when Victor was Bishop of Rome, who
was an African borne; and when as Septimius
Severus was Emperour, that then this Tertullian
an African, was famous also in the Church. There
have beene those who have striven about two
Questions; first, concerning the knowledge of
this Tertullian; from one Tertullus a Consul; and
from one Tertyllianus, a Counsellour: as also

from one Tertullinus a Martyr. The second que|stion
is about the time wherein this our Tertul|lianus
lived: some will have him to be conver|ted
to e Faith, in the yeere of Christ, 160. but
that is rejected, but Eusebius and others do with
better judgement place him in the yeere of our
Lord 200.
I cannot let passe in the first place, the cause
of the multiplicity of his names. All Antiqua|ries
do hold that he was called Quinctus,  loco
in quo natus: from the place in which hee was
borne: which was his praenomen sed by the Ro|mans,
as Onuphrius testifies, and cites some so
called, as Quinct a Septimia, a famous Matrone.
Septimius was added to him  Gente; from his
stock which was amongst the Romans, both Re|gall,
Plebeian and Consular.Lactant. in lib. instit. c. 1. lib. 5. Ierom. Ep 12 So Septimius Me|sius
rex Aequicolrum. Lactantius in his Insti|tutions,
and Saint Ierome in his Epistle to Fabio|la,
doe suppose this Tertullians stock to be very
noble. The Cognomen, or Sirname of Florens
denotes a certain Family of that Race of Septi|mius:
As for his name Tertullianus, it is a deri|vative
of Tertullus, as Octavianus of Octavus,
and as Septimius, of Septimus. It is concluded
by Eusebius and Saint Ierome, that this Tertul|lianus
was an Affrican borne, the sonne of a
Proconsul; which also is affirmed by Isidorus,
Nicephorus, and Beda: and more specially to be
of the Citie of Carthage.
For his Institution he was happy, for it was
excellent, and hee was as industrious to adde

what could be had by study: his Works against
the Gentiles testifie his able parts, which accord|ing
to Saint Ieroms words; Cunctam saeculi con|tinent
disciplinam, that is, they containe all sorts
of Learning. He was well read in Poets, Gram|marians,
Histories, and Lawes. Hee was well
seene in Physicks and Philosophy. Lactantius says,
hee was in omni genere doctrinae peritus: well
skild in all kinde of Learning. Eusebius stiles
him, Peritia rerum  legum Romanorum cla|rum:
He knew well and dexterously the affaires
and Lawes of the Romans. Saint Ierome sayes,
he was, Acris  vehementis ingenii, vir erudi|tus,
quo nihil eruditius, c. That hee had a
sharpe and pregnant wit; that there was none
more learned than himselfe. Saint Austine stiles
him, Disertissimum; a most discreet man: Ni|cephorus
calls him, Eloquentia acrem  pollen|tem:
powerfull in his Eloquence and Oratory:
but hee that will see his large prayse, let him
read Vincentius Lyrinensis: His words I have
Englished; Inter Latinos omnes hic facile prin|ceps
judicandus, that is, Amongst the Latine
Writers, hee is chiefly accounted of, for
what learning greater then his? Who more
exercised in all divine and humane knowledge?
For he was expert in all Philosophy; He knew all
Sects, their Authors, Defendors, Abettors, Ar|guments,
Fallacies: hee was full of all History:
his wit was able to decide any Controversies; and
that with forcible Arguments: hee convinced
any Opposite hee undertook judiciously: who

can sufficiently blazon his prayses? Each word is
a Sentence: all his constructions victorious. He
wrote many Workes that were necessary for
Christians: which are all so copiously adorned
and beautified, with such solid Reasons, that
they are able to drive any one to his opinions:
Some do stile him harsh and crabbed, which is
supposed came to him, by his daily reading
Greeke Authors: Hee was not so harsh, but hee
was as beneficiall for his Matter; and this wit
hee shewed even in his youth; thus and more
copiously doth he set him forth, and (under the
correction of better judgement) set but his too
severe faults and imperfections aside: look not
too rigidly upon his fall. For those subjects
which hee wrote of, I dare say it, none perfor|med
them more solidly, or devoutly: and it is
thought by candide Divines, it was his too
much addicting himself to the strictnesse of life,
his too deep austerity that caused his fall: how
ever, the most eminent Lights of the Church
have had their imperfections; it is so by the
Divine permission, and Satans malice; and what
if to this end? That Men may know them|selves
so; and to render all glory to God: and
my conclusion concerning his fall, it shall be
vaild with the Mantle of Charity; and let
mee say thus much of it, and seriously professe,
When I read him, I admire him. His Disci|pline
may be too rigid for these more licentious
times. But if it was as Saint Paul sayes, Contun|dere
corpus, to beat downe his proud flesh, that

always rebels against the spirit, who can justly
blame him? his method and practice may be
harsh and difficult, his intention and aime can|not
but be commendable: though he a little mi|stook
the method, yet if he attaind the end, may
wee not conclude him an happy Conquerour?
For his Heresie, of which he stands guilty, have
not all Ages shunn'd that Rock, and yet enter|taine
Tertullian? For certaine, his errour was
grosse, but why may not that famous Tract of
his, de Poenitentia, make amends for it? Hee is
gold, though not altogether refined; so, nor to
to be refused. Wheat he is; who not through|ly
clensed, yet may be placed in the Garner:
perfectly good he is not, yet not to be despised;
for then who should not? And what pen is that
in Writing never made blot? but I doe not here
intend a discovery of his faults, but rather of his
excellencies: and so I say to all; Let him that
thinketh he standeth, take heed least he fall.
Hee liv'd to his Clymactericall yeere, and as
Saint Ierome, and Nicephorus relate it, hee in the
middle of his Age made this declension: but
this Pamelius whom I follow for the descrip|tion
of his life, sayes, that hee fell into it in the
53 yeere of his age: and why might it not please
God to give him a recovery before the revolu|tion
of ten yeeres, when it may by his Divine
providence be effected in ten minutes? And how
usuall it is with God, to bring light of darknes,
and to make crooked things straight; hee that
knowes it not, is not acquainted with Gods

mercifull dealing towards penitent and relent|ing
Sinners.
In the yeere then of our Lord 194. It seems
that this Tertullian was unconverted from Hea|thenisme,
for such an one hee was, by his owne
confession: When he writes of the Resurrection
from Death, the last judgement, the joys of
Heaven, and punishments of Hell, he saith, Haec|nos
aliquando risimus, cum de vobis fuimus: iunt,
non nascuntur Christiani. I laughed, and thought
scorne of such points, when I was (of you)
(meaning Heathens); but now I see wee are not
borne, but made Christians.
But for that time which hee passed before his
conversion to the Faith, it will not be so much
materiall for our purpose. Though he was inge|nuous
and powerfull in pleading Causes at the
Barre; Yet will we not insist upon him as follow|ing
that course of life, but take him in his time,
wherein he saith: Cancellos non adorior, Subsellia
non contundo, Iura non conturbo, Causas non
elatro: plus Togaelaesere Rempublicam quni Lo|ricae.
that is, I follow not the Laws, plead not at
the Barres, beat not the Desks, disturbe not the
Laws; doe not baule out any Causes. The
Lawyers Gownes have hurt the Common-wealth,
as much as the Souldiers Helmets.
The means as Nicephorus and Eusebius guesse,Niceph. l. 5. c 2 Eccles. Hist.
by which this Tertullian was converted, was
thus. The Iews being by Adrian forbidden to
returne home againe after their Warres, they
wandred, saith Tertullian, up and downe, ha|ving

neither home, nor friend, without any
man to comfort them, and without God their
King. So that at the beginning of Severus
Reigne, Bono statures nostrae fuere, Our affairs
went well: and the Christian Faith daily tooke
a larger augmentation; by the famous Writings
and Preachings of excellent Ecclesiasticall Wri|ters
and Preachers. And it was not promoted
in obscure and little Villages, but in the most
eminent and renowmed Cities, to wit, Alexan|dria,
Antioch, Aelia, through all Palestine, as also
in Ephesus, Caesarea, and towards the Westerne
Parts. At Thessalonica, Athens, Corinth; in Gaule,
or France, and Rome. For whole Families, nay,
great multitudes came and embraced the faith;
being ready to doe or suffer any thing for the
defence of it. At the same time, there were
worthy Writers, and diligent Preachers (as Eu|sebius
reports) to some of which this Tertullian
was bound for ever to give God thanks for his
conversion,Tom. 1. Apolog. c. 5. n. 65. 70.  71. as he witnesseth himselfe: as at Alex|andria,
Demetrius
the twelfth Bishop: and Pan|thenus
and his Scholer Clemens Alexandrinus.
A Antioch, Serapio the ninth Bishop: at Ierusa|lem,
Gordius the fourth. Theophilus at Caesarea
Palaestina. Polycrates at Ephesus; Ponticus, Palmas,
Berillus and Bacchilus at Corinth: Agrippinus at
Carthage: Saint Irenaeus at Lions in France, and
Victor Bishop at Rome: and in this time hee set
out his Booke called his Apologie: his conver|sion
he declares to be by meanes of one of their
Idoll gods whom they worshipped, being by a

Christian adjured to declare it, said plainly, that
he was a Devill, and not onely by that, but by
his reading the holy Scriptures. Which the De|vils
(said he) confessed to be the Word of God.Tom. 1. li. ad Scap. c. 3. n. 20. Ibi. Apo c. 19. n. 273 274 275. 276. 277.
Moreover, hee saith, that they are surpassing all
others for Antiquitie, for omnes Substantias,
omnes Materias, Origines, Ordines, c. They
include all Substances, Matter, Originals, Or|ders,
beginnings, c. And also because he found
that what was written in them was Majesticall
and Truth it selfe,Lib. de Pallio, c. 2.  Apolog. c. 40. for quicquid agitur, praenun|ciabatur:
nothing is done, but it was in them
fore-told; and hee confesseth, that the Writings
of many worthy men brought him in: he names
many;Tom. 3. l. adver. alent. c. 5. n. 41. 42. 43. as Melito, Theophilus Antiochenus, Apol|linarius,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustinus Mar|tyr,
and Irenaeus, whom hee calls omnium doctri|narum
curiosissimus Explorator; he was taunted
because hee went  toga ad pallium, from the
study of Law to that of Divinity; but he justi|fies
his Act most learnedly, in an Oration made
at Carthage, and wrote a Booke called, Liber de
Pallio: wherein he shews the Antiquitie, Sim|plicitie,
Libertie, Gravitie, and Holinesse of it,
and says plainly, vitio sibi dari non debere, c.
Hee ought not to bee blamed, because hee had
chang'd his profession.
But observe his behaviour, when he was thus
converted to the Faith:A. D. 197. his owne learned Wri|tings
doe sufficiently declare, that he was whol|ly
taken up night and day in the reading of the
holy Scriptures, and did with great paines get

most of it by heart, so exactly,Tom. 2 lib de  muieb. c. 3. n. 33. Apl. c. 18. that hee knew
each period: in his quotations hee did follow
the Septuagint, and highly prayseth it, and did
not onely exercise himselfe in the Pentateuch,
and other Historicall Bookes, but in the Pro|phets,
nay, in all those sacred Oracles.
And what paines did hee not take in reading
many other Authours, which any wayes might
make for the increase of Faith: As Apollonius
and Victor; Philo and Iosephus, whom hee calls
Antiquitatum Iudaicarum vernaculum Vindi|cem:Tom 1. Apolog. c. 19. n 292. Tom. 3. l. ad|versus Haers. c. 32. n. 185. 186.
that is, The naturall Challenger of the
Iewish Antiquities. Appion and Egisippus, Cle|mens
Romanus, Polycarpe, Saint Ignatius, Dio|nysius
Areopagita, Papias, Panthes; Rhodon of
Asia, Serapion, and one Proculus, whom hee
stiles Eloquentiae Christianae dignitatem: The
dignitie of Christian Eloquence, and divers
others: Behold here the Effigies of a Chri|stian
Bee.
And it is thought, that hee first wrote upon
all the History of the Bible in Verse:Tom. 4. oper is Tertull. How ever
he had an admirable faculty this way; and how
wisely he wrote against one Blastus, who would
have had the Christians Easter to have beene
kept according to Moses,Tom. 3. l. de praescript. adv. Haeres. c. 53. baes 22. n. 328  lib. de . c. 14. n. 84. not to Christian pre|scription:
Est praeterea his omnibus etiam Blastus
accedens, qui latenter Iudaismum vult introdu|cere,
that is, There is, moreover, one Blastus
come forth, that would have us turn Iews, c.
but who knows not (saith he) that the Gospel is
made void, if Christian liberty be to be reduced

to the Law, and in this point what good hee
did to the Church of God, is to this day very
remarkable.
In the yeere of our Lord 195,Ibid. c.  and the sixth
of Severus Empire: what a worthy dispute had
this Tertullian with a Iew a Proelyte, about the
spreading of Christs Kingdom throughout the
World: and what his wisdome was herein who
knowes not? and did thereupon set out that
Book, Adversus Iudaeos. In quem (saith hee)
enim alium universae gentes crediderunt nisi in
esum Christum, qui jam venit, c. In whom
doe all the Nations of the World believe, but
in Iesus Christ who is come? and proves it
from that place,Acts  Parthians, Medes, and Elamites,
c. and though some, nay, most of the Roman
Officers at the Entrance into their places did ex|ercise
their cruelties by the persecution of Chri|stians.
This Tertullian doth highly praise this
Severns the Emperour, for he saith, Sed  cla|rissimas
foeminas,  clarissimos viros Severus
sciens hujus sectaesse, c. Severus though hee
knew many noble men and women to be of this
way, did not onely not punish them, but did
highly commend them, and did publikely with|stand
such as were their enemies. And some
thinke that the Emperour hereupon set forth
that Law called the Law of Severus and Anto|ninus,Tom. 1. l. ad Scap. c. 4. n. 36. Tom . Apolog. c. 1. n. 9.
that no man should be condemned being
absent, or before his cause was heard: which gave
the Christians great matter of joy: and by the
providence of God made way for the enlarge|ment

of the Church and propagation of the
Gospel. And herein who will not say, that this
Tertullian did performe an excellent Worke to
the Church of God?
And when as the Christians were begun to be
vexed by their Enemies, did not this Tertullian,
as Iustinus Martyr had done before, write a
large Apologie for the defence of the Christi|ans,Apolog. c. 4. n. 50. 51. 52.
and send it to Rome; of which Lactantius
speaks, that Tertullian had fully, and judiciously
handled the whole matter, for the generall bene|fit
of the Church of God. Wherein hee hath
this saying, Christianos ad Leones: The Chri|stians
are laid out for the Lions: and saith more|over,Ibid. c. 37. n. 490.
Externi sumus,  vestra omnia complevi|mus,
Vrbes, Insulas, Castella, c. Wee are all
strangers, yet wee fill all your Cities, Islands,
Castles, Garrisons, and yet our reward is no|thing
but heavy persecutions, death it selfe: and
this persecution came by three false calumnies
and slanders imposed upon the Christians at that
time: as the murdering of Infants; eating mans
bloud, and incest: which were all refuted by
this onely Instrument of GODS Glory, Ter|tullian.
Oh admirable Instrument, and painfull La|borer!
how ought thy memory to be kept fresh
and precious for these rare performances! what
shall I terme thee, but Christianorum libera|tor,
The setter of Christians free, who by thy
learned Writings, didst even in a manner, stop
the fury of Lions!

When this worthy Worke was done, hee set
himselfe to write against the Idolatry of Hea|thens,
and the same time was made Priest by
Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage,Tom 3. l. de ani|ma c. 20. n. 226 in the eighth
yeere of Severus Empire, and then, as some say,
hee liv'd as though hee had no Wife: but gave
himselfe wholly to his study and Writing, and
then set forth his Bookes of Repentane and
Prayer, and in the ninth of the Empire of Seve|rus,
hee perswades the Emperour to favour the
Christians in respect of their innocence,Tom. 1. l. ad Scap. c. 2. n. . and
shewed how that they prayed for the prospe|rous
successe of the Emperours affaires, and im|putes
the slaughter of Bizantium to the effusion
of Christian bloud.
And in the sixteenth yeere of Severus Reigne,
there were many Heresies sprung up, and spread
themselves both ancient and new, whereupon
this Champion for the Church bestird himselfe,
and set forth that Aureum Opus, so tis called, that
Golden Worke called de Praescriptionibus ad|versus
haereticos,Tom. 3. lib. de praesrip. adv. Haeres. c 45. n. 293. 294. Certaine prescriptions against
Heretikes. Wherein he shewed as wel his valour
as his diligence, to suppresse and oppose all
growing Vipers. Now (saith he) wee have onely
handled them in generall, but (God willing) we
will answer them all in particular: At the end
of the worke hee makes a Catalogue of all the
Heretickes that then tore the bowels of the
Church. He first takes those foure of the Iewes.
Dositheus the Samaritan, the Sadduces, Pharisees,
and Herodians. Then five and twenty who pro|ved

Hereicks out of the Gospel, as Simon Ma|gus,
Menander, Nicholaus, Cerinthus, Hebion, Sa|turninus,
Basilides, Ophitas, Carpocrates, Caivets,
Sethoites, Valentinus, Polomaens seoundus, Hera|cleon,
Marcus Colorbasus, Gerdo, Marcion, Luca|nus,
Apelles, and divers others: and who will
but confesse, that it was no small taske to stop all
these breaches, and cut off all these Hydraes
heads.
In the eleventh yeere of Severus Reigne,
though then the persecution against the Chri|stians
was hot and violent, yet hee desisted not
from his Labours, and Writings against Here|ticks:
especially against Quintilla. Who knows
not but that many good spirits have hid their
heads in a storme? yet this daunted not Tertul|lian,
twas his worke, and hee was resolved to
performe it, an infallible demonstration of a
noble and unconquered spirit, not to desist from
good actions, though times prove dangerous.
So, likewise, in the thirteenth of Severus, did
he not as worthily withstand the proceeding of
some Libertines, as well at Carthage as elswhere,
who strive to corrupt the Christians by their
Idolatrous shews;Tom 2. de spct. n. 1. then Tertullian wrote his
learned Treatise, de spectaculis, wherein hee
handles the case to the full. And at the same
time how did hee stop an Heresie arising in Af|frick,
called the Apelletians, from one Apel|les:
which worke is desired, but not as yet
enjoyed.
In the fifteenth yeere of the Emperour

Severus,Tom. 3. l. de Resur. Car. c. 2. n. 25.  45. n. 320. did hee not famously write against that
great Heretick Marcion; and set forth his Book
De Resurrectione Carnis? And presently after
wrote his Booke, De Carona Militis worthy
here to be spoken of a little: upon a Triumph
all the Emperours Souldiers,Tom. 3. l. 1. ad|vers. Marcion. c. 15. n. 102. for the greater
pompe were to weare Crowns made of Bayes;
but one Christian there was, who when he had
his Crown given, held it on his arme, but would
not weare it: whereupon being demanded why
hee alone had refused to set forth the pompe of
that day;Tom. 2. de Co|o. . he did boldly answer, Non decet Chri|stianum
in hac vita coronari, A Christian ought
not to be crowned in this life; a true and a wor|thy
answer. And so upon this, Tertullian wrote
his Book so entituled.
I read not after this, that Tertullian did write
any thing for the Church, but against it, The
more is the pitie, so great a Scholer should fall
so fouly. There are many Fathers who have dis|coursed
what might be the cause of this Tertul|lians
revolt. Some (as Saint Ambrose) say it was
Envie; Vincentius Lirinensis makes a good ap|plication
of it. It was, saith he, a great tentation
and triall: The Lord saith Moses, tries us whe|ther
wee love him or not, when there ariseth
up one of these false prophets, or teachers, or
dreamers. Saint Ierome gives him a great praise
for his wit: but laments his losse. Saint Cyprians
phrase was, when hee would read Tertullian, to
say,Hiero in C|talogo script. Eccles. Da Magistrum, Give me my Master. Trithe|mius
terms him, Tam in divinis, qum in saecu|laribus

Scripturis doctissimum: The most lear|ned
in sacred and secular affaires. And that hee
taught Rhetorick at Carthage, a long time, Glo|rios
(saith he) with great glory and credit, and
againe, scripsit Latino sermone pen, c. That
hee wrote almost infinite Workes in Latine,
wherein he hath most judiciously confuted and
overthrown all the Heresies hee wrote against,
 licet in aliquibus, c. and though (saith he)
he erred in some things, yet he wrote profitably
in many other his Books. Hee lived till hee was
old and decrepite, and so yielded up his spirit,
after that he had painfully and learnedly studied
the Word of God, and carefully and discreetly
answered all those that proved Hereticks to the
Truth.
I have here not followed Trithemius Cata|logue,
nor yet Bellarmines concerning his
Works, but as Pamelius hath registred them,
in the Collen Impression, Anno 1617. Hee hath a
learned commendation set under his Effigies,
wherein as Tullius was the Pillar and praise of
Rome, so Africk glories in her Tertullian. His
Oratory was famous, and Tertullians speech was
sweeter then honey, as may appeare by some of
his Sentences.


Tertul. de poenitenia.
If thou be backward in thoughts of repen|tance,
be forward in thy thoughts of Hell; the
flame whereof only the streame of a penitent eye

can extinguish: and first so thinke on the great|nesse
of the punishment, that thou mayst not
doubt of getting a remedy against it.


Idem, de fuga in persecutione.
The Legion of Devils could not have con|quered
a Herd of Swine, if God had not given
them power: farbe it then, the Devill should
have power over Gods owne Sheepe: I may say,
That even then the bristles of those Swine were
numbred before God, and much more are the
haires of his Saints.


De Fide.
Ex personis probamus fidem,Tertull. de praescrip. con|tra Haeres. an ex fide perso|nas?
Doe wee try mens faith by their persons?
we should try their persons by their faith?


Idem, de Oratione.
The remembrance of Gods precepts, chalkes
out a way for our prayers to Heaven: the chiefe
of which precepts is, That we come not first to
make our atonement with God on his Altar,
before wee have made our atonement with our
brother in our hearts. For what profit is it to
come to the peace of God, without peace? to
come for remission of debts, without remission
of debts? How can he appease his Father, that
is angry with his brother?



Idem, de Oratione.
Let us not approach unto Gods holy Altar,
before wee have made peace with our offended
brother: for to what end should wee come to
the God of peace, without peace? for the re|mission
of our own sinnes, without any intenti|on
to forgive one another? How can hee that
is not pleased with his brother, thinke to please
the God of his brother, seeing that God com|mands
him not to be angry at all, but forgive
him? Hee that then prepareth himselfe on earth,
shall be sure of his reward in Heaven.


Tertullians houres of prayer.
They were the third,Tertull. de je|junio. cap. 10. the sixt, and the ninth
houres: for they are, saith he, the more eminent
part of the day, to distribute and distinguish the
publike affaires of men: so have they beene ac|couned
the most solemne times for Prayer, and
Divine Duties in the Church of God: For at
the third houre were the Apostles met together
at their Devotions, and were filled with the
power of the Holy Ghost.
GOd Almighty who is the protector and defen|der
of Kings,Tertull. in Apolog. grant to your Sacred Majesty,
along life, a happy Reigne, a secure State and habi|tation,
a strong Army, a faithfull Senate or Coun|cell,
and a Royall people. These were the solemne

Prayers of Tertullian for the Emperours; and
used by the ancient Church.


De Sanctorum Passione.
Tertullian saith, that Paul thought himselfe
unworthy to suffer for his Saviour, because hee
had no more lives to lose for his sake: For hee
that lost his life for us that wee might live, de|serves
our lifes, and all to bee laid downe for
him.
Whence it is that the Saints have rejoyced in
their sufferings, not counting their life deare
that they might winne Christ. Yea, to mee
(saith Saint Paul, in his Epistles) to live is Christ,
and to die is gain. And elswhere he saith, I beare
in my body the marks of the Lord Iesus. And in|deed
the sufferings of the Saints, though for the
present grievous and hard to bee borne, bring
forth an hope of reward exceeding great and glo|rious;
while wee looke not at the things temporall,
but at the things eternall. And this should en|courage
us for Christs Name sake to passe
through bad report, and good report, setting be|fore
our eyes the example of the Saints; and not
onely so, but with cheerfulnesse to sustain all in|jurious
dealings of men, though they deprive
us of livelihood and life it selfe, for Christ and
his Truths sake; knowing that it is a good thing
to suffer in a good cause, and that this shall make
our Crown to be glorious, and enstate us into
blessednesse with eternity to have a period.



De Christo VERBO.
Tertullian upon occasion, taking a serious
surveigh of the blessed Apostles Writings, a|mongst
the rest, fixing his eye of contemplati|on
on the first Verse of the first Chapter of Saint
Iohn the Evangelist, affirmes thus much in these
termes, This barbarous man wrote more in few
words, than all the Apostles in any one of their
Chapters; namely, in these, In the beginning was
the Word, and that Word was with God, and that
Word was God.
Which place though at first hard to bee
understood, containeth in it an hidden mystery,
the revealing whereof is worth the while; for in
that it is said, In the beginning was the Word, we
must know, that without Gods Word, there
had been no beginning, nothing had been made
that was made; for at first God said, Let there
be Light, let there be a Firmament, let there be
Sea and Earth, c. still God said it; in the be|ginning
was the Word. And that Word was God:
it was very God; for God admits of none acci|dents,
God is all substance; nothing that is in
God or immediatly from God, is accidentall to
God. But Christ the begotten of God, was with
God, yea, God himselfe: that Word was God.
That Word, which was the Word of the Word
of God; for the whole Scriptures speake of
that Word, and without that Word there had
been no Scripture.



Tertul. in Apologetico.
Hell is a treasure of secret fire kept under the
Earth to punish sinners withall.


Idem, de Praescript. adversus Haereticos.
It is not lawfull for us to devise any thing of
our selves, nor to follow that which others have
devised; wee have the Apostles of our Lord for
our Authours, who devised nothing of their
own heads, but delivered faithfully to the Na|tions,
the Doctrine which they received of
Christ. Therefore though an Angell from Hea|ven
should preach otherwise, wee should count
him accursed. Every Teacher is a Servant of
the Law, because hee may neither adde of his
own sence unto the Law, nor according to his
conceit take any thing from the Law, but preach
that onely which is found in the Law.



His Works are here as follow.

1 De Pallio, or the
Surplice.
2 His Apology against
the Gentiles, for the
Christians.
3 Of the Testimony of
the soule against the
Gentiles.
4 To Scapula.
5 Against the Jews.



Tome 2.
1 Of Repentance.
2 Of Prayer.
3 To the Martyrs.
4 Of Patience.
5 Of Shewes and
Playes.
6 Of Idolatry.
7 Of Womens attire.
8 Of the deeking of
Women.
9 To his Wife two
two Books.
10 Of the Souldiers
Crown.
11 Of Virgins Veils.


Tome 3.
1 Of prescriptions a|gainst
Heretikes.
2 Of Baptisme against
Quintilla.
3 Against Hermoge|nes.
4 Against the Valen|tinians.
5 Against Heretikes
and philosophers of
the soule.
6 Of the true flesh of
Christ, against foure
Heretikes.
7 Of the Resurrection
of the body.
8 Against Marcion.
9 Against the Gno|sticks.
10 Against Praxea.


Tome 4.
1 Five Books against
Marcion.
2 Of the Iudgement
Day.
3 His Poems on Ge|nesis,
on Sodome.
4 To a Senatour that
fell from Christiani|tie
to Idolatry.
5 Fragments of some
Greek works.
6 To a friend a philo|sopher,
of the trouble
of Wedlock, and of
Virginitie.
7 Of Fate.
8 Of cleane and un|clean
creatures.
9 Of Circumcision.
10 Of Aarons gar|ments.

11 Of the blessed Tri|nitie.
12 Against Hermoge|nes.
13 Against Apelletians
14 Of Paradise.
15 Of Extasie.
16 Against Apollonius


Tome 5.
Those that he writt
in his fall.
1 An exhortation to
Chastity.
2 Of Monogamy.
3 Of flight in perse|cution
to Fabius.
4 Of Fasts.
5 Of Mod sty.
6 Of the Trinitie.
7 Of Jewish meats.
8 Of Circumcision, 
the true keeping the
Lords Day.





An. Christi 204. Clemens Alexan|drinus.

CLEM: ALEXANDRINVS.

_THis great Father was born at Athens,
but governed the Church of Alex|andria,
(as Saint Hierom witnesseth
in his Catalogue) He was an auditor
to Pantenus (who dying) this Clemens was Ma|ster
of the Catechists, his Works are full of Lear|ning
and Eloquence, and wrote in a most ele|gant
stile: take but what Gentianus Hervet pro|duceth
out of Cyrill the Patriarch of Alexan|dria
against Iulian, for a true testimonie of this
Clemens endowments and abilities. Quam is au|tem
utilis sit futurus, hinc potest evidenter perspi|ci.
Suntne aliqui, qui priseis,  ex alto petitis
delect antur Historiis. Hi legant Clementem: qui

omnes anti quas it a tenuit Historias, ut nihil co|rum,
His History. qu in universo terarum Orbe gesta sunt 
eum latuisse videantur, c. that is, How usefull
and how profitable to future ages this man will
be, may easily be seen, for are there any who are
delighted with ancient and profound Histories?
Let such read this Clement, who was so skilfull
in all sorts of Histories, that hee was not igno|rant
of all, or the most famous passages that
were done in the World.
Are there any that everence the antiquitie of 
Verse and Poetry,Poetry. and the divine answers of the
Oracles? Let such set an high esteeme upon this
Clement, who cites the testimonies of many fa|mous
Poets, whose Works at this day are utter|ly
perished, are there any that desire to know the
ancient Rites and Ceremonies of the Heathe|nish
gods sacrifices? Let such take counsell of
this Clement, who layes open plainly all the wic|ked
and prophane sacrifices, Orgies and Myste|ries
of the old Heathenish gods. So that if any
Christian should yet love Gentilisme, and who
should prayse and admire the ancient Manners
and Institutions of the old Gentiles, (as would
to God there were none) such a man upon the
reading of Clement, unlesse possessed with the
spirit of slumber and stupiditie, will reject his
former opinion of those false gods, and laugh
at the madnesse of their worshippers, and wish
them condigne punishment for their folly.Philosophie. Are 
there any that desire to know the determinati|ons
of the ancent Philosophie? Let such but

read this great Scholer, who hath fully delive|red
and described the Originall, Families, Sects,
Successions, Learning of all those Ancients, yet
hee did mightily preferre Christian Philosophy
before all other sorts whatsoever, that there is
not any man but of necessity must acknowledge
it to be divine, and in truth to be inspired of
God. Doth any one desire to know the Tenents
of those Heretikes that disturb'd the peace of
the Church in the infancie of it? Let him but
be conversant with this eminent Father, who
both discovers and explaines, and also learnedly
confutes their unsound opinions: doth any de|sire
the authority of the Primitive Fathers; to
overthrow such Heresies as are broach'd in our
times? In this case also will this Clemens give
them great and commendable satisfaction. Doth
any desire to have the basenesse and corruption
of mens manners to bee corrected? There is
none that doth more sharply lash at vice, and
beat downe sinne; none that gives fairer exhor|tations
and incitements to Vertue and Pietie;
None affords fairer demonstrations for the insti|tution
of a godly life; then this one Father. Does
any one desire to see good Discipline decayed,
to be restored entire and whole? Hi cum Cle|mentis
doctrinam  vitae sanctitatem (ut par
est) laudaverint, qui cum esset presbyter solum|modo,
talis fuit, c. When such shall (as it is
equall) have praised the doctrine and sanctiie of
Clement, who was onely a Priest, but such an one,
that if our times did afford but many such, it

would goe prosperously and happily with the
cause of Christianity.
This Clemens is wonderfully commended by
Eusebius, Nicephorus, and Hierome, and Photius
himselfe speaks of some of his Works, especial|ly
of that which hee cals his Pedagogue, which
doth give directions for manners and life, con|taining
three Sections,Photius in Bib|lio beca p. 287. in which (saith he) Dictio
est florida, quaeque assurgit in Majestatem cum
suavitate conjunctam, in quibus etiam est eruditio
multa  decens: that is, The Language is flou|rishing,
and ariseth into certain Majestie joyn'd
with sweetnesse wherein is very much Learning
comely adorned and set forth: so that as Euse|bius
and others testifie, those blemishes that
were cast upon his Works and Writings, were
done by the Easterne Heretikes, and Alexander
Bishop of Hierusalem,Trithem. de scrip. Eccles. fol. 8. gives him a sufficient te|stimony
for Life and Learning. Trithemius
terms this Clement, virum devotum, doctum, 
eloquentissimum: that is, a Religious, Devout,
Learned, Eloquent Father: and that faire En|comium
which is extant of him in Saint Ieromes
Catalogue,Hieron. cat script. Eccles, fol. 95. I thought good to insert here made
by Alexander Bishop of Hierusalem, and sent to
the Antiochians. Haec vobis Domini  Fra|tres
scripta transmisi per Clementem Beatum
Presbyterum, virum illustrem  probatum, c.
that is, These Writings, Brethren, have I sent to
you by Clement that blessed Priest, a man famous
and tried, whom you know, and now will know
better, who, since hee did come hither by the

sending of God, and his providence hath main|ly
confirm'd and encreas'd the Church of God:
Origen was his Disciple,Hierom. Epist. ad Mag Tom. 2 pag. 108. and succeeded him in
his place at Alexandria. Saint Hierom gives him
this phrase, Clemens meo judicio omnium eru|ditissimus,
nihil indoctum, c. This Clemens,
in my judgement, was of all others the best
Learned, and his Workes full of sacred Philo|sophy,
c.

His Sentences are these.
He used to say of such,Clem. Alex. .  Pedag c. 21. as adorned themselves
with gold, that hee or shee that thinke themselves
bettered by the addition of gold unto their at|tires,
are worse then gold: And they that are in|feriour
to gold are not Lords of it, as all men
should be.
Out of the depth and bowels of the earth hath
God discovered and shewed gold unto men:Ibid.
and they have made it the occasion of all mis|chiefs
and wickednesse.
Gold, saith hee, to many men is more dearer
then either faith or honesty: For the love of it
makes some men so covetous, as if they were
to live here for ever: And some others are so
prodigall, as if they were to die instantly.
Avarice is not the vice of gold, but of man
that useth gold ill and wickedly.
The dayes of that man must needes be happy
and long, that hateth and abhorreth the love of
gold for lucre sake.



His Workes.

1 His Stromata, or
his books of Varieties
8 books.
2 Against the Gen|tiles,
1 book.
3 His Paedagogue, 3
books.
4 Of Easter 1 book.
5 Of Fasting 1 book.
6 Of Disputation 1.
7 Of the salvation of
the Rich man 1 book.
8 Of Slandring 1.
9 Against those that
turn to Judaisme 1.
book.
10 Of Ecclesiastical Ca|nons
1 book.

Hee set forth likewise many Treatises and
Epistles,Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l. . c. 11. whose Titles cannot be knowne: and
this Father lived in the Reignes of two Empe|rours,
Commodus and Severus.Ruffin. c. 11. In a word, hee is
generally approved of, and to shut up all with
that registred in Eusebius,Nyceph. c. 33. lib. 4. Euseb lib. 6. of one Alexander,
who was familiar with one Pantenus, and this
Clemens: Nam illos beatos patres, qui ante nos
sedulo viam virtutis instituerunt cognovimus.
Pantenum beatum  sanctum. Clementem Do|minum
meum, qui mutum mihi saepe commodavit.
We knew (saith he) those blessed Fathers, who
before us followed diligently Vertue, to wit;
blessed Pantenus and holy Clemens, who profited
me much.




Origenes Adaman|tius.

S. ORIGEN.

_THis eminent Writer, who was Scho|ler
to Clemens Alexandrinus, was
called by two names, some call'd
him Origen, some Adamantius,
which sirname was not given him as some other
of the Fathers had given to them, as Saint Basil
for his admirable wit was called Magnus, Saint
Chrysostome was so called for his sweetnesse of
speech, Gregorius Nazianzenus was termed for
his wonderfull knowledge in sacred Writ, Theo|logus,
that is, the Divine. But Origen had this
sirname from his first growth and progresse. The
first of his names was given him for his sublime
and divine speculations, who by sweet and mel|lifluous

Allegories, carries his Readers affecti|on
from terrene to celestiall contemplations:
his second name he had from the nature of that
precious stone called the Adamant, whose lustre
and hardnesse gives it renowme; such was this
Fathers noble and generous minde, not daunted
or affrighted with any afflictions, but in all states
and conditions kept his resolution and integri|tie:
so that as Erasmus who wrote his life, speaks
of him, in these words, Quem nec vit ae austeri|tas,
nec perpetui labores, nec dura paupertas, nec
improborum pravitas, nec suppliciorum terror;
nec ulla mortis facies,  Sancto instituto vel tan+tillum
dimovere potuit: that is, whom neither
austerity of life, nor perpetrated labours, nor
dejected poverty, nor wicked mens policies, nor
terrour of punishments, no nor yet death it selfe
could any whit displace or remove: oh admired
patterne to succeeding ages!
There is not much written of his Country,
but most do conclude him to be of Alexandria,
because there his Father suffered his imprison|ment,
and Martyrdome, and there left his Wife
and Children, It makes not so much where wee
are borne as of whom: this Origens Father and
Grandfather were Christians, though Porphyrius
relates that his parents were Heathens: his Fa|thers
name was Leonidas, a honest devout man,
and well learned, who after imprisonment lost
his head under the persecution of Severus the
Emperour, leaving this Origen with sixe other
brethren in great want and penury: for his

goods and estate were confiscated to the Empe|rour.
Some report this Leonidas to have been a
Bishop, as Eusebius and Saint Ierome.
This Origen was very famous,Ierom. in Ca|tal. Illust. viro|rum. Euseb. Eccles. Histor. lib. 6. and so little
feared Martyrdome, that had not his mother
prevented his intents, he had made himself a pat|tern
to his Father. For shee in the night got
away his cloathes, so that hee could not goe
abroad: but however while his Father was in
prison, he wrote a worthy Letter to him; not
any wayes to shrinke under the suffering for any
respect; in which he useth this phrase, Vide pater,
ne quid mea cansa secus facias, Look to it, oh my
Father, that you do not change your resolution
for my sake: Hee was of that undaunted spirit,
that hee would comfort the Christians in their
Martyrdomes, and would visit others, that were
in chaines for the cause of CHRIST: Nay,
and without feare of punishment delivered
some from their fetters. And in his Writings,
when as he speaks of Martyrs, and their tor|ments,
hee seemes to be even ravished in spirit.
Hee was not seventeen yeeres old when hee was
deprived of his Father, and had a Mother with
many brethren, whom hee did by labour and
study maintaine and cherish, and the better to
provide for their sustenance, hee did publikely
professe Grammar, which though many may
take to be a needlesse profession, yet in ancient
times it was in high esteem, so that of it, it was
said, Senile atque arduum fuisse negotium: that
is, it was a taske for an old grave man to per|form,

and full of difficulty, for as a great Writer
speaks, Non ta~tm expect abatur Declinationum,
Conjugationum  Constructionum ratio: sed
sermonis elegantia, plurimorum Authorum lectio,
Antiquitatum  Historiarum peritia; ac etiam
Poeseos, Rhetorices, Dialectices, Arithmetices, 
Cosmographiae, Musicaeque cognitio, that is, There
was not onely expected in one of these Profes|sors
a method for the Declensions, Conjugati|ons,
but there was a requisite elegancy of speech,
reading of divers Authours, skill in Histories,
Poetrie, Rhetoricke, Logicke, Arithmeticke,
Cosmographie and Musicke, in all which this
Origen was excellently wel experienced; and the
place in which hee professed was no meane one,
but in the famous Citie of Alexandria: and pre|sently
after, hee read the grounds of Religion,
divinely instructing the Christians, confirming
and strengthening their hearts against all the
stormes of persecution. Amongst many others
one Disciple called Plutarchus, was so encoura|ged
by this famous instrument, that hee under|went
Martyrdome: and one Heraclas a Kinsman
of this Plutarchus, for his holinesse of life, was
after the death of Demetrius, advanced to the
Government of the Church of Alexandria, Se|renus
also was so instructed by Origen, that hee
died for the name of Iesus, as also Heraclides,
and many others as well men as women, so ser|vent
and powerfull was the doctrine of Origen,
and such deepe impressions made it in the minds
of his Auditors.

He did strictly keep under his body, and sub|jugated
the flesh to the spirit, lest, as hee said,
while he saved others, hee himselfe should be a
cast-away, he was frequent in watchings, in fast|ings,
humicubations, in labours and wants, and
yet underwent all with a great deale of alacritie,
integritie and patience, his holinesse of life was
not onely admired and followed by Christians,
but also by many Heathens, so attractive and
powerfull is the example of a good life.
But now Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria,
hearing of Origens paines and piety, thought
him a fit instrument to be placed in the Church,
and so called him to be the Catechista, or Rea|der
of Divinitie in that place, a weighty and
eminent place, which after the Apostles one
Pantaenus, and after him one Clemens had sup|plyed
in the Citie of Alexandria, and now this
Origen enjoy'd; and kept it many yeeres, with a
general approbation and renowne, the Disciples
of these men were termed Catechumenists, or
hearers.
Now he left his profession of Grammar, and
sold all his bookes to a friend of his for the al|lowance
of foure half-pence a day, and wholly
addicted himselfe to the studie of Divinity, in
which he so profited and exceld, that hee was by
Alexander Bishop of Hierusalem, and Theoctistus
Bishop of Caesarea, called to the Priesthood: a
great dignity in those times, though much and
too much slighted in these looser and propha|ner
days.

The Churches of Achaia, were vext at this
time with divers Heresies, to stop which Origen
was sent with the Epistles or Letters Testimo|niall
of the Church, and as he went through Pa|lestine,
towards Athens, hee was by the Bishops
aforenamed, ordained Priest, that He might be
the more potent, being confirmed by authority
Ecclesiasticall. He did not run, but was lawful|ly
sent, and did painfully undergoe that charge;
and indeed his doctrine and life was so renow|med,
and eminent, that they caused him to be
envied, and hated, especially of Demetrius; so
that he did what he could to cloud and darken
this Origens fame, (a fault not fitting to harbour
in a Divines breast, though through the Devils
malice too frequent.) This Demetrius ript up
this Origens faults, and by his writings did pub|lish
them to the World, and especially hee up|braided
him with that rash and inconfiderate
act of his dismembring himself, which He stiles
puerilis error, a childish fact, a blind zeale with|out
knowledge, and said, that He took some o|ther
things Historically, which he should not in
the Gospel, as that having two Coats he should
give away one, as also that of not caring for the
morrow, c. so that what Origen thought not
to have bin known, was, and Demetrius for that
imperfection, deem'd him unfit for the Priest|hood,
and so did now dislike what formerly hee
approved; and envied deeply him, whom hee
should have lov'd. Such power hath premedita|ted
and working revenge.

Well, in the height of Origens fame, these
things were divulged, and his adversary was
potent, and thereupon Origen was forced to
give way to the storme, and yield to the impor|tunitie
of his Enviers, and so left Alexandria,
yet always kept his constancie and courage, and
retain'd his piety unmoved, preaching the Go|spel
with all diligence and painfulnesse, striving
to convert many to Christ, not doing as Ter|tullian
did, to turn from Orthodox, to a Monta|nist,
but the more his affliction was, the closer
he kept his piety, nor yet troubling the World
with Schisme, nor yet requiting his adversaries
with ill language, or calumniations, but hee
went another way to worke, to doe good for
evill, and to speak well of His standerers, (as
Saint Peter saith) by this meanes stopping the
uthes of his Gain-sayers.
The principall place in which He taught was
Caesarea of Palaestine, there hee instructed many
in the Faith, and saw the fruits of His labours;
for Hee had many famous men who were His
Followers and Scholers, as Firmilianus, after|wards
Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia, of whom
Hee was entertained with applause through all
Cappadocia. Who after that he had seen the Holy
places in Palaestina, return'd to Origen againe.
He brought up Theodorus, afterwards called to
the dignity of a Bishop: as also Gregorius, who
for the Miracles which Hee wrought, was ter|med
Thaumaturgus, who was an eminent Fa|ther
of the Church. This Origen did likewise

convert Anthenodorus the brother of Gregorius,
and made him leave all his worldly wisdome to
gain the knowledge of Christ, and gained great
advancement in the Church of God. He was cal|led
to Antioch by Mamniaea the mother of Alex|ander
Severus, and was by her honourably en|tertained
and religiously dismissed againe, this
woman is called by Saint Ierome a Religious
Matron. He wrote a famous and learned Epistle
to Philip the Emperour who was the first King
of the Romans which was Christian. Hee saw
Rome which hee cals Ecclesiam magnam a great
Church in one of his Epistles, and this was done
in the time of Zepherinus: so againe he did re|turne
to Alexandria, and admitted into his so|ciety
Heraclas again. He recald Ambrosius from
the heresie of the Marcionites, and caused him
to embrace the orthodox faith. He never affe|cted
wealth, but contented himselfe with a low
estate; for being so beloved he might easily have
abunded in riches, if his mind had beene set|led
on them. He was so studious, that he would
read at his meales. It is said of Him to his cre|dit
and renowme, that, Origeni null a par aetatis
periit  studiis, that is, Origens whole life was a
continued study: and another speaks thus of
him, Origenis ingenium sufficiebat ad omnia per|discenda:
that is, Origen had such a pregnancie
of wit, that he was apt to learne any thing. Ad|fuit
illi mira ex tempore dicendi facultas,  in
obscuris dictionibus perspicuitas that is, He had
a wonderfull faculty in expressing himselfe ex

tempore, and to explicate obscure places won|drous
quick and able. Quanti fecerit Originem
Antiquitas, c. How much did Antiquity ac|count
of Origen, any man knows, for Saint Ie|rome
stiles him no lesse then Magistrum Ecclesia|rum
post Apostolos, the Master of the Churches
after the Apostles: And Saint Augustine wished
that His Works were turn'd into Latine, Victo|rinus
and Hilarius Bishop do mightily endevour
to set forth his prayses. And as one saith, Quis
ex Scriptoribus qui post Origenem vixere, non
insigniter ab eo est adjutus: that is, Who of all
the Writers who lived after Origen, was not
singularly helped by Origens labours: Nay, to
shut up all, it is said of Him, primus omnium
glaciem scidit: Hee was the first that broke the
ice, for the explanation of the Scriptures. To
conclude all, Hee carefully employed His
time, endured a great measure of affliction,
faithfully preached the Gospel, converted many
to Christ, having spent himselfe in holy labours
for the good of the Church, In the first yeere
of Decius,Ruff cap. 29. the seventh persecution being raised
against the Christians, in the 225 yeere after
Christ.Nyceph. c. 27. 32. 33. lib. 5. And in this persecution, it is generally
knowne what heavy and cruell torments this
Origen then endured, and indeed, it was not so
fierce against any as this Father, for Hee suffered
bonds, tortures of his body, being fastned by
the neck with a great iron chaine, and many
dayes together: his feet were kept in a paire of
Stocks of wood, and then were stretched foure

paces wide, with threatnings of fire, and a
most cruell Judge striving by all means to pro|long
his tortures;Euseb. lib. Ec|cles. Hist. 6. pag. 173. but what pious Ejaculations
and comfortable prayers, and zealous exhorta|tions
he made and gave to the Christians, is to
be wondred at, considering the length and ex|tremity
of his sufferings, that he should retaine
his valour and constancie, untill the giving up
of his spirit. I know how some have sharply
reprov'd him for that act of dismembring him+selfe,
and others have condemned him and his
Writings; but these are not demonstrations, so
much as calumniations of so great a Light of
the Church: However if hee was in an errour,
the Mantle of Charitie should hide and conceal
it. I have read too that he died at Tire very old
and poore:Trithe. descrip. Eccles. fol. 10. But we are not to believe a private
pen before so great a Cloud of Witnesses to the
contrary: However, Hee lived to the seventieth
yeere of his age, and died a constant Martyr for
Christianity.
Hee flourished in the Reigne of Antonius
Caracalla, Macrinus and others; from the yeere
of our Lord 213. to 240.
Also I have annexed some of the famous Sen|tences
of this Father.

Origen.
Let every man know his place and order,Origen. super Levit. and
understand what doth become his place and de|gree,
and so weigh his actions and speech, and

moderate his gate and habit, yet it may bee a|greeable
to his degree and profession.
Thou that art a sinner,Origen. super Ezec. hom. 10. grieve not to encoun|ter
afflictions in the pilgrimage of this life, for
thou shalt not deserve compassion, if thou suf|ferest
with indignation: but rather thinke thy
selfe worthy of punishment, and when thou hast
humbled thy selfe, and hast said, that Gods
judgements are just and right, thou shalt obtain
mercy from him, who can restore thee to his
favour.
Those that are humbled and cast downe,
whether worthily or unworthily, let them leave
the judgement to God, and patiently beare his
judgements, for thereby they shall obtaine mer|cie
from God, and recover amongst men their
former degree and glory which they lost.
Hee that hath exchanged poverty for riches,Origen. super illud Mat. 20. c.
that hee might be perfect, was not made perfect
at that instant, when hee gave his goods to the
poore; but from that day when the speculation
and consideration of Gods goodnesse drew to
the perfection of all vertues.
Gods providence hath ordained all things to
some end and purpose.Origen. super Numb. 22. He made not malice; and
though he can restrain it, he will not. For if ma|lice
were not, Vertue should not have a contra|ry,
it could not shine cleee, there would be no
examination, and vertue could not be tried and
proved. For the malice of Iosephs brethren
was the meanes whereby God brought about
the works of his providence effected by Ioseph.



I have annexed his Works as they are in two
Tomes.

Tome 1.
On Genesis, homilies 17
On Exodus, 13.
On Leviticus, 16.
On Numbers, 28.
On Josua, 26.
On Judges, 9.
On the Kings, 1.
On Job, books 3.
On the 36. 37. 38. Psalms
homilies, 9.
On the Canticles, homi|lies
6.
On Esaiah, hom. 9.
On Jeremiah, 14.
On Ezechiel, 14.
De principiis, 4.
Threnes, or Lament, 1.
Pamphilus his Apology
for Origen.
Ruffinus depravation
of Origen.


Tome 2.
On Matthew, Tracts 35
On Luke, Homil. 39.
On John, 32.
On divers places of the
new Testament, ho|milies
10.
On the Romans, books,
10.
Against Celsus, books 8.
Dialogues against the
Marcionites, book 3.





An. Christi 233. Sanctus Gregorius Thaumaturgus.

GREG: THAVMATVRGVS.

_I Doe intend to describe the lives
of foure famous Fathers of this
name, who have beene eminent in
the Church for Piety and Learning,
for Action and Passion, viz. Gregorius Nazi|anzenus,
then Gregory sirnamed Magnus, Pope
of Rome, Gregory Nyssenus who was brother to
Saint Basil the Great, and this Gregory Thauma|turgus:
the greatest part of the Churches Histo|rians
have beene copious in setting forth the
prayses of all these. I now set upon this, and
what I doe expresse to the World shall be true,
and mayntaind by sufficient Witnesses. He was
called Theodorus before, and hee got his name

Thaumaturgus, from the abundance of Mira|cles
which hee wrought, and great Wonders
which hee did, if wee give credit to Gerardus
Vssius, in his Preface before this Fathers work;Paeat. Ge|rard. Vossi.
that Saint Basil ranks him not inferiour to Mo|ses,
the Prophets and Apostls and that hee was
full of great Signes and Miracles, that hee was
indued with the spirit of prophecie, that hee by
prayer removed a great Hill which hindred the
perfecting of a Church, that hee dried up a great
Lake which had caused great discord betwixt
two Brehren, that Hee by His prayer stopt the
force of the River Lycus, which overflowed and
drowned the neighbouring fields, and so bride|led
the swelling waves that ever after they did
keep within their own bounds and banks: That
this Faher likewise cast out Devils out of the
bodies of men; that He stayed the plague in pla|ces
that were infected, that he heald the sick and
weak, and that He also raised the dead, and that
Hee brought many souls to embrace the Gospel
of Christ Iesus: Whether he was so full of these
Works and Wonders, I doe not here intend to
dispute, but I have onely related what I have
read of him, and I have not much cause to su|spect
the wordes of so many Fathers of the
Church, who witnesse it of Him. Take there|fore,
I pray you, the commendation which
Saint Basil the great affords Him in His Booke
of the Holy Ghost,Sanctus Basil. in lib. de S. S. cap. 29. Chapter 29.
; that is, Where shall I find

a fit place for this great Gregory, and his praises?
May I not fitly set him with the Prophets and
Apostles, a man endued with the same spirit in
great measure, a man whose life paralled those
former stars of Heaven: a man who did power|fully
shew the vigour of the Word of God. We
should do injury to the Truth, if we should not
account him amongst the blessed in glory and
felicity, which like an eminent Torch shined in
the Church of Christ,S.  Basil. loco citat.  ope S. S. tremendam
habuit adversus Daemones potestatem. And who
by the helpe of the Holy Ghost, had mighty
power against Devils: Hee had received such a
plentifull portion of the graces of Gods Spirit,
that by the helpe of seventeen more Christians;
he brought whole Cities and Countries to the
obedience of the Gospel. Hee also chang'd the
course, and bridled the force of Rivers: and of
a great Lake which was cause of dissention be|twixt
two brothers: and his predictions of
things to come, makes him that hee may be rec|koned
amongst the Prophets: If saith Saint
Basil, I should reckon up all His Wonders and
Miracles, which hee did in the sight of the peo|ple,
I should even attribute that title to him
which his very adversaries afforded him, ,
a second Moses; for they are so fixed in
the hearts of men, and so knowne amongst all,
so faithfully registred amongst Historians, that
the envy of the Devill,S Basil in Ep. 62. Cosolatar. ad Ecclesiam Naeo caesari. nor the length of time
can ever abolish the memory of them, Qui 
tempore magni praesidis Ecclesiae vestrae Gregorii,

Who from the time of that Great President of
your Church, Saint Gregory have flourished.
Here I cannot but cite the admirable commen|dation
that Eusebius the Historian giues him,Euseb. l. 7. Ec|cles. Histor.
beginning thus. ,
about the same time that Xistus ruled the Roman
Church, and Demetrianus who succeeded Fabia|nus
in the Church of Antioch, and Firmilianus
the Church of Caesarea, that this Gregory called
Theodorus, who was an Auditour of S. Origens,
together with his brother Athenodorus, did
wisely manage the Church of Pontus,Euseb. lib. 7. Eccles. Hist. c. 25. and in an|other
place, the said Eusebius reckons up this
famous Gregories actions, Verum quoniam Beati
Gregorii historiae textus mentionem attulit, c.
But for as much as the Text of the History hath
mentioned this Blessed Saint Gregory, I will not
omit the worthy Workes of so great a man.
There was a great Lake in Pontus, full of all
sorts of fish, which came to be the Inheritance
of two Brethren, who fell to civill dissention a|bout
it, so that many men had lost their lives in
the quarell: which thing when Gregory heard
of, he presently came to the place, and uttered
these words to the two contentious Brothers:
Nolite,  Filioli, rationales animas pro multis
animantibus vilare, Fraternam pacem quaestus
cupiditate dissolvere, Dei leges  naturae pariter
jur a temer are: that is, Do not,  my sonnes, !
doe not destroy so many reasonable soules for a
few mute creatures, break not the bond of bro|therly
love and peace for transitory gaine: doe

not so rashly and desperatly violate the Laws o
God and Nature at once: come wih mee to this
fatall Lake, and I will by the help of God recon|cile
you for ever: Whither comming this good
man upon his bended knees, prayed heartily to
God in the sight and hearing of all present; and
Eusebius sets down the words of his prayer, That
he desired of God, that never any more fish might
be in it, but that it should be a field for corn, that by
this means these two Brethren might agree in love
together: whose prayer God heard, and did imme|diatly
grant his request, to the amazement of all
the standers by.Euseb. Ec Hist. lb. 7. c. 25. Such force have the prayers of
a faithfull man with God: this one action is
enough to renowme him in all Ages: but he was
admirable likewise for ingenuity and dexteritie
of wit,Euseb Ec Hist. lib. 7. cap. 25. as the same Eusebius gives testimony of
him in these words. Sed  ingenii sui in parvo
nobis maxima monumenta dereliquit: But hee
shewed in briefe the excellency of his wit. For
Magnificentissime scripsit, that is, He writ most
elegantly upon Ecclesiastes, and left a brief, but
an eloquent Exposition upon the Catholike
Faith which hath beene and is a great edificati|on
of the Church of Christ: His wordes begin
thus: Vn Deus Pater Verbi Viventis, that is,
One God, the Father of the Living Word: of the
Subsisting Wisdome, of the Ever-living Power,
the Perfect begetter of the Perfect One, the Father
of the onely begotten Sonne: and so goes on, ex|pressing
the Deitie and Trini in most apt and
significant judicious termes.Greg. Nyssen. in vit S. Greg.

Saint Gregory Nyssen affords this man a singu|lar
Encomium, and Eulogie in these words: Si|ct
de Mose ait Scriptura, c. that is, That as
the Scripture speaks of Moses, so may I of this
Gregory: Hee was seene in all the Learning of
the Gentiles, hee found how weake and unwise
their opinions were, and embraced with great
ard our and sanctity the Gospel.
Saint Hierome also blazons  his Works
with prayse and commendation.S. Hirom. in s pt. Ecls. in Theodoro. They begin
thus: Theodorus, qui postea Gregorius a pella|tus
est, Theodore who was after called Gregory,
was Bishop of Neocaesarea in Ponts: in his
youth to learne the Greeke and Latine with his
Brother Anthenodorus, he passed from Cappa|doci,
to Beritum, and afterwards to Caesarea of
Palestine, where Origen seeing their admirable
wit, taught them Philosophie, and so instucted
them in Divinitie; and sent them to their Mo|ther:
this Gregory wrote an eloquent Letter to
Origen, extant yet. And Hierome stiles him, Vi|rum
Apostolicorum signorum  virttum, that
is, A man ful of signes and Apostol call Mira|cles.
And he that will read more of him,Hieron, in Ep. S. ad Orato|rem Romnum. let
him accept of this cloud of Witnesses. Sanctus
Gregorius pap lib. 1. Dialogorum cap. 7. Socrates,
lib. 4. c. 22. Enagrius, lib. 3. cap. 31. Cedrenus in
anno 12. Anastasii Imp. Haymo lib. 7. c. 8. Nceph.
lib. 9. Beda  Ruffinus. Suidas speaks of him al|so,
Factus Episcopus, signis, c. that is, Graeco M|nolog . Being
made Bishop, he exceld for signes and wonders
above humane power. He was full of holinesse.

Phedinus Bishop of the Amassensians, ordained
him a Bishop. Hee flourisht under Aurelianus,
and he reigning, this Gregory died. At his death
he thanked God, that hee left as many faithfull
Christians in that City, as hee found Infidels at
his comming.Ex Rom. Bre|viario 17. N|vembris. The Roman Breviary stiles him
Sanctitate doctrina illustris, c. famous for
sanctitie and doctrine, and much more for mira|cles.
At this death hee asked how many Infidels
there were in Neocesarea, it was answered, but se|venteene:
thanks be to God (said he), for at my
comming there were just seventeen Orthodoxe
Christians in this place.
Bellarmine and Baronius declare his worthy
parts, and say,Bellar. de Il|ustr. Scriptor. Ecclesiae. that he was famous for Learning
and Miracles, and that hee flourisht in the
Reigne of Alexander Severus, and Baronius te|stifies
in his second Tome, that hee was made
Bishop in the tenth of Severus, hee suffered so
much for the Truth, that in the Greek Churches,
he is reputed a Martyr.


S. Gregorius Thaumaturgus in
Ecclesiast. cap. 12.
It will be worth thy labour, whilst thou art in
the prime of thy youth to be affected with the feare
of God, before thou give up thy selfe unto sinne
and wickednesse, and so that great and terrible
day of the Lord steal upon thee at unawares, when
thou art unprovided for it.


Ibid. Cap. 11.
If thou feed the hungry, and cloath the naked

what though others thinke alls lost that goes that
way, and no better then bread ast upon the waters,
yet let mee tell thee, that in processe of time thou
shalt have it returned ten-fold into thy bosome a|gaine.


Idem Cap. 10.
Listen to the voice of the King, and of those
that are set in authority over thee, doe them no
harme, nor be thou too free in thy speeches against
them, for assuredly know that whatsoever thou
doest or sayest against them though never so secret|ly,
it will appeare against thee when thou shalt least
think of it.


Idem Cap. 10.
This World's at no certainty, now it is all warre,
anon all peace: this yeere comes famine; the next
brings plenty, nay, such is the inconstancie of
things sublunary, that hee which we knew one day
abounding in prosperity, the next day we saw de|jected
by adversitie.



His Works extant are these according to Bel|larmine.

1 A Metaphrase on
Ecclesiastes.
2 A Panegyricke of
Origen.
3 A briefe Confession
of Faith, which hee
learned of St. Johns
Revelation.
4 An exposition of
Faith against Elia|nus.
5 A Canonicall Epi|stle.

To these Vossius
hath put twelve Sen|tences,
Greeke and
Latine, with Anathe|matismes.
6 Three Sermons of
the Annunciation of
the Blessed Virgin.
7 Of the Baptisme of
Christ. Of the Epi|phany.
8 A dispute of the
soule against Tatia|nus.

Hee was borne of Gentile parents, but had
good education: at Alexandria, he cast out a De|vill
from a woman which would have tempted
him, and did accuse him of lust; to the wonder
of all: So after great paines endured for the
Truths sake, he died peaceably. Read more of
him in Baronius Annals, Tome 2.
I cannot omit to speake some things of him
in briefe.

1 His patience when a Strumpet reviled him.
2 Divine revelation, and receiving the Arti|cles
of the Faith so effectually.
3 His erecting of a Church, his flight in the
persecution by Decius.
4 He cured divers of the Plague, and so also con|verted
them to the Faith.
5 He frees himselfe from the calumnies of Sa|bellius.
6 Hee was at the former, Councell at Antioch,
and opposed Paulus Samosatenus.
7 Before his death, he visits the Churches.
8 Gave away all his possessions, and yielded
quietly his spirit to God.





An. Christi. 250. Sanctus Cyprianus.

S. CIPRIANVS.

_IT hath always beene the providence
and goodnesse of God to raise up,
and finde men of parts and graci|ous
endowments, to mayntaine the
cause of his Church, amongst which this Saint
Cyprian merits a place, whom so many of the
ancient Fathers of the Church doe highly com|mend,
as Gregory Nazianzen, Hillarius, Ambrose,
Prudentius, Saint Augustine, Fulgentius, Ma|ximus,
Isidore, Petrus Chrysologus, Beda and R|banus
Maurus: as also Eusebius, Zonaras, Nice|phorus,
and Divine Saint Ierome, who bestowes
this Encomium of him: Quam, purissii fontis
instar, dulcis incedat  placidus, ingenio sit faci|li,

copioso, suavi:  (quae sermonis maxima est
virtus) aperto; ut discerni nequeat, ut rumne or|natior
in eloquendo; an facilior in explicando, an
potentior in persuadendo fuerit. When as this
Father runs like a Fountain sweetly and calmly,
of an apprehensive, copious, delicious note, and
(that which adds grace to him) of an holy wit:
so that it is hard to distinguish, whether he was
more rich in eloquence, or facile in his explica|tion,
or more powerfull in perswasion:Pontius Diaco|nus in vita sancti Cypriani Pontius
his Deacon writing of him stiles him thus, Cy|prianus
religiosus Antistes, Testis Dei gloriosus.
Saint Cyprian, that Religious Prelate, that Glo|rious
Witnesse and Martyr: to passe by therefore
the part of his life as he was a Rhetorician, wee
will onely describe him as a Christian.
At this first ingresse to Christianitie, he chiefly
studied to keepe his body continent and cleane
from lusts and occasions provoking, saying,
Tunc enim posse fieri pectus idoneum,  sensum
ad plenam veri capacitatem pervenire; si con|piscentiam
arnis robusto atque integro sancti|moniae
vigore  rigore calcaret: That then his
heart would be truly fit, and his spirits to come
to the full capacitie of the truth; if that once he
could with a strong and entire vigour and rigor
of Holinesse trample down his concupiscence of
flesh. And not onely eminent for his austeritie,
but also in the reading of the Scriptures, hee
chiefly aimed how hee might improve his la|bours
to Gods glory. Hee at his initiation to
Christianity, gave and distributed all his estate

to the poore, ut ambitionem saeculi spernert:
that hee might avoid worldly ambition, and
performe an act of mercy well pleasing to Gd.
A strange thing, and not to be paralleld by any
of the Fathers. Upon this hee entred into the
Priesthood: Where, how worthily hee did be|have
himselfe is manifest, hee was not daunted
with any oppositions, nor frighted with any
persecutions, so that as Pontius saith well,
Non illum penuria, non dolor fregit: It was not
want or sorrow that startled his noble heart: not
his Wifes disswasions, not the worlds frownes,
not the malice of his adversaries could affright
him. He stood firme  unshaken in all estates and
conditions, keeping his faith and devotion, and
blessed God in his deepest sufferings. His house
was free to all commers, he never turn'd widow
empty away from him, he was the blinde mans
eye, and the lame mans legs, and the naked
mans garment, Haec debent facere (dicebat) qui
Deo placerent: These things ought to be done
of such as would please God.
There was one Caecilius a Priest and upright
man, who first did enlighten his minde, a man
worth commendation, whom this Saint Cyprian
highly honoured and reverenced, calling him
novae vitae parentem, The Father of his Chri|stian
life. It is not possible to reckon up all his
severall graces: this adds to his credit, that being
but a Neophyte in Christianity, yet God so dispo|sed
it, that hee was chosen to be a Bishop, with
an unconceiveable joy of the people, which did

honour him, but he was so humble, that hee see|med
not to regard their praises, but at his com|ming
out and going into his house, a World of
Christians attended: quae illi pietas? qui vigor?
misericordia quanta? quanta censura? O how
great his piety? his valour? O how admirable
his mercy and his discretion! His countenance
full of gravity and pleasantnesse, not too much
expressing a severe sadnesse, nor yet affecting
wantonnesse, but so equally tempered, that it
was hard to say whether hee was more loved or
feared; his carriage was answerable to his aspect,
not any wayes swelling or puft up with pride,
nor dejected with poverty. But what was this
Bishops love to the poore, may be a patterne to
all succeeding ages: but Satan envied this good
man, and so at last he was banished; but even in
this state he performed a world of good. Wit|nesse
that speech made, and sent to Nemesianus,
oelix, and Lucius, with other Priests and Dea|cons:
saying, It is no shame but glory, not to be
feared, but to be rejoyced at, to suffer banishment
or paines for Christ; that such as suffer shew
that they are valiant Captains of Vertue, provo|king
by the confessions of their mouth, and suffe|rings
of their bodies, the hearts of the faithfull
to Martyrdome. For, saith he, it is no new thing
for a Christians body to be beaten with clubs, or to
be full of wounds or skars, in as much as they
were ornaments to them not any discouragements
and though the Mines afford no beds to Christians,
yet they shall rest in the Lord: and though their

weary bodies lie on the cold ground, yet they shall
be refreshed, though their hands and feet have bin
loaden with fetters and chains of iron, yet Christ,
will loose them, and make them free men of Hea|ven,
the tying of them fast here is a meanes to
make them run the faster to Heaven; and though
they be stripped of their garments, yet Christs
Righteousnesse would cover them, their deformity
shall be turned to honour, their mourning to joy,
their pain to pleasure, and to endlesse felicity. And
though they could not bee admitted the Temples to
pray in, yet they might offer their bodies and
souls in humility and contrition to God, which
would be Sacrifices that would please him: And
concludes his comfortable speech to them with
the words of S. Paul,Cypr. l. 3. Ep. ult. These present sufferings are
not to be compared with the brightnesse of that
glory, that shall be revealed to the Children of
God. As also that saying of his shews his worth,
Quis doceret poenitentiam lapsos? Veritatem H|reticos,
Schismaticos unitatem, filios Dei pacem,
 Evangelicae pacis legem? Who ever gave such
directions to such as were flne, to renew their
repentance? Who ever gave better directions
to Hereticks, to embrace the Truth? Who better
taught Schismaticks the way to Unity? or the
Children of God the pth of peace and prayer?
By Him it was that the blaspheming Gentiles
were convinc'd in themselves of those things
whereof they accused the Christians: By Him it
was that the weaker Christians were so willing
to forsake all worldly preferments, in hope of a

reward in heaveu. Hee it was, of whom wee
may truly learne pity and patience. It was this
Cyprian that overcame the malice of his E|vious
Adversaries, by a sweet and Christian|like
meeknesse? Who was it that afforded
stronger Cordials and Counsels to conquering
Martyrs,Pontius in vita sancti Cypriani and to speak truth, Quis denique tot
confessores frontium notatarum secunda inscrip|tione
signatos,  ad exemplum Martyrii super|stites
reservatos, incentivo tubae Coelestis anima|ret?
Who ever did by the heavenly trumpet,
encourage so many Confessours branded and
twice written downe and signed, and daily ex|pecting
Martyrdome to stand firme in the faith
as Saint Cyprian.
It was then the singular providence of God,
that this man should be yet reserued, so that his
feare and his departure was divine and appro|ved,
that yet he might confirme many, convince
others, and comfort many others in their suf|ferings:
for at this time the Church of God
was deeply wounded by the common adversary,
and therefore fit it was, that hee and such like as
he was, should binde up and cure the wounded
and broken.Ribud. in vita sancti Cyp. 439. Lactantius gives this Cyprian a
great commendation, for his gravity, and cleer|nesse
of stile, he was unwilling to have been Bi|shop,
but the voices of all cried out either Saint
Cyprian or none, and indeed who can sufficient|ly
set forth either his wisdome or diligence in
feeding Christ his flock, so that hee was like a
loving Father to all, A vigilant Bishop and an

heavenly inpired Master: when as the Church
 miserably wasted by persecution un|der
 the Emperour, whose governmen
was ut short, but as Saint Cyprin witnesseth himselfe,
extremly bloudy, for the Church, saith
 having enjoyed a long peace under his ther,
all men studied their private wealth, so
that Devotion and Religion, and good 
were quite neglected, and all estates and
orts of men and women were fearfully corrup|ed;
svit hoc agellm Deus, God suffered thi
 of persecution to reforme it; which
Saint Cyprian avoided by flying, as 
testifies: but his Adversaries sought for him to
have cast him to be devoured by Lions in the
Amphitheatre: so that they that would ot be|lieve
him a Bishop in prosperity, should 
him one in banishment: but what great go
in his banishment, did hee performe, doth easily
appeare, by his care to see the slaughtered christians
to have decent buriall, to care that 
wounded and mangled should have releafe and
comfort; and it pleaed God to afford him uch
a perswading power, that he obtain'd whatsoe|ver
he desired for them: but this storme of per|secution
was but of one yeers continuance. For
 raigned but one yeer and three moneths,
so that all things being alme, this Saint Cyprian
returned to his charge againe, gathering toge|ther
the dispersed lock; yet for all this, the Bar|barians
entred Nmidia, wasting and destroying
many Christians, whom Saint Cyprians provided

for: and got monies for the ransome of such as
were captives.
About this time a grievous pestilence raged
in Africk, in which Saint Cyprian shewed a
marvellous measure of Piety and Charity: Hee
comforted some, administred to those that were
in want: hee stird up those Christians that were
persecuted by Pagans, to afford them neverthe|lesse
reliefe in the time of Contagion, teaching
them to doe good even for evill: but yet not all
these unparalleld patternes could move those
Heathens: for Valerianus and Galienus Empe|rours,
The Proconsull Aspatius Paternus see|ing
of what great authority Saint Cyprian was
in Carthage, nor yet daring to lay hands on him,
commanded him to depart the City. Wel, Saint
Cyprian obeyed his Injunction, and went to Cu|rubis
for one yeere, till the Proconsull died,
whom Galienus Maximus succeeded, and then
this Father returned; and if the persecution had
not hindred, hee had sold all his Gardens, and
distributed the mony to the poore: He told his
friends the time of his Martyrdome. But this
Proconsul hearing where Saint Cyprian lived,
and how the people flocked to him, commanded
him to bee apprehended, and carefully to bee
watched in his owne house: hither came a world
of people, supposing to have seene the Martyr|dome
of this Reverend Father; but he knowing
this purpose of the Proconsul, did prevent him,
for he departed to Vtica, and writ an Epistle to
the Christians shewing the cause: well though

he suffered not Martyrdome in the Citie of Car|thage,Sanctus Cypr. Epist. 33.
but at Sextum, six miles distant, so called,
because the sixt great stone from Carthage was
here erected, as also it was called Saint Cyprians
Table, not for his banqueting there, but because
he was offered up there, yet there was such an
infinite multitude of people there, as if it had
beene in the middle of Carthage it selfe.Sanctus Aug. Ser. 113. 114. 115.  116. Nay,
this Father at the very time of suffering was so
carefull to doe good, as though death had not
beene so neere to him, witnesse his comforts,
that hee gave to Virgins at the same time. Hee
suffered under Galienus Maximus, who when
it was told him that the Emperour had com|manded
him to death, answered joyfully doe
fully what belongs to your office, and one telling
him he must lose his head, Saint Cyprian answe|red,
God be thanked for delivering mee from the
bonds of the flesh: the people that accompanied
him, desired also to suffer with him. When hee
came to the place of Martyrdome, hee put off
his Bishops attire, and gave them to his Dea|cons,
onely reserved one to die in, and wisht
them to give to his Executioner 25 pieces of
Gold in testimony of his love to him. All the
Clergie and his friends wondrously deplored
his death, so that they laid their owne garments
under his body, because none of his bloud
should fall to the ground: hee covered his owne
eyes, and so kneeling down, tooke the blow of
the Executioner quietly, and with all signes of
joy. All the Christians had a great care to see

his body honourably interred, not fearing all
the threats of the Officers, nor Heathens. Hee
was the first of all the Bishops of Carthage, that
suffered Martyrdome: afterward there were two
great Churches builded to his honour: one was
uil in the plce of his Martyrdome, the other
where he was buried. So many of the Fathers
doe praise him, that wee cannot comprehend all.
Saint Hierome calls him an holy and most elo|quent
man. St. Augustine reckons him amongst
the rarest and learnedst men, a most sweet Do|ctour,
a most glorious Martyr, an unconquered
Martyr: and such like glorious titles. He suf|fered
under Valerianus and Galinus, on the
eighteenth of the Calends of October,

His Sentences are these:

De Sanctorum passione.
The Psalmist tels us, That preious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Where|upon
saith Cyprian, that though they were vexed
in small things, they should be required with
great matrs, and what though they were in the
 yet they should come forth with the more
lusre and glory, we know that the Prophets and
Apostles are our patterns in these bonds; and
we know, That if wee doe suffer with him here,
wee shall be sure to reigne with him hereafter.
And as hee did encourage those that were in
onds, so hee advised those that were free, to
cherish those that were in misery.



Cyprian Epist. 2. de disciplina 
habitu Virginis.
Discipline is the preserver of hope, the reins
of Faith, the guide of salvation, the encourage|ment
of a good disposition, the mistresse of ver|tue,
making us cleave to Christ, and live to
God, and to obtaine heavenly promises, and
divine rewards.


Cyprian in Epist.
An open enemy is not so much to be feared,
as a secret enemy that creeps on secretly: as the
Serpent, who is so called from his secret creep|ng
on.


Cyprian. de 12 abusionibus.
The justice of the King, is the peace of the
people, the defence of the Countrey, the free|dome
of the people the joy of mankind, the
almnesse of the Sea, the fruitfulnesse of the
arth, the comfort of the poore, the inheritance
of children, and the hope of future happinesse.


Cyprian. de habitu Virginis.
Those that are clothed in silke and purple,
cannot be sincerely clothed with Christ, and
those that are so curiously dressed, want the o|naments
of the soule.



Cyprian. de laud. poen.
O Repentance, thou dost lose that which is
bound, open that which is shut, mitigate adver|sitie,
heale after contrition, enlighten confusion,
and enliven desperation.


Cyprian. Ep. 5. de Oratione dominica.
Thy will be done. Christ did practice and
preach the will of God, humility in conversa|tion,
stability in faith, modesty in words, justice
in deeds, mercy in works, discipline in manners,
innocencie in doing wrong, patience in suffering
wrongs, to maintaine concord with our bre|thren,
to love God with all our heart, to love
him as a Father, to feare him as a Lord, to pre|ferre
nothing before Christs love, as hee prefer|red
nothing before our love.



His Workes follow, as they are reckoned up
by worthy Writers.

Foure Books of Epistles
in number 83.
1 Of the habit of Vir|gins.
2 One Treatise.
3 Of such as are falne
one booke.
4 Of the simplicity of
Prelats and the Chur|ches
unitie, one book.
5 Vpon the Lords
Prayer, one book.
6 Against Demetria|nus,
one book.

7 Of the vanitie of
Idols, one book.
8 Of mortalitie, one
book.
9 Of Almsdeeds, one
book.
10 Of the God of pa|tience,
one book.
11 Of Zeale and envy,
one book.
12 Of exhortation to
Martyrdm one book.
13 To Quirinus against
the Jews, three books.
14 To Jubajanus of
baptizing Hereticks,
one booke.
15 To Pompeius a|gainst
the Epistle of
Stephanus the Pope,
one book. Pamelius
reckons these two a|mongst
the Epistles.
16 Sentences out of the
Councel of Carthage
concerning the bap|tizing
of Hereticks.
There are some others
which are doubtfull
and supposititious.
17 Of Syna and Sion,
one Tract.


2 An Exposition of
the Creed.
3 Of the single life of
Clergie men.
4 Of the Workes of
Christ, twelve Ser|mons.
5 Of the prayse of
Martyrdome.
6 Of Discipline
7 To Novatianus.
8 Of a twofold Mar|tyrdome.
9 Of players at dice.
10 Of the disposing the
Lords Supper.
11 Of Playes and pub|like
Shews.
12 Verses on Genesis.
Sodome on the Pas|chall
Lambe.
13 A prayer for the
Martyrs which begins
Agios.
14 Another prayer
which begins, Do|mine
ancte pater.
But there cannot be
any certainty of the
truth of these, and
therefore I leave it to
the Readers liberty.







S. ARNOBIVS

_WAs by Country an African,
 Hee was
eminent in the Church of God, in
the Reigne of Dioclesian the Empe|rour,
and professed Rhetorike with
the applause of all men in a certain Citie of A|frick,
called Sicca. Amongst many other ex|cellent
Scholers to whom he read daily, the most
famous for wit and learning was Lactantius,
there are many things which doe greatly set
forth the praise of this Arnobius, though many
pens have striven to ully, or at least to lessen
this mans good name; and to cast aspersions, and
make suspicions of his Writings: for who can
in the first place, but ingenuously confesse

him to be an able man for learning; how is it
possible else that hee should have brought up o|thers
to that height and excellencie? How could
he otherwise have kept his place with such a ge+nerall
approbation? How could hee have set
forth those worthy Works which are reserved
in the Church with great applause? For where
can there be more solid pieces found then his?
And secondly, his conversion from Heathenisme
to Christianitie, as it was worthy of commenda|tion,
so the more prayse-worthy, because it was
voluntary, sincere and constant: voluntarily
dne it was, for there were no threats to terrifie
him; no tormentors to urge him; there were no
men imployed in that service to winne him; nor
yet any preferments (either promised him to al|lure
him, nor any could hee hope for in those
times, and from those persons, that then ruled;
neither did he (by any probability) lay down his
former profession upon any such indirect and
uncertaine foundations: so that without tor|ments
and threatnings; without rewards or
hopes of any he did voluntarily embrace Chri|stian
Religion: an act very rare, to offer up him|selfe
willingly into the Lords Harvest. Then se+condly,
his conversion was sincere, though by
many Bishops not onely suspected; but at first
feared: for when as hee came to them, and did
earnestly desire of them to be received into the
Church,Sixt. Senes. loco praedict. and to be baptized, it is said, quem cum
illi rejicerent, veriti, ne vir saeculari eloqentia
tumens, Religioni Christianae, quam semper oppug|naverat,

illudere vellet: Whom, they fearing
denied it to him, lest he a man swelling and puft
up with secular wisdome, and who had alwayes
thitherto opposed Christian Religion; should
make both a mock of them and it, whose deal|ing
and proceedings in that kind were wise and
politicke: For it is usuall with great learned
men without the speciall grace of God working
and ruling them, to despise the simplicitie of
Christianity: but yet God brought him in,
worke hee had to be done by his pen, which
should stop the mouthes of the Adversaries of
his Church. And who knows not Gods dealing
with Saul, who was sorely against his children,
yet a man in that state and condition wel known
for Learning and able parts, but brought to be
one that was ready to die for the Name of the
Lord Jesus. It makes not what the instrument
hath beene so much as what it is.
But yet Arnobius finding this repulse at these
Fathers hands, leaves not his intendments; but
presently produceth his Letters Testimoniall,
sufficient proofe that Hee intended what hee
made profession of. For then Obtulit eis in Argu|mentum
sinceritatis suae praestantissima adversus
pristinam Religionem disputationum volumina;
tanquam fidei suae obsides,Sixt. Senen. loco pae icto. that is, offered to
them those most excellent Volumes of his Di|sputations
against his former Gentilisme, as in|fallible
arguments of his sincerity, and to be for
ever the manifest pledges of his Faith: which
were presently with great joy received by them

and he received of them the sure seale of Chri|stianitie.
And as his conversion was voluntarily as from
himselfe without any constraint used, as it was
sincere without Hypocrisie, as may be seene by
his Works, so likewise was He in the third place
to his dying day constant in it: For notwith|standing
the hate and envy of his former asso|ciates;
notwithstanding the dangers that Chri|stians
are subject to, and more specially those of
that time, in which Hee lived, being many;
though Hee could not choose but know the
mockes and scoffes that were put upon Christi|ans,
yet none of these could any whit remove
him; or cause him either to be sorry for his act,
or to relinquish the Faith: contrary to the pra|ctice
of too too many Formalists and Tempori|zers;
who can take up, and lay down Religion
as they do their garments: but our Arnobius did
goe on and hold out.
Now thirdly, for his upright life and learned
Writings, they are known to all: though there
be some disputes about the latter, yet, none but
Heathens have spoken against his life: no que|stion
but his life was answerable to his professi|on;
however Charity shall perswade where
none accuses: and hide his blemishes if Hee had
any: and therefore I will a little touch upon the
latter: some cals his Works, Insignia volumina,
famous Volumes: others say, Multa praeclarae|didit:
that is, He set forth many admirable pie|ces,
Habuit (sayes another) multos egregios 

Nobiles Discipuls: that is. Hee had many excel|lent
and Noble Scholers. Ecls fol. 14. To omit what Saint
Ierome and divers others have said of him, I
will expresse to you the testimony of Erasmus
concerning his Commentarie, which Hee hath
rit upon the Psalmes: though some have suspe|cted
the Work to be none of Arnobius pnning,
yet Ersmus doth as well, as many others give
many excellent and faire conclusive arguments
to avouch the certaintie of it.
When as Hee lived about Frankendale, this
Commentary was brought him: at first he doubted
whether it would please or not, because they were
termed, Juni Commentarii, empty Commenta|ries,
and Impoliti sermones erant,  soloecismis
scatentes, They were of harsh and impolished lan|guage,
and had some seeming Soloecismes in
them; But (sayes he) when I had turned over two
or three leaves, and strictly read them; Sensinon
esse vulgarem Infantiam; led expolitissimam im|politiem,
 copiosissimam brevi-loquentiam,
c. that is, I perceived, that they were not chil|dish,
but most polite and neat in their dresse, speak|ing
much in little: the words, indeed, seemed
somewhat more neglected, but the sense most ample
and absolute, so that I thought no small store of
treasure to be come unto my hands. Would to
God (saith he) that there were more store of such
judicious Authors as Arnobius was; who writes
so perspicuously,Erasmus in Epist. dedicat. in ommnt. in Ps. so learnedly, so briefly, and
so holily. For his Solecismes they proceeded not
from unskilfulnesse, but from judgment, and are

not to be imputed to the man; but the times: nor
can any prove this not to be the same Arnbius,
who writ against the Gentiles: For it is certaine,
the same pen writ, though not to the same persons:
Hee writ the one to Scholers learned, this to the
common people, Hee fitted himselfe to the meanest,
that all might understand what all did sing: he
had a care of the weakest; that hee was so short,
it was for mmory, that he was so plaine, it was for
profit, in both these hee shewed exquisite eloquence
and depth of judgment, as well knowing what he
did. He doth not use any circumlocutions, hee de|sired
rather to give the best, then much and naugh|ty.
His stile is no where languid or dull, he strives
to refresh, to stirre up, to comfort the Reader, for
the learning and sincerity that you shall find, you
may admire him. In briefe, hee hath so done all,
that none but the malicious can speak against him,
or his Works. This, and a great deale more doth
that learned Erasmus speake of our Arnobius;
so that who pleaseth to read his prayses at large,
may view them set forth in the Epistle Dedica|try,
before the Commentary on the Psalmes,
printed by Frobenius.
This Arnobius flourished in the time of
Dioclesian, from the yeere of our Lord 290,
to 300.

Arnobius sayings.

Of Prayer.
It is the bed of a sick and weake mans soule,

refresheth in tentations, and keepes warme the
actions of grace. In Psal. 41.


Of Despaire.
He that fals into Despaire, is like a ship that
looseth her Anchors, and runs on the Rocks.
In Psal. 42.


Of Persecution.
Persecution brings death in one hand, and
life in the other: for while it kils the bodie, it
crowns the soule. In Psal. 45.



His Writings.

1 Seven Books against
the Gentiles.
2 Commentary on the
Psalmes.
3 A learned tract of
Rhetoricke, hee died
under Dioclesianus
the Emperour.





An. Christi 326. The life of Eusebius Caesarien|sis.

EVSEB: CAESARIENSIS.

_EVsebius Bishop of Caesarea Palaestina,
formerly called the Tower of
Strato,Fortunatus de vita S. Hllarii ane ejus opera. for his great friendship to|wards
Pamphilus, sirnamed also
Pamphilus, being Scholer to Dorotheus the Eu|nuch,
a most learned man, and a most diligent
searcher of the Divine Library with Pamphilus,
was so famous among all the contemporary Bi|shops
of his age for his knowledge in divine
and humane Learning; so that his deserts were
celebrated with this most noble Eulogie of the
Emperour Constantine, who would often say,
That it was Eusebius happinesse to bee worthy to
be Bishop, not onely of one City, but of the whole

World. A praise of an high straine beseeming
an high place! Indeed, mens abilities should be
answerable to their dignities: greatest perfecti|ons
are fittest for greatest places and promoti|ons.
If Moses be placed over all the Israelites as
supream Judge, his endowments ate proportio|nable;
but with his employments his measure
of spirit is abated, and part resteth on the seven|ty
Elders, who were fitted for the like perfor|mances.
He that is , is an Over-seer, and
such had need bee furnished with more then
ordinary gifts, for correcting of vice, instructing
the ignorant, making straight that which is
crooked. Such were the manifold endowments
of this Reverend Bishop Eusebius.
And for his eloquence,Biblioth. sacra pag. 248. Saint Ierome stiled
him, Romani eloquii Tubam, the Trumpet of
Roman elocution. Eloquence in a Minister is a
singular ornament. Moses was fearfull to take
up Gods Embassage, not being eloquent, but
slow of speech: therefore God appointeth his
brother Aaron for his helper. The lineaments
of a Picture make it no exquisite without co|lours
and varnish; they make it beautifull. Of|tentimes
a faire out-side leads us to the finding
of hidden worth within, and the phrase or stile
of writing, sets a lustre upon the matter. Luther
caused to be painted over his study doore. Verba
sine rebus, Erasmus: Res sine verbis, Lutherus:
nec res, nec verba, Carolastadius:  res  ver|ba,
Melancthon. Words without matter, Eras|mus:
matter without words, Luther: neither

matter nor words, Carolostadius: both matter
and words Melancthon. Thrice happy Melanct|hon:
judicious and eloquent.
Omne tulit punctum qui misuit utile dulci.
The same was the commendation of Eusebius.
That he was a defender of the Arrian He|resie,
and a corrupter of the Nicene Synod
some Writers affirme, either deceived by the
affinity of name and dignitie which he had with
Eusebius first Bishop of Berithus in Palaestina,
and afterward at Nicomedia in Bythinia, Cap|tain
of the Arrians, or else induced to that be|liefe,
because Eusebius of Caesarea, would
not consent in the Nicene Councell to the pro|pounders
of the word , or Consubstan|tiall;
but after a long inquisition and exami|nation
of the said word, done by him not ma|liciously;
but rather out of sincere pietie; for
when many of the Bishops would have the
word Homousii, as excluding a multitude of
gods, inducted by Arrius, and most of the
Bishops did sharply oppose the acception of
the same word, as introducing the opinion of
Sabellius, who held that the Father, Sonne,
and Holy Ghost were but one person; through
their diversitie of opinions: Eusebius being
doubtfull to whether part hee should assent:
Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, accused after|ward
by Cyrus Bishop of Bexoen, opprobrious|ly
termed him a Favourer of the Arrians, and a

corrupter of the Nicen Faith. Eusebius on the
conrary, affirmed, that hee neither favoured
Arius, nor corrupted the Nicen Faith; but that
Eustathius did introduce the perfidious opini|on
of Sabellius: Lastly, when it was declared
by the Fathers, that this word Homousii did not
take away the distinction of persons, which
were of the same Nature and Essence, hee sub|scribed
to the Decree of the Homousii, or Con|substantialls,
and by the Fathers command hee
composed that Nicene Creed, which is now
sung in the Church.
A singular stayed discretion in a man of au|thority
and eminent dignity, not rashly to suf|fer
any noveltie to creep into the Church with|out
examination, how farre forth it may prove
profitable to the good of the Church; especial|ly
in matters of greatest importance, such as
this, concerning the Deity's essence, and man|ner
of existence, which is well distinguished by
the Schoolmen: every person in the Deity (say
they) is alius  alius, sed non aliud  aliud:
the former notes the distinction of persons, but
the later their essence to be the same and undi|vided:
such as the Father is, such is the Sonne,
and such is the Holy Ghost.
And that you may the better be drawne into
the admiration of his eloquence, take notice of
some of his sentences, which were like Gold
Coine, containing much worth in a little com|passe,
they are here inserted.



Of the Law and Gospell.
Moses did write the old Law in dead Tables
of stone,Euseb. Demon|strat. Evangel. pag. 144. but Christ did write the perfect Docu|ments
of the new Testament in living soules.
And the difference of the Law and Gospell
may further appeare in this, that the Law is a
killing letter, for it worketh death, making us
lyable to the curse, For cursed is hee that conti|nueth
not in all things that are written in the
Law, to doe them: but the Gospel is a quickning
letter, and supplies for our defects in not obey|ing
the Law, we being clothed with anothers
righteousnesse, the long white robes of Christs
righteousnes; the imputation whereof makes us
as acceptable to God, as if wee had fulfilled the
Law in our own person, Christ having actively
and passively fulfilled the whole Law for us by
satisfying Gods Justice, and working our sal|vation.


Of serving God.
There are two ways of serving God;Ibidem. when
wee despise the World and love God onely:
this is Religion in perfection: the other is, when
wee love God and the world, and this is an im|perfect
affection and profession of Religion.
The former is perfection without imper|fection,
which is not attainable in this life:
for since wee bee partly flesh, and partly spi|rit,

our affections are divided in their operati|ons.
I sleepe (saith the Spouse) but my heart
waketh: her better part was directed towards
God, her carnall part was lesse capable of hea|venly
raptures, being sluggish and drowsie. The
good that we would do, that doe wee not; but
the evill we would not doe, that doe wee. Wee
love God and the World here, as if the love of
God and the World were competible; but the
good Christian labours (as much as hee may)
to renounce the World, to gaine God, which
is better then 1000 Worlds: to lose God is to
lose all, Tolle meum,  tolle Deum: to lose the
World and get God by the losse of it, is with
Mary to choose the better part, which never shall
be taken away. God is All in All. None but
Christ.


Of Christs Incarnation.
Christ that he might shew himselfe unto men,
and teach them the true way of adoring and
worshipping his Father,Ibid. p. 165. taking on him our na|ture
came downe into the World; his first Mi|racle
being to shew God in the shape of a man.
And surely that was a great miracle, farre be|yond
the reach of our capacitie, that the Crea|tour
should so farre stoop to the Creature, as to
take upon him the nature of man, that hee that
made woman should be borne of a woman, that
he whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot con|tain
should be contained in the narrow wombe

of a Virgin, that God that made man should
himselfe be made man, in all things like us, sin
alone excepted; that the Sonne should take
upon him the nature of a servant; that the King
of Kings should be subject himselfe to the mea|nest
vassals; that he that was invested with the
Robes of the Deity, should be clothed with
the rags of our humanity. A wonder exceeding
all wonder! a Miracle without a parallell!


Of the Devils power.
The Devill doth worke upon the natural in|clination
and free will which men have unto
evill,Ibid. p. 159. thereby overthrowing States and Cities,
and by the flattery of pleasures drawing many
soules to all kind of wickednesse, taking their
affections with pleasant and delightfull objects,
hee doth hold the World in captivity and sub|jection.
The Devill cannot compell us to commit
sin: hee may move externally by propounding
objects, but the tinder which taketh fire, is our
own naturall corruption. We may thanke our
selves for sin, and the punishment of sin. Eve
blamed the Serpent; the Serpent beguiled me:
this made her not excusable: had shee not con|sented
to the temptation, the Serpent had not
deceived her; but the occasion of sinning being
offered, and the will consenting, sin is commit|ted,
and punishment for sinne is admitted.



Of the Apostles.
Christ chose illiterate men to convert the
whole World,Ibid. p. 163. which hee did, that his divine
counsell and power working and operating in
them might be manifested and declared.
It is Gods ordinary proceeding, by small or
no meanes to bring great things to passe: what
were a few fishermen for converting the whole
World? What weake instruments were Rams
Horns, for the blowing downe of the walles of
Iericho? Elijahs Mantle divideth Iordan. A
little barley Cake tumbling downe the Hill o|verthrows
the tents of Midian. Thus Gods
strength is perfected in weaknesse, and his Maje|stie
shines in meannesse; and the more contemp|tible
the means, the greater is his glory manife|sted
in the meanes: that hee that glorieth may
glory in the Lord.


Of Christs Divinity.
Christs Divinity shined through his body,Ibid. p. 188. as
light doth through a Lanthorn, with beams of
humane and divine light, illuminating the soules
of men.
No marvell then, that his Adversaries con|fesse
saying, Never man spake like this man: his
words argued his Divinity, which were soce|lestiall
and void of exception, as mans wisdome
could not contradict. When his Adversaries

would have apprehended him, they went back|wards
and fell to the ground; another argument
of his Deity, the rayes whereof confounded the
faces, and daunted the courage of malicious
men. When Pilate said, Knowest thou not that
I have power to condemne thee? reply was made,
thou couldst have none, except it were given
thee from above. My Deity stoops not to thine
humanity.


Of Gods Word.
The Fountaines of Israel were the words
which were delivered to Israel,Ibid p. 191. for to them
the Oracles of God were first committed,
whence living waters should be drawn to water
the Church of Christ.
Therefore Saint Pauls caution was not in
vaine, that wee should not despise the Iewes,
they being broken off from the Olive tree, wee
being graffed in, and partaking of the fatnesse
of it: their ruine is our rising. Let us not be
high-minded, but feare, least wee suffer by their
example.


Of Gods Omnipotencie.
God doth order,Ibid p. 168. augment, perfect, penetrate,
and move all things in every place; yet his na|ture
is not thereby impaired or polluted; and
thus he becomes a Saviour and Physician to the
wicked; and as the Musician sheweth his Art in

tuning a disordered Harpe: so Christ declareth
himselfe to be the soules Physician, by curing
mans discording affections, and regulating them
by his exemplary Life and Doctrine.
It is God that is able, when and how hee will
to dispose of the creature, for his owne glory,
and our good: If wee bee so fast bound with
chains in prison, that wee cannot get out, hee
turnes our captivity as the Rivers in the South:
if sicknesse oppresse, God is our health: Are
we hungry? God is the bread of Life to feed
us: thirsty? God is water of life to refresh us:
naked? his robes of righteousnesse cloath us,
he is every way able to relieve us.


Of Salvation.
Christ by his precious bloud wrought mans
freedome and redemption,Ibid. p. 496. his desertion by God
on the Crosse was either to manifest the dignity
of his passion, or his miraculous affection to
mankind, laying downe his soule for mans sal|vation.
Admirable was his love to man in so great a
worke, and in the manner of performing it: the
worke was wonderfull; that enemies should be
saved, who were to be destroyed: and the man|ner
of it as wonderfull, that it should be procu|red
with the shedding of his owne bloud, a
drop whereof is more precious then a thousand
Worlds. Our sins were of a deepe die, which
nothing but Christs bloud could expiate. It was

not the shedding of the bloud of Bullocks or
Goats in time of the Law that was satisfactory
to God: they were types of the shedding of the
bloud of the Lambe of God, which taketh a|way
the sins of the World: manent actn, tollun|tur
reatu. This is Christ our Saviour.
And as hee was infinitely read in Books of
Divinity, so by way of Commentaries and Il|lustrations
on them, hee composed many Vo|lumes,
therein following Origen, of whom he
was a diligent admirer and imitator.
Hee flourished under Constantine the Great,
and Constantius about the yeere of our Lord
320. And after a long and studious life, hee sur|rendred
his soule into his Makers hands. His
Life was written by Accacius his Successour, and
Eusebius Bishop of Emesen. His Apologie is to
be found in his Workes, sacr a lib. 2. hist. there
collected.



Now appertaining to the understanding
of the divine Scriptures, are these Works fol|lowing.

1 All the Canonicall
Books of the old Te|stament
translated
into Greek.
2 Of Hebrew places,
one Book.
3 Of the description
of the Holy Land,
one Book.
4 Of the doctrine of
the Ancients, and an|other
of collections

of Divinitie.
5 Learned Commen|taries
literally and
mystically on the
whole Psalmes.
6 Fifteene Bookes of
Commentaries on I|saiah
the Prophet.
7 Thirty Volumes in
defence of either Te|stament,
opposed by
Porphyrie in fifteen
Books.
8 Of Evangelicall pre|paration
five Books.
9 Of Evangelicall de|monstration,
twenty
books.
10 Of the dissonance of
the Evangelists, one
Book.
11 Of Evangelical Ca|nons
one Book.
12 Commentaries on
the first Epistle to the
Corinths.





An. Christi, 330. L. Caelius Lactantius Firmianus

LACT: FIRMIANVS.

_I Doe not finde any mention of the
parents, Countrey, or education of
this Father, nor is his fame and re|putation
therefore diminished, see|ing
that hee is registred and numbred amongst
the ancient Pillars of the Church for his Pietie
and Learning; and hee is sufficiently praysed by
those pens, whose worth and veritie have been
approved in all ages. It is no small credit to be
enrolled amongst a cloud of so divine and pious
Fathers; I finde by the testimony of Saint
Ierome, that hee was the Scholer of Arnobius,
who, in the Reigne of Dioclesianus the Empe|rour,
was together with Flavis, the Gram|marian

cald to preferment, and that hee pub|likely
taught Rhetorick in Nicomedia. Hee ad|dicted
himselfe to writing Bookes: amongst o|ther
his workes, Saint Ierome speakes these
words of his Treatise of Gods Anger, Edidit
Lactantius librum qui inscribitur Grammaticus,ieron. de  illust. in actn.
 pulcherrimum, de Ira Dei, that is, Lactantius
set forth a booke called the Grammarian, and
another beautifull and faire piece of Gods An|ger:
and indeed, his subjects which hee treates
of, and the stile in which he writes are both ex|cellent,
divine and fluent, savouring of a minde
that was truly mortified and intended to bring
his Auditors to a resolved course of sanctifica|tion
and pietie. For piety and holinesse is the
true knowledge of God: it was never yet, saith
hee, rewarded with punishment or shame: For
true piety preserveth and defendeth every ver|tuous
man from shame.
The party to whom he dedicates the most of
his Workes, addes no small testimony to his
parts and learning, for most of them were in|scribed
to no lesse person than to Constantine
the Great, an Emperour whose fame doth and
will for ever flourish in the Church, if for no
other cause, than even for his pietie, and studie
to preserve the professors of the Gospell, and
for his bounty and liberality to the Bishops of
his time: as also for his building of Churches
for divine worship; and his valour and he|roicke
constancie in opposing Hereticks and
Schismaticks, who began to grow potent: And

Saint Ierome leaves him not thus,Hieron. in tras. Euseb. sub Const. magno. but proceeds
further in his divulging his prayses, in the trans|lation
of Eusebius, under Constantinus the Em|perour
in these words, Lactantius quasi quidam
fluvius Eloquentiae Tullianae Crispum filium
Constantini Latinis literis rudivit; vir omnium
suo tempore eruditissimus, that is, This Lactan|tius
flowed with Eloquence, and was as abound|ing
as Tully himselfe, and as famous for his stile
of Latine: Hee was Tutor to Crispus the sonne
of Constantine, and learned him the Latine
tongue: A man in his time of all others the
most learned and dexterous for the education
of Princes, and well and deeply seene in the
points of Divinity: and againe, Lactantium
propter eruditionem hic legendum, that is, La|ctantius
therefore is approvedly read for his
singular Learning;Hieron. in Epist. Quis mihi interdicere potest
ne legam institutionum ejus libros, quibus contra
Genies fortissim scripsit, quos silegeris, stylum
Ciceronis excerptum reperies, that is, who can
forbid me to reade his Bookes of Institutions,
which with such a noble and valorous resoluti|on
Lactantius published against the Heathens;
which if you doe reade, you shall finde a pure,
elegant and eloquent phrase, no whit inferiour
to that of Cieero.
Platina gives this Lactantius also a faire
commendation in these words,Platina in vi|tis Pontif. p. 38. and to the same
effect. His ver temporibus floruisse Firmianum
Lactantium constat Arnobii Discipulum, c.
that is, about these times flourished Firmianus

 actantius Arnobius his Scholler, who taught
Rhetoricke in Nicomedia; who upon some di|sturbance
left that profession, betaking himself
to writing: in which hee was so excellent, that
next to Cicero, he bore away the name from any
other Writer: Hee writ many famous Treati|ses,
full of judgment and discretion, so that in
his old age, hee was for his rare parts appointed
to be Tutor to Crispus, the sonne of Constanti|nus
the Emperour, a place of great weight and
estimation, and of no lesse carefulnesse and wis|dome:
which arguh this Lactantius to be able
in his parts, or else hee would scarce have beene
admitted to a place of that dignity: Saint Au|gustine
and Ierome, in severall places are not
sparing to commend this Lactantius; the latter
of them speakes, that although his parts were
great and his preferments eminent and large,
yet he died very poore, and so lived: not gaping
or greedily pursuing worldly preferments of
honour and riches; but as one who was wil|ling
to count all as dung and drosse, so that hee
might gaine the eternall inheritance: For a
quiet and peaceable life ought to be preferred
before all other things, and should be the chie|fest
study and care of every man, so that hee
might passe his life time in joy and tranquillitie,
that his soule might bee free from anguish and
trouble at his death. For it is impossible for that
man to be excellent both in riches of this world,
and in the practise of godlinesse: Honour and
riches are the occasions of all kindes of mis|chiefs,

for they doe draw and seduce a man out
of the right way.
In the time of the great persecution of the
Church of Christ under Dioclesianus the Em|perour,Euseb. Eccl. Hstor. l. 8 c. .
begun against the Christians (as Eusebius
relates it) in the nineteenth yeere of Dioclesian,
in which there was cruell demolition of Chur|ches
and sacred Temples, burning of holy and
godly Books, inhumane tortures and torments
inflicted against the Christians; so that, where
any were found that were pious and Christian,
they were fetcht and most severely martyred
for the truth,Baron. nno 302. um. 16. as Cardinall Baronius averres: and
indeed all other Ecclesiasticall Historians, that
though the Tempest raged horribly, yet this
worthy constant Father retain'd his piety, and
feared not any Tormentors, but resolv'd both
in life and death to keepe his stedfast faith in the
merits and mercies of Jesus Christ.
Behold, in this Lactantius a true patterne of
a true follower of Jesus, who despaired not in
the depth of his penury, and poverty, nor yet
was daunted or struck off from Heaven by the
rage of persecution: these two I dare boldly say
have made many to deny their Lord that so
dearly bought them, with the price of his most
precious bloud.
To bee poore by nature is no shame unto a
man; for we brought nothing into this world
with us; nor must we carry any thing out of it;
but to be made poore by any evill or unhappy
occasion of our own, that we ought to be asha|med

of and hate: And there is one thing only
for which poverty ought to be beloved: because
that maketh triall and shew of whom thou art
beloved; for who was poorer on earth then
Christ, which died for us; for he had no where
to repose or lay his head.
But this furious Thunderclap removed not
this stout Lactantius, but as his name, so his na|ture
was firme and fixed: his education under
such a stout Master, was a great motive to him
to stand fast, for Arnobius (whose Disciple this
Lactantius was) did, to testifie to the World
his constancie in Religion,. de scrip. Eccles. p. 45. even in the Reigne
of Dioclesian, set forth seven Books against the
Heathens (as Bellarmine avers) by which and his
Masters example, Lactantius learn'd to imitate
so noble a vertue. It is none of the least testimo|nies
of a pious mind to be spurred on to follow
good examples. And it is a thing very unfit
and inconvenient for any man to carry goodnes
in his mouth, and have none at his heart.
I cannot omit to mention likewise thus much
of him, that when as with much profit and
commendation Hee had learn'd of Arnobius,
(that being sheltered by some friends to the
Gospell of Christ during the time of persecu|tion)
as I am perswaded not without the singu|lar
providence of God, ordering it for the pre|servation
of this man, that hee was in his old
age (as I have said before) upon severall proofs,
called to instruct Crispus,Hiron. in scrip. Eccles. in Lactantio. the sonne of Constan|tinus:
as Saint Ierome, Ruffins, and Socrates:

doe witnesse: any man of judgement, I suppose,
will conclude that such a wise, religious, potent,
and munificent Emperour as Constantine would
never have taken such speciall notice and know|ledge
of a decrepit old man; had he not certain|ly
been informed of, or really knowne the wor|thy
parts and pious endowments of this Reve|rend
Lactantius: neither could hee have beene
admitted into the Emperours favour, had hee
not beene formerly well approved by the Fa|thers
of the Church; and had of them Letters
Testimoniall and Commendatory for his inte|gritie
and learning; nay, unlesse he had been well
furnished with learning and gravity, holinesse
of life: Constantine would not have committed
the Education of his sonne unto him: Good
Education being the manifest pillar of Nobility
and Greatnesse, and indeed good and able Tu|tors
are necessarily requisite about the persons
of Princes. Education, indeed, alters the whole
course of Nature; Hence it is said, that an ill
man by due ordering and good governance, is
made good, as a piece of ground which is full of
weeds, may by a skilfull and diligent hand be
cleere and fruitfull to bring forth fruit. So a
minde that is full of vices and corruption may
by good discipline be made honest and vertu|ous.
Education, saith one, is compared to a
Sickle and a Hand; and being demanded the
reason, made this answer: that if there was any
vice in the soule, it would weed it out, and if
there was no vertue as yet in the soule, it would

plant some in. These things aforesaid, seriously
considered, doe not a little set forth the lustre
and glory of our Lactantius: and to adde this
one thing to what hath been said, all the Histo|rians
do not mention any thing of his remove|all
from his great charge, but by all probabilitie
he continued his place with repute, and a gene|rall
approbation as well of the Emperour as of
his sonne. For his carriage in the place, or how
long hee continued it, nor Saint Ierome, nor
Eusebius, Ruffinus, nor Nicephorus, nor Bellar|mine,Hieron. in scri|ptis Eccles. in Lactantio.
or Baronius do once mention: and there|fore
we may safely suppose that Lactantius was
upright and vertuous. If we may give credit to
Saint Ierome, this Father also was an industrious
man for his Writings, of which there were ma|ny
penned that are not now extant. And wee
may believe that though the Author did escape
the great persecution, yet many of his works
perished in the flames, when as the enemies of
the Church did not spare to burne the Word of
God; and of those that are extant, Cardinall
Bellarmine hath censured some of them to be
none of Lactantius.Bell. de scrip. Eccles. p. 46. Especially the Verses, and
those of the Phaenix: his words are these, Et
quidem opera omnia quae extant exceptis carmini|bus,
sine controversi Lactantii sunt, carmen de
Phaenice Ethniei hominis videtur esse, and, carmen
de Resurrectione  Paschate,  de Passione am|biguum
est an Lactantii sint: that is, and truly all
the Bookes that are extant, except the Verses,
without controversie are of this Lactantius

making: the Verses of the Phaenix seeme to
be an Heathens: as also the Verses of the Re|surrection,
of the Passeover and Passion are
doubtfull whether they be his or not? neither do
I certainly finde the time of his death, nor yet
the manner, but all agree that he lived till he was
very aged: an argument that God saw him ne|cessary
for the benefit of his Church.

His Sayings.
I have added some of the famous Sentences
of this Lactantius, that you may by them per|ceive
what a learned man he was, in his Treatise
of false Religion against the Gentiles: in his third
Chapter of the Governance of the World, to
prove one God, hee saith: Deus ergo quia per|fectus
est, non potest esse nisi nus: ut in eo sint
omnia, that is, God being a perfect substance
must needes bee one: that all things may bee in
one.
All vices are temporary, nor can alwayes be,
and therefore the followers of them are vain in
the prosecution. De divino praemio, lib. 7. cap. 10.
The followers of righteousnesse are con|temned
here, but their reward is great hereaf|ter.
Godlinesse alwayes enriches the possessour.
Lib. 7. de divin praemio, cap. 11.
No righteousnesse, no wisdome, no know|ledge
of God, no way to curbe our unruly af|fections,
and to suppresse sin without Religion.
Lib. de ira Di, cap. 12.

Every man is mortall because corporeall, for
every body is soluble and corruptible: they are
but unwise therefore, who trust upon long life,
when at any time they may be dissolved. Lib. de
opific. Dei, cap. 4.
There is no conquest, but there is also a bat|taile,
nor no vertue but hath its enemy. God
would have our graces proved, and known, not
overthrown. The Devill therefore may exer|cise
us with combats, not conquer us by his as|saults:
but that we knowing we are beset every
where, should alwayes watch and be ready. Lib.
de opificio Dei, cap. 20.
Lactantius reading the first Verse of the four|teenth
Psalme, viz. The foole hath said in his
heart that there was no God; asked why the
foole said so: he first gives this answer, because
he was a foole: then hee askes the question far|ther,
why hee did say so in heart, and not with
his tongue? Because, said hee, if hee had said
it openly and before men, then they would con|clude
him a foole indeed. Ibid. 16. cap. 14.


I have here also registred his Works, as recor|ded
by Cardinall Bellarmine.

1 Of divine Institu|tions,
7 books.
2 Of Gods Anger,
one book.

3 Of the Creation, one
book.
4 An Epitome upon
his books.
5 Verses on the Phae|nix.
6 On the Lords Pas|sion.
7 On our Saviours
Resurrection.

Saint Ierome reckons up one that was writ|ten
to the youth of Africke, and another in|scribed
the Grammarian, and two to Aesclepia|des.
One of Persecution. Foure books of
Epistles to Probus, two books of Epistles to
Geverus, two of Epistles to Demetrianus his
Auditour.




An. Christi, 340. Sanctus Athanasius

S. ATHANATIVS.

_AMongst these glorious Lights of the
Church, who have beene (even) by
their Adversaries, not onely known;
but confest to have bin eminent for
piety and learning; this reverend Athanasius de|serves
for his worth to be enchased, if you will
believe a cloud of witnesses: then you cannot
but have this Athanasius in a singular reverence,Greg. Nazian. Encomium S. Athanasi, p. 5.
for Saint Gregory Nazianzen speaking in his
Oration, that God hath alwayes had famous
men in his Church, either dignified for their
good Government, abilities of Learning, or
for Miracles done by them, or else for their con|stancie
in suffering Martyrdom by Tyrants. (Ex

his Athanasius) alios exaequavit, c. So speaks
that Father, That this Athanasius did equall
some, came short of very few, excelled many;
hee obtained the Learning of some, the Elo|quence
of others, the Action of others, hee fol|lowed
some in meeknesse, others in zeale, and
many he exceeded in his sufferings: hee lost by
none, gained some goodnesse from all; so that
the same Father speaks thus in his commenda|tion;Geg. Nazian. Encom. S. A|thanas. p. 3. l. 1.
,
Athanasium laudans, in praysing this Athana|sius,
I commend vertue it selfe, for it is all one
to set forth the prayse of him and vertue, for he
doth truly possesse all vertues in himselfe. For
vertue in all workes is chiefly, and above all
things to be praysed, as the head fountaine, our
most precious Jewell, of all manner of riches:
Vertue is said to be a strong Castle that can ne|ver
be won; it is a river that needeth no row|ing;
a Sea that moveth not, a fire that quench|eth
not; a treasure that ever hath an end; an
army never overcome; a burden that never wea|rieth:
a spie that ever returneth, a signe that
never deceiveth; a plain way that never faileth;
a sirrope that forthwith healeth, a renowne that
never perisheth: it is onely vertue which attai|neth
everlasting blessednesse: all these appeare at
once in this our Athanasius, as you shall plainly
confesse by his constancy in suffering; and by his
Piety, in the conclusion.
Lampadius doth declare him to be well de|scended
of vertuous and Religious Parents,Lampad. in vi|ta S. Athan. Tom. 2. p. 27. who

had no more Children but this one Athanasius
who did not degenerate from their worth, but
added lustre and glory to his progenitors; his
spring shewed what a rich harvest he would
produce. For even in his young yeares hee was
Ingenious, liberally disposed, of upright cariage,
obedient to his parents. Hee is of all Writers
famous for his actions, even in his youth especi|ally
for one which I cannot omit: when Alexan|der
the Bishop of that City did yeerely cele|brate
a great Feast in memory of Peter the Mar|tyr;
which had beene formerly Bishop in the
same place: he having his house by the waterside
saw many youths playing together (now the
manner of their sport was that all the boyes
should personate Priests and Deacons) and so
they all consented and choe this Athanasius to
be their Bishop, and so they presented unto this
Athanasius, some other youths which were not
yet baptiz'd, that they might be baptized by him:
so Athanasius performing all things requisite,
baptized them with the water of the sea, and
gave them good counsels and admonitions,
directing them what to doe hereafter, which the
Bishop of Alexandria beholding and wondring
at their actions, caused them to be brought to
him, whom when he had asked many questions,
being certified of the act, would not have the
children to be rebaptized, and gave order forth|with
that Athanasius parents should be brought
to him; to whom he gave strict charge that they
should see him brought up to Learning, which

they performed. So this Athanasius profiting ex|ceedingly
in all sorts of learning, he was as an
other Samuel to the old Bishop, Alexander:
who at first used him to read to him, and write
from him: then he was ordained Deacon, and
so received the order of Priesthood: about what
time Arrius began to broach his too too infe|ctious
Heresie, about which there was some pri|vae
meetings and conferences at Alexandria,
before the Nicene Councell: in which this A|thanasius
shewed himselfe a maine opponent,
and that with an admirable expression of Lear|ning
and integritie.
Whereupon the old Bishop Alexander going
to the Councell at Nice, tooke this Athanasius
with him, not onely as his companion in his
journey, but as his fellow Champion in this
great conflict: and to speak truth, his learning
procured him all good mens love, and hatred
from the Arrians: well, His old Lord Bishop
dying, shortly after the Nicene Councell, this
Athanasius was not onely by his last Will, but
by the Generall Suffrages of all the Churches of
Alexandria, chosen Bishop of that See; and
that not without the singular providence of
God so disposing it: for hee proved so eminent,
that few in after times equall'd him: take but a
judicious mans testimony of him, Iudicium in
, vis ingenii excellen,In vita S. A|tha scripta per virum doct. Tom. 2. p. 118. Eloquentia eximia,
inveris sententiis tuendis , in adver|sariis
refutandis firmitas inexpugnabilis,  ad res
adversas perferendas. Magnanimitas ver

Heroica  Spiritu Sancto accensa in ipsius pectore
flagrabat: This Athanasius had a sharpe judge|ment,
a strong wit, an admirable gift of Elo|quence,
resolute in defence of the truth, valo|rous
in refuting his Adversaries, and patient in
all adversities: in a word, There was an Heroi|call
magnanimitie kindled in his heart by the
Holy Ghost. There is not any Doctour of the
Church since the Apostles times, that suffered
for so long time; more hatred, treacheries, perse|cutions;
even as though the whole World had
conspired against him. For as one saith well,
Non solum Episcopi, sed ipse etiam Imperatores,
Regna, Exercitus, populi infesti sunt: Not only
Bishops, but Emperours, Kingdomes, Armies,
Nations molested him: but the Sonne of God
(whose cause this Athanasius maintained) pro|tected
him. So that this Father would say,
though an Army should encampe about mee,
yet would I not feare, Psal. 27. Witnesse those
slanders and tales raised up against him by Euse|bius,
the Bishop of Nicomedia: witnesse the
grosse suggestions of a certaine Arrian Priest,
that lived with Constantia, the sister to the Em|perour,
wife to Licinius, who being sent to Con|stantine,
suggested to the Emperour, that Ar|rius
was unjustly condemned, so that the Em|perour
call'd him from his banishment, and en|devoured
to restore him againe to the Church.
Arrius counterfeiting that hee was of the same
faith with the Nicene Councell, complaining
that Athanasius would not admit, him into the

bosome of the Church, and that all would be
peace, and all factions cease, but onely for this
onely man Athanasius, and such like: in so much
that Constantine being overcome with these de|lusions,
writ sharpe and reprehensive Letters to
Athanasius, to admit this dissembling Arrius
to the Church, and threatned the good Bishop,
(being perswaded that Arrius was no Counter|feit)
that unlesse he would receive him, that hee
would presently send such to him, that should
not onely strip him of his Bishoprick, but also
cast him out of the Citie of Alexandria: but
hee withstood this storme, and sent Letters to
Constantine, declaring the reasons why Arrius
could not nor might not be entertained: Then
his Adversaries failing here, stirred other ca|lumnies
against him by wicked instruments Me|letians.
For they politickly divulged it, that
Athanasius should exact new customes, and im|pose
new burthens upon the Churches in Egypt,
and that hee intended evill against Constantine
the Emperour: but being sent for to Constanti|nople
by the Emperour, hee made his innocen|cie
appeare to the Emperour, so that the Em|perour
honoured him highly, and sent him back
to Alexandria, with Letters Certificatory, that
all what was objected against him was false, and
gave him this commendatory title, Virum plan
Divinum existimo. I hold him a sincerely Di|vine
Man. This was the Emperours opinion
of him.
But these Devillish instruments left not pro|secuting

their causes; they accused him of Ma|gick,
and that he had out off the hand of one
Arsenius, to practise with; then a wicked wo|man
accuseth him, that he had forc'd her chasti|tie:
but all these engines fail'd, for Constantine
upheld this Athanasius integritie a long time;
yet he also stil hearing new accusations and con|tinuall
complaints against this Athanasius, whe|ther
out of anger, or being overcome with the
policies of Athanasius adversaries, or whether
in hope this Athanasius being removed, his ac|cusers
would cease, or whether to safeguard this
good Bishop from violence, he consented to ba|nish
this Athanasius to Treveire in Gaule, which
indeed gave scope to Arrius his admittance to
new favours, and liberty the more to settle and
spread his poysonous Heresie: which those of
Alexandria, not liking, Tumults being among
the people; Constantine sends for Arrius to
Constantinople, to declare his Faith, and tooke
oath of him, to agree to that which was establi|shed
in the Nicene Synod, But this Impostour,
though hee swore, yet, not as the Emperour be|lieved,
but to such Tenents as hee had closed in
his bosome: well having thus dissembled with
the Emperour, and being confirmed, he and his
followers prove themselves raging Wolves a|mongst
the faithfull; till at last by the prayers of
the Church, especially by the devout and unces|sant
Prayers of Alexander then Bishop of Con|stantinople,
who was threatned and hated by
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia and Arrius: the

good man desired of God in the Temple, either
to take him out of this miserable life, or else by
his divine hand and power to send some redresse
to this great spreading evill: It pleased God
that the next day, Arrius going with great
ostentation, with a great number of followers,
to a publike meeting, sitting in Latrin, was
senslesse (and mad as it were) and voided out a
great deal of bloud, and his bowels, so that he
died like Iudas: and presently after him died
also the Emperour Constantine; but before hee
died, hee commanded Athanasius to be recall'd
from banishment.
So Constantine his sonne comming to the Im|periall
Dignity, sent for Athanasius, and sends
him after Honourable and Princely entertain|ment
to the Church of Alexandria, perswading
them, that his Father sent him into banishment,
not for any ill will, but because he thought that
course to bee the only way to keepe him from
his Adversaries.
Thus Athanasius being entertain'd (after two
yeeres and foure moneths banishment) hee go|verned
the Churches of Egypt; but continued
not above three yeeres; and then the Priest
mentioned before, which wonne Constantia the
Sister of Constantine the Emperour to the Ar|rian
cause; seduc'd also his sonne Constantius;
which he effected the easier, because he was ap+pointed
the Keeper of his Fathers will, and this
young Emperour was of an unconstant cariage,
so as Theodoret complain'd of him, ,

that hee was too easily wonne to be|liefe.
Hereupon they urge vehemently that the
word , was not in all the Scripture, and
that all the Churches in Egypt, Palaestine, Phae|nicia,
and severall other Countries were all full
of Tumults about the urging of that word,
and this they also complain'd of at the Coun|cell
of Antioch, at which by the Injunction of
Constantius, were ninetie Bishops assembled, to
the Dedication of the Temple which Constan|tine
had built. The Arrians also prevailed so
farre, that they deposed Eustathius from the Bi|shopricke
of Antioch, and having possessed
themselves of that, broacht their Heresies.
Well Athanasius could not long rest at Alexan|dria,
but Gregory being in his Seat, hee fled to
Iulius the Bishop of Rome, who sent him to be
at his old Seat againe; but the Emperour Con|stantius
was vex'd, and the Arrians were all up
against him; nay, hee could finde no hope of
shelter in the East, for the Emperour sent Cap|tains,
Tribunes, Centurions, Souldiers: nay,
whole Armies to bring this Athanasius, and pro|mised
rewards to them that could bring his
head: but all their search was in vaine to finde
him that God hid: for Athanasius was kept close
a long time in a close pit, and fed by a familiar
friend, as Abdias, in former time did the Lords
Prophets: yet at last a Maid servant made it
known to his Adversaries: but Athanasius was
sent away that very night before the searchers
came, by the goodnesse of God; and so con|veyed

himselfe into the West; where Constans
after the death of Constantine the younger
raigned: hereby the help of Iulius the Roman
Bishop, he got a little breathing: but it was con|cluded
at Sardis, that the Nicen Faith was right,
and that they who did defend contrary, were
not fit to bee admitted amongst the faithfull.
The Decree of that Synod is to bee read in
Theodoret.
Upon this grew the Division of the Eastern
and Westerne Churches, and this was it that
made the Church of Rome to flourish; but the
Easterne Churches were divided into three
parts. There were first Arrians and Eusebians,
then the Aetians and Eunomians, and lastly, the
Macedonians: by these three the Churches were
miserably vexed.
But foure yeeres after the Councell of Sardis
even to the death of Constantius some ten
yeeres space: this Athanasius was again banish|ed
into the Desarts of Libya; but the Emperour
was sorely vexed at him: but Liberius then Bi|shop
of Rome, pleaded hard for him, in so much
that Constantius banished him for it: well in the
absence of Athanasius, Constantius caused coun|cels
to be held in severall places, that was chiefe
against Photinus the Heretike, who dispraised
both the Orthodoxe and Arrians. Against this
Photinus, both the Orthodoxe Christians and Ar|rians
agreed well.
But in what troubles was the Church under
the Reigne of Constantius, who gouerned 24

yeers, in which space there were so many Coun|cels,
and nine contrary Confessions of Faith to
that of the Nicene Councell; the two first were
proposed at Antioch, the third by Constantius
his Embassadours to Constans: the fourth was
sent by Eudoxius, to the Westerne Bishops: the
fifth, sixth and seventh was at Sirmium, the
eighth at Seleucia by the Acacians, the ninth
was at Constantinople: to which Vlphilas
the Bishop of the Gothes subscribed: upon
all these hath Athanasius divinely spoken.
Witnesse his Creed, every syllable whereof
beares matter of importance answerable to the
judgment of so divine an Author: whose do|ctrine
in other things was no lesse judicious,
though not altogether so profitable, as in this
his compendious abridgment, and abbreviation
of the Christian faith briefly comprehended in a
short Epitome, yet not so briefely as plainly
dilucidated and expounded to the general bene|fit
and edification of the Church. Concerning
which it may be said, maximum in minimo, that
the greatest thing is in the least, the most matter
in fewest words. And albeit in the Apostles
Creed there are not many words, yet the words
might appeare unto some not sufficient for re|strayning
Heretikes from their opinions; and
hence this Father advisedly undertooke the
penning of this his Creed, for explication of
those articles which others wrested and perver|ted
to their own and others destruction: which
had it bin sooner written, in all probability those



their errors had bin nipped in the bud,  never
germinated to the scandal and annoyance of the
Church of God. So that as it is said of the good
woman by the Son of Syrach, Many daughters
have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all:
so may we say of this learned and reverend man,
many have written Creeds of the Christian faith,
but thine (the Apostles onely excepted) is infe|riour
unto none, yea, superiour being compared
with others.
Upon these occurrences, Constantius died,
sorrowing for three reasons: The first, that hee
had furthered his Kindreds death; the second,
because hee had nominated Iulian the Apostate
Emperour: the third, that he had too much ap|proved
those new and Hereticall Arrian points.
But now the case of the Church under Iulian
was deplorable, who strive to put downe all
Christianity: But for all this, Athanasius receives
his charge at Alexandria, where while he staid,
he called the Bishops together, and they streng|thened
the Nicene Confession: and they con|demned
the Arrians, Eunomians, Macedonians,
and the Audaeans, and Apollinarians with the
Sabellians: but now the Church increasing at
Alexandria, by Athanasius presence, the great
Philosophers, Magicians, Wisards, and South-sayers,
cry out, that they can do nothing, unlesse
this Athanasius be removed: So Letters were
granted not onely to take him, but to kill him:
upon this Athanasius leaves Alexandria and in|tends
to go by ship to Thebais: his friends grie|ving

at his departure, he told them, Nubecula est
ito transitura: It was a cloud that would soone
be over, and so it came to passe: for the yeere
after, Iulian died fearfully: but how ever, he
sent after Athanasius to apprehend him; but they
were deceived that sought him, for hee came
presently back to Alexandria, and kept close till
Iulian was dead. Then Iovianus succeeding
in the Empire, recall'd the banished Orthodox
Bishops, and embrac'd them highly; Athana|sius
writ an Epistle to this 'Emperour of the Ni|cene
Faith: but this good Iovianus after seven
moneths raigne died at Bythinia; so Valenti|nianus
and Valens succeeded him: different
these were, for Valentinian was Orthodoxe, but
Valens was an Arrian; and did persecute the
Easterne Churches; so that Athanasius was for|ced
to hide himselfe in his Fathers Monument,
the space of foure moneths: yet for all this stir,
this Emperour was in a manner forc't to give
leave to Athanasius to reside in Alexandria: so
long as this Athanasius liv'd, the Church of A|lexandria
was quiet: but this good Father died
in the seventh yeere of Valens his Raigne, peace|ably,
and in his old age, having been Bishop 46
yeeres of Alexandria. This Father is commen|ded
of all Ecclesiasticall Writers. Gregory Na|zianzen
stiles him, Tubam ingentem  colum|nam
Ecclesiae: The great Trumpet of the
Church, and the Churches Pillar: and further
he calls him, Oulum Orbis, Doctorem Certami|num,
vocem magnam, fidei sustentaculum, secun|dum

Christi praecursorem  Lampadem: Epi|phanius
calls him patrem rectae fidei. Theodoret
stiles him, , the Bulwarke of
Truth.Ep. 48.  49. Saint Basil praises this Father highly: so
doth Iulius the Roman Bishop, in his Epistle to
the Alexandrians. So doth Constantine the
younger in his Letters to the said Citizens. So
doth Saint Hierome, Ruffinus, lib. c. 14. So doth
Cassianus lib. 7. de Incarnat. cap. ult. and Vincen|tius
Lirinensis, and Cyrillus of Alexandria, and
divers others: and so this Father having finisht
his course, and kept the faith, expects the se|cond
comming of the Lord Jesus.

Athanasius his Sayings.

Of Faith.
The religious forme of godlinesse is above
every forme, and is knowne only by Faith: For
it is the light of the soule; the doore of life; the
foundation of eternall salvation: for without it
no man can come neere the number of the sons
of God;De side cap. 6. lib. 10. and without it all the endevo of man
is of none effect.Gal. 3. 26. So the Apostle Paul declares
himselfe, saying, ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus.
Againe, his divine power hath given unto us
all things that pertaine to life and Godlinesse,
2 Pet. 1. 3.
To believe rightly in God, and also of the
whole Trinity, is to direct all our hope unto



God:Athan. in Gal. and with sure trust to depend only upon
his truth and goodnesse.
These are the works of faith, saith he, name|ly
a quiet and good conscience: the love of God,
and the blessed Trinitie; and the hope of things
to come: a boldnesse to come to the Throne of
grace, prayer, true worship, confession of the
truth; obedience, perseverance, in yielding up
of the spirit, and to goe immediatly to God.


Saint Athanas. de meditatione.
Let the Sun when it riseth in the Firmament,
see the Psalter or thy Prayer book in thy hands:
that so the Sonne of righteousnesse may shine
into thy heart by faith in thy heart.


Saint Athanas. de meditatione.
Be instant at prayers with God, and worship
him that hung upon the Crosse for thee at the
sixt houre of the day.



His Works follow in two Tomes:

Tome the first.
1 His Oration against
the Heathens.
2 Of the Incarnation
of the Word.
3 Disputation against
Arrius, in the Ni|cene

Councell.
4 Vpon that Scrip|ture,
All things are gi|ven
me of the Father.
5 Epistle to Adel|phius.
6 Epistle to Maximus
7 An Oration against
them, who say the
Sun is no creature.
8 Against Serapion.
9 Testimonies of ho|ly
Scripture to prove
the Vnity in Trinity,
and Trinity in Vni|ty.
10 Exposition of faith.
11 Liberius Epistle to
Athanasius.
12 Athanasius answer.
13 An Epistle to Jovi|anus
the Emperour.
14 A Narration of the
Nicene Councell.
15 Five Orations a|gainst
the Arrians.
16 An Epistle of the
sentence of Diony|sius
of Alexandria.
17 Epistle Catholicall.
18 A Refutation if the
hypocrisie of Mele|tius,
Eusebius, and
Paulus Samosaten|sis.
19 An Epistle to the
Antiochians.
20 An Epistle to Epi|ctetus.
21 Of the Humane Na|ture.
22 Against Apollina|rius
of the Incarna|tion.
23 An Oration against
Apollinarius.
24 Of the comming of
Christ.
25 Against Sabellius.
26 An Oration prove|ing
that Christ is
one.
27 A Letter to Sera|pion
of the death of
Arrius.
28 An apologie to Con|stantius.
29 Two apologies for
his flight.
30 A Letter to all so|litary.
31 The Protestation of
the Alexandrians.
32 A Letter of the

Councels of Arimi|num,
and Seleucia.
33 A Letter to the A|fricans.
34 A Letter to all Or|thodox
Christians.
35 Letters to Palla|dius,
to Antiochus,
and to Dracontius.
To Marcellinus.
36 Of the Sabbath, and
of Circumcision.
37 Vpon that Scrip|ture,
Who so shall
speak a word against
the Sonne of man,
c.
38 Vpon that, as they
came to the Village.
39 Vpon the Passion.
40 Of the holy Virgin.
41 Of Virginity.
42 Of the Sower.
43 An Oration against
all Heresies.


Tome the second.
1 An Oration of the
Ascension of Christ,
translated by Lam|padius.
2 Of Melchisedeck.
3 A Letter to Serapi|on
of the Holy Ghost.
4 Another of the same.
5 A concise Oration
against the Arrians.
6 The first Colloquie
of the Arrians with
Jovianus at An|tioch.
7 The second, and
third and fourth.
8 Of the Incarnation.
9 The Creed of Atha|nasius.
10 Jovianus Letter to
Athanasius.
11 Athanasius answer.
12 Severall Letters.
13 Definitions.
14 Synopsis of the
Scripture.
15 Five Dialogues of
the Trinity.
16 A Dialogue betwixt
an Orthodoxe and a
Macedonian.
17 A Colloquy of A|thanasius.
18 A Letter of the
Churches tragicall
troubles.

19 Severall Disputes
and Objections, 17.
20 Questions to An|tiochus.
21 Interpretation of
the Evangelicall Pa|rables.
22 Other Questions.
23 St. Anthonies life.
24 On the Paraseve.
25 Fragments of the
Commentary on the
Psalmes.
26 Other fragments out
of severall authours.
27 Of the united Dei|ty
of the Trinity.
28 Of the proper Per|sons.
29 A Treatise against
Marcellinus.
30 Of the severall
names.
31 Of the united sub|stance
of the Trinity.
32 Of the blessednesse
of the Sonne of God
33 Of the profession
Catholike, Lib. 6.
34 Of the Catholike and
the Arrian Confessi|on,
Lib. 5.
35 Of his owne faith
nine books.
36 Of the Vnitie of
faith, ten books.
37 Of the Faith of the
Vnitie and Trinitie
of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, eleven
Books.
38 Athanasius dispute
with Arrius at Lao|dicea.
39 An exhortation to
Monks.
40 Athanasius and the
Egyptian Bishops,
their Letter to Mar|cus
Pope of Rome.
41 The Rescript of
Marcus.
42 Vpon our Saviours
Passion.

Then follow seven Homilies, and then seve|rall
Encomiums of this eminent Father.
Cardinall Bellarmine de Scriptoribus Ecclesia|sticis,
ranks his Works into foure Tomes, but
I have reckoned them as they are printed at Pa|ris
in two Tomes, Anno 1627.




An. Christi, 355. The Life of St Hillarie Pictavius.

S. HILLARIE PICTAVIVS

_SAint Hillarie Bishop of Poicters,Fortunatus de vita S. Hillarii ante eius oper. was
borne in the Countrey of Aquitaine,
ninety miles distant from the British
Ocean, nobly and generously descended, and
his naturall gifts so improved by education,
that hee became a worthy Champion in de|fence
of Christian Religion.
For although Saint Paul say, that not many
wise, many noble according to the flesh, yet when
they that are noble by birth receive Christ and
the faith of Christ, they prove singular instru|ments
of Gods glory, and the good of his
Church; accordingly did this blessed Father
shine to posteritie, by the manifold naturall en|dowments,

and spirituall graces, wherewith he
was beautified.
His Wife and Daughter hee endoctrinated
with the rudiments of Christianitie,Sexi sinsi. Etioth p. 248 and him|selfe
lived a strictaustere life, shunning the con|versation
of Iewes and Hereticks. Herein hee
shewed himself a true Christian, whose practice
must be answerable to his profession; for other|wise
a man may be said to beare fire in one hand,
and water in another: whatsoever a man pro|fesseth,
except he put what he professeth in pra|ctice,
there is a shadow without substance, a tree
without fruit; whose leaves of profession will
not keep it from being cut downe and cast into
the fire. No such tree was Saint Hilary, but the
Psalmists tree, which brought forth his fruit in
due season.
O most perfect man, whose life was with love
to feare, and with feare to love Christ.
Hee preached often to informe the people of
the mysterie of the Trinitie, sowing the words
of truth on the ground of their hearts.
In this he was a faithfull Minister of Christ:
he did feed Christs sheep, aswell as cloath him|selfe
with the wooll: and how did he feed them?
pavit verbo, pavit exemplo, by doctrine, and ex|ample:
his example availed to the teaching of
the ignorant; his doctrine for information of
the judgement, both of learned and unlearned.
This his pious zeale being knowne, hee was
elected Priest, and his fame spread abroad
through France, and forraine Countries. After|wards

he resisted and opposed the Arrian Here|sie;
whereupon the Bishops Valens and Vrsatius;
perswaded the Emperour to banish Saint Hilary
into Phrygia, together with Dionysius Bishop
of Millain, and Eusebius Bishop of Vercels.
And it is observable, That wheresoever God
hath his Church, the Devill hath his Chappell; and
where the Husbandman sowes wheat, there the
enemy sowes tares. As the truth of God was
propagated, so the tares grew up among the
wheat: and not onely so, but the tares wuld
overgrow the wheat, and not suffer it to grow
up with them.
During his banishment, hee understood that
his Daughter Abra left at Poicters with her
mother, was sought in Marriage by a wealthy
proper young man; whereupon he wrote a Let|ter
to his Daughter that hee had provided her a
Husband of great Nobilitie, and of such ad|mirable
beauty, that it exceeded the amiable
colours of the Rose and Lilly; admonishing
therefore not to match her selfe to any one un|till
he returned, and that till then she should ex|pect
the comming of this promised Bride|groome.
Whereupon his Daughter Abra,
mildly embracing her Fathers counsaile, remay|ned
unmarried.
A notable example of an obedient childe in
a matter of greatest consequence. Shee did not
so much satisfie her fancie, as magnifie her un|derstanding
in receiving her Fathers advice.
Which should other children doe, they might

please God better in obeying his Commande|ment;
and their Parents, who lege talionis, de|serve
more respect then their children can give
them.
Many Bishops by the Emperours command,
being assembled at Selucia, to give their opini|ons
concerning the Arrian Heresie: Saint Hlary
comming on a Sunday into a Chappell belong|ing
to a Castle; Florentia a Heathen Maid cry'd
cut with a loud voice, That a servant of God was
come thither; and falling downe at his feet, shee
earnestly desired his benediction; and afterward
leaving her parents, shee followed him even to
Poicters; saying, That though hee were not the
father of her generation, yet he was the Father of
her regeneration.
Thus it is an easie thing with God of the stones
to raise up Children unto Abraham; to mollifie
stony hearts, and make them fructifie, and be|yond
all mans beliefe, by small or no meanes to
bring great things to passe, no lesse then an Hea|thens
Conversion, at the sight and approach of
a man of God. Such is the freenesse of Gods
grace, which is agens liberrimum. The Winde
bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the
sound thereof, but knowest no whence it com|meth,
nor whither it goeth; even so is every
one that is borne of the Spirit.
Hee got much credit and approbation in the
Arrian Synod; and by persecution of his ene|mies,
Valens and Vrsatius, was sent back againe
into France; where Saint Martin met him;

seeking his acquaintance, and adoring him as
an earthly Deity. Afterward Saint Hilary being
come home, and finding his Daughter to whom
he had written a former Epistle, constant in de|siring
to be married to the Bridegroome which
her Father had provided; shee returned unto
Christ the Bridegroome of her soule, whose bo|dy
her Father with his owne hands buried; O
glorious Funerall better than life, being translated
from Earth to Heaven, and that in the flowre of
her age and spring of her youth: Thus despising
naturall affection, hee shewed loves perfection,
in seeking her eternall felicity and glorifica|tion.
An History which sets forth to the life the
reward of obedient Children: She that obeyed
her earthly father, is rewarded by God her hea+venly
Father: And whereas she did expect for a
recompence of her patience an earthly Bride|groome,
she was espoused to the Bridegroome
of her soule, fairer than the sons of Men, richer
than the greatest Potentates, whose are all the
Beasts of the Mountaines, and the Cattell on a
thousand Hills; sweeter than all sweetnesse, and
better than all goodnesse.
Within few yeeres after, Saint Hilary depar|ted
this present life in the Reigne of the Empe|rours
Valens and Valentian, Earth deploring,
Heaven rejoycing, and also our Saviour Jesus
Christ admitting him into felicitie, to whose
glory he had lived and died.
Thus a blessed Life was seconded by a blessed

Death; and he that had seene the various chan|ges
in the revolutions of times, did at last ex|change
 drosse for gold, misery
for happinesse, and in peace was gathered to
his Fathers.
But what eloquence can expresse his facun|diousnesse,
he being in discretion provident, in
handling matters profound, in learning elo|quent,
for vertue admirable; in composition
various, in resolution subtle and wise, as our Sa|viour
saith, as a Serpent, yet gracious as the sim|ple
Dove. He was the Salt of Wit, the Fountain
of Eloquence, the Treasury of Knowledge, the
Light of Learning; a Defender of the Church,
and an Enemy to the opposers thereof; whose
words read, seemed not words but thunder; He
that would know the character of his minde,
let him remember his constancie, reade his Vo|lumes,
and weigh his Sayings, some whereof are
here inserted.
Whose excellency may appeare to any in|different
Reader, who shall weigh them in
the ballance of mature judgement; and they
deserve no lesse approbation or title, than some|times
did the sayings of Pythagoras among the
ancients, which were intitled ,
the golden words of Pythagoras; for ac|cording
to that of the Wise man, A word spo|ken
in due season is like unto Apples of Gold in
pictures of silver. Such were these following,
viz.



Of Custome.
Custome is a strong obligation, and therefore
he is a better Christian, who not only by remis|sion
of sinne, but by ignorance in sinne is blame|lesse
and innocent.
Whence it was, that the Prophet denoun|ceth
a woe against such as draw iniquity toge|ther
with cords of vanity. Such are the cords
of long continued custome, which habituate a
man in an evill way, making him irrecoverably
wicked. Can a Blackamoore change his skin,
(saith the Prophet) or the Leopard his spots?
no more can yee that are accustomed to evill
learne to doe good. So that the truth of the
ancient Proverbe is manifest, that Custome is a
second Nature: for as slips of trees that are in|grafted,
and inoculated into another stocke
partake of the nature of the stocke whereinto
they are ingrafted: so whatsoever vice a man
accustometh himselfe unto, to the same are his
affections glued (as it were) and inseparably
joyned, and the corruption thereof concentra|ed
and made coessentiall unto it.


Of Gods Works.
God hath performed many things whose na|turall
causes being hid; yet their effects are
knowne. And Faith is religious, though joyned
with naturall ignorance.

A fit Register of Gods various wisedome, yea
the treasure house thereof is the whole Uni|verse,
wherein all his workes are done in num|ber,
weight and measure; all which by their
operations and impressions they make, are easi|ly
to be discerned, to bee nothing else but the
foot-steps of his Majesty. Now as Moses
could not see GODS face, but his hinder
parts he saw, so can we not many times discerne
Gods workes in themselves  priori, but
 posteriori wee may; by necessary collections.
Proportionably Faith (which is the gift of
God) in it selfe is a glorious grace, but because
of our ignorance, naturall and affected, wee doe
not attaine to that height and depth of that di|vine
mystery; which they that shall doe, must
be , must have an Eagles eye,
not , having their understand|ings
darkned, being strangers from the covenant
of grace.


Of hidden treasure.
By the similitude of hidden treasure, the ri|ches
of our hopes are shewed; because God was
found in man, for obtayning of whom all is to
be sold, that wading through all wants, we may
attaine the riches of Heaven.
That man can want nothing, which hath
him, which is All in all. And as sometime the
Philosopher said, Omnia mea mecum porto,
Whatsoever is mine, I beare about mee, so may

a Christian rich in grace say, Deus meus,  om|nia,
since I enjoy God, I enjoy all; without
whom enjoying all, I enjoy nothing; other
things utor, non fruor, I enjoy for their use, but
have no true contentment in enjoying them.


Of the Church.
Those that are out of the Church cannot be
capable of understanding divine mysteries; for
the ship wherein Christ preached the Word of
Life, was a Type of the Church, those without
being like the sands were not intelligible.
And hence appeares the folly of them that
forsake the Church, and excommunicate them|selves
for feare of being excommunicate by the
Church. It was sometimes Saint Pauls saying,
Brethren, I would they were cut off that trouble
you: but such there are in these dayes as cut off
themselves; they are so farre forth obnoxious
in troubling of others among whom they live,
that being conscious to themselves, they be|come
a punishment to themselves, in forsaking
the Church that bred them, that educated
them, that instructed them, that defended them,
that (had they continued in it with sincere and
pure Religion) would have saved them. But
they went out from us, because they were not
of us.


Of the love of God.
Such is the power of the love of God, that it

maketh us to bee of one spirit and affection with
God, as distance of place or time cannot alter or
change a setled affection.
Magnes amoris amor, The Load-stone of love
is love. Gods love allureth ours; Prior nos di|lexit
Deus (saith Saint Bernard) tantus tantum,
 gratis tantillos  tales. God first loved us,
and that in a high degree, when wee were vile
and contemptible. A strong inducement to
render love for so great love.


Of Election.
The Elect clothed with the wedding garment
do shine, in the newnesse of regeneration, nei|ther
is our election merit, but our merit procee|deth
from election.
God electeth none for their owne sakes, or
any thing in them, but of his meere free mercy.
Wherefore did he love Iaakob, and hate Esau?
Search not into Gods secret counsell: Scrutator
Majestatis opprimetur  gloria. Cannot the pot|ter
make one vessell for honour, another for dis|honour?
as the clay in the potters hand, so we
were in Gods, who chose us or rejected us, ei|ther
for the magnifying of his mercies, or the
manifesting of his justice.


Of Hypocrisie.
The inward part of the cup is most usefull; if
it be foule within, the outward washing is to no

purpose, and so the inward integrity of the con|science
doth purifie the body.
God requireth truth in the inward parts, and
of all the sacrifices of the Old Testament most
esteemed of the fat of the inwards; he will have
no dissembling. That Harlot in the Kings would
have all the childe or none; she was the childes
mother: but that other Harlot said, Let it be
neither thine nor mine, but let it be diuided. God
hateth divisum  dispersum cor: wee must not
have one heart for God, and another for the
Devill: give him all, or none at all.


Of Self-deniall.
Christ is to be followed by taking up his Crosse,
and though not in act, yet in will we should be
ever ready to suffer with Christ, as companions
of his passion, though not in act, yet in affection,
for when Christ comes to judgement, how shall
eternall life be obtained? by wealth, gentilitie, or
dignity? these things and the like are to be con|temned,
and Christ to be followed, whereby
eternitie with losse of earthly felicitie is gained.
It is an hard matter at once to looke up to
Heaven with one eye, fixing the other upon
earth: we must either adhere to our selves, and
deny Christ; or adhere to Christ denying our
selves. No man can serve two masters, that is,
commanding contrary things. Let us then de|nie
our selves, saying, with the blessed Apostle,
We have forsaken all, and followed thee.



Hilary on that in Matthew,
My yoke is sweet.
What is sweeter than Christs yoke? what is
lighter than his burthen? to abstaine from
wickednesse, to desire that which is good, to
love all, to hate evill, to obtaine eternity, not to
be taken with things present, and not to impose
on another that which thou wouldest not thy
self suffer.


Hilar. lib. 4. de Trinitate.
Words and sayings are to be understood ac|cording
to their causes, because the matter is
not subject to the speech, but the speech is subject
to the matter.


Hilar. de Trinitate.
The flesh became the word, that is man God:
his humanity is in Heaven, his Deity was of
Heaven: this is in Heaven as it was, and that is
in Heaven which was not.


Hilary in principio: Lib. de Trinitate.
All humane speech and eloquence is obnoxi|ous,
to contradiction: because such as disagree
in manners, disagree also in mind, and the errour
of their foolish will doth strive against the

truth, either not understood, or offending their
folly.


Hilar. lib. 1. de Trinit.
The beginning of Discipline is humility,
whereof there are three documents which espe|cially
belong to a Reader or hearer, the first is,
that hee despise not any Science or Author.
Secondly that hee bee not ashamed to learne.
Thirdly that when he hath gotten knowledge,
he doe not despise others.


Hilar. super Mat.
Christ did so highly commend concord and
peace that he affirmed that Prayers made in the
Unity of the spirit should bee heard, and hath
promised that where two or three were gathe|red
together in his name, hee would be in the
midst of them.



An Epitaph on Saint Hilary collected out of
an ancient Authour.

Hilarius cubat hac Pictavus Episcopus una,
Defensor nostrae terrificus fidei.
Istius aspectum Serpentes ferre nequibant,
Nescio quae in vultu spicula Sanctus habet.


Hilary of Poicters this Grave doth contain,
Our Faiths Defendor, which he did mayntain:
His blest aspect did Serpents away chase,
Affrighted to behold his holy Face.




His Works.

1 Against the Emperor
Constantius, 1 book.
2 Two Books unto the
Emperour.
3 Against Auxen|tius
the Arrian, one
booke, and one con|cerning
Synods a|gainst
the Arrians.
4 An Epistle to his
daughter Abra, and
a Hymne.
5 Commentaries on
Matthew.
6 The explanation of
some places.
7 Of the unitie of the
Father and the Son.
8 Of the ssence of the
Father, and the Son.
9 Epistles to Saint
Augustine.

He was abundantly eloquent, as appeareth by
his twelve Bookes of the indivisible Trinity,
written in a swelling stile, as are his Commen|taries
on the Psalmes.




An. Christi, 365. Sanctus Cyrillus Hierosoly|mitanus.

S. CIRILLVS.

_BEfore the passages of this Fathers
Life shall bee treated of, 'twill not
be amisse to discover two things:
the first the time in which this St.
Cyrill lived;Bell. de script. Ecclesiast. for Bellarmine placeth
him in the yeare 365: his words are, Sanctus
Cyrillus Hierosolymae Episcopus, c. St. Cyrill
Bishop of Ierusalem under Constantius, often
cast out of his place, by the fury of the Arrian
faction, but restored, and at last dyed under
Theodosius.Surius in vit is Sanct. But Surius puts him in the yeare of
our Lord 340. Now the difference is not to be
accounted so great, the one accounting from
his birth till hee began to be esteemed of in the

Church, and the other reckoning from the time
of his being first Bishop, to the time of his
Death. The other is, the distinguishing this St.
Cyrill from the Patriarch of Alexandria, and al|so
from another St. Cyrill Deacon and Martyr;
which is thus to be knowne; first, he is knowne
from St. Cyrill of Alexandria, because this was
but a Confessor, that of Alexandria a Martyr;
so also was that St. Cyrill which was a Deacon:
then also by their difference of Times; this of
Ierusalem being in the yeare 365, the other in
430. But St. Cyrill the Deacon was in the same
time with this worthy instrument: yet they are
easily distinguished; for this Saint was Bishop of
Ierusalem, the other did defend the faith in Phae|nicia,
in Heliopolis, whose Martyrdome (as
Theodoret in his Ecclesiasticall Historie relates
it) was no lesse famous than Cruell, perpetra|ted
by the Gentiles under Constantine the Em|perour;Theod. Eccles. Histor. l. 3. c. 6.
for in that this St. Cyrill did breake
some of their Idols and Images, they not onely
killed him, but ript up his belly, and eate his
Liver; upon whom God did speedily manifest
a terrible revenge: for the Teeth first, and then
the Tongues of all that tasted his Entrailes
fell out, putrid and fetide, then their Eyes; and
so all presently miserably dyed. Now this St.
Cyril though he had divers bloudy  malicious
Enemies who would, if they durst, have acted
as much upon him; yet he was by the all-ruling
Providence, and protection of God, preserved
from their fury.

So these two things being cleared, let us
proceed to write the actions of this worthy
Saint. Constantius reigning, who was sonne to
Constantine the great; this Cyrill succeeded
Maximus, who was Patriarch in the same Me|tropolis:Ex Rom. Martyrol.
A man magnae Sanctimoniae, Doctri|nae,
Prudentiae, qui successit ob praeclaras raras
animi, corporis Dotes, (id est) Of great San|ctimony,
Learning, Wisedome, who did suc|ceed
Maximus for his rare and excellent en|dowments
both of body, and minde; who
endured many heavy things for the testimony
of Faith and a good Conscience, being
often forced to forsake his place: and yet af|ter
all these storms, raised by the Devils agents,
he slept quietly in the Lord. Of whose undefi|led
faith the Synod of Sardis writing to Daa|sus,Theod. l. 5. c. 9.
have given a large and evident Testimony,
which is to be seene in Theodoret; which be|cause
it is so prevalent to remove all the scandals
of his adversaries, I have here set downe.
We have exhibited to the Church of Jerusalem,
which is the Mother of all other, the most reve|rend
and most Holy St. Cyrill, which was appoyn|ted
and approved by all the Bishops of the Provin|ces
(as saith the Canon) and also waged many
famous Combats with his Adversaries the Arri|ans,
with admirable successe and renowne. He is
said to have governed the Church singularly
well, and it is knowne that he got the hatred of
many for his great Charity and Compassion to|wards
the poore, for this made him famous

and envyed; for in the time of a great famine,
when as the poore were destitute of all helpes,
and meanes, and knew not where to finde re|liefe,
they flocked all to this holy Patriarch, as
to their utmost refuge: Hee was so liberall to
them, that he gave them all he had: nay, so full
of pitty and compassion was this Father, that
when he had nothing left him of his owne, hee
tooke the Vessells and Church ornaments, and
sold them to relieve the necessity of the indi|gent;
so that hee feared not to spoyle the
Temples Materiall, so that the Temples Spirituall
might be furnished, imitating in this his acti|on,
the examples of St. Ambrose, St. Augustine,
and others; and even for this act he wanted not
many adversaries: yet for all their proceedings
he justified the act, and was beloved of all pious
and good men.
Nicephorus saies of this Father,Niceph. l. 9. c. 14. Eccles hist. that inter
veteres Ecclesiae patres, c. St. Cyrill is reckoned
amongst the ancient Writers of the Church,
and is reputed famous amongst the Defendors,
and Champions of the Catholike and Aposto|licke
Doctrine: for he was not onely equall to
very many of those strong Pillars of the Church,
but their Senior, and held the Catholicke
Doctrine sincerely; and as hee is mentioned of
most Historians; as Socrates, Theodoret, Zozo|men,
Nicephorus, and others: So none speak of
him, but with singular and honourable account:
and when as Nicephorus speaks of learned and
judicious men, as Palus of Constantinople,

Athanasius of Alexandria, Anthonius of Egypt,
Eusebius Bishop of Emissen, Titus Bostrensis,
Basilius of Ancyra,Loco Citato. Eudoxius, Acacius the succes|sor
of Eusebius of Caesarea, and St. Cyrill, who
succeeded Maximus, and Ephrem Syrus,
(saith he.)
Tis also said, that St. Cyrill was not onely en|dowed
with parts requisite for the adornment
of such a great Patriarch, but also with the Spi|rit
of prophecy: For when as Iulianus the Em|peror
had given command to have the Temple
of Ierusalem rebuilded, and the charges thereof
to be disbursed out of the common stocke, St.
Cyrill being at that time Bishop of Ierusalem,
remembring the prophecy of Daniel, and what
our Saviour had confirm'd in his holy Gospell,
and told it to many, how that one stone should
not be left upon another which should not bee
throwne downe;Dan. C. 9. Ma. C. 24. Luk. 19. said presently, all what is here
foretold shall come to passe: the Bishop said it,
and in one night there was such a terrible earth|quake
in Ierusalem, which parted the very
stones of the foundation, and so all the upper
building fell downe, and with the fall ruined
all the contiguous houses: and whereas many
of the Iewes came to behold what was done,
suddenly there came downe fire from heaven,
and consumed all the Instruments and Tooles
of the workmen: So that what St. Cyrill had
said, did come to passe.Socrat. L. 3. C. 17,  20. Eccls. Hist.
Nicephorus saith, that there was a Crosse seen
in the heaven of almost all the Iewes, by which

this St. Cyrill did convert may to believe on
IESVS the Saviour of the world,Niceph. Lib. 9. C. 22. Eccles. Hist. who dyed
upon the Crosse; and this St. Cyrill mentions
in his Epistle to the Emperour Constantius: and
others affirme, that GOD did by this signe add
Confirmation to this worthy man, and gave ef|ficacy
to his Doctrine, So that what he preached
of Iesus which was crucified, was readily and
chearefully embraced.
Theodoret saith, that Macarius being dead,
and Maximus that followed him;Theod. lib. 2. 27 Cyrillus ala|cris
 promptus doctrinae Apostolicae propugna|tor
in Episcopatus gradulocatur, (id est) Cyrill
the lively and prompt Champion of the Apo|stolicall
Doctrine was placed in that prefer|ment.
Whereupon the Arrians knowing,
and indeed finding his undaunted spirit and
courage; for the opposing of all Heresies, and
defence of Piety and Truth, (as Sozomen rela|teth)
raised sundry Calumnies,Sozomen. li. 4. C. 25. Eccles. Hist. and spread a|broad
divers disgracefull reports of him, ins|much
that they thought to have possessed the
Orthodox Bishops of these his scandalous acts,
and to have utterly eclipsed his glory: yet for
all these projects and pretences, the Catholike
Bishops, being 150, which held a Councell at
Seleucia, would not any wayes confirme or ra|tifie
his deposition (as Theodoret testifies) nay,Theodor. lib. 2. C. 27.
they were so farre from doing any thing against
him, that they did resolve to proceed against
his chiefest adversary, who was called Acacius,
and excluded him from the Synod: and as

Nicephorus who did write the Acts of the Seleu|cian
Synod, and of this Acacius and his Favorites
sayes, they did not nor should professe the faith
Catholike, nor would they suffer any objecti|ons
to be brought in against this famous Cyril:
nay, moreover, those that were invited to the
hearing the cause of Saint Cyrill decided, who
had also determined his deposition, were not
onely not there nor was there any who answe|red
for them,Bon. Annal. Anno 359. yet (as Baronius reports) St. Cyrill
was driven from his place by the Arrians in the
Councell of Constantinople.
Mark (saith Nicephorus) the admired integri|ty
of this Cyrill,Niph. l. 9. c. 43. who appeared to defend his in|nocency
notwithstanding all his enemies brava|does
and menacings; nay, he was so farre from
being daunted, that he affrighted the hearts of
all his enemies, so that they durst not maintain
their forged accusations before so many famous
and learned Judges: But when as they found the
Emperour infected with their heresie, then they
grew potent and impudent, and Cyrill being re|moved,
Heraclius was brought in, and after him
Hillarius, (as Nicephorus maintaines) for they
two administred the affaires of that Church
untill the reigne of Theodosius,Niceph. l. 9. c. 49. and then Cyrill
was again restored,Niceph. l. 12. c. 16. and how reverently and pi|ously
hee determined all affaires belonging to
that place is easily seene.
And Epiphanius (who was the Hammer of
Heretiks) gives this Cyrill a worthy Encomium,
in these words, Qui praeter Acacium Arrianum,

cum multis aliis illius sectae Episcopis contendere
religionis erg non dubitavit,Epiph. lib. 3. Tom. 1. Haeres. 73. that is, who not
onely not feared to encounter. Acacius the Ar|rian,
but did Christianly and faithfully oppose
divers other Hereticall Bishops: nor is Saint
Ierome wanting to commend him: for Cyrillus
(saith he) Frtissimus Christi athleta, orthodoxae
fidei Assertor constantissimus c. That valiant
Combatant of Iesus Christ, that most constant
Mayntainer of the Orthodoxe faith, for many
yeeres together, strove for the propagation of
Divine Truth, suffered various and heavy per|secutions,
exercised in these dangers from the
beginning almost of Constantius Reigne, to ma|ny
yeeres of Theodosius,Hieron. in Ca|talogo, script. Eccles. yet all this while, in
these manifold grievances kept his first resoluti|on,
and died in the faith at last. Thus he.
And saith Nicphorus, though the Arrians at
that time by their flatteries, policies and sugge|stions,
had corrupted the minde of the Empe|rour,
though the Court was also all of that Sect,
yet this Cyrill startled not; which was an infal|lible
demonstration that he preached not Christ
out of vain glory, or in hope of reward at
Court, no yet that hee was desirous to follow
the times, but that thee strove to keepe the aith
in a pure conscience,Niceph. lib. 12 c. 24. as knowing that would be
his recompence at last.
Cardinall Bellarmines testimony of him shal
briefly conclude my discourse of this laborious
and constant Embassadour in the cause of Christ.
Saint Cyrill (saith hee) after he was made Bishop

of Ierusalem, for his singular parts and Learn|ing,Bellar. de scrip. Eccles.
the state of the Church at that time requi|ring
faithfull Dispensers of Gods Word: was
often driven by the Arrians from preferment,
yet did hee hold the faith till his death, which
was under Theodosius the Emperour.Inscriptis Sancti Cyrilli ante opus. Hee
preached every Sunday, and all the Lent every
day with great pains, and profit.

These are some of his Sayings.

Sanctus Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus,
Praefatio in Cat.
Be not curious in things of vanity, seeke not
to know what's done in the Citie, what the King
doth at the Court, what the Bishop in his Consist|ry,
what the Priest in his Parish; it is high time
to looke into thy selfe, and then up to Heaven from
whence thy salvation commeth.


Idem 16.
Some come to Church for fashion, others to meet
their friends: this man upon one pretence, that
man upon another: yet its better to come so then
not to come at all: in the meane time the net is cast
out, the Word being preached draws in them which
came with no intent to be caught at all; being thus
taken they shall be preserved, for it is Christ that
hath catch'd them, not that hee may destroy them,
but that being dead, hee may bring them to life
eternall.



Idem Cat. 16.
Let every good Christian say thus within him|selfe;
certainly, now the mystery of iniquitie is
wrought; the rumour of warres affrighten mee;
the Schismes and divisions of the Church are ready
to distract me; the difference amongst brethren
make me amazed; surely the end is not far off:
Lord when thou commest, let me be prepared for it.


Idem Cat. 16.
What though thou suffer for Christs sake? sup|pose
that fire, and swords, racks and torture, be now
ready to seize thee, harken what the blessed Spirit
of God the Comforter saith unto thee: Trust still
in God, those are but flea-bitings; continue but a
while, and thou shalt be in Heaven for evermore.



Here follow the Treatises of his which are
called his Catechismes: by the Paris Edition,
Anno 1631.

1 An introductory to
Baptisme, and his Le|cture
out of Esay, up|on
that, Lavamini.
2 Of Repentance, and
of remission of sin, of
the adversary of man.
Lectures upon that
of Ezechiel, Justitia
justo.

3 Of Baptisme, Le|ctures
upon that of
the Romans, Know
ye not, c.
4 Lectures upon that
of the Colossians,
Cavete ne quis vos,
c.
5 Of faith, out of that
to the Hebrewes.
Chap. 11.
6 Of the soveraignty
of God, of Heresies,
and Lectures out of
Esay, upon that, Turn
unto mee, ye Isles.
7 Of the Father. Vpon
the Ephesians, for
this cause.
8 Lectures upon that
of Jeremy, Deus
magnus,  fortis.
9 Lectures upon Job,
upon that who is he?
10 Vpon that, and in
one Lord Jesus
Christ.
11 Vpon that, the one|ly
begotten Sonne
of God. Vpon that
of the Hebrews, Mul|tis,
 multifariam.
12 Vpon that, Hee was
incarnate, and was
made flesh.
13 Lectures upon that
He was crucified.
14 Lectures on Christs
Resurrection.
15 Lectures upon that,
He shall come again
to judge the quicke
and dead. And of
Antichrist out of
Daniel, Aspiciebam,
 Throni, c.
16 Lectures upon the
Holy Ghost. Vpon the
first of the Corin|thians.
17 Lectures upon the
holy Catholicke
Church, the Resur|rection
of the body,
and the life everla|sting.
Out of Eze|chiel.
And the hand
of the Lord was up|on
me.


1 Lectures to those
who are newly bap|tized,
out of that of
Saint Peter, Be yee

sober and watchfull,
c.
2 Lectures upon the
body and bloud of
Christ, out of that of
the Corinths. What
I have received of
the Lord, c.
3 Lectures upon that
of Saint Peter, Cast
away, therefore, c.

These were the pious and learned Works of
this Father, which the Church hath always kept
as a solid buckler against Hereticks, and as a re|storative
to the faithfull members of our Lord
Iesus Christ.




An. Christi, 368. Sanctus Ephraem Syrus.

S. EPHREM SYRVS.

_IT is not fitting that such eminent
Lights should be hid under a Bushel,Gregor. Nys|senin vit Sancti Ephr.
but that their renowmed and pious
actions should be blazon'd to the
World for admiration and imitation; the time
in which he died in the Church, was under Valen|tinian
and Valens, He led a Monastick course of
life, and was over the Church of Edissa, as Tri|themius
reports in his booke of Ecclesiasticall
Writers: He was made Priest by Saint Basil the
Great, borne he was of Christian parents in the
time of Constantine the Great, a Syrian hee was
by Nation: even from his childhood abstemi|ous,
and shunned the appearance of evill: His

parents in a Vision saw a fruitfull Vine branch
spring forth of Ephraems mouth and they saw it
spread,Ex vetustis. Graecis. Manuscrip. Anonyis. as it were, into most parts of the world,
and though all the fowles of Heaven came and
eat of the fruit, yet still there remayned a great
quantity: this as they verily judged, shewed how
his doctrine of the true Vine Iesus Christ should
be so copious and delicate, that all Nations in all
ages, might out of his Works gather nourish|ment,
and yet there would be store enough for
others that should come after: and certain it is,
that this man had admirable endowments,
whom all the worthy Fathers of the Church
have so highly commended: it will not, there|fore
seeme false what here is recorded of this
Father, if so many worthy Writers may be cre|dited:
and it hath alwayes been the custome of
the Church, to celebrate the memory of pious
and religious men; especially of those who did
as this Ephraem, optabat enim non videri, sed bo|nus
esse: he did not onely desire to seeme, but
to be really good, whose minde was as a golden
Ring all enchased and decored with rich jewels:
heare therefore what a man he was, of whom
Gregorius Nyssenus speaks thus,Gregor in vi|ta. Sancti Ephr. Celebrandus est
mihi, igitur Ephraem ille, qui cunctis Christianis
versantur in ore, that is, That Ephraem the Sy|rian
must be praysed of me, who is well known
to all Christians in the World; neither is hee
ashamed of his Kindred, whose Vertues are
as a generall light to all, whose life and doctrine
have made most men wonder at him, there are

none but such as be ignorant of great Saint Ba|sil,
but know him. And as the same Father
speaks, the prayses which he gives this man, are
not small, or such onely as are worldly: neither
doth hee speake of his education or forme of
bodie, or comelinesse of his person; but as hee
witnesseth they were,Idem ibid. Actio  Contemplatio;
Fides, Spes  Charitas, Pietas erga Deum, c.
that is, Action and Contemplation, Faith, Hope
and Charitie, Pietie towards God. Meditation
on the holy Scriptures, puritie of minde and bo|die,
strict Mortifications, privacie of life, dili|gence
in prayer, often changing his place by
trials and hardnesse, a flying from evill, being
instant in preaching, no lodging but the cold
earth, an incredible austeritie of life, poverty
with singular Humility, mercifull in a manner
beyond humane condition, opposing, and in|deed
not enduring the Broachers of Heresies:
in a word, furnished with all the gracious en|dowments
that should bee in the man of God;
how zealously did He in His Writings by sun|dry
places of Scripture, and severall undeniable
arguments detest those furious and mischiefe
working Hereticks, as Sabellius, Arrius, Apol|linarius,
Anomius, Novatus, and others: in so
much that He was stiled the Pancratiastes, or the
unconquered Souldier of Iesus Christ:Greg. Nyssen. in vita S. Eph. For his
great love to God and his Neighbours, the words
of his own will, do sufficiently declare, which
deserve to be engraven in Golden Characters;
Nullo modo in tota mea vita contra Deum contu|meliosus

extiti, nec sermo stultus  labiis meis
egressus est: Neminem in tota vita maledict is
onerari; nec cum ullo Christiano homine conten|tiosum
me praebus: that is, By no means in all
my life (saith hee) have I reproached God, or
suffered foolish words to flie out of my mouth,
never did I burthen any man with curses, nor
did I ever shew my selfe contentious with any:
so that it doth plainly appeare, what circum|spection
hee had over his wayes: Hee was won|drous
studious in the Word of God; and made
divers very comfortable and learned Commen|taries;
and he was wonderfull eloquent to per|swade
men to embrace the Word of God; hee
kept his bodie and minde chaste and pure; as
doth appeare by repelling the shamelesse beha|viour
of a lewd woman, which being instigated
by the Devill, thought to have entic'd him to
lust: but this grave Father, what with his ex|hortations,
admonitions, and divine speeches,
caught and overcame the Tempter; so that shee,
which had beene light of behaviour by his fa|therlike
advise, prov'd a grave, modest, religious
Matron; He would very often weep for and be|waile
the calamities of men, the losse of time,
his inbred corruptions. Hee that reads but that
one Tract of his of Humilitie seriously; will (if
endued with any sparke of grace) remove all
pride and self-conceit, and will with that King,
and this Father confesse, That hee is a worme,
and no man, corrupted with sinne and ini|quitie.

Indeed, Humility for her excellency should be
the sister of true Nobility: for God hath more
respect unto them that with humblenesse of
heart, can cast themselves lowly before the pre|sence
of his Majesty. For as the lowlinesse of
heart, maketh man highly in favour with God:
even so meeknesse of words, maketh him to
sinke into the hearts of men; such was this our
Ephraems condition of humilitie.
Who shall read his booke of Divine Love,
whose heart will not be inflamed? For the grea|test
argument of godly love is to love that
which God willeth and commandeth: and con|trariwise
not to love that which God loveth
not: And the true lover of God, (which is pro|perly
the charitable person) is under no rule; but
he is Lord above all inventions, all precepts, and
all commandements, that God hath given to
man: for love is not confined or limited with|in
any bounds.
Who shal read his Tract of Chastity Virgini|ty,
wherin it is praysed, but wil studie to keep his
body and soule free from adultery and lust, and
say as Saint Paul did, that our bodies are the tem|ples
of the Holy Ghost? For Chastitie is the
beauty of mans life, consisting either in sincere
Virginity, or in faithfull Matrimony: For cha|stitie,
puritie of life, continencie, or refusing the
corrupt pleasures of the flesh, and of this witty
wicked world; are precious in the ight of our
Creatour: and doe possesse such as keepe their
bodies cleane and undefiled; and in life and

conversation refraine from evill. And who is
hee that hath any sence in him or faith, medita|ting
his Divine Sermons of the last judgement,
and Christs second comming; but will speedily
prepare himselfe to appeare, and strive ever so
to live as if he was presently to give an account
of his whole life, for our whole life is nothing
else, but as it were a glue, which in a man faste|neth
the soule and body together, which pro|ceedeth
of the temperament of the Elements,
whereof the bodie is made, which if it bee not
violently melted before, through our owne di|stemperance,
or loosed with the moysture of
our owne merits; or suddenly consumed with
the love or hate of God, weareth away through
age of the body, and so at length comes to no|thing:
Life is of its owne nature a grievous
thing, most miserable and full of innumerable
cares: O life (saith a wise man) how may a man
get from thee without Deaths helpe? thy evils
be infinite, and yet no man is able either to a|void,
nor yet to abide them: And if any good
thing happen to a man in his life; he feeleth also
therewith tribulation and sorrow, as sometime
no other, which maketh our joyes little, and
our life deplorable.
For the manner of his life, it was solitary;
for he would say, by this meanes,Gregor. Ns|sn in vit. Sancti Ephr. Ex turbulentis
hujus saeculi perturbationibus ac procellis libera|ri,
c. that is, He was freed out of the turbu|lent
turmoiles and stormes of this World, that
hee did sweetly enjoy his thoughts without di|straction,

that hee was the more fit for divine
Contemplation and studie. Yet hee often re|mov'd,
but it was still to doe some notable ser|vice
for the Church of Christ. Hee went to the
Citie of Edissa, to visit the Churches, and to
meet with some learned Father to conferre, but
by the providence of God he met with an Har|lot,
who was impudent, yet witty, this Ephraem
presently turnd his eyes away not willing to be|hold
her; but she the more earnestly lookt him
in the face to whom hee spoke, Oh woman, why
doe you so greedily gaze on mee, to whom shee
readily replyed, Ex te viro ego sumi: I am come
from your loines, why then doe you cast your
eyes upon the earth, out of which you were
taken, and neglect me? well he rejoyced that
GOD had sent him good counsell from the
wicked.
But not staying here hee went to Caesarea of
Cappadocia, where hee both heard and saw that
sweet Trumpet of Gods glory Saint Basil, whom
he entirely reverenced, here he desired of God
to give him abilitie of utterance to preach to
the people, which God gave him abundantly, he
did not any wayes affect prayse, so his will runs:
Nulla Ephraem cecineritis carmina, c. that is,
sing no Verses in commendation of Ephraem,
bury mee not with any lofty Linnens or Oint|ments,
rayse no Monuments or Tombs, for I
am a sojourner and a stranger here as all my Fa|thers
were, Psal. 39. He was wondrously mer|cifull
to the poore, for though hee had not of

his owne to give, yet by his sweet and attractive
Sermons, he stirred up the hearts of others to
relieve them: he was of so Angelick an Aspect,
that his Dove-like simplicity, his compassion and
integritie was easily decyphered in his counte|nance:
Gregorius Nyssenus compares him with
Abel, for offering sacrifice to God,Gen. 4. which was his
soule and body, as an acceptable sacrifice; to
Enoch for his constant walking with God: to
Noah, for his never making shipwrack of Faith
and a good Conscience. To Abraham for leaving
his owne, and going forth by Gods promises.
To Isaack being willing to lay down his life for
the Gospel. To Iaakob for supplanting Esau, so
hee the Hereticks: and for blessing the people at
his death. To Ioseph for Chastitie; and especial|ly
for distributing the pure wheat of GODS
Word wiely to the famishing soules: in many
things to Moses for striking the Rocke, and
bringing forth water from the flinty stone: so
he by the Rod of Gods Word did fetch teares
from hard-hearted men; and brought many to
repentance. To Iosuah, for bringing many in|to
the spirituall Canaan: to Samuel, for devo|ting
his youth to God. To Elias, for repro|ving
false Teachers: to Elizeus, for abundance
of the spirit; to Saint Iohn Baptist, for living
in the Wildernesse; and teaching men to repent:
To Saint Paul for his manifold sufferings, and
indeed it is hard to say, wherein hee was defe|ctive:
at the time of his death hee denied to
have any cost bestowed upon him, but willed

them to give it to the poore. And a great man
having prepared a rich Vestment for him, said,
That pietie should be respected before povertie;
and so did not give it as Ephraem had willed
him: but hee was presently sorely visited, and
could not be released till this old man imposed
his hands on him, and blessed him, and then said
to him,Greg. Nysse. in vit. Perfice, Homo, quae dudum promisisti,
Perfect that which whilome,  Man, thou did|dest
promise, and so he was restored to health:
Well, this Father gave the people comfortable
directions at the time of his death, so that it was
rather, Transitus qum mors, a sleeping in the
Lord, quietly and comfortably in fulnesse of
dayes, and was buried by the Monkes that
were his Disciples: I could bee tedious, if I
should largely and particularly expresse the pray|ses
that many Writers afford Him:Bas. in Hex. divin. opific. Hom. 2. Hieron. in Cat. soip Eccles. Basil the
Great sayes of him, that distabat  mundana sa|pientia,
He affected not worldly wisdome; Saint
Ierme sayes, that He came to be of that fame,
that next to the Scriptures, his Works were
publikely read:Theodor. Hist. Eccles l. 2. c. 30 Zozo. l. 3. c. 15 Theodoret stiles him a most ad|mirable
man, an excellent Writer in his fourth
booke, Chap. 29. Zozomen saith of him, that
about that time, there liv'd one Ephraem Syrus,
a man excelling others, and a singular ornament
to the Catholike Church;Hist. Trip. l. 5. c. 45. the Tripartite History
calls him a man admirable for knowledge and
writing.
So also doth Simeon Metaphrastes, Anastasius
Synasta, Photius, Cedrenus, Nicephorus, Trithe|mius

and others, so as I have said. He flourished
under Constantine the Great, and died under
Valens.

Ephraem Syrus his Sayings.

Of the excellencie of Faith.
As the body is more worth then the raiment,
so the soule more worth than the body,Ephraem Syrus de side, p. 74. and
faith in Christ more excellent than all: get ther|fore
that in thy soule which may get him, who
is the rich clothing both of soule and body.


Vpon earnest, though late repentance.
Despise not an old man who desires to come
to the haven; though he comes late,Ephraem Syri senten. p. 214. Tom. 2. yet he comes
in time God rejected not those that come at the
eleventh houre, thou knowest not but that hee
may have his penny as well as the first.


Of perseverance in Grace.
The resolute Traveller knowes that his jour|ney
is long, and the way durty and dange|rous,
yet goes on in hope to come home to his
house: so let the Christian,Ephraem Syrus de virtute, cp. 4. Tom. 2. though the way to
Heaven be narrow and difficult, though it be set
with troubles and persecutions, yet let him goe
on till hee hath finished his course with joy, for
Heaven is his home.



Of the neglecting the Soules welfare.
Hee that feasts his body with banquets and
delicate fare,Ephraem Syrus in illud, atten|de tibi, c. 6. Tom. 2. and starves his soule for want of
spirituall food, is like him that feasts his slave,
and starves his own wife: therefore rejoyce ra|ther
with thy wife and keep under thy servant,
and so all shall be safe.


Of comming to Christ.
Stay not away (o my soul) from him though
thou beest wounded, for hee came to heale;
though thou beest lost, for he came to seek: let
not thy diseases affright thee from the Physitian;Ephraem Syrus in peccatorem  Pharisaeum p. 550. Tom. 2.
for hee calls those that are sick and maimed: if
thou dyest uncured, it is thy own fault; his mercy
and goodnesse is open freely to thee, as to Mary
Magdalen, and the penitent Thiefe.



His Workes are contained in three Tomes,
which containe matters of severall subjects, all
full of Divinity printed at Antwerpe, 1619.
Bellarmine doubts of many of them,Trithem. descrip. Eccles. fol. 20. Trithe|mius
doth thus record them.

1 Of the Holy Ghost,
one book.
2 Of compunction of
heart, one book.

3 Of Contrition, one
book.
4 Of Penitence, one
book.
5 Of the strife of this
World, one book.
6 Of the Day of Iudg|ment,
one book.
7 Of the Resurrecti|on,
one book.
8 Of the blessednesse
of the Soule, one book
9 Of Thoughts, Ho|mily,
one.
10 Of the difficultie of
preaching, one book.
11 Of celebrating the
mysteries, one book.
12 Lamentations for
the Citie of Edissa.





An. Christi 370. Sanctus Basilius Magnus.

S. BASILIVS.

_THe life of this great St. Basil is of
worth and rarity, that it is not only
fit for imitation, but also admira|tion;
and therfore I have excerpted
it partly out of his owne works, and partly out
of those funerall Sermons which have beene
made for him, by St. Gregory Nyssen, and Gre|gory
Nazianzen, the one his halfe brother, the
other his most faithfull and worthy friend, as
also out of St. Hierome, Amphalochirs Bishop of
Iconium, and Helladius Bishop of Caesarea, and
successor to St. Basil: I also take some passages
out of Metaphrastes, Suidas, and Cardinall Baro|nius.
A Writer saith of this St. Basil, that he wel

deserv'd the name of Great: for he was Mag|nus
ingenio, Magnus Eloquio, Magnus Sapientia,
Magnus Sanctimonia, Magnus Divina gloriae
propugnande, propagandaeque Zelo, Magnus ad|versus
Hareticos Constanti, Magnus dein omni|bus
rebus  negotiis. (idest) Hee was great in
Wit, great in Eloquence, great in Wisedome,
great in Sanctity, great in defending, great in
propagating Gods glory, great inconvincing
Heriticks, and great in all his imployments and
undertakings.
He was born in Helleno-Pont in the Iland of
Pontus, of Noble, Wealthy, and Holy Parents:Birth.
his Fathers name was Basil, his Mothers Emilia;
they had ten Children, whereof the eldest was
called Marina, who dyed a Religios Virgin:
such as the trees were such were their fruit, for
all their off-spring are commended for piety
and holinesse. His grand-father, and great
grandfather endured heavy miseries and afflicti|ons
for Christs sake under the reigne of the
Emperour Galerius Maxims, a sworne enemy
to the Christians: in his time these kept close in
Desarts and Caves, and endured all hardnesse,
as well for their lodging, apparell, diet, as also
expecting each moment when they should have
beene apprehended, and at last suffered constant
Martyrdome for Religion. So you see this St.
Basil proceeded from an holy and religious
progeny, and what more is, he was a grace even
to them. He was of a rare wit, and grave judge|ment,
sweetly composed behaviour, won|drously

modest: he got learning first at Caesarea,
then at Constantinople, then he went to Athens.
where he gain'd and held the love of Gregory
Nazianzen: Well, he was wholly bent to the
study of Theology, nd therefore left Athens,
and went into Aegypt, to see and heare one
Porphyrius read Divinity; and here hee stayed
one whole yeare.
He was of an excellent constitution, but with
much watching, praying, reading, fasting, and
spare diet: he did much wear down his strength.
He left this Porphyrius, and travailed to see Ie|rusalem.
He converted his Master Eubulus to
the Faith of Christ, so that he travaild with him
to Ierusalem, where lodging at Antioch, at one
Libanius his house, a great rich man: this Saint
Basil expounded to this Libanius some of Ho|mers
verses, wondrous difficult to bee under|stood,
with such readinesse and wit, that hee e|ven
astonished this Libanius, so that hee made
them a great banquet; but Eubulus and Basil
feasted with nothing but meere bread and wa|ter:
and this St. Basil strived to have wonne this
Libanius from Idolatry to Christianity, but
could not, so deepe was his wilfulnesse: but he
gave admirable directions and instructions to
the young men concerning their behaviour and
deportment in their studies; and so tooke leave
of Libanius, and were wondrous kindly enter|tained
of the Bishop of Ierusalem, and were by
him baptized.
Having ended this jurney they returned to

Antioch, where Meletius the Bishop made this
Basil a Deacon, and being ordered, he shewed by
his able parts what a Prelate he in time would
prove, for Antioch was fild with his fame, so
that he went to Caesarea a City of Palaestine,
where Hermogenes the Bishop consecrated him
a Priest, who presently dying, all mens expecta|tions
were upon Basil to have succeeded him,
but Factions arising, one Eusebius a Catholike
Christian, but puft up with envy and vaine-glo|ry,
succeeded Hermogenes, and this Eusebius per|ceiving
the admirable parts of Basil, and with|all
the peoples affection to him, began to hate
him, so that Basil retreated into Mataria, be|yond
the River Iris, a solitary place of Pontus.
Here he stayed some certain years with Gregory
Nazianzen, where they led such holy and godly
lives, that they were esteemed rather divine than
mortall. St. Gregory in his 8. Epist. hath lively de|scribed
his life with S. Basil. Here they were both
driven to that exigency, that if it had not bin for
S. Basils mother Emilia, they had there perished.
Here St. Basil gain'd many schollers, and was fa|mous
as well for his Doctrine, as his pious ex|ample:
and in this place they had matter enough
to exercise their patience, not onely from their
poverty, but also from their adversaries: for it
happened that Musonius Bishop of NeoCaesarea
dying, when there were publick meetings for the
election of another Bishop, that might be worthy
the place, as St. Gregory Thaumaturgus was, they
all pitched their thoughts upon this Basil, which

so gald the Hereticks of that place, who knew
his Doctrine would overthrow theirs,  his life
shame their doings, that they presently with all
the policy they could, rais'd slanders and op|probrious
disgraces against this man. But Basil
like another Lampe had so enlightned all Pontus
with his vertues, that though Valens the Empe|perour
favoured the Hereticks, and though
they did waste the Easterne Churches, and daily
accuse this Basil: nay though this Basil was ha|ted
of Eusebius before, and seemed to be well
content with a solitary life: yet as if stayed up
at this time by God, he reconciles himselfe to
Eusebius, who ever after highly loved and estee|med
him: and being departed this life, all men
concluded that there was none so worthy of
this place as St. Basil: so by their choyce, and
by the advice of Gregory Nazianzen, he yielded
to their requests, and proved a worthy shep|heard
to that flocke, as well by truely feeding
them, as by driving away all Hereticks,
which were as Wolves to devoure the Church.
But scarce was he setled in this Bishoprick, but
there arose a mighty famine in this City: the
rich and Merchants would not part with their
provision, so that there were miserable com|plaints
made by the poore. St. Basil to miti|gate
this griefe, did whatsoever he could, for
he sold all his Lands and other goods, and
freely distributed them to the poore, as well
Iewes Children as Christians: the goodnesse of
this man stayed not here, but as he had made

himselfe an example to all; so he frequented the
publicke places, and there exhorted the rich by
severall places of Scripture, and sweet spee|ches,Greg Naz. in laud. S. Bas.
to distribute to the poors necessity; so that
at last hee got provision for the needy. Hee
was also as carefull to see the sick provided for;
and he caused publicke places to be erected for
their maintenance, and would often not onely
visit them, but also administer to them. Some
there were that hated him even for these wor|thy
deeds, but he left not off, but proceeded
the more couragiously, because he was opposed;
for vertue is alwayes envyed, yet it faints not.
Iulian the Emperour having knowne him at
Athens before sent and desired him to write to
him, but though he was Emperour, yet because
of his Apostacy, this Basil would not entertaine
any courtesies from him; whereupon this Apo|stata
intended when he had finished the Persian
Warre, to have put this Basil and Nazianzen to
death; but he failed, for he dyed miserably in
that warre: nay, when Valens the Emperour
persecuted the Orthodox Christians, and had
remov'd some, and had put 80 Priests into one
Vessell, thinking to have burned them in the
Sea; this Valens meeting St. Basil, spoke him
faire, and afterward sent to him by severall
messengers to winne him to that Heresie, yet nor
the threats nor promises of this Emperour
could once stirre or move him. Then Modestus
his Praefect commanded him to be brought be|fore
him, which was perform'd, and Basil being

come, the Praefect looking sternly upon him, told
him, he wondred that he could stand before him
so impudently: and art thou only he that oppo|sest
the Emperor? to whom St. Basil answered, he
wondred that he should so taxe him of Impu|dence,
when as he was free; but he was bound to
obey the King and Emperor of heaven  earth:
but saith the Praefect, will you, nil you, you shall
be made to obey: for know you not who we are
that command it? no body, said St. Basil, while
you do command such things: Know you not
said the Praefect, that we have honours and pre|ferments
to bestow upon you? but said St. Basil,
they are but changeable like your selves: then
the Prefect said, none of the Christians ever an|swered
him so: perhaps said St. Basil, you never
examined a true Bishop before. Upon this the
Prefect all in a rage, threatned to confiscate his
goods, to torment him, to banish him, or to
kill him: to whom St. Basil made this answer,
he need not feare confiscation, who hath no|thing
to lose; nor banishment, to whom onely
Heaven is a Country: not torments, when his
body would bee dasht with one blow: nor
death, because it was the onely way to set him
at liberty. Thus they parted, onely St. Basil had
that night given him to resolve what he would
doe, but he was the same next morning. The
Prefect related all to the Emperour, how he lost
his labour in examining this Basil, whereupon
the Emperour thought to have disturbed him,
even in the performance of holy duties in the

Church upon a Twelfth-day; but suddenly
comming in, and seeing the Reverend carriage
of the Bishop, and the Priests about him, all see|ming
as glorious starres, he made a large offe|ring;
but Basil refused it, as comming from an
Hereticke. The Emperour was so suddenly
taken with a swimming giddinesse in his head,
that he was faine to be upheld by the hands of
his Courtiers; and after speaking with this St.
Basil, he was so mitigated, that he was intended
to have proved favourable to all the Orthodox
Christians: but such was the uncessant malice
and policy of the Hereticks, that they procur'd
that Valens banished this Great and famous
Basil.
And now it was expected that the Emperors
decree should be fulfilled, to the griefe of the
people, and to the joy of the Hereticks, his ad|versaries;
but God crossed this, for the same
night the Physitians had laid the Emperours
sonne Galate downe sicke of a doubtfull disease;
whereupon the Empresse told Valens, this is a
just revenge from God, inflicted for the banish|ment
of St. Basil, whereupon the Emperour cal|led
for him, and said to him; If thy prayers bee
right and faithfull, pray that my Son may live:
to whom St. Basil replyed; If you would be of
the same faith, your son would be well: his son
did recover, and Basil went home; but shortly
after the Emperor caused the Hereticks to pray
for his sonne; it was performed, but to the grief
of the Emperour afterwards, for his son speedi|ly
dyed.

The Arrians insisted and urged that there
was no hope of good successe as long as Basil
stayed at Caesarea: whereupon it was decreed
again to have him banished, but when the wri|ting
was brought to Valens, to confirme, the
pens would not write, being often tried, and the
Emperour could not write, hee was so amazed
and convinced in his owne judgement, finding
that God did protect this Basil.
Many and great were the troubles and tryals
of this great Bishop, but he still kept his faith
and constancie, and never was moved by feare
or favour, it was not the frownes nor promises
of great Ones that could taint Him, he desired
heavenly, not earthly contentments. So having
beene Bishop of Caesarea and Cappadocia eight
yeeres, and an halfe, and some odde dayes, hee
departed this life with these words, Into thy
hands (O Lord) I commend my spirit: he was bu|ried
with great state and lamenting, by all the
Inhabitants of Caesarea, as well Iews as Chri|stians;
but above all the Physician which Saint
Basil converted from Judaisme to Christianity,
shewed his depth of sorrow.
The Church of God is enriched with the rare
labours of this father. Saint Gregory Nazianzen
writing of this Saint Basils workes avers thus
much of him, Neminem ante ipsum ade divine,
adeoque secur sacr as liter as interpretatum: That
before this man, none ever did expound the sa|cred
Scriptures more divinely, or more safely:
and the same Father calles him elsewhere no|lesse

then, Vinculum pacis, Tubam Veritatis, Cla|rissimum
Reipub.Greg. Naz. in laudem S. Basil Christianae oculum, virumque
cujus doctrinae moribus,  doctrinae mores rect
concinuerint. The Generall Peacemaker,
Truths Trumpet, the bright Eye of the Chri|stian
World: and a man, whose life and learn|ing
did in all points justly concentre.
Gregory Nyssen stiles him thus, Prophetam 
Sancti Spiritus Interpretem,Greg. Nyss. in Orat. de Basil. Generosum Chri|sti
Militem, Excellentem Veritatis Praeconem,
Invictum Catholicae fidei propugnatorem: that
is, a Prophet, an Interpreter of the blessed Spi|rit,
a truly valiant Soidier of Christ; an
excellent Preacher of the Truth; an uncon|quered
Defender of the Catholick Faith, and
that for valour and for strictnesse of Life, hee
was another Elias, or like Saint Iohn Baptist.
Saint Ephrem saith,S. Ephraem Orat. Panegyr. that Saint Basil was so be|loved
of God, that hee was kept in the midst of
all dangers, as an other Noah, and as Moses Aaron
and Iosuah.
Symeon Metaphr astes names him, Praeclarissi|mam
Ecclesiae facem, splendidissimum purae Veri|tatis
Solem, qui suorum claritate radiorum omnes
orbis terrarum or as illustret: and also Excelsam
Dei Columnam, Theologiae Ibar, legitimum ip|sius
sapientiae filium. Consummatam Intelligen|tiae
perfectionem, Patris aeterni Legatum, Divini
verbi Tubam, Donorum Spiritus Sancti Dispen|satorem
fidelem: that is, The resplendent torch
of the Catholike Church, a bright Sunne to the
truth; by whose lustre and brightnesse all the

parts of the world are enlightned, a main Pillar
for the trueth of God, a bright beame of theolo|gie,
the very sonne of Wisdome, the perfection
of Understanding, the Embassador of the Eter|nall
Father, the trumpet of Gods Word, a faith|full
Steward and Dispensour of the guifts of the
Holy Ghost. Thus doe these, and so have many
others of the Primitive Fathers celebrated this
Saint Basills praise. Cardinall Bellarmine speak|ing
of his Works, calls them no otherwise then
Basilii Magni opera praeclarissima, the most fa|mous
works of Saint Basill the Great:Bell. de script. Eccles. p. 119. hee flou|rished
under Valens, died under Gratianus, as
Saint Hierome in his Ecclesiasticall Writers doth
testifie.

Saint Basils Sayings.

To know thy selfe is a difficult considera|tion.
For as the eye can see all things but it
selfe, so some can discerne all faults except their
owne.
Divine Love is a never failing treasure: hee
that hath it is rich, and hee that wanteth it is
poore.
The love of God is an excellent ointment to
cure the infirmities of the minde, and cleere the
eyes of the understanding.


Basil. in Hexamero.
Hee that willknow true love, let him learne
to love Christ, for Christ is love.



Basil ibid.
Divine love is a never failing treasure, he that
hath it is rich; and he that wants it, is poore.


Basil in hom.
What shall I doe? shall I pull downe my
Barnes? Who doth not pitie his unhappinesse?
He wants in abundance, and is troubled with
too much wealth, and is unhappy in his present
prosperitie: and as his field brought him a great
increase, so that increase did augment his care
and trouble.


Basil in Hexameron.
There are three things which nourish Humi|litie:
daily subjection, consideration of our own
frailtie, and the hope of reward.


Basil in Hom.
Every Hypocrite is like Simon carrying the
Crosse on his shoulders: they afflict their bodies
with corporall abstinence, and yet through the
love of glory they live to the World.


Basil ibid.
Three things doe settle a wandring minde,

watching, me ditation, and prayer, the assiduity
and fervencie whereof doe establish and settle
the soule.
Hee being asked why wee should love those
that speak ill of us:In Regu fal. disp. q. 76. answered, Because for their
sakes it is, that we are blessed, according to those
words of Christ, Blessed are yee when men speak
evill of you, Mat. 6.
He likewise being demanded of Eubulus the
Philosopher, what was the definition of Philoso|phie?
answered, The meditation of death.
He being demanded again,Roswed. l. 1. p. 153. Quis est mundus,
made this answer;Ibid. Qu est super mundum.
Saint Basil speaking of the joyes of Heaven,
saith, of the sweete harmony that is there, the
sweet melodie, the heavenly musique they en|joy
would ravish a soule on earth, if it were
but capable of it: nay, farther hee goes; and
sayes, that it is sweeter than devotion; more
sweete than contemplation, and farre sweeter
than all things in this earthly Mansion.


Sanctus Basil in Psal primum,
When he had read the Bible over, saith, that
it is a Physicians shop of preservatives, against
poysoned Heresies: A patterne of profitable
Laws, against rebellions spirits; a treasury of
most costly jewels, against beggerly rudiments;
a foundation of most pure water springing up
unto everlasting life: The originall thereof
being from Heaven, not from Earth; the Au|thor

being God, not man, the matter veritie, pie|tie;
puritie, uprightnesse. The forme is Gods
Word, Gods testimony, Gods Oracles are ef|fects,
light of understanding, repentance from
dead works, newnesse of life, peace and holi|nesse
the end and reward of the studie.
The same Basil hearing of a Senator that had
renounced the World,Ibid. l. 1. and yet retained unto
himselfe, some part of his meanes to live with|in
a Cloyster, told him, that he had left to be a
Senatour that was not made a Monke.



I have here set downe his Works as they are
contained in foure Tomes printed at Basile, in
the yeere of Grace, 1540.

Tome 1.
1 Homilies upon the
work of the six days,
being eleven in num|ber.
2 Homilies upon the
Psalmes. 17.
3 Homilies of severall
Arguments. 28.


Tome 2.
1 Of Virginity, two
books.
2 Of Paradise, one
book.
3 Against Eunomius
three books.
4 Against Sabellians
and Arrians.

5 Of the Holy Ghost,
one book.
6 Of free will, one
book.
7 Of Baptisme, two
books.


Tome 3.
1 Sermons, seven.
2 Of the judgement of
God.
3 Of the Confession of
Faith.
4 The summe of Mo|rals,
80.
5 Questions largely
explained.
6 Questions shortly
explained.
7 Monasticall Consti|tutions.


Tome 4.
Epistles of Saint Basil,
and Gregory the Di|vine,
180.
2 An Epistle to Chilo
of solitary life.
3 Other Epistles of the
same.
4 An Oration against
them who calumniate
those which say there
is a Trinitie.

Cardinall Bellarmine thinks as Saint Hierom,
that there are but nine Homilies of Saint Basils,
the other two he supposes to bee Gregory Nys|sens:
and so this great Light went out, whose
memory wil ever be fresh and honorable among
the faithfull.




An. Christi 390. The Life of S. Gregory Nazianzen

S. GREGORI NAZIANZEN

_GRegory first Bishop of Sasima, a lit|tle
Citie in Cappadocia, then of
Nazianzen in Cappadocia, and then
of Constantinople; whom the
Graecians for his singular learning
and authority, first after Saint Iohn the Evan|gelist,
sirnamed the Divine, was a living Libra|ry
of Philosophie and Divinitie, and the most
eloquent Oratour of his Time, attayning to
the high stile of Polemon Laodicenus a most fa|mous
Sophister. So that as men exceed beasts in
the ability of speech, so hee excelled others in
the facultie of Eloquence and sweetnesse of
speech; whereby he allured mens minds, encli|ned

their wills and affections, defended the
poor and oppressed, comforted the afflicted, and
got himselfe a generall fame and good opinion:
using it also to the edification and instruction of
others in Divinity; For his eloquence was but
the expression of his divine contemplations and
conceptions. Non enim tam nos ratio juvaret,
nec tam esset in nobis manifesta, nisi quae mente
concepimus, proferre etiam loquendo, possemus.
Ipsa vitae praecepta, ets natura sunt honesta, ta|men
plus ad formandas mentes valeant, quoties
pulchritudinem rerum claritas orationis illumi|nat.
Reason would not be so helpfull to us, nor
so manifest in us, unlesse wee could by speech ex|presse
our conceipts. Even moral precepts of life,
although naturally honest, yet are more power|full
to fashion minds, when cleernesse of speech
doth illuminate their beauty. And in this facul|ty
this famous holy Saint was most powerfull;
so that it may be said. Veram animae illius pul|chritudinem
in oratione lucere, hanc illius comi|tem
ac ministram. The true beauty of his soul did
shine forth in his eloquence, Rhetoricke being
both his companion and servant.
And to the higher increase of his glory, hee
was a familiar friend to Basil the Great, and St.
Hierome was his Scholar for Divinitie, more|over
he was of so great authoritie  estimation
in the Grecian Church, that whosoever durst op|presse
his testimony was accounted and suspected
for an Heretike, and generally hee was a man of
so great learning, integrity and eloquence, that

his Adversaries durst not contradict his asserti|ons,
so that Gregories , or affirmation
was a confirmation and authority to prove any
point of Divinitie. Hee loved and adored so|litude
and the Monasticke Life, and when for
his excellent Learning and sanctitie of life, hee
should have been made a Bishop, he retired him|selfe
into obscuritie, desiring rather to lead a
poore religious life, than to be advanced to po|pular
Honour. But Omnipotent God would not
have so cleere a Light of Religion, which might
illuminate many soules, hidden under the bushel
of a Monastick life. Being therefore by divine
providence discovered and found out, hee was
by the people made a Bishop, and afterward to
excuse his former flying and retiring, a solemne
 was composed, i qua ars artium anima|rum
regimen ostenditur, shewing that the go|vernment
of soules, is the Art of all Arts. For
his great Learning and sanctity of Life, he was
called Gregory the Great, before Pope Gregory
was so stiled. At the last growing old, and un|capable
of Episcopall Government, having con|stituted
another Bishop in his place, he returned
to his former solitude and Monastick Life.
Hee lived in the Reigne of the Emperour
Theodosius, Anno 390.

Gregory Nazianzen his Sayings.
Wee should walke in the middle way betwen
fearfullnesse ad rashnesse,Gr. Na. in apo. that wee may bee

more modest then they are, who ambitiously
aspire to undeseved honour, and more confi|dent
then such as decline all good actions for
feare of being censured.
In a great multitude of people of severall
ages and conditions who are like a Harpe con|sisting
of many strings,Greg. Naz. in apol. it is hard to give every
one such a touch in words and preaching, that
they may all be pleased, and none offended.
A sparke of envie will sooner inflame the
minde,Greg. Naz. in apol. than the flames of vertue can warme the
affection. For a little Worm-wood being cast
into a great deale of Honey presently maketh it
bitter, but twise as much Honey mingled with
Worm-wood will not make it sweete.
Better is that spirituall warfare which doth
make one drawne ere to GodGreg. Naz. in apol. then that peace,
which doth separate from God.
The Art of Arts and Discipline of Disciplines
is government in a man,Greg. Naz. in apol. who is of all creatures
most various in manners and divers in will.
The chiefe wisdome is a laudable life and a
pure minde before God,Greg. Naz. in apol. whereby the pure are
joyned to him that is pure, and the holy to him
that is holy.
Hee that for a vertuous course of life begun
desires to be praised,Greg. lib. 8. hee eats the fruit of his tree
before it is ripe.
Thus Gregory Nazianzen used to say, that
God required but three things of every man
that should be saved: First, faith and confidence
in God. For Faith is the gift of God, and

breathed by the Spirit of God, into the hearts
of those that be the children of God. And
through a lively, quick, and fruitfull faith, wee
have our first entrance unto God: but the faith
that is without good works is not a lively, but a
dead faith and therefore now not to be called
faith, no more than a dead man is to be called a
man.
Secondly, continence in his tongue. For the
tongue is a slippery and nimble instrument,
wherby commonly the treasures of the heart are
in such wise unlocked, and laid forth, and spread
abroad, that not onely thereby friendship is
greatly ingendred, earthly treasures increased,
the life quietly stablished, perpetuall prayse and
everlasting felicitie obtained, but contrariwise
friendship is decayed, worldly riches are dimi|nished,
the life most miserably wasted, infamie
and immortall pain is thereby purchased. The
tongue if it be well used, is the most precious
member of a man; but otherwise the most de|testable,
pernicious evill, and full of pestiferous
poyson: And it is most plaine, that the heart
within is very filthy, and fouly defiled and cor|rupted,
whensoever the tongue is wickedly
ent, and utterly uncleane, by filthy and wicked
speeches.
Thirdly, Chastity in his body. For Chastity
is the beauty and glory of a man: a chast heart,
(which is onely seene and approved of God) is
most precious and blessed in his sight; and
therefore deserveth of all men, so farre forth to

be well judged or else condemned, as the words
uttered from the mouth, the manner of outward
gesture, the usage in eating and drinking, and
the order of apparell, seemeth to be honest, mo|dest,
temperate, and seemly: And Chastitie with|out
Charity is a Lampe without Oile; take the
Oile away and the Lampe giveth no light: take
away Charity, then Chastity pleaseth not at all.
Therefore that man whose minde is wholy de|dicated
to the use of vertue and chastity of life,
and despiseth the vanities of this life; most cer|tainly
prevaileth and obtaineth salvation in the
end.


He composed Works in prose and verse, contai|ning
30000 Verses, as namely annotations on the
first Chapter of Ezechiel, and a Sermon on the
contention of the Maccabees, also on the Phari|sees
question concerning Divorce. One Homily
beginning, Jesus qui piscatores: and on the pas|sion
and death of Christ out of the foure Evange|lists
A Tragedy enttuled ,
Or Christ suffering. He writ also in favour of the
younger Christians, prohibied by Julian the Apo|state
to study any Grecian Arts, besides many other
divine Poems, that young men learning them in|stead
of the Greeke Poets, might attaine te
knowledge of the Greeke Tongue, and of versi|fying.




An. Christi 370. Sanctus Epiphanius

S. EPIPHANIVS.

_THere were many of this Name, and
therefore it will be convenient and
profitable to the Reader to know
them, that thereby this famous Fa|ther
may bee distinguished from the rest, and
nothing attributed to him, but what doth truly
belong to him. There was one that was called
Epiphanius Scholasticus, because he translated
the Tripartite History of the Church out of
Greeke into Latin: as Cassiodorus testifies, there
was a second that was Bishop of Selybria, other|wise
called Olybria, which writ an oration
against the burners of Images,Possev. Appar. sac. pag. 509. (as Possevinus
saith) another was called Vlpianus a Sophister,

as Suidas reports. A fourth of this name there
was, who in the acts of the second Nicen Coun|cell,
affirmed that Eusebius of Cesarea, had in his
Commentaries on the Psalmes spoken some
things of the inequality of the Father, and the
Sonne, which did relish of Arrianisme, and spe|cially
upon those words of Psalme the foure|teenth,
Dixi Domino, Deus mes es Tu: I have
said unto the Lord, Thou art my God. The fifth
of this name was this reverend Father, whose
Life and Actions I now describe, who was Bi|shop
of  in Cyprus, whom St. Hierome
and other famous Historians have largely and
highly commended.
Read his Life therefore with a care, and
purpose to imitate his piety and vertues: Hee
was borne in a Towne of Phoenicia, not farre
from the City which takes her name from E|leutherius:
borne he was of poore and obscure
Parents, and his father died when he was yong,
and so he was let with his mother and his si|ster
Callitrpe to bee brought up: but they ha|ving
but short meanes were not able to nourish
him, and themselves, had not Tryphon tooke
compassion on them, who adopted this Epipha|nius
for his owne sonne, and did likewise allow
a sufficiency of provision to his mother, and si|ster
during their lives. Therefore saith a wise
man give unto the good, and hee will requie
thee againe, or lend it unto others; but give
to the evill disposed, and hee will begge and
crave more; neither have compassion on the

needy: for he that may give, and giveth not, is
utterly an enemy: And he that promiseth forth|with,
and is long ere he doe it, is but a suspici|ous
friend what neede words to our friends,
when we may succour them with works of our
Almes It is not right that wee render those
who are in necessity onely our tongue, which
is the worst thing without; of whom we re|ceive
the Heart, which is the best thing with|in:
Nor yet when thou hast bestowed thy Cha|rity,
boast not of thy good deeds, least thine e|vill
be also called to remembrance, and laid to
thy charge: But remember this, that a vertuous
and charitable Hand is not bound to make the
Tongue a foole.
Now I cannot but praise God who hath
raised many a famous instrument for the good
of his Church, out of poore and meane families:
He takes the poore from the Dung hill,Psal. 113. to set him
with the princes of his people, saith that Princely
Prophet; and here poverty is not to be despised
or lighted, nor men to be disparaged by the
meanes of their families. A man were better
live poorely, being assured of the blisse of hea|ven,
than to be in doubt thereof, possessing all
worldly riches: For no man is poore, but hee
that thinketh himselfe poore.
This Triphon was a Ie, well instructed in
the Law of Moses, who as most thought, took
this Epiphanius unto him, to marry him to his
onely daughter; so this Epphanius did live with
this Triphon, and grew in yeares, and obtained

an excellent knowledge in the Hebrew: thus it
pleaseth God to make roome for those whom
He intends to advance. Wel, God so disposing all
things, this Triphon and his daughter both dy|ed,
and this Epiphanius was left with their
whole estate, which was very large, by Triphons
onely appoyntment. Enjoying this faire estate,
with the affluence of all contentment (his Mo|ther
also being dead) he tooke his sister into
his house, and lived wondrous pleasantly. It
so fell out that on a time this Epiphanius going
to the Towne in which he was borne, by chance
there met him a Man, a Christian by Religion,
whose name was Lucianus, famous for his Lear|ning
and Vertue. God doth use to dispose of
Times and Persons: It was well for Epiphanius
that God lent him this fair occasion to embrace
Christianity. This Lucianus led a Monastick life
strict and holy the professors of it were in those
times, and followed it onely, that they might
the more sweetly and quietly addict themselves
to prayer, meditation, and reading neither
was it lesse commodious for writing, and to
shunne the snares and tentations of the World;
to subjugate the flesh to the spirit, and to
mortifie sinfull lusts and affections; so being by
this man instructed in Christianity, he was, toge|ther
with his sister, baptized into the Faith of
Christ Iesus, by the Bishop of that place: and so
having disposed all his goods to the poore, hee
with Lucianus embraced a Monastick course of
ife. This Lucianus put him to Hilarion to learn,

whose Manners and Learning Epiphanius so
imitated, that he made the vertues of so great a
Master more conspicuous: He increased won|derfully
in Learning daily; so that people began
from all parts to resort to him; so that his
Fame being growne to such an height, he could
not enjoy that privacy in that course of Life
which he desired. Upon this, he made a depar|ture
into Aegypt, where he also was highly estee|med
for his rare gifts and endowments: From
hence, after some time he returned to his own
place; where being come, and knowing that
Hilarion was sailed to Cyprus, having a great
desire to see him, Epiphanius sailed to Paphos,
and at the first meeting with Hilarion was al|most
overcome with joy: presently Hilarion
appoynted him to goe to Salamine; and so it fel
out, that that Church at the same instant being
voyd and destitute of a Pastor, the faithfull
Christians by prayers having intreated God that
they might have one that was faithfull: instant|ly
Epiphanius presented himselfe in that place,
and by the prediction of Pappus Bishop of Cytria,
an holyman of life, and specially God disposing
it so, Epiphanius was appoynted the man, who
modestly at first refused this imposed dignity;
but afterwards was made Bishop of that See,
in which hee so lived,Poss. Appr. sacr. p 510. that as one sayes well
of him, vitam Doctrina, Doctrinam vita Com|probaret,
that his Doctrine approved his Life,
and his Life defended his Doctrine: he was, as
the same Writer speakes, semper Haereticorm

acerrims oppugnator: alwayes a sharpe opposer
of Heretiques, witnesse that admirable and pain|full
work of his, called his Pammachion. He quite
stopped the blasphemous mouth of Aetius the
Valentinian Bishop, and did reduce all of that
sect to the Orthodox faith; no easie piece of
worke to bring those to embrace the truth, who
for the most part are filled with the spirit of
Contradiction, and Contumacy: He purged all
Cyprus, defiled and slurried with this and other
Heresies; and having gained an Edict from
the Emperour Theodosius, he cast out all the
Hereticks out of the Iland: Well, He was a
great Engine in promoting the Christians cause
and as some doe report of him, he was famous
for some Miracles: At length it so fell out, that
Eudoxia the Empresse deeply hating Iohn Chry|sostome,
this Epiphanius was by her called to
Constantinople: where being come, he was layed
at by all the faire baits that could be, to stand a|gainst
this famous Chrysostome, and to consent
to his deposition; but all their slights could ne|ver
move him from his integrity, and love to
that worthy Father: So hee departs from the
Emperours Court, and entred into a Ship
to have returned to Cyprus, and made a fa|mous
speech to his fellowes, in which hee did
by all perswasions that could be, stirre up their
Spirits to Innocency of Life, and Constancy in
the Christian Faith: For, said He, GOD
would call him from this labour here, and
settle him in glory in Heaven; and so after

fervent prayers, he embraced them sweetly;
much like as St. Paul did the Ephesians,Acts. 20. and
uttered these words, Salvi estote filii, Epipha|nius
enim non vos amplius videbit in hc vit,
that is, God blesse you my Children, for Epi|phanius
shall see your faces no more in this life;
and so it came to passe, for hee did depart this
Life shortly after, being aged an hundred and
fifteene yeeres, and three moneths: for a little
before he went into the Ship, Arcadius asking
him of his age,Possev. Appar. Sacr. p. 541. he answered, Sexagesimo aeta|tis
anno ad Episcopatum promoum esse, in eo au|tem
per quinquaginta quin annos  tres men|ses
vixisse: that is, that hee was promoted to
the Bishopricke when he was sixty yeares old,
and he lived in it fifty five yeares and three
Moneths. The Ship that he dyed in arriving
at Salamine, and it being told abroad of the
Bishops death, all good men lamented his losse,
and so hee was buried with great lamentation,
and abundance of teares. Manifold are the
commendations that the Fathers have afforded
to this Epiphanius.Hierom. in lib. de scrip. Eccl. St. Hierome saith, Epipha|nius
Cypri Salaminae Episcopus scripsit adversus
omnes haereses libros, c.  in extrema senectu|te
varia cudit opera; that is, Epiphanius Bi|shop
of Salamine in Cyprus, Writ Bookes a|gainst
all Heresies; and in his extreme old
age set forth many workes:Apol. secund Cont. Ruffi. the same Father
saith, non tibi sufficit contra omnes detractio,
nisi specialiter contra beatum  insignem Eccle|siae
Sacerdotem styli tui Lanceam Dirigas, that

is, Can it not suffice thee to have slandred all
men, but thou must needs direct thy Lance a|gainst
that blessed and ever famous Father of
the Church Epiphanius?Aug. lib. de Her. ad quod vult Deus. Saint Augustine
speakes of him, Epiphanius inter-Graecos mag|nos
habitus, et  multis in Catholicae fidei sanitate
laudatus, that is, Epiphanius was accounted a|mongst
those great Greek Fathers, and is prai|sed
of many that are of the Orthodox Faith.
. That is, about
this time Eiphanius flourished, not onely fa|mous
for his Life, but also for his singular
parts of Learning. So Photius speakes of him
likewise,Zozom. lib. 6. cap. 26. in confuting all Heresies he excel'd, so
that hee stiles him for this :
That is, the most Copious and
Commodious: So, ex Menologio Graecorum:
, That great and admi|rable
Epiphanius.Photii bibl. N. 124. See you may what a worthy
Man this was, by that Epistle which Acacius
and Pauus writ to him in the times of Valenti|nian,
Valens, and Gratianus: It begins,
.
To our most Honoured Lord, and in all
things to our most religious Father, Epiphanis
Bishop.

Epiphanius his saying.
This Epiphanius used to say, that he never let

his adversary sleepe: By which he meant, not that
he tooke any delight in disturbing of him when
he was a sleepe: but that without agreeing with
his adversary, as the Scripture speakes; Agree
with thy adversary: and let not the Sunne goe
downe upon thy wrath; for without forgiving
of him, he would never let him goe to bed.
Wrath and revenge (saith a Philosopher) is a
vice most ugly, and furthest from all humanity:
for who beholding a man by fury changed into a
horrible figure, his face enforced with rancour,
his mouth foule and embossed, his eyes wide, sta|ring
and sparkling like fire; not speaking, but as
a wilde Bull roring, and braying out despightfull
and venomous words, forgetting his estate and
condition, if he be learned, yea, and forgetting
all reason; who, I say, will not have such a passion
in extreame detestation? For wrath and revenge
taketh from man the mercy of God; and destroyeth
and quencheth the grace that God hath given
him: And he that is inclined to his owne passion
and will, more than to forgive and shew mercy, is
neare unto the wrath of God.


I have here annexed the Works of this great
light of the Church.

1 His Panacion against
all Heresies, being in
number at that time
fourescore.

2 A Book intituled his
Anchorite.
3 The summe of his
Books against Here|sies.
4 Of Measures and
Weights.
5 Of the life of the Pro|phets
a short History.
6 An Epistle to John,
Bishop of Hierusa|lem.
7 An answer to Acaci|us
and Paulus E|pistle.

Of all these there is no doubt to bee made:
this Epiphanius is said to have written the life
of Hilarion, but it is not extant. In the Epistle
to the Bishop of Hierusalem there seemes some|thing
to be added: who desires to know this, let
him read Bellarmines Controversies, li. 2. de San|ctis
cap. 9.
These, though they seeme to bee but few, yet
considering their worth and nature, they are of
all men of learning and judgement, held to bee
rare and admirable for use in all ages. Hee flou|rished
in the reignes of Valens, Gratianus, and
Theodosius, as St. Hierome witnesseth, untill the
fourteenth of the said Emperours reigne.




An. Christi 374. Sanctus Ambrosius.

S. AMBROSIVS.

_PAulinus at the request of Saint Augustine
did write the life and passages of Saint
Ambrose:Vide Palin. in vit. S. Ambros. in his prologue or entrance in|to
it, he useth these words, Hortaris venerabilis
pater Augustine, c. that is, you desire most
Reverend Father, Saint Augustine, that as Atha|nasius
and Saint Hierome did write the lives of
Paulus and Antonius driven into the Wildernes,
so that likewise I would describe in my style and
phrase the life of this most blessed Father Saint
Ambrose Bishop of Millain; but I am unable
fully and compleatly to expresse the merits of
these eminent men, who were Ecclesiarum muri,
Eloquentiae fontes, that is, the Walles and Bul|warkes

of the Churches, and the fountaines
and springs of Eloquence, but I have collected
this Life from Paulinus, rather then from any
other, because hee was a present Witnesse of
most, and had instructions from Marcellina, si|ster
to Saint Ambrose.
His Father was made Prefect, to administer
the affaires of France: when his sonne was born
there appeared a swarme of Bees,Pauln. in vita ut sup. as hee lay in
his Cradle, who sate upon his mouth and cove|red
his face all over;Card. Baro. in vt. Am. and at last flew so high into
the aire, that they could not bee seene: which
wondrous thing, his Father, with his Mother
and Daughter beheld,  commanded the Nurse
not to drive them away, and presently spoke
these words, Si vixerit infantulis iste, aliquid
magni erit: that is, if this infant live, he will be
some great man. Which thing was truly fulfilled
in his mellifluous Writings: afterwards he came
to Rome, his Father being dead, being accom|panied
with his Mother and his sister, and ano|ther
Virgin, who had a sister called Candida,
where this yong man gained wonderfull know|ledge
in the liberall Arts, and was not (which is
a thing too common with young beautifull per|sonages)
infected with the sinnes of that popu|lous
Citie, but did wholly apply himselfe to his
study, and in short time by his excellent wit and
memory (the great helps to Learning) hee was
eminent for his parts, so that he publickly pro|fessing
and handling matters, was taken notice
of by Probus then a Praetor, and was approved

of for abilitie of Counsell and Judgment: so
that this Probus adjudg'd him a fit man to go|verne
the affaires (being,Baron. Annal. Tom. 4. p. 225. as Baronius testifies)
cruditione praeclarum, eloquentiae studiis egregie
excultum, optimisque compositum moribus, that
is, famous for his Learning, excellently accom|plished
for eloquence, and of worthy carriage
and sweet behaviour; so that hee made him Ru|ler
of Insubria, Liguria, and Emilia; and so
this Ambrose came to Millain; to whom as he
departed, Probus uttered (as it prov'd prophe|tically)
these words, Vade, age non solum ut Iu|dex,Card. Baro. Tom. 4 p. 22.
sedut Episcopus, that is, goe and manage
the affaires, not onely as a Judge, but as a Bishop,
which came to passe five yeares after: Auxen|tius
the Arrian Bishop being dead, who gover|ned
the Church of Millain, Dionysius the Con|fessor
of blessed memory being banish'd, and
the people being divided and almost ready to
rise, and mutiny about the election of a Bishop;
this Ambrose to stop the fury of the peoples
rage, and to hinder the Arrian faction, under|took
to decide the matter: but of a suddain
there was a voice as it were of a Child heard to
sound these words, Ambrosium Episcopum, that is,
Ambrose the Bishop, and so both parties, as well
the Orthodox Christians, as the Arrians cried
out publikely with one consent the same words;
but hee was offended at this, and going out of
the Church caused a tribunall to be erected, and
some persons to be punished: but they cried out;
let his sinne be upon us: and knowing him to be

a Catechumenist, they did promise remission of
his sins by the vertue of baptisme: well he gave
himselfe to study Philosophy shewing indeed
what a wise man he would prove in the Church
of God; nay to divert the peoples intention he
gave admittance to common women to resort
unto him; but seeing that would not take effect,
hee intended to fly and leave the place, so in
the middle of the night hee intended to have
gone to Ticinum, but hee was discovered at the
Gate of the City of Millaine called Romana; so
that God seemed to hinder his flight: so being
kept by the people; word was sent to the
Emperour Valentinian how Ambrose who was
their Judge, was of all men desired to be their
Bishop: which gladded the good Emperour:
and especially rejoiced Probus, who heard that
his words were come to passe; but Ambrose a|gaine
prepares to escape, and hides himselfe in
a great mans house called Leontius; but the mat|ter
being concluded by the Emperour, and the
peoples desires satisfied, Leontius who had for|merly
hid, now brings him forth, well finding no
hopes any longer to resist: hee was brought to
Millain, and desired to be baptized by none but a
Catholike Bishop; Cavebat enim solicite perfi|diam
Arrianorum: that is, for he did solicitous|ly
beware of, and shun the treachery of the Ar|rians:
being baptized, he fulfilled all Episcopall
Functions,  was eight days after his Baptisme,
to the great content of all, named and ordained
Bishop: a few yeares after his Ordination, Hee

goes to Rome, where he findes his sister, and the
other Virgin; but his Mother was dead: Hee
going over the River Tyber, to a rich Womans
House, healed one of the Palsie; which was
published and knowne abroad, only by touching
his Garment, which shee presently devoutly
kissed and was restored.Such power hath God gi|ven to godly men, from time to time. Comming to Syr|mium,
to ordaine Anemius Bishop, hee was
opposed by Iustina a Queen, who would have
not him, but the Arrians to doe it: well he pro|ceeded
to it, where an impudent Maid boldly
putting on the priests habit, came boldly and
sate by Saint Ambrose, to whom hee spake, that
though hee was unworthy of such an Office
himselfe, yet shee nor any of her Sexe were to be
admitted into the Office of Priesthood, and told
her, shee had neede to feare some heavy judg|ment,
which fell out; for the day following shee
died: having perform'd this, hee returnd to Mil|lain.
But Iustina prosecuted him with all her
power and malice, for she set the people against
him, and promised them places of eminence and
great rewards, if they would take him and send
him to banishment: Amongst the rest one Euthy|mius
thought to have performed it; but failed;
for it is in vaine to dispossesse those whom God
hath placed: but Iustina's malice ceased not, but
shee intended to act that by force, which shee
could not by policie: For the Arrians by her
counsell beset the Church call'd Portiana, and
would not suffer any Catholicks to enter: but
God stirr'd up holy men to put by this plot also:

at this time there were Anthems, and Hymnes,
and Vigils kept in the Church of Millaine, and so
have continued in the Western Churches to this
day; but the Arrians informed Iustina, that
Ambrose should give men money to give of
that she was troubled with ill spirits,Paul. in vit. S. Amb. but that lie
was disclosed, and one of the Arrians was pre|sently
possessed of an ill spirit, and was forced
to cry, That so let all those be tormented, which
would deny Martirs, or the unitie of the Tri|nitie,
or the Trinity which Saint Ambrose main|tained;
but the Arrians took him and drowned
him in a fishpond, adding murther to their trea|chery;
but in spight of all these adversaries St.
Ambrose every day grew more famous then o|ther;
retaining his Integrity and Humility; at
the same time, as Paulinus hath it, there was a
man who was a great Disputant and an Arrian,
and would not yield to the truth, being in the
Church, where this Saint Ambrose preached,
saw an Angell stand by his eare, as it were speak|ing
to Ambrose, what he taught the people; at
which sight hee presently altered his minde,
and was converted to the faith; there were like|wise
two Bedfellows who were Arrians, and
they intended to propose a question to Saint
Ambrose; and so comming to the Church with
a great Company, the question was of Christs
Incarnation: these swelling with pride, and
forgetting the power of God, or his Judge|ments
upon scorners, both in their comming
fell down suddenly dead; which when Saint Am|brose

heard, hee presently made an admirable
Sermon to confirme the Incarnation of Christ;Ambrosii Tom. 4. Epist. 56. ad Valen. Imp. Tom. 5.
as it is to bee read in his Workes: and in his E|pistle
sent to Valentinian the younger; Iustina
being dead, there was a certaine Witch called
Innocentius, who being punished for his Villa|nies
and Witchcraft, confest more then hee was
asked, and said, there was an Angell to inflict
greater punishments upon him then those, be|cause
of Saint Ambrose, for he had sent Devils
to kill Saint Ambrose, but they found him hed|ged
by God, as Iob was; so another came to
his bedside with a sword to have kild him, but
could not stirre his hands; and hee confest that
Iustina had hired him before her death; so being
sorry and repenting his intent, he was by prayers
restored to the use of his hands. This Saint Am|brose
freed a boy possessed with a Devill, which
left him as soone as he came neere Millain; the
Conjurers demanding of the Devil why he left
him; he replyed, se timuisse Ambrosium, that he
feared Ambrose: he was sent by Probus the Pretor.
Maximus being dead, and Theodosius residing
at Millaine, Saint Ambrose being plac'd at Aqui|leia;
it so fell out that there was a Synagogue of
the Iewes, and a Grove of the Valentinians
burnt by the Christians; in so much that both
these began to insult over the Orthodox Chri|stians;
these Valentinian Heretikes worshipt
thirty gods: whereupon the Governour of the
place sent word to the Emperour what was
done, and the Emperour commanded the Syna|gogue

to be rebuilded by the Catholick Bishop
of that place; and revenge to be executed on the
Agents; which when Saint Ambrose heard, hee
presently sent an Epistle to perswade the Empe|rour
to revoke his act:Epist. 17. ad Theodos. Imp. and sent word that hee
was ready to die, rather then fulfill it: So when
hee came to Millaine, the Emperour being at
Church, he treated of this in the presence of all
the people, and spoke to the Emperour divine|ly
and couragiously in these words. Ego te ex
ultimo Imperatorem feci, c. that is, I have at
last made you an Emperour: I have delivered
your enemies into your hands; I have subdued
those that rose against you; I have confirmed
you in the Empire; and have made you triumph
without your helpe or power, and now will you
triumph against God, who hath done all this
for you? To whom when Sermon was done, the
Emperour replyed, Oh, Bishop, you have this
day spoken against us: but this Ambrose did an|swer,
I have, oh Emperour, spoken for you; and he
did perswade him so divinely, that the Emperour
did revoke his former Decree; nay, the Bishop
was so carefull to maintaine Gods honour, that
hee would not goe to the Altar, untill the Em|perour
gave him his faith for it: A worthy
Champion and fit for such a place. This you
may see in his Letter to his sister Marcellina:Epist. ad Mar|cell. soror. 18. nay,
that miserable destruction and slaughter made
in Thessalonica, by the Emperours consent, Saint
Ambrose hearing, denied him entrance into the
Church, untill he had done publicke acknow|ledgment:

to whom the Emperour said: Da|vid
the King did commit murther and adulterie;
to whom the Bishop, Quem secutus es erran|tem,
sequere corrigentem, that is, as you have fol|lowed
him in his fall, so follow him in his re|pentance:Epist. 59. ad Theodos. Imp.
to which the milde Emperour did a|gree,
and submit.
The fame of Saint Ambrose his wisdome was
spread farre and neere: so that two mighty and
wise men of Persia hearing his fame, addrest
themselves for Millaine, and furnished them|selves
with many questions, to aske him to try
his wisdome; so they came and staid disputing
with him by an Interpreter, from the first houre
of the day, untill three of the clocke at night;
and wondring at his wit and wisdome, depar|ted,
and taking their leave of the Emperour
went to Rome to see Probus, and so went home.
But now Theodosius leaving Italy, and going
for Constantinople, and Valentinian being ap|pointed
Augustus for all Gaule, there was a direct
order under the name of the Senate, by one Sym|machus
for the restoring of the Altar of victory,
and for the charges of the Ceremonies: but St.
Ambrose finding the plot,Epist. 11.  12. writ to the Emperour
and so wrought, that Symmachus was not able
to effect his desires: but when Valentinianus
was dead at Vienna, then Eugenius undertooke
the Empire, and Flavianus the Prefect with Ar|gobastes,
desired to have the said Altar restored:
which when Eugenius granted, Ambrose hea|ring
this departed from Millaine, came to Bono|nia,

and so to Faventia, where staying a while,
The Florentines entreated him to go to Thuscia,
which he yielded not, desiring to see the face of
that sacrilegious person; and presently sent
him a Divine Letter, as you may read in his
Works; while he stayed in Florence, there was
one Decens in whose house St. Ambrose abode,Epist. 15. ad Eugeni.
who had a son cald Pansophius, who was possest
with an ill spirit, but by the prayers of S. Ambrose
and the imposition of his hands he was restored:
He built there a great Church,Vide Hort. ad Vir. Tom. 4. and therein laid
the relikes of Vitalis and Agricola, whose Corps
were found in the Citie Bononia, for they were
promiscuously buried amongst the Iews.
Argobastes the Commander at the same time
prepared for Warre, and having raised a mayne
Army, overthrew the Adversaries: being in
banquet with the Kings of that people; they as|ked
him whether hee knew Saint Ambrose, to
whom Argobastes replyed, hee knew him very
well, and loved him deerly, to whom they re|plyed:
Ideo vincis, quia ab Ambrosio diligeris,
qui dicit soli, sta,  stat, Therefore thou over|commest,
because thou art beloved of Ambrose,
who saith to the Sun stand, and it standeth.
Saint Ambrose leaving Tuscia, returned to
Millaine, when as Eugenius went to war against
Theodosius, Flavianus, and Argobastes going like|wise
said, That when they returned conquerors,
they would make the great Church in Millaine
a stable for their Horses; and try the Priests by
force of armes: but they fail'd: for Eugenius fell

by his owne souldiers, and Theodosius got the
victory; which when Ambrose heard, hee re|joyced,
and sent his Deacon with Letters to the
Emperour, to pardon those that were Agents
and involv'd in that warre; and then sent Iohn a
Tribune, afterwards Praetor, to perswade the
Emperour to spare those that had fled to Chur|ches:
nay, hee himselfe came to Aquileia, and
prayed for them, whose petition the mild Em|perour
easily granted, and falling at his feet, con|fest,
he was preserved by his praiers,  afterwards
went to Church, and gave his three sons into the
Bishops hands, and died not long after: About
which time the corps of Nazarius the Martyr,
was found in a Garden not corrupted, nor his
haire on his head falne, but the corps was redo|lent,
and so were buried in the great Church at
Millaine,Ambr. serm. 14 de S. S. Tom. 5. by Saint Ambrose his care. This Bishop
was very abstinent, full of watching and pray|ers,
diligent in writing, never dining but on
Sundays, or at the Celebration of the Birth-days
of the Martyrs. Hee weakened his body with
writing, he had an especiall care for all the Chur|ches,
wondrous couragious for Gods Truth,
mercifull he was also to the poore and captives;
at at time when hee was ordained Bishop, hee
gave all his money to the Church, and to the
poore; all his Lands, onely some reserved for
the mayntenance of his sister, hee bestowed on
the Church: hee rejoyced with those that rejoy|ced,
and wept with those that wept; hee would
weep when hee heard any Religious Priest to be

dead, because the Church wanted such men; hee
foretold his death: Hee grieved deeply to see
the covetousnesse of men who oppressed the
poore.
A little before hee lay down sick, hee reading
the 43 Psalme, in the sight of Paulinus, there
appeared, as it were, a bright fire entring into
his mouth, and his face presently was as white
as snow:Paulin. in. vit. Ambros. which so amazed Paulinus, that hee
could not write what came from Him; the Cap|taine
Stilicho had a servant possessed, and Saint
Ambrose healed him, but hee after writ many
false things, and Stilicho should have punished
him: Ambrose hearing of it, ad the servant to
bee brought to him, to whom Saint Ambrose
said, he should be delivered to Satan, which came
to passe immediatly: Hee healed likewise Nice|tius
of the pain of his feet. After he had ordai|ned
one Priest of Ticinum, he fell sick, and Sti|licho
hearing, said, That all Italie would be rui|ned
when so pious a man died. Foure Deacons
in his sicknesse, discoursing softly, who should
succeed him; one answered, Symplicianus: and
Ambrose by inspiration answered presently, Se|nex,
sed bonus: that is, He is an old man, but
a good man, at which they were affrighted;
which came to passe, for Symplicianus did suc|ceed
him; and Venerius succeeded Symplicianus:
Foelix governed the Church at Bononia; Castus
and Polemius bred under Saint Ambrose, conti|nued
Deacons in Millaine: before hee died hee
was instant in prayer: those that stood by heard

him pray with his hands lifted up, and so he de|parted
this life, and was buried in a Church cal|led
by his name, with the confluence of abun|dance
of people of all sorts and ages; hee was
another Elias, and feared not to speak the truth
before Kings and Emperours, so that hee got
the title, Irrefragabilis Ecclesiae Doctor, and is
reputed amongst the most famous Fathers of
the Latin Church.
Baronius and divers others have writ his life,
Saint Augustine prayseth Him highly, so doe all
grave Historians; His Works that follow will
prayse him in the gates: Hee flourished under
Grtianus and Theodosius Emperours, and died
the third yeere after Theodosius, which as Baro|nius
says, was in the yeere of our Lord three
hundred ninety seven.

Sentences out of Saint Ambrose.

Against covetous desires and pride.
Men that are carried away with insatiable co|vetousnesse,Amb.  super illud Iohan. ager cujusda divitis.
are (as it were) hurried to Hell with
unbridled and untamed Horses. What wealth
or faculties hadst thou, oh man, at thy first en|trance
into the World:Amb. 97. dist. what shalt thou have at
thy departure? why doest thou therefore tor|ment
thy selfe?



Against neglect of grace.
Gold is offered to thee,Amb. in serm. de. Elmosyn.  jejunio. thou doest not say, I
will come tomorrow and take it, but art glad of
present possession, thou shunnest delayes, and
puttest aside all excuses: but salvation is promi|sed,
offered to our souls, and few men haste to
obtain it.


Confession of sins.
To accuse our selves is to acquit our selves: he
that confesseth his sins,Amb. sup. Bea|ti Immaculati. acknowledgeth Gods
righteousnesse. Confession takes off Gods anger.


Against anger.
Anger is the fire-brand of all evill: resist it if
you can; if not,Amb. de Pa|radiso. keepe thy place: the best station
is thy patience.Amb. de offic. lib. 1.


Liberalitie.
It is not to be so much enquired,Amb. l. de Vi|duis  de of|fic. l. 1 how much
thou givest, but with what heart: that is not li|berality,
when thou takest by oppression from
one, and givest it to another.


Of Virgins.
The victorie of Virgins exceeds that of

Angels, for they live out of the flesh, these
live in it.


Ambros de officiis.
Victorie is most glorious, after a combat dif|ficult
and laborious.
The circle of goodnesse is to use Justice in
seeking, wisdome in inventing, fortitude in
prosecuting, and temperance in possessing, that
there may be Justice in the affection, wisdome in
the understanding, fortitude in effecting, and
temperance in using.
We have all things in Christ, and Christ is all
in us. If thou desirest to be cured of the wounds
of sinne, hee is thy Physician: if thou art in a
hot Fever of worldly affections, hee is thy coo|ling
Fountaine: if thou art loaden with iniqui|tie,
he is thy Justice; in necessity, he is thy helper:
if thou fearest death, hee is thy life; if thou
would shun darknesse, he is thy light: if thou
seekest Heaven, hee is the way: if thou desirest
spirituall food, he is thy heavenly Manna.
Selfe accusation for sinne is the beginning of
Justification: for hee that declareth his owne
transgression, glorifieth Gods Justice by his con|fession.


Ambros. super Beati immaculati.
A cleere conscience should not regard slande|rous
speeches, nor thinke that they have more
power to condemne him, than his owne con|science
hath to cleere him.

He that giveth counsell to another, should be
exemplary in good works, in learning, in inte|gritie,
in gravity: that his speech may be whol|some
and irreprehensible, his counsell profita|ble,
his life honest, and his opinion gracious.
Comfort should be given with milde gen|tlenesse,
not with rugged harshnesse, that so it
may rather pacifie sorrow, and mitigate the
fury of passion, than stirre up in the minde any
commotion.
Christ took upon him the nature of man; that
he might confirme man. Again, Christ suffered
himself to be overcome, that hee might over|come
by his sufferings.
Againe, saith this Father, wee owe God all
that we have for our creation: O then what do
we owe him for our preservation?
Again, he saith, what have wee that we have
not received? yes, saith hee, sins of all sorts and
degrees.



His Works in the Pariian Edition 1549, are
by Cardinall Bellarmine registred. In the read|ing
whereof, you shall finde no lesse judge|ment
then eloquence, well beseeming such a
Father.

Tome 1.
1 Of Offices, 3 books.
2 Of Virgins, three
books.

3 Of the Institution of
Virgins, one book.
4 To a devout Virgin,
one book.
5 To a falne Virgin,
one book.
6 Of Widdowes, one
book.
7 Of Penitence, two
books.
8 Exhortation to pe|nitence,
one book.
9 Of forsaking the
World, one book.
10 Of the good of
Death, one book.
Bellarmine takes that
book to a falne Virgin
not to be St. Ambroses.


Tome 2.
1 Of the calling of the
Gentiles, two books.
2 Of Faith to Gratia|nus,
five books.
3 Of the Holy Ghost,
three books.
4 Of Faith against
the Arrians, one book
5 Of the Incarnation,
one book.
6 Of the Mystery of
the Pasche, one book.
Bellarmine allows not
that of the calling of the
Gentiles, to be this Fa|thers.


Tome 3.
1 A Funerall Oration
at the death of Va|lentinian.
2 Another on Saty|rus.
3 Of the Resurrection.
4 On the death of
Theodosius.
5 Ten books of Epi|stles.
6 Sermons to the peo|ple,
92.
Bellarmine doubts
some Epistles to be
his, and some Ser|mons.


Tome 4.
1 His Exameron, six
books.
2 Of Paradise, one
book.

3 Of Cain and Abel,
two books.
4 Of Noe, one book.
5 Of Abraham, two
books.
6 Of Isaac and the
soule, one book.
7 Of Jaacob, and a
blessed life, two books
8 Of Joseph, one book
9 Of the blessings of
the Patriarchs, 1 book
10 Of Naboth, one
book.
11 Of Eliah, and fast|ing,
12 books.
12 Of Tobiah, one
book.
13 Of Job and David,
three books.
14 Of Davids Apolo|gie,
one book.
15 Of Solomon, one
book.
16 Of Mysteries, one
book.
17 Of the Sacraments,
six books.
18 Of the dignitie of
the Priesthood, one
book.
19 Prayers before Di|vine
Service. 1 book.
20 Commentaries on
some Psalmes.
21 Another apologie of
David.
22 Of Davids inter|pellation.
Bellarmine allows not
of these apologies to bee
Saint Ambroses.


Tome 5:
1 On the Gospel of St.
Luke, ten books.
2 Commentaries on all
St. Pauls Epistles.
3 Of the Resurrecti|on.
4 Holy Prayers.
5 Hymnes holy,
6 A Song of the
Saints by Saint Am|brose,
and Saint Au|gustine,
that begins
Te Deum laudamus

Some of the Commentaries on Saint Pauls
Epistles are doubted not to be of Saint Ambrose

his Writings, and as Bellarmine sayes well,
not without cause.
First, because Saint Augustine against the Pe|lagians
useth the authority of S. Ambrose, and
yet doth not use any out of these Commenta|ries.
So having done such famous things for the
truth, his memory will ever be sanctified, and
at the day of the Resurrection will be
gloriously rewarded by our
Lord Jesus Christ.




An. Christi 380. Sanctus Gregorius Nyssenus.

S. GREGORIVS NYSSENVS

_THis famous Father of the Church was
Brother to St. Basill the great;S. Hierom: de script. Eccles. he is cal|led
Gregorius Emisses by Honorius,
and Trithemius: his Life, Studies, Actions, and
Sufferings, though mentioned all by severall
Writers, yet by way of History none have com|pleatly
done them: but those things which Gre|gory
Nazianzen remembers of him, in His E|pistle
to him, are so many, great, and large, that
they may serve in place of  History. Theo|doret,
so Cratos, Suidas, Nicephors, and the
Roman Martyrologie, with some later Writers,
as Volateranus, Trithemius, Possevinus, have
written most Honourably of his Life, Doctrine,

Eloquence, accounting of him as a Father of
Fathers. Gregory Nazianzen doth speake of
Him in severall places with great commendati|on
and approbation,Possev. in Sc. Appar. p 677. and did write many E|pistles
to him, as his 34, 35, 36, 37. 42, 43.
95. 142.
But if there were nothing else to set forth his
praise, and to cause him to be worthily ranked
amongst the great Fathers of the Primitive
Church: it is enough that hee was sent into ba|nishment
by the Arrian Hereticks, under the
Emperour Valens; and this Emperour dying, he
was appoynted the onely man by the Antiochi|an
Synod, to goe and settle, and order the Ea|sterne
Churches: had he not been eminent and
faithfull, the Fathers of that Councell would
not have employed him in so weighty a charge;
for it is a labour full of difficultie, and must be
undertaken with a great deale of wisdome and
patience: and this honourable charge was not
onely imposed upon his shoulders; but also the
Oecumenicall Synod of Constantinople, under
Theodosius the Emperour, destined this man as
most fit to visit the Churches planted in Arabia:
so that for these his actions, hee is worthy to be
accounted amongst the chiefest Champions of
the Church: this Father was likewise admired
for his Eloquence and Rhetoricke by those that
have the knowledge in the Greeke.Phot. Biblioth. Photius
sayes of him, that hee alone carried away the
Bell from all men for his elegant stile and elo|quent
expressions One calls him, (a learned

man pervigilom Antistitem, the faithfull and vi|gilant
Prelate: He was the elder brother of Ba|sil
the Great:Theodor. l 4. c. 28. hee embraced a Monasticke life,
highly respected in those Primitive times; and
so joyning Theology to his other indow|ments,
he proved in short time an eminent Pil|lar
of the Truth: he did read the Scripture with
all diligence, reverence, and strictnesse, having
a speciall regard to the genuine sence of it, at all
times: so being made Bishop of Nyssa, of which
City he tooke name, he did for a while surcease
the reading of the old and new Testaments, and
addicted himselfe to the study of Rheto|rique;
insomuch, that Gregory Nazianzen in
his 43 Epistle to him seemes a little to repre|hend
him: for his time of comming to his
Bishoprick, it was under Valens, when Gregory
Nazianzen had the Bishopricke of the Sasimes
allotted him by St. Basil: This Gregory did (as
Theodoret relates it,Socrat. l. 5. c. 8 succeede his brother Basil
in the Bishopricke of Caesarea, which some have
questioned for an improbability: Well, he was
a man meriting commendation, and so you shal
heare what report the Ancients doe afford him.
Saint Hierome speakes of him thus:Hierom. in sr. Eccles. Gregorius
Episcopus Nyssenus, c. That is, Gregory, Bi|shop
of Nissa, brother to Basil of Caesarea, not
long since reade to mee Gregory Nazianzen
his learned bookes against Enomius, who is
said also to have written many other famous
Treatises.
NicephorusNiceph. lib. 11. cap. 29. in his Ecclesiasticall History

describes him in these tearmes. Basilius habuit
fratres, c. That is, Basil had brethren, of whom
Gregory Bishop of Nissa was one, the light, and
ornament of the Nyssen Church; a man answe|rable
to his brother for Life, Manners, Lear|ning,
Piety, Faithfulnes, Courage; who though
he was married, yet he did not any waies neg|lect
the care of soules: He writ his book called
Hexameron after his brothers death, and also
against Eunomius and Apollinaris: he is greatly
praised for his indefatigable labour and study,
especially for that funerall Oration in praise of
Gregory Thaumaturgus:Soc. l. 4 c. 21. Socrates also describes
him by praysing his parts and abilities, saying,
Basilius autem duos fratres, c. That is, Basil
had two famous brethren, especially this Gre|gory,
who finished the booke not perfected by
his Brother called the Hexameron, not without
demonstration of singular learning and piety.Theodor. l. 4. c. 28.
Theodoret writing of him, prayses him for his
strictnesse of life and purity of learning.Phot. in Bibli. Photius
in his Bibliotheca makes mention of this Grego|ry
in these words, Lectus est similiter Gregorii,
Episcopi pr Basilio adversus Eunomium liber,
That is, we reade and approve of a Booke of St.
Gregory Bishop of Nyssa for St. Basil against Eu|nomius:
he uses a stile that is so full of Elo|quence
and Rhetoricke, that it doth even ravish
the mindes of the Readers, and captivates the
eares of the Auditors. Hee doth methodical|ly
beate downe Eunomius. He is more concise
than Theodore, more copious than Sophronius,

full and abounding with Enthymemes, and ex|amples
of all sorts: so that I may truely pro|nounce
it, that as farre as Gregory, for comeli|nesse,
splendour, and pleasantnesse excells Theo|dore,
so farre doth this man surpasse in copious|nesse
and confluence of vailed arguments,Phot. Biblioth. and
illustrating examples: and the same Photius in
another place goes on in his praise in these
words, Lectum est Alterum Gregorii Nysseni
opus, That is, there is another worke of Gre|gory
of Nyssens, read of the same matter, in
which, grappling with Eunomius, he armes
himselfe with all sorts of arguments dextrously;
so that overthrowes him by maine force of wit
and learning, and pulls downe and defaces all
the said Eunomius tottering ill-grounded Con|ceits
and fancies: but the gracefulnesse of his
speech, and the lustie joyned with sweete
pleasure doth manifestly shew it selfe in every
line; and amongst many others, that testimony
which Suidas doth yield unto him, is not to be
slighted or neglected:Ex Suida. it begins thus, Gregori|us
Nyssenus Episcopus, c. that is, Gregory Bi|shop
of Nyssa, brother to Saint Basil of Caesarea,
a man excellent for his qualification, being com|pleatly
furnished with Learning of all sorts,
chiefely addicting himselfe to the study of Rhe|toricke;
in which he gained such an eminency,
that none of the ancient Fathers doe in this
kinde exceede him. He writ an admirable book
against Eunomius; as also another no lesse fa|mous,
of the Creation of Man, and many excel|lent

Sermons did he make; but that Treatise of
the Soule, which hee writ to his sister Macrinia,
deserves the prayse of all Learned men in suc|ceeding
ages.
Cardinall Bellarmine sayes that he writ in the
fourteenth of Theodosius his Reigne,Nyceph. l. 12. Eccles Hist. c. 13. and that
he was present at the first Councell of Constan|tinople,
as Nicephorus doth report it; he writ
the Symboll of Faith, set forth in the same
Councell.

Sayings out of Saint Gregory Nyssen.

Of Vsury.
A Usurer that lends his money out,Contra Vsura|ios. Tom. 1 pa. 978. is like a
man who stands by another icke of a burning
Fever, who desires to drink water to ease him:
the other doth reach him it, but it does him no
good, but a great deale of further mischiefe to
increase his pain: so hee, though for the pre|sent
he seemes to relieve his want, yet he after|wards
doth mainly torment him.


Against the same sinne.
Hee loves no labour, but a sedentary life:Id. Ibid. the
pen is his plough, parchment is his field; Inke
is his seed: Time is the rain to ripen his greedy
desires, his sicle is calling in of Forfeitures, His
house the Barn where he winnows the fortunes
of his Clients. Hee follows his Debtors as Ea|gles

and Vultures do Armies: to prey upon the
dead Corps.


Of the same sinne.
Men come to Usurers as Birds to heapes of
corne;Idem. Ibid. they desire the corne, but are destroyed
in the nets laid for them; so borrowers for a
time may flourish, and come and goe, but at last
lose all. For Usurers are as fishers, assoone as
they have caught fish in one place, let downe
their nets in another.


Of relieving the poore.
There is no excuse to be found for hard hear|tednesse
against the poore:Gregor. Nyss. de paup. A|mand. Tom. 1. p. 971. for where can the
rich cast their eyes, but they may behold them?
He therefore that despiseth the poore, despiseth
his Maker.



His Works as they are set forth in the Editi|on
of Basil 1562. I have here set downe.

1 An Epistle of a
Christians name.
2 Of the Lords prayer
one book.
3 Of the 8 Beatitudes
on Mat. 5.
4 Sermons of the Na|tivity.
5 Of Saint Stephen.
6 Vpon the sixth Psal.
7 Of Easter.
8 Of the Assumption

of Christ.
9 Of the Trinitie, and
that the Holy Ghost
is God.
10 That there are not
three Gods.
11 Of the difference of
the Essence and Hy|postasis.
12 Of the faith in the
Trinitie.
13 Vpon that of the
Apostle, Then shall
the Sonne himselfe
be subject unto him,
1 Cor. 15.
14 Of Sleepers.
15 Of Infants taken
away.
16 Of the Resurrecti|on,
foure Sermons.
17 Authour of the
Lords Assumption.
18 Vpon Matth. 25. As
much as yee have
done it to one of
these, you have done
it to me.
19 Disputation of the
Soule, and of the Re|surrection.
20 Of the Trinity a|gainst
the Iews.
21 Of holy Baptisme.
22 Commendatory spee|ches
upon Saint Ba|sil.
23 Vpon the 40 Mar|tyrs.
24 On Pulcheria.
25 On Placilla.
26 Gregory of Naeo-Caesarea.
27 On Theodore a
Martyr.
28 On Meletius.
29 Vpon the Creation
of Man. A supplement
to his brothers Hexa|meron.
30 Of Philosophy eight
Books.
31 Of the life of Mo|ses,
one booke.

Here as Bellarmine
observes, want his books
against Eunomius.
These are therefore
in the Edition of Paris
added in the yeere
1573.

1 Eight Sermons on
Ecclesiastes.

2 An explanation up|on
the Canticles.
3 Of the form of a per|fect
Christian.
4 A Catechisticall
speech.
5 Against those that
deferre the Baptisme
of Children.
6 Of avoiding forni|cation.
7 Against those that
will not be reprehen|ded.
8 Vpon the woman
sinner.
9 Of loving the poor.
10 Of true Virginitie.
11 An Epistle to Fla|vianus.

Concerning which Bellarmine doth give
good observations for distinction of them.
Briefely, this famous man was studious and well
learned, being excited by his brother Saint Ba|sil,
lived gloriously, and died piously in the yeer
of Grace 380, Valentinian and Valens then
swaying the Roman Eagle.




An. Christi 388. Theodore|tus

S. THEODORETVS

_NIcephorus the Historian hath taken
the greatest paines and travell a|mongst
all others to describe the
life of this Theodoret at large, and
therefore I shall principally follow his steps.
This Theodoret (saith hee) was born at Antioch,
a famous place, and an ancient Citie, and re|nowmed
for many things; but specially for that,
in that the Disciples were first called Christians
in this place:Acts 11. 26. as also for the Apostles determi|ning
that great question about Circumcision,
sent their resolutions to this place, by Paul and
Barnbas,Acts 15. 22, 23. with Iudas and Silas, The Apostles
and the Elders with the Brethren unto the bre|thren

which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and
in Syria, and Cilicia, c. so that this Citie is
ennobled in this respect, and as the place of his
birth did grace him, yet more did his parents
Nobilitie and Religion; for they were both
great personages,Niceph. in vita Theodoret. and both addicted to Christi|an
Religion: but his Mother (as my Authour
testifies) was grieved in minde deeply because
she was barren, and was without any hope of
issue to inherit their large possessions; so that
they both resolv'd to bequeath all their Reve|nues
to the mayntenance of Christians, and to
Monasteries whereof there were many in Syria;
but by her prayers shee was heard, and God did
not deny her the request of her lips; but did
grant her her hearts desire, and fulfilled her re|quests,
and sent her a sonne which (shee said)
should be dedicated to God, and shee was as
good as her word, for his name imports as
much as a gift of God, or Theodoret: well this
her sonne by the provident care of the parents,
and by the acutenes and excellencie of his own
wit, in a short time profited so in pietie and let|ters,
that though (as Procopius testifies) juvenis
consecratus Episcopus Cyri, c. hee was very
young, yet hee was chosen and consecrated Bi|shop
of Cyrus, which is a Towne of Syria of
the Iews, which was builded by Cyrus King of
Persians, and was by him enfranchised and en|dowed
with many priviledges; what hee did,
being now seated in this Reverend place, you
will by the sequell perceive: what a worthy

worke did he presently set forth call'd the Histo|rie
of the Lovers of God? was hee not as vigi|lant
to find out and discover, nay, to expell He|retikes
out of the Church, or reducing them to
it? At the same time there were whole Parishes
in his Diocesse infected with the pestilent Here|sie
of the Marcionites, and did not he by his sole
wisdome and labour, even to the hazard of his
owne life, bring them backe into the bosome of
the Catholike Church? which thing alone
shews him to be an able and learned Prelate: for
it is a taske of tasks to learn men to swim against
the streams of their own perverted wils; and to
make obstinacie it selfe to submit and yield; was
he not wondrous diligent to gather the bodies
of the Saints, and interre them with great re|spect;
and in the honour of them to build fa|mous
Temples? as (also imitating his parents
piety) was he not wondrous charitable too, and
conversant with those that lived an holy Mo|nastick
life? did not he visit them? and refresh
their bowels with the bowels of love and com|passion.
Especially one Symeon called Stillites,
which lived austerely, and one Iacobus Nizibe|nus,
and many others whose lives and vertues
hee writ elegantly, and left them to posterity.
Hee was a carefull imitator of Iohannes Chryso|stomus,
for he alwayes proposed him as his wor|thiest
patterne in forming his stile of writing;
and by this means hee proved so fluent and elo|quent,
so full of grace and learning in his works:
It is good to have worthy patternes to imitate,

and it is no lesse ingenuitie to gather good by
them, they are lent for the same purpose: how
sweet and beautifull are his studious and melli|fluous
Commentaries upon the Scriptures?
How divinely doth he resolve the hardest places
of the old Testament? How significantly hath
he explained the Prophets, how elegantly hath
he delineated that sweet singer of Israel? What
learning is there wanting in his divine Treatise
of Gods providence? How strenuously and
powerfully hath he laid open the fond conceits
of abundance of Heretikes; as of Symon Ma|gus,
Menander, Basilides; Carpocrates? of Her|mogenes,
Tatianus, Cerdo, Marcion, and Manes?
Of Hymenaeus, and Phyletus, Ebion, Cerinthus,
Paulus Samosatenus, Sabellius, Marcellus, and
Photinus? Of the Nicolaitans, Montanists,
Noetians? As also of Arius, Eudoxius, Eu|nomius,
Macedonius, Donatus, Meletianists, Apol|linarians,
Messalians, Nestorians with the Euty|chians?
in the which labours hee hath shewed
to all ages to come, what gifts and endowments
hee had lent him of God, and how well and
faithfully hee used them to his Creatours glory,
and the Churches benefit; I cannot let passe
that hot contention that once was betwixt that
worthy Father of the Church Saint Cyril, and
himselfe, sprung rather from zeale to Religion in
them both, and from the study of pietie, then
any vaine ambitiou, or self-conceit of their own
sufficiencies: and it is not a wonder; for where
doth not that great fire-brand of Hell, strive to

kindle the fire of dissention and division, was
not there strife even amongst the Apostles? and
great ambition, had it not beene regulated by
our Saviour? This contention betwixt these
two Fathers happened in this manner: whereas
there was a Synod appointed at Ephesus, to stop
the grouth and spreading of the Heresie of Ne|storius
Bishop of Constantinople; which did
daily begin to spread it selfe, and to infect divers
with its contagion, this Saint Cyrill being first
come, had by his owne labour and wisdome
condemned Nestorius for an Hereticke, not
knowing that Iohn Bishop of Antioch, or the
other Bishops of Syria would have been there:
but when Iohn Bishop of Antioch, and the o|ther
Syrian Bishops, amongst whom this Theo|doret
was one of the chiefe were come, and per|ceived
that Cyrillus did not seem to respect their
counsels; they tooke it ill at his hands, and
thereupon canceld his Decrees as void; and so
by a generall consent with a great deale of la|bour,
they all condemne this Nestorius; it is
thought, that had not the care and wisdome of
Theodosius the younger calling the Bishops to|gether
to Constantinople taken away, and re|moved
this contention, it would not have so
soone ended, but hee did take it away, and
Nestorius was anathematized, and Theodoret
and Saint Cyrill wondrous loving one to ano|ther
ever after: to proceed, that renowmed
Councel of Calcedon, wherein sate 600 Bishops,
and above, where this Theodoret was present;

I say the testimony of that so learned a Councell
is a large proofe of this mans Faith and Integri|ty:
for was not he by the generall acclamations
of all there present publickly stiled Catholicus
 Orthodoxus Ecclesiae pastor,Nicep. Callist in vita Sancti Theodor.  doctor sin|cerus;
that is, a Catholike and Orthodoxe
Pestor of the Church, and a sincere Doctor for
the truth: a large commendation from the
mouthes of such a cloud of learned Witnesses,
which bestowed it not on him for flattery or fa|vour,
but by desert and merit: doe not the lear|ned
Epistles of Leo the Bishop of Rome, sent
to him, sufficiently commend him? by which
it may easily be perceived how vigilant hee was
to settle Truth in the borders of the Church,
and how carefully he preserved the Faith a|mongst
the high swelling surges of Heresies
unviolated? will not his daily meditations and
explanations in, and of the sacred Scriptures
eternize his fame to posterity? Doth not Genna|dius
Priest of Messilea,Gennad. in l. script. Eccles. afford him and his labours
a large Encomium? calling his Writings, Scripta
fortia, per quae Confirmat  ratione  testimo|niis
Scripturarum, c. that is, Impregnable
and undenyable arguments, by which with
Reasons and Testimonies out of Gods Word
he doth confirme and establish it, that Christ
was truely incarnate of the Virgin Mary. And
doth not Cardinall Bellarmine ranke him equal|ly
with St. Cyril,Card. Bellar. de scrip. Eccl. and stiles him, virum plan Do|ctissimum
c. that is, an absolute learned
man: Photius he also reckons him an able man,

against Heresies:Phot. Bibli. p. 902. 903. first he useth his authority as
well as Saint Athanasius, to prove that Dionysius
was not tainted with the Arrian Heresie.
, so also doth Theodoret censure
of Dionysius: and again, he takes and approves
of him as well as Ignatius, and Clemens Stroma|taeus,
or Eusebius in the condemning the Nicho|laitans
for Heretiques, in these words ,
c. That is,Leco praedict.  pag prd. but Saint
Ignatius and Clemens, and Eusebius, with
Theodoret of Cyrus, doe all agree the Nicholai|tans
to be Heretiques; so that this Theodoret, as
appeares, was a Father of no small Esteem or
regard: and doth not Photius in another place
afford him as high praise for his Ecclesiasticall
History,Photii Bibliot. pag. 19. beginning thus, Lecta est Theodoreti
Historia Ecclesiastica, c. that is, The Eccle|siasticall
History of Theodoret is likewise allow|ed,
and saith, of all which I have formerly no|minated,
hee useth the most convenient Stile
and phrase for an History; Clarus enim  gran|dis,
minime redundans, that is; for he is per|spicuous,
weighty, and not too luxuriant; and
praiseth him for so learnedly relating the Acts
of the second Synod: Is there not also a short
Epigram in Greeke in an ancient Manuscript,
concerning the Excellency and Eloquency of
Theodorets Disputations in three short Verses,In Augustano Codice. M. S.
which are here set downe.
,

.

That is, that as another Nilus with his o|verflowings,
hee made all the Grecian fields
fat and full of Eloquence, and by his labours
had enlarged the Faith; which shewes likewise
not onely the indefatigable studies of this Theo|doret;
but also the admirable wit and wisdome
that flowed in his soule,Sixtus Senen|sis de Theod. and was exprest in his
works. Doth not likewise Sixtus Senensis spea|king
of his selected questions of the Scriptures,
speake in these words, ab initio Geneseos adulti|mum
librum Regum, insigne opus, c. that is,
Questions from the beginning of Genesis to the
end of the second of Kings, a most famous
worke; in which, saith he, by way of Question
and Answer, Theodoret doth briefely and clear|ly
explaine all the hard places of Scripture with
admirable industry! what pen can sufficiently
blazon thy worth? for his Commentaries on
the Psalter, doth not the same Senesis stile
them, Nobiles Commentarii, that is, Heroicke
Commentaries: and upon his Commentaries
on St. Pauls Epistles, doth he spare to commend
him? For saith he not, Feruntur Commentarii
in omnes Pauli Epistolas, in quibus quantum
fieri otest. c. that is, there are likewise extant
Theodorets Commentaries on all St. Pauls E|pistles,
in which (as much as can be) the genu|ine
sence of St. Paul is succinctly, elegantly, or|derly,
and piously exprest, and (which in Saint
Pauls writings seemes to be most difficult) sen|tences
are joyned with sentences, with wonder|full
skill and Art, to the great profit of the

Reader. And if I should enlarge my selfe which
of the Fathers either doe not use his Authority
with great approbation and commendation,
and all of them doe hold him an able judicious
eloquent man; he dyed, being not very old, but
rather spent with labour and studies than with
age, and dyed in the reigne of Theodosius the
yonger Emperour, and was buried in the same
Sepulchre, in which that holy man Iacobus Nizi|benus,
before mentioned, was intombed.

His sayings of the government of the soule.
The delights of the soule are to know the
Maker:Treatise of di|vine Provi|dence, cap. 12. to consider the Workes of Heaven,
and to know her owne estate and being.
The soule knoweth all things, wherefore
he that knoweth his soule, knoweth all things;
and hee that knoweth not his soule, knoweth
nothing.
The soule when it dyeth carryeth nothing
with it but her vertue and learning,Ibid. c. 16. and it seeks
none other helpe: wherefore all such as for the
multitude of their sinnes and transgressions are
hopelesse, as murtherers, blasphemers, with
such like wickednesse; the justice of God and
their owne deserts condemnes them unto ever|lasting
death, from which they shall never bee
delivered: But such (saith he) as have lived
godly and carefully, shall be by death delivered
from the prison of the body, and shall ascend
up into a purer life, and dwell in heaven for
ever.

If the soule of man (through sinne) be once
dead,Ibid. cap. 16. it is never againe revived, but by the one|ly
meere grace and mercy of the most gracious
and ever-living God; whose vengeance (by his
justice) still waiteth the destruction of wicked
and wilfull sinners: therefore say the learned,
and doe conclude, that blessed is the soule
that is not infected with filthinesse of this
World.


I have set his Workes as they are registred in
two Tomes Printed at Collen, 1617.

Tome. 1.
1 Vpon all the hard
questions in Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuero|nomy,
Joshua, Jud|ges,
Ruth, and upon
the Kings.
2 Exposition of all the
Psalmes.
3 Vpon the Canticles.
4 Vpon Jeremiahs pro|phesie.
5 Vpon Baruch.
6 Vpon Jeremiahs La|mentation.
7 Vpon Ezekiel.
8 Vpon Daniel, Hosea.
9 Joel, Amos, Abdiah,
10 Micha, Nahum.
11 Habakkuk, Ze|phaniah.
12 Aggee, Zhary.
13 Malachy; to which
are now added these.
14 Vpon Moses Song.
Exod. 15.
Vpon his Song in Deu|teronomy.
Vpon Anna her Song.
Vpon Abakkucks Song.

Vpon Esaies Prayer.
Vpon Jonas Prayer.
Vpon Ezechiah's prayer
Vpon the prayer of the
3 Children.
An Hymne of these 3.
Virgin Maries Song.
Zachariah's prayer.
Symeons prayer.


Tome 2.
1 Vpon all St. Pauls
Epistles, from the Ro|mans
to Philemon.
2 Ecclesiasticall Hi|story
5 Books.
3 Three Dialogues a|gainst
certaine Here|tiques.
4 The fables of Here|ticks
5.
5 An Epitome of di|vine
decrees.
6 A religious History.
7 Of Evangelical truth
drawne out of the
knowledge of Philo|sophy.
8 Of Divine provi|dence:
and of the soul
of man.





An. Christi 390. Sanctus Hierony|mus Stri|donensis.

S. HIERONYMVS.

_THis great and eminent Father of the
Church must bee ranked according
to his deserts: In writing whose life
I follow the directions of Erasmus
of Roterdam. To begin therefore; the time
of his Birth was under the Reigne of Constan|tine
the Great, in the yeare of Christ 331, in a
Towne called Stridon, which was ovethrown
by the Gothes, then wasting and spoyling seve|rall
places: Upon the borders of Dalmatia, and
Pannonia,Hieron in cat. Sciptorum illustrium. as he himselfe testifies, some, as Blon|dus
will have it, to be that which now is called
Sdrigna, a little Town of Histria in Italie: some
hold, that to this day there is to be seene Saint

Hieroms Monument. He had a yonger brother
called Paulinianus: his mothers name was Ca|storina;
His Fathers name was Eusebius: but
we will not insist upon his parents, but will de|clare
his owne worth: he had sufficient meanes,
as may appeare by his education, which was at
Rome; then counted the onely Nursery of Let|ters,
as hee doth testifie: for though learning
was at the same time in France, Spaine, and Af|fricke,
yet no where was it so free from pollu|tion
and corruption as at Rome. His Master,
for the Grammar, was Donatus, and Victorinus
for the Rhetorique. Some have made question,
whether this Donatus were the same that made
such eloquent Commentaries on Terence and
Virgil: Well, making faire hopes of a large
progresse in Learning, and being well furnished
in these, he proceeds to read Porphyrius Isa|goge,
or Introduction to Logique, and read the
Philosophy of Plato, and the Stoicks; but not
staying here, he lookes now into Cosmography,
History, and Antiquities; and intends to study
Divinity, and to set it forth with all the lustre
that might be. His fellow students were Pam|machius,
Bonosus: both these were highly born.
Heliodorus, who for his eminency of parts was
made a Bishop.In Epist. ad Damas pap. This Hierome received his bap|tisme
also at Rome, as he proves: and now being
sufficiently seasoned with these Arts, he soares
higher, and followes the foot-steps of learned
men, as Pythagoras, Plato, Apollonius; and so he
addresseth himselfe to travaile: he surveyed all

France, aud gained acquaintance and love of
the chiefest Scholars: hee testifies that he was
at Triers, where hee described that Booke of
St. Hilaries de Synodis with his owne hands;
and Bonosus travailed with him, as may be seen
in his Epistle to Florentius; so having taken a
view of most of the Libraries, and having con|ferred
with the learnedest in those places whi|ther
he came, he visited the place of his Birth,
and the place of his new Birth, having like a
wise Merchant stored himselfe with abundance
of Goods, hee resolves upon a course of life,
and a fit place to settle downe in: hee likes not
Rome, as savouring somewhat of Paganisme,
and was too full of pleasures, which are dan|gerous
Baits for young men to bee insnared
with: Neither doth he like his owne Country,
being corrupted with Barbarous delights, as he
testifies himselfe in his Epistles, saying, In my
Country they make their belly their god; and he
is counted the holiest, which is the richest. So ta|king
advice with his fellowes, he resolved to
depart into some remote place, that he might
the freer give himselfe to the study of the holy
Scriptures, and the more truely follow our
Saviour. Pammachius advised him to marriage,
but this Hierome desired liberty. Boosius hee
perswades him to a Monasticke course of living
in some remote Island. Well, the minde of St.
Hierome was thus resolved, hee got him a rich
Library, and tooke a competency of meanes for
his support and maintenance; hee goes into

Syria with Heliodorus with him: but Heliodorus
repents him of his resolution, and so returnes
home: it is thought that they both in their
journey saw Hierusalem, which was famous at
that time. And being now destitute of his
friends, his body was much altered by change|ing
his course of life, so that hee was sicke,
but was wondrously courteously used by a
Monke, but more especially by Euagrius, who
afforded him lodging kindly at his house: be|ing
recovered to his health, with a great ardour
of soule he set himselfe to follow Christ: so he
departed farre off into a solitary place, where
was no company but wilde Beasts and Serpents,
and a few Cells of Monkes here and there scat|tered
among the Syrians and Agarens, onely
Euagrius would now and then even in this
his solitarinesse give him a visit: Ruffinus
who of a former friend, became an Enemy,
at this time came to Nytria of Egypt; and now
also his brother Paulinianus having betaken
himselfe to a Religious course of life, was after
a while made a Priest; which thing Iohn Bishop
of Hierusalem did not approve of, but Saint
Hierome doth answer it sufficiently, his dislike
grew, because Paulinianus was made so young,
being not yet thiry yeeres old, as my be seene
in his Epistle to Paulinianus.
Saint Hierome lived foure yeeres in this state,
all this while subjugating his body, and study|ing
and meditating continually, with watching,
fastings and prayers; and seriosly repenting

the sins, which he had in his youth committed;
and imploring Gods grace to preserve him from
future temptations: So that as Erasmus speaks,
hee did not onely study hard all day, but spent
most part of the night in pious performances,
so that, Minima pars noctis dabatur somno, mi|nor
cibo, nulla otio, that is, Hee did allow the
least time to sleepe, little for refreshments by
diet, none for idlenesse. When hee was weary
with study, he would go to prayer, or to sing an
Hymne; he read over all his Library, and what
is rare, sacras literas ad verbum ediscebat, that is,
he learnt the Scriptures perfectly to a word, hee
was vigilant in reading the Prophets, and find|ing
out the intent of their prophesies; he was
studious in the Evangelists that he might know
our Saviours life the better, and with more
ease and profit follow it. His prayer was, Lord,
let me know my selfe first, that I may the better
know thee, the Saviour of the world. Hee was
so addicted to reading, that hee would let none
passe him, no not, Ethnicos, non Haereticos,
not the Heathenish Authours, nor yet the
Heretikes: what he read with judgement, he
made use of knowing how to fetch Gold from
a dunghill, or Medicines from poyson; by this
meanes so fitting each Authour for his owne
memory, that hee was able to speake suddenly
upon any point of Learning; hee was mainly
taken with Origen, so that hee cald him by way
of praysing him Suum, his owne; that little
Book which he writ to his Associate Heliodorus

shewes sufficiently what an able man hee would
prove in the schoole of Christ.
Hee had excellent skill in Hebrew, knowing
how necessary it was for the understanding of
the Scriptures, which he got of one Bar-hamina,
hee obtained excellent knowledge in Chaldee,
knowing that some of the Prophets; as Daniel,
and some other books as that of Iob, was writ|ten,
not onely in the Hebrew, but also in the
Chaldaick Dialect; so likewise did he gaine the
Syrian, because of some affinity with the Hebrew.
Now having past so long a time in this strict
and rigid course of life, by the perswasions of
Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine, and Paulinus
Bishop of Antioch, whom upon some necessary
employments the Emperour had calld to Rome;
some say hee was made Priest at twentie yeeres
of age by Liberius Bishop of Rome; but hee
testifies hee was ordained at Antioch, by Pauli|nus
aforesaid. When hee came to Rome, hee was
acquainted with many Noble Matrons, especi|ally
Marcella, who being stirr'd up by Athana|sius,
and other Priests of Egypt, was the first
of that sex, that profest a Monasticke life at
Rome and shee by her faire devout carriage
gained others aswell Virgins, as Matrons, to the
same profession; especially Sophronia, Princi|pia,
Paula, and Eustochium: to whom divers
others joyned themselves; and Hierome instru|cted
them, and stirr'd up their spirits to the stu|die
of the holy Scriptures; but hee wanted not
those that envied him; for there came in

closely at the same time certaine Arrians under
the name of Origenists; whom they knew this
Sint Hierome had in high esteeme; and so they
did strive to defame his splendour, by raising
scandals of him, so that hee left the City of
Rome as unworthy of him, and (as some write)
Melania and Paula went with him, or else did
presently follow him, hee describes his journey
in his Workes, and gives sufficient Reasons
why he went, and why he visited so many places;
hee termes Gregory Nazianzen his Master for
Divinitie; hee heard likewise Apollinarius at
Antioch; hee went to Alexandria, but for the
practice of Divinitie he chose to live in Bethe|lem,
which hee made famous by his excellent
preaching; Here Paula builded foure Mona|steries,
three for women, one for men, in
which Saint Hierome lived many yeeres, as hee
testifies in his Epitaph of Paula; Ruffinus pro|secuted
Saint Hierome with a great deale of
malice; in so much that Saint Augustine began
to suspect him, untill he better knew his life and
learning; yet though this Ruffinus was so bitter
against him; Hee had famous men that stood
for him, as Epiphanius in Syria, Theophilus,
Bishop of Alexandria, Marcella, Pammachius,
and Chromatis at Rome: so that being much
threatned and hated by these Arrians, his life
may be term'd a tedious Martyrdome, hee stu|died
Gods Word thirty yeeres: having buried
Paula his Disciple, the time came that his course
was accomplished, and so in the ninety one

of his age, of Christs Nativitie, 422.
Under Honorius and Constantius hee payed
Natures debt, his bones were afterward trans|lated
to Rome; where to this day there is a Mo|nument
of his to bee seene: Hee was in his life
of such fame that Greece did rejoyce, that shee
had his Works translated.
His Epistles are approved of in Italy, France,
Spain, all Germany and Afrike; He was honoured
and sought to far and neere by Bishops, by Noble
Matrons, by great Rulers: many great personages,
came farre having seene his Workes to see the
Authour: Amongst the rest, one Alipius sent
by Saint Augustine, Paulus Orosius the Historian
came to see him; so did Sulpitius Severus who
highly commended him; Apodemius out of
France, with many others with him; Hee was
full of Eloquence; but hee that will read Eras|mus
commendation of him, will admire how
one man should be so generally expert in such
rare gifts; Quis docet apertius, quis delectat
urbanius? quis movet efficacius? quis laudat
candidius? quis suadet gravius? quis hortatur
ardentius? c. that is, who teaches more di|stinctly?
who delights more modest? who
moves more effectually? who prayses more
candidly? who perswades more gravely? who
exhorts more ardently? Dalmatia, Pannonia,
Italy may boast of him; Stridon rejoyceth in
him for bringing so great a Light to the world;
Italy comforts her selfe in three respects: First,
that she instructed him, next that shee baptized

him: lastly, that shee reserves his bones as a me|moriall
of him.
France is glad that hee sent Epistles to her in|habitants,
all the world may bee comforted in
having such an excellent Bulwark for the truth,
all ages and sexes may get profit out of his Vo|lumes:Trithem. in Scrip. Eccles. fol. 25.
the best wit may hee helpe, and all can|not
but praise him except Heretikes, whom hee
detested. Heare but what Trithemius speaks of
him, Vir in saecularibus valde eruditus, in divi|nis
Scripturis inter omnes doctores eruditissi|mus,
c. that is, Hee was a man well seene in
secular Learning, but in Divinitie he carries the
chiefe fame amongst all the Doctours of the
Church, famous for the knowledge in Lan|guages;
he was the rooter out of all Hereticks,
the defender of the Truth, a labourer in Vertue,
an hater of Vice,Baron. Annal. Tom 3. a true Meditatour on Gods
Law.
Baronius doth commend him deeply, as you
may read in his Annals. So doth Prosper.

Sentences out of Saint Hierome.

Vpon Heresies.Hieron. in E|pist.
Dead flesh is to bee cut off for feare of Gan|greenes,
the scab'd sheepe is not to be admitted
into the Fold, lest it defile, corrupt, and spoile
others. Arrius at first was but as a sparkle; but
because he was not at first suppressed, he proved
the incendiary of the whole Church.



Of Innocence.
Wee must be like to children who forget
hurts,Hieron. super illud Mat. qui|cunque humili|averit se. who doe not retaine anger, look not on
beauty to lust after it, doth not speak one thing,
and think another: so unlesse wee have puritie
and such innocence, we shall not enter Heaven.


Of Gods Word.
If according to the Apostle Christ is the
power and the wisdome of God, then hee that
knows not the Scriptures,Hieron. sup. Isa. in Prover.
knows not the power
of God; hee that is ignorant of Gods Word,
knows not Christ.


Of simplicitie.
Thou must be a Dove; and a Serpent, the one
not to doe hurt to others, the other not to be
hurt by others.


Vpon disgrace.
The Sonne of God endured the shamefull
death of the Crosse,Hieron. in Epi. and dost thou think to fol|low
him and be where hee is, and live here in
pleasures?


Vpon Women.
Womens beauty is not to be respected,Hieron. contra Iovinian. but
their chast modesty: shee is truly chast, who

hath liberty and opportunitie to sinne, and will
not.


E duris ad placida.
He used to say of himselfe, that whether hee
did eat or drinke,In Reg. Mo|nac. cap. 30. or whatsoever else he did; that
horrible voice was ever in his eares: Surgite
mortui,  venite ad jdicium: Arise you dead,
and come forth to judgement.
He saith, the first Adam sinned by a Tree;
whereby we were lost: and our second Adam to
redeeme us, dyed on a Tree.
If Adam was cast out of paradise for one sin,
O Lord, what shall become of a sinner that hath
a world of sins?
All Vertues are so united together, that hee
that wants one wants all, and therefore hee that
hath one, hath all.
Whatsoever it is a shame to speake, it is a
shame also to thinke: therefore the safest and
perfectest course is to accustome the minde to
watch over the thoughts, and at their first mo|tion
either to approve or reject them, that so
good cogitations may be cherished, and the bad
extinguished.
Beware that thou hast not an itching tongue
or eares,Hier. in Epi. ad Nepotian. Doe not detract from others,
nor harken unto them that doe detract from
others.
He that doth afflict his body,Hie sup. Ep. ad Rom. and yet forsake
concord, doth prayse God in the Cymball, but
doth not prayse him in the Quire.

He that gives almes to a poore sinner,Hier. ibi. Glo. sup. illud Ecc|cle. 10. Da mi|sericordi, c. is truly
mercifull.
For nature is to be respected, not the person.
For he that gives to a poore sinner, not as hee is
a sinner, but as hee is a man, hee doth not relieve
a sinner, but a man.
Christ was a sacrifice ordained for our recon|ciliation:Hier. super Lucam.
and if thou dost contemne the myste|ry
of the Sacrament, thou contemnest the re|medy
contained in the Sacrament.
A just and valiant man should neither be de|ject
in adversity,Hier. sup. Iel. nor puft up with prosperity,
but in both estates should be moderate.
When the body is strong the soule is weake;Hier. sup. A|mos lib. 2.
and again when the body is weake, the soule is
strong.
The kingdome of Heaven suffers violence,Hieron. in Ep for
it is great violence that men borne on earth
should seek Heaven, by vertue possesse it, where|unto
they have no right by nature.



I have here set out his Works as they are re|corded
by the Edition set forth 1567, contained
in nine Tomes.

Tome 1.
1 Hortatory Epistles,
42
2 To Heliodorus.
3 To Rusticus and
Laeta.
4 To Salvina.

5 To Ageruchia, two
Epistles.
6 To Paulinus.
7 To Paula.
8 To Eustochius, 3
Epistles.
9 To Paulus Concor|diensis.
10 To Theophilus of
Alexandria.
11 To Castrutius.
12 To Exuperantius.
13 To Julianus.
14 To the Virgins of
Hermon.
15 To Ruffinus.
16 To Chromatius, to
Antonius, of shunning
suspected places.
17 To Sabinianus, Ne|potianus.
18 To Florentius, De|metriades.
19 To Furia, Gauden|tius.
20 To Caelantia, Eusto|chius,
two Epistles.
21 To Lucinius, Abi|gaus.
22 To Julianus, Casto|rina.
23 To Theodosius, Au|gustine.
24 To Nycaeas, Chry|sogonus.
25 To Rusticus.
26 Twelve funerall E|pistles
in prayse of
many.


Tome 2.
1 Against Heretikes.
2 Helvidius Jovinia|nus.
3 Apologie for his
bookes against Jovi|nian.
4 Apologie to Dom|nio.
5 To Pammachius.
6 Against Vigilan|tius.
7 Against the same,
one booke.
8 To Marcella against
Montanus.
9 Against the Lucife|rians.
10 Originists.
11 Against John of Je|rusalem.
12 To Pammachius, to
Theophilus.
13 Apologies against

Ruffinus, three books.
14 To Cesiphon a|gainst
Pelagius.
15 Against the Pela|gians,
three books.
16 Thirty Epistles of
divers Arguments.
17 Eight Epistles to
Hierome.


Tome 3.
1 Prefaces and expli|cation
of questions,
2 To Paulinus.
3 Prefaces on the Pen|tateuch.
4 On Jonah, Kings,
Chronicles, Esdras,
Tobiah, Judith, He|ster,
Job, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Canti|cles,
Esaiah, Jere|miah,
Ezekiel, Da|niel.
5 Twelve prophets and
foure Evangelists.
6 Then follow the ex|plication
of questions
propou~ded by divers,
as Damasus, Darda|nus,
Vitalis, Aman|dus,
Miverius, Alex|ander,
Cyprian, Pau|la,
Euagrius, Mar|cella,
Sophronius,
Hedibia, Principia,
Fabiola, Ruffinus,
Sunia, Fretella, Al|gasia,
Paulinus, De|siderius.
7 Then follow some
questions out of He|brew
on Genesis,
Chronicles, Kings.
8 Also books of Hebrew
names, which are in
the Old or New Testa|ment.

Cardinall Bellarmine
doth doubt of some of
these Workes, whether
they be Saint Hieromes
or not, as those upon the
Kings and Chronicles.

Tome 4.
1 Commentaries upon
the foure greater Pro|phets,
and on Jere|mies
Lamentations.



Tome 5.
A Commetarie upon
Ecclesiastes, as also
upon the twelve lesser
Prophets.


Tome 6.
1 Commentaries upon
Saint Matthew.
2 Vpon the Epistles to
the Galatians, Ephe|sians,
Titus, Phile|mon.
3 A book of Didymus
put into Latine by
Saint Hierome.
Some doubts are made
whether in the fourth
Tome the Lamenta|tions
of Jeremy, were
done by Saint Hie|rom:
it is thought to
be Rhabanus Mau|rus,
because it is
found amongst his
Works.


Tome 7.
1 Commentaries on all
the Psalmes.
Bellarmine makes some
doubt of some of the
Psalmes, viz. against
14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19
20. and sayes they are
not of Saint Hie|roms
turning.


Tome 8.
1 Commentaries on Job
2 On the Proverbs.
3 Homilies on the
Canticles.
These are rather attri|buted
to Beda, be|cause
they are said to
be written in favour
of Vecterius. Now
Vecterius was a Bi|shop
in England, in
Beda's time, as hee
testifies those on the
Proverbs are thought
to be of Beda his
Works, because on the
21. and 31. Gregory
is cited, and in the
30 Saint Hierome
himself is cited. Com|mentaries
on the E|pistles

are suspected
to be Pelagius.


Tome 9.
1 There are many things
of other mens, as of
Eusebius, Caesarien|sis,
Ruffinus, Augu|stine,
Gennadius, and
others, which are all
good pieces, but not
to be ascribed to this
Father.

And so I will shut up the life of this Great
Saint Hierome with the prayses that Saint Au|gustine
gives him in his 18 booke de Civita|te
Dei, Non defuit in Temporibus noster presby|ter
Hieronymus, that is, there wanted not in our
time that Priest Saint Hierome, a most learned
man, skilfull in three tongues especially, which
turn'd the Scriptures not out of Greeke, but out
of Hebrew into Latine. So his actions and inde|fatigable
pains, with his many sufferings, doe
serve to shew that hee did well employ his time
to Gods glory, and the Churches good: which
doth even to this day reap great benefit out of
his Works.




An. Christi 411. Sanctus Chrysosto|mus.

S. CHRYSOSTOM.

_I Am now to Write and describe to
the view the sweetest Father that the
Church of God inioyd in many ages:As Bellarm. in 398.
whom to prayse is but of Desert;
whom not to Commend, would seeme barba|rous
and unchristian. He was an Auditour and
Disciple to Eusebius; then when hee was Priest
at Antioch: hee got this name Chrysostome, as
one saith, Ob venustatem Eloquii, for his grace|full
Eloquence: it signifies a golden tongue, for
hee was prevalent and attractive, a man most
learned in Theology, of an admirable Wit in
his framing his Homilies, hee was beloved
and reverenced of all men; His fathers name

was Secundus, and his mothers name was An|thusa,
both able and noble: Hee was borne at
Antioch; in which place, after some time spent
in secular affaires, he entred into the Priesthood,
and was made Governour of the Church at
Antioch, and Nectarius Bishop of Constantino|ple
dying, being by the perswasions of Arcadius
the Emperour placed Bishop in the same See,Sophr. in prat. spirit. cap. 119.
hee did worthily manage that great charge: So|phronius
doth highly commend this man, for
hee writes, Nunquam eum mentitum fuisse, nec
unquam alicuj maledixisse, ne scurrilialoquutum,
nec Iocos admisisse: i. e. That he never told a lye:
never cursed any, never spoke any scurrilous mat|ter:
never admitted of vaine sports. Admirable
parts  and indeede fit for a man of his Calling:
many learned men have admired his parts: A|nianus
sayth thus,Anianus ad Horom. Episc. Chrysostomus cert peculiare
illud custodit, c. i. e. Chrysostome keepes that
peculiar gift and property, that though won|drously
studious, alwayes watchfull, though an
enemy to dulnesse and stupidity; yet never doth
his words flye out into vaine flashes, but still
applyed to the profit of the hearer, for his
very stile is accommodated to the profit of the
Church, expressing antiquity and learning to|gether;
neyther too lofty, nor too meane: at all
times keeping equality and measure, full ripe,
modest, free from all fault of too much affected
curiosity: not too luxuriant, not sordid, nor
yet too much garnished; yet sufficiently and
powerfully trimmed and decked; not too sub|tile,

not too smart or sharpe, unwantonly, plea|sant,
wondrously copious, expressing an admi|rable
faculty of the Master, yet alwaies free
from pride: hence it is, that the plain man may
read him with profit, and the greatest scholar
cannot but praise him with just desert. He doth
not onely equallize Saint Basil, nor yet paral|lell
Saint Gregory, but exceeds them: in a word,
here the curious Palate shall find true Eloquence
joyned with Wisdome: sound Theology set forth
with lustre: Holinesse and Scholarship joyned in
one, in his Works throughout; there is store of
Bread and abundance of Milke, with variety of
sweet Delicates of all sorts for Divines. In his
Homilies to the people,Sixtus Senens. he studied for their pro|fit,
not to tickle their eares, but to ravish their
hearts, performing in all the office of a painfull
Doctor: he was industrious in his Expositions,
powerfull in his Morals, in all full of Complacen|cy;
hee would tell his Auditors, they were not
onely to learne, but to exercise themselves in
practising, and searching the Scriptures, lest
they should bee addicted to Idlenesse: Hee very
seldome handled any questions that were curi|ous
to the Auditors; as of Predestination, Re|probation,
of Grace, or of Free-will; but when
necessity, and the Auditory in his judgement
were fit to understand them; then hee perfor|med
them plainly, soundly, and with a great
expression of Piety and Learning.
He had excellent judgement in Morality, and
did contemne Riches, and hated Vices, so that

it doth appeare by some golden sentences, that
hee was, as one stiles him, ver Aureum flu|men,
truely a golden River. Take an In|stance
in some of them here set downe to your
view.

1. Vertue is neither troublesome, nor hard
to be obtained.
2. It is easier farre to live well than ill.
3. Small and little vices ought to bee avoy|ded
with greater study than great.
4. No punishment so great as an evill Con|science.
5. No man is hurt but by himselfe.
6. It is better to suffer than to offer injury.
7. Many doe hurt unjustly, none are hurt
unjustly.
8. This worlds glory is reproach, and re|proach
in this world is glory.
9. This Life is rather a Death than a Life.
10. Death is better than this worldly Life.
11. We gaine most in Afflictions and Mi|series.
12. That all punishments are to bee accoun|ted,
and may be made beneficiall.
13. Charity is the most gainfullest trade.
14. A private seclused life is preferred be|fore
all worldly contentments.
15. To be deprived heaven is a greater pu|nishment,
than to be punished in Hell.
16. Not to be too wise is to be truely wise.
17. That we may powerfully and evident|ly
prove the Divinity of Christ without Scrip|ture.


Saint Chrysostome, as it appeares by all Eccle|siasticall
Writers doth surpasse most for abun|dance
of Similitudes, which adde lustre to ones
speech and worke, upon the Affections, Com|parisons,
and Metaphors to stirre delight in the
Hearers: He is not like St. Ambrose for his dif|ficulties;
nor doth hee use Poets and their Fan|cies
with St. Ierome; nor yet Jests, and pleasant
Conceits with Tertullian; but with a Father|like
affection, fits himselfe to edifie soules com|mitted
to his charge.
That famous Historian Theodoret stiles him
Ioannem eximium orbis terrarum luminare,Theodor. lib. 5. Eccles. Histor. in Theodos.
Iohn the eminentest light of the whole world:
and againe, , This great Iohn be|ing
made governour of the Church of Constan|tinople,
upbraided the wickednesse and lewd|nesse
of many men; for wickednesse and lewd|nesse
in the heart of man, maketh the Spirit of
God dull and insensible, that is, not to worke in
him according to his divine Nature: Likewise
he admonished the Emperour and his Empresse
to stand in the faith, for faith is the gift of God,
and breathed by the Holy Ghost, which is the
Spirit of God, into the hearts of those that bee
his Children and walke in his wayes. Hee also
exhorted the Priests to frame their lives accor|ding
to the Canons of the Church, and told
them, that such as would not, should not enjoy
their places; and he used this speech unto them
recorded by Theodorete,Theodor. Eccle. Hist. l. 5. c. 28. .

That is, that it was not fitting that they should
enjoy any Priestly honour, who doe not live
as true and zealous Priests should doe: and by
this meanes Saint Chrysostome did not onely re|forme
those of that place,Niceph. l. 13. c. 3. but also by his reve|rend
carriage did also settle all the Thracian
Churches,Socr. l. 6. c. 3. which did containe sixe Bishop|ricks:
nay, and by Authority rectified at the
same time all the Churches in Asia, which then
had eleven Bishopricks;Zozom. l. 8. ca. 2, 3. and further his good
patterne extended, if you please to reade the
aforesaid Theodorete, in his fifth Booke before
cited. Ponticam praeterea Ecclesiam quae eundem
habet Episcoporum numerum, quem Asia eisdem
legibus adornavit: hee also adorned and graced
the Churches of Pontus with the same insti|tutions,
which did containe in it as many as
Asia.
And here a little to digresse,Note well. any one may see
plainly these foure particular poynts, and they
deserve imitation.
1. That if the Churches Discipline bee not
strictly maintained, corruption of manners pre|sently
breake in: for want of Discipline ushers
in Licentiousnesse.
2. That when Churches are fallen from
their pristine and ancient Government, they
are to bee reformed by Discipline. For Dis|cipline
well managed settles Reformation.
3. That the fittest and onely men who still
have, and alwayes should reforme Churches
by good Discipline, are Bishops, for they

have both power and discretion.
4. That good examples are of admirable ope|ration;
for doth it not easily appeare, that
by the wisedome of this one Reverend Bishop,
how all the other Churches strive to follow his
patterne? It is an old one, yet a true saying,
Exempla mags praevalent quam praecepta, Ex|amples
make a deeper stampe than precepts.
In briefe, the two first of these well conside|red,
our Zelots would not so much speake a|gainst
such good meanes, unlesse they bee igno|rant.
The third, well observed, would teach
all to afford those reverend Prelates more ho|nour,
and to learne the fifth Commandement
better, and to practice that rule of Saint Paul,
Let such as rule well have double honour; they
would not surely, if they had any insight into
the Primitive Times, so rashly and unchristian|ly
murther their spirituallBishops. Fathers, nor yet
so deeply wound theirThe Church. Mother, by Scandals,
Slanders, Reproaches, Schismes, Factions,
Fractions, Conventicles, Libells, and the like
hasty hare-brain'd fancies. The last will direct|ly
condemne them, for not obeying and follow|ing
such ancient and allowed Fathers: But I
will not insist upon this, though it doth faire|ly
offer it selfe to mee, but returne to our Fa|ther
Chrysostome, as he hath begun a faire Refor|mation
in the Church.
Having so fairely wrought upon these Chur|ches,Niceph. l. 1. c. 3
he proceeds further; he settles the Chur|ches
likewise in Phaenice, though addicted to

Idolatry; nay, though they worshipped De|vils,
and gatherd together all the Priests,Zozom. l. 8. c. . and
settle them to study Piety: and send thither
the Emperours Edicts (obtained by him for
that purpose) to demolish and throw dowe
the Images of the Idols, and to ruine their
Temples; and as for the Officers and worke|men
which should effect this great taske, hee
payed them not out of the Emperours Coffers,Socrat. l. 6. c. 3
but stir'd up the spirits of noble Matrons,
whom he had instructed in the Faith, and flow|ing
in wealth, to give large summes of money
to this purpose, assuring them that it was a
worthy worke, to cast out the Devill by this
meanes:Theodor. l. 5. cap. 29. and this his Counsel was so powerful,
and wrought so effectually, that in short space
he left the Devil not an house to put his head
in, but level'd them to the ground.
And this able Enginiere left not off thus, but
proceeds further: when as hee perceived the
whole Nation of the Scythians to bee deepely
intangled and insnared in the Arrian Heresie, o
expell this and the professors of it, he took this
course; he ordeined many Priests and Deacons,
that could speake the Tongue expertly, and
placed them in several Churches, and ap|poynted
likewise Readers; and thus hee by his
care, reduced many that were farre gone with
that Heresie, to the Orthodox Faith: and often
hee himselfe would give those Churches visits,
and speake to them learnedly by an Interpre|ter;Niceph. l. 13. c. 3, 4.
and still inducted others who had a faculty

that way:Zozom. l. 8. c. 6 and thus as in Phaenicia he had expel|led
the Devil, so in Scythia hee drove out his
Champions and strongest upholders.Socrat. l. 6. c. 3
And now finding in these his undertakings
such an happy successe, hee being incouraged
in his vertuous proceedings stops not here, but
stoutly workes whilst hee sees an opportunity:
which was as followes.
Hearing for certain that those Scythians,Theodor. l. 5. cap. 31. who
are called Nomades, living by the River Ister,
eagerly hirsted after the knowledge of the
truth, and yet did want all meanes which should
direct them to the knowledge of Christ: being
as those Children spoken of, who cryed for
bread, but there was none to give it them,
This Saint Chrysostome (sorrowing that the De|vill
should keepe their soules in the shadow of
darknesse any longer) sought diligently farre
and neare for such men as imitated the foote|steps
of the Apostles labours,Socra. l. 6. c. 3. and having found
them, sent them to bring those wilde people to
the knowledge of the Gospell; and sent his Let|ters
with all speed to Lontius,Zozom. l. 8. c. 6 then Bishop of
Ancyra, wherein he signified, that the Scythi|ans
had embraced the Truth, and exhorted him
to send able men to them, to confirme them
in the received Faith: furthermore, having
heard of the Marcionists, who had about his ju|risdiction
infected some people with their He|resie,
to stay this running soare, hee dispatched
Letters to the Bishop of the same place, that
He should carefully expell all of them out of

their places, and for feare least hee should either
want helpe or courage to effect his desires, hee
sent him the Emperours Edicts, obtained for
this purpose, to encourage him in it: so by these
his noble actions, the case is cleare, that he (as a|nother
St. Paul) had a great care of the Chur|ches
welfare, unity, and prosperity. Indeed a
wise man will order and square his actions
and thoughts by divine Lawes; for by that
meanes he shall be sure to be blessed.
I must not let passe in silence another notable
and famous passage of this Father,Niceph. l. 12. cap. 4. recorded
by Theodorete, Nicephorus, Zozomen,Socrat. l. 6. c. 6. and
Socrates, which shewes what a brave gift
and faculty hee had in perswading. It so
fell out,Zozom. l 8. c. 4 that there is one Gainus, or
rather Gainas, for so it is in the Greeke,
, A Scythian by Nati|on,Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 32.
of a Barbarous minde, full of Insolency,
and Tyranny; who that time was a comman|der
in warre, and ruled not onely over the Ar|my
of his owne Nation, but over certaine
Troopes of Roman Horse-men, and some
Regiments of Foote-forces, whom not onely
most men feared, but even the Emperour
himselfe, (knowing his bloody disposition)
mainly suspected.
This wicked Gainas desires of the Empe|rour,
that hee and his might have a Temple
allowed them, (he being mainly affected with
Arianisme:) The Emperour for the pre|sent
told him, hee would thinke of it, and

at last promised him one: But the Emperour
calling this Divine Iohn Chrysostome to him,
wisht him to give this Gainas an answer:
Withall the Emperour informed him of his
maine Power, and strength, and Tyranny, and
so thought it best by yielding to his desire to
asswage his high swolne pride. To whom this
Iohn presently answered: Ne istud ei pollicare,
ne dare sanctum Canibus mandes. You may not
promise it to him, neither may you give ho|ly
things to Dogs: nam nunquam patiar, ut qui
Deum Verbum Sanct,Theodor. l. 5. Eccles. Hist. cap. 32.  august laudibus 
Hymnis Celebrant, expellantur  Sacro Templo:
idemque tribuatur his, qui contra eum Blasphe|mias
loquantur, that is, for I will never suffer
that those, who prayse God the Word with ho|linesse
and Hymnes shall bee expelled the
Temple of God, and the same to bee given
to those who furiously doe speake Blasphemy
against him. And I beseech you (oh Empe|rour)
not to feare the power or Malice of that
Barbarian, but call me and him together
into one place, and be pleased with silence to
heare mee speake to him; for I perswade my
selfe I shall overcome his fury. Well, the
Emperour was glad to heare this good Father
to say thus much, and the next day hee caused
them both to meete. Gainas hee laies claime
to the Emperours promise;Niceph. l. 12. cap. 45. Chrysostome an|swers
him, that it was not fit for the Empe|rour
rashly to attempt any thing against sacred
places; to whom Gainas answered, that hee

would have a Temple; Iohn Chrysostome reply|ed,
that the Holy Temple was free and open to
any one that would truely serve God in it, and
pray in it: But saith Gainas, I am of another
Sect, and I would have a Temple for my selfe,
and all those that be of my way: And I thinke,
I who have performed such and so many ex|ployts
in the Romans defence, may justly claime
this priviledge: To whom Saint Chrysostome
againe answered, the rewards bestowed upon
you for your Service, hath not onely equalled,
but exceeded your labours; for you are made a
Commander, and have attained to a Consular
dignity, and you ought to consider what once
you were, and what you may bee; in what indi|gency
you lived, and now how you have abun|dance
of all things: how poorely you passed
over Ister, accoutred in meane habit, and now
what Princely Ornaments you have on: thinke
therfore seriously the smalnesse of your labours,
in respect of the greatnesse of your reward; and
be not, oh bee not ungratefull to those who
have bestowed all these upon you: I mean God,
and the good Emperour. With these speeches,
as Theodoret reports, he so overcame for the
present this Gainas, that he was mute and asha|med,
and he stiles this Father,Theodor. l. 5. Eccls. Hst. cap. 3. Ioannes cele|bris,
totius orbis terrarum Doctor; Iohn, the fa|mous
Doctor of the whole world. Further|more,
when as this Ganias did break forth into
cruelty, so that he wasted all places, and frigh|ted
all men, even the Emperour himselfe; and

when they did not know how to send an Em|bassadour
to him, for none durst approch him;
yet as Nicephorus relates it, and Theodoret .
that is, at that time
leaving all others, as struck dead with feare, they
had recourse to this Iohn, the most undaunted
souldier of Christ, and exhorted him to under|take
the Embassage to this Gainas:Theodor. l. 5. c. 33. well hee was
not any whit daunted with his former free dis|course
with him, nor yet at his cruelty; but
willingly takes his journey into Thracia: and
Gainas having intelligence of his comming,
and knowing what a zealous,Zozom. l. 8. c. 4 pious man he was
for Gods service, went a good way to meet him;
and friendly taking him by the hand, kist it, and
made his sonne embrace his holy knees, such
force is there in vertue, that it makes even Lions
become calme; vertue hath that power and
efficacie, that it stops the envious and slande|rous
mouth, or else the eares of the that
shall heare it.
Cardinall Baronius cites one Metaphrastes,Baron. Annal. Tom. 5. p. 113.
who found it in antiquities, that this Chryso|stome
prevailed so farre with Gainas, that hee
made peace with Arcadius the Emperour;
and that hee set some certaine men of note
free from slavery, and specially that hee loosed
Aurelianus the Consul, and Saturninus from
banishment: and this seems to be true, by the
Homily of Saint Chrysostome, which doth begin

in these wordes: Beati Johannis Chrysostomi
Homilia, cum Aurelianus  Saturninus acti es|sent
in exilium;  Gainas egressus esset  civi|tate.
An Homily of that blessed Iohn Chryso|stome.
when Aurelianus and Saturninus was ba|nished,Chrysost. Hom. eo. titulo  de avaritia.
and Gainas departed out of the Citie:
and the same Baronius cites a Sermon made by
Chrysostom, when he returned to Constantinople,
so it begins, Multo tempore silui, I have beene
long silent, at last I am returned to your love.
I have beene abroad pacifying stormes and
tempests, and to bring those into harbour, who
were ready to sink, and so goes on wondrously
divinely: and was not his care great for the
Churches peace, when as hee undertooke that
voyage into Asia, and at Ephesus met Palladius,
Cyrinus and Paulus his associates? so there was
a Councell at Ephesus where assembled seventy
Bishops, about Symoniack Priests and Bishops.
S. Chrysostome,Zozom. l. 8. c. 6 as Zozomen testifies, deposed 13
Bishops, others say but six, this act commends his
integrity. So he returned to Constantinople again,
 preached to his charge, where he was received
with joy, as he expresses in that Homily; how did
the voices pierce the Heavens?Hom de re|gress. suo ad Constant. The whole City
was a Church, and the like: How faithfull was
he in telling Eudoxia the Empresse, that shee
would for her covetousnesse, bee called a second
Iezabel; but now the Empresse being angry,
studied revenge:Paad. in Dia|logo rerum gest. . Chrysost. and so Theophilus comming
to Constantinople, with some other Bishops, of
whom, as Palladius affirmes Acacius of Beraea,

was of greatest note, and indeed Chrysostomes
greatest adversarie; for they sent to Antioh
to enquire of his life when he was young; but
finding nothing worth objecting, they then sent
to Theophilus to Alexandria, and set his malice
on working, who was glad at such an occasion:
but they found accusation against him for that
Sermon which he preached, out of 3 Kings 18
for they alleaged that what he said against Baals
priests was meant of them: and what he spoke
of Iezabel, he meant of Eudoxia: Thus Chryso|stome
was beset with the malice of the Empresse,
and of three other women, whose names were
Martia the wife of Promotus, Castritia the wife
of Saturninus, and Eugraphia: as also by those
some Bishops whom before he had deposed, and
loose priests of Constantinople, and the East and
West Bishops for receiving the Origenists. But
Theophilus workt upon two priests which Chry|sostome
had deposed, the one for murther, the
other for adultery; so Theophilus calls a Synod
against Chrysostome: and brings these and o|thers
to accuse him; Saint Chrysostome thought
them not competent Judges, nor the other suf|ficient
accusers. So amongst all these troubles
he preaches to the people wondrous godlily, but
they desist not,Baron. Tom. 5. 173. but produce 29 Articles to ac|cuse
him of: which Baronius sets downe com|pleatly:
so they never left until they procured his
banishment: so they gain'd upon the Emperour
to banish him, and so not having heard his ac|cusation,
hee is forced to Heiron: but upon an

Earthquake that fell, hee was recall'd; but staid
not long: for a few moneths after, Hee was by
their malice banished to a little Towne of Ar|menia,
call'd Ccusus; from thence to a place
that lay upon the utmost confines of the Roman
Empire: exposed to the cruelty of the Barba|rians,
but God prevented: for at Comana He did
quietly and peaceably commend his soule to
God, and his body was inerred hard by Basilis|cus,
the famous Martyr: many Bishops suffered
for his sake: and few of his adversaries escaped
unpunished. The Bishops of Europe hated the
proceedings. The Bishops of the West would not
communicate with those of the East, untill they
had set and enrold his name in the Table of the
most famous constant Bishops: and after this his
later Writings were brought to Constantinople,
and there by a company of pious and devout
Christians were reserved: and so after a long
and tedious troublesome life, this famous Chry|sostome
departed.

Sentences out of Saint Chrysostome.

Of Continencie and Chastitie.
As a great showre of raine falling upon the
fire doth streight extinguish it's force;Ioh. Chrysost. Ser. de Ioseph. p. 42. so the
Word of God in the soule by meditation, puts
out all the fire of lustfull concupiscence.


Of Riches.
They are unthankfull Fugitives, and destroy
them that love them most; as a boat, if over|ladn

it sinkes,Chrysost. ser. de Avaritia. p. 46. but being justly ballasted sailes
prosperously: so when men stirre to heape up
too much wealth they drown themselves in per|dition:
Doe not hord up more therefore then
is usefull, for feare thou losest what is necessary,
be rich in necessaries, not in superfluities.


Of covetous thoughts.
If thou wouldest not feare a storm in a calme,
or sicknesse in health, nor beggery in wealth; do
as the dresser of Vines, cut off the superfluous
branches, that the tree may bring fruit, and not
leaves onely: so cut off those insatiable thoughts
of wealth: and thou hast enough.


Of brotherly love.
A bulwark of Adamant is not more impreg|nable
than the love of Brethren:Chrys. Homil. e pace,  de recipiend. Se|veriano. p. 48. as a City com|pacted
and united is fortified against all assaults;
so Brethrens hearts knit up in love are uncon|querable.
Twas love that brought the Sonne of
God from Heaven, to reconcile all things to
himselfe.


Against Covetousnesse.
A covetous man is as bad as the plague,Chrys. Epist. ad Hebraeos c. 9. Hom. 15. for as
it infects the aire, the house, the body, then the
spirits; now it makes men to be inflamed, now
they are distracted, and can take no rest: so is it

with the covetous. For there cannot be a worse
infection in a Common-wealth than covetous|nesse:
nay, they are worse than Whores, for as
the Prophet says of them, They open to all passen|gers:
so doth the covetous oppresse father, mo|ther,
brother, sister, servant, or friend. What?
he stands not in awe of God, nor his sacred
Word, but laughs and derides his threats.


Of Faith.
Solid Faith is like a mighty Rocke;Chrys. in Ep. ad Tim. 1. c. 6. Hom. 18. which
though the winds, and waves, and weather doe
all beat against it to overthrow, yet it stands un|shaken.
So true faith grounded on that great
Rock Christ holds out in all temptations and
spirituall combats.
Man discerneth anothers fault easily,Chrys. l. 3. de . but his
owne very hardly, because in anothers case his
heart is quiet, in his owne troubled, and a trou|bled
heart cannot consider what is good.
Contemne riches,Chrys. super Ep. ad Hebraeos serm. 25. and thou shalt be rich, con|temne
glory, and thou shalt be glorious: con|temne
thy enemies, and thou shalt overcome
them: contemne slothflnesse, and thou shalt
enjoy rest and quietnesse.
Discourse and sudden speech declare a mans
inward affection,Chrys. . 3. de Vest. for a lascivious man craftily
conceals his vice, is discovered by his filthy
speech. For the conscience cannot be so dissem|bled,
but that the wantonesse of the mind may

be discerned in the countenance, and the secrets
of the heart are discovered by the motions and
gestures of the bodie.
Spend an hundred yeeres in delights,Chrys. de repa|ratione lapsi. and an|other
hundred, nay, ten hundred: what are all
they to eternitie? Is not all the time of this life
wherein wee enjoy delights and pleasures, but
like one Nights Dreame in comparison of
eternity?
The Devils first assault is violent:Chrys. super Mat. 4. but if he be
then valiantly resisted, his second temptations
will be weaker, and being once foyled, hee
proves himselfe a coward.
If it were possible to be revenged on the rich,Chrys. super Ep. ad Heb. serm. 2.
you should see all the prisons filled with them,
but amongst other evill qualities belonging to
riches, this is one, that they deliver and protect
offenders from punishment.
If thou separate art and exercise,Chrys. in polic. lib. 6. exercise
without art is more profitable, than art without
exercise. For art is unfruitfull without practice,
and practice is rash without art.
Saint Chrysostome saith, that Iohn Baptist
spake more when his head was off, than when it
was on: For (saith he) he then spake of Christ but
with one tongue: but being dead, all that heard
him speak of Christ, spake by him.


Of prayse.
When God is praysed, and when thanks be
given unto him of men, then the more plenti|full

blessings are given of him, even for their
sakes by whom hee is blessed: for hee that pray|seth
God, maketh him a debtor of a greater
blessing.
When Eudoxia the Empresse, who was wife
of Arcadius, had sent Messengers unto Saint
Chrysostome, with many threats and terrours,
how she would molest and vex him, if he did not
condiscend unto her desires: The messengers
failing of their purpose, when they returned,
told her, saying, In vaine doe you goe about to
terrifie or fright this man,Simeon Meta|phras. in vit S. Chrysost. for he feareth nought
bnt sinne.
Saint Chrysostome reports, that it must bee
our hand, that must bring us to Heaven, and
not our tongue only.
Hee calls the life of man a Faire or Market,
where some are seeking for gaine and profit; o|thers
for pleasure and delight: others for prayer
and devotion: and the last of these are those
that walke as children of light.
Saint Chrysostome calls Saint Paul the tongue
and Teacher of the whole World, who lived like
an Angell on earth; and now enjoyes a crowne
in Heaven.
Saint Chrysostome gives man the reason why
the Angels did not bring the tydings of our Sa|viours
birth first to Kings and Princes, or other
great men, aswell as to the poore Shepherds:
And this is it, because, saith hee, great mens
eares were so stopped with cares and honours,
that they have no pleasure to heare it; or

would not take so much pains themselves: but
sent their servants.
His Works are here registred, He departed in
the thiriteenth of Arcadius and Honorius, Hee
was made Bishop in the fourth of Arcadius, and
received Priesthood in the eleventh of Valenti|nian
the younger, and in the eighth of Theodo|sius
the elder.



His Works as Bellarmine doth reckon them
whom I follow, are contained in five Tomes
printed at Venice 1575.

Tome 1.
1 Homilies on Gene|sis,
in number 67.
2 On the Psalmes, 26.
3 On sundry places of
the Old Testament, in
number 52.
4 Whereof five out of
Esay.


Tome 2.
1 Homilies on Mat|thew,
in number 89
2 More on the same.
54.
3 On sundry places of
Saint Matthew, 26.
4 Homilies on Saint
Mark, 14.
5 Homilies on sundry
places of Saint Luke.


Tome 3.
1 Homilies on Saint
John, 87

2 More or some places
of Saint John 6.
3 Homilies on the
Acts, 51.
4 Sermons for Feast
days, 32.
5 On severall places of
Saint Paul, and many
things in commendati|on
of him.


Tome 4.
Commentaries, or Ho|milies
on all Saint
Pauls Epistles.


Tome 5.
1 Homilies to the An|tiochians,
80.
2 Dialogues of the
Priesthood, 6.
3 Of compunction of
heart, 2.
4 Of Gods providence
6 books.
5 Of praying to God,
two books.
6 Against the dis|praysers
of a Mona|stick
life, three books.
7 Against the Gen|tiles,
one book.
8 12 Sermons of Pe|nitence.
9 Against Jewes and
Heretickes, 15 Ser|mons.
10 Against Concubi|nists,
two Sermons.
11 Of divers arguments
48 Tracts.
12 To Innocentius the
Pope, two books.
13 To Cyriacus, one
booke.
14 To Bishops and
Priests in prison, one
book.
15 To Theodorus be|ing
falne, two books.
16 To Eutropius, one
book.
17 To Olympia a fa|mous
Matron, 1 book.
18 St. Chrysostomes
Lyturgie.

I have not followed the Edition of Paris, those
who would fully bee satisfied, they may have
their choice either of the Venetian, Parisian, or
Eaton Edition.




An. Christi 420. Sanctus Aurelius Augusti|nus.

S. AVGVSTINVS.

_IN describing this Fathers life, I fol|low
not any uncertaine Relations,
but I follow the method of Possi|donius,
who in writing the passa|ges
of his life saith, such things, quae in eodem
vidi ab eodemque audivi, which I saw in him,
and heard from him, two sure witnesses, the
eyes and the eares; and therefore may for succe|ding
times be easily admitted for truth.
This Augustine therefore was an African by
birth, borne in the City of Thagasta, of pi|ous
and Christian Parents,Vide in Possid. in vita Au|gust. bred and nourished
by their care and diligence, and singularly well
learned and approved for skill in the Liberall

Arts, for he taught Grammar in his owne City,
and Rhetorique in the head City Carthage; and
after going over sea, he came to Rome, and so
to Millaine, where hee was appoynted to in|struct
the Emperour Valentinian, being the
fifth of that name, and the Bishop, at the
same time of that City being that worthy Pre|late
Saint Ambrose, whose sermons to the peo|ple,
and publicke disputations this Augustine
did attentively heare and like of. He was living
in Carthage, tainted with the Pestilent Heresie
of the Manichees, but by the providence of God
and the wisedome of Saint Ambrose, his heart
was enlightned,  so he was brought safe from
that Rocke, was confirmed in the faith, and a
little before Easter, did receive the Doctrine
of the Catholick Church, and also Baptisme,
by the ever honoured Father Saint Ambrose, and
being in this state so fairely recovered, he set his
heart wholly and intirely to seeke the Lord, and
to leave the world, not now regarding honors,
wealth, or riches, but sought diligently heaven|ly
treasures, striving with might and maine to
be one of that little flocke of whom it is said,
Feare not little flocke,Luk. 12. it is your Fathers good
will to give you the Kingdome: Hee was about
thirty yeares old when hee thus beganne, ha|ving
onely his mother Monica alive, who did
mainly rejoyce to see him so intirely converted:
His Father called Patricius was dead before, and
now also he left his Scholars whom hee taught
Rhetorique, and told them they should pro|vide

themselves another Master, for hee would
onely serve the Lord.
It pleased him, being baptized, to goe and
live in Affricke with other faithfull Christians;
where, when hee was come, how speedily did
he performe what he had resolved? for leaving
all secular affaires, how constant was hee in
Watching, Fastings, and Prayers? and those
graces which it did please God to give him,
how did he imploy them? so that by his Ser|mons
and Bookes he taught those that were ab|sent,
as well as those that were present; for hee
converted one to the faith in a short time.
At the same time one Valerius was Bishop of
Hippo, and having a great care to provide able
men to teach the people, he, with the peoples
great desire, ordained this Augustine a Priest,
and being entred into that holy function, hee
did strive to grace the Gospell by an holy Life.
This Valerius ordained him being banish|ed.
This Augustine did powerfully preach the
Word, and had great conflicts with Fortunatus
a defender of the Manichees; who was appoin|ted
to meete Augustine in a publicke place,
and to dispute with him, which with a great
deale of feare he did undertake, but was quite
foiled, and so by Gods blessing and the consent
of all the learned men, the Manichees fell, and
sincere Religion was maintained in the City of
Hippo.
He also preached and writ with singular care
and dextrous learning against the Affrican

Heretiques, as the Donatists, Manichees, and
Pelagians: so that by his writings the Affrican
Churches did recover the ancient Truth: and
he was so able and powerfull in the Scriptures,
that the very Heretiques were forced to con|fesse
him a Divine Man. He was appoynted by
the Bishop to dispute of Faith, which hee did,
with the approbation of all: but this good old
man Valerius, finding him so rarely qualified,
sent to the Primate of Carthage, and certified
him that he was so old and weake, and the
charge was so great to manage, and this Augu|stine
was so learned and pious a man, that hee
intreated him to bee ordained Bishop of that
City: so that Megalius Bishop of Calama, and
Primate of Numidia, comming to visit the
Church of Hippo with other Bishops, this Va|lerius
did obtaine of his hands what he desired,
with the generall rejoycing of all the Clergy;
though Saint Augustine did mainly at first refuse
it, and alledged it was not fitting, neither was
it the custome of the Church to ordaine any
to be Bishop of a City, before the other was
dead: but it was imposed upon him: and so be|ing
ordained, hee doubled his vigilance, and
not onely in that City, but in every place hee
taught and writ against the Donatists. There
was a sect of perverse and desperate people, who
under the colour of great continence were cal|led
Circumcellians, who being not able to
withstand the Writings, nor Preachings, nor
Disputations of this Augustine, they did by

might and violence, and force of Armes strive
to stop Saint Augustines proceedings but all
their Actions were in vaine: for Gd did still
prosper and blesse the labours of this Augustine;
for he ordaind Orthodox Priests, men approved
and well knowne to him for Life and Learning,
and did give them promotion in the Church;
so that the sincere Doctrine of Faith, Hope,
and Charity was not onely taught in the Affri|can
Churches, but also in other Transmarin
Regions; Books being printed and sent abroad,
which made these Heretiques rage; insomuch,
that they intended to have killed this Saint Au|gustine,
had hee not by the great providence
of God escaped, by missing that way in his Vi|sitations
which they had beset: but such was
their fury and power, that they neither spared
Clergy men nor Lay men: but there was a mee|ting
at Carthage appoynted, and one Crispinus
was the Donatists Champion; against whom
Saint Augustine opposed himselfe, who did
by force of arguments convince this Crispinus;
and so by the Proconsuls authority hee was ad|judged
as Hereticall, and a fine imposed upon
him: and further it was ordered, that all the
Donatists should be accounted Heretiques and
fined; but by the Catholike Bishops perswasi|ons,
with the clemency of the Proconsull their
fine was remitted, and peace restored happily
to the Church, under the Reigne of that glori|ous
Emperour Honorius, though there were
some that gave out, that the Donatists were

unjustly condemned by the Bishops at the mee|ting
at Carthage, because they had not (as these
favourers pretended) free liberty to speak their
mindes: Especially one Emeritus maintained
this; but not long after this, Saint Augustine
going to the City of Caesarea in Mauritania, be|ing
sent for by other Bishops by Letters, to de|termine
some necessary affaires of the Church,
this Emeritus being then a Donatist, and Bishop
of the said place, Saint Augustine told him that
he had so given it out, and wished him now be|fore
all those Bishops and all the people, if
he could, to defend his assertions, but he would
not, nor could not performe it, onely said, that
what he should say: would bee by the Notaries
Registred at Carthage: what a poore evasion
was this? for if it had beene, truth it was the
onely way to preserve it; if it was a lye, as in|deede
it was, it would for ever bee his dis|grace.
Possidonius reports an admirable passage of
Saint Augustine; it so fell out, that preaching
against the Manichees, that there was one Fir|mus
by name, a Merchant by profession, who
was stiffe for that side, and had given and spent
amongst them much monies, hearing Saint
Augustine preach, was touched in heart, and
presently came to this Father (other men being
then with him) and did ingenuously confesse
that he was infected a long time with that He|resie:
but by the blessing of God, hee was fully
resolved now to forsake it, and with teares on

his knees, he desired Saint Augustine, and the
other Catholicke Priests, to pray to God to
pardon him, and to give him grace to persist
in the true Faith, which was performed, and
he reduced from Heresie, and leaving his for|mer
course of life, and living with the faithfull
obediently, at last proved an eminent Preacher
of the Orthodoxe Christians, and not onely sa|ved
his owne soule, but many others: See (saith
Possidonius) the wonderfull goodnesse of God,Possid. in vit. August. that
calls whom he will; whom he will, where he will,
and how he will to salvation. God, as he is Al|mighty,
so may he worke in all creatures and
things after his owne Minde and Will: for
there is nothing that God cannot bring to passe,
and that without labour and travaile. It was
Saint Augustine by the preaching of the Word,
which caused the Merchant to forsake all, and
cleave to the Truth; but it was chiefely the
power of God which had that efficacy in that
Word; that by one knocke at the doore of the
heart of this man, that it should open and re|ceive
the seale and covenant of Grace, which he
did without any prorogation or delay, or time
to consider of it: for in these cases delayes are
dangerous, for the devill, the world, or the
Flesh may cast a baite in our way, and so hinder
us. Therefore let all men in this be truely per|swaded,An Exhorta|tion.
that God is the Moderator and Gover|nour
of all things both in heaven and in earth;
and that all things are done by his owne power,
and appoyntment: and that he it is, who most

clearely beholdeth every man, both what hee
doth, and what he admitteth in himselfe, with
what minde and godlinesse he doth love and fa|vour
Religion; and that hee hath also a regard
both of godly and wicked men.
So likewise one Foelix being one whom the
Manichees called Electos, came to Hippo, and
thought to have spread his Heresie there, but
Saint Augustine by publicke Disputation so so|lidly
convinced him, that he likewise acknow|ledged
his error, and was joyned to the Church.
This Augustine was termed Haereticorum mal|leus,
the Hammer against Heretiques: How
judiciously did hee overcome those two great
Arrians, Pascentius, and Maximinus, the one
being full of wealth and authority at Court, the
other a great Bishop? Pascentius, who was great
in Riches, disturbed many poorer Christians,
and boasted in it, that none could object any
thing justly against the Arrians. St. Augustine
hearing this, with other Priests went to him,
and desired to have some private conference
with him, before they should publickly dis|pute
it; this Pascentius admitted, but hee was
quite overthrowne, and had no warrant for
his poynts; but afterwards bragged it, how he
had confuted this Augustine: whereupon St.
Augustine with speed sent in writing, many
great men being witnesses, the grounds of
Faith confirmed by the Scriptures to him,
which he never did replie against: so also dealt
he with Maximinus the Arian Bishop, who





had belyed him in the like manner.
The Pelagians likewise politique and subtle
Sophisters who did seduce many, and did great
mischiefe to the Church, how did hee the space
of tenne yeares convince and overthrow? that
afterwards it was determined by Innocent
of Rome, and Zozimus, that their poynts
should be anathematized, and sent Letters to
the Churches of Affrick to condemne them as
Heretiques, and that pious Emperour Hono|rius
confirmed their Religious proceedings
and adjudged them Heretiques: so many of
them returned to the bosome of the Church a|gaine,
and dyed in the Faith: Alwayes great
was the care of St. Augustine for the good of
Religion, not onely in Hippo, but in other
parts of Affricke, and not onely against Here|tiques,
but also in winning Pagans to imbrace
the Truth. He was just in all his Counsels, espe|cially
hee would determine according to the
Truth: Hee was not onely learned, but also
ready to instruct, and to take off differences: he
would not spare likewise to reprove wisely and
seasonably the sinners, admonishing them to
obedience, and Christian Devotion: so that as
Possidonius reports it, He may worthily be called
a Watchman to the house of Israel, to the Church
of God, preaching the Word in season, out of sea|son,
exhorting, instructing, rebuking, with
all long suffering, Hee was excellent for deci|ding
temporall causes, and very circumspect
to relieve the party wronged: how divinely

did he write to Macedonius, a Priest of Affricke
and granted his desire. As hee had liberty, hee
would be present at the meetings of the holy
Priests, celebrated through diverse Provinces,
not seeking those things which were his; but
doing all for the glory of God; doing as Saint
Paul writes to the Corinthians, not seeking yours,
but you: taking care, that the faith of the holy
Catholicke Church should remaine unviolated,
and that unworthy men should be punished: in
ordaining Priests, he would alwayes follow the
custome of the Church, and the generall con|sent
of Orthodox Christians: For his apparell,
it was neither too sumptuous nor sordid, kee|ping
a faire mediocrity; saying, that many were
puft up with pride by the riches of their Gar|ments,
and so did fall into sinne: Hee kept a
spare dyet, and frugall, being Broth and Roots;
sometimes for his guests he would have flesh, or
for the weake and sicke folkes: He alwaies kept
Wine, alledging that of the Apostle, Every
creature of God is good, and not to bee rejected,
being sanctified by the word and prayer:Lib. 10. cap.  And as
hee speaks in his Confessions, Hee did not so
much feare the uncleannesse of his meate, as the
uncleannesse of his desires: and useth many fine
examples out of Gods Word to prove it: his
Utensils in which his meat was brought to
table were either earthen or wood, or Marble:
His Table was rather for disputation and dis|curse,
than for any rich Banquetting, or drin|king,
and it had this Distich ingraven on it.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi.
That is,
Who shal their absent friends with words disgrace,
Are guests unworthy of this roome, or place.
And therefore he would tell them that were
faulty this way, that either those Verses were to
be blotted out, or else he to depart. Hee was e|ver
mindfull of the poore, and would, either
out of the revenues of the Church, or out of the
offerings of the faithfull, distribute to their ne|cessities:
His House was a Church: Hee never
bought land. Possidonius speakes, that there
was an Honourable man of Hippo, living at
Carthage, would give his possession to the
Church, an act used in those Primitive times,
(now it is out of use) and caused it to bee past
under Seale, and sent it to Saint Augustine:
but a few yeares after hee changed his minde,
and sent his Son to desire the deeds to be rever|sed,
and in liew of it his Father had sent to
the poore an hundred shillings. St. Augustine
was sorry that the man should so suddenly bee
weary of well-doing; but withall restored to
his Son the Acts, and withall did rebuke him
sharply, and bad him take heed that God did
not punish his proceedings. He did not regard
wealth, but counted it combersome, and there|fore
did as Mary did, chuse the better part: Up|on
a time he wanted monies to release some pri|soners

and Captives, and caused the holy Ves|sells
to be melted and given for their freedome.
Saint Ambrose saith, that in such cases it may
bee permitted: He alwayes kept Divines in his
house, whom he fed and cloathed: hee was
wondrous severe against Oathes, so that hee
abated their portion and allowance that did
commit it. He never did admit women in his
house, no not those of his kindred; Hee never
entertained discourse alone with any, but had
some still with him. In his Visitations hee
kept the rule of the Apostle, he relieved the
Fatherlesse and Widowes in their distresse:Ian. 1. ult if they
entreated him to pray to God for them, and lay
his hands on them, hee would presently doe it: He
praised one, who when hee was sicke, said
to those that stood about, I have not lived so,
that I am ashamed to live with you; nor doe I
feare to dye, having so good a Lord to goe to.
This Father before his death recounted strictly
all his Books, and those which he writ when he
was not experienced in the affaires of the
Church, which would not agree with the
Church, hee himselfe corrected and reproved:
and hee writ two Volumes which carry this
Title, De recensione Librorum, which are his
Bookes of Retractations: hee complained that
some of his Books were taken away before they
were well mended; some he left imperfect, being
prevented by death: Hee writ a Booke called
the Speculum, in which any one that reades it
may find either his obedience, or disobedience

towards God.S. Patrick a|bout this time began to convert the Irish to Chri|stianitie. Hee lived in the time of that bar|barous
invasion of the Goths and Vandals out of
Spain, into Africk and Mauritania, in which
were Cities  Churches, Monasteries laid wast,
Virgins defloured, Matrons abused, the Altars
puld down, the Priests slain, the faithfull hiding
themselves in Holes, Dennes, and Caves: Hee
saw almost innumerable Churches destroyed,
onely three escapt their out-rage, Carthage,
Hippo, and Cirtis; yet after his death Hippo was
burn'd; it was besieged fourteen moneths. Saint
Augustine and all the faithfull did pray God ei|ther
to free the Citie, or give them patience to
endure, or to take him out of this life, which
last came to passe, for in the third month of the
siege he fell sicke of a Fever and died, hee healed
one possessed of a Devill,The gift of God given to man. and by prayer dispos|sest
him. Hee healed one readie to die by laying
his hands upon him, whereupon they said, if
any was sicke, Vade ad AUGUSTINUM,
That is, Goe to Saint AUGUSTINE, and
you will recover: hee writ an Epistle to Hono|ratus
his fellow Bishop, who desired to know
whether they might not fly in those dangerous
times or not? It is extant among those 180
Epistles, wherein he declares largely his mind in
this point. Hee lived to the age of 76 yeeres,
hee continued Priest and Bishop almost forty
yeeres, hee dyed wondrous penitent, and had
Davids penitentiall psalmes before him which
hee constantly read, and would weepe: hee suf|fered
none to come to him, but at such times as

the Physitians came with refections for him:
ten days before his death and all that while hee
prayed fervently: at the time of his death his
sight and hearing were good, and divers priests
being present, and praying with him, he depar|ted
this life in fulnesse of days, and gave order
to them for his buriall, and so offered himself as
a sacrifice to God: hee made no Will at all, but
gave order that his Library and all his Bookes
should be safely reserved to posterity for the
Church: he left an able Clergy after him: his
Epitaph was this Distich.
Vivere post obitum vatem vis nosse Viator,
Quod legis ecce loquor, vox tua nempe mea est.
This doth sufficiently shew what a jewell this
Saint Augustine was in the Church of God.

Sentences out of Saint Augustine.
What availes it to keepe the flesh entire,Aug. in Ps. 26 if the
minde be corrupted? holy marriage is more ex|cellent
then proud virginity:Aug sup. Ps. 17. a solid hope, a firm
faith, a sincere Charity is the virginity of the
mind.

Of servitude.
Doest thou desire to have thy flesh serve the
spirit?Aug. sup.  let thy spirit then serve God: that must
be ruled, that the other may rule.



Of Prayer.
If it be pure and holy,Aug. sup. Ps. 83. it pierceth the Heaven,
it returnes not empty: thy prayer is thy speech
to God: when thou readest, God speaks to thee;
when thou prayest, thou speakest to God.


More of Prayer.
It is the shelter and safeguard to the soule,Aug. in Serm.
a sacrifice to God, the scourge of the Devill.


Of Death.
There is nothing doth more abate sin then a
frequent meditation of death:Aug. I. exhort. Aug. de Doct. hee cannot dy ill
who lived well; nor seldome doth hee die well
that liv'd ill.


Of Riches.
If men want wealth,Aug. Ep. 140. it is not to bee unjustly
gotten; if they have wealth, they are by Good
works to lay it up in heaven: a Christian must
not be proud in their aboundance, nor despaire
for their absence.


Non verborum flores, sedsequere Mores.
If thou wilt be perfectly purged from all vices,Aug. in serm. de Amore.
strive to kindle in thy self the fire of divine love.

For if thou hast perfectly tasted the sweet|nesse
of divine love, thou wilt not care for any
temporall sweetnesse.
The reasonable soule made to the likenesse of
God may find in this world much careful distra|ction,Aug. de dct. Christ.
but no ful satisfaction; for it being capable
of God, cannot bee satisfied with any thing but
God.
The covetous man like Hel devoures all,Aug. in p. ad Comitem. and
desires that there were no man else in the world,
that he might possesse all the World.
The blessednesse of this life doth consist in the
heavenly wisedome,Aug. in Ep. ad Proum. quietnesse of conscience,
and sublimity of vertue. For not to be without
affliction, but to overcome affliction is blessed|nesse.
Love is as strong as death, for as death kils the
body,Aug. de ivit De, l. 15. so the love of eternal life doth kil al world|ly
desires and affections, for heavenly love grown
to perfection, grows insensible of earthly affecti|on,
and he that will mortify his body must first
mortify his mind.
Hee is a Christian that at home and in his
own house thinks himselfe to be a stranger:Aug. sup. Ps 32. our
countrey is aboue, and there wee shall not bee
strangers.
None can separate Christ from thee,Aug. sup. Lu. unlesse
thou separate thy selfe from Christ.
Our Redeemer was born like a child,Aug. de ve religione. died like
a Lambe, rose from death like a Lion, and ascen|ded
into heaven like an Eagle.
If Adam for one sin was cast out of Paradise,

O Lord, what shall a poore sinner be become
that hath a world of sins?
St. Augustine saith, he that gave his son for his
enemies, surely hee will give his Sonne to his
friends.
Reject not ( Lord) the worke of thine own
hand, but be favourable, and shew mercy upon
me; who hath been a sonne of perdition, and a
child of rebellion.
And though,  Lord, I cannot weare out my
tongue with praying, nor my hands with lifting
up to Heaven for my sins; I may weare out my
eyes with weeping for them: And be thou, 
my God, more gratious to heare, then the De|vill
is ready to be malicious to hinder.


Of Ingratitude.
Saint Augustine calls Ingratitude the Devils
sponge, wherewith he wipes out all the favours
of the Almighty.
Saint Augustine was so great a lover and ad|mirer
of the seven Penitentiall Psalmes, (as wee
call them) those Psalmes that expresse the Pro|phet
Davids sorrow for this grievous sin; that
hee commanded them to be written in a great
letter, and hung about the curtains of his death|bed
within, next unto him: that so hee might
give up the Ghost in the contemplation and
meditation of them.
Saint Augustine speaking of the conversation
of the wicked amongst the godly, used to say,

For my part I am a man, and live among men, how
dare I promise to my selfe, that my house shall be
better than Noahs Arke? for there were in it
both clean beasts and unclean; good and bad.
Saint Augustine saith,  let,Lib. 1. Conf. c. 2.  let the Scrip|tures
be my pure delight! let mee not be decei|ved
in them: neither let me deceive by them.


Of Prayer.
Saint Augustine saith, Lord, give first what
thou requirest, and then require of mee what
thou wilt.
And again, saith Saint Augustine, hee that
prayes well cannot chuse but live well; and pray|ers
is a private expression of the soule to God;
for by prayer Gods eare is tied to the tongue of
man: we speak to God by prayers, and he speaks
to us by preaching.



I have here also set the Catalogue of his
Works, which are many and rare, so that they
may be called a little Library.

Tome I.
1 Retractations, two
books.
2 Confessions thirteen
books.
3 Of Grammar, one
book.

4 Of Logicke, one
book.
5 Of the predicaments,
one book.
6 Principles of Rhe|torick,
one book.
7 Of Musique, sixe
books.
8 Against Academick,
three books.
9 Of order, one book.
10 Of a blessed life, one
book.
11 Soliloquies, two
books.
12 Of a Master, one
book.
13 Of the immortalitie
the soule, one book.
14 Of the quantitie of
the soule, one book.
15 Of Free Will, three
books.
16 Of true Religion,
one book.
17 Of the manners of
the Church.
18 Of the manners of
Monks.
19 Against the Mani|chees,
two books.


Tome 2.
1 Epistles of St. Au|gustine,
with rescrip|tions,
being 222.
2 Epistles to Deo gra|tias,
49.
3 Two to Januarius.
4 To Honoratus, 120
5 To Paulinus, 112.
6 To Boniface, 150.
7 To Dardanus, 57.


Tome 3.
1 Of Christian Do|ctrine,
foure books.
2 Speeches of holy
Scripture, 7 books.
3 Of Faith, one book.
4 An Enchyridion, 1
book.
5 Of the Trinitie, 15
books.
6 Of Genesis, twelve
books.
7 Of the wonderfull
things of the Scrip|ture,
three books.
8 Of a Christian fight,
one book.
9 Of the worke of
Monks, one book.
10 Of the spirit and let|ter,
one book.
11 Of Divination, one
book.
12 Of Ecclesiasticall te|nets,
one book.
13 Of the spirit and
soule, one book.
14 Of faith to Peter,
one book.
15 His looking-glasse,
one book.
16 Questions of the
Trinitie, one book.
17 Of the Patriarchs
blessings, one book.
18 Sentences, one book.


Tome 4.
1 Of Lying, two books
2 Of Faith and Works
one book.
3 Questions, 10 books.
4 Of the consent of the
Evangelists, foure
books.
5 83 Questions, one
book.
6 21 Sentences, one
book.
7 Questions to Sim|plicianus,
two books.
8 To Dulcitius, one
book.
9 Questions, 65.
10 Questions of the
old and new Testa|ment.
11 Of the care for the
dead, one book.
12 Of Catechising the
rude, one book.
13 Of the word incar|nate,
two books.
14 Of the Trinity and
unitie, one book.
15 Of the Essence of the
Divinitie, one book.
16 Of the Faith of In|visibles,
one book.
17 Of the substance of
Love, one book.
18 Of Continence, one
book.
19 Of Patience, 1 book
20 Of the good of Wid|dowhood,
one book.
21 Of true and false re|pentance,
one book.
22 Of wholsome docu|ments,

one booke.
23 Of Friendship, one
booke.
24 Of the Lords Ser|mons
in the Mount,
two bookes.
25 Exposition of the
Epistle to the Ro|mans.
26 Exposition of some
propositions on the
Romans, one booke.
27 Exposition on the
Galatians.
28 Annotations on Iob.


Tome 5.
1 Of the City of God,
22 bookes.
The occasion was by
Romes devastation
under Alaricus King
of the Gothes. 25.


Tome 6.
1 Of Heresies, I Book.
2 Aspeech of 5 Heresies.
A Sermon to the un|learned.
3 Against the Iewes.
4 Of the Church, and a
Synagogue.
6 Of the profit of Faith,
1 book.
7 Against an Epistle
1 b.
8 Of the 2 soules. 1 b.
9 Against Fortunatus
1 b.
10 Against Adiman|tus.
1 b.
11 Against Faustus.
33 b.
12 Of the passages with
Foelix, the Mani|chee
2 b.
13 Against Secundi|nus
1 b.
14 Of the Nature of
God. 1 b.
15 Of Faith against the
Manichees. 1 b.
16 Against an adver|sary
of the Law and
Prophets. 1 b.
17 Against Priscilia|nists,
and Origenists.
1 b.
18 Against the Arians.
1 b.
19 Against Maximi|nus.
1 b.
20 Against Felicianus.
1 b.

21 Against Jovinian.
1 b.
22 Of holy Virginity.
1 b.
23 To Polentius. 2 b.
24 A Tract of Epicures
and Stoikes.
25 Of that saying, I am
that I am, a Tract.


Tome 7.
1 Against Donatus.
1 b.
2 Against Parmenia|nus.
3 b.
3 Against Petilianus.
3 b.
4 Against Cresconius.
4 b.
5 Again Gaudentius.
4 b.
6 Against the Dona|tists.
7 b.
7 Against Petilianus
of Baptisme. 1 b.
8 Of the Churches uni|ty
1 b.
9 Briefe Discourses of
Donatists. 1 b.
10 Of Emeritus passa|ges.
1 b.
11 Against Fulgenti|us.
1 b.
12 Of pardon of sinnes.
3 b.
13 Of Nature and
Grace. 1 b.
14 Of the grace of
Christ, and of origi|nall
sinne. 2 b.
15 Of Marriages. 2 b.
16 Against the Pela|gians.
4 b.
17 Against Julianus.
6 b.
18 Of the soule 4 b.
19 Of Perseverance 1. b.
20 Of Predestination.
1 b.
21 Of Grace. 1 b.
22 Against the Pelagi|ans.
6 b.
23 Against Caelesti|nus.
1 b.
24 Of the Acts of Pe|lagius.
1 b.


Tome 8.
A Tract upon al Davids
Psalmes.


Tome 9.
1 On Saint John 124
bookes.

2 On the first Epistle of
John, ten bookes.
3 On the Apocalyps,
18 bookes.
4 Meditations. 1. love
of God 1. Soliloquies
1. a Mauel 1.
5 Of Christian Disci|pline,
one booke.
6 The sinners looking-glasse.
7 Of the praise of Cha|rity.
8 Of Pastors.
9 A Psalter to his Mo|ther.
10 Of the Tree of good
and evill.
11 Of the profit of Fa|sting.
12 Of the fight of the
soule.
13 Of the destruction
of the City.


Tome 10.
1 Of our Lords Words,
Hom. 64.
2 Of the Apostles
Words, 35.
3 Fifty Homilies, 1.
4 Of Time, Homilies
256.
5 Of Saints. 51.
6 To his Brethren in
the Wildernesse, 76.
7 Of Clergy mens lives,
two bookes.
8 Sermons newly prin|ted,
128.

These are the fruits of this Fathers labour,
he who desires to know which are truely Saint
Augustines, and which are suspected for adulte|rine,
let him read Cardinall Bellarmines obser|vations
de scriptoribus Ecclesiastiis, in the life of
Saint Augustine; but these doe shew what a
painfull labourer he was in the Vineyard of the
Lord. He dyed in the yeare of Grace, 430.




An. Christi 432. Sanctus Cyrillus Alexand.

S CIRILLVS ALEXAND

_THis eminent Father of the Church,
was Bishop of Alexandria, a Gre|cian
by Nation, famous for his acti|ons
done in the Church. As for his
parentage, no doubt, but that also was in some
sort suitable to his breeding;Socrat. hist. l. 7. c. 7. for Theophilus the
late Archbishop of Alexandria was his owne
Uncle; whom also hee succeeded in that See:
but not without opposition. Some stood for
one Timothy, then Archdeacon of Alexandria,
others came in for this Cyrill,Niceph. hist. Graecolat. c. . l. 14. partly because of
his neere alliance to this former Archbishop,
who they esteemed highly, and reverenced for
his sanctitie and holinesse of life: but chiefly

because this Cyrill was a generall Scholer, and
one well qualified with all temporall vertues:
much adoe there was on both sides, yet at three
days end, this good man obtained it, and was
conducted to the Episcopall Chaire with grea|ter
state than ever any Bishop that was at Alex|andria:
He was vir doctus,  sanctus: a lear|ned
and a holy man of life:Trithem de Eccles. Scrip. by Pope Celestines
injunction, he ate President in the Councell at
Ephesus, amongst two hundred Bishops, in
which with a great deal of learning and judge|ment,
hee absolutely confuted and condemned
those two arch disturbers of the Churches
peace Nestorius and Pelagius: hee was admira|bly
experienced in the holy Scriptures, he flou|rished
chiefly under the raigne of Theodosius the
yonger ~ one gives him this faire Encomium.Raphael Vola|aeranus
lib. 13.
Nestorii omnia occulta venena refellit: he disco|vered
all the secret poison of Nestorius. There
are some who have related that hee was a Monk
a Carmelite (as Tritenhem) but Baronius the
Cardinall doth absolutely hold that to be a ridi|culous
opinion: for these are Baronins his own
words, Facessat igitur ejusmodi fabella de Moa|chismo
Cyrilli in Carmelo, that fained fable of
Cyrillus being a Monke of Mount Carmel, falls
to the ground: and indeed it is strange that St.
Hierome, Palladius, Euagrius, Cassianus, Theo|doret,Pssevinus in Apparao sacro pag 402. with others, that often mention the
Monks that liv'd in Palaestine at that time,  yet
not so much as once remember this great Father
of the Church, and indeed I doe much wonder

that the Great Cardinall Baronius would con|demne
that Tenet, if there had been but proba|bilitie
of truth in it, it making for their cause.
But to proceed, this famous Cyrill was so ad|mired
for his singular piety, eloquence, and wit
(that Gennadius reports) that the Grecian Bishops
got some of his Homilies by heart, and so reci|ted
them to the people with wonderfull delight
and approbation; and truly besides many other
things which are reported of him to his praise,
let this also be one, that Iohn the third King of
Sweden gives him; when as hee was sent into
England by his brother Ericus, then King;
When the Commentaries of Saint Cyrill
upon the holy Gospell of Saint Iohn were
delivered to his hands, and hee had read them,
hee plainly and ingenuously confest, that many
new Writers had much swayed him, but now,
sordescere coeperunt,  postea illos, ut novos de|testabatur,
that all were farre short: nay, in re|spect
of this one man, hee detested all new Wri|ters:
and to speak truth, as I do verily think, one
mayne reason why Factions and Schismes have
such great growth of late, is, because most of our
younger wits, and hottest Preachers doe not tie
themselves to the reading of the Primitive Fa|thers,
but slightly content themselves  others,
with conversing onely with some few Geneva
Writers of late; or think to carry it away with
the strength of their owne braine: by which
meanes, many of them know but the shell of
Theologie: when as (if my advise might take

place) I would have them enquire of the Anci|ents.
Moses doth invite them to the same:
for saith he, Aske thy Father, and hee will shew
thee; aske the Elders and they will tell thee,
Deut. 32. 7. They, they (I say) are onely the
ancient Bulwarks of Truth; they onely, and
chiefely, have maintained Gods truth against
Heretiques, and they are the pure Wells out
of whom our Divines might exhaust wholsome
Waters: Give thy selfe to reading was Saint
Pauls Councell to Timothy, and it is not unfit
to be practised of many young Zelots in our
Church: but to returne to our occasion.
Many and admirable are the writings of this
Father: He writ to Theodosius to prove the dan|gerousnesse
of Nestorius Heresie. Photius stiles
this Cyril thus, when amongst many other Fa|thers,
as he stiles Athanasius strenuus Praeful
Infractus Ambrosius,Phot. Bibl. pag. 890. Decus Ecclesiae Basilius, 
Verborum flumen Nyssenus,  fortis Athleta Cy|rillus.
Athanasius, that stout Prelate, Irrefra|gable
Saint Ambrose, Saint Basil, the grace of
the Church: Gregory Nyssen, a River for copi|ousnesse
of words, and that valiant Champion
of the Church St. Cyril: nay, hee is stiled Beatus
Cyrillus, twice for condemning the Nestorian
Heresie.Phot. Bibl. pag. 818. He is also called Perstrenuus Cyrillus,
 multis modis pietatem corroborans Cyrillus;
that is, Cyrill, who so many wayes confirmed,
and strengthened piety, upheld religion, esta|blished
Councells, confounded Heretiques, de|fended
the Orthodox Christians: And Eulogius

his Scholar praised him, calling him, Doctum
 pium minime vacillantem Cyrillum, Lear|ned,
godly, and not fearefully hearted in the
cause of truth: And Photius hath registred his
praise,Phot. Bibl. pag. 311. Leguntur Cyrilli Thesauri: refertus est
liber,  pugnat valide, ac varie cum Arii  Eu|nomii
furibunda rabie, etenim  Logicis argu|mentis
sapienter illorum destruit amentiam, qui|bus
dum sacrae scripturae adnectit adtexitque te|stimonia,
qum sit doctrina illa futilis omni ex
parte divulgat: adhibet idem quoque nuda Sacrae
scripturae testimonia, ut qu se fastuosi vertant,
obsepti undi atque conclusi non habeant. Est au|tem
inter omnia ejus Scripta liber hic maxim
perspicuus, ijs potissimum, qui Logicorum argu|mentorum
sensum capere possunt, which is in En|glish
thus much, that Booke of Saint Cyrils,
which is stiled his Thesauri, is plentifull and
abounding with wit and learning, and fights
valiantly and diversly with the fury and madnes
of Arius and Eunomius: for he doth by force of
Logicall arguments wisely verthrow and de|stroy
their folly, to which, while hee joynes
and annexeth the testimony of the holy Scrip|tures,
he doth divulge to the eye of the world
how empty and weake their Doctrines are; and
by using those testimonies of the Scriptures, he
doth so hedge those Heretiques in, that they
know not which way to turne or winde them|selves
off, or out from shame. This booke of
his is so perspicuous for learning, that it is
highly esteemed of all pious and judicious

scholars; and more specially of those who can
apprehend the sence and vigour of Logicke:
and his scholar Eulogius stiles him thus againe,
accuratissimus autem Doctor Cyrillus, singuls
Haereticorum pariter execratus est sententias, 
duas in Christo naturas concurrentes indivisas
 inconfusas planissim demonstrat. And again,
Cyrillus rerum divinarum sciens: AndPhot. bib. pa. 838. Ardens
ille eritatis studiosus Cyrillus, and Sapiens Cy|rillus,
Cyrillus homo divinus: in English, that
most accurate and smart doctor Saint Cyril, ha|ted
the positions of all Hereticks, and did most
plainly demonstrate the two Natures in Christ,
undivided and unconfused Cyril had true know|ledge
of holy things; he was studious and zea|lous
for the truth, and full of wisedom, a
man plainly divine: nay it plainly appeares,
that his authority was great, to whom Coun|cells
yielded to for his learning, for it is said of
him, Sic Concilium  Cyrillus, so the Coun|cell
holds, and so doth Cyrillus too.
Cardinall Bellarmine calls him, Virum San|ctissimum,
Doctissimum, ac praesertim circa myste|rium
Dominicae incarnationis a Deo doctum, Ne|storium
Haeresiarcham primum scriptis, deinde e|tiam
authoritate damnavit; a most holy man,
and learned, and especially hee was taught and
instructed of God in the mystery of Christs In|carnation:
He condemned (as is said before) Ne|storius
the Heretique, who was then Bishop of
Constantinople, first by his famous Writings,
then by his authority.

This Nestorius Doctrine was: That the
Blessed Virgin Mary was the Mosher of
Christ, c.
Christ as he was Man, but not as God, thereby
most impiously inverting that great Mystery of
the Incarnation of the Sonne of God; this be|ing
taught at Constantinople by Nestorius and
his Disciples was a great trouble to the people;
and so much the more,Niceph. Hist. li. 14. cap. 33. because he had ingratia|ted
himselfe into the Emperours favour, so that
no meanes was left for redresse, but the calling
of a Councel; yet in the interim, this good man
tooke pen and inke, and wrote a briefe, and
modest Epistle to Nestorius, wherein hee ad|monished
him of the peoples discontents, and
what great danger was in all likely-hood to fall
upon the Church, through his still obstinacy
and indiscretion, but all in vaine: the answer
return'd, was rather reprehensory than other|wise.
The Bishop in tendernesse of his dignity,
and as he was Caesars friend, writes againe, and
againe; but still answered with the same successe
as before, if not worse: hereupon several Coun|cels
were called,Niceph. Hist. l. 14. ca. 34. one at Rome, the other at
Alexandria; but that Oecumenicall one at E|phesus,
called by the Emperour, Hit the Naile
on the head,Bellarm. de  Eccles. Trithem. where the reverend Prelate of Alex|andria
sate as President amongst two hundred
Fathers of the Church: much ado there was on
all sides, and there wanted not some that sided
with Nestorius in his errors;Niceph. . lib. 14. cp 34. but such was the
grave carriage of our reverend Father, and

strength of argument there used, that the very
sinewes of Nestorius Doctrine were againe cut
in sunder; he himself deprived from all spiritual
promotion, digraded from all Ecclesiasticall
function, and his positions condemned as
most blasphemous against the Sonne of God,
Christ Iesus. Thus the Councell closed, but
with applause unanimously conferred on their
learned President.Anast. Synaita in Hodeg. c. 5. Blessed for ever be the memo|riall
of Cyrill Arch-bishop of Alexandria: many
were the Epistles commendatory sent unto this
renowned Prelate from al the parts of the Chri|stian
World: No generall Councell for a long
time after, wherein the very name of Cyrill
was not precious; as in that of Chalcedon, after
the repetition of the Nicene Creed,Synodus Chal|cedon. they all
cryed out: This was Saint Cyrils Doctrine, thus
he beleeved, this is true faith indeed, and thus wee
all believe; blessed bee the memoriall of Cyril of
Alexandria.
Yet the perfidious Nation of the Iewes dwel|ling
within this City, grew very tumultuous
upon this second blow,Niceph. Hist. lib. 14. cap. 14. where after many mu|tinous
uproares, much slaughter having drawn
a great party to their side: to maintaine their
tenents, they tooke a Christian Boy, and in de|rision
of Christ, they hung him on a Crosse,
mocked at him, spit on him, buffeed him, and
at last cruelly whipped him to death: the Chri|stians
hereupon made head against the Iewes,
and the good Bishop himselfe all on fire with
zeale, for the Name of Christ, leades on to

their Synagogues, where some of them were
put to the sword, the rest banished, and all the
spoile of their goods divided amongst the peo|ple;
and yet this is not all, sedition and pri|vy
conspiracy of the Iewes false Doctrine, and
Heresie of the Novatians, and Anthropomor|phites
being thus removed, hee looked more
neare home, by reducing those Christians that
were any way dissolute, into better order, by
information of the simple, by comforting
the afflicted, and by relieving the poore and
needy; as may appeare by his Sermons to the
people upon severall occasions.
This, and much more (not unlike a Ship in
the midst of a tumultuous Sea) was the state
of this reverend Prelate, during the first foure
yeares of his government at Alexandria. So
we may perceive that his paines were great, and
his care for the Churches good deserves perpe|tuall
commendation.Socra. l. 7. c. 29 And who shall read his
Workes, will finde them well stored with all
sorts of Learning.
And here I can but observe two passages,
worth observation: first, that the Devil doth
at all times strive to destroy the Church of
of God, and labours to sow Heresies and
Schismes in the midst of it: Secondly, that
it hath alwayes pleased GOD to stirre up
at all times, and upon al occasions some
men who have resisted the malice of all oppo|sers,
and have proved themselves resolute
Champions in the truths cause: so Athanasius

against the Arrians, so this Saint Cyrill against
Nestorius and Pelagius, Magna est Veritas, 
praevalebit. Hell gates shall not prevaile against
it, this House the Church being the Pillar of
truth shall stand, because it is builded on a rock,
which rock is Christ.
After forty two yeeres government, this
Noble and Orthodoxe Father, this great starre
of Alexandria, began at last to twinkle; and
yielded to death; having sweat hard, and la|boured
extraordinary for the space of twenty
two yeeres in that Vineyard: hee received the
earnest peny of salvation in the yeere of Christ
448,Baron. in An. Tom. 4. and in the Reigne of Theodosius the
younger.

Cyrillus his Sayings.

Cyrillus Alexand. de Fest. Pasch.
Homil. 16.
Wee must, as it were, graspe any occasion
of doing well in both our hands, nor let slip
those precious opportunities wherein wee may
doe good.
If a Seaman lose but the opportunity of a
good gale, hee is cast behind in the Voyage: if
the Husbandman neglect the season of the yeer,
he may sit at home and pick straws; and if any
who hath a Christian calling, shall be a cunctator
in Religion, and procrastinate those more spe|ciall
employments, I judge him fit for all re|prehension,

and to undergoe such inconvenien|ces
as shal be conducible to such a negligent, and
carelesse condition.


Idem in Fest. Paschal. Homil. 27.
Admiration! the Rich man wanteth in the
midst of his abundance, is more tormented with
care than other; taketh up the beggars note,
and cryeth out, O, what shall I doe? yea, ra|ther
how shall I dispose of my goods? Where
shall I lay them? I have a plentifull crop this
yeere, and there is now a world of labourers in
my harvest: my Vineyard swels with store of
Grapes, and the Wine presse runs over with a|bundance;
heres all things in plentifull manner,
yea but then life fails him, what becomes then
of his goods? nay, what becomes of himselfe?
better had it beene to have made the bellies of
the poore his barns, succoured the fatherlesse
and needy, to have laid up his treasure in heaven,
that so he might have beene received into ever|lasting
habitations.


Idem adversus Anthropomor|phitas,
cap. 2.
Where the Scripture wants a tongue of ex|pression,
we need not lend an eare of attention:
we may safely knock at the Councell doore of
Gods secrets; but if we goe further, we may be
more bold then welcome.



Idem de vita hom. justificati.
The divell runs with open mouth upon Gods
children seeking to devoure them: they manful|ly
resist him: he thinketh to weaken their faith,
and they by his assaults are made so much the
stronger: he fights against them, but they gain
ground upon him: and so by this meanes what|soever
he intendeth for their destruction, ful sore
against his will makes for their advantage.


Idem, contra Julianum. lib. 3.
The great Creatour of all things forcing
what would come to passe, steps in betweene
life and death, how hee nips one in the bud new|ly
grown ripe for heaven; there an other to pre|vent
the evill to come: this man he frees from
the miseries of a sinfull life, that man hee suffers
to goe on that he may fill up the measure of his
wickednesse: thus to God the Lord belong the
issues of death: but thanks bee given to God
that affordeth us this comfort through Jesus
Christ our Lord.


Idem, de Fortitudine quae in Christo
est, lib. 5.
Hee that's taken up with the pompes, and va|nities
of this wicked world is one of the Devils
Champions not worthy to bee listed under the

Regiment of Christ Jesus the Captain of his sal|vation.
As for his Writings,Photius in Bibliothec. Graec. in Mae|nolog. Iunii 9. Matyro. Rom. Ian. 27. they were such as the
whole Christian World at that time approved,
in so much that the Grecian Bishops got his Ho|milies
by heart, and so repeated them to the
people: his name became memorable, for the
Eastern and Western Churches have made room
for it in their Calenders with this adjunct: The
Champion of the Catholike Faith.



But his Writings have the more eterniz'd him,
such as were printed at Paris 1605.

Tome 1.
1 Explanations to the
literall and mysticall
sence on Genesis, e|leven
books.
2 On Leviticus, 1
books.
3 On Esay, five
books.
4 On Saint Johns
Gospell, 12 books.
5 Sayings on the old
Testament Anagogi|cally
explained. Col|lected
out of Cyrill,
Maximus, and o|thers.
6 A booke against the
Jewes, with que|stions.
7 Short explanations
of those who flourish|ed
before the Law.


Tome 2.
1 Epistles of Saint

Cyrill to divers with
their answers to him,
39 books.
2 Homilies of the In|carnation,
being 10
books.
3 An Apologie to
Theodosius the Em|perour.
4 A Declaration of
the twelve Anathe|matismes.
5 An Apologeticall
book for his Anathe|maes.
6 Another Apologeti|call
booke to Euop|tius
against Theo|doret.
7 Exposition of the
Nicen Creed.
8 Schoole Notes on
Christs Incarnati|on.
9 Two Epistles to
Succensus the Bi|shop.
10 Twelve Synodall E|pistles.
11 Nestorius Tenets
gathered out of his
owne Works.
12 A speech of the
going out of the soul,
of the second com|ming.
13 A famous Worke
called Thesaurus,
containing fourteene
books.
14 Seven bookes of
Dialogues with Her|mias.
15 Of worshipping in
spirit, and in truth,
17 books.
16 Against Julian the
Apostate, ten books.
17 Of the right Faith
to Theodosius and
his Queens.
18 Against the Anthro|pomorphites.
19 Of the Trinitie.

Besides these, there are extant printed at In|golstadt,
his Commentaries on the lesser Pro|phets,
Greeke, and Latine, in Folio, and five
Books against Nestorius, Greeke and Latine, in

the end of the first Tome of the Generall Coun|cell
of the Roman Edition. And there shortly
are expected thirty Paschall Sermons.
In these Workes, you may finde Learning,
Wit, and Eloquence, in all which this Father
excelled. So that if a man call him the Maga|zine
and store house of divine perfection, hee
shall not mistake himselfe, nor transcend the
bounds of modestie. But of him
ne me Crispini scrinia lippi
Compilsse putes, verbum non amplius addam.




An. Christi 440. Sanctus Petrus Chrysolo|gus.

S. PETRVS CHRISOLOGVS.

_THis Worthy Fathers Birth-place
was at Imola a village neare Reven|na
in France, sprung from Parents,
who are commended for their up|rightnesse
and sincerity, not of meane or de|jected
fortunes, but having ability of meanes to
support them with credit and reputation: and
they are prayse-worthy for their great care that
they had to see their sonne vertuously brought
up in study and good Arts.
This Chrysologus had institution for good
manners and learning, from Cornelius, who was
Bishop of that City: so likewise from the same
Bishop he received holy Orders, and was found

wondrous able for that holy function; inso|much,
as not long after, hee was by Sixtus the
third of Rome, chosen to bee Arch-bishop of
Ravenna, and was the two and twentieth that
had successively managed the affaires of that
Sea. Hee deserves high commendation for his
rare parts, and indefatigable paines, and va|rious
studies. Hee was present at two Coun|cels,
the one was held at Ravenna, the other
at Rome, by the authority of Caelius Symma|chus,
then Pope of Rome, and Theodorins,
King of the Ostrogoths. He sent Letters full of
learning to the Synod of Calcedon against Eu|tiches
the Heretique, which are yet extant; but
what a copiousnesse of wit he did enjoy, may
easily be perceived: as also what a measure of
Eloquence he possessed, by the number of his
Homilies and Sermons full of Elegancy and
matter, being above 176. He sate Bishop the
space of sixty yeares, and governed the Church
of God with admirable wisedome and industry.
Trithemius amongst his Ecclesiasticall Writers,
speakes thus of this Chrysologus,Trithem. de Scrip. Eccles. Petrus Archie|piscopus
Ravennas vir eruditus, atque Sanctissi|mus,
c. that is, Peter, who was Arch-bishop
of Ravenna, a man full of learning and holi|nesse,
performed many worthy actions in the
Church of Christ.
He was so powerfull in Eloquence, especi|ally
in his Sermons to the people, and so holy
in his conversation, that he by both these did
daily bring some to the imbracing the truth,

and did set forth many rare pieces pro edificati|on
fidelium, that is, for the edification of the
Faithfull. You have this Father sufficiently
commended for his excellent parts in an Epistle
set before his Workes, which were printed at
Paris with the Workes of Leo the Great, the
first of that name, Pope of Rome, as also of
Maximus, the Bishop of Taurinum, and Ful|gentius
Bishop of Ruspa, with the Workes also
of Valerianus, Bishop of Cemelium in one Vo|lume,
where this Chrysologus is commended
with these words, En tibi Chrysologum, c.
that is, behold this Chrysologus, not onely fa|mous
for his Divine Eloquence, and solidity of
Learning, but also for his honour'd antiqui|ty,
and faithfulnesse in the Episcopall functi|on.
He lived within a while after Saint Chryso|stome,
and other famous pillars of the Church.
He got this name as Chrysostom got his; for he
is termed of all Divines , that is, the
Golden spoken man; for who wil but reade his
Workes, shal finde a lofty Majesty of stile and
phrase, absolute and profound Learning, such
purity of Divinity, not stained or tainted with
any vaine affectation, nor any rigid and harsh
Interpretation, no obsolete deductions, or con|clusions,
but direct and even Natural: so that if
you compare Neotericks, either Commentators,
or as my Author speakes , that is,
Homily Writers with this man, you shall finde
them as Pigmies to another Atlas, for where
have you a more modest Interpreter of the

sacred Scriptures? Where can you finde one
so conspicuous for pious Eloquence, or
Eloquent PIETIE? Who opens the most
obscure places of the Text with a more apt,
consonant, ingenuous sincere interpretation?
so that he doth not wrest the sence, nor corrupt
it, nor unfitly expound it, but with judgement,
integrity, exact Learning and industry, so that
in these respects, hee doth well deserve to bee
ranked with the most eminent Fathers, he doth
not rashly or childishly heape together a few
places of Scripture, but doth (where the place
or matter wants testimony) wisely and discreet|ly
exhibit his proofs for confirmation. As hee
was studious in his preachings, so always before
he pend any thing he would with great arden|cie,
and humilitie set himselfe to prayer. Car|dinall
Baronius in his Annalls doth commend
this Petrus Chrysologus,Card. Baron. Tom. 6. p. 88. 89. for his Epistle writ to
Eutyches, dignam plane tanto viro,  Episcopo
Epistolam, that is, An Epistle indeed worthy
such a great Bishop, and it doth begin in these
words, Tristis legi tristes literas tuas, with grief
of heart, I have read thy heavy and dolefull
Letters: as the peace of the Churches, the con|cord
of the Priests, the tranquillitie of the com|mon
people makes our joy to abound, so no
lesse doth the dissention of brethren arising out
of such causes deeply afflict and torment us: oh
now why should the actions of Christ done so
long since, allowed and approved in all ages, by
your pen be calld to question? How Origen too

nicely searching into Divinity, and how Nesto|rius
disputing too curiously of the Natures fell,
your wisedome cannot but know; the Wise|men
cnfesse him to be a God, though at that
time laid in a Cratch; by presenting their My|sticall
presents: the Priests do acknowledge him
that should be borne of a Virgin, the heavenly
Army of Angels sing at his Nativitie, Glory to
God in the Highest: And when as at the Name
of JESUS every knee should bow, both of things
in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, what a
strangenesse is it, that your pen should move a
question of his beginning, we do (Beloved) with
the blessed Apostle safely conclude, that though
we have knowne Iesus after the flesh, yet now
know wee him no more, nor is it safe to search
too farre, when as wee are commanded to ho|nour
and feare him. It is not the wisest course to
gaze too much upon this resplendent Sun, lest
we be justly by his glorious beams beblinded; it
is easie to collect by the words, and advise of
this Epistle to judge what a singular man for
Learning this Peter Chrysologus was: Baronius
saith, that having with great pains long gover|ned
the Church; and having beene always stu|dious
of his wayes, hee died in December, the
second day, which, saith he, hath a faire proba|bility
of truth, in that because Leo then Bishop
of Rome in the Consulship of Martianus, a
yeere after this, is said to have sent Letters to
Leo this Peters Successor: as appeares in the E|pistles
of Leo, hee was by all likelihood an up|right

man, and of courage in matters of Reli|gion:
For hee and Laurentius the Bishop of
Millain,Leo Epist. 37. would not communicate with Symma|chus,
lest they should bee suspected to side with
him, against the other Orthodox Bishops, when
the Councell was held in Rome: and Cardinall
Baronius shall conclude all in a word. Sed 
qui post Laurentium sequitur ordine Petrus Ra|vennas
Episcopus, his temporibus eximia sanctae
vitae nituit claritudine, that is, but amongst
those other worthy men after Laurentius, in or|der
is to be reckoned Peter Archbishop of Ra|venna,
who in these times exceld for the con|spicuous
fame of his holy life: and because ma|ny
Students may the easier find upon what sub|jects
Chrysologus hath written, knowne to be
all his owne Labours, and not fathered upon
him by them that were admirers of him: I
have here set them downe in order as they
are registred in the Parisian Edition in the yeere
1623, which you shall find after his Sayings.

Chrysologus his Sayings.

Of an unprofitable Servant.
Hee is like the fig-tree that was well looked
to by the Master, yet was unfruitfull, onely cum|bred
the ground, suckt vertue from others;
troubled and grieved the Master,Pet. Chrys. ser. 106. p. 279. was a disgrace
to the Garden, and at last cut down for the fire:
and what else is hee who hath Natures endow|ments,

the benefit of Reason, of Sense, of Judge|ment,
of good Education and Example, but
yet brings forth no fruites of a sanctified life,
but as that Tree who hindred others and hurt it
selfe.


Of uncharitable Rich men.
Remember that,Chysol. serm. 104. p. 275. Thou Foole, this night shall
they fetch away thy soule: perplexe not thy selfe
what thou shalt leave behinde, but bee sure to
send thy almes before thee: bee rich in good
Works: Let not thy care be to have thy hands
alwayes full, and the poores alwayes empty.
The onely way to have full Barns is to have cha|ritable
hands.


Vpon Mildnesse and Meeknesse.
The Apostle Saint Paul hath, I beseech you
brethren by the mercies of God: A good man
uses intreaties rather than commands: the hea|venly
Physician rather cures our wounds with
divine salves, than makes them with his punish|ing
rods: God had rather men should love him
than feare him: He had rather be called Father,
than Master:Idem in serm. 108. p. 283. Hee winnes by mercy, that Hee
might not punish by Justice. If thou wilt be like
thy Father, doe likewise.


Of the meanes to grow in grace.
As neither in the flint alone, nor in the steele

alone, any fire is to bee seene, nor extracted, but
by collision and conjunction;Chrysol. serm. 96. p. 251. fire and light is
brought: so nor by faith alone, nor by good
works alone is salvation attaind: but if ever
you intend to come to that infinite light, joine
both together.


Against Drunkennesse and Gluttony.
Variety and satiety of dainty meates and
drinks weakens the vitals, spoiles the stomacke
corrupts the bloud,Chrysol. serm. 42. p. 106. poisons the humors, kindles
choller, ends in the scar-fire of burning feavers:
as the clouds darkens the Heavens, so intempe|rate
banquetings the minde: as the violence of
wind and waves drowne and sinke a ship into
the bottome of the sea: so doth drunkennesse
and gluttony our souls and bodies to the depth
of Hell.
Who sinn'd more grievously then Paul? who
offended more grievously than Peter? yet they by
repentance deserv'd not onely the ministery,Pet. Chrysolg in qudam se but
also the mastery in holiness: remember there is
mercy with the Father in the Gospell shewed to
the prodigall sonne returning home: judge not
therfore before the time before the Lord come,
c. for men know not the judgments of God,
for that which they praise hee doth condemne,
and that which they condemne, he doth praise.
In God, piety is not without justice, nor
justice without piety; nor equity without
goodnesse, nor goodnesse without equity.

Vertues being separated are annihilated, and
perish. For equity without goodnesse is seve|rity:
and justice without piety is cruelty.
Some have lived commendably before their
attaining to dignity:Pet. Chrysol. in quodam ser. 1. but being set upon the
Candlesticke of the Church, they turne their
light into darknesse, and their fame into infa|my;
and it had beene better for such Lights to
have beene still hidden under a Bushell, than
with disgrace to have got into the Candle|sticke:
for their wickednesse which was obscu|red
by their poverty, was manifested and di|vulged
by their dignity: As they increased in
dignity, so they did also in disgrace and infa|my.
A private sinner is often spared, but if a
Prelate offend, all tongues are sharpned to speak
his disgrace.
Discretion should be used in making promi|ses;Pet. Chrysol. in quadam Epis.
for a vain promise doth often make friends
become enemies.
Where greatest losse is feared, there greatest
warinesse should be used.



Chrysologus his Workes.

1 Homilies for Christ|masse
day.
2 Vpon Saint Stephens
day.

3 Vpon Innocents day,
or Childernmasse
day.
4 Vpon New-yeares
day.
5 Vpon Twelfth day.
6 First Sonday after
Epiphany. On the
Second, third, and
fourth Sondayes after
Epiphany.
7 Vpon the Septuage|sima.
8 Vpon Ash-wednesday,
9 Vpon the first Sonday
in Lent.
10 Vpon all Lent Son|dayes.
11 Vpon Good-friday.
12 Vpon Easter-day.
13 Vpon all the Son|dayes
till Whitson|tide.
14 For Ascention day.
15 For Sondayes after
Whitsontide.
16 Vpon St. Andrews
day.
17 Vpon St. Thomas
day.
18 Vpon our Lady day.
19 Vpon St. John Bap|tists
day.
20 Vpon Saint Peters
day.
21 Vpon St. Mathews
day.
22 Vpon the beheading
of Saint John Bap|tist.
23 Vpon St. Luke the
Evangelist.
24 Vpon some Mar|tyrs.
25 Vpon one Confessor.
26 Vpon a Virgin Mar|tyr.
27 Vpon the day of the
Dedication of the
Temple.
28 A booke against the
Heretique Euty|ches.
29 Some learned E|pistles.

The time of this Fathers Life was long; hee
did, as Trithemius reports of him, flourish prin|cipally

under Martian the Emperour, and dy+ed
in the yeare of Jesus Christs Incarnation
500. His body (as was fitting) was with great
solemnity and lamentation buried hard by the
body of that renouned Martyr Cassianus, and
doth with him expect a glorious resurrection
amongst the just and upright men. His Works
are of great esteeme amongst the learned,
and are to bee reserved in the
Church of Christ, as Mo|numents
of his great
labour and lear|ning.




An. Christi 445. Sanctus Prosper.

S. PROSPER.

_THis famous Writer was of the same
time with Hilarius Arelatensis, and
was the Amanuensis to Leo; His pa|rentage
is not amongst the Church
Historians fully knowne, and therefore not to
be mentioned; but certainly they were both of
abilitie and religiously carefull, because their
sonne had such vertuous education, some say
that hee was Bishop of Rhegium, a Citie of
Emilia in Italie; others doe hold that hee was
Bishop of Rhegium in Gaule.Card. Bellar. de scrip. Eccles. pag. 98. Cardinall Bellar|mine
doth in his Ecclesiasticall Writers, suspect
the former opinion, as not consonant to truth,
and gives two reasons for his assertion; for hee

finds Saint Prosper to have subscribed to the Va|sensian
and Carpeuctorete Provinciall Councell,
which are in Gaule, not Italy: so that hence it is
probable, he was Bishop in a Province of Gaule:
Moreover, Saint Faustus succeeded St. Prosper
in his Bishoprick: now all have concluded Fau|stus
to bee a French Bishop, not an Italian, and
that his Diocesse was subject to the Metropoli|tan
of Aquitain, not to Ravenna: but I will not
insist upon this. Hee was in his time famous for
his learned and judicious Writings, and shewed
himselfe to bee a true Scholer to so great a Ma|ster
as Saint Augustine was: For Hee, aswell as
his Master, had learnedly confuted and over|thrown
the dangerous Heresie of the Pelagians,
and as Iohannes Antonius Flaminius of Imola,
who writes his Life, saith, that hee was Bishop
of Rhegium, Vir multiplici doctrina  sanctita|te
insignis: A man eminent for his sanctitie and
multiplicitie of Learning: but in what place,
or of what parents hee was borne, non satis
compertum habemus, wee have not sufficiently
knowne: but it doth appeare to all, Aquitanum
fuisse, That he was of Aquitaine; but while he
lived in his Countrey, he did lay a sure founda|tion,
that in after times hee would be a shining
Lampe in the House of God: for hee was assi|duous
in reading, and most conversant in the
Scriptures, and usually had the foure Evangelists
in his hands, in which meditating, it was by di|vine
providence so ordered, that He should me|ditate
upon that place of our Saviour, where it

is said, If thou wilt be perfect, goe and sell all
that thou hast, and give it to the poore, and come
and follow me, which place of holy Writ, Hee
did so strictly apply unto himselfe, that willing,
not to be onely a Reader, but a devout practiti|oner
of Gods Word, He presently without any
delay, put this in practice, and made sale of all
his Lands and Goods, and distributed them
freely to the poore members of his Saviour,
that so being disburthened of his earthly estate,
hee might the more easily and comfortably fol|low
his Saviour, to get an heavenly inheritance
which will never fade, but is everlasting. So set|ting
his servants free both men and maids, and
yielding them a competencie to live on, he went
to Rome, that he might see the servants of God
in that famous City; At the same time that
most holy and sweetly eloquent Bishop Leo rul'd
that Church, who hearing of the comming of
such an excellent man as this Prosper was, left
not till hee had got him into his houshold, and
it is not to be conceivd with what humanity
and curtesie, and with what joy and rejoycing he
received this Jewell, as sent to him by Gods spe|ciall
Blessing: so highly was piety and learning e|steemed
in those dayes, though much slighted in
these looser times: this learned Leo rejoyced at
the approach of Prosper, even as Saint Peter is
said to have done at Saint Pauls comming, for
amongst other things Leo did perceive what an
able Engine God had sent him to oppose that
Heresie of Eutyches, which holds but one na|ture

in Christ, which every day began more and
more to take root in severall places; but espe|cially
in the Citie of Chalcedon: to overthrow
which Leo afterwards sent this Prosper with ma|ny
other Roman Clergie men: Such cares there
alwayes hath beene in the Governours of the
Church, to keep down Heresies and Schismes, and
were it not for the vigilancie and dexterous
Learning of Pious Governours, and Reverend
Bishops, how soone would obstinate Here|ticks
and hot-spirited Schismaticks overthrow
the grounds of Divinity and order of the
Church?
These pious men being sent by Leo, unani|mously
maintaind the Nice Creed, and did lear|nedly
and divinely by infallible arguments de|fend
the two natures, and took away the afore|said
Heresie, and by their hand writing sent to
Martianus the Emperour, with full consent con|demned
the said author Eutyches as an Heretike.
So this Prosper being overcome by the prayers
of this good Leo, stayed there a good while, and
when he had struck off the heads of many Here|sies,
by sending to divers Churches his learned
Epistles, Leo being inwardly warned by Gods
Spirit, made him (though for his part with a
great deale of reluctancie) Bishop of Rhegium,
for he said his shoulders were not able to under|goe
such a burthen: But Prosper being over|come,
he took his journey, and the former Bi|shop
being worne out with age, and troubled
with a grievous disease, gave up his spirit into

the hands of God: for the losse of which good
man, the whole City did grieve exceedingly:
but suddenly their mourning was turned into
joy, for the old Bishop before his death willed
them not to grieve for his death: for said hee,
God in especiall love to you, and the Bishop of
Rome, out of his care hath provided you another
man to succeede me,  Deoelectum, Chosen of God,
famous for holinesse of life, and ability of judge|ment,
who is now comming to you. Which words
comforted them exceedingly; for when the
same of his comming had extended it selfe to
the gates of their City, all the Citizens went
out to give him honorable entertainment. Such
reverence in ancient times did men give, even
to the persons of their spirituall Rulers.
Being thus (with the generall acclamations
of all men) called to be their Bishop, and seated
in his Episcopall Chaire, that he might give
them a testimony of his parts, and what a
worthy Light he would bee to his charge, his
Speech which he made to them doth sufficient|ly
expresse, which doth begin in these words;
Video, Fratres Charissimi, quantum meis imbecil|libus
humeris onus impositum fuerit c. that
is, (which for the sweetnesse both of stile and
matter I have translated) I see, (deare brethren)
what a great burthen will be put upon my weak
shoulders: For can there be a greater than the
charge of mens soules? and that which makes
it the weightier, is the expectation of men, who
looke for things to be performed by us, even

beyond mans ability; or at least such gifts a
are given but to few: for is it not a difficulty to
turne mens judgements? to alter their etled
opinions? and even now I see plainly, that
such is the expectation of men: Wherfore I
plainly see, that I must omit nothing which
doth any wayes belong to the care of soules.
But knowing the burthen will bee the lighter
if it be laid upon many mens backs, I entreate
you (oh my beloved sonnes) to partake some
part of the burthen with mee. Which you doe,
if you will (remembring your owne salvation)
keepe Gods Commandements, and live in u|nity
and godly love; from which, as from a most
plentifull Fountaine, will flow out abundantly
wonderfull vertues, viz. Humility, mutuall
love, setled peace and concord; which vertues,
if they doe as they should do, abide and abound
in you, Christ will be alwayes amongst you, and
all things will have good successe. This is it
(as I said before) to divide the burthen with
me, and so hee divinely goes on, exhorting
them to have God in all their thoughts: these
are the things (said he) that I thought fit to ad|monish
you of at my entrance.
This was a faire demonstration what a wor|thy
Bishop hee would bee to them: His speciall
care was to take away all strifes and contenti|ons
from amongst them: and therefore in his
speeches to them still commended peace and u|nity,
which were so full of native and genuine
Eloquence, and strengthned by Gods Word,

and his beautifull Life, that they tooke deeply,
and did work powerfully; for what he said, that
he did: his Heart was adorned with charity, his
countenance was composed of meeknesse: Hee
was wondrous affable, hee was temperately
severe: What a care had he of the poore? How
did hee support poore Orphans and Widowes?
Was he not a Father to all Ages, Sexes, Orders,
that were in that City? how carefull in his Ser|mons
to excite men not onely to heare, but al|so
to worke out their salvation? How watch|full
was hee in his Episcopall charge, lest the
Devill should cause any of his flo to goe a|stray?
What admonitions gave he to his Cler|gy?
and lest while hee preached unto others,
he himselfe should be a cast away: how did hee
addict himselfe to watching, fasting, prayer,
and Meditation? Did hee not likewise send
Letters to other Bishops, his fellow-labourers,
to entreat them not to forget their charge?
which actions and deportments as they did de|serve
love, so they did gaine him the love and
reverence of all about him: He sate Bishop two
and twenty yeers in Rhegium, unto the 466. yeer
of Christ. He flourished chiefly under Leo the 1:
Having done his work so well, so long a time in
the Church, the time of his dissolution came, and
he fell sicke and dyed: But before he yielded up
the Ghost, he called divers unto him, and made
a heavenly speech unto them, all weeping for
the feare of losing so good a Bishop, and so wor|thy
a Father: It begins Video, dilectissimi, c.

I see, most dearely beloved, how you all grieve,
and I wonder not, for it is hard for true lovers
to part without teares, but you must beare it,
for to have stayed longer here, might seem bet|ter
for you, for me it is better to bee dissolved,
and to be with Christ. Consider that mans life
is weake and fraile, heaped with many froward
and troublesome businesses, providing things
needful to save his body from misery and want;
for the life that I have enjoyed was but given
me upon condition, to render it againe, not
grudgingly, but gladly, and with a cheerefull
heart; forth is the onely easement of all our
trouble and anguish: the longer I live, the lon|ger
I live in sinne; the more time I spend, the
more I erre and goe astray, each houre purcha|sing
to my selfe a new paine and punishment:
For it is not the man which liveth longest, but
he that liveth justly and vertuously shall attaine
the promise and reward of heaven. Hee it is,
that is worthy to be honoured and lamented of
all good men: and so divinely goes on, certify|ing
them of the resurrection to glory, and en|treating
them to live in love, and keep peace
unbroken.
These dying words melted them into teares;
for what can make sooner or deeper compas|sion
into ones heart, than to heare the dying
words of a good man? So after Psalmes and
Hymnes sung by his friends, he praying lifted
up his hands to God in the sight of them all, and
departed. His Corps with the Citizens and

all his Priests was with great pompe interred in
the Church, which hee had consecrated to the
honour of God and the blessed Saint Apollina|ris;
hee dyed the eighth of the Calends of Iuly,
Hilarius the second being Bishop of Rome, and
Martianus tuling the Empire. Faustus succeeded
him, a worthy and pious man.

Saint Prospers sayings.

1. Of being with God.
It is the greatest misery of man,Prosp. n lib. sent p. 174. to bee with|out
Him, without whom Hee cannot be: but
whosoever doth not meditate of Him, nor
rightly conceive of, Him, nor yet truely love
Him, is for certaine without Him.


2. How wicked men should be hated.
He hates perfectly who hates in righteousnes
and knowledge: that is,Idem p. 75. that thou shalt neither
hate the man for his vice, nor love the vice for
the mans sake. Wee may rightly then hate the
wickednesse of wicked men, and yet love the
Creature: so that man is not to bee blamed for
the sinne, nor yet the sinne to be loved for
the man.


3. Of the hope of the faithfull.
Let it not (good Christian)Idem lib. sent. p. 178. affright thee,

that thou dost not presently enjoy what thou
believest: be sure that thou continue thy prayer
in Hope; though the thing promised bee as yet
hid: Worke still and increase in vertues; for
while the constancy of thy Faith is tryed, the
Mercy and Glory is augmented.


4 Of Riches and Honours.
Thou boastest thy selfe of thy wealth,Idem in lib. sent. 225. and
braggest of thy honour, and triumphest in thy
strength and beauty. Consider what thou art
by sinne, and consider what thou shalt bee in
the grave, and thy Plumes will fall: for every
proud man forgets himselfe.


5. Of being in Christ.
The branches are so in the Vine,Idem in lib. sent. 364 p. 219 that they
adde nothing to it, but receive from it their
life and liberty: the Vine is so in the Branches,
that it gives nourishment to them, takes none
from them: and so to have Christ dwelling in
us, and wee in Him, is profitable to us, not to
Christ: for though one branch be cut off, ano|ther
may spring from the living tree: but that
which is cut off, cannot live without the Vine.


6. Of a two-fold life.
Life is two-fold,Idem in lib. 236. p. 197. of the body, of the soule: as
the soule is the life of the body, so the life of
the soule is God: and as when the soule departs,
the bodie dyes, so when God departs, the soule
dyes.


Prosper, lib. 1.
The poore eate the fruits of their labours,
but the rich eat the fruits of their sinnes.


Prosper, de vita contemplativa.
He is ignorant of his sins, which hee should
know and bewaile, that doth curiously consider
others offences. But if he turn to himselfe, and
behold his own manners, he will nor reprehend
others, but lament his own sins.


Prosper, de vocatione Gentium.
Those things which God would have hid|den,
are not to be searcht into: but those things
which are manifest are not to be neglected, lest
in those wee become unlawfully curious, and in
these damnably ingratefull.


Prosper, pro vita contemplativa.
The Churches treasure should be communica|ted
to those which want; but to those which
have sufficient, nothing should be disbursed:
for to give to the rich, is to defraud the poore.



Prosper, de vita contemplativa, lib. 4.
The proud man would bee accounted con|stant,
the prodigall liberall, the covetous dili|gent,
the rash valiant, the inhumane sparing,
the slothfull quiet, and the fearefull wary.


Prosper, de vita contemplativa.
The life to come is blessed eternitie, and eter|nall
blessednesse, where there is certaine security,
secure quietnesse, quiet joyfulnesse, happy
eternitie, eternall felicitie: where there is per|fect
love, no feare, eternall day, and one spirit
attended on by Angels, where the blessed are not
rejected, nor no sinner admitted.


Prosper, lib. 5. de Vitiis,  Virtutibus.
The envious man hath so many torturers, as
the envied hath praisers. It is the justice of en|vie
to kill and torment the envious.



His Works are here truly registred by Bellar|mines
computation.

1 Of Predictions, 3
books.
2 Of the contempla|tive
life, 3 books.

3 Of the calling of
the Gentiles, 2 books.
4 Of Grace and Free|will.
5 Answers to the
Chapters, of the ob|jections
of the
French, Vincentians
Gemensians.
6 Of Grace, one book.
7 Of St. Augustines
Sentences, one book.
8 Of Gods providence.
 one book.
9 Of predestination an
Epistle to S. Austine.
10 Commentaries on
the Psalmes from the
100, to the 150.
11 A book of Epigrams
against ingratitude.
12 A continuation of
Eusebius and Hie|roms
Chronologie.





An. Christi 525. Saec. 6. Sanctus Fulgentius.

S. FVLGENTIVS.

_THere is amongst Ecclesiasticall Wri|ters
mention made of two of this
name, the one was Bishop of Vtricu|lanum,
memorable for his holinesse
and sincerity of life, and flourished under the
reigne of Totila, King of the Gothes, Iustinian
being Emperour, and Vigilius Pope. Saint
Gregory in his third booke of Dialogues, in
his twelfth Chapter describes him compleatly.
This is he, who was one of those two hundred
Bishops; which King Trasamund, King of the
Vandals,Lib. Rom. Pon. in hist. Sym. hist. Miscel. l. 15. sent bound into the Island of Sardinia,
to whom Symmachus the Pope sent sufficient
daily provision. This was equall in Holinesse

and Learning, if not excelling the other. This
famous Fulgentius, whose life I describe, was
an Affrican by birth, sprung of noble Parents,
and o much the more honoured, because they
were Christians: His Grand-fathers name was
Gordianus, a Senator of Carthage, and it fell
out so, when Gensericus was King of the Van|dals,
that this Gordianus, with divers other
Noble-men, and Counsellours, were expulsed
Carthage, and stript of all their meanes and re|venues.
Upon this, Gordianus sailed into Italy,
for feare, that as hee was cashier'd from his E|state,
so likewise he should lose his liberty, if
not his life; where dying, two of his sonnes re|turned
into their Country, and obtained some
part of their fathers inheritance; where, one of
them, called Claudius by his wife Mariana, an
honest Matron in the Towne of Leptis, had
born unto him this worthy Fulgentius: but his
Father dying, committed the care of his little
sonne to his Wife, which with great care
brought him up both to the knowledge of
the Latin and Greeke tongues, wherein he pro|ved
most excellent and expert.
Being young he is commendable for his obe|dience
to his Mother: so that she committed the
charge of her House to his circumspection; and
in this charge Hee shewed such an example of
modesty, obedience, and diligence, that as one
speakes of him, hee was Matri praesidium, do|mesticis
solatium,Reibadei  vit. S.  geni. externis quibus conversaba|tur,
exemplum: that is, a safeguard to his Mo|ther,

a comfort to the family, to those without, with
whom he conversed, a rare example.
But God had laid and appoynted him out
for higher imployments, and so stirred up and
enlightned his understanding, that Hee knew
and shunned worldly delights and vaine plea|sures
and profits, and so left the company of
young men, and gave himselfe to prayer, to a|stings,
watchings, and reading, and meditation.
So having exercised himselfe in these duties, he
goes to a certaine Reverend Bishop called Fau|stus,
and humbly prayed him to admit him
into his Cloyster, and afford him a religious
habit: The Bishop at first doubting whether he
was fit to be admitted or not, because hee was
but young, tender, rich, and noble, and there|fore
not yet able to undergoe that strict course
of life, telling him, how that before he did re|solve
of it, to take a tryall and surveigh of his
owne strength, and seriously bethinke himselfe
of that charge which he went about to embrace,
seeing usually that many doe presume too much
upon their owne power, and many times at|tempt
more than their ability are fit to under|goe:
But at last noting well his eagernesse, and
hoping well of his constancy and continuance,
he yielded to his request.
But as soone as it was knowne that Fulgenti|us
had undertaken this state of life, all good
men rejoyced, and bad men fretted: nay, his ve|y
mother in all haste comes to recall him, and
disswade him from it, fearing that shee should

lose much by this departure from her she cryed,
complained, and grieved deeply, but her sonne
would not alter, and indeed she gained well by
this his departure, for hee gave himselfe wholly
to vertue and holinesse of life. His diet was
spare, and hee tooke no Refectories to please his
palate, he subjugated his flesh, so that with this
abstinence, he fell into a deep sicknesse, and yet
during his disease, hee kept the same strictnesse
of diet, saying, that this sicknesse proceeded
from the hands of God, and that it was for his
good, which so fell out, for he speedily recove|red.
He gave his Heritage to his mother, not
to his younger brother Claudius, lest it should
make him too proud, and because he should give
the more respect to his Mother during life.
About this time the Devill raised up a great
storme of persecution against the Catholike Chri|stians
by Thrasimund King of the Vandals, in
which the good old Bishop Faustus was driven
from his government, and this Fulgentius also
from this Cell: but he got into another, where
one Felix ruled, here he shewed admirable parts
of modestie and temperance. But the Barba|rians
entring this Countrey with violence of
armes, this Fulgentius and Felix consulting for
their safeties fled from their places, but fell into
the hands of the Arrians, who were more in|humane
and cruell then those Barbarians. For
it happened while they stayed at Barbadilia,
one Felix an Arrian Priest, being a cruell perse|cutor
of Orthodoxe Christians, tried all plots

how to apprehend this Fulgentius and elix,
and having misused some by shaving them, and
sending them away naked from their lodgings,
he so displeased the Bishop of Carthage, though
an Arrian, that hee prosessed he would punish
that Priest if Fulgentius would accuse him, for
this fact: but this good man would not accuse
him, lest hee might seeme to revenge his owne
wrongs, saying, plura pro Christo toleranda:
That he ought to suffer more then so for Christ.
Well, he resolves to reture into his owne coun|try,
hoping to finde more mercy amongst the
Barbarians then amongst the Arrians, so going
for Sicily, hee was driven into Syracuse, where
he was kindly entertained by an old Bishop cald
Eulalius, and by one Ruffinianus, who were fled
from the Arrians: so past he to Rome, and so in|to
Sardinia, where hee was received with great
joy. Here having setled himselfe, there resorted
to his Cell great store of Christians, whom he
daily taught and instructed; but he intended to
lead a more private life, but hee was forbidden
by Faustus a Bishop, who made him priest, and
not long after made him Bishop of Ruspa, a
great and populous Citie, though Fulgentius
was unwilling to accept this great preferment:
being thus invested, he kept his ancient Humili|tie,
Pietie, and Constanci; but was the same in the
height of Honour, as he was in the deepest ebbe
of Adversitie: and where so many graces as hu|militie,
c. are connext with meditation, they
give an edge unto the soule, and make it un|pierceable

as steel, hardly to endure the sharpest
point of envie.
Hee was much addicted to studie, for hee
would rise in the night to reade and pray: hee
obtained ground of one Posthumianus a Noble
man, to build a place for Religious Monks. But
now Thrasimund King of the Vandals proscri|bed
all the Orthodoxe Bishops: and so this Ful|gentius
was banished with the rest: where what
good he did, is easily seene, for he resolved all
doubts, relieved the poore, reconcil'd the diffe|rences
of many, made friendship between those
that were at difference, reduc'd those that were
fallen into sinne, gave instructions to some, en|couragements
to others: none wanted that
good, that he could supply with all.
At the same time,Apud. Euod Ticinensem. p. 318. Symmachus was Pope, who
hearing the wasting of the African Churches,
sent provision to these Fathers that were fled,
and a worthy Epistle of Comfort, which begins
thus, Ad vos specialiter dictum est, Nolite timere
pusillus Grex, c. to you it is specially spoken,
Feare not little flocke, it is your Fathers good plea|sure
to give you the Kingdome.
But now Thrasimund the King dealing poli|tikely
intending to overthrow the Church Or|thodoxe,
made as though hee was turned Or|thodox
himselfe, and so he seemd to desire to
have some eminent and Orthodox fathers by
him to resolve all doubts and questions, and so
hearing of the ame and learning of Fulgentius,
hee sent for him to come to him to instruct him:

whither when Fulgentius was come, he effected
much, and converted many Arians to the Faith,
And writ a booke of the Trinitie, which was so
soundly and judiciously written, that it asto|nished
the King; and yet by wicked Councels
hee did command him to returne by night to
Sardinia, lest the people should mutinere: but
yet it pleased God by contrary windes to bring
him i again into Harbour, by which meanes all
the people did lend him prayers and prayses, and
wept for his departure: and great numbers went
along with him; but not long after, Thrasimund
dying, Hildericus succeeded him, who recal|led
the banished Bishops, and restored them
to their places: but this Fulgentius, of them all
is said to be, Decus, Ornamentum, Corona: the
Grace, Ornament, and Crowne: Here he refor|med
many abuses in the Clergie, gathered
together the scattered flock, was highly hono|red
of all good men.
He had an admirable dexterity in preaching,
and was powerfull in convincing, and reverend
in his carriage. In the time of his sicknesse, this
was his familiar speech, Da Deus mi, hic patien|tiam,
post indulgentiam: Here,  God, give me
patience, and then pardon and mercy: falling
sicke, he lay so forty dayes, and calling the Cler|gie
about him declaring his faith, and exhorting
them to stand in the same, hee quietly gave his
soule into his Creatours hands, in the yeere
529, and of his Bishopricke the five and twen|tieth,
aged sixty five, and was honourably bu|ried,

and greatly lamented of all Religious
Christians: and was buried in a Church called
Secunda.

Fulgentius Sayings.

Of Christs Death.
He died for Men and Angels: for men,Fulgent ad Thrasimund Reg. l. 2. cap. 3. that
they might rise from sinne: for Angels, that they
might not fall into sin, for them that they might
not bee wounded: for man that hee might bee
healed of his wounds. He tooke infirmity from
man, gave confirmation to them: Certainly, he
was the wisdome of the Father to enlighten,
the vertue of the Father to uphold.


Another of his sufferings.
It was necessary he should be both God and
Man to worke our Redemption:Idem ad end. l. 2. cap. 2. as he was God
he was able, as he was man he had aptnesse: no
Man nor Angell could haue effected it: not man,
for how could hee who was dead in sinne give
life to others? not the Angels: for they had not
sufficiencie to stand upright themselves.


Of Prayer.
Though thou boast in the darke,Idem l.  c 16. yet pray,
for thy Father is Light: thou canst not lie hid
from his eye: and therefore neither faint in thy

devotion; nor dissemble in Hypocrisie, for thy
God heares thee in secret, as well as sees thee.


4. Of suffering persecution.
Though thou be banished,Lib. 2. c. 17. ad Trasimund. yet Christ is thy
associate: though amongst Thieves or wilde
beasts: though at Sea in tempests, or on Land
in troubles; though in hunger, cold, and naked|nesse;
Thy Captaine stands and sees thee com|bating:
hold out then, for hee will Crowne
thee.


5. To incite to good Workes.
If they goe to hell,Lib. 2. c. 14. de remissione pec|catorum. not because they tooke a|way
the garment from the naked, but because
they did not cloath them; not because they took
away the bread fro~ the hungry, but because they
did not give their bread to them: what shall be|come
of them who doe not give nor cloath, but
doe strip off and rob the indigent? Remember
the torment of the rich man, and relieve Laza|rus,
that thou maist escape damnation.


Of Divine Love.
The thoughts and affections do follow loves
direction;Fulgentius in quodam serm. wherefore the truth saith, Where your
treasure is, there will your heart be: Therefore
if our treasure be in Heaven, our affections will
be in heaven. To lay up this Treasure, mark thy

thoughts; so thou shalt know thy Treasure by
thy love, and thy love by thy thoughts.


Of Covetousnesse.
If Barrennesse be cast into the fire,Fulg. sup. illud Mat. omnis ar|bor. c. what shall
Covetousnesse deserve? or what shall covetous
capacity receive, when want of Charity shall be
tormented in Hell-fire? And if hee shall have
judgement without mercy, that hath not shew|ed
mercy; what judgement shall he receive that
hath done others injury?


Of Charity.
Stephen, that he might deserve the Crowne,
as his name doth import,Fulgen in ser. de Sanct Steph. used no weapons
but Charity, whereby he obtained the victory:
by Charity he resisted the Iewes cruelty: by Cha|rity
he reproved and corrected others impiety:
and by Charity prayed for those that stoned
him cruelly.



He writ many famous works, but some
were lost by the injury of time, and malice of ad|versaries.
Those that are really his, and extant,
are here registred by Antwerp Edition. 1574.

1 Three books to King
Thrasimund.
2 Of Christs incarnati|on
one booke.

3 To Monimus three
bookes.
4 Against the Arrian objections.
5 To Donatus 1.
6 To Erithymius. 2.
7 To Ferrandus que|stions,
two bookes.
8 Of Faith to Peter,
to bee read amongst
St. Austines works.
9 Seven Epistles.
10 Ten Sermons on
sundry arguments.
11 Some other Treati|ses
of the truth of Pre|destination,
of the
Trinity, c.

So having thus faithfully discharged his Cal|ling,
he rests with other such famous Cham|pions
of the Church, and expects a happy Re|surrection.




An. Christi 604. Sanctus Gregorius Magnus.

S. GREGORIVS MAGNVS.

_THis bulwarke of the trueth Saint Gre|gory
may well be placed amongst
these Reverend Fathers, for he hath
not onely equall'd many, but excell'd
most in pious performances and hardnesse of stu|dies:
hee was by birth a Roman, his Fathers
name was Gordianus, a great counselor, and a
devout Religious man, and noble by descent, his
mothers name was Silvia. Felix once Bishop of
Rome a man admired for his devotion, was his
Grandfather: but this Gregory excell'd his proge|nitors
for holinesse of life, and he so little respe|cted
his descent from such great personages, That
with teares hee would often confesse and say, that

all earthly honour and glory was miserable, If
the possessor of it did not seeke after the glory of
God; He said, that the chiefest pleasures here be|low
were but torments, unlesse the minde did
resolve upon those never fading pleasures in
Heaven, nay, he was such a rare man for morti|fication,
that he feared not death, because (hee
said) it was the gate to life eternall, and the one|ly
way to obtaine the reward of the faithfull, a
crowne of righteousnesse. Hee was a strict re|garder,
how he spent his time, as knowing what
a severe an account hee was to render to GOD
for it.
Venerable Bede cals him, Apostolum nostrum,
that is, our Apostle, and he gives the reason for
it,Bed. in bist. Eccl. Quod nostram, id est,
Anglorum gentem, de
potestate Sathanae, ad fidem Christi sua industria
convertit, that is, Because he by his labour and
industry did convert the Nation of the English|men
from the power of the Devill, unto the
faith of Christ: so that (as Beda saith) wee may
well say of this Saint Gregory, as Saint Paul
speakes of himselfe, That though hee bee not an
Apostle to others,1 Cor. 9. yet hee is one to us, for the
seale of his Apostleship are we in the Lord: and
it fell out that this Saint Gregory had such a de|sire
to bring our Nation to the faith thus. On a
time crtain Merchants comming to Rome, and
exposing their commodities to sale, amongst
the rest they had some youths also to sell, a|mongst
many Chapmen, it pleased God that
this Gregory should passe by that way, he behol|ding

(as Beda doth testifie) inter alia, pueros ve|nales
positos candidi corporis, ac venusti vultus,
capillorum quoque forma egregia, that is, amongst
other Merchandise, certaine pretie youths ex|pose
likewise to sale, who were of sweet perso|nages,
comely countenances, and beautifull
haire; asked presently from whence they came,
it was answered, from Brittany an Island, whose
inhabitants were most of such faire and come|ly
countenances; then hee again asked whether
the inhabitants of that Island were Christias,
or not; it was answered, that they were Pagans;
at which words this Gregory did deeply sigh,
and said it was a great pitty that the prince of
darknesse should keepe in subjection such sweet
natured people, and demanding further, what
was the proper name by which they of that Is|land
were called, it was answered Angli: and so
they may, qia vultu nitent ut Angeli,  Ange|lorum
in coelis decet esse cohaeredes: that is, they
may well bee called so, For they have faces like
Angels, and no question but they will bee co|heires
with Angels, and asking their names, it
was answered Deiri, and truely may they bee so
called said Saint Gregory, for by gods blessing
they are come de ira Dei, from the wrath of
God: and forthwith hee went to the Bishop of
Rome, and did earnestly desire to send some able
men into that Island to convert the people, and
to instruct them in the knowledge of Christ, and
told him that hee (by Gods grace assisting him)
was ready to undertake the taske: but at that

time this Gregory was so beloved of the Citi|zens,
that though the Bishop would have per|mitted
him to have gone, yet they would not
have lost such an eminent man as hee was.
But within a short time the Bishop of Rome dy|ed,
and this Gregory was chosen Bishop of the
same See: He presently with great care did pro|vide
sufficient  able men to effect this his long
desired worke: and that then Preaching might
be the more effectuall, hee gave them admirable
instructions and exhortations, and joyned him|selfe
in prayers with them, desiring God to
give their labours good successe, and so sent
them. The names of some of them that were
sent were these;Martyrolog. Martii 4. Melitus, Augustinus, Iohn, with
some others, whom he knew to bee pious men;
as Ado, Arch-bishop of Triers doth testifie, in
the life of this St. Gregory.
This man was singular for parts and Arts;
when his parents were dead he builded sixe Mo|nasteries
in Sicily, and one within the Walls
of Rome, and laid as much meanes to them as
was sufficient for their maintenance, and what
was over-plus, He sold and gave it to the poore;
and whereas Hee was before rich in Cloath and
Iewells,Poverty is a punishment, not a sin. now hee went in poore Habit,  pau|per
ise ministrabat pauperibus, and in poverty
and lowlinesse of Spirit, He ministred daily to
the poore.
For His learning, all that read his Workes,
will ingenuously confesse that speech of Possevi|nus
concerning Him, which is taken out of

Sixtus Senensis in his fourth Booke Bibliothecae
Sanctae.Possev. in sacro ppar. p. 659. Gregorius eruditione insignis,  expla|natione
Divinorum voluminum c. that is,
Gregory, famous for learning and the expla|nation
of the holy Scriptures, illuminated by
the light of the holy Spirit, hath partly by E|loquent
Homilies, and partly by able Com|ments,
explained the whole Scriptures, of
which the greater part after his death, by the
Devils malice, and the envy of wicked men
were burnt: Veriti (as Sixtus Senensis hath it)
ne Sanctitatis  doctrinae gloria scriptorum mo|numentis
ad posteros perveniret: fearing least the
glory of his Holinesse and Learning should by
his Writings be knowne to posterity.
In his Homilies, especially those to the peo|ple,
he did alwayes use a briefe and succinct
method to lay open the text: but in his Com|menatries,
he delighted in a more rich dresse:
He laid open the Scriptures, with a most co|pious
and full explanation both of the words
and sence. Photius doth highly extoll this Gre|gory,
calling him, ,Photii  pag. 139. Most grate|full
to God, and termes his Dialogues, quatu|or
libros vitae utilissimos, that is, foure Bookes,
most profitable to our lives, and stiles him, for
his pious government of the Churches affaires,
especially that of Rome, qui caeteris pietate praei|vit,
that is, who out-stripped others for piety,
and doing other things which made him admi|red,
that was his Charity and Writings: irtu|tibus
vitam instituit, Eleemosynis claruit, that

is, ordering his life in vertues pathes: He shined
in Alms-deeds, and of his charity to the poor,
I must not let slip what is recorded of him by
Photius,Photii biblio p. 1398.  Sy|meon Metaphr. and Simeon Metaphrastes. On a time
there came to him a poore man, who made his
mone to him, that he had endured ship-wracke
at sea, and had lost all his goods; insomuch, that
he had not any thing to relieve himselfe nor his
family withall. Gregory presently moved with
compassion, gives him forthwith six Ducats: So
he having received them departs; and yet the
same day returnes to this blessed Father, and
told him, his necessity was so great, that what
he had received, hee had payed away, and so
desires some more of him: Saint Gregory gives
him other sixe Ducats: well, hee the same day
came the third time, and desired reliefe, which
was given him without gain-saying by this Fa|ther
proportionably: but this poore man com|ming
the fourth time, and Gregory having no
more gold to give, yet unwilling to send him
away empty, hee remembred he had a piece of
Plate in his House of a good value, and present|ly
commanded that to be given, and it was per|formed
according to his desire. Here was com|passion,
that was beyond the bounds of a com|mon
man, foure times in one day, and of the
same party to crave, and at every request to
receive a reward, without reluctancy or repi|ning.
Here was Charity and Liberality bestow|ed
the right way: for whom perverse Fortune,
long sicknesse, threats and oppressors have

brought unto poverty, to those let men ex|tend
forth their compassion and charity. This
Saint Gregory by the wisedome of God so dis|posing
it for his admirable endowments, being
made, as I have said before, Bishop of Rome,
by the suffrages of all good men: it was a cu|stome,
that upon the first day of his enjoying
that preferment, there should twelve poore
men be called in to dine with him: so hee that
was chiefe over-seer that way, did, as was in|joyned
him. Well, this father being sate with
these twelve, he presently counting them recko|ned
thirteene, and asking his Officer why hee
had transgressed the custome, hee presently re|plyed
that there were but twelve; but Gregory
affirmed there were thirteene; so looking well
upon them, he saw one of their Countenances
often change and to shine: so after dinner hee
tooke the thirteenth into his study, and serious|ly
demanded of him who hee was: he replyed,
that he was the poore man, which hee foure
times in one day so bountifully relieved with
gold and plate; which almes-deeds (saith he) of
yours are so well-pleasing to God, that I am
sent (being an Angell) to you, to preserve your
life, and to direct you in your studies. At which
words, Saint Gregory was strucke with feare:
but the Angel vanished immediately, and Saint
Gregory fell devoutly to prayers, and gave God
thanks for his great favour shewed to him.
Here I may say as it is of Cornelius, Act. 10.
Thy prayers and thy Almes-deeds are come up be|fore

me, and I wonder where can we finde such
a pattern of Charitie in these dayes; Rich men
doe debar themselves of many a great blessing,
for not exercising themselves in Almesdeeds (as
Photius saith) here was that saying of Saint Paul
verified,Heb. 13. 2, 3. Harbour and entertain strangers, for so
many have received Angels, so did Abraham and
Lot. But I will not insist longer upon this.
Now I will proceed, This Gregory was of
that acutenesse of wit, that he easily overthrew
Eutyches the Heretike in a publicke disputation
concerning the resurrection, and did so confirme
it, that the Emperour caused Eutyches his books
to bee burned as hereticall, as you may see and
reade in his Workes,Lib. 4. Moral. c. 29. Beda l. 2. c. 1. Hist. Angl. as also in Beda. Read
Iohannes Diaconus in the life of this Gregory in
his first book, and foure and twentieth Chapter,
where hee shall finde with what solid places of
Scriptures, and invincible arguments hee doth
establish it. When as the plague did rage so fu|riously
in Rome, that the living could scarce bu|ry
the dead, and when Pelagius was dead of it,
how worthily did this Gregory behave himselfe
during that heavy visitation and judgment? how
did he stirre up the hearts of the people with all
speed to turn to God with fasting  prayer, and
by serious and unfained repentance? What an
elegant speech did hee make unto them is easily
to be seen,Ioh. Diacon. in vit. S. Greg. c. 41. l. 1. it is so full of piety and wisdome that
it deserves to be registred in Letters of Gold,
and is able to make the hardest heart to weepe
and lament his sins, and to set himselfe to seeke

the Lord. How powerfully did he by dextrous
Counsels establish the Churches? How did he
cause the Ligurians, the Venetians, and Spaniards
to be drawn from Schismes, and to embrace the
authority of the Chalcedon Councell? How did
he reduce the African Churches from the Heresie
of the Donatists? Sicily from that of the Ma|nichees?
Spaine from that of Arianisme? Alex|andria
from that of the Agnoetans, by his deep
learning and judgment? And did hee not like|wise
free France from Symoniacks, which did
grow up in every place? Did hee not so power|fully
prevail with Brunichilda the Queen, with
Theodoricke and Theodobert Kings of France,
that he procured from them a generall Councell
against these persons, and anathematized all that
should dare to practise that sin? Yet in these He|roick
proceedings, the Devill did all he could to
oppose him by calumniation, but he left not off
to proceed, maugre all their malicious conclusi|ons,
to effect that good to the Church of God,
for which he thought he was set up: how Chri|stianlike
did he speake to the Emperour Mauri|tius
against his making that unjust Law, that
none of those souldiers which were marked in
the hand should ever be converted to the faith
of Christ:Iohan. Diacon. in vit. S. Greg. l. 3. c. 50. Did not this Gregory answer the Em|perour
in these words; Ego te de Notario Comi|tem
Excubitorum, de Comite Excubitorum Cae|sarem,
de Caesare Imperatorem, nec solum hoc, sed
etiam Patrem Imperatorum feci, Sacerdotes meos
tuae manui commisi;  Tu  meo servitio mili|tes

tuos subtrahis? that is, I have (meaning
God) made thee of a Notary to be Captain of
the Watch from that, I have made thee Caesar
from Caesar: have advanc'd thee to be Emperour,
and not only so, but I have made thee a Father
of Emperours; Have not I given thee my spi|rituall
Souldiers which are my Priests, and dost
thou take fom my service thy Souldiers? An|swer,
I beseech thee,  Emperour, to thy ser|vants?
What wilt thou answer to thy Lord and
Judge, when he shall demand this at thy hands?
a worthy speech, and savouring of a generous
and religious spirit.
How severely did hee reprove the Bishop of
Constantinople,Iohan. Diacon. in vit S. Gre|gor. l. 3 c. 53.  54. who would have beene called
Vniversalis for his prid? and doth he not direct|ly
call it, No men istud blasphemiae, that name of
blasphemy? How did he wisely stop the fury of
the Longobards, and reduced them to peace by
writing his book to Theudalinda the Queene? in
a word, having with great care and piety, a|mongst
a world of troubles governed the
Church thirteen yeers, six moneths and ten days,
in the spight of all oppositions, he died quietly
and comfortably, rendred up his soule into the
hands of his Maker, in the second yeere of Pho|cas
the Emperour, and was buried in the Cathe|drall
Church of Saint Peter; in which, Leo,
Simplicius, Gelasius, and Symmachus were for|merly
interred, with a large Epitaph in commen|dation
of his labours and studies. His Deacon
is highly to be praysed for preserving some of

his Workes from the fire, even to the hazard of
his owne life.
Heare but what a man he was by the testimo|ny
of Paulus Diaconus,Paulus Diaco|nus in vit. Iisdem diebus sapientis|simus
ac beatissimus Papa Gregorius Romanae
urbis Episcopus, c. that is, In these dayes that
most wise and blessed Father Saint Gregory Bi|shop
of the City of Rome, which, when he had
written many things to the profit of the Church,
composed foure famous bookes of the lives of
the Saints which he called his Dialogues, which
books he sent to Theodelinda the Queen, whom
he knew to be a Protector of the faithfull, and
which did much good to the Church, for shee
perswaded her husband to give meanes and Re|venues
to the Church, and caused those Bishops
which were in misery, and cast out to be resto|red,
and peace was by her meanes procured to
Gods people.
Sabinianus was the man that did succeed him
in his Bishopricke,Paulus Diacon and as one testifies, there was
a great dearth the next yeer after his death, and
(hee saith) debuit enim mundus famem sitimque
pati, c. The world, must needs suffer a famine
and thirst, when such a Doctor as was both spiri|tuall
food and drink to their souls, was taken
away.
He wants not divers to afford him commen|dations,
and indeed there was a cloud of Wit|nesses
who doe extoll him;Sidor. Hisp . Isidore cals him ti|more
Dei plenus,  humilitate summus: that
is, full of the feare of God, and chiefe for Hu|mility,

endued largely with the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and saith thus in conclusion, Foelix
tamen  nimium foelix, qui omnium studiorum
ejus possit cognoscere dicta: that is, Happy is hee,
nay, thrice happy that can know all his Works
and Sayings.
Honorius Augustodunensis termes him no
lesse then Organum spiritus Sancti, c. that is,
The Organ of the blessed Spirit. Incomparable
for his wisdome,Trithem. de scrip. Eccles. who writ many things more
precious than the refined Gold. Trithemius cals
him, Theologorum princeps, splendor Philosopho|rum,
 Rhetorum lumen, vit  conversatione
integer  sanctissimus, c. the Prince amongst
Divines, the beauty of Philosophers, and the light
to Rhetoricians, of life and conversation most
upright and holy.
And to shut up all:Ildep. Tolet. de viris illustr. heare but what Ildephon|sus
of Toledo saith of him, Vicit sanctitate An|thonium,
Eloquentia Cyprianum, Sapientia Au|gustinum,
that is, he exceeded Saint Anthony in
Sanctitie, Saint Cyprian in Eloquence, and Saint
Augustine in Wisdome: and so heare onely what
Cardinall Bellarmine relates of him,Card. Bellar. in script. Eccl. p. 110. who calls
him, Doctorem eximium,  merit magnum:
that is, a most egregious Doctor, and well de|serving
the name of Great. Hee died in the
yeere of Christ Iesus 604.

Sentences out of Gregory Magnus.

Of Poverty.
Hee is poore whose soule is void of grace,Greg. super Ezech. Hom. 6. not

whose coffers are empty of mony: the conten|ted
poverty is true riches.


Of the holy Scriptures.
The holy Scriptures are direct,Greg. super Ezech. and right for
admonition, lofty for promises, terrible for
threatnings.


Of God.
God is never absent,Greg. in hom. 8 in Ezech. though the wicked have
him not in their thoughts: where he is not by
favour, he is by punishment and terrour.


Of conversion to God.
Every convert hath a beginning,Greg. in Mo|ral. 24. a middle, a
perfection: in the first there is sweetnesse to al|lure
him, in the second bitternesse to exercise
him, in the third fulnesse of perfection to con|firme
him.


Of the Incarnation.
Will you observe our Saviours motions,Greg. 20. homo super Evag. ecceiste venict saliens. hee
came from Heaven into the wombe, from the
wombe to the cratch, from the cratch to the
crosse, from the crosse to the Grave, from the
Grave to Heaven.



On the Crosse of Christ.
Christ shewed patience in his passion,Greg. in hom. com|mended
humility, fulfilled obedience, perfected
Charity: those were the four Jewels that adorn'd
his Crosse.


Charitatis  Humilitatis jubar.
These are onely true riches which make us
rich in vertue:Greg. hom. sup. illud, exiit qui seminat. c. therefore if thou desire riches,
love true riches. If thou aspire to honour, seek
the Kingdome of Heaven. If thou affect glory,
strive to bee enrolled in the high Court of An|gels.
Hee that loves this present pilgrimage,Greg. l. Moral. in the
midst of sorrow, knows not how to shew sor|row:
for the words of a just man are full of sor|row:
for in regard of present sufferings, his
speech and sighs aspire to heaven.
He is most perfect in piety,Greg. ibid. that doth most per|fectly
feele anothers misery.
The best eloquence and expression,Greg. l. 6. Mo|ral. is to de|clare
the mind by good action, for conscience
doth not check the speaker when his life is bet|ter
then his speech.
Hee that lives obscurely,Greg. super Eze. hom. 1. and doth not profit
others by his example, is like a burning coal, but
hee that imitates holinesse shewing the light
of uprightnesse to others, is like a lampe burning
to himselfe, and shining to others.

True Faith doth not onely consist in verball
profession, but in actuall operation.Greg. hom. 29.
The fortitude of the Just;Greg. l. 8. is to overcome the
flesh, to contradict the will, to forsake the de|lights
of this life, to love affliction for an eter|nall
reward, to contemne prosperity and to o|vercome
adversity.
Joy doth discover the mind,Greg. l. 28. Moral. but adversity
as it doth outwardly oppresse, so it doth inward|ly
suppresse the thoughts, and make us more
close and cautious.
Gregory Magnus would say of himselfe, that
hee could never reade those words in the Scrip|ture,
which Abraham spake to Dives, Sonne, re|member
that thou in thy life time receivedst good
things, without horrour and astonishment,
lest having received such good things of this
World, meaning such dignities and honours as
he had, he should be excluded from having any
part and portion in the happinesse or good things
in the world to come.


Of Gods Word.
Saint Gregory saith, and wishes all men that
heare the Word of God, to taste the Word of
God with the palate of their hearts.


Not to have a slavish feare.
Feare not man who must die, nor feare the
sonne of man who is but grasse.



Of godly Desires.
Our desires, saith this Father, do sound more
powerfully in the secret eares of God, than our
words.
Againe, the more earnestly God is desired of
us, the more sweetly is he delighted in us.
Saint Paul saith, Hee that searcheth the heart
knoweth what is the minde of the spirit, Rom. 8.



I have here set downe his Works as they are
set before his Books printed at Rome 1588, di|stributed
into six Tomes.

Tome 1.
1 Saint Gregories
Life contained in
foure books, by Joan|nes
Diaconus.
2 Testimonies of sun|dry
men given to him,
as Gregorius Tu|ronensis,
Paulus Di|aconus,
Venerabilis
Beda, Ado Viennen|sis,
Symo Metaphra|stes.
3 Eulogies and testi|monies
of his Works.
4 The argument of all
his Works.
5 The argument on the
second book of the
Kings by him ex|pounded.



Tome 2.
1 Morall Expositions
upon Job in thirtie
five books.
2 Exposition on the
seaven penitentiall
Psalmes.
3 Exposition on the
Canticles.
4 Twenty two Homi|lies
on Ezechiel, in
two books.


Tome 3.
1 A booke of fortie
most learned Homi|lies
to Secundus a
Bishop upon divers
readings on the Go|spels.
2 A booke of the Pa|stors
charge to the ho|ly
Father John Bishop
of Ravenna.
3 Foure books of Dia|logues.
4 Those translated in|to
Greeke by Pope
Zachary.


Tome 4.
1 Twelve books called
his Registery of E|pistles
of severall sub|jects.


Tome 5.
1 Containing Anthems
and a booke of the
Sacraments.
With certaine Hymnes,
for Mornings and
Evenings, to give
thankes.
For Lent.
For Palme-sunday.
For Good Friday.


Tome 6.
1 On Genesis, in se|venty
nine Chapters
with expositions.
2 On Exodus in sixty
two Chapters, with
Expositions.
3 On Leviticus, in
fifteen Chapters with
Expositions.

4 On Numbers with
twenty foure Chap|ters.
5 On Deuteronomy,
in twenty eight chap|ters.
6 On Josuah in two
chapters.
7 On Judges, in eight
chapters.
8 On the first booke of
Kings in 15 chap|ters.
9 On the second of
Kings in fifteene
chapters.
10 On the Chronicles,
twenty foure chap|ters.
11 On the Psalmes,
two hundred eightie
seven chapters.
12 On the Proverbs,
thirty seven chapters.
13 On the Canticles,
49 chapters, by Pate|rius.
On the New Te|stament.
14 On Matthew a hun|dred
and foure chap|ters.
15 On Saint Marke, 54.
16 On Saint Luke, 99
chapters.
17 On Saint John, 59
chapters.
18 On the Acts, forty
chapters.
On the Romans, thirty
chapters.
19 On the 1 Corinthi|ans,
52 chapters.
On the 2 Corinthians,
29 chapters.
20 On the Galathians,
nine chapters.
21 On the Ephesians,
14 chapters.
22 On the Philippians,
11 chapters.
23 On the Colossians,
six chapters.
24 On the 1 of Thes|salonians,
7 chap.
25 On the 2 of Thessa|lonians,
4 chapters.
26 On the 1 of Timo|thy,
13 chapters.
27 On the 2 to Timo|thy,
4 chapters.

28 On the Hebrews, 12
chapters.
29 On Saint James, 9
chapters.
30 On the 1 of S. Peter,
8 chapters.
31 On the second, six
chapters
On the 1 Epistle of St.
John, 12 chapters.
32 On the second, two
chapters.
33 On the Apocalypse
69 chapters.

And so I will conclude this famous St. Gre|gory
his life with St. Damasces commendati|on.
Gregory was Bishop of the ancienter Roman
Church, a man admirable for his singular up|rightnesse
of life, and purity of learning, who
had as hee laboured in the sacred Mysteries of
Gods Word, an Angell to direct him, and was
inspired by the Spirit of the Holy Ghost. Da|mascenus
in Oratione de iis qui cum fide dormie|runt.




An. Christi 630. Isidore Hispalensis.

S. ISIDORVS HISPALENSIS.

_HE was by birth a Spaniard, of good and
honest parents, such was their conditi|on,
that they had alwayes an especiall
care in the educating of this their young sonne,
in vertue in his youth, that hee might bee the
more endued with it, when hee came to maturi|ty:
For many teach their children the liberall
Sciences, not because those Sciences may give
any vertue, but because they make the minde
apt to receive any impression of vertue: for ma|ny
mens children be divers and of sundry con|ditions:
some bee of nature not prompt and
forward, wherefore by education they must
thereunto bee formed. This Isidore was of a

quick wit, and of an able memory (pointed out
by heaven) in so much that he was admired and
respected of all for his Learning and Eloquence:
And being come to yeeres, and taken notice of
by the Bishop (who then sate in that See) and o|ther
learned men, gained much love and respect
from them for his constancie, descent, and pie|tie;
whereupon hee was called to bee a Priest:
which he performed with a great deal of pietie,
circumspection, and care: To be briee, the old
Bishop falling sicke and dying; many stood for
some, and more friends for the obtaining of it;
but at last it came to a generall election, and by
that meanes, it was bestowed upon this Isidore:
who was successour, and also Cozen to Bishop
Leander; Hee flourished in the Reigne of the
Emperour Mauritius,In vita Isidor ate ejus ope and of King Rivaredus,
and was so generally eloquent, that hee could
accommodate the quality of his speech fitly to
discourse with the Ignorant or Learned. His
works were most famous for humane and di|vine
Learning, he was of a subtle, sharpe wit, a
cleere apprehension, and a composed speech, ex|cellent
in verse and prose, shining with the re|fulgent
beams of sanctity and learning, so that
all those naturall gifts which lie scattered in o|thers,
were in him collected into one subject. He
was called the younger, to distinguish him from
the senior Bishop of Corduba, or from another
Bishop of Siuill his predecessor,In Epist.  When he per|ceived
that hee was neere his end, and did fore|see
by the quick sight of his soule, that his body

was spent wearied and decayed by continuall
sicknesse, hee gave such liberall Almes daily to
the poore for six moneths together, so that they
tarried all day to receive his charity: afterward
his sicknesse increasing, and his stomack through
weaknesse refusing all kind of sustenance, he de|sired
to make his reconciliation with God by
prayer publikely, and amongst the Congrega|tion:
and so was carried to S. Vincents Church,
where hee confessed himselfe and said, Thou, 
God, which knowest the hearts of men; and didst
forgive the poore Publican that stood afarre off,
and knocked his owne brest, who on the fourth day
didst raise dead Lazarus from the grave, and
wouldst have him received into Abrahams bo|some,
receive at this houre my confession, and re|move
from thy sight the innumerable sins I have
done: remember not,  Lord, the sins of my youth;
and because thou sayest, Quod in quacunque ho|ra
peccator  viis suis reverterit, omnes iniqui|tates
suas traderes oblivioni; I am mindfull of
thy gracious promise, I call unto thee with hope
and confidence, being in regard of my sinnes un|worthy
to looke up unto Heaven: but,  Lord, I
beseech thee, receive my prayer, and pardon mee a
sinner. For if the Heavens bee not pure in thy
sight, much more am I impure, who have drunke
iniquitie like water: Then hee asked pardon of
the Clergie and Citizens, saying, I beseech the
whole Congregation of the Clergie, and people
here present to pray unto the Lord for me a wic|ked
sinner, that I who am through my own me|rit

unworthy to obtaine mercy; may by your
intercession receive pardon of my sins, Forgive
me, I beseech you, all the offences I have com|mitted
against you, if I have contemned any
one, beene uncharitable, if I have corrupted any
one with bad counsell, if I have wronged any
one in anger; I desire you pardon mee that am
penitent, for my offences. After hee had made
this prayer and confession, being brought home
againe, hee died foure dayes afterward, in the
Reigne of the Emperour Heraclius, and of Chin|tilan
the most Christian King of the Goths, in
Spaine; being exceedingly famous for sound|nesse
of doctrine, and for abundance of charita|ble
works. Many mellifluous Sentences fell from
his holy mouth and pen, some whereof collected
out of his writings, are these following.


Of Affliction.
Thou seeekest rest and condemnest ease,Comment. in Cant. cap. 3. but
remember that affliction, and greater is the fruit
of preaching then of silent quietnesse, as Christ
saith to the Church, Sicut Lilium inter spinas,
sic amica mea inter filios: As the Lily among
thornes, such is my beloved among the daugh|ters
of men.


Of Christ.
Hee came from Heaven into the Virgins
wombe,In Cant. chap. 5 from the womb into the manger, from

the manger unto the Crosse, from the Crosse
unto the Sepulchre, from the Sepulchre he re|turned
into Heaven.


Of the Church.
The Church is a fenced Garden,In Cant. cap. 4. because it
produceth many fruits of spirituall workes; it is
a Fountaine because it floweth with the Do|ctrine
of Salvation, Armed because it is defen|ded
by the Lords protection, and sealed by the
word of Faith.


Of Wisdome.
Wisdome is above all things,Chap. 1. neither can there
be any justice without wisdome, and none can
fully receive the wisdome of God, but such as
withdraw themselves from worldly cares.
He is more to be blamed that knoweth what
hee ought to follow, and will not follow that
which he knoweth.
Knowledge and a good life are both profi|table;
but if both cannot be obtained, a good
life is to bee sought rather than much know|ledge.


Of Perseverance.
The reward is promised to those that begun,Chap. 7.
but it is given to those that persevere. As it is
written, He that shall persevere to the end shall
be saved.



Of Converts.
New converts should not trouble themselves
with outward cares,Isidore sent. Cap. 7. for if they be entangled in
them, like new planted trees not well rooted,
they are suddenly shaken and doe wither.


Of Compunction.
Compunction of the heart,Sent. cap. 12. is the humilitie
of the minde accompanied with teares, arising
from the remembrance of him, and the feare
of judgement.


Of Repentance.
His repentance is acceptable,Chap. 13. that doth be|waile
his sins, condemning himselfe and lamen|ting
for them, being as profuse in weeping as
he was forward in sinning.


Of thought.
As the Viper is killed by the young ones in
her belly,Chap. 1. so wee are betrayed and killed by our
owne thoughts, nourished in our own bosomes,
which doe both poyson and consume the soule.


Of Conscience.
All things may be shunned,Chap. 26. but a mans owne

heart. For no man can run from himselfe, for a
guilty conscience will not forsake him whereso|ever
he goeth.


Of speech.
The evill speech of the heart are hurtfull co|gitations
and meditations,Chap. 28. of the tongue pu|nishable
speeches. The evill speech of action is
an ill life corrupting others by example.


Of pride.
Every sinner is proud, for by doing that
which is prohibited,Chap. 29. he contemneth divine pre|cepts.
Therefore pride is the beginning of all
sinne, for the disobeying of Gods Commande|ments
is transgression and sinne.


Of Diet.
Diet should not bee luxurious nor wanton,Chap. 31.
but sufficient to sustain Nature: for as Philoso|phers
say, the belly should b so meated, that it
may keep life and soule together, not corrupt
both life and soule together.


Of the Soule.
The life of the bodie is the soule, the life of
the soule is God: and as the body is dead with|out
the soule, so the soule is dead without God.

As Angels had a beginning, but no ending,
so also have soules. For some things are tem|porall,
perpetuall, and eternall. Temporall
matters have a beginning and ending. Perpetu|all
have a beginning, but no end. Eternall have
neither beginning nor end.


Of the Saints glory.
As white compared to black is more beaute|ous,
so the glorification of the Saints compared
to the damnation of the wicked will bee more
glorious, therefore the damnation of the wicked
is an augmentation of the Saints glory.
After the Resurrection, the Saints all bodily
ascend into Heaven, as Christ saith to his Fa|ther,
Iohn 17.
The Devils have a threefold prescience or
fore-knowledge;Isidor. l. 1. de summo boo. namely, by naturall sub|tiltie,
temporall experience, and supernaturall
revelation.
The Devill in deceiving any one observes his
nature,Isidor. . 3. de summo boo. and doth apply such temptation as will
draw his naturall inclination to sin.
Good done with discretion is vertue,Isior. in lib. de synd. and any
action undiscreetly done is vice: For even un|discreet
vertue is accounted vice.
Philosophie doth shew the order of causes,I sidor. l. 2. Ety|mol.
Morality the order of iving, and Logicke the
reason of understanding.
Drunkennesse is a vice which makes the mind
forgetfull of it self,. . 3. Eymol. through superflous drinking.

It is impiety to spend on the rich,Isidor. l. 3. de summo bono. that which
should be given to the poore, and by peeling the
poore, to obtaine the favour of the powerfull.
As to take water from the thirsty ground, and
powre it into Rivers that have no need thereof.
Hee that begins to amend and grow better,
let him beware lest he grow proud of his vertues:
lest vain-glory give him a greater overthrow
than his former vices.
When the poor are fed for ostentation sake,Isidor. de sum|mo bono l. 3.
a worke of mercy is turned into a sinne.
Doe good in secret if thou canst,Isidor. de con|flict. vitiorum. but if not
have a desire to doe it in secret, and so thou,
shalt: avoid ostentation.
Avoid anger or moderate it,Isidor l. 1. soli|quio. shunne furie or
restrane it, for a wise patient silence doth over|come
an enemy sooner than impatience.





An. Christi 731. Beda.

VENERABLE BEDE.

_THis Venerable Bede was a Benedictine
Monke, of the Monastery of Saint
Peter and Paul, in England: He was
an English Saxon, borne in the yeare
of Christs Incarnation 671. in the time of Deo|datus
Ppe: Hee was deprived of both his pa|rents,
when he was but seven yeares old: Hee
was delivered into the Monastery of Saint Peter
and Paul by the care of his Neighbours, and
was brought up there under Benedict and Ceal|frid
then Abbots, and men famous for Piety
and learning; where in short space hee shewed
what parts he had gained by vertuous educati|on
in his youth; for he was a man most studious

in the holy scriptures, and wondrously learned,
skilfull in all secular occasions; a great Philoso|pher,
Astronomer, Musitian, and Poet, skilfull
in the Greek Tongue, a mellifluous Rhetorici|an,
Arithmetician, and a famous Divine. Hee
practised these three things himselfe, and taught
others to doe so too. O rare! scribere  do|cere,
to pray, to write, to preach: at nineteene
yeares of his age, he was by Ceolfrids appoynt|ment
ordained a Deacon, Sergius the third be|ing
then Pope, and at thirty he was ordained
Priest; from which time hee wholly devoted
himselfe to the study of the sacred Scriptures in
meditation and interpretation of them; for he
speakes so much of himselfe in the end of the
History of England, in these words, Beda Dei
famulus  Presbyter Monasterii Apostolor. Petri
 Pauli, quod est ad Wirimudam  Ingiruam,
c. omnem meditandis scripturis operam dedi.
Hee was sent for to Rome by Pope Sergius,
that he might discourse with him, Bede being
so famous in all parts for his vertues and sci|ence.
The Epistle of that Pope is to be seene in
the third Tome of the generall Councells, and
begins in these words, Opportunis ergo, c. the
subject of it was, that there was a great need of
the advice of learned Divines to settle the
Churches peace, and he was knowne to be able
in the study of Theology, and therefore was de|sired
to repaire to Rome with all convenient
speed; but it is concluded by the best Historians,
that he stirred not out of England.

He was wonderfully modest, and did never
hunt after preferments, but contented him|selfe
with that life and daily study: in his rea|dings
oftentimes he was so devout, that hee
would shed teares abundantly: and after he had
done reading, he would fall to prayers; for he
would say, that prayer was of great force to
get the true understanding of Gods Word. O
famous instrument to Gods glory! who not
onely was fervent in his prayers, but exceeding|ly
both by life and learning, edified the Church
of Christ.
Hee hated idlenesse, and would say, hee
thought there was so much worke to doe for a
Divine in so little a space of time, that hee
ought not to lose any of it; it is imployment
keeps the soule safe and sound. He did not begin
to take this taske upon him when the Sun was
setting, in his old age; or begin to live when he
should dye: no, he offered God his youth, and
began in the strength and prime of his age. He
was a Bee in his owne hive; he dressed his own
Garden; hee managed his owne affaires, for|getting
all desire of honour and riches, which
bringeth with it miserable and stupendious ef|fects.
And for pleasure and delights of the
World, we must deale with it (saith hee) as men
doe who buy and taste honey, onely touch it
with the tip of the finger, not with our whole
hand, for feare of surfeit. He had many famous
Schollars, which he provoked to study by his
owne example; in a word, he was full of know|ledge,

charity, devotion, and chastity.
For his person, he was of a comely stature,
grave in his going, of a lofty voyce, pleasant of
speech, comely of countenance, and pleasant|ly
severe.
Being aged 59 yeares, in the yeare of Grace
731 he finished the Catalogue of his Workes;
but it is not on all parts resolved justly what
yeare he dyed in. Marianus Scotus saith in the
yeare of or Lord 729. Sigebertus saith in the
yeare 731. Trithemius saith in the yeare 733.
Some have much erred, who say that he dyed in
the yeare 700: but Baronius he approves them
not. How he departed this life, is to be seene
by an Epistle of one of his Scholars, who af|ter
great commendations of him for piety,
learning, patience, and the like, saith, Grava|tus
infirmitate anhelitus, hardnesse of breathing
a little after Ascention day, hee was sicke of it,
and had a tumor in his feet: in his sicknesse hee
was not any whit disturbed to appearance, but
would often exhort his Scholars to bee quicke
in gathering notes from him: for hee had not
long to stay with them. For my life (said hee)
is uncertaine at the best; and that man which
goeth on wandring without any faith or con|stancy,
feedeth his thoughts and cogitations
with vapour: no man knoweth what will hap|pen
in time to come; howbeit God governeth
all men in the midst of all perills and dangers:
and many times on the contrary hee bloweth
upon us a strong winde, or tempest of adversity:

And that life is good, and best to be esteemed,
which is led in honesty and vertue; for at the
day of death it will trie it selfe: for the day
of death is the Master and judge of all other
dayes, being the tryall and touch-stone of all
the actions of our life: then doe wee make our
greatest assay, and gather the whole fruit of all
our studies: and he that judgeth of the life of
a man, must looke how he carrieth himselfe at
his death: for the end crowneth the workes,
and a good death honourerh a mans whole life.
There was a young man one Witberch, that
spoke to him and said; Loving Master, there is
something left to write; to which he answered
and said it was finished, and so cald him to hold
his head, and then singing Gloria Patri, Filio,
 Spiritui Sancto, with cheerefulnesse he brea|ted
out his Spirit, and slept in the Lord. Many
famous men have praised him as Hildwines, and
Marianus Scotus: Albinus Flaccus termes him,
Eximium Doctorem, and Amalarius calls him
Venerable, according to that Verse.
Hic sunt infossa Bedae venerabilis ossa.
So also St. Boniface the German Apostle calls
him, sagacissimum scripturarum Indagatorem.
I should bee too large, should I reckon up
each particular praise that is given to this Fa|ther;
yet I cannot let passe that which Trithe|mius
speakes of him in his Ecclesiasticall Wri|ters.
He was (saith he) uncorrupt of life, devout

in heart, full of knowledge, wondrously industri|ous,
excellently acute; usually reading the Scrip|tures,
adorned and graced with all sorts of ver|tues;
a witty writer. Possevinus speaking of him,
useth these expressions, Ingentibus Dei dnis,
doctrina  sanctitate ornatus, c. that is, ador|ned
with the great gifts of Gods Spirit; with
learning and sanctity; a diligent Writer, full fur|nished
with wit and wisedome, wondrous chari|table,
devout, humble, patient: in a word, a pat|terne
to Preachers, a lanthorne shining into all
parts, c. So doth Cardinall Bellarmine ex|toll
him also. But I shut up all in these word:
Hee did much, and suffered much to defend
Gods Truth, and to propagate the Gospell of Ie|sus
Christ.
Hee flourished in the time of Gregory the
Great, and long after, to the yeare 750. being
the ancient glory of our English Nation, and
a man of greatest worth and learning of any in
his time. So after hee faithfully shewed him|selfe
a worthy Steward, a carefull Watchman,
a painfull husband-man, a powerful Labourer;
a learned Priest, in the thirteenth yeare of his
Primacy God cald him from hence.

His Sayings.
He is a sluggard that would reigne with God,
and not labour for God.Bed. sup. Pro. li. 2. In the promised re|wards
he takes delight, but the commanded
Combates doe him affright.

Flattery is the nurse of sinne,Bede sup. Luc. l. 2. which like
Oyle doth feed the flames of sinfull affections.
True love doth love truth, judge in truth,
strive for truth, and finish Workes with
truth.
None doth ascend into Heaven,Bede sup. Ioan. 3. but hee
that doth descend from Heaven. Therfore he
that will ascend into heaven, must joyne him|self
by true faith and love unto him that descen|ded
from Heaven; knowing that hee cannot
ascend into Heaven, but by him that descended
from heaven.
It is lesse labour to resist carnall pleasure un|knowne,Bed. sup. Esd. l. 4.
than after experimentall knowledge.
The rich man is not reprehended for plough|ing
his lands,Bede. in glo. sup. Luc. 2. and gathering his fruit into his
Barnes, but because hee put his confidence in
them, and did not bestow them on the poore,
that so his soule might bee received into
heaven.
Through Riches and Liberty,Bede sup. Esd. l. 1. mans heart
doth commonly grow dissolute; but by trouble
and poverty it is recollected.
Anger doth languish by suppressing,Bede sup. para lib. 1. but
flames higher by expressing.
The pleasure of Fornication is but a breath,Bede de tem|plo Sl.
but the punishment thereof is eternall death.
Wantonnesse is a Bestiall languishing of the
Body, arising from carnall Conceits and Co|gitations.


And for to declare unto the World the great

paines this worthy man tooke, in propagating
the Gospell of Christ, I have here annexed
the Works, which are onely knowne to be his.

1 Vpon Genesis.
2 Exodus.
3 Numbers.
4 Leviticus, Deutero|nomy.
5 Of the Tabernacle,
and questions upon
the Kings.
6 Iosuah.
7 Iudges.
8 Chronicles.
9 Proverbs.
10 Ecclesiastes.
11 Canticles.
12 Esdras, and Nehe|miah.
13 Tobias.
14 Esay.
15 Ieremiah.
16 Ezekiel.
17 Daniel.
18 Twelve lesser Pro|phets.
19 On Marke.
20 On Luke.
21 On the Evangelists.
22 On Pauls Epistles.
23 On the Canonicall
Epistles.
24 On the Acts of the
Apostles.
25 On the Apocalyps.
26 Of Times and their
Nature.
27 Some sparkes out
of the Fathers.
28 Deeds of the En|glish
Nation.
29 Flowers out of Gre|gory
the Great, on
the Canticles.
30 The actions of divers
Saints.
A Cronologie of his own
Monastery.
31 A Martyrology.
32 Hymnes in sundry
sorts of Verses.

33 Epigrams in Hero|icke
verse.
34 Of holy places. Rea|dings
of the old Te|stament.
36 On the new Testa|ment.
37 Distinctions on Ie|remaih,
Iob.
38 Of Christ and his
Church.
39 Of Abaccucks song.
39 Of making of
Verses.
40 Of Scheames.
41 Of Orthography.
42 Epistles to divers.

So having beene laborious in the Church, he
departed, Leo being Emperour, Anno Christi
732. Of whom I might speake much more ac|cording
to his deserts; but let this suffice.




An. Christi 731. Sanctus Damasce|nus.

S. DAMAZEN.

_IT is no small comfort to proceed
from the loines of worthy Proge|nitors,
when not onely wee are ena|bled
by our owne vertues, but also
made the more conspicuous by our parents. In
this respect, this worthy Father challengeth a
double honour, for hee was not onely well de|scended
from parents of worth and pietie, but
also was himselfe a grace to them and the place
of his Nativity. Hee was borne in Damascus a
City well knowne, if it were but for that very
one cause that is registred in holy Writte, and
was as it is to be read in the ninth of the Acts of
the Apostles, a place of refuge for the persecuted

Saints which fled from Hierusalem,  were pro|secuted
by Saul, who was converted in his jour|ney
to this place; for his parents, though they
lived in dangerous times, and in the midst of
barbarous people, yet they as Lilies among
thornes retained their beauty and integrity, not
losing their piety in the midst of a perverse ge|neration,
and when the Agarens subjected that
City by the sword, and used cruelty towards the
Chrians, yet these worthy paire (by Gods pro|vidence)
were preserved, (as it might seeme) to
produce to the World this their son, nay, their
very enemies admired their constancie, and gave
them reverence: and as God who kept Daniel
among the Assyrians, though a captive, yet made
him a Ruler and a Commander, and likewise
Ioseph, though sold and imprisoned, yet was by
the same providence set up a chiefe Ruler in the
midst of his adversaries: so likewise did God
give this Damascens Father such credit and re|spect,
that even those Saracens made him for his
worth and conspicuous piety, Administrator of
their publick and most weighty affaires, and he
is called, Vt lucerna in nocte, signum in monte,
scintilla in cinere: that is, As a Lanthorne in a
night, as a Beacon on a Hill, as a spark amongst
ashes, as a Diamond among dust for his justice
and integritie: and what he got in wealth by his
Offices, he did with liberall hands distribute, in
the reliefe of captives in slavery, nay, hee gave
his estate and land which was a great quantitie
in Iudea and Palaestine, to the maintenance of

the poore Christians in bondage, and his Father
by his purse did not redeeme so many from cap|tivity,
as his sonne did from the snares and sla|very
of the Devill; this Damascens father had a
speciall care, that assoon as his sonne was borne,
he should be christened, and made a member of
the Christian Church; a dangerous thing in those
times, when to be but suspected to be a Christian
was matter enough of bonds or death. Hee
likewise had an especiall care to his education,
which is commendable in parents, and chose
him a Master, not a man of the sword, but emi|nent
for austerity and holinesse of life; and it
fell out thus: It was the custome of the Barba|rians,
in ships and boats to rove about, and to
take prisoners, and often they brought Chri|stians
with them, whom they inslaved, or put to
the sword, or made sale of them: and bringing
in many, amongst the rest there was an ancient
old man an Italian in an Hermits habit, of a
comely gracious aspect, called Cosmas: they that
were put to the sword gave great respect to this
man, so that the Barbarians seeing the Christi|ans
so to reverence him, conceived him to bee
some great man, and demanded of him what he
was, he answered, hee was a poore, old, unpro|fitable
man; and thereupon wept, onely he was a
Philosopher, as he confest, which Damasecns Fa|ther
standing by and hearing him, and seeing
him weepe, asked him why he wept? Who told
him it was because he had gain'd the knowledge
in all the liberall Arts, but as yet he had not bred

up any in the same knowledge: whereupon
this Damascens Father presently went to the
Captaine, and humbly on his knees begd him
to be given to him, which was granted him,
and so hee brought him to his house, and ha|ving
refresht him, told him he had a son which
he would commit to him,Billius in vita Ioannia. which was this Iohn
who (as my Author testifies) Naturae praestanti
atque animi studio  industri, by the excel|lency
of his naturall parts and endowments
quickly attained to a perfect knowledge in
Grammar, and Logicke, and Philosophy, Rhe|torick,
Musick, Astronomy and indeed in all the
Liberall Sciences, and, what is admirable, was
not for all his knowledge and learning tain|ted
with pride or vain glory, but still retained
his humility: His Master seeing such forward|nesse
in so young a Scholer, and such a prompti|tude
and promising abilities to future per|formances,
spoke these words to his Fa|ther;
En quod cupiebas plen consecutus es; puer
enim me eruditione antecellit, that is, What you
have desired, you have fully obtained: for hee
which you call a youth excels mee in Learning.
Wherefore seeing I have satisfied your desire in
this respect, give me leave to end the rest of my
dayes in a solitary course of life, so that I may
be also skilfull in the study of heavenly matters,
whereunto all these Sciences and gifts are but
servants and subalternate; which words the Fa|ther
of this Damascen grieved at, being loth to
lose such an able man whom he so loved, yet be|cause

he would not seeme so to requite his pains
for his sonnes tuition, gave him a large reward
at his farwell, and so dismissed him in peace; so
he going to Laura a solitary place, spent the re|mainder
of his life in heavenly meditations, and
in fulnesse of dayes dyed, and so did Damascens
Father likewise: his Father being dead, the
Prince of the Saracens called this Iohn to pos|sesse
his Fathers place, which hee at first refused,
but it was imposed upon him, which hee admi|nistred
with singular fidelity. Hee lost his right
hand, which was cut off by the policy of the
exhibition of certain fained Letters which were
shewed and read to the Emperour Leo Isauricus,
that if it pleased him to come with an Army in|to
those parts, hee would procure him the City
of Damascus to be yeelded to him; he having (as
he said) almost all the rule and preheminence in
those parts; Leo receving the letters, sent one
presently backe unto the Prince of the Saracens,
wherein he signified how farre it was from his
thoughts to make any hostile invasion into his
Dminions, though hee had faire hopes of suc|cesse
by such a mans promise to assist and direct
him: Hereupon Damascen was presently sent
for by the Prince, and the Letters were shewed
to him, he wondred at the matter, and said the
hand-written was some thing like to his, but
for the fact or intention hee never harboured
such an one in his soule: but the Prince being
inraged, commanded his right hand to be cut
off, which was, as my author relates, restored to

him againe, to convince by this wonderfull act,
the heart of the incensed Prince, and to manifest
to all men the innocencie of this Iohn: it
wrought so effectually, that hee had all his Offi|ces
and preferments bestowed on him againe,
but hee intended another course, for hee desired
the Prince to acquit him of all his places, and to
give him leave to live retiredly: after much de|bate
the Prince yeelded, and so immediatly this
Iohn did sell all his goods (except such as hee
gave to his Kindred) for the avoiding of suites
and strifes, and made distribution to the poore.
And so going to Hierusalem, hee went to be ad|mitted
into the same Monastery into which Cos|mas
had beene before; whither comming the
President of the place finding him to bee full
fraught with all sorts of learning, appointed a
famous member of that Societie to be his Instru|ctour
in the study of Gods Word, but hee, as also
a second and third refused it, holding themselves
not able to teach such a learned man, the fourth
takes him into charge, and gives him precepts
and rules both how to order his body and soule,
to whom this Iohn, perceiving his directions to
be sweet and wholsome, gave speciall obedience
and singular respect, though afterwards hee was
by his said Master ejected out of the Monastery,
for a matter of disobedience, but by his sorrow
and submission hee was restored, hee was full of
Divine Hymnes; and having by Gods blessing
gained much in the knowledge of Gods Word,
he was by the Governour of the Church of Hie|rusalem

ordain'd a Priest, who having that
charge laid on him, hee did with great care and
pety undergo it, so that it is said of him to his
eternall praise, Cum religiosae vitae curriculum
confeisset, c. that is, when hee had consum|mated
the course of a religious life, when he had
kept the Faith, or, as my Authour speaks, when
hee had propagated the faith in his Sermons,
when hee had graced it with his Writings, hee
was after much labour and travell cald to rest.
His prayses are large which are afforded him:
they stile him pietatis Athetam, Ecclesiae orna|mentum,
veritatis ducem, certatorem, religiosae
vitae cultorem, dogmatum peritum, insipientes
sapientia instruentem, prophanorum institutorem,
that is, the Champion of Pietie, the Churches
ornament, the Captain for Truth, the imbracer
of a religious life, skilfull in his doctrines, in|structing
the unlearned in Wisdome, reducing
the prophane to Holinesse.
Suidas speaks thus of him,Suidas. Iohannes Damas|cenus,
sirnamed Mansur, was a most eloquent
man, behinde none of his time for various lear|ning.
His Works are many, and those accurate,
he was so skillfull in Musique that none ever did
or will parallel him.Trit. de scrip. Eceles. Trithemius terms him, Vi|rum
sanctum  doctum, A learned and holy
man of life, of whom there are wonderfull
things reported for his doctrine and sincerity of
life.
Hee writ divinely many things in Greeke; in
Constantinople hee was highly esteemed, hee

brought many from sin and impiety to embrace
the truth: Hee was a stout Antagonist against
Heretikes.
Hee flourished under Theodosius that worthy
Emperour, in the yeere of Christs Incarnati|on,
731.

Damascen his Sayings.
If therefore there be no Resurrection,Damascen. l. 4. there is
no God, nor any providence, but all things are
governed by chance and fortune: For we see that
the just are in necessity, and do suffer injurie; but
sinners and the unjust have abundance of riches
and pleasures: but who shall imagine that this
is not the worke of a just judgement and wise
providence: therefore there shall be a resurrecti|on;
for God is just, and of those that trust in
him is a mercifull rewarder.
Worldly wisdome is to disguise and cover the
heart, to dissemble in words,Damasce. .  to make falshood
appeare truth, and to make truth appeare fals|hood:
this wisdome young men learne by expe|rience:
those that know it grow proud and de|spise
others, those that know it not are subject
 fearful, and admire it in others: being obey'd,
it maketh men climbe to the highest degree of
Honour; being gotten, it commandeth men to
rejoyce in the vanity of temporall honour,
to requie wrongs with advantage, and having
power to yield to no opposition, and being de|stitute
of ability to expresse malice, to counter|feit

a peaceable goodnesse of disposition.
An Angell is an intellectuall substance,Damasc. lib. 2. cap. 3. always
moveable, free, incorporeall, ministring to God
by Grace, not nature, and immortall: whose
specificall kind of substance is knowne onely to
the Creatour.
The Name of Christ doth expresse the unity
of person in two natures, it expresses also his
Regall dignitie, and fulnesse of grace by the
prerogative of anointing.


I have here placed his Works as they are set
downe in the Parisian Edition, 1619.

1 Of Parallells, three
books.
2 Of the Orthodoxe
Faith foure books.
3 Of some who have
died in the faith.
4 A speech of Christs
Transfiguration.
5 Of the birth of the
blessed Virgin.
6 Of her Assumption.
7 Divine Iambikes,
Greek and Latine.
8 Various Hymnes.
9 Damascens Logick.
10 Institutions of De|crees.
11 Physicks.
12 Of Heresies.
13 A Dialogue against
the Manichees.
14 Of Nature.
15 A learned Epistle.
16 Of the two wils in
Christ.
17 How we are created
in the Image of God.
18 Of Images, three
speeches.
19 St. Stephens life.

20 A dispute of a Chri|stian
and Saracen.
21 A fragment of
Sentences.
22 Of the eight naugh|ty
thoughts by Eua|grius.
23 Of the same by Ni|lus.
24 Of the day of judg|ment.
25 Damascens Histo|ry.
26 Of the holy Sabbath.
27 An Oration by Da|mascen.

Cardinall Bellarmine, amongst his Ecclesia|sticall
Writers, calls him a man of great Holi|nesse
and Learning. And as Beda was admired
in the West, so was he in the East. Hee suffered
many things for the Faith under Constantinus
Copronymus, wrote many famous things be|fore
he died, whom the Master of the Sentences
and all the Schoole Doctours have imitated for
his worth and wit.




An. Christi 828. Sanctus Nicepho|rus.

NYCEPHORVS.

_HAving drawne the pictures of so ma|ny
famous Fathers, eminent in the
Church for their piety, sanctity,
and learning, it is necessary leviter
tantm vitam S. Nicephori adumbrare, light|ly
to shadow out the life of St. Nicephorus; for
indeed, what praises can reach the height of
his perfection? who like a bright lampe of
learning and of religious life, shined forth in
the Horizon of the Church in the yeare 840. for
then he lived in his brightest lustre, like the East
starre, leading both the vulgar by his Doctrine,
and the wise men by his writings to the know|ledge
of Christ: for sapientes faciunt  loquun|tur

sapienter omnia, wise men doe and speake
all things wisely: and Nicephorus being really
religious, must needs bee wise in words, wise
in actions, and, which is the highest wisedome,
wise to salvation. Neither was he inferiour to
most of the Fathers for profound judgement
and learning, both in Humanity, and Divinity,
having read much, and spent many houres to
adorne his soule with Art and Grace, that so he
might informe others in the Doctrine of Sal|vation,
and illuminate the world then being in
great darknes, and under the shadow of sin and
death. He was a Physitian to cure the miseries of
humane life, and especially those which are inci|dent
to the soule: namely, tenebras intellectus,
errores mentis, vitia appetitus, irrectitudinem
voluntatis, the errors of the understanding,
the viciousnesse of the appetite, and the croo|kednesse
of the will: for all these maladies of
the soule he cured by his powerfull Doctrine,
and religious exemplary life; so that those that
were blind through spiritual ignorance, he made
them see and abhorre their sinne: the lame in
Charity and good workes, hee made cheare|full
and forward to doe good; the stubborne
hee convinced and confuted by Arguments;
the weake he comforted and instructed. And
as the Sunne doth with his chearefull beames
soften waxe, refresh the drooping flowers, and
cherish the new sowne seeds, so with the beams
of his life and learning hee did warme and sof|ten
the obdurate hearts of men, refreshed

wearied soules, groaning under the burthen
of their sinnes, and by his Doctrine cherished
the seeds of Grace, to bring forth in others the
fruits of good life and conversation.
The Philosophers were derided, quia in li|brossns,
quos de gloria contemnenda scripserunt,
nomina sua inscripserunt, because to those
bookes which they writ of contemning glory,
they set their owne names, shewing themselves
thereby most vaine-glorious. But Nicephorus
Workes are a glory to his name, living to eter|nity
in his learned Volumes. If therefore his
great wisedome and learning, which attracted
generall admiration, may deserve commenda|tion;
If the gifts and graces of his soule were so
wonderfull and divine; If his life were so
sanctimonious and exemplary, hee being a spi|rituall
Physitian, and a Sunne to illuminate the
ignorant world; if all these may render his
life perfect and glorious, then Nicephorus may
be acknowledged amongst the most famous
Fathers of his time, who after this Pilgrimage
of life, peregr constitutus properabat in Patri|am
regredi, being a stranger on earth, made
haste to returne to heaven, leaving to the world
his Sentences and Workes.
He lived in the time of the Emperour Andro|micus
senior, to whom he dedicated his Eccle|siasticall
History, containing eighteen Bookes,
and survived after the yeare of our Lord, 1300.
not long after exchanging this life for eternall
glory.


His Sayings.

Of Example.
The naturall man cannot attaine to the height
and perfection of active vertue,Nicepb. Eccles. Hist. cap. 22. or contempla|tive,
unlesse he propose unto himselfe our Sa|viours
example, as perfect God and man, equall
in power and vertue to God the Father, and
beseech him to give him the power of operati|on
and contemplation.


Of Security.
He that liveth in security,Cap. 2. lib. 7. is so farre from
thinking of appeasing Gods just anger towards
him, that he heaps sinne on former sinnes, as if
God did not behold them, and would not re|quire
an accompt of them.


Of Providence.
God doth behold,Cap. 5. lib. 3. and moderate our actions,
using the scourge of affliction for our castigati|on
and conversion; and after due correction,
sheweth his Fatherly affection to those that put
their trust in him for salvation.


Of the Scriptures.
The Scriptures rightly conceived,Cap. 3. lib. 5. make us

cheerefull and active in the performance there|of;
also good, just, quiet, upright, and confor|mable
to our great example of righteousnesse
Christ Jesus.


Of Christ.
The Wisedome and Divinity of Christ, was
seene by his words and actions, drawing his
Disciples to divine contemplation and imitati|on,
and working Miracles for their Faiths con|firmation,
so bringing them to perfection
which consisteth in the love of God.


Of Martyrs.
The ancient Martyrs would not be so called;
though they suffered Martyrdome, yet they
would not bee called Martyrs: ascribing that
title onely to Christ; and so by their humiliati|on
deserved a glorious exaltation.


Of Faith.
None of the ancient Fathers and Patriarchs
did please God, but by Faith in Christ, as ap|peareth
by Abraham; his faithfull obedience
being his justification.


Of Peters denyall.
Christ asked Peter three times if he loved him;

not for his own knowledge or information, but
that by his three-fold profession, he might help
and heale his threefold negation of him.



These are those things which he writ.
Namely his Ecclesiasticall History, which hee
composed, both for style and words, in elegant
Greeke. Also a Synopsis of the whole divine
Scripture, digested into Trimeter Iambicks,
wherein he briefely contained the arguments of
all the bookes:Possev. apparat. Sacr. p. 139. cap. 141. This Worke beginneth: .
And Gulielmus Esingr. in
his Catalogue of Ecclesiasticall Writers doth adde,
that he did write of the Acts done after the Mac|cabees
even to Christ, and the destruction of Ie|rusalem.
The Genealogy of the Patriarchs unto
David. Of Mosaicall Rites. A Catalogue of the
Iudges of Israel. A description of tbe Kings of
Israel: and of the Patriarchs of Constantinople,
The Genealogy of Christ. Of our Saviours Mira|cles,
according to the foure Evangelists.




An. Christi 1071. Sanctus Theophyla|ctus.

THEOPHILACTVS.

_THe birth place of this Father was the
famous City of Constantinople,
which once was the glory of the
Roman Empire, and the bulwarke
of Christendome against the Turkes, but by fatall
divisions of Princes, and Christians among
themselves, it is now the seat and residence of
the Grand Signior, the arch enemy of the Chri|stians.
I doe not reade anything of his parents,
what sort or condition they were of, neither
is it declared by Historians, it seemes that this
Theophylact had liberall education, or else hee
would not have beene admitted to sueh digni|ty
in the Church of God, nor trusted with such

a pastorall charge. I wil therfore principally fol|low
the passages that are worth observation of
him, as they are registred by Cardinall Baronius.
Cardinall Bellarmine hath placed him in the
yeere of our Lord,Bellar. de scrip. Eccles. p. 33. 1071. when as Alexander the
second was Bishop of Rome, and when as Dio|genes
was Emperour of Rome. There have beene
great mistakes concerning the time in which
he lived, some having reckoned him 200 yeeres
before he was, which errour hee himselfe doth
openly confute in his Epistles which hee writ to
severall men, who lived at the same time. They
have placed him (though mistaken) to have
flourished in the Reigne of Basilius the elder
Emperour,Panvium vide in fastis. Sixtus Senensis in Biblioth. in the yeere 883, so Panvinus rec|kons.
Sixtus Sonensis puts him in the yeere 842,
when as Michael began to reigne with Theodora
his Mother, but his owne Epistles which are to
be seen in the Vatican Library,Card. Baron. Annal. rom. 11 p. 402. being 59 in Greek
not as yet printed, but translated into Latine,
and preserved from perishing, by the care and
industry of Iacobus Syrmondus, doe evince that.
And first that Epistle to Mary the Empresse, takes
away all controversie in this point, for from the
time of Michael who reigned with his Mother
Theodora, unto the time of Isacius Comneus,
nor any Empresse was called by this name Mary:
but to cleere this point a little more, for the dis|crepancie
of Times disiynts Histories, and
therefore it is profitable truly to know the series
of the times directly.
Therefore if you doe but look into his thir|teenth

Epistle to Iohannes Duca, Kinsman to the
Emperour, which begins thus, Nunc demum ag|novi,
c. At length now I know, wherein hee
calls this Duca the principall man, and of the
Imperiall Line,Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. 403. now it is manifest that hee writ
this when as the Lineage of the Ducae's swayed
the Imperiall affaires of Constantinople, who is
of so little judgement, as to maintaine that he
lived under Basilius, and to these may be added,
that in the same Epistle, Bulgaria was not go|verned
by her owne Kings at that time, but by
such Governours as it pleased the Constantino|politan
Emperours to send to them; for in the
Reigne of Basilius (as Baronius speaks it) Con|stal
Bulgaros proprios habuisse Reges, that is, it is
apparent that the Bulgarians had then Kings of
their owne: and in his eight Epistle it doth
plainly appeare, that he was Archbishop of Bul|garia,
when either the Family of the Ducae's,
or the Comnens did sway the Scepter. But to let
this passe, it doth seeme, that this Theophylactus
had (being made Archbishop) a speciall regard
of the Churches prosperitie, a good signe of a
nobly qualified and religious soul, to have a care
to beautifie and reedifie the Houses of God: it
was the wicked speech of those in the Psalmes,
Let us take in possession the houses of God that he
in the land, nay, worse then so, Let us destroy the
houses of God that be in the Land: but that this
Theophylact did respect the Churches Mainte|nance,
appeares by his learned Epistle, which hee
wrote, and sent to the sonne of Sebastocrator,

being the seventeenth, wherein hee laments the
ruine of some Temples which were famous,
but by the injury of time, and the violence of
warre, as also the neglect of men, were ruined
and decayed; and is not his letter wondrous per|swasory,
and full of Eloquence and Pietie,
which shews hee was not onely a great Scholer,
but also a zealous man for Gods Honour? I have
here set downe the words of the Epistle how it
begins, as they are also recorded by Cardinall
Baronius:Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. p. 4 Oro igitur,  his litteris tanquam
corpore supplex procumbo, ut misercaris foelicis|simae
quondam Ecclesiae, quam Christianissimus
ille Borises Bulgarorum Rex, unam,  ipsam 
septem Catholicis, tu renova: that is, I therefore
doe beseech thee, and as upon my knees beg of thee
to reedifie and renew that one of the seven Catho|like
Churches, which that most Christian King of
the Bulgarians Borises did build. Oh! take pitie
of that once most happy Church, c. in which
truly hee doth declare also a great and Heroick
spirit; for hee that will sollicite Kings and Prin|ces
this way to shew their bounty, must not be
faint-hearted: oh, where shall one finde now
such a spirit? many doe strive to hinder the de|coring
or enlarging of Temples, few men plead
for them; but it shall be my prayer to God, to
stirre up some to stand in the cause of the Church,
and to blesse them for ever with happinesse for
their endevours, Sions carved stones, and seiled
worke will for ever speake their praise and worth.
But to proceed, It seemes the state of the Church

was but deplorable, for he departed from thence
to Constantinople, and in his  age when hee
departed from Constantinople to Acridia, the
Metropolitan Church of all Bulgaria, he wrote an
Epistle to the Empresse Mary, in which he shews
elegantly the despicable condition of the Chur|ches
in these parts, and prayes God for ever to
preserve the Empresse from all evill and dangers.
Hee underwent this charge a long time,Baron. Anal. Tom. 11. p. 404 though
(as Baronius saith) aegro animo veluti dur ex|ilium,
quo se tandem liberari vehemente ,
atque patrio solo reddi: that is, With an unwil|lingnesse,
counting it in a manner no better than
an hard banishment, from which hee did wish to
be discharged, and to return to his native soyle
to which he was drawn, as it seems, not for any
unwillingnesse to undergoe the charge, but by
reason of the wickednesse and barbarousnesse of
the Natives, as appeares in his Letter sent to
Iohannes the great Courtier, in which he relates
his misery in that place most sweetly by the fable
of Omphales: it begins thus; Non servio Reginae
diviti, mundaeque  pulchrae, sed servis barbaris,
impuris, c. that is, I serve not a rich, comely,
beautiful Queen, but I am inslaved to barbarous
and impure slaves, smelling of nasty skins, and
living a beggerly and base life, who are onely
rich in villany, and who admit of no civill go|vernment,
and hee calls those of Acridia, men
without heads, because, New Deum, nec homines
revereri norint, that is, They neither reverenced
God nor man. Yet for all this he in this deplo|red

estate, proved himselfe, Vigilem operarium,
persever avitque in Pastorali cura diligenter: that
is, A watchfull workeman, and stood stoutly in
his Episcopall Charge.
I cannot but remember his Letter which hee
wrote to the Emperour; who desired that one
of the Dukes of the Scopians, whom he commen|ded
should be preferr'd to one of the Bishopricks
of Bulgaria, when this Theophylact with a great
deale of sanctity and wisdome returned this
answer to the Emperour. It begins, Quoniam
ergo de accepta Domini mei Scheda,Vide Baron. Annal. Tom. 1 p. 404. quae de Epis|copatu
agebat respondi, c. that is, I have
therefore not onely answered the Letter of my
Lord which treated of the Bishopricke, but
also I have written to him some things concer|ning
the condition of the Bishopricke it selfe. It
is not for my Lord to intrude into this sacred
Function, which containes great and fearfull
things, for they, who have by us as yet beene
preferr'd to Bishopricks, some of them when as
they ministred in this Church had good Testi|mony
of their pietie and gravitie, before they
obtain'd that weighty charge, as the Moro|bians,
and Prisdians, and some were before emi|nent
for reaching and eloquence at Constanti|nople,
as the Castorians and Belegards. And o|thers
were renowmed for their austerity and
sanctitie of life in Monasteries, and either well
known unto us, or else sufficiently by Letters re|commended,
as the Triactitzae: now if the man
whom my Lord speaks of be such as any f

these we shal be bound not onely to admit him,
but also to give wonderfull thanks to your Ma|jesty,
for the care you have of Gods Church;
but if hee be neither knowne to us, nor yet ap|proved
of at Constantinople, for life and learn|ing,
doe not most mighty Emperour too rashly
offend God, nor lay unfitting burthens upon
us, for in this case it is better to obey God than
man. And beside, there is no Bishoprick at this
time void except that of Bydin, which is scarce
worth acceptance; and yet of all others it re|quires
a man that must bee well experienced in
Spirituall and Secular affaires. This very Letter
is testimony sufficient what a Reverend Prelate
this Theophylact was, in that he would have none
admitted, but such as were furnished with gifts
and graces suteable to that charge.
And when as by warre the Churches in Bul|garia
suffered much misery by the Armies of the
Servians, which came to bring Bulgaria into
subjection; doth not this Archbishop de|plore
and deeply lament the devastation in his
seventeenth Epistle to Sebastocrator:Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. p. 437 ab omni|bus
praetergredientibus viamspoliatur, c. that
is, It is spoiled by every one that passeth by,
neither hath it any Bishop resident, for his back
shall be wounded with blows, and his cheeks
with buffeings, so that the Bishop is fled, and
none will supply his office: but the people are
fled into Caves and Woods from the violence
of the sword, and no Priest nor Deaeon ( mi|serias
meas) saith hee, (the more is my griefe)

to officiate in that once renowmed Bulgarian
Church: so I went to see it, and when I beheld
it, I wept, and weeping ask'd the cause, and
learn'd it, and know it, and doe certifie this to
be truth.
Did he not likewise write a consolatory Let|ter
to Camaterus Gregorius Bishop of a Church,
which ws buried by the fury of war, which be|gins,
Tempusest,Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. p. 438 439. ut proheticum illud dicam frater
Reverendissime, c. that is, The time is come,
that I may say with the Prophet (most Reverend
brother) Woe is me, for fire hath devoured the
beautifull places in the Land, what place more
specious, more decore, more pleasant, than the
Temple of God, and so wisheth (as Ieremie)
that his head were a fountaine of teares, and with|all
tels him that it was for sinne, yet bad him be
comforted, since it proceeded by Gods permissi|on,
and perhaps for the best, and saith to him,
Exurge igitur charissime frater, c. that is, stand
up therefore most dear brother, stand shew your
constancie and Christian valour, for you must
comfort others, make others valiant, and there|fore
not to droop your self, remember that once
renowmed Temple, and the wonder of the
World built by King Salomon; yet laid waste by
the Babylonians, and rebuilt, and did not the
Prophet Aggee then comfort the people mourn|ing,
and told them the glory of the latter house
should be greater than the first: and so it may
please God to deal with your Church: and did he
not likewise send consolations to the Bishop of

Bydin, who was in the same misery, and did hee
not send a most divine Epistle to the Patriarch
of Constantinople, wherein he declares the fear|full
vastations of the Church? And did not the
Patriarch, write backe againe to comfort him,
and did he not highly prayse him? What a wor|thy
Epistle did hee write to Nicholaus Sebastus
Pagurianus, wherein he rejoyceth for his happy
victory over the Persians and Franks: who de|sires
to know the elegantnesse and learning in it,Baron. Annal. Tom. 11. pag. 440. 441.
may reade it in Baronius at large, it being too te|dious
for this Treatise.
So this Father having indured the miseries that
a barbarous Nation could offer, and having seen
most lamentable destruction of many Churches,
the killing of Christians, hee having proved
himselfe a painfull Labourer in these hazardable
times of persecution, did yeeld his spirit to his
Maker.
Cardinal Bellarmine in his History hath blemi|shed
this Theophylact for his opinion about the
proceeding of the Holy Ghost:Bellar. in scrip. Eccles. But I suspend to
censure of it: onely I would advise young Di|vines
to read his Works cautelously.

Theophylactus his Sayings.

D. Theophylactus in Matth. cap. 12.
When thou hearest any foul-mouthed man
prating of that which hee hath nothing to doe
withall: then conclude with thy selfe, that there
is more rottennes inwardly in his heart, then he
vomiteth outwardly by his words, for out of
the abundance within doth he vent himself out|wardly,
but still keeps the mine of his mischiefe
undiscovered.


Idemin cap. 18. Lucae.
God is truly good, the very fountaine, and
principle of all substantiall goodnesse; as for us
men we may be called good, but not in a proper
sence: for wee onely participate of that good|nesse
of God, have it in a promiscuous manner,
and are daily subjected to vicissitude, and change
of condition.


Idem in Marcum, cap. 14.
The day of judgment is hid from our know|ledge,
for it that now (the time being so un|certaine)
we make so little use of it, what would
we not doe if we knew the same? Even slip over
all precious opportunities, and then thinke to
leape into Heaven with a Lord have mercy on
me, at the last gaspe of time.


Idem in Iob cap. 11.
Satan drives us from God, and many ways
divides us, in so much that one man upon the
least punctilio of Honour is ready to stab his
brother; another by reason of his riches swels

against his poorer neighbour: but Christ gathers
all into one Church, puts all under one and the
same yoke, and makes them all as well those
that are neere, as those that are afar off to be one
bodie, so that he which is at Rome believes him
that is in the India to be a member, and confes|seth
that Christ alone is the head of them all.


Idem in 1 Epist. ad Timoth. cap. 6.
All men may be termed the men of God, but
the just are more particularly so called, not by
the reason of creation or generation, but of
that interest they have in him by the way of re|generation;
if therefore thou be a man of God,
looke not after those things which may draw
thee aside from the love of so good a God, and
gracious Father.


Idem in 2 Epist. ad Timoth. cap. 3.
Let it not trouble thee if this man live in tran|quillitie,
and thou thy selfe in tribulation: God
will have it so; it is hee that hath put thee into
the combat, thou must therefore sweat hard be|fore
thou come off with victory; Where as he
that comes forward in the World, goes back|ward
in grace; and miserable must that mans
estate needs bee that goes laughing to destructi|on,
as a Foole to the stocks for correction.




I have here set them downe as they bee regi|stred
Bellarmine.

1 Vpon the lesser Pro|phets,
Hosea, Jonah,
Nahum, Abakkuck.
2 Vpon all Saint Mat|thew
3 Vpon Saint Mark.
4 Vpon Saint Luke.
5 Vpon Saint John.
6 Vpon all the Epistles
of Saint Paul.
7 In his Commenta|ries
on the Evange|lists,
and on the Epi|stles,
hee hath so imi|tated
Saint Chryso|stome,
that he is sty|led
Saint Chryso|stomes
Abbreviator,
that is, Saint Chry|sostomes
Epitomi|ser,
or Abbreviator.





An. Christi 1080. Sanctus Anselmus.

ANSELMVS.

_THat the Reader may reape the more
satisfaction, concerning this famous
Father of the Church, St. Anselmus,
who was Arch-Bishop of Canterbu|ry,
I thinke it very fit to speake something of
his Country and Parents. His fathers name was
Gundulphus, and his mothers name was Ermer|berga,
both of them well and nobly descended,
and both of them abounding with wealth, lived
in the holy state of wedlocke a long time, in the
City Augusta. Which City lying on the confines
of Burgundy, and of the Longobards, was the
birth-place of this noble Matron: and she made
Gundulphus of a stranger a Citizen of the same

place: she was the more devout, for her hus|band
followed his secular affaires, and hath bin
censured of some as too profuse and prodigall:
But Ermerberga, with great care and providence
lookt to the government of her family, and
kept all things in comely order, of an upright,
modest carriage, and sweete behaviour to all
her neighbours: Yet Gundulphus before his
death despised the world, and the affaires of
it; and so entred into a Monasticke course of
life.
This Anselme being put to learning, proved
excellent in it, at foureteene yeares of age; and
then his Mother dying, he lost the best Anchor
to his ship; and so having want of good coun|cell,
and mother-like instructions, he began to
faile of his former good intentions, and did
give himselfe a while to the vaine sports of this
world, and neglected his learning and former
studies; so soone doth youth, if not well gover|ned,
follow fast to its owne ruine: But God,
who had otherwise disposed of him, and inten|ding
to use his labours in the Church, did by the
good motions of his blessed Spirit, speedily
reduce him: for his father did prove wondrous
strict unto him; and the more humble this
Anselmus was to his demands, the more did
he seeme to be exasperated against him; so that
Anselmus did fully resolve to travaile, and not
to live under his father who was so severe a|gainst
him: and hee was so hard put to it, that
in his travaile fainting, and being without

ny refection, hee was forced to eate snow to
quench his thirst.
So having spent some three yeares in Burgun|dy,
and France, he came into Normandy, where
he hearing of the holy man Lanfrancus, desired
to see him, and speak with him; and if he could
so farre prevaile, intended to put himselfe un|der
his government, and tuition. Well, hee
obtained his desire, and so was admitted for
one of his Scholars, and being now held hard
to his study night  day, his body was brought
downe with Watchings and Fastings, so that
he did begin to repent this hard course of life,
and thereupon resolves to turne a Monke, in|tending
(as he said) to dedicate himselfe whol|ly
to the service of God: And so having well
pondred the case with himselfe, hee comes to
Lanfranck, and desires to know which of these
three courses were the best; for he intended to
follow his father-like directions, and his pre|scriptions
should be a law unto him, either to
enter into some Monastery, or to live an Her|mit,
or else to enjoy his fathers meanes, and
to distribute it to the poore, his Father now
being dead? Lanfrancus deferres to resolve
himselfe; but he advised him to goe to the Bi|shop
of Rhone, and to follow his grave Coun|cells,
who was called at that time Mauritius
Anselmus comes to the Bishop through the
great Woods rhat are hard by Becc: he having
here propounded his minde, the good old
Bishop commends unto him the Monasticke

life, as most sit and profitable for him; where|upon
this Anselmus resolves to enter himselfe a
member of the Monastery of Becc, being now
seven and twenty yeares old, and one Herlvi|nus
being Abbot, an old honest man, and had
setled that Monastery with his owne revenues:
into this, Anselmus being entred, set himselfe
studiously to imitate the vertues of the chiefest
and holyest men; and was so strict in holinesse
of life, that in three yeares space hee was admi|red
and beloved of all. What shall I speake of
his Watchings? his Fastings? his Meditati|ons?
How wisely and prudently did he convert
one Osberne, a wild young man? how carefull
was he in the visitation of the sicke? How vi|gilant
to confirme men in that course of life?
What famous Treatises did he write? What
Questions and doubts did hee resolve? How
mainly did he contemne the World? How bit|terly
did he repent him of his sinnes? How con|stant
was he in prayer? So that living thus ho|lily,
not onely Normandy tooke notice of him,
but all France and Flanders; and his fame was
spread into England: so that many of all sorts
resorted to him for Counsel. Thus by his worth
and piety, that Monastery increased within, and
without, within with Piety, Learning, and
good Discipline; without with faire and large
possessions and meanes given to it.
And now this old Herlvine being not able to
undergoe the weight of that charge, committed
the administration of it to this Anselmus, who

having this imposed upon him, how wisely and
faihfully did he performe it? Did hee not
distribute, with discretion, meanes to such
as wanted, did hee not settle good Orders
in it?
And now at this time the old Abbot Herl|vine
yeelding to death, all the Brethren with
one consent resolved upon this Anselme: but he
with words and teares denyedit; but at last,
their eagernesse, and the Arch-bishop of Rhones
exhortation prevailed, and so he is made Abbot,
the inferiour matters and causes of the Mona|stery
being referred to the care and charge of
the Brethren: Ipse Dei contemplationi, monacho|rum
eruditioni, admonitioni, correctioni, jugi|ter
insistebat, that is, He was daily in Divine con|templations,
and instructing the Monkes, with
admonitions, corrections, and comforts, as occa|sion
served. How full of Hospitality was he to
strangers? How humble, how cheerfull, and
how liberall, not onely refreshing their bodies,
but comforting likewise their soules with spiri|tuall
directions? Did not all men, knowing
his excellencies, send in reliefe to the Brethren?
either by shipping out of England, or by Wills
of men dying, still was this Monastery supply|ed.
There did likewise belong faire revenues
to this Abby out of England, to bring in which
to the Cloyster, this Anselmus came over in the
first yeare that he was ordained Abbot; and not
onely for that reason, but also to see and speak
with Lanfrancus, who was from being an Abbot

preferred to the Arch-bishopricke of Canter|bury.
Whither, when Anselmus was come, with
what a confluence of all sorts of people was hee
entertained at Canterbury? so there was Dis|course
had betwixt Lanfranck and himself; and
this is said of them both to their commenda|tions,
Non erat ullus eo tempore qui aut Lanfran|co
authoritate vel multiplici rerum scienti,
aut Anselmo praestaret in Sanctitate vel Dei sa|pienti,
that is, There was none at that time
that did exceede Lanfranck in authority and va|riety
of knowledge; nor Anselme in holinesse, nor
heavenly wisedome.
He proceeds now to effect that for which hee
came, and takes an account of all the meanes
which did belong to their Monastery: but it is
to be wondred at, with what expressions of joy
and love was he every where entertained, what
grave Counsells and directions hee gave to all
sorts of people, especially to the Clergy; there
was not a Lord or a Lady in England at that
time, but did strive to expresse their loves to
him, by presenting him with rich presents; nay,
William the Conquerour, though otherwise
sterne and rigid, yet how did hee expresse his
love to this great man. So having beene joy|fully
received of all sorts in England, he intends
his journey for his Monastery againe, having
gained large meanes for his fellowes.
But now the Conquerour dying, and leaving
his sonne William King of England, Lanfranck

also the Arch-bishop being dead, this William
began fearfully to waste the Churches through|out
England; which Anselme having with
griefe heard of; did he not at the solicitation of
Hugh Earle of Chester, and other Nobles, come
againe into England? and comming to the
Court, did hee not modestly and divinely tell
the King what wrongs he had done? and how
such things would draw downe Gods, heavy
judgements upon him and his posterity: but
the King was for the present unflexible: so this
Anselme went to this Hugh Earle of Chester;
but the King falling sicke, all men cryed up
this Anselmes fame, and that hee was the onely
man to bee Arch-bishop of Canterbury. By the
Kings authority, and the whole Kingdomes
love he was consecrated the first Sunday in Lent,
in the yeare of Grace, 1093.
But he found this place, at that time, to bee
full of troubles, and cares; yet he being sent for
to Court, did meekly beseech the King to cease
from afflicting the Churches: did not this man
performe his charge with patience, industry, and
with expressions of learning and fidelity: he was
not any wayes addicted to pride, not ensnared
with covetousnesse, neither was he tainted with
idlenesse. He committed the administration of
his houshold affaires to one Baldwine: Hee did
mainly lament the abuse that was offered to the
Church by prophane covetous men, who took
the meanes of them into their owne possession.
The King return'd from forraine parts, An|selmus

humbly intreats of his Majesty, that hee
might have licence to go to Rome; but at this the
King was incensed, and told him there should
no Pope have any Authority over his subjects,
nor any power within his dominions; hereup|on,
there was a generall meeting of all the Bi|shops
and Lords at Rothingam to decide this:
Here most, to gaine the Kings favour, were di|rectly
against this Arch-bishop: onely the Bi|shop
of Rochester stood with him: But the King
was so vexed, that he told him, he would not
hold him as an Arch-bishop, unlesse forthwith
he would deny the Popes authority: and again
at Winchester desiring of the King the same
thing, the King told him that hee should never
have that liberty, nor any other, if he did per|sist
in that minde. So Baldwine was driven out
of England, and Anselmes servants misused, and
his lands alienated, and hee himselfe derided
and hated; yet in the depth of this storme hee
retained his piety, and said that of our Saviour,
By patience possesse your soules: at last he was for|ced
by secret meanes to flye, and so came to a
place called Whitsands, and so to Saint Bertine,
being glad that hee was out of England: but
then the King hearing, presently ceized upon
all his lands and goods, and so Anselme came to
Lions, and was kindly entertained by the Arch-bishop
of that place, and so being weake in
body, and unfit to travaile to Rome, hee sent his
cause thither, but stay'd in Lions till they retur|ned.
They comming backe, told him, all excuses

laid aside, hee must himselfe goe in person to
Rome. So they came to Secusium, and presented
themselves to the Abbat of that place; there
were three of them, Anselmus, and Baldwine,
and Edinerus, which writ this his life. So after
much travaile and danger we came to Rome, and
it was bruted abroad of this Fathers approach,
and all men desired to see him: but it being ex|treame
hot in the City of Rome, this Anselme li|ved
in a Village, seated pleasantly, called Schla|via:
a great deale of time was spent in delibera|ting
for the Churches good: but it was thought
safest for Anselme not to returne into England
while William lived, neither did he: but his suc|cessor
Henry came into Normandy, hearing that
Anselme was there, and did reinvest him into all
his state and honours againe, and he came in|to
England, and was entertained with great
reverence of all the Lords of the Kingdome,
and the love of all the Common people. So
King Henry was very glad that hee had gained
the peace of Anselme; but hee was even spent
with age, labour, and watching; for age brings
to us experience in one hand, and death in the
other; and so did not live long after his return,
but with a great expression of holinesse and
comfort did commend his spirit to God.
Time deales with man Arithmetically: First,
he addes to beauty, multiplies his graces, and
then he subtracts all these, and makes a long
lasting division between him and Nature: And
now he is dead, it is high time to cover this

sweet and heavenly Father with his first mother
the Earth; who (being honourably attended
to the grave) with the Rose and the Violet is
laid to sleepe in the bosome of the earth; and
shall enjoy, though not so suddenly, yet as cer|taine
a Spring as they; and which is more, an
everlasting one.

His Sayings.

S. Anselm. de Malitia,  foeditate
peccati. Cap. 190.
Saint Anselme was wont to say; that if hee
should see the shame of sinne on the one side,
and the paines of hell on the other side, and
that he must of necessity bee cast upon one of
them, that he had rather bee thrust into hell
without sinne, where the drowned are tormen|ted,
than goe to heaven, cloathed with sinne,
where the Saints onely enjoy everlasting life.


Idem de Venatione Diaboli. Cap. 183.
The Devill goes out every day a hunting:
First, he seizeth on them that never sorow for
their sinne: but he begins to let them goe, that
he perceiveth to be cast downe in the sight of
their offences; yet there's a third sort that up|on
repentance are healed from their sinnes,
those hee looseth altogether. Let the first

sort lament, and mourne, let the second grieve
on still, but let the third rejoyce for evermore.


Id. de quadrato lapide. Cap. 173. de similitud.
Every foure square stone hath sixe equall
sides, let it fall upon which it can it lyes fast; so
must a just man persist in his integrity; for hee
hath sixe sides to fall upon too: Prosperity, Ad|versity,
Liberty, Subjection, Private and pub|licke
employment: Now upon which of these
soever the Dye turnes, let him stand fast and im|moveable,
maugre the Devill, and all his oppo|sition.


Id. de Iustitia.
Justice is the freedome of minde, giving to
every one his due: To betters, reverence; to
equalls, love; to inferiours, instruction; to
God obedience; to it selfe, sanctity; to ene|mies,
patience; and to the poore, workes of
compassion.
Such was the detestation which this good
man had of sinne, that hee would use to say; If
I could see the horror of sin, and the dolour of hell,
both with my bodily eyes before mee,In vit. ejus a|pud Surium cap. 19. and must of
necessity passe through one of them, I would rather
chuse Hell than sinne.
Another saying of his was, I had rather

enter Hell, being free from sinne, (if it were pos|sible)
than reigne in Heaven with the pollution
of sinne upon me.
Likewise humane frailty made this good man
thus to crye out: O durus casus! Heu! quid per|didit
homo? quid invenit? perdidit beatitudi|nem,
ad quam factus est,  invenit mortem, ad
quam factus non est: O hard hap! alas! what
did man lose? what did he find? He lost the bles|sednesse
to which he was made; and found death to
which he was not made.



His Workes are thus registred by Cardinall
Bellarmine.

Three Bookes.
1 Of Truth.
2 Of Free-will.
3 Of the fall of the De|vill.


then 3 more of
1 Grammar, and prose.
2 Enarrations on St.
Matthew.
Explanations on some
of the Evangelists.
Vpon the Canticles.


Tome 2.
Vpon all the Epistles of
St. Paul.
On the Apocalypse.


Tome 3.
Of the contempt of the
World. Hymnes.
4 Soliloquies.

5 For an unwise man.
6 Against an unwise
man.
7 Of the Incarnation.
8 Why God was made
man.
9 Of the Virgins Con|ception.
10 Of the Sacrament
11 Annotations on the
same.
11 Of the proceeding
of H. G.
12 Of Similitudes.
13 Of Gods will.
14 Of the concord of
Praescience and Pre|destination.
15 Of mans misery.
16 Of members and
actions attributed to
God.
17 Of the measuring the
Crosse.
18 Of Meditations.
19 A meditation of our
Redemption.
20 Of the Passion.
21 Pricks of divine
Love.
22 Homilies on Saint
Luke.
23 Of the Virgin Ma|ries
excellence.
24 Of the Image of the
World.
25 Dialogues contai|ning
the summe of
Christian Religion.


Tome 4.
Divers Epistles in three
bookes.





An. Christi 1119. Sanctus Rupertus.

RVPERTVS.

_HE that reades this mans life must ex|pect,
that nor my pen, nor any other
can compleatly in each particular
act, fully delineate it, but yet as Au|thours
have publikely blazoned his worth, it
hath beene my care to register it in our native
tongue, and I hop not in vaine; for good ex|amples
prevaile much, and are to an ingenuous
spirit, as a whetstone or patterne to imitate. To
begin therefore with his parents, He was borne
in Germany, as Trithemius and Cocleius doe te|stifie,
but they were not so able for wealth as
vertue, they had an especiall care that this their
sonne should be vertuously educated: our birth-places,

nor our parents cannot diminish the
worth that wee practise, the house is never the
worse for being little in Israel, the Family dis|parages
not, so there be a David in it, wee are
not bound to answer for other mens faults, nei|ther
is it to be concluded, because our Fathers
have halted, that therefore wee should be lame,
Vertue deserves commendation as well in the
Cottage, as in the Court, and many times is not
accommodated with the affluence of worldly
endowments. The greatest Rivers flow from
Springs, and the Tree is not to be disliked, be|cause
it is low, if the fruit be good, it makes not
whither it grows on an Hill or a Valley: Accor|ding
to that of Ausonius.

Non obstare locum cum valet ingenium.


Question not the Tree,
When the minde you good doe see.

This Rupertus was in his youth brought up in
all offices of pietie and duty in the Monastery
of Leige, under the tuition of Heribrandus, an
upright and prudent man, of whom hee acqui|red
the principles of those Arts that were fitting
his age, and it seems, his Tutor did not neglect
his charge, but finding him to be an ingenuous
youth, mildly imposed some duties of Religion
upon him, which he performed as carefully and
reverently: an admirable patterne, the onely way
to have men prove absolute, is to have them

well at first seasoned, seldome fals that fruit by
stormes which is cherished by a milde spring.
There are few that faile in age, whose youth
have been accustomed and inured to pious per|formances,
being by this good Instrument so
fitted, now hee proceeds to higher actions, hee
made godlinesse the very food of his soule, and
profited in the practice of it daily more and
more, so that following that, he gained know|ledge
and reputation as it is said,
I bone, qu virtus tua te vocat, I pede fausto
Grandia laturus meritorum praemia
That is,
Proceed,  Goodman, with an happy pace
In tracks of vertue, take th' rewards with
grace.
He was not carelesse of any kinde of Learn|ing
that might conduce to Religion, so was hee
admirable for divine poetry, as may appeare by
his expressions of the Holy Ghost in excellent
Verse, as also the life of Saint Augustine and
Odolia a Virgin, as also his Hymnes upon Seve|rus
the Confessor, so likewise hee alwayes
thought upon that of Saint Paul, give atten|dance
to reading. Did hee not also restore the
Greeke Tongue at this time almost decayed in
Italy? nay, did he not fairly recover them from
their Barbarismes that were then encroaching
upon the Latine? so that it appeares, this Ru|pertus





was not onely famous for Poetry and the
Greek tongue, but also for Oratory in the Latin
phrase; a rare thing living in those barbarous
times to restore Languages to their Genuine
beauty. And if I should but a little digresse, it
would not be an errour, a little to insist upon the
praise of Divine Poetry, if there were nothing
else but the diligent practice of so many Fathers
as have been renowmed for this, it was enough,
and I cannot let some of them passe without a
due respect and reverence, they having beene,
some of them so highly in Gods favur, and re|gistred
in sacred Writ, as Moses, David, Salomon,
Ieremiah, and of the famous Fathers of the
Church, as Saint Cyprian, Lactantius, Iuvencus,
Saint Hillarie, Marius, Victorius, Gregorius Na|zianzenus,
Saint Ambrose, Hillary, Sedulius,
Synesius, Paulinus, Ausonius, Paulus Diaconus,
Rhabanus Maurus, with divers others; neither
can I let passe his care to keepe the vertue of a
good Oratour, for in this also hee deserves an
eminent commendation; for take a way or di|minish
the lustre of that, and what spurious and
barbarous proceedings will there not be admit|ted?
How soone will not the pure fountains of
Eloquen be stopped, and Rhetoricke neglected?
and inded, how soone will all good literatue
and painfull studies be cunted needlesse, if once
this be slighted? have not so many of the Fa|thers
of the Church been studious this way? and
indeed take away this jewell, and how shall
mens hearts be wrought upon? are not Origen,

Saint Cyprian, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, Gregory Nyssen, Saint Augustine, Chry|sologus,
Saint Gregory, Beda, Damascen, Bernard,
with many others admired for their excellencie
this way, that with their Oratory, they have
wonderfully wrought to the stopping of Here|sies,
and the advancing of truth, to the convin|cing
of errours, and the converting of soules
to Religion. But I leave this as knowne, and
proceed to his further increasing abilities. As he
increased in yeeres, so in gifts; when he came to
mans estate, hee settles upon Philosophy, and so
to Divinitie, then he fits himselfe by prayers and
other duties required in such a choice, and here
he found that sweetnesse, that it was not satis|factory
to him to spend the day in these, but the
night also, and that not without fasting, prayers,
and teares, hee was long gone in yeeres before
he was made Priest, in respect of the dissentins
of the Roman Church, and in regard that the
Armies of Henry the Fourth, at that time wa|sted
Germany, by reason of those Thunderbolts
sent from Rome, so that it was an hard case for a
Student to reade Divinitie, amongst Horse|troops,
and to addict a mans selfe to the Muses,
when Mars was Commander: yet even in these
times did this Rupertus follow his worthy in|tentions,
and did not abate, bur rather double
his diligence, even in these boysterous stormes,
and especially he was sheltered by the protection
of Fredericke Archbishop of Collen, from the
hazards of the intruding sword, and was made

Abbot of a Dutch Dorpe in lower Germany,
seated upon the Rhine, a little below Collen, cal|led
as my Authour testifies, Tuitium, or Divi|tense
Mompientum,.  . F errar. in lex. Geogr. from a Cloyster builded
there by this Rupertus himselfe, and dedicated
to Saint Lawrence: and here hee wanted not
adversaries to calumniate him, and those that
did accuse him of Heresie; but he cleeres these
oppositions, and in short space confutes the
Authors, though for a time hee ceased writing,
and as the Devill was malicious to hinder good|nesse,
much more propitious was God to this
Rupertus, for it pleased him to raise up great
men to protect him as the aforenamed Arch|bishop
of Collen, who did make him one of his
Clients, and Cuno an Abbot, afterwards Bishop
of Ratisbone, eminent men, and both of them
equally intending to preserve the fame of this
Rupertus: and they doe deserve their due En|comiums
for their pious sheltering of him: ne|ver
hath it beene knowne that God hath left his
Church; of Enemies he will make friends, if
a mans ways please the Lord, hee will make his ene|mies
to be at peace with him; and so this Ruper|tus
escaped the mouth of that Lion: Will you
but heare this mans praise, Dum quidem stabit
Ecclesia Catholica, c. that is, As long as the
Church Catholike stands on earth, so long shall
the worth of this man be celebrated, which
more then any one hath ennobled the Church of
Collen, in whose Writings there is nothing but
gravity, sanctity, and solidity, who by the in|stinct

of the blessed Spirit of God did search
out many mysteries, who handled the points of
Faith sincerely and judiciously, who with wit
defended the Ceremonies of the Church against
all Opponents, who play'd the parts of an ab|solute
Divine, who setled dextrously all diffe|rences
in Religion, and for humane Learning
who knew it more expertly, or did practise it
more substantially, yet so as he would call them
Dona Dei preciosa, sed ancillas,  Theologiae
Ministras: that is, The precious gifts of Gods
Spirit, but yet Handmaids, and attendants to
Divinitie: and so speaks another of him, Si|vitae
sanctitatem inquiras, religiosissimus; si scien|tiam
undecunque doctissimus; si mores, omni ho|nestate
insignis erat: that is, If you desire to
know whither he was an holy man or not, I te|stifie
hee was wholly addicted and devoted to
Religion: if you enquire of his knowledge
and Learning, he was every way accomplished;
if you look into his manners and course of life,
it was at all times, in all places, upon all occasi|ons
decored and graced with honesty, who can
expresse his Humility iu the height of his pro|speritie?
Erat fide firmus,Ioannes Abbas Spahem. in laudem Ruper|ti. spe certus, chari|tate
repletus, sapientia clarus, c. that is, hee
was setled in the Faith, grounded in hope full of
lave, famous for wisdome, truly valiant, honest
in his actions, of a sober life, patient in the dee|pest
affliction, a fit Shepherd for Christs Lambs,
meek, courteous, devout, frequent in praying,
deepe in meditations, studious in his readings:

so as it is said of him, semper legit, semper
scripsit, semper oravit: He always was reading
or writing, or praying, nay (as the said Author
hath it) Non erat virtus, quam Ruperti conver|satio
nesciret, that is, there was not a vertue,
which this Rupertus in his life did not practise.
How did he instruct the ignorant? reduce the
wandring? confound Heretikes? How did hee
hate pride, abandon covetousnesse, trample on
luxury, tamed anger, expelled envy, and detested
idlenesse?
Heare but the short commendations of Tri|themius,Trith. in scrip. Eccles.
Vir erat in divinis Scripturis doctissi|mus,
c. that is, Hee was a man most learned
in the Scriptures, whom Envy it self cannot but
praise; whose Labours all the Learned rejoyce
to reade, who as he lived as an Angell here, so
he shall be as an Angell in glory. Will you know
him further, then take his Epitaph cut upon a
stone, Anno Domini 1135. 4. Non. Martii obiit
Venerabilis Pater ac Dominus Rupertus Abbas
hujus Monasterii, vir doctissimus at que religiosis|simus,
ut, in libris suis, quos edidit, apertissim
claret, that is, In the yeere of our Lord 1135,
on the fourth of the Nones of March, died this
most Reverend Father Rupertus, Lord Abbot
of this Monastery, a most Learned and Reli|gious
man, as is easily to be seen in his writings;
Hee lived long till hee was very old, and in this
his old age he did with abundance of teares la|ment
and bewail the vanities of his life, still de|siring
God to pardon his sins, to omit his errors,

 to make him one of those of whom it is said,
Come yee blessed children of my Father, c. all
his desire was to be loosed from the Tabernacle
of corruption, so that it appeares he had hopes
of a better possession in that Citie, whose buil|der
and maker is God. So in fulnesse of dayes,
after many tedious labours and travels hee was
struck with a Fever, of which he died, with great
expressions of joy and comfort, that at the day
of accompts hee should rise to live with the just
and upright men made perfect.

I have here set downe his Workes as they are
registred before his books printed at Mentz, in
the yeer of our Lord 1631, in two Tomes.

Tome 1.
Commentaries of the
Works of the sacred
Trinitie in fortie
two books.
1 On Genesis, nine
books.
2 On Exodus, foure
books.
3 On Leviticus, two
books.
4 On Numbers, two
books.
5 On Deuteronomy,
two books.
6 On Josuah, one book
7 On Judges, 1 book.
8 On the Kings, five
books.
With the Psalmes an|nexed.
9 On Esay, two books.
10 On Jeremiah, two
books.

11 On Ezekiel, one
booke.
12 On Daniel, one
booke.
Haggay, Zachary,
Malachy, being ad|ded.
13 On the foure Evan|gelists,
one booke.
14 On the Works of
the Holy Ghost, nine
books.
15 Commentaries on
the twelve lesser Pro|phets,
one and thirty
books.


1 On Osee, five
books.
2 On Joel, one book.
3 On Amos, foure
books.
4 On Abdiah, one
booke.
5 On Jonah, two
books.
6 On Micha, three
books.
7 On Nahum, three
books.
8 On Abacuck, three
books.
9 On Zephaniah, two
books.
10 On Aggee, one book
11 On Zachary, five
books.
12 On Malachie, one
book.
13 Of the Canticles,
of the Incarnation,
seven books.
14 On Ecclesiastes, one
book.
15 On Job, one book.
These are of late an|nexed.


Tome 2.
1 On Saint Matthew,
of the glory of the
Sonne of God, thir|teen
books.
2 Of the Trinity, nine
books.
3 On Saint John,
thirteen books.
4 On the Apocalypse,
twelve books.
5 Of the victory of
Gods Word, thirteen
books.

6 Of divine Offices,
twelve books.
7 Of the misery of his
Monastery, one book.
8 Of the meditation
of death, two books.
9 The life of Heribet,
Archbishop of Col|len.


To these now are
added.
1 Of the losse of Vir|ginitie,
one book.
2 Of the Divine will,
one book.
3 Of the Omnipoten|cie
of God, one book.

These are the demonstrations of the Labours
of this man, which are large enough to prove
him an eminent man; and so I end and shut up
my discourse of him, desiring those that reade
his Life or his Works, both to imitate his
Learning and Holinesse, that they with him
may receive comfort at the second comming
of our blessed Saviour. Happy are they then
when our Lord shall come, shall be found so
doing.




An. Christi 1130. Sanctus Bernardus.

S. BERNARDVS.

_IT is not fitting that this great Light
which God did set up should be hid
under a bushell, but that his pietie
and vertues should be celebrated to
all posteritie: Hee was borne in those parts of
Burgundie, in which his Father held much land
and large possessions. His parents were noble
and religious. His Fathers name was Tecelinus,
a great Souldier, and such a one as Saint Iohn
wish'd others to be, laid violent hands on none;
but kept himselfe within the bounds of civility
and sobriety, and so followed his Commanders
here, that hee did not neglect his chiefe Com|mander
in Heaven: his mothers name was Aleth,

sprung from a Towne not farre from the moun|taine
called Barrus: shee following the rule of
the Apostle was subject to her own husband,
and ruled her family with wonderful care and re|ligion;
shee bare to her husband six sonnes, all de|voted
to God and religion, and one daughter
which was also addicted to pietie: all these shee
lovingly did give suck to from her own brests,
the third of these was this Bernard, whose Life
I will now set forth.
In his minority hee was very obedient and
dutifull to his parents, wonderfull apt to learn,
and quick to conceive, of an admirable memo|ry,
accute wit, ready apprehension, ingenious
of nature, flexible to discipline, of an excellent
feature, comely personage, sweete behaviour,
courteous, meeke: all these shewing what a
rich Harvest this Spring would produce, when
he was young he was troubled with a great pain
in his head, which a woman having long time
used that way was brought to him, who said she
would remove that pain by certain verses by way
of enchantment; but when shee came before
him, hee utterly rejected her and her devise, ra|ther
being willing to endure the hand of God,
then the hand of the Devill, and God in short
time after in great mercy did acquitt and free
him of this pain, and did comfort him and con|firme
him as he did Samuel in Shiloe; being put
forth to learning, he was not onely as forward as
the rest, but exceeded, and even in his youth did
learne to mortify his head-strong affections: he

was as well by education as nature addicted to a
solitary life; hee was also full of charity, for if
hee had any money hee would privately give it
away to the poor: his master dyed in his youth,
and was honourably interred: this Bernard was
to be admired for his chastity, and for quelling
of lustfull thoughts, so that hee did often use
that speech of Iob, I have made a covenant with
mine eyes not to looke upon a maid,Iob, 32. which will
appeare if you consider those two eminent de|monstrations
of it; the one was thus by the in|stinct
and suggestion of the Devill, there was a
young beautifull maid laid in bed, which thing
when Bernard perceived, though then in height
of bloud, and she an object to incite him to vio|late
his chastity, yet hee never so much as tooke
any notice of her, but lamenting her impuden|cie,
lay on the other side remote from her; and
so kept himselfe continent to the astonishment
of that bold intruder. And the other passage is
this, It so fell out, that Bernard with some other
of his associates should lodge at a Matrons
house, but the woman being overcome with
tentation, viewing the comely countenance of
Bernard, and the beauty of his eyes, and grace|ful
deportments of his person, when night came,
did prepare a more sumptuous Chamber for
him, than for the rest, and shee burning in lust
towards him, in the middle of the night came to
his bed, which thing Bernard suspecting sudden|ly
cried out, as if there had beene Thieves in his
Chamber, so the people awaking, and the wo|man

fearing to be taken, fled; well, they all goe
again to rest, but the woman not being daunted
with this, approached the second time, but he, as
before, cryed Thieves, so the houshold rose a|gain,
but found non, nay, shee was so impudent
that shee adventured the third time; but being
by his cry, either struck with shame or despaire,
left off her enterprize: Upon this thinking it
not safe to dwell with Serpents of this nature,
he intended to remove, and though the world
seem'd to flatter him with hopes of honours,
wealth, preferment, pleasures, and the like; yet
hee was desirous rather to take the yoke of his
Saviour on his shoulders, and thereupon enqui|red
what place would best fit such a practice, and
at that time there being an order of Cistercians
come up, and having as yet, by reason of their
poverty of life and austerity, there were but few
that followed this course of life, and as yet few
or none admitted; It so fell out that after long
debate with his associates, he resolves upon this,
to enter himselfe a member of that society, and
so in the yeer of our Lord 1113, and of his age
the two and twentieth, with thirty more he en|tred
into this Monastery; under the govern|ment
of Stephen then the Abbot, and from that
time it pleased God to shew him singular mercy
and favour, and he made good use of it, not tur|ning
the grace of God into wantonnesse, but did
set himselfe wholly to the worke of the Lord,
and often would say to himselfe, Bernarde, Ber|narde,
ad quodingressus es? that is, O Bernard,

Bernard, to what purpose entred you in hither?
and when by the appointment of Stephen he was
made Abbat of Claravallis, his fellows have heard
him say often, yee that doe enter in here, leave
the fruits of the flesh, and bring in the fruits of
the spirit, for this is a schoole to exercise grace
in, not nature. This Claravallis was in the Ter|ritory
of Lingonia, and was once called Absyn|thialis,
for the abundance of Wormwood that
grew there: it was a Den of Robbers, and was
not farre from the River Elbe: but now this Ber|nard
and those that came with him made this
Den of Thieves the House of Prayer, where
these professors liv'd in great want and penury,
in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakednesse, in
Watchings, fastings, and prayers, spare in their
dyet, especially this Bernard, lying often on the
ground, and this did hee onely to mortifie the
deeds of flesh, Plenus autem erat (saith my Au|thour)
devotione, mansuetudine, charitate, hu|militate,
he was full of devotion, imitating the
Apostles rule, be instant in prayer, and pray con|tinually:
endued he was with the spirit of meek|nesse,
so that hee had learned to practise that of
our Saviour, Learne of mee for I am humble and
meeke, and as he knew meeknesse to be a fruit of
Gods holy Spirit, so he put it upon his soule; a|bound
he did likewise in charitie, knowing it to
be the bond of perfection, and the chiefest above
Faith, or Hope, and would fast himselfe to give
to others that were in want: he could never in|dure
to keep any wealth by him, but all that he

could spare, charitie dispos'd of: God crowns
the intent where hee finds not the faculty: true
charitie proceeds not from a full purse, but from
a free bosome.
His humility was likewise admirable, for hee
said hee had learnt it of so good a Master, that
hee should not bee a good scholer, if hee
should forget it. Nay, hee was so devout in
prayer, that as it is said of him, Orabat stans
die noctuque, donec genua ejus infirmata jejunio
corpus sustinere non potuere; He prayed standing
night and day, untill his knees were so weary
with fasting that they could not uphold his bo|dy;
for prayer is the chiefest thing which a man
can present God withall: he seldome did drinke
wine, and when he did he was very sparing, and
mixt it with water, because he said as Salomon, it
was a mocker, and that strong drinke was raging:
and being ordained Minister, this lustre of holi|nesse
of life and frugality, how did they pro|cure
him reverence, authoritie, obedience, how
happy were they that could be admitted for his
auditors? and the first thing hee tooke speciall
care of, was to have decent and reverend carri|age
used in Gods house, and had an excellent gift
and grace in preaching the Word to the people.
I is reported of him, that being in the Priest|hood,
and having remained some yeeres in the
said Monastery, that it happened one Iosbertus
a noble man, who liv'd in the next Towne to
that Monastery, was taken speechlesse, and was
as it were void of reason; which thing being re|lated

to Saint Bernard by his sonne, he said thus,
Notum est vobis, quod homo iste in pluribus gra|vavit
Ecclesias, oppressit pauperes, offendit Deum:
that is, it is knowne to you how in many things
this man hath burthened the Churches, oppressed
the poore, and offended God: Now if hee will
restore what hee hath taken from the Churches,
and leave off to oppresse and vexe the poore, and
pray heartily to God, and confesse his sin, and re|pent
him of it, hee will by Gods mercie be re|stored,
so all things were promised to be perfor|med:
and this Saint Bernard did servently pray
and cry unto God to restore him, that they
which thought it impossible might see it, and so
believe in all saving mercie: it fell out so, that
this Iosbert performing what was enjoyned
him, hee was restored; and Bernards brother
who did not give credit to his words, was
convinced, whose name was Gerrard, so was his
Uncle Gardricke: His fame spread farre and
wide, and abundance of people came to heare
his Sermons; so that Pope Innocentius got him
to Rome, and how was he there admired for his
abilities? did he not worke upon the Emperors
heart, and for his Holinesse; were not all Church
businesses moderated by his onely advise and
counsell? and how did hee repell the intention
of the King who intended to have made Thea|ters
of Churches? and did not he reconcile the
Religious men of Millain to him, and pacifie
all things that then were in combustion where
were not his counsels held as Oracles? and what

did he faile to effect which he undertook? and
what Bishopricks were not offered him? The
Church of Lingonium, the Church of Cathalau|nia,
did seeke for him with teares and petitions
to be their Bishop.
How many Cities in Itali, especially Millain,
did thirst after his doctrine, and desired his go|vernment?
Did not Rhemes doe the like by all
sollicitations that could expresse reverence and
love? With what teares was hee welcomed af|ter
his journey to his old Monastery What
feares were there that hee would bee made a Bi|shop,
and so leave them Yet how humbly did
he in the midst of all these offers demeane him|selfe?
How untainted was hee from the sins of
the times? How zealous for Gods glory Was
it not hee whom Theobaldus a Prince gave large
means to, for the due sustenance of the Socie|tie?
Was it not he that by his sinceritie of life,
and purity, and efficacie of preaching, made
men of all estates willing to afford reliefe for
the repairing and enlarging their seat? How
did he stop the fury of the Schismaticks, and re|strained
the persecution? Did not he being sent
for to Rome oppose the Schismaticks, that hee
stopt their mouthes? and so by his care and di|ligence
peace was restored to the Church? Did
hee not so gaine the love of Prince The obaldus,
that he was joyfull and ready to part with all his
titles, and dignities, and means, for the mainte|nance
of Gods Church Oh should I, or could I
indeed reckon up all his eminencies and gra|cious

endowments? How incredible, nay, how
unimitable are they? For God brought mighty
things to passe by this Saint Bernards meanes.
Take his commendation as one gives it him, Se|renus
vultu, modestus habitu, circumspectus in
verbis; in sacra meditatione assiduus, c. that
is, Of a gracious countenance, a modest habit,
circumspect in his words, assiduous in meditati|on,
devout in prayer, strong in the faith, patient
in hope, made up of charity, chiefe for humili|ty,
principall of all in piety? in counsels provi|dent,
powerfull in deeds, never idle, rejoycing
when reproached: modest to petitioners, flow|ing
with abundance of wisdome, vertue, and
grace with God and men, apt in speech, fitting
himselfe to his auditory, admired for his dyet,
and not affecting any earthly promotions, nay,
he is termed, Olivaspeciosa, Vitis fructuosa, Pal|ma
florida, Cedrus multiplicat, vas Electionis,
vas Honoris in domo Dei, vas auri solidum, c.
that is, A beautifull Olive-tree, a fruitfull Vine,
a flourishing Palm-tree; a lofty Cedar, a vessell
of Election, a vessell of Honour in the House
of God, a pure vessell of solid Gold set with
precious stones.
He foretold his death, and hee that desires to
read copiosly of each circumstance, there is an
Epistle extant to Arnaldus an Abbot: thus
much in briefe, after so many great labours in
the Churches cause, having happily finished his
ayes, being the first Abbot of that place, at the
age of sixty three yeeres, having setled above

a hundred and sixty Monasteries for Religion,
He sickned and commended his soule devoutly
into Gods hands, a great concourse of people
shedding teares for the losse of such an Ange|like
man.
This hapned in the same yeere that Eugenius
the third of that name an holy man departed
this life, Anastastus succeeding him in the Roman
See, then reigning that illustrious Fredericke
over the Romans, and Ludovicus that godly
Prince, the sonne of Ludovicus, governing
France: Hee was buried on the Calends of Sep|tember,
with great state and pompe, Anno 1130.

Bernard his Sayings.

Of sloth.
Sloth is a certaine languishing sluggishnesse
of the minde,Bern. 1. serm. whereby one neglects to begin
that which is good, or to finish that which is
begun.


Of brotherly love.
Then selfe love is just and temperate,Bern. de dict. when
that which is withdrawne from pleasurable va|nitie,
is bestowed to relieve our brothers neces|sity:
for true love regards the common good.
Helpe is in vaine expected,Ibid. where punishment
is deserved. Expectation from others must be
according to our dealing with others.



Of Ambition.
Ambition is a gilded misery, a secret poyson,
a hidden plague,Bern. in serm. quadrages. the Engineere of deceit, the
mother of hypocrisie, the parent of envy, the
originall of vices, the moth of holinesse, the
blinder of hearts, turning remedies into disea|ses,
and medicines into sicknesse.


Of Gods love.
God loved us sweetly, wisely, and valiantly;
sweetly,Bern. super Cant. serm. 20 because hee put on our flesh; wisely, be|cause
hee was blamelesse; valiantly, because, hee
suffered death. Learne therefore, O Christian,
from Christ how to come to Christ: Learne to
love him sweetly lest we be allured, wisely lest
we be deceived, and valiantly lest we be subded
and vanquished.


The Soules three estates.
There are three estates of holy souls;Bern. ser. 107 the first
in the corruptible body, the second without
the body, the third in the glorified body. The
first in warfare and unperfectnesse, the second in
rest and quietnesse, the third in perfect felicity
and happinesse.


Of the hearts Ascension
There are foure degrees of ascension,Bern. super Cant. first, to

the heart; secondly, in the heart; thirdly of the
heatt; and fourthly, above the heart: In the first
God is feared, in the second his counsel is heard,
the third is the desire of Christs comming, the
fourth is the fruition of Gods presence.
Saint Bernard, when he entred the Temple, or
any other holy place, when he came to the door
of entrance, said thus to himselfe: Stay here
all my worldly thoughts, all vanity, that I may
entertain heavenly meditations.



His Works are these that follow, registred by
his owne Scholer who wrote his Life, and by
Cardinall Bellarmine.
Such as are reckoned
by Godfrede, his Scho|ler,
are these.

1. Homilies in praise of
the Virgin Mary, 4
books.
2 Of the degrees of
Humilitie, one book.
3 Of loving God, one
book.
4 Apologie to William
one book.
5 Of Precept and dis|pensation,
one book.
6 Exhortations to the
Souldiers of the
Temple.
7 Of grace and Free
will.
8 Of consideration,
five books.
9 Sermons on the
Canticles, 86 books.
10 Epistles to divers,
351.

11 On Saint Malachies
life the Bishop of Ire|land.

These are of the se|cond
order, and no
doubt to bee made of
them, as Bellarmine
Writes.

1 Of the Lords com|ming,
seven sermons.
2 On the Vigils of
Christs Nativitie, 6
sermons.
3 On Christmasse day,
6 sermons.
4 On New yeeres day,
3 sermons.
5 On Twelfth day, 4
6 On the first Sunday
after the Epiphany,
two sermons.
7 On St. Pauls con|version,
two sermons.
8 On Candlemas day,
three sermons.
9 On Septuagessima,
two sermons.
10 On Quadragessima
seven sermons.
11 On St. Benedict, one
sermon.
12 On our Lady day,
three sermons.
13 On Palme-sunday,
three sermons.
14 On Easter day, foure
sermons.
15 Sunday after Easter,
two sermons.
16 On Rogation weeke,
one sermon.
17 On Ascension day,
one sermon.
18 On Whitsontide,
one sermon.
19 On St. John Bap|tists,
one sermon.
20 On Saint Peter and
Paul, foure sermons.
21 On David and Go|liah,
one sermon.
22 On the seven houres,
three sermons.
23 On St. Victor, two
sermons.
24 On St. Mary Mag|dalen,
one sermon.
25 On our Lady day,
five sermons.
26 On these words, it is
a great signe, one ser|mon.
27 On the Virgin Ma|ries

birth day, one
sermon.
28 On Saint Michael,
two sermons.
29 On All Saints day,
five sermons.
30 On St. Malachies,
one sermon.
31 On Esayes words,
five sermons.
32 On St. Martine, one
sermon.
33 On St. Clement, one
sermon.
34 On Saint Andrews
Eve, one sermon.
35 On Saint Andrews
day, two sermons.
36 On Humbertus, one
sermon.
37 At the Dedication
of a Church, six ser|mons.
38 On the 90. Psalme,
seventeen sermons.
39 On divers Argu|ments.
35.
40 Of the depth of the
heart, foure sermons.
41 Of conversion to the
Clergie, one sermon.
42 Short sermons, 66.
43 Of the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, one ser|mon.
44 St. Bernards sen|tences.
45 A Declamation on
that saying, We have
left all.

Those of which there
is some doubt made,
are these.

1 To his Brethren.
2 Meditations.
3 Of the inward house,
the soule.
4 Of the order of life.
5 Of the Ladder of
Monks.
6 Form of honest life.
7 The Monks Look|ing
Glasse.
8 Divers sermons.
9 A description of his
Monastery.
10 The lamentation of
the blessed Virgin.
11 The doctrine of St.
Bernard.
12 Homilies on them
that went to Emaus.

13 Of Gods love.
14 Of the nature, and
dignitie of divine
love.
15 On the Lords Passi|on.
16 A Tract of the Passi|on.
17 St. Bernards Rheto|rick.
18 Of the manner of
living well, to his si|ster.
19 Of Conscience.
20 Sermons on divers
Arguments, 15.
21 Vpon that, Salve
Regina.
22 An Epistle to one
to shew what God
doth require of us.
23 Of Burthes.

Cardinall Bellarmines judgement of these, is
this: some of these are known manifestly not to
be Saint Bernards, yet are full of weight and
profit; Some of them have their Authours
names noted, some are so slight, and not any
wayes relishing Saint Bernards stile nor spirit:
and some are so like his Works, that it is hard
to make distinction of them: those, that ei|ther
for curiosity or satisfaction desire to know,
may see the Cardinals observation upon each
Tract in his booke of Ecclesiasticall Writers,
pag. 142. 143.




An. Christi 1145. Peter Lombard.

PETER LOMBARD

_HEaven hath been pleased to send ma|ny
famous Divines into the world,
who, like Embassadours, comming
from our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, have expounded the Gospell of Salvati|on,
and defended it from the schismaticall in|terpretation
of Hereticks. As therefore Solo|mon
saith, memoria justi cum laudibus, the me|mory
of the just is pretious and praise-worthy:
it must needs follow, that the praises of these de|ceased
holy Fathers, will encourage others to
give God thanks for raising up such worthy in|struments
in his Church, and also in their lives
and conversations to follow their example.

Amongst the other renouned Fathers, famous
for Learning, soundnesse of Doctrine, Piety,
and integrity of life, Peter Lombard deserves a
prime place: For as it is a Divine gift, above
the nature of man, to instruct men concerning
God and Religion, and to move and incline
their minde to piety and sanctimony of man|ners,
so it is necessary that Divines should bee
furnished with Ecclesiasticke Eloquence, and
sentences, to bring about this great work; which
famous men, even from the first infancy of the
Church have endeavoured and laboured to ef|fect:
And from hence proceeded so many Greek
and Latin Commentaries, Meditations, Ho|milies,
Precepts, and Ecclesiasticall instructions,
written by the holy Fathers, who that they
might by their laborious writings illuminate
the Church in mysteries of salvation, were all
brought up to scholasticke learning; that some
by Commentaries, some by Sermons, and some
by Sentences, might all helpe to edifie and
build up the Church of God.
And this Father, the most renowned Peter
Lombard, of Novaria, Bishop of Paris, was (as
Sixtus Senensis and others have written) by all
Schoole Divines, for a certaine singular excel|lence
of Veneration, called the Master of the
Sentences; upon whose compendium of Divi|nity,
and Volumes of innumerable disputati|ons,
the most learned Divines of the most fa|mous
Universities in the whole Christian
World have elaborately written.

He was contemporary with Gratian, and as
hee gathered Canons, and was the Master of
the Canons, so he collected out of the sentences
of Ambrose, Hillary, Augustine, Cassiodorus,
and Remigius, suppressing their names, most
learned sententious Commentaries on all Da|vids
Psalmes, and on all Saint Pauls Epistles, in|serting
some things of accompt of his owne.
The Commentaries on the Psalmes begin, Cum
omnes Prophetas Sancti spiritus revelatione con|stat
esse locutos. The Commentaries on Saint
Paul begin; Principia rerum sunt inquirenda.
So that this Peter Lombard, being endowed with
all naturall qualities, improved by education
and learning in the schools; and being also pain|full
and industrious to advance Religion, to in|crease
spirituall knowledge, and to furnish Stu|dents
in Divinity with most exquisite and melli|fluous
sentences, so sweet, so admirable, and pa|theticall,
hee I say, to this end collected the
Sayings and Sentences of the Fathers, which
may be thence gathered and cited to various and
divers purposes, either to confirme any Do|ctrine,
to amplifie matters, or to delight the au|dience;
Sentences being the Creame of wit, the
abstract and epitome of words, for instruction
necessary, easie to be retained in memory, as
briefe rules of Life and Religion. How ought
then posterity to be thankful to this famous Fa|ther
Peter Lombard, who out of so many lear|ned
Divines, painfully collected so many Sen|tences
out of their Gardens, gathering Divine

flowers which are all bound together in his
Workes?
And therefore although Laus est or atio bona
alicujus enumerans, praise is but the repetition of
particular vertues and goodnesse; Yet the life
of this worthy Father would deserve a whole
volume of praises, fild with Encomiums and
sententious Eulogyes: but because they cannot
reach his desert both for Piety, Religion, and
Sanctity, it will bee his best commendation
to read some of his sweet Sayings, collected
out of his owne Workes.

Peter Lombard his Sayings.

Of Sinne.
Every sinne that is not speedily by Repen|tance
discovered, becomes a new Sinne, and
the punishment of former sinne.


Of the Will.
There can no good dwell in us that cannot
will good;Comment in St. Paul Epist. nor can we perfect good that can|not
desire good.


Of the Law.
Death is not by the Law, but by the fault of
man; but sinne is the procurer and efficient
cause of Death, because it turneth that which is

good into evill. For so Physicke is not the cause
of Death, though it discovers deadly poysons,
nor the Law discovering the poyson of sinne in
reprobate men.
There are in us evill concupiscences and de|sires,
which are the Devills weapons, whereby
when God for sakes us, he overthrowes us, and
gives our soules a deadly wound.


Of Predestination.
God condemneth none before he sinneth; he
crowneth none before hee over-commeth; but
he hath a definitive prescience of every ones
will, whereby hee shall bee condemned or
crowned.
If God be for us by predestinating us before
our being, by our vocation when we were ene|mies,
by justifying us when we were sinners, by
glorifying us when we were mortall; nothing
can hurt us, but all things worke for our
good.


Of Gods Love.
If nothing can separate us from Gods love,
what more certaine and greater good can there
be? For he that loveth God cannot dye; but it
is death not to love God, or to preferre any
thing before the love of God; therfore the love
of God is a right affection of the minde, which
joyneth us to God; and God sheweth his love

to us in Christ, whom for us hee delivered
to death.


Of gifts.
Let none glory in the gifts of Preachers, or
men, in that they edifie more by them; for
they are not authors of grace, but ministers.


Of Love.
The reall vertue of Piety is the love of a pure
heart,Comment. in 3. cap. in Paul. a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.
This is vertue which nothing overcommeth;
no fire or windes of persecution; no flames of
temptations can extinguish: of this vertue it is
said, Love is as strong as death, by a contrary
comparison: For as death is violent in destroy|ing,
so love is violent in preserving.


Of Corporall Exercise.
Corporall exercise, as Fasting, watching,
and abstinence, which bridle the flesh, are
little profitable, unlesse piety be added there|unto;
for it makes us shunne vices, and so to
be excusable for some vices, but not for all, but
piety and good workes are gratefull unto
God.



Of Christs Love.
There came one without sinne, that saved us
from sinne; for the Sonne of man came to seeke
and to save sinners, because he came in love as
he was man, and was from eternity as he was
God.
The instruction of words is not so powerfull
as the exhortation of workes: for if those that
teach the truth well doe neglect to do well, they
shall hardly profit their audience. For workes
perswade more than words.



The Writings and Bookes of Peter Lombard
may bee knowne by the Epitaph on his Sepul|cher,
which is in Saint Marcels Church in Pa|ris,
where these words may be read, Here lies
Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, who composed
the Booke of Sentences, Commentaries on the
Psalmes, and Saint Pauls Epistles. Moreover,
there are foure bookes of Sentences, which are
the chiefe works of Master Peter. The first con|taineth
sentences of the Fathers concerning the
Trinity and Unity of God. The second of the
Creation of the World, and especially of An|gels
and men, and of the grace of God. The
third of the incarnation of the Word, and of
vertues and vices. The fourth of the Sacraments,
and of the last things, the Resurrection and
Judgement.




An. Christi 1245. Alexander Hales.

ALEXANDER HALES

_THis Irrefragable Piece of Learning
was borne in England, in a place
called Hales in Norfolke; where ha|ving
had liberall and free education
bestowed on him by his friends, he wholly ad|dicted
himselfe to literature: it seemes hee
had not onely an excellent wit, but as forward
a will to study; for he proved famous in a short
time, which argues, that he was wondrous pain|full
in his studies, and so gained the height of
learning by his indefatigable care, and labour:
And although England bred him, yet hee tra|vailed
into other Countries, and was as famous
abroad as hee was at home: for as it is testified

of him; Magno tempore Parisiis legit, (id est)
He read a long time in Paris:Bartho de Pisis. li. 1. He it was, that
made the summe of Divinity, and divided it
into foure parts, which he performed so accu|rately,
profoundly, judiciously and learned|ly,
that hee was called in Paris, Fons vitae, the
Fountaine of life. So likewise others termed
him Doctor Doctorum, the Doctor of Doctors:
But the most generall Title of worth that was
given him was this,Sixt. Sen. li. 4. Bibl. Sanctae. that he was Doctor irrefra|gabilis.
Sixtus Senensis saith, that for his know|ledge
in all the liberall Arts, and for his wisedome
in Schoole-Divinity, he was not onely not infe|riour
to any, but indeed did farre excell all others,
so that he may wel be termed the guide of Schoole-Divinity.
Another entitles him,Trithem. Catal. Scrip. Eccles. Virum in Di|vinis
Scripturis eruditissimum,  in seculari
Philosophia, nulli suo tempore secundum; ingenio
subtilem  clarum Eloqui, (id est) a man most
absolutely experienced in the Scriptures, and in|feriour
to none of his time for Philosophy, most
acute in Wit, most renouned for his Eloquence.
Possevinus saith of him, that he writ the summe
of Divinity Ea Methodo quam ante nemo un|quam
attigerat,Possevinuin Appar. Sacro. (id est) in that dainty Method
which never any before had done. But abve all
the pens that have writ in his praise, Petrus Ru|dolphus
hath gone the highest, whose Encomi|um
of it selfe is sufficient to cause this Author
to be esteemed: And since he was so famous a
Writer, I cannot let his name and fame dye
without adding something of mine own know|ledge

to perpetu ate him to posterity. There be
three or foure remarkable things in him, which
praise him sufficiently; as first his general Lear|ning;
secondly, the Scholars of note that hee
was Tutor unto: thirdly, the various Workes
that he writ: fourthly, the honest and sanctified
life that he alwayes led: and lastly his death.
For the first, who can suspect his ability for
any kinde of Learning, when as hee is rather
admired of all, than yet equallized by any? Who
that is of solid judgement, but doe allow of his
authority? who but subscribes to his Conclusi|ons?
Who desires not to register his undeny|able
Sentences? Who but spend themselves at
the Lampe to have resolution of difficult points
from his Treasury? What Case doth hee leave
unresolved? what Science doth he not handle?
Is hee not absolute for Grammar? fluent for
Rhetorique? deepe in Philosophy expert in
Metaphysicks? made up compleat for Divini|ty?
Who almost can reckon up the number of
his scholasticke Questions, with their wise and
learned Answers? satisfies he not any man in a|ny
poynt or head of Divinity? Is not hee the
Garden that's variously decked with most sorts
of sweet Flowers, and wholsome Herbes? so
that while some have endeavoured to bee emi|nent
in this or that Science, and with great diffi|culty
have scarce attained their desired perfecti|on,
is not he made up of all? as though Natures
endowments and graces blessings attended him,
and did both strive to the utmost to enrich him.

And then secondly, doe not those worthy In|struments
of learning, who proved such solid
Scholars afterwards, speak this Alensis praise?
especially those two more eminent Lights, to
wit, Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure; the one
being for his admirable parts stiled Doctor An|gelicus:
and the other for his rare knowledge
in Divinity, is called Doctor Seraphicus: of the
first it is said, Tolle Thomam  dissipabo Eccle|siam:
take him away and the Church will bee
weakned; and take away both, and how will
the Schooles be darkned, and their glory eclip|sed?
and were not both these, by their own con|fessions,
instructed and tutored by this Alexan|der
of Hales? the Master sure was an able man,
who gave learning in such a measure to two
such Champions.
And thirdly, doe not his numerous unpa|ralleld
Workes sufficiently renowne him? Did
not all the chiefe Divines, and Masters of Paris,
to the number of sixty, approve and seale to the
allowance of his summe of Divinity? Did not
the same Alensis decore and illustrate the old
and new Testament with Marginall Notes,
which Worke was called Postills on the whole
Bible? Are there not in Manuscripts, in foure
Tomes, Expositions and Commentaries of his
upon Saint Marke, Saint Luke, and upon all the
Epistles of Saint Paul? Did not his pen set forth
the summe of vertues? Hath not hee writ like|wise
on the Pentateuch, Commentaries on the
Booke of Iosuah, on the booke of Iudges, on

the bookes of the Kings, as also on the Psalms?
hath not his labour set forth Annotations on
the lesser Prophets? Are not those his Com|mentaries
on Aristotles Metaphysicks knowne
by the name of Alexander ab Alexandria? Did
not he write learnedly likewise on the foure
bookes of the Master of the Sentences? hath
not he made many sermons to the people? and
did not he compile that worthy piece that is ter|med
Vitiorum Destructorium? which is indeed
the very undermier of the Kingdome of sinne
and darknesse: these workes are so able to de|fend
themselves, that I neede not spend time
to lend praise to them.
Fourthly, as his learning was great, his
pains wonderfull, his Scholars famous, his
Workes unreproveable, so his life and conver|sation
was as upright and honest. Certainly he,
who did take such labour to kill vice in others,
would not harbour it in his owne soule. Are
not those his remedies which hee hath prescri|bed
against the Capitall sinnes, demonstration
sufficient, that his aime was to kill them? are
not all his arguments against them, as so many
Engines unresistable? who is so ignorant of his
pious intention, that knowes not the reason
why he entred into that strict course of life, but
that he might be the more free from the snares
of the world? and that he might have the more
time and space to give himself to prayer, watch|ing,
fasting, meditation, and godly writing?
and what ingenuous spirit but knowes, that

writing many books is wearinesse to the flesh? (as
Solomon speakes) and did not he write many,
and those solid ones, which must needs take
up most part of his time? adde moreover the
set houres of his publick exercises, which could
not be performed with that generall applause as
they were, had not hee in private spent much
time in molding them; so that these things con|sidered
seriously, who can finde almost in all
his life any time for to be idle, or ill imployed
in? did hee not all his life rather chuse to live
poorely, as holding that to bee the lesse sub|ject
to any incombrances: was hee not alwayes
a friend to the poore, as well knowing whose
Members they were, and to whom they did be|long?
And as his Life was full of Charity and
labour, so it was as spotlesse and innocent, free
from suites and needlesse contentions: so that
in all his deportments he shewed himselfe a pat|terne
of meeknesse, temperance, and sobriety:
And to conclude, when it pleased God to call
him from earth, was not his heart and soule
ready to be offered? Saint Pauls Cupio dissolvi
was his resolution; and at his death was he not
of all learned, pious, and devout men, generally
lamented, aswell knowing what a great labou|rer
was then called to rest? so after a religious,
devout, humble, and laborious life, he depar|ted
quietly in the Lord, being in his time the
glory of the Pulpit, the Father of scholars,
and the light and grace of the Schoole-men He
departed in the yeare of our Lord, 1245.

in the reigne of Fredericke the second, then
Emperour.

Some of Alexander Alensis his wise and
religious Sayings, collected out of
his Workes.

Of Charity.
Charity in the soule of a man is like the Sunne
in the Firmament, which spreads his beames up|wards,
downewards: upwards towards God, the
Angels, Saints; downwards to the Creatures, e|specially
to the poore that are good: and as the
Sunne shines upon the good and bad, so true cha|rity
dilates its beames to its enemies. Destruct.
vitior. pa. 7. cap. 12. Num. 3.


Of Patience.
A soule patient for wrongs offered, is like a man
with a sword in one hand, and salve in another;
could wound, but will heale. Part. 6. cap. 26.


Of Faith.
What the eye is to the body, that is faith to the
soule; tis good for direction, if it be well kept:
as Flies doe hurt the eye, so doe little sinnes and ill
thoughts the soule. par. 6. cap. 32.



Of the detestation of Covetousnesse.
It deserves hate of all men for sixe reasons:
First, because it is a sinne against Nature, ma|king
the desires of the soule terrene, whereas
they should be Celestiall. Secondly, from the many
curses that are laid against it in Gods Word. Woe
to them that joyne house to house, Esay. 5. Third|ly
from the many evills it subjects a man to: it is
the roote of all evills. Fourthly, it makes a man a
foole: Thou foole, this night, c. Fiftly, it causes
strifes and contentions: From whence are strifes,
c. Sixtly it brings men into snares, which
drowne them in perdition. Destruct. vitior.
page 44.


Of the Sinne of Lying.
Every lye is odious, but that most which is a|gainst
the poynts of Faith: as to say that Jesus
Christ was not borne of the Virgin Mary, c.
Faith must bee defended, not opposed. Dectruct.
page 52.


Of good Counsellours.
Such should be holy in their lives, true in their
words, righteously zealous, and wise by experience.
par. 4. cap. 44. in Destruct.



Of the danger of customary sinnes.
Custome in sinne enticeth, and invadeth youth,
tyes fast, and bindes age, deceives and infects
the affections; subverts the judgement, and is
hardly cured. par. 5. cap. 2. num. 11.


Of Humility.
An humble man is like a good tree, the more
full of fruit the branches are, the lower they bend
themselves. par. 4. cap. 48. num. 6.


Of teares and weeping.
Shed teares of compunction, of compassion, of
devotion: weepig availes not if it bee feigned,
for vaine things, immoderate for the dead, or the
crying of the wicked in Hell torments. par. 4. cap.
52. num. 5.





An. Christi 1264. Bonaven|tura.

BONAVENTVRVS

_IN many Authours this Seraphick
writer was called Iohn,Petrus Galis|us hanc vitam scripsit Lat. Gerso. part. 1. tit. de laudibus Bonaventurae. Gerso the
Cardinall of Paris thinkes that hee
was called Eustachius, some have
term'd him Eustathius, others Eutychius, but the
most call him Bonaventure: the reason why hee
was termed Eustathius, or Eustachius, was be|cause
in all his disputations had at Paris with
the Grecians, he stil was constant and resolved to
defend the truth with all solidity, and gravity.
Hee was borne in Etruria, of the Greeks cal|led
Tyrrhenia,2 His Country and Parents. one of the most flourishing parts
of all Italy; called at this day Tuscany: his fathers
name was Ioannes Fidantius, his mother Rite|lia,

both of great Descent, wondrous devout,
and full of charity: who had this sonne borne
to their mutuall joy in one of the ancientest and
renowmedst Cities of all Tuscany, called Balneo-Regium,
in English, The Kings Bath.
This Bonaventure in his youth shewed what
he would prove afterwards; for as he was main|ly
addicted to study, so he set himselfe to follow
that way and those men, which were most ho|ly
and learned in those times, principally Alex|ander
of Hales, the glory of that age, as also
Ioannes Rupellius, with many others, and for
certaine it is, that age was as active and full of
Disputations as any could be: so that Bona|venture
could not want occasion or opportuni|tie
for exercise.
For his feature and proportion of body,
though,Nazianzen. Orat. 30. as Nazianzen said in the life of Saint Ba|sil;
his minde was so adorned, that hee would
passe over all the praise of his outward parts;
yet he doth plainly say, that Saint Basil when he
was young; was of an able, strong, constituti|on,
comely proportioned, gratefull in his be|haviour,
of an heavenly aspect. So I may say of
this great Doctor; though his soule was richly
decked with graces, his body did not want it's
persections: for he had a proper stature, a grave,
pleasing, and winning countenance; and he was
so healthy by nature, that seldome or never did
any disease or sicknesse torment him. But I passe
from all those outward decorements, and will
take a view of the gifts of his minde.

Being entred into a devout course of life,
who can but admire his innocence and integrity
of life? it was so eminent, that Alexander
Alensis would say, Non videri Adam in Bo|naventura
peccasse, that is, that Adam seem'd not
to have sinned in Bonaventure. And was not his
meeknesse and humility as great, which indeed
is the Basis and ground-worke, the Mother and
Mistris of all vertues, and that he might not for|get
the practice of it, did hee not ingrave in his
study that sweet saying of our LORD JESUS,
Learne of me,Mat. c. 11. for I am humble and meek: Doth
he not in all his Writings lively expresse it; for
with what simplicitie is his stile composed off,
only for that hee writ for the good of simple
men, as he saith, and was not hee as carefull to
keepe his conscience unspotted and pure? Did
he not use ordinarily to say? He could not for|get
his appearance before the great and terrible
Judge? And they that please may reade the com|mendation
that Gerso,Opusc. de pur. conscien. c ult. Chancellor of Paris, gives
him for the care he had of it.
Nay, such was his study of humility, that
lest at any time his mind should swell with pride
or ambition; he would put himselfe to servile
and inferiour offices, as to sweeping of roomes,
washing of vessels, and making of beds which
many thought too base to be performed by such
an holy and Religious man: yet nor any nor all
these seem'd so to him, hee knew how to bring
good out of them, for he would say, they kept
his body from pride and idlenesse.

Who when hee thinks of Bonaventures care
for the poor and sick, but will admire him; how
cheerfull was hee in ministring to them? how
diligent in visiting them, though their diseases
were noysome, and in some sort dangerous: it
may be said of him,Naz. Orat. 30. as Gregory Nazianzen said
of Saint Basil, qui hominum lepr laborantium,
vulnera  curavit,  osculatus est, that is, who
both healed the Lepers, and kissed their sores:
hee spent much time in these actions; yet per|form'd
the houres at his study: so that he seem'd
to be one who had a care to redeeme the time: if
he knew any troubled in minde, hee would not
leave him, till he had given him comfort: if
any was poore, what care would hee have to get
him provision? where any was falling from the
truth, how earnest would he be to recover him?
To come to his spirituall exercises of Medi|tation,
Contemplation and Prayer? Did hee
not make his head a fountaine of teares? Was
it not his chiefest care in all his Meditations
to inflame the hearts of his Readers; to kindle
the fire of devotion in their breasts? Hath hee
not shewed the vertue, matter, forme, end, and
distinction of Contemplation, and Meditation?
Hath hee not laid forth the parts, effects, fruits,
times of prayer? And in all his labours is that
saying true of him,Trith. de scrip. Eccles. that his words were not in|flantia,
but inflammantia, that is, not high swel|ling,
puft up, but inflaming: such as moved com|punction,
stird up zeale, did work mortificati|on,
and produced repentance in the hearts of his

auditors? What might not I say of his pa|tience
in bearing injuries? Of his true valour
in undergoing labours? Of his contentednesse
in refusing great Honours? Of his wisdome in
managing himselfe in all publike meetings? Of
his prudence in government.
But let us take a short view of excellent learn|ing,
and admired Scholership: who in this kind
flowed more than he? it is without all question,
that he attained not to such an height onely by
his labour, but also by the helpe of the blessed
Spirit of God. Yet his labour was great and
constant; he hated idlenesse. He read over the
whole body of the Fathers, and made that fa|mous
piece which hee cals his Pharetra, by the
Works and Sayings collected out of Saint Gre|gory,
Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Hie|rome,
Cyprian, Chrysostome, Isidore, Anselme,
Bernard, Cassiodore, and divers others: hee was
so diligent in holy Writ, that he did write two
Bibles out with his owne hand; hee was so con|versant
in the sacred Scriptures, that he had most
of them by heart. One of his Bibles is at the
place of his birth kept as a treasure in the
Church, the other reserved in a famous Library,
as a testimony to future ages of his labour.
Now observe his happy progresse which hee
made in Paris, and indeed how could such a di|ligent
Bee as Bonaventure was, but gather honey
from such able Instruments as there then was; to
omit many others, these two were of note, Al|bertus
Magnus, and Alexander Halensis: so that

by the Learning of these men, Paris was to
Thomas Aquinas, and Bonaventure, as once
Athens was to Saint Basil, and Nazianzen. After
the studie and paines of three yeeres in Paris,
Bonaventure was by the good liking of all
held fit to be publike Reader in Divinitie there;
which hee so divinely performed, that Gerso
sayes of him, thus: Nescio, si unquam talem
Doctorem ac Bonaventuram habuerit studium
Parisiense. I know not (saith he) whether ever the
Universitie of Paris had the like Doctour as
Bonaventure was.
The first Worke hee set out at Paris, was Ex|positions
and Comments on the bookes of the
Master of Sentences: Hee also made an Hexa|meron
on the first Chapter of Genesis, which all
men lament, that hee brought it not to perfecti|on:
but it was so well liked, that hee had the
Archbishopricke of York in England offered
him for his labour, which Dignity he modestly
refused:Annal. Franc. part. 2. 4. when as he was made and appointed
Chiefe of his Order, hee stopt the mouthes
of all Adversaries by his example, wisdome,
moderation, learning, and good constitutions:
hee was meeke and courteous to all, rather
working men to obedience by faire exhortati|ons
and entreaties, then by force and rigour.
His generall Learning is divided into three
parts, his exposition of Scriptures, his Tracts,
his interpretation of the Sentences. In all his
Works appeare Learning, study, exercise: Tri-themius
sayes of him to his eternall prayse, that

he was matter, not words; subtile, not curious;
eloquent, not phantasticall.
His actions were as renowmed as his Works,
what journies did hee undertake to relieve the
poore, to profit the Churches, to reconcile dif|ferences:
this I cannot omit, that when as by
the death of Clement the fourth, at Viterbium
there was no Pope, but a great dissention a|mongst
the Cardinals for three yeeres together,
when as they had so ordered, that the choice of
the Pope should be put to Bonaventures choice,
hee contrary to all their expectation, chose a
stranger, a man of excellent parts, one Theobald,
Archdeacon of Leige: whereby he stopt a great
quarrell, and withall shewed his great wisdome
and integritie. And who knows not his admi|rable
comportment in the second Councell of
Lions, how forceably hee convinced all that op|posed
him? so that for his labour, hee was
made Cardinall and Bishop of the Church of
Saint Alban.
So having spent himselfe in pious actions,
and continued studies, hee gave up his spirit
during that Councell, in the yeere of Grace
1274, and of his age the three and fiftieth, in
which yeere also Thomas Aquinas his loving
friend departed.
There are many Miracles ascribed to him, but
I force no mans beliefe.
His Works are many, and counted rare pee|es,
divided into eight Tomes: allowed by the
authorities of all learned men.

The first Tome containes Expositions on the
Scriptures, so the second.
The third Tome contains Sermons, and of the
Saints.
The fourth Tome containes Commentaries on
the Master of the Sentences, so the fifth.
The sixt Tome containes various Tracts of se|verall
things.
So the seventh and eighth, all full of piety and
devotion, few having come neere him, none gone
beyond him.



An. Christi 1265. Thomas Aquinas.

S. THO. AQVINVS.

_THe thing principally for which the
memory of men is celebrated with
prayse and Commendation is wis|dome
that (in whomsoever found,
though meane of parentage and birth, or ob|scure
by Countrey or Nation) deserves perpe|tuity
of honour and reverence: for his wisdome
that erects our minds to the contemplation and
practise of divine things, it is wisdome that dif|ferences
men from men, and makes man like to
the Angels, 'tis wisdome that rectifies all that's
perverse and naught, either in the will or in the
affections. Wisdome is that which steers all our
actions to an happy conclusion.

This worthy Divine then cannot without
great injury bee left out from the Fathers of the
Church; his Name deserves an everlasting re|membrance;
for who had abler indowments
than this Aquinas? Who ever was more sedu|lous
for study, and more desirous of true wis|dome
than this great Doctor, which, as Bona|venture
got the title of Seraphicus Doctor, and
Alexander Alensis, of Doctor Irrefragabilis; So
this Thomas Aquinas not undeservedly is called,
Doctor Angelicus, that is, the Angelicke Doctor?
For scarce any of the great Fathers of the pri|mitive
times shin'd more gloriously in the eyes
of the whole world, then this eminent man did
for sanctitie of life, and puritie of Learning.
He was an Italian borne, (as Cardinall Bellar|mine
hath it) not farre from Naples, of paren|tage
it seemes great and famous: in the story of
his life, it is said hee was borne in Campania or
Samnos, all hold hee was not borue farre from
these places; some others thinke hee had his
name of the Citie where he was born, being cal|led
Aquino, which in former times was great and
populous, though long since made a heap of dust
and rubbish by the barbarous invasions of other
Nations; but it not onely bred up our Aquinas;
also it was the birth place of Pescenius Niger the
Emperour of Iuvenall, and divers other learned
and famous men. However, if he cannot receive
any credit from the place of his birth, yet hee
adds Honour to it, and though it be now over|throwne
and laid waste, yet his name and re|nowme

every day doth more increase and aug|ment:
and his Workes generally approved of all
Scholers, nay, indeed admired.
There is great doubt concerning his parents,
some who lived a long time with him, and were
daily conversant with him, report that he drew
his Lineage and Kindred from the Counts of
Apulia, and Kings of Sicily: and the Cassinian
Chronicles doe verifie and confirme this same
thing, which for every particular act and circum|stance
would be too tedious here to insert.
It is reported, that an holy devout man, who
lived in a place called Rocca, meeting Theodora
his Mother when shee was great with childe of
this Thomas, bade her be joyfull, for her wombe
carried one in it, and should safely deliver him
into the World, that would be heard of, and
speake through the whole World: and indeed
the issue proved true.
His youth was spent, for the most part, in a
learned Monastery of Cassine; it being custo|mary
and usuall for those times, to put into
the Cloysters great mens sonnes, to give them
generous and holy education: and it said of this
Thomas, that hee needed not so much tutoring
to make him a Monke, for he naturally inclined
to that course of life; He was humble of mind,
modest, bashfull, obedient, grave, industrious,
witty, all great furtherances to his intended re|solutions:
at his first entrance and admission,
(as my Author saith) Caut, apt, sanct, verba
protulit: that is, he discoursed warily, congru|ously,

holily: and that there was in him, ardens
orandi consuetudo, a zealous and inflamed de|sire
of praying to Almighty God.
It so came to passe, that his parts began to be
taken notice of by the Abbot of the place, who
diligently observing the young mans deport|ment,
did presently say of him, that there was
some great expectation of him in time to come.
Whereupon the said Abbot went to his parents,
and declared unto them how happy they were
in him, and related to them his excellent endow|ments,
aswell naturall, as those acquired by stu|dy,
and did earnestly beg of them that they
would not remove him from his course begun,
nor yet bring him up in Secular affaires, or to
follow the Wars; but to keep him at his study,
and he said, hee would warrant them that they
should finde him to bee in short time eminent
and famous: but however hee was by their ad|vice
and direction sent to Naples, to make tri|all
of him, which way, and what course hee
would follow: which City, though often mo|lested
by wars, yet it was at that time full of
great Scholers aswell for Greek as Logicke, and
indeed it was the seate of all the seven Liberall
Sciences.
Not onely Italy at that time did abound with
Learning, but all Europe: amongst divers there
was one Dominicus, whose life and doctrine,
manners and institutions were highly praysed:
Thomas resolves to be one of his followers, but
by reason of the commotions and warres in

those Countries, hee was disappointed for a
time: and this Dominicus, though dead in the
time of those troubles, yet hee left many excel|lent
men which professed his way; above all one
Ioannes which was so called from a Towne
where he was borne: this mans learning and pie|ty
did so sound in all mens mouthes, that a|mongst
divers others Thomas Aquinas heard his
publike Lectures and Disputations, and that with
such great ardencie, that there wanted nothing
in him to be his Disciple, but acquaintance one|ly.
Well, this learned Ioannes tooke notice of
Thomas Aquinas diligence in hearing, and see|ing
more than ordinary parts to be in him, at
last by the motion of Gods blessed Spirit, dis|coursing
with him, strove to make Thomas what
he formerly desired to be, and thereupon rela|ting
unto him the glory and felicity of true wis|dome,
and withall the vanity, instabiliy, vility,
contemptiblenesse of terrene objects, asked him
whether or no hee had any desire or bent to fol|low
the one or the other? to whom Thomas
readily and shortly replyed, think me not (good
Sir) to bee so backward or negligent to follow
vertue, lay you downe the method and rule, and
I will presently, (though through many dangers
and hazards) follow you.
Whereupon this Ioannes did goe to the
Master or Father of his order, which at that
time was called Thomas Lentinus, to whom he
said: Good Father make no delay, but give ad-admittance
to a young man, which is endued

with all parts requisite for study, you need not
doubt him, take him upon my word, he will in
short time prove the mirrour of your house. To
whom Thomas Lentinus replyed, that hee was
much ingaged for bringing him such a rich
Jewell to bee of his Societie: so presently
all things being rightly ordered, as Thomas A|quinas
was admitted into his sacred way of life.
As soone as hee was entred hee slighted all
worldly desires, and ruminates with himselfe,
which was his best method to make a faire pro|gresse
in divinity, so he resolved to reade the
writings of the fathers in which hee was watch|full,
and to hear others wherein he had an excel|lent
retentive faculty, for hee did seldome for|get
any thing which hee saw was profitable and
excellent, but he aimed to get one grace above
all the rest, and that was humility, for hee was
suspicious of himselfe for feare as hee said that
the Devill should poyson all his good gifts, by
making him proud of them, a common infecti|on,
and by him well prevented, and secondly
he said 'twas not fit for yong men to rule, but to
obey the precepts and commands of Superiours,
and therefore hee strove to demeane himselfe
modestly to others Judgment, so that hee
thought nothing was to be spoke, done, or me|ditated
which had not beene by holy men in
former times practised.
To these hee joyned a third grace, and that
was Sobrietie, giving himselfe daily to fasting,
and in the night to watching, at all times to

prayer for these (said he) are the conquerours of
all lusts and pleasures of the flesh; it is impossi|ble
for a man to please God, if his lusts be not
subdued and conquered. These were the pri|mordiall
exercises of this hopefull youth.
But in a short space, his name being up, so it
came to passe, that either some of his familiar
friends, or some other comming to Aquinum,
told his Mother where hee was, and what a wor|thy
Divine he would prove; she bearing a good
minde to Religion, and now remembring the
words had been told her by the Monke of Rocca
before, intended to goe to visit him, but they
who kept Thomas, fearing lest by the sight, the
teares and speech of his mother his mind should
be altered from his good intendments, secretly
convayed Thomas away from that place to
Rome; and from thence to Paris. Shee finding
their policy turned angry; and presently went
for Rome, but missing her sonne there likewise,
sends to her other sonnes which were souldiers
in Tuscany under Fredericke, that they should
beset all ways and passages, and if by any means
they could recover their brother Thomas, and
bring him to her; they desiring to please their
mother,  being commanded by Frederick to do
so, at last find him sitting all weary by a fountain,
they presently apprehend him, and bring him a|long
with them: whom when his Mother saw,
she received him with teares; and withall saw
him put into that defenced Castle called Racca,
intending to tempt and trye what he intended;

and there were no small complaints urged a|gainst
his brethren with the Roman Bishop,
shewing what an ill example of such violence to
a religious man might produce, and urging,
that if such insolencies went unpunished, there
would not want them, who would rob and in|jure
the consecrated Cloysters; and moreover,
that it was not fit his brethren should bee strict|ly
dealt withall for their fact.
But now his Mother having his person sure,
set upon him with a learned, deepe, grounded,
and eloquent Oration, mixt and parenthized
with teares, and all to draw him from that
course: and when she saw she could not prevaile,
shee set her two Daughters to perswade him,
which used all their power to alter his minde,
but they were unable to effect what they were
sent for; nay, they were rather perswaded to
follow a religious life themselves, when they
heard the divine exhortations that came from
their brother.
To bee briefe, his brethren Bore him great
spight, and as much as they could strive to lay
plots to shame him; insomuch, as they hired a
young Curtezan of a singular feature to go to
him, to see if she could entice him to her desired
lust; which she endeavoured to have done: but
this divine instrument of Chastity shunned her
allurements; and when shee saw her hopes lost
she departed, made relation to his brothers of
his constancy and integrity; and Thomas after|ward
gave himselfe to prayer, intrearing God

to pardon his frailty of nature, and to give him
grace and power against such forcible tentati|ons,
that he might keepe his body and minde
holy, cleare, and undefiled, that so hee might
present them with comfort to his Lord at his
second comming.
He continued two yeares in this Castle impri|soned,
in which time he gave himselfo to divine
Contemplations and Prayer, and spent the rest
in reading and writing; for he read the whole
bookes of Sentences, and the word of God di|ligently:
But when his Mother saw, that shee,
nor her Daughters could divert him, fea|ring
lest shee might seeme to strive against
God, sent to some of his brethren that they
should fetch him away privily: which they did,
and carryed him to Naples, so to Rome; and for
the more safety to Paris: but he stayed not long
there, but went from thence to Collen, de|siring
to heare that renowned Albertus Magnus.
He had two Masters, Iohn, aforenamed, and
this Albertus; which, because he saw a kinde of
unwillingnesse in Thomas for disputations, cal|led
him Bos mutus, the dumbe Oxe; but when
he had heard him twice or thrice in his publick
exercises, said of him, that his lowing would one
day be heard through the whole world.
He taught the Sciences principally in foure
places, in Paris, Rome, Bononia, and Naples, and
that with abundance of wit, and plenty of rea|ding;
and when hee was publickly allowed by
Albertus, and Hugo Cardinalis, yet he never ex|ercised

his prts before he had fitted himselfe by
prayer, fasting, and watching: and that God did
blesse him in his Labours appeares, for (as it is
said of him) acut, graviter, copiose, dilucide, eru|dit
disputarit, that is, he disputed smartly, grave|ly,
copiously clearely, learnedly, semper er at (saies
my Author) inter Libros, Disputationes, 
Meditationes veratus, that is, he was alwaies ei|ther
at his Bookes, Disputations, or Meditations.
Insomuch, that supping at Court with Lewis the
French King, while other Lords were discour|sing
of pleasant matters, Thomas was so high
at his thoughts of disputation, that hee for|getting
himselfe strooke the Table with his
hand, and said, ja contra Manichoeos conclu|sum
esse, that now the Manichees were foyled.
He was one that may be a perpetuall patterne
for refusing and contemning worldly honours
and wealth; for though he was young, and had
great wayes to helpe himselfe, yet he regarded
them not: nay, insomuch, that when Clement
the fourth, Bishop of Rome, would have made
him Arch-bishop of Naples, he did refuse it, and
when great promotions were offered to him, his
usuall answer was, Chrysostomi in Matthaeum
Commentarios mallem, that is, I had rather have
the Commentaries of Saint Chrysostome upon
Sint Matthew.
He desired three things principally: First,
that he might not be weary in well-doing: Se|condly,
that he might not dislike that calling,
though with poverty, which hee had chosen:

thirdly, what became of his brother Rainal|dus,
who endured such a bloody death for the
good of the Church; and in this last he said, hee
was sure that his brother, for that temporall
death, enjoyed eternall life.
In his teaching hee alwayes strove to frame
his speech to the peoples capacity; and that hee
might avoid all pride and ostentation: nay, in
his disputations, he would seeme to yeeld, that
he might rather shew his humility, than height
of learning: Hee had abundance of Auditors, as
Doctors, Bishops, Arch-bishops, Cardinalls,
who counted themselves happy in being his hea|rers:
He was of spirit wondrous mild, in his cor|rections
and reproofes, hee would hate the vice
and spare the person. When as he was deputed
to be at the Councell of Lions, hee fell sicke and
was carryed on a Mule to Severinum; where,
when he was entred into a Cloyster, he writ his
Commentaries on the Canticles; and perceiving
his death to draw nigh, received the blessed Eu|charist
prostrate on the earth. After when his
sister asked him if he would have any thing? an|swered,
he should within a little space enjoy all
things: This was his fiftieth yeare of his age.
He had many witty sayings, as one asking
him, why he was so long silent under Albertus?
he answered, because he had nothing of worth
to say to him. Another asked him, what was the
most pleasant thing to him? Hee replyed, to
understand all he had read. One telling him, he
was not learned, as he was supposed; hee an|swered,

I will study the more to prove his
words false. A woman reproved him, that see|ing
hee was borne of a woman, hee should so
shunne them: Yes (said he) even therefore be|cause
I was borne of them. One asked him how
he might live without blame? hee told him, if
he would remember his reckoning to the great
Judge of Heaven and Earth.
So when, after great paines and studies, hee
had approved himselfe to the Church of God,
he yeelded to Nature, and was honourably
interred with all the Rites and Ceremonies due
to so great a person as he was. His Workes are
of that value, that he who hath them in his stu|dy,
is furnished for all manner of learning.

His Sayings.
A day will come,Aquinas de Humanitate Christi Art. 25 when faire dealing shall be
found a jewell, and false dealing shall come to
nothing; when a good conscience shall be bet|ter
than a good purse; for the Judge will not
then be put off with faire words, nor drawne
aside with hope of reward.
He that's armed for the warres,Id. de eruditi|one Principum lib. 7. cap. 3. let him con|sider
who it is that gives him strength, and tea|cheth
his fingers to fight; then let him employ
that strength to his glory; so that by this means
come life, come death, all's welcome that God
sends.
In all thy undertaking make much of time,Id. ut supra. cap. 6. lib. 5.
especially in that weighty matter of Salvation:
O how much would that man, which now lies
frying in Hell, rejoyce, if there were but possibi|lity

to obtain the least moment of time where|in
he might compasse the favour of God, and
so be freed from those torments which seize up|on
him for evermore.
Thou that art young hast death at thy back,Id. cap. 8. lib. 5.
whereas the old man hath it before his eyes: and
that must needs b a more dangerous enemy
that pursues thee, than that which marcheth up
towards thee face to face: Remember therefore
thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, and re|member
withall, that though God promise for|givenes
to repentant sinners, yet he doth not
promise, they shall have to morrow to repent.


I have set down his Works as Cardinall Bellarmine
hath registred, according to the Roman Edition.

Tome 1. Contains his life upon the Perihetmenias,
and the Analatickes.
Tome 2. Containes Commentaries upon the 8 bookes
of Physicks; Vpon the fourth book De Coelo,  Mundo:
and of the generation.
Tome 3. Contains his works upon the books de Meteoris.
Tome 4. Vpon the Metaphysicks 12 books.
Tome 5. Vpon the 10 books of Ethicks, and upon the
8 books of Politicks.
Tome 6. Vpon the 1. and 2. books of the Sentences.
Tome 7. Vpon the third and fourth of the Sentences.
Tome 8. Vpon Disputaions and Quodlibets.
Tome 9. Containes his summes against the Gentiles,
with the Commentaries of Franciscus Ferrarinsis.
Tome 10. The first part of his summes of Divinity,
with the Commentaries of Card. Caietan, and the Expo|sition
of divine names by St. Denis.
Tome 11. Containes primam secundae,  secundam
secundae. With Cajetans Commentaries.
Tome 12. Containes the tertiam partem summae.

Tome 13. Contains Commentaries on Iob, on the 57.
Psalme, on the Canticles, Esay, Jeremy, Lamentations.
Tom. 14. Commentaries on St. Matthew, and St. Iohn.
Tom. 15. Contains his golden chain on the 4 Evangelists
Tom. 16. On all the Epistles of S. Paul. Sermons de tem|pore,
and of the Saints.
Tome 17. Contains 73 little Tracts, and a little book
upon the foure book of Sentencs.




THus farre have we brought the lives of these ho|ly
Fathers and Doctors, in every Century of
yeares wherein they lived, downe to our owne
Moderne Writers, whose vertues have shined on
Earth, like starres in the firmament, by illuminating
the darknesse of the blinde world, with the light of
the Coelestiall Doctrine. These holy men, I say, did
willingly and chearefully offer their lives and bodies
as a living sacrifice to God; not grudgingly or
piningly, but with alacrity of spirit: for though by
the hand of envy and tyranny they were judged to
death, yet they willingly dyed for his cause, and yeel|ded
their bodies as a debt due to Nature: for they
thought so long as the soule was in the body, it was
no better than in prison: for the body at the best is
is but a Coffin of the soule, as the grave is a Coffin for
the body. Therefore let us strive, by their examples,
to goe to heaven like them, through persecutions,
tribulations, and all worldly temptations: for wee
ought to desire with ardency, (as these holy Fathers
did) that joyfull day which all the Elect have, and
doe still long to enjoy: For when Death and Time
shall both cease, and tender downe their Septers of
authority (as I doe now my self:) prostrate before
God Almighty, then shall I, and never till then, bee
truely and really happy.
FIN





