




 the most  and perfect honourable  Sidney Knight, late Gouernour of Flushing  Famous r Letters and Armes. Hee receiued his  at a Battle nere Zuphen  22 of Septem: And died at Arnm the 16. day of October. A^o. 1586.




The Image of Irelande, with a discouerie of VVoodkarne, wher|in is moste liuely expressed, the Na|ture, and qualitie of the laied wilde Irishe Wood|karne, their notable aptnesse, celeritie, and pronesse to Rebellion, and by waie of argumente is manife|sted their originall, and ofspryng, their descent and Pedigree: Also their habite and apparell, is there plainly showne. The execrable life, and miserable death of Rorie Roge, that famous Archtraitour to God and the Croune (otherwise called Rorie Oge) is likewise discribed. Lastlie the commyng in of Thyrlaghe Leonaghe the greate Oneale of Ire|lande, with the effecte of his submission, to the right honourable Sir Henry Sidney (Lorde Deputie of the saied lande) is thereto adioyned. Made and deui+sed by Ihon Derricke, Anno 1578. and now pu|blished and set forthe by the saied authour this present yere of our Lorde 1581. for pleasure and delight of the well disposed rea|der.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Daie. 1581.




To the right worshipfull Maister Phillip Sidney Esquire, Soonne and heire to the right honourable sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the moste noble order of the Garter, Lorde President of Wales, and Merches of the same, Lorde deputie generall of her high|nesse realme in Irelande, and one of her Maiesties moste honourable priuie Counsell in Englande, Ihon Derricke wisheth perfecte felicitie in Christe, AMEN.
_COnsideryng with my self (rigt worshipfull) that it is not onely sufficiente for menne towardes their benefactors, to beare an in+ward affection, and minde gratulatorie for benefites receiued, but also, that some outward and exter|nall token, of necessitie bee thereto adioyned, liuely to expresse outwardly, the secrete affectes of the same, though notwithstandyng inwarde good will, bee suche an excellent vertue, as who so euer hath it, sta~des partly in securitie, but who soeuer hath and expresseth it, to hym is all thng made sure: Euen so, and for because I haue uer

studied, and imployed my diligence, to flee vn|thankefulnesse, that notable vice detested of God and man, and to imbrace gratefulnesse, that hea|uenly Sacrifice, approued of God, manifestyng it to the whole worlde, in discharge of my duetie towardes my Lorde your father, whom for many respectes, vnfainedly I honour, and in hym to your worship as a pattre~ of all benignitie, proce|ding from so honorable a kindrede, with all seme|ly reuerence I worship, I saie with all humilitie, sinceritie, and integritie of mynde, as a notable argument of my vnfained good will, these my la|bours beyng the fruites of my trauell, I humblie doe offer, assuryng my self of your fauorable cou~|tenaunce therein, to whose protection I am so muche the more bolder to comme~de them, by how muche I vnderstande your excellent Nature to|wardes all laudable exercises. And though (per|aduenture) some will impute me arrogante, and passyng presumptuous in attemptyng the same: Hauyng respect but onely to the naked partes of the outward gifte and giuer, not waiyng the in|ward motion of the mynde, whereof the outward accions spryng, nor yet sufficiently ponderyng, that as it is impossible, for fire to be without heate

or the Sunne without brightnesse, no more can the good meanyng of the good bee for euer repressed, but that at the laste it bursteth forthe  is made manifeste, shewyng it self openly muche like the flames of fire, after a thicke and smouldryng smoke: not yet diligently consideryng, like wise and cunnyng Carpenters, that by how muche the weaker a house and buildyng is, by so muche the stronger ought the postes and pillers to bee, (I saie) thei hauyng regard to none of these thyn|ges, or at the leaste not fullie consideryng theim, neither remembryng how commendable a thyng it is, for euery creature to yeelde his fruite sim|plye in his naturall kinde, without colouryng or dissimulation, bee it little or muche, but ra|ther castynge their eyes like sencelesse beastes downe to the grounde, chauntyng vppon the outwarde Elementes, damnyng, and con|demnyng those externall actions, signes, and to|kens, and as vaine, friuolous, and of no effect, yet not withstandyng this maie not discomfort me in that whiche I haue here determined, but that (maugree their beardes) my good will muste ap|peare, giuyng them to vnderstande, that it is as possible for them, to put the whole seas, into a lea|ther

Bottle, and to driue all the VVoodkarne of Irelande, into one Shepheardes bagge, or Satchell, as it is to driue me from my pretended purpose, because I knowe it consisteth in your worshippes free choise, and libertie, to make bothe the gifte, and giuer, seeme sufficient worthie, c. Thus be|yng emboldened through fame of your courtesie, with hope of remission for this my temeritie, I duetifullie ende, besechyng God to preserue your worship, in good health, and long life, with muche encrease of worship, and honour, c. At Dublin her Maiesties cheef Citie in Irelande, xvj. of Iune. M.D.LXXVIII.
Your worshippes moste humble Ihon Derricke.



To the right honourable and my verie good Lordes, the Lordes of her Maiesties realme of Irelande, and to all other in ge|nerall of the saied lande, beyng louers of vertue, and imbracers of ciuilitie: grace bee mul|tiplied, and peace euerlastyng.
_IT maie be thought (right honourable) and likewise be imagined of some, who peraduenture) readyng this my little treatise, of the Image of Irelande, with a conscience corrup|ted, to bee a thyng deuised and sette forthe, in reproche of all the Nobilitie, and others, borne within this Realme of Ire|lande, as though the partie, ment nothyng els but a meere contempte of so many Noble, and worshipfull personages, and that this title of Woodkarne, should be but a couert, to shroude hym from suspition of the former allegation: Truth is my very good Lordes, if credite maie bee giuen to the artificer, simply as he meaneth, the substaunce is all one, (the matter I meane) to the verie Title, of that whiche is here called Woodkarne, who dissalowyng their Karnishe maners, affirme their dissolute life, and inordi|nate liuyng, better to pertaine vnto Infidelles,

and Heathen, then for those whiche in any re|specte professe the name of Christe, (and what Christians thei bee, right honourable iudge ye) wherefore bee ye not then offended, O ye freen|des of vertile and imbracers of ciuilitie, that I should so fore lothe, or enuaigh their farre vn|seemely maners, settyng out in liuely protrac|tours, in contempnyng the same, bothe their shape, and execrable accions, for (in verie troth) my harte abhorreth their dealynges, and my soule dooeth detest their wilde shamrocke ma|ners, yea so muche the rather, because there is no societie, or fellowship betwene God, and the Deuill, little amitie betwene the Wolfe and the Lambe: like good will, betweene a Rebell, and a faithfull Subiect. Now for as muche then, as thinges with their co~traries agree not, I moste humblie beseche your courtesies, not to deeme the reprehension of these wilde wanto~ Wood|karne, to bee spoken of all menne in generall, whiche is here ment but of some, of those I saie, that are Rebelles to our (Queene) enemies to peace, and disturbers of the common wealthe, as for your (Honours) in good tyme bee it spo|ken, and voide of flatterie recited, who knoweth not, what festination by your Lordshipps hath been vsed, what godlie care taken, what mea|nes practised, what pollicie shewed, and dili|gence bestowed at all tymes (as occasio~ serued) to serue, accompanied either with the Lorde Deputie, or by your Lordshipps alone, against

those whom I haue here tearmed by the name of Woodkarne bestowyng not onely your tra|uelles, adioyned with greate charges, but also ventred your liues in aduauncyng her Maie|sties honor, shewyng thereby, bothe a conant faithe, a perfecte fidelitie, to her royall Croune, conflictyng by force of maine batteil, many of these monsters, beeyng sworne enemies to her noble grace, the attempte whereof was lauda|ble, and the action meritorious, before GOD and man. This I truste maie suffice (right ho|nourable) your noble wisedomes, to withdraw all sinister suspicions from your suppliant, and his booke, giuyng full credite, my purposed in|tent is not, neither yet euer was, to bemishe a|ny mannes renowne, (beeyng approued serui|tours to her moste noble and dreadfull scepter) whose continuaunce, I praie GOD, maie bee long and ioyfull, peaceable as the daies of Sa|lomon, copyng with the long yeres of Neor, to gouerne vs her people, with an admirable regimente, and ouer her foes, triumphantly to raigne. Amen. God blesse your honours, with all maner of spirituall, and yearthly blessyngs, the fauour, and loue of God and manne, muche honour in your countrie: and to conclude, life euerlastyng c.
Your honours moste humble Ihon Derricke.



 To the good and gentle Reader in all places wheresoeuer, but especially, to my louing countrimen of En|lande, hartie salutations, and greetyng euer.
_DIuers were the causes (good Rea|der) that moued me first to take in hande, the caruyng forthe of this Image, and lastly to commende it to thy gentle deuotion, hoping, that as with no small labour, and trauel I haue finishte, and brought it to this perfection, and with no lesse willyng consent, and single mynde haue made it seruiceable at thy good pleasure to vse, so likewise on thy part, thou wilte freendly accept the same, entertainyng it as a straunger, or messenger come from a farre Coue, simplie to report, and deliuer vnto thee, the state and condition of his saied Countremen the Woodkarne, without any im|paryng of their credites, the more notable members of the same, who differyng from theim, in their rusticall udenesse, doe agree wholie with vs, in all laudable discipline. Touching whiche causes, though thei bee many, and as I saied before di|uerse, twoo yet especially, I thought good to signifie, where|of, the one came of a duetifull affection, and vnfarned good will (drawne of long continuaunce through graces receiued) to|wardes his persone, whiche vndoubtedly I honor, and the o|ther of a bounden duetie, (through loue inseparable) towardes my natiue Countrey: Or whiche twoo, though either of them were sufficient to moue any man (if he were not a forgetfull persone) to like indeuer, yet seeyng thei are variable, an he of them so laudable, I might in no wise slacken my pretended

purpose, but shewe my hartie good will, bothe to freende and countrie. If you therefore (my beloued countrimen) for whose sakes (as I saied before partely I framed it, and for whose greater delight, I haue clothed it with varietie, shall deeme it worthie of your custodie, or receiue thereby any profitable, pleasure, I obtaine not onely my expectation, touchyng suche courtesie, but also full recompence, of all my whole charges, (who doubtlesse accoumpte theim nothyng, to pleasure either partie). And if (by waie of digression) some peraduenture (whose iudgementes are parciall in other mennes labours) shall cauill at this my imprinted Image, or impugne the thin|ges therein contained (as reportyng matters of vntrouthe) especially the third lease of this discouered Woodkarne, affir|myng no suche rudenesse, in these our daies to bee practised with the rudeste of that moste barbarous Nacion, to suche I replie (crauyng their pacience) saiyng, that it is not our En|glishe Pale, whiche in any respecte I haue touched, nor yet those of the Southe, whom I haue impeched, nor yet of the Weste, whom I haue nipped, but a people out of the Northe, whose vsages I beholde after the fashon there sette doune, and those are thei whom I haue detected, shadowyng notwithstandyng parte of their maners with flowres of that Countrey, and least peraduenture ye might muse whom I meante, I will not be curious in dischargyng my conscience, lettyng you vnderstande, that thei are a people sprong from Macke Swine, a barbarous ofspring, come from that Nation, whiche maie bee perceiued by their Hoggise fashion: So as my beloued countrimen, and well desposed Reader, if wilful|nesse blinde not the fightes of your iudgementes) it manifest|ly appeareth, and maie easely bee coniectured, that it is not a|gainste any one good member of this Common wealthe of Irelande, that I haue made my discouerie, but onely against the pernicious Uipers of the saied lande, whiche thing I wish hartely eche one to beleue, and credite, knowyng (for example sake) that warre is not waged, against the Queenes freendes, not yet a battell fought, saue onely against her enemies, which

if you so credite, and therewithall accepte of my trauelles, (whiche do represent my vnfained good will) I leaue not this simplie as a pledge of a further beneuolence with you, but therewithall doe paune euen my credite, for ac|complishyng my promesse, till whiche tyme farewell as your hartes can desire.
Yours as his owne Ihon Derricke.





The first parte of the Image of Irelande.
_THe The aucthor in this his firste beginnyng, sheweth that GOD was the onely cause, whiche moued hym to write and set out this his woorkes, helpyng and fauourably sup|portyng hym in the same, who beyng o|therwise insufficient, and not able of hym self to doe the same, but by the goodnesse and furtheraunce of God, yeldeth to hym due honor therefore. heauenly God puissant Prince,
the'ternall kyng of grace:
The lorde which rules both heauen  yearth,
with his Imperiall mace.
Whiche caused first the cristall Skies,
in liuely formes appeare,
And by the course of glistryng Pheabe,
deuided eke the yeare.
Whiche did the lothsome Chaos part,
and separate a sonder:
And plaste the yearth aboue the Sease,
for mortall men to wonder.
Whiche gaue commaundement to the same,
in Natures perfect kinde.
To multiply and yelde the'ncrease,
to those that came behinde:
(Whiche was to man as then not made,
a famous creature sure:)
Of all the woorkes of mightie Ioue,
(renowmed rare and pure:)
Whiche gaue hym reason from aboue,
his will to vnderstande:
Upholdyng heauen and yearth likewise,
with his moste holie hande.
Whiche did reduce from bale to blisse,
the wretched state of man:
And in exchange the sacred heauens,
allotted to hym than.
(Not for the good desartes he sawe,
in mortall fleshe to be:
But meerly of his owne accorde,
that grace extenden he.)
Whiche made the seate of Brittishe kynges,
with honour to abounde:
And eke their iuste deserued fame,
through glom'ryng worlde to sounde.
Suppressyng all their mortall foes,
that vp against them rose:
And by the force of bloodie blade,
afflicted euer those.
Forraine Princes, Nations and Coun|tries, can witnesse of the honourable estate and Royaltie of the kynges of Englande since the tyme it was enhabited.This sondrie Lands can testifie,
as stories witnesse yeeld:
And wee the fruite thereof doe reape,
as from a fartile feeld.
Whiche to relate in this discourse,
I deme it not amisse:
Because I iudge the same to shewe,
Probations.a pleasant storie is.
Prince Arthure is here brought forth as an vnreprobable te|stes (beyng as it wer) a moste famous Ri|uer that watereth the face of y^e whole earth, with the streames of his immortall fame and renowne. And to beginne with Marses knight,
that mightie man of of warre:
Whose fame might not suffice the worlde,
but peerst the highest Starre.
Who now though shrowded in the yearth,
with bodie tournd to claye:
Yet euer liuyng with the iuste,
and shall from daie to daie.
Who neuer made his backe retourne,
once enterde in the feeld:
Till he had made the stoutest foes,
their stately Scepters yeeld.
And brought by Marciall force of armes,
their honour to the duste:
By pluckyng doune their cheefest staies,
whereon their hope did truste,
Prince Arthure is that noble kyng,The honour of king Arthure his Actes, manhode, conquestes Magnanimitie, Chi|ualrie, and what els, in chronicles are suf|ficiently set out, to the greate comforte and consolatio~ of all Bri|tishe and Englishe mennes hartes.
whose fame and greate reporte:
Stirde vp the Nobles of the worlde,
to seeke vnto his Courte.
This is the Prince whose courage stout,
his credite did aduaunce:
This is the man that raignde as Kyng,
in Britaine and in Fraunce.
This is the knight whose bloodie blade,
obtained Caesars Croune:
This is the man that brought at laste,
the haughtie Romanes doune.
This is that thrice renowmed knight,
whom stories doe commende:
This is the Prince whose fame and name,
Dame honour doeth defende.
Thus here of this victorious knight,
I make a small ende:
And to the kyngs of like renowne,
in later yeres descende.
Wherefore attentiue Lordyngs bee,
your listnyng eares to fill:
For breefly of them will I speake,
accordyng to my skill.
And as with Arthure I beganne,
so will I here proceade:
King He~ry the seco~d as Chronicles record for wisedome, know|ledge, and iudgement was holden famous throughout the world in so muche as Em|perours, (namely the Emperour of Rome, and of Constantino|ple) hearing of his no|table wisedome, sent by their Ambassadors to haue his resolution  iudgement in great matters of strife and conte~tion. Read more of this Kynges glorie his wealth and posses|sons in maister Fo|xes Ecclesiasticall historie, I meane the Actes and monumen|tes. To write of Henries noble name,
the seconde as I reade.
To shewe his magnanimitie,
in wrightyngs comprehended,
And other graces specially,
in Chronicles remembred.
For he it is whiche mightily,
augments our Countries fame:
And in his tyme moste roially,
defended eke thesame.
He is that seconde Salomon,
as writynges doe importe,
Whiche filde all corners of the worlde,
with fame of his reporte.
Whiche moude bothe Kyngs  Emperours,
and Princes farre and neare:
To drawe vnto his noble Court,
his wisedome for to heare.
He sheweth the cause why kyng Henry was had in suche honour and greate admiratio~ For why, his domes were purely giuen,
in matters of debate:
He was an vmpere equally,
to euery kinde of state.
He forste not principallitie,
nor yet regarded might:
In eu'ry cause especially,
respected he the right.
For whiche his actions purely doen,
by wisedomes rules approued:
Of Princes, Kynges, and Emperours,
he highly was beloued.
Thus was he counted in his daies,
the wisest vnder Sonne:
Through Europe and beyonde those partes,
so farre his fame did ronne.
And as for his possessions,
so largely thei extended:
As neuer Prince before nor since,
had like as is remembred.
O Kyng these thynges assuredly,
deserue to be enrolde:
And grauen in tables sumptuously
made all of beaten golde.
The Scepter of the noble Relame of En|glande, daiely more  more encreased in ho|nor and fame, beeyng as the Sunne in the firmament of heauen, that casteth y^e beames of his shine vnto the vttermoste partes of the worlde, so that no|thyng might bee hid from the heate and presence thereof. But did the glorie of the Realme,
from thence forth ginne to cease?
Or did it not like the Lawrell tree,
in freshnesse still increase?
Did not the Princes of the same,
by Marciall actes maintaine?
The garlande of immortall fame,
that others earst did gaine?
Goe looke and searche the monumentes,
and there you shall beholde:
That there their names emong the beste,
dame Honour hath enrolde.
There shall you see the famous Prince,
in prease of worthies stande:
Euen cheeke by cheeke to mightie Mars,
with dreadfull sworde in hande.
There shall you see dame Honour braue,
amide the golden raies:
This noble prices banner vaunce,
to his eternall praise.
Prince Edward is that noble Knight,Prince Edward the third is here a noble testimony, to approue the aboue saied alle|gation, beeyng in his tyme moste excellent on yearth, as in Chro|nicles is reported.
the third Kyng of that name:
Approued in the Misteries,
of Marses warlike game.
This is the Prince whose roiall acts,
were knowne by sea and lande:
This is the knight whose presence durste,
no forraine Kyng withstande.
This is the prince whose co~quryng sworde,
possest a double Croune:
This is the manne that made his foes,
on euery side come doune.
Kyng Edward not abiding the mallepart+nesse of the dronken Pope of Rome, which needes would bee a stickler twixt him and the Frenche Kyng, standes at defiaunce bothe with Frenche Kyng and Pope, and offereth to fight hand to hande with them bothe, whiche when the Pope vnderstan|deth, like a Coward, or rather like a snaile in a shell, draweth in his hornes, for feare of a broken Costerd, and quietly suffereth this noble Kyng Ed|ward accordyng his pleasure, to execute the force of his sword against his aduersa|rie, whiche braue exa~|ple if al other kynges would followe  imi|tate, the beaste would beware how he enter|medled with Princes matters, impertinent to his callyng. This is the manne whose valiant harte,
for triall of his right:
Did proffer gainst the Romishe Pope,
euen hande to hande to fight.
But durste the Popes heroicall harte,
take thoffer of the Kyng?
No, no, the foole was wise enough,
he feard an other thyng.
He knewe that if he had assaied,
to tempt hym in his rage:
That captiue should he yeeld hym self,
or leaue his harte to gage.
Wherefore to saue his credite then,
he knewe no waie but one:
Whiche was to take the Keyes, and leaue
the sworde to hym a lone.
For Peter needes must silence keepe,
when Paule steppes forthe in place:
And knowe we not how Paule withstoode,
sainct Peter to his face?
This thyng importes a misterie,
of whiche here to dispute:
I purpose not, but leaue the same,
for others to confute.
Yet might I saie my minde therein
as some before haue doen:
But that I see the daie forbiddes,
and tyme is almoste ronne.
I see how Nox her self applies,
to shade sir Phebus light.
But let the toothlesse crabbed queane,
boyle in her owne despight.
Yea let her euer frettyng liue,
and pinyng fade awaie:
A iuste reward for suche a drabbe,
her mallice to bewraie.
But as for Phebe, you holie ones,
graunt he maie flourishe still:
And to the endyng of my worke,
Lorde guide my quiuryng quill.
When thus this high and mightie Prince,Kyng Edward ha|uyng long ruled the scepter of his Kyng|dome with glorie and greate honor, resigned the same vp to his successours, who also augmente the fame thereof, and in his po|steritie is more excel|lente then his ante|cessours, as in the tradations of histo|ries is at large dis|cussed.
whose glorie did extende:
Throughout all corners of the worlde,
euen to the furthest ende.
Had rulde, and rainde, and wealde the mace,
and Scepter of this lande:
Long tymes and daies and many yeres,
as wrighters beare in hande.
At length as all thyngs hath a tyme,
to spryng, to growe, and crease:
And backe againe in elder yeres,
to wither, fade, and cease.
Muche like the sweete and pleasant hearbe,
or fragrant sentiue flowre:
That riseth brauely for a tyme,
and falleth in an howre.
Or as the auncient aged Oke,
sometyme of passyng strength,
But yet through sondrie winters stormes,
a feeble tree at length.
Or rather like the gallant Sunne,
(that golden firie ball:)
Whiche hauyng past the toppe of heauen,
declineth to the fall.
Euen so this famous peerlesse prince,
(that precious pearle of price:)
Through all the hostes and cope of heauen,
(renowmed famous thrice.)
At laste by Death arested was,
and forced to resigne:
The thynges he conqu'red by the sworde,
as whiche from royall line.
Did erst descend, surrendring them
to other noble Kynges:
Whose praises all eche sacred Dame,
in heauenly ditties synges.
Though sonderie of Kyng Edwardes suc|cessours deserued im|mortal renowme, who~ seuerally I omitted here to entreate of, yet emongest them all, one of late memorie I thought fit for proofe and argumentes sake to set forthe as an vn|doubted paterne of all Nobilitie, whiche is meant of Kyng Henry the eight.Emongest the whiche (though thei deserue,
to haue immortall fame:)
Yet here of one his praise to wright,
it ioyes my hande to frame.
The onely looke and countenance of Kyng Henry the eight, was sufficie~t to discomfort an hoste of menne.It gladdes my harte to name hym once,
to bryng hym forthe in place:
For hym that onely durst dese,
his enemies to their face.
Kyng Henry beyng at warre with the Fre~ch retaines the Empe|rour to serue vnder his standred, and ther withall makes his foes to taste bitterly of the rod of his cor|rection, for his Maie|stie would not abide to be dallied withall. He, he it is, and none but he,
in these our latter daies:
Through Europe, and beyonde partes,
hath wonne like noble praise.
Kyng Henry that moste famous Prince,
the eight I meane by name:
Whiche left behinde hym for his deedes,
so high renowme and fame.
This is the Prince whose onely lookes,
made diuerse Nations quake:
This is the manne that made likewise,
huge towres and holds to shake.
Kyng Henry waiyng with hym self, what a miserable plague it was for hym self, his people and kingdome, to be subiect vnto the Pope of Rome (that presumpteous Pre|late to the admiratio~ of all the worlde, vn|horseth the Pope, and makes him go on fote (w^t a mischeef) where as before he spared not to ride in the nec|kes of Christan Em|perours and Kynges farre better then hym self. (So couragious was y^e excellent king) as therin he enterpri|sed that whiche all the potentates of y^e world durst not attempt be|sides.This is the Prince that did retaine,
the Emp'rour in his bande:
This is that knight that made his foes,
to feele his heauie hande.
Kyng Henry waiyng with hym self, what a miserable plague it was for hym self, his people and kingdome, to be subiect vnto the Pope of Rome (that presumpteous Pre|late to the admiratio~ of all the worlde, vn|horseth the Pope, and makes him go on fote (w^t a mischeef) where as before he spared not to ride in the nec|kes of Christan Em|perours and Kynges farre better then hym self. (So couragious was y^e excellent king) as therin he enterpri|sed that whiche all the potentates of y^e world durst not attempt be|sides.This is the Prince that of hymself,
did holde the stately Croune:
This is the manne that durst attempt,
to throwe the Papistes doune.
This is the Prince that freedome got,
to this his Countrie soile:
This is the manne that put the Pope,
and Popishe foes to foile.
This is the manne that made his Bulles,
goe flittyng doune the streames:
And thrust out all his peltyng trashe,
The honour of Kyng Henry is triple au|gme~ted in his succes|sors (especially in the gouernement of our gracious and Soue|raigne Ladie the que|nes moste excellente maiestie) who not one+ly hath continued in y^e course of her Father, by suppressyng y^e pope but w^t more seueritie hath holden his nose doune to the grinde|stone, as by continual grindyng it is almost worne out to the gri|stle and bare stumps. The honour of our good Queene in her excellencie is here in published.
Queene Elizabethes sacred arme, as y^e pope saieth, hath giuen him such a cut ouerthwart his Monkishe visna|mie, that he is in dout whether he shall euer be able to be cured of the wounde, his Car|dinalles are vtterly disco~forted, his Chi|turgians haue giuen hym ouer as all his doctours doe doubt. The great care of her maiestie is euer in se|kyng out the waie by whiche she maie go|uerne her people and cou~trie w^t al godlines tra~quillite and peace. The life and blood of her Maiestie (whiche GOD for his mercie preserue  maintain) is not to deare in her Graces sight, for the preseruation of her people and Countrie, but that she would if occasion serued (as God forbid that wee should see that daie to be so distressed) bothe venter an hazarde for defe~ce of the same for whiche God be prai|sed, and her Maiestie honoured (a singuler token of a most godly and christian prince.) The aucthor stirreth vp all Christian peo|ple and true subiectes to giue forthe a signe of their hartie good will, and loue towar|des her sacred Maie|stie, by adding) Amen) to that whiche he be|fore praied for.
Here the aucthour ex|horteth al estates and degrees of menne to praie for the prosperi|tie of her Grace, that God would be on her right hande, continu|ally giuyng good successe to all her highnesse enterprises, (that she with vs her loyall and obedient subiectes, and we with her our right dread and soueraigne Queene, the true anoynted of the Lorde) maie raigne, and liue together in all peace and godli|nesse, to the honour and glorie of God for euer.out of his highnesse Realmes.
This is the manne whose roiall actes,
haue wonne eternall fame:
Emongest the sainctes and sonnes of men,
deseruyng well the same.
But yet O Kyng especially,
thrice famous art thou calde:
Through her whiche in the self same throne
of honour now is stalde.
I meane our (gracious soueraigne Queene,
that sacred virgine pure:)
Whose raigne God graunt thice Nestors ye|res,
with honour to endue.
This is the Prince whos worthie fame,
doeth liue and raigne for euer:
This is the Queene whose noble name,
can bee defaced neuer.
This is the Prince whiche in her daies,
wrought wonders in her lande:
And made her foes like heards of Sheep,
amazed for to stande.
This is the Prince whose sacred arme.
hath wounded so the Pope:
That to recouer his former strength,
he liueth voide of hope.
This is the Prince whiche to her Realmes,
procureth reste and peace:
This is the Queene that causeth warres,
and bloodie broiles to cease.
This is the Prince that little cares,
to hazarde life or blood.
This is the Queene that nothyng spares,
to doe her people good.
O giftes of rare varietie,
adornyng Princes grace:
Stande vp eternall memorie,
Elizas fame to blaze.
O perfect magnanimitie,
thy fame continue euer:
As doeth the Sonne in circled Skies,
who ight decreaseth neuer.
And euerla maiest thou liue,
to 
To whiche  saie,
vnfainedly 
O praie for her ,
you people of her lande:
That God maie prosper happely,
what so she takes in hande.
That God maie fauor graciously,
the things she hath begonne:
That she with vs, and we with her
a blessed race maie ronne.
In this as in all other thyngs,In all our petitions, actio~, and requestes, wee muste referre the successe euer to the good will  pleasure of God.
The cause why wee should yeeld our will to Gods will is, be|cause he is euen still y^e self same thyng that neuer chaungeth nor alters his entent or purpose, established in his secret counsell, but as he doeth  hath purposed, so also in tyme conuenient doeth likewise accomplishe by whiche we may per+ceiue his excellent pu|ritie.
th'almighties will be doen:
Since nothyng maie preuent his grace,
or godlie purpose shonne.
For why? he is that self same God,
that neuer alters kinde:
(A God I saie moste excellent,
and of a constant minde.)
Whiche neuer doeth forsake the thyng,
once tane in his protection:
Nor yet reiecteth vtterly,
whiche is in his election.
(He is a God omnipotent)
on whom the world dependeth:
Whose vigor, force, and celsitude,
through eu'ry part extendeth.
(A roiall God immencible)
that can not be enclined:
To chaunge from all eternitie,
his sacred purpose minded.
But that whiche his Deuinitie,
before all ages formed:
In his eternall secresie,
shall doubtlesse be performed.
This is a portion of that whiche in the be|ginnyng was alled|ged, where it is saied, that God was y^e cause principall, whereby the mynde of the auc|thor was mightely en|flamed to write some pleasant Historie, but wiste not what, till at length by the self same cause he was enstruc|ted and taught what he should write, as more fullie hereafter to set doune.This holie and immortall God,
euen he I must confesse:
Did stirre me vp moste studiously,
my senses to addresse.
To write some pleasant historie,
I musyngly began:
The aucthour is not ashamed to acknowe|ledge his imbecillitie, of hym self vnable to bring to passe any no|table exploite, saue onely that he depe~deth on Gods direction to fluishe the thyng his goodnesse shall begin.For to consider warely,
of what it should be than.
I was no fitte Astronomer,
to treate vpon the Starres:
Nor yet trainde vp in Marsis court,
to tell of bloodie warres.
I was no famous Oratour,
nor craftie manne of Lawe:
Better to bee meere ignorant, then to bee ouer skilfull to the hurt of other.Whiche from a but of Muskadine,
a tunne of Malmessies drawe.
Nor yet recounted excellent,
in those high mist'ries seuen:
By whiche I might vpon myne othe,
tell what is doen in heauen.
I was not of God Neptunes Court,
as Pirates be on sease:
I deemde it farre a better life,
(though poore) to liue at ease.
Meanyng not ac|quainted in the science of Usurie, whereby he might haue had good occasion and matter to write of. I was not skilful in their trades
whiche giue out golde to gaine:
No, no, I dare auouche suche sainctes,
my pouche did neuer staine.
Nor yet with Marchant venterers,The aucthour still procedyng on in the discription of his im|perfectio~, and hauyng felt the ground of his knowledge, seing him self to bee altogether vnfurnished of that, which in historiogra|phers is required (doth as it) were aske a que|stion, how it wer pos|sible for hym to acco~|plish the thing he glad+ly desired, wherevnto he makes aunswere, alledgyng though in his owne eyes he see|med insufficient, yet God who gouerneth all thynges, bids hym but adde to his good will,  he would fur|ther hym in the reste.
(those were too high for me:)
Unneath to shewe their famous sleight,
acquainted might I bee:
I founde not in me verelie,
of wrighters that's required:
How might I then performe the thyng,
my soule and harte desired?
But he that worketh all in all,
did will me forward venter:
And he would aide me warlike wise,
strong towres and holdes to enter.
Whereon I tooke suche harte of grace,
as with a ioyfull minde:
I marched forthe in stedfast hope,
some good successe to inde.
In whiche my trauells suerly,
he did so wel attende me:
As nothyng could bee deemed fit,
but forthwith did he sende me.
He gaue me to associate,
a chosen Crewe of Dames
Three principal thin|ges are to be retained of euery Chronicler  writer of Histories, (that is to saie) In|uentio~, Memorie, and pleasant Conueiance without whiche, what soeuer a man doeth is altogether vnsauerie.Inuention, with good Memorie,
these were their perfect names.
To whom Conueighaunce was adioyned,
as Corp'rall to the bande:
Conuaiyng eche thyng pretily,
what so thei tooke in hande.
With these I venterde forwardlie,
to prosecute with speede:
What so my harte assuredlie,
had long before decreed.
The aucthour at last through many daies trauail, obtaineth the Porte and Hauen of reste, where his three foresaid companions Inuention, Memorie and Conueighaunce, consultyng together, agree and conculde that he should entret vpon the Irishe soile and inhabitauntes of the same, with the fer|tilitie of the ground.And hauyng now the lothsome goulfe,
of deepe Dispaire well paste:
We did approche Thelysiane feelds,
of comfort at the laste.
Where all the Crewe of heauenly Dames,
with one consent beganne:
To sit them doune, and on my cause,
aduisedly to scanne.
In whiche high court of Parlament,
it was concluded on:
That of the famous Irishe soile,
I should enlarge vpon.
Marke the prepara|tion made for the auc|thour, leste peraduen|ture he might relate ought amisse, and so by false discouerie of thynges therein con|tained, roune in dan|ger of reprofe, where|vnto the nature of the Cauiller is passyngly addicted.And least thereof in any parte,
I might relate a misse:
By reason of the longitude,
or latitude, there is.
A goodly braue Piramides,
erected passyng high:
From whence all corners of the lande,
I might at large discrie.
From whence I did behold and see,
moste noble slowyng streames:By these flowyng stremes are ment, the goodlie Hauens and Riuers through eue|ry parte of Irelande, most famous for mar+chantes, in whiche ri|uers also are store, change, and choise of all fine and delicate fi|shes, and that in most abondant sort, a nota|ble pleasure and ne|cessarie co~moditie for a co~mon wealthe, and this is the firste parte co~cernyng the waters
Fit for the Marchantes of the worlde,
to saile from forraine Realmes.
Wherein were sondrie store of beastes,
in waters that doe liue:
To whom their proper names I am,
vnable for to giue.
Yet were thei suche as doe maintaine,
and serue for common wealth:
By yeeldyng plentie to the soile,
where store of people dwelth.
Yea suche and suche (if credite maie,
be giuen vnto me than:)
As doe refreshe the hongrie soule,
and serue the vse of man.
All whiche I sawe abondantlie,
a loose where I did stande:
As the Riuers of Irelande are notable famous for the varie|tie of all maner of fis|shes, giuen in moste plentifull maner, so is the lande farre more renowmed for her si|tuation, pleasant ayre operation, and good|ly store of all maner of cattell behofefull for the lande, and for all kinde of wildfoule for pleasure and pro|fite of man, as in the discourse thereof shall spedely be set out.But farre more brauer things then those,
vpon the stable lande.
I there beheld how urie parte,
and percell was conuaide:
With hills, an woods  champion ground,
moste artificiall laide.
The hills drectly ronnyng forthe,
and turnyng in a genne:
Muche like a sort of croked mates,
and ouertwhartyng menne.
The discription of the woodes of Ire|lande. The woodes aboue and neath those hills,
some twentie miles in length:
Rounde compaste with a shakyng bogge,
a forte of passyng strength.
From whence a certaine fire is drawne,
to sheeld from Winters colde:
Whereas Poh Morishe hides hymself,
as in a fenced holde.
The discouery of the Irish Nimphes, their pleasures, pastymes, and accustomable v|sages, wherein daiely thei are occupied, are guratiuely expressed. The Nimphes of sondrie matrones, I
haue hard doe there resorte:
As tyme and fitt occasions serue,
to vse for their disporte.
Some for to shade them from the heate,
and some an other thyng:
Accordyng as the raine doeth fall,
so doe the flowers spryng.
One doeth reioyce to spende the daie,
in plaiyng Barlibrake.
An other doeth (I meane no harme)
as greate a comfort take.
This Nimphe doeth ioye to scudd a longest,
the woode and riuerse side:
But she in snortyng in a bushe,
Receiu'th as greate a pride.
These doe inuite the Murm'ryng brookes,
these diue and rise againe:
And bathyng in their sweete delightes,
so long thei doe remaine.
Till Cupid toul'th his sacryng bell,
to enter other Rites:
Ah would'treuiue a manne halfe dedde?This doe expounde the true meanyng of the rest that went be|fore.
to see those naked Sprites?
To see what games thei can deuise,
and sondrie pastymes make:
Twould cause I doe assure you,
a Horse his halter brake.
To daunce attendaunce on those Dames
with reuerent seruice then:
To waight vpon them in that case.
it forceth sondrie men.
These Nimphes de|serues eternal memo|rie for their holy con|uersation: yea, though it were but with As|modious the Deuil of hell: For pitie it were if thei should not bee remembred somwhere and since thei are not thought vpon in hea|uen, giue them leaue to bee had in memorie in hell.O Nimphes of lastyng Memorie,
your vertuous actions rare:
With Venus for integritie,
I freely maie compare.
With Venus for agilitie,
(speake I of veniall sinne:)
In her celestiall paradice,
ought you to enter in.
The cause why these Nimphes are worthy of suche remembrance is becaus of y^e greate paine and labour thei tooke in the lande in bryngyng forth fruite after their kinde.For you are thei whiche store the ground,
with fruites of your encrease:
And make it daiely to abounde,
(meane I with rest and peace?)
With little Nimphes and mountaine Gods
transformed now and then:
From Bores to Beares, and yet sometyme,
resemblyng honest men.
From whe~ce there flowes as from a spring,
an other generation:
The generation of these wood Nimphes are in their kind more craftier then y^e Foxes more frettyng then Bores, and terribler tha~ Beares, working by secret conspiracies the subuersion, ruine, and destruction of the hurtlesse creatures of the lande.More subtill then the Foxes are,
in their imagination.
Who as thei growe in elder yeres,
and springyng rise in strength:
So doe thei worke the Realmes anoye,
and hinderaunce at the length.
So doe thei worke the landes decaie,
procuryng what thei canne:
The ruine and vndoyng quight,
of many an honest manne.
The Aucthour seing the greate inconueni|ences that happen daily by the retaining of suche a pestiferous generation, giueth counsell to all those that loue their owne saftie and securitie to ridde their handes of them, least retainyng and still maintaining them they doe but fo|ster a wolfe, and che|rishe a sarpent, which are redy daily both to deuoure, and destroye them.This is a thyng that euery one,
had neede to looke vpon:
For els too late the doore is shutte,
when as the steede is gone.
And since the pale is often plag'de,
with suche a hellishe sorte:
Let that suffice, and let vs all,
be warnde by true reporte.
So shall wee shonne the dangrous snares,
our secret foes haue sette:
And ouerpasse the hunters toiles,
and Foulers craftie nette.
So shall wee flie the traitrous grinnes,
that treasons might procure:
And in a towre of strong defence,
our safties all assure.
The aucthour conti|nuing in his exhorta|tion thereby to driue it more deper into the hartes of men brin|geth forth a similitude of a tode and a croca|dill, signifiyng that it is all one equall secu|ritie for a ma~ to sleepe with all those poyso|nyng wormes, as it is to keepe about hym those members before specified, for (in co~clu+sion) the wormes can but poyson them, and they murder them, so that bothe of them do worke all one effete whiche is death.Wee knowe by good experience,
it is a daungerous thyng:
For one into his naked bedde,
a poysning Tode to bryng.
Or els a deadly Crocadile,
when as he goeth to reste:
To lead with hym, and as his mate,
to place next to his breste.
The mischeef thereof certainly,
is this that doeth ensewe:
Euen nothyng but a odain death,
to carelesse persones dewe.
Then since the harme is manifest,
consent with willyng minde:
To ridde your handes from suche a sorte,
for Catte will after kinde.
And be not witched euermore,
with their externall sight:
For why should men of Th'englishe pale,
in suche a Crewe delight?
Or eke repose suche confidence,
in that vnhappie race:
Since mischeef lurketh oftentimes
euen in the smothest face?
Be not deceiude,It is a true saiyng preuent the worste and the best shall saue it self. preuent the worst,
the beste shall saue them selues:
And giue not you, your liues to keepe,
to suche dissemblyng Elues.
Els if you doe, (as practise proues,
in these vnconstant daies:)
You doe but trust your mortall foes,
and seeke your owne decaies.
This is my dome and counsell eke,
imbrace it who so can:Here the aucthour re|nueth his storie and setteth out the opera|tion of the Irishe grounde, whiche nei|ther breedeth nor yet fostereth vp in it any venimous beastes or wormes.
And to retourne vnto my texte,
I deme it wisedome than.
Within the compasse of this land,
no poysonyng beast doeth liue:
To Adder, Snake, nor Crocadile,
no respitte doeth it giue.
Whereby thesame repast maie take
to feede his appetite:
But with a deadly percyng blowe,
eche vermine it doeth smite.
As sone as thei doe touche the grounde,
euen by and by thei dye:
And hope of longer life to liue,
from euery one doeth flye.
Irelande tyme past, had store of all kinde of wormes, serpents, and venimous beasts if fables be scriptu|res.For where tyme past it did possesse,
eche hurtfull wicked beast:
The hissing serpent with her mate,
and worme of poyson least.
Yet now no suche it will retaine,
it voucheth not to see:
The Frogge, the Tode, nor Uiper vile,
within her boundes to bee.
Doubtfull obiectio~s, whether processe of tyme, or the power of Gods abbollished the serpentes out of Ire|lande.If tyme haue chaunged thus the ground,
I stande therein in doubt:
Or whether that the Goddes them selues,
haue driuen those Serpentes out.
For thynges fore knowne to mightie Ioue,
whiche after should ensewe:
Or for preseruyng of some graftes,
whiche there at that tyme grewe.
Or if perhappes thei ment to place,
the wandryng Huntresse theare:
Through hilles  dales the wolfe to chace,
in steade of Sauage Beare.
Or if it were for Iunos sake,
who happlie begg'de the same:
In pasture for her newe giuen Cowe,
(that Io. Greekishe dame.)
Or if it hapte when thondryng fame,Emongest sondrie suppositions a very likely hoode, opening the tyme of the wor|mes exylement.
did pearce the stately Skies:
Affirmyng troupes of mortall men,
in warlike sorte to rise.
With engens framed for the nonce,
the sacred Turrettes hie:
In maugre Ioue, and Ioues despight,
by force and pollicie.
To take, and make the same a place,
mischaunces to expell:
If afterward by fatall happe,
should happe them ought but well.
I thinke when as suche brutes were made,The aucthour yeelds his verdict and opini|on, in this pretie tale.
then goddes bothe greate and small:
Consulted with th'infernall ghostes,
and mountaine Sprites withall.
How and what sorte thei might repulse,
or bryng to small effecte:
The worldes entent that would so vile,
dame Natures lawes reiecte.
In whiche consult one stepped forthe,
(as farre as I can gesse:)
Apollo was that reuerende sire,
cheef in this businesse.
Who saied, you goddes that rul dome holde,
aboue the circled Skie:
Let out the threates of fadyng men,Good counsell neuer yet hurted y^e receiuer.
your graces terrifie.
Mars co~firmeth Ap|polloes saiyng, veri|fyng his greate wise|dome, showing reason why they should ex|empt feare.In sothe saied Mars (whose curled lokes,
did shade a doubtie face:)
Appolloes councell noble is,
and fruitfull in this case.
For why should wee that moulded man,
of man be thus a fraied?
Or for the soonnes of mortall men,
so greatly bee dismaied?
The reason truly set doune, for the abolly|shyng of feare.If man by sleight should scale the heauens,
wee goddes maie thinke no wonder,
To see the highest God of all,
to spoile them by his Thonder.
But if wee would deferre no tyme,
for feare of worser happes:
But shunne asmuche as in vs lieth
the brunte of after clappes.
Bloodie Mars ouer|twharteth Appollo, annichillating his reasons, giuyng con|trarie counsell to the confusion of the ene|mie.Let worthie Ioue in Irefull rage,
restraine them by his might:
And suffer half his thonder boltes,
vpon their pates to light.
Apollo contendyng with Mars, manife|steth his notable wis|dome in waiyng the royall estate.Peace (saied Apollo) conqu'ryng Mars,
that were not wisest lore:
For Ioue to spende his warlike boltes,
if you beholde the store.
And now the cicloppes are decaied
(whose connyng science sure:
Could make the seate of mightie Ioue,
for euer to endure.)
But if that ye will liste awhile,
and harken my deuice:
I will relate a better waie,
whiche doubtlesse maie suffice.
There be a Crewe of mountaine gods,The deuice of Apollo is here most excelle~t, who opens a meane to saue both men and money.
possessyng yearth belowe:
Praie that their Godheades would a fewe,
of Marshall men bestowe.
To keepe (saie ye) a little plat,
in whiche is moste mistrust:
And through whiche the forain foe
perforce there trauell must.
For it is next the Articke Pole,
it houes you keepe it well:
And no deuice maie serue so fitte,
their mallice to expell.
Though god Apollo spake full wiseMars addicted onely to slauter gensaithe Apolloes counsell, obiectyng, it to bee voyde of wisedomes forecast, not hauyng regarde to causalties that might ensue.
Mars ganne againe replie:
My soueraigne Lordes let reason yet,
haue superioritie.
Since Marshall knightes haue felt the tast,
of Fortunes sweete and sowre:
As those that fight in Princes cause,
doe taste it daie and howre.
How maie the Goddes that hills posses,
graunt this vniust requeste?
Or who would deeme Apollo sage,
had follie in his breste?
Knowe ye not in that sauage soile,Mars showeth rea|son, why the Gods should reiecte Apol|loes counsell, he sets out the whole rabble of ill beastes bred in the lande.
the Adder there to dwell?
And see you not the Coccatrice,
and sleyng Serpent fell?
Behold you not the Sloworme there,
with Uipers generation?
Maie ye not see the Frogge and Tode,
there haue their procreation?
Cannot eche wight (except the blinde)
the sauage beastes perceiue?
As Lion, Wolfe, and rau'nyng Beare,
whose heardes thei oft deceiue?
The tamelesse Panther them emongest,
With Tygers cruell kinde?
The Leoparde with a thousande more,
as Nature hath assignde?
Mars makes here his conclusion.How then maie man haue companie, with
this hurtfull generation?
Or soonnes of men with noysome worm's
enioye their consolation?
Apollo confueth Mars and his Mar|shall reasons beyng once experimented in the misteries of diui|nitie hauyng fore knowledge of Iupi|ters entent and pur|pose.Why (saied Apollo) angrie Mars,
eche parte maie well agree:
When as by Ioue eche sleayng beast
abstracted thence shalbe.
Ioue first shall banishe quite the bests
yea he shall cleane destroye:
The thing that might in any wise,
the Souldiers ought anoye.
And thei debarred once from the~ce,
in aufe Securitie:
The Souldiers then in open field,
by daie and night maie lye.
To watche and ward, least Irefull foes,
through Pilgrimes lye pretence:
Should vnawares against the Gods,
their warlicke sute commence.
Yea thei maie sleepe in bushe or hedge,
for safetie shall be suche:
As neither Snake nor Lion fearce
their slombryng corpes shall touche.
A mantill maie suffice to shroude,It appeares by this, that Apollo was first deuisour of the wood|karnes glibbe and mantell.
their lethie naked skinne:
And heare long growne maie serue full well,
to lappe their noddells in.
In deede (saied Mars) it maie be so,Mars conuicted by reason, concludes with Apollo.
if Ioue thereto agree:
But first tis meete that euery hill,
in leauell sorte should bee.
Be whishte (O Mars) saied thondryng Ioue,Iupiter to Mars in Apolloes praise, ra|teyng, that Apollo had respecte, to daun|gers as well extant, as to those that might after followe.
Apollo in degree:
The seconde to my sacred self,
I hould hym next to bee.
Hath saied, what might suffice eche one,
whose far forcastyng witte:
Preuenteth daungers euen at hande,
as els not extant yet.
Eche hurtfull beast that noysome is,
I will commaunde awaie:
Not one shall reste the Mountaine men,
by any kinde to fraie.
The crokyng Tode that ougly semes,
with Snakes and Adders fell:
Shall be desmiste and sent forthe with,
to Plutos ghostes in hell:
To feede thereon, them selues to glutte,
sufficyng hongrie mawe:
Yea thei them selues without constraint,
them selues shall thether drawe.
Let therefore little Mountaine Gods,
a troupe (as thei maie spare:)
Of breachlesse men at all assaies,
bothe leauie and prepare.
The order of the I|rishe kares apparel, is here allowed by Iupiter beyng first found out by Apollo.With Mantelles doune vnto the Shoe,
to lappe them in by night:
With speares and swordes and little dartes
to sheeld them from despight.
And let some haue their breaches close,
to nimble thynges annexte:
With safer meanes to daunce the Boggs,
when thei by foes are vexte.
It is agreed vpon, by consent of the Gods, that Woodkarne shall weare glibbed heds, signifiyng their monstrous mallice, irefull hartes, and bloodie hands, which moste stricktly they to this daie doe ob|serue.With glibbed heddes like Mars hym self,
their malice to expresse:
With Irefull hartes and bloudie hands,
soone prone to wickednesse.
Ioue spake, twas doen and I suppose,
then Serpents were dismiste:
And sent awaie, whiche to be true,
now credite if ye liste.
(Againe) the Irishe yong and old,
presumeth for to saie:
The Irishe man, contrarie to the for|mer allegations pre|scisly saieth that sainct Patritke expulsed the venimous beasts out of Irelande, for whiche thei haue hym at this daie in greate addoration.Their sainct (S. Patricke) was the man,
that banishte them awaie.
And therefore is S, Patricke held
in passyng admiration:
Still worshipped of all that stocke,
with holie veneration.
No beast that noyeth mortall man,
is procreated theare:
A renuyng againe of the historie.It brynges forthe no Lion feare,
nor yet the rau'nyng Beare.
No beastes (I saie) whiche do possesse,
one iote of crewell kinde:
Excepte the Wolfe that nosome is,Greate store of wol|ues in Irelande.
in Irishe soile I finde.
But as for other sortes of beastes,Irelande replenished with all kinde of ne|cessarie and profita|ble cattell.
delightyng mortall eye:
Therein consistes her chefest praise,
who maie it here denye?
First for gallant stouryng Steede,
mans helpe at all assaies:
And next for Neate, whereby his life,
is lengthned sondrie waies.
Dame Venus hath a portion eke,
obseruyng well her tourne:
Restoryng that whiche tracte of tyme,
and withred age hath worne?
What this should be my mistresse deare,
can construe verie well:
Who vsyng it in tyme of neede,
sore combattes doth refell
And now as touchyng featherd Foules,Plentie of all kinde of wilde foule in Ire|lande whatsoeuer maie be named.
and birdes of eche degree:
The nomber doeth extende so farre,
that tis too hard for me.
The multitude thereof to knowe,
or shewe in plaine prospecte:
Because I am no God at all,
my cunnyng hath defecte.
Of haukes which retaining sondrie names,Irelande hath great store of Hawkes  in it.
the Countrie store doeth breede:
Whose names if Pacience will abide,
in order shall proceede.
The names of the Hawkes that are bred in Ireland with their estemations or|derly whiche are in nomber seuen.The Goshauke first of the Crewe,
deserues to haue the name:
The Faucon next for high attemptes,
in glorie and in fame.
The Tarsell then ensueth on,
good reason tis that he:
For fliyng haukes in Ireland next
the Faucon plaste should bee.
The Tarsell gentels course is nexte,
the fourth peere of the lande:
Combined to the Faucon, with
a louers freendly bande.
The pretie Marlion is the fifth,
to her the Sparhauke nexte,
And then the Iacke and Musket laste,
by whom the birds are vexte.
These are the Haukes whiche cheefly breed,
in fertile Irishe grounde:
The Irishe Hawkes peerles, for speedines of wing.Whose matche for flight and speedie wyng,
elswhere be hardly founde.
(And to conclude) of feathered foules,
there breeds the cheef of all:
Many Eagles in Irelande.A mightie foule, a goodlie birde,
whom men doe Eagle call.
This builde her neast in highest toppe,
of all the Oken tree:
Or in the craftiest place, whereof
in Irelande many bee.
Not in the bounds of Englishe pale,
whiche is a ciuill place:
But in the Deuills Arse, a Peake,
where Rebells moste imbrace.
For as this foule and all the reste,
are wilde by Natures kinde:
So do thei kepe in wildest Nokes
and there men doe them finde.
For like to like the Prouerbe saith,The olde saiyng is here founde true, that like loueth like.
the Leoparde with the Beare:
Doth liue in midest of desarts rude
and none doeth other feare.
For as the Irishe Karne be wilde,
in maners and in fashion:
So doe these foules enhabite, with
that crooked generation.
Yet when as thei are taken yong,
(though wilde thei be by kinde:)
Enstructed through the Fauconers lure,By pollicie brute bea+stes are brought to a peaceable order of li|uyng, seruyng and obaiyng man orderly in their nature and kinde, yea the very fou|les of the ayre and beastes of the fielde, haue a certaine kinde of reuerence and feare, towardes those whom they consider doe worke them any good, but onely these mon|sters of the worlde, these pernicious members of Sathan, these wretched wretches haue no consideration, nor yet beare any kindly affection towardes (her Maiestie) whose mercie doeth preserue them, whose gracious fauour doeth protect them, whose royaltie not only wisheth them good, but also doth them good, not for a day, a weeke, a moneth, or a yeare, but continually, for if her Grace would their subuertion, if then she had but saide the worde onely, iudge what had followed (euen vtter desolation) which thing, these blinde Idits doe not or at least will not see or consider, O ingra|titude moste intollerable, and blindnesse irrecuperable.
by triall good I finde.
That thei doe come as twere at becke,
and when as thei doe call:
She scarce will stint on twige or bowe,
till on his fiste she fall.
Thus thei obey their tutors hestes
and doe degenerate:
From wildnesse that belonged to,
their forepossessed state.
No pollicie, wisedom or cunnyng, scarce al|reth the wilde Wod|karnes croked na|ture.But Irishe Karne vnlike these foules,
in burthe and high degree:
No chaunglyngs are thei loue nowhit,
in Ciuill state to bee,
In steede of ciuilli|tie, Woodkarne vse villanie.Thei passe not for ciuilitie,
nor care for wisedomes lore:
The felicitie, that Irishe karne do most of all reioyce in.Sinne is their cheef felicitie,
whereof thei haue the store.
And if perhappes a little Ape,
be taken from the Henne:
And brought fro~ Boggs to cha~pion ground,
suche thyngs happe now and then.
The sowe returnes to the mire, and the dog to his vomite a|gaine.Yea though thei were in Courte trainde vp,
and yeres there liued tenne:
Yet doe thei loke to shaking boggs,
scarce prouyng honest menne.
And when as thei haue wonne the Boggs,
suche vertue hath that grounde:
This hath been to well proued true in these late daies.That thei are worse then wildest Karne,
and more in synne abounde.
An exclamation vp|pon Sainct Patrick, chief Sainct in Ire|lande.O holie sainct, O holie man,
O man of God I saie:
O Patrick chiefe of all these Karne
if I speake to thee I maie.
What moued thee, the wriglyng Snake,
and other wormes to kill?
What caused thee on sillie beastes,
to woorke thy cruell will?
What thyng incenst thee for to strike,
them with thy heauie hande?
When as thou leftest more spitefull beastes,Irishe krne more hurtfull then Ser|pentes.
within this fertile lande.
Thou smotest the Srpentes venimous,
and Furies didst subuerte:
And yet the footers of the boggs,Sainct Patrickes preachynges, could neuer bring Wood|karne to holly per|fection of life.
couldst thou no whit conuerte?
Couldst thou not bryng them to thy bende,
nor bowe them like a Bowe?
Doeth not the Parsone teache his Clarke,
his duetie for to knowe?
But thou good man enstructedst them,Sainct Patricke is here excused, who doutlesse tooke great paine and labour, if it had been possible to haue made Wood|karne be come religi|ous Sainctes.
in schoole of Uertues lore:
Though thei thy holie counsells did,
like gracelesse graftes abhorre.
Thou tookest paine them to reduce,
vnto a godlie state:
But could thy meanes preuaill where Ioue,No strength maie preuaile whom God doeth withstande, no phisicke can cure, whom God in his ire striketh, showing that God hath giuen vp Woodkarne to a re|probate sence infec|tyng them also with an incurable botche.
smightes with a curelesse fate?
Can Phisickes arte restore the lame,
or make the blinde to see?
When as the Lorde of hostes doeth saie,
this wretche was plagued by me?
No, no, I dare auowe the same,
doe Phisicke what it can:
In eche respecte it must confesse,Signifiyng it is mere madnesse to striue a|gainst the lorde god. Irelande hath no Pyes breeding in i.
it self a mortall man.
No Pies to plucke the Thatch from house,
are breed in Irishe grounde:
Better it were to haue Pyes the~ prow|lers.But worse then Pies, the same to burne,
a thousande maie be founde.
Whiche will not sticke without remorse,
whole tounes for to deuoure:
Where Irishe karne haue superioritie, ther thei commit all thin|ges to fire and sword, as house, corne, and cattell, men, women and children.

O viperous VVoodkarne,
right sons of the deuill:
A hangyng come to you,
rewardyng your euill.
A poore onely hangyng,
for this pestilent brood:
Both hanging  drawing,
were for them to good.
Committing house and housholde stuffe,
to Sulphers mightie powre.
Consuming corne and cattel bothe
(O heauie tale to tell)
Like Sathans ympes regardyng nought,
the endlesse paines of hell.
Who beyng growne to sappie strength,
long norishte in their synne:
By murderyng, spoy|lyng and burnyng, Woodkarne hope to come to heauen, but it must be by a hater.Suppose by plaiyng of suche partes,
eternall ioyes to winne.
By murderyng, spoy|lyng and burnyng, Woodkarne hope to come to heauen, but it must be by a hater.O pleasaunt lande deformed through,
the life of Irishe Karne:
The glorie of Ire|lande wholy extin|guisht, through Irish karnes liuyng.O peruerse flocke that hell nor heauen,
from liuyng ill many warne.
O frettyng Bores more bloudier then
the Wolfe, or sauage beare:
An exclamation dra|wen from the depth of the harte, wherein the aucthour seemeth to bewaile the defor|mation of the lande by or through the li|ues of these rebelli|ous Woodkarne.Was neuer beast more brutishe, like
lesse voide of soueraignes feare.
Irishe karne bru|tisher then beastes.No men so bare of heauenly grace,
more foes to Countries soile:
Nor traitours that doe more reioyce,
when thei their neighbours spoil.
No men more grace|lesse then Wood|karne, none greater foes to their country, nor yet any that re|ioyce more in vnhap|pinesse then they.No monsters louyng lesser peace,
delightyng more in warre:
Nor Rebels seekyng feller waies,
a common wealthe to marre.
Woodkarnes ar|mes artificially dis|plaide.No wight regardyng vertue lesse,
more prone to sinfull lust:Woodkarne of all creatures least regar|deth vertue, beyng giuen wholy to wic|ked sensualitie and lust, they are of least credite vnder heauen a notable commenda|iton.
Nor creatures liuyng vnder heauen,
that men maie worser trust.
Gods grace must support where man can doe no good.God tourne them to a better life:
reformyng whattes a misse,
For man maie not comprice the same,
tis not in handes of his.
If cunnyng had preuailed ought,
or toile might winne the game:
Then Sidney had through labours paine,Sir Henry Sidneys indeuour in reducyng of Irelande.
long since atchiu'd the same.
If execution of the Lawes,
could make them to repent:Two thynges practi|sed by Sir Henry Sidney, drawyng the Irishrie to a confor|mitie of good liuyng, that is to saie, iudge|ment and mercie.
Or Princes grace ablating crimes
might cuse their hartes relent.
Then doubtlesse he had been of force,
whose carefull care was suche:
As peace to winne to Irishe soile,
he demde no trauaill muche,
Sir Henries care, wisedome and polli|cie, could not bryng the Woodkarne to a better order and con|formitie of liuyng.But care he takes both night and daie,
and meanes that he did vse:
Might make this gracelesse cursed race,
their euill liues refuse.
Marke here the ob|stinacie of these wod|karne whiche by how muche leitie they are better vsed ordered, and gouerned, by so muche the more wil|fulnesse, frowardnesse and stubbornesse, they are aenated, and en|stranged fro~ all good discipline, and loyall obedience, a moste e|uident signe and to|ken of an vntowarde generation.The more he seeketh them to win
the further of thei straie:
As ympes that doe detest to walke
the high and pleasant waie:
I cease I cease more to relate,
their stratagemes to showe:
Till place and space and heauenly grace,
shall fitter tyme bestowe.
And to conclude this formoste part
herein I make an ende:
Supposyng loiall subiectes minds
in nought I doe offende.
Though pictures, and protractours made,
by Painters cunnyng skill:
With gestures of the Irishe Karne
set out by quiu'ryng quill.
I publisht haue, wherby the world
maie knowe their inclination:
As how thei passe for wicked life,
the synfulste generation.
And if for want of better arte,
some things I pretermitte:
Whiche rightly here to this discourse,
might be adioyned fitte.
A reasonable request to be graunted in consideration of the paines.Let pacience Lordings yet supplie,
the things so doen amisse:
Or let correctyng of the faltes,
amende that faltie is.
At least declare when you haue redde,
in what I haue offended:
And if it resteth in my handes,
it shalbe then amended,
FINIS.



The Prolog to the seconde parte.
_SInce sacred Ioue whose royall throne,
is plaste in circled Skies:
Beholdeth thinges farr distant the~ce,
with vewe of godly eyes.
And seyng that the Lorde doeth guide,
eache thyng with heauenly might:
As well the Sonne and orient daie,
as Moone in frostie night.
Conductyng them as seemes hym best,
disposing all at will:
VVhereby his creatures diuersly,
his pleasure might fulfill.
Support good God with heauenly grace,
my penne for to relate:
The seconde parte that doth belong,
vnto the Irishe state.
Illuminate my senses all,
that I maie rightly tell:
The nature of the Irishe Karne,
as how they doe rebell.
And euery thyng to showe aright,
thou Lorde directe my course:
And leade me to Thelysian fieldes,
by thy triumphant force.
I seeke no helpe of forraigne Gods,
nor ayde of suche a crewe:
Because to trust in senslesse thynges,
small comforte can ensewe.
But thy good ayde is that I craue,
wherefore graunt me the same:
That I by it maie haue the strength,
a pleasaunt verse to frame.
And in the same a matter fit,
applied to the thing:
VVhiche is the chiefest cause whereof,
my sillie verse doeth spring.
FINIS.



The second part of the Image of Irelande.

_THough that the royall soyle,
and fertill Irishe grounde:
With thousande sondrie pleasaunt thinges,
moste nobly doe abounde.
Though that the lande be free,
from Uipers generation:
As in the former parte I made,
a perfecte declaration.
Though that the yearth I saie,
be bliste with heauenly things:
And though tis like the fragrant flowre,
in pleasante Maie that springs.
Yet when I did beholde,
those whiche possesse the same:
Their maners lothsome to be told,
as yrcksome for to name.
I meruailde in my mynde,
and therevpon did muse:
To see a Bride of heauenlie hewe,
an ouglie Feere to chuse.
This Bride it is the Soile,
the Bridegrome is the Karne,
With writhed glibbes like wicked Sprits,The discription of the Irishman, aswell of the Lordes, as of the galliglasse and horseboy fully set out.
with visage rough and stearne.
With sculles vpon their poules,
in steade of ciuill Cappes:
With speares in hand and swordes by sides,
to beare of after clappes.
With Iackettes long and large,
whiche shroude simplicitie:
Though spitfull dartes which thei do beare
importe iniquitie.
The Irishe Karnes apparell moste liuely set out.Their shirtes be verie straunge,
not reachyng paste the thie;
With pleates on pleates thei pleated are,
as thicke as pleates maie lye.
Whose sleues hang trailing doune
almoste vnto the Shoe:
And with a Mantell commonlie,
the Irishe Karne doe goe.
Now some emongest the reste,
doe vse an other weede:
A coate I meane of strange deuice,
whiche fancie first did breede.
His skirtes be verie shorte,
with pleates set thicke about,
And Irishe trouzes more to put,
their straunge protractours out


Loe Lordynges here the draught,
sett out in open vewe:
For by instructions I am taught.
false forgynges to eschewe



Like as their weedes be straunge,
and monstrous to beholde:
So doe their maners far surpasse,Woodkarnes man|ners are more strau|ger then his apparell.
them all a thousande folde.
For thei are tearmed wilde,
Woodkarne thei haue to name:
And meruaile not though strange it be,
for thei dosarne the same.
In maners thei be rude,
and monstrous eke in fashon:
Their dealynges also do bewraie,The fruite sheweth the goodnesse of the tree, approuyng all Woodkarne, strong theeues for to bee.
a crooked generation.
For why, thei feare not God,
nor honour yet their Prince:Irishe Rebbelles feare neither god nor man.
Whom by the lawes of mightie Ioue
thei ought to reuerence.
Eche theef would be a Lorde,The hautie hartes of Woodkarne desire rule dome, but they shall haue a rope.
to rule euen by a becke,
The faithfull subiectes often times
thei shorten by the necke.The Rebbelles en|uie towarde a good Subiecte, whereto many be ioyned, the affection of a pernici|ous Papist, towarde a true Christian.
And those that would be true,
to God and to the Croune:
Marke the moste pestilent nature of the wilde villanous Woodkarne.With fire and sworde, and deepe despight,
thei plucke suche subiects doune
Woodkarne are s Grashoppers, and Catterpillers to their countrey, and people.Thus thei be mortall foes,
vnto the Common wealthe:
Maintainyng rackhells at their heeles,
through detestable stealthe.
Thei harpe vpon one stryng,
and therein is their ioye:
When as thei finde a subtill fleight,The ioye of rebbelles is in plagyng of true men.
to worke true mens anoye.
For mischeefis the game,
wherein thei doe delight:
Spoyling and bur|nyng is the Irishe karnes renoune.As eke thei holde it great renowne
to burne and spoile by night.
When tyme yeeldes true men ease,
suche reste thei pretermitte:
Woodkarnes exer|cises when true men take rest, to robbe burne and murder, when true men take rest, with fire sworde and axcesse, these tra|ters are preste, thei take no compassion of men children nor wi|ues, but ioye when they doe them, depriue of their liues.And giue them selues to other artes,
for their behofe more fitte.
To wounde the harmelesse sorte,
it is the Karnishe guise:
And other some to stiffle quight,
in slumbryng bedde that lyes.
An other sorte thei spoile,
euen naked to the skin:
And leaue hym nothyng for to wrappe,
his naked bodie in.
Irishe karne seldome leaue any thyng worth the bearyng a|waie behinde them, but either thei take it or els do set it on fire.Thei leaue no kinde of thyng,
that maie be borne awaie:
The potte, the panne, the Horse, the Cowe,
and muche more maie I saie.
Now thynges that are to sadde,
that maie suppresse their powre:
Thei doe commit to flames of fire,
the same for to deuoure.
The stolne pore Cowe must be knoc|ked doune as sone as they come home, to make the theeues a feaste.And when thei haue their luste,
the sillie captiue beaste:
Must presently be knocked doune,
to make the knaues a feaste.
The woodkarnes Cookes.But who shalbe the Cooke:
it is no question here:
Nor for the Pantlers chipped loues,Bread seldomly vsed amongst Wodkare
thei aske for once a yere.
Eche knaue will plaie the Cooke,
to stande his Lorde in steede:
But tagge and ragge will equal be
when cheefest Rebell feede.Maister and man all one at eatyng of meat
Well, Beeues are knocked doune,
the Butchers plaie their parte,
Tho take eche one the intrails forthe,
the Liuer with the Harte.A moste perfecte dis|cription of Irishe hors boyes eatyng their meate.
And beyng breathyng newe,
th'unwashen Puddyngs thei:
Upon the coales or embers hotte,
for want of Gredyron laie.
And scarse not halfe enough,
(draffe serueh well for Hoggs:)
Thei take them vp and fall therto,
like rau'nyng hongrie Doggs.
Deuouryng gutte and limine,The rudenesse of hors boyes is herein set open, who fill them with driffe draffe, far|well the good token.
no parte doth come a misse:
Whose lippes  chappes w^t blood doe swim,
moste true reporte is this.
As for the greatest Karne,Beholde here the dif|ference twixt Karne and their men, the Karne haue the best meate, the hors boyes eate then, of inmeates and puddings, which to lucke is imputed, their lippes with greene onytment be|yng fouly poluted.
thei haue the cheefest stuffe:
Though durtie tripes and offalls like
please vnderknaues enoufe.
Whereof thei parte doe roste,
and other some thei boile:
Thus what betwene the sodde and roste,
fearce honger thei assoile.
No table there is spread,The very order of the wilde Irish, their sittyng, table, dishes, and cushens discribed O braue swinishe fa|shion founde our e|mongst hogges. Deseruyng for ma|ners to sitt amongst dogges.
thei haue no courtlike guise,
The yearth sometimes standes the~ in steede
whereon their victuall lyes.
Their Coushens are of Strawe,
of Rushes or of Haye:
Made banckesetwise with withies,
their tailes to vnderlaie.
Their Platters are of wood,
by cunnyng Turners made.
But not of Peauter (credite me,)
as is our Englishe trade.
The order of Wod|karne is to haue a Frier blesse hym and all his housholde be|fore he sits doune.Now ere the Lordesitts doune,
with concubine or wife:
Irishe Karne euery yeare once or twise peraduenture make exchaunge of their wiues, as thei like the~ so will thei keepe the~, for thei will not be bounde to them.(Whereof he often makes exchaunge,
in compasse of his life.)
Before he takes his rome,
a Frier doeth beginne:
To blesse the Rebell with his wife,
the place and theeues therein.
Whiche when he blessed hath,
in highest place of all:
The Cheeftaine then this traitrous knaue,
like honest man doeth stall.
Friers haue chiefest and hiest roomes at feastes amongst the Irishrie, and why should not we giue them like honour at the gallowes.And next his Surgion he,
doeth sette at Friers side:
And then himself his rome enioyth
adorned with his Bride.
(In fine) the hetlishe route.
Like vnto like saide the Deuill to the Collier.like luckie fellowes mette:
Doe sit them doune on strawe or grounde,
their victualles for to gette.
Long stabbers plucke thei forthe,A Foyner of three quarters of a yarde long, is the Wood|karnes knife.
in steede of handsome kniues:
And with the same thei slashe me out,
good God what preatie shiues.
Not shiues of bread I meane.
for that were verie rare:
But gobbes of fleshe not boyld inough,
whiche is their common fare.
Their cheefest drinke is Milke,The Irishe mans drinke.
for want of Milke, the brothe:
Thei take which thing y^e Surgio~ sweares,A thyng of necessitie proued to be phisicke, hauyng his confirma|tion vpon the othe of a periured caitiffe Karne.
is Phisicke by his trothe.
And if that brothe be scante,
yet water is at hande:
For euery Riuer yeeldes enough,
within that goodly land:
Againe if Fortune faunth,
or on them chaunce to smile:
She filles the~ then with Vskebeaghe,Vskebeaghe, is Aqua|nite.
and wine an other while.
O that is cheare in owles,
it beautifith the feaste:
And makes the~ loke with dronken noules,
from moste vnto the leaste.
Now when their gutts be full,
then comes the pastyme in:
The Barde and Harper mellodie,The Woodthiues loue mirth after meate.
vnto them doe beginne.
This Barde he doeth report,
the noble conquestes done,A Barde and a Ri|mer is all one.
And eke in Rimes shewes forthe at large,The Barde by his Rimes hath as great force emongst Wood|karne to perswade, as the elloquent oration of a learned Oratour emongest the ciuill people.
their glorie thereby wonne.
Thus he at randome ronneth,
he pricks the Rebells on:
And shewes by suche externall deeds,
their honour lyes vpon.
The pollicie of the Barde to encense the Rebelles to doe mischefe, by repeating then forfathers actes, O craftie Appostle as holy as a Deuill.And more to stirre them vp,
to prosecute their ill:
What greate renowne their fathers gotte,
thei shewe by Rimyng skill.
And thei moste gladsome are,
to heare of Parents name:
Marke how apte and prone these theeues are to doe mischiefe, in whiche is verified the saiyng that is witten, like as the fa|ther is, suche is the sonne, knaue father and knaue sonne, to the twentie genera|tion.As how by spoilyng honest menne,
thei wonne suche endlesse fame.
Wherefore like gracelesse graftes,
sprong from a wicked tree:
Thei grow through daily exercise,
to all iniquitie.
And more t'augment the flame,
and rancour of their harte:
A wicked man neuer wants ill counsell.The Frier of his councells vile,
to rebelles doth imparte.
The Frier perswa|des the Rebels that it is an high worke of charitie, to kill loy|all Subiectes, which thyng they beleeue though neuer founde on scripture, O gho|stly Frier as inno|cent as Iudas.Affirmyng that it is,
an almose deede to God:
To make the Englishe subiectes taste,
the Irishe Rebells rodde.
To spoile, to kill, to burne,
this Friers councell is:
And for the doyng of the same,
Beholde the plaguy counsell of a pockie Frier, the very fruite of Papistrie.he warrantes heauenlie blisse.
He tells a holie tale,
This flatteryng Frier promiseth to the Rebels euerla|sting life, if they per+ceiuer in rebellyng a|gainst the (Queene.)the white he tournes to blacke:
And through the pardons in his Male,
he workes a Knauishe Knacke.


Beholde the self same thyng,
set forthe by Caruers Arte:
With pictures framed pretely,
expoundyng euery parte.


2
When Friers tale is doen,
and Rebells waied haue:The ende of the Fri|ers oration, is the be|ginnyng of rebellion, he is a sharpe spurre to make them gallop hedlong to all kinde of mischiefes, and last to the gallowes and deuill of hell.
The circumstaunce of eu'ry worde
reported by the knaue.
From supper then thei rise,
with Friers blessyng, thei
Unto the Englishe borders next,
doe take their onward waie.The Karne go forth with the Friers bles|syng to spoyle loyall subiecttes, but looke what enseweth.
And all in warlike wise,
the Borders thei inuade:
Supposyng subiectes for to quell,
by force of Irishe blade.
But loe whom traitours serue,Whom the Frier doth blesse, them doth God curse, bringyng their wicked purpo|ses to a wonderfull ende.
deceiues them now and then:
Deliu'ryng them and all their strength,
captiues to loiall men.
For louyng subiectes rise,
the Captaine with his bande:
With strokes doe lode these filchyng theeues
as long as thei maie stande.
The pray the rescude is,The praie is recoue|red to the Rebels da|mage.
and woodkarne buyes it deare:
For heddes are swapt from shoulders quite,Sweet meate must haue sowre sauce.
a sause to stealyng cheare.
Whose heddes are taken vp,
their triumphe to declare.
And more to make their doyngs knowne,
As a notable Rebell had in his life tyme greater dignitie then many of like profes|sion, so beyng dead, his head receiues a more stately place of exaltation.to Dublin thei them beare:
Now if it were a Theef,
whiche had a bloudie hande:
Or if he were as rancke a knaue,
as liu'th within the lande.
His hedde is poled vp,
vpon the Castle hye:
Suche Astronomers God sende vs enough daily.Behidyng starres, as though he were,
in high Astronomie.
Now God be than|ked hedlesse Wood|karne are not to bee feared, fortune goeth beionde their expecta|tions, which bryngeth Rebels with all their reuels to shame and dishonour.Their bodies lackyng life,
are lefte vnto their frends:
To beare awaie, as to deplore,
their lucklesse fatall ends.
Thus hedlesse thei retourne,
from whence thei did proceede:
Receiuyng for their proude attemptes,
a traitours rightfull meede.
The Frier mournes for the losse of his poore Woodkarne, he curseth as blacke as pitch their oppres|sors.The Frier seyng this,
lamentes that lucklesse parte:
And curseth to the pitte of hell,
the death mans sturdie harte:
The kindnesse of the Frier towardes the Rebelles after their death, by purchasyng their pardons, with booke, bell, and can|dell, whiche thyng ar|tificially the knaue doth handell.Yet for to quight them with,
the Frier taketh paine:
For all the synnes that ere he did,
remission to obtaine.
And therefore serues his booke,
the Candell and the Bell:
But thinke you that suche Apishetoies,A notable question whiche demaundes, if pardones fro~ Rome, maie bryng damned soules from hell.
bring damned soules from hell,
It longs not to my parte,
infernall thyngs to knowe:
But I beleue till latter daie,
thei rise not from belowe.
Yet hope that Friers giue,Friers perswasions cause Rebelies still to perseuer in rebellion, O blinde fooles, to beleeue all that Pa|pisticall Monkishe momes tell you to bee Scripture, when in the ende they seeke your vtter destruction and desolation.
to this rebellyng rout:
If that their soules should chaunce in hell,
to bryng them quicklie out.
Doeth make them lead suche lines
as neither God nor man:
Without reuenge for their desartes
permitte or suffer can.
Thus Friers are the cause,The Friers in Ire|lande, are chiefest in|strumentes of Irishe disturbaunce, they are the onely spurre to pricke them onward to rebell against the Queene, procuryng the meanes of their vtter distruction, be|yng the hed welspring of all sinne and wic|kednesse.
the Fountaine and the Spring,
Of hurleburles in this lande,
of eche vnhappie thing.
Thei cause them to rebell,
against their (soueraigne quene)
And through rebellion often times
their liues doe vanishe clene.
So as by Friers meanes,
in whom all follie swimme:
The Irishe Karne doe often lose,
the life with hedde and limme.
Rebelles bewitched or deluded by sathan, measure not their owne estate by other mens harmes, or ca|lamities, but still marche forwarde in the pursute of sinne, till they come to like ende of destruction.Yet that auaileth not,
thei so bewitched arre:
The losse of freends cannot disswade,
the reste from mortall warre.
But still thei busie are,
leage Subiectes to desease:
Their natiue countrie for to spoile,
and Princs to displease.
As by obaiyng the Prince, there sprin|geth rest, peace, and tranquilitie, so, in dis|pleasing her Grace, groweth trouble, vex|ation, confusion, and death.In pleasyng whom is reste,
and thereof riseth gaine:
As in displeasyng of her grace,
procureth nought but paine.
Thei raise still fearcer warre,
The Karne goe still on in their malice, gro+wyng from pettie fel|lonie to maine trea|son.and marche in warlike wise:
Unto the feeld, with sworde and speare,
whiche Mars did first deuise.
They boste of their manhood.Thei bragge to fight it out,
their quarell iuste to trie:
They vowe, the En|glishe hostes destruc|tion.Thei sweare that all the Princ's freends, through bloudie sworde shall die.
Thus in their rage thei frette,
and in their moodes doe fume:
The successe of reach|lesse enterprises.Whereof doe rise a sodaine plague,
these traitours to consume.
The celeritie of Sir Henry Sidney, to en|counter with the Re|belles.Our valiaunt Sidney Lord,
who gouernes Irishe soile:
Doth poste himself with Marshall knightes
those braggyng beastes to coile.
The noble stomacke of the Captaines des|cribed.And Captaines thei doe vowe,
who did the heauens create:
Their hands should strike y^e warlike stroke,
Karnes courage to abate.
The courage of the Souldiers liuely ex|pressed, who had ra|ther then their liues be vpon the Iackets of these fif kyng and shippyng Rebelles.The Souldiers doe reioyce,
to see that happie daie:
In whiche Caliuers vantyng foes,
their iuste reward maie paie.
And many Irelande Lords,Recommendation of the good subiectes of Irelande, their fideli|tie, loyaltie, and ser|uice to their Prince is described.
beyng faithfull to the Croune:
Protest through force of horse and speare,
those crakyng Knaues shall doune.
The pot now ginnes to seeth,
the fire is so greate:
And Smith assaies with mightie sleadge,
the Iron hotte to beate.The dai of ttaie is appointed, if wod|karne will abide it.
The daie appointed is,
the place likewise assignde:
The messenger he trotteth forthe,In this is manifestly proued how the Lord Deputie attempteth nothyng vnaduised|ly, either in rearyng vp of warr or in put|tyng it doune, where|by the Irishrie might finde any occasion of rebellion, or cause to rebell, for beyng come into the fielde in hostill araie, yet before he soundeth to the battaile, mercifully allureth them to submitte them selues to the Queenes good Grace, who refusing this offer, fallyng vpon them, showeth no mer|cie or compassion, whose eye doeth neither pitie them, nor yet his hande spare them, but like a most seuere warrier, executeth the function and office appertaing to warre
to knowe the Rebells minde.
Who makes his backe retourne,
with answere of the foe:
And worde for worde as he did speake,
he doeth relate it soe.


Agen beholde the thyng
in figures well requited:
Expoundyng breefly euery point,
that was euen now recited.


3
Now forward marche our hoste,
in battaill raie beset:
Who with couragious hartes goes on,
the Karne to paie their debt.
Against whom comes the Karne,
farre of in warlicke wise:
The marche of the Irishry and their no|table bragges beyng farre from their ene|mies, wherein they discouer openly their couragious dasterly hartes.With three and three in ranckes beet,
to doe some enterprise.
Thei make a goodlie shewe,
till nere thei come at hande:
Thei set them selues moste liuely forthe,
like conquerers of the lande.
But when thei are in reache,
or compasse of the bowe:
The stately courage of the Rebelles, is sone put doune, at sight of our Princes hoste.Doeth not the vewe of Princes hoste,
Karnes courage ouerthrowe?
Their pride God wot must swage,
where feare doeth plucke it doune:
Feare a suppresser of the sturdiest Rebels harte.What Rebell would not stande agaste,
to meete the roiall croune.
The order of the I|rishe warre is plainly set out, who leauyng the order of battaile raye, beyng neare the combat, fall into a cluster, therein they suppose their saftie to consist, makyng a moste terrible noyse of criyng to terrifie (if it were possible) the whole hoste of En|glishe men.Now warlicke raie thei leaue,
and on a heape thei clunge:
Supposyng safer for to bee,
as better foes repunge.
And with a mightie crie,
our hoste thei doe inuade:
But sone repulsed backe againe,
by warriours pearcyng blade.
The Trompetts sound me forthe,
the scirmishe to reueale:
And murderyng gunnes their secret grudge
no further maie conceale.
Here bulletts flye abroad,
there dares againe are sent:
And blowe for blowe in recompence,
to either parte is lent.
The horsemen scoures the coaste:
with shakyng speares in hande:
And Rebells whiche before did boaste,Uauntyng Wood|karne doe first giue backe.
now ginne to flye the lande.
Still sounde the trompetts forthe,
eche Souldiers harte to cheare:
And captaines with twoo edged swords,
doe giue the traitours geare.
Here lyes a Rebells hedde,
from shulders taken quight:Under these  tytles, the valure of all our English Cap|taines are expressed.
And here the Lions tearing pawes
on woodkarnes costard light.
The Griphon here assaies,
to haue his manhoode knowne:
Whose valure hath sufficientlie.
from tyme to tyme been showne.
The Eagle with the reste,
no lesser honour hath:
When as his bill and tallentes bothe,
in Rebells bloud he hath.O Souldiers of re|nowne shielde you from mischaunce, whiche doe in spight of Irishe karne, your Countries praise ad|uaunce.
And all the lustie youthes,
belongyng to the traine:
To purchase fame by Marshall acts,
their azure vaines doe straine.
Now goe the foes to wracke,Woodkarne must needes sweate, for their labour is great.
the Karne apace doe sweate:
And bagge Pipe then in steade of Trompe,The piper seyng the Karne to haue the worste ende of the staffe, doe lull the I|rishe retreate.
doe lulle the backe retreate.
Who eares the Bagpipe now,
the pastyme is so hotte:
Our valiant Captens will not cease,Commendations worthie of right, to be long to our Englishe Captaines, who ne|uer shrincketh, but with greate valure and manhood tarieth the finall ende of the battaile.
till that the feeld be gotte.
But still thei forward pearse,
vpon the glibbed route:
And with their weapons meete for warre,
these vauntyng foes thei cloute.
Loe yet behold a Knight,
our Princes proued frende:
In armour readie for to fight,
the quarell so to ende.
No daunger ought to be eschewed, nor labour refused, in the defendyng our prince and Countries cause.This seekes by warlicke meanes,
his credite to augment:
And for his Prince and countries sake,
his Pistoll forthe is sent.
Whiche doeth relate the cause,
of her exceadyng Ire.
The gelousie of a Prince deuoureth like the flames of fire.As how her iuste conceiued wrath,
surpasse the flames of fire.
That maie not be extincte,
(signes verifie the same:)
The anger of a prince ceaseth not til he hath brought his purpose to perfection.Till cuttyng sworde and pearcyng speare,
Rebellyng foes doe tame.
Here lyes a breechlesse Knaue,
smote iuste from coursers backe:
Thus through the souldiers doubtie harts,
the Woodkarne goe to wracke:
The Irishe Karnes hartes now more and more doe faint.Now faint the ouglie beastes,
for Lyon plagues them soe:
As thei are like to Bedlem folke,
that wote not what to doe.
Irishe Woodkarne had rather fli then fight, and good rea|son they haue so to do, for who would take blowes if he can shun them.To flye thei dare assaie,
for so thei thinke it beste:
As for to stande to fight it out,
their soules doe it deteste.
Their hartes are molified,
with feare thei are opprest:
And now thei waile y^e thing which wrought
them this vnquiet reste.Marke Traiters in the midst of battaile is no place to repent.
But will repentaunce serue?A notable question that demaundes, if the repentaunce of  vile catrife, and re|bellious Wodkarne, maie satisfie the In|iuries committed a|gainst our Queene.
I put herein a case:
Or maie it satisfie the wrong,
doen to her (noble grace?)
When Lyon once is stirde,
he by and by doeth rage:
And twill be long who knowes it not,
before his anger swage.
And when he once beginnes,A similitude of the Lyon.
to shewe his Princly force:
He stintes not till he tournth his foes,
into a breathlesse corse.
Euen so the Irishe Karne,The Princes plea|sure put in execution by Sir Henry Sid|ney.
whiche doe our Queene prouoke:
Doe throughly feele by Sidneis hande,
the waight of Lyons stroke.
For why? he mailes them doune,
he strikes them in the chase:
When gentlenesse preuaileth not,Bygour is meetest where clemencie a|uaileth not.
then rigour taketh place.
And rigour beyng showne,
the terrour of the same:
Perforce doeth make them celebrate,That whiche is doen by compulsion, is no goamacie.
her thrice (renowmed name.)
But then it is too late,
for Iustice commeth in:Iustice and fortitude yeeldes Rebels their hire.
With Fortitude that (worthie wight,)
to contribute their sinne.
The Souldiers wrecke their anger and displeasure vpon the poore Irish karne without all pitie.Thei prosecute the chase,
pursuyng fase the foe:
And with their weapons framde to warre,
O harde harted men that takes pitie of none.the Karne thei ouerthrowe.
Here lieth a packe of Karne,
distracte of limme and life:
Woodkarne abides the brunt of fortune.Here headlesse Knaues abide the bront,
of warriours mortall knife.
The Karne receiue the foile,
beyng ouercome by might:
Irishe Karne fight with their heeles with greater courage, then with their handes.And for the sauyng of their liues,
eche one doeth take his flight.
The piper and his bagpipe laide bothe flatte on the grounde.The Bagpipe cease to plaie,
the Piper lyes on grounde:
And here a sorte of glibbed theeues,
deuoide of life are founde.
The Woodkarnes legges must helpe them when handes will not serue them.Now flye whose lucke is beste,
the lucklesse man let staie:
And now bewaile thou Irishe Karne,
thy haplesse happe I saie.
Uery good counsell giuen to the remnant of Woodkarne, war|nyng them how they doe attempt any thing preiudicall to the ho|nour of the Crowne.Lament thy wofull state,
deplore thy fatall chaunce:
And warefull bee against (our Queene,)
how ye your selues aduaunce.
Yea good aduicement take,
before you doe prouoke;
As the Lyon is fea|red, and reuerenced of all the beastes in the Forrest, so ought  King to be feared and loued of his sub|iectes within his Realme.The Lyon for no mortall wight,
his purpose maie reuoke.
For as he is the Prince,
and kyng of eurie beaste:
So would he haue obedience showne,
from moste vnto the leaste.
Els if you should repunge,The rewarde of Re|bellion is death.
against his noble minde:
You might expecte at hands of his,
nought els but death to finde.
Let this a lesson bee,A cauiat for Wood|karne.
to this Rebellyng route:
To Macke, and O. to Rorie Ogge,
to all the Traitours stoute.
Let Brians fall suffice,Good reason that the Asses calamity should make the Foxe to be ware.
let Wolfe and Foxe beware:
How with the noble Lyon thei,
the gotten praie doe share.
Still sounde the trompetts forthe,
the foe to terrifie:
And Souldiers with courageous harts,
vpon the Karne doe flye.The corde that rebel|lion did binde, maie not be loused by any meanes, but by the ingen of death.
The Karne apace doe fall,
like leaues through blustryng winde:
And maie nowhit vnlose the corde,
that thei them selues did binde.
Bohbowe now crie the knaues,The Irishe Karnes crie.
and lullalowe the Karne:
And Englishe youthes a cauate sende,
rebellyng foes to warne.
Here parte doe take the Bogges,The remnaunt of the vnslaine Wodkarne, doe parte take the Bogges, and other some the Wood.
and some the woods retaine:
And other beyng hedlesse made,
like witlesse Geese remaine.
Irishe coltes are ta|med by the snaffie of warre.Thus vauntyng foes are tamde,
by gliues of warlicke youthes:
Receiuyng strokes in steede of meedes,
for their inconstaunt truthes.
Englishe men returne ConquerersThe victours doe retourne,
thei haue their hartes delight:
For Woodkarne thei are knocked doune,
the reste are put to flight.
Untruste remaineth not one,
whiche maie the least anoye:
For windes are stilde by mightie Ioue,
O cause of endlesse ioye.
Sir Henry Sidney is worthely renowmd for prudence and magnanimitie.Sir Henry is renowmde,
with fame vnto the Skie:
And is receiu'de to Dublin toune,
prais'de for his cheualrie.
Peace commeth of warre.Thus peace ensewes by warre,
the ende of warre is peace.
A Godly praier that Irelande ought to vse.God graunt the warres of Irishe sone,
by Sidneys meanes maie cease.
Loe Lordyngs here the draught,
of that whiche went before:
And lande discride, the wished tide,
hath brought my Shippe to shore.

FINIS.



_AFter that I had finished the first and se|conde parte of the Image of Irelande, and had there somewhat disclosed the nature and qualitie of the wantone Irishe wilde VVoodkarne, I thought it expedient for the vo|lumes augmentation, as more ampler by examples to proue the thinges therein co~tained, to put next in sequence, the picters and protractours of the moste notablest Rebelles in Irelande, (who as they are many) so doe thei aske sondrie opperations, if of eache seuerall one I should make relation. (And againe) musing in my mynde with whom I might encounter, as best beginne withall, hauing sondrie choyse to chose vpon, I supposed it a thing necessa|rie, and at this instant fittest to serue my turne, to laie the foundation of my attempt,  sure sub|stanciall corner stone, vpon Rory Ogge our next neighbour, at this present (a liuely Image  pat|terne of rebellion) who after many pagentes of treasons plaid, and notable offers of grace refused, beyng brought into greate miserie (by Sir Henry Sidney the Lorde Deputies daily instigation) and seyng hym self vtterly forsaken bothe of God

and man, at last moued through a desperate and condemned conscience, confessing his folly, mani|festeth to the whole world, his croked nature, com|plaineth of his fatall destenie (and finally) as it were through a certaine coniecture, fore telleth of thynges that shortly shall happen hym. VVhere|fore behold in plaine protractour, a grose and cor|pulent man, lapped in a mantel ouerwhelmed with miserie, beyng in a VVood (an ill fauored Churle) standyng on a Hillocke enclosed with a shaking Bogge (his onely refuge in the tyme of trouble) vtteryng moste lamentably, with brynishe salte woluishe teares, his life as enseweth.
FINIS.




I Rorie Ogge,Rorie Ogg sho|weth hee the Countie where|in he dwelleth, and his naturall inclination, whereunto he is addicted. inhabitaunt of Leasse,
A rebell false, against my (soueraine quene)
I loue debate, expellyng godlie peace,
I lead my life, in Boggs and thickets grene,
What mortall wight, my co~pere then hath seene,
Whiche of y^e lorde nor prince doeth stand in awe,
Nor passe not for, the rigour of the Lawe.


My harte is bent,Marke where vnto this Re|belles harte is bent, (that is to saie) to all kind of mischiefe, sinne and wic|kednesse. to eurie kinde of ill,
Whose outward deedes, doe well relate thesame
I loue the thyng, supporter of my will,
I spoile and burne, thereby t'encrease my fame,
Thus by suche actes, I gotten haue a name.
Euen traitour false, that neuer shall decaie,
Nor bee extinct, by any kinde of waie.


I vilaine vile, and craftie as the Foxe,
Rorie in accu|sing hym self, is not to be iudged of other, for here he showeth that he is as craftie as a Foxe, an extortioner like the Wolfe, fal|ser then a theef, and a traiter to the Queene, in whiche I beleue hym, though he neue swore for the matter.Yea like the Wolfe, whiche doeth extortion vse,
I falser am, then theef that pickes the lockes,
In deulishe sorte, my self I so abuse:
(My noble Queene) for cheef I doe refuse,
Whose roiall name, doeth monte vnto the skie,
And curie where, is in ancthoritie.


What maie displease,Rory Ogge go|yng forwarde in the settyng out of his dispositio~ telleth that he doeth all this kind of mischefe of set purpose a|gainst y^e queene, who notwith|standyng, laieth al the blame and falte vpon the Deuill. her princly roiall grace,
(I like a theef) doe put the same in vre,
Her highnesse Lawes, I daiely doe deface,
And through y^e same, her heauie wrath procure:
Thus Sathan he, my sences doeth allure,
Who makes them thrall, to serue his appetite,
So that in nought, but synne I doe delight.


She would me good, if I would loyall bee,
But my ill happe, and crewell Destinie,
In parte or whole, that thyng forbiddeth me,
Till Ize constrainde, through Sidneis pollicie:
Her mightie hande, perforce to testifie,
Prostratyng me, before her fearfull Lawe,
Though of the same, I stoode not erst in awe.


In this he ma|nifesteth the great goodnesse of the Queene, whose mercie is daily extended towardes those whiche are wil|lyng to yeelde to the obseruation of her statutes and lawes, but he in no wise maie yeeld ther|to, till by com|pulsion he bee constrained.And forste perforce, God knowes what doth re|main
But cruel plages, for my desartes are iust,
Suche is the meede, whiche eurie Rebell gaine,
That doeth pursue, the chase of ragyng luste:
O carelesse Karne, O Rebell false to truste,
Rory Ogg be|yng compelde to acknowledge y^e great aucthority of the Prince, is therfore worthie of small goda|mercie.O Rorie Ogge, thrice cursed maie I be,
Who mou'de to wrath, the queens high maiestie


Wo Where Rorie bid the three cur+ses light vpon him, I wish hym for euery one twentie (sauyng my charitie.)maie I be, for mouyng her to Ire,
The M. woes, through which my soule possesse
In eche respect, surpasse the flames of fire,
I languishe still, but hopelesse of redresse:
My wicked life, I needes must now confesse,
Through which I feele, eue~ liue y^e pa~ges of hell,
A good note for Rebelles, Marks the effecte, of rebellion, and wherevnto it driueth this wretched Roge, euen to the brincke of desperation, who as he saieth beyng yet aliue, feeleth moste appa|rantly the tormentes of hell, and here it is proued true, that a mans owne conscience is better then a thousande witnesses.That neither penne, nor tongue of man can tell.



I am expelde,There be two sortes of people on earth, knaues and honest men, whereon I ga|ther that Rorie Ogge being ba|nished the com|panie of honest men, must be en|tertained of his like euall com|panio~s, (who as him self saith) is daily pursued of the good in moste wofull sorte. from crewe of honest men,
None but my mates, me traitour maie abide,
As for the good, thei hunte me now and then,
From wooddes to Boggs, beset on eurie side:
And where that I, so euer am espide,
There waight is laied, to catche my sillie soule,
And with the axe, to shorte me by the poule.


Whiche thyng to taste, I well deserued haue,
Rorie is here  very penitent persone, whiche co~fesseth his life to haue deserued death, which re|fused the princes pardone once offered hym.Since freedome once, was offerde vnto me,
Vaine is the gift, that's profferde to a knaue,
Who nought estemes, his Princes elemencie:
O Rebell cause, of all thy miserie,
Which mightest haue had, remission of thy sinne,
What, greater gaine, supposedst thou to winne.


O happlesse wight, refusyng Princes grace,
Here Rorie Ogge taketh on with himself for refusing the par+done,  acknow|ledgeth hym self an asse, and a beast in deniyng the same.O dismalle daie, wherein I it denide,
O peruerse harte, that couldste not it imbrace,
But like a theef, suche courtesie denide:
O brutishe beast, who doeth not now deride,
The vauntyng harte, asspiryng ouer hye,
Whose haughtie thoughts, did match y^e rouling skye.


But true it is, that Fatall letters saie,
Who takes no tyme,Rorie calleth to memorie the sa|ing that is writ|ten, tyme beyng once past, is not easely cald back, whereby we are leaed to take the tyme present whilst it is of|red. when as the same is lent,
And holde it faste, hym self thereby to staie,
Whom if it passe, the crooked waie it went:
He maie not finde, the Tauerne, House or tent,
Though them to seeke, he spendeth daie  night
And all because, he helde not when he might.



He verifieth and approueth the aboue saiyng by hym self, whiche reiectyng grace beyng offered, now seeketh af|ter it, but maie not haue it, though with weeping he doth request it.Euen so alas, when noble Sidney he,
My pardon sent, for faltes I did comit,
Though there I saw, eche crime forgiuen to be,
I not contente, with chat his pardon yet:
Let passe the same, as gifte for me vnfit,
Whiche to reuert, now lyes not in my might,
For God  time, haue wrought me this dispight


Rorie Ogge sheweth for par|done, but maie not obtaine it, for Princes by Rebels will not be deluded.Now do I seke, though sekyng nought preuaile
Faine would I finde, the fauour of my Prince,
But craft serues not, that stately forte to scaile,
For well she knowes, my subtill hartes pretence
Who hath a tyme, the same to recompence,
As semeth good, vnto her royall grace.
For God and tyme,Rorie Ogg se|yng hym self en|uironed on eue|ry side with ene|mies, manife|steth his miserie, showing not one craftie hose or enne to be free from the know|ledge of y^e Lord deputie, but that he hath intelli|ge~ce and know|ledge of it. bid Iustice to take place.


And Iustice she, sendes forthe her warlike crew,
With sondrie spies, my haunte for to disclose,
Who connyngly poore Rories tracte doe vewe,
Relatyng it vnto his mortall foes:
As nought is lefte, wherein he maie repose,
Mo~gest all his de~nes a bulwarke for his health
Nor yet a hoe, to shroude his gotten stealth.


Rorie sheweth how spitefull greedie, the En|glish Captanes and Souldiers are in chasyng and hu~ting him.Like greedie haukes, pursuyng faste their praie,
All fullie bent, the same for to deuoure,
And as the Night, the Orientall daie,
Doeth captiue make, by his externall powre:
So time from time, small distance fro~ an howre,
Pursude I am and brought to suche a baie,
As I expecte, nought but my dismall daie.



Sir Henry now,Rorie acknow|ledgeth y^e Lorde Deputies nota|ble wisedome, onely to haue brought hym to this miserie. who gouernes Irishe soyle,
Hath made an othe, to breuiate my daies,
Whose stratagemes, haue giuen me suche a foile
As all the lande, soundes out his noble praise:
For he it is, that breaketh doune my staies,
And who but he might Rorie ouerthrowe,
Though Mars hmself, had sworne my mortal fo.


Who might haue tane,He proueth his affirmation by a moste manifest example, whiche was brought at that time to pas out of my bloodie hande,
Whom by my sleightes, I captiue made to bee,
That Marshall knight, and captain of a bande,
No second one, (excepte againe twere he:
In fine twas he, whiche made of bondmen free,
And put to sworde,Rorie Oges wife is slaine. for my vnstable truthe,
My spoused wife, the garlande of my youth.


With many mo, my deare and speciall frends,Rories frends to the nomber of sixtene are saine in a cabbin, be|yng in a Wood of the Englishe men, and after warde the cab|bin beyng set on fire, all their bo|dies are burned also.
Whose brethlesse corps, wer giue~ to flams of fire
Good cause had I, to waile their lucklesse ends,
Though Ioue agreed, to yeeld them suche a hire:
O heauie plague, to moue the heauens to Ire,
Through whose outrage, y^e iust oft sufers pain
To cause the reste, from wicked actes refraine.


And I my self, in daunger of my life,
Rounde compaste then,Rorie Ogg be|yng at that tyme in the foresaied cabbin, with those that were killed hardly es|capeth, though not without a good knocke of a halbert vpon his costarde. by men of worthie fame,
Sought out to shift, how to escape the knife:
That readie was, my courage for to tame,
Whiche when that I, well pondred had thesame
I tooke good harte, it stoode me then vpon,
And leapt me forthe, tyme wilde I should be go~.



To leape well is very necessa|rie sometyme, as appeareth here by Rorie Ogge.Now with that leape, I got me quight awaie
Moste ioyous that, I skaped had the trappe,
My leggs were good, to vow that thing I maie
Whiche set me free, that tide from that mishappe
Not ouer free, for one gaue me a rappe,
Whiche thing I sweare, did pinche me to y^e hart,
The blowe was greate,  came so ouerthwart.


Rorie here sho|weth that the Englishe men, were very sory for his escape out of the cab|bin, and from their handes. This happines is to be referred to the Englishe men, whose chaunce was to kill those rebel|lious knaues. Rorie Ogge es|pecially doth be waile the death of one Saue Macke Rorie Reagh aboue y^e rest that were slaine at y^e tyme.But scape I did, so muche the more their greef,
And got me soone, into an other denne,
None fledde with me, but one poore onely theef,
As for the reste, thei were saluted then,
That instant tyme, were xvi. of my men,
Put to the sworde, in cabbande where wee laie,
O my ill happe, but happie theirs I saie.


Emongest them all, one auncient aged sire,
Whose councels I, eche while did well alowe,
Though old he was, yet pearcyng as the fire,
A craftie Foxe, as any liueth now:
Was murdered then, by chance I wot not how
Whose crewell fall, giuen by the sisters three,
Alas, alas, full sore disquiets me.


Here he setteth out y^e cause why he so eploreth his destenie.For whilste he liu'de, my harte possest his lust,
And lust enioyde, what so it could inuent:
But since the poste, whereon my hope did trust,
Receu'de his dome, by warriours fearce assent,
Like thradomes slaue, I sithens haue been pe~t.
Rorie Ogge be|ing be reaued of his counsellers, is all moste out of his wittes.In easlesse holde, not wittyng what to doe,
Or what were beste, to put my self vnto.



My men wer slain,When Rebels lacke fawterers and helpers, the~ fall they to mi|serie. which onely wer my staie,
My wife through whom, I often gat releef,
My fre~des which brought, to Rorie daie by daie
The stolen horse, the Mutton and the Beef,
Which thinges to wa~t, who holds it not a greef?
Yea suche a plague, as aucthours tell to me,
That to a man, no greater plague can be.


Loe first the woe,The first steppe to Rories mise|rie. my soule doeth ouer quell,
Behold y^e straight, whereto I now am brought,
Marke well the place, where caitife I do dwell,
As eke the knight, this alteration wrought,
Then shall you se, if throughly you haue sought
The perfect waie, that leadeth to the hall:
Where are the plagues, on Rorie Ogge shall fal.


For Sidney now,The Lord De|putie is in ar|mour against Rorie Ogge, whose fame is spread vniuer|saly through out the Realme of Irelande. that thrice (renowmed knight,)
T'augment the fame, and seruice of his (queene)
Stands out in feeld, by sworde to trie her right:
(Whose valiant hart, like to the Laurell greene,
For courage stoute, and prudence mixt betwene,
Is had in Price) renowmed for the same,
Through Irishe soile, w^t trompe of happie fame


He sondrie waies,Sir Henry Sid+ney encreaseth Rorie Oges miserie, and wor+keth his subuer|sion by his no|table industerie. doeth aggrauate my smart,
He he I saie, hath wrought me sore anoye,
His wisedomes skill, hath dau~ted sore my hart:
And my attemptes, doeth vtterly, destroye,
He daie from daie, his accious doeth imploye,
False Rories daies, to breuiate with speede:
Because that he, so vile a life doe leede.



Souldiers are sent out to put in practise, the Lord Deputies purpose.
Rorie plaieth the Astronomer this starre was sene from Dub|lin south west, by whiche bla|syng starre, Ro|rie Oge coniec|tures his speedy fall, whiche ac|cordyngly hap|ned. By these enis and cees, are ment the Mores and Co|mores Rories cheefe frendes.His Marshall knightes,  expert men of warre,
By hym are sent, to put the same in vre,
Who me of all, my freedome doe debarre:
Whereby I maie, not long their force endure,
But force no force, since I did so procure.
Bothe heauen and yearth, to be my mortall foe:
If in their rage, thei Rorie ouerthrowe.


Beholde a Starre, apparant in the Weste,
This H. doeth signifie, how Macke Shaue whiche is Rorie Oges father in lawe.Whose fierie streames, I finde by learned skill,
Betokeneth peace, tranquilitie, and reste,
When M Ms  Cs, to serue false Rories will,
Debarde shalbe, for thereof come the ill.
Or if that H. had seru'de his Queene a right,
Long sithens R. had been extirped quight.


This is a true and good co~fes|sion of Rorie Oge, vttered in his extremitie. Rorie Oge is in his similitudes vp to the harde eares, prouyng with manifest arguments, vn|lesse he had been bolstered vp by his saide father in lawe and his frendes, it had been vnpossible that he should haue continued so long vnexe|cuted or taken.When H. doth well, to deale with double hande
Els from his kinde, he should degenerate.
But if that S. his sleight did vnderstande,
H. should be turnde, augmenter of debate,
In little space, vnto a vier state,
*Though yet not spide, he goeth vncorrected:
Whiche is the botche, wherewith R. is infected.


*Like as that house, whereon hym self to staie,
Hath sondrie postes, by workmen fastned sure,
With eurie puffe, maie not be blowne awaie:
So long as thei in linked state endure,
Euen so my self, I doe you all assure,
Shall scarce betrapt w^t Fortunes fatall chau~ce
Whilst frendes w^t aide, my mischeef do aduau~ce.



But postes remou'de, the house sone hath a fall,
And buildyng goeth,Marke here Ro+ries reasone, whiche speaketh by experience. with violence to wracke,
No parte maie stande, the rofe nor yet the wall:
When as the same, his vnderstaies doeth lacke,
Euen so my self, nowhit could holde out tacke.
Excepte that I had vnderpropped been:
By hym or them, that seme frends to the queene.


Whiche if thei were,Gods blessyng haste thou good Rorie for spea|kyng the truthe. fro~ Rorie once remou'de,
Who would misdoubt, y^e peace that should ensue
This by his like, the wise hath often prou'de:
As now by me, it maie bee holden true,
If that the cause,Rorie Ogge ta|keth vpon hym here, to haue skill in Phisick. whereon the Phistoll grewe,
Had first been tane, from pacient cleane awaie:
No Phistoll then had sprouted there I saie.


But as a part,As the Lorde Deputie abbrid+ged the daies of some of Rorie Oges fosterers in this his visi|tation, so he pro|phesteth of the ende of the rest of his said fren|des together with hym self. is silde through fatall chaunce,
Or by the sleight, of Sidneys prudent skill,
So in good tyme, the rest shall trace that dau~ce:
Whiche hetherto, haue seru'de my wicked will,
And since that thei, haue nourst me in myne ill.
Thei shall receiue, with me for their rewarde:
Aguerdon due, long since of Ioue preparde.


That tyme drawes nye,Rorie seeth by some secret waie that his prophe|sie is at hande, ready to be per|formed, and so muche the more he is certaine of it, because he doeth see Sir Henry Sidney bent wholy to his destruction. and howre is at hande,
In whiche the cept, of my rebellyng race,
Shall be extirpt, and bolishte cleane the lande:
(For God hym self, doe sitte in iudgement place)
To Iudge I saie, with Iustice now the case.
Whiche tyme from tyme, hath euer been defard:
So that the right, at no tyme could bee heard.



Rorie Ogge t|keth this sithe to be the sworde of Iustice, which the Lord Depu|tie hath plucked out of the sheath onely to do exe|cution vpon all transgressors.Lo lo I see, in Mowers crewell hande,
A fearfull Sithe, whiche doeth prognosticate,
Both here  there, throughout this Irishe lande
That growth of things, are at their ripned state
Whiche must be cropt, by Sithe of dismall fate.
For God and tyme, hath sworne by sacred othe:
That Reede  huske, shall suffer penance bothe.


It is at hande, for feelds declare the same,
The date is out, and tyme appointed spent,
And reapman now, the vanter to reclame:
The Harolde of death is sent to Rorie Oge, cer|tainly to make manifest, his ruine and fall.In Irefull rage, from mightie Ioue is sent,
Whose message thus, vnto me doeth present.
Affirmyng R. to come to desolation:
And his supporters, to suffer like destruction.


Then men shall walke, vpon the mou~taines hie,
The peace is discribed that shall be after the death of Ro|rie Oge.And feare nowhit, the Tyger, Wolfe, nor Beare
The Kids shall slepe, with Leopard quietly:
And yet nowhit, his fearfull visage feare,
For why? no cause, of tremblyng shall be there.
When as the thing, whereof thei were afraied:
Shall be by sworde, and crewell conquest laied.


The Lord De|putie in prosecu|ting his purpose against Rorie Oge,  through procurement of the saide Rories fall, deserueth e|uerlastyng re|membraunce, with all good  famous men.The~ H. S. through who~ this peace doth spring,
For his desartes, shall crouned sitte with Fame,
And ouer that, whiche is a better thyng:
He shall possesse, an euerlastyng name,
Emongest the iuste, that well deserue the same.
And though y^e tyme, shall turne his corps to clay
Yet shall his name, still florishe as the Baye.



Lo you that liue,Rorie Oge ma|keth here his conclusion, and giueth forthe a good exhortatio~ to all men, coun|celyng them to eschewe and flee treasons, and showeth though sinnes be for a while let go vn|punished, yet at length they are recompensed at full. and I that soone shall dye,
Beholde I saie, the salerie for synne,
Now let my cause, teache other impes to flye:
From treasons lure, lest stipende like thei winne,
For though tis long, ere Iustice cometh in.
Yet when it comes, it paieth once for all:
And suffreth plages, by heapes on plages to fall.

FINIS.



_ENteryng into the discourse of Rorie Ogge, at the firste, I was purposely bent, frendly with hym to adioine the liues of many (the open professed enemies of her Maiesties gouerment within this Realme of Ire|lande) but before I had ended that portion (euen in the middest thereof) I behelde many impedi|mentes, wonderfull obstacklesse, stoppes, and staies perswadyng the contrarie, whiche beeyng repleni|shed with sufficient matter, grounded vpon rea|son, wisedome aduised me, to co~sider thereof (least peraduenture) ranging on rashely, I might seeme to prosecute an endlesse worke, making a volume, more greater, then gratefull, and more painfull, then pleasaunt, (whiche thyng doubtlesse) I vt|terlie abhorre. Seeyng that praise consistes not, in the quantitie, but rather, in the qualitie  grace of a thing doen. And thus I breuiated my former entent, though in effect, nothing deminishyng that whiche I promised. For in this discourse, you may

perfectly se, as in a glasse, perceiue, learne, and vn|derstande, to what vexations of minde, troubles of bodie, anguishe and wretchednesse in conscience all the rable of Rebels are captiued vnto. VVher|fore leauyng theim with their vngracious Pa|trones; Phisniognamies, externall; and infernall, to thy consideration (gentill Reader:) It came then into my minde, freshely to gather my wittes together, to the settyng forthe of an other maner of thyng, of greater valure then as yet thou hast seen (that is to saie) the commyng in of O Neale to (Sir Henry Sidney our Lorde Deputie of Ire|land) at the Newrie, with his submission, the othe that the saied O Neale the~ and there made, tou|chyng his perpetuall fidelitie, and inuiolable con|tinuaunce of his duetifull aledgaunce, to the (que|nes Maiestie her royall Croune and dignitie) with sondrie other promisses moe, decently becom|myng euery good Subiecte: not barely in woordes to saie, but actually in deedes to accomplishe and performe, whiche if I had passed ouer in silence, some perhapps would haue blamed me of parciali|ties, who in this Image so sharply enueighyng, a|gainst the wickednesse  rudenesse of woodkarne,

should haue omitted suche a presidente of humble submission, wherefore beholde the saied O Neale here making his submission, as before is saied, who~ the Lord Deputie in the (Queenes Maiesties) be|half moste noblie accepteth, renderyng such honour as to his persone appertai|neth. The effecte whereof hereafter followeth.




IF sillie beastes,If beastes whiche haue no vnderstan+dyng, doe re|ioyce at win|ters depar|tyng, and at the comming in of sommer, (the encrea|ser of their delightes) much more ought that man, who beyng long without the princes fauour, and kept in disgrace, be trebble ioyous, (receiued at length to mercie and fauour) long pent in droopyng stale,
Or if the Harte, sore pincht with chillyng cold,
No meruaile ioyes, to see the Sommer fale,
Through whiche the plantes, kept doune in massie hold
Their fragra~t se~tes,  beauties maie vnfold.
Or if the Larcke, when cloudes are paste awaye,
Te deum synges, to see the Sunnie daie.


Why should not man, the highest firmament,
Whose thoughtes did pearce, where Ioue resple~dent sit
Whose outward shape, the same doth represent:
As nexte extende, for his forecastyng witte,
To whom alone, he onely doeth committe.
The vastall worlde, with ruledome of the same:
The fishe in Seas, and beastes on lande to tame.


Reioyce I saie, vnbounde from thousande cares,
From greef of minde, with sorowes ouer preste,
From sighing sobbs, far fetcht with trillyng teares
From heapes of cares, clos'de vp in pantyng breste,
From euery thing, that might gainsaie his reste.
And now in place, and steade of suche anoye:
To reape at full, his long expected ioye.


This ioye at full, I meane my Princes grace,
The fauour of the prince is an inesti|mable trea|sure to that subiect which hath it, sur|mountyng  and preacious stones.The chefest wealth, that subiectes can require,
A learned iudge, to soile eche doubtfull case:
As readiest waie whereby men maie aspire,
To honours seate, from youth whiche all desire.
A pereesse peate,  worth then golde:
And more o price, then Diamonds to be solde.


A tower of strength, and forte of Fortitude,
This setteth out most liue+ly in sondrie, formes and fashoes,  what a thing the fauor and grace of our Queene is.A Samson strong to riue the gates a sonder,
A mightie Sea, that lande from lande exclude:
A doubtie Mars, whiche Nations bringeth vnder,
A seconde Ioue, that worketh mickle wonder.
A passyng strne, to guide mans Shipp a right:
A pleasant feeld, and gardeine of delight.


O who can tell, expressyng eurie parte,
The happie estate and condition of good sub|iects, is with out all com|parisons.The xceedyng ioye, that loyall Subiects winne,
Or who can shewe, the thrice redoundyng smarte:
That reachlesse liues, to rebells bringeth in,
Whiche make things seem, as though thade neuer bin,
(O peare of price) to honour Princes Lawes:
Of healthe and wealthe, the sole and onely cause.


In deede, I think if there were any grace at al in hym, whiche is once brought to be a subiecte, he maie not lightly be tur+ned to be a Rebel again.Who so did taste, once of that Sugred life,
And reape the fruite, that spryngeth of the same,
Bi't wildest Karn, b'it infant child or wife:
Wearte fearrest oe, by conquest worthie fame,
Weart-Macke, or O. Macke deuil weart by name
I thinke if grace, did them conduct a right.
Theilde no exchange, though change at will thei might



If happe to change,Truly the condition of Rebelles in Irelande is very ticklish, and their chaunces ve|ry harde, as in this part is discribed. the change for worser parte,
As triall tells, eche where in Irishe soile,
In reachlesse change, things light ouerth warte
For though the foe, in treasons feelde domoile,
Yet dreades he sore, eche while to get tho foile.
And though for once, he passeth by the trappe:
Yet at the length, in pantell he shall happe.


Yea though their straightes,A most plain and true dis|cription of Rebelles ti|merosrie. hard fortune to expell
Are hundred Karnes preparde at all assaies,
Yet eurie Rushe, their haughtie hartes doeth quell:
As whicly winde, their courage sore alaies,
Thus feare them daunt, by 1000. kinde of waies.
Thei feare to see, the shiu'ryng of the daie:
Thei feare as faste, when it is paste awaie.


Thus feare eche while,Feare euery while and where, trou|bleth the Re|bell, waking, sleepyng, and at all tymes and seasons. enuironth traitors minde,
And cares againe, to sheeld them from mischance,
Thei are disturbde, at eurie puffe of winde:
The dusked cloudes, which ouer them do glaunce,
Thei saie foreshewes, some sodaine fatall chaunce.
And often tymes, the shaddowe of a tree:
Makes them beleeue, a bande of men to see.


Suche feare turmoiles,The traiter that thinketh hym self in moste securi|tie, is often tymes brought into greatest per|plexitie, such an horrible thing is trea|sone. the sturdest of them all,
Suche feare I saie, eche Rebell doeth retaine,
Suche feare I vowe, vpon the beste doeth fall:
Suche feare I sweare, the chefest foe doeth paine,
Suche feare againe, in loftest harte remaine.
And though suche feare, doeth ouerwhelme their hartes,
Yet cease thei not, to plaie disloiall partes.



ebellion is  very foolish plaie and pa|styme, and moste foolish is he, that f|eth his hart and stomack with treason as if it were with moste holsome meatSuche plaie maie well, be counted fooles game,
For none but fooles, therein doe take delight,
Iuste was the cause, whereof it helde the name:
As eke a curste, that brought it first to light,
In steade of foode, to glutte mans appetite.
And bande are all, in Citie, Feeld or Toune:
That holde suche plaie, against the royall croune.


Those that liue well, and loue well their Prince, is euery wher counted hap|pie  blessed.But bleste are thei, that doe refuse the same,
And trebble blest, that loue their Prince a right,
Blest shall he bee, whiche pretermittes that game:
Yea bleste I saie, bothe mornyng and at night,
Bleste shall he bee, whiche hath his whole delight.
In good attemptes, and furdryng Princ's cause:
Conductyng hym, by tenour of her Lawes.


This is the protestation of O Neale to the Lorde Deputie.My Princes freende, I vowe my self to bee,
And loyall eke, vnto her noble grace,
A freende to her, a freende likewise to me:
As tyme shall trie, the vtmoste of her case,
And who that seekes, her honour to deface.
I doe protest, by all my force and might:
My blood to gage, but Ile maintaine her right.


This is largely prof|ferd of hym.In Princes cause, my hande shall strike y^e stroke,
And who that dare, her Cepter to defame,
As he that will, not yet againe reuoke:
By Marshall actes, that persone Ile reclame,
And make hym yeeld, submission to her name.
Yea though he were, a seconde Mars I vowe:
Ile make hym stoope, to breake, to bende, or bowe.



Fewe Scottes in North (if Quene will haue it so)
Shall there abide,O Neale pro+miseth to ex|pell al Scots out of the North of Irelande, if the Queenes Maiestie would but giue hym ayde, or if her grace would haue it so. the grounde for to manure,
Excepte that thei, their homage yeeld her to:
Auowyng eke, their fealtie to endure,
Conioynyng it, with compliments moste sure.
Not one I saie (if Queene will me supporte)
Shall there possesse, one castell toune or forte.


Since I haue reapte, the thyng I did desire,
And wonne at laste, the fauour of the croune,
My harte is set, as twere in flames of fire:
By seruice iuste,Meanyng Sir Henry Sidney, to whom O Neale made like protesta|tion. t'augmene her greate renowne,
Whiche shall appeare, by Rebells pluckyng doune.
Withstandyng the~, that shall withstande her right:
In midste of feelde, (I vow'de it to her knight.)


Let them beware,An admoni|tion to the enhabitantes and borde|rers neare to the North that border nere my holde,
In any case how thei their liues doe leede,
For with an othe, to vowe I maie be bolde:
If to their cuttes, thei take not better heede,
In harte and minde, I fullie am agreed.
The beste to quell,O Neale pro+miseth not onely to be a scourdge to the euill li|uers and di|sturbers of her Maie|sties people, but also a frende and helper of her good sub|iectes to the vttermost of his powre. (that shall molest her grace:)
Demissyng them, from honour, life, and place.


But *those that leade, a faithfull subiectes life,
I their defence, doe put my self to bee,
Supportyng them, in eurie kinde of strife:
Defendyng them, from cruell tyrannie,
By waie I saie, of noble cheualrie.
And whereas I, maie doe them any good:
For Princes sake, Ile hazarde life and blood.

FINIS.



The Aucthors exhortation.

Come eche wight, whiche now do haunt the wood,
Submit your selues, vnto your soueraignes lawe,
Come forthe I saie, receiue my councell good:
Let not fonde luste, your sences thence withdrawe,
But of the croune, like subiectes stande in awe.
So shall you finde, suche fauour of the Queene:
As hetherto, the like you haue not scene.


In steade of woodes, then houses you maie vse,
In steade of Boggs, the Cities at your will,
Procede therefore, leste tyme you should abuse:
Now reape the fruite, of pleasure euen your fill.
Let loyall loue, Rebellyng fancies kill.
(In fine) submit, you (to her royall grace:
So mercie shall, areste you with her Mace.

FINIS.



_THE miserable calamitie of Rorie Ogge set out by meanes of the dead|ly pursute of valiaunt seruitures daily pursewyng him, remained no|thyng to the concludyng of my la|bours, but the finall endyng of his wretched race, which thing I constantly beleued would shortly come to passe, (admirable both to the beholders and seers) for as his life was notorious and passyng knauishe, so could it not otherwise be, but that his death must a|gree, fallyng out equall in eache condition to his trai|terous vsage, for seldome is it seen, that wicked re|belling hath a blessed ending, and as men oftentymes hope not in vaine, so I expectyng, or rather wishing, the cuttyng of (of suche a botchie member (receiued at length, the rewarde of my expectation, in the ful|nesse of the thyng I so long thursted for. (For as God would) it came luckely to passe, (long tyme predesti|nated by his vnsearchable and secret counsell) efte sone, as I had ended with the discription of O Neale, that this cursed caitife, (cursed of gods own mouth)

was through the sworde, by the meanes of the Lorde of Vppossery and his seruiters (a faithfull subiecte of that Realme) bereaued of his life, to the greate tranquilitie of Lease, and els where (her Maiesties leage people there inhabityng) accordyng to the true prophesie, in his liuyng story, at large set out. VVher|fore, and for as muche, as I suppose your desire is, to heare some discourse consernyng his death, as you heard before touchyng his life, suppose that you see a monstrous Deuill, a trunckelesse head, and a hedlesse bodie liuyng, the one hid in some miskin  donghill, but the other exalted, yea mounted vppon a poule (a proper sight God wot to be holde (vanting it self on the highest toppe of the Castell of Dublin, vtteryng in plaine Irishe the thynges that ensewe.
FINIS.




WHilste feare ioynde w^t hope,In this part Rorie Oge showeth the state of that man to be sure, so long as he kepeth hym self du|tifull to his Prince and Countrie. liege people retaine,
A feare to offende, the Prince or her lawe,
And hope for desartes, suche goodnesse to gaine:
As shall be imposde, to the line they drawe,
Whilste one vprightly, twixt these standes in awe.
He dreades no turbulent stormes that maie chau~ce
For tyme trieth falshood, the trothe to aduaunce.


But feare expulsed, clene out of the mynde,
Not waiyng Iustice,That man whiche ca|steth of feare falleth into many mis|chefes. detectour of sinne:
And hope of correction, which subiectes doth binde,
Their liues for to leade, the statutes within,
Are lightly extende, when rancour beginne,
To plaie her pagent, as wily she can:
She spoyleth wholy, the nature of man.


Procuryng enuie,He that hath wicked ran|cour in his breast, hath with it also a greate nom|ber of euill vices. Tyme is a detectour of treasone. grudge, strife, and debate,
Anger, and malice, bothe fit for the turne,
Dissimulation, a principall mate:
That other vices, doeth neately adorne,
Holdyng them smouldryng, and neuer to burne,
Till tyme descries it, detectyng the treason:
Whiche then is maintainde, by colour of reason.


Aledgyng reason,Treason e|spied, is exe|cused by rea|sone. suche folly to couer,
Though treason not reason, is chefest pretence,
Thus whilste in malice, the Rebell doeth houer:
Raising a powre, to be his defence,
To subiectes disquiet, the Realme and the Prince,
Good God what reason, iste then to defende,
The thyng that treason, is founde in the ende?


That traiter which is wil|fully giuen to plaie the Rebell, hath neuer regard to the cause be it good or bad, for whiche he riseth.But man addicted, to fancie and will,
Forced by Sathan, to followe his luste,
Regardes not the cause, be it good or ill:
For whiche in hazarde, his life he doeth thruste,
He passe not a myte, b'it iust, or vniust:
For as the Pooke leades hym, so forward he must:
Not ceasing till bayarde, laith hym in the dust.


A Rebell doeth not re|member wat is the ende of his treasons.He nought forcasteth, enflamed with yre,
At last what guerdon, false treason awarde,
Nor yet diserneth, through passyng desire:
What plagues for traitours, y^e law hath preparde,
But ronnyng forwarde, not hauing regarde,
To thinges before hym, or after ensewe:
He sone possesse, what for treasone is dewe.


Though for|tune doeth fauer the traitour for a while, yet at last she leaueth hym in the bryers.Although for a tyme, dame fortune doeth smile,
Fauryng moste frendly, the thing set abroche,
Whose craftie suggestions, compact in a wise,
At last bringes the Rebell, to shame and reproche,
Deludyng his rashnesse, that darde to encroche,
So muche on fortune, abusing her wheele:
That leaste puffe of winde, doeth make for to reele.


What here is spoken, a thousande haue tride,
Who maie be triall, the truth will declare,
The course of fortune,Many  founde fo|tune very de|ciptfull. thei likewise haue spide,
As how she seketh, but people to snare:
To snarle and intangle, with sorowe and care,
And they thus hampred, from them to flie,
Suffryng those captiues, in fetters to lie.


Yet she forsakes not,To augment the miseie of man, fortune doeth some tyme seeme frendly, rid|dyng him out of one small trouble, to bryng hym in to fowre greater, and then bids hym adewe. still men in their neede,
But sometyme faureth, their hardlesse distresse,
As who that listeth, in stories to reede,
Shall see how frendly, she seekes their release,
Though for no true loue, yet more to encrease,
The plague of vengeaunce, that after ensewe,
(A stipende iustly, to traitours b'yng dewe)


These thinges to confirme, I Rorie am he,
Who sometyme mounted,Rorie Oge is a sufficient witnesse, to tell of Dame Fortunes variablenes. a lofte in the Skie,
And fortune castyng, a fauour to me:
Prouoked me higher, and higher to flie,
Thus like an Eagle, I neastled on hie,
Full little thinkyng, againe to descende:
Or that my glorie, would euer haue ende.


In all my actions,Marke how fortune did fauer Rorie Oge, accor|dyng to his owne setyng, who beyng to muche besot|ted therwith, fell to vtter confusion and shame at last. moste happie successe,
Dame Fortune, euer alotted to me,
For what I mynded, in harte to suppresse:
The same accomplisht, she caused to bee,
Thus will and fortune, did euer agree,
Whiche thing espied, puft vp with aspiraunce:
I stoode with Sir Henrie, alas at defiaunce.


Muche like a champion, addicted to warre,
 Oge gathereth eight score men to main|taine his knauerie.Tyme seruyng fitly, to anger my foes,
I sommnde a nomber, of neighbours from farre:
Twice eightie persones, the beste I could chose,
For manhood, and sleightes, in whom to repose,
I might in saftie, my life and my lande:
No dasterdes nor shrincklinges, but those y^t would stande.


Rorie Oge troubleth both Toune and Country with his Karne, and setteth more then a hun|dred houses on fire in one night.With these I marched, from place vnto place,
With these I troubled bothe Uillage and Toune,
With these in one night, I fired the Nace:
With these my Recisters, I spoylde of renoune,
With these I made many a Castell come doune,
With these I yeelded, augmentyng my fame:
The people to sworde, and houses to flame.


With these I wasted, the Countie of Lease,
The places likewise, that bordred it nye,
Rorie Oge maketh the Farmers of Leasse to giue ouer their plo|wing, by rea|sone of his daily robbing and burning.I made from tillage, the Farmors to cease:
I made them gladly, awaie for to flye,
Inuityng them nightly, with a freshe supplye,
Giuyng my woodkarne, their states to maintaine
The fruite that growed, of other mens paine.


But God detestyng, this horrible life,
The iust Iu+stice of God permitteth not Rorie Oge to rage still on in his furie, but ca|lyng hym to accompt yeil|deth hym his duetie.Might not of Iustice, permit me furder,
To rage in suche furie, delightyng in strife:
Contemnyng vertue, addicted to murder,
His Iustice, and Iudgment, meetyng together,
For my demenure, since wilfull I swarued:
Awarded me death, long sithence desarued.



And here I lye groulyng, poore wretch on y^e grou~d
Spoylde of the Iewell,Rorie Oge hed is sert vp+pon the top of the Casel of Dublin, for a specta|kle to all the whole lande. I cheefly loued,
Thus God of Iustice, doeth traitours confounde:
When from their sinnes, thaile not be remoued,
With shame and confusion, I now am reproued,
My hed from the bodie, parted in twaine:
Is set on the Castell, a signe to remaine.


All men that heare this, take warnyng by me,Rorie Oge maketh here his conclusio~ and giueth wholsome counsel more better then he euer could take, how they attempt any thyng that might be preiudiciall to the prince, for feare of like distruc|tion.
Least that ye fall, in like predicament,
The arte of treason, see likewise ye flee:
Wisely forecastyng, whereto ye consent,
Against the Croune royall, doe nothyng attempt,
For if against it, ye falyng at odde:
Doe feele as I felt, the strength of the rodde.

FINIS.




