




DARY'S
Miscellanies Examined;
And some of his
Fundamental Errors
DETECTED.
BY
Authority of Ancient and Modern
MATHEMATICIANS.
The Ancient: Euclid, Diophantus, Apol|lonius
and Archimedes.
The Modern: Xylander, Bachetus, Stevin,
Albert Girard, Torricellius and
Regeomontanus.
To which is added,
A Task for Mr. Dary of his
own setting.
By Robert Anderson.
London, Printed for Philip Brooksby, next to the
Golden Ball, near the Hospital gate, in
West-Smithfield. 1670.






DARY'S Miscellanies
EXAMINED.
And some of his
Fundamental Errours
DETECTED.
WHilst those miscellanies were printing, I met
with two of Master Darys friends together, at
their office in Holborn and they related to me that
Master Dary had a Book in the press, in the Preface
whereof he had a quarrel with me, and that he was
resolved to vex me; my answer was, that if he
gave me bad language I would lay it under my feet;
but if he gave bad mathematicks I would return it
to him again; therefore, all those calumnies, that
bad and scurrilous language, (for such are their on|ly
demonstrations) either by him or by any of his
crew in that preface given, or may be hereafter given
in any of their writings, I shall take no further no|tice
of, but shall ever lay them as dirt under foot;
but I shall prosecute a close conviction of their er|ronious
principles in Geometry. That preface those

authors divides into two parts, the first against
Stereometrical Propositions, the second in defence of
the ART of practical gaging; and as they have little
to say against the first, they have as little to say in
defence of the latter, but in both I shall easily sub|vert
their crippled arguments. To the first,
In the first page of the preface, Master Dary hath
it thus; in the tail of which Book there is a whole broad
side. Here he is outragious because he was so per|fectly
confuted in the tail of the guide to the young
gager: truly, as it was the confutation of the ART
of practical gaging; it deserved no better preferment,
than to be put in the tail of the young gagers guide:
however, if I find Master Dary's understanding im|proved
by my instructions there given, in these
his Miscellanies; I shall to encourage him,
commend him in the tail of this.
In the second page of the Preface, he hath these
words, the word frustum pyramide I cannot under|stand,
But if he had said frustum of a pyramid, c.
this complaint may consist of three parts, first,
frustum pyramide; second, I cannot understand;
third, frustum of a pyramide; if we compare the
first with the last, we shall find them both of one
signification, for frustum signifies a broken piece,
therefore it is as well sense to say a broken pyramid,
as to say a piece of a pyramid; one familiar example
for many, a broken knife, as to say a piece of a
knife. Such expressions are brief and well under|stood,
both signifying the same thing, and he him|self
using the same expressions in the 31 and 32. 89
pag, of the Art of practical gaging: thus, is the content
of the frustum pyramid, and in 29 page of that Book of
Art, you have it thus, Master Michael Dary, an inge|nious

Artist and practised gager: when it is the fru|stum
of a Cylindriod: here we find him a giving him|self
a good character; and then telling us of a fru|stum
of a Cylindriod, and in page 32 of that Book
of Art, thus, to cut this Cylindriod, here we may ob|serve
this ingenious artist, how in one page he calls
it a frustum of a Cylindriod, and immediately he
calls the same solid a Cylindriod, so he makes no
difference betwixt the part and the whole. Further,
as for those mighty words of art, to wit, Cylindro|id,
prismoid and peripetasma; I shall say only this,
Oft have I known some men of no great parts,
Stuff up their mouths with mighty words of arts.
For his 2. complaint, that is, I cannot understand;
it troubles me to hear it, yet I see his understanding
mend a little, as we shall observe hereafter. In the
same page, he is angry because that irregular fru|stum
is cut into so many parts, if that do not please
his worship he may take one of the other ways
which cuts that solid into fewer parts; for there
are four ways every one lesse work than other. But
the gunner and his crew must be a shooting though
but with pot-guns.
In the third page, our gunner gives the seventh
prop. of the 5 of Diophantus a Broad-side; thus, the
stress of his argument is weak and infirm. Though we
should grant Z equal to , it is yet to demonstrate that Z
is 3 and A 5. A by supposition was an unit, then re|duce
them to one denomination, and that denomi|nation
being rejected, Z will be equal to 3, and A
equal to 5 this he looks upon as an hard demon|stration,
which I am not bound to tell him how
to do, saith he. Further, he dwindles to his Reader,
hoping for glory and would know, Whether this pro|position

hath any relation at all to gaging. I answer
yes, and argue thus, numbers have relation to ga|ging,
this Proposition is of Numbers; there|fore
this Proposition hath relation to Gaging.
Again, triangles have relation to gaging, this pro|position
is of triangles; therefore, this proposition
hath relation to gaging. This prop. which he
quarrels with, is the 7. of 5. of Diophantus, as is ci|ted
in the 106 page of Stereo. Prop. and seeing he
hath so much immodesty as to say his arguments are
weak and infirm, I shall set down the text as Bache|tus
hath it. Esto primus 1 N. secundus unitatum quot|libet,
puta 1.  est productus eorum multiplicatione
1 N. summa vero quadratorum est 1 Q  1. adde
1 N. fit 1 Q  1 N  1 aequalis quadrato. Esto
latus ejus 1 N  2. fit quadratus 1 Q  4  4 N.
aequalis 1 Q  1 N  1.  fit 1 N.  ad positiones,
Erit primus , secundus 5/5:  abjecto denominatore, erit
primus 3. secundus 5.  postulatis respondent. So
then I have these witnesses on my side, 1. Diophantus
the author of the proposition, 2. Xylander. 3. Ba|chetus.
4. Stevin. 5. Albert Girard. Those four
commentators upon Diophantus every one of them
setting it as above. 6. Truth it self, and it will pre|vail.
So then, if Mr. Dary cannot bring better au|thority
then these on his side for the stress of his
argument; I shall conclude, that pride and igno|rance
is baffled; and where he saith I fling dirt in
the face of Van Schooten, I may very well say he
flingeth dirt in the face of these 5 authors, yea and
in the face of truth it self. Further, had this 7. and 8.
prop. of the 5 of Diop been observed by the propo|ser
and resolver of that question, it is very likely it
would not have been proposed by the one, nor re|solved

by the other; however, what I said concer|ning
Van-Schooten and des Cartes is true and just,
therefore no dirt. In the fourth page, our gun|ner
hath more fire-works, to wit, his note for progres|sions
is invalid and of no force. For saith he, there is
no need of unity for the first terme of this progression.
My answer is, that note for progression is of force
and truth, and unity of use; thus, the question it
self requires whole numbers; the seventh of the
fifth of Dioph. finds whole numbers; therefore grea|than
an unit; therefore well limited.
The second part, in defence of the Art of Practi|call
gaging, and it begins in the fifth page, and
there he telleth his Reader how he hath been com|mended
by divers artists in this City. Here he ap|peals
to men as ignorant, as himself is vain glori|ous.
In the 6 pag. he flingeth dirt in the face of the
printer, thus, in which I see there are many press-faults;
that is false, they are the segment makers faults, for
the segments are the complement of one to the o|ther
to 100000 c. therefore no printers faults.
In the sixth and seventh pages, he sheweth how to
calculate a table of segments, and here his under|standing
mends a little, for he works pretty well
since the last time I taught him; so then, as one
mends in his Rules, so I hope the other will mend in
his calculation, (with that instruction I formerly
gave him) so we may expect a better table of seg|ments
some time or other. In the 8. page he again
dwindles and would fain insinuate into the affection
of his Reader; and make him believe that I did not
know that there was a third c. differences in the
table of segments, to speak the truth, that table of
segments was calculated so falsly that the first diffe|rences

did manifestly shew it; further, If Mr. Dary
had known that way, or any other way better to
examine Tables by, before he published those se|gments;
more shame to him to publish such false ta|bles,
without examination. In the 9 and 10. pa.
the Gunner has fire and gun-powder, viz. know ye
not that the Table for wine, ale and beer, are capable
but only of the first and second differences. If so, more
shame to the Calculator that they have more diff.
and they so much confusedly put. As for that Book
entituled A guide to the young gager, I knew not
the man nor heard of the Book untill a great part
of it was printed, neither did I see one line of that
part of it, till it was publickly exposed to sale.
Thus have I passed through this fiery conflict, and
have not heard the bounce of one gun, nor receiv|ed
any harme, which makes me conclude our
gunner and his crew are as bad marks men, as they
are segment makers, for he promied at the begin|ning
of his preface to charge his guns and pepper
me. Thus have I considered him as a Gunner with
his Crew; now will I consider him as a Geometer,
with his famous Companions.
These famous men, whose true descent doth run
From aged Neptune, and the glorious Sun.



AN
EXAMINATION
OF
Dary's Miscellanies.
IN the first page of the Preface, he saith, Most
whereof have lain by me many years: If so, I
hope very true.
1 In the second page of the Preface, saith he,
For although the sides thereof be continued, they would
never be included or terminated in one point, as the
Pyramide is; that is, the sides of a Pyramide are
included in one point, which I deny, thus; a
point hath no part, by 1 def. 1 Euclid. A Superfices
(for such are the sides of a Pyramide) have length
and breadth 5 def. 1 Euclid. That which hath no
part, to include that which hath length and breadth,
is absurd; that's a lumping point for an able Any|list.
2 In the fourteenth page, saith he, The 3 Angles
of any Spherical Triangle being given, there are like|wise
three sides of another Spherical Triangle given,
whose Angles are equal to the sides of the former Tri|angle.
Here the Gentlemen forgot to complement,
and I presume in the next they will forget all good
manners. Further, the sum of the sides of any sphe|rical

triangle, are less then two semi-circles, Reg.
39 of 3. The sum of the three angles of any sphe|rical
triangle, are greater then two right angles,
but less then six, Reg. 49 of 3. therefore the Rule
is false, except the sum of the three sides be grea|ter
then two right angles; but the Rule is set
down general, therefore a general error.
3 In page 21. we have it thus; If a sphere be by a
plain touch'd, and the eye be placed at the center of the
sphere, then a right line infinitely extended from the
eye to any assigned point in the spherical surface, shall
project the assigned point upon the plain. Here the
Radius of the Sphere is taken to be infinite, for,
saith he, then a right line infinitely extended from
the eye to any assigned point in the spherical sur|face;
but the plain is without the sphere, there|fore
beyond infiniteness it self, which is absurd:
however this proves them to be infinite Projectors.
4 In page 29. at the 18th it is thus; If a sphere
be inclosed in a cylinder, and that cylinder be cut with
plains parallel to its base, then the intercepted rings
of the cylinder are equal to the intercepted surfaces of
the respective segments of the sphere; that is false:
For Hemisphaerii superficies aequalis est superficiei cur|vae
cylindri eadem ipsi basim,  eadem altitudinem
habentis, saith Torricellius at the 18. Prop. de sphae|ra,
 solidis sphaeralibus lib. prim. and as the
whole, so the parts, by the 19. Prop. of the same.
Here we have a combat betwixt Torricellius and
our Geometers: First, they say the intercepted
rings of the cylinder are equal to the intercepted
surfaces of the respective segments of the sphere.
Torricellius proves, that the intercepted superfices
of the cylinder, are equal to the intercepted super|fices

of the respective segments of the sphere.
2. These Geometers say, if a sphere be inclosed in
a cylinder, here we may make the Diameters of
the base of the cylinder of any magnitude, grea|ter
then the diameter of the sphere, and yet the
sphere be inclosed Torricellius proves, that the cy|linder
and hemisphere must have the same base.
3. These Geometers regard it not, whether the
sphere and cylinder are upright or inclining. Tor|ricellius
by construction makes them upright. Thus
do these Geometers make solid superfices, for a
ring is solid.
5 In page 33. they set down a rule for the
sphere, and conclude it will hold in the spheroid;
this rule will also hold if it were the Frustum of a
Spheroid, putting dd equal to the fact of the right
angled conjugates in the base. That is false, by 21 of
1 of Apollonius, and 31 and 33 of Archimedes of
conoid and spheroid; for the diameter of the base
one way, or the right angled conjugates of the base
the other, with the height of either, will not limit
a spheroid, as the diameter of the base and the
height doth a sphere. This very rule Crowns all
their endeavours; for before they had made a
point bigger then any superfice, a line longer then
infiniteness, a solid superfice, but now they are
come to an unlimited solid.
6 In page 39. they write thus; But if such a so|lid
have not its Zons made by circles or ellipses, but
by four flat sides at right angles to the foresaid conju|gates,
then it is a prismoid; nevertheless, the rules
before prescribed, hold to all intents and purposes:
that is false to all intents and purposes at the first
appearance; for if two right lines be at right an|gles,

and they be at right angles with four plains,
those plains wil be the 4 sides of a Parallelepipedon,
by the 2, 3, and 30 def. of 11 Euclid. a Parallele|pipedon
being calculated gradually, can have but a
first difference, and not a second and third: But
this is like the rest of these Famous Geometers
works. Our Master Geometer telleth his Reader
thus, Most whereof have lain by me many years.
And in the Title Page he saith, they are brief
Collections from divers Authors: If so, why so
many Fundamental Errors? Further, seeing M. Da|ry,
and his Companions will assert any thing, and
demonstrate nothing, except they are required
in print; therefore I desire them to demonstrate
these six following assertions of their own, and
and shall call it

A Task for Mr. Dary of his
own setting.
To wit:
1 The sides of a Pyramide being 32000. I de|sire
Mr. Dary to give one point to include that su|perfice,
as he asserts in page 2.
2 The three sides of a Spherical Triangle, be|ing
6, 8, and 10 degrees, their sum 24 degrees, I
desire Mr. Dary to give a Spherical Triangle, whose
sum of the three angles are 24 degrees, as he as|serts
in page 14.
3 In the Gnomonick Projection, the Radius of
the Sphere being infinite, and the arch from the
touch point to the assigned point be 30 degrees, I
desire Mr. Dary to extend a line from the center
of that sphere, by the assigned point, to

the touching plain, that is further then infiniteness,
as he asserts in page 21.
4 If a Cylinder and Hemisphere be of one
height, but the diameter of the base of the Cy|linder
be greater then, or equal to the diameter of
that Sphere, and they concentrick, this Hemis|phere
is inclosed in that Cylinder; let that Hemis|phere
and Cylinder be cut with Plains parallel to
their bases I desire Mr. Dary to prove, that those
intercepted rings of the Cylinder (that is solid
rings) are equal to the intercepted surfaces of the
respective segments of the Sphere, as he asserts
in page 29
5 In a Spheroid, let 6 be the perpendicular
height of the Frustum, 8 the diameter of the base,
when cut by a Plain at right angles with the Axis;
let 10 and 12 be the right angled conjugates in the
base (as he calls them) when the cutting Plain is
parallel to the axis, the altitude of the Frustum 4.
I desire Mr. Dary to give one example in each, if
but one; if more then one, to give them all; that
is, to prove it a limited Proposition, as he asserts
in page 33.
6 If two right lines, to wit, one 6, the other 8,
be at right angles, and these two lines be at right
angles with four Plains, the height of these plains
may be 12. those will be the limits of a solid,
which Euclid names a Parallelepipedon, at the
30 def. of 11. I desire Mr. Dary to prove such a
solid to be a Prismoid, and to have second and
third differences, as he asserts in page 39.



Now to commend him.
THose six Assertions of Mr. Dary's, may well
be termed A Task for him for six daies;
which Assertions being performed according to
the Rules of Geometry, I shall ever conclude
Mr. Dary to be great, yea greater; nay the greatest
Geometer of all mortal men.
But if Mr. Dary, with the help of his Compa|nions,
cannot or will not fairly demonstrate these
their Assertions, but still cavil and quarrel it out.
I may well conclude, his or their Geometry is not,
nor will not be worth taking notice of for the fu|ture;
for that Micellanea Riff-raff having lain by
him many years; and we may be sure, often
thumb'd over with much care and prudence, like an
ingenious Artist, and a practised Gager; being his
whole stock of Mathematical knowledge, is now
made publick, to prove himself what he is, to wit,
a Geometer full of errors, and a Mathematician al|together
without demonstration; therefore I shall
imploy my idle time better then in confuting such
unwise ridiculous Assertions; for this we may be
sure of that whatever Mr. Dary writes, will be
full of Fundamental Errors.
Although I am well assured, that whatever
Mr. Dary writes will be so full of Fundamental Er|rors,
that it will not be worth taking notice of:
yet seeing one deeply swears by his Maker he would
have us never agree, because it will be good sport
for them; and another of Mr. Dary's friends is

desirous to see Paper Battels, therefore I shall the
rather desist: However, if I take pen in hand a|gain,
I shall be as ready to bring them into the
Lift, by examining their works, as they are desirous
that we should make them sport. Further, Mr. Da|ry
hath related to several of my acquaintance,
that those his Miscellanies were published as a
snare for me; and one of his Crew hath told me
to my face, that he could be revenged on me, and
never appear in it himself: I asked him how; He
answered, he could hires a stab to be given for a
very small matter: My answer to these two, and
the rest of them is, I value the snares of one, the
stab of the other, and the envy of the rest, no
more then the dirt of my shoes; my seconds shall
be Euclid, Diophantus, Apollonius and Archimedes,
and my Weapons Truth and Demonstration.
FINIS.





