



THE
DUTIE
AND
DANGER
OF
SWEARING:
Opened in a Sermon preached at YORK
February 3. 1655. the day of Swearing
the Lord Maior.
By Edward Bowles M: A. Preacher of the
Gospell there.
Zach. 5. 4.
And I will bring forth the Curse, saith the Lord of Hosts, and
it shall enter into the House of the Thief, and into the House
of him that sweareth falsly by my Name: and it shall remain
in the midst of his House, and shall consume it, with the
Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof.
Printed and sold in York by Tho: Broad.
1655.




To the Honourable Stephen Watson Lord Maior,
the Aldermen and the Common Counsell of
the ancient Citie of York.
Honoured and beloved,
_IT hath pleased the Lord of the
Harvest in his wise and good
Providence, to allot my Work
and Service (if it be worth the
name of Service) to that Citie
which God hath made not one|ly
your habitation, but also your
charge; I am pleased with my
lot, not onely as it is from the
Lord, but as it is among you: I must acknowledge
(and hereby do) that I have found that affection and
respect from you as becomes a Minister of Christ; and
I have endeavoured to give you a testimony, that I
have not sought my own profit, but the profit of ma|ny,
that they might be saved, (if I may use the words
of so great an Apostle concerning my self) I have
been induced partly by way of acknowledgement and
respect, but especially by the sense of my duty, as a
Minister, to offer to your reading and consideration the
substance of a Sermon lately preached among you,
which I hope (through Divine blessing) may be usefull
to you. You who are awakened cannot but be sensible
how easily, and how quickly the Word spoken slips

from you. It is soon gone from us who study it, and
write it, and speak it; you have lesse advantage to re|tain
it, who hear it but once, unlesse the peculiar Pro|mise
and Blessing made to the Word Preached, do be|friend
you. I am jealous over you (I hope) with a
godly jealousie, least through inadvertency of mind, un|sutablenesse
and unprepardnesse of heart, earthlinesse of
affection, seconded with Satans depths and devices, this
counsell given you concerning Oathes may be forgotten.
I know you have almost daily need to consider of this
subject, being frequently called to actions relating
thereunto, and it is now in your power daily, or at
least frequently, to peruse it: If you walk in the vio|lation
of the Oathes of God that are upon you, it will
not be charged upon me, I have delivered my own
soul, and endeavoured to deliver yours. I have but
two words further to speak unto you at this present;
First, that you would more frequently and diligently
attend the preaching of the Word, The Power of God
unto salvation. It pleaseth God out of his bounty and
good will to you, to afford you besides the publique
Ordinances on the Lords day, a weekly Lecture, which
I apprehend to be very much neglected, and I have of|ten
heard the paucity of hearers laid as a reproch upon
the Citie, by well disposed strangers. I pray consi|der
your selves and those that are sorrowfull for the so|lewn
assembly to whom the reproach of it is a burthen
Zeph. 3. 18. You may plead our unworthinesse whe
preach unto you, but that Plea I doubt will not be ad|mitted
at the great Barr; there is not the meanest o
the Ministers of Christ by whose labours you migh
not profit, if the defect were not in your own hearts

Remember that Divine Institution and Blessing are the
main advantages in hearing the Word, not the Gifts of
the Speakers, or the capacitie of the Hearers. God is
pleased most frequently to concurr with the plainest,
(I had almost said the meanest) gift, in the conversion of
men, that the glory might be of God, and not of men. I
am sure you cannot plead want of leisure, through mul|titude
of trading  worldly imployment, I wish it were
more; and truly I think there is no better way to help
it, then to deal liberally with God in publike Duties.
First, he hath secured you that you shall be no loosers,
by that promise made to the Israel of God, Neither shall
any man desire thy Land (that is, thou shalt sustain no
dammage,Exod 34. 24. the Lord is thy security) when thou goest up to
appear before the Lord thy God. Nay, I think you may
safely applie that passage of the Lord to his people,
Hagg. 2. 18. Consider the day that the foundation of the
Temple was laid, consider it, from this day will I blesse
you. Trie the Lord, or rather trust the Lord. You com|plain
of great decayes, and they are visible; You Sow
much, and bring in little, c. Consider your wayes;Hagg. 1. 6, 7. whe|ther
you be not defective in that which concerns the
House of God. The second is this, that you would stu|die
by all means to preserve peace and unitie among
your selves, by delivering up unto perpetuall oblivion all
inveterate envies and enmities; to that end that Magi|strates
would equally and gently (as to Brethren) admi|nister
justice, (I mean onely such a gentlenesse as to ex|ecute
the Law with a Gospell spirit) that the people
would submit themselves in the fear of God,  not wear
out the spirits of their Rulers by their cumbrance and
strife; but turn some of their complaints into prayers,

to which they are obliged by the sacred Rule1 Tim 2. 1, 2. It is easier
to blame then understand the work and weight of Magi|stracy
and Ministery, especially when they have to deal
with a people that are poor  foolish, and know not the way
the Lord, nor the judgement of their God, Jer. 5. 4. And
lastly, it will tend much to unity, that you be very care|full
what Ministers are planted among you, such as
give some evidence of the Spirit of God dwelling in
them, whose fruits are love and peace; such as are desi|rous
of Reformation, least superstition, vanitie and
strife proceed from them who should be the greatest
promoters of Knowledge Truth and Peace. I will de|tain
you no longer, if I have erred in what I have
written to you, impute it to the largenesse of my affe|ction
to the Citie, which may possibly have intrenched
upon my understanding in what I have said.2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally,
brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one minde, live in peace; and the God of love und peace
shall be with you.
Yorke, March, 15.
1655.
Your affectionate servant
in the Lords work,
Edw: Bowles.






Matth. 5. 33, 34.
Again ye have heard it hath been said by them of old
time, thou shalt not for swear thy self, but shalt
perform unto the Lord thine Oathes;
But I say unto you, swear not at all, c.

_I Have often had it in my thoughts to speak
something concerning Oathes, a subject
which (duely considered) would admi|nister
matter of humiliation and reforma|tion
to us and many more: and having
this opportunity put into my hands, I
shall deliver my self, taking the words of
our Saviour which have been read unto
you for my ground-work, which, whosoever would understand,
must diligently consider the scope of the place, and the persons
he had to deal with, viz. the Jews, leavened with Pharisaicall
glosses, and corrupt traditions.
Our Saviour was now in the exercise of his propheticall Of|fice,
and preaching the Gospell of the Kingdom, and finding the
Sect and opinion of the Pharisees to be most opposite and pre|judiciall
to his intention, he sets himself in this Sermon to pull
down the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, that so
he might bring in the righteousnesse which is of God by faith;
and therefore tells them plainly, that except their righteousnesse
did exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, they should

in no case enter into the Kingdom of God, Verse 20. Now because
the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees was in better
credit among the people then to be blasted with a bare asserti|on,
Christ shewes the vanitie and defectivenesse of it, in that
it fell exceeding short of its pretence, which was, to fulfill the
Law of Moses, which instead of fulfilling they destroyed. For
as it is the common practice of erroneous persons when they
cannot bring their opinions to the Scripture, they will wrest the
Scripture to their opinions, as the Father speaks of some who
did pertrahere Evangelium ad sententiae suae praecipitium; so the Pha|risees
seeing they could not raise their righteousnesse to the
line of the Law, they brought down the Law to the levell of
their own righteousnesse; in particular, they restrained the
Commamdements which in themselves are spirituall and excee|ding
broad (reaching the thoughts and intents of the heart,
all kinds and degrees of evill) to some outward actions, which
in the strength of morall principles they might forbear, whose
right Heirs are the Papists, who, resolved to establish a righte|ousnesse
of works, and possibility of fulfilling the Law, will by
no means grant that concupiscence is sin, least thereby their le|gall
righteousnesse should be tainted.
But to return to the Pharisees with whom Christ had to deal
they restrained the seventh Commandement to the act of Adul|tery,
Christ extends it to the wandrings of the eye and heart:
they limited the sixt Commandment to actuall murther, where|as
Christ extends it to inordinate passion and ill language: so
dealt they in this particular whereof we treat. They confined
the third Commandement to prejurie, whereas Christ extends
it to the prohibition of rash vain swearing by the Creatures.
And so I come to the words, onely I must first endeavour the
determination of one Question, whether Christ in this dis|course
intend an abrogation of the Law, an addition to it, or one|ly
an interpretation of it? Certainly not an abrogation of the
morall Law, which he professes he came not to destroy, but to ful|fill,
Verse 17. Some would have it to be an addition, which
opinion indeed hath the countenance of some of the Fathers;
but the Socinians are most earnest in this conception, upon this
ground, they will not admit of the satisfaction of Christ, o

justification by his death; and for the wrong they do to his
Priestly Office, they pretend to make amends in his Propheti|call,
and say that he came to improve and raise the Precepts of
the old Testament, and give a more exact Law then was given
by Moses, in the observation whereof our Gospell righteous|ness
should consist. But we beleeve that our Lord Jesus only in|tended
a restauration of the Law from the corrupt glosses and
traditions of the Elders, with whom he deals in this discourse,
not with Moses, who was faithfull in the House of God: for he
professes that he came not to destroy the Law, which upon the
matter he had done, if he had shewed it to be a short or crooked
rule, but to fulfill it, or (as the word will bear) to fill it up,. by
true and full interpretations. Christ fulfilled the Law both
practically in obeying it, and doctrinally in making up those gaps
which the Pharisaicall glosses and traditions had made in it.
You have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, ,
or as some would have it, to them of old time: It may be
here enquired what times and persons Christ hath reference to in
this passage; some may think that he hath respect unto Moses
and the people of Israel to whom he spake things to this purpose:
Lev. 19: 12, Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, c. But I be|leeve
that an antiquity of a much later date is meant by this ex|pression,
even of those Elders mentioned, Mat. 15. 2. whose
traditions the Pharsees complained were broken by Christs Dis|ciples;
for the word , signifies sometimes that which is
not long past, as Act. 15. 7. And here take notice that after the
Law and the Prophets there rose up a generation of men who
were not content with the written word, but added the supple|ment
of traditions, which though in the esteem of the Pharisees,Act. 22. 3.
were ancient, yet very far short of true antiquity which was Mo|ses
and the Prophets; the counterpart of this dealing we find
in the Church of Rome; who besides the verbum ,
will have a verbum , a traditionall word which they make
equall to the Scripture in authority and esteem; thus the Councill
of Trent, Traditiones ipsas tum ad fidem tum ad mores pertinentes pari
pietatis affectu ac Scripturas suscipit  veneratur Ecclesia Romana.
And they will pretend much of antiquity for their practises, but
it is a modern antiquity, (if I may so speak) the true antiquity

of Christ and his Apostles they have no minde to deal with, not
yet that of the first three hundred years after Christ, unlesse it be
some peeces which they may justly call theirs, because they
have either forged or corrupted them: although we must ac|knowledge,
that some of their corruptions began early in the
Church, of which we have an intimation, 2 Thessalonians 2. 7.
1 Iohn 2. 18.
What is it that was said by them of old time? Thou shalt not
forswear thy self, c. was it not well said? yes doubtlesse it was
the truth, but not all the truth; take the words in themselves
and it was well said, but take them with respect to the third
Commandement, which thereby they intended to interpret, it
was a misse; for they contain not the sum and substance of that
Commandement, which reaches not onely to forswearing, but
to vain swearing, swearing by the Creatures, and other abuses
of the name of God, then frequent among the Jews, who (pro|vided
they did not swear by the name of God) thought them|selves
excusable if they swore frequently in ordinary communi|cation,
and that by the Creatures; and that some of their Oathes
by the Creatures were not obliging, as we finde Matth. 23. 16.
where the Gold and the Gift were by their covetousnesse ad|vanced
to be more sacred then the Temple or Altar.
But I say unto you, Swear not at all. These words seem to be a
direct prohibition of all Oathes, and hence the Anabaptists have
concluded the unlawfulnesse of swearing in any case, and it hath
deceived some of the Ancients: Hierome himself saith upon this
place, that Evangelica veritas non recipit juramentum: But
I hope we shall without much difficultie evince, that it
is not the intention of the Holy Ghost to forbid swearing in
all cases by this expression, but that particula omnino non
ad substantiam sed ad formam referenda, as Rivet well ob|serves:
For we must know this in generall, that uni|versall
terms in Scripture are sometimes to be taken with
restriction,1 Cor. 9: 22. as in that passage of Paul, I became all things to
all men, that is, all lawfull things; and so I conceive must that
place Rom. . 18. be interpreted, By the righteousnesse of one (that
is, Christ) the free gift came upon all men to justification of life; that
is, upon all that have relation to the second Adam, as man|kinde

had to the first, viz. to be of his Seed. So that this expres|sion
[swear not at all] may be limited, notwithstanding its seem|ing
universalitie, and must be expounded by the temper of those
times in which it was spoken, and those persons to whom it
was spoken; for where the Scripture speaks ad hominem, as it
doth much in this place, their disposition and opinion must be
considered, which was to swear ordinarily in their communica|on,
when bare affirmations or negations would have sufficed:
and because they had not onely a religious but a superstitious
apprehension of the name of God, and would not use it when
they might, they swore by the Creatures, and thought they
were not much bound by such Oathes; so that all our Saviour
intends, is this, Swear not as you are wont to do, or, as you
think you may do; swear not at all by the Creatures: for the
generall word [not at all] must be interpreted by the particu|lars
enumerated, which if they had been omitted, or, if the
name of God had been put among them, it must have been
construed as a generall prohibition, which now it cannot be.
And whereas this not mentioning of the name of God may
seem to be supplied in that of Iam. 5. 12. where to the enumera|tion
of some particulars this generall clause is added, [Neither
by any other oath] it must be restrained to oaths of that kinde; for
it were strange that the name of God should be intended and
not mentioned in either of these Scriptures, which ought
especially to be vindicated from profanation. If this Question
need any further clearing, I shall mention another place, where
under the single expression of swearing, not all swearing, but fals,
vain, and rash swearing is discountenanced, viz. Eccles. 9. 2. He
that sweareth, and he that feareth an Oath are opposed; where he
that sweareth, signifies, a prophane swearer, and he that feareth
an Oath; one that reverenceth, not one that refuseth it in all
cases, So that you see it is agreeable to the scope and circum|stances
of this place, as also to other Scriptures, that this uni|versall
clause [Swear not at all] be interpreted with restriction
to the vain, unnecessary customary abuse of swearing among
the Jews.
The words thus explaned, offer to our observation these two
Propositions;

Propos. I. It is not utterly unlawfull to swear.
II. It is utterly abominable to forswear.
The later of these Propositions was never under question,
the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees which reached
not heaven, yet reacht thus far, Thou shalt not forswear thy self.
The former hath endured some dispute, and therefore I shall
endeavour to confirm it by some arguments.
1. The first taken from the consideration of the third Com|mandement,
to which swearing is generally reduced, and in|deed
seems to be the main intent of it; it is there said, Thou
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: thou shalt not
use it nee frustra, nee falso, for the word [vain] in Scripture signi|fies
both. But it is not said, Thou shalt not use it, or lift it up,
(as the word signifies) in any case; but the forbidding of the
abuse doth implie, or rather enjoyn a lawfull use of the name
of God in swearing, which is the affirmative part of the Precept.
And if the Morall Law (of which this is a speciall part) be of
generall and perpetuall obligation to all men in all ages, (a
without doubt it is) we yet remain not onely under the liberty
but in just cases under the duty of swearing.
2. It is a part of Divine worship, not a Ceremoniall or mu|table
part, there is no shadow of a shadow or Type in it, as one
well observes, and therefore not out of date in the new Testa|ment.
It is so considerable a part of worship, that all worship
is sometimes expressed by it,Psal. 63. 12. as at other times by calling upon
the name of God.Ierem. 10. 25. And the Apostle to the Hebrews, though
his work be to shew the diasnulling of all carnall and tempo|rary
ordinances among the Jews, is so farr from putting swea|ing
among them, that he seems to establish it as a standing Or|dinance
in that place, Heb. 6. 16. where it is said, That an Oa
for confirmacion is (not was) the end of all strife. And indeed it i
an action which (duely and reverently managed) doth give a
great deal of honour to God, which is the proper end of wor|ship;
it gives him the honour of his Soveraigntie, Omniscience
Justice and Truth; it gives him the last appeal in all differen|rences,
which is a great Trust, and consequently a great ho|nour;
and, Inquisitio post juramentum Deo irrogat injuriam, It re|flects
upon God himself, when men will not rest in an Oath
which was appointed for the end of strife.

3. The ground and occasion of Oathes yet remains, and the
Law must remain till the foundation of it be removed. An Oath
was appointed in remedium defectus, and these defects which
swearing was appointed as a remedy for, yet continue such as
the deceit, falshood, incredulity of men, the ground of assertory
Oathes; the instability and changeablenesse of men, the ground
of promissary Oathes. There are controversies yet to be decided,
and will be, and so an usefulnesse of Oathes for the ending of
them. Humane Societies cannot subsist without evidences of
truth, and mutuall belief among men, which sometimes must
be established by an Oath; and therefore Iulian the Apostate
taking it for grant, that the Christian Religion did forbid all
Oathes, insulted upon it as false and ridiculous, because it did
Tollere praecipuum humanae societatis vinculum.
Having spoken to the vindication of Oathes, it is not unne|cessary
to adde something concerning the regulation of them,
 because I must not exceed the limits of a Sermon, I shall onely
open that known place Ier. 4. 2. Thou shalt swear the Lord liveth, in
truth, in righteousnesse, and in judgement: where we have the form
and qualifications of a lawfull Oath; the form, The Lord liveth.
In every Oath there ought to be an interposing of the Name of
God; Deut. 6. 13. Thou shalt swear by his Name. To swear is to
confesse a Deitie, as appears by comparing those two places, Isa.
45. 23. To me shall every knee bow, and every tongue swear; with
Phil. 2. 11. That every tongue should confesse that Iesus Christ is Lord.
And because we finde this expression frequent in Scripture, The
Lord liveth, it deserves a little opening; to which purpose we
may take notice of that passage in Hebrews, 6. 16. Men verily
swear by the greater. And when the Lord sweareth,Deut. 32. 40. he doth it by
that in himself which is the greatest,Psal. 89. 35. his Life, and his Holinesse,
which are more then single Attributes: His Life is his funda|mentall
excellency, and his holinesse is more then an Attribute,
for it is that complexion which runs thorow all his Attributes,
and makes them beautifull. And this is the usuall forme in
Scripture which Men and Angels have made use of. Revel. 10. 6.
because of the peculiar accommodation of the life of God un|to
an Oath, for it imports that he sees and knows our appeal,
that he abides ready to confirm the truth, or avenge the false-hood

of him that swears. And I see not how swearing by any
Creature can be exempted from Idoltary, if swearing be (as it
hath been proved) a part of Worship. God complains that
the Children of Israel swore by them that were no gods, Ierem.
5. 7. and to swear by Creatures, turns them into Idols, if they
were not so before: to worship an Image and swear by a Crea|ture,
may be ranked together. And though some would ex|cuse
that expression of Ioseph, [By the life of Pharaoh] and tell us
that the primitive Christians did sometimes swear per salutem
Imperatoris, yet the former language seems fitter for Aegypt then
for Canaan, and the later savours more of Courtship then Chri|stianity.
There is indeed a passage of our Saviour, Matth. 23.
21, 22. where he seems to make it all one to swear by some
Creatures, as to swear by God himself; for he saith, that he that
sweareth by the Temple, sweareth by him that dwelleth therein; and he
that sweareth by Heaven the Throne of God, sweareth by him that sitteth
thereon: but the scope of our Saviour must be attended, who
reproves the vain conceit of the Pharisees, who thought God
was not concerned in those Oaths where his Name was not ex|presly
mentioned; and tels them, that because those Oaths were
reducible unto God, who accounted himself interessed in eve|ry
Oath, they could not be excused from perjury in the breach
of them. Pareus expresses it briefly and well, that those Oaths
were formaliter vitiosa, sed finaliter obligatoria: So that our Sa|viour
doth not countenance those forms of swearing, but dis|countenance
their great vanitie and folly in the construction of
them; for an Oath taken by that which is no god, if he that
swears, puts it in the room of God, it will be found to oblige.
Thus much for the Form of an Oath, from which howsoever it
hath pleased men to vary, yet it is good to have recourse to the
first and purest use of Oathes, which was, to mention the Name
of the Lord with lifting up the hand to Heaven; so Abraham (as
fit for our pattern as any man else) Genes. 14. 22. I have lift up
my hand to the Lord, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth, that I will
not, c.
Thus much concerning the Form, the Qualifications follow,
In truth, in righteousnesse, and in judgement. Hierome gives this brief
and clear interpretation of these words, There must be veritas

in re, justitia in causa, juditium in modo jucandi. First, he that
swears must have a principall eye to Truth, for the end of an
essertory oath is to evidence truth, and of a promissory oath to engage
truth: veritas entis must be looked to in the former, veritas mentis
in the latter, and no room is left for equivocation, which cros|ses
the very end of an Oath. It is certainly a most horrid im|piety
to call God to witness an untruth, who delights to be stiled
The God of truth; it is an affront we should be ashamed to offer
a Person of Honour, to make him a partner in our iniquitie. In
brief, he that swears a falshood, doth insinuate, that God doth
either not know the truth, or not regard it; but his eyes are on
the truth, Ierem. 5 2, 3. Let those that swear falsly well consi|der
it, lest a curse enter into their houses, as the Lord threat|neth,
Zech. 5. 3, 4.
2. He that sweareth must do it in righteousnesse, in a law|full
and just matter; if the oath be promissory, the thing sworn
must be lawfull and good; not such an oath as David swore
against Nabal and his house, 1 Sam. 25. 22. or Herod to Herodias,
Matth. 14. 7. If the oath be assertory, let it be with righteous and
just intentions, to the furtherance of justice and charitie, and
upon no other account.
3. In judgement, that is, wisely discerning the occasion and
ordering the circumstances of his oath; for instance, he that
swears in judgement will not swear in a triviall or sleight busi|nesse;
the Name of the Lord is great, wonderfull, and holy,
and not to be made use of but in solemn and serious things. An
honest man will not swear in a false matter, nor a wise man in
a frivolous. Oathes and Lots are of like nature in this particu|lar,
both seriously to be used, and in cases of necessitie. Temere
jurat qui aliter potest proximo consulere, is a sober speech, and to be
regarded; If by any other means we can provide for our neigh|bours
good and safetie, it is rashnesse to swear on his behalf. To
swear in judgement, is to do it with deliberation, and actuall
consideration of the importance of an oath; the Majesty, Truth,
and Justice of him by whom, or unto whom we swear.
Having thus confirmed and illustrated the Proposition, a
word of application will be needfull.
First, by way of consutation to those who utterly deny the

lawfulnesse of oathes in the times of the Gospell, and that under
the countenance of this Scripture which I am insisting on, toge|ther
with that of the Apostle Iames,Iam. 5. 12. already mentioned, which I
hope are sufficiently vindicated from any such meaning, in the
judgement of the considerate Reader: If men will run away
with the sound of words, instead of the sence of them, and sin|gle
out an expression of Scripture, and urge it against the evi|dence
of severall plain places, speaking the contrary, it argues
an Hereticall disposition, more addicted to opinion than to
truth. Calvin takes notice of such a temper, in his Commenta|ry
upon this place, his words are these, Vna cum rixandi libi|dine
crassam inscitiam produnt Anabaptistae dum, vocem unam morose
urgendo, totum sermonis tenorem clausis oculis praetereunt: The Ana|baptists
by occasion of this Scripture discover (together with
their perversnesse) grosse ignorance, while they frowardly urge
one word, neglecting the whole frame of the discourse. It is said
our Anabaptists (if they will admit of that name, which they
must rather than we to gratifie them with the name of the bap|tized
Churches, deny our own Baptisme) allow of oathes: It
is well if it proceed from a soundnesse, and not from a latitude
of Principles: But by denying the use of them God loses ho|nour,
and men come short (many times) of truth and justice.
It is true, if men were as they ought, yea and nay might suffice
instead of Oathes. Omnis fidelis sermo pro juramento est, saith Hie|rome;
but we must take men as they are, with their defects of
faith, truth, and knowledge, and the remedy of those defects,
which is an Oath, must still continue.
2. But because where there is one too scrupulous, there are ma|ny
too profuse in the matter of oathes, a severe reprehension be|longs
to those who observe no rule in swearing; such are they
who sweare by the Creatures, light, bread, or any thing that
comes next hand, whereby a man first abuses his own reason;
for what ridiculous folly is it to call inanimate Creatures to at|test
any thing? what madnesse to curse ourselves by our bles|sings?
Secondly, he abuses the Name of God, which ought to
be interposed in an oath, by substituting any other thing in his
room, which there is nothing in Heaven or Earth fit to supplie.

And thirdly, he abuses the Creature it self, by imploying it to
an end dishonourable to its Creator, an use to which it never
was appointed; and this may well be part of that burthen un|der
which the Creature groaneth and travelleth in pain, as the
Apostle speaks Rom. 1. 22. and of that vanitie of sin and trou|ble
which it is subjected to. To swear by Creatures below our
selves, is to under-value our selves: For men verily swear by the
greater, Hebr. 6. 16. To swear by Creatures above our selves, (as
glorified Saints and Angels) is to overvalue them, for what or
who are they that they should be to us in the room of God?
They also who regard not truth, judgement, and righteousnesse
in their oathes, what reproof is sharp enough for them? To
swear falsly by the Name of the God of truth, how great a pro|vocation
is it? Those that swear falsly, that is, either that
which they know to be false, or that which they know not to be
truly, are highly guilty of offence against the God of truth,
whose eyes are upon the truth, Ierem. 5. 3. and also against hu|mane
society, which is knit together by the bands of truth and
justice. The Aegyptians had so reverent an esteem of their Idols,
which were but vanity, and a lie, that if any were found to swear
falsly by them, they were adjudged worthy of death; and shall
we make light of abusing the name of the living and true God?
There is no person of honour and honesty but would look upon
it with highest indignation to be called to attest an untruth;
what shall we then think of the God of truth, will he not be ve|ry
jealous for his honour, in such a case? It is sad to see and
consider how often men are produced to swear contradicti|ons,
where one must needs be guilty of false-hood in swearing,
unless, both parts of a contradiction can be found true, which
is impossible. And that which adds to the mischiefe, is, that
unrighteousness is bound up with untruth in the most false
Oathes, and so both Tables are broken at once. Sometimes
men swear falsly, out of malice, and revenge, but it is a strange
revenge, to destroy a mans reputation, to wound his consci|ence,
to hazard his salvation, that he may require another. Oh
what folly and madness is in the hearts of the sons of men while they live,
and after they go to the dead, as the wise man complaines, Eccles.
9. 3. Others swear falsly out of a covetous principle, loving the

wages of unrighteousness, as Balaam did; but what profit is it to
win the world and lose a mans own soul, saith Christ, who knew well
enough what the worth of both was, Matth. 16. 26. such a man
is like to come to Iudas his reckoning, who dearly earned the
reward of iniquity, Act. 1. 18. Others who think it base to forswear
themselves for money, will yet do it out of respect to a Superi|our,
or kindnesse to a friend; but for a man to pawn his soul
in courtesie, is madnesse and not kindnesse, and most desperate
folly for one to lay down his own conscience or comfort as a
Bridge to make passage for another to his worldly advantages.
But I shut up this admonition with that of the Lord by the Pro|phet
Zechariab, 8. 17. Let nme of you imagine evill in your hearts
against his neighbour, and love no false Oath, for these things I hate,
saith the Lord. Odium terminatur ad non esse. Destruction is the
fruit of hatred.
And lastly, the number of them that swear but not in judge|ment,
is exceeding great; alas, how few are there that under|stand
an Oath, and fewer that consider it! Those that swear
in common conversation, certainly swear not in judgement,
they do it so frequently, so sleightly, that their understanding
cannot exercise any deliberate act about it; they take so little
notice of it that they will hardly be brought to acknowledge
they have sworn; if they confesse it they will tell you it was
before they were aware, and so are found witnesses against
themselves, that they swear not in judgement: but if every idle
word is to be accounted for, as our Saviour tels us Matth. 12. 36.
what shall we think of idle oathes, which signifie nothing but a
profane and vain spirit, will not they inflame the reckoning ex|ceedingly?
The sons of men (especially great and noble per|sons)
cannot endure to have their Names tossed up and down
among vain men, or used upon sleight occasions: and will no
the God of heaven take it in greater indignation that his Name
[which is great, wonderfull, holy] should be made triviall or com|mon,
by the frequent usurpations of ignorant and wicked men
certainly he will not hold them guiltlesse that thus take hi
Name in vain: It is not the plea of custome that will excuse no
yet extenuate the sin. It is true, some places are so profane, th
swearing is become the very dialect of the Town or Family

where they dwell, and shall they escape by the commonnesse of
their iniquity, no surely neither nature nor custome which is
the second nature are tolerable excuses for any evill, but rather
aggravations of it. Sin is not the lesse but rather the more to
be bewailed, because of the deep root it hath in our corrupt na|tures.
In this glasse it was that David and Paul saw their sins
to be above measure sinfull, Psal. 51. and Rom. 7. And the like
may be said of custome, alteranatura; it is so little capable of be|ing
pleaded by way of mitigation of the sinn of swearing, or
any other iniquity, that it renders it the more mischievous and
dangerous. The Lord by the Prophet Ieremy gives an account
of the state of Iudah, Chap. 13. 23. Can the Aethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good who are accusto|med
to do evill. But was this any advantage to them, that they
were so accustomed to evill, that they could not leave it? No,
for it follows vers. 24. Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that
passeth away by the winde of the wildernesse. This is thy lot, the portion
of thy measures from me, saith the Lord. Let men take heed of custo|mary
sins. If men will be wont to sin, God is wont to punish.
Others there are more deliberate in this wickednesse, and so
more guilty; they think it a kinde of a gallantrie and grace|fulnesse
of speech to interlace it with Oathes and Execrations;
nay, some are become so exceeding vain and vile, that they will
study new-fashion'd Oathes, as well as cloaths, and so go down
to destruction in the right mode: Concerning these persons I
know not well what to say, but choose rather to stand and ad|mire,
first, the depth of wickednesse and madnesse in the heart
of man, which casteth up such mire and dirt; and then the in|finite
patience of the God of heaven, who is highly sensible of
such affronts and provocations, and easily able to avenge him|self,
yet forbears to execute his just displeasure. But let them
who like raging waves of the Sea thus foam out their owne
shame, and vent the superfluity of naughtinesse that is in them,
know, that though God be long suffering, yet he will not al|wayes
suffer, his patience hath prefixed bounds; and though
for some time there may be one event to the righteous and the
sinner, to him that sweareth and him that feareth an oath, as saith the
Preacher, Eccles. 9. 2. yet there is a day of the revelation of the

righteous judgement of God approaching, and then will the
Lord put an everlasting difference betwixt the righteous and
the wicked; betwixt him that serveth God, and him that serves him
not, Malach. 3. ult. It may be such profane persons finde not the
Curse entered into their houses, according to the threatning
Zach. 5. 3, 4. but it is entred into their hearts, which is of worse
consequence, for by their hardnesse and impenitency they trea|sure
up wrath against the day of wrath.
And though the persons mentioned do most notoriously of|fend
against this rule of swearing in judgement, for they have
no judgement in their goings or doings, yet they are not the
onely offenders in this point; there are many who call others
to swear, and are called lawfully thereunto; that rush upon
oathes without due consideration: they consider not the
weight of the matter, or the necessity of an Oath in the case.
Every unnecessary Oath is a vain Oath, and litigious persons
who occasion many Oathes for the decision of their needlesse
controversies, will finde they have much to answer for; their
sins against charitie by contentions, against justice by vexations,
and against the Name of God by calling men to swear about
that which is hardly worthy a mans going over the threshold
to prove. And though Erasmus was too strict in saying, Non est
ingenui Christiani jur are pro rebus hujus seculi, pro praediis  nummis;
yet the truth lies very near it, and that is, men should be very
backward to swearing in such cases, and utterly averse if the
difference may otherwise be determined.Exod. 22. 11. An Oath is rather to
be reckoned in necessariis quam in simpliciter bonis. The command
to swear by the Name of God, Deuter. 6. 13. is not like that of
calling upon his name, but the meaning is, If there be a just occa|sion
of thy swearing, then let it be by the Name of God, and
not by any Idol or Creature.
Others consider not the solemnity of an Oath, the Majestie
and Dread of that Name which is in vocated thereby, but light|ly,
hastily, and irreverently use the Name of God, which is full
of provocation. It is sad to see how in Courts of Justice, where
Magistrates are tender enough of their own Honour and Power,
the Name of God is profaned with rude and irreverent swear|ing:
what hudling of Oathes there is with very little sense or

consideration of the weight and importance of them, which if
administred with deliberation and solemnitie, would conduce
much to the Honour of God, and the right end of an Oath,
which is the serious confirmation of a Truth in question. And it
would be no small degree of reformation among us in civill pro|ceedings,
if the number of Oathes were lessened, and those that
must be taken were administred with more solemnitie, as all the
parts of Gods Worship ought to be: Let me therefore put you
my Lord Maior  the rest of the Magistrates in mind, that God
hath intrusted you with a very great Treasure, which is The glori|ous
and fearfull name of the Lord your God, which he is very tender of,
and expects you should be so also, and expresse your regard
thereto, by punishing unlawfull Oathes, preventing unnecessa|ry
Oathes, and duly regulating those which are lawfull and ne|cessary,
in order to truth and peace. The day is hastening up|on
us when we shall have no other refuge but the Name of the
Lord, which is a strong Power to the righteous, Proverbs 18. 10.
and how sad will it be to finde such a repulse as this, What have
you to do take my Name in your mouthes, which you have profaned and
suffered to be profaned, for want of executing the Power and Trust com|mitted
to you by God and men? Is not every mans particular bur|then
heavie enough for him to bear? Let us not then neither
Magistrates nor Ministers (for we are most concerned) make our
selves partakers of other mens sins, by not discharging our du|tie
to them. This shall suffice o have spoken of 
wherein I have had more speciall respect to ass
I come now to the second, which will more directly c
Oathes promissory, such as you have taken this day.
Propos. II. It is utterly abominable to forswear, or not to perform
our Oathes unto the Lord. The righteousnesse of the Scribes and
Pharisees which came short of the Law, and short of Heaven
(as I have already said) yet reachd thus far, that Oathes were
to be performed; if Scripture were silent, the Law of Nature
and Nations would speak plain and loud in this point, there
being hardly any sin upon which they have set a fowler mark
then that of perjury; I suppose because of the peculiar mischief
and malignitie that it carries with it to humane Societies,
which are preserved by truth and fidelity. Apud omnes populos 

ab omni aevo circa pollicitationes et contractus maxima semper vis fui
jures jurandi.Grot. de jure belli  pacis. I think it utterly superfluous to produce any thing
by way of proof in so clear a point as this is, I only give this
argument from the lesse to the greater, if it be generally look'd
upon as unworthy to break a mans word or promise (as indeed
it is, for it renders a man inconstant, if not unfaithfull) much
more unworthy is it to recede from a promise strengthened and
seconded with an Oath. It is worth the consideration that of
Paul. 2 Cor. 1. 17. Where you find him exceeding solicitor
to preserve his reputation from the stain of lightnesse; When
therefore was thus minded did I use lightnesse? or the things that
purpose do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should b
yea, yea, and nay, nay? But as God is true, our word toward you wa
not yea, and nay: And so it becomes every one that nameth the
name of Christ, the faithfull and true witnesse, to have a tende
respect to credit and conscience in the matter of Oathes and
promises which is one speciall branch of that blessed exercise o
keeping a good conscience void of offence toward God and toward men.
To this may be added the consideration of the strictnesse o
God in this particular, how severe hath he been in reprehensi|ons
and punishments for the violation of promissory Oathes, though
some excuse might have been pleaded for the breach of them
When Saul broke the Oath made by Ioshua and the Princes o
the Congregation to the Gibeonites, Ioshua 9. 15. he might have
said it was made by his Predecessors, but not by himself; it was
a surprize, a Covenant obtained by indirect and fallacious
means, it seemed to clash with the injunction of God for de|stroying
the Nations;  lastly, that he did it not out of revenge
or self-interest, but in zeal to the people of God, the Children
of Israel: but notwithstanding all these Pleas, the Lord took
himself so much concerned in the breach, that he looked upon
the House of Saul as a bloody House for this cause, and took a
sharp recompense for his transgression, 2 Sam. 21. 1, 2, c. Ano|ther
instance may be that of the King and Princes of Iudah, who
being overcome by the King of Babylon, entered into an Oath
and a Covenant with him, which afterward they violated, by
sending Ambassadours to Aegypt for Auxiliaries, that they
might get their neck from under the Yoke. Forth is also some|thing

might be pleaded, as That it was a forced Oath, drawn
from them in extremity, that it was contrary to the promises
made to Israel, that it should be high above all Nations, con|trary
to the honour and interest of the Church of God to be un|der
the oppression of strangers: should Israel be a servant, a
home-born slave, and not deliver himself at his first advantage?
But notwithstanding all this the Lord tels them, that though the
oath was made to the King of Babylon that was his enemy as
well as theirs, yet it was the Lords Oath: Therefre thus saith the
Lord, as I live surely mine Oath that he hath despised, and my Cove|nant
that he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head, and
I will spread my Net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare; see|ing
no Bands of mens making will hold him fast, I will make
a snare for him in which he shall be surely held.
But because notwithstanding the strictnesse of the obligation
of promissory Oathes, there will be sometimes a necessitie of dispen|sation,
some explicatory Rules must be added; as,
1. An unlawfull Oath or engagement, I mean, that which
obliges to a sinfull Act, a breach of any of Gods Commande|ments,
must not be performed.Iuravit David temete sed non implevit jurationem majori pieta|te. August. Iuramentun non debet esse vin|culum
iniquitatis. Ames. and therefore David did much better in
breaking his Oath made against Naball and his house by way
of revenge, 1 Sam. 25. 22: 23. then Herod did by keeping that
rash and sinfull engagement made to Herodias, Matth. 14. 7,
8, 9. For though it may seem to reflect upon the obligation of
an Oath, that in any case it should be remitted, yet it would
be a greater dishonour to the nature of an Oath if it should be al|lowed
to tye a man to the disobedience of Gods commands,
and so have influence into sin. And therefore if any be so un|warrantably
engaged, they must repent of the first sin in ma|king
such an Oath, and not adde a second in the keeping of it:
for as we say of precepts, so we may of promises,Durand. lib. 2: dist. 39. Praeceptum
inferioris non obligat contra potestatem superioris. Neither precepts
nor promises made against the lawfull power of our Superiour,
(much lesse our supreme God himself) are binding. Naturall
light reaches thus far,lib. 6: Cap. 7. for we find in Curtius that Nicomachus
having rashly sworn secrecy to Dymnus, when he understood the
businesse to be an intended murther against the King, he denied

that he was obliged by a religious Bond to a wicked Act, and re|vealed
the matter.
2. An Oath binds not to impossibility, to swear that which
is at the present impossible, is great rashnesse and folly; but a
man sometimes finds it impossible to perform that which was
possible when he engaged to it, but certainly with the possibilitie
the obligation ceases, and it suffies that there be a willingnesse
to perform, and a propensitie to embrace an opportunity of ful|filling
it when God shall render it possible and fit to be done;
and here the Lord himself makes a dispensation by providence,
as in the case of an unlawfull Oath he doth by Precept.
3. If the Oath be lawfull and possible, though it be ex|tremely
prejudiciall, and incovenient unto the person so inga|ged,
he is not to dispense with the performance of it. This is
made a character of a Citizen of Zion, that he sweareth to his
own hurt, and changeth not; and it sufficeth not for an excuse of
the breach, to say, We did it rashly and upon mistakes, for so might
Ioshua and the Princes of Israel have said concerning their Oath
to the Gibeonites, which was an Oath of disadvantage to Israel, as
Saul thought, when in zeal to their good he brake it, and an
Oath wherein they were surprized, yet they were obliged by it.
And as for that dispensation which some allow in the case of
prejudice to publike good, although I would not wholly reject
it, for a man may pass away his own right when he cannot do
so with the publique, yet it is to be admitted with very much
caution and tendernesse, because there is great danger least it
open a gap to unjust and unnecessary violations of this religious
bond, and be made a cloke to private interests as frequently it
is, and therefore let it be a clear and indisputable good, and
judged so to be by others rather then him that is to dispence
with his Oath about it. To keep an Oath with my own dis|advantage
is a demonstration how far I prefer the name of God,
the honour of Religion unto my own concernments, and so an
argument of sincerity toward God, or at least of honesty a|mong
men. Having gone as far as the limits of a Sermon will
permitt, I must refer to Treatises for that which is further desi|red
concerning this subject, onely I must close with a word of
application.

First,Application to those who have the power of imposing promissory
Oathes upon others; that they would be exceeding tender, nay
I will say, backward and averse unto such kind of obligations,
some have thought them utterly unlawfull and that our Saviour
in this Text intends the prohibition of them, whom though we
cannot agree to, yet we must acknowledge them to be exceeding
dangerous; Assrrtory Oathes are the end of all strife, but promissory
Oathes prove many times the beginnings and aggravations of
strife, and if there ought to be so great care to avoid unnecessa|ry
Oathes in case of assertion, certainly much more in case of
obligation: to offend in the former is an act more transient,
in the latter more permanent. Governours are ready to think it
is their great security to establish themselves by Oathes, Cove|nants,
 engagements; the use of them is not absolutely denyed,
but the abuse and unprofitablesse of them is evidently manifest;
how easily men say even concerning these, Let us break their bonds
in sunder, and cast away their cords from us. The policies of men
have been pronounced vain in this case, and will be, so long as
men purpose according to the flesh, (as Paul speaks 2 Cor. 1.)
their words will be yea and nay; and especially to do it at such
a time as this, a time of unsetlednesse and quick revolution,
wherein it were too hard a task to bid a man lay hold of the Sails
of a whirling Windmill, or stay the wheels of a running Cha|riot:
the truth is, men will not be bound, much lesse will the Al|mighty
by such Cords as these. Canst thou draw out Leviathan
ith a Hook? Job 41. 1.
The like may be said in some degree concerning the Oathes
taken by inferiour Officers, by Tradesmen in Companies and
Corporations; these Oathes are too much used, and too little
observed among them: I think it is possible to hold forth a
more excellent way both in the former case and this latter; if
agistrates would take fast hold of the people, and lay firm ob|ligations
upon them; it must not be by words, but actions; not
y the peoples Promises, but their own performances: Vbi non
 sanctitas, pietas, fides, instabile regnum est, saith the Heathen Poet.
onsciencious persons who lay to heart the things of God,
ould be obliged by nothing more then due liberty and order
 matters of Religion, which two howsoever they have been

kept at distance, are not onely possible but willing to be recon|ciled.
Faith and Order are matter of rejoycing to an Apostle
Col. 2. 5. And as those who are for heaven would be most in|gaged
by such means; so they who are for the earth, by con|sulting
their profit  their quiet, both the one and the other by
publike justice in which all are equally concerned. And as to the
latter case, concerning the tying of Officers and others to their
duties by the Bond of Oathes, it is indeed in it self the most sa|cred
and strong tye, but it is not so to the generalitie of men, who
are more awed by Penalties then by Oathes; and till the reve|rence
of an Oath be restored to the world, that men shall regard
their Consciences more then their Purses; it would be advantage
to both Parties concerned in Promissory Oathes, that penalties were
many times imposed in the room of them.
2. I shall adde a word to those persons who are ingaged in
Oathes promissory. First, that we should look back upon all
the solemn obligations of this kinde into which we have at any
time entred, and seriously bewail before the Lord our great sin
and folly concerning them; how rashly, slightly, implicitely
and inconsiderately have we adventured upon Oathes, Schollers
in the Universities, Tradesmen upon their admissions to freedom,
Officers entring on publike employments? and if we search our
consciences it may be we shall finde little of them remaining, but
the guilt; let us humble our selves and pray that it may be
removed. And let us not think that sufficient, but account it our
dutie to revive them, and so farr as it is lawfull or possible, hold
our selves obliged to perform them, though we have been in|cautelously
and unwisely surprized in them. Loose and libertine
spirits are very forward to say, Let us break these Bonds in sun|der,
and cast away these Cords from us; let us look upon them
as Almanacks out of date; but let such take heed they reckon
not without the Lord, whose account shall only stand in the
day of our great account, and if that be found upon the File,
which we thought had been cancelled it wil be a sad reckoning
And to invort that of the Roman Senatour: Si non Romiae tamen
vestri miserescite. If you have no compassion of your selves, yet
pitty a poor Nation that lies mourning under Oathes,Iereniah 23. 10. not on|ly
the rash vain Oathes of profane and licentious men, but

deliberate promissory Oathes and Covenants so frequently and
alsly violated. I would not extenuate any sin, much lesse
that of swearing, but the ormer Oathes are like man slaugh|ter,
when the latter are as murther. The Lord forgive our sin and
heal our Land.
And for the time to come let us as far as possibly we may avoid
them, Falsa juratio mala est, omnis periculosa. But if there be
a just and necessary occasion for a promissory Oath, as sometimes
there may, let us be exceeding circumspect in the taking of it,
well weighing what we do and with what intention, and be|ing
once engaged, not to study evasions but executions of trust
and promise. What can I say more then the Lord hath said in
his perpetuall law: The Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh
his Name in vain. There is much said, but more intended then
expressed, in these words; the Lord will deal with such a per|son
as one who is deeply guilty of provocation.
Give me leave to be particular and plain: You my Lord
Major and Sheriffs are under the band of an Oath; That you
will diligently execute the office you are called unto according to your skil,
power and understanding. Hereby you are tacitely obliged to do
your utmost to understand the duty of your places, and expresly
bound to execute them to the utmost of your skil and power,
which is a great word and hard to be performed.
You the Aldermen, Common-Councell, and four and twenty
(as you are called) are sworn to assist the Mayor in his office, to come
to Councell at all times, when you are sent for, unlesse you have a just
excuse; take heed of hindring instead of assisting, take heed
of absenting your selves upon frivolous excuses, or things of lesse
moment then that you are called unto; think not to be your
own judges in the excuse, you will find another besides you, and
above you, whose Judgment is according to truth. Think not
that if you have not taken the Oath this year, you are not obli|ged,
a former Oath binds you as long as you continue in
your Station. Give not heed to evasions, but in all doubtfull
things take the safer course. You also take an Oath of secrecy,
in which there is a snare, be carefull that you be not taken in it,
but let prudence and conscience set a watch before the door of
your lips.

You that are Freemen of the Citie are also under this sacred
Bond, for preservtion of the due rights and priviledges of the Citie,
and to be obedient to the just and good goverment of the same: Take
you heed also, and be exceeding circumspect, dispence not with
your obedience, where the Lawes of God, and the Lawes of the
Land allow not a dispensation; think not it is left to your pri|vate
determination, what is just and good goverment; you
must take it as you find it, and do all things without murmurings
and disputings, where the Lawes of your Superiors are not con|trary
to the Divine and Supreme Law. So shall you seek and
procure the peace of the Citie, and of your own souls also.
You are sometimes called as Jurors, and sworn to make true
Inquisitions and Presentments; not to present for hatred or malice, not to
forbear Presenting for favour or reward, truly to trie Issues according
to your evidence, not your prive opinions and mistaken charitie.
Take the counsell given by Moses to Israel, Take head to your selves,
and keep your souls deligently. In all things that I have said unto you be
circumspect. I adde only this one consideration from the usuall
close of your Oathes wherein you promise to do such and such
things, so help you God; a most weightie and important expressi|on.
If the Lord help not, how sad is the condition of any of us
and shall we forfeit our Interest in it by breaking the Oathes
we enter into? and give the Lord occasion to say when we flie
for help unto his Name, How can you expect help from me, remem|ber
the day when you said and swore, that as you expected help from me, you
would do the things which you have not regarded. Thus have I accord|ing
to my measure given in that counsell which I desire may be
acceptable to you. The Lord by his blessed Spirit supply the de|fects
of my words, and of all our hearts and wayes.
FINIS.




