



An Extract out of a LETTER from a Gentleman of Quality, wherein this ADDRESSE was sent up to be Printed.
SIR,
I Send you inclosed the Addresse of this County, just as it is desired to be Printed, to avoyd surreptitious Copies, which I leave to your care to be done, with all speed possible; and that we may have some Copies sent down by this Bearer my Servant. I suppose the sale of it will abundantly pay the Printing. And it had so good a Reception, that I would not for any Money we had been neglectfull in it. The Parliament Commissioners were mightily displeased with it, and the City Commissioners as well satisfied; unto whom there has been given a Copy of our Addresse, and a Letter also sent to the Common-Council. My Lord Generall being advised aforehand by  not to receive any Addresse, told him, He would consider: But when the Gentlemen came, he received it; and not opening the Paper, told them, He understood the scope of it was to have the Parliament filled, which he had intelligence the Parliament would consent to, and so hoped their desires would be answered. He told us; He would endeavour to have the Parliament filled, and sit without interruption, gave thanks to the Gentlemen of the County, for their kindnesse, and took notice how great Obligation he had to the Gentlemen of the North; and said, He would support both the Ministers and Gentry. Some Presents of Venison and Wine were very acceptable to him: As likewise the appearance of the Gentry, who met him with about 300 Horse. I wish that as many persons of quality as can, would meet and wait on him at Barnet, where his generall Rendezvouze will be on Monday next: And if you hear of any surprize that may be offered from the Army at London, and Sectaries, it will be very acceptable to give him notice of such Designs and motions: Though indeed the Generall is cautious enough both of his Person and his Army; for when one of the Parliaments Commissioners pressed him to come to London with one Regiment of Horse, he replyed, He understood he was obnoxious to a great Envy, and the Anabaptisticall Party was numerous about the Town; and judged it absolutely unsafe to goe without his Army; which consisteth of 5000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, all well appointed. I am confident, he will maintain whatsoever the House will do when it is filled up; and I believe will be against the pressing an Engagement. I am
SIR,  Your humble Servant, H. C.
Northampton, Ian. 27. 1659.


The Addresse of the County of NORTHAMPTON, To his Excellency the Lord Generall MONCK.
WE the Gentlemen, Ministers, Free-holders, and others of the County of Northampton, humbly conceiving that the first Force put upon the Parliament, hath been an Encouragement to open the way to all the rest, and finding that your Excellency under God hath been the principal means for repairing of the last Interruption, are the more encouraged (having the presence of your Excellency now among us) to desire your Assistance in the procuring these our just Desires, as a visible means of a happy Peace, and Settle|ment of these Nations.
Whereas every Free-born Subject of England is supposed to be present in Parliament, by the Knights or Burgesses of the place where he liveth, and thereby is presumed to consent to all things that passe in Parliament: So it is now, that there is not one Knight for all the Counties in Wales, nor for divers Counties of England, and some of them the largest in England, as that of York-shire, and for this County, and the Burroughs but Two of Nine.
I. Therefore we desire, That all vacant places may be supplyed, whether they became vacant by Death or Seclusion, and that those that were secluded by Force in the Year 1648. may sit again: And that no previous Oath or Engagement may be put upon any that is chosen by his Countrey, to sit and Vote freely in Parliament.
II. That no Free-born Subject of England may have any Taxes levyed upon him without his consent in Parliament.
III. That the Fundamentall Lawes of England, the Priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Propriety of Goods, may be asserted and defended according to the first Declarations of the Parliament, when they undertook the Warre.
IV. That the true Protestant Religion may be professed and defended, all Heresies and Schisms discountenanced and suppressed; A lawfull succession of godly and able Ministers, continued, and encouraged, and the two Universities, and all Colledges in both of them, preserved and countenanced.
V. That all the Souldiery that will acquiesce in the judgment of a Free and Full Parliament, in the promoting and setling a happy Peace upon these Foundations, may have their Arrears paid; and as many of them as the Parliament shall think necessary, may be continued in the Publick Service: And that as many of them as have been Purchasers of Lands from the Parliament, may either enjoy their Bargains, or their Money paid back with Interest, and some considerable advantage over and above, as the Parliament shall judge may be more expedient to the good of the Nation.


This Addresse was presented to his Excellency the Five and Twentieth of Ianuary, by Colonel Benson the High-Sheriffe, attended by Forty or Fifty of the principal Gentlemen of the County, and subscribed by above Ten thousand Hands annexed thereunto, and three times as many more whose Names there wanted time to engrosse.



