



THE Bishop of LONDON's Ninth CONFERENCE With his CLERGY Upon the Fifth and Tenth INIUNCTIONS, Given by the KING February the 15th. 1694/5 Held in the Years 1695. and 1696.
LONDON: Printed by Benj. Motte, 1699.






THE Bishop of LONDON's Ninth CONFERENCE With his CLERGY, c.
HAving at several times formerly taken notice of so many of the Subjects of these Injunctions as concern the Clergy in general, except these two: I thought it might not be amiss to desire your ad|vice upon them; especially since the Vanity of being thought Good natured, too often tempts Men to forget the discharge of a good Conscience, and the easiness of Complaisance draws them into those things which are not Convenient, but sometimes Scandalous.
I. The Words of the Fifth Injunction run thus. That that part of the 34th. Canon, which relates to the givingInjunct. 5. of Certificates, concerning the Lives and Manners of those who are to be Ordained, be strictly looked to. And that the Bishops lay it on the Consciences of the

Clergy, that they sign no Certificates, unless, upon their own knowledg, they judge the Persons to be duly Qualified.
The words of the Canon, so far as this Injunction isCan. 34. grafted upon it, are these: Except he shall then exhibit Letters Testimonial of his good Life and Conversa|tion, under the Seal of some College in Cambridge or Oxford, where before he remained, or of three or four grave Ministers, together with the Subscription and Testimony of other Credible Persons, who have known his Life and Behaviour by the space of Three Years next before.
The Church had several occasions for Letters recom|mendatory and Testimonials for the Security and Preser|vation of her Discipline, according to the exigence of different Ages, as well for the brotherly and hospitable Reception of those that travel'd into Forain Jurisdictions, as for the satisfaction of those Churches they went to, that they might not be Imposed upon by False Brethren. These were called  by St. Paul. They2. Cor 3. 1. Rom. 16. 1. Can. Apostolo|rum. 33. were afterwards called Literae Canonicae, and sometimes Formatae. Of which you have a learned discourse written by Priorius Philippi Priorii de li|teris Canonicis dissertatio. Paris. 1675 8^o But I believe you would be more sa|tisfied in the reason and authority of this sort of Credenti|als from the Canons of the Catholick Church, Canones Ecclesiae Uni|versae Iustelli. Paris. Ed. 8^o under the four first General Councils. Which gave ground to those so many and divers directions afterwards in the following particular Councils of several Nations. But this were too large a Work, and too much beside our purpose to be treated of at this time.
We will therefore confine our selves to the conside|ration of those Letters Dimissory and Testimonials only,

as relate to such as seek to enter into holy Orders. And this I conceive will appear in the best light, if we proceed by these Three steps.

I. To look into the Appointment of them.
II. To examine the Reason of that Appointment.
III. To apply that Reason to our Behaviour in this particular.

I. As to the Appointment, it is so obvious a method to come to the knowledge of any thing otherwise out of our reach: that without question it must have been the universal Practice of all Ages. But it will suffice us to keep within the compass of our own Profession.
When Moses directed the People to find out fit Men to be Rulers over them, amongst other Enquiries, he would have them expect good Testimonials from their NeighboursDeut. 1. 13. and Acquaintance. Take ye wise men and understanding, and known among your Tribes. When the Apostles instituted Deacons, they gave this charge to the Disciples, Look yeAct. 6. 3. out among ye seven men of honest report. We see the reason given, why St. Paul took Timothy forth with him, becauseAct. 6. 2. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. he was well reported of by the Brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium. The Characters St. Paul requires of such as are to be admitted to the Orders of Bishops, Priests or Deacons, shews the necessity of good Testimonials: because many of those Particulars upon which that Character depended, could not otherwise be so well made out. And there|fore1. Tim 3. 7. v. 10. he says, A Bishop must have a good report of them which are without. And of Deacons, Let these also first. be proved.
In conformity to this necessary Method of proceeding has the Church practised ever since. So it was in St. Cyprian's Epist. 38. Edit. Oxon. In Ordinati|onibus Clerico|rum, Fratres charissimi, so|lemus vos ante considere,  mores ac meri|ta singulorum communi con|silio ponderare. time. In the Ordination of Clergymen, most dearly beloved Brethren, we are used to consult you beforehand, and by common consent examine both the Manners and Merits of each Person. For this reason it is, that the Council of Nice  Con. Nie. Can. 16. would have every one Ordained in their own Diocese, where they are known. If any Bishop shall presume to take one out of another Diocese and Or|dain him in his Church, without the consent of his proper Bishop, from whom he has departed, such Ordination shall be void. To the same purpose is that of Chalcedon . Concil. Chal|ed. Can. 13.. Strange and unknown Clergymen are by no means to Of|ficiate in another City without commendatory Letters from their own Bishop. But these primitive Councils had the Apostolick practice too fresh before them, to need such particular directions as were given by later Councils. A|mong which you have one that says, Quia con|tigere potest, ut qui  Ordines |qui velit, aea|rem,   morum probi|taem,  genus mentiatur: ut omnis via faudi doloque praecludatur, literas secum deferat pro|movendus  judice ordinario  consulibu  unde originem duxerit, sive quem incolere consueverit, qui|bus testetur se idon  aetate bonisque moribus praeditum,  legitimo sanguine seu matrimonio ortum: qu nisi Episcopo obtulerit, ordine non donetur, nisi haec ei ater perspicua sint, c. Concil. Narbon. Can 7.. Because it may so fall out that they who desire to get into Holy Orders, may give a false account of their Lives and Conversation, as likewise of their Pedigree: to the end that every way to Fraud and Deceit may be stopt: let him that is to be pro|moted to any Degree bring with him Letters from his Or|dinary, or the chief Men of the Place where he was born or wont to inhabit, by which he may be attested to be of full Age, of a good Conversation, c. which unless he bring to the Bishop, let him not be Ordained, unless it appear evident to him some other way, c. There is likewise another remarkable Passage in the same Council,

Quibut hanc inseret clausulam, Quem idone|um  dignum reperimus: aut nulla literis fi|des habebitur. Can. 12. Wherein shall be contained this Clause, whom we find to be fit and worthy; or else no credit shall be given to the Letters. To the same purpose it is expressed in another Council. Non prius promoveant Dioecesani suos ad aliquem sa|crum Ordi|nem, qum vi|derint literas Testimoniales presbyteri pa|rechialis, quae contineant du|orum aut tri|um testium probatorum, non suspecto|rum depositio|nes juramento solenni firma|tas de suffici|enti aetatis promovendi,  de probat  inculpat illius vit. Concil-Senonense. Can. 3. Diocesans are not to promote any to Holy Orders, before they have seen Testimonials from the Mi|nister of their Parish, wherein are contained the Depositi|ons of two or three approved unsuspected Witnesses, given upon Oath, of the sufficiency of their Age, and of their commendable and unblamed Life. Thus we see, or may easily gather from what has been quoted, that the Church was careful in all Ages to admit of none but approved Persons to the Ministry.
II. Therefore it may be convenient in the second place to look into the Reasons of this cautious Proceeding. And truly they are so natural, that it is impossible they should bear any Debate. For common Reason tells us, we must take our Information from others in those things, the no|tice whereof we cannot attain to by our selves: and Expe|rience teaches us to have a care whom we believe. So that where a Testimony is required, we are to receive it with great Wariness. Now that part of satisfaction relating to Life and Conversation, which ought to be had before Per|sons are admitted into Holy Orders, generally cannot be come by without sufficient Testimonials. Which how cautiously they should be admitted, appears plainly from the ill consequences of a Mistake in this kind. For

1. What a grievous Offence would it be to good Men to meet with such spots in their Feasts!
2. How would it make the Sacrifices of God to be loathed and abhorred especially of the weaker and more undistinguishing sort of People!
3. How every way would God be provoked and his Honour blasphemed!
4. What a provocation would it be to despise the Ordinances of God, to uncharitableness, and to en|tertain ill thoughts of Religion itself for the sake of him that ministers in it!
5. As Example is the great director in the Lives andDecipit ex|emplar vitiis vnitabile. Horat. Conversation of men: what a fatal Misguidance must it be, when they who are set up for Lights to the World, turn ignes fatui, and lead people out of the way by their evil Practices! The Eye has a much quicker sense than the Ear, and makes a stronger im|pression upon the Mind. For Imitation of what we see, as it is more easy, so it is more natural than to learn by Precepts. Lib. 4. de ve sapi|enti. Men, therefore says Lactanti|us, choose Examples before words, because it is much easur to say than to do. Words are but speculative Expressi|ons, and may please the Fancy: but Deeds make the deepest Impressions on the Heart. We may admire a man for his Ingenuity, that sets excellent Rules: but if he Practise by other measures, we are apter to follow his Life, than his Doctrine.

If then we put all Considerations together, and consider how abominable in the sight of God and how pernicious to men the disorderly walking of those who are admitted into Holy Orders, would be: what care has or can the Church take, which may prove too much to prevent so great an E|vil!
III. Therefore ye see of how weighty a Concern it is, that ye behave yourselves uprightly in giving Testimonials to those who are to serve at the Altar, that neither Fear, Fa|vour, Affection, nor Indifference prevail with you to give a rash, much less a false Certificate.
If any Man should recommend an Officer to the State at all Adventures or out of Partiality, and this Man should prove any ways unfit for his Employment: would it not bring Shame upon the Voucher, and a publick Curse for his unadvised Officiousness? What an unneighbourly part is it to put a Servant upon another Man, whose Faults we know, or at least are ignorant of his Vertues? It is unkind and unjust at the best, and may prove barba|rous. What Name then can we give that Action which imposes an unfaithful Servant upon the Church of God, where his Honour and the eternal Concern of his Creature's Soul is engaged, and endanger the Death of so many as he would save alive.
I will charitably hope, that no Man is wilfully guilty of a Transgression of this Nature. But we are apt to be of too easie a Disposition in this Case: and either out of an unwillingness to disoblige a Friend, or a desire to please him, or for some particular Kindness, or thro' an incon|siderate Easiness, to flatter ourselves with a General Presum|ption, that all is well; and so yield to a blind Compli|ance.
Indeed if such sort of Frailties might plead Prescription by being common; I know not any may bid fairer for it, than this: but the ill Consequences are such, as admit of no Excuse. For the Fitness of the Person to be admitted, as to his Morals, depends so entirely for the most part upon the Integrity of the Testimonial: that a Failure on this side renders the Certifier partaker of another Mans Sins, by loa|ding the Ordinance of God with so heavy and so mischie|vous a Scandal. In effect it is a lying to God, if unad|visedly we recommend an ill Man to his Service.
Ye ought therefore not only for Reputation, but for Conscience sake, to be very wary whom ye witness for: that ye have a competent intimacy in the knowledge of them, as having to answer before God as well as Men for what ye do in this kind.
II. The Injunction we have hither to conferred upon, is to keep safe the Door of the Church; that none be admitted to enter into it, but such as are fit for the Ministry: this o|ther is to admonish such as are already entred; that they walk as in the sight of God, and do not by an unwary Be|haviour bring reproach upon his Service. The Injunction is this. That the Bishops shall look to the Lives andInjunction 10. Manners of their Clergy, that they may be in all things regular and exemplary according to the 75th. Canon. The Canon upon which this is grafted runs thus. NoCan. 75. Ecclesiastical Persons shall at any time, other than forInjunctions given by the Queen, in the Year 1559. Article 7. their honest Necessities, resort to any Taverns or Ale|houses, neither shall they board or lodge in any such pla|ces. Furthermore they shall not give themselves to any base or servile Labour, or to Drinking or Riot, spending their Time idly by Day or by Night, playing at Dice, Cards, or Tables, or any other unlawful Game: but at all times convenient, they shall hear or read somewhat of the Holy Scriptures, or shall occupy themselves with some other Honest Study or Exercise, always doing the things which shall appertain to Honesty, and endeavour|ing to profit the Church of God, having always in Mind that they ought to excel all others in Purity of Life, and should be Examples to the People to live well and Chri|stianly, under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures to be infli|cted with severity, according to the Qualities of their Of|fences.
Whenever ye read over, as I hope sometimes ye do, the Exhortation that goes before the Questions in the Form for Ordaining Priests; ye will there find the Matter of this Ca|non treated in a fuller and more Pathetick Stile. Not at all to derogate from the Expression of the Canon. For Laws we know, ought to be in as few and plain Words as may be: whereas Advices upon those Laws, have a Pri|vilege to enforce the Reasonableness of them by the most powerful Arguments that can be sound out, and to apply the most prevailing Inducements for their Observation.
The main Scope of this Canon seems to be a negative Direction to the Clergy, that they should not be guilty of such and such Irregularities, which are of the most noisy sort and give the most Publick Scandal. For however there may be others, as Covetousness, Ill nature or the like, that may cry as loud against us at the last day: yet thoseLuke 16. 15 enumerated in the Canon are of a more clamourous kind in this World. But these are not all of the same nature. For some are absolutely unlawful as Drunkenness and all sorts of Riot: others are so only by accident, as Cards, Dice, Taverns and Alehouses.
The former seems not fitting to be taken notice of upon this occasion. For we are not to imagin, that any of our Brethren can be guilty of such gross Misdemeanours, as would render them the most unfortunate of Mankind. The wretched State such Ill Habits bring both upon Body and Mind is the least to be considered. Were it barely the disreputation of such courses, which to an Ingenuous Man is more grievous, than the loss of Life; it were but a light matter, in comparison of those dismal Consequences, which attend such disorders. Nay the Scandal, take it alone, is nothing when compared with the effects of it. Hinc illae

lachryme; here lies the Transcendency of the Mischief, be|sides the Dishonour to God and his Worship, it staggers the Believer, it drives the weak Brother out of the Con|gregation, giving great occasion for Schism, confirms the Dissolute, and makes the Atheist triumph. Therefore I say, we ought rather to presume, that such destructive Vices can never take Root amongst us: than by Dehor|tations from what may be, cause Unwary and Malicious Men to conclude, that the Plague is already begun, and so bring a present Obloquy upon the Function. I wish therefore I have not said too much upon this point. I will say no more: but proceed to those other Irregulari|ties, which are so by Accident.
These we find to be of Two sorts.

I. Such as relate to matters absolutely Prohibited.
II Such as are only so Conditionally.

I. The things absolutely prohibited in this Case are Cards, Dice and Tables: not as meerly unlawful in themselves, but of such a nature as for good rea|sons may be forbidden. For at the best they can no way turn to any profitable account, only serve to amuse at very Idle Hours. And then they are apt to draw on such Mischievous and Wicked Consequences; that if from the experience of such ill Effects, our Governours should not have power to Restrain the Cause, they would be hin|dred from answering one of the greatest ends of their Appointment. And therefore it is absolutely necessary, that they have a Power, in Prudence to with-hold us from what is Dangerous: as in Justice to forbid what is simply Evil. An Army otherwise would be in a desperate condi|tion,

especially when near an Enemy, where the Loss or Gain of an opportunity is so ticklish, and for the most part so irrecoverable: if we should allow such Privileges to be disputed. And tho in the Civil Administration com|monly the mischief of such a Licentiousness would not so quickly be felt: yet, like a lingring Disease, it would grow more and more uneasie to the State, till the one con|cluded in the ruin of the other.
In the things therefore that pertain unto Godliness, where the loss is not Transitory and Finite, but Eternal; how much more ready ought we to be, in owning that Au|thority, which would keep us out of Harms-way! For as I said before, Gaming is a Diversion that can do no Good, it is at best but an Idle Amusement, it may do much Harm. The temptations it carries with it are many and dangerous. If it proceed not at first from a covetous inclination, it seldom fails of concluding in it (Whoever would read at large the shameful con|sequence of this loose sort of en|tertainment, with the just characters of Theft, Robbery and the like that it is stig|matized with; let him consult Tractat. Tra|ctar. Paridis de Puteo  aliorum de lu|do. Num. 1. c. fol. 151 c. Tom. 7.). And this frequently upon ill fortune causes great Passion, which often breaks out into Cursing and Swearing, sometimes attended with such horrid Blasphemies as would be dread|ful to name. Besiyes it creates Quarrels, that are too of|ten found guilty of Murder. And after all this, we see so clearly from constant experience, how natural it is to run into these Inconveniencies: that we may safely say, who|ever ventures upon this Liberty, runs himself into such Temptations, as he knows not where they will end.
No wonder then if we meet with restrictive Laws in those places, where these Idle Divertisements have been followed. Our own Laws are an Instance, where in (33. H. 8. c: 9.) one of them notice is taken of the many precedent Laws against them: and particularly they are forbid, not only as unprofitable, but as effeminating the persons en|gaged

in them. For they are observed to hinder those Manly and useful exercises of Arching and the like, which prepare Mens Bodies for Agility in War, and Vigour in other Employments for the Publick Good. A|nother 23. Ph.  m. c. 9. is very short, but yet complains of the mis|chievous effects of such prohibited Games, whereby Idle and Dissolute Persons are drawn together, and take that occasion to contrive Robberies and other Villanies. The last 16. Car. 2. c. 5. is to prevent the fatal consequences which fall often upon whole Families, whose Fortunes are fairly or fowly Impaired, if not Ruined, by the Extravagancies and Folly of a Young Heir, and many times by those that should have more Wit. And to shew that it is no new thing, we may find the like caution taken in for|mer dayes, see the Roman Senatus|consultum ve|tuit in pecuni|am ludere, prae|terquam siquis certet hast, vel pilo jacien|do, c. quod virtutis caus fiat. ff. 11.  6. Laws. Nay it goes further in another place, Cod. 3. tt. 43. 44. Vid. Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 21. and not only makes the Debt con|tracted by Gaming void, but likewise the ready Mony laid down by the Looser recoverable by Law: alledging, amongst other reasons for this discouragement, the Pro|phaneness and horrid Blasphemies, which are occasioned by the passionate prosecution of such Gaming.
Attalus King of Asia at his leisure hours recreated him|self in his Gardens, and sometimes diverted himself in Casting of Statues. It is said of Demetrius Poliorcetes, that his Pastime was spent in making Warlike Engines: and of Europus King of Macedon, that at his spare hours he made Lights. It is reported that the Kings of Parthia were used to spend their idle hours in Sharpning of Spears. And Dionysius the younger, when he was at Peace, would contrive little Wains, Seats and Tables with wonderful Art. I suppose the custom of the Ottomon Emperours, who always take some Handicraft Employment upon

them, is upon the same ground, to invite their Subjects by such examples to spend their spare time in something that may be Profitable. To this end the Romans encourag'd none but such Games as consisted in manly and robust Exercise, which for the number were called Pentathlum: that no time might be lost, but their very Sports might make them Active and Hardy for time of War. And if that purpose failed, they were sure to get Health and Vigour by it, besides the avoiding the many inconvenien|cies of Idleness, or the other effeminate Divertisements.
Now of all Men it most behoves us of the Clergy to walk Circumspectly in these matters, as appears by the Apostolick . 24. Canon. For we are set up as Lights to Guide the People: and where Laws are made upon such weighty Motives, as those abovementioned, we ought very carefully to set a good Example, by paying our ut|most Obedience to them. If the Blood of him, whoEzek. 33. 8. Dses in his Wickedness, and whom we have not forwar|ned, shall be required at our Hands: how much more1. Tim. 5. 22. shall we be answerable for his Transgressions, whom we our selves have misled by our unwary Behaviour! Of which St. Paul has warned us in his advice to Timothy, Be not partaker of other Mens Sins. But after all it seems to be superfluous, and I hope it is (tho ahundans cautela non nocet) to warn those that serve at the Altar, to be cau|tious in having to do with such things, as oftentimes causes so great Offence and Scandal. Especially since the duty of our Abstinence should carry us far beyond these considerations: even by denying ourselves, upon oc|casion, those things which may be both Lawful and Useful for us. Thus we find S. Paul governing himself,1: Cor. 10. 23. Non omne, quod licet, ho|nestum est. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient:

all things are lawful for me, but all things edifie not. And what he prescribes to himself, in the following part of the Chap|ter, he gives as a Rule to all Christians under the particular case of Meats offered to Idols.
If what has been said, seems to bear too hard uponDeteriores om|nes sumus li|centi Ter. Heaut. this point: to be sure it is an Error on the safest-side; and will easily be pardoned by all, that are worthy to have it asked at their hands. For Liberty, especially in things of this kind, is like an edged tool: which if not skilfully managed, cuts the Fingers, if not the Throat of him that uses it.
II. The other Prohibition is conditional: because the thing forbid is only so occasionally. For Publick-Houses are necessary for Travellers and Way-Faring People, and convenient many times for meeting upon common Bu|siness. But, as many things appointed for good Ends are abused, so none more shamefully than these. That which was appointed for Refreshment, is made the receptacle of Idleness and Debauchery: and that which is allowed for honest Purposes, is too frequently made use of to contrive Mischief. However, the design of the Canon in this par|ticular is to warn us of two Dangers; the one relating to our Selves, and the other to our Neighbour. Both nicely to be observed, and subjected to that caution of Tully, Est aliquid quod non opor|tet, etiamsi li|cet. Cic. Orat. 3. pro Corn. Balbo. There are some things which ought not to be done, tho they be Lawful.
I. In relation to our Selves we should consider very well, what sort of Company we are like to meet with in those Publick-Houses, before we go to them. Whether we may not be drawn into a complaisance that may go

beyond Discretion. For if your Company be given to Excess, it is the Interest of those places to promote it, and by consequence they will be sure to do it. Besides there is another reason should make us wary, how we comply with invitations to such Houses; lest by an over|easiness in yielding to importunities of this kind, we insensibly steal into an Idle Habit; and instead of a Mo|dest Complyance, when we are asked the question, be|come at last forward to attack others. Nemo repent fit turpissimus: but it is so natural to advance in Folly, that, unless a Man keep a strict hand upon himself, the Clowd which seem'd but as a Hand at first, may in a little time draw such a Storm after it, as may Overwhelm those that come in its way. Now the ready course for a Man to avoid the Danger of these Temptations, is to take up a firm Resolution never to go into any of those Houses, when it may reasonably be avoided. For such a Resolu|tion once well fix'd, will keep him always upon his Guard; and he will never do the thing, till he sees a very good or necessary reason for it.
II. The care we ought to have upon this account in re|spect to our Neighbour, is neither to set him an ill Ex|ample, nor give him Offence by abusing our Liberty. It gives too just a cause of suspition to be seen in disorder|ly Company, tho' we be ever so Sober our selves: and it is never to be excused from setting a very Ill Example, if we unduly or too frequently haunt these places. Indeed the Abuses committed in them are so Scandalous and In|famous; that I should think no consideration likelier to make us wise in this regard.
For it must be confessed, that Idleness and Tipling are Faults, wherever they are found: but in Publick-Houses they are doubly Scandalous and Shameful, because they are lyable so much more to expose to the View and Cen|sure of all the World. Therefore it is no new thing to see such matters animadverted upon. Claudius Caesar Tradit historicus Di|on, Claudium Caesarem Cau|ponas, inquas poturi diver|rerent, solvisse. Cael. Rhod. l. 27. Col. 1492. put down all Tipling-Houses. And if our Antient Laws take no notice of these matters; it is, because England, generally speaking, was a Sober Nation, till the Fashion was brought over from Forein Parts, where better things might have been learnt. But when once this evil Practice took place amongst us, the Inconveniencies were so many, the Scandals so gross and the Mischief, to the Publick so apparent, that you will find from that date nothing more strictly directed to be look'd after, nor attended with quicker Penalties upon the Offender, nor oftner re|peated than the Laws which animadvert upon those that unnecessarily haunt such Publick-Houses or that are the keepers of them; as well as those that are taken in actual disorder. 1. Iac. c. 9 4. Iac. c. 4. 7. Iac c. 10. 2. Iac. c. 7. 1. Car. c. 4. 3 Car. c. 3. . 2.
The Sum of all is this. It is justly expected, that the Honour of God, the Service of his Church and Good of Mens Souls should be always upon our Minds, when we give Testimonials for those that are to serve in Gods House: that neither for Fear nor Favour, but as in Con|science we may answer before God and Man for the Truth of what we certifie. As being well assured, if through Negligence or Easiness we Subscribe to what we are not well apprised of from our own experience; what|ever harm comes by the unfitness or Scandal of the Per|sons so recommended, we shall be deeply partakers of the Guilt of it, besides the great blame of Rashness in a matter

of that Importance. And as for avoiding offence we are to abstain from all appearance of Evil: so especially are we obliged not to engage our selves in those things, which are of Ill Report. For it would be inexcusable in us to abuse our Liberty in those things, which are of ill Fame: when it is our Duty to Abstain even from things of com|mon use and convenience, so oft as it may give offence. All things indeed are pure; but it is Evil for that Man whoRom. 14. 20. eateth with offence. The pretence of giving a greater lustre to Chastity by taking in Young Women to cohabit purely for Religious Conversation, would not pass upon the World. The Can. 3. by the name of . Council of Nice; ye know, as did afterwards several Imperial Laws and Provincial Councils, forbid all such practice, as Scandalous, because it has an ill Aspect; and would therefore make him have so too, that should take it upon him. For as it is a Datum in Mathematicks, that if you put unequal things to equal, the whole will be unequal: so it is in Morality likewise, if a Vertuous Man will be so unequally yoaked as to ven|ture upon an action that gives Scandal, himself shall thereby become scandalous. For the prevention of which these words of St. Paul may most fitly be applied, That noRom. 14. 13. Man put a Stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way.
Thus have I endeavoured to set down the substance of our Conference upon these two important Injunctions. Which when I weigh, with the Charge that lies upon us for their due Execution, I Tremble to think of the account we are to give. We are Messengers sent to deliver the Oracles of God; and Wo be to us, if we keep them back. We are Stewards of the manifold Mysteries of the Gospel, and Deplorable is our Case if we be not found Faithful.

We are Watchmen to Watch for the Souls of Men:  thro our fault they miscarry, our Souls are to ans it. Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, be Vig that whenever he shall come ye may be found prepare that comfortable Applause, Well done, good and  Servant. Amen.
Your Affectionate Brother,
H. 
FINIS.




