




Roman-Catholick Doctrines
NO NOVELTIES:
OR AN
ANSWER
TO
Dr. PIERCE'S Court-Sermon,
Mis-call'd
The Primitive Rule of Reformation.
By S. C. a Roman-Catholick.
1 PET. 3. 15.
Parati semper ad satisfactionem omni poscenti vos
rationem de e quae in vobis est spe, cum modesti
 timore, conscientiam habentes bonam, ut in eo
quod detrahunt vobis confundantur.
MDCLXIII.




TO THE
Queen-Mother.
_MADAM,
IT cannot be doubted but your Majesty has
of late been a great Sufferer, in being forced
to hear frequent and loud Triumphs for a
supposed Victory, which, by a Court-Ser|mon,
scarce an hour long, the English Pro|testant

Church at one blow, and without any
resistance, pretends to have a gained over the
Catholick.
But your sufferings were much more en|creased,
when you saw the immediatly follow|ing
effects of that and several other Sermons
of the like stile, which, by concert, at the same
time proclaimed distruction to that very
Christianity, which first expelled Paganism
out of our Nation.
Your Majesty has oftentimes heretofore
been wakened and affrighted with such A|larmes:
But then the Trumpets were blown
by men whose Profession and Religion obli|ged
them to renounce all humanity towards us,
and all respect to Monarchy. Whereas this
last unexpected blast proceeded from those,
who, even but yesterday, promised us, as a re|ward
for our common sufferings, a security
from those our common Enemies, whose ma|lice
and rage we only apprehended.
God forbid we should be astonish'd, as if
some strange thing hapned to us, to see our
Religion persecuted: It is impossible it should
be otherwise, because the great Enemy of Truth
and Charity wil never be reconciled to live
at peace with either. Yet when we see so

wonderful and so sudden a change in formerly
professed Friends, when not only the hands,
but the voice of Jacob, are become the voice
and hands of Eau: And when we, examin|ing
our selves, can neither find nor suspect any
demerit to provoke our Protestant Friends a|gainst
us; nor so much as imagin, what ad|vantage
they can gain by our ruine, but rather
an apparent harm to themselves: This being
a Case of suffering, for the entertaining
which we have no Pattern to prepare us, and
for mitigating which, all rational means are
uneffectual, we cannot forbid our selves a lit|tle
to wonder at it: Yet this great Blessing we
may reap from it, that thereby we are even
forced to our own happiness, by having recourse
for comfort and deliverance to God onely,
who, when the World goes farthest from us,
Himself approaches nearest to us, and looking
fixedly on him, we shall discover, by his Divine
Light, how our unexampled ingratitudes
have extorted from him unexampled pu|nishments.
So many years of oppressions, and such vicis|situdes
in them, have not diminished, much less
changed the constancy of our affections to
Creatures; we have passionately loved the

World, even when it was bitter to us; When
God called us to mourning and penitential
humiliations, we dissembled the taking notice
of it: In the midst of persecutions we conten|ded
in pride and vain jollities with our Op|pressors:
Yet now we see how mercifully God
deals with us, lest our former miseries should
prove beginnings of eternal ones, he has
brought upon us these new and unfore-seen af|flictions,
for a last Tryal whether his mighty
hand can humble us, or no. He has seen
that the fideliy we perform'd to our Temporal
Governors, and the charitable assistance we
afforded to our fellow suffring Brethren we
perhaps expected should be recompensed by
them in this life. Therefore he will have
us continue the same Duties more cordially,
now that we know and see that himself on|ly
must be our reward. Our complaints and
prayers (which are so far from mitigating,
that they rather incense some spirits against
us) he will force us to addresse to himself one|ly;
which if we do as we ought, and mend
our lives under his correction, we shal certain|ly
pacify him, and, when he sees it for our
good, conciliate men to us also; since for this
last, which onely can be doubed, we have no

lesse engagement than that of his own Word:
When the waies of a man please our Lord,Prov. 16. 7.
he will convert even his Enemies to him.
Madam, these reflections I can with much
more assurance represent to your Majesties
consideration, because, though hitherto the too
common in sensibility of Catholicks to God's
Visitations, has been much aggravated by our
neglect to follow so Christian an example of
humiliation, penitential austerities, contempt
of worldly vanities, and delight in solitary
retraits to converse with God, as your Ma|jesty
has afforded; yet it is now at last to be
hoped, that in the present dispersion of Ca|tholic
Pastors, if your Majesty could joyn
your Authority with your Example, they both
together would prove forcible means to invite
all Catholics to a serious compunction for
their former miscarriages, to an acknowledg|ment,
not only of the justice, but even merci|fulness
of our Lord's Visitations, to a willing|ness
in suffring for him, and an expectation of
deliverance onely from him.
Never certainly did our Nation, nor per|haps
any other afford two Catholic Courts
such perfect Schools of Piety, in which there
are two such Mistresses, of most peculiarly

Christian, though seldom found to be court|ly,
vertues; such are Humility, Mortifica|tion,
Penance, zeal for true Religion, e|quanimity
in Suffrings, assiduous and un|wearied
Devotions, c. But in a Genera|tion
so perverse as this, it must be somwhat
more then Example, that can render these
vertues fashionable abroad also. Insensible,
vain, tepid, and negligent Catholics must
see themselvs reprehended by the severity of
your Majesties looks, and if need be, condem|ned
by your charitable reproofs. Bravery and
curiosity of Attires, precious time mispent in
vain Conversations and Visits, magnificence
in entertainments, dissolution in dancing, c.
are justly to be esteem'd crimes unpardonable
in those upon whom the hand of our Lord
lies so heavy.
There is no joy now seasonable, nor indeed
excusable among Catholics, but a Joy in
suffring for truth and fidelity; For we never
had, till now, so comfortable a refreshment to
our afflictions. It is now made evident that
ur only fault is that which is our greatest
glory. We are threatned more severely then
ever, whilst we are declared most innocent.
In former Edicts for execution of Laws the

principal motives were a care for safety of
his Majesties Person, and the security of
the State and Government; Withdrawing
of Subjects from their natural Allegiance;
contriving of Seditious and Treasonable
practises; maintaining of rebellious princi|ples,
c. were formerly our pretended
crimes. Such was the stile in which the late
desolating Parliament represented to our
most Excellent King of glorious memory, a
necessity of persecuting and destroying his
most faithful Catholic Subjects, when, God
knowes, both His safety and security of the
Government was at the same time in design,
and shortly after in effect, destroy'd only by
the Representers themselves.
But now Treason is left out of our charge:
Nor is there any apprehension of the least dan|ger
from us to his Majesties Person or the
State: Nay, so publickly and constantly have
we asserted the innocence of our Religion in
the Point of fidelity to Princes, and such un|questioned
proofs thereof have we given by
our actions, that the Honorable Peers of this
very Parliament were in an immediate pre|paration
of mind to antiquate all the Sangui|nary
Laws against us: God Almighty

give repentance and pardon to the unhappy
obstructors of that grace.
Yet for all our innocence, Preachers must
be satisfied: They cry aloud their fears of the
increase of Popery; when as, for one new-professed
Catholic, who forsakes their
Churches, hundreds of all other Sects relin|quish
both their Churches and Allegiance
too. They impute as a Crime to us, what all
other Sects impute to them, and themselves
glory in, that we receive our Ordinations
from Rome, that is, that we are not a separa|ted
Sect, but members of the true Catholic
Church. For if there be indeed a Catholic
Church, Ordinations must be derived into
particular Countries from a Common Prin|ciple
and Fountain, otherwise the Cement of
Union and Subordination is dissolved.
But what esteem our former Princes had
of this pretended Crime, will appear by a late
example given by his Majesty of happy
memory;Sanderson's Hist. pag. 349. out of the Re|cords of the House of Commons, 1640. He had graciously reprieved a Priest
condemned at the Old Bayly. Hereupon the
Commons in the late unhappy Parliament
A. D. 1640. by Mr. Glyn, request the Lords
to joyn in a Petition to his Majesty, to be in|formed
who should dare to be instrumen|tal

in retarding Justice in the face of the
Parliament: To which the King by the Lord
Privy Seal (28 January) tels them the cause
of the reprieve was, because the man was
found guilty, as being a Priest only; up|on
which account neither King Iames,
nor Queen Elizabeth ever exercised the
penal Lawes. Notwithstanding, his Maje|sty
left the Prisoner to their wills, to live or
dye, according to their Votes; and thereby he
escaped; for even they had not the courage to
say, Let this mans blood be upon us and
our Children.
This, MADAM, is our condition:
A condition, though, according to the World's
estimation, to be bewailed, yet if we look up
to Heaven, it is a condition to be triumphed
in. Now we are sure a reward in Heaven
expects us, since we are thus recompenced upon
Earth. It becomes us all therefore, bending
the Knees of our Hearts, to give infinite
thanks to our gracious God, since it is now e|vidently
and confessedly for him onely, and
the Catholic verities revealed by him,
for the unity of his Mystical Body and the
religious fear we have of being guilty of
Schim, that we do, and shall hereafter
suffer.

This, Madam, is now our onely crime, and
this I am now actually committing, and am
so far from being asham'd [except only of the
imperfect manner of executing it] that I
have assumed the boldness to desire and hope
your Majesties approbation and defence both
of the crime and criminal Person: it is our
whole common Faith, delivered by God
to the Church, that both at Court, and
all over the Nation, has been publickly
traduced; some Doctrins have been char|ged
to be contrary to the honour and safety
of the State; others to be Doctrins of De|vils;
all of them to be Novelties and usur|pations;
our whole Catholic Church is
made to pass for a Sect, a separated Schis|matical
congregation; But from what other
Church, neither can our Accuser tell, nor
any one imagin.
Perhaps the present temper of the Times,
and delay of an Adversary appearing, had en|couraged
the Preacher to think his Sermon
un-answerable, not for any weight in his
proofs, but, because it may be in his power
to reply with an Instrument sharper than his
Pen. Notwithstanding, as Prudence did
justly restrain that impetuosity, which zeal to

Gods truth might move in the hearts of Ca|tholics
to retort this Cartel of Defiance,
which he has published against His Church:
so to remain utterly silent after so many re|impressions
of that Sermon in several
forms and after such diligent Translations of
it into forraign Languages, after that in|credible
avidity with which so many thousand
Copies of it have been snatched out of the
hands of the Readers, and from the Stalls of
the Sellers, this would be a confession of our
own guilt, and a distrust in our Cause, as pub|lick
as his challenge and provocation has been,
this would be indeed to be ashamed of Christ
and his truth before men.
For this reason, shutting my eyes to all ex|ternal
frights or discouragements, I presumed
to undertake an Answer to his Allegations,
hoping that some others of my Brethren would
do it with greater efficacy and fruit, than I
dare promise to this imperfect work: And ha|ving
this resolution, I took the boldness to in|scribe
your Majesties Name in the Front,
being assured that nothing could be more ac|ceptable,
nor a greater refreshment to your
most tenderly Christian heart, (which bears
an equal share in this our common oppression)

then to see that Faith, which you valew above
Crowns, at least not betray'd, and, truly I
confidently hope, demonstrated to remain un|prejudiced
by any thing alledged in that Ser|mon.
With this perswasion, I most humbly
beg leave to cast at your Majesties feet both
my self and Work, which, as it was under|taken,
not upon my own single judgment, so
that it may not appear in public, without your
Majesties approbation and protection, is
the most humble Suit and only Petition of,
14 May, 1663.
MADAM,
Your MAIESTIES
Most humbly Devoted
Servant
in our Lord,
S. C.





CHAP. I.

Of Doctor Pierce's Sermon
in General: What was
probably the inward design
of it.

_I Cannot forbid my self
to wonder that a Book
so universally esteem'd,
so often reprinted, and
not only reprinted in
our own, but transla|ted
into foreign Lan|guages,
should yet
lye open to so many and so plain Excepti|ons:
Not one period can I find that seems
to me Extraordinary; Not one Instance
but has long since been often objected
both with closer Reason and neater Rheto|rick:
So that now by experience, as well
as faith, I see 'tis true that the Scripture
sayes,Eccles. 9. The Race is not to the Wise, nor the
Battle to the Strong, nor favour to men

of Skill, but Time and Chance happens to
them all.
2. And are we not come to a fine passe,
when not onely a dozen perhaps of the great|est
and subtilest Controversies in Religion
shall be crowded into a short Sermon; but
exprest with such vanity and affectation of ex|otic
and abstruse Phrases, as if the end of
Preaching were nothing but to talk an hour
of hard things in harder words? Ask the
great Auditory of Lords and Ladies, that
heard this Doctor (Persons of clear and inge|nuous
apprehensions, who like good sense,
though not delivered in Greek, who pene|trate
into the connection of Things, though
they have not mis-spent their lives in studying
Words) Ask that Illustrious and Noble As|sembly,
what they think of the  of the
Emperor Zeno; or of the itching to be as old
as the Iulian period begun before the Proto|plast.
Some of them perhaps may have
heard of the Palladium of the Conclave; but
for the Embroidery of the Theopneust Aholiab,
or the Antiquaryes Keimeliah, I believe the
Ladies at least, were a little puzled on the sud|den
how to understand them; yet if those
pompous Sounds were translated into plain
English, not one of them but would easily see
the sense, without other Dictionary than
their own Cabinet.
3. As for the Doctor's profession in his E|pistle
Dedicatory, That his Resolution was,

the Sermon should never have been expos'd to the
World, had not his Majesty commanded it. I
readily beleeve him; for a Victory is easily
and very cheaply got, if a Controversie be to
be decided by a flourishing Speech, confident|ly
pronounc'd by a Person in esteem for Lear|ning
and Sincerity, in a Place where none
must contradict, especially when he protests
he has Proofs unquestionable for all his As|sertions.
But till those Proofs be examin'd,
the Conquest is only over the Hearer's passi|ons
not their reason: It may be, (and I pray
God this Sermon was not meant so) a good
preparation to usher in the Calvinistical zeal
for executing severities on innocent Persons,
who sincerely abhor the crimes deserving such
Rigors, and the unchristian Principles, the
Fountains of those Crimes: that is, on Per|sons
against whom the Law-givers themselves
have publickly professed they never intended
those punishments. This kind of Iustice he
may hope for from his Sermon, but a ratio|nal
conviction will never be the effect of it.
4. Truly Doctor Pierce must not blame us,
if we fear he had some such thoughts in his
mind, when he preached this Sermon, so dif|fering
from the style of Court-Sermons in the
times of his Majesty of glorious memory, and
of the late (as he styles him) immortal Arch|bishop.
But have we since those dayes deser|ved
such a change in the Tongues and Pens
of any Protestants, especially the Clergy?

By what crimes? Is it because we have ever
since been ready, and are so still, unanimously
to sacrifice our Blood and Fortunes for his
Majesty, by which also their Church hath
been maintained and setled against all the ir|reconcileable
enemies both of monarchy and
It? Methinks they might forgive us this fault,
both for past and future: For we shall fall in|to
it again, if they do not take care, by de|stroying
us, to prevent it.
5. This suspition of ours is much encrea|sed,
when we reflect on that bitter passage in
his Epistle Dedicatory, where he sayes, I sup|pose
my discourse, however innocent in it self,
will yet be likely to meet with many, not only
learned and subtile, but restless Enemies; men
of pleasant insinuations, and very plausible
snares; nay such as ar apt, where they have
power, to confute their Opponents with fire and
faggots.
Indeed it is possible his Sermon may some|where
fall into some such hands: But, unlesse
he will renounce all Charity, justice and hu|manity,
he must not impute particular
mens actions to Catholic Religion, and, for
their faults, expose us to the common hatred
and violence. Let all the received Canons of
the Church be searched, and if one be found
that justifies the shedding of blood simply on
the account of Religion, he may have some
pretence for such an indefinite odious reflexi|on
upon innocent suffering Christians.

Let all the practises of the World be ex|amined,
and it will clearly appear, 'tis not
Catholick Religion that's chargable with these
Excesses, since in so many places both they
are not, where it is; and are, where it is not.
And, though for some few of these later
Ages, the Civil Magistrates of some Coun|tries
have exercis'd a greater severity, then
aniently was us'd; Yet now even they have
entertain'd a more calm and tractable Spirit,
and seem to hope by other Arguments suffici|ently
to secure their Religion. However,
why must our England imitate the rigidest of
other Nations, against whom, for that very
reason, we so loudly exclaim; rather than
the moderate proceedings of those, who are
nearer us both in scituation, temper, and in|terest?
Why thus continually be harping up|on
one string that jarres, and never touch the
rest that move in harmony?
6. Our late unhappy wars have made the
Preacher and many others besides him Travel|lers;
We appeal to their consciences and ex|perience,
if they would be pleased to speak,
as Persons of honour and integrity; Did
they in any Catholick Countries, even
ROME it self (though here much spoken a|gainst
for cruelty) ever apprehend any dan|ger
for their opinions, or refusal to joyn in
the exercise of Catholick Religion? so they
would abstain from publick scandalous af|fronts
to the Church, they had freedom not

only with all quietnesse to enjoy their con|sciences,
but civilly to justifie their Doctrines.
All expressions of kindnesse, tendernesse and
compassion they received from their Catholick
Opponents, but surely not the least hard u|sage
that might imprint terrour in their
minds.
7. Thus much may be permitted us to al|ledge
in our own Defence upon this occasi|on
gives us by the Preacher; especially, con|sidering
we are the onely persons expos'd to
the publick hatred and rigour, though we
onely, of all the Dissenters from the Religi|on
of the Kingdom, least deserve it: For;
we are no Innovators, but Professors of
the same Religion that made this Nation
Christian. A Religion, though now too ge|nerally
decryed, yet in those times confirmed
by great Miracles, as even Protestants ac|knowledge:
A Religion, which for almost
a thousand years was onely known and pro|fessed
here. When the Reformation entred,
though almost all Subjects were Catholicks,
yet seeing the change was introduc'd by a
Supream Authority, no opposition was
made to it by any other Ames, but Prayers
and Tears: Whatsoever Treasons have been
acted by a few wretched persons, even our
Princes themselves have acquitted the gene|rality
of Catholicks thereof, and our Religion
from allowing them. There cannot be fra|med
any Formes of professing or acknowledg|ing

due Supremacy and Allegiance to our Kings,
but we are ready to subscribe them in the
same sense that the most learned Protestants
themselves ordinarily say they intend them.
Publick atttestations of our fidelity and
zeal, in serving and defending our Princes,
and even the Religion of the Kingdom (al|most
destroy'd by a Conspiracy of all other
Dissenters) have been made in our behalf, e|ven
by some, who now are most sharp against
us: Yet after all this, of them who are not
able to alledge any one of these excuses for
themselves some are rendered in a capacity to
Triumph over our Suffrings; unrepentant
Traytors are among our Accusers; though
it is known, the thing which most en|rages
them, is our fidelity; their Inve|ctives,
how false soever, are believ'd, and
they hope to become popular for their at|tempts
to destroy us.



CHAP. II.


Eleven Novelties charged on Catho|lics.
Schism imputed to Catholics.
Why necessary the Sermon should be
refuted by Catholics.
The Answerers protestation of since|rity.


1. THe Doctours Sermon, for as much as
concerns us Roman Catholicks, pre|tends
a double Design. First, Confidently
enough to assert that the Doctrines in which
we differ are on our parts meer Novelties, and
that Primitive Antiquity both of Scripture and
the four first General Councils stands clearly
for Protestants. Secondly, In consequence to
this, that not they, but the Roman Church a|lone
is guilty of Schism.
2. As to the first Part he exemplyfies in
these following Points of Catholick Doctrine,
which he saies are Novelties, and undertakes
to calculate the precise time of their Nativi|ty
1. The Supremacy of the Pope. 2. The

infallibility of the Church. 3. Purgatory.
4. Transubstantiation. 5. The Sacrifice of the
Masse. 6. Communion under one Species.
7. Worship of Images. 8. The Scriptures and
publick Divine Service in an unknown Tongue.
9. Invocation of Saints. 10. The forbidding
Mariage to Persons in holy Orders. 11. The
allowing Divorce for other causes besides Forni|cation.
3. Then concerning the other part of
his general Design about Schism, he acknow|ledges
that a real Schism there is, but that the
cause of it came from the Roman Church, which
made erroneous Novelties, new Articles of
their Creed, which errours the Reformers
were oblig'd in conscience to reject, and re|ject
them they did by warrantable and legal
Authority: So that though they separated
from the then present visible Church yet they
ought not to be called Schismatics, but that
Church is to be esteemed Schismatical, which
caused them to separate.
4. This is in grosse the substance of what
in his Sermon he alledges against Her, that
heretofore was this Churches Mother, and a
great proportion of whose kindnesse she still
enjoyes, the Roman Catholick Church. Now
considering with what triumphing applauses
this Sermon was heard, and with what a ge|neral
greedinesse thousands of the printed
Copies have been bought up, even by those
that formerly have not been curiously inqui|sitive

after Court Sermons for any good they
meant the Preachers. Would not Protestants
themselves in their hearts condemn Roman
Catholicks, if, being confidently perswaded,
(as truly for my part I am) that there is not
so much as one single allegation among all
his replenish'd Margins that reaches home to
a concluding proof of what he pretends to,
they should out of a treacherous fearfulnesse
be utterly silent, as acknowledging that now
they have a prostrated cause. And there|fore
if it be but onely out of fear of losing
their good opinion, somthing must be said
by us to acquaint him with his mistakes.
5. Now in my Remarks upon this Sermon,
I will follow his own order before summari|ly
set down: And both in the Points of Do|ctrine
and Schism I will select his Arguments,
adjoining to each Point respectively the
Quotations or Authorities of Fathers related
to in the Margins: And having done this, I
will sincerely discover the grounds upon
which I think I can Demonstrate, That he
has neither rationally concluded any of our
Catholick Doctrines to have been Novelties, nor
freed his own Church from the just imputati|on
of Schism.
6. And, knowing very well what candor,
sincerity and charity Almighty God requires
from those who undertake his cause, and the
cause of his Church; I do here call Him as a
witnesse upon my Soul, that my purpose is

studiously to avoid all cavilling distorsions
either of Texts of Scriptures, or the holy Fathers,
and much more those falsly called pia
fraudes, corruptions of either: And both in
my Answers and Objections, I will alledge no|thing
but what I am perswaded is both per|tinent
and efficacious to conclude that for
which it is produced, that is, I will bring no|thing
as a proof, which I for the present think
can be answered.
7. I am inform'd that he in his Sermon
made the like Protestation. If he did, I am
very glad for his own sake, that he forbore
to print, what he then spoke: because though I
must not charge him with wilful sincerity, yet
I believe he will find by this short Paper, that
he did neglect to make use of his best judge|ment
and caution, which certainly, if ever,
was most requisite, in a cause so important,
especially it being to be debated by one that
professed to supply the place of God himself
in his own House, and who spoke to no mean|er
Person than the KING, God's own Vice|erent.
8. But whether the Preacher in his Ser|mon,
the subject whereof was nothing but
Controversies, and such as his Text neither
invited, much lesse compelled im to under|take,
or however to debate them with such
Invectives and exulcerating digressions whe|ther
I say, herein he expressed that respect and
duty he owed his Majesty, that is, whether

such a distemper'd Sermon was conformable
to the Injunctions touching Preaching, which
his Majesty had lately commanded my Lord
Archbishop to communicate to the Clergy,
I leave to the Preachers own Conscience. If
he resolved to transgresse those Orders so be|comming
a Prince who lov'd the peace of his
Kingdoms, and still feels so much by their dis|unions
in Opinions: yet in reason he might
have abstained from letting the Court and
Kingdom see, that he had the courage to dis|obey
the King to his own face: The Univer|sity-ulpit,
or some City Congregations,
where such behaviour is in fashion, might
well enough have contented him.



CHAP. III.


Bishop Jewel's Challenge imitated
by Doctor Pierce.
Primitive Reformers acknowledge An|tiquity
to stand for Catholics.
The Doctor's notion of Beginning:
He is obliged thereto by an Act of
Parliament, 5 Eliz.
Five Questions proposed touching that
Notion.


1. VVHat ground or motive the
Preacher had to renew the vain
brag of Bishop Iewel, derided by his Adver|saries,
and condemned by his Brethren, it will
be lesse difficult for us to imagin, than for him|self
sincerely to acknowledge. However,
that, both that Bishop and He are singular in
this matter of challenging the concurrence
of Antiquity for themselves, and imputing
Novelty to the Catholic Church, we have a
cloud of Witnesses among the first Reformers,
both in grosse and by retayl, through all the

particular Points by him mentioned.
2. In general let him consider what Me|lancthon
writes:Melanct. in 1 Cor. 3. Presently from the beginning
of the Church, the antient Fathers obscured
the doctrine concerning the justice of Faith, en|creased
Ceremonies and devised peculiar Wor|ships.Pet. Mart. 1. devotis. p. 477.
In like manner Peter Martyr affirms,
That in the Church errours did beg in immedi|ately
after the Apostles times:Id. ib. p. 490. And that pre|sently
after their Age men began to decline from
the Word of God:Id. ib. p. 476. And therefore so long as we
insist upon Councils and Fathers, we shall al|wayes
be conversant in the same errours. In so
much as Beza had the arrogance to write
thus in an Epistle:Beza Epist. Teol. 1. I have said more than once,
and I suppose not without reason that compa|ring
the antient times of the Church, even those
immediately succeeding the Apostles with ours,
they had better Consciences, but lesse Knowledge:
On the contrary, We have more Knowledge, but
lesse Conscience. This is my Iudgement, c.
These are esteem'd as learned Writers as the
Reformation had; They spent their lives in
reading and examining Antiquity, and were
as willing to make it speak on their sides, as
the Preacher was: But as ill Consciences as they
had, they were convinced and forced pub|lickly
to confess that the Fathers were against
them, and focus.
And in particular Opposition to his
Claim of Antiquity, (like Bishop Iewels for
the first six Centuries) Doctor Fulk is so far

from concurring with him or Bishop Iewel,
that he is so choleric at the suspition of
such a charge, that he addresses himself to
his Adversary in this civil language;Fulk in Rejoynd. to Bristow. page. 4. I An|swer,
saies he, if he charge me with confessing
the continuing of the Church in incorruption for six
hundred years next after Christ, he lyeth in his
heart.
3. One passage there is of that famous
Andreas Duditius, which truly I cannot read
without extream compassion and astonish|ment
at the dreadful judgment of God, and
it may do Doctor Pierce much good, if he
sadly reflect on it. Many years he had lived
in great esteem for learning and prudence, a
Catholick Bishop of Petscben in Hungary, called
Quinque Ecclesiae; present he was at the frame|ing
the Decrees of the Council of Trent: But
at last falling in love with a Maid of honour in
the Queen of Hungaries Court, to marry her, he
quitted both his Bishoprick and Religion. This
poor man in his declining Age could not ab|stain
from confessing in a Letter to Beza his
unsatisfaction in his new Religion, vainly
hoping some either Cordial or Opiate for his
distressed Conscience, from one as deeply
plunged, and by the very same motives enga|ged
in the same change. I pray observe his
words:Andre, Duditius in Epist. Theol. Beza. 1. [Si veritas est, saies he, quam veteres
Patres, c.] If that be truth which the antient
Fathers, by mutual consent have professed, it will
entirely stand on the Papists side: For if heretofore

any Controversies out of a beat of Disputation aros
between the learned among them, an end was pre|sently
imposed thereto by Decrees of Councils or e|ven
of the Pope alone. But what strange people
have we among us? They are alwaies wandring,
toss'd with every wind of Doctrine, and being hur|ried
into the main Deep, they are carried some|times
this way, sometimes another. If you would
inform your self what their Iudgment to day is
touching Religion, you may perhaps come to know
it: But what it will be to morrow on the same Ar|gument,
neither themselves nor you can certainly
affirm: Thus Duditius. And what Cordial
against this scrupulous Melancholly does
Beza his good friend afford him? Take it
from himself:Ibid. [Scio speciosum esse venerandae
velustatis nomen, c.] I know the name of ve|nerable
Antiquity is very specious: But whence
shall we fetch the beginning of that Title, but
from the Prophets and Apostles? For, as for Wri|ters
that come after them, if we will take their
own advice, we will believe them on no other terms
but as far as they shall evidently make good what
they deliver, out of the Holy Scriptures: That
is in effect, have but the Christian mode|sty
and humility to prefer your own sense of
Scriptures before all the Fathers and Councils of
Gods Church, and then nothing, they say,
need to trouble you: Antiquity, venerable
Antiquity will be on your side: You may con|fidently
say of all your Adversaries Doctrins,
From the Beginning it was not so.

4. Many other Confessions of the like nature
might be added: but for brevity-sake I will
content my self with onely one more, and
that is (as it seems to me) a secret acknow|ledgement
of the Church of England in her
publick Liturgy, directly contrary to the
Preachers pretension and applications of his
Text, by which she, after a sort, imputes
Novelty to her self, and confesses the Roman
to be that Church which was from the begin|ning.
In the Order for Morning-prayer
there are these Versicles and Responds.
V. O. Lord save the King.Common-Prayer-book.
R. And mercifully hear us when we call up|on
thee.
V. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.
R. And make thy chosen people joyfull.
V. O Lord save thy People.
R. And bless thine Inheritance.
Then follows a Versicle for Peace. Now
these, as almost all the other Prayers, are ma|festly
translated out of the Roman Office. But
that which ought to be observed, is, That in
the Roman Office there is a Versicle and Re|spond
immediately following these, and going
before the Versicle for Peace, which the Eng|lish
Church has studiously left out; and that is
this,Memento congregationis tuae Domie quam pssedisi AB INITIO.
V. Be mindfull of thy Congregation (O
Lord.)
R. Which thou didst possess from the begin|ning.

Now the ground why this special Versicle
or Prayer for the Church was left out, is not
so mysterious, but it may be very probably
guess'd at.
The first Reformers did not love to put
God in mind of that Church which was from
the beginning: Or rather they were desirous
the People should forget the Church which
was from the beginning: They had rather no
Prayers at all should be made for the Church,
than for one that was from the beginning,
because apparently that could not be the Re|formed
Church of England, whose beginning
themselves saw.
5. Notwithstanding such plain Confessi|ons
of these Pillars of Reformation, yet the Do|ctor
confidently stands (with a little con|traction
and abatement) to Bishop Iewel's
Challenge: He indeed mentions 27. Points,
of which 22. are about circumstantial matters
touching the Eucharist, and two more of
them [viz. 1. That Ignorance is the Mother
and Cause of true Devotion and Obedi|ence.
2. And that the Lay-people (if he
speaks of them in general) are forbidden to
read the Word of God in their own tongue,]
are Calumnies. The other are three indeed
of the Preacher's points, viz. 1. Supremacy of
the Pope. 2. Worship of Images. 3. Com|mon-prayers
in a strange tongue, though the
only fault he can find in this last, is, That the
later Church hath adhered too close to An|tiquity;

that the hath not varied in the lan|guage
of her Devotions from her Predeces|sors;
and, after A. D. 600. continued to
say her Prayers in the same Language she
did before. But then this Bishop, (as being
somewhat better experienc'd in Antiquity
than Doctor Pierce) had not the confidence
in this his Catalogue to reckon as Novelties
either the Infallability of the Church, Invo|cation
of Saints, Purgatory, or Prayer for the
Dead, Celibacy of the Clergy, or Sacrifice of
the Mass. So much more courage had the
Preacher than even Bishop Iewel himself.
Well, between both, all antiquity is for them,
and nothing but novelty on our side. No
doubt but his admiring and believing Hea|rers
assured themselves that some never-be|fore-examined
Witnesses, some hitherto un|known
or un-observed Records had been found
out by their learned and confident Preacher,
to justifie their deserted claim of Antiquity, I
mean by way of aggression, and not simple
defence. But when the Sermon is publish'd,
nothing appears in the Text or Margins, but
Assertions and Quotations an hundred times
before produced, and as often silenced, ma|ny
of which too (as he explains them) have
no regard to the publick received Doctrin of
the Catholic Church, but particular Opinions
of some Catholic Divines, as much disputed
against by other Catholics as by Protestants.
6. However to qualifie a little the admira|tion

that many Protestants have of their new
Champion, or Hyperaspista, as he calls it, som|thing
must be said thi hundred and one time
to old allegations and new mistakes. And
first, whereas in all points now in debate be|tween
us, he so often repeats, From the Begin|ning
it was not so; He did very well to fix a no|tion
and conception of this word Beginning,
or a distinct measure of time after which only
whatever Doctrins are broached, ought in his
opinion, to be esteemed Novelties; Novelties
of so great importance, as to justifie a separa|tion
from the external communion of all Chur|ches
both Eastern and Western. And that is
the time of the Apostles, and so downward, till
the fourth General Council inclusively: This
he has don not out of a voluntary liberality,
but because an Act of Parliament obliges him,
wherein it is said: That such persons, (Laicks
or Ecclesiasticks) to whom Queen Elizabeth
shall,Stat 1 Eliz. by Letters patents under the great Seal of
England, give authority to execute any Iuris|diction
spiritual, or to correct any Errors, Here|sies,
Schisms, c, shall not in any wise have au|thority
to adjudge any matter or caus to be Here|sy,
but only such as heretofore have been determi|ned
to be Heresy by the authority of the Canonical
Scriptures, or by the first four General Coun|cils,
or any of them, or by any other General
Council, wherein the same was declared Heres
by the express and plain words of the said Can|nical
Scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be

judged to be Heresy by the High Court of Par|liament
with the assent of the Clergy in their
Convocation.
7. By this Proviso it appears, that, though
in words the Doctor is more liberal to us than
the Presbyterians and other Sects, who will
call all things Novelties, which they think are
not in express Scripture, yet the Law would
have allow'd him a greater extent, for the
might have enlarg'd the time beyond the four
first General Councils to any succeding Coun|cil,
that (in the Opinion of Commissioners)
judged Heresy by express Scripture, or to fu|ture
Acts of Parliament, judging after the
same manner: but we are content with, and
thank him for his allowance.
8. Only he must give us leave to propound
a few Questions upon this occasion;Quest. 1. As first,
Does he submit only to the four first General
Councils, because they had an Authority in|herent
in them obliging him thereto? Or
because he judged their Decisions conform|able
to God's express word? If the former,
then he must inform us, why only four Coun|cils
have such authority, which it seems the
Church lost as soon as the Fathers at Chalce|don
rose? If the later, then he deludes us, and
with Presbyterians, Independents, Quakers,
c. makes Scripture alone in effect th Rule
of Reformation, and Protestants only the In|terpreters
of that Rule: Because the Statute
tyes no further to any General Council, than as

that Council is believ'd to proceed according
to express Scripture: which, whether it does
or no, who must be Judge, Doctor Pierce? To
answer this Question well will be a great Ma|ster-piece:
I am sure his late immortal Arch|bishop
found it a Task too hard for himself, as
shall be seen before we part: too hard I say to
resolve so, that any rational man can be satis|fied
with.
9. A second Question is,Quest. 2. Whether to judge
of Heresy, that is to determin authoritatively
what is Heresy, and what is conformable to
Scripture, be not an Act of Iurisdiction
parely Spiritual and Pastoral? (though it
seems to reside notwithstanding sometimes in
Lay-Commissioners, but ordinarily in the
Parliament) And this not being possible to
be denyed, then he must be further ask'd,
since by one of the 39. Articles it is affirmed,
That General Councils may and have err'd, whe|ther
the English judge of Heresy (be it the
King, as in the days of Henry the 8th and
Edw. the 6th. or the Parliament also, as in
Queen Elizabeths) be infallible or no? If he
acknowledge it infallible, he must resolve us,
whether the Supreme Temporal Authority,
with the assent of the Clergy be infallile only
in England, or in other Countrys also as Hol|land,
Swedland? c. If the former, he must
shew what Promises our Lord has made to
England alone. If the later, then it will fol|low
that that may, and certainly will be He|resy

and contrary to Scripture in England,
which England it self confesses is not Heresy
beyond Sea. But if no such Authority be in|deed
infallible, then it will follow, that De|cisions,
made by it, do not oblige in Consci|ence:
and by consequence in his Opinion
there is no Spiritual Authority on earth that
does so, I mean oblige, not only to non-contradiction,
but to internal assent. The conse|quences
of which Position he may imagin, and
shal see anon.
10. A third Question is,Quest. 3. Whether since
Presbyterians and Independents, and all such
Reformed Churches, following the Heresy of
Aerius, do directly oppose the Order of Bishops
and their Iurisdiction, (that is, the whole
frame of God's Church) manifestly asserted
in the four first General Councils, and as is
here affirmed, of Divine Right by expresse
Scripture; whether, I say, they be not, accor|ding
to this Rule formal Heretics, or however
Schismatics; since to alter this Frame, they
relinquish'd both this Church and ours? And
especally for their denying the Supream Ec|clesiastical,
or Spiritual Authority, to be in
Temporal Governors, which yet the Statute
tells us, in effect, is the fundamental Corner-stone
of the English Church? If all this do not
render them Heretics, or at least in the high|est
degree Schismatics, what will become of
this Act of Parliament, and his Primitive Rule
of Reformation? If they be such, what will

become of the English Church, which gives
to Heretics and Schismatics the right-hand
of Fellowship, and acknowledges them holy|Christian
Reformed Congregations? And on
the other side, since, notwithstanding the ex|tremity
of passion against Catholics, if was ne|ver
yet pronounced that Roman Catholics are
Heretics, nor possibly could by their own
Rule and measute; how comes it to passe that
we alone are punish'd with death as Heretics,
and this meerly for Religion since we both of|ten
have justified and still are ready to justifie
our Principles of Fidelity and Peaceableness
beyond all exception; which yet no other
Diffenters from this Church, though real He|retics
and Schismatics, either have, or I fear
will do?
10. A fourth Question shall be,Quest. 4. how can
the Preacher answer to God for abusing Scri|pture,
and mis-applying, through the whole
Sermon, his Text, to the prejudice of his
Church? He pretends that our Saviour's
words are to be esteem'd the Pattern, or
Primitive Rule of Reformation, and con|sequently,
as our Lord demonstrated Pha|rasaical
Divorces to be illegal, because Ab
initio non fuit sic: So the Dctor pre|tends
to prove the Justice and Legality of
the English Reformation, because, by the like
examinaton, he finds that Roman Doctrins
are  and that  initio non fuit sic;
Therefore they, as Jewish Divorces, are 

abolished, and that only to be confirmed,
which God instituted from the Beginning.
But he little considers that our Saviours say|ing,
It was not so, signifies, It was directly con|tray
to SO, as if he said, You allow Divorces,
ob quamcunque causam, in manifest opposition
to God's Ordinance from the Beginning,
who said, Whomsoever God hath joyn'd, let no
man put asunder: This is therefore a Novelty
necessary to be reform'd. Now, if the Preacher
would have made use of this, indeed, perfect
Primive Rule of Refermation, he by his Text
was obliged to have produced from the Be|ginning,
that is either in Scriptures, or in the
Fathers within the four first General Councils,
some expresse Authorities and Decisions di|rectly
contrary to Roman Doctrines, which
he calls Novelties: He ought to have quoted
out of Holy Scriptures, or some Councils
or consent of Fathers, such sayings as these:
1. St. Peter and his Successors never bad nor
ought to have any Supremacy of Iurisdiction.
2. The whole Church is a fallible Guide, not to be
relyed upon against our private sence of God's
Word. 3. There is no state after death in which
Souls may find refreshment by the prayers of the
living. 4. The body of Christ is not substanti|ally
present on the Altar. 5. There is no true
Christian Sacrifice 6. Both Elements are es|sential
to the Sacrament. 7. All respect to Ima|ges
is forbidden. 8. Invocation of Sains is un|lawful.
9. The Scriptures must be given into all

mens hands, without any certain guide to interpret
them. 10. Prayers not in a vulgar tongue, though
interpreted, are abominable. 11. To forbid the
use of Mariage to Priests is a Doctrine of Devils.
12. To separate Bed and Board among maried per|sons,
though when, without danger of their lives,
they cannot live together, is a practice condemn'd
by our Lord. And after all, 13. To break the
visible unity of God's Church, for Doctrines and
Practises not in themselves causing Damnation, but
onely said to be false, is the Duty of every good
Christian. Such sayings as these had been to
some purpose, they would have been perti|nent
to his Text; But no such appear. On
the contrary, it serves his turn to say again
and again, From the Beginning it was not so:
This is the burthen of his Song: If he can shew
that, because this is the first time, we hear or
read such a Doctrine (mentioned in any Ec|clesiastical
writer) as Origen, Tertullian, c.
therefore it is a Novelty, it was never in the
Church before, the saies somthing to the pur|pose.
But, let me ask him, was there no Do|ctrine
at all in the Church before it was writ|ten?
Or was there no Doctrine in the
Church but what was written? And again,
is all that's written in any Age still Extant,
and come to our hands? Or do those Fa|thers,
who first writ it, say, That they, or
their times first introduc'd it? No: On the
contrary, they expressly declaim against Inno|vations,

Noveltie is their Prescription against all
Heresies; So that for them to bring into the
Church any Doctrines not heard of, or not
received before, had been to profess them|selves
Hereticks, and there would not have
wanted other Fathers that would have con|demned
such Innovations: Which yet was
never done to Origen or Tertullian, c, for a|ny
Doctrines mentioned by the Preacher:
Whereas for other Errors they were suffici|ently
proscribed. From whence 'tis evident,
that, through the whole Sermon there is a
palpable misapplication of the Text, and that
the Preacher has been injurious to our Savi|our,
in making his just condemnation of the
Pharisees, a warrant for him unjustly to con|demn
his Church. Indeed, in all matters
left indifferent, and no way commanded
from the beginning, nor contrary to any
Divine Revelation, the Church of later
times may vary, as she thinks sit, either from
the practice, or injunctions of the former:
For example, supposing Celibacy of the
Clergy, (the 7th, Point the Doctor instances
in) had not been practised or mentioned
from the beginning; yet, if God had not
commanded the contrary, and the thing in it
self be feasible (of which more anon) the
Church of a later Age may lawfully enjoyn
it: The Rule therefore holds only for mat|ters
of Faith and Divine Revelation. In
which 'tis true, That the Later times may

not vary from the former; But yet, neither
doth the Rule hold in these, as to the express
terms of every Proposition that is matter of
Faith, but only as to the sense and substance.
It is not necessary that ab initio, God the Son
should be declared in expresse terms Consub|stantial
with the Father, which was first put
into the Christians reed by the Council
of Nice: But only that that Doctrine can
be shewed ab initio, which is identified in sense
with this: Nor can I think the Doctor, upon
second considerations, will offer to gainsay
so plain a truth.
But it is now time to Examin the parti|cular
Pints which he charges on the Church
as Novelties, and of each of which be saies
as unwarrantably, as our Lord, against the
Iewish Innovations said justly, From the be|ginning
it was not so.



CHAP. IV.

The sum of Dr. Pierce's Discourse
against the Pope's Supremacy en|ervated
by himself. The Churches
Doctrin touching that Supremacy.
The Text, Mark 10. 42. cleared.

1. IN the Doctor's Catalogue of Roman No|velties,
the first is, The Supremacy of
the Pope:Epist. Dedica Concerning which, he tells his Maje|stie,
he has spoken most at large, because it is a
Point wherein the honour and safety of his Domi|nions
are most concern'd; And because, by Bellar|min's
Assertion, it is the chief, if not onely
hirge on which does hang the whole stresse of the
Papal Fabrick.
This universal Superintendency or Supremacy ofSerm. pag. 10. Page 16.
the Pope (saies he) hath been a visible usurpation
ever since Boniface the 3d. to whom it was sold by
the most execrable Phocas, the greatest Villain in
the world, except Cromwel and Pontius Pilate,
not out of reverence to the Pope, but in displeasure

to Cyriacus, Patriark of Constantinople,
c.
2, In contradiction to this Usurpation, he
adds,Page 17. But from the beginning it was not so. For
we find in Scripture the Apostles were equally foun|dations
of the wall of God's City, c. They were all
as St. Cyprian saies,Page 18. Pari consortio praediti
 honoris,  potestatis: And S. Hierom is as
expresse: And sure Paul, who withstood Peter to
his face, was equal to him at the least. And for
any one Bishop to affect over his Brethren a Supre|macy
of Power and Iurisdiction is a most impudent
opposition both to the Letter and Sense of our Sa|viour's
precept, Mark 10. 42, 43, 44. They
that rule over the Gentiles exercise Lordship
over them, c. But so shall it not be among
you, but whosoever, c. Nay, by the Canons
of the two first General Councils,Ibid. every Patriark
and Bishop is appointed to be chief in his proper
Diocesse, as the Bishop of Rome is the chief in his.
And a strict Injunction is laid on all, the Bishop of
Rome not excepted, that they presume not to meddle
in any Diocesse but their own.Page 19. And the chief Pri|macies
of Order were granted to Rome and Con|stantinople,
not for having been the Sees of such
and such an Apostle, but for being the two Seas of
the two great Empires: Witnesse the famous Ca|non
of the General Council of Chalcedon, c.
Nay, the immediate Predecessr of Boniface the
third,Ibid. Pope Gregory the Great, calls the Ti|le
of Universal Bishop, a wicked, prophane,
and blasphemous Title, importing that the times of

Antichrist were at hand, c. Further adding,
That if any one Bishop were universal, there
would by consequence be a failing of the universal,
Church,Page 20. upon the failing of such a Bishop: Which
is an Argument ad homines, not easily to be an|swer'd,
whatsoever infirmity it may labour with in
its self, c. And upon that occasion he
makes an excursion about the Pope's infallibi|lity,
and his falling into Heresie, c. nothing
to the Point. Lastly, He concludes, that
Whosoever shall read at large the many Liberties of
the Gallican Church,Page 21. and the published confessions
of Popish Writers for more then a thousand years
together, touching the Papal Vsurpations, and
Right of Kings, he will not deny that the Supre|macy
of the Pope is but a prosperous Vsurpa|tion.
3. This is the substance of his Discourse
upon this Point of Novelty, the Supremacy of
the Pope. In answering which he must per|mit
me, yet without any prejudice to the
Cause, yea rather for a better clearing of it,
not to bind my self to his Order: Assuring
him, in the mean time, that I will not pur|posely
omit any thing material, either in his
Reasoning or Quotations.
1. And first in general, he must give me
leave to tell him, that by the Conclusion of
the foregoing Discourse, he has entirely en|ervated
all that went before. For by argu|ing
and asserting, That the Gallican Liberties
and Popish writings against Papal Vsurpations

do demonstrate that the Supremacy of the Pope 
but a prosperous Vsurpation: He clearly shows
that his fore-mentioned Reasons do not
touch the Catholic Cause at all: He acknow|ledges
those Writers to have been Roman Ca|tholics:
None can deny the French Church to
be a Member of the Roman Catholic Church,
acknowledged for such by the Pope himself,
and professing a subjection to him, as to the
Supream Spiritual Pastor of God's Church:
Therefore it is evident that what they deny
to the Pope, is not simply his Supremacy in
Spiritual matters, (which is all that will be
required of Protestants) but an extending of
that Supremacy beyond what they conceive the
received Ecclesiastical Canons do warrant:
(and this the English may as well be permit|ted
to do as the French.)
4. To the end therefore he may no longer
mistake this so important an Argument, I
will clearly set down the Churches Doctrine
concerning this matter. This Doctrine is
contained in that profession of Faith com|piled
by Pius 4. and extracted out of the
Council of Trent.Sess. 25. I believe that the Pope is the
Successor of St. Peter, and Vicar of Iesus Christ
on Earth: I acknowledg the Holy Catholic, Apo|stolic
and Roman Church, as the Mother and Mi|stress
of all other Churches. And more largely
in the Decree, with great circumspection fra|med
in the Council of Florence, and subscribed
by the Greeks.Concil. Floren. We do define that the Holy A|postolic

See and Bishop of Rome does enjoy a Su|premacy
through the whole world; And that the
Same Bishop of Rome is the Successor of St. Peter,
Prince of the Apostles, the true Vicar of Iesus
Christ, the Head of the Vniversal Church; the
Father and Teacher of all Christians; and that in
the Person of St. Peter he hath received from our
Lord Iesus Christ full power to feed, rule and go|vern
the whole Church in such manner as is ex|press'd
in the Acts of Oecuminical Councils and
the holy Canons.
This is the Decision of the Council of
Florence: The substance of the Doctrine of
which Decree, (by which the Pope, as Suc|cessor
of St. Peter, is acknowledg'd to have a
Jurisdiction over all Christians, to be regula|ted
by the Ecclesiastical Canons) is so received
even in France, notwithstanding all the Gal|lican
Liberties, that whoever denies it, will
not be esteem'd a Catholic. See what Cardinal
Palavicino writes touching the Cardinal of
Lorrain and his French Bishops proceedings a|bout
this Point in the Council of Trent.
5. This Jurisdiction the Preacher positive|ly
denies both to the Pope and St. Peter, affir|ming
It to be an impudent opposition both to the
Letter and sense of our Saviours forecited precept,Page 17.
Mark 10. But I heartily with Dr. Pierce
would look well on this passage of the Go|spel
once more, and ask his own reason,
though he should not be able to exclude all
the fumes of passion from it; Is Ecclesiastical

Authority in Superiors, and Subordination
of Inferiors forbidden in this Text? Will
one that calls himself a Regular Son of the
Church of England, by vertue of this Text
pronounce the Sentence of Decapitation (ac|cording
to his own pleasant expression) upon
his own Church, whosoever passes for the
Head of it, whether his Majesty, or my Lord
of Canterbury? On the contrary, I dare pro|nounce
that (not the affecting, but) lawful
exercising a Supremacy of Power and Iuris|diction
is so far from being an impudent oppositi|on
to this Precept, that it is establish'd by it.
For in this very Text expresse mention is
made of some that are great, yea some that are
the chiefest. And if he would have adjoyn'd
the next Verse to his Quotation, he would
have published to the most ignorant of his
Hearers of Readers his manifest abusing this
passage of Scripture: Our Saviour immedi|ately
adding,Mark. 10. 45. For even the Son of man came not
to be ministred unto, but to minister. Surely he
will not deny, but that our Saviour had Au|thority,
yea a Supremacy of Iurisdiction over
the Church, and only here proposes himself
as a Pattern of humility to be imitated by his
Apostles and their Successors. And what were
the Apostles? Church Governors without que|stion.
How then are they to imitate their
Supream Governor? In renouncing Superiori|ty?
Did he himself do so? By no means.Hebr. 5. 5. 6.
But as he did not glorifie himself to be an High

Priest: But he that said unto him thou art a Priest
forever after the order of Melchisedech: And be|ing
high Priest he did not forget his meek|nesse
and humility, consistent very well with
the vigour of Spiritual Jurisdiction: In like
manner his Apostles, (and all that succeed
him) are commanded not to affect Superiori|ty,
and when they are lawfully invested with
it, not to exercise it with such an arro|gant
pride as Heathen Princes usually do,
. Conc. Eph. 1. Can. 8.
they must neither , nor ;
neither ambitiously seek Superiority; nor
after a secular manner,1 Pet. 5. Lord it over the Flock of
Christ.
6. And now let the Doctor say where is
the impudent opposition of Supremacy and Iuris|diction
both to the letter and sense of our Saviours
Precept? Such an Argument as this, being
Magisterially and confidently pronounc'd,
might for half an hour serve his present turn
in the Pulpit: But I wonder he could have
the confidence to expose it to examination in
Print. 'Tis time we come a little closer to
examine this his first great Novelty.



CHAP. V.

The Doctor obliged to acknowledge
Submission due to the Pope's Au|thority,
as exercised during the
four General Councils. Of the Title
of Universal Bishop. It is not
generally admitted at this day.

1. HIs main Position in his forecited Dis|course
on this Argument is: That
a Supremacy of Iurisdiction challenged and
exercised by the Pope, as Successor of St. Pe|ter,
is a visible usurpation ever since Boni|face
the Third, to whom it was sold by the Ty|rant
Phocas: that is, it began about the year
606.A. D. 606. never before that time having been ac|knowledged
in God's Church. To prove
this, all the foregoing Reasons and Allegati|ons
are produced by him: From this usurpe
Authority, his English Church (forsooth)
hath made a Secession, as he demurely Phrases
it, and not from any Authority (if any were)
exercised by former Popes, especially during

the times of the four first General Councils.
A Primacy of Order he is content to allow him,
but by no means a Supremacy of Iurisdi|ction.
2. Whatsoever Authority then the Prede|cessors
of Pope Boniface the Third by consent
of other Churches enjoy'd, especially till the
end of the fourth General Council, he must
grant is no usurpation, and therefore a Le|gal
rightful Authority, from which, with|out
a formal Schism, they could not with|draw
themselves. He will not surely say with
one of their learned Bishops, That they take
from the Pope his lawful Christian Authority,
and give that (only) to the King, not his un|lawful
and Antichristian. So that the Con|troversy
between us is reduced to this precise
point, Whether before Boniface the Third's
time the Pope enjoyed a Supreme Iurisdiction
over the Catholic Church. This he denies.
On the contrary I here engage my self not on|ly
to prove he had it, but moreover, that not
the least degree or Iota of Iurisdiction will be
impos'd on them to acknowledge, for enjoy|ing
the Communion of the Catholic Church
more than the very same that Pope Boniface's
Predecessors within the times of the four first
General Councils confessedly exercised. I may
adde, that the new usurped Title, (as he says)
sold to him by Phocas, did not give him, nei|ther
did he pretend to by it, any more au|thority
than himself and his Predecessors for|merly

enjoy'd. And this is I be able to make
good, then not all the water in the Sea will
be able to wash off his Churches Schism
by his own confession.
3. Before I shew what Supremacy the Pre|decessor's
of Boniface the Third exercised in
the Church, it will be convenient to enquire
into the Bargain that, He says, Boniface made
with Phoca; what he gain'd by it; and why
his Predecessors St. Gregory the Great, and
Plagius refused it.
The Patriark of Constantinople, Iohn, out of
an humor of lightness and vanity, proper to
the Grecians, assumed the Title of [Episcopus
universalis, or Ocumenicus] Vniversal Bi|shop,
or Bishop of the whole World: A Title
that the Council of Chalcedon had in an E|pistle
given to Pope Leo, but which his Suc|cessors
like't not. Certain it is that Iohn in|tended
little more by it, but to be a distinction
of honor and preference above the other Ea|stern
Patriarks: For whilst he took that title, he
still acknowledg'd the Pope's Superiority, not
only of place, but authority over him. But be|ing
Bishop in a City, wherein the Emperor of the
world resided, he thought it not unbecomming
him to be called the Bishop of the world, as the
Emperor was the Governor. Perhaps indeed
his Successors, (if this ambition had been ei|ther
approv'd, or but connv'd at by the West)
would have endeavour'd to make it not a
meer empty Title, but would have invaded an

Authority, which the Title might seem to
warrant. Hereupon Pope Pelagius and after him
Pope Gregory the Great did vehemently resist
this foolish ambition of Iohn, though the
Emperor himself, to gain a dignity to his own
City, favor'd it in him.
4. Now the Arguments that these two
good Popes made use of against him, did not
so much combate Iohns present intention
(though his meer vain-glory and affectation
of Novelty deserved to be repressed) as the
probable consequences of such a Title, which
might argue, that besides himself there were
no Bishops in the Church: For if he were the
Vniversal Bishop, and the whole world his
Diocess, since by the Canons there can be but
one Bishop in a place, it would follow that all
others were only Bishops in name, and by
their Character had no other office but as his
Substitutes depending on his will, whereas
the Apostles received their Office and Autho|rity
immediately from our Lord himself: And
so their Successors, the Bishops, would never
acknowledge a receiving their Episcopal cha|racter
and right of Iurisdiction from any but
Christ himself. For, as in other Sacraments,
whoever administers Baptism, whether an A|postle
or an Heretic, Baptismus solius Christi+est,
says Saint Augustin: And again, Peter
and Iohn (sayth he) pray'd that the Holy
Ghost might come on those upon whom they im|posed
their hands, they did not give the Holy

Ghost (Acts 8.) They, as his Substitutes apply
the outward Element, but the inward vertue
of the Sacrament is administred only by our
Lord himself. And as a Subject that receives
n Office of Iurisdiction from the King, will
not esteem he derives that Authority from the
Person, who presents him the Letters patents,
or invests him ceremoniously in the Office,
but only the King. So though a particular
Bishop be ordained by a Metropolitan, a Primat,
a Patriarc, or by the Pope himself, and Iuris|diction
given him, they indeed are the Mini|sters
of Christ to convey his Characters and
Authority, they assign him the place in which
he is to exercise that Authority, but the inhe|rent
Authority it self Christ only gives him.
5. Upon these grounds Pope Pelagius thus
argues.Pelag. 2 Epist. [Vniversalitatis quoque nomen,
c.] Do not give heed to the name of Vni|versality
that John of Constantinople hath un|lawfully
usurped, c. For none of the Patri|triarks
did ever make use of so profane a Title:
Because if [the Bishop of Rome] the Supreme
Patriark be call'd an universal Patriark, the
Title would be taken away from the rest. But
God forbid this should happen, c. It therefore
John be permitted to take this Title, the honor
of all Patriarks is deny'd, and probably he, who
is called Vnivrsal, will perish in his error, and
there will not be found one Bishop in the state of
Truth. The very same arguments he knows
St. Gregory makes use of in several Epistles

both to the Emperor, to Iohn himself, and o|thers,
which being already produc'd by him
need not be repeated. Yet for all this nei|ther
Pelagius nor St. Gregory, notwithstand|ing
their detesting this Title, did therefore
quit their right to the Vniversal Pastorship of
the Church, and their Iurisdiction over all both
Bishops and Patriarks too: nay they assert it
in these very Epistles, wherein they are most
sharp against that Title, as shall be shew'd.
6. The reason of this, 'tis manifest, the Prea|cher
does not understand: therefore let him
not disdain to be inform'd. The like Or|der
that is observ'd in the Church of England,
he may conceive, is observed in the Catholic
Church: that is, that the same person may be
both a Bishop, an Archbishop, and a Primat; I
will add also the Supreme head of the Church,
as the Archbishop of Canterbury is among Ec|cesiasticks: [For as for his Majestys Suprema|cy
in Ecclesiastical affairs, it is not in this place
to be treated of.] Now my Lord of Canter|bury
is just like other Bishops, merely a Bishop
in his Diocese of Canterbury: He is likewise a
Metropolitan in his Province to visit all Bi|shops
in it, but he is not a Bishop in the other
Dioceses subject to him; for in them none have
Episcopal right but only the respective Bishops
themselves, which are not removeable by
him, unlesse they incur crimes that by the Ca|nons
deserve it. Lastly, he is a Primat over
both Provinces, that is, the whole Nation, yet

without prejudice to the other Metropolitan,
in whose office of Visitation and Ordinations
he cannot interpose; though he have a power
to summon him to a National Council, c.
And in this regard he may be stiled the Vni|versal
Pastor of England, and, by being so,
makes the Church of England to be one Na|tional
Church, which otherwise would have
two Episcopal heads. Yet if any one should
stile him the Vniversal Bishop of England, it
would not be endured, because he can exer|cise
Functions properly Episcopal in no other
Province or Diocese but his own. By conside|ring
this well, the Doctor may more clearly
apprehend how matters stand in the Catholic
Church.
7. For, though this Title of Vniversal Bi|shop
taken in some sense, might draw after it
such ill consequences, yet being apply'd to
the Supreme Pastor of God's Church, it might
innocently signifie no more but such a general
Superintendency, as the Scriptures allow to
St. Peter, and the Canons of the Church also
have acknowledged due to his Successors, and
with such an innocent meaning (as this Title
was used long before in the 3d. Act of the
Council of Chalcedon, without any contradi|ction
of the same Council to Pope Leo) Boni|face
the Third did accept it from Phocas:
yet having done so, it seems to me apparent
that he neither exercised nor challenged the
least access of Iurisdiction by it more than

himself and his Predecessors had enjoy'd.
And of this the Doctor himself shall be
Judge. If he can find any proof to the con|trary,
let him produce it, and I will immedi|ately
recall what I have said.
'Tis true, as appears in the History of the
Council of Trent, written by the Illustrious
and learned Cardinal Palavicino;Card. Palav. Hist. del. Conc. de Trento. lib. 19. c. 15, 16, c. lib. 20. c. 3. 9, c. lib. 21. c. 4, c. that there
was in that Council an earnest and constant
opposition made by the French Prelates a|gainst
naming the Pope, Bishop of the Vniversal
Church, who, in conclusion, absolutely gain|ed
the silencing of that Title: But this hap|pened
not because these denied to the Pope an
Universal Superintendency over the whole
Church, or over all Churches taken disjun|ctively,
for this they willingly acknowledged;
but they opposed this Title only as the Univer|sal
Church might be taken in a collective sense,
that is to say, as united in a General Council,
whereby a right of Superiority over a Gene|ral
Council may seem to be determin'd to the
prejudice of the Decisions of the Councils of
Constance and Basil, which in this matter
they allowed.



CHAP. IV.

The absolute necessity of a Supreme
Pastor in the Church. Supremacy
of Iurisdiction exercised by Pope
Boniface the Third his Predeces|sors,
viz. St. Gregory, P. Pela|gius,
P. Felix, P. Gelasius, P.
Leo. The 28th, Canon of Chal|cedon
illegal. Of the 2d. Canon
of the first Council of Constan|tinople.

1. BEing now to demonstrate (more
than a Primacy of Order) a pri|macy
of Iurisdiction in the Predecessors of
Boniface the Third, extending it self to
all Christians, all particular Prelates and
Churches: yet a Supremacy not unlimited,

(for then General Councils, would be useless)
but sufficient to preserve unity in the Church:
I will first, to make it appear reasonable, de|clare
the ground of the necessity of it, which
in brief is, as the Preacher will find by the
succeeding Testimonies of the Fathers; be|cause,
since General Councils (the only abso|lute
Supreme Authority Ecclesiastical) either
for want of agreement among Princes, or by
the inconvenience of the long absence of Pre|lates,
or great expences, c. can very seldom
be summon'd, it would be impossible, with|out
an Ordinary, constant, standing Supreme
Authority in the Church, to prevent Schisms,
that is, it is impossible the Church should sub|sist.
2. For what effect against Schism can be
expected from a meer Primacy of Order, a
, a sitting at the upper end of the
Table, a priviledge to speak first, or to collect
Votes? Therefore for a Protestant to deny a
Primacy of Iurisdiction to be necessary to con|serve
unity, as in a National Church, so in the
Vniversal, is to give up his own cause to the
Presbyterians. For all the subtilty of human
wit, without such a Concession, can never
answer the arguing thus,Ius Divinum Ministr. Evang. in Appd. prep. 5. If (according to the
Doctrin of the Fathers) there be a necssity of
setting up one Bishop ver many Fresbyters for
preventing Schism: there is (say they) as
great a necessity of setting up one Archbishop
ver many Bishops, and one Patriark over many

Arch-Bishops, and one Pope over all; unlesse men
will imagin that there is a danger of Schism only
among Presbyters, and not among Bishops, Arch-bishops,
c. which is contrary to reason, truth, hi|story,
and experience. But what expedient
now, without such a primacy of Iurisdiction,
can the Presbyterians find out against the mis|chief
of Schism? Truly no other, but by re|jecting
that Article of the Creed in which we
professe the (certainly visible) unity of the Ca|tholic
Church, that is, by believing that Schism
i no such ill thing, as that much care needs
be used to prevent it. But surely English
Protestants, not having blotted out of their
Creed that Article, since they acknowledge the
constituting one Bishop necessary to the unity
of a Diocesse c. will find great difficulty to
shew a reason why one Governor is not as ne|cessary
to the nity of the whole Church, to
which only both unity and Indefectibility is
promised, and without which, the unity of
Provinces or Dioceses are but factions.
3. Certain it is, that the antient Fathers
thought so, as shall be shewed. And because
new opinions arising do naturally cause de|bates
and contentions, from what causes so|ever
they flow, and contentions are apt to
generate Schisms, since likewise Ecclesiastical
Lawes are made to be observed every where, if
any particular Church were Independent of the
whole, there could be no remedy against Di|visions;
hence it is, that the Holy Fathers do

assert the necessity of a Supream Authority, and
assign thereto these Acts. 1. Either to de|termine,
or at least silence Disputes about o|pinions.
2. In those which are called
majores causae, (as wrongful Depositions of
Bishops, c.) either by appeals or consultations
to restore the Persons wrong'd, and punish
the wrong-doers. 3. To take care that
Discipline, establish'd by received canons, be e|very
where observ'd. 4. To judge when
there is a necessity of convening in General
Councils, and thereupon to summon all Bi|shops,
and, as far as the Authority of a common
Spiritual Father may extend, to oblige Princes
to permit their respective Bishops to meet.
4. These things thus premised, now fol|low
the Proofs demonstrating, that, before
Boniface the thirds time, suck like Acts of a
Supream Authority were practised by his Prede|cessors,
and submitted to generally in the
Church. I must not write a Volume, there|fore
I will select a few examples in all Ages,
which will at least recompence the Doctors
Anti-quotations, and when he shall require it,
many, many more shall be added.
5. To proceed therefore ascendendo;A. D. 590. St.
Gregory the Great, Predecessor of Boniface the
third, though he would not admit an Vniver|sal
Episcopacy, yet at the same time he chal|lenged
and exercised an Vniversal Superinten|dency:
Hence,Greg. M. lib. 2. all Indict. 11. Ep. 3. saies he, tis notorious that the See A|postolic
by Divine institution is preferr'd before all

Churches. And again more fully; The careIdem. lib. 7. jud. 2. Epist. 64.
of the Church was committed to the holy Apostle,
and Prince of the Apostles, St. Peter: The care
and principality of the Vniversal Church was com|mitted
to him, and yet he is not called the Vniver|sal
Apostle. Again, writing to the Bishop of
Syracusa, If any fault be found in any Bishops,Id. lib. 7. jud. 2: Epist. 64. I
know no Bishop that is not subject to the See Apo|stolic:
But when no fault exacts it, we are all, in
regard of humility, equal. And this subjection,
saies he elsewhere,Id. l. 2. Indict. 2. Ep. 63. both our most Religious Lord
the Emperor, and our Brother (John) Bishop of
the same City do frequently protest. And in an
Epistle to Natalis,Id. l. 2. Ind. 10. Ep. 37. Bishop of Salona, If, saith
he, any of the four Patriarks had committed such an
act, so great a disobedience would not have passed
without great scandal. Moreover in another
Epistle he declares how he had reversed the
judgment of the Church of Constaninople a|gainst
a Priest of Chalcedon, where he saies,Id. l. 5. Indict. 14. Ep. 24.
Dost not thou know that in the cause of John the
Priest against our Brother and Collegue, John of
Constantinople, he, according to the Canons, had
recourse to the See Apostolic, and that the cause was
determined by our Sentence? A world of like
examples more may be added: And in these
a primacy of Iurisdiction is manifest, which
therefore by his own confession is no Vsurpa|tion.
6. In the next place the immediate Prede|cessor
of St. Gregory,A. D. 577. Pope Pelagius the Second,
in the very same Epistle, in which he con|demns

the presumptuous Title of Vniversal
Bishop, assumed by Iohn of Constantinople, hath
this passage, writing to the Eastern Bishops,Pelag. 2. Ep. .
The Apostolic See is inform'd that John Bishop of
Constantinople out of this his presumption hath
convoked you to a Synod, whereas the authority of
assembling general Synods is by a special priviledge
deliver'd to the Apostolic See of St. Peter; neither
can we read of any Synod esteem'd to be ratified,
which was not establisht on the Apostolic Authority.
Therefore whatever you have decreed in your fore|said
Conventicle, by the Authority of St. Peter,
Prince of the Apostles, and the Speech of our Sa|viour,
who gave to Blessed Peter the power of bind|ing
and loosing, I do command all things determi|ned
by you to be void and repealed, c.
Again his,A. D. 494. not immediate, Predecessor, Pope
Gelasius is a yet more full and convincing
witnesse to the Popes Vniversal Iurisdiction,
upon this occasion. Pope Felix the second,A. D. 484.
who possessed St. Peters Chair next before
him, had been appealed and complain'd to
by Iohn Patriark of Alexandria, unjustly dis|possess'd
by Peter an Eutichian, whom the
Pope in a Synod of 42. Bishops excommunicated.
Moreover, upon the complaints of the same
Iohn, he cited Acacius Bishop of Constantinople
to appear: And upon his contumacy excom|municated
him likewise in this Form: Take
notice, saies he, that thou art deprived of Sacerdo|tal
honor, and Catholic Communion, and moreover,
that thou art segregated from the number of the

Faithful, having lost both the Name and Office of
Priestly Ministery, being condemned by us by the
judgment of the Holy Ghost and Apostolic Authori|y.
Yet this Sentence, not having been, as the
former was, denounced in a Synod, some Ea|stern
Bishops found fault with it. Whereupon
his next Successor Pope Gelasius justifies his
proceedings in an Epistle to the Bishop of Dar|dania,Felix 2. in Ep. ad Episc. Dard.
he shews that when any Heretic has bin
once condemned by a Synod, (as Sabellius, c.)
there was need of convoking new Synods for
the condemning his Followers: And that
this was the case of Acacius, who communi|cated
with Peter and Timotheus, Bishops of A|lexandria,
Eutychians, which Heresie had been
condemned in the Council of Chalcedon. In
consequence whereto he adds these Words:
Neither do we omit to signifie, which the whole
Church all the world over knows very well, that the
See of the blessed Apostle St. Peter, has a power to
loose whatsoever things shall be bound by the Sen|tences
of any Bishops whatsoever, as being the
Church which has a right to judge every other
Church, neither is it permitted to any one to censure
its judgment: Seeing the Canons have ordain'd
that appeals should be made to it from every part of
the World. Are these now marks onely of a
Primacy of Order, and not Supremacy of Iu|risdiction?
7. We will next enlarge a step to Pope Leo
the Great,A. D. 440. who began his Seat in the year 440.A. D. 451.
and in whose time the General Council of Chal|cedon

was assembled. How couragious and
constant an Assertor he was of his Supream
Iurisdiction, most of his Epistles witnesse, and
almost all Protestant Controverists complain.
He in his 53d.Leo M. in Ep. 53. Epistle to Anatolius, Bishop of
Constantinople; in the 54th. to the Emperor
Marcianus;Idem. Ep. 54. and the 55th. to the Empresse Pul|cheria,Idem Ep. 55.
vindicates the Derivation of his Au|thority,
not from the Imperial City, but St.
Peter, Prince of the Apostles.
8. Therefore, whereas the Preacher calls to
witnesse the famous Canon of Chalcedon,Serm. pag. 19. decree|ing
to the Bishop of Constantinople an equality
of priviledges with the Bishop of Rome; not for
any other reason then its having the good hap to be
one of the two Imperial Cities. If he had had a
mind to dealingenuously, he would have cal'd
it an infamous Canon surreptitiously made,
saith Liberatus, after the departure of the Iudges,Liberat in Brev. cap. 13.
the Senate, and of the Legats of the See Apostolic;
and entirely nullyfied by the protestation of
the said Legats,Socrat. Hist. l. 2. c. 5. and the Sentence of Pope Leo,
without whose consent, according to the antient
traditionary Law, nothing made in any Council
could oblige the Church. A Canon this was, so
despised during that whole Age and more,
that the memory of it only remained in the
Acts of that Council, but it was not inserted
among the other Canons, for as it appears by
the most antient Greek and Latin Copies of
that Council, by the collection of Dionisius
Exiguus,Theodor. Anag. in Syng. Can. and by the Testimony of Theodoret

Anagnostes a Grecian, the Council of Chalcedo
publisht only twenty seven Canons, whereas
now this is reckoned the 28th.
Lastly, A Canon this was, that Anatolius
Bishop of Constantinople (by whose briging
with some Bishops, and violence to others it
was compiled) was himself both ashamed
and sorrow for it,Leo. Ep. 55. ad Anat. as appears by St. Leo's an|swer
to him: And of which Pope Gelasius
forty years after affirms,Gelas P. Tom. de Anathem. Vinc. That the See Aposto|lic
never consented to it, the Emperor never imposed
it; Anatolius never made use of it, and the whole
matter was put in the power of the See Apostolic:
And therefore what the same See confirm'd, re|mained
in force, and that which it receiv'd not,
could not have any firmnesse.
9. Now because this enormous Canon was
pretended to be only a renewing of a former
Canon made in the second General Council of
Constantinople,A. D. 381. observe the false dealing of that
Bishop and his Clergy, in citing that Canon.
For whereas it was thus conceived, Let the
Bishop of Constantinople enjoy () pre|rogatives
of honor after the Bishop of Rome:Conc. Constanti|nop. 1. Can. 3.
These renewers of this Canon at Chalcedon,
fraudulently thrust in the words []
equal priviledges: As if, excepting only the
sitting in the second Chair, he was to enjoy
in the Church all the prerogatives of the See A|postolick:
A fancy which never entred into
the minds of those former Bishops. And in|deed
de facto after the fourth Council of Chal|cedon,

the new Patriark, by vertue of the ex|otic
power given him, presumed to summon
all the other Patriarks and Bishops in the East
to a Council; An attempt repressed by Pope
Leo.
And no doubt when afterward the usur|ped
the Title of Oecumenical Bishop, they
would not fear to give the same Title of Oe|cumenical
to their Councils too.
10. And as for the second Canon of that
Council of Constantinople quoted in the Mar|gin
of the Sermon,Serm. pag. 18 Concil. Const. 1. Can. 2. whereby the Eastern Pa|triarks
are forbidden to meddle in Ecclesiastical af|fairs
beyond the limits of their Provinces, what
is this to the Bishop of Rome? He is not so
much as named nor thought of in that Canon:
Neither was there ever any received Council in
Gods Church that excluded him from an uni|versal
Iurisdiction which the Doctor sees was
rcised by so many Popes at and after the
Council of Chalcedon, and he will see more be|fore
it.



CHAP. VII.

The Pope's Supremacy confirmed by a
Law of the Emperor Valentinian.
Decrees of Pope's had antiently the
force of Lawes: Yet with restri|ction.
The Pope's Supream Iu|risdiction
confirmd by Examples in
the Eastern Church. Appeals to the
See Apostolic decreed at Sardica,
where were present British Bishops.
Of the first Council at Arles, where
British Bishops likewise were pre|sent.
The sixth Canon of the
Council of Nice explain'd.

1. THere was an Imperial Law made by
Valentinian the third,Novel. Theodos. Tit. 24. (who began his
Reign A. D. 424.A. D. 424.) directed to the Bishops of
France, importing that Whatever had been, and
should be establish'd by the See Apostolick, should

have the force of a Law to them and all others. And
this the Emperor saies is Secundum veterem con|suetudinem.Ibid.
Moreover to shew the grounds
of that Law,Ibid. he further saie, That the Supre|macy
of the See Apostolic has been established both
by the merit of St. Peter, who is the Prince of E|piscopal
Society, and by the dignity of the City, and
by the sacred Authority of a Synod.
2. Now if we shall consider the weight of
such a publick Testimony, and how Christian
Catholick Emperors never made Lawes touch|ing
Ecclesiastical matters, but by the advice of
Bishops, and for the corroborating of former
Church Canons both touching Faith and Disci|pline,
and by no means for introducing of
new ones, we shall find a greater proof can
scarce be produced against the Preachers pre|tention,
That between the times of the four first
General Councils the Popes enjoyed only a primacy
of Order, and not Iurisdiction.
3. Though this Law seems too exces|sively
large, commanding That whatever
had been or should be, c. Pope Leo, who lived
in the same Age, limits the true sense of it,
when he commands That all the Decretals and
Constitutions both of Pope Innocent,Leo in Decret. T. 5. and all o|ther
his Predecessors, should be observed; namely,
such as are publish't touching Ecclesiastical Orders
and Canons: Or,Hilar. P. in Ep. d Ep. Provinc. Vien. as Pope Hilarius expresses it,
What ever Constitutions have been made by Popes
for the quiet of all Gods Priests, the observance of
Discipline and taking away confusions.

4. Examples of such publick Decrees of
unquestion'd Authority, even in the judge|ment
of the most learned Protestants,A. D. 385. to 418. we finde
made by Pope Zosimus,Zosim in Decret. c. 1. 2 Innocent. in Decret. c. 21.  tit. 45, 46, 47. Pope Innocent the First,
and Pope Siricius, who governed the Church
between the yeares 385. and 418. For as for
the Decretals pretended to be made by ante|cedent
Popes, they do except against them,
and perhaps not without ground, He will
not expect I should transcribe those authen|tick
Decrees to weary both him and my self
unnecessarily. He knows very well where to
find them. I will only adde, that such De|crees
were actually received as Laws by the
Churches of Spain, France, c. Hence it
is,Conc. Tolet. 4. that in the fourth Council of Toledo, the
Bishops say, For what is to be observed by us in
such Cases, Let us be informed by the Precepts of
the Apostolick See, and not follow our own, but our
common Fathers Instruction. And the Council
of Tours says,Conc. Turon. 11. Can. 20. What Bishop shall presume to act
contrary to such Decrees as have proceeded from
the See Apostolick? Notwithstanding, it was
not forbidden to Bishops to consider and ex|amin
such Decrees; for if they were made
upon misinformation, even Popes themselves
have declared that the force of them should
be suspended. And much more, if against
the ancient Canons; for saith Pope Zosimus
(ap. Gratian. 25. q. 1.) Even this Seat hath not
Authority to constitute or change any thing contra|ry
to the Statute of the Fathers.

5. As for the more Primitive times prece|ding
these, I will content my self with a few
examples, but such, and of so great weight,
that if the Preacher will be ingenuous, they
will even content him. In the recounting
of them it will not be necessary, I should ob|serve
exactly the Order of times in each of
them. And the first shall be a passage of the
great Saint Basil, who writing to St. Athana|sius
about suppressing Arianism in the East,
hath these words, It seems convenient to us to
write to the Bishop of Rome,Basil. Ep. 52. to desire him that he
would have regard to our affaires, and interpose
the judgment of his Decree, c. Moreover, that
he would give Authority to sm choice persons, who
may bring the Acts of the Council of Ariminum
for the annulling of those things that were violently
done there, c.
6. Again,A. D. 343. when the Synod of Antioch about
the year 343. assembled by Arians to the
prejudice of the Council of Nice, had framed
a new confession of Faith, it was argued of
nullity, saith Scrates,Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. . cap. 5. especially because Iu|lius
Bishop of Rome was neither himself pre|sent,
nor sent any to supply his place: Whereas
(saith he) the Ecclesiastical Canon commands
that no Decrees be established in the Church
without the assent of the Bishop of Rome And
this authority the same Pope Iulius asserts;
For writing to the Eastern Bishops, who had
condemned St. Athanasius,Apud Atha|nas. Apol. 2. he sayes thus,
[] Are you ignorant, this is the

custom that you should first write to us, and after
that determin just matters there? Therefore if
there were any ill suspition against that Bishop
[of Alexandria] you ought to have signified it
in the first place to the Church here.
7. Consonantly hereto Sozomen,Sozom. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. c 9. another
Greek Historian saith expresly, That there
was received in the Church a Sacerdotal law, de|claring
all things to be void that are done with|out
the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. Nay,
which is yet more, this (which for ought ap|pears
was only an unwritten Canon or Cu|stom,
for no Council mentions it, but deli|ver'd
by Tradition even in the Eastern Chur|ches)
was of such authority,Novel. Theod. tit. 24. that the fore|said
Emperor Valentinian makes it a Law-Imperial:
We decree, says he, that according to
the antient custom nothing be innovated in the
Church without the sentence of the Bishop of
Rome. Surely Dr. Pierce will acknowledge
these Testimonies argue more than a Primacy
of Order; here is a Iurisdiction, asserted, ex|tending
it self beyond the Diocesn, Metropo|litan
or Patriarcal limits of Rome.
8. I will add a few examples more: when
some Eastern Councils had deposed Athana|sius,
Patriark of Alexandria, Paul Bishop of
Constantinople, Marcellus Priat of Ancya,
and Asclepas, Bishop of Gaza, The Bishop of
Rome,Sozom. Hist. Eccl. . 3. c. 2. saith Sozomen, (to whom for the dig|nity
of his Throne the care of all things does
pertain) restored to every one of them their

own Church. And he adds further, That
he commanded those who had deposed them
to appear on a day appointed at Rome, to
give account of their judgement: threat|ning
that he would not leave them unpu|nish'd,
if they did not cease from innovating.
All this he did, saith Theodoret,Theod. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 4. [not by usur|pation,
but [] fol|lowing
the Churches law.
9. Again, when the General council of EphesusCor. Eph. p. 2. . 5 in relat|d Calest.
was entring into debate about the cause of
Iohn Patriark of Antioch, the Bp. of Ierusalem
interposed, affirming, that according to the an|tient
custom, the Church of Antioch as al|wayes
governed by the Roman; Whereupon the
whole Council remitted the judgement of that
Cause to the Pope.
10. Moreover, when Dioscorus, Patriark of
Alexandria, in the Scismatical Council of E|phesus
had deposed Flavian Bishop of Con|stantinople,
Flavian appealed to the Pope. And
this he did [] according
to the custom of Synods,Epist. ad The|odos. in peamb. Conc. Chalced. sayth the Emperor Va|lentinian.
11. Two examples more I will the rather
add, because we of this Nation are particular|ly
concern'd in them. The first is taken out
of the famous Council of Sardica assembled
about twenty years after that of Nice.A. D. 345. This
Council was by Iustinian called Oecumenical,
because, though the Eastern Bishops departed
before the conclusion; yet the Canons of it

were never rejected by them.Concil. Sar|dic. can. 3, 4. In the third
and fourth Canons of this Council it was or|dain'd,
upon a proposal made by the famous
Osius of Corduba, to this effect, That in any
Controversies between Bishops which could not
be determined in their own respective Provinces,
the person aggrieved might appeal to the Bishop
of Rome, who might renew the Process and ap|point
Iudges: And (by a second proposal of
Gaudentius a Bishop) in case any Bishop depo|sed
should make such an appeal, till the Pope had
determin'd the cause, it was not permitted that
another Bishop should be ordained in his place.
These Decrees the Council made to honor the
memory of St. Peter the Apostle.
12. Now at this Concil among other Bi|shops
from all the Western Countreys, some
came out of our Britany, as St. Athanasius an
eye-witness assured us.Athan. Apol. . And therefore the Ge|neral
Superintendency of the Pope over all
churches could not have been unknown in this
Nation long before St. Augustin the Monk, or
the Saxons had possession here. By which may
appear the slightness of the late found Welsh
paper, though much bragged of, in which the
Abbot of Bangor is said to have refused the
subjection to the Pope, which St. Augustin
requir'd of the British Bishops. For what
grosse ignorance was it in this Abbot (if the
Paper relate truth of him) That after all that
power exercised by that man called the Pope
over the whole Church of God, especially o|ver

the Western Provinces, and so much re|spect
return'd him from them after the pre|sence
of the British Bishops at so many famous
Councils, and after so many holy Bishops sent
for the conversion of these Islands by the Bi|shops
of Romes delegation, he should be such
a stranger to his person, or authority, or his
titles, after the year of our Lord 600? At
which time also the Irish Bishops are found
to have yielded all obedience to this Roman
Bishop, when the Britains thus denied it,
as appears Both in that they are said by vene|rable
Beda (the South-Irish at least) to have
returned very early to a right observation of
Easter Ad admonitionem Apostolicae sedis Anti|stitis,Hist. l. 3. . 3.
and also in that about this time they
sent Letters to St. Gregory then Pope, to know
after what manner they ought to receive in|to
the Church such as were converted from
Nestorianism, to whom he sends his Orders
concerning it directed Quirino Episcopo 
ceteris Episcopis in Hybernia Catholicis,Greg. 9 ep. 61.
as may be found in the Register of his E|pistles.
13. A second Monument wherein we Bri|tains
have a peculiar interest, is that most an|tient
first Council of Arles, celebrated accor|ding
to Baronius and Sirmondus (assented to
by Sir Henry Spelman) in the year 314. about
eleven years before the first Council of Nice.A. D. 314.
The Canons of this Council are directed to the
Bishop of Rome, as appears by the first Canon in

these words, First concerning the Paschal
observation of our Lord,Conc. Arlat. can. 1. that it be observed by
us upon one day and at one time through the
whole world; and that according to custom thou
wouldst direct Letters to all. And moreover
in the head of the Canons is inserted this Bre|viary
of their Epistle, To our most holy Lord
and Brother Silvester, Marinus and the Synod of
Bishops assembled together in the Town of Arles:
We have signified to your charity the things de|creed
by common Council, to the end that all may
know what they ought for the future to observe.
Here may be seen a Patriarchical council send|ing
their Decrees to the Bishop of Rome, as being
the chief person from whom all Christians are
to receive information of what they ought
to believe and practise, and by whom no
doubt they were to be obliged thereto. In
which regard St. Martin, Pope and Martyr,
makes this the Popes most proper Title, that
he is Custos Canonum Divinorum.
14. At this Council were present three Bi|shops
Representatives of the British Clergy, E|borius
Bishop of York, Restitutus Bishop of Loni+don,
Adelphius Bishop of (Maldon, called then)
Colonia Londinensium, with Sacerdos, a Priest,
and Arminius, a Deacon. And the Canons of
this Council, were by Restitutus brought into
Britany, saith Bishop Godwin out of Bale. By
which also it appears that neither the Pope
himself, nor his place and authority in the
Church were unknown, nor un-acknowledged

by the Britains long before St. Augustines
days.
15. And now it will be seasonable to answer
the Doctors great Objection grounded on that
famous 6th. Canon of the first Nicene Council,
by which he says, Every Patriarch and Bi|shop
is appointed to be chief in his proper Dio|cese,Serm. pag. 18.
as the Bishop of Rome is chief in his. This
is now to be examin'd. The words of the
Canon are, [, c.] Let
the antient Customs be still in force in Egypt,Conc. Nicen. 1. can. 6.
Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alex|andria
enjoy a Iurisdiction over them all:
In as much as such likewise is the custom of the
Bishop of Rome. In like manner both in An|tioch
and other Provinces, let the []
priviledges be preserv'd entire to every Church.
16. The true sense of this Canon will best
appear from the end for which it was enacted,
and that apparently was for the regulating
and composing disorders begun in Egypt by
Meletius Bishop of Lycopolis, who rebellious|ly
refused obedience to the Patriark of Alex|andria,
presuming to ordain Bishops inde|pendently
on him. This Scismatical attempt
the Council here represses, commanding that
according to the antient custom the Bishop of
Alexandria should have entire Iurisdiction
through all Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis; And
the Roman Bishop in his Patriarchat, and
may say in his Metropolitanship too is made
the Patern according to which this Regula|tion

is framed not in regard of his plenary
right, and universal Jurisdiction in the Church
of God, which (I have shewed already, and shall
demonstrate the same yet further, even in the
times preceding this Council) is extended to
the whole world, and was exercised over the
Patriarcs themselves, But only of the cu|stom
and practice of his calling Synods,
correcting manners, and making ordinations
according to his Patriarkal and Metropoliti|cal
Jurisdiction: for those words in the sixth
Nicene Canon, Similiter autem  apud caete|as
provincias, In like manner in the rest of the
Provinces, that is, those Provinces also that
were not such where a Patriarc resided, Ho|nor
suus unicuique servetur, Let every one's
Honor be preserved to him, compared with the
second Canon of the first Council of Con|stantinople,
and the eighth canon of the
Ephesian Council, shew clearly enough, that
not only Patriarkical authority, but Metropo|litical
also is spoken of in this canon, and the
Roman Bishops authority also herein made a
Pattern. And upon this ground that the
Canon intends not to equalize the Bishop of
Alexandria with the Bishop of Rome in his full
Jurisdiction,De concord. Sacerd.  Im|perii, . 7. n. 6. the most learned Marca late
Archbishop of Tholouse observes, that those
who object it against the Popes Primacy,
though they fortifie themselves even with
Ruinus his interposition of suburbicarian
Churches will gain but little by it, for it signi|signifies

no more but that the Bishop of Rome
did ordain either immediately or by Commis|sion
all the Bishops in the Suburbicarian
Churches, so ought the Bishop of Alexandria
to do in Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis.
17. But, though I mention this Version of
Ruffinus, because it is much applauded by our
primitive Reformers, and I expect Doctor
Piere, in his Reply, will have recourse to it,
yet it is a most groundlesse and sencelesse
Translation, or rather corruption of the Ca|non;
His words are, Vt apud Alexandriam,
 in urbe Roma vetusta consuetudo servetur,
ut ille Egypti, vel hic Suburbicariarum Eccle|siarum
sollicitudiem gerat. Against which
so much hath been written that it would be
to lose time to repeat it, especially to the Do|ctor,
who cannot be unacquainted with what
Erasm Prf. in Hilar. Erasmus andScalg. in Chron. Euseb. Baron Spond. Annal. 325. Peron. rep. to K. Iam. c. 33. Scalager have observed of
the Interpreter, that it is his custom to omit,
pervert and change the Text as he pleases;
and what Others with much Learning and
Judgement have said to this interpretation.
Not to speak of the Bishop of Rome's ju|risdiction
as first Patriarc, whereby the o|ther
Patriarcs were subordinate to him, be|ing
obliged even in this matter of their own
Ordinations to give him notice, sending with|al
a Confession of their Faith, upon the ap|probation
whereof, and of the legality of
their Election and Ordination, He confirm|ed
them or otherwise deposed them, of which

many examples may be produced: Whosoe|ver
hath but looked into Ecclesiastical History
must confesse that His particular Patriarchat
was far from being confined to the ten Sub|urbicarian
Provinces subject to the Vicariat
of Rome: Nay, it is manifest that it extended
to the whole Western Empire, which, besides
Italy, France, Spain, Germany, Britany, the
six Maritime Provinces of Africa, c. con|tained
Illyricum, Macedon, Epyrus, Greece,
and the Islands near it; And all this by the
confessions of Adversaries, Zonaras, Balsa|mon,Basil. Epist. 10.
c. writing on this very Canon. Hence
St. Basil calls the Bishop of Rome []
the head or chief of the Western Regi|ous.August. l. 1. cont. Julian. c. 2.
And St. Augustin says, that Pope Innocent
did preside over the VVestern Church. And St.
Hierom,Hieron. Epist. 77. Let them (says he) condemn me as
an Heretic with the VVest, as an Heretic with
Egypt,Justin. Novel. 123. that is with Damasus and Peter. And
Iustinian the Emperor affirms, that all the Re|gions
of the VVorld are subject to the five Pa|triarcs,
that is [] to VVe|stern
Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, The|polis
(or Antioch) and Ierusalem. Now unless
Hesperia signifies the whole VVest, to what Pa|triarc
was France, Spain, Africa, c sub|ject.Theod. l. 5. c. 23. If not to Rome, how can all Bishops be
said to be subject to five Patriarcs? Hence the
VVestern Bishops are by Theodores call'd ;
and by Sacrates .Socrat. l. 2. c. 29.



CHAP. VIII.

Proofs of the Popes Supreme Iurisdi|ction
before the first Council of
Nice. How all Apostles and all
Bishops equal: and how Subordi|nate.
St. Peter had more than a
Primacy of Order. Of St. Paul's
resisting St. Peter. The Popes
Supremacy not dangerous to States.
On the contrary, c. Protestants
writing in favour of it.

1. BUt as yet our Proofs of Primacy of
Iurisdiction in the Successor of St.
Peter, though they reach to the Beginning in
the latitude fixed by the Doctor, and truly I
am perswaded to an indifferent Reader will
appear more credible than any his Margins
furnish to the contrary: Yet they may be
continued, till we come even to the Presbyte|rians,
Independants and Quakers Beginning

too, that is, the Gospels themselves. To de|monstrate
this, we will make a short enquiry
into the times of the Church before Constan|tin,
whilst it was a mere suffering Church, inca|pable
of conspiring either in or out of General
Councils: But withal a Church lesse disper|sed
and torn by Heresies or contentions a|mong
Bishops, and therefore lesse needing
this Preservative against Schisms, Supreme Au|thority.
2. In these holy peaceable times therore be|fore
Silvester, I will content my self with two
or three examples to prove the acknowledge|ment
of such a Primacy. And the first shall
be of St. Melchiades the immediat Predecessor
of Pope Silvester:A. D. 311. St. Augustin will afford us a
Testimony of his care and authority extended
into Africk,Aug Epist. 162. whose words are, [Qualis ip|sius
Melchiadis ultima est prolata Sententia,
c.] Such an one was the last sentence
Melchiades himself pronounced (in judge|ing
the cause of Donatus:) by which he
would not have the boldnesse to remove
from his Communion his Collegues, (the
Catholic Bishops in Africa) in whom no
crime could be proved: And having censu|red
most deeply Donatus alone, whom he
found to have been the Original of all the
mischief, he gave a free choyce of healing
the breaches of Scism to all the rest of his
Followers: being also in a readiness to send
communicatory Letters to those (subdi|vided

Scismatics) that were ordained by
Majorinus (a Donatist Bishop:) in so much
as his Sentence was, that in whatsoever Ci|ties
of Africk there were two Bishops dis|senters
(a Catholic and a Donatist he should
be confirm'd in the Bishoprick, who was
first ordained, c. and that another Dio|cese
should be provided which the other
should govern. O Son of Christian peace!
and truly Father of the Christian flock, says
St. Augustin.
3. I will add to this three other examples,
in which, though as to the use and admini|stration
of the Superintendency som Objecti|ons
have been made, yet they suffice to con|firm
the acknowledgement of such a Super|intendency
in the Pope as the Preacher denies.
The first is of Pope Stephanus contemporary
with St. Cyprian and his fellow in Martyr|dom,A. D. 258.
concerning whom we read in Eusebius,Euseb. Hist.
that he either inflicted,Eccles. lib. 7. c. 4. 6. or at least threatned
excommunication to som of the Churches of
Asia that held a necessity of Rebaptization af|ter
Baptism received by Heretics. And in
the same quarrel, between the same Pope Ste|phas
and St. Cyprian himself,Cypr. Epist. 75 matters were
almost brought to the like extremity: yet nei|ther
did St. Cyprian, though wonderfully
sharp, nor even that violent Cappadocian Bi|shop,
Firmilianus ever question the Popes
Authority, though, as they thought, unjustly
employed

4. The other is extant in the same St. Cy|prian,
who endeavour'd to peswade the Pope
to depose Marcianus a Metropolitan Bishop of
Arles, siding with Novatian; His words to
Pope Stephanus about it are these,Id. Epist. 67. Let Letters
be directed from thee into the Province, and to the
people of Arls, commanding that Marcianus be
excommunicated, and another put in his place.
And to the like purpose is another Epistle of
his in a cause touching two Spanish Bishops,Id. Epist. 68.
upon mis-information restor'd by the
Pope.
5. The third is that so well known exam|ple
of Pope Victor,A. D. 19. concerning whom Euse|bius
thus writes,Euseb. Hist. Eccl. Victor endeavours to cut off
from the fellowship of Communion the Churches
of Asia, as declining into Heresie, and sends Let|ters
by which he would divide them all indifferently
from the Ecclesiastical Society, c. But there are
extant Letters of Bishops by whom Victor is sharp|ly
reproved, as one that was carelesse of the com|modity
of the whole Church. Particularly I|reneus
reprehends him, telling him, that he did ve|ry
ill to divide from the unity of the whole Body so
many and so great Churches. Now in such re|proofs
from Ireneus, and even Polycrates an
Asian Bishop, himself the ring-leader of the
party of the Quart decimani against St. Victor,
it was not impued to Victor that he exercised
an usurped Authority over Bishops not sub|ject
to him, but that the cause of exercising
his just Authority was ot sufficiently
weighty.

6. Having proceeded thus far, our last step
shall be to the utmost degree, the very begin|ning
it self, our Lord and St. Peter in the Gos|pels.
And here we will acknowledge what
the Dctor saies, that all the Twelve Apostles
were equally foundations of the Churches building:Serm. page. 18.
That the same Authority which was first given to
St. Peter alone, sustaining the person of the whole
Church, was afterward given to the rest of the A|postles;
that as St. Cyprian saies, the same that
St. Peter was, the rest of the Apostles likewise
were [pari consortio praediti, c.] endowed with
an equal participation of honor and power. And as
St. Hierom affirms, that all Bishops in all places
whether at Rome or Eugubium, [Canterbury
or Rochester] are of the very same merit, c.
But he will give leave to the Scripture to in|terpret
it self, and to the Fathers to interpret
both it and themselves. We grant therefore
that all the Apostles, and all Bishops their Suc|cessors,
enjoy the whole latitude of Apostolic
and Episcopal Iurisdiction, for as much as con|cerns
the internal, essential qualifications of ei|ther:
But for the external administration
there may be, and alwaies was acknowledg|ed,
a subordination and different latitude in
the exercise of the same authority both a|mong
the Apostles and Bishops. Let him not
find fault with this distinction; for they
themselves have occasion somtimes to make
use of it to the like purpose. Arch-bishop
Whitgift, in his Defence of the Answer to the

Admonition, affirms, that Archbishops, quoad
Ministerium, do not differ from other Pastors, but
touching Government, page 303. And after|ward
page 386. Answering the same Argu|ment
out of St. Hierom, who equals the mean|est
Bishop with the Pope, he saies, that they are
equal quoad Ministerium, but not quoad polittam.
7. Let him take therefore an example il|lustrating
this at home. What Function,
what Act of Iurisdiction can my Lord of Can|terbury
exercise (I mean according to their
Tenets) which the meanest of his subordi|nate
Bishops cannot perform? He can ordain
Bishops and Priests; So can they; the former
with him, the other without him. He can
visit his Prvince; they their Dicesse. He
can give the Holy Ghost by Confirmation; So
can they He can assemble a Provincial Coun|cil;
They a Diocesan. He has a Canonical
Authority over Bishops, c. They over Priests.
He can absolve from Censures inflected by
himself; they can do as much. Yet nothing
of all this excludes him from enjoying a spe|cial
priviledge in the exercise of every one of
these Acts and Functions, or exempts them
from Subordination to him as their Superior,
yea, Supream Pastor, Supream not in Order on|ly,
but Iurisdiction. Certainly the Doctor
can easily apply this to St. Peter, and the rest
of the Apostles, or to St. Peter's Successors, and
all other Bishops.
8. Now if the Fathers may be believed, is

was a priviledge, and a great one, that St
Peter, for the merit of his Confession, had
Christs own Title, as Christ was Governor of
the Church, given him, of being called a
Rock. For in the Syrian language, in which
our Lord spake, the words have no different
termination, as in the Greek or Latin, Petrus,
Petra; but the words were, Thou art Gepha (a
Rock) and upon this Gepha (Rock) I will build my
Church. It was a priviledge that Peter, neither
the eldest, nor first chosen Apostle, is alwaies in
the Gospel first reckoned, and expresly called,
, the First. It was a priviledge import|ing
a greater latitude of Iurisdiction, when
after our Lord's Resurrection, St. Peter alone
had in the midst of the rest a Commission
given him of indefinitly eeding Christ's
Flock; And after the Descent of the Holy
Ghost, was peculiarly appointed the Apostle
of the Circumcision, as St. Paul was of the
Gentiles: Yea that the Dedication of St. Paul's
Office was performed by St. Peter, who by
immediate revelation was appointed to ga|ther
the first fruits of the Gentiles, in the con|version
of Cornelius, and his house-hold,
c.
9. But, why among such Governors as the
Apostles, was any Supereminency of Iurisdicti|on
given to one man? Certain it is, there ne|ver
was lesse necessity to provide against dis|obedience
and dis-unions, then among the
Apostles; every one of whom was guided by

a Divine unerring light, by which they knew
all Truth, and replenish'd with the Spirit of
Charity and Vnty, which exempted them
from all ambitious, envious or malicious de|sign:
Yet a Subordination, not absolutely ne|cessary
to them, was established among them,
for the succeeding Churches sake, which
without such order would in a very short
time become a meer Babel. Hence St. Hierom
saies,Hierom. cont. Jovin. lib. 2. The Church was built upon Peter: though
true it is the same thing is done upon others, and
that the strength of the Church equally rests upon
all. But among the twelve one is chosen, that a
Head being constituted, the occasion of Schism may
be taken away.
10. To the same purpose St. Cyprian,Cypr. de unit. Ecclesiae. not|withstanding
the Sentence produced by the
Preacher out of him, That all the Apostles were
pari consortio praediti honoris  potestatis;
Yet in the very same Book saies,Ibid. [Super unum
aedificat Ecclesiam, c.] Our Lord builds his
Church upon one Person. And, though after his
Resurrection, he gave an equal power to all the A|postles,
saying, As my Father sent me, so send I
you: Receive the Holy Ghost: Whose sins you re|mit,
c. Yet that he might manifest unity, he by
his Authority disposed the Original of the same V|nity
beginning from one.Ibid. (And presently after)
Whosoever holds not the unity of the Church, does
he believe that he holds the Faith? He that opposes
are resists the Church; he that forsakes the Chair
of S. Peter, upon which the Church is founded, does

he trust that he is in the Church? In like manner
St. Optatus at Rome,Optat. cont. Parm. lib. 2. (saies he) a Chair was
placed for St. Peter, to the end that unity might be
preserved of all; and for fear the other Apostles
should challenge to themselves each one a particular
Chair. So St. Chrysostome, Observe now, how
the same John,Chrysost. in Act. Ap. cap. 1. hom. 3. that a little before ambitiously
beg'd a preferment, after yields entirely the Supre|macy
to St. Peter. And again, Christ did con|stitute
Peter the Master,Id. in. cap. 21. Jon. hom. 87 not of that See of Rome
alone, but of the whole world.
11. Now,Serm. page 17. whereas the Doctor objects that St.
Paul's contesting with St. Peter, and resisting him
to his face, argues that he did not acknowledge any
Superiority in him:August. lib. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat. Let St. Augustin, from St.
Cyprian, resolve us, You see (saies he to the
Donatists) what St. Cyprian hath said, that the
holy Apostle St. Peter, in whom did shine forth so
great a grace of Primacy, being reprehended by St.
Paul, did not answer that the Supremacy belong'd
to him, and therefore he would not be reprehended
by one that was posterior to him. And he adds,
The Apostle St. Peter hath left to posterity a more
rare example of humility,Ibid. by teaching men not to
disdain a reproof from inferiors; then St. Paul by
teaching inferiors not to fear, resisting even the
highest, yet without prejudice to Charity, when
Truth is to be defended.
12. From all that has been said on this Sub|ject,
it will necessarily follow, that whatever
Superiority St. Peter enjoyed, and the Holy Fa|thers
acknowledged, was the gift of our Sa|viour

only, a gift far more beneficial to us
then to St. Peter. He was, as St. Chrysostome
saies, Master of the World, not because his
Throne was establish'd at Rome, but receiving
from our Lord so supereminent an Authority,
he therefore made choice of Rome for his See;
because that being the Imperial City of the
World, he might from thence have a more
commodious influence on the whole Church.
13. Upon which grounds, whensoever
the Fathers make use of the Authority of his
Successors, Bishops of Rome against Hereticks
or Schismaticks, they consider that authority
as a priviledge annexed to the Chair of St. Peter,
and only for St. Peters regard to the Sea of
Rome. This is so common in the Fathers
writings, that I will not trouble him with
one Quotation. Indeed Iohn of Constantino|ple,
when he would invade an equality []
in some sort with the Pope, did
wisely to mention only the priviledge of the
Imperial City, because he could allege no o|ther
pretention for his Plea. But St. Leo,
St. Gregory, St. Gelasius, c. produce their e|vidences
for their Supremacy from Tues Pe|trus,
 super hanc Petram, c. from Pasce oves
meas, c. Nay, St. Augustin and other Bi|shops
of the Milevitan Council, writing to Pope
Innocent to joyn with them in condemning
the Pelagians, tell him their hope was those
Hereticks would more easily be induced to
submit to his Authority: Why, because of

the splendor of the Imperial City? No, but
because the Popes AuthorityAugust. Ep. 92. was [de Sancta|rum
Scripturarum authoritate deprompta] de|duced
from the Authority of the Holy Scri|ptures.
14. I might with reason enough, yet I
will not omit to take notice of Doctor Pierce's
trivial reasonings against the Popes, (as he
calls it) pretended Headship; because such
being sitted to vulgar capacities, and confi|dently
pronounc'd, do more mischief, then
those that have more shew of profundity and
weight. Thus then he argues: If the Pope
be head of the Church, then the Church must be the
Body of the Pope:Serm. Pag. 20. And if so, then when there is no
Pope, the Church has no Head: When there are
many Popes, the Church has many Heads: When
the Pope is Heritical, the Church has such a Head
as makes her deserve to be beheded.
Whatever advantage the Doctor expects
from such a Discourse as this, it must flow
from a childish Cavil upon the word Head,
and whatever consequences he here draws
from thence against the Pope, may as well be
applyed to all kind of Governors, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil: For they are all Heads
within their Precincts: A King is the Head of
his Kingdom; and a Bishop of his Diocesse. When
we call therefore the Pope, Head of the Church,
we mean that among all Governors thereof,
he is the Supream in the sense before declared:
He is a Head, but not so as Christ is in respect

of his Mystical body, who by his Spirit inter|nally
quickens and directs it. The Pope is
only an external, ministerial, visible Head,
and, as it were, Root of Vnity and Govern|ment.
All this, no question, the Doctor knew be|fore
to be our meaning: and by consequence
he knew that his inferences from thence were
pitifully pedantic,  insignificant, though ma|ny
of his Court-hearers and Country-readers
perhaps wonder there can remain a Papist in
England unconverted after such a Sermon has
been publish'd.
15. When there is no Pope, says the Preach|er,
the Church wants a Head. It is granted:
For sure he does not think it is a part of our
Faith to believe Popes are immortal. But yet
for all that the Papacy is immortal: The Go|vernment
is not dissolv'd: Succession is not
interrupted. It is a Maxim in our Law that
Kings dye not, that is, the Regal Authority
lives, though Kings in their particular persons
dye: Nor is there any substantial difference,
as to this point, between hereditary and ele|ctive
Monarchy And in this sense we may
say, that Popes dy not, nor Bishops: Partly
because when a Bishop or the Pope dys, at
least his Jurisdiction remains in the Chapter
or Body of Electors. Hence it is that in St.
Cyprian we read Epistles of the Roman Clergy
exercising authority beyond the Diocese of
Rom: But principally because, when an Ec|clesiastical

Superior dyes there remains by
Christs Ordination a [vis generativa] or vir|tue
in the Church to constitute another in his
place, and so to continue the Government.
There has been oft times a long vacancy in
the Apostolic See, as well as in Dioceses and
Kingdoms. After the death of Pope Fabian
(before there were any Christian Emperors)
the See was vacant for above a years space:
yet neither did St. Irenus, Optatus, Epipha|nius,
or St. Augustin, when they objected
the chain of Succession in St. Peters Chair,
esteem that thereby the Chain had been bro|ken:
neither did any old Hereticks make use
of such an argument to invalidate the Popes
authority.
16. But what shall we say to the Doctors
next inference, in a case of Schism? when there
are many Popes, then says he, the Church is
become a Monster with many Heads. But he
is deceived. As when, after the death of a
King, several pretenders to the Crown ap|pear,
there is still by right but one legitimate
Successor: all the rest are Rebels and Tyrants.
It is so in the Papacy.Cypr. Epist. 76. In that case St. Cypri|ans
Rule holds, If the Church be with Nova|tian,
it was not with Cornelius, who by a law|ful
Ordination succeeded Fabian. Novatian
therefore is not in the Church, nor can be e|steemed
a Bishop (of Rome.) Or if it be un|certain
to which of them the right pertains,
so that some Nations adhere to one Head, o|thers

to another: it is a great calamity: but
yet the Church remains, though wounded,
yet not wounded to death: A General Coun|cil
cures all.
17. If the Pope, (according to Doctor Pierce
his supposition) should prove an Heretic, he
infers very improperly, that the Church ha
such a Head as makes her deserve to be beheaded:
For in that case, the Pope is so far from re|maining
a Head, that he is not so much as a
Member of the Church, but is deprived not
only of the Administration, but also the Com|munion
of the Church, as other Heretical Bi|shops
are: So that then there is a pure vacan|cy.
I shall not be so severe as to take notice
of the unhansom (not to say unmannerly)
terms the Doctor uses in expressing the last
branch of this Objection.
18. Thus much concerning the Doctors first
pretended Novelty of the Roman Church, the
Popes primacy. Now whether my asserting that
Primacy or his denying it to be a Novelty, and
whether his proofs or mine are more conclu|ding,
I leave to the Readers consciences. He
will excuse my dilating on this Point, because
therein I follow his own example,Epist. Ded. for he tels
his Majesty, He has spoken most at large of the
Popes supremacy and his reasons given for such
Largenesse shall be mine too, though I believe
we shall have different meanings, yet without
equivocation, even when we deliver our rea|sons
in the same words. For i. I also acknow|ledg

the Popes supremacy to be the chief, if not on|ly
hinge on which does hang the stress of (more
than Papal) the Ecclesiastical Fabrick, as being
the Cement of the Churches unity.Ibid. 2. Because it
is a point wherin (say I likewise) the Honor and
safety of his Majesties Dominions are most con|cerned.
His meaning is, that no danger is to be
apprehended for England, but only from that
Point. I am sure, on the contrary, that whilst
such a Primacy purely spiritual was acknow|ledged
in England, the Church here was ne|ver
torn in pieces with Schisms, nor poyson'd
with Heresies: The Throne was never in the
least danger upon that account; never was a
Sword drawn for or against it. Some few
little more than Paper-quarrels hapned be|tween
the English and Roman Court, about
matters, not of Religion, but outward Inte|rests:
in which generally the Pope had the
worst at last: But the Honor and Safety of these
Dominions were far from being prejudiced.
The Kings of France always have been, and stil
continu as jealous and tender of their temporal
Regalities, as ever any Princes were: yet they
account it one of the most sparkling Jewels of
their Crown, that they call themselves the eld|est
[and most devoted] Sons of the Catholic
Church. The acknowledging the Spiritual
Primacy of the chief Pastor they find a greater
honor and defence to them than many Armies
would be: because it preserves peace and u|nity
in that Kingdom, not by the terror of

Swords drawn and Muskets charged in their
Subjects faces, but by subduing their minds
and captivating their consciences to Faith
and Obedience. And let Doctor Pierce be as|sured,
without a Spiritual Authority, which
may have influence on the hearts of Christian
Subjects, all their preaching, and Laws too
will prove but shaking Bulwarks for suppor|ting
Monarchy.
19. But we must not yet leave this passage
without considering it a little better. He saith,
That in the point of the Popes Supremacy of Iu|risdiction
the honor and safety of his Majesties
Dominions are most concern'd: his meaning is,
that it is both dishonorable and dangerous to
his Majesties Dominions, that any of His
Subjects should be permitted to acknow|ledge
such a Supremacy. I would I could
oblige the Doctor by any exorcisms to discover
sincerely the inward thoughts of his heart up|on
this Subject. But, having no such pow|er,
at so great a distance, I must be content to
argue the Case with him once more, because
it is a passage, that reflects not only upon the
honor of Catholick Religion, but the safety of
all Professors of it.
20. He cannot be ignorant, how often and
how earnestly Roman Catholicks here have
protested their renouncing any acknow|ledgement
of the least degree of Temporal
power or Jurisdiction as of Right to belong to
the Pope, over any Subject of his Majesties;

It is therefore meerly a pure Spiritual autho|rity
that they acknowledge in their Supreme
Pastor. Is this now dishonorable? Is it un|safe?
To whom? To all Supreme Princes,
whether Catholics, or not? For Catholic
Princes, they protest against this Opinon ei|ther
of dishonor or danger; If only then to
other Princes or States which are dissenters
from, and enemies to Catholick Religion,
then Nero and Diocletian had reason and ju|stice
on their sides, when they persecuted a
Religion dishonorable and dangerous to the Ro|man
Empire: For evidently, neither St. Peter,
nor any other Apostle, or Bishops, but were,
as to their Spiritual Authority, independent
on the Emperors.
21. Nay more, let the Doctor himself con|sider,
lest He and his, both Brethren and Fa|thers,
the Bishops, be not more deeply invol|ved
in the guilt, for which he desires the Ca|tholics
only should suffer. They themselves
acknowledge, in despite of so many Statutes
to the contrary, a pure Spiritual Authority
in their Bishops, not derived from the King,
they promise a Canonical obedience to them
they do not so to the King, therefore they ad|mit
a Jurisdiction in Bishops, of which the
King is not the Root.Contrary to th Statute 37 Hen. 8. c. 17., Ed. 6. c. . Reform. Leg. Ecclesiast. c. De Offici  Iu|risdictione, p. 190. For tho' for example,
a publick denunciation of Excommunication

in their Spiritual Courts: or the conferring
of Orders, or determining points of Faith,
c. without the Kings consent may expose
them, in case they exercise such Functions,
to some danger from the Law of the King|dom,
yet they will justifie such acts to be in
themselves valid, that is, perform'd with
sufficient authority; See Bishop Andrews
Tort. Tort p. 366.Bishop Carleton of Ju|risdict.
Reg.  Episcop. c. 1. p. 9.c. 4.
p. 39, 42.Bishop Bramh. Schism guarded,
p, 61, 63, 92.Answer to Bishop of Chalced.
p. 161.Doctor Ferns Discovery of Episco|pacy
and Presbytery, p. 19.Doctor Tailor
Episcopacy asserted, p. 236, 237, 239, 243,
Mr. Thornd. Right of Ch. c. 4. p. 234.
Epilog. l. 1. c. 8. p. 54.l. 1. c. 19,  20.
l. 3. c. 32. Which Quotations if any in|telligent
Reader will take the pains to peruse
and consider, he may clearly see what limi|tations
they make in the sense of that Oath of
Regal Supremacy, which Oath yet they free|ly
take in the full latitude of its words, though
these expresse not any of the said limitations.
Amatter, which hath not passed unobserved
by Mr. Thorndyke in his Iust Weights, c. 20.
who there conceives great reason why the
Kingdom for this should enact a new Oath.
22. But if I should address my Speech now
to Presbyterians and their Consistories, the
Case is far more evident. They are so far
from permitting to the King a Supremacy of

Authority in their Ecclesiastical Courts (if
such conspiracies may be called Ecclesiastical)
that they will not so much as allow him any
authority at all in such transactions: Nay
they will exempt him no more than his mean|est
Subject from subjection to them. The
like may be said of other Sects, which though
they are not guilty of the Presbyterian tyranny,
yet are as averse from granting his Majesty
any Supremacy in matters of Religion, as ei|ther
Presbyterians, Protestants, or Roman Ca|tholics.
But I am now to deal with the Prea|cher
and his Protestants: I therefore desire
them to compare themselves and Roman Ca|tholics
together as to this point of honor and
safety to his Majesty and his Dominions.
23. Is it dishonorable either to the King
or Kingdom, that a purely Spiritual authori|ty
should be acknowledged in him, to whom
this whole Kingdom from its first conversion
to Christianity together with the whole Chri|stian
world submitted it self as to their Su|preme
Pastor? And is it Honorable, that the
same authority should be granted to more
than twenty of his Majesties own Subjects?
Again, is it unsafe that Canonical obedience
for Christian Vnity's sake should be professed
to one Venerable Prelat a 1000. miles off, and
is there no danger in making the same Professi|on
to so many at home, who, besides their spi|tual
authority, have a right to concur in the
enacting and executing Civil laws too; and

who, we see, can either exalt or depresse, ac|cording
to their Interests, and advantages the
Royal Prerogative?
2. To resolve such Questions, as these,
but also so to resolve them as becomes a Prea|cher
of the Gospel of peace and truth would be a
subject worthy the stating in a Court-Sermon.
But it must be don without transgressing the
precise limits of the question, that is, by com|paring
the state of Catholic Religion as pro|fessed
and practised, for example, in France,
Venice, Germany, c. with the reformed
Religion in England; the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy of the former with that of the lat|ter;
and then judging whether of the two
bring more security and honor to their Prin|ces,
and are more effectual upon the consci|ences
of Subjects to breed them up in peace
and obedience. For my own part, simply as a
Catholic, my desire and prayers are, that Gods
divine truth may prevail in all our hearts,
but so prevail by those wayes of Charity, Pa|tience,
Justice and Piety with which it first
conquered the World. And as a Subject of
the Crown of England my Prayers are, that we
may be all united in the profession of that on|ly
Religion, which more perfecty and most
indispensibly gives to Caesar the things which
are Caesar's, and to God the things which are
God's.
25. I will row for a farewel, to these Te|stimonies
of our Catholic Fathers, add the

Votes of the Fathers also of the Reformation,
that he may see how far more ingenuously
they write then himself has don touching the
Popes Primacy. And first I will produce two
or three, who, though they oppose it, as he
does, as a Novelty yet allow a far greater age
to it.Fulk against Bristows mo|tives, p. 48. Doctor Fulk (most unchronologically)
says, that five or six hundred years before Pope
Leo and Pope Gregory (that is almost an hun|dred
years before Christ was born) the myste|ry
of Iniquity wrought in the See of Rome, and
then daily encreased; they were so deceived with
long continuance of error, that they thought the
dignity of Peter was much more over the rest of
his fellow Apostles, then the Holy Scriptures do
allow. Archbishop Whitgift assures us,Whtg. De|fence, cap. 59. that
the Papal Supremacy began with St. Peter,
his words are, Among the Apostles themselves
there was one chief, that had chief authority o|ver
the rest, to the end Schisms might be com|pounded.
And this he quotes from Calvin,
who said,Ibid. p. 173. The twelve Apostles had one among
them to govern the rest.
26. I will now produce two, who will give
this whole Cause to the Pope. The first is
the so fam'd Melanctho, who writes thus:
As certain Bishops preside ver particular Chur|ches,Centur. Eist. Thol. Epist. 74.
so the Bishop of Rome is President over
all Bishops. And this Canonical policy no wise
man, as I think, does or ought to disallow, c.
For the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is in
my judgement profitable to this end, that consent

of Doctrine may be retain'd. Wherfore an agree|ment
may easily be established in this Article of the
Popes Supremacy, if other Articles could be agreed
upon.
The other witnesse is learned Doctor Covel,Covel. Exam. page 106, 107.
the Defender of Mr. Hooker, he having shew'd
the Necessity of setting up one above the rest in
God's Church to suppresse the Seeds of Dissention,
c. thus applies it against the Puritans, If
this were the principal means to prevent Schisms
and Dissentions in the Pimitive Church, when
the graces of God were more abundant and eminent
then now they are: Ny, if twelve [Apostles]
were not like to agree, except there had been one
chief among them: For saith Hierom, Among
the twelve one was therefore chosen, that a chief be|ing
appointed, occasion of Schism might be preven|ed;
how can they think that equality would keep
all the Pastors in the World in peace and unity?
For in all Societies, Authority, which cannot be
where all are equal, must procure unity and obedi|ence.Ibid.
He adds further: The Church without
such an Authority, should be in a far worse case
then the meanest Common-wealth; nay almost
then a Den of Theives; if it were left dstitute of
means, either to convince Heresies, or to suppresse
them; yea, though there were neither help nor as|sistance
of the Christian Magistrate. Thus Dr.
Pierce may see how these, his own Primitive
Reformers, either joyn with us in this Point
of Primacy, or however they oppose him, in
calling it a Novelty begun by Pope Boniface
the third.



CHAP. IX.

Of the Churches Infallibility. The
necessity thereof, that she may be
a certain Guide to Salvation;
And the grounds whereupon She
claims it.

1. THe Second pretended Novelty of Ca|tholick
Doctrine, is the Infallibility of
the Church, called by the Preacher,Serm. pag. 8. The Paa|dium
of the Conclave, and derived from the Schol|lars
of Marcus in Irenaeus, or from the Gno|sticks
in Epiphanius. Against which Infallibi|lity
his unanswerable Arguments are,Ib. page 22. 1. Infal|libility
is one of Gods incommunicable Attributes.
2. The Church not being omniscient, must there|fore
be ignorant in part, and consequently may fall
into Error. 3. It is confess'd by the great Cham|pions
of the Papacy, that the Heresie of the No|vatians
was hatch'd in Rome, and continued
there almost two hundred years. 4. Besides Ari|anism
that over-spread the Church, she was infe|cted

with the Heresie of the Chyliasts, being de|ceived
by Papias, which Heresie found no contra|di
for some Ages. 5. Yea, the whole Church
in the opinion of St. Augustin and Pope Inno|cent,
(during the space of six hundred years ac|cording
to Maldona) thought the Sacrament
of the Eucharist necessary to Infants: yet the
Council of Trent is of a contrary mind.
2. In order to the answering of this Di|scorse,
he will sure acknowledge that all
Sect of Christianity agree in this, that each
of them has both a Rule of their Faith, and
a  also: But in both these there is diffe|rence
among them. To the Presbyterians, In|dependents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, Socinians, c.
the only Rule is the Holy Scripture. But both
Catholicks and English Protestants, though they
acknowledge Divine Revelations to be their
only Rule, yet they admit certain universal|ly
received Traditions, besides expresse Scri|pture.
3. But as for the Guide from which we are
to learn the true sense of this Rule, the dif|ference
among the said Sects is far greater,
and more irreconcilable. The Socinians will
have Scripture interpreted onely by private
reason, a Guide evidently fallible, and therefore
not to be imposed on others. The Indepen|dents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, and Presbyterians
too, pretend to an Infallible Guide, Gods Holy
Spirit; but with this difference, that the In|dependents,
Anabaptists, and Quakers, rationally

acknowledge that this Guide is only to direct
those that have it, and perceive they have it,
but cannot oblige other men that have it not,
nor can be sure they have it. Whereas
the Presbyterians by an unexampled Tyranny
(at least in France) do oblige themselves and
their Posterity to a Profession, that by a Di|vine
Illumination they are taught to distin|guish
Canonicl Books of Scripture from Apo|criphal,
and by the same Guide to justifie all
the Doctrines by which they dissent from all
others: And moreover, by a most senslesse
inhumanity, will impose a necessity on all o|thers,
to belie their own Consciences, and
acknowledge the same Guide; though they
have never wrought any Miracles, which
certainly are necessary to oblige others to
believe and follow the internal Guidance of
that Spirit to which they pretend.
4. As for Dr. Pierce, and the generality of
English Protestants, (I speak of them now, as
hitherto they have bin, for what they must be
hereafter, neither they nor I know a special
Guide of theirs, beyond Reason and Spirit,
for the finding out the sense of Scripture, and
judging of Traditions received by them, is
the Primitive Church, or foure first General
Councils: But since those ancient Fathers
are now past speaking, and their Writings are
as obnoxious to disputes as the Scriptures
themselves, a speaking Judge of the sense of
all these, I suppose, is their Ecclesiastical Sy|nods,

or Bishops, when Synods are dissolved:
but principally those that are to make, and
determine the sense of Acts of Parliament.
And upon these grounds they finde them|selves
obliged to behave themselves different|ly
to several adversaries. For against Sects
that went out from them, they use the help
of Catholick weapons, the Authority of the
Chuch, Councils, c. But against Catholics,
they (renouncing the Authority of the present
Church in her Supremest Councils, of conve|ning
which the times are capable, and (in
the interval of Councils) in the major part of
the Governours thereof united with him,
whom themselves acknowledge the prime
Patriark) will make use of a kind of private
spirit or reason; or the judgment of a most
inconsiderable number of Church-Governrs,
going against the whole Body of the Catholick
Church, and their chief Pastor, but this, as to
assent only, where it likes them, and so will
be their own selves Judges of what is the
sense of Councils, Fathers, Scriptures and all:
And great difficultie they often find how to a|void
being accounted Papists, when they
speak to Sectaries, and being even Fanaticks
when they Dispute with Roman Catholicks.
And truly the Doctors whole Sermon, is in ef|fect
meerly Fanatick: For though he florish
with Greek and Latinquotations of Fathers
joynd to Scripture, which they do not; yet
since there is no visible Judge talk'd of in it,

but himself, that is able to speak; What is
this but private spirit, having little measure
of the gift of Tongues more than Quakers
have? So that let them preach as much as
they will, the result of all Dispute between
them and us must come to this, Whether their
last speaking Iudge in England, or ours in the
whole Catholic Church, deserves better to be be|liev'd
and rely'd on.
5. It cannot be deny'd but that there is som|thing
of Truth in all these Sects. The Guide
which each of them respectively layes claim
to, is a justifiable Guide, though being alone
not sufficient. For 1. To exclude Reason
from guiding us, would be to become Beasts.
2. To exclude Gods Spirit from directing us,
would be to cease being Christians. 3. To
renounce the Testimony of Antiquity, and Au|thority
of General Primitive Councils, would
be an arrogant temerity unpardonable.
4. And last of all to deny a judging deter|mining
power to the present visible Go|vernors,
I mean those Governors and Synods
which are Superior, in respect of all other
Governors or Synods Inferior, would be to
make all Heresies and Schisms justifiable.
Therefore not any of these partial Guides must
be neglected: Yet unlesse they all concur,
that which we take to be Reason, and Inspira|tion,
and the sense of the Primitive Church may
deceive and mis-guide us.
6. Now, it is only the Roman Catholic

Church, whose enre Guidance proceed from
all these, and the effect of which Guidance
in full satisfaction to each mans Soul, and u|niversal
peace in Gods Church: which ef|fects
cannot possibly flow but from a compli|cation
of all these Guides. Roman Catho|lics
admit Reason to judge of the sense of
Scripture, (as the Socinians do:) but they
give due bounds to Reason, nay they silence
it quite, when it would presume to judge of
incomprehensible Mysteries, and reject them
because Philosophy cannot comprehend them.
When Reason has found out the sense of
Scripture, they with the Presbyterians, and
even Fanatics, acknowledge it is Divine Inspi|ration
that moves the Soul to assent thereto,
and embrace the verities contained in Scri|pture,
directing their actions accordingly.
But because the Devil can transform himself
into an Angel of Light, neither can there be
any Guide more dangerous then false Inspi|rations,
they conclude that all such preten|ded
Inspirations are indeed Diabolical Sug|gestions,
which are prejudicial to Honesty,
Virtue, Piety, and the common Rules of O|bedience,
both Spiritual and Civil; All In|spirations
which which incite private, uncommissi|on'd
persons to reform either Churches or
State; all that nourish Factions or Com|motions
in the Common-wealth: All that
beget Pride, and an opinion of self-sufficiency,
or an humor of censuring others, especially

Superiors. In a word, whensoever the spirit
of single Prophets refuse to be subject to the com|munity
of the Prophets, that is, Church Govern|ors;
such Inspirations in Catholic Religion
are rejected, detested, and sent back to the
Infernal Father of them.
7. Moreover, Roman Catholics do wil|lingly
and confidently appeal to the Primi|tive
Church, the four first General Councils,
and the holy Fathers. But universal experi|ence
demonstrating it impossible, that any
writing can end a Debate between multitudes
of persons interessed, and therefore not im|partial
or indifferent, their last recourse is to
the present visible Church; which cannot de|clare
her sense to us in any other way then as
she is represented by her Pastors out of all
Nations, that is, by a General Council. All
Catholics, submiting to this Council, not
their tongues only, but also their judgments,
by following the Church thus with humili|ty,
shew, that they are guided both by Reason,
Inspiration, and Examples of Primitive Fathers.
Hence St. Austin sayes, We receive the Holy
Spirit if we love the Church, if we rejoice in the
name of Catholics, and in the Catholic Faith.
And elsewhere, [Contra rationem nemo sobrius,
c.] No sober man will admit an opinion against
Reason, no Christian against Scriptures, no lover
of peace and unity, against the Church. And this
only is the Guide that we say, and presently
will demonstrate to be infallible.

8. Now, that the final Decision of all Con|troversies
in Faith, can only be expected from
such a Guide, and consequently that all Chri|stians
under pain of damnation, are obliged
never to contradict this Guide, and alwaies to
assent when it requires, we are taught, not
by Reason only, but God himself also, and
this in the Law of Moses. The whole Nation
of the Iews, (saith St. Augustin) was as it were
one great Prophet; the policie of their Church
was the Scheme of the Christian, to the
twelve Princes of their Families answer'd the
twelve Apostles, to the Seventy Elders
the Seventy Disciples, to the several Courts
of Judgement, our Ecclesiastical Synods, to
the great Sanhedrim, a general Council, and
to the High Priest, our Supreme Pastor. Now
for our present purpose, the Ordinance that
God made in the Jewish Church for deciding
Controversies about the Law, ran thus, If
there arise a matter too hard for thee in judge|ment,Deut. 7, 8, 9. c. (that is, as we find in 2 Chron.
19. 8. between blood and blood, between Law
and Commandment, Statutes and Iudge|ments,
then shalt thou arise and get thee into the
place which the Lord thy God shall chuse: And
thou shalt come to the Priests and Levites, and
to the Iudge that shall be in those dayes, and en|quire,
and they shall shew thee the sentence of
Iudgement, and thou shalt do according to the
sentence which they shall shew thee, c. Thou
shalt not decline from the sentence to the right

hand or to the left. The man that will do pre|sumptuously,
and will not hearken to the Priest,
or unto the Iudge, even that man shall die, and
thou shalt put away the evil from Israel. Up|on
those words in this passage [unto the Iudge
that shall be in those daies] Ainsworth,Ainsworth in Deut. 17. 9. out
of the Rabbins, observes, that if the high
Synedrion had determin'd of a matter,  after
another Synedrion rose up, which (upon Rea|sons
seeming good unto them) disannulled the
former Sentence, then it was disannull'd, and
Sentence passed according as seemed good to
those later; So that the present Authority was
alwaies to take place, and no Appeals to be
made from it. For if any Disputes against
the Sentence of living speaking Iudges, upon
any pretence whatsoever, either of a private
exposition of the Law, or the Authority of
preceding Rabbies were allow'd, there would
never want Contentions and Schisms in the
Synagogue. And observe that in this obedi|ence
was implyed an assent or submission of
Judgment: For otherwise it would be against
Conscience, in case the party continued in a
contrary opinion of the sense of the Law. It
is just so, and alwaies has been so in the Ca|tholic
Church: The present Superiors living
and speaking must conclude all Controver|sies,
their Interpretation of Scripture and
Fathers, their Testimony of Tradition must
more then put to silence all contradiction of
particular Persons or Churches, it must also

subdue their minds to an assent, and this un|der
the Penalty of an Anathema, or cutting
off from the Body of Christ, which answers
to a Civil death in the Law.
9. If then an Obedience so indispensable
was required to Legal Iudges, who might
possibly give a wrong sentence: How secur|ly
may we submit our judgements to the Su|pream
Tribunal of the Church: And how just|ly
will an Anathema be inflicted on all gain|sayers
of an Authority that we are assured
shall never mislead us? And the grounds of
this assurance, which the Preacher is not yet
perswaded of, are now to be discoverd.
10. The true grounds of the Churche
Infallibility are the words of Truth, the In|fallibility
of the promises of Christ, the Eternal
wisdom of the Father. These Promises are
the true Palladium, not of the Conclave, but
of the Vniversal Church: Nor do we think
Doctor Pierce such an Vlisses, as to apprehend
he can steal it away.
11. We do not deny however,Serm. page 22. that Infal|libility
and Omniscience are (as he saies) incommu|nicable
Attributes of God: It is God alone to
whose Nature either lying or being deceived
are essentially contrary, because he is essenti|ally
immutable as in his Being, so in his Vn|derstanding
and Will. Yet the immutable
God can preserve mutable Creatures from a|ctual
mutation: God, who is absolutely
Omniscient, can teach a rational Creature 

Truths necessary or expedient to be known:
So that, though a man have much ignorance
yet he may be in a sort omniscient within a
determinate Sphere, he may be exempted from
ignorance or error in teaching such special
verities as God will have him know, and has
promised he shall faithfully teach others.
Our Saviour, as man, was certainly infalli|ble,
and as far as was requisite, omniscient too:
So were the Apostles likewise, whose wri|tings
Protestants acknowledge both to be in|fallible,
and to contain all Truth necessary to
Salvation. Good Doctor, do you think it a
contradiction that God should bestow an in|fallibility,
as to some things, on a Creature?
What did our Saviour give St. Peter when he
said, I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not?
Thus the Doctor, may see what a trifling Dis|course
he has made against Gods Church.
12. Now, the infallible promises of our
Lord to his Church, by vertue of which she
has alwaies been believed to be in our sense
infallible, follow: At least as many of them
as may suffice for the present purpose. 1. Our
Saviour has promised his Apostles,Math. 28. 20. That he
would be present with them alwaies to the end of the
World: Therefore since not any of them out|liv'd
that age, this infallible promise must be
made good to their Successors. 2. He has
promised that When two or three of them meet
together in his Name,Math. 18. 20. he will be in the midst of them;
Surely to direct them. Therefore much

more when the whole Church is repre|sentatively
assembled about his businesse
onely. 3. He has promised that he will lead
his Church into all Truth; at least all that
is necessary or but expedient for them to
know.Math. 16. 18 4. He has promised, that Against
his Church, built upon St. Peter, the Gates
of Hell (that is Heresie, say the Fathers)
shall not prevail: Therefore it shall be in|fallibly
free from Heresie. 5. He has com|manded
that,Math. 18. 17. Whoever shall not obey his
Church, shall be (cut off from his Body)
as a Heathen and a Publican: Therefore
Anathema's pronounced by his Church are
valid. Our Lord indeed speaks of De|cisions
made by a particular Church in
quarrels among Brethren: Therefore if
Disobedience to such Decisions be so grie|vously
punished, what punishment may
we suppose attends such as are disobedi|ent
to Decisions of the Universal Church,
(call'd by the Apostle, The Pillar and
ground of Truth) made for the com|posing
of publick Debates about the com|mon
Faith. 6. To conclude, the be|lief
of the Churches Vnity is an unchang|able
Article of our reed: Therefore cer|tainly
the onely effectual mean to pre|serve
Unity, (which is an un-appeal|able,
and infallible Authority) shall ne|ver
be wanting in the Church.

13. All these Texts and Prmises we by
the example of the Holy Fathers and Autho|rity
of Tradition, produce as firm Grounds
of an Infallibility in the Universal Church re|presentative,
which has an influence over the
Souls of men requiring much more than an
external submission, which yet is all that Pro|testants
will allow to the most authentic gene|ral
Councils. We hope now Doctor Pierce
will not fly to Mr. Chillingworths miserable
shift, and say that all these Promises are on|ly
conditional and depending on the piety of
Church-governors: For this is contrary to
the assertion of all Antiquity, which from
these Promises argues invincibly against all He|retics
and Schismatics, who might otherwise,
on Mr. Chillingworths ground, alledge (as
the Donatists did) that the Church by the
sins of some had lost all her Authority, and
that Gods spirit was transplanted from her in|to
themselves. Nor yet that he will use the
plea of several other Protestant Writers som|what
more discreet, who are willing to allovv
those Promises absolute, and to belong also
to the Guides of the Church som or other,
that they shall in all ages continue orthodox,
but not alvvayes to the more superior, or to
the greater bodies of these assembled in Coun|cils
(because, thus, they see their cause will
suffer by it.) But this plea also is utterly un|satisfying;
For whenever the superior and
subordinate Church-Officers, or Ecclesiasti|cal

Courts shall contradict or oppose one an|other,
here the superior questionlesse is to be
our Guide (otherwise we have no certain rule
to know who is so) and therefore to these,
not the other, in such cases, must belng these
promises, where they cannot possibly agree to
both.
14. These promises now being Yea and A|men,
the Doctor must not seem to make our
Lord passe for a Deceiver, but apply them
to his English Protestant Church, since he
will not allow them to the Catholic, for to
some Church they must be applyed. But let
him consider withal, he must condemn St.
Gregory,Geg. M. l. 1. Epist. 24. who professed that he venerated the four
first General Councils of the Catholic Church,
as the four Gospels. He must condemn Con|stantine,
who, in the first Council of Nice pro|fessed,Act. Conc. Nicen.
that [, c] whatever is
decreed in the holy Councils of Bishops, that
ought to be attributed to th Divine will In
a word he must by condemning all the Gene|ral
Councils of Gods Church, condemn like|wise
(which is more dangerous) the Act of
Parliament, 1 Eliz. For manifest it is that all
the Fathers in those Councils did pronounce
many Anathema's against all those that would
not submit to a belief of such and such Decisi|ons
of theirs, in some of which were new ex|pressions
not extant in Scripture, but devised
by the Fathers then present, as the words
, c. Now I ask Doctor

Pierce, were those Anathema's lawfull? were
they valid? Or will he say, those first Coun|cils
(to which he professes assent) usurped
an Authority in this, not of right belonging to
them? If those Anathema's were valid, then
the Councils had a just authority to oblige
Christians to an internal belief of verities de|clared
by them, as the sence of Divine Re|velation,
and this, under the penalties of being
separated from Christ: And can any Autho|rity
but such as is infallible lay such an obliga|tion
upon Consciences under such a penalty?
But, if those Anathema's were illegal and inva|lid,
then were the Fathers both of those Coun|cils
and of All others, who still followed the
same method, not only impostors, but most
execrable Tyrants over the Souls of men.
15. These Deductions surely are more effe|ctual
to demonstrate the Churches infallibility,
than any of his Quotations can be against it:
Here we have expresse Scripture, and uni|versal
consent of Antiquity: Nay here we have
the concession of the more judicious Writers
of the Church of England (at least before their
late restitution:)Dr. Hamond of . sect. . n 1. sect. n. 15. sect. 13. n. 2. sect. 14. n. 6. Bishop Bram|al Reply to Bishp Chal|ced Prefae and Vindic. ca. 2. p. 9. who seem to agree that in
the Controversies between our Church and
theirs, they would certainly submit to a future
lawful General Council: Now, could they
lawfully make such a Promise and think such a
Council could misguide them? Therefore tru|ly
I cannot have the uncivility to judge, that,
when one of your 39. Articles declares, that

some General Councils have err'd,Artic. 19. the meaning
should be  that any legal, legitimate General
Council has err'd, but only som Councils that
som Roman Catholics esteem to be General,
concerning which the Church of England is of
another opinion: And if this be the mean|ing,
the breach made by it may be cu|rable.
16. Now whereas the Doctor alleages, as
against this Point,Serm. p. 22. the concession of Baronius,
c. that Novatianism was hatch'd and conti|nued
two hundred years at Rome. I cannot de|vise
how to frame an Objection out of it: Can
no Church be Orthodox, if Heretics rise and
continue in the same City? Is the English
Church a Quaking Church, because Qua|kers
first began, and still encrease at London?
As for Novatians at Rome he cannot deny but
they were so far from being Members of the
Roman Church, that they were continually
esteem'd Heretics and condemned by it.
17. The like we say touching the Donatists.Ibid.
Indeed his objecting the Arians has more ap|pearance
of reason and sense [Ingemuit orbis,
c.] The world (says. St. Hierom)Hieron. sadly groa|ned
and was astonished to see it self on a sudden
becom Arian,, that is, after the Council of ri|minum.
But how was it Arian, if it groaned?
c. for it could not be really Arian against
its will. But St. Hierom uses this expression,
because the great Council of Ariminum had
seem'd to favour the Arian party against the

Catholics. And true it was, that Catholic
Bishops were indeed persecuted, and many
banish'd: But not one of them chang'd their
Profession of the Nicene Faith, unlesse you will
accuse Pope Liberius, who for a while dissem|bled
it, and presently repented. Besides, the
Canons at first made in that Council were per|fectly
Orthodox, but afterwards by the Empe|rors
Tyranny, and subtilty of two or three
Arian Bishops a Creed was composed, wherein
though the Nicene Faith was not sufficiently
expressed,. Yet there was not one Article per|fectly
Arian, but capable of a good sense: to
which may Catholic Bishops out of fear sub|scribed,
yet to nothing but what in their
sense was true though defective in delivering
all the truth; but presently after, being at li|berty,
both themselves and all the rest re|nounced.
And after all, there remained but
three years of persecution, for after that
time the Arian Emperour Constantius
dyed.
18. Next concerning the objected Heresy
of the Millenaries: It is very unjust and a
great irreverence in him to charge upon the
Primitive Church the sayings of two Fathers:
and though one of them says, All that were
purely Orthodox, (that is, such as he esteemed
so, because they were of his Opinion) held that
Doctrin yet he thereby shews, that his own
Opinion was not universally embraced by the
Church: But the truth is, there was a double

Millenary opinion, the one that interpreted
the reign of Martyrs with Christ for a thou|sand
years, in base, sensual pleasures, ban|quets,
and women: This was the Doctrine
of the unclean Heretick Cerinthus, as Eusebius
and St. Augustin relate:Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. Against this St. Dio|nysius
Bishop of Alexandria wrote an elegant
Book, as St. Hierom affirms:Hierom. Aug. l. 2. de Civ. D. c. 7. And it is most
deservedly detested by the Church. But there
was another Opinion, that the Martyrs
should reign a thousand years with Christ in all
Spiritual delights, and ravishing consolation,
in a blessed conversing with him: And this
Opinion might not unbecom Papias, St. Ire|neus,Aug Ibid. Hieron. l. 4.
and St. Iustin Martyr: For St. Augustin
and St. Hierom both professe themselves un|willing
to censure it, neither can the Doctor,
I believe, shew that it was ever condemned by
the Church.
18. To his last Objection touching the
communicating of Infants, it is granted that in
St. Augustin and Pope Innocent's time, and ma|ny
years after, such was the common pra|ctice
of the Church to communicate them
Sacramentally (but withal take notice, it was
onely in one species.) Again, it is confessed
that from that Text [Nisi mandcaveritis car|nemAug. l. 1. de pec. merit. cap. 20. Innocent in Epist.
c.] St. Augustin, c. argue a necessity
that Infants should participate of the flesh
and blood of our Lord, but this not Sacra|mentally,
but Spiritually, by such a participa|tion
as may be had in Baptism.

This appears first, From the constant
Doctrine of St. Augustin,Aug. b. c. 19. 21, 22.  lib. 2. cap. 28. c. c. the whole
Church affirming that, Baptism alone may
suffice to the salvation of Infants. 2. From
his interpreting his own meaning, in
a Sermon quoted by St. Beda and Grati|na.
His words are these,Bed. ad 1 Cor. c. 10. Gratian Consecr. dist. 2. cap. Qui passus est. None ought by
any waies to doubt but that every Christian by be|ing
made a Member of Christ in Baptism, thereby
becomes partaker of the Boy and Blood of our
Lord, and that he is not estranged from a Com|munion
of that Bread and Chalice, though being
setled in the Vnity of Christs Body, he should de|part
out of this World, before he really eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Chalice. For he is not
deprived of the participation and benefit of the Sa|crament,
whensoever that is found in him which is
signified by the Sacrament.
19. That therefore which the Church
since, and particularly the Council of Trent
alter'd in this matter, was nothing at all
touching Belief: For all Catholicks this day
believe St. Augustin's Doctrine in that Point,
but onely an external practise of the Church:
And this was done out of a wonderful reve|rence
to those Holy Mysteries, which by fr|quent
Communions of Infants could not escape
many irreverences and inconveniencies. And
many such Alterations even the English
Church observes and justifies, both in the
administring of the Eucharist and Baptism too.
To conclude this matter: For a further

proof that these two instances about the
Millenay Belief, and Infant Communion are
not at all conducing to the Doctors Design,
I will refer him to the Judgment of Doctor
Ferne, of some weight no doubt with him,
who expresly saies, and proves by Reasons
not unlike these,Dr. Fern in certain Consid. in Preface. That nothing can be concluded
by those two Instances to the prejudice of the whole
Church, as if thereby might be proved that the
whole Church, Vniversally, and in all the Mem|bers
of it, may be infected with Error in Points of
concernment or prejudicial to the Faith.



CHAP. X.

Of Prayer for the Dead. Its Aposto|lic
antiquity. Purgatory necessa|rily
supposed in it. The Doctor's
Objections answer'd.

1. HAving treated so largely of the
Preachers two pretended Noveltys;
1. the Primacy of Iurisdiction of the See Apo|stolic;
and 2. the Infallability of the Church in
her General Councils, I might rationally e|nough
neglect examining the following parti|cular
Dogma's which he likewise charges with
Novelty, and betake by self to the point of
Schism: because if the Church have a spiritu|al
obliging Iurisdiction, taking its Original
from the Chair of St. Peter; and again if what
the proposes to us to be believed, she pro|poses
validly under the penalty of being sepa|rated
from Christ, since it is manifest that she
so proposes the said particular Doctrins, not
in her Councils onely, but universal practise,
wherein her Infallability is with an equal

Autority demonstrated; they ought with|out
contradiction be submitted to: Never|thelesse
having some reason to doubt that in
case any of his Novelties be omited, he, or
at least some of his over-credulous Readers
will impute such an omission to a difficulty
in disproving him, I must be content to take a
trouble on me, which is therefore only neces|sary,
because many Protestants are unreaso|nable.
2. His third pretended Novelty, is the
Doctrin of Purgatory,Serm. p. 8. which he says, We
have from Origen, or at the farthest from
Tertullian, and he from no better Author than
the Arch-Heretic Montanus. Nor does Bellar|min
mend the matter by deriving it from
Virgil, Tully, or Plato's Gorgias.
3. It would have been a great courtesie
both to his Hearers and Readers, if he had
inform'd them why he singled out a specula|tive
Point touching Purgatory, and omit|ted
one of far greated importance, because
obliging to Practise also, which is Pray|er
for the Dead. His way of proceeding,
doubtlesse does not want a Mystery: And he
must give me leave to answer his Novelty of
Purgatory by speaking scarce any thing at all
of it, but only telling him nakedly the Chur|ches
Doctrin about it; and by insisting on the
confessed Antiquity, Apostolic Antiquity of
Prayer for the Dead; which being cleared, I
defie all his learning and skill, unlesse he can

disprove this, to deny or so much as questi|on
on the other.
4. Now the Doctrin of the Church concer|ning
Purgatory and Prayer for the Dead is con|tained
in this Decree of the Council of Trent,
There is a Purgatory:Concil. Trid. Sess. 25. and Souls detained there
are helped by the suffraes of the Faithfull, (that
is, by Prayers and Alms) and most especially by
the most acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar. By
which Definition the Church obliges all Ca|tholicks
no farther than simply to believe that
there is a place or state of Souls in which they
are capable of receiving help or ease by Pray|ers,
c. The Council tells us nothing of the
position of this place, nor what incommodi|ties
Souls find in it, nor whether there be
fire, c. which are Points that St. Augustin
says he could not resolve: On the contrary,
it forbids, (at least out of the Schools) all
curious subtile Questions concerning it,Ibid. all dis|courses
which are not for edification.
5. Having represented the Churches Do|ctrine,
I will next transcribe the Form of
her Prayers for the Dead, extant in the Canon
of the Masse.Can. Missae. Memento. Remember likewise, O Lord, thy
Servants who have gone before us with the Sign of
Faith (i. e. Baptism,) and repose in the sleep of
peace. We beseech thee, O Lord, mercifully
grant to them, and to all that rest in Christ, a
place of refreshment, light and peace, through
Christ our Lord. And after the Canon, We
beseech thee, O Lord, absolve the Soul of thy Ser|vant

from all chains of his sins, Commun. to the end, that in
the glory of the Resurrection, he may respire by a
new life among the Saints and Elect, through
Christ our Lord. Now if it can be demon|strated
that by the universal practise of the
Primitive Church, such Prayers as these were
made for the Dead; it unavoidably follows,
That the Souls for whom they are made, are
neither in Heaven nor Hll: And if so,
where are they, Doctor Pierce? speak like an
honest man.
6. To demonstrate this, let him view nar|rowly
these passages of the Holy Fathers, be|fore,
and during the space of the first four
General Councils. St. Denis the Areopagite,
(or whoever was Author of the Book of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and who by confessi|on
of Protestants, liv'd within the second
Century after the Apostles) declares that the
Priest does demand from the Divine goodnesse for
the person departed,Dion. Ar. de Eccles. Hierar|chia. c. ult. a pardon of all sins through
human frailty committed by him, and that he
may be conducted into the light and region of the
living, into the bosoms of Abraham Isaac, and
Jacob, into a place from which grief, sadnesse,
and mourning it banished. And presently af|ter
he testifiesIbid. that What he commits to wri|ting
concerning this Prayer pronounced by the
Priest for the Dead, he received by Tradition from
his Divine Teachers (the Apostles.)
7. Next Tertullian, Let the faithful Wid|dow,Tert. de Mon. cap. 10.
saies he, pray for the soul of her Husband,

and make an oblation in the Anniversary day of his
death, begging for him refreshment and part in the
first Resurrection. And, to prevent the Preach|ers
Objection, that the Father learned this
from the Arch-Heretick Montanus, let him an|swer
for himself;Id. de Coron. Mil. cap. 3. We make, saies he, Anniver|sary
Oblations for the Dead, and for the [Nata|litia]
of the Martyrs. And presently he ad|joynes,Ibid. cap. 4.
Concerning these and the like Observan|ces,
if you require the Authority of Scriptures,
you will not find any: Tradition shall be alleged to
you for the Author, custom for the confirmer, and
Faith the Observer.
8. After him follows his Schollar blessed
St. Cyprian,Cypr. Ep. 66. The Bishops (saies he) that went
before us, have ordain'd that not any one of our
Brethren at his death shall name in his Will for an
Executor, or Guardian, any Ecclesiastical Person;
and if any one shall do otherwise, that no Oblati|on
should be made for him, and that the Sacrifice
should not be celebrated for him at his death: For
such a one deserves not so much as to be named at
the Altar in the Priests Prayer.
9. Eusebius relates that, at the Obsequies
of the Emperor Constantine,Euse. de vit. Const. l. 4. c. 71. the People and
Clergy unanimously sent up prayers to God, not
without tears and great groanings for the Soul of
the Emperor. Likewise Epiphanius disputing
against the Heretick Aerius, reckons this a|mong
his heresies (as St. Augustin likewise
does) That he denyed Prayers and Oblation for
the Dead.Epiph. 3. hae. In opposition whereto he saies,

Prayers made for the dead profit them, though they
do not blot out [] entirely
all (mortal) sins.Ibid. And again, Who shall now
have the oldnesse to dissolve the Statute of his Mo|ther
(the Church) or the Law of his Father?
(which Father he there interprets to be the
Holy Trinity.) Moreover St. Chrysostome,Chrysost. in Ep. ad Philip. c. 1. hom. 3.
It is not in vain that the Apostles have instituted
this Law, That during the celebration of the dread|ful
mysteries, commemoration should be made of
the dead: for they knew that great benefit and pro|fit
would thereby accrew unto them. And yet
more expresly in another place,Id. hom. in 1 Cor. c. 15. v. 46. We must
(saith he) give our help and assistance to sinners
departed, by our Prayers, Supplications, Alms, and
Oblations: For these things were not rashly and
groundlesly devised: Neither is it in vain, that in
the Divine Mysteries we make mention of these
who are dead; and approaching to the Altar, ad|dresse
our prayers for them to the Lamb placed there
who took away the sins of the World: But we do
this to the end that some comfort and refreshment
may come to them thereby. Neither is it in vain
that he who assists at the Altar at the time when the
dreadful Mysteries are communicated, cries out,
Pray for all that are dead in Christ, and for those
who celebrate their memorials. For were it not
that such commemorations were profitable to them,
such things would not be spoken. For the matters
of our Religion are no sport: No, God forbid.
These things are perform'd by the Order and Dire|ction
of Gods Spirit.

10. True it is, that antiently in the pub|lick
Liturgies a commemoration was made
even of the greatest Saints, yes, and pray|ers
were made for them: But yet not such
prayers as were made for the imperfect. But,
since all future things may be the subject of
our prayers, it may become our charity to
pray for accession of glory to Saints already
glorified, but which at the Resurrection
shall be in a yet better State. And therefore
when St. Austin saies, It is an injury to pray for
a Martyr, since we ought rather to commend our
selves to his prayers: he means such prayers,
as we make for imperfect Christians, that is,
for remission of their sins, refreshment, c.
11. Now, tho' some such prayers extant
in the Holy Fathers did regard the day of
Judgment, and the glory ensuing; yet with|al,
that they thought, to some Souls a
present refreshment did accrew in the inter|mediat
condition, is evident both by the
foresaid Testimonies, and many more that
may be added: As where St. Abrose saies, he
would never cease his Intercessions for the
Soul of the dead Emperor? till he found a de|liverance
by them. This is so apparent both
out of the Fathers and ancient Liturgies,
that Bishop Forbes,Forb. de Pur. c. 3. . 27. Spalato, and other Prote|stant
Writers, do acknowledge it, and refuse
not to assent to the ground of such a pra|ctise.
The words of Spalato are these: There
would be no absurdity if we should confesse,Spal. l. 5. cap. 8. that

some lighter sins which have not in this life
been remitted (quoad culpam) as to the guilt
or fault, may be forgiven after death, and
this somtimes a little after the departure of the
Soul, c. by vertue of the Churches interces|sion.
12 It cannot be denied, but that there
are among the Holy Fathers great varieties of
Opinions touching some particular circum|stances
regarding the state of Souls after
death, and at the present some differences
there are between the Roman and Greek
Church. In which notwithstanding it will
appear to any who will compare them, that
the Roman Doctrin is far more moderate, re|ceiveable,
and approaching to the grounds
of Protestants, than that of the Eastern
Church. But however, it is without all con|troversy,
that all Churches who professed
Christianity before the Reformation, do a|gree
unanimously in the practice of praying
for the Dead, so as to beg forgiveness of
sins, a bettering of their state, an asswage|ment
of their sufferings, c. Which practise
they esteem not a voluntary offering, but a
duty, to a necessary performance of which,
charity obligeth all Christians. And there|fore
English Protestants cannot be excused
for their neglect of this duty, especially consi|sidering
that the Doctrin upon which this
Practice is grounded, is not mentioned at all
among those Points which they account No|velties

in the Roman Church. On the con|trary,
the more learned among them have
and do, though not in expression, yet in sense
agree with Bishop Andrews, conceding in his
Reply to Cardinal Perron,P. 9. That for offe|ring
doth he not mean here, for offering the
Christian sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist for
them, for what is more manifest in Antiqui|ty,
than this?] and prayer for the Dead, little
is to be said against it. No man can deny, but
it is very antient. Since then the Church
cannot be thought, from the most antient
times thereof, to have offered up to God all
her prayers in all ages pro defunctis in vain,
methinks I cannot here, but in this respect al|so
commiserate the condition of those poor
Souls, who depart hence un-owned by that
Church, and without any share in her pray|ers
(which only like a true Mother, is so sol|licitous
and carefull a Supplicant not only for
her living, but also deceased children) and
who, after a life here not so well spent, seeing
themselves going hence only with an inchoa|ted
repentance,  an unperfect reformation,
and very unprepared to be immediatly enter|tained
in that place of bliss, and glorious so|ciety
into which no impure thing shall enter,
yet are content rather to lose the benefit of
the daily prayers and oblations for them of
this careful Mother, than to render themselves
capable thereof by returning into her Com|munion.
And surely much more uncomfort|able

must such a death be, that is void of the
hopes of any such assistance, than theirs is,
who, departing hence in the bosom of the
Church, and in this blessed communion of
Saints with the request of St. Austins dying
Mother in their mouth,Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 11. Illud vos rogo, ut ad
Domine altare memineritis mei: This I beg of
you, that at the Altar of our Lord ye make re|membrance
of me: are sure to enjoy the last
aid of this pious charity, and also the yet more
efficacious sacrifice of the Altar to be fre|quently
offered to God in their behalf.
10. Lastly, to omit particular Quotations out
of the antient public Liturgies of the Church,
that of St. Iames acknowledged by the second
General Council, that of St. Basil, St. Chryso|stom,
c. in every one of which are expresse
prayers and oblations for the Dead, demand|ing
pardon of their sins, refreshment of their
sufferings, c. I will conclude with a full
convincing Testimony of St. Augustin,Aug. Ser. 32. de verb. Apost. whose
words are these, That by the Prayers of the
Holy Church, and saving Sacrifice, as like|wise
by Alms expended for their Souls, our de|parted
Brethren are helped, that God may deal
with them more mercifully than their sins de|serve,
not to be doubted. For this the univer|sal
Church observes as a Tradition of our Fa|thers,
that for those who are dead in the Com|munion
of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Pray|ers
should be made, when at the holy Sacrifice
their Names are in their due place rehearsed,

and that it should be signified that the Offering is
made for them. And when out of an intention
of commending them to Gods mercy, works of
Charity and Alms are made, who will doubt
that these things help towards their good, for
whom Prayers are not in vain offered to God?
It is not therefore to be doubted but that these
things are profitable for the Dead yet only such
as before their death have lived so, as that these
things may profit them after Death. And a|gain,Id. Enchirid. c. 110.
For Martyrs the Sacrifice is offered
as a thanksgiving, and for others as a propiti|ation.
14. The Doctor cannot but know in his
Conscience, (for he is no Stranger to the Fa|thers)
what a great Volume may be written
to confirm this: And that not one expressi|on
can be quoted against it. Therefore
whereas he said without any ground, that
Tertullian borrowed from Montanus; I would
ask him, From whom did he borrow the o|mission
of this charitable duty to the Dead,
but from the Heretie Aerius? Nor is this to
be considered as a voluntary courtesie don
them, which without any fault may be omit|ed.
On the contrary St. Epiphanius will tell
him,Epiph. l. 3. haer. 75. the Church does these things necessarily,
having received such a Tradition from the Fa|thers.
And St. Augustin,Aug. de cur. pro mort. c. 5. we must by no means
omit necessary Supplications for the Souls of the
Dead: For whether the Flesh of the dead Per|son
lye here, or in another place, repose ought to
be obtained to his Spirit.

15. If these Souls were believ'd to be in
Heaven would it not be ridiculous? If in Hell
would it not be impious to offer the dreadful
Sacrifice, to make Supplications to be at
charge in Alms for the obtaining them re|pose,
pardon of their sins, refreshment of
their sufferings, a translation into the region
of Light and peace, and a place in the bosom
of Abraham? But if they be neither in Heaven
nor Hell, where are they then? He cannot deny
a third place, unless he thinks them anihilated:
He will not say that third place is Purgatory,
because the Church calls it so. But suppose
the Church dispence with him for the Name; I
would to God he would accept of such a dis|pensation;
one pretence of Schism would
quickly be removed.
16. To conclude; If all the Liturgies of
the Church, all the Fathers have not credit e|nough
with him to perswade that this is no
Novelty yet greater Antiquity for it he may
find in the Iewish Church: an expresse Testi|mony
for which we read in the Book of Mac|chabees:
He will say it is not Canonical: at
least let him acknowledge it not to be a Ro|mance:
and however, the universal Tradition
and practise of the Synagogue will justifie it.
From the Jews no doubt Plato borrowed this
Doctrin, and from Plato Cicero, and from
both Virgil. Nay even natural reason will
tell him, that Heaven, into which no unclean
thing can enter, is not so quickly and easily o|pen

to imperfect Souls, as to perfect: nor have
we any sign, that meerly by dying, sinful li|vers
becom immediatly perfect.
17. To fill his learned Margins, he quotes
certain Contradictors of Bellarmin, as the Bi|shop
of Rochester, Polydor Virgil, Suarez, and
Thomas ex Albiis; but since both Bellarmin
himself and all his Contradictors agree with
the Church, in contradiction to the Preacher,
that there is a Purgatory; what other induce|ment
could he have to mention them unlesse
it were that his Readers might see what his
Hearers could not, that he was resolved to
pretend, but was not able indeed to produce
any thing to purpose against the Catholic
Church?



CHAP. XI.

Of Transubstantiation, or a Substantial
Presence of our Lords Body in the
Sacrament. Iustified by the Au|thorities
of the Fathers, c. The
Preacher's Objections Answer'd.

1. THe three next supposed Novelties of
the Catholic Church all regard the
most holy Sacrament. That blessed Myste|ry,
which was instituted to be both a Sym|bal
and instrument, to signifie and to ope|rate
Vnity, is, by the cunning of the Devil,
and malicious folly of men, becom both the
work and cause of Dis-union.
2. Touching this Subject the first of the
three Novelties the Doctor says is Transub|stantiationSerm. p. 9.
So far from being from the be|ginning
that it is not much above four hun|dred
years old,Ibid. p. 23, 24. that it was first beard of in
the Council of Lateran. For in Pope Ni|cholas
the Second's time the submission of

Berengarius imports rather a Conthen
Transubstantiation. But evident it is, That
it was never taught by our Saviour, since he
in the same breath wherewith he pro|nounced,
This is my Blood, explain'd himself
by calling it expresly the fruit of the Vins.
and there needs no more to make the Roma|nists
ashamed of that Doctrin, than the con|cession
of Aquinas, who says, That it is im|possible
for one body to be locally in more
places than one: From whence Bellarmin
angrily infers, that it equally implies a Con|tradiction
for one body to be so much as Sa|cramentally
in more places than one.
3. In order to the giving some satisfaction
touching this matter, I will, as before, set
down the Churches Doctrin concerning this
most holy Sacrament, which will extend it self
to all his three pretended Novelties. In the
Profession of Faith compiled by Pope Pius iv.Profess. Fid. Pii 4.
out of the Council of Trent it is said, I profess
that in the Masse there is offered to God a true
proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the living
and Dead: And that in the most holy Sacra|ment
of the Eucharist there is truly and Sub|stantially
the Body and Blood together with the
Soul and Divinity of our Lord Iesus Christ:
and that there is a Conversion (or Change) of
the whole Substance of Bread into his Body, and
of Wine into his Blood: which change the Ca|tholic
Church calls Transubstantiation. More|over
I confess that under one of the Species alone

whole and entire Christ, and a true Sacrament
is received.
4. And if he will needs have it so, let it be
granted, that the Latin word Transubstanti|ation
begun commonly to be received among
Catholics at the Council of Lateran: Though
there was a Greek expression exactly import|ing
as much [] as old as his Begin|ning,
that is, in the time of the first General
Council. But for God's sake let not a new
word drive him out of God's Church, as the
word  did the Arians. He may ob|serve
with Cardinal Perron that the Church
only says, the change made in the holy Sacra|ment
is usually called Transubstantiation: So
that on condition he allow a real Substantial
change, the word it self shall not hinder us
from being good Friends.
5. The Doctor sees now what our Church
holds concerning this Point. She delivers her
mind sincerely, candidly, ingenuously. But
if I should ask him what his Church holds, it
would cost him more labour to give a satis|factory
Answer than to make ten such Ser|mons.
6. There are among Christians only four
ways of expressing a presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. 1 That of the Zuinglians, Socini|ans,
c. who admit nothing at all real here;
The Presence, say they, is only figurative or
imaginary: As we see Bread broken and
eaten, c. so we ought to call to mind that

that Christs Body was crucified, and torn for
us, and by Faith (or a strong fancy) we are
made partakers of his Body, that is, not his
Body, but the blessings that the offring his
Body may procure. 2. That of Calvin and
English Divines,Calvin in  Cor. cap. 11. 24. who usually say, as Calvin
did, That in the holy Sacrament our Lord offers
unto us not onely the benefit of his Death and Re|surrection,
but the very Body it self in which he
dyed and rose again: Or, as King Iames, We ac|knowledge
a presence no lesse true and real then
Catholics do;Casaub. p. ad. Card. Per. only we are ignorant of the manner:
[Of which it seems he thought that Catho|lics
were not.] So that this presence is sup|posed
a Substantial presence, but after a spiritu|al
manner: A presence not to all, but to the
worthy receivers: Offred perhaps to the un|worthy,
but only partaken by the worthy:
A presence not to the Symbols, but the Recei|vers
Soul only: Or if (according to Mr.
Hooker) in some sence the Symbols do exhibit
the very Body of Christ, yet they do not con|tain
in them what they exhibit, at least not
before the actual receiving. 3. Of the Lu|therans,
who hold a presence of Christs Body in
the Sacrament as real, proper and substantial
as Catholics do, but deny an exclusion of
Bread. For Bread, say they, remains as be|fore,
but to and with it the Body of our Lord
(every where present) is in a sort hypostati|cally
united: Yet some among them dny a|ny
reverence is to be exhibited to Christ,

though indeed substantially present. 4. That
of Roman Catholics, whose sense was let down
before; whereto this only is to be added,
That believing a real conversion of Bread in|to
our Lords Body, c. they think them|selves
obliged, in conformity to the Ancient
Church, as to embrace the Doctrine, so to
imitate their practise in exhibiting due reve|rence
and worship (not to the Symbols, not to
any thing which is the object of sense, as Cal|vinists
slander them; but) to our Lord himself
only, present in and under the Symbols.
7. Now three of these four Opinions,
that is, every one but that of English Prote|stants
speak intelligible sense: Every one
knows what Zuinglians, Lutherans, and Ro|man
Catholics mean: But theirs (which they
call a Mystery) is Indeed a Iargon, a Linsey-Wolsey
Stuff, made probably to sui with any
Sect according to interests: They that taught
it first in England, were willing to speak at
least, and, if they had been permitted, to
mean likewise as the Catholic Church instru|cted
them, but the Sacrilegious Protectour in
King Edwards daies, and afterward the Privy
Council in Queen Elizabeths, found it for
their wordly advantage, that their Divines
should, at least in words, accuse the Roman
Church for that Doctrine which themselves
believed to be true. But now, since the last
Restitution, if that renew'd Rubrick at the
end of the Communion, be to be esteem'd Do|ctrinall,

then the last Edition of their Religion
in this Point is meer Zuinglianism, to which
the Presbyterians themselves, if they are true
Calvinists, will refuse to subscribe. Thus
the new Religion of England is almost become
the Religion of New England.
8.  remains now that I should by a few
authorities justifie our Catholic Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or real substantial Presence,
to be far from deserving to be called a Novelty
of our hundred years standing. By Catho|lic
Doctrine, I mean the Doctrine of the Church,
not of the Schools, the Doctrine delivered by
Tradition, not Ratiocination: Not a Doctrine
that can be demonstrated by human empty
Philosophy. On the contrary, it may be con|fidently
assorted, that all such pretended de|monstrations
are not only not concluding,
but illusory, because that is said to be demon|strated
by reason, which Tradition tells us is
above reason, and ought not to be squared
by the Rule of Philosophy: The presence of
Christ in the Sacrament is truly real and Sub|stantial,
but withall Sacramental, that is My|stical,
inexplicable, incomprehensible. It is
a great mistake among Protestants, when
they argue that we, by acknowledging a
Conversion by Transubstantiation, pretend to
declare the modum conversionis. No; that is
far from the Churches, or the Antient Fathers
thoughts. For by that expression the onely
signifies, the change is not a matter of fancy,

but real, yet withal Mystical. The Fathers,
to expresse their belief of a real conversion,
make use of many real changes mentioned
in the Scripture, as of Aarons Rod into a Ser|pent,
of water into wine, c. But withal they
adde, That not any of these Examples do
fit, or properly represent the Mystical change
in the Sacrament: Sence or Reason might
comprehend and judge of those changes, but
Faith alone must submit to the incomprehen|siblenesse
of this. When Water was turn'd
into Wine, the eyes saw, and the Palat tasted
Wine, it had the colour, extension, and lo|cality
of Wine; But so is it not when Bread
by consecration becomes the Body of Christ;
For ought that Sence can judge, there is no
change at all: Christs Body is present, but
without locality: It is present, but not cor|porally,
as natural bodies are present, one
part here, and another there. The Quomodo
of this presence is not to be inquired into,
nor can it without presumption be deter|min'd.
This is that which the Church calls
a Sacramental, Mystical presence. But, that this
presence is real and substantial, a presence in
the Symbols or Elements, and not only in the
mind of the worthy receiver, the Fathers
unanimously teach: And indeed if it were
not so, none could receive the Body of Christ
unworthily, because according to Protestants,
it is not the Body of Christ, but meer Bread
that an impenitent Sinner receives: And St.

Pauls charge would be irrational, when he
saies,1 Cor. 11. 29. such An one receives judgment to himself
in that he does not discern the Body of our Lord.
Besides, if the change be not in the Elements,
but in the Receivers Soul, what need is there
of Consecration? What effect can Consecration
have? Why may not another man or woman
as well as a Priest, administer this Sacrament?
What hinders that such a Presence may not be
effected in the mind every Dinner or Supper,
and as well when we eat flesh, and drink any
other Liquor besides Wine at our own Table,
as at that of our Lord.
9. Now, whether their Doctrine or ours
be a Novelty, let Antiquity judge. If I should
produce, as he knows I may, hundreds of
Testimonies that by conversion a change is
made of the Bread into the Body, and Wine
into the Blood of Christ, he would think to
escape by allowing a change to be made, but
only in the Act of worthy receiving. There|fore
I will onely make use of such Authorities
as demonstrate this change to be made before
communicating; that it remains, when the
Sacrament is reserved, and that immediately
after consecration, before any participation of
the Symbols, both the Priest and People did
perform an act of Adoration to Christ, belei|ved
to be really and substantially, though mysti|cally,
present.
10. In all ancient Liturgies (as BlondelBlondel. him|self,
though a Huguenot, confesses) the pray|er

in the consecration of the Elements was,
That God would by his holy Spirit sanctifie the Ele|ments,Lturg. S. Basil. Cyril. Hier. Catech. Myst. 5.
whereby the Bread may be made the Body,
and the Wine the Blood of our Lord. And, that
before communicating, whilst it was on the
Altar, it was esteem'd and worshiped as the
true Body of our Lord, St. Chrysostome will
witnesse,Chrys. in. 1 Cor. 10. hom. 24. Let us, saith he, who are Citizens of
Heaven, imitate but even the barbarous Magi,
(who worshipped our Lord an Infant, c.)
Thou seest him not in the Manger, but on the
Altar. Thou dost not see a woman holding him,
but the Priest standing by him, and the Spirit with
great vertue hovering over these (Mysteries) pro|posed.
Thou not only seest the Body it self, as the
Magi did, but thou knowest also the vertue of it, c.
The same Body which is the most precious and most
honour'd thing in Heaven, I will shew thee placed
upon Earth, c. Neither dost thou only see it,
but touchest and eatest it, and having received it,
thou returnest home with it,Opta. lib. 6. c. Hence Optatus
saith, What other thing is the Altar, but the Seat
of the Body and Blood of Christ. A yet more
irrefragable witnesse hereof is the General
Council of Nice, wherein (Act. l. 3. c. de Di|vin
mens) are these words, In this Divine
Table let us not abase our intentions so as to consi|der
the Bread and Wine set before us, but raising
up our mind by Faith, let us understand that upon
that holy Table is placed the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the World, which is unbloo|dily
immolated by the Priest, and receiving his pre|cious

Body and Blood, let us truly believe that
these are the Symbols of our Redemption.
And, that the Elements, once consecrated
and after reserved, yet remain the Body of
Christ though not participated, St. Cyril of
Alexandria expresly ectifies, I hear (saith he)
there are others who affirm that the Mystical Eulo|gy,Cyil. Al. Ep. ad Calosyr.
if any thing of it remain till another day, doth
profit nothing to sanctification. Bur they are
mad who say these things: For Christ is not
alter'd, neither is his holy Body changed; but the
vertue of Benediction and quickning grace perpe|tually
remains in it. And as touching Adrati|on
of our Lord, as acknowledged substantial|ly
present on the Altar, St. Ambrose expresly
asserts it, Adore the foot-stool of his feet. There|fore
by the footstool is understood the Earth;Amb. de Spis. lib. 3. cap. 12. and the
Earth the flesh of Christ, which at this day also
we adore in the Mysteries, and which the Apostles
adored in our Lord Iesus. And from St. Ambrose
the same is taught as expresly by St. Augustin,
discoursing on the same Text,Aug. in Psal. 98. 5. Adorate Scabel|lum
pedum ejus: Who moreover adds, Christ
hath given his flesh to be eaten by us for our Sal|vation:
Now no man eats this, except he first a|dore
it. Yea, moreover he saies, We do not only
not sin by adoring it, but we should sin if we did not
adore it, And in an Epistle to Honoratus, he
affirms,Id. Epist. 120. That the rich of the Earth and proud are
somtimes brought to the Table of our Lord, and
there receive of his Body and Blood, but they onely
adore it, they are not satiated with it, because they

do not imitate him (by humility.) For of the
humble it is said, Edent pauperes  satura|buntur.
11. The same may be inferr'd by the won|derfull
niceness and scrupolosity observed in
the Primitive Church in the handling, com|municating
and reserving these Mysteries;
what a crime was it esteem'd in the Primitive
times, if but a crum or drop of the consecra|ted
Elements should fall to the ground? For
fear of that, till about the year six hundred
they were received by the Communicants not
in their Fingers, as among the Reformed,
but in the inside plain of their hands, and in
a silver Pipe, c. But I will conclude this
point with a brief Answer to the Doctors Alle|gations.
12. Whereas therefore he says, It is evident
that Transubstantiation wa never taught by
our Saviour, since in the same breath wherewith
he pronounced these words, This is my Blood, he
explain'd himself by calling it expresly the Fruit
of the Vine. On the contrary I do confident|ly
pronounce it to be evident, that those
words were neither spoken by our Lord in
the same breath after the Consecration of the
Chalice, nor had they any regard to the Sa|crament.
'Tis true they are mentioned by St.
Matthew after the Consecration, but he knows
that in St. Luke, who promised to write ,
those words are mentioned before any Conse|cration
began, and the occasion of them is

evidently the eating of the Paschal Supper
c. For this is his Narration: When the
hour was come he sate down,Luke 22. 14, 18. and the twelve A|postles
with him. And he said unto them with
desire I have desired to eat this Passeover with
you before I suffer. For I say unto you, I will
not any more eat thereof until it be fulfill'd in the
kingdom of God. And he took the Cup and gave
thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among
your selves, For I say unto you I will not drink
of the fruit of the Vine, until the kingdom of
God shall come. Now after all this follows his
own last Supper, the Mystical consecration
and communion of his blessed Body and Blood.
For the Text thus continues, And he took
Bread saying,lbid. 10. 19, 20. This is my Body, c. likewise
also the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup,
c. This being the order of the words,
no Text can possibly with more evidence con|ute
the Doctor than this which himself cites:
for what can be clearer, if before Consecrati|on
our Saviour said, He would drink no ore of
the fruit of the Vine? then that what he drank
after was not of the fruit of the Vine? But be|sides
this, though our Lord should have cal|led
it, after Consecration, the fruit of the Vine,
as Saint Paul calls the other Symbol Bread:
this does not argue against a Change in
their nature; For Moses his Rod, after
it was changed into a Serpent is call'd a
Rod still, because it had been one [Exod. 7.
12.] and [Io. 2. 9.] it is said, That the Ma|ster

of the Feast tasted the Water that was made
Wine.
13. Is not now the Doctor's Insincerity e|vident
his insincerity even in the Pulpit? has
he not palpably mis-inform'd his Majesty and
so illustrious an Auditory? And though he
should still continue to prefer St. Matthews
order of Narration before St. Lukes, yet what
St. Luke writes cannot possibly be applyed to
the Sacrament: For, though those special
words,Matth. 26. 29.  I will not drink henceforth of this fruit
of the Vine untill, c. if they stood alone,
might seem applicable to the consecrated Cha|lice:
yet those other of Saint Luke, I will
not any more eat of this Passover, untill,
c. cannot possibly be applyed to the con|secrated
Element of Bread: and therefore
since both these Sayings were manifestly in|tended
of the same Subject; It is more
than evident they were meant only of the
Paschal Supper, and not at all of the Sacra|ment.
14.Serm. pag. 14. As for Bellarmins quarrel with St. Tho|mas
his affirming that one Body cannot be locally
in two places: and his revengeful inference, that
neither then ca they be Sacramentally: All I
will say hereto shall be, that if there be any
quarrel on Bellarmins part, which truly I do
not find to be such but may very friendly
be composed. Yet however since it is on|ly
about a Scholastical Notion of Locality,
Circumscription, c. and it is apparent,

that both these Doctors held a true Sub|stantial
presence of our Lords Body in the Sa|crament,
as the Church teaches, I will not,
by troubling my self about composing the
matter between them, invite the Doctor here|after
to unnecessary excursions: It is only the
Churches Doctrin that I engage my self to ju|stifie.
15.Serm. pag. 25. In the last place, touching Berin a|rius
his submission, if the Form were the
same mentioned in the Doctors Margin from
Floriacensis, there is nothing appears in it
favouring Consubstantiation. Certainly, it
was sufficient, if he spoke sincerely, to
acquit him from any suspition of holding
onely a Figurative Presence of Christ's Bo|dy:
and that onely was his businesse.
As for his Expressions that Our Lords Bo|dy,
not onely in Mystery, but Truth is
handled, broken and chawed with the teeth
of Faithful Communicants, unlesse they
be understood Sacramentally, they are
far from being justifiable. And so are all
the Capharnaitical Objections that Prote|stants
make against Catholic Doctrine in
this matter. VVe acknowledge more than
a Spiritual, an Oral Manducatian, but
without any Suffering or Change in the
Divine Body it self: VVe acknowledge
it is Nourishment to us, but not after
a Carnal manner; Christ is not changed

by Digestion into our Bodyes; yet san|ctifies
even our Bodies also, as well as our
Souls:Greg. Nyss. orat. Catech. c. 37. Because in Saint Gregory Nyssen his
Expression, Insinuating it self into our Bo|dies,
by an union with our Lord's Immortal
Body, We are made Partakers of Immorta|lity.



CHAP. XII.

Of Communion under one Species-Confirm'd
by the practise of the
Primitive Church in private Com|munions.
The Preachers Obje|ctions
solved.

1. HIS fifth pretended Novelty, imputed to
the Catholic Church is,Serm. pag. 9. Communion un|der
one Species, no older, saies he, then since the
time of Aquinas, unlesse they will own it from the
Manichees.Ibid. pag. 25. But we find our Saviour intended
the Chalice to every guest: Drink all of this, saies
he. And St. Paul speaks as well of drinking the
Mystical Blood, as eating the Body of Christ.
2. To the substance of what is here alle|ged,
we readily subscribe. We acknowledg
our Saviour instituted this Mystery in both
kinds: That the Apostles received it in both
kinds: That St. Paul speaks as well of drink|ing,
c. That most commonly in the Church
till a little before the times of Aquinas, in the

public Celebration of these Mysteries, the people
communicated in both kinds: All this we
agree to.
3. But the general Tradition of the Church,
at least from his beginning, will not permit us
to yield, that the receiving in both kinds was
esteem'd by the Church necessary to the essence
of the Communion, or integrity of the parti|cipation
of Christs Body and Blood, or that
it is fitly called by him a half Communion,
when deliver'd and receiv'd only in one kind.
On the contrary, we appeal to Dr. Pierces
own Conscience, whether, if we should yield
this, we should not be overwhelm'd with the
Depositions of the most ancient Fathers against
us: As evidently appears in Communions an|ciently
practised under one kind only, and this
upon many occasions: As during the times
of persecution in Domestic Communions men|tion'd
by Tertullian,Tertull. lib. 2. ad Uxo. St. Cyprian, and others,
in which the holy Eucharist was deliver'd to
the Faithful under the species of Bread alone,Cypr. l. de lapsis.
and by them carried home, to be reverently
participated by them,Ambr. orat. 1. in obitu frat. according to their par|ticular
Devotions:Aug. lib. 2. lit. Petil. c. 23. The same was practised
in communicating Infants, or innocent Chil|dren
of more years,Euseb. lib. 5.  lib. 7. (witnesse besides the said
Fathers, the practise of the Church of Con|stantinople
mentioned by Nicephorus:Beda in Mart. ad 15. August.) In
communicating the Sick, and Penitents at the
point of death:Niseph. hist. lib. 18. cap. 6. In communions at Sea: In com|munions
sent to other Provinces, c.

4. In all these Cases the Communicants were
esteem'd to be partakers of ntire Christ, nor
did they think they received more of him at
publick Communions in the Church, when the
Sacrament was delivered in both species, then
when at home in one only. They believed
it was Christ entire which they received in e|very
divided particle of the species of Bread,
and every divided drop of the species of Wine:
and that the flesh of Christ could not be parti|cipated
without a concomitance of his Blood,
nor the Blood without the Flesh, nor either
of them without a concomitance of his Soul
and Divinity.Ambr. de ils qui Myster. c. 9. Hence St. Ambrose, Christ is
in that Sacrament, because it is the Body of
Christ.Conyl. Eph. in Epst. ad Nestor. And the Council if Ephesus, That those
who approach to the Mystical Benedictions do par|ticipate
the Flesh of Christ, not as common meer
Flesh,August. in Psal. 33. but truly quickning Flesh. And St. Au|gustin,
That Christ, [ferebatur in manibus
suis] did carry himself in his own hands: and
this in a litteral sense. And St. Cyril of
Alexandria says,Cyril. Alex. lib. 12. in Ioan. cap. 32. By the unparted Garment of
Christ was mystically signified, that the four
parts of the world, being brought to salvation by
the Gospel, did divide among themselves his
Flesh without dividing it. For (says he) the
only begotten Son of God passing into, and, by his
Flesh, sanctifying the Soul nd Body of each of
them severally and in particular, is in each of
them entirely and undividedly, being every where
one, and in no sort divided.

5 These things thus premised (which are cer|tain
Truths, and cannot by the Preacher be
deny'd) since he will needs make a quarrel
with the Catholic Church upon this Subject, he
must necessarily take upon him to demon|strate,
1. Either, that these Communions under
one species, allowed and practised on so many
occasions in the Primitive times, were half Com|munions,
sacrilegious Transgressions of the
Institution of our Lord, contrary to the teach|ing
of St. Paul, conspiring with the Heresie of
the Manichees, c. And doing so, he will
contradict himself, whilst he pretends half
Communions to be a Novelty since their times.
2. Or, if these Practises were justifiable, and
that the Church had warrant and authority
to do as she did, he must prove that such an
Authority could be extended only to private
Persons or Fanilies, and by no means to pub|lick
Congregations: That the same was a whole
Communion in a Chamber, and but a half Com|munion
in a Church: That a sick man, or one
at Sea, c. broke not the institution of Christ
whilst he communicated under one kind, but
did break it when he was in health or upon
firm ground.
6. Till these things be proved by him (which
will be ad Graecas Calindas he must of necessity
grant, that here is no Novety at all, no change
in the present Catholic hurch as to Doctrin:
And that the change which is made in exter|nal
Disciplin, is of so great importance, that

Protestants (who would not have separated
from her Communion; if she had given them
leave to break our Saviours Institution only
privatly) will renounce her, because she thinks
and knows that a privat House and a Church
cannot make the same action both lawful and
unlawful, and therfore since she had authority
within doors, she cannot be deprived of it a|broad.
7. Nay further, Doctor Pierce's task does
not end here: for though he should be able to
prove all this, yet if this be one of the pro|vocations,
and causes of their separation,
he cannot justifie that separation till they
have made a tryal, whether the Church will
not dispence with them as to this point of Dis|cipline,
and after tryal, been refused. For
surely he will not esteem Schism a matter so
inconsiderable, as to expose themselves to the
guilt of it, because others besides them are ob|liged
and content to receive under one species,
whilst themselves are left at liberty: They
will not unnecessarily make tumults and divisi|ons
in the Church by disputing against others,
when they themselves are not concern'd. Now,
that such a dispensation may possibly be had,
does appear, in that the Church by a General
Council hath either given to, or acknowledg|ed
in her Supreme Pastor a sufficient authority to
proceed in this matter according to his own pru|dence,Conc. Tid. Ses. 22. in fin.
and as he shall see it to be prfitable to the
Church, and for the spiritual good of those that
shall demand the use of the Chalice.

8. As for us Catholics, we are bread up to
the Orders established by Gods Church: And
being assured that our Lord will not forget
his Promises, and consequently his Church
shall never mislead us to our danger, we do
not think it our duty to question the Churches
prudence, or set up a private Tribunal to cen|sure
her Lawes: We are not sure we know
all the Reasons that induced the Council of
Constance to confirm a practise almost gene|rally
introduced by custome before. Yet
some Reasons we see, which truly are of ve|ry
great moment for that purpose, to wit,
the wonderful encrease of the numbers of
Communicants, and wonderful decay of their
Devotion: From whence could not be pre|vented
very great dangers of irreverences and
effusion oft-times of the precious blood of our
Lord, considering the defect of providence,
and caution to be expected in multitudes, lit|tle
sensible of Religion.
It is probable likewise that the Heresie of
Berengarius, who acknowledged no more in
the Sacrament, than the meer signs of the body
and blood of our Lord, might induce the Ca|tholics
publickly to practise what the Primi|tive
Church did privatly, to the end they
might thereby demonstrate, that though
they received not both the Signs, yet they
were not defrauded of being partakers of all
that was entirely contained under both the
Species, which was whole Christ, not his body
only, but also his blood, c.



CHAP. XIII.

Of the Sacrifice of the Masse.
Asserted Universally by Antiqui|ty.
The true Doctrine concern|ing
it explained.

1.Serm. Pag. 13. HIS sixth supposed Novelty (which is the
third that regards the blessed Sacra|ment)
is the Sacrafice of the Masse. But how
is this prov'd to be a Novelty? Ipse dixit.
Not one Text, not one Quotation appears in
the Margin; and why? Alas! where should
he find any? Since there's not a Father in
Gods Church from the very Apostles, but ac|knowledged
a Christian Sacrifice; nor any
old Heretick ever denyed it. Nay, who be|sides
himself calls it a Noveltie? I am sure
Dr. FulkFulk. conut. of Purg. page 362, c. expresly confesseth that Tetullian,
Cyprian, Austin, Hierom, and a great many more
do witnesse that Sacrifice, yea, Sacrifice for the
Dead is the Tradition of the Apostles. And Mr.
Ascham acknowledges that the Sacrifice of the

Masse is so antient,Ascham. Apol. pro cna Dom. that no first beginning of
it can be shewed. Yet Dr. Pierce would fain
have proved it to be a Novelty Gladly would
he have applyed to this, his From the beginning
it was not so: But could not find one Word in
Antiquitie for his purpose. However, for all
that it must not be omitted. His Auditors
would have wonderd to hear the Church ac|cused,
and the clause touching the Sacrifice
left out of the Indictment.
2. To please therefore popular ears, he
named it, as an ill thing: But coming to
print his Sermon, he leaves that Margin empty:
For what could be in the Fathers to fill it?
It was not for his purpose to quote St. Igna|tius's
saying,Ignat. Ep. ad. Smirn. cent. 2. cap. 4. It is not lawful either to offer, or to
immolate the Sacrifice or  with|out
the Bishop: (Which, (say the Centurists)
are dangerous words, and seeds of Errors) Or St.
Ireneus,Iren. l. 4. c. 32. who tells us that our Lord, consecra|ting
the Mystical Elements, Taught us a New
Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church
having received from the Apostles, offers to God
through the whole World.Cypr. Epist. ad Cyril. Or St. Cyprian,
whose words are, Who was more a Priest of the
most High God, then our Lord Iesus Christ? Who
offred a Sacrifice to God the Father? and offred
the very same that Melchisedech had offred, that
is, Bread and Wine, to wit, his own Body and
Blood, c. and commanded the same to be after|ward
done in memory of him. That Priest there|fore
doth truly supply the place and function of

Christ, and imitates that which Christ did, who
undertakes to offer according as he sees Christ him|self
offerd. In which one Epistle he calls the
Eucharist a Sacrifice, seven times, and above
twenty times he affirms that the Symbols are of|fred
in it.
3. The truth is, in the writings of Anti|quity,
the celebration of these Mysteries, is scarce
ever call'd by other name, but Oblation, Sacri|fice,
Immolation, c. And because the Fathers
may be said to speak figuratively and rheto|rically,
the Canons also of the Church, which
ought to speak properly, scarce ever use any
other expression. See the third among the
Apostolic Canons; The 58th. Canon of the
Council of Laodicea: The 20th. Canon of the
first Council of Ales: The 40th. Canon of the
Council of Cartage: And the 18th. Canon of
the first General Coucil of Nice, in which are
these words, The Holy Synod is inform'd, that
in some places Deacons administer the Euharist to
Priests: A thing which neither any Canon nor
Custom hath deliver'd, that those who have no
power of offering should give the Body of Christ to
those who offer. Whole volums may be tran|scribed
to this effect: I will only therefore re|fer
him to St. Hierom on Titus,Hier. on. Ti. cap. 1. Chrys. 21. hom. and St. Chry|sostom
on the Acts, where he will find the Eu|charist
not only a Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice for
remission of sins,; a Sacrifice for the Priest that
offers; a Sacrifice for the multitude; a Sacrifice
for the procuring of plenty, c. sutably

to the modern and ancient Liturgies.
4. If after all this he will not allow any
of these expressions in Doctors, Canons, Litur|gies,
c. to be proper and litteral, St. Augu|stin
will contradict him: Who saies, Presby|ters
and Bishops are now in the Church properly
called [Sacerdotes] sacrificing Priests.Aug. lib. 20. de Civ. D. cap. 10. And be|cause
the fancy which Protestants have enter|tained
against the term Sacrifice, Oblation, c.
proceeds from a mistake of the true sense in
which the Church intends it; for ordinarily
the conception of a Sacrifice, is supposed to
import an immolation, shedding of blood,
killing, c. and no such matter appearing
here, but only a commemoration of a former
real immolation and shedding of Christs blood,
therefore generally among all Sects, divided
from the Church, the title of Sacrifice will not
be endured.
5. To prevent therefore for the future
such a mis-understanding, let them be pleased
to take notice that all the Sacrifices of the
Law were shadows and types of the Sacrifices
of our Lord, and the Legal Priest-hood a type
of his Priest-hood: But above all other Sacri|fices
and functions of Priest-hood, those were
most lively figures of our Lord, which were
perform'd on a certain day, only once every
year, for the sins of the whole Congregati|on:
In the solemn celebration of which Sa|crifice,
besides the immolation of it on the
Altar, the High Priest alone was appointed to

carry of the blood of that Victime into the
most holy place within the Veile, and there to
sprinkle it before the Propitiatory or Mercy-Seat.
This is that Sacrifice which St. Paul
especially applies to our Lord, and shews that
Christ, as a Victime, was once, and but once
immolated on the Altar of the Cross for the
sins of all mankind: And that for the merit
of his obedience to the death even of the
Cross, he was raised from death, and made a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech, a Kingly
Priest, a Priest who had power given him in
Heaven and Earth, to apply the merits of his
own Sacrifice: And that the proper function
of his Regal Priesthood, was the entring with
his immolated Body into the Sancta Sanctorum,
the highest Heavens, there appearing before
his heavenly Fathers Throne, and presen|ting
that most precious Victime to him.
This function of Priest-hood, far more august
than the immolation, he does, and will con|tinually
exercise to the end of the World.
By vertue of this he is made Head of the
Church, he has the power of sending the Ho|ly
Ghost, c. and hereby he perfects Re|demption.
6. And withal, knowing of what infinite
value and vertue this function of his Priest-hood
is, he has been pleased to execute, as it
were by proxy, the same function on Earth,
that himself immediately performs in Hea|ven.
For which purpose he has instituted

Bishops and Priests to be not only his Mini|sters,
but Substitutes and Vice-gerents on Earth,
giving them power to consecrate, and by
cosecrating to place upon the Altar that ve|ry
Body and Blood which was immolated on
the Cross, and is now present before his Fa|ther
in Heaven. This body and blood they Sa|crifice,
this they offer, this they with the Peo|ple
participate. It is not a Sacrifice of im|molation,
in that mistaken sense, for nothing is slain,
the Victime suffers nothing: It is
but a Commemorative Sacrifice of Immolation:
But it is, in the most proper rigorous sence,
an Oblation, the very same, of the very same
body and blood that our Lord now offers in
Heaven: And the same vertue it has, the same
effects it produces, propitiation, remission of sins,
participation of the graces of Gods holy Spirit,
and all blessings both spiritual and temporal. So
that in a word, as under the Law the Legal
propitiation was said to perfected by the
High Priests offring the blood in the most holy
place: So by this Oblation of Christs bood in
the Heavenly Sanctuary, perfect Redemption i
obtained, and by the Commemorative Oblation
of the same body and blood by his Priests in our
earthly Sanctuaries, an application of the
benefit and vertue of that only meritorious Sa|crifice
once offered on the Cross, is then pro|cured
unto us for remission of our sins, and
the donation of all other benefits, spiritual
and temporal.

7. In regard of this sublime function of the
Priest it is, that the holy Fathers exalt his of|fice
before that of Princes, yea even of Angels:
in this regard they call the oblation it self the
most dreadful Mystery at which the Angels
themselves assist with reverence and astonish|ment.
To which purpose I will content my
self with only one or two passages of St. Chry|sostm:
When the Sacrifice, saith he, is brought
out of the Quire,Chrysost. in Eph. cap. 1. hom. 3. Christ himself the Lamb of
our Lord immolated; When thou shalt hear the
Deacons voyce crying, Let us pray all in common,
when thou seest the Curtains and Veyls of the
Gates drawn, then think the Heavens are open|ed
and the Angels descend. And in an other
place:Id. l. 6. de Sa|cerdot. When the Priest has invcated the Holy
Spirit and perfected the Sacrifice full of terrour
and reverence, touching and handling with his
Fingers him who is Lord of all things, to how
sublime a rank is he elevated, c. In that time
the Angels assist the Priest, and all the Celestical
powers send forth cryes of Ioy, all the places a|bout
the Altar are filled with Quires of Angels
in honour of him who is offered. This we may
have ground to believe, if we only consider the su|per-eminent
greatness of the Sacrifice then per|formed.
But moreover I have heard from the re|port
of one who learnt the story from the mouth
of an admirable old man, to whom many revlati|ons
of divine Mysteries have been revealed
from Heaven: How God was graciously plea|sed
to honor him with a Vision of these things,

and how in the time of the Sacrifice he sau sud|denly
appear, with as much splendor as human
sight could support, a multitude of Angels cloa|thed
with white Robes encompassing the Altar,
and having their heads enclined in the same po|sture,
as we oft see the Souldiers in the pre|sence
of the Emperour. Thus Saint Chryso|stom.



CHAP. XIV.

Of Veneration of Images. The Ro|man-Churches
approved practise
of it most suitable to Reason.

1. THe seventh Novelty produced by the
Preacher is the worshipping of Images:
but it being only named, without any proofs
or quotations, I will spare them too: And to
shew that the term of worshipping is none of
ours, but invented by Protestants to render a
most innocent Doctrin odious, and moreover
to demonstrate the no grounds such Preachers
as he have to accuse the Catholic Church of
I know not what, Idolatry in this matter of
Images, I will presume to borrow from an
Author (who will not be angry with me for
it) a passage touching this Point, by which he
will see, that Catholics do no more than every
mans own reason wil justify, in the respect they
give to sacred Images. It is the namelesse Au|thor
of an Answer to Mr. Bagshaw's Treatise of
Infallibility: where he will find this following
passage,Answer to Mr. Bagsh. p. 70, c. in which there are some glances, that

regard only such furious impertinents as Mr.
Bagshaw, which therefore I am far from thin|king
applyable to Doctor Pierce.
2. hus then writes that Author, intending
to demonstrate that in the veneration of Ima|ges
taught by the Catholic Church there is no|thing
at all swerving from common reaon:
Give me leave, saith he, to propose to such a
sober man as you are, altogether compoun|ded
of Reason, some few Questions. First
then suppose there were represented to you
while you were thinking of other matters,
or talking, a Picture of our Lord hagng on
the Cross: coud you pssibly avoid the cal|ling
to mind who our Lord was, and what
he had done or suffered for you? And if
not being able to forbid the entrance of such
thoughts into your mind on such an occasi|on
would your reason dictate to you that
you had done ill in changing your thoughts
from the World to God, would you repent
of it, asking pardon of God, and praying
that such a tentation might never befall you
aterwards? Does your enlightned rea|son
suggest his to you? Truly it i do, I
believe you are of a temper of mind, almost
specifically different from all mankd be|sides,
and they must change their nature be|fore
you make them of your perswasion, or
Church. And yours is no a common sense,
if it either tell you, that by your beating
down of Crosses and breaking Church win|dows,

our good Countrymen think more of
God than they did while those Remembran|ces
were standing: or if they think less, that
it is better for them to forget him.
3. To make a step further, Let it he sup|posed
that at the same time you saw before
you several Pictures of several Persons in a
contrar manner regarded by you, as of St.
Peter and Iudas, of our late Severaign and
Bradshaw: Or put case you had in one
hand a Bible, and in the other the infamous
story of Pantagruel: does not your com|mon
sense and reason tell you, that such Pi|ctures
or Books force upon you quite con|trary
thoughts and affections, which re|gard
those Pictures or Books not simply
considered, but as representing such Per|sons,
and containing such matters? Which
thoughts being just, and not at all harm|full
to you, and withall almost impossible to
be avoided, I cannot find any reason why
Reason should forbid them: I am sure com|mon
sense will not.
4. If then it be according to reason, and
common sense, and likewise unavoidably to
admit such different thoughts: will not rea|son
also warrant you to express outwardly
by words or actions, whatever you may
without any fault think inwardly? For my
part I cannot imagin any scruple in this. If
then I may and must think reverently or
contemptuously of the Objects, I may as well

speak, or behave my self externally after
the same manner to them respectively; For
whatsoever is ill or good in words or acti|ons,
is so likewise in thoughts.
5. Now to shew that such thoughts or
affections regard not the Persons only but
the Pictures also as representations of such
Persons, ask your own heart and you will
find that you would not place St. Peter's
picture, or the King's in an unclean, disho|nest
place. If any one should spit upon ei|ther
of them, your heart would rise against
him, and tempt you to strike him  which
it would not do, if the same contemptuous
usage were shewed to the picture of Iudas
or Bradshaw. Now this is so naturally im|bibed
in the hearts of all Mankind, that in all
Kings Courts a respect and outward mark of
reverence is requird to the Chamber of Pre|sence,
or Chair of State: and a refusal of it,
much more a contemptuous behaviour,
would be criminal. To apply this to the
forementioned Books: You could not bring
your reason to permit you to tear out a leaf
of the Bible for an unclean use, as you could
without the least remorse do to the story of
Pantagruel or Aesop's fables..
6. Let us now consider what kind of re|spect
this is that we expresse to such Images.
Comparing the Images of St. Peter and our
Sovereign's together, we find that a respectful
regard is had to both, and a contemptuous

usage of either would displease us: Yet it is
not the same kind of respect: For St. Peter's
Image we consider as of a man that puts us
in mind of Heaven ann Heavenly things, one
highly favour'd by Almighty God, a princi|pal
Courtier in his Kingdom, and one that
by his writings and example has been a great
instrument of promoting our eternal happi|nesse.
We do not so esteem of every good
King. Therefore to shew the difference of
our respect to each, we would choose to give
St. Peter's picture a place in our Oratory, and
the Kings in our Gallery. But what Names
to give these different respects is not easie to
determin. It is plain, that which is given
to the King's picture is purely a civil respect.
But what shall we call that which is given to
St. Peters? If we say it is Religious, you
will quarrel, as derogating from God. Let
us therefore call it a sacred Veneration, or
honor: For since all things, that are ap|pointed
on purpose to mind us of God, of
Heaven, and the salvation of our Souls, we
call Sacred, this Name may well be apply|ed
to such a Picture. But moreover, because
there are not invented such variety of
Names as there are things, and there are far
fewer sorts of outward postures of our Bo|dys
denoting respect, than there are Names
or Words: Hence it comes to passe that
when we would expresse a Civil and a Sa|cred,
yea a Religious respect, we are forced to

to use the same outward behaviour of bow|ing,
kneeling, c. to Fathers and Magi|strates,
which we do to God himself:1 Chron. 29. 20. Yea
we find in the Scripture Kings adored, and a
prostration of Bodies paid to them. Yet
for all this no man will suspect that thereby
any dishonor was intended to God, or the
Honor due onely to him was paid to Crea|tures.
7. In the next place let reason and com|mon
sense give judgement of the distinction
between the respect that may be paid to the
Picture of St. Peter, and that which ought
to be paid to Himself, in case he appear'd
to us glorified as he is. A Divine respect
we pay to neither, though sometimes we use
such postures as we do when we pray or
worship God. It is then a Sacred Venerati|on
only: But yet there are some expressions
of respect which we would use to the Person,
that would be ridiculous to the Picture, as
reverently to speak to him, to beg his Pray|ers
to God for us, to ask a Question, c.
8. Our last Enquiry shall be into the dif|ference
of regard (if any there be) to our
Saviour's Picture and St. Peter's, the for|mer
representing to us him that is both God
and Man, the later meerly Man. Howe|ver
we shall find that the regard to both
the Pictures is of the same species and na|ture,
that is, only Sacred: because a Picture
we never look upon, but as an instrument

to put us in mind, or to call to our memo|ries
an object: And therefore it being of our
own framing, is not capable of any respect
beyond that which is due to so material, in|ferior
a thing, what ever the object repre|sented
by it be. True it is, that the internal af|fections
and thoughts occasionally raised in
our minds will be infinitely different, for we
shall think upon Christ with Adoration, Love,
Resignation and Obedience due to God only:
Not so of St. Peter: But the Pictures them|selves
will be treated by us as Sacred Pictures
only, that deserve a respect proportionable:
And since it is eviden they are capable of a
sinful dis-respect, consequently a due respect
may be paid to them. I say (may) not alwaies
ought to be: For then it would never be fit to
put on ones Hat, c. in a Room where
there hangs a Crucifix.
9. To sum up briefly our meaning in this
whole matter: We find minds too apt
to be distracted from meditating on Divine
things: Therefore we help our selvs by such
as will call to our memories, and fix our
thoughts upon objects good for our Souls:
Such are holy Pictures both in times of pray|er
and out, we find this benefit by them.
Being such sacred things, we must renounce
our reason, if we deny a respect may be due
to them: But by honoring with an outward
regard a Picture, we intend only to give a te|stimony
what respect we beat to the person

or holy thing represented: And though for
want of variety of postures, we shew some
part of the same outward Reverence to the
Pictures of St. Peter and our Lord, yet that
signifies, we only venerate St. Peter, as a glo|rious
Saint, yet a Creature, but that we a|dore
Christ, as God: And no man that sees or
knows us, can think otherwise. So that un|lesse
it be a fin to show outwardly what we
are oblig'd to think inwardly, there is not
the least fault committed.
10. And now (Mr. Bagshow) give me leave
to acquaint you with your mistakes. First,
this respect called by the Church, Honor and
Veneration, which we affirm may be payd to
Sacred Images, you call Worshipping of Images,
meerly to make in odious to your ignorant
Proselites; For worship is commonly taken to
be that honor which is due only to God, and
which we abhor to give to Images. But Se|condly,
You give it an other name more a|bominable,
calling it Idolatry, such as God pu|nished
in the worst of Pagans. Once at least in
your life speak your Conscience: Do you
think, or only suspect, that we Roman Catho|lics
worship false Gods, and true Devils? Do
we consider our Images, as they did their I|dols,
to which by Magical conjurations they an|nexed
an evil Spirit to do wonders, and to
extort Devine worship from the seduced peo|ple?
Taketheed Sir, how you persist in so
unjust a Blasphemy against Gods Church A

time will come that you will be called to a
strict account for it: It concerns you there|fore
to make some reparation.
11. But after all this take notice that the
Catholic Church, though it declare that such a
veneration may fitly be given to holy Ima|ges,
as common reason, and human nature
cannot chuse but allow: Yet it commands
none to afford them even so much. You may
be a Roman Catholic all you life, and never
be obliged to perform any external respect
to an Image. There is not in Catholic Coun|tries
a Groom or Kitchin-Maid so ignorant,
but would rather burn an Image, then afford
it any honor due to God only. And shall
those that think thus, and do only what hu|man
reason generally approves, and cannot
hinder, be esteem'd and publisht by you the
only Christians in the World, fit to be thrust out
of all Christian Kingdoms, and executed as Tray|tors,
though otherwise they be acknowledgmost
faithful, peaceable men, and obedient
Subjects? Are you not afraid of, In quo judi|cio
judicaveritis, judicabimini?
12. You see Sir, how sinee you will not
admit of Authorities to justifie the Belief and
Practise of Roman Catholics, but only com|mon
sense and reason, I have complyed with
you: And now in one world tell you, that
you must never hope to make any sober man
believe that Roman Catholics are Idolaters, or
even faulty in the matter of Images, till you

can demonstrate, 1. That it is unlawful to
make use of our seeing faculty to put us in
mind of God. 2. That he dishonors the
King that shall with reverence, bare headed,
and in a kneeling posture receive a Letter or
Mandate that com from him. 3. That it
is a contempt of God to go through a
Church with ones head uncovered. 4. And
that it is unlawful and irreligious to make
a scruple of using a Leaf of the Bible in the
house of Office.
13. For a Farewel, I will conclude this
Point with a Story, the truth whereof seve|ral
Gentlemen, Protestants too, in this Town are
able to justifie. In the Year 1651. a devout I|talian
Friar, being appointed to preach in the
Great Dome at Padua, the Arch-bishop present,
and having been informed that among his
Auditors there were some English Protestants,
who in discourse had earnestly objected (as
you do) Idolatry to Catholics: He therefore
that he might encounter such a scandal, made
choice of the Doctrine concerning Images
for the subject of a great part of his Sermon.
And when he came to that Point, holding in
his hand a Crucifix, he could his hearers, That
that Image did in one glance lively represent,
even to the most ignorant beholder, our Lord
Iesus, God and Man, and almost all the Cir|cumstances
of his most bitter and accursed
death, so patiently and willingly suffered
for us. Thereupon with great Passion and

Rhetoric he magnified the love of our Lord
hanging on the Coss, earnestly pressing his
Hearers to return a proportionable Love and
Duty to him. And during this Discourse,
he often, with great reverence and tender|ness
of affection embraced and devoutly kis|sed
the Crucifix. Having said much to this
purpose, after a little pause he pursued his
Discourse, telling them he could not believe
or suspect that any one who had heard and
seen what he had said and done, could rea|sonably
imagin that he had any intention to
dishonor our Lord, by that which he had done
to the Crucifix which represented him, much
lesse that he adored it, as if he thought it a
kind of God, that he put his trust in it, as
expecting any good from it, as if (he knew
not what) Divinitie, Vertue or Sanctitie was
in that carved piece of wood. Notwith|standing,
because he had heard that such a
scandalous imputation was by some mis|perswaded
persons laid on the Church, he
would then and there undeceive them.
Thereupon he spit upon the Crucifix, threw
it scornfully to the ground, and trampled
it under his feet.
14. You see, Mr. Bagshaw, what kind of
Idolaters the Papists are. Against this Ido|latry,
let us see what expresse Scripture you
can produce. This is the great crime for
which there can be no expiation but oppres|sions,
Imprisonments, and Gallowses. Now if

what hath been here said give you no satis|faction,
in case you have a mind to reply,
do not practise your old way of snatching
a phrase or expression out of a single Author,
a School-man or Controvertist, making the
whole Church answerable for one mans in|discretion.
But search what the Church her
self has declared in the Council of Trent: I|magines
Christi,Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. c. in Templis praesertim retinen|dae,
c. Images of Christ, c. ought to be retein|ed
in Churches especially, and due honor and vene|ration
exhibited to them, not that there is believed
any Divinity or Vertue in them, for which they
ought to be worshipped, or that they are to be petiti|oned
for any thing, or any confidence to be repos'd
in them, but because the honor exhibited to them is
referred to the Prototypes they represent. Dispute
against this as well as you can; and be assu|red
you shall either be answered, or told you
are unconquerable.



CHAP. XV.

The Roman Churches Prudence in
restraining the too free use of Scri|pture
from the Unlearned. The
miseries of this Kingdom justly
ascribed to a defect in such Pru|dence.
Of Prayers not in a Vul|gar
Tongue; The Causes and
Grounds thereof. That practise
not contrary to St. Paul.

I. DOctor Pierce his next (which is a
double) Novelty, regards not any
Doctrines, but only a Point of Discipline in
the Church,Serm. pag. 26. which is, The with-holding Scri|pture
from the Vulgar, and practising public De|votions
in an unknown Tongue. Concerning
the former, he saies, The Scriptures were writ|ten
in Hebrew, the mother-tongue of the Iew:
and in Greek, a Tongue most known to Eastern

Nations: And afterwards were translated into
the Dalmatick by St. Hierom, into the Gothick
by Vulphilas, into the Arminian by Chryso|stom,
c. and the Vulgar Latin was anciently
the Vulgar Language of the Italians, c.
2. Truly the Doctor has, if it be well con|sider'd,
made choice of a very proper season
to renew a quarrel against the Roman Church,
upon this Point, and to endeavour the en|gaging
his Majesty in it, as if the calamities
already hapned, both to the Royal Family,
and the whole Nation, were either too little,
or not to be imputed chiefly to that Error.
He, and all Christendom, has seen the blessed
effects that this prostituting Scripture to the
passions and lusts of the rude and common
people of all Conditions, Ages and Sexes,
has wrought the last twenty years in this
Kingdom. What was it but Scripture (as it
was used, and of which ill use themselves
were the first causes, and hereafter will never
be able to prevent) that justified Discontents
against the Government, both Civil and Ec|clesiastical;
that put Swords and Guns into
the hands of Subjects against their Kings,
and all that were faithful to them; that dis|solved
the entire frame of the Kingdom; that
encourag'd men to Plunder, and all manner
of Rapines; that Arraign'd and Murther'd
our last most Excellent KING, that endan|ger'd
his now living Son, our most gracious
Kings life, and forced him into a long neces|sitous

banishment; that has revived and gi|ven
strength to old and new Monsters of He|resies,
to the astonishment of Man-kind,
some of which are no where else to be seen,
and the rest in no where place so venomous, as in
England: Let but the Doctor remember how
much mischief the perverse interpretation of
this one Text, which none but the ignorant
could mistake, produc't in this Nation:
Having a form of godlinesse, but denying the
power thereof How did this ring in their ears,
and stir them up to reject and hate all set-forms
of Prayer! How, with this Text a|lone,
often repeated, and industriously en|larged,
and zealously apply'd by the holy
Lecturers, were their very hearts set on fire
to burn the grand Idol of the Common
Prayer Book! And yet, after all this, the
Doctor makes or renews quarrels with the
Roman Catholic Church, because she is unwil|ling,
by imitating them, to give a birth from
her bowels to such mischiefs as these.
3. Yet cannot be deny'd, that Doctor
Pierce was subtile, for having a design (in
recompence of the service Roman Catholicks
have done them) to expose them to the com|mon
rage of all these Monsters, he could not
make choice of a subject more proper for his
purpose than this, in which alone they were
all interessed, not for the good they reap by
Scripture, but because without it, they would
not have the advantage to do half so much
mischief.

4. Yet must he not think he can so blind
mens eyes, but they know well enough that
English Protestants are in their very Souls grie|ved,
That 'tis now too late for them to e|deavor
how they may imitate both the Pru|dence
and Charity of Catholic Churches in
the dispensing of Scripture. Our Pastors do
not, as he wrongfully seems to charge them,
forbid the Translation of Scripture into Vulgar
Tongues, since there is scarce any Nation but
hath it. There are Catholic Translations of
the Scripture into English, French, Dutch, I|talian,
Spanish, c. for the use of those of
the Laity, who are by their Spiritual Guides
judged such, as that they may reap benefit
and no harm by the reading thereof. And
what more doth the Preacher shew in the pra|ctise
of the ancient times, in saying that the
Holy Scriptures were then translated into the
Dalmatick Tongue by St. Hierom, then I shew
in justification also of the later times (which
he would here condemn) in saying as truly,
that the Holy Scriptures are also found tran|slated
long ago in Wicliffs the Refor|mers
time, by the allowance and Authority
of the Catholic Church (of which thus Dr.
Flk) That the Scriptures were extant in Eng|lish
both before and after Wicliffs time, and not of
his Translation, beside your conjecture out of Lid|ood,
it is manifestly proved by so many ancient
riters Copies of the English Bible differing in
anslation, yet to be shewed, of which Wicleffs

Translation could be but one. Or in saying,
That the same Holy Scriptures have been
Translated also of late, since Luthers, a se|cond
Reformer's time, with the allowance
of the same Church Catholic, by the indu|stry
of the Rhemish Divines.
But Catholic Governors, knowing how im|possible
it is for ignorant Persons to under|stand
it, and for passionate minds to make
good use of it, esteem it more conduce|ing
to their edification and the common
peace, that such easily misled Soul should
be instructed in their Duies, both as Christi|ans
and Subjects, by plain Catechisms and In|structions
prudently and sufficiently, with all
plainnesse gather'd out of Scripture, then
that the Bible should be put into their hands,
a Book, the tenth part whereof scarce con|cerns
them to know, and in which the seve|ral
Points wherein they are concern'd are so
dispersed in several places, so variously, and
somtimes so obscurely, and so dubiously ex|pressed,
that all the learning and subtilty of
Doctors, since it was written till these daies,
have been exercised in enquiring, comparing,
discussing several Texts, and clearing the true
Doctrine of them fit for the conception of
vulgar capacities. The whole Direction,
necessary to govern Pastors in their permit|ing
others to read the Holy Scripture, is
fully and excellently containd in that on:
Text of the Second Epistle of St. Peter, 3. 16.

Wherein (the Epistles of St. Paul) there are
certain things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable pervert (as also the other
Scriptures) to their own perdition. Two sorts
of Reaers are here plainly forbidden by the
Apostle; for certainly none o them who
we know are apt to pervert the Scriptures,
should be permitted to read them. Consi|der
then how far these two words reach, un|learned
and unstable: I doubt, to ninety nine
of every hundred in England: Which if ad|mitted,
not above one in a hundred, were
good discipline observ'd, would be allowed
to read the Bible.
Nor can it be Objected (as usually Prote|stants
do) that the Scriptures are safely clear
to every one in Fundamentals, and mistakable
onely in Points of lesser consequence, since
the very Text saies, they are both hard to be
understood, and pervertible to the perdition of
their Readers; and if such Points as import
Salvation or Damnation be not Fundamen|tal,
I'm utterly ignorant of the meaning of
that word. Let then the Learned, and the
stedy Christian read, and study, and meditate
th Bible as often and as long as he will, eve|ry
Catholic will commend him, but by no
means should that liberty be given to the un|learned
and unstable, lest the Scripture it self
condemn it, as a boldnesse that may endanger
their eternal Salvation.
And 'tis observeable in King Henry the 8th.

who, after he had caused the English Bible
to be publish't, so as to be read by all with|out
any restraint, was forc't again, after
three years experience (wherein he saw the
many strange and horrid opinions rising a|mong
the ignorant people by occasion there|of)
by a new Act of Parliament to abridge
the liberty formerly granted,See Injncti|ons A. D. 1536 1538. (Fox. p. 1000.) set forth by Crom|wel. Stat. 34, 35. Hen. 8. c. 1. and to prohiit
upon the penalty of a months Imprisonment to|ties
quoties, that any Woman, Husbandman, Arti|ficer,
Yeoman, Servingman, Apprentice or Iourny|man
Labourer, c. should read them to themselves
or to others, privatly or openly. See Stat. 34, 35.
Hen. 8. 1. Because (saith the Preface of that
Statue) his Highness perceived that a great mul|titude
of his Subjects, most especially of the lower
sort, had so abused the Scriptures, that they had
thereby grown and increased in diverse naughtie
and erroneous Opinions, and by occasion thereof
fallen into great Divisions and Dissentions among
themselves. And if you say, the Opinions
the King calls here erroneous, were the Prote|stant
Doctrines, discovered by the Vulgar
from the new light of the Scriptures, you
may see the very Opinions, as the Bishops
collected them in Fox, pag. 1136. un-own|able
by any sober Protestant or Christian.
A thing perhaps not unworthy the se|rious
consideration of the present Gover|nors,
who have seen the like effects in these
daies.
5. But as for other Lay-persons of better

judgement and capacities, and of whose sub|mission
to the Churches Authority, and aver|sion
from Novelties sufficient proofs can be gi|ven,
our Ecclesiastical Governors are easily e|nough
entreated, yea, they are well enough en|clin'd
to exhort them to read the Scriptures
themselves in their vulgar Tongues, and are
forward to assist them in explaining diffi|culties,
and resolving doubts that may oc|curr.
6. And now let Doctor Pierce speak his Con|science,
if he dare do it; Is not this way of
managing the Consciences of Christs Flock
and this prudent dispensing of Scripture very
desireable, yea actually in their hearts here in
England, that it may be in practise among
them? But it is now too late: Their first Re|formers
found no expedient so effectual to
call followers to them out of God's Church,
as by wastfully powring this Treasure
into their hands, and accusing the Church
for not doing so, not fore-seeing, or not ca|ring,
if, in future times, that which was an
instrument of their Schism, from the true
Church, would be far more effectual to mul|tiply
Schisms from their false one. For the
making an ill use of Scripture by ignorant or
passionate Laicks is not altogether so certain
or probable to follow in the Catholic Church,
where men are bred up in a belief and most
necessary Duty of Submission even of their
minds to her Authority for the delivering of

the only true sence of Scripture: Whereas in
such Churches as this, in which not any one
Person ever was or can be perswaded that the
sence of Scripture given by them can challenge
an internal assent from any, or that it may
not without sin be contradicted; to give the
Scripture indefinitly to all who can read or are
willing to hear it read, without a Guide
to tell them the true sense which they are
bound to believe, is to invite them to ascend
into Moses Chair, which such Reformer's
themselves have made empty and vacant for
them.
7. The second Part of this pretended No|velty
concerns Public Praying in an unknown
tongue:Serm. p. 9. which, says he, may be fetcht indeed as far
as from Gregory the Great (that is, ever since
this Nation was Christian:) But is as scandalous|ly
opposite to the plain sence of Scriptures,Ibid. p. 27. as if
it were done in a meer despight to 1. Cor. 14. 13.
c. And, besides Origen, it is confess'd by Aqui|nas
and Lyra, that in the Primitive times the
public Service of the Church was in the common
Language too. And as the Christians of Dal|matia,
Habassia, c. and all Reformed parts of
Christendom have God's service in their vulgar
tongues, so hath it been in divers places by appro|bation
first had from the Pope himself.
8. I will acknowledge to Dctor Pierce, that
this is the only Point of Novelty (as he calls it)
of which he discourses sensibly, and as it were
to the purpose: But withall I must tell him, it

is, because he mistakes our Churches meaning.
For he charges the Catholic Religion, as if one
of its positions were, That Gods publick Ser|vice
ought to be in an unknown Tongue, or
as if it forbad people to understand it. And
truly if it were so, we could never hope to be
reconciled with that passage of Scripture out
of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 13, c. But all this is
a pure mis-understanding. Therefore I desire
him to permit himself for once to be informed
how the matter stands in this Point with the
Roman Catholic Church.
9. We Roman Catholics (I.) do willingly ac|knowledge,
that in the Primitive times the
Public Service of God was (generally speak|ing)
perform'd in a Tongue better understood
than now it is, yet not then for many pla|ces
and Countries in their vulgar, or native, or
best understood tongue; For it is evident by
St. Augustin that in Afric it was in the Latin
tongue,De Doctr.
not in the Punic,Christ. l 2. c. 12, 13. Expo|sit. Psal. 123. Exposit. incho|ta Epist. ad Romanos. which yet was the
only Tongue the Vulgar understood. So the
Liturgy of St. Basil was used in the Greek
Tongue in most parts of the Eastern Church|es.
And yet it appears as well out of later Hi|story,
as out of the Acts 2. 8, 9, 10. c. 14.
v. 11. That Greek was not in those antient
times the vulgar tongue of many of those Ea|stern
Countrys, no more than Latin was of the
Western. 2. We professe it was not, nor yet
is the intention of the Church that the Public
Devotions should therefore be in Latin, be|cause

it is not vulgarly understood: but this
has hapned as it were by accident, besides
her intention, and onely because the Latin
Tongue, in which it was first written, by revo|lution
of times and mixture of Barbarous Na|tions
in Europe, has been corrupted, and cea|sed
to be a so commonly understood Language
by unlearned people; for indeed probably it was
never so well understood, as that other native
Language which they used before it, or with it.
10. Matters standing thus, yet the Church
does not think fit to change with the times,
but continues Gods publick Service as it was at
first: And this we may conceive she does.
1. Because no example can be found in an|tiently-established
Churches, that any of them
changed the Language of Gods public Service
entirely. The Greeks now use the Antient
Masse of St. Chrysostom written in pure Greek,
as much differing from the Vulgar, as Latin
from the Italian, Spanish, c. The like may
be said of the Syrian, Cophtites, c. among
whom the Mass is celebrated in the od Lan|guage,
far from being vulgarly understood.
Yea, the Iews continue their Devotions, to this
day, in the Hebrew, understood by few among
them. 2. Because, though the Latin be not
now in any place a vulgar Language yet
there is no Language so universally un|derstood
in Europe as that: And a great
fitnesse there is that the most Public Ser|vice
should be in the most public Language, in

which all Nations may joyn every where.
And by those who most frequently recite the
Divine Service in the Catholic Church, viz.
the Clergy, and other Religious (for whose
proper use a great part of this Service was
composed) the Latin Tongue is well under|stood.
3. Because the Latin ongue now that it
is not vulgar, being thereby becom unchange|able,
the Churches Doctrins contain'd in her
Litrgies are so much the more freed from the
danger of being innovated. Whereas vulgar
Languages almost in every age become un-in|telligible,
or at least sound very unpleasing in
mens ears, as we now see in King Edward the
sixth's Common-prayer-book: would it not seem
an odd translation now to read, that Saint
Philip baptiz'd the Gelding? and Paul the
Knave of Iesus Christ, yet this was once the
English Scripture; Nay more, within this
twenty years we find many words and phrases
have quite changed their former sense: So that
all Nations must be ever and anon altering
their Liturgies, to the great danger of chan|ging
the Churches belief; And (which is not
altogether inconsiderable) for the present
good husbandry of the world, to the infinite
expenes of moneys in printing c.
11. I doubt not but he will reply that not
any one, or all these commodities can answer
and satisfie for an express, and, as he calls it,
a scandalous opposition to the plain sense of Scrip|ture,
1 Cor. 14. I grant it: All these commo|dities

are to be despised, rather than so to op|pose
the Apostles Doctrin. But what is his
Doctrin? For I evidently perceive the Doctor
has not well search'd into it, much lesse, right|ly
apply'd it. The Apostle says. If I pray in
an unknown tongue, my Spirit prays, but my un|derstanding
receives no benefit, c. And how can
an unlearned Person say Amen to such Prayers?
In which passage seems involved a tacite pro|hibition
at least of publick Prayers in an un|known
tongue. All this is granted: but yet
with this exception mention'd by the Apostle
himself, unless either he that prays, or some other
interpret. Therefore before he took on him
to charge the Catholic Church with a scanda|lous
opposition to this passage of Scripture, he
ought to have examin'd better her doctrin and
practise: otherwise he himself will be found
guilty of a Scandalous opposition to God's
Church.
Now for a tryal of the Churches sence, let
him observe the Ordinance of the Council of
Trent touching this very Point: the words are
these, Though the Mass contain instruction
for Gods faithful people,Conc. Trid. Ses. 2. cap. 8. yet it seem'd not expe|dient
unto the Fathers that it should be celebra|ted
every where in the vulgar tongue; where|fore
retaining in all places the Churches antient
Rite, approved by the holy Roman Church
the Mother and Mistresse of all Churches; lest
Christ's Sheep should hunger, and Children ask|ing
bread, none should be found to break it to

them, the Holy Synod commands all Pastours
and all that have care of Souls, that during the
celebration of Mass, they should frequently either
by themselves or others, expound some part of
those things which are read in it; and among
other things let them explain the mystery of this
most Holy Sacrifice, especially on Sundays and
Feasts. The Preacher here may see that the
Church does not make such a secret even of
the most sublime Mysteries of her Office, as the
Court believ'd upon his report.
12. Likewise between this speaking in an
unknown tongue, mention'd by St. Paul, and
the Churches publick Latin Service, there is
this great disparity, that this later is always
a known Language to several of those present,
if not to all, and there are alwayes those who
understandingly say, Amen. And again being
a known set-form in one set-language, recur|ring
continually the same according to the
Feast, those who are ignorant of it at first,
need not continue so, but by due attention,
and other diligence may arive to a sufficient
knowledge at least of the chief parts thereof,
they having also in their Manuals, Primers,
Psalters, c. ready translated both the Psalms,
Hymns and Prayers, c. and there being se|veral
Books both in English and all vulgar
languages, that expound the Church-service
even to the meanest capacity. Neither is the
Latin tongue, by reason of its affinity with
many vulgar tongues, and of the constant use

hereof, a language unknown to such a degree
in Catholick Conntries, as our English Nati|on
imagin it, and therefore is so much scan|dalized:
Neither is there the same motive
for some dispensation of a change in those
places, as perhaps would be in a Country less
acquainted with the Latin, and of a Language
more remote from it. Yet our venerable
Beda in his History saith,Bed hist. l. 1. c 1. That in his time
to these Northern Languages of ours, Eng|lish,
Scotch, Britans, Picts, the Latin
Tongue, by perusing the Scriptures, was made
common to them all. The usual Language
therefore wherein the Scriptures were delive|red
in his times was Latin, and by this that
Tongue rendred common, and not un|known
even to these Northern people.
13. Besides all this, several Popes, Patri|arks,
c. have approved the Translation of
the Missal, c. into the vulgar Languages,
as Pope Iohn the Eighth,Hist. Boem. cap. 13. who was induced
thereto by a Miracle related by Aeneas Sil|vius
(afterward Pope Pius the Second) like|wise
Pope Innocent the Third, Pope Leo the
Tenth, Balsamon, Patriarch of Antioch, c.
To conclude, since the Doctor confesseth
that Popes have given leave to some Chur|ches
that the Divine Office should be in a
vulgar Tongue, he ought not to have made
a Quarrel of this to a Separation, till it
could be shewed, that their first Reform|ers
had demanded a dispensation, and been
refused.



CHAP. XVI.

Of Invocation of Saints: Proved out
of Antiquity. Concessions: De|ductions:
And Objections answe|red.

1. THe next supposed Novelty is the
Invocation of Saints departed: which
says Doctor Pierce,Serm. p. 9. is no doubt an aged error,
though not so aged as they would have it, (for
the gaining of honor to the invention) because
St. Augustin does deny it to have been in his
dayes.
2. Though perhaps the Preacher may for
some ends be unwilling, yet that other Pro|testants
may see the Innocence of the Church
in this Point, and how free she is from any in|tention
of deterring any one from having ac|cess
in Prayer to our Lord immediately; or of
diminishing the all-sufficient vertue of our
Lords Merits and Intercession; or of iducing
men to security by relying on the holynesse

and intercession of others, and neglecting the
means of Salvation themselves, c. (which
are generally the grounds upon which Prote|stants
condemn this practise:) I will first set
down the Churches Decision: And next, in or|der
to demonstrate the reasonablenesse of it,
I will shew, for preventing such prejudices,
what concessions are generally made by Ca|tholics.
Thirdly, I will confirm the Chur|ches
practise by the Testionies of the Primi|tive
times. And lastly, answer the Doctors on|ly
argument.
3. First, then touching the Churches Do|ctrin,
contained in the Council of Trent,Conc. Trid. Ses. 25. The
Holy Synod commands all Bishops and others who
sustain the Office and care of teaching, that, ac|cording
to the use of the Catholic and Apostolic
Religion received from the primitive times, the
consent of the Holy Fathers, and the ecrees of
the Sacred Councils especially touching the
intercession and invocation of Saints, c. that
they diligently instruct the Faithful, teaching
them, that the Saints reigning together with
Christ, do offer their Prayers to God for men, and
that it is good and profitable humly to invocate
them, and to have recourse to their Prayers, help
and assistance for the obtaining of benefits from
God by his Son Iesus Christ our Lord, who alone
is our Redeemer and Saviour. Let them like|wise
teach, that those who deny that the Saints,
enjoying eternal felicity in Heaven, are to be in|vocated;
or who affirm either that they do not

pray for men, or that the invocating them to
pray for us in particular also, is Idolatry, or that
it is repugnant to Gods word and contrary to the
honor of the one Mediator between God and Men
Iesus Christ; or that it is a foolish thing to sup|plicate
with words or mind to them reigning in
heaven [impie sentiunt] are impiously persuaded.
4. In the second place, in conformity to the
doctrin of this Decree, Catholics believe and
acknowledge. 1. That we have only one Me|diator
Iesus Christ, to whom only belongs the
Merit that by it's just worth redeems us from
eternal Death, and purchases for us eternal
life: As likewise that as his Merits by satis|faction,
so also his Intercession is all-sufficient
by way of impetration, to obtain all blessings
for us. 2. Yet cannot it be deny'd but our
Lords intercessin is not actually and absolutely
beneficial to all, but that some Duties and
qualifications on our part are necessary both
that his Merits, and the benefits of his Inter|cession
should be effectually applyed unto us.
3. Among these Qualifications we are to rec|kon
not only our own Prayers for our selves,
but mutual Prayers for one another: which
therefore we may beg from one another, as
St.nkes. 6. 19.
Paul himself did from the Ephesians,Colos. 4. 3. 2  3. 1. Colos|sians,
c. 4. Because the more holy any
person is, the more effectual will his Interces|sion
be with God, therefore we may beg
of known Saints their Prayers to God for
us with greater hope of successe. 5. Such

begging of Prayers is farr from Idola|try,
Superstition or diminution to Christ's
honor, since holy Persons (living or dead)
are not invocated as Donors but Fellow-beg|gers
with God for us. 6. Though a Chri|stian
may be saved who prays to God alone,
and requests not the prayers of others, yet
to refuse the assistance of those, whose
Prayers God more willingly hears, is a neg|lect
at least of using all means helpful to us.
7.Chrysost. hom. 23. in Genes. Neverthelesse we say with Saint Chryso|stom,
God will bestow salvation much rather
on us praying for our selves, than for others pray|ing
for us: And we are much more safe by our
own Devotions (without others) then by others
(alone:) And therefore we ought not to be
slothful and secure, depending on others merits.
For the prayers and supplications of Saints have
indeed very great force with God in our behalf,
but it is then truly when we with penance and
humiliation beg the same thing also of God. And
therefore saith the same Saint, Knowing these
things,Id. om. 1. in 1 Thes. let us neither neglectingly contemn the
prayers of Saints, nor cast our selves wholly upon
them.
5. Whatsoever hath been hitherto said, may
indifferently be applied as well to Saints depart|ed,
as to Saints alive: If the Prayers to Saints de|parted
be prejudicial to the merits  interces|sion
of our Lord, so is the beging of the prayers
of those alive: If one be unlawful, so is the o|ther:
nay, most certain it is, that if both be

lawful, the prayers of Saints departed will be
incomparably more effectual, and therfore will
better deserv to be made use of, than the other.
Therefore, notwithstanding most of the Argu|ments
of Protestants against the Doctrin of the
Church touching Invocation of Saints depart|ed,
do prove full as much against Prayer to
the Living, and therefore are evidently un|concluding:
Yet those, who are most learned
and sober, and will not wilfully mistake Ca|tholic
Doctrin, do free us from all imputation
of Idolatry, superstition, or doing injury to
Christ, and reduce the Controversie to a short
point: For they question not whether the
Saints pray in general for us, but rather wil|lingly
acknowledge it; yea they will not po|sitively
deny but they may and do pray perso|nally
for their former known acquaintance, as
St. Augustin believ'd his Mother did for him:
Likewise they will grant that though they be
in Heaven, they may either by Gods reve|lation,
or by relation from Angels be in|formed
of the Prayers made to them by any o|thers
on earth: and that supposing such a
knowledge, they will become Intercessors for
them in particular.
6. But, you'l say, since there is no general
certainty, that they understand our Prayers
or wants, or interesse themselves in the parti|cular
necessities of the living, Therefore
though it be not unlawful, as prejudicial to
the honor and duty we owe to God, to invo|cate

them in particular, yet it may be call'd
unlawful, in regard it is uncertain.
To this Scruple, Catholicks acknow|ledg
the Church by no Decision hath declar'd
that the Saints generally hear all the particu|lar
prayers of us on Earth: And consequently
that it is not any Article of our Faith to believ
they do so: Yea, several moderate Catholics re|fuse
to say peremptorily that it is so; yet in all
Catholics Opinion this does not, nor ought
to hinder them from acknowledging that the
practise of Invocating Saints by name, is very
beneficial to us, though they should have no
particular knowledge of your Prayers.
7. And the grounds to prove this to be
rational are these, First, Because though it
were so that the Souls of glorifi'd Saints did
not hear our prayers, or know our particular
necessities, yet at least, it is certain the Holy
Angels are continually present with us on
Earth, and that it is by them we are defended
from the Divels malice, who otherwise, ha|ving
such a wonderful strength exceeding
ours, would destroy us all in our sins.
Now, since God does not ordinarily inter|pose
his power immediatly in natural acti|ons,
nor substract his universal influence on
his Creatures, it cannot be imagin'd (since
the Devils will not be hindred by any Law
or prohibition) by what other power, but
that of Angels, they should be restrained
from executing their malice against us. Adde

to this, that History tells us Magicians have
the Divels alwaies ready to come at their call
Why then should not Angels be witnesses of
our actions, and especially our prayers,
which, as the Scripture saies, They offer as In|cense
to God, being alwaies assistant in the
houses of Prayer. This being supposed, we
are not to imagin that those holy Spirits
stand upon niceties, and will not do any good
unlesse particularly call'd upon: But on the
contrary, will be charitably officious in help|ing
and delivering us, whensoever we implore
the assistance of any of their fellow Citizens.
And it is upon this matter that St.Aug. l. de ur. pro mort. cap. 26. Augustin,
not doubting at all that great good arrives
unto us by invocating the Martyrs, c. (for
the beginning of his Discourse is, Although
that Question doth exceed the power of my under|standing,
How Martyrs succor those which cer|tainly
are in effect aided by them, c.) very
subtilly Disputes whether the Saints them|selves
hear us, or the Angels for them: And
whether, when they seem to appear unto us,
it be not the Angels which take their shape.
8. Again, How great the Spheare of the
activity of the Saints glorified may be in re|spect
of this whole visible World, we know
little. That it is finite we know: But how
far it may be extended, viz. their faculties
of seeing, hearing, and operating, especial|ly
since the Ascension and Glorification of
our Lord, we know not. Thus the Arch|bishop

of Spalato, no great Patron of Invo|cation
of Saints:Spalat. de Rep. Eccl. l. 3. c. 6. I do not think it unprobable,
saith he, that there should be assigned to every
Angel and beatified Soul very vast spaces both of
the Superior and Inferior World, wherein they
may operate: And perhaps the whole sensible
world may be no more to one of them, than its pro|per
body is to a humane Soul informing it. And
thus Vossius interprets St. Hieroms Speech of
them;Voss. Disp. Hist. 2. Thes. . That he held beatified Souls present at
their Tombs, and like Angels passing most swiftly
through spaces wonderfully distant; moreover, that
they there know the necessities, and hear the request
of those who have recourse to them. But suppose
their agency and intelligence, as Spirits, con|fined
only to the Circuit of Heaven, yet how
great the knowledge of these Saints, standing
continually in Gods presence, may be by way
of Revelation of things absent or future, of
mans thoughts, c. in the same manner,
(tho' in a higher degree,) as also some special
Saints have on earth, who can determine?
If God said of Abraham, a Pilgrim on earth,
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do?Gen. 18. 17.
How much more may we imagin that he hi|deth
not the mighty works of his Provi|dence,
Mercy and Justice here on earth from
those his Domestick Servants? So we read,
not onely an Angel, but every one of the
Twenty four Elders to have in their hands golden
Censers,Rev. 8. 3.Ibid. 5. 8. aud Vials full of odors, which are the
Prayers of Saints; that is, of their Brethren
on earth.

9. Again, though there were no certain|ly
in this, that even the Angels are present
to us, and execute the things we pray for,
yet the practise of Invocating Saints ought not
to be neglected; because, considering the un|questionable
proofs of a world of miraculous
effects of such Prayers, both in modern and
ancient times, recorded by the most Learn|ed,
Prudent, and Holy among the Primitive
Fathers, of many of which themselves were
eye witnesses, and the rest confirm'd by Testi|monies
irrefragable; Miraculous effects I
say, not only of Prayers here directed to God,
with relation to the acceptablenesse and In|tercession
of such Saints; but also of Prayers
directed to the Saints themselves, as appears
by the Quotations below: We may be assured
that this practise pleases Almighty God, and is
very benefical to us. Among other witnes|ses
of this, I will only name St. Gregory
Nyssen,Greg. Nyss. or de S. Theod, Theodo. l. 8. de Mart. and Theodoret for the Greek Church,
and St. Augustin for the Roman. The first of
these in his Oration on the Martyr St.Aug. l. 22. de Civ. Dei. cap. 8. c. Theo|dorus:
The second through his whole 8th.
Book intituled of Martyrs; and St. Augustin
in his 22th. Book de Civitate Dei, through
several Chapters, shew both that frequent
Addresses were made to, and many wonder|ful
Miracles perform'd by the Intercession of
Saints, especially Martyrs, which Miracles
were shew'd rather in the places, where those
Martyrs were particularly honour'd, and

where their Reliques reposed, then in others;
and upon those, who Invocated their Inter|cession
and assistance, then on others, c.
which are demonstrative proofs that the Ve|neration
and Invocation of them are accepta|ble
to God.De Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. St. Augustin relates that the mul|titude
of Miracles which were done at Hippo,
the Seat of his Bishoprick, at the Memory of
St. Stephen, and that within the two first
years, after some part of his Reliques were
brought thither from Ierusalem by Orosius,
was so great (who also caused them to be en|rolled,
and for God's and the Saints glory, to
be recited to the People the next Festival af|ter
they were done, of some of which also he
was himself an eye-witnesse) so great I say,
as that those that were registred amounted to
near 70. (whereof he sets down a considera|ble
number in that 8th. Chapter) and those
done at Calama to a far greater number. It
is not yet two years since the memorial at Hippo
Regius was erected, whereas the Books delivered
in to us concerning these miraculous effects (yet
many other, as we are most certain, not being given
in) even to the time when I am writing this, a|mount
to some seventy. But at Calama, where
the Memorial was set up sooner, and the Books
brought faster, they are incredibly more in number.
At Uzala too, a Colony adjoyning to Utica, we
have been witnesses of sundry things of note done
by the same Martyr; whose Memorial was erected
there by Bishop Evodius, long before ours. And

St. Theodoret also, (who was a member of
the 3d. and 4th. General Council) speaks of
the peoples frequent repairing and presenting
their requests to the Martyrs for so many
Miracles received by them on this manner
Neither do we resort hither once or
twice, or five times in a year, but frequently
in them we keep our Festivals, yea, oftentimes for
many daies together, we sing Lauds and Hymns
to the Lord of these Martyrs. Where such as are
in health petition the Martyrs for the continuance
thereof; such as are sick petition them for health,
c. Not conceiting that they approach to Gods,
but praying to these Martyrs of God as Divine
men, invocating and petitioning them for their In|tercessions
with God. And that such, who have
devoutly and faithfully invocated them, do obtain
their requests, those several guifts do witnesse,
which such, obliged by their Vows, do bring thi|ther,
being clear evidences of their unfeigned cures.
For some hang up their Tablets of eyes, some of
feet, others of hands, made of gold or silver. These
things therefore exposed to the view of all, do evi|dence
the driving away of their diseases: These
I say do demonstrate, what the power of those Mar|tyrs
is, which are buried there, c. Thus Theo|doret,
whom, tho' some of the Reformed
(upon a negative Argument, because Nice|phorus
mentions not this Book amongst o|thers,
but so he omits some which Gen|nadius
(mentions) deny to be the Author
of this Book, yet Rivet is more candid,

saying,Rivet. Crit. Sacr. l. 4. c. 21. Libris de Graec. affect. curand. non|nulla
addita esse malim dicere, quam de Au|thore
dubitare. And lastly, St. Gregory
Nyssen speaks thus on the same Subject
After one hath thus delighted his eyes
with the building, he desires further to approach
the Monument it self, believing the very touching
thereof to bring a benediction and hallowing along
with it. But if any be suffered to take away any
of the dust gathered from off the Martyrs Se|pulchre,
such dust is taken for a great guift, and
this very Earth laid up as a precious Treasure.
But if at any time such a happinesse befalls any, as
to have the priviledge to touch the Reliques, how
earnestly such a thing is to be wished and desired,
being the reward of much importunitie, they know
well, who have sought and obtained it. For then
they view and embrace this body, as if it were alive
and fresh; apply it to their mouth, their ears, and
the other Organs of all their Senses: Moreover,
powring out tears of duy and affection upon the
Martyr, as if he appear'd to them sound and entire,
they offer up their humble prayers, that he would in|tercede
as an Advocate for them, begging of him
as a Courtier of Heaven, and invocating him, as
one that can obtain any thing he pleaseth. To what
Prince is there such honour given?
10. In the third place I will adjoyn fur|ther
expresse Testimonies out of the ancient
Fathers, all living within the Doctors deter|minate
times, and shewing the lawfulnesse
and usefulnesse of this practise of Invocating
the glorified Saints.

Thus then saies St.Basil. Orat. 40. Mart. Basil: Whosoever is in
any pressure, let hin fly to the assistance of these
Martyrs: And again, whoever is in a state of joy,
let him pray to them: The former, that he may be
delivered from misery: The latter, that he may be
preserved in prosperitie.Chrys. Homil. 66. ad pop. Antioch.  Hom. 26. in 2 Corinth. Thus St. Chrysostom,
The Emperor, who is cloathed with purple, takes a
journey to visit these Sepulchres [of St. Peter
and St. Paul] and laying aside his pomp, presents
himself to make supplication to them, to the end
they may intercede to God for him, be whose Temples
are encompassed with a Diadem, praies to a maker
of Tents, and a Fisherman, as his Protectors. And
to the same purpose,Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 23. Ambr. de vid. of the same Emperor,
speaks Ruffinus. Thus St. Ambrose, We ought
to pray to the Angles which are given us for guards:
We ought to pray to the Martys, whose Bodies seem
to be as it were gages and hostages, that we may
challenge their Patronage and protection, c. Let
us not therefore be asham'd to employ them as Inter|cessors
for our Infirmitie; for they themselves by
experience knew the infirmitie of our bodies, even
then when they surmounted it. This St. Ambrose
writ not, as Bishop Andrews imagins, when he
was a Neophite, but a Bishop. See Voss. de In|vocat.
Disp. 2, Thes. 1. and Forbs de Invocat.
cap. 3. their more candid concessions con|cerning
this Father.Hilar. in Psal. 129. Thus St. Hilary, It is
not the nature of God, but our infirmitie that stands
in need of the Intercession of Angels: For they are
sent for the benefit of those which shall inherit Sal|vation,
God himself not being ignorant of the things

which we do, but our infirmitie needing this myste|ry
of a spiritual intercession for the imploring and
obtaining for us (what is good for us). In
which Testimony so much is clear, that the
Angels know our necessities, c. And this
is sufficient to infer the lawfulnesse of reque|sting
them also to intercede for us. To these,
many more Testimonies may be added out of
other holy Fathers, as likewise the actual
Prayers to Martyrs made and recorded by St.
Basil, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Gregory Nazianzen,
St. Ephrem, Theodoret, St. Hierom, St. Pauli|nus,
Prudentius, c. To which, I hope, Dr.
Pierce will forbear to return the usual evasi|on,
that all these are but Rhetorical Apostro|phe's:
Since other expressions of the same
Fathers, viz, That they are well perswaded that
those Saints to whom they addresse these Requests,Nazianz. Orat. de 8. Athan. Basil. Ot. de 40. Mart. Nysien. Orat. de S. Theodo|ro Mart.
have an inspection from Heaven on their affairs.
That they do relieve the necessities of those who
supplicate to them. That the people make addresses
to these heavenly Courtiers, as to those who obtain
guifts from God when they please. And that if
the Lamb be every where, these Saints which are
with the Lamb, ought to be believed to be any
where, (or every where) as they please:
Since, I say, these expressions do not consist
with such a pretence of their invocating
them only in an empty flourish; And since
this is a put-off too vain, to get any credit
with sober men, to say that such grave and
holy Bishops, when preaching to the people,

would make petitions to these Saints to ex|ercise
their Rhetorick, and yet without any
cautioning their hearers, that they did it in
such a manner; which, if done seriously,
would have been an injury to God, to Christ
our Redeemer, ye, Idolatry, c. And
lastly, since the Doctor may find Vossius and
Forbes, for some of them at least, condem|ning
this evasion.
11. To these Testimonies, I may adjoyn
the expresse confessions of Protestants, That
Invocation of Saints was commonly in use in
the Greek Church long before the 3d. and
4th. General Councils. For which, besides the
confession of Chemnitius,Chem. exam. Conc. Trid. p. 3. de Invo|cat. S. S. Vossius Disp. 2 Thes. 1. Vossius also is clear,
whose words are; About the year of Christ,
370. those to whom the care of instructing the peo|ple
was committed, did by their practise lead them
to invocate the Saints departed. And indeed, in
the Greek Church the first, or at least very near
the first of those which gave such Examples were
Basil, Nyssen, Nazianzen: And in the West, at
the same time, Ambrose of Millain, a diligent
Reader and Imitater of the Greeks, followed the
same custom. Now, since Dr. Pierce professes
so ready a submission to the Judgment of the
four first General Councils, and must grant,
that several of these Fathers, whom Vossius
acknowledges to have been Patrons of Invo|cation,
and to have used it even in the pub|lick
Assemblies, (for which they were never
censured) did precede many years two of

these General Councils; I would gladly know
if such a Question had been made before the
third or fourth Council, concerning Invoca|tion
of Saints, as was, before that of Trent,
Whether he can perswade himself, that those
Fathers would not have justified such Invo|cation
for lawful in those Councils, which
they practised as lawful out of, and before
them, and would not have produced at least
as high a stating of that Point, as the Coun|cil
of Trent did? And indeed a particular
knowledg and agency of Saints deceased in
in human affairs seems to be acknowledged
in the fourth General Council, and Invocation
in the third Person:Act II. Conc. Chalced. Whose words are, Let
Flavian be had in everlasting memory: Behold
Vengeance, [i. e. on his murderers.] Behold the
Truth! Flavian lives after death! Let Flavian
the Martyr pray for us.
12. It remains in the last place, that an
Answer be given to the only Agument out of
Antiquitie, produced by the Doctor against this
Doctrine, and to prove it's Noveltie. For,
saies he,Serm. pag. . Aug de Civ. D. lib. 22. c. 10. St. Augustin denies invocation of Saints
to have been in his daies: And his only proof
that he does so, is from those words of his,
The men of God (that is Sains departed) are
named indeed in their due place and order, but they
are not invoked by the Priest who Sacrifices.
12. To this passage, our Answer it,
1. That sure the Preacher had forgot he was
to reckon, presently after, the Sacrifice of the

Masse among Novelties, introduced after the
fourth General Council, when he produced
this Testimony that expresly proves the con|trary:
Here is a Sacerdos brought in, and here
he is brought in both praying and Sacrificing
and yet, saies the Doctor, no such thing as a|ny
Christian Sacrifice. Or, if a Sacrifice, on|ly
a Sacrifice perhaps of praise and thanks|giving.
But St. Augustin will contradict
him, who as hath been said, calls this indeed
a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving in regard of glorified
Saints commemorated in it: but a Sacrifice propi|tiatory
in regard of the faithful departed with some
stains of sins remaining,
2. The same thing St. Augustin means here
(i. e. That Saints are not soveraignly invocated
by way of Sacrifice, as the Supream Donors and
Fountain of all good that descends to mankind,)
is taught by the Catholic Church even where
she professes Invocation of Saints in the same
sense as St. Augustin allows it, that is, as of
our fellow-members and citizens, making ef|ficacious
intercessions for us to this Supream
Deity to whom we Sacrifice. For thus saies
the Council of Trent,Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 3. Although the Church be ac|customed
to celebrate Masses somtimes in the honour
and memory of Saints; yet she does not teach that
the Sacrifice should be offered to them, but to God a|lone
who has crown'd them: And hence it is that
the Priest is never wont to say, O Peter, O Paul,
I offer this Sacrifice to thee, but to God, to whom he
gives thanks for their Victories, and implores their

patronage, that they may vouchsafe to intercede for
us in Heaven, whole memory we celebrate on earth.
A part of which Decree is taken out of S.Aug. de Cir. D. l. 8. c. 37.  lib. 20. cont. Faust. M. c. 21. Au|gustin
himself in the same Treatise quoted by the Preacher.
3. Dr. Pierce could not possibly have made
a worse choice of a place from whence to se|lect
a Testimony (as he would have us believe)
denying all Invocation of Saints, whenas in
the two Chapters of the same Book immediate|ly
preceding this, many stories are largely re|counted
to certifie the great good that Chri|stians
had found by the intercession of Saints,
and all this, whilst in their Oratories they
begg'd their intercession.
4 Perhaps he will not yet be content:
but with Bishop AndrewsResp. ad A|polog. c. 1. page 46. will urge, it is
not here said by St. Austin, That the Saints
are not Sacrificed to, but that they are not so
much as invocated at the Altar. And if it
be unlawful to invocate them there, it will be
as well unlawful any where else. Hereto it
is answered, That all this, taken in a right
sense, is granted. For first, To this day in
the Masse there is no kind of Invocation of
Saints; yea more, according to the Council
of Carthage,3 Conc. Carth. cap. 23. till the Consecration be perfe|cted,
there are no Prayers directed to the Son
of God, nor to the Holy Ghost, but only to
God the Father. 2. But this argues not
that (if the Church had so order'd it) it
might not have been lawful even at the Altar

to have Invocated the Saints by such an infe|riour
Invocation or Compellation as the
Church has determined, which is only accor|ding
to Card. Perron [prier pour prier] to de|sire
them to pray for us: As even in the Masse
it self, the Priest requests the Assistants, saying,
Orate fraires, ut meum ac vestrum Sacrificium
acceptabile fiat apud Deum,Ord. Missae. c. To whom the
people Answers, Suscipiat Dominus Sacrifici|um
de manibus tuis, c. 3. But as for the Su|pream
sort of Invocation, which St. Austi
only intended in this passage, and which he
calls Culium latriae, this is only due to God,
and without impiety cannot be made to
Saints: And thus St. Austin writing against
Faustus,Aust. cont. Faust. l. 20. c 21. the Manichean, fully justifies what he
saith in this passage.
5. But after all this, that St. Austin allows
Invocation of Saints in an inferior way, do
but examin only these places in himc. 4.
De cur pro mortuis (a Book which he wrote
in Answer to a Quere of Paulinus, Whether
it doth benefit any one after his death to have
his body buried in the Memorial of some
Saint)When as (saith he) such conso|lations
of the living are looked after [that is, of
burying their Friends in such sacred places]
whereby their pious affection may appear to their
Friends. I see not what advantages may accre
[hereby] to the dead, except this; that whilst they
call to mind where the Bodies of those who are dear
unto them are laid, they with their Prayers com|mend

them to the same Saints, as it were to Pa|trons,
that by them they may be helped with our
Lord, which also they might do, although they could
not inter them in such places.Whensoever
therefore the minde recounts, where the body of
some dear friend lies buried, and streight the place
occurs renown'd for the name of some Martyr, the
devotion of him, who thus remembers and prayes,
forthwith commends this beloved soul to the same
Martyr.
There was here in Hippo (saith
the same Father) a certain old man
called Florentius,De Civ. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 8. poor but pious, and a
Tailor by Trade. He had lost his Cloak,
and had nothing wherewith to buy him
another. He prayed with a loud voice, to
the twenty Martyrs, whose Monument
here among us is very famous, to re|apparel
him. Some scoffing young men
by chance being near hand, over-heard him,
and at his going away followed him jeering
him, as if he had begged of the Martyrs fif|ty
half pence to buy him clothes.And af|terward,
The Cook (saith he) cutting up
the Fish, found in the belly of it a gold
ring, which, moved with pity and piety to|gether,
he straightway delivered to the poor
man, saying, See how the twenty Martyrs
have furnished you with clothes.
De diversis Serm. 32.  33. (unquestioned
that I know of, and which appear sufficiently

to be S. Austins, by comparing these with the
conclusion of cap. 8. l. 22. de Civit. Dei.A
certain woman (saith he there) lost her
son, a sucking Infant, being as yet a Cate|chumen
only.Full of faith she took the
dead childe, and ran to the memorial of the
blessed Martyr Stephen, and began of him to
demand her son, and to say, Holy Martyr,
you see I have no comfort at all left me; For
I cannot so much as say that my son is gon
before me (to Bliss) whom you know is ut|terly
perished (because dying unbaptized). You
see the cause of this my dessolate grief; re|store
me my Son, c.
De Baptism. l. 7. c. 1.and l. 5. c. 17.
being compared, This Father supposeth the
Martyr Cyprian to know his affairs; and, in
his handling that Controversie of Rebapti|zation,
contrary to St. Cyprians former judg|ment,
(in which Point he presumes that
Saint now fully illuminated) yet hopes
for his favour, and requests the assistance
to him herein of his PrayersLet
him help us therefore (saith he) with
his Prayers, laboring here in in the mor|tality
of this flesh as in a dark myst,
that by Gods help we may, as much as
we can, imitate the good things that were
in him.
6. Upon these grounds Bishop Forbes
grants,De Invocati|one Sancto|tum. c. 4. n. 2. that St. Austin doth allow Invocati|on

of Martyrs; commends Bishop Montagues
candor in acknowledging it; and there also
censures Bishop Andrews for denying it, in
these words: The Bishop of Ely wrongful|ly
affirms that St. Austin disallowed the In|vocation
of Saints, the contrary whereof
is apparent in his Bood De cur pro mortuis,
c. And afterwards he adds, Truly I am
sorry, that so just a cause is given to Iohn
Barclay of exposulating with the most
learned Bishop of Ely, who speaks thus
concerning himHere I have a desire to
tell the King of Great Britain's Almoner:
The King believes him, and so do many o|thers;
and yet he is as oft in fault, as he
makes others to be so. Let him therefore
consider, how erroniously he denies that St.
Austin approves the Invocation of Martyrs.
Adde to Bishop Forbers, and Bishop Montague,
the Testimony of Dr. Fulk long ago in his
Rejoinder to BristowI acknowledge
(saith he) St. Ambrose,Page 5. St. Austin, and St.
Ierom held Invocation of Saints to be law|ful,
which is an ErrorAnd the Testi|mony
of the Bishop of Spalato,Republ. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12, n. 25. who numbers
this Father among many others that allowed
Invocation of Saints: The Fathers (saies
he) without any hesitancy either Invocate
Saints, or grant they may be invocated:
the Latin; Hilary, Ambrose, Ierom, Pau|linus,
Maximus, Prudentius, Augustinus,
And the Testimony of Chemnitius also,

who,Exam. Concil. Trid. 3. p. 197. upon the former Quotation taken
out of St. Austin de Baptismo, l. 7. c. 1. sayes,
Thus St. Austin speaks without ground of
Scripture, yielding to the times and com|mon
custom. Yet for all this, a confident
pronouncing that St. Austin knew nothing
of this Doctrine or Practice serv'd the Preach|ers
turn Many of his Auditors knew no|thing
to the contrary, and therefore believ'd
him, and, according to his desire, detested
Roman Catholics the more for this Novelty.
And that was enough then; but what will it
be when the Righteous Judge shall call that
Sermon to a second account?



CHAP. XVII.

Celibacy of Priests. Vowes of Cha|stity:
The Doctrine and Practice
of the Church in both. Objecti|ons
Answered.

1. THe Doctors tenth pretended Noveltie,
is the Roman Churches prohibition of
Marriage to Priests and others in holy Orders:Serm. pag. 27.
Which, saies he, is by some derived from the third
Century, by others from the eighth; and in the ri|gour
that now it is,Ib. page 9. from Pope Gregory 7. and by
Roman Catholics themselves, 'tis dated but from
Pope Calixtus. But (saies he) both in the old
and new Testament, Priests were permitted to have
Wives: The Apostles were married: Besides
marriage of Priests was asserted by Paphnutius
in the Council of Nice: And by one of the Apo|stolic
Canons: And the forbidding of Marriage,
with Saturninus and the Gnosticks, is worthily
called by the Apostle the Doctrine of De|vils.

2. Indeed if the prohibition of Mariage to
some certain states of men or women be the
Doctrin of Devils, the Preacher has reason
rather to seperate himself from a Church that
enjoyns such a Diabolical vertue as Continence,
than from a wife that will not permit it, and
who perhaps and therefore a great influence
upon his zeal, more warm in this Novelty than
any of the rest. Though it is not only per|mitted
him, but esteem'd meritorious to blas|pheme
the Church of God, yet let him take
heed how he blasphemes the Apostle, who, in
the same Epistle out of which the Doctor
quotes his Doctrin of Devils, forbids marriage to
Widows, who had consecrated themselves to
our Lord's service: Younger Widows refuse (says
he) for when they have begun to wax wanton a|gainst
Christ,1 Tim. 5. 11, 12. they will mary: Having damna|tion,
because they have cast off their first Faith.Aug. in Ps. 95. Id. de bon. Vid c. 8.
What means this phrase [They have cast off
their first Faith] (saith St. Augustin?) [Vo|verunt
 non red did eunt.Id. de Sanct. Virg. c. 33, 34.] They vowed (per|petual
continence) but they kept not their vow:Id. de ult. Conjug. l. 1. c. 24, 2.
and therefore they have damnation.Id. Epist. 70. This is
St. Augustin's constant Doctrin and interpre|tation
of that place of the Apostle,Epiph. hier. 43,  61. as may be
seen by examining the quotations in the Mar|gin.Hieron. l. 1. Cont. Iovin. Id. in Ep. ad Fuia. Fulg. Ep. 1. c. 6. Conc. Carthg. 4. c. 104.
The same is taught by St. Epiphanius,
St. Hierons, Fulgentius, the fourth Council of
Carthage, (at which St. Augustin was present)
c. And it is not contradicted by any one
Antient Doctor, nor any, except antient He|reties,

Iovian, Vigilantius, c. And this surely
will suffice to demonstrate it, no Novelty
in God's Church, much lesse that it was e|steem'd
a Doctrin of Devils, to forbid Mar|riage
to Persons consecrated to God's service.
Forbid it; I say, not the Gnosticks, Mani|chees,
c. forbad it, as an unlawful thing in it's
self, but only as an impediment and distracti|on
in a spiritual Vocation. Now whether Wi|dows
are esteem'd by the Preacher to be more
nearly and perfectly consecrated to the Divine
service, by the Office of Deaconesses, then
men by Priesthood, 'tis expected he should de|clare.
3. But for better clearing of this Point,
touching the prohibition of Mariage to persons
in holy Orders, c. in charity I must suppose
the Doctor will not professe the Heresie of
Iovinian, who taught that Virginity does not
excel Matrimony. An Heresie so contrary to
reason, that (as St. Augustin tell us) it was
presently extinguished and never could attain to
the deceiving so much as one Priest.Aug. in. Haeres. 82. This He|resie
formally contradicts St. Paul teaching
thus,1 Cor. 7. 34. There is difference between a wife and a
Virgin, The (Virgin) unmarried woman ca|reth
for the things of our Lord, that shew ay be
holy both in body and spirit: But she that is ma|ried
careth for the things of the world, how she
may please her husband. Which saying of the
Apostle certainly at least declares a state of Vir|ginity
and continency much more advantagi|ous

to promote the service of God and keep
the mind fixed on spiritual and heavenly im|ployments,
than a Married state, encombred
with worldly cares, and carnal appetites.
Thus much I doubt not will by the Preacher be
granted.
4. But now the Question must be, whether
Eunuchism for the Kingdom of Heaven, that
is, a perpetual abstinence from Marriage and
all carnal lusts may lawfully be by Priests, c.
made the matter of a Vow? That it is a
Council of Perfection is evident from our Savi|ours
speech, Qui potest capere, capiat. But
upon supposition that Continency is a special
gift of God, not bestow'd on all, and that it
is infinitely difficult for any one certainly to
know he has this Gift: for these and such like
reasons the Roformed Churches, in opposition
to the Roman Catholic, have generally con|demned
the practice of such Vows, at least con|sider'd
as extending it self generally to any
whole Order or state of men, and especially
an Obligation imposed on them to this pra|ctice.
5. On the other side the Roman Catholic
Church, though she acknowledges Continence
to be a special Gift of God, and that there may
be some difficulty to attain and preserve it, yet
esteems not these to be grounds sufficient to
relinquish the obligation of Clibacy in Priests,
c. which she submitted to from the Preach|chers
Beginning, that is in the primitive times

of the Church, at least within the four first
General Councils.
6. It is granted then, that Continency,
(that is an ability to abstain (not from all
motions of Concupiscence but) from putting
in execution all motions, either by a voluntary
morose delectation in them, or much more
by outward unclean practises of them) is a
Gift of God, a fruit of his Holy Spirit, and
cannot by natural means be obtained so as to
be practised in obedience to him. But so are
all Christian vertues: So is Faith, so is Repen|tance,
so is Charity, all which notwithstand|ing,
we vow in our Baptism. And why do
we vow a practise of those vertues which are
pure Gifts of God? Because we are assured
the same God, who commands that Vow, will
not be wanting to supply strength to perform
it, in all those that sincerely beg those Gifts
of him by earnest Prayers made in Faith, and
by avoiding all known, and possible-to-be|avoided
impediments to the practise of those
vertues.
7. But it will be said, that great difference
is to be made between that Continence which
is a Christian vertue necessary to all;Obj. viz. a
Continence from all unlawful Lusts; and such
a Continence as is now treated of, which is an
Abstinence from Marriage, that is from the
lawful Remedies of unlawful Lusts, which
Abstinence is so far from being necessary to all,
that it is no more than a Council to those that

aspire to perfection, which are but few, even
in the opinion of the Roman-Church. This
Abstinence certainly is a far more special Gift of
God, say they, and not too easily and common|ly
to be presumed on.
8. AllSol. this likewise understood cum grano
Salis, is acknowledged by us. Yet withall
Protestants know that even this Abstinence
from Marriage, or from exercising the law|ful
Acts in Marriage is a Gift bestowed on ve|ry
many, and in some cases necessary to almost
every one. For otherwise it would be utter|ly
unlawful for Parents to keep their children
unmarried after the time they are capable,
and thereby to expose them to unlawful lusts,
since it seems they are not sure they have such
a Gift: it would be unlawful for Merchants
and Travellers to make long voyages abroad,
and leave their Wives at home deprived of the
necessary lawful Remedies against Lust and
Temptations to which they are exposed. All
Statutes of Colledges ought to be repealed,
which forbid Marriage still to all Fellows, and
heretofore to all Presidents, upon penalty of
forfeiting their whole subsistence. A long
Sickness inflicted by God on either of the mar|ried
Couples, would be far more dangerous to
their Souls than their Bodies, so as if such an
Abstinence, as is now spoken of, were such
an extraordinary Gift of Perfection, England
would have more Saints, or more Adulterers,
c. than she is aware of. And here good Doctor

I desire you tell me a thing that perhaps you
have not thought on, yet will easily perceive
its meaning assoon as you think on't. What is
the reason that the Ministers of England gene|rally
marry not till they are above thirty years
of age? Can they abstain all that while, when
their passions are stronger, and their reason
weaker, and then, after so long a Continency
begin to plead 'tis impossible for them to hold
any longer, unlesse they had the gift of Cha|stity,
which God bestows not on every one?
shall I give you my Conjecture? I doubt they
force themselves to live single till they have a
Benefice, and then, assoon as they can maintain
a wife, they get one: is not this meer hypocrisie
to talk of Marrying out of tenderness of Con|science,
to allay their Concupiscence, when
the danger is almost all past; and make no
provision to prevent the sins of the unrulyest
part of their age? Methinks they should ei|ther
marry earlyer, when they may justly su|spect
their Chastity, before they have tryed
themselves; or live longer Batchellors, when
they may prudently hope by the grace of God
to persevere after so much experience of their
continency.
9. Catholicks therfore, though they confesse
this continence to be a special Gift of God not be|stow'd
on all, because all do not use the means,
yet resolve it is such a special gift as is denyed
to none, who rightly seek it, and conceive,
it also may be made the matter of a vow by

those, who have a steddy purpose to use the
necessary means to attain and conserve it,
and by those who by humble and due ex|amining
themselves, are perswaded that God
calls them to a state of greater Perfection, and
being in that state depend on his grace for
performing their Vow, seeking his assistance
by constant Prayers, watchfulnesse, and ne|cessary
penitential austerities. Now those
may be confident they are called to such a
state, either in a Monastical or Ecclesiastical
Profession, who betake themselves thereto, not
out of any worldly respects, for gaining a sub|sistence
or preferment, or other temporal in|vitations,
but purely to avoid the tentations,
solicitudes and distractions of the world and
flesh, and to devote themselves more to the
service of God, and advancing their Souls in
vertue and piety. In this state of Perfection,
and in complying with this Council of Perfecti|on,
those, who duly undertake that state,
may as undoubtedly promise to themseves
Gods assistance whilst they use the means to
obtain it, as generally all Christians may after
the vow of Baptism. St. Augustin writes
thus,Aug. in Psal. 131. David vow'd, as having the matter in
his own power: And yet he beggs withall f God
that he may perform what e vow'd. Here is
the devotion of one that vows: here is the humi|ty
of one that prays. Let no man presume on his
own strength, as if he were able of himself to
perform what he shall vow. He that exhorts

thee to vow [saying Vovete  reddite] the
same God helps thee to perform what thou hast
vow'd.
10. If then it be lawfull for private persons
to vow Celibacy, surely it is lawful for the
Church to enjoyn it: her Doctrin being, That
Goddenies not the gift of Chastity to them who ask
it aright,Conc. Trid, Sess. 24. Can. nor suffers us to be tempted above what
we are able. Which Doctrin is the ground
why the Church enjoyns Celibacy to Priests:
So that Chastity is called a special Gift, not in
this sence, as it all men, though using what
means oever, are not capable of it: But it is
such a Gift as many men never actually receive
from God, because they do not use the means:
and such a Gift as few also will endeavour to
use the means to attain, because these means
are harder than those by which other Gifts may
be attained. That the undertaking by Vow
such a life of Chastity, and abstinence from
Marriage, yea in Marriage it self, has been ap|prov'd,
commended, and practised in Gods
Church from the very beginning, if the Preach|er
will not believe us, let him not suspect at
least partiality in his own best Friends.Chemnit. ex|am. part. 3. p. 41. We
are not ignorant, says Chemnitius, that the
Fathers did approve the vows of perpetual Celi|bacy,P. Mart. de vot. pag 490.
and acknowledge them to be obligatory.
Profession and Vows of Chastity (says Peter
Martyr) were extant among Christians in the
time of Clement of Alexandria [that is about
the year 170.Id. ib. p. 524.] Again, I know, says he, that
Epiphanius with many of the Fathers erred in

this, that they said it was a sin to violate such a
Vow when it was requisite, and that he did ill
in referring it to Apostolic Tradition.Danaeus conr. Bellarm. part 1. part. acra. Da|naeus
says confidently, That St. Augustin and
all the Bishops in the Council of Carthage a|bused
manifestly the word of God, saying, upon
the Apostles words, If any widows how young
soever have vowed themselves to God, c.
and afterwards shall go to secular Marri|age,
they shall according to the Apostle have
damnation: because they dared to make void
the vow of Chastity made to God. The
Centurists affirm it to be manifest by the E|pistles
of Ignatius, that in those times men be|gan
to have too much liking of the Profession
of Virginity: for he says, Let Virgins consi|der
to whom they have consecrated them|selves.
11. And as for the Doctrin of Devils mentio|ned
by the Preacher, he may do well to sit him
down and consider the words of the Apostle,
and the comments of the Fathers on them a lit|tle
better. First he will find the Apostle, in
his opposing those, who in the latter times
should forbid to marry, and command to ab|stain
from meats, to argue against them thus:
That every Creature and Ordinance of God is
good (according to Gen. 1. 31.  2. 23, 24.)
and therefore, being sanctified first by the word
of God and Prayer, may lawfully be used. (See
1 Tim. 4. 3, 4, 5.) which plainly shews, that
St. Paul means such Apostates as abstain from,
or prohibit Marriage and Meats as in them|selves

unlawful and unclean and contamina|ting.
Which thing can neither be objected to
the antient nor modern Church-practise, using
abstinence from some meats for the chastise|ment
of the body, not for any uncleanesse in
the food, and not forbidding Marriage to any
single person absolutely, but only upon his vo|luntary
undertaking such an employment, with
which they imagin a married condition not so
well to sute. In which case, if necessary absti|nence
from Marriage be a fault, the Apostle
himself may seem to comply with it in those ex|pressions
of his forementioned concerning the
Widows, 1 Ti. 5. 11, 12. 2ly. He will find
it manifest by experience, that this prophecy of
the Apostle was most eminently fulfilled in o|ther
persons of these latter times (whom these
Fathers even in these points most vehemently
resisted) they affirming downright all Marri|age,
especially with reference to procreation of
children (therefore the married were advised
by them in such manner to use their Wives, as
to avoid this: See S. Aug. De Morib. Manich.
c. 18.) to be unlawful, and the work or de|design
of the Devil, as likewise flesh-diet to be
unclean and defiling. They forbid living Crea|tures
as detesting them,Haeres. 47. saith Epiphanius, not in
respect of preserving continency, or a vertuous life,
but out of fear and fancy, that they might be defi|led
by eating such living Creatures. Wine
they use not at all, saying, 'tis Diabolical. And
S.Aug. con. . l. 30. c. 5. Austin, Contra Faust. l. 30. c. 5. Ye call the
Creature unclean, because the Devil (ye say)

frames flesh out of the more feculent part of na|tural
matter. Such were some of the Gosticks,
Eucratites, Mntanists, Marcionites, and in the
last place the Manichees, who, not holding all
things to have been created by the same good
God, but this lower world by an evil Principle,
or by the Prince of Darkness, as they call him,
affirmed in the begetting of a man, that the
Soul, which they account to be a part of the
substance of God himself, becomes fertered and
imprisoned in the walls or handy-work of the
Devil, i. e. the body, and therefore was marri|age,
as occasioning such imprisonment, for|born
by all their Elect; and though this was
permitted to their Auditors, yet (saith S. Au|stin)
it was not by telling them it was no
sin, but by shewing favour to the persons thus
sinning, because they allowed them maintenance.
3.Conc. Faust. Man lib. 30. Again he will find, that when they were
accused by the Fathers for such errors, it was
ordinary with them to recriminate the Ortho|dox
with the same things, both for their fre|quent
abstinences from flesh, and some other
Fruits, and for their (to some Persons at least)
recommending Virginity, who in this matter
were answered by them after the same manner,
as the Protestants, objecting the same things,
are now by the Church Catholic. See Chry|sostom,
Ambrose, and lastly Doctor Hamond on
this place of Timothy, understanding it of the
same Heretics. Lastly he will find that Fa|stus
the Maniches made the very same Objecti|on
to prove profess'd Chastity to be the Do|ctrin

of Devils. To whom St. Augustin thus
answers,Aug. Cont. Faust. Man. l. 30. c 4. I am now afraid in the behalf even of
the Apostle himself, lest he should seem to have in|troduced
the doctrin of Devils into Iconium, when
by his Speeches be enflamed a young Maid already
betrothed, to a love of perpetual Virginity, and
when he pronounced damnation to Widows
transgressing their Vow.
12. To come home to the Celibacy of Priests
in particular, whereas the Doctor build much
on the Authority of Paphnutius, and the mind
of the famous first General Council of Nice
thereupon, let him consider what an Author
(not partial he may be sure for the Roman
Church) has said of that Point,Cartw in d. Reply, part. 1. p. 4. that is, The
Patriae of Presbyterians, Mr. Cartwright, The
Council of Nice (says he) did affirm and teach
that to those who are chosen to the Ministry un|married,
it was not lawful to take any wife after|ward;
only, being married before intrance into the
Ministry, it was lawful for them to use the bene|fit
of that precedent Marriage. And Paphnu|tius
shews that not only this was before that Coun|cil,
but was an antient Tradition of the Church,
in which both himself and the rest of the Council
rested, for a motion being made by some in the
Council, that the married Presbyters (such as
were married before made Presbyters) should
after their Ordination be separated from their
Wives, this Paphnutius, a Reverend Bishop
and a Confessor, though himself never marri|ed,
opposed, saying, Grave jugm,This was
a heavy yoke, c. and that perhaps such a strict

rule of Continency could not be observed by all
Clergy-mens wives. [But now mark what fol|lows].
That it was sufficient that those who had
entred into the Clergy before they had married
Wives secundum veterem Ecclesiae traditio|nem,
according to the Churches antient traditi|on,
'should afterward forbear from marrying: But
yet that none ought to be separated from his wife
that he had married before, when yet a Laick. The
story is in Socrates, l. 1. c. 8.  in Zzomen, l. 1.
c. 22. Thus the Preacher gets not much ad|vantage
from Paphnutius.
13. Now for as much as concerns the Con|troversie
touching Marriage of Priests, Bellar|min
will grant,Bellarm. l. 1. That the vow of Continence
was annexed to Holy Orders onely by the
Churches Decree: Cleric. cp. 18. and consequently that it
may be dispensed with.Ibid. Moreover that the
Roman Church in several Cases hath permit|ed
the Grecian Priests the use of their wives
to whom they were married before their Or|dination.
And indeed, considering the tem|per
of the Eastern Countries, far more enclin'd
to such passions, than that of the Europeans, we
find the Eastern Churches gave themselves
far greater liberty than the Western. Yet no
antient Canon f either of the Churches can be
ound that permitted Priests to contract Mar|riage
after Ordination: And even among the
Grecians, a cohabitation with their Wives was
forbidden to Priests, who attended the Altar.
14. But what the universal belief and pra|ctise
of the Western Churches was, our Preach|er

may collect from the following Testimonies.
Therefore not to insist upon the generally e|steem'd
and resolved unlawfulnesse for Bishops
and Priests after their Ordination to contract
Matrimony, (of a dispensation from which not
one example can be given); It appears, that a
Matrimonial use of wives to the formerly mar|ried,
was forbidden, 1. By the Second Council
of Carthage, express in this Point: It was a|greed
unto by all the Bishops,Conc. Car|thag. Can. 2. that Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, and such who dispense Sacraments,
should be Observers of Chastity, and abstain even
from their own wives, that so what the Apostles
taught, and Antiquity observed, we likewise may
keep.Conc. African. cap. 37. 2. The Second African Council thus de|creed,
Whereas Relation was made of the Incon|tinence
of certain Ecclesiastics, though with their
own Wives, this Council thought good that, ac|cording
to former Decrees, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons should contain even from their Wives;
which if they do not, let them be removed from
their Ecclesiastical Office. As for other inferior
Clarks, they are not compell'd hereto. But let
every Church observe their own custom. 3. Saint
Ambrose witnesseth the same, You, (says he)
who with pure bodies,Ambr. l. 1. de Offic. c. 1. ult. uncorrupted modesty, and
being estranged even from Conjugal conversation,
have received the grace of the holy Ministry, know
well that we must exhibit the same Ministry
without offence, without stain, neither must we
suffer it to be violated with any Matrimonial
Act. This I have not omitted to speak because
in certain remote plates, some have prcreated

children, when they exercised Priesthood. And
again, the Apostle speaking of a Bishop, sayes,
having children, not getting them. 4. Saint
Hierom writing against Vigilantius, sayes,
What shall the Churches of the East do?Hieron. lib. cont. Vigilant.
What shall the Churches of Egypt do? and
of the See Apostolick? all which receive
Clerks, either such as are Virgins or Conti|nent,
or if they have wives, such as cease to
be husbands to them. The like is said in
the Conclusion of his book against Iovinian.Id. Epist. ad Pmchius.
And he writes to Pamachius thus, If married
men like not this, let them not be angry with me,
but with the holy Scriptures, with all Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, who know they cannot offer
Sacrifice,Aug. l. a. de A|dult. conjug. cap. 20. if they use the Act of marriage. 5. We
are wont (says Saint Augustin) to propose to them
the continence of Ecclesiasticks, who for the most
part are compelled against their wills to undergo
this burden, and yet having received it, they, by
Gods assistance, bear it to their end. I will con|clude
with the Spanish Council of Eliberis, more
ancient then St. Augustins time, nay, ancienter
then the First General Council of Nice, The
Council hath thought good,Concil. Elber. Can 33. that it should be abso|lutely
commanded to Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Sub-Deacons, to abstain from their Wives, and not
to beget children.
15. That the Eastern Churches took to them|selves
anciently a greater liberty, is to be un|derstood
not generally; for in many of them
a great a strictness was observed: as, besides
the forecited tstimony of S. Hierm, concern|ing

the Churches of the East and of Egypt,Orig. hom. 23 in num. Eseb. de dem. Evang. lib. 1. cap. 8. ap|pears
from Origen, Eusebius, and Epiphanius, who
all require continence in Priests, even from
their wives, if they have any; And particu|larly,
S.Eph. Haer. 59.  in fine operi. Epiphanius says, That to do otherwise is
not to observe the Canons, but to follow our natural
inclinations, soon weary of such a burden. And
ow the Doctor may do well to consider what
a Novelty he has found out to entertain his
Auditors with; especially, since all the fore|cited
Canons and Practices (Which are within
the time of the four first Councils) were in
force in England at the Reformation, as England
was a Member of the Western Patriarchat, and
therefore could not, without a transgression
of all Ecclesiastical Order, be repealed by this
single National Church: much less could this
Church without a criminal, formal Schism,
make such a generally received practice a pre|tence
for separation.
16. His Allegation out of Clemens of Alexan|dria,
that some of the Apostles had wives, is
granted: But did they, after their executing
their Office of Priesthood, lie with them?
Did they leave any young Apostles behind them?
As for the Apostolick Canon which forbids
Priests, c. to cast off their Wives: what would
he infer from hence? Does he think married
persons are husbands and wives only in the
night? That which the Canon intended was,
that Ecclesiastical persons should not make their
office a pretence to cast off the care of provi|ding
for their wives, or to be divorced from
them: that is, such as ere married, and had

wives before they entred into Orders, who af|terwards
must not refuse cohabitation with
them, except when they officiate, unless with
their wives consent, in the Eastern Curches,
That the Priests under the Law were married,
cannot be denied: since Priesthood necessarily
descending by generation, marriage was there|ore
necessary. But sure he does not think such
a carnal, umbratick Priesthood, is fit to be a
Pattern for our Christian Priesthood, wholly spi|ritual,
and withal Elective. Yet he may take
notice, that even in that Legal Priesthood, at
the times when they solemnly attended on the
Altar, they had no Matrimonial Commerce with
their wives: They came not reeking out of
their beds into Gods Sanctuary, as may be ga|thered
from 1 Sam. 2. 4. and the prohibition in
Exod. 19. 15, 22. Be ready the third day, and can|not
at your wives; On which place St.
Ambrose discourses thus,S. Ambr. Offic. l. 1. cap. 50. Zach. 7. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Filios susceperunt 
id tanquam usu veteri defendunt; There are
Priests and Deacons in some secret places that
defend their use of marriage by the Practice of
old, when the duty of sacrificing had its in|terval
of dayes. And yet then even the peo|ple
were sanctified by abstaining from their
wives two or three dayes before, and washd
their garments, that they might approach pu
unto the Sacrifice, Si tanta in figura observanti
quanta in veritate, If the observation [of ch|stity]
were so strict in the figure what ought i
to be in the truth, Disce sacerdos atque Levi quid
sit lavare vestimenta tua t mundm corpus 
lebr and is exhibeas Sacramentis.

17. To conclude, Celibacy to the Clergy be|ing
only injoyn'd by an Ecclesiastical Law, as
being a thing at the least no way repugnant to
the Divine Law, nay, much recommended
therein; it is certainly lawful enough, though
from the beginning it had been otherwise: For
the Church hath liberty of making Laws con|cerning
such things from time to time, as she
sees fit, and her subjects are obliged to obey
them.


CHAP. XVIII.

Of Divorce. The Practice of the
Roman Church manifestly mistaken
by the Preacher.

1. THe Doctors last Novelty is, the Church
of Romes allowing Liberty of Divorce
betwixt man and wife,Serm. pag. 19. for many more causes then
the cause of fornication, contrary, sayes he, to
the Will of our blessed Saviour, revealed to us
without a Parabl, as if they meant nothing more
then the opening a way to rebel against him. A
heavy charge: But for the Legality of it, he
alledges in the Margin an express Canon of
the Council of Trent, which, whether he reads
 toto, or  toro, says nothing at all to his pur|pose,
proper Divorce being therein not so

much as thought of. And he himself saw and
proved, it made nothing to his purpose, yet
serv'd his turn, because Chemnitius, a malici|ous
Lutheran, said falsely and ridiculously
That the Papal separation from Bed and Board 
in many ways a dissolution of the Conjugal
Tie. He would ain have Maldonate thought
to speak on his side too, but it is apparently o|therwise.
2. Truly this is a Quarrel so properly al'
Alamand, that one would think the Doctor
took only an occasion thereby to let the Court
see his critical diligence in observing the false
and true Impressions of the Canons of the Coun|cil
of Trent, in some of which he has read [
toto] which makes no sence: and in others
[a too] which only could be the Councils x|pression.
But we hope an undiligent Printer
(who for all that may be good Roman Catho|lic)
shall not make the Roman Church it self
causally Schismatical, and thereby excuse the
Preachers separation.
3. It is pitty to lose time about such a trifle,
which, I think, never before this Sermon,
was by any English Protestant reckon'd a|mong
the pretended Criminal Novelties of the
Roman Church. (Yet I may be mistaken, for
there are a world of Sermons and Treatis,
like his, in intrinsic value, which never had the
fortune to be made so current.) Howe're, left
he should be angry if so materlal a part of his
Sermon be neglected, a little pains shall not
break squares between us.
4. He may therefore take notice, that in

the businesse of Marriage there are, among Ca|tholic
Writers, distinguish'd four sorts of Se|parations:
1. A Iewish Divorce, which in La|tin
we seldom call Divortium, but Repudium.
2. A Christian Divorce, properly so called.
3. A Separation a toro. 4. A Separation both
a toro  cohabitatiore.
5. Touching the first, if we have regard to
the direct intention of God and his Servant Moses,
it was no other, nor ought to have been put in
practice upon other grounds then the Christian
Divorce, allow'd by our Saviour, that is, for
Fornication only. But by the permission in the
Old Law,Deut. 24 there might follow that Divorce, a
second Mariage by either of the parties, whether
innocent or guilty: Yet not upon every cause
a the Iews practisd it, but besides Adultery
only propter turpitudinem, for some notorious
uncleannesse extreamly distastful. Now, not|withstanding
such permission, which was meer|ly
for the hardness of Iewish hearts, their Divorce
or any other cause, and especially their second
Marriage after it, was not excused from sin, but
only from a legal punishment: And the prin|cipal
motive was, left worse effects, as poyson|ing,
or any other way of murdering, c. should
be practised by the discontented party, in case
a total separation might not be permitted.
This Supremest Degree of Jewish Separation
(or Repudium) does not intirely dissolve the
Matrimonial Contract, which being consummate
of its own nature i indissoluble; for the
parties, being by Matrimony become One flesh;
and one Principle of a new stock, cannot by

any following act or accident, but only Death,
become two again, so as to be in the same ca|pacity
as they were before they were married
And for this reason the Iews, though permit|ted
to marry afterward, yet sinned in so doing
against the primary Precept of God. Those
whom God hath joyned, let no man separate.
6. Much lesse does the second species of Sepa|ration,
or the proper Christian Divorce dissolve
this tye. The only lawful cause of which Se|paration
is by our Savior allow'd, and by the
Catholic Church acknowledged to be Fornicati|on,
(that is indeed, Adultery:) under which are
likewise comprehended, as our most learned
Doctors say, other more grievous sins of unn|tural
Lusts. And the reason why only such
sins may (not must) cause such a perpetual se|paration
is, because they alone are directly
contrary to Conjugal Faith By this separati|on,
whensoever it is caused by the crime of
the one party,) neither of them, (not the inno|cent
party) are permitted to betake themselves
to a second Marriage: for then they could no
be reconciled but by a new Marriage: And here
the Preacher may do well to consider what 
Patron he has betaken himself to, which 
Chemnitius, who, against our Saviours Law
(as all Antiquity, and the practice of the Eng|lis
Reform'd Church interpret it) contends for
the lawful Marriage of the innocent party, so
teaching formal Adultery. This separation
for such a legal cause is perpetual, that is, the
innocent persons may deprive the others of
the right they have over their bodies, and are

in a free condition even after the faulty persons
repentance, whether or no to receive them a|gain
into their former condition: Neither
can it be imputed to the innocent person, if the
criminal should by such a separation fall into
the sin of adultery.
7. The other two Separations (not Divorces)
one whereof is only [a toro] from the Bed, the
other from Cohabitation also, may be made for
other causes, besides fornication. As for sm ve|ry
infectious diseases; for almost irreconcileable
quarrels, for attempts of killing or wounding
one another, c. Such Separations are not so
perpetual as Divorces, each of the parties being
bound; assoon as these impediments of conju|gal
conversation are removed, to return, as be|fore,
to a Matrimonial Amity and Correspon|dence;
And till then, I would ask the Doctor,
whether he have the courage to admit into his
Bed, or even his house, a Serpent not only full
of venom, but ready and attempting to kill him
with it? Or if he have not this courage, whe|ther
he will acknowledg such a separation so
necessary, even to the preservation of life, to be
a Divorce damnable, because not for fornication?
What he will answer, I know not; But what he
must, if he go about to maintain his Assertion,
I am certain will be very irrational.
8. Let him reflect on the practise of his own
Church, where he cannot but have heard of
the common distinction of Divorces A Vinculo
Matrimonii,   mensa  toro: these two are
both allow'd in England: now I ask the Do|ctor,
of which does our Saviour speak? If he

say of the first, then clearly the Husband of an
Adultresse may marry again; which is contrary
to the Law: if he say of the second, still e
contradicts his own Law, which every day al|lows
a separation for other Causes, besides that
of Fornication. Can we believe the Doctor ne|ver
read the ordinary Cases wherein Diorses
are granted, as Pre-contract, Fear, Frigidity, Con|sanguinity?
c. all which dissolve the very
Marriage it self, and yet in all these the Mar|riage
was valid, till actual divorce, and the
children shall bear the Fathers name, and inhe|rit
his lands, if there never happen an actual
divorce; this the wise men of our Nation do,
and never think they open a way to rebel against
Christ.Pag. 29. Something like this, for the second
branch of the distinction,1 Cor. 7. St. Paul himself does,
and sure he cannot be opposite to the will of our
Saviour; If, says he, the Vnbeliever depart, let
him depart, a Brother or Sister is not subject in
such cases, that is, the Innocent may remain
separate: and why may not the laws of a Nation
regulate that liberty, which the Apostle allows
to every private Person? or why may not a Ge|neral
Council determin such points as well as
the laws of a particular Nation? Thus I con|ceive
it clear'd, that You and We are in this
particular either Both innocent, or Both guilty.



CHAP. XIX.

Of SCHISM. The unpardon|ableness
of that Crime, ac|knowledged
by Antiquity, c.
No cause or pretence can ex|cuse
it.

1. HAving followed the Doctor
through all his vainly preten|ded
Novelties of Doctrine: We are at last
arrived to the most concerning Point of
all, Schism: Most concerning certainly; for
there is not any one of the fore-mentio|ned
Doctrines, which in themselves consi|dered,
would absolutely destroy Souls,
though they erred about them; But
Schism alone, whatsoever Error of Do|ctrine,
yea though no Error of Doctrine,
were either indeed, or pretended to be a
cause of it, will be inevitably damning to
every Soul guilty of it; which damnation
neither rectitude of Faith, nor any good
Works, nor even Martyrdom it self will be

able to prevent.Aug. de Symb. ad Carech. l. 4. c. 10. For this cause, (sayes
St. Augustine) our Christian Creed concludes
with the Articles touching the Church, be|cause
if any one be found separated from her,
he shall be excluded out of the number of
God's Children: neither shall he have God
for his Father, who will not have the Church
for his Mother. It will nothing profit such
an one that he hath been Orthodox in belief,
done so many good works, c.
2. This is a Truth generally testified by
the ancient Doctors of God's Church, and
not at all questioned by the more sober
Writers of the English Church who have
written of Schism, c. They all are rea|dy,
in words at least, to say with St. Denys
of Alexandria,Euseb. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. That we ought rather to en|dure
any torments, then consent to the division
of God's Church, since the Martyrdom to
which we expose our selves by hindring a di|vision
of the Church, is no less glorious, then
that which is suffer'd for refusing to sacrific
to Idols.Pacian ad Sympr. Epist. 2. And with St. Pacian, Though (the
Schismatick) Novatian hath been put to
death (for the Faith) yet he hath not been
crown'd: Why not crown'd? Because he
dy'd out of the peace, concord and Communio
of the Church, separated from that comm
Mother, of whom, who ever will be a Marly
must be a Member.Iren. l. 4. c. 62. And with St. Irenus,
There cannt possibly be made any Reforma|tion
of such importance, as the mischief 
Schism is pernicious, c.

3. But I do not find that Protestant Do|ctors
have endeavour'd to penetrate into
the true grounds, why, above almost all o|ther
sins a Christian is capable of com|mitting,
Schism, that is the setting up an
Altar against an Altar, or the relinquishing
the external Communion of the Church, the
making Collects or Assemblies without,
yea against the consent of Bishops or
Church Governours, c. should be a sin
so unpardonable, that no ignorance (un|less
supposed such as is invincible; which
I fear much fewer then is ordinarily ima|gined,
of those, who have any liberal
Education can pretend to, in that great
evidence and light which they have of
the continued succession, unity of Do|ctrine,
perfect obedience to their spiritual
Superiours, penances, and retirements
from the world, and several other signal
marks of the One, Holy, Catholick, Apo|stolick
Church) no ignorance, I say, no sur|reption,
provocation, c. can excuse it.
Some may be more deeply guilty, and ob|noxious
to a heavier damnation then o|thers,
as Ring-leaders more then followers;
but damnation is by the Fathers generally
denounced as the portion of all.
4. The true Reason whereof may be de|duced
from the example of all other Go|vernments
whatsoever. The greatest of|fence
a Subject can commit against Mo|narchy,

is an actual attempt, or rather the
attempt executed, by which Monarchy is
disolved: Inwardly to condemn the Laws
of such a Government, to entertain Princi|ples,
which if put in practise, would with|draw
Subjects from their due Obedience,
is an offence of an high nature, but the
actual cantonising of a Kingdom, and the
raising in it Courts, or Iudicatories inde|pendent
on, and opposite to the Common
Tribunal of the Country, is the utmost of
all crimes: both the Seducers and Seduced
are not only deprived of the priviledges
belonging to good Subjects, but pursued
by Arms as the worst of all enemies.
5. It is so in God's Church; The main
thing our Creed teaches us to believe of it,
is its unity, without which it is not a
Church: Now if Vnity, then Order, then
Subordination of Governours, c. what
therefore is the great sin against this fun|damental
constitution of the Church, but
Schism? a dissolving the Communion and
connexion that the members of this great
Body have among themselves, and with re|lation
to the whole? We all willingly ac|knowledge,
that the great sin of the Sy|nagogue,
the sin that fill'd up the measur
of the crimes of the Iews, was their mur|dering
our Lord.Chrysost. ad Eph. hom. 11. Now sayes St. Chrysostom,
We shall not merit and incurd less cruel pu|nishment,
if we divide the unity and plenitu

of the Church (the mystical Body of our
Lord) then those have done which pierced,
mangled and tore his own Body.Cypr. de unit. Eccles. And the ve|ry
like expression hath St. Cyprian.
6. There are very few Heresies (that
is, only such Errors as are formally de|structive
to those very few verities or Ar|ticles
of Faith, without an explicite be|lief
whereof no man can be saved) which
do in themselves, simply, as false opini|ons,
universally destroy Salvation: In|deed,
if they have the formality of Heresie
joyned to them, and be maintained with
a knowledge that they are contrary to the
sence and authority of the Church, then
they have involved in them something of
Schism, or at least they are in an immedi|ate
disposition to Schism, and in that re|gard
all Heresies, though in Points of them|selves
less important, are damnative. But
Schism alone, though there be no Heresie
joyned with it, immediately divides from
the Body of Christ, and consequently from
Christ himself.
7. But may not ignorance excuse the guilt
of Schism? No: on the contrary in some re|gard
it aggravates it. For though Pride
and Malice be far greater in the Leading
Schismaticks, persons of wit and learning:
yet ignorant souls and ideots seem more to
contradict human reason; because the

more ignorant they ought to know they
are, and being confessedly no Pastors, the
more ought they to submit their judg|ments
to Authority, and consequently
the preferring their own conduct; or the
conduct and direction of particular men
or Churches, before the universal Authori|ty
of the Church, the excommunicating
(as it were) the whole Church of God,
the esteeming all Christians, both Pastors
and Flocks, as Heathens and Publicans, is a
presumption so contrary to human nature
and reason, that their want of learning is
that which will most condemn them. I
speak not now of persons absolutely ideots,
who scarce know there are any other Pa|stors,
or any other Church then their own,
who pretend not at all to pass their
judgements on other Religions; but know
only what their Pastors teach them, having
no ability, by reason of their condition,
to examine Scriptures and Churches: For
such no doubt, may by their simplicity
and absolute invincible ignorance, escape
the malignity of Schism. But I speak of
inferiour Tradesmen, of Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, who have a capacity of be|ing
rightly instructed, and better inform|ed
of that spiritual authority to which
they owe their subjection, and yet who, by
their own perversness, become trouble
of the Church, and who, because they ca

read the Scriptures, take upon them to
judge of the sence of them, both for
themselves and their Pastors, c. Such as
these no doubt have drunk in the very
gall of Schism, by usurping an authority,
which express Scripture sayes belongs on|ly
to Pastors.
8. Some learned persons (particularly
Doctor Steward) attribute much to the
temper of the English Church, which he
sayes is like St. Cyprians, Neminem con|demantes,
aut a communione separantes:
and this alone they suppose will exempt
Protestants (as it did St. Cyprian) from the
imputation and penalty of Schism, to
which other violent Calvinistical Congre|gations
are more obnoxious. But the case
is not the same: This indeed did exempt
St. Cyprian, because as St. Augustin sayes,
the Church had not then decided the dis|pute,
to whose decision St. Cyprian would
certainly have submitted. The case of
Protestants is evidently different. If a
Province in England had withdrawn it self
from the publick civil authority, would
this excuse serve them to say, We do
not intend to quarrel with those that conti|nue
in obedience to the King, we mean nei|ther
him nor them any harm, they shall be
welcom to come among us, if they will, we
will be good friends, we will not meddle with
their doings: But we will be govern'd only

by our own Laws and Magistrates c? I
believe not: Their civility in their rebel|lion,
will not change the Title of their
crime, nor free them from the punishment
due to it: it may perhaps qualifie the Prin|ces
resentment; but the civillest Treason is
Treason.
9. Being to examine the Doctor's Plea,
touching the Point of Schism, I thought
requisite to premise this consideration of
its heynousness, that both he and my self
also, should consider it as the most impor|tant
of all other, in which the least mistake
will prove mortal. I will add a bold word,
and undertake to justifie it: Though it
were far more probable that the Catholick
Church had been guilty of Innovation in
all the Points mentioned by the Doctor: yet
since by the Protestants confession those
Points are not fundamental, their voluntary
separating themselves from her Commu|nion,
will be in God's esteem very Schism.



CHAP. XX.

How the Preacher vainly endea|vours
to excuse his Church
from Schism. Of the Subor|dination
of Church Gover|nors
and Synods. The breach
of their Subordination, is the
cause of all dis-unions and
Schisms. The unappealable
Authority of general Councils,
acknowledged by Antiquity.

1. IN this point of Schism, to the end
the Doctor may clear Protestants, and
lay the weight of so great a crime on the
Catholick Church, he argues thus, Since
besides corruptions in practice (which yet alone
cannot justify separation) there were in the
Roman Church so many corruptions in Do|ctrine

likewise intrenching on Fundamentals,
the Schism could not be on the Chruch of En|glands
side, which was obliged to separate,
so just a cause being given, but on theirs,
who gave the cause of the separation? Now,
that particular Nations have a power to
purge themselves from corruptions without
leave from the See of Rome, appears 1. By
the concession of the most learned Popish Wri|ters.
2. From the ancient practise of the
Kings of England, who were .
3. Likewise from the Codes and Novels of
Justinian, the capitulare of Charlemagne,
and the endeavours of two late Emperours.
4. From the examples of the Kings of Juda.
He concludes, that had the Pope been con|tent
with his Primacy of Order, they would
never have cast off the yoke, which never had
been put upon their necks; whence appears,
sayes he, that the Vsurper made the Schism.
This is the substance of his Discourse.
2. In answering this, I will proceed ac|cording
to this method. 1. I will shew
out of Antiquity, from the example of all
orderly Governments, from evident rea|son,
c. what obedience every Christian is
obliged to perform to Church Governors,
in the obstinate refusal of which, consists
Schism. 2. I will apply this to the pre|sent
controversie, between the English and
Roman Church. I will consider the va|lidity
of his allegations, and leave it to

any indifferent mans conscience to judge
whether they are sufficient to justifie the
separation.
3. Touching the first Point, I take it for
granted, that we both agree that our
Lord has placed in his Church, Ecclesia|stical
Governours, to continue by a legiti|mate
succession, to the end of the world:
And that the exercise of their Authority,
consists partly in proposing Doctrines to be
believed, partly in making Laws for Dis|cipline
and Order. And that the Doctrines
are to be no other, then such as either are
expresly, or at least, in their immediate ne|cessary
Principles, contained in Divine Re|velation:
no innovation, no change must
be in them; whereas orders for Discipline
may, according to the prudence of the
Church, sometimes admit alteration.
Likewise I believe, we agree that this
lawful Authority of Church Governours, or
Bishops, may be differently exercised, that
is, either by their single persons, or in
conjunction with others, meeting in Synods
Diocesan, Provincial, National, Patriarki|cal,
and Oecumenical: The Authority of
which Synods, is by degrees respectively
encreased, according to the quality of
them; the lowest degree among these,
being Diocesan, and the Supream unappeal|able
authority being in Oecumenical Synods.
To deny this in gross, is to make them

ridiculous Conventicles; and the more
plenary they are, the more dangerous and
destructive of unity will they be, if they
may be repealed by others less plenary.
4. Thus far we agree; but when we
come to a precise declaration of the qua|lity
of that Authority, by both sides a|greed
on in the general, here we begin to
differ; wherefore to the end, indiffer|ent
Readers may be enabled distinctly, to
view and judge on which side Justice and
Truth lies; I will, besides what has al|ready
been said of infallibility, plainly set
down the Catholick Doctrine concerning
this matter, with the exceptions, which
the most learned Controvertists of the
English Church have interposed against it.
5.Clem. Constit. l. 6. cap. 14. There is in St. Clements Constitutions,
a saying, that to every Bishop is entrusted
[] the Episcopal Office Vni|versally.
In like manner St. Cyprian says,
[Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in
solidum pars tenetur] The Episcopal Office is
but one,Cypr. l. de. unit. Eccles. of which every Bishop holds his por|tion
in common. The meaning of which
speeches is not, that every particular Bi|shop
is, in regard of his Jurisdiction, an
Oecumenical Bishop: But since the Church
in general is truly and perfectly one Body,
each Bishop in it is so to administer his
Charge, as that he must have an eye to
the whole.

Dioceses and Provinces, c. are not to be
esteem'd as so many Secular Principalities
independent and absolute, which can
publish Declarations and Laws without any
regard to their Neighbours profit, or li|king:
It is not so in the Church; But
every Bishop, in executing his Episcopal
Office, ought much more to be sollicitous
of the general Vnity, Peace, and Edifica|tion
of the whole Church, than of his
own Diocese: So that if any Law, Custom,
or Doctrine in it be discordant from,
but especially if it condemn what is by
Law in force in the Province, Patriarchat,
or much more the Vniversal Church, such
a Law ought not to be made, or being
made, ought to be Repealed.
6. As for the Authority of Bishops in Sy|nods,
particularly in declaring Doctrines,
(for in that we are at present principally
concern'd) Such Authority may be con|ceived
to extend it self either to the not|out-ward-contra-Profession
only, or to the
inward assent, c. Between which two
there is a great difference.
7. The common received Catholick
Doctrine teacheth, that whereas in General
Councils (the only Tribunal which is by
all acknowledg'd to be infallible) there
may be either, 1. A Declaration of Tra|ditionary
Doctrines, which formerly before
such Declaration did not evidently and

niversally appear to be Traditionary:
2. Or a Decision of Debates about clear
and immediate Consequences of such
Doctrines. In both these the Church is
infallible, Infallible I say (not to enlarge
Disputes beyond the present exigence) at
least in all points any way necessary to
our Salvation; and this grounded upon
those sure Promises of our Lord made to
these Guides of his Church mentioned
before, Cap. 9. 11, 12. And hence such
both Declarations and Decisions are to be
not only not contradicted, but submitted
to by an internal assent; the undiscover'd
refusal of which assent, though it doth
not render the refusers Hereticks in the
judgement of the Church, as upon con|tradiction
or refusal of assent would (for
Ecclesia non judicat de internis:) Yet since
such Declarations and Decisions are alwayes
attended either with express, or at least
imply'd Anathemas to contrary Doctrines,
the contrary internal Judgments are He|retical.
8. Of the acknowledged Infallibility
of the Representative Church in Decla|rations
of Traditionary Doctrines, we have
sufficient Testimonies from Antiquity.
St.Athan. Ep. ad Epict. Epiph. Haer. 77. Athanasius, quoted also by St. Epipha|nius,
professes, That he wonders how any
one dares move a question touching matters
defined in the Nicen Council, since, the De|crees

of such Councils cannot be changed
without errour; Therefore they are un|alterable,
and in our sense infallible. Nor
can there be any doubt, but those matters
defin'd, were Ancient and Traditionary
Doctrines.Aug. Epist. 162. id. lib. 4. de Trin. And St. Augustin sayes, The
last Iudgment of the Church is a General
Council. The same holy Father, treating
of Rebaptization formerly held by St.Id, lib. 1. de Bapt. cont. Donat, l. 1. c. 7. Cy|prian,
and after by the Donatists, says,
That for that Doctrine (which was truly
Traditionary) the Donatists were Hereticks,
but St. Cyprian not: Why? Because it was
permitted to the former Fathers and Bishops
to debate, and, without breaking Communi|on,
to determine oppositly to one another in
Provincial Councils: Till in a General Coun|cil,
the true Orthodox Doctrne were with|out
all further doubts confirmed.Ibid. l. 2. c. 4. Which
Authority (says he) St. Cyprian, if it had
been declared in his time, would without any
doubt at all have believed.
9. In the next place, as touching Deci|sions
of Controversies about (not expressly
Traditionary Doctrines, but) clear and im|mediate
consequences of such Doctrines,
it is absolutely necessary oft-times, for
the Church to make such Decisions; for
otherwise the Devil would have power to
undermine a great part of our Faith, if
permission were given to maintain freely,
any thing that does not appear to any

one expresly, either in Scripture or in
Tradition. Thus, many of the Articles of
the Nicen, Constantinopolitan, and Atha|nasian
Creeds, are only the clear and im|mediate
Consequences of express Tradi|tions,
which Articles, in the Terms where|in
they were there conceived, were not
absolutely necessary to be believed, be|fore
the arising of Heresies, forced the
Church further to explain the Faith.
And hence it is, that the Enlargements
and clearer Explanations of our Faith,
in many Doctrines, otherwise not necessa|ry
to be so generally known, must and will
encrease to the worlds end, in case New
Heresies arise.
10. Now such Decisions are truly de fide,
or objects of our Faith: For though it
be most certain, that the Church neither
hath, nor pretends to have any New Re|velations;
of Christian verities, but the
same Faith which was delivered by the
Apostles, is still the Faith of the Church,
and no more: There are no Additions
made, no new Articles invented: Not|withstanding
the same Articles, by occa|sion
of Heresies arising, may in succeed|ing
times be further explained, and the
Truths implicitely involved in them may
be discovered.
In like manner, some Traditionary points
convey'd by the general practice of the

Church, when they come to be question'd
or denyed by Hereticks, are often expli|citely
declared in Councils to be Traditi|ons,
by which Declaration, there is no
new thing taught, but that which was
formerly involved, is more clearly mani|fested,
and that which was taught by pra|ctice
is declared by words, and that
which was known to the learneder part of
Christians, becomes extended to all:
Thus the Doctrine of Purgatory, Prayer for
the Dead, Invocation of Saints, c. have
been in later Councils made Articles, not
de novo, (as the Doctor misapprehends) but
they are lately testified to have been so an|ciently
believed; and so are all other new
decisions of later Councils, Points of an|cient
Faith, either in themselves explicite|ly,
or in their necessary principles im|plicitely.
And if, after such decisions of
Councils, there ariseth a new obligation;
that none can dissent from them without
incurring the guilt of Disobedience, so
was there before an obligation of non-dis|senting
from the same Points without fal|ling
into Error; and that in a matter of
Divine Revelation. Such Points were al|wayes
matter of faith, if we would believe,
in those particulars, what was Divine
Truth; though now indeed more necessary
matter of our faith, out of the obedience
also and submission that we owe to the

Church's judgement; to which judge|ment
we could have no obligation, before
she declared it. Neither can this be avoi|ded
when ever the Church is by new risen
Errors necessitated to state or declare such
a Divine Truth, but that such a new obli|gation
will arise to Christians, in relation
to Her, of believing it; else to what end
does the state it? Which obligation is al|so
a restraint of our former liberty indeed,
whereby we might then believe an error
in divine matters, without the guilt of
disobeying the Church; but this restraint
is much for our benefit in our knowing
and holding some truth now, which per|haps
we did not formerly, and that in a
time, when we are in more danger, from
Seducers, of falling into the contrary Er|ror.
And now behold, these necessary
decisions are called the Church's new Ar|ticles
of Faith; this is her chief accusati|on;
and the same clamour now raised by
the Preacher against the Council of Trent
for this matter, as was anciently by the Ar|rians
against the first General Council,
who cryed out against the new Article
and word Consubstantiality, which was not
found in their former Creed; as was an|ciently
by the Nestorians against the third
General Council, and by the Eutychians
against the fourth. And therefore, why
may not the Council of Trent, for its de|fence,

return the same answer to the Prea|cher,
as the fourth General Council, which
he professeth to allow, did to the Euty|chians?Conclus. of the Synod ad Marcianum Imperat.
A not-much-discussed expli|cation
of the faith is sufficient (say they) for
the benefit of sincere Believers. But for those
who endeavour to pervert the true Doctrine,
'tis necessary to make opposition to all those
things which they erroneously broach, and to
provide fit remedies to their objections. For
if all would willingly acquiesce to the esta|blishment
of the [Nicene] Faith, and would
disturb this clear way of Piety with no inno|vation,
it were meet, for the posterity of the
Church, to excogitate [in their Councils]
no new additions. But because there are ma|ny
that decline from this right line, through
the crooked paths of error, we are confirained
with new discovery of truth to reduce them,
and to refute their straying opinions with
wholsom additions [i. e. to the former Do|ctrines
of the Church.] Not, as if we
were ever seeking out some new thing tending
to Godliness, as though the former faith were
defective, but that we may seek out those
things which are judged salutary and beneficial
in opposition to those things which are innovated
by them. Thus that Council, whose
words clearly demonstrate, that Councils
may define, not only traditionals in mat|ters
of Faith, but any new conclusions
which are necessarily and evidently deri|vative

from them. And here let the equal
Reader judge, whether the Doctor hath
more reason to complain of the Councils
new Articles, or the Council of his, and
his Predecessors new Errors. Out of
which evil yet, the wisdom of God, in
the several ages, brings this good (as E|vagrius
 accutely observes to the Pagans,Hist. 1. lib. 11. c.
scandalized at the divisions and novelties
of opinions that arose amongst Christians)
that by occasions of Heresies the Orthodox
dogmes are more accurately polished, and more
entirely compiled, and that by this means the
Church every day increaseth in knowledge:
i. e. by having the explicite Articles of
her Faith more and more enlarged. As
we see how much even in early times the
Athanasian Creed (by the springing up of
several Heresies in those days) had enlar|ged
the Apostolick.
11. All these Declarations and Decisi|ons
framed by General Councils, we Ro|man
Catholicks do esteem our selves ob|liged
to the assent unto, which is far more
then not to contradict. And this obliga|tion
is founded on the Infallible Authority
which we acknowledge in the Catholick
Church, derived from the promises of
Christ, whose Spirit shall lead her into all
Truth: The denial of which assent we af|firm
to be formal Heresie: and an open
contradiction to which Authority; is for|mal
Schism.

12. This we are taught concerning our
Duty and Submission to General Councils.
And hereto we must add, that considering
the present distracted state of the Christian
world, and especially the Schism pertina|ciously
persisted in by the Eastern Patri|arks,
who live under the Tyranny of the
Turk, and therefore will never probably
be permitted to convene for the general
Union of Christendom, it is almost be|come
impossible that such General Coun|cils
should now be assembled with all for|malities,
as the four first were, wherein all
the five Patriarks were present, at least by
their Deputies. Yet, notwithstanding all
this, we cannot without infidelity doubt
that God will be wanting to his Church to
preserve it in Truth and Vnity. Since there|fore
such an Oecumenical Council cannot be
expected, as was during the times of the
Roman Empire, the Supremest that can
now be had, ought to have the force and
vertue of obliging, which the former ones
had; the Anathemas of it must be as va|lid;
the Decisions of it as much to be
submitted to, and a renunciation of its
Doctrine and Laws as heynously Schismati|cal,
as of any Council that ever went be|fore:
Therefore Doctor Bramhal, Lord
Primate of Armagh, in the Preface of his
Reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon, decla|ring
that he submits himself to the Repre|sentative

Church, that is, to a free General
Council, most rationally adds this clause,
or to so General, as can be procured.
13. Thus of General Councils. As for
inferior subordinate Councils, though their
Decrees touching Doctrines and Laws for
Discipline are not unappealable, yet an ob|ligation,
in both these respects, they im|pose
on Christians living respectively with|in
their Precincts. The Decisions of a Pro|vincial
Synod are to be internally assented
to, except they be evidently erroneous, or
contradictory to those of a Superior Synod,
so that without Schism they cannot be o|penly
contradicted. Yet the same Decisions
may be annulled by a Patriarchical Synod:
And all by an Oecumenical, of which alone
all the Decisions and Laws are irreversible,
because there is no Authority upon earth
superior to it, and in all Governments an
inferior Authority can never reverse what
hath once been established by a Superior,
especially if that establishment hath been
actually submitted to: For, if a Provin|cial
Synod could annul the formerly recei|ved
Acts of a National, or a National of a
Patriarchical, there must of necessity follow
a Dissolution of all Government and V|nity,
as to the whole Catholick Church,
yet we profess in our Creed, Vnam Ca|tholicamAdd
to this, that in all Synods
the Major part alwayes must decide: so

that the fewer, however they may be e|steem'd
the better or more learned, must
submit to them: These likewise all use of
meetings and consultations will be eva|cuated.
14. This fundamental Rule of all Go|vernment
and Vnity is the only true, uner|ing
Touch-stone, by which a judgement is to
be made concerning Schism; If Doctor
Pierce can furnish us with a better, let it
be produced: but that being impossible,
he must give us leave to make use of this
to examin the cause between the Roman
Catholick Church, and all other Congre|gations
that call themselves Reformed. But
indeed it is lost labour to apply such a Rule
as this to any Calvinistical, Independent, or
Fanatick Congregations, because they re|nounce
both all such Laws, and the whole
Authority and Offices of those that made
them: Therefore (leaving them to
the severe judgement of him who said,
Where are those my enemies that will not
have me to rule over them?Luke 19.) I will consi|der
the Controversie, as the Preacher sta|ted
it, between the Roman Catholick and
English Protestant Churches, I say [as he
hath stated it] because being to treat of
Schism, he hath given the right notion of
it, and not mispent time and paper, as
some others have done, with vain discour|ses
of an Internal and External separation,

c. as if there were no danger in exter|nal
Schism or dividing of Communion,
unless men also have, with the Presbyteri|ans,
c. lost all even appearance of cha|rity
to all Christian Churches before
them, damning all who believe that Arti|ticle
of our Creed concerning the Unity
and Authority of the Church.



CHAP. XXI.

The Fundamental RULE of
Church-Government. Limi|tations
of the Authority of
Gen Councils. Their Grounds
made by Arch Bishop Lawd,
Dr. Feild, c. Of Points
Fundamental, and Non-fun|damental.
Protestants allow
not so much Authority to Gen.
Councils, as God commanded
to be given the Iewish Sane|drim.
Of the pretended In|dependence
of the English
Church, from the Example
of Cyprus.

The foresaid fundamental Rule of all Go|vernment,
That no Laws can validly
be repealed by an Authority Inferior to that, by

which they were Enacted, is a Rule not now
invented to serve our present purpose, but
written in the hearts of all mankind, that
consider what Government is; and it is,
as to Church-matters, particularly taken
notice of by St. Augustine, when he de|clares
the Order that is in the Church,
and which alone can keep it in unity;
Particular Writings of Bishops,Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 3. saies he, if
any Error be in them, may be corrected by o|thers
more learned, or by Synods; and Synods
themselves assembled either in Provinces, or
Regions ought without any tergiversation to
yield and submit to the Authority of Plenary
Councils; and oftimes former Plenary Coun|cils,
may be corrected by other following Ple|nary
Councils.
2. This most Irrefragable Rule, is that
by which Schism may most certainly, and
undeniably be discovered. And therefore
though in gross it be admitted by Prote|stants,
(I mean the wisest and most learn|ed
among them) yet out of a necessity of
maintaining the grounds of the English Re|formation,
they put such restrictions  ex|ceptions
to it, as utterly take away all use
of it. For whereas S. Augustine makes the Su|pream
Authority of the Church, to reside in
plenary or general Councils, because he with|al
implies, that such Councils may be correct|ed,
they therefore take the liberty to reject
them, at least in decisions in their esteem of

less importance, and by that means altoge|ther
inervate their Authority: Not consi|dering
that in case the Decisions, which he
saies, may be mended, should regard mat|ters
of belief, which perhaps, upon bet|ter
consideration, may be expressed more
commodiously, and so, as that they may
be less liable to misconstruction; yet it be|longs
not to any particular men or
Churches to correct them, but onely to
succeeding Councils of equal Authority.
To demonstrate this, I will here set down
what Authority learned Protestants, such
as Doctor Field, the late Arch-Bishop Lawd,
c. acknowledg in general Councils, and
withal, how they circumscribe the same
Authority.
3. These agree, that the Universal
Church is infallible in fundamentals:
Hence says the Archbishop,Archb. Lawd, Conser. Sect. 37. Numb. 3. The visible
Church hath in all ages taught that unchan|ged
faith of Christ in all Points fundamen|tal:
Doctor White had reason to say this,
c.Id. ib. sect. 21. n. 5. Again, The whole Church cannot uni|versally
erre in absolutely fundamental Do|ctrines,
therefore it is true also that there can
be no just cause of making a Schism from the
whole Church.Ibid. Again, quoting Kickerman,
he saith, That she cannot erre, neither in the
Faith, nor in any weighty point of Faith.
And from Doctor Field he asserts,Ibid. That she
cannot fall into Heresie, c. That she may

erre indeed in superstructions and deductions,
and other unnecessary Truths, from her cu|riosity
or other weakness. But if she can erre
either by falling away from the Foundation
totally, or by heretical error in it, she can
no longer be holy: (for no Assemblies of
Hereticks can be holy:) And so that Arti|cle
of the Creed, [I believe the holy Ca|tholick
Church] is gone. Now this holiness,
saith he, Errors of a meaner allay take not a|way
from the Church.Id. sect. 33. a. 14. The same Archbi|shop
likewise acknowledges, that a General
Council de post facto is unerrable: that is,
when the Decisions of it are received and
admitted generally by Catholicks.
4. Thus far goes the Arch-Bishop, atten|ded
by Doctor Field, Doctor White, c. But
being necessarily obliged to maintain the
separation of his own Church from the
Roman, c. he (treating of that point) ex|tends
most enormously the Errors of the
Church in non-Fundamentals; for then,
forgeting his former phrases of unprofit|able
curiosities, unnecessary subtilties, unne|cessary
Doctrines,Id. Sect. 21. n. 5. to which her curiosity or
weakness, may carry her beyond her Rule, he
saith,Id. Sect. 37. . 5. 6. The Roman Church held the Funda|mentals
literally, yet she erred grosly; dang|erously,
nay damnably in the exposition of some
of them: That she had Errors, though not
Fundamental, yet grating upon the Founda|tion,
c. Now what he speaks of the Ro|man,

is manifest, must as well be applied
to the Eastern Church too; and so to the
whole Church Catholick at Luthers discession,
for most of the Doctrines found fault with
by Protestants in the Roman Church, them|selves
see to have been, and still to be
taught by the Eastern, c. with an accessi|on
on of other Errors, from which the Roman
is free.
5. Hitherto these Writers speak of the
Authority of the Church onely in gene|rals:
The Church, say they, cannot Erre
in Fundamentals; She may Erre in non-Fun|damentals:
But who is to discern between
Fundamentals and non-Fundamentals? And
who is to judg of the Churches Error
in non-Fundamentals? Doctor Field will
tell us to this purpose,Dr. Field of the Church cap. 5. p. 666. That no particular
man or Church, may so much as profess pub|lickly,
that they think otherwise then has
been determined in a general Council, except
with these three limitations. 1. Vnless he
know most certainly the contrary to what the
Church has determined. 2. If there be no
gainsaying of men of worth, place and esteem?
3. If there appear nothing that may argue an
unlawful proceeding. And the Arch-Bishop
briefly to this effect,Lawd Sect. 33. con. 5. n. 1. states the Point:
That General Councils, lawfully called and
ordered, and lawfully proceeding, are a great
and awful representation, and cannot erre in
matters of Faith, upon condition. 1. That

they keep themselves to God's Rule, and not
attempt to make a new one of their own.
2. And they are with all submission to be ob|served
by every Christian, where Scripture, or
evident demonstration come not against them.
6. These are their limitations, and sure
it was a very great necessity, that forced
such wise and learned men, to grant so
licentious a liberty, for annulling what
ever hath been, or shall be determined by
the Supream Tribunal in Gods Church. A
liberty never heard, or thought of from
Doctor Pierces beginning, I am certain. A
liberty manifestly destructive to all their
own Articles, Canons, and Acts of Parlia|ment:
For sure they will not say, that these
are of more sacred and inviolable Autho|rity,
then those of the whole Church: Do
none pretend to know most certainly the
contrary to those determinations? or do
none of worth, place, and esteem, gainsay
them, when all the Christian world Refor|m'd,
and non-Reform'd, except a little
portion of England, absolutely reject them?
Lastly, does nothing appear, that may argue
an unlawful proceeding in Hen. the Eighths
first Reformation, or K. Edwards, or Q. Eli|zabeths?
But there was no possible avoiding
the concession of this liberty, apparently
ruinous to themselves; because they have
usurped it against the whole Church, could
not refuse it to any that would make use of
it to destroy their own.
7. Let us here briefly examine these
Grounds, laid by the Arch-Bishop, c. viz.
1. The Church is unerrable in Fundamen|tals,
but subject to error in non-Fundamen|tals.
2. The Decisions of General Councils,
are to be observed, where Scripture, or evi|dent
Demonstration come not against them.
8. In these Assertions is included a Sup|position
not denied by Catholicks, That
even among Doctrines determin'd by the
Church, there are some which are in
themselves fundamental, others not so:
but yet withal those Doctrines which in
themselves are not fundamental, being
once determin'd by the Church, are ne|cessary
to be assented to by all Catholicks,
to whom they are so represented, for in
those circumstances, Obedience is a fun|demental
duty. But though Catholicks
allow this distinction in general, they
withal profess, it is impossible for any
particular persons of themselves to de|termin
among all the Churches Decisions,
and say, this or this Point is necessary and
fundamental, the others not. And the
reason is, because the terms Necessary,
Fundamental, c. are relative terms when
applied: for that is necessary to be be|lieved
and known by one, which is not so
by another: Many Doctrines are necessary
to Churches for their well ordering, which
are not so to any single persons, Parishes, c.

c. For this reason all Decisions of the
Church are sacred to them; no permissi|on
to question any of them is allow'd:
and by this means the Church is continu|ed
in unity, and by assenting to all De|cisions,
they are sure never to dissent from
those that are necessary. Whereas Prote|stants
taking a liberty of discerning be|tween
fundamentals and non-fundamentals,
and of dissenting in non-fundamentals at
least, wherein they think the Church Ca|tholick
may be fallible (though they have
no Rule by which to judg so) are, be|sides
a certainty of dis-union, exposed to
errours even in fundamentals.
9. The ground upon which those learn|ed
Protestants conclude a fallibility even in
the universal Church as to Doctrines not
fundamental [besides the manifest in|terest
of their own Church] is because
the end why Christ made such promises of
leading his Church into all Truth, was,
lest the Gates of Hell should prevail against
her, which can be done only by Heresies
against fundamental Doctrines: and
therefore God's assistance for other
Points not fundamental, is not to be pre|sumed
on.
10. But, though this Position in general
were allow'd them, That the Church is
fallible in unnecessaries, this will not ex|cuse
them for dissenting from the Church

in any particular Doctrines actually de|cided
by a General Council. Themselves
acknowledge that all dissenting even in|ternal
is unlawful without a certain de|monstration,
that the Church hath actu|ally
erred in such and such Doctrines. But
which way possibly can any particular,
person, or Church, arrive to such a de|monstration?
It must be by producing
express Scripture, or universal Tradition,
formally opposite and contradictory to
what the universal Church hath declared.
Who can think, who dares believe, that
those supreme Guides of all Christians,
who were by our Lord placed in the
Church, and graced with such promises,
who are the only Guardians of the Scrip|ture
it self, and only unappealable
Iudges of the sense of it, should conspire
to propose Doctrines formally and mani|festly
contrary to express Scripture or e|vident
demonstration? And as for uni|versal
Tradition, there can be no Iudge of
it, but the whole Church: particular
persons, or Churches, are utterly un|capable
of making such a judgment, e|specially
in opposition to the whole
Church.
11. It were happie therefore, if Prote|stants,
considering the Promises of Christ,
and the necessity of unity in the Church,
would allow but as much submission to

the Supreme Tribunal of his Church, as
God obliged the Iews to perform to their
Sanedrim, to which no such Promises were
made. For then, though in Thesi they
did affirm the Church to be fallible, yet
they would acknowledge, that not only all
declaration of non-assenting is forbid|den,
but an internal assent is of necessary
obligation to every one of her Decisi|ons.
12. Let them seriously consider the
passage of Deuteronomy heretofore pro|duced,Deut. 17. in which God commands the Jews
under the penalty of death, to obey whatsoever
sentence should be pronounced by the present
Iudges of those dayes in any Controversies
touching the Law. This Precept argues
that the Supreme Council of the Iews was
infallible in Fundamentals. And in|deed
God had promised that the Scepter
should not depart from Judah,Gen. 49. 10. nor a Law-giver
from between his knees till Shiloh
(that is the Messias) came. By vertue of
which Promise the Iewish Religion could
not fail in Fundamentals: and the effect
of this Promise was manifestly performed:
For as to the outward proession and pra|ctises
of the Mosaical Law, it was alwayes
continued, in so much as our Saviour
himself enjoyned Obedience to all the
Commands of those who sate in Moses his
Chair.Matth. 23. I say as to the outward practises

of it: For in the Spiritual sense of it,
the Iewish Ecclesiastical Magistrates were
horribly perverted, so far as to oppose
and Murder the Messiah himself, typified
therein; But now Shiloh was already
come, and God's promise of Indefectibi|lity
rested in this New High Priest, and
his Successors.
13. Notwithstanding all this, yet Er|rors
might creep in about non-fundamen|tals,
as the Rabbins confess, when they
suppose a future Sanedrim might annul
the Decisions of a former Council; in
which case the Ordinances of the later
must take place, and without all tergiver|sation
be obeyed. So as though they, being
indeed in such things fallible, should com|mand
any thing contrary to the true sense
of the Law, the Iews were under the ut|most
penalty obliged to obey them, which
obedience required a submission of Judg|ment
and internal assent to such Com|mands,
that they were agreeable to God's
Law, because it would be utterly unlaw|ful
to obey any commands of men, which
the Subject believed to be contrary to
God's Law. Now the reasonableness of
this Command of God appears in this,
That it was a less evil and inconvenience
that some Legal Precepts of no great im|portance
should be transgressed, than that
Contentions and Disputes should be end|less

14. From this pattern Protestants may
be instructed, that though they should
allow a General Council no more obliging
Authority, than the Iews did to their
Sanedrim, which was infallible in funda|mentals,
but subject to Error in non-funda|mentals,
they can never have a warrant to
Dissent from any Decisions of such a
Council, but ought to submit their inter|nal
Judgment to them. For, since it is
impossible they should have any demon|strative
proofs that such Councils have
de facto erred, I mean in matter of Do|ctrine;
all other inferiour Judgments,
all only probable Arguments against them,
ought to cease; the Judgment of the
whole Church rendring all contrary opi|nions
altogether improbable. So that
though (upon their Supposition that the
Church in non-fundamentals is fallible)
she should have erred in such not-much-concerning
Decisions, and by consequence
their assent would be erroneous, yet that
small incommodity would be abundantly
recompenc'd with the most acceptable
vertue of Obedience, humble submission of
Judgment, love of Peace and Unity which
accompanies it. Besides, that both Truth
and Errour in such things lyes only on
the Churches, and not at all on their ac|count.

15. But since Protestants find an extra|ordinary
difficulty more than Catholicks,
to submit their Judgments to Authority,
and are apt to think all their opinions and
perswasions to be certain knowledges;
Let it be supposed that their first Reform|ers
not being able to perswade themselves
to renounce their Opinions, should there|upon
have been excommunicated by the
Church: In this case they ought to have
suffered such Censures with patience, and
not voluntarily forsake her Communion;
and much less ought they to have set up,
or repair to an Anti-communion: For that
was in the highest degree a Formal
Schism.
16. In all this discourse touching
the Infallibility of the Church, and the un|lawfulness
of separation from it; I do not
mean a Church of one denomination, no,
not the Roman, as such, for so we ascribe
not Infallibility to her: But I intend
the Vniversal Church, which we call Ro|man
Catholick, because all true Orthodox
Churches (an union of which, constitutes
the Universal Church, acknowledge the
Roman Church, to be the Root of their
Unity. Therefore Protestants, in vain, seek
to excuse their separation, upon pretence
it was onely from the Roman, not from
the Vniversal Church: because, 1. A sepa|ration
from the external Communion of

any one true Member of the Catholick
Church, for Doctrines which are common|ly
held by other Churches in communion
with that Member, is indeed a separation
from all Churches; which is manifestly
the case of the English separation. 2. Be|cause
it is evident, that the pretended Re|formed
Churches, really separated them|selves
a toto mundo. A thing which Calvin
confesseth in an Epistle of his to Melan|cthon,
in these words, Nec non parvi re|fert,
c. For it doth not a little concern us,
that not the least suspition of any discord risen
among us, descend to posterity: For it were a
thing more then absurd, after we have been
constrained to make a discession from the whole
world, if we, in our very beginnings, should also
divide from one another. And which Chil|lingworth
also confesseth in several places,
cap. 5. sect. 55. As for the external Communion
of the visible Church, (saith he) we have,
without scruple formerly granted, that Prote|stants
did forsake it: that is, renounce the
practise of same observances, in which, the
whole visible Church before them, did com|municate.
And sect. 56. What do you con|clude
(saith he) from ence, but that see|ing
there was no visible Church, but corrup|ted,
[where note, that he must affirm not
only corruptions in manners, but also in
Doctrines and Lawes, for from several of
these, he will not deny Luther to have

made a discession] Luther forsaking the ex|ternal
Communion of the corrupted Church,
could not but forsake the external communion
of the Catholick Church. Well, let this be
granted; what will come of it? That Luther
must be a Scismatick? By no means. I say,
it is evident (as these confess) that the
pretended Reformed Churches really sepa|rated
themselves from the whole world, that
is, from that holy Catholick Church which
we believe is to continue so in every Age:
Since not one Church upon earth antece|dent
to their separation, can be found out
with which they are joyned in external
Communion, not one which has Laws, or
Governors in common with them, not
one that will joyn with them, or with
which they will joyn in publick Offices,
Lyturgies, Sacrifices and Synods. The En|glish
Church doth not pretend a Com|munion
with Churches manifestly Here|tical,
as the Armenian, Coptite, Abissine,
Nestorian, Iacobite, Georgian Churches, c.
And for the Grecian, the Reformers, at
their first separation, were actually divided
from her; and sure they will not say, that
by separation from the Roman, they be|came
ipso facto in communion with the
Grecian; or if they would say so, the Gre|cian
would protest against them, as we see
their Patriark Hieremias did, c.

17. And that is but a very ineffectual
Salve,Dr. Bramhall. which a late learned Protestant Wri|ter
in his discourse of Schism, insists upon,
when, seeing clearly the English Church
could not pretend a Communion with any
other Ancient Churches in the world, he
therefore claims priviledges of the English
Church, equal to those ancient ones of
Cyprus; which was a Church independent
of all other, and exempted from the Ju|risdiction
of the Eastern Patriark of Antioch:
For though this pretention could be made
good, which is impossible, yet this would
not serve their turn, considering the En|glish
Church, ever since her Conversion,
acknowledged her self a Member of the
Western Patriarchate: But though she had in|deed
such a priviledge, and never re|nounced
it, who will say the Cyprian
Church, (because exempted from certain
Acts of Patriarckical Iurisdiction, as Ordi|nations,
Visitations, c.) could therefore
independently of all the world, frame or
change Articles of Faith, or be excused
from subscribing to the Decisions of Coun|cils,
though onely Patriarckical?



CHAP. XXII.

The limitations of the Chur|ches
Authority, made by Arch-Bishop
Lawd, c. examined.
Objections against the Pro|ceedings
in the Council of
Trent, answered. Manifest
Illegality in Q. Eliz. Refor|mation.
Secular and Carnal
ends in it.

1. HAving shew'd the indispensible
obligation of even an internal as|sent
that Roman Catholicks acknowledge
due to the Decisions of General Councils,
as being infallible, and which Protestants
ought also to perform, though they ac|knowledge
such an infallibility to extend
only to Doctrines Fundamental; since
the Church her self hath not declar'd
which of her Decisions are Fundamental,

and which not, for she hath affixed Ana|themas
to many, which in themselves are
not Fundamental, and hath said only,
si quis dixerit (not) si quis non crediderit,
concerning Doctrines which are unque|stionably
Fundamental and necessary: We
will now examine the foremention'd Li|mitations
or cases in which it is said par|ticular
persons or Churches may and
ought to be dispensed with for yielding
an assent to Decisions of General Councils
touching matters not Fundamental, or e|ven
for not contradicting them; which
limitations have been fixed by Archbishop
Lawd, Doctor Field, c.
2. In the first place, An assent even in|ternal,
say they, is to be given indispensably
to all Decisions of General Councils touching
such Doctrines (only) as are Fundamental,
or Points of necessary Faith, because so far
and no farther their Infallibility extends.
But who shall, or can judge what Points
are or are not of necessary Faith with re|spect
to all particular states of men or
Churches, when the Church her self hath
not made any distinction between them,
and perhaps cannot? Surely Prudence, and
a most necessary care of our own Salvati|on,
by continuing in the Unity of the
Church, would dictate to us, that since the
Church is as to Fundamentals infallible,
and therefore cannot mislead us to our

danger, there can be no safety but in as|senting
to all her Decisions, as if they
were of necessary Faith, for only by do|ing
so, we can be sure not to err in neces|sary
Points, and we shall be certainly free
from all danger of Schism.
3. Secondly, As to Decisions made by
General Councils of Doctrines not necessary
(if we could find them out) the same in|ternal
assent, say they, is due, except in two
cases. i. Vnless Scripture or evident demon|stration
come against them, whereby we know
most certainly the contrary to what they have
determined, in which case it is unlawful to
assent, yea it is permitted rather to contra|dict
and separate. But let any Christian
mans conscience judge, whether this be
to be admitted as a fitting, respectful, or
even possible supposition, that the whole
Church should conspire to frame Decisions
in matters of Christian Doctrine, against
which express Scripture or evident de|monstration
can be produced. This li|cence
being admitted, who shall be judge,
whether that which is pretended to be a
Demonstration, be really one, or no? Or
whether a person do know most certainly
the contrary to what the whole Church
hath decided? None can judge of the
thoughts of another: So that upon these
grounds, whoever shall say he is certain
the Church hath erred, must be believed,

or however cannot be found fault with|all
for his renouncing obedience to the
Universal Church. What Presbyterian,
writing or disputing against Episcopacy or
other Doctrines of this Church, will
doubt to say, that he does most certainly
believe and know such Doctrines to be
Errors? And if he say so, who can de|mostrate,
that he does not think so? And
if he think so, he may question, contra|dict,
and make parties to reverse all the
Laws, Decisions, c. both of the English
and God's Church too, by the Archbishop's
warrant; for he taking notice (page 245.)
that such an Objection will be made, re|solves
it thus, That a General Council (he
means another (General Council) must de|cide,
whether it be a demonstration or not;
Hence it will follow, 1. That when any
one cries a Demonstration, he cannot be
reduced to obedience till another General
Council be called. 2. But if another Gene|ral
Council must decide it, why hath not
the last General Council, which he disobeys,
decided it? Or if this may not oblige
him, why should the next? But this is not
yet judged to be dispensation enough;
For according to the foresaid limitations,
One may be excused from assenting to Decisi|ons
of General Councils, about Points not of
necessary Faith, in case they be gainsaid by
men of worth, place and esteem: So that if

any such persons do contradict General
Councils (whether in or out of the Council,
He mentions not) ignorant men may
lawfully join with them, and in compa|rison
esteem all other Pastors of God's
Church to be of less worth, place or esteem.
What a broad Gate, yea how vast a breach
have these Doctors, with all their learning
and prudence, made in the walls of God's
Church, to let in all manner of confusion?
Can any Protestant now deny Smeymnuus,
Mr. Prinn, the Rump Parliament to have
been persons of worth, place and esteem?
At least the generality of England once
thought them so, and themselves chal|lenged
those Titles, and whilst they were
the strongest, enjoy'd them. To what
miserable straits a necessity of justi|fying
the English Separation reduced such
wise and learned men?
4. In the third place, according to the
same Writers Position, all manner of De|cisions
made by Councils, both in necessary
and unnecessary Doctrines, cease to be ob|ligatory,
in case something appears that may
argue an unlawful proceeding in the Council,
out of passion, interest, want of liberty, c.
But still who shall be judges of Councils
proceedings? Among Catholicks, when
there are perhaps suspicions of some irre|gular
proceedings, yet if the Points deci|ded
be embraced by the particular Ca|tholick

Churches, generally speaking, they
then have the force of unquestion'd Ca|tholick
Doctrines. But as for those, who
are enemies to Councils, in which their
Doctrines have been condemn'd, such will
be sure to charge them with unlawful
proceedings. For did not the Arians
urge that Plea against the Council of Nice?
The Nestorians against that of Ephesus?
The Eutychians against that of Chalcedon?
5. This clause in all probability was
put in to exclude the Authority of the
Council of Trent; against the proceedings
of which therefore, very loud and very
unjust clamors were made by Protestants,
imputing especially to the Court of Rome
many policies and attempts either to in|timidate
the Fathers of the Council, or
to induce them to favour, and enlarge the
Grandeurs of the Pope. But who ever shall
unpassionately read the History of that
Council, compiled by the most learned and
eminent Cardinal Palavicino from authen|tick
Records yet extant, will be satisfied.
1. That the liberty of the Bishops was on|ly
straitned by their own respective tem|poral
Princes, and not by the Roman
Court. 2. That the Pope was so far from
gaining an access to his Authority, that
when a far greater number of the Bishops
would have concurr'd thereto, the Pope
himself forbad it, meerly because the

French Bishops, inconsiderable for their
numbers, did joyn to oppose it.
6. But there is no necessity that Catho|licks
should trouble themselves with ma|king
Apologies for that Council. 1. Because
all the Doctrines of it, opposed by Prote|stants,
as Novelties, were manifest in the
general Writings and Practise of the
Western Church long before that Council;
and most of them in the Eastern. 2. Be|cause
they are now actually embraced by
all Catholick Congregations, as Declared
Doctrines of the Church: in which case by
the Archbishop's own Concessions, they are
to be esteem'd infallibly true. 3. Because
the principal Doctrines, censur'd in the
Preacher's Sermon, had been expresly de|termin'd
by former either General, or at
least Patriarkical Councils, admitted in
this Kingdom: as Transubstantiation, Ve|neration
of Images, Prayers not in a vulgar
tongue, Communion under one Species, Celi|bacy
of Priests, the universal Iurisdiction of
the Pope, c. 4. And lastly, because, in
condemning the Protestant Doctrines op|posite
to them, the Bishops of the Council
of Trent are found, even bySee the Eng|lish Edition of that Histo|ry, concern|ing Transub|stantiation and Adoration of the Eucharist, pag. 324,  326.Concern|ing the Masse, that it is a Propitiatory sa|crifice, p. 544, 545,  738.Concern|ing the Law|fulness  Suf|ficiency of Com|municating in one kind, pag. 324, 325, 519.Concern|ing Purgatory; the Lawfulness of Invocation of Saints, and of Veneration of Images, p. 799, 803.Concerning the Lawfulness of not using some part of the Divine Service in a vulgar Language, p. 573, 574.Concerning Priests not Marrying; and the universal Capacity of the Gift of Chastity; and the Lawfulness of Vowing it, p. 783, 747, and likevvise, p. 678, 679.] Padre Paulo's

Relation (no favourer of that Council)
unanimous in their Judgment; which
the Reader may there see, if he please to
examine their Votes concerning those
Points. Neither did, nor needed the
Pope, or his adherents, to use any artifice
herein to gain the Suffrages of a Major
part: And this is, in that History of his,
only pretended to be done in other mat|ters
of Contest among Catholicks them|selves.
7. Therefore it would certainly be
much more for the good of Conscienci|ous
Protestants to reflect seriously on the
method of their Reformations: and then
let them be Judges of the legality of
their proceedings, and the disinteressed|ness
of their first Reformers. I speak not
now of Presbyterian Reformations, which
in all Countreys have been usher'd in with
Tumults, Rebellions, Murders, Rapines,
Dissolution of Monarchies, c. but of
the English Reformation only, which
though free from such horrible Crimes,
yet how legal it was, how free from
worldly and carnal Interests, let their own
Historians be Judges.
8. And first, This Relation is made of
it in general by Dr. Heylin;Reform. Justi|fied, pag. 37. In Queen
Elizabeths time (saith he) before the new
Bishops were well setled [I need not mind
the Reader here, that all her former

Bishops, save on, had deserted her] and
the Queen, assured of the affections of her
Clergy, went that way to work in Her
Reformation, which not only her two Prede|cessors,
but all the godly Kings and Princes in
the Iewish State and many of the Christian
Emperours in the primitive times had done
before her, in the well ordering of the Church
and People committed to their care and
government by Almighty God. And to that
end she published her Injunctions, Ann. Dom.
1559. A Book of Orders, 1561. Another of
Advertisements, 1562. All leading unto the
Reformation, with the Advice and Consent of
the Metropolitan, and some other Godly Pre|lats
who were then about Her [these were
those newly Ordained, the former Bishops
being ejected] by whom they were agreed
on, and subscribed unto, before they were pre|sented
to Her. But when the times were bet|ter
setled, and the first difficulty of her Reign
passed over, she left Church-work to the dispo|sing
of Church-men, who, by their place and
calling, were most proper for it; and they, be|ing
met in Convocation, and thereto autho|rized
as the Laws required, did make and
publish several Books of Canons, c. Thus
that Doctor; the sum of which is, That
the Queen, finding no foundation to
build upon, because all the Innovations
begun by her Father and young Brother,
had been utterly demolished by her Sister

Queen Mary, and withal perceiving the
main Body of her Clergy, as well as her
Bishops, except such as the caused to be
made de novo, to be generally averse from
her proceedings, was fain to do all the
Ecclesiastical work her self, assisted with
some of her New Bishops, without the
Concurrence of any Synodal Authority;
till, having first by her Orders sufficiently
purged the Clergy, she saw, she could se|curely
now do Church-work by Church|men.
9. But Mr. FullerFuller Hist. l. 9. p. 54. is more punctual in
delivering the retail of these her first
proceedings, which he extracted out of
the authentick Synodals, 1559. He tells
us then, That in the beginning of her
Reign, the Queen called both a Parliament
and a Convocation of the Clergy: Which
Convocation unanimously persisted in a re|solution
not to forsake the old Religion
restored by Queen Mary, and publickly
declared against such an intended Refor|mation.
Particularly the body of the in|feriour
Clergy composed certain Articles
of Religion, which they tendred to the
Bishops, and the Bishops in the Name of
the whole Clergy, presented them to the
Lord Keeper. The said Articles were these
five, 1. Of the real substantial presence of
our Lord's body after Consecration. 2. Of
the non-remaining of the substance of Bread

and Wine. 3. Of the Propitiatory Sacrifice
in the Masse. 4. Of the Supreme Spiritual
Iurisdiction of the Pope. 5. That the power
not only of defining, but even treating and or+dering
of Ecclesiastical matters touching Do|ctrine
and Discipline pertains only to Spiritu|al
Pastors, and not at all to Lay persons. A
little after this, during the same Convo|cation,
there came from both the Vniver|sities
a Writing signed by a Publick Notary,
by which they both signified their Con|currence
to the aforesaid Articles, only
with a little alteration of the last.
10. I have thought fit to annex here
the very words of that Convocation, as
Dr. Fuller transcribed them out of the
Synodal Book, 1559.



Reverendi in Christo Patres as Domini
Colendissimi.
QVoniam Fam Public referente ad
nostram nuper notitiam pervenit 
multa Religionis Christianae Dogmata pub|lico
 unanimi gentium Christianarum
consensu hactenus recepta  probata, at|que
ab Apostolis ad nos usque concorditer
per manus deducta praesertim Articulos in|fra
scriptos, in dubium vocari. Hinc est,
quod Nos Cantauriensis Provinciae inferior
Secundarius Clerus in uno (Deo sic dispo|nente,
ac Sereniissimae Dominae nostrae Re|ginae,

Decani  Capitali Cant: Manda|to
Brevi Parliamenti ac monitione Eccle|siastic
solit declarat id exigente) con|venientes,
partium nostrarum esse existi|mavimus,
tum nostrae, tum eorum, quo|rum
cura nobis committitur, saluti, omni|bus
quibus poterimus modis prospicere.
Quocirca Majorum nosrorum exemplis
commoti; qui in similia saepe tempora in|ciderunt,
fidem, quam in Articulis infra
Scriptis veram esse credimus,  ex animo
profitemur, ad Dei laudem  honorem,
Officiisque,  aliarum nostrae curae com|missarum
animarum exonerationem, presen|tibus,
duximus, publice afferendam, af|firmantes,
 sicut Deus nos in die Iudicij
adiuve, asserentes.
1. Quod in Sacramento Altaris, virtute
Christi verbo suo  Sacerdote deite prolato
assistentis, praesens est realiter sub speciebus
panis  vini naturale Corpus Christi con|ceptum
de Virgine Mari. Item naturalis
ejus sanguis.
2. Item. Quod post Consecrationem non
remanet substantia panis  vini, neque ulla
alia substantia, nisi substantia Dei  Homi|nis.
3. Item. Quod in Miss offertur verum
Christi corpus  verus ejusdem sanguis, Sa|crificium
propitiatorium pro vivis  defunctis.
4. Item. Quod Petro Apostolo  ejus le|gitimis
Successoribus in sede Apostolic tan|quam

Christi Vicario data est suprema pote|stas
pascendi  regendi Ecclesiam Christi mi|litantem,
 fratres suos confirmandi.
5. Item. Quod authoritas tractandi 
definiendi de iis quae spectant ad fidem, Sa|cramenta,
 disciplinam Ecclesiasticam, ha|ctenus
semper spectavit  spectare debet tan|tum
ad Pastores Ecclesiae, quos Spiritus San|ctus
in hoc, in Ecclesia Dei, posuit;  non ad
Laicos.
Quam nostram assertionem, affirmationem
 fidem, nos inferior Clerus praedictus vestris
Paternitatibus tenore praesentium exhibemus;
humiliter supplicantes, ut quia nobis non est
copia hanc nostram sententiam et intentio|nem
aliter illis, quorum in hac parte interest,
notificandi, Vos qui Patres estis, ista superi|oribus
ordinibus significare velitis. Qua in re
officium charitatis ac pietatis (ut arbitramur)
praestabitis,  saluti gregis vestri, ut par est
prospicietis,  vestras ipsi animas liberabitis.



But what effect had these Declarations
and Protestations of the whole representa|tive
Clergy and Universities? All that
could be got was a Disputation, the order|ly
proceeding whereof, and conclusion,
may be seen in Fox and Camden, A. D. 1559.
Neither can the salvo used by M. Thorn|dick,
who proceeds somewhat otherwise
in this point, then the Arch-Bishop, or
Dr. Field, be rationally admitted here.
Right of Church in a Christian sate p. 247. 248. c. Who first yields, that if the Clergy of

that time when the Reformation began,
(he means the Clergy in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeths Raign) had been sup|ported
in that Power, which by the pre|mises
[in his Book] is challenged on be|half
of the Clergy, the Reformation could
not have been brought to pass, and grants,
Ibid. p. 251. that secular power gave force to that
which was done contrary to the Rule,
wherein the Unity of the Church consist|ed:
But yet justifies the Reformation thus,
Pag. 273, c. He saith, that as the power of the
Church (obliging Christians to their Di|cisions)
is a Law ordained by the Apo|stles,
for the Unity and edification of the
Church, c. So, also there are abundance
of other Laws given to the Church, by our
Lord and his Apostles: And that there|fore,
if by injurie of the times, the pra|ctice
(of the Church) become contrary to
these Lawes, [given by Christ and his A|postles];
or if those, whom the power of
the Church is trusted with, shall hinder
the restoring of such Lawes; (of Christ
and his Apostles) the Soveraign Power be|ing
Christian, may and ought to suppress
their power, (though he grants this their
power to be an Ordinance of the Apostles,
necessary to the Unity of the Church);
that so their power may be committed to
such as are willing to submit to the Su|perior
Ordinance of our Lord and his A|postles.

A thing (saith he)Pag. 275. throughly
proved, both by the right of Secular pow|ers
in advancing Christianity with penal|ties,
and in establishing the exercise of it,
and in particular, by all the examples of
the pious Kings of Gods people, reducing
the Law into practice, and suppressing the
contrary thereof. Thus Mr. Thorndicke
takes this way of freeing the English Re|formation
from Schism, upon the just Re|forming
power of the secular Prince a|gainst
all, or most of his Clergy, when he
judgeth them to teach or practise against
the Doctrine of our Lord and his Apostles.
But all this while, he never so much as asks
the question, what if the Prince be mi|staken
in these Doctrines which he calls of
our Lord and his Apostles; Or be mista|ken
in what the Ancient Church, and
primitive times have delivered for such?
And what if all the Clergy which he oppo|seth
be in the right? Nor this, What if
our Lord hath committed this to the Cler|gy,
and Successors of the Apostles, to judg
and decide for ever (when any doubt or
dispute ariseth) what are the true Lawes
of our Lord and his Apostles? Or, what
ancient Tradition hath delivered to po|sterity
for such? But he discourseth so,
as if the Christian Prince were herein in|fallible,
when yet he supposeth, that all
his Clergy may be herein deceived: As

if Queen Elizabeth understood the Scrip|tures,
and ancient Tradition, aright in
these Lawes, whilst her Bishops and Con|vocation
erred in both, till she had new|moulded
them. Is not this a strange way
to justifie a Church-Reformation?
For the Kings of Iudah, it shall be spo|ken
to by and by,Chap. 23. n. 7. and as to what he ur|geth
concerning the power of Kings, it is
by no means denied, that these have Supre|macy
proper to them, to command o|bedience
from all their Subjects, and that
as well from a Clergy-man, as any other,
to the Lawes of Christ and his Apostles
with the civil Sword, and with temporal
penalties (a Supremacy to which the
Church layes no claim). But when any
doubt or controversie ariseth, what, or
which these Lawes be, (as there was in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeths Raign
in many points) Secular Princes as well as
others, are Sons of the Church, and are
to learn this from the Expositions of their
Spiritual Fathers, the Church-Men. I
mean that body of them, which hath the
just and Superior Authority of deciding
such controversies. And let this suffice to
shew the legality of the first proceedings
of the Reformation, in opposition to the
unanimous Votes of the whole Clergy, or
of those therein, who clearly had the de|cisive
power of Ecclesiastical Controver|sies

either concerning the sense of Scrip|tures
or Truth of ancient Tradition.
12. Then comparing this Reformation
with the Council of Trent, in regard of
worldly or carnal interests, let any indif|ferent
man judge between them. Was
not the liberty obtained by King Henry
the Eighth, to bring into his Bed, a new
handsom Wife, instead of his former ver|tuous
Queen, a very carnal Interest? Was
not his invading all the possessions and trea|sure
of Monasteries a great secular Interest?
was not the dividing the said Lands, among
the Nobility and Gentry at very easie rates,
a very great interest? In King Edwards
daies, was not the Protectors seizing on
the remainder of Church-spoils a great
Interest? Was not the freeing of Clergy-men,
from a necessity of saying daily, and
almost howerly, long Ecclesiaical Offices,
from lying a lone without bedfellows, c.
Matters of great, both carnal and secular
Interests? Was not the exempting of all,
both laity and Ecclesiasticks from the Duty
of confessing their sins, and submitting
themselves to penitential satisfactions;
from rigorous Fasts out of Conscience and
Religion, and other austerities, a matter
of considerable interest, to flesh and cor|rupt
nature? Can any such interests as
these be proved to have been operative in
the Council of Trent? How far all these

interests of the world and flesh, had influ|ence
on the first godly Reformers, we may
rationally suspect, but God only knows,
and themselves long before this time feel;
God is not mocked.
13. By what hath been hitherto said ap|pears
but even too clearly, how that Fun|damental
Rule of all Government and subor|dination
was utterly neglected in England,
at the time that the pretended Reforma|tion
was contrived and executed. Here is
a new and thorow moulding of a Church,
both a Doctrines and Discipline, called a
Reformation, wherein all the Synodical Acts
of this Church, since Christianity entred
among us, are as to any obliging power
by their Authority reversed: wherein all
the Decisions of Patriarchical Councils, yea
of Oecumenical Synods are call'd into ex|amination;
all their Laws, so far as
seemed meet reform'd, the whole regard
that England had to all other Catholick
Churches, as a Member of the whole, is
utterly broken by one National Church:
Nay not so much, but by one luxurious
King, by one Child, and by one Woman,
even when the whole Body of the Clergy
protested against it. And yet after all
this,Pag. 35. if Doctor Pierce may be believed,
thus to reform was to write after the Coppy
which had been set to the Reformers in his
Text, by the blessed Reformer of all the
World; which was so to reform as not to in+novate,

and to accommodate their Religion
to what they found in the Beginning: In the
mean time accusing the Church of Rome
(as he expresseth it, but indeed the whole
Catholick Church, as he must, and as others
grant) of not only horrible corruptions in point
of Practise, but hideous errors in matters of
Faith too,  such as trench upon Foundations.
14. But the Preacher must not expect his
confident asseveration without proof can
seduce the judgement of any considering
man to believe him against evidence and
experience.Pag. 12. Nothing is more plain then
that the Catholick Church, by observing
the foresaid Fundamental Rule, is and will
be eternally free from danger, either of
causal or formal Schism. And as plain
it is, that no Churches can be separate
from the Catholick Communion but by
transgressing that Rule: For if Diocesan
Churches and Synods would submit to
Provincial; and Provincial to National,
and these to Patriarchical, and all to Oecu|menical,
how could Unity be dissolved?
But on the contrary, if subordinate Coun|cils
shall take on them to reverse the Acts
and Decisions of Superior ones, especially
of Oecumenical; how can Schisms possibly
be avoided? And with what shew of rea|son
can any particular Churches thus
breaking Ecclesiastical Orders, charge o|ther
Churches with Schisms, because they
will not break them too?



CHAP. XXIII.

An Answer to the Doctor's
Proofs alledged to justifie the
lawfulness of the English Se|paration:
As, 1. From the
Independent Authority of our
Kings. 2. From the Exam|ples
of Justinian and other
Emperors. 3. From the pra|ctises
of fourteen of our
Kings. 4. From the Exam|ples
of the Kings of Juda. In
what sense New Articles of
Faith are made by the Church
in the Council of Trent.

1. IT remains now that I answer the ex|amples
produced by the Preacher to
justifie their Separation to be no Schism;

he sayes,Pag. 33. That by the concessions of the most
learned Popish Writers, particular Nations
had still a power to purge themselves from
their corruptions, as well in the Church as in
the State, without leave had from the See of
Rome: This is willingly granted. But do
those Writers concede such a purgation as
their first Reformers administred to this
Kingdom? not only without, but against
the consent of the See of Rome, nor only
of Rome, but of the whole Catholick
Church? A Purgation from the whole
Faith and Discipline, in any thing they
judged fit to be rectified, that by the Au|thority
of Councils and Laws of Princes
had been received and in force ever since
the Nation was Christian: and by which
they declared themselves Members of the
whole Catholick Church? On the con|trary,
from the beginning of Christiani|ty
he will not be able to produce one ex|ample,
either of States or Princes, except
profess'd Hereticks, (such as the Emperors
Constantius, Valens, Zeno, c.) that ever
made any Laws to repeal any Doctrines
declared or Disciplines established in the
Church. The Purgations conceded and
executed by Princes truly Catholick was to
extirpate all Innovations in Doctrine, all
transgressions of Discipline that swerved
from the Decrees and Ordinations of the
Church, and no other.

2. Surely the Doctor doth not think
Christian Princes, as such, cease to be sons
of the Church, they must be saved as well
as their Subjects, and therefore are not
dispensed from that speech of our Lord,
Qui vos audit, me audit. They are not Pa|stors,
but Sheep. Yet Catholick Religion
obliges us to acknowledge, that their Ci|vil
power extends it self to all manner of
causes, though purely Ecclesiastical; so as
to make use of the Civil Sword in con|straining
even their Ecclesiastical Subjects
to perform that duty which either the Mo|ral
and Divine Law (according to the
Churches exposition thereof) or the Laws
of the Church require. Such a power, yea
a Supremacy in such a Power we acknow|ledge
to be in Princes. But withal we can|not
find either in reason or Antiquity any
ground to apply to Princes that Commissi|on
which our Saviour only gave to the A|postles
and their Successors [Sicut misit me
Pater, c.] As my Father sent me, so send
I you: Receive the holy Ghost, c. Teach all
Nations, c. No promise hath been made
to Princes, that God's Spirit shall lead them
into all Truth, any other way, then whilst
they follow the direction of their Eccle|stical
Pastors, to whom only that Promise
was made.
3. Nay, that very Argument by which
he would assert his cause, is a Demonstra|tion

against him. He sayes, and that very
truly, Our Kings are as much as any in the
world,Serm. pag. 33. , they hold their Regal Au|thority
immediately from God, without any
dependence on any other authority on earth.
The like must be said of other absolute
Princes too. Now this independency of
Princes demonstrates, that the regulation
of their power in Ecclesiastical matters,
must of necessity be made according to
an Authority and Iurisdiction purely spi|ritual
common to them all, which is in the
Church. For otherwise, being indepen|dent
and absolute, they may perhaps be
able to preserve a kind of Unity in their
respective Kingdoms, by forcing from
their Subjects an Obedience to a Religion
and Church-policy framed by themselves,
contrary to the Law of the Catholick
Church: But how shall the whole Church
be preserved in Unity by this means?
Other Princes are independent as well as
they; and therefore may frame a Religion
which they may call Reformation, as well
as they: So that if there be not a spiritual
Director and Ecclesiastical Laws common
to them all, and submitted to by all, what
will become of Vnity? Which of these
Independents will make himself a Depen|dent
on another? Shall there be Patri|archicall,
or General Councils of Kings meet
together? Who shall summon them? In

such Royal Synods there must be order:
which of them shall challenge a Primacy,
even of Order? Doctor Pierce may see what
consequences naturally and unavoidably
flow from his Positions.
4. Touching the Code and Novels of
Iustinian,Pag. 34. and the practice of Charlemain
(for the Emperor Zenos  we leave
to himself) he may please to cast a seri|ous
eye on their Laws, and will find they
were all regulated by the Law of the pre|sent
Church in their Times: The Chur|ches
Faith and her Canons for Discipline
they reduced into Imperial Laws, to the
end their Subjects might be more obedi|ent
to the Church, more averse from in|novations
in Doctrine, and irregularity
in manners. And doth all this suit with
the case of English Protestants? Can he
justifie King Henry the Eighths Oath of
Supremacy and Head-ship of the Church:
or King Edward the Sixths Reformatio le|gum
Ecclesiasticarum, or Q. Eliz. new Ar|ticles
and Canons, by these Laws of the
Code or Capitulare? Let the Emperor Iu|stinian
pronounce his Sentence in this
matter [Sancimus vicem Legum obtinere,Justin. in Au|thent. de Ec|cles. Tit.  Privileg.
c] We ordain and command that the holy
Ecclesiastical Rules declared and established
by holy Councils shall obtain the force of
Laws: For their Doctrines we receive as the
Holy Scriptures themselves, and their Rules

we observe as Lawes. Add again, to shew
that the Laws, enacted by him, touching
Ecclesiastical matters, were intended not
as Acts of an absolute Ecclesiastical Supre|macy,
but as consequences of the Churches
Authority,Id. in Authent. ut Cler. ap. prop. Ep. 10. Conven. he saies, Our Lawes disdain not
to follow the holy and Divine Rules (of the
Church). These were indeed Lawes of
Reformation, fit for glorious Princes, de|vout
Sons of the Church, to make but
surely very incommodious patterns for
the Preachers purpose.
5. What the late Emperours, Fardinand
the first, and Maximilian the second did,
neither his Sermon,Serm. pag. 34. nor Margin tell us, but
onely that something was done, which
he, it seems, thought for his advantage;
I'le tell him what it was: Their Reform|ers
in Germany were grown very power|ful;
yet not so, but that they made a shew
of hearkening to some composition. Those
worthy Emperors, for peace sake, made se|veral
consultations with learned and mo|derate
Catholicks, (some indeed too mo|derate,
as Cassander, c.) how the Church-Doctrines
and Ordinances might be quali|fied.
Hereupon divers expedients were
proposed, Treatises written, c. by which
the Emperors were in hope debates might
be ended, But how? By betraying the
present Churches Faith? By renouncing
the Popes Iurisdiction, or consent to a com|position?

Far otherwise; For when they
saw no agreement would please the Luther|an
Electors and their Divines, but such as
was derogating from the Authority of the
Supream Pastor, and prejudicial to the
Lawes of the Church, they surceased all
motions of reconciliation; rather chusing
to expose themselves to all the dangers
that might come from their arms and
Rebellion.
6. Touching the many Kings of England,
as he sayes,Ibid. in Popish times, whose actions
in his opinion, shewed, that the work of Re|formation,
belonged especially to them in their
Kingdom: His Margin, indeed, quotes the
Names of fourteen of our Kings since the
conquest, as if he would have the world be|lieve,
the pure Reformed Religion were al|most
six hundred years old: But what
Reformations were made by any of them,
either in Religion or Church-Discipline,
neither I, nor himself can shew, except
by the last King Henry the Eighth, who
was indeed a Reformer of the new fashion.
'Tis true, the former Kings had frequent
quarrels with the Court of Rome, touching
Investitures, procuring of Bulls for deter|mining
causes belonging to the Kings Courts,
usurping a disposal of Bishopricks, and other
Benefices, c. But what is all this to Re|ligion?
Such debates as these, he may see
at this day, between the Roman Court, and

the Kings of France, Spain, c. in all which,
commonly the Pope is but little a gainer;
yet, notwithstanding all these, he will not
sure deny, but that the Kings of France
and Spain; and 'tis as certain, that all
those former Kings of England, except
one, were perfect Roman Catholicks; not
any of them ever did believe, that their
Supremacy could allow them to alter the
Religion of their Fore-Fathers: even
King Henry the Eighth, for all his Head|ship,
never pretended so far.Cokes 5. Re|port. Of this I
dare accept, as Judge, even Sir Edward
Coke himself,Balsamon. and Balsamon likewise, though
a malicious Schismatick, therefore the fitter
to be quoted by him; yet all he sayes is,
That the Emperor has an inspection over the
Churches, that he can limit or extend the
Iurisdiction of Metropolitans, erect new ones,
c. which, whether by the ancient
Lawes of the Church, he can do or no,
is little for the Preachers purpose: I am
sure he is not able to prove it, or if he
could, it is a Reformation which will not
serve his turn.
7. His last Examples of Reformations
made by Princes, is that of the Kings of
Iuda, in which indeed Religion it self was
Reformed. But withal, the Doctor may
do well to take notice. 1. That those
Kings are no where said to have reformed
all the Priests, or the High Priest, or not

to have found him as Orthodox as them|selves.See 2 Chron. cap. 29. 4. 12. 16. Ibid. cap. 34.
2. They are not said to have re|formed
the people against the Priests. 3. Or
without the Priests. 4. Yea in several pla|ces
we read, they were by the Priests as|sisted
in their Reformation. And there|fore
Bishop Andrews, who was willing to
make as much advantage of this example
against the Roman Church,Tot. Toti. p. 365. as might be,
says only, that those Kings did reform citra
or ante, declarationem Ecclesiae, but he saies
not, contra. And, to make good his citra or
ante, hath only the strength of the weakest
of all Arguments, a Negative, thus, There
is recorded no such Declaration of the Church
in Scripture, ergo there was none. The in|firmity
of which argument is much more
visible, if applied to such a short History as
that of the Kings and Chronicles, contain|ing
a relation of so many hundred years,
and chiefly of the actions of Kings, not of
the Clergy.
8. It cannot indeed be denied, but that
in such publick changes, the Power of
Kings is more Operative and Illustrious
then of the Priests, because their Civil
Sword awes more than the others Spiritual
and therefore no wonder, if their part in
such Reformations is more spoken of, e|specially
in so very short a story. But
certainly,Mal. 2. 7. according to Gods Institution,
the Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, and

it is from their mouths that (Kings) are to
learn Gods Law, and what they are to Re|form,
because they are the Angels of our Lord.
Now, for Reformations, or other Ecclesia|stical
Ordinances made by such Kings as Da|vid,
Solomon, c. who, besides a Regal
Authority, were Prophets likewise, immedi|ately
inspired and so employed by God,
I suppose the Doctor will not draw such
into consequence, to justify the actions of
a King Henry the Eighth, the young child
his Son, or youngest Daughter; no Prophets
surely.
9. To these examples alleged by Doctor
Pierce, but very insufficient to justify the
English Reformation, I will in the last place
take notice briefly of one great motive,
which, as he sayes, set on work the English
Reformers (of happy Memory); which was
their observing that in the Council of Trent,Serm. pag. 13.
the Roman Partizans, were not afraid to
make new Articles of Faith, commanded to
be embraced under pain of Damnation, as
it were in contempt of the Apostles Denun|ciation,
Gal. 1. 8.
10. But to omit his contradictions,
charging us with hideous errors in Faith,Pag. 12.
which yet he dare not say are Funda|mental,Pag. 8.
lest he ruine his own Church:
To omit his uncivil language to the Bi|shops
of that Council, persons of too ho|nourable
a quality, to be called, by a little

Doctor, contemners of the Apostles denunci|ation,
conspirators liable to a curse:Pag. 13. To o|mit
his commending the first English Re|formers,
our Kings, c. that they consul|ted
not with fleth and blood, then which,
what could be said more unluckily to him|self?
Did not our first Reformer consult
sometimes with flesh and blood? Was
Henry the Eighth so wholly spiritual? Do
not your self confess, that Sacriledge and
Rebellion help'd Reformation?Pag. 35. To omit
his petty Quibble, that the Church of
Rome is but the younger Sister to that of
Brittain: Directly contrary, not only to
many of his brother Divines, but to the
Head of his Church, King Iames, who, in
a publick Speech to his Parliament, says,
I acknowledge the Church of Rome to be our
Mother Church.Stow. p. 840. Anno. 1603.To omit all these, and
more, I shall desire the Doctor to take no|tice,
that neither what the Church hath
done in the Council is any Novelty, nor
is it a Novelty that the Churches Adver|saries
should make such an objection:
concerning which, the Reader may please
to review what has been said before, chap.
20. Sect. 9. 10.  11.
11. Protestants must impute this to their
first Reformers, that the Church hath been
forced to make such (as they call them)
new Articles of Faith. For what would
they have advised the Council of Trent to

do, when the Churches ancient Doctrines
and Traditionary practises were question'd
and condemned by Innovators? As yet
such Doctrines, c. having never former|ly
been opposed, except by inconsiderable
Hereticks; Such as Iovinian, Vigilantius,
c. whose Errors (before any Council
could take notice of them, soon after
they appeared, withered away again)
were visible only in the consent and pra|ctise
of Catholicks. But now it was ne|cessary
to declare Conciliariter, that they
were unjustly question'd, either of Error
or Novelty. Must there be no decisions in
God's Church after the four first General
Councils? For fear of new Articles, must
liberty be given to new Heresies? Old
Articles, such, as the Church had for|merly
occasion from time to time to
mention in her Creeds and Canons, will
not serve the turn explicitly to condemn
them, therefore new ones must be excogita|ted
says the Council.Conc. Chal|cedon. ad Im|perat. Marci|an. New ones, that is,
Old ones further explained: Or, Old
Practises newly declared to be Traditi|ons.
12. But surely these which are mentio|ned
by the Doctor, and related to in his
margin, are no new Articles; Most of them
had been expressly declared in former
Councils; and all were as old at least as
Christianity in England. For even St. Gre|gory,

who sent St. Austin hither to Preach
the Gospel, is accused by learned Prote|stants
of all, or most of these very Novel|ties
which the Preacher objects. Doctor
HumphreyIn Jesuitism. Part. 2. accuseth him and St. Austin
the MonkQuod invexerunt in Angliam
Purgatorium, c. that they brought into Eng|land
Purgatory; Oblation of the salutary
Host, and Prayers, for the Dead; Relicks;
Transubstantiation. To whichEpist. Hist. Eccles. Cent 6. Osiander
adds,That the same Gregory vehement|ly
urged Celibacy of the Clergy; Invocation
and Worship of Saints; nay, that the Idola|trous
Veneration of Images also was by him
approved, excused, defended. To which
Carrion, in his Relation of the state of the
CHURCH in those dayes, adds,
That, when he tragically exclaim'd, that
he abhorred the Appellation of Vniversal
Bishop; yet at the same time he sufficiently
declared his vehement desire of the thing
which this Title signifies, in his assuming to
himself such Authority over other Churches.
Here then are Seven of the Doctor's No|velties,
confessed by Protestants them|selves,
to have been the Doctrines of St.
Gregory, which the English here received
with their Christianity (which also suffi|ciently
appears, to those who are yet un|satisfied,
out of Bede's Ecclesiastical Hi|story
of England, written about an hun|dred
years after St. Gregory: of whom

the same Oiander also relates, That he was
involved in all the Romish Errors concerning
those Articles wherein (saith he) we dis|sent
at this day from the Pope: And for
the Two others of the Doctor's Points,
1. Publick Prayers in an unknown Tongue,
And, 2. Infallibility; himself confesseth
the first of these to have been in Gregories
time; For thus he,Serm. pag. 27. The Publick Prayers
of the Romanists have been a very long time
in an unknown Tongue, even as long as from
the time of Pope Gregory the Great. And
the second he must grant to have been
pretended to before Gregory, in that the
Preacher allows the proceedings of the
Four first General Councils; for these
required several Points not before deter|mined
to be believed by all Christians un|der
pain of Anathema, and also inserted
them into the body of the Christian
Creeds. Which thing the Doctor some|times
thinks unreasonable, that any fal|lible
Authority should assume to it self.
For surely upon this ground it is, that he
condemns the Council of Trent for pre|suming
to make new Articles of Faith,
though they have put none such in our
Creeds.
13. By which it appears, that this Ser|mon,
and all the severity practis'd against
us in consequence of it, might as justly
have been preach'd and executed against

our first Apostles, St. Gregory and St. Au|gustin
the Monk, as against us. And if
against them, then against the Vniversal
Church both Eastern and Western; since it
is evident that in St. Gregory's time they
were in perfect Unity both for Doctrine
and Discipline; And consequently, if
such pretended new Articles can justifie
the English Separation from the present
Church, the same Separation ought to
have been made from the universal Church
above a Thousand years since. I might go
higher, but this is even too too much.
That man surely must have a prodigious
courage, who dares venture his Soul and
Eternity rather upon Scripture interpreted
by an Act of Parliament, or the 39. Articles,
than by the Authority and consent of the
Vniversal Church for so many Ages.
I will conclude this so important Ar|gument
of Schism by a closer Application,
which may afford more light to discover
on which side the Guilt lyes. And this
shall be done by making some Concessions,
and proposing some other Considerations,
c.



CHAP. XXIV.

Of Causal and Formal Schism
or Separation; and the va|nity
of their Distinctions.
Considerations proposed for a
clear Examination on which
side the Guilt of Schism lyes.
The manifest Innocency of the
Roman Church.

1. FIrst, As to the Preacher's so com|mended
Distinction of Causal and
Formal Schism, it is borrowed from the
late Archbishop: The former member
whereof only he applies to the Roman
Catholick Church, the later to no body:
He must give me leave to propose to his
Consideration a Saying or two of St.Aug. Epist. 43. Augustin,
thus writing to the Donatists, Si
possit, quod fieri non potest, c. If any could
have, which really he cannot possibly, a just

cause for which he should separate his Com|munion
from the Communion of the whole
World, How do you know, c. Ad again
in the same Epistle, There is the Church
where first that (Separation) was made
which you after perfected, if there could be
any just cause for you to separate from the
communion of all Nations. For we are cer|tainly
assured that no man can justly separate
himself from the communion of all Nati|ons,
because not any of us seeks the Church
in his own Iustice or Holiness (as you Do|natists
do) but in the Divine Scriptures,
where he sees the Church really become, as
she was promised to be, spread through all
Nations, a City on a Hill, c. Hence it
is, that the same Saint, though he wrote
several Books against the special Doctrines
of the Donatists, yet whensoever he treats
of their Schism, he never meddles with
any of their Opinions, but absolutely
proves their Separation unlawful from the
Texts of Scripture, and Promises of
Christ, which are absolute and uncondi|tional:
So that the alledging Causes to
justifie Separation, for which there can be
no just one, is vain and fruitless; And
this way of Arguing is far more forcible
against English Protestants, than it was a|gainst
the Donatists, because all their so|ber
Writers acknowledge the Church of
Christ was, and alwayes will be unerrable

in Fundamentals; and this as she is a Guide:
And further, that the Roman is either
this Church, or at least a true Member of
it.
2. But Secondly, whatever becomes of
this Distinction,Pag. 32. his concession is, That
really a Formal Schism there is between us:
nay more, that the Protestants made the
actual departure, and indeed they must put
out their eyes, who see it not. The visible
Communion between the now English
Church, and all other in being before it
beyond the Seas, is evidently changed and
broken. The same Publick Service of
God, which their first Reformers found in
God's Church all the World over, they
refuse to joyn in, for fear of incurring
sin: Most of the Ecclesiastical Laws, e|very
where formerly in force, they have
abrogated, and without the consent of
any other Churches have made new: they
were formerly Members of a Patriarchical
Church (which they esteem'd the only
Orthodox Vniversal Church) to the Go|vernment
of this Common Body they ac|knowledged
themselves subject: And a
denial of subjection to the Common Go|vernors
of this Body, and especially the
Supreme Pastor, they judged to be a formal
Act of Schism: Lastly, the common Do|ctrines
of the Church they formerly em|braced
as of Divine Authority, Traditio|nary,

only ancient and Primitive: Now
they called Apostatical Novelties. Any
of those changes conclude a Schism on
one side or other, but all of them more
then demonstrate it. A Schism then there
is, therefore one of the parties is guilty
(not of causing, but) of being Schisma|ticks,
properly, formally, Schisma|ticks.
Now would it not be hard for the Doctor
to speak his conscience, and declare once
more at Court, which of us two are pro|perly
Schismaticks? It could not indeed
be expected he should answer as a young
maid did to my old Lady Falkland, when
she asked, if she were a Catholick? No
Madam, (said she with a low curtesy) if it
please your Ladyship, I thank God I am a
Scismatick; but withal, his tongue would
not readily pronounce Roman Catholicks
to be Schismaticks from the English,
Reformed Church.
3. That which is opposed to Schism, is
Catholick Communion.August. Collat Carth. c. 3. We shew, saith Saint.
Augustine, by our Communion, that we have
the Catholick Church. Therefore in dis|course
of Schism,Serm. pag. 32. one while to talk of In|novations
of Doctrine, or of making a se|cession
from a Church, twelve hundred years
since, c. and perhaps, charging us with
causal Schism: And on the other side, to
acknowledg that the actual departure was
indeed theirs, yet they are not Scismaticks,

they left the errors of Catholicks,
rather then them: Is indeed to act the
very part of the Donatists, who, as Saint
Augustine sayes, affirmed that the word Ca|tholick
was not derived from the universality
of Nations,Aug. Brevic. Collat. lib. 3. but from the plenitude of Sacra|ments,
that is, from the integrity of Do|ctrine.
And in another place, writing to
a Donatist, Thou thinkest (says he) that thou
hast spoken acutely,Epist. 48. when thou interpretest the
Name Catholick, not of Vniversal Commu|nion,
but of observation of all Precepts, and
Divine Mysteries. And hence it was that
the Donatists call'd their Bishops, Bishops of
Catholick Verity, not of Catholick Vnity,
as St. Augustine says in the same Epistle.
4. I desire to know, whether before
their Reformation, our Church was Schis|matical,
or it began afterwards so to be?
If it was so before, where was that Church
from which we separated? no where on
earth sure: And by consequence either a
separation may be from no body, or the
whole Church failed, the gates of Hell
(contrary to our Saviours promise) pre|vailed
against it. Again, if our Church
became Schismatical, after their deserting
us, because she would not immitate them,
or because she would communicate
with those who held such Doctrines; then
it will follow (since the Church that was
then, did in this, nothing vary from it's prede|cessors

in a former age) that a
Church remaining the same without any
alteration at all, may be the only true
Church of Christ to day, and the Synagogue
of Satan to morrow. These are Riddles
unconceivable.
But, to demonstrate that, even in Pro|testants
opinion, we are not Schismaticks,
there needs only this Proof, that gene|rally
Protestants, yea even Hugenots, ac|knowledge,
that Salvation may be had in
Our Church; which no man, charging us
with Schism, can say, if he knows the na|ture
of Schism; how grievous and unpar|donable
a crime it is, that cuts off from
the Mystical Body of Christ.
5. On the other side, That the crime
of Schism is truly and only to be charged
on them (besides the visible marks of leav|ing
Communion, changing Government, Laws,
c.) may be demonstrated thus. There is
no particular true Church, which is a
Member of the Catholick, but thereby
hath a power validly to excommunicate all
those that desert her Communion, trans|gress
her Laws, c. And whoever are so
excommunicated by her, are esteem'd ex|communicated
by all other Catholick
Churches. So that, if another Bishop or
Church, after information of this, shall
receive them into their Communion, that
Bishop, c. ipso facto incurs excommunica|ion

himself. Which excommunication,
being according to the Laws of the
Church, is valid and ratified in Heaven.
Now suppose an English Bishop should ex|communicate
one of his Subjects for a to|tal
renouncing Episcopal Government and
Ordination, and the person so excommuni|cated
should adjoyn himself to a Congre|gation
of Presbyters in Scotland, France,
Holland, c. They would no doubt re|ceive
him: and being so received, he is,
even in the Bishop's own judgement, in as
undoubted (though not so straight) a way
to Heaven, as he was before: because the
Bishop himself acknowledges Presbyterian
Congregations to be true Reformed Chur|ches
of God: so that by their Excommu|nication
he is not cut off from Christ, but
from preferments only. The late Act of
Vniformity doth far more validly excom|municate
Non-Conformists, then all their
Bishops Courts.



CHAP. XXV.

The Doctor's desire of Recon|cilement,
and the conditi|ons
of it. The necessary pre|parations
thereto. Of the
Court, and Church of Rome.

1. AFter all the Doctors triumphant
Invectives against the Catholick
Church, he yet concludes his Sermon in a
less tempetuous stilePag: 36. He sayes, he hath
the Charity to wish for Reconcilement: That
they departed with higher Degrees of Indig|nation
from the insolent Court, then Church
of Rome. That Court which proudly trod
upon Crowns, and made Decrees with a
non-obstante to Apostolical constitutions, c.
That they were called Protestants, because
they protested not so much against the Church,
as against the cruel Edict made at Worms,
c. But yet when they wish a Reconcilement,
they do not mean by compliance with any

the least of our defilements, but by our Har|mony
with them in being clean.
2. If Doctor Pierce hath indeed the cha|rity,
and if he doth any more then with
his tongue say, they wish for Reconcilement;
they, that do so, will not want a reward
from God for so much charity: And I
doubt not there are a world of English
Protestants (with him) who heartily wish
the same. And they that have charity,
will easily believe we wish so too. So that
both parties being so far on the way to
agreement, as to wish it: the next step
must be to endeavour to procure it. Our
frequent endeavours, they know, have been
to little purpose; We have oft in vain
protested, that our Doctrines, practises,
c. have been misunderstood: we still
persist in the same protestation: and per|ceive
by this very Sermon that they are
still misunderstood: And whilst they are
so, that condition of Reconcilement which
he makes is not unreasonable, that they
will have no Reconcilement by a compliance
with our defilements. Therefore to take a|way
this misunderstanding, let them obtain
that for us, which we yet could never be
able to do, a permission to be heard speak
for our selves.
3. We pass for Traitors, but cannot ob|tain
to be informed wherein our Treason
ies, nor what we must do to prove our

selves no Traitors. If the ackowledgement
of his Majesties Supremacy in as high a de|gree
as they themselves will allow, with
exclusion of all manner of Temporal Au|thority
in any other, be no Treason: If
the exposing our lives as willingly for
Monarchy as they can do, be no Treason:
If there be not any proof of faithfnl Al|legiance
which is refused to be submitted
to by us, what suspicion can they have
that we are Traitors? But our present
a la mode Treason is, that our Priests re|ceive
their Ordination from Rome: and
do not they so to? I am sure we cannot
anger them worse, then to question or
doubt whether the Church of England hath
received her Mission, Orders and Iurisdi|ction
from the Roman Church.
4. For our Doctrines: I am perswaded,
if only this poor Answer fall into the
hands of any ingenuous Protestants, who
will seriously consider the several Points
so Tragically declam'd against by the Prea|cher,
they will think even the Church of
England little beholding to him for his
Sermon, and Truth much less. But since
small effect can be expected from such 
Treatise as this, bound up to his blunder|ing
method; therefore, unless it be their
interest, or as they may think, their safe|ty,
that our innocence should be stifled
and oppress'd, if they have the charity i|deed

to wish for a Reconcilement, let them
procure for us a peaceable authorized
Conference, in which the only Design may
be by consent to enquire and set down
clearly upon what terms a Reconcilement
may follow, and without which it must
not, nor ought to be expected. Let us un|derstand
one anothers Churches; let us
know one anothers essential Doctrines: If
there be any mistakes, any misinterpreta|tions
on either side, let them be cleared:
But till this be done, and it can only be ef|fected
by them, they must pardon us, if
according to the temper of calamitous,
unjustly oppressed persons, we suspect that
this last seemingly moderate passage of his
Sermon, is in effect the most severe and
bitter against us, as declared to be persons
with whom all Reconcilement is unlaw|ful.
5. Certain I am this zealous Preacher
is far from the prudent temper of King
Iames, whose authority (being his Su|preme
Governor in all spiritual things as
well as temporal) should surely have more
then an ordinary influence over him; That
learned King in his before mentioned
Speech,Stow. Chron. pag. 84. hath these remarkable words, I
could wish from my heart it would please God
to make me one of the Members of such a
general Christian union in Religion,Anno 1603. as, laying
wilfulness aside on both hands, we might meet

in the midst, which is the Center and perfe|ction
of all things; For if they (of the Ro|man
Church) would leave and be ashamed
of such new and gross corruptions of theirs,
as themselves cannot maintain, nor deny to
be worthy of Reformation; I would fr my
own part be content to meet them in the mid|way,
so that all novelties might be renounced
on either side. See the condescence of this
great King, and compare it with the stiff
humor of this little DoctorHe'l not
comply with the least of our defilements;
not he,Pag. 36. Softly, good Sir, do you not as ill,
when you comply with the Lutherans, who
surely are not without some little stains?
Do you not. as ill, when you comply with
the Hugenots, who are not at so perfect a
harmony with you in your being clean? Look
soberly into your own rashness: you be|gan
the Separation (that hath bred so ma|ny
wars, and so much licenciousness both
in faith and manners) upon points which
your selves confess are not fundamental;
and now you solemnly protest to continue
it without complying in the least diffe|rence
between us. Go now, and close
your Sermon with a few soft words
Your arms are open to embrace, c. your
hearts are wide open to pray to God to bind
up the breaches,Pag. 36. c. of his divided, defiled,
disgraced SpouseAnd when all's done,
you'l not stir an inch towards the peace

you so gloriously talk of. If this be Hy|pocrisie,
remember, Doctor, the woes that
attend it, if not, express your self so sin|cerely
hereafter that we may not suspect
it. For my part of all the faults in a
Sermon, to that of dissembling I here de|clare
a Vitinian hatred, as you learnedly
call it.
Much more moderate were Vives and
Cassander, whom you commend for com|plaining
of some abuses in the Church
(among other Authors which you there
cite, jumbling Protestants and Catholicks
confusedly together) for after all their
zeal they dyed quietly in her bosom, and
did not, like you, tear in pieces the seam|less
Coat of our SAVIOUR, and re|ject
all terms of peace, unless every pre|tence
of yours be satisfied to a tittle.
I remember too a dogged word you
gave us,Pag. 7, 8. not far from the beginning of
your Sermon; where after you had rec|koned
up Socinians, Antinomians, Ranters,
Solifidians, Millenaries, Reprobratarians,
c. (a fine Peal to make a Pulpit ring) to
all which you yield more antiquity then
any will allow your Reformation, you pass
them over with the gentler names of He|resie
and Usurpation, but when you come
to the Pontificians, you immediately grow
high and rage, and resemble them to the
Mahometans, c.blind and imperti|nent

Passion! Do you not see abroad a ci|vil
and learned portion of Christians in
Communion with the Bishop of Rome,
and are they no better than Mahometans?
Do you not see, in your own Country,
and at Court too, Persons so qualified,
that you should blush at your own unman|nerliness
to compare them to Mahome|tans?
6. If their chief quarrel be against the
Court of Rome for proudly treading upon
Crowns, and making Decrees with a non-ob|stante
to, c. This might perhaps have
been more seasonable five or six hundred
years since. But surely they know Catho|lick
Princes are wiser now, and the Court of
Rome too. This needs not be the least
hindrance to a Reconcilement: On the con|trary
by a Reconcilement this Church and
Kingdom would receive from the Court of
Rome, only what France, Spain, c. find
extremely advantageous, both to the
honour and safety of their Churches and
States. And as for Decrees with a non-ob|stante,
he mistakes the terms of Apostolick
Constitutions, by which is intended Con|stitutions
not made by the Apostles, but
former Popes.Pag. 35. And touching the Decree
of the Council of Constance in his Margin,
let me ask him a Question or two: Do not
Protestants in Baptism use sprinkling in|stead
of dipping, non obstante that our

Saviour and his Apostles instituted it other|wise?
Do they not think themselves ob|liged
to communicate fasting, non-obstante,
that our Saviour instituted the Sacrament
after Supper? Do they not without scru|ple
eat Black-puddings, non-obstante the A|postles
gave a command to the contrary?
All this they do, because they think these
things not essential or unalterable, but left
to the prudence of their particular
Church: Let them permit therefore the
same liberty to a General Council.
And here give me leave to insert some
few Citations concerning the Protestant-acknowledgments
of the Authority of
Councils.Act. Mon. pag. 1288. Mr. Ridley sayes, Councils in|deed
represent the Vniversal Church, and
being so gathered together in the Name of
Christ, they have the promise of the Gift and
guiding of the Spirit into all Truth. Doctor
Bilson plainly confesses,Perpet. Gov. p. 372, 373. the Presence and
Assistance of the Holy Ghost for Direction of
General Councils into all Truth; And after
fairly sayes,Pag. 374. The Fathers in all Ages, as well
before as since the Great Council of Nice, have
approved and prastis'd this of Councils as the
surest means to decide Doubts.Hooker
professes,Pref. to Eccl. Pol. pag. 28. The Will of God is to have us do
whatever the Sentence of judicial and final
Decision shall determin, yea, though it seem
utterly to swerve from what is right in our
opinion.Their Authority (General

Councils) is immediately deriv'd and dele|gated
from Christ,Dr. Potter. pag. 30. sayes Potter.And
if Doctor Peirce agree with these his Bre|thren,
I might say Fathers, in this Point,
I shall not easily fall out with him about
it, but rather endeavour a further ap|proach
by offering this fair Proposal; I
will not require of him to hold that the
Fathers meet in Council to make questi|on
of the matters of Faith, for those they
were taught from their Childhood; but to
consult about their adversaries proofs,
and what arguments should be alleadged
against them; to consult how to express
the Catholick Doctrine in such words as
might best instruct the people, and prevent
Hereticks from abusing them; Hence it
was St.Athan. in Ep. de Syn. Athanasius said, We meet here, not
because we wanted a Faith, i. e. were incer|tain
what to hold, but to confound those who
go about to contradict the Truth. Which
Rule, if Councils observe, I think the Do|ctor
would scarce refuse to obey them; and
our only difference in this point, I hope,
is, he thinks they do not observe this Rule,
and I think they do.



CHAP. XXVI.

The Preacher's boasting. Ca|tholicks
cannot justly be ob|liged
to shew from Antiqui|ty
Evidences of their Do|ctrines.
Conditions necessa|ry
to be Observed by the
Doctor, in case he Reply. Of
the Name Protestant.

1. THus I have gone through, and exa|min'd
(except to those who love
to be contentious) sufficiently, all the
pretended Novelties imputed by Dr. Pierce
to the Roman Catholick Church; I have
likewise brought to the Test all the Alle|gations
made by him, either to excuse the
English Churches Separation from the Ro|man
Catholick, or at least to perswade us
not to call it Schism: And it seems to
me, I have demonstrated him unsuccess|ful
in both. Nay more, (which is a
great misery, if he would consider it
with that seriousness, which Eternity de|serves)
I think I have prov'd that the
fearful crime of Schism will lye heavie
upon his Church, though he had shew'd all
the Points by him mention'd, to be No|velties.
And having done this, I must
say with St. Augustin, Vtinam verba ista in|fuderim,
 non effuderim. But consider|ing
the present temper of this Age, I
doubt, I shall have reason to fear, accor|ding
to the same holy Father's expression,
lest, when I beg them to afford their ears,
they should make ready their teeth.
2. However I hope the Doctor will no
more be believed with any reason to com|plain
(as he doth in his Sermon) of one
remarkable infirmity in the Popish Writers,They
ever complain we have left their
Church,Pag. 14. but never shew that Iota as to which
we have left the Word of God, or the A|postles,
or the yet uncorrupted and Primitive
Church, or the Four first General Councils.
Truly, this Speech of his seems to me so
vain, and rash, and shameless a boast, that
I cannot but blush for him, when I read
it, and tremble for him when I see Truth
so little consider'd by a Preacher, sustain|ing
God's Person, as he pretended.
3. But perhaps I understand not his
phrase of [shwing that Iota as to which

they have left, c.] If he mean we have
not demonstrated their deserting Antiqui|ty,
or, that we believe not, even since we
have seen their Answers, that our demon|strations
are unanswerable; there are
extant whole Libraries of our Controver|tists,
sufficient to overwhelm him. Par|ticularly,
before he say so again, let him
enquire out and consider a Book, written
by Simon Vogorius, Counseller to the
French King, entituled, An Assertion of the
Catholick Faith out of the Four first Oecu|menical
Councils, and other received Synods
within that time. Or even, let him review
what is quoted against him hereCha. 17. Sect. 10. con|cerning
one of his own Points, Celibacy
of the Clergy, out of the Four first Gene|ral,
and several other, as ancient, Provin|cial
Councils. Before all which Coun|cils
there is found an Injunction of it as
high as Calixtus his dayes about A. D. 220.
which also Doctor Peirce mentions.Pag. 9. Doth
not this prohibition of the Priests from
Marriage amount to the magnitude of an
Iota with him? How comes it then to be
one of his Grievances in this Sermon,
and that under no milder a phrase than
the Doctrine of Devils? Or will not such
Antiquity pass for Primitive, and Anti|quity
Antique enough (to use his words)?
Unless he will shrink up Primitive Anti|quity
from the 6th Age to the 4th, from

the 4th to the 3d. (where few Writings
being extant, less of the Churches Do|ctrines
and Customs can be shewn in
them) Or from the 3d to the 1st Age
and the Apostles times (as the Presbyte|rians,
in the Plea of Antiquity, treat the
Prelatists.) For on this manner even the
most learned of the Protestant Writers,
when they are straitned with proofs, are
wont to retire. So Bishop Iewel long a|go
made a bold challenge to be tryed by
Antiquity for the first 600 years.
But after many hot Encounters be|tween
the Controvertists, and after An|tiquity
better discover'd to the later Pens
on the Protestant Party than to the first,
A. Bp. Lawd, more cautious, contracts the
Protestants Challenge somewhat narrow|er
to the Fathers of the first 400 years, or
thereabouts, The Protestants (saith heSect. 28. p. 217)
offer to be tryed by all the ancient Councils
and Fathers of the Church within the first
400 years, and somewhat further. And,
since the A. Bp. Doctor Hammond makes
his Plea of Antiquity yet shorter, viz. for
the Fathers of the first 300 years; For the
particular Doctrines (saith heOf Schism, c. 8. sect. 7.) wherein
we are affirmed by the Romanists to depart
from the Vnity of the Faith, we make no
doubt to approve our selves to any that will
judge of the Apostolical Doctrines and Tradi|tions
by the Scriptures, and consent of the

first 300 years, or the Four General Coun|cils.And
again, We profess (saith
heIbid. c. 9. sect. 7.) to believe so much, and not to be con|vinced
by all the Reasons, and Authorities,
and Proofs from Scriptures, or the first Chri|stian
Writers, those of the first 300 years, or
the Four General Councils. Where by sub|mission
to the Four first General Councils,
he means only to the bare decisions of these
Councils in matters of Faith concerning
our Saviour and the Holy Ghost, not ob|liging
himself also to the Authority of
those Fathers, who flourished in the time
of these Four Councils, and sate in them.
For, though the last of these Councils was
held in the middle of the 5th Age, yet he
claims a tryal by the Fathers only to the
end of the 3d Age. Again, by this sub|mission
to the Writers of the Three first
Ages only, he bars most of the chief Fa|thers,
and all those that are more large
and Voluminous, from bearing any wit|ness
against Protestants, and leaves scarse
half a score Authors of Note now extant,
and several, writing only some short Trea|tises
or Epistles, whereby they are con|tent
to try all the Doctrine and Discipline
of Antiquity.
4. But these were timorous Souls that
would fain be thought to deal civilly with
antiquity; let us hear two or three bolder
spirits, that speak plain and freely: What

sayes Doctor Willet?Willets Survey of Common-Prayer. p. 18. Let not your Majesty
be deceived by the Popish Arguments of suppo|sed
antiquity, as Joshua was with the old
and mouldy bread of the Gibeonites; and the
reason is given, for Anti-christ began to raign
in the Apostles dayes, in St. Pauls dayes.
What says Acontius?Strang. li. 6. pag. 296. Some of us are come
to that, that they will fill up their Writings
with the Authority of the Fathers, which I
would to God they had performed with pros|perous
success, as they hopefully attempted
it, c. I onely think this custome is most dan|gerous,
and altogether to be eschewed. What
sayes the witty Whitacre?Contr. Dur. lib. 6. p. 423. The Popish Re|ligion
is a patcht coverlet of the Fathers Er|rors
sewn together. And again, to believe
by the Testimony of the Church (not ex|cepting
any Age) is the plain Heresie of
the Papists.Idem. lib. 1. de script p. 39. To conclude (for I might
quote all day long upon this Subject)
what sayes the Patriark of Protestancy,
Luther,Luth. in Act. Apost. ca. 15. There never was any one pure Coun|cil,
but either added something to the faith
or substracted. And now, what shall we say
our selves in this confused variety? Against
some of our Adversaries, we must cite an|tiquity,
or else we do nothing; against o|thers,
if we cite all the antiquity that e|ver
was baptized, we do nothing. God
deliver them from their cross and incer|tain
wandrings, and me from the weari|ness
of following them in their wild chase.

5. But, if the Doctor means by [shewing that
Iota, as to which, c.] that we have not so
shewed it, as to stop their mouths, or to force
them to confess and repent of their fault, then
there can be no shewing any thing by any one
party to another, as long as the dissention lasts
between them. In this sence they have never
shewed one Iota to the Presbyterians, Anabap|tists,
Quakers, c who (after all their Books,
Canons, Acts of Vniformity, c. which those Sects
call Antichristian, tyrannical Popery, as the
Protestants did ours) still persist in separation
from them. Then neither the Apostles, an|tient
Fathers, or Councils ever shewed one Io|ta
to antient Pagans or Heretics: because, for
all their shewing, others remained Pagans and
Heretics afterward. And yet, even in this par|ticular,
though a very unreasonable one we
Cathlics can confidently affirm, that we have
defeated this bravado of the Preacher. For e|vident
Truth on our side has extorted from
the mouths and pens of a world of the most
learned among the Reformed Writers, a Confes|sion
both in general and in every particular
Controversie, that Antiquity declares it self
for the Roman Church against them. Thou|sands
of such proofs may be read in the Prote|stants
Apology, the Triple Cord, c. Books writen
on purpose to reckon up such Confessions.
This is truly, if well considered, an advantage
strange and extraordinary for I believe never
did any of the Antiet Hretis so far justifie
the Catholic Church. No such confessions
of theirs are recorded by the Antiet Fa|thers:

which shews that, above all former ex|amples,
the Heretics and Schismatics of this
last Age are most properly [] con|demned
by their own Consciences.
6. But withall the Doctor must take notice
of this one thing, That it does not belong to us
Catholics to be obliged to shew that Iota, in
which they (who have set up a new and separa|ted
Church from us but the other day) have
left the word of God or Primitive antiquity, or
the four first General Councils; a it belongs to
them, who have thus divided themselves, not
only to shew, but to demonstrate first most
clearly, that there is such a discession from
those Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils, by that
former Church (which they deserted) not in
an Iota but in some grand principle of our
Faith, which admitted no longer safety to
them in her Communion; because the Roman
Catholic Church is in possession: and, by our
Adversaries own Confession, has been unque|stionably
so for above a Thousand years, of
all or most of her present Doctrins for which
they have relinquished her.See cap. 23. Sect. 13. Particularly the
Pope has enjoy'd an Authority and Suprema|cy
of Jurisdiction a longer time, than any suc|cession
of Princes in the world can pretend
to; A Jurisdiction acknowledged as of Divine
Right, and as such submitted to by all our An|cestors,
not only as Englishmen, but as Members
of the whole Western Patriarcha, yea of the
Vniversal Church, and this as far as any Re|cords
can be produced. He is now, after so
many Ages, question'd and violently deposed

from this Authority by one National Church,
nay by one single Woman and her Counsel (the
universality of her Clergy, protesting against
her proceedings) and much more against her
destroying a Religion from the Beginning esta|blish'd
among us, and which had never been
question'd here in former times but by a Wic|lef,
or a Sir Iohn Oldcastle, c. manifest He|retics
and Traytors. Now it is against all
Rules of Law, Iustice and Reason, that such as
are Possessores bonae fidei, should be obliged to
produce their evidences: This belongs only to
the Plaintiffs and no Evidences produced by
them against such a Possession can be of any
force, except such as are manifest demon|strations
of an Vsurpation, yea such an Vsur|pation
as cannot either be exercised, or submit|ted
to without sin.
7. The Doctor is likewise to consider, tha
if, ex super abundanti, we should yield so far
as out of Antient Records of Councils or Fa|thers
to alledge any Proofs to enervate their
claim to them, and justifie our Possession: Such
Proofs of ours, though considered in them|selves,
were only probable, yet in effect would
have the force of demonstrations against Eng|lish
Protestants: But on th'other side, unlesse
they can produce from Scripture or Antiquity
evident demonstrations against us, they are not
so much as probabilities: all this by their own
confession. For, as has been shew'd, they lay
it for a ground, and acknowledge the Catholic
Church (of which according to their own Do|ctrin
the Roman is at least a Member) to be in all

fundamental Points infallible: and that in all
other Points, now in debate, which are not
fundamental, it would be unlawful for par|ticular
Churches to professe any dissent from
her, without an evident demonstration, that
she has actually and certainly erred in them;
yea moreover, that she will admit none of the
Dissenters into her Communion, except such as
(though against their Consciences and Know|ledge)
will subscribe to her Errors; Errors so
heynous, as to deserve and justifie a separation.
8. These things premis'd, my last care
must be to provide, that, in case a Reply be
intended to this Treatise, it may not be such
an one as may abuse the world. The Preacher
must consider it is not such another blundering
Sermon that will now serve his turn to give sa|tisfaction,
so much as to any Protestant, who
has a Conscience guided by the light of Rea|son,
or thinks Schism not to be a sleight Peca|dillo.
Therefore that he may know, what
Conditions are necessary to render an Answer
not altogether impertinent and insupportable
I here declare, that, in case he shall un|dertake
a confutation of what is here alled|ged
by me to disprove the charge of Novelti
by him laid on the Roman Catholic Church, and
the excusing of Schism in his own, he will be a
betrayer of his own Soul, and the Souls of 
those that rely on him, unless he observe the
Conditions following.
9. The first is, since if Protestants have in
truth an evident demonstration that the Roman
Doctrins, for which they separate, are indeed

such pernicious errors and Novelties, we readi|ly
grant they are not obliged to subscribe
them; And it being supposed by the Arch|bishop,
c. that, without such a certainty. it
would have been unlawfull for Protestants to
question or censure such former Doctrins of the
Church; The Doctor is bound, and here ad|jure
him to declare expresly. as in the presence
of Him, who is. Supreme Head of the Church,
and will revenge severely all calumnious per|secutions
of it, that he is demonstratively
certain, that in all these Points, charged by
him on the Church of later times as Novelties
and Errors introduced since the four first Coun|cils,
she is manifestly guilty: and that nothing
appears in this, or any other Catholic book
of his Acquaintance, which deserves to be e|steem'd
so much as a probable proof to the con|trary.
For my part I here protest on the o|ther
side, that I find not any one concluding
allegation in his Sermon, nor believe there can
any be produced; which can warrant him to
make such a Declaration.
10. The second Condition is, That in like man|ner
he professe he can or hath demonstratively
proved by Scripture or Primitive Antiquity,
the main grounds, upon which they pretend
to justifie their separation to be no Schism, to
wit, these. 1. That the universal Church, epre|sented
in a Lawful General Council may in
points of doctrin not fundamental so mislead the
Church by errors, that a particular Church,
c. discovering such errors, may be obliged to
separate externally. 2. That a particular Chr|stian

or a Congregation Diocesan may lawfully
reverse Decisions formerly made by a Nationa
Synod, and assented to by it; and that a Nationa
Council may do the like in regard of a Patriar|chical,
or any of them, in regard of an Oecumeni|cal
formerly accepted and admitted. If these As|srious
he Innovations, as in our perswasion they
are, it is clear they destroy all possible unity:
If they be not, let some demonstrative
Proofs and Examples be produced out of An|triquity,
that a reversing of such order and sub|ordination
has been practised and approved in
the Catholic Church. 3. That a particular
Church, c. in opposition to the Vniversal, can
judg what Doctrines are fundamental or necessary
to all Persons,  Communities, c. and what
not: And that a Catalogue of such Doctrines be
given by the Respondent, or demonstrative reasons
alledged why such an one is not necessary.
11. Thirdly, if he will deny the Church of Eng|land
has separated externally from the present
Vniversal Church, but only from the Roman;
then, to make this good, he is obliged to name
what other visible Member of the Vniversal
Church they continue in Communion with, in
whose public Service they will joyn or can be
admitted, and to whose Synods they ever have,
or can repair. And, since at the time of their
first Separation, they were only in Communion
with the Roman-Catholic Church, and the Mem|bers
of it, be must shew how, when, and
where they entered into any other new Com|munion.
Lastly, Since the English Church, by
renouncing not only several Doctrines, but se|veral

Councils acknowledged for General, and
actually submitted to both by the Eastern and
Western Churches, hath thereby separated from
both these, he must find out some other pre|tended
Members of the Catholic Church divided
from both these, (that is, some that are not
manifestly heretical,) with whom the English
Church communicates.
12. A fourth Condition is, that he must either
declare other Calvinistical Reformed Churches,
which manifestly have no succession of lawfl|ly
Ordained Ministers, enabled validly to ce|lebrate
and administer Sacraments, to consecrate,
confirm, preach God's Word, c. to be no here|tical
or Schismatical Congregations: Or if they
be, he must demonstrate how the English
Church can acquit her self from Schism, since her
Bishops and Divines have authoritatively repai|red
to theirA. D. 1618. at Dort. Synods, and a general permission
is given to any Protestant Writers to acknow|ledg
them true, reformed, and sufficiently Or|thodox
Congregations.
13. The last shall be, that he abstain from
imputing to the Catholic Church the opinions
or sayings of particular Writers. The Church
her self having sufficiently declared her Do|ctrines
in her Councils, especially that of Trent.
If he will combate against her, there he has a
fair and open field, and charity requires that
he affix to her Decisions the most moderate and
best qualified sense: Otherwise he will de|clare
himself as one, who is sorry his Mother
should not be ill reputed. Now in exchange,
I for my part am extreamly willing to proceed

in the same manner with the English Church. I
would sain charge her with nothing but her
own declared Doctrines and Decisions. But
truly I know not where to find them, except
only in the little Primmer and Catechism for
Children. For the 39. Articles, being almost
all Negatives, may as well be reputed the Do|ctrines
of Iewish, or Turkish Congregations,
since these also deny the Sacrifice of the Masse,
Purgatory, Infallibility of Councils, c. other
Reformed Churches have published reasonably
large Professions of their Faith, they have de|clared
their own positive sense in almost all
Points of Christian Belief, as the Huguenots in
France, c. the Lutherans in Germany, c: on|ly
the English Church seems to have made a
secret of her Faith; upon what motive I am
unwilling to guess.
14. These Conditions in themselves so rea|sonable,
and even according to Protestants
grounds also, so necessary, if the Replyer shall re|fuse
to perform, he will, in the judgment of all
discerning Readers, be himself the Answerer
and Conuter of his own Reply; and withall,
will shew it is not Truth or Peace he aims at, but
the satisfying his own, or others interests,
passions and revenge against those who least
deserve it. All subterfuges, all involved intri|cacies
in answering, all discourses which are
not open, candid, and sincere, will be confes|sions
of guilt: He may perhaps hide the weak|nesse
of his cause from credulous Women,
Trades-men, or possibly the more unlearned
part of our Gentry; but to all considering

Readers, his Art of hiding will be his most ma|nifest
discovery. Aristotle saies, the Sepi is the
wisest of all Fishes, because she conceals her
self by casting forth round about her a black
humour, which hinders the sight of her. But
on the contrary, Iulius Caesar Scaliger affirms
she is of all Fishes the most imprudent, Quia
cum se putat latere, prodit seipso latiblo; for the
Fishermen are sure to find her under her inky
humour.
15. And now having finished our Answer
to the substance wherein we differ, let us con|clude
with the Name that distinguishes us: He
puts us in mind of the reason why the Luthe|rans,
and from them other Reformerd took the
name,Page 36. Protestants, for protesting against the bloo|dy
Edict of Worms, Spires, c. we find little
ground why the Reformers in England should
borrow that title. Against what Armes or
Armies did they ever protest? What Edicts were
made against them? We Catholics might rather
assume such a title, if it were of any special ho|nor,
having seen (and felt too) Edicts of ano|ther
and far more bloody nature made against
us: Nay (thanks to such Sermons) we see at this
day Edicts, severe enough, published, and worse
preparing, not against Subjects in Arms and a|ctual
Rebellion, as the Lutherans were against
the Empire, but against such, as the Law-givers,
and Law-perswaders know mean no harm; a|gainst
such as would be both most watchful 
assisting to establish the peace of the King|dom:
Edicts, to draw all the remainder of
blood out of our vein, which have been al|most

emptied in our Kings and Countries
Cause; though our hope is still in the mercy
of our gracious Sovereign, and the prudent
moderation of those about him.
16. Yet sanguinary Sermons are greater Per|secutions
than sanguinary Laws; for Laws may
and somtimes are qualifi'd by the equity of
Judges, and in particular those against Roman
Catholics have often been allay'd by the graci|ous
clemency of our Kings. But the uncharita|ble
Sermons, that call for blood, inspire fury
into mens hearts, make compassion esteem'd un|lawful,
and the most savage cruelty the best Sa|crifices
of Religion. The truth is, Pulpits have
been the Sources whence so much blood has
flow'd in this Kingdom, which Sources, if they
had been open'd by such as Smectymnus, whose
vocation is Rebellion against the Princes, and
barbarous inhumanity to all that are not of
their fiction, Sustinuissemus utiand so we
shall do still with the help of Grace, by whose
hands soever Almighty God presents us this
Cup. Quod voluit factum est,  quod fecit bonum
est. Sit nomen Domini benedictum. AMEN.

PSAL. 108. 3.  73. 2.
Pro co t me dligerent, detrahebant mihi:
Ego autem or aham,
Memento Congregationis tue, quam poss|disti
AB INITIO.

FINIS.



The CONTENTS.

CHAP. I.
OF Doctor Pierce's Sermon in general. Sect. 1, 2.
What was probably the design of it. 3, 4.
Catholicks persecuted, though their best friends. 6, 7.


CHAP. II. Page 8.
Eleven Novelties charged on Catholics. 2.
Schism imputed is them. 3.
Why necesssary the Sermon should be refuted. 4, 5.
The Answerers Protestation of sincerity. 6, 7.


CHAP. III. Page 13.
B. Jewels Challenge imitated by the Doctor. 1, 5.
Primitive Reformers Acknowledgment. 2, 3, 4.
The Doctors Notion of Beginning, 6.
Questions proposed touching that Notion. 8. 9, 10, 11.


CHAP. IV. Page 29.
The sum of the Doctors Discourse against the
Popes Supremacy enervated by himself. 1. 2, 3.
The Churches Doctrine therein. 4.
The Text, Mark 10. 42. cleared. 5, 6.


CHAP. V. Page 36.
The Doctor obliged to acknowledge submission due to
the Popes Authority, as exercised during the Four
General Councils. 1, 2.
Of the Title of Universal Bishop. 3, 4, 5.
Not generally admitted at this day. 6, 7.


CHAP. VI. Page 44.
The absolute necessity of a Supreme Pastor in the
Church. 1, 2, 3.
Supremacy of Iurisdiction exercised by Boniface III. his Prede|cessors.
4, 5, 6, 7.
The 28. Canon of Chalcedon Illegal. 8.

Of the second Canon of the Council of Constantinople. Sect. 9, 10.


CHAP. VII. Page 54.
The Popes Supremacy confirmed by a Law of
the Emperor Valentinian. 1, 2.
Decrees of Popes, their Ancient force. 3, 4.
The Popes Supreme Iurisdiction confirmed by the Eastern
Church. 5 6, 7, 8, 9.
Appeals to the See Apostolick decreed at Sardiea; British Bishops
present. 11, 12.
Of the first Council at Arles. 13, 14.
Sixth Canon of the Nicene Council explained. 15. 16, 17.


CHAP. VIII. Page 67.
Proofs of the Popes Supreme Jurisdiction, be|fore
first Council of Nce. 2, 3, 5.
How all Apostles and all Bishops equl, and how subordinate. 6, 7.
St. Peter had more then a Primacy of Order. 8. 9, 10.
Of St. Pauls resisting St. Peter. 11, 12.
Objections Answered. 13, 15.
The Popes Supremacy not dangerous to States. On the contrary,
c. 18, 20, 22.
Protestants writing in favour of it. 25, 26.


CHAP. IX. Page 89.
The Churches Infallibility. 2, 3, 4.
The Necessity thereof. 8, 9.
The Grounds whereon she claims it. 10, 12, 14, 15.
Objections Answered. 16, 18.


CHAP. X. Page 109.
Prayer for the dead. 3, 4, 5.
Its Apostolick Antiquity. 6, 7, 9.
Purgatory necessarily supposed in it. 11, 12.
Objections Answered.


CHAP. XI. Page 121.
Transubstantiion. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8.
Iustified by Authority of the Fathers. 10.

Objections Answered Sect. 12, 14, 1


CHAP XII Page 137.
Communion under one Species. 2.
onfirmd by the practice of the Primitive Church
in private Communions. 3, 4, 5, 6.
No cause of Separation. 7, 8.


CHAP. XIII Page 143.
The Sacrifice of the Mas. 1.
Asserted universally by Antiquity. 2, 3, 4.
The true Doctrine concerning it explain'd. 5 6, 7.


CHAP. XIV. Page 151.
Veneration of Images. 1.
The Churches Approved practice of it most suit|able
to reason. 213.


CHAP. XV. Page 163.
The Churches prudence in restraining the too free
use of Scripture from the unlearned. 2. 4, 5.
Our late miseries justly ascribed to a defect in such Prudence. 6.
Of Prayer not in a vulgar Tongue. 7, 8.
The Causes and Grounds thereof. 9. 10.
That Pracise not contrary to St. Paul. 11, 12, 13.


CHAP. XVI. Page 178.
Invocation of Saint. 2 3, 4, 5, 6.
Proved out of Antiquity. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Concessions, Deductions, and Objections Answered. 1. adult.


CHAP. XVII. page 201.
Celibacy of Priests. 2, 3, 4.
Vows of Chastity. 5, 6.
The Doctrine and Practice of the Church in both. 9, 10.
Objections Answered. 10, 13, 14, 15,


CHAP. XVIII. page 219.
Dovorce, and the several kindes of it. 2. 37.
The Practice of the Roman Church manifestly
mistaken by the Prcher. 8 to 17.



CHAP. XIX. page 225.
Of Schism. Sect. 1.
The unpardonableness of that oime acknow|ledgd
by Antiquity. 2, 4, 6.
No cause or pretence can excuse it. 7, 8.


CHAP. XX. page 233.
The Preacher vainly endeavrs to excuse his
Church from Schism. 3, 4, 5. and chapter 21.
Sect. 15, 16.
Of the Subordination of Church-Governours and Synods. 13
The unappealable Authority of General Councils acknow|ledged
by Antiquity. 8.
Of the decisions of later Councils. 9, 10, 11, 12.


CHAP. XXI. page 249.
The Fundamental Rule of Church Govern|ment.
1, 2
Limitations of the Authority of General Councils. 5, 6.
Their Grounds made by A. B. Lawd, Dr. Field, c. 3, 4.
Of Points Fundamental and non 7, 8, 12,
Protestants allow not so much Authority to General Councils
as God commanded to be given the Sahedrim. 13, 14.
Of the pretended Independence of the English Church from the
Example of Cyprus. 17.


CHAP. XXII. page 265.
Limitations of the Churches Authority, by
A. B. Lawd, c. examin'd. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Objections against the proceedings in the Council of Trent an|swered.
5, 6.
Manifest Illegality in Q. Eliz. Reformation. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11
Secular and carnal ends in it. 12, 13.


CHAP. XXIII. page 28.
The Doctrs Proofs alledged  justifie the
English Separation, answered. 1, 2.
1. From the independent Authority of our Kings. 3.

2. From the Example of Justinian and other Emperrs. 4, 5.
3. From the practice of fourteen of our Kings. 6.
4. From the Example of the Kings of Judah. 7, 8.
In what sense new Article of Faith are made by the Church
in the Council of Trent. 10. 11, 12, 13.


CHAP. XXIV. page 291.
Of Causal and Foral Schism: and the va|nity
of their distinctions. 1, 2.
Considerations for a clear Examination, on which side the
guilt of Schism lies. 3, 4.
The manifest Innocency of the Roman Church. 5.


CHAP. XXV. page 298.
The Doctors desire of Reconcilement, and
the Conditions of it. 1, 2, 3.
The necessary Preparations to it. 4, 5.
Of the Court and Church of Rome. 6.


CHAP. XXVI. page 307.
The Preachers boasting. 1, 2, 3.
Catholiks cannot justly be obliged to shew
from Antiquity Evidences of their doctrines. 6, 7.
Conditions necessary to be observed by the Doctor, in case
he Reply. 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14.
Of the name Protestant. 15, 16.

FINIS.





ERRATA
PAge 11. line 15. read wllful  p. 15.






