




FANATICISM
Fanatically
imputed to the
CATHOLICK CHURCH
by
DOCTOUR STILLINGFLEET:
And
The Imputation refuted and
retorted
by
S. C.
a Catholick
O. S. B.
Psalm. LXXI. 4.
Iudicabit pauperes populi  humiliabit calum|niatorem.
Proverb. XXVI. 18 19.
As a madman vvho casteth fire-brands, arrovvs,
and death:
So is the man that vvrongeth his neighbour, and saith,
Am not I in Sport?
M.DC.LXXII.
Permissu Superiorum.




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
SIR MARC-ALBERT
D'OGNATE KNIGHT,
Counsellour to his Catholick
Majesty, Commissary for Re|nevving
of Magistrats in the
Province of Flanders, President
of the Chamber of Commerce
and Navigation, and Envoy
from the King of Spain to his
Majesty of Great Brittain.
SIR,
It had been to be vvished that
vve might have concealed from
Strangers the Stains of our Na|tion,
and that they might remain
ignorant that neither Fidelity to
our Prince, nor Charity to our
fellovv-Subjects can secure Ca|tholicks

from the vvorst effects of
vvar in the midst of Peace:
such is the Virulence of one ma|lignant
Party: vvho though
they enioy their lives by an un|merited
Pardon of their Rebel|lion,
vvill never pardon us for
our Loyalty.
In most Countreyes of Europe
there are agitated dayly Dispu|tes
and Controversies about Re|ligion,
and in Books on each side
ordinarily some sharpness is
mingled. But in England our
Lott must be , vve are
forced to contend vvith Adver|saries
vvhose minds by our late
Tumults are rendred savage
and implacable. They to spite
us, resume a Nevv vvar

against Heaven it self, deriding
and blaspheming the Saints in
Glory. And against Gods
Church on earth they frame Ac|cusations
never heard of before,
making her greatest Vertues passe
for the directly opposite greatest
Crimes. The most Saintly Exer|cises
of Persons among us con|secrated
to God and entirely
subiect to Authority are disgra|cefully
stiled Fanaticism: Be|cause
vve vvill not be chusers
each one of his ovvn Faith, vve
are accused to have an Enthusi|astick
vvay of Religion: vvee
exercise Charity to our Freinds
Deceased, and that is called an
Impediment of Deuotion: vve
teach (as our Saviour did) that

the vvay to Heaven is strait,
and consequently that to enter
into it vve must practise Con|fession
of Sins, Pennances, Mor|tifications,
Praying, Fasting,
Alms-giving c. and for this
vve are charged to be Hinderers
of Piety and a Good Life: Our
acknovvledging an Authority
in Gods Church to end Contro|versies
is called an effectuall
Mean to multiply them: If out of
Compassion to persons guilty of
Schism, and out of a tender love
to Vnity any one among us
strains his vvitts to persvvade
our Adversaries that the dis|tance
betvveen us is not so vast
as some of them seem vvilling to
conceive, his recompense must

be contemptuous revilings: No
Pagans or Cannibals must be
esteemed so blindly, so horribly
I dolatrous, No Quakers so ri|diculously
Frantick, No Fifth-Monarchists
so dangerous both
to Church and State.
These enormous Excesses
vvich have been lately exposed
to the vvorld in a Stile partly
Burlesque and partly Tragicall
vvere never heard of in any o|ther
Nation but England, and
only of late in England, and
I hope, for the credit of our Na|tion,
are not taken notice of by
many Strangers living here, and
thereby less in danger to be pub|lished abroad.
But from you,
SIR, they could not be concea|led,

since your zeal to Catholick
Religion makes you inquisitive
into all things that concern it,
and your perfect knovvledge in
our Language renders all our
BOOKS as intelligible to you, as
if vvritten in your ovvn. My
hope novv is that you being vvell
acquainted vvith the present
Temper of our Nation, vvill
judge aright, that a Book vvrit|ten
in such a Stile, and vvholly
composed of malignant Passions
and nevv-invented Calumnies
against Gods Church vvas only
the private Design of a mali|cious
Brain on purpose to feed
the exulcerated minds of a, ma|levolent
Party among us, and
consequently not to be imputed

to any other besides. The affe|ction
you bear to our Nation,
from vvhich you are not quite,
even in blood, a Stranger,
encourages mee to expect thus
much iustice from you.
As for my self, I being,
I hope, not the only person, en|gaged
in the defence of Truth
and Innocence against Malice
and Calumny, am desirous
to address to you this my Ans|vver,
as a Testimony of my
gratefull resentment of the fa|vour
and honour you have been
pleased to conferr generously on
mee, in allovving mee a share
in your freindship: the com|fortable
effects vvhereof have

likevvise been extended to an
afflicted Community abroad,
recommended by mee to your
Protection.
But besides this, a far
greater obligation both my self
and all loyall English Sub|jects
have to honour you for
your constant respect, duty,
and assistance vvhich you have
allvvayes vvith great zeale
shevved to his Sacred Ma|jesty
and his cause, vvhen he
vvas inhumanly treated by the
same Party, vvhich novv so
inhumanly treats his Faithfull
Catholick Subjects. In vvhich
fatall Conjuncture also, his
banished freinds and servants

found in your house Hospita|lity
and kindness vvhich vvith
them had been banished out of
England. I beseech you, SIR,
accept this Address as a gage
of gratitude, honour and res|pect
from,
SIR,
Your devoted Servant
in our Lord.
S. C.




To the Reader.
THE report is very current that
Doctour Stillingfleet wonders,
and even complains that, having
made a generall formall Challenge to
Catholicks to come openly into the field
against him being ready with weapons
in his hand, he cannot yet have the
contentment to give further proof of
his Skill and courage against them. But
surely it is not for the Doctors credit
to make such a Complaint, when
the world knows how all passages
into the field are stoppd and even wal|led
up, I will not say, by himself,
yet at least by his Partizans; how
Stationers apprehend greater danger in
publishing Answers to his Book, then
any Books of Sedition or Treason; and
how during the space of a few months
since his last Book saw the light,
Searches into Presses have been more
sollicitously exact, and more frequent
dayly and hourly, then they have

been all the years taken together since
his Majesties Restauration, Inquisitors
searching into every hole, turning
over every small paper, and rigo|rously
examining both Maisters and
Servants whether any thing has been
written against Doctour Stillingfleet.
How securely now may the Doctor
triumph, and as oft as he pleases, mul|tiply
his Challenges of Defiance against
Catholick Adversaries so bound hand
and foot: and at how cheap a rate has
he gotten (from Tradesmen and Gos|sips)
immortall honour by a Book,
then which England never to this day
saw any one, pretending to Contro|versy,
more harmless to the Church
he professes to oppose, nor more
destructive to the Church he professes
to defend. Now whether this be
not a true Character of it, I do wil|lingly
and confidently stand to the
judgment of any learned and consi|dering
Protestant Reader who shall
think fit to peruse the following Trea|tise.
Notwithstanding it cannot be de|nyed
but that the Doctor has used a

wonderfull dexterity in mannaging
this Controversy: For though his
Book proves in effect exceeding harm|less
to the common Cause of Catho|licks,
and though all the Weapons
made use of by him against the Ca|tholick
Faith really want both edges
and points of Sufficient sharpnes and
strength to make an entrance into the
Rock on which our Saviour has built
his Church, yet they pierce into the
very bowells of the Persons, fortunes
and condition of English Catholicks,
whose destruction he seems to design.
And on the other side, though the
same weapons do draw out the very
heart-blood of the English Church, yet
he pretends all the way, and seems
to be acknowledged by them a Cham|pion
of its cause, and not to intend the
least harm to the Prelats and Subiects
of it.
Cicero was wont to say, that he
thought any one Roman Augur could
not without Smiling look upon ano|ther
Augur, considering what large
preferments and honours they en|ioyed
by befooling the whole Roman

Common-weale with their ridiculous
fopperies. The like smile of secret in|telligence
passes between the Doctor
and his ancient Brethren. For a great
pleasure it must needs be to them to
see him in his new dress, in his Sur|plice
and Scarlet-Hood, so Canonically
defending out of the Pulpitt the Church
of England, or brandishing his Sword
against her Adversaries in printed Vo|lumes;
but so defending it, as not to
do the least harm to the old cause: Not
one word falls from his tongue or
pen to give his now Prelats warning
of their danger from Presbyterians,
Independents, Latitudinarians and o|ther
Sects, though all these conspi|ring
against them had held their Necks
so many years of late under their
feet.
But nothing can be more ridiculous
to those Sectaries (nor truly more
deserving detestation from all loyall
Subiects) then to see the same Secta|ries
quondam friend Doctour Stillingfleet
zealously pretending a care of the
Safety of his Majesty and the State
against the seditious writings and pra|ctises

of ill-principled Subiects, and
at the same time, as if he thought the
world by vertue of the Act of Obli|vion
had quite forgott the last twenty
years troubles, naming none but Ca|tholicks
as such ill-principled Sub|iects,
who yet alone among all Dis|senters
from the English Church had
all of them unanimously adhered to
his Majesty, and for his Majesties
sake had defended also the said Church
against the Doctor and his Brethren in
evill, the Sectaries.
The plain truth is, the Doctors
collusion and prevarication in his Book
seems to me so visible and so insup|portable,
that it is a shame that hi|therto
not one true Prelaticall Prote|stant
has appeared as a Defender of
the English Church and State against
him: but on the contrary even some
English Prelats themselves have con|gratulated
and boasted of his supposed
succesfull endeavours against the Ca|tholick
Church, though ruinous only
to themselves. Indeed it was the
Doctors Master-piece by his Drollery to
putt Protestants into a fitt of laughing,
that being in so good an humour they

might drink down the Poyson he pre|sented
them. This Poyson, it seems,
does not yet sensibly work with
them, and therefore they neglect to
provide Antidots. Well: all J can say
is, Viderint ipsi. But they may also do
well to consider that to this hour they
have not from this Defender of the
Church of England seen one line which
was not more to the advantage of
their Enemies, the Sectaries, then of
their own Church. So that abating
severall hundred pounds of yearly pre|ferments,
he still is what he was be|fore
his Majesties return. He was
pleased to stile some late Catholick
Writers by the name of Ratts, for not
answering line by line his great Vo|lume:
He must give me leave to make
use of his Metaphor another way, ap|plying
it to himself. It is a common
Observation among Mariners that
when they see a Ship suddenly freed
from Ratts formerly abounding there,
they conclude that there are some leaks
in it, unobserved by any but the Ratts
themselves, which threaten its sud|den
sinking. Now let any one judge
wherther the Doctour by publishing his

Principles has not stolln out of the
Church of England: (yet with a Lati|tudinarian
conscience holding fast his
Preferments:) and does not this argue
that the Ratt foresees, or shrewdly
suspects some danger to the Ship, and
therefore provides for his own safety,
by returning to the same Sects which
uncessantly plott against it, and, it is
to be feared, against the Civill State
too?
It is a sad thing therefore that not
one Protestant will open his eyes, and
give warning of the dangerous pro|ceedings
of their Champion. Now whe|ther
that task and duty deserted by
them, has not been efficaciously enough
undertaken and performed by the Au|thour
of the following Treatise. J leave
to all indifferent Iudges to determine.
They are also hereby entreated to im|pute
the delay of this Answer to the
true cause above mentioned, or indeed
to any thing rather then to the least
guilty apprehension which Catholicks
may have of encountring such an Ad|versary
as the Doctour is supposed to be
by persons who are perswaded that an
insolent confidence must needs be ac|companied

with Reason and Truth. And
for such persons, so qualified, no doubt,
it was that the Doctor wrote his Book,
not to instruct them, but to imprint his
own enormous passions in their minds.
Whereas Readers of but ordinary capa|city
and prudence will easily perceive
that it was a consciousness of his own
inability to cast any prejudice on the
received Doctrins and Discipline of the
Catholick Church her-self that forced
him to indulge to his fancy and inven|tion
to expose to contempt and hatred
of unwary Readers the Opinions and
Practises of a few particular persons a|mong
Catholicks, not alwayes faith|fully
related by him, and most of them
already censured by Superiours. But
that which has gained to him the most
of his applauding Readers is his acting
the Theologicall Zani, after a fashion
altogether new and unexpected, whilst
he most ridiculously imputes Fanaticism
to the Catholick Church, of which
never any Heretick before him suspec|ted
her capable.
My last request to the Reader is that
seeing this Treatise written in a stile
so unpractised hitherto by mee, and

indeed so contrary to mine own incli|nation,
he will interpret it aright, and
believe that J judged my self obliged
to neglect complements of Civility to
such an Adversary. If he had written
like one that sought out Truth, J
should have condemned my self if any
phrases of bitterness had escaped my
pen. But in answering such a mass of
Buffonry mixed with rancour and ma|lice,
the Wise man has taught me my
Duty. Proverb. xxv. 5.






OF FANATICISM

. 1. The Authours Motive of
Writing this Treatise. Doctour
Stillingfleets three Heads of Ac|cusation
against the Catholick
Church, c.
1. THe Authour of this follow|ing
Treatise may with con|fidence
profess, that it was not from a
resentment of severall contemptuous
Aspersions cast on him by Doctour
Stillingfleet in his lately published Book,
that he was induced to write this
Answer. For who would not glory
in suffring any scorns or calumnies,
when merited only for recommending
to devout Christians instructions for the
practise of Christian Vertues and Piety in
the greatest perfection that this life is
capable of? His Motiues therefore of

writing and publishing this Discourse
were first his Obedience to certain freinds
whose commands he ought in no wise
to resist: And then a just Indignation
in seeing the most Sacred things and
Persons in the Catholick Church selected
on purpose by him, to be contaminated
with his inck full of gall and poyson,
thereby imprudently ministring new
aims to Atheists (against whom as a
considerable and growing Sect among
them, he and others begin to preach and
write) by shewing, to his utmost abili|ty,
that all the Religion professed in the
world, and that thing that bare the
name of a Catholick Church for so many
Ages before the times of Luther and
Calvin, was nothing, for their Worship,
but Idolatry; for their Devotions, but
Fanaticism: and for their Doctrine and
Disciplin; nothing but Faction, Ambi|tion
and Avarice.
2. The task therefore here imposed
being to answer in the Doctours last
Book, not the Points of Controversy be|tween
the Catholick Church and Prote|stants
(reserved for a more learned pen
of his worthy Antagonist) but those dis|courses
in his Book (and principally tou|ching

Fanaticism) in which the Doctour
seems not to have intended to employ
his Talent of Reasoning, but to discharge
his excess of Spleen and choler and to gi|ve
free scope to all Vnchristian and even
in human Passions, the Authour hopes he
shall not deserve justly a Censure from
the Reader, if he endeavour here to de|fend
the Truth with as much zeal and
confidence as his Adversary hath assaul|ted
it: So long as nothing passeth from
him that any way woundeth Christian
Charity, nor any sharpness is used, but
such as may, through Gods Grace prove
beneficiall to him, and his applauding
Readers.
3. Now in the Doctours Book there
are three Heads of Accusation selected
by him with intention to disgrace, and
fright his Readers from the Communion
of the Catholick Church, by imputing to
her. 1. That she is guilty of Severall
Opinions and Practises which hinder De|votion
and a good life. 2. That Fana|ticism
is not only countenanced by her, but
made a ground of believing some Doctrins,
of making some Ecclesiasticall Ordonnan|es,
of erecting Religious Orders, and
kewise of resisting lawfull Authority.

3. That there are among her Subiects Divi|sions
about Doctrins of great moment and
no possibility of reducing dissenting Parties
to Vnity or Obedience.
4. These Accusations my purpose
is to refute, and for his Proofs of them,
to shew the invalidity of those which
are pretended by him to regard the
Church her self. But as for such as regard
the Opinions or Actions of particular
persons, and which fill up the far grea|test
number of his leaves, some thing
shall be said to those among them which
seem of any considerable moment, and
the rest shall be neglected, as needing
no Answer, though never so truly al|ledged
by him. And having done this,
I will, as I am perswaded, with much
greater confidence, retort the same
Heads of his Accusations upon himself,
demonstrating that his Protestant Chur|ches,
as principled by him. 1. doe evident|ly
undermine the foundations of Piety and
a Good life. 2. That the Essence of his Re|ligion
is meer Fanaticism, in his own sence
of the Word: and that it iustifies Rebellion
against the Civill Magistrate. 3. That by
the Grounds of his Religion all manner of
Divisions and Schims are not only excusa|ble

but lawfull, and withall incurable.
5. He will perhaps, when he sees
his large Book pretended to be sufficient|ly
answered in a few sheets of paper,
renew the scornfull complaint made by
him in his Preface, That those who in,
some small measure have attempted to
answer him, have performed it in a way
that Ratts answer Books, by gnawing some
of the leaves of them, the Body and Design
of them remaining wholly untouched by
them. Now who those persons are
whom he is pleased to resemble to
Ratts, I can only iudge by guess: and if
I guess aright, particularly of one Au|thour,
I could make it appear to the Doc|tour,
that the very bowells and most
Vitall parts of his great Volume have been
eaten through and consumed by that his
Adversary.
6. However, I conceive he wil not
have iust reason to apply this Metaphor
to the Authour of this present Treatise,
since it was his own fault, by heaping
together a great Masse of rubbage and
stuff altogether impertinent, to make
a short Answer sufficient. Does he think
his Adversaries, in case they were al|lowed
the liberty and commodity of

publishing large Volumes, so much at
leasure as to follow him step by step in
examining Quotations, and answering
Obiections which are of no moment
whether they be true or false? He may
by such a way of writing beget in the
minds of the vulgar sort of Readers a
high Opinion of the Vastnes of his un|necessary
reading, and his well-furnish|ed
Library: but his Adversaries will be
much to blame if they trouble themssel|ves
with defending every Old Story, or
personall imputations: or indeed, if he|reafter
they engage themselves in any
Controversy with him, except in Points
pretended by him of such consequence
as to iustify a necessity in Protestants of
separating from the Catholick Church
And few such Points are to be found
in his Books.
7. But moreover, as short an Answer
as this is, he wil have less reason to say,
That the Body and Design of his Book will
remain wholly untouched in it. He may
indeed perhaps have some ill Design in
publishing (as it were by conspiracy
with others) a Book so voyd of Christian
Charity and moderation: Which Design
may remain untouched by mee, because

I am unwilling to declare the grounds
of my coniectures moving me to look
upon it as an Ominous ill-boading Book,
fore-running some expected mischeif.
But for the Body of his Book, that is,
whatsoever appears to me in it of con|sequence,
it is truly a very slender dwar|fish
Body, being almost entirely contain|ed
in a few sheets at the beginning, and
in the last single sheet which enwraps
his Protestant Principles. The publishing
of which Principles was truly an act of
commendable ingenuity and confiden|ce
also: For I think he is the first Prote|stant-Controvertist
who upou such a
tender Subiect has appeared bare-faced
out of the Clouds. And moreover I
may take leave to tell him that from a
heedfull consideration of those his
Principles I do collect that He and myself
are of the same iudgment in one matter
of great importance, viz. That no shew
of Reason or conscience can be pretended to
escape from the Authority of the Catholick
Church but by renouncing entirely (as he
has done in his Principles) all Ecclesiasticall
(or even Civill) Authority: and by con|sequence
that no Churches proceed Logically
in asserting the grounds of their Religion,

but only Catholicks or Single-Independents.
The reason hereof is, Because for any
Ecclesiasticall Superiours to acknow|ledge
any obligation lying on thers Sub|iects
to submitt to their Authority, and
at the same time to preferr the Autho|rity
of a particular Church before that of
the Vniversall, which is the fountain
of all Authority, is to putt out their Sub|iects
eyes, and to hale them after them
with chains. And above all other Con|gregations
the Tyranny of Presbyterians is
most brutish, who after a denyall of all
Visible Authority extant before them,
endeavour violently to subdue mens
consciences to the Jurisdiction of their
Classes, erected upon controverted Texts
of Scripture, as interpreted by themsel|ves
alone.
8. The Doctours Principles therefo|re
being by far the most materiall Part
of his Book, it is not notwithstanding
my business in this Treatise to examine
them apart one by one, or to trouble
my self with making a setled Iudgment
whether of the two fore-named Parties,
Catholicks or Independents has the most
solid reasons on their side. For being en|gaged
to make Reflexions on that part of

his Book which is of least importance,
writen in an immodest, uncivill, petu|lant
stile, it was not fitt in my Answer
to mingle considerations on a Subiect so
serious, and soberly expressed as his
Principles are, which indeed deserve to
be examined separately with all possi|ble
calmness and impassionateness, as
being an Argument on which all other
Controversies do depend, and which
one way or other makes an end of them
all.
9. Yet for all this, it was not possi|ble
for me to avoyd all mention of his
Principles in this Answer to a different
Subiect: since (as hath been already in|timated,
and will be seen by the Se|quele)
whatsoever Charge he brings a|gainst
the Catholick Church, and which
I pretend here to refute, does scarce at
all touch Her, but lyes most heavily and
unmoveably upon his Principles, and on
any Church acknowledging or adopting
them. He must therefore dispose him|self,
with the greatest patience he can,
to be put in mind more then once or
twice of his Principles and the fatall
Consequences of them. From which Con|sequences
till he can effectually clear

them, he will have little cause to call, as
he hath done, for an Answer to his for|mer
large Volume. For if it shall appear,
by the ruine of his, that the Principles
of Catholick Religion only are solide and
inexpugnable; that is, that the Catholick
Church is indeed, and to be acknowled|ged
the Pillar and ground of Truth, from
whose Authority no Appeal is to be ad|mitted,
then both his Former and latter
Books are thereby sufficiently refuted,
as far as they condemn or but question
any Doctrins whatsoever determined
by her. This being once established, he
will find his Books, not having a few
leaves gnawed by Ratts, but un litur
entirely abolished.



. 2. A Vindication of the
Honour and Sanctity of S. Be|nedict
c from the Doctours
contumelious imputations.
10. HAving given this Account
of the Motiue and Design of
this Treatise, it is time to take into con|sideration
the forementioned Heads of
Accusation layd by the Doctour against
the Catholick Church, which he thinks of
sufficient weight to deterre any one
from ioyning in her Communion. I will
begin with that touching Fanaticism,
which though the Second in his Order,
yet principally concerned me to dispro|ve,
and particularly that part of it which
contains an Invective against the Life
and Prayer of Contemplation commended
and practised only in the Catholick
Church, it being a State which from the
infancy of the Church hath been estee|med
the nearest approching to that of

Glorified Saints; From whence notwith|standing
he has taken occasion to vilify
in particular the Authour of this ensuing
Treatise: Who is very well content to
receive his proportion of Scorn with
such companions, as Thaulerus, Suso,
Rusbrochius, Blosius c.
11. Now the Doctour, to the end he
might make an entrance into his In vec|tive
with better grace, has prepared a
way thereto, then which a more proper
could not be found for such a purpose,
by producing on his Stage, antickly dis|gvised,
the famous Teachers and Erectours
of Schools for Contemplation,Nullos esse Deos, in ane coelum Affir|mat Se|lius, probat|que, quod se Fac|tum, du~ negat haec, vi|det Beatu~. Martial l. 4. Epi|gr. 21. S. Bene|dict,
S. Romuald, S. Bruno, S. Francis,
S. Dominick and S. Ignatius: so exposing
them like blind Samson to the derision of
profane Readers: for from Such only can
he expect an applause for his impiously
employed Wit: And he will find in the
end, except Repentance prevent it, that
Selius his argument in the Epigramma|tist
wil prove a dangerous Fallacy.
12. And to the end he may not too
much boast of the Novelty of his inven|tion,
and his profanely employed Witt,
I doe assure him that I my self, being
then a young Student in Oxford, was

witness of a far greater, and if Fancy
alone be considered, far better deserved
Applause given to a Preather, who in a
Repetition-Sermon to the Vniversity,
descanting on the whole life of our Sa|viour,
rendred him and his Attendants,
men and women, Obiects of the utmost
scorn and a version, as if they all of them
had been only a pack of dissolute Vaga|bonds
and Cheats. This the Preacher per|formed,
taking on him the person of a
Iewish Pharisee and Persecutour of Christ.
And he performed it so to the life, that
he would have shamed Lucian, and rai|sed
envy in the Doctour himself. But pre|sently
upon it, changing his stile as beca|me
a Disciple of Christ, he with such ad|mirable
dexterity and force of Reason
answered all the Cavillations and Invec|tives
before made, that the loudly repea|ted
Applauses of his Hearers hindred him
a good space from proceeding. Notwith|standing
this, the Grave Doctours and
Governours of the Vniversity, though
much satisfied with his Intellectuall abi|lities,
yet wisely considering that a pe|tulant,
histrionicall Stile even in Obie|ctions,
did not befitt so Sacred a Subiect,
and that it was not lawfull to personate

too naturally a deriding Iew, obliged the
Preacher to a publick Recantation-Sermon
in the same Pulpit the Sunday following.
And this deservedly, For Vitium simu|lari
non potest, Virtus potest.
13. If the Doctour would now make a
second Essay of his Witt and invention
on severall Stories as we find them re|corded
in Holy Scripture, he would per|haps
find his Fancy as inventive, and if
Nature had denyed him, the Devill
would, no doubt, once more furnish
him with Expressions as apt to move the
Spleen and laughter of his present ap|plauding
Readers, as any are now found
in his Book: by which means he perhaps
may arrive at the glory to be acknow|ledged
the Head of a New Sect of the
Ecclesiae Malignantium. And unless Re|port
deceives us, there are already se|verall
Books of the Holy Bible descanted
upon in a stile like to his, and it may be
the unhappy Authours conceive that the
same Press may (without an Imprima|tur)
be allowed them also.
14. It is not now my purpose to make
a particular Vindication of each Saint
traduced by him. But considering the
publick Interest obliging the whole

Western Patriarchat, and most especial|ly
England to be tender of the Honour
of S. Benedict, by whose Disciples, if
they were Fanaticks, Christianity has
been established among us, and in ve|neration
to whom such a world of Re|ligious
houses and Churches have been
erected and enriched with vast posses|sions,
I can not, without renouncing
my Duty as a Christian, Religious man,
and an English man, by silence conspire
to his dishonour: the rather, because
to my best remembrance I never knew
that any of the English Church since the
Reformation did ever cast any scornfull
Aspersions on his Memory: and I believe
the Doctour will scarce find any one he|reafter
willing to imitate his malignant
Ingratitude.
15. Now what is it that the Doctour
layes to the charge of S. Benedict?Pag. 262. The
whole Charge consists in repeating af|ter
a ridiculons manner certain passa|ges
of S. Benedicts life written by S.
Gregory: As 1. how being a child he by
his Prayers obtained a Miracle for the
consolation of his Nurse, a Monument
of which Miracle remained publick|ly
Visible many years after. 2. How

he lived three years with wonderfull
austerity in a cave, unknown to any
but S. Romanus, who to the Devills
despight furnished him with necessary
food. 3. How he rolled himself in
thorns to conquer his amorous Pas|sions.
4. How he was enabled by
Supernaturall Revelations and Lights
to spy out Devills, to discover things
absent and foretell things to come, to
be a Spectatour of the Soule of his
Sister S. Scholastica in the shape of a
Dove going up to Heaven, and to
see all the world in uno radio Solis,
c.
16. By this brief Account of the life
and actions of S. Benedict, all which the
Doctour expects that his Readers should
esteem to be meer fanaticall Lyes and
forgeries, his intention seems to be to
convict both S. Benedict and S. Gregory
of lying against the Holy Ghost, and a|scribing
to a Divine Power pretended
Miracles, Visions c. which either were
not at all, or were Sleights of Leger-de-main.
But what arguments does the
Doctour give to disparage S. Gregories
relation? Will he deny that any Mira|cles
were wrought by Gods servants in

that Age? If so, he will find it a hard
task to defend himself against so many
Saints, learned and prudent men, who
have testified that they have been eye|witnesses
of many. He will not sure|ly
affirm (though he is bold enough to
affirm anything) that such Miracles, if
reall, were Proofs that the Workers of
them were Fanaticks and Deceivers.
These things considered where will
he hope to find Readers who can be
inwardly perswaded that what S. Gre|gory
relates is sufficiently confuted by
his scornfull manner of repeating it in
the new stile of a Theological Scarron?
Or to iudge this a concluding argu|ment;
S Benedict wrought Miracles,
was favoured with supernaturall Vi|sions
and Revelations, therefore he is
manifestly convicted of Fanaticism? and
upon that Fanaticism he instituted his
Religious Order, for which he framed a
Fanaticall Rule?
17. Now by Fanaticism the Doctour
ays he intends an Enthusiastick way of
Religion, that is, a Religion built upon
falsly pretended Inspirations, Illuminations
c. Which Definition being approved,
with what shew of reason can the Doc|tour

accuse S. Benedict of Fanaticism? For
did S. Benedict frame to himself a New
Religion? Did he make any the least al|teration
in the Religion conveyed to
him by Tradition, and professed by the
whole Church? Had any of his Visions
or Revelations any influence on his Re|ligion
to make him introduce any inno|vations?
How was he then an Enthu|siast?
18. But S. Gregory affirms that he had
Revelations, Inspirations and the Guift
of discerning Spirits: And these things the
Doctor will needs call Enthusiasms. Sure|ly
he will not deny but that God may;
yea often has conferred on his servants,
Revelations of his will, in some speciall
circumstances, which are not in the
Doctors sence, Enthusiasms: Neither,
will I on the other side deny but many
persons, even in the Catholick Church
have bin seduced by the Devill, and
their own pride, to pretend to lights re|ceived
from God, which were either
effects of a distempered fancy, or sug|gestions
of the Devill. The question
therefore is, whether S. Benedicts vi|sions,
and Revelations came the for|mer,
or the latter way. But it is no

question touching the Doctours Iudge|ment
in this case: for certainly he durst
not decide them, if he thought or but
suspected that they came from God.
19. I beseech him now that he would
examine his own conscience, whether,
I will not say, convincing proofs, but
rational grounds may not be affoorded,
that S. Benedicts Visions and Revelations
were truely divine, considering. 1. the
Innocence, purity and vninterrupted
fervour of devotion conspicuous in S.
Benedict, from his Infancie, to his
death. 2. The admiration in which the
age wherein he lived held him, both for
his piety, and the stupnduous favours,
conferred on him by Almighty God.
Will the Doctor now say, that all that
age, and all ages following, have been
deluded by an Hypocrit, and Counterfeit
Enthusiast, and that himself was the
only person Clear-sighted enoug to
discover the cheat? not only all Chri|stians
living in his time, but even the
Pagan Goths had him in veneration: By
what light now after above a thousand
years, has he seen that the whole world
besides himself have been deluded? Hee
will easily giue me leave to say assuredly

it was not by a supernaturall light, least
he himself should be suspected an En|thusiast:
And for a naturall light to justi|fie
him, he has shewed us none, having
concealed the reasons moving him to
make a Saint soe glorious in the esteem
of the Christian world, the obiect of his
derision.
20. I verily believe the Doctor would
have been easily induced to have spared
the person of S. Benedict (and so of the
other Saints) had not a saying of Car|dinal
Bellarmin afflicted his mind, and
stirred up his choler, viz. That Religious
orders were at first instituted by S. Bene|dict,
S. Romualdus, S. Bruno, S. Domi|nick,
and S. Francis by the inspiration of
the holy Ghost: This was a sayeing insup|portable
to a mind by education, and
wordly interest preve~ted with a strong
preiudice, and therefore all books
and Legends must be searched, and eve|rie
crifling passage, and circumstance,
perhaps indiscreetly inserted any whe|re
by, Authors, must be made use of to
disgrace the Saints, and to prove them
Enthusiasts: Though all the world besi|des
haue them in veneration.
21. Now to enter into dispute concer|ning

their personall qualities with such
an Adversary, wil bee to offend against
Charity by giving him occasion, of re|viling
yet more Gods most beloued per|fect
servants. The most commodious
way then to make a true judgement of
them will be, to examine their fruits.
For by their fruits, saith our Saviour,
they will be known.
22. Therefore to determine, whether
it was by Gods Inspiration that they in|stituted
their respective Orders, lett
those who doubt, yea those who scarce
think it lawfull to doubt. 1. Examine
their severall Rules, according to which
their Disciples oblige themselves to con|form
their lives and actions. And. 2.
consider whether God has acknowled|ged
them for his servants, by making
use of them to the great benefitt of his
Church, and dilatation of his honour.
Now if it shall appear that their Rules
advance perfection in all Christian ver|tues:
And that such among them as
have Squared their Actions by their
Rules have in a signal manner benefitted
Gods Church, and encreased his honour,
It is most certain that Bellarmin had
just grounds, how angrie soever the

Doctour be, to say, that such Orders were
Instituted by the Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost.
23. I doe heartily wish for the Doc|tours
good, that he would without pre|judice
examine these two points, or at
least patiently read what is here writ|ten
concerning them: Now to descant
upon all their Rules, and to Enumerate
the services done by the severall Orders
to Gods Church would be too tedious. I
will therefore as my duty more particu|larly
engages me, confine my self to S.
Benedicts Rule and his Disciples Actions:
And in so doeing the Reader will be
sufficiently informed in all the rest:
Since they all agree in the Sanctity of
their Rules and glory of their actions,
Though in some circumstantiall Rites,
and Observances there be some va|riety.
24. As touching therefore the Rule of S.
Benedict, whether it was written with
a Fanatick Spirit or not, The Doctours
own Judgement may be appealed to, If
he would vouchsafe to read and exami|ne
it. For what is it but a collection
skilfully made of all Evangelicall pre|cepts,
and counsells of perfection? There

the Ecclesiasticall Office is so wisely or|dered,
that the whole Church Judged
it fitt to be her Pattern. There S. Bene|dict
teaches his Disciples to begin all
their Actions with an eye to God, beg|ging
his assistance, and referring them
entirely to his Glory. There a holy fa|mily
is so ordered, with such a decent
assignation of dutyes proper to all offi|ces
both of Superiors, and subjects, in
their severall Rancks, that a great and
Wise King made choice of it for his Rule
in Managing his Kingdome. There a
contempt and hatred of the world is
taught with great Energy: Religious
men are enioined to hide themselves
from it, that they may in their Seque|stred
cells enioye a freer conversation
with God. And because they cannot ex|clude
themselves out of their Solitude,
They are instructed to mortifie there all
Sensuall Passions, by prayer and Tempe|rance.
If by Gods Providence they en|ioyed
plenty of Temporall goods, The
poore and strangers only reaped the
fruits of it. Yea their Lawgiuer taught
them not only by his Rule, but example
also, to preferre even in the times of the
greatest scarcity the satisfieing the

wants of others before their own:
Hospitality was a vertue soe peculiar to
them, and so constantly practised by
them, that till the Rapine and furie of
a Tyrant here in England destroyed
them, there was no need of any Law
among us for sustaining the Poor,
who after soe many Modern Lawes
can scarce be preserved from Pe|rishing.
And there (which the Doctour
may doe well to consider) the vertues
of Humilitie and Peacefull obedience most
contrarie to and Inconsistent with Fa|naticism
are of all others most copiously
and vehemently inforced, as if in them
the Spirit of his Rule did Principally con|sist.
By these two vertues his Disciples
were securely guarded from all dan|gers
which an externall exercise of
other vertues might expose them to: By
the former (Humilitie) they were exem|pted
from Pride and self complacencie,
in case God should bestow any Super|naturall
favours on them: And by the
latter (Obedience) which obliged them
to discover even their most secret
Thoughts to their Superiours and Spiri|tuall
Directors, they were secured a
Demonio Meridiano, from false Illumina|tions,

and Illusions of the Enemy. And
lastly to prevent all Innovations in opi|nions
touching Religion, and disturbing
of the Churches peace by spreading a|broad
new invented Fancies; a most
strict Silence was inioynd them at home,
and none permitted to goe abroad, ei|ther
for busines, or preaching, but such
as the Superiour esteemed fitt, with the
benediction and prayers of whom, and
of their other Brethren they were sent
forth, and at their Return received
again.
25. Now can the Doctour believe
that it was a fault in Cardinal Bellarmin
to say that it was by the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost that such a Rule as this was
instituted, and Families erected for the
observing of it? And yet if he will per|use
it he will find that I have omitted
many other Perfections which shine
forth in it.
26. And whereas from some mistaken
expressions of S. Gregory he charges S.
Benedict with the great crime of being
a hater of Human Learning: wee doe not
find that he forbids his Disciples the stu|dy
of it in his Rule, at such times as the
Office of the Quire and Manuall Labour

for the benefit of the Monastery affor|ded
them a vacancy. And it is unque|stionable
that wee owe to his followers
the preservation of almost all the Lite|rature
which remains in the world:
For by their care in conserving and
Transcribing of books, all our Libraries
are now soe richly furnished and the
Doctour enabled to write against them
and their Master. This they did notwith|standing
such a deluge of Barbarous Na|tions,
which for Religions sake hated
and sought to destroy all manner of
Learning: And S. Benedicts Disciples
doeing so, they thought such their care
to be no Transgression of their Rule.
27. But as for S. Benedict himself
Almighty God did not call him to be a
Critick, but a Teacher of Sanctity. And
to enable himself thereto, wee find in
the last Chapter of his Rule, that he was
no stranger in the books of Holy Scriptu|re,
in the writings of the Ancient Doc|tours
of the Church, in the Conferences,
and lives of the holy Fathers, all which
he recommends to his Disciples. But as
for the Subtilties of Pagan Philosophers,
the Elegancies of their Poets and the
like (considering his Vocation) it would

have been in him the vice of Curiosity
to have spent his time in them: Which
S. Augustin Judges to have been the
Concupiscence of the Eyes, reckoned by
S. Iohn, as one of the three great Temp|tations
of the world.
28. S. Benedict therefore was not a
hater of Human Learning (as the Doctour
vnjustly and without warrant stiles
him) But for his own vse and office he
preferred before it that Learning which
the Wiseman stiles Scientiam Sanctorum,
that learning which does not puff up
the mind, but renders it Docibilem Dei,
and makes the possessors of it Saints:
And I am confident that in the day of
Iudgment God will never (as the Doc|tour
does) impute this choice to him as
a fault. I would to God the Doctour, in|stead
of deriding, would imitate him.
In this regard therefore it was that S.
Gregory stiled S. Benedict [Scienter nes|cium
 Sapienter Indoctum] Skilfully
ignorant, and wisely Vnlearned: By which
Character he had no intention certainly
to disparage him, but rather to paralell
him with the Kingly Prophet who wri|ting
of himself, Saith: That he was wi|ser
and had more understanding then his

Enemies, Then his Teachers, Then the
Ancients,Psal. 118. Mem. only by meditating on Gods
law, and Keeping his Precepts.
29. Thus far concerning the severall
Heads of accusations of S. Benedict, in a
scornefull manner represented by the
Doctour to make his Readers merry at
the expences of a Glorious Saint. But wi|thall
his Readers are desired to consider,
that all these heads are borrowed from
S. Gregory who wrote the Saints life,
from the testimonie of certain Holy
men who had been S. Benedicts Disci|ples.
So that the very same things which
S. Gregory wrote to prove the Sanctity
of S. Benedict, the Doctour makes use of
to shew him, as it were on a stage to
have been a Fanatick, a false pretender
to Miracles, Visions and Inspirations, and
an Ignorant Fool: And all this without
any reason or proof given to iustifie such
Imputations.
30. But the Readers are desired
to consider, that whatever opinion
they have of S. Benedict (to the zeal and
Charity of whose Disciples notwith|standing
they owe their Christianity)
yet surely S. Gregory was not a person
fitt to make sport for the Doctour and his

Readers: S. Gregory, perhaps the most
exalted and most humble Saint, the
most Illuminated Doctour, the most zea|lous
and most Charitable Prelat, that
since the Apostles times Almighty God
ever provided to govern his Church.
Thus he has alwayes been esteemed not
only through the Western, but Eastern
Churches also. And can the Doctour think
he can find any Reader who has not in
his heart renounced Christianity, that
wil applaud him for trampling with
scorn on S. Gregory? For it is from S. Gre|gory
indeed that the Doctour is informed
that S. Benedict was a Fanatick, if he
were such an one: It is S. Gregory who
commended and confirmed his Rule,
and if the Doctour may be believed, it
seems very ignorantly and foolishly sti|led
it [Discretione Praecipuam] eminent
for the discretion of it; which is a vertue
ill suiting with a Fanatick. It is S. Gre|gory
who has conveyed to posterity an
account of the Graces and Supernaturall
Favours by God conferred on S. Benedict:
the truth of which I believe scarce any
one hitherto has disbelieved, beside the
Doctour: Certain it is that a generall
firm belief of them, both during S. Be|nedicts

times and afterward, made a
change in Christendom scarce ever to be
paralleld before or since, whilst incre|dible
multitudes of well meaning Chri|stians
wakened from a Lethargy of sin,
either flocked together to take on them
the Yoke of that Rule, or if they wanted
such courage, powred forth their trea|sures
to entertain such as consecrated
themselves to Gods service. And all this
the Doctour without any proof, pro|nounces
Fanaticism, and is desirous that
men of this Reformed Age should be|lieve
these Divine Favours communica|ted
to S. Benedict to have been Illusions
of Satan (which Satan himself never
durst own) and that men had done mo|re
wisely if they had continued to serve
the world, and the Flesh, rather then
to quitt both in following an Hipocriti|call
Fanatick.
31. Surely the Doctour was much to
blame, and I hope he will sadly reflect
on the danger of raising mirth from such
an argument as this. Or if he doe not,
it will be very fitt that when hereafter
he mentions those two persons so vene|rated
by all but himself, he would ab|stain
from calling them Saints. For in

the same breath to call S. Benedict a
Saint and a Fanatick, savours something
of blasphemy. Yet it will be a hard task
for him to conquer so inveterated a cus|tome:
Mens tongues are so enured ne|ver
to mention them without that Title
of Saint, that the only expedient to cor|rect
that fault in himself and others,
will be to let his Readers know that he
intends the same ill thing by the terms
of Saint and Fanatick. Thus farr tou|ching
S. Benedict and his Rule: by exa|mining
whereof I conceived men
might Judge whether, notwithstan|ding
the Doctours Raillery, God did not
esteem him his faithfull servant.
32. The next thing proposed in or|der
to make the like judgement, was to
consider whether after S. Benedicts
death, God did not declare the same
thing, by making choice of the Disciples
of S. Benedict to procure an encrease of
his honour, and considerable blessings
to his Church: For if he did, surely the
Doctour himself, how bold so ever, will
scarce dare to disgrace them hereafter
by the Title of Fanaticks.
33. To clear this, it is to be observed
that in S. Benedicts age Christians gene|rally

were falln into such a decadence
from Piety, charity among them was
become so cold and frozen, and all man|ner
of vices raigned so impudently and
uncontrollably, that Almighty God was
even forced to open a free passage
among them for Innumerable armies of
barbarous Pagan Nations from the
North, Getes (or Goths) Vandalls,
Francks, Hunns, Saxons, Danes, Lom|bards,
and many others, which like
Locusts spread themselves, devouring all
things through all countreyes, especially
of the Western Church, all which did
not expresse their fury so much against
their Christian Enemies forces, as against
their Religion. Now what could be ex|pected
from such Conquerours, but that
the Christian Faith should be vtterly ex|tinguished.
34. Yet such was the infinite Wisedom
and Goodnes of God that that which was
a most terrible Plague to impious and
dissolute Christians then alive, proved
in generall to Gods Church and Christian
Religion a most unvaluable blessing. For
in a short time, God of those stones raised
up Children to Abraham: Children, not
like the former, who sluggishly con|tented

themselves with the name of
Christians, and in their lives denyed
Christ: but heroically zealous servants
of our Lord: Witness innumerable Chur|ches
magnificently built, and richly en|dowed,
to his honour: Witness innu|merable
Monasteries and Schooles of
Piety frequently inhabited by Empe|rours,
Kings, Queens, Princes, and Prin|cesses,
who preferred a voluntary life of
Solitude, Poverty, and Mortification (to
the end they might more freely attend
to heavenly Meditations) before Mag|nificent
Courts, Scepters, and Crowns.
Lastly witness a numerous Army of
Martyrs, not a few of them Soueraign
Kings, and Princesses  tender Virgins
witness likewise Aposticall Bishops
who willingly offered their blood for
the Salvation of their Barbarous Mur|derers.
35. Now who were the persons
who, by Gods most blessed direction,
instilled into the hearts of all these such
an Heroicall Faith and Divine Loue?
were they not principally the Disciples
of S. Benedict? Let the Records and
Annals of so many Nations in Europe be
consulted: they will justifie the same,

and to Gods glory will testify how his
Apostolick Preachers to convert their
Ancestours have been dignified with
stupendious Miracles. Yet all these are
derided by the Doctour as Fanaticks, the
Children of a famous Hypocrit and Fana|tick:
by the Doctour, I say, who can|not
shew one Village converted to
Christianity by any one of his own sect,
nor one Miracle pretended to.
36. Now if any thing here delivered
touching S Benedict and his Disciples
be true (and if all be not true, wee have
been deceived by the Common Tradition
of whole Nations, besides bookes ne|ver
hitherto contradicted) Nay if any
one Miracle has been truly reported of
him or them, in what a condition has the
Doctour by his unseasonable mirth con|cluded
himselfe? The Wiseman tells us
there is a time to weep, and a time to laugh
God has placed them in this order, that
weeping should goe before Laughing; but
the Doctour has perverted the order:
He must expect therfore after his and
his profane Readers mirth, a time of
weeping will succeed: God Almighty
grant that his weeping time may come
in this life, and that weeping and way|ling

and gnashing of teeth come not toge|ther.
37. I doe not know how any Ad|versary
of the Catholick Church could
with all his study have shewd himself
more impotent in his passions, and less
succesfull in reasoning, then the Doctour
has done in his book. Certainly it must
be a hatred horribly poysonous against
the Catholick Church Militant, which
will not spare the Church Triumphant.
I defy the Doctour, how bold a Cham|pion
soever for Schism to say publick|ly
or by writing to signify only his opi|nion,
that S. Benedict, S. Gregory, S.
Francis and the rest are now reprobate,
damned souls in hell: Yet such they must
needs be; if they were Hipocriticall Vi|sionaires,
and false pretenders of Mira|cles,
on purpose to gather Disciples, and
withal dyed vnrepentant of these
things, as most certainly they did. Now
if such be not his opinion, nay if he be
not assured that they are in an accursed
condition, was not his tongue (or penn)
] Sett on fire
of hell, whilst it uttered such Blasphemies
against them, as a perpetuall Monument
of his rage till the day of Iudgment,

when he must be answerable for all that
shall be corrupted by them.
38. But suppose that all these Accu|sations
could really be verified, must
the whole Church be esteemed Antichri|stian,
in which Salvation is scarce pos|sible
to be had (for to prove that is the
Doctours design) because five or six Hi|pocrits
have lived undiscovered in it? be|cause
a Young man notwithstanding
all his austerities, and prayers, having
been inflamed by the spirit of unclean|nes,
chose rather to torment his flesh
by rowling himself naked among bry|ars
and nettles, then to suffer its impure
delectations? or because another young
man having been commanded to restore
to his Father all the goods committed to
his care, meerly to hinder his Charitie
to the poor, in a fitt of fervour gave up
not only his goods, but cloaths also, to
his very Shirt? or because another man
out of some severe (or the Doctour may
call it, capricious) humour, or to pro|cure
contempt to himself, would refuse
to give a civill respect to his betters?
39. What then would the Doctour
say of a Church, in which Visions, and
Dreams and Revelations far more exotick

in outward appearance, are proposed to
mens belief? In which one who calls
himself a Prophet professeth that another
sort of Mortification was enioynd him
then that which S. Benedict practised,
namely to mixe his bread with mans
dung, and so to eat it? In which a Pro|phet
by Gods command for three years
together walked naked and with his feet
bare before all the people? In which
another commands his Disciple not to sa|lute,
or shew any respect to any person
whosoever should come in his way? Yet
not any of these persons or actions the
Doctour dares deride, or refuse to yield
his assent and approbation of them,
though he has encouraged his profane
Readers by his example to deride
them.



. 3. Of the Life and Prayer
of Contemplation, derided by
the Doctour.
40. THe Doctour, not being
contented with recreating
himself and others by vnsainting, and
as he hopes, plucking downe from
Heaven many glorious Saints, so estee|med
by Gods Church (whose company
notwithstanding, where ever they are,
I wish both he and my self may forever
enjoy) proceeds to represent as ridicu|lously
the way of devotion in greatest re|quest
among those of the severall Orders
instituted by them. This is the Prayer of
Contemplation taught by Rusbrochius,
Suso, Harphius, Blosius (and F. Baker
reduced into a Method by M. Cressy.)
He might, if he had pleased, have cited
far more ancient Authours had he consul|ted
Cassian, the Disciple of S. Chrisostom,
in his Conferences of Hermits of his time,

and a Primitive writer, Denis the Aro|pagite,
who, whatever his true name
was, was questionles an Authour of the
second, or at least the third Age of the
Church, and who describes the most sub|lime
and most purely Divine Prayer
exercised by Hierotheus, a Disciple of the
Apostles. It had been a Mastery worthy
of such a Champion as the Doctour to ha|ve
trampled on such Contemplatives as
these, or on S. Paul the Hermit, and S.
Anthony, or rather on S. Mary Magda|len,
S. Mary the Egyptian, and other in|habitants
of desarts, who it seems,
wanted such a directour for Contempla|tion
as the Doctour is.
41. If he doe acknowledge a reall dif|ference
between an Active and a Con|templative
life, (in the opinion of the
Ancient Fathers exemplified by the em|ployments
of the two holy sisters, S.
Martha, and S. Mary Magdalen) he
might doe well to teach this Age what
is meant by a Contemplative life, and
what way and Manner of Devotion pe|culiarly
suits to it: And whether among
all the Sects which he call by the com|mon
name of Protestants, he can tell us
any news of any who have pretended

to a Contemplative life, or given any
Rules for such as would performe the
exercises of it: Such are, and have always
been esteemed such, Solitude, Abstrac|tion
from worldly cares, Rigorous absti|nences,
Cilices, indispensable Obedience
to Superiours, Continuall Prayer practised
according to the degrees of it, still more
and more pure and Spirituall, a perfor|mance
of all dutyes and even ordinarie
actions in vertue of Prayer and Vnion in
Spirit with God c. I doe not now re|quire
of him an account of Raptures, Ex|tasies,
Passive Vnions with God, in which
a pure soule only receives Divine in|fluences:
For these things he derides as
Phantasticall Enthusiasms, and yet all
ages have mentioned them, and affor|ded
innumerable Examples of them,
and they are recorded by persons emi|nent
for Piety and Learning.
42. But the Doctour has one argument
unanswerable, which iustifies him to
call that language unintelligible Canting,
by which certain Mystick Divines en|deavour,
as well as they can, to express
the most pure operations of the soule
herself, and likewise of God upon the
soule in Contemplative Prayer: and this

argument is drawn from a treasvre of
most deep Humility. His argument is
this; I, even I the most learned, and all
comprehending Doctour Stillingfleet doe
not understand the language of such Mys|ticks,
therefore it is unintelligible Canting.
43. Yet notwithstanding this more
then Herculean argument, I believe I
can oppose against him an Antagonist
who will have the boldnes to maintain
that he will answer this argument, and
demonstrate it not to be concluding.
And this is a certain Holy man that pro|fesses
of himself that in a wonderfull
Extasy he found himself present in Pa|radise,
and there saw and heard (as he
thought) God only knows what. Now
what soever it was that he saw and
heard, he was, no doubt, willing to
have communicated it to his brethren,
but he had not the power to doe it.
No human language could afford words
to express matters so elevated and Di|vine.
For if it could, I am assured he,
who was the greatest master of language
that perhaps ever was, had not failed to
do it. Nay more, which still encreases
the wonder, though he professes that
he really saw and heard these inexpli|cable

glorious things, yet he could not
determin whether all the while his
corporall sences, externall or internall,
were employed in this Divine Visita|tion.
44. This was surely, according to the
Doctours grounds, the greatest Fanatick
that ever was, yea the father of all Fana|ticks.
Yet the Doctour dares not call him
so,2. Cor. 12. v. 2. 3. 4. after he is told that this was S. Paul:
and that he it was who describes the
Revelations communicated to him by
Gods Divine Spirit: describes them, I
say, by not describing them, but by
professing that no human language
could describe them, nor humane fancy
comprehend them. This certainly the
Doctour will not deny to have been a
Passive Vnion (so derided by him) of S.
Pauls soule with God, for he contribu|ted
nothing actively either to the pro|curing
or enioying of it.
45. If therefore Mystick Writers,
many of them persons both of great
Sanctity and Learning, in endeavouring
to describe what passed in their soules
during Vnions far inferiour to those of
S. Paul, are forced to make Expressions,
out of the common road, and not

agreeing with School Philosophy; if obser|ving
that in pure Contemplative Prayer
their own operations, and the infusions
of Gods Spirit are so in time in the soule,
that it seems to them that there is as it
were a Region of it beyond the discove|ry
of Philosophy, which they think fit
to call the Apex mentis, and Fundus ani|mae,
the Doctour might without any fur|ther
guilt have abstained from imputing
Fanaticism to Ludo vicus Blosius, or M.
Cressy, for transcribing such expressions.
But this is a Sycophancy inexcusable in
the Doctour, who mentions such Mysti|cal
phrases on purpose to deride them as
unintelligible Non-sence, and at the
same time omitts the setting down ex|pressions
which interpret them.
46. But there is one speciall Phrase
which above the rest cited by M. Cressy,
exposes him to the Doctours utmost con|tempt.
This is where it is sayd that, In
the supreme Degree of Contemplative Pray|er
the soule is so united to God as if nothing
were existent but God and the soule:P. 334. Yea
so far is the soule from reflecting on her own
existence, that it seems to her God and she
are not distinct, but one only thing. This
is called by some Mysticks an Vnion of no|thing

with nothing in which the soule comes
to a feeling of her not being, and by conse|quence
of the not being of Creatures: the
which is indeed a reall Truth. True, says
the Doctour, this is indeed either a reall
Truth or else Intollerable Non-sense.
47. Now I suppose it is not for the
Doctours interest to seem to have recei|ved
any satisfaction from persons iniu|red
by him: Therefore addressing my|self
to any indifferent Reader, I doe af|firm,
that the most supreme affirmative
Notion that we can have of God is that
which is implyed in his most adorable
incommunicable name of Iehova, or as
himself interprets it [Sum qui Sum] I am
what I am, which imports an infinite
Vniversall Plenitude of Being. Therefo|re,
as the Schoole Doctours say, if we
hold to the Notion of Being, between
the Being of God and the limited, parti|cipated
Being of Creatures, there is an
infinite distance, and by consequence
Creatures compared with God have
more of Not-being, then they have of
Being; in which regard their denomi|nation,
so considered, ought rather to
be taken from not-being, then from
being. Thus the Sthooles: which if they

speak Nonsense (for my part I think they
doe not) yet surely the nonsense is not
intolerable.
48. But moreover Mystick Divines
though they acknowledge the Infinite|nes,
Totality, and Vniversality of Gods
Being; yet they rather chuse [to which
choice the Nature of Contemplative
Prayer even forces them] to reiect all
distinct, affirmative Notions of God and
his perfections, as coming Infinitely
short of his Divine Nature, and which
indeed are falsely applied to him, if con|sidered
as they are comprehended by
us: and they frame to themselves a Ne|gative
Notion of him, by separating from
him all Attributes whatsoever compre|hended
by us, because as such they are
indeed imperfections. And to instill
into our minds such a Notion of God, of
all others least imperfect, he is pleased
to describe himself in Scriptures to be
inaccessible light, that is, light though infi|nitely
glorious, yet to us invisible, and
invisible because of the excess of its Visibi|lity.
Hence he is sayd to dwell in darknes,
and to make darknes his secret place, and
his pavilion round about him to be dark
waters and thick clouds of the skyes.

In this darknes it is that God is contem|plated
in pure Spirituall Prayer, in which,
all Images and positive Notions of the
Divinity being reiected, an Incomprehen|sible
Nothing remains, to which the Sou|le
is united, and in whose presence all
Created Beings are annihilated. In this
darkness therefore contemplative Sou|les
have, as it were, an experimentall
perception of what Schoolmen deduce
from reasoning.
49. It seems now to mee that a
weaker Capacity then the Doctours
may perceive in this no intolerable Non|sense.
Yea I must add, that here the
Doctour gives a manifest proof of his
dishonesty, in wilfully leaving out that
which evide~tly explains M. Cressy's mea|ning:
which if it had not been concea|led
from the Readers would have ren|dred
his Assertion touching the Not-being
of Creatures to be most rationall.
For thus M. Cressy (in Sancta Sophia
Treat. 3. p. 304.) treating of the State
of Perfection, writes: In this State the
soule comes to a feeling indeed of her
Not being, and by consequence of the
Not being of Creatures: The which in|deed
is reall Truth: Not as if the soule

or other creatures either did cease ac|cording
to their Naturall Being; or as
if a natural Being were indeed no
reall Being (as F. Benedict Canfield
doth seem to determin) But because
all sinfull adhesion by affection to
creatures being annihilated, then
they remain (as to the soule) only in that
true Being which they have in God, by
dependance on him, and relation to him,
so that he (alone) is all in all. Whereas
while we sinfully adhere unto them,
by staying in them with Love, we
carry our selves towards them as if
we thought them to have a Being or
subsistance of and in themselves, and not
of God only, and that they might be
loved for themselves, without refe|rence
to God: Which is the fundamen|tall
Errour and root of all Sin.
50. Thus the Doctour deales with
his Catholick Adversaries. He can at
pleasure make them write Non-sense by
concealing their Sense. And thus also he
treats M. Cressy again in repeating seve|rall
passages of Sancta Sophia touching
Contemplative Prayer: For selecting from
severall places certain abstruse Words
and Phrases made use of by Mysticks to

express, as well as they can, their con|ceptions,
he presents them all together
in a heap before his Readers eyes, and
then miscalls them Vnintelligible Can|ting,
whilst in the mean time he leaves
out the interpretation which M. Cressy
gives of those words and phrases, to make
them intelligible. Truly it is not with|out
some scruple now that I take noti|ce
of any thing that such an Adversary
as the Doctour shewes himself, doth or
can write on an argument so unfitt for
Controversy as Contemplative Prayer is,
which cannot but he disgustfull to such
a sensuall Palat as he shews his to be,
being willing to corrupt the Palats also
of his Readers. It may be e're long they
will see a Treatise on this Argument,
demonstrating the substance of what
so ever the Doctour finds fault withall in
M. Cressy's Sancta Sophia, to be suitable
to what the Fathers of Gods Church have
both from Tradition, and from their
own experience also, delivered on that
most Divine Subject. And the Doctour
shall have free leave (without any fu|ture
Reply) once more to call what those
Holy Fathers write unintelligible Can|ting,
and intolerable Non-sence, though

their expressions be parallelled and con|firmed
by numerous Texts of Holy Scrip|ture.
In the mean time,P. 336 for the Readers
sake, I will here add some Reflexions
upon what the Doctour has written.
51. He proceeds further, saying
That the utmost effect of contemplative
Prayer if intelligible and practicable, is
gross Enthusiasm. And why? Because,
forsooth M. Cressy says that by a diligent
practise of such internall Spirituall Prayer
the soule receives from God a heavenly light
and Inspiration for her direction in all her
actions, according to the Psalmists
words. Accedite ad Deum  illumina|mini,
and according to the Prayer in his
own Churches Liturgy, borrowed from
the Roman: [Fifth Sunday after Easter]
Lord from whom all good things doe
come, grant us thy humble servants that
by thy holy Inspiration, we may think those
things that be good, and by thy mercyfull
guiding we may perform the same. The
word Inspiration therefore needs not
trouble the Doctour: neither by it is any
other thing meant, but Divine Grace,
which, sayes he, none denyes.
52. Yet he must know that this Divi|ne
Grace obtaind by Spirituall Prayer

constantly exercised, though it be in its
nature and Kind the same which every
good Christian enioyes, yet the lights
and motions of it extend much farther,
even to the directing a person not only
in necessary dutyes, but to the sancti|fiing
of all his actions, otherwise in
their own nature indifferent, and im|proving
them for the perfectiona|ting
the soule in Divine love, in soe much
as those actions which are performed by
ordinary good Christians meerly out of
an impulse of Nature, or for some sen|suall
satisfaction, are by these done in
obedience to the Divine Will, discove|red
to them.
53. And whereas to distinguish these
Inspirations from those pretended to by
Fanaticks, it was sayd, that in Contem|plative
persons these direct rather to not
doing, then doing, when both these seem
otherwise equally indifferent, I wonder
why the Doctour should be displeased
with this. He may remember that in
the time of the late Vsurper, when him|self
was a great leading Preacher, all the
actions almost of his Brethren were pre|tended
to come from a Divine light and
Inspiration all warranted by the Bible,

which Light (more, it seems, to the
Doctours mind) directed them to no|thing
but doing, viz: to reform Religion,
to rebell against their King, to pluck
down Hierarchy, to multiply Sects, to
usurp the office of Preaching without
any Vocation, to imprison, Pillage, kill
their fellow subiects and the like: But
no such effects proceed from the lights
and Inspirations of Internall livers among
Catholicks: they (having the same Vo|cation
that S. Mary Magdalen had) lea|ve
the many businesses to Martha, vnles
God by their lawfull Superiours, calls
them to externall Emploiments, which
when he does, he enables them to
perform them with greater Perfection,
as we see by the Conversion of many Na|tions
performed by such as had spent a
great part of their lives in Solitude and
Contemplation.
54. It is most certain that if Luther,
Calvin, Tindall and such Reformers had
by Prayer disposed themselves for such
lights as these, and also followed the
direction of them, they would never
have procured warre and bloodshed,
destruction of Kingdoms, rebellions of
Subjects, tearing asunder Gods Church

and sacrilegiously invading its revenues
neither would they to satisfie their lusts
have incesttuously polluted themselves
with Consecrated Virgins: in a word they
would have done all things contrary to
what they have done. And if the Doc|tour
himself had followed the guidance
of such a Light, he would never have
published such a Book, in which preten|ding
to demonstrate that Salvation can
scarce possibly be attayned in the Ca|tholick
Church, whatsoever is alledged
by him which truly concerns the Church
it self, may be contained in twenty or
thirty pages, whereas the Book it self
consists of five or Six hundred, all the
rest being Scurrilous buffonries, petulant
revilings of Gods Saints, imputing to the
Church the Doctrins and practises of
madmen or Sectaries condemned by the
Church herself, and any thing that he
could take out of Dunghills which
might be serviceable for his unchristian
purpose to eradicate out of his Readers
hearts Charity and all sense of humanity:
and all this without any provocation, as
if, enraged to see that the same merci|full
indulgence is not denyed to Catho|licks
alone, which is allowed to himself,

and all Sects among us which vnani|mously
conspired to his Majesties des|truction,
and of which not any one to
this day has renounced the Principles
which led them thereto: as if, I say, in
that rage his design was to expose inno|cent,
and peaceable subiects to all man|ner
of Contempts, affronts, hatred, and
mischievous attempts of their fellow
Subiects, to the disturbance of the king|doms
peace and the renewing of our pu|blick
calamities and Tragedies, to which
he knows that thirty years since, such
books and Sermons were made use of as a
Prologue.
55. He must give me leave to add
hereto, that in the Principles at the end
of his Book, giving an account of the Faith
of Protestants, he has layd a foundation
to support and iustify not only all man|ner
of Sects, but the worst effects of
them, I mean, the late Rebellion, and any
other that may follow hereafter: I will
not say this was his Intention, but the
consequence may easily be demonstra|ted.
56. For in the said Principles this being
layd down by him as a ground of Pro|testancy,
That every sober enquirer into

Scriptures may be infaillibly certain of all
necessary Truths contained in them without
any obligation to consult or however to obey,
Ecclesiasticall Superiours and Teachers:
does it not necessarily follow, that all
Sectaries are equally iustifiable, since it
is impossible, without looking into
their thoughts, to evince against them
that they have not enquired soberly? What
monstrous opinions now may not here|by
be justified? and what possibility
of confuting them? now if among
such opinions this be one, That it is
the necessary Duty of a Christian Sub|iect
to contribute all that is in his Pow|er,
even goods and life it self, to sett up the
true Religion, that is, his own Sect, and
this against all Power whatsoever civill or
Ecclesiasticall, which shall seek to oppress
it, what will the Doctour, standing to
his own Principles, say hereto, if he
had a mind to oppose it? Now that such
an Opinion may possibly spring up, and
the Assertours of it may pretend that it
is grounded on evident Scripture, the
Doctour himself will not deny, since I
am sure he remembers, and has reason
to do so, that this was the Architectoni|call
Principle, common to all Sects in the

like Rebellion: this was thundred out in
Pulpits, of this all Pamphlets were full:
the Bible and nothing but the Bible was
all their warrant, the Bible was the En|sign
carried up aloft before their Troops,
as if the King, Bishops, and all their party
had been professed Enemies to the Bible,
or had grounded their Religion upon the
Alcoran, whereas indeed all these Sects
had turned Christs Doctrine into that
bloody law of Mahomet. Yet notwith|standing
all this the Doctour zealously
and furiously against the Papists still
contends for putting the Bible into all
mens hands, and assures them that they
are the only Legall Iudges of the sense of
it in Necessaries, upon condition they
will only say that they are Sober Enqui|rers
into it.
57. This seems to me to be an evi|dent
consequence of the Doctours Prin|ciple;
a Principle never acknowledged
in Gods Church for above fourteen hun|dren
years by any one Orthodox Chri|stian,
or by any unless by some
whom the Doctour himself will call
Hereticks. If the Doctour think I doe
not speak truth, lett him search, and lett
him employ his freinds to search into

Libraries: let them consult all the an|cient
Fathers of the Church, and all Coun|cills:
and when they have done, and
seen themselves deserted by all Anti|quity,
and Vertually condemnd and
Anathematized by all Councills (which
pretend to have right to teach, and to
oblige Christians to yeeld their assent)
will it not follow that his Religion hath
a most pittifully unstable and sandy
Foundation? But to return from this
digression to an argument more grate|full
to the Doctour, the Fanaticism by
him imputed to the Catholick Church,
with regard to the Prayer of Contem|plation.
58. Whereas M. Cressy in his Sancta
Sophia among severall things by which
Liberty of Spirit may be hindered,P. 336. reck|ons
this for one: The doing actions meerly
for edification: the Doctour in scorn
adjoyns hereto these words, A most ex|cellent
and Apostolicall Doctrine! These
words shew that the Doctour likes not
that saying: but I cannot imagin what
reason he had for it. Our Saviour indeed
requires that our light should shine before
men, that they seeing our good works might
(being edified) glorifie our heavenly Fa|ther.

But this concerns only such good
works as our Duty obliges vs to doe in
Publick. But as for other duties, such
as is Prayer and Fasting, he bids us retire
into our closets to practise them there,
without an eye to the Edifiing others,
and condemns the Pharisees for doing
them that they may be seen of men. In like
manner those who are called to an In|ternall
life and Solitude, for them to
quitt their proper Exercises to goe a|broad
on purpose to do actions good in
themselves, for no other end, but
Meerly to give a good example for the
Edification of others was there iustly
esteemed a prejudice to the liberty of
Spirit necessary for their state.
59. But moreover I would ask the
Doctour, whether being at Church in a
publick Duty, and not having any De|votion
himself at present, he would
esteem it a commendable action to pre|tend
to much fervour, by lifting vp his
eyes or beating his breast, and this meerly
and only to the end that others seeing
him might be edifyed, himself being no|thing
the better for such grimaces? or
would he give an Alms before people
meerly for their edification, and not out of

a Motive of Charity inherent in himself?
Truly if he should doe all this in such a
manner, I should be none of his admi|rers.
And much lesse do I, or I think,
any good Christian admire him for his
Book so full af all manner of Vnchristian
affections, which surely he cannot pre|tend
to be written meerly for edification,
and for which I hope his Judgement is
not soe perverted as to expect a reward
from God, who litle esteems witt wi|thout
Charity, or rather witt shewed
for the destruction of Charity, and
Truth also.
60. After this the Doctour out of the
same Book mentioning the Supernatu|rall
Favours which innumerable Catho|lick
Writers both ancient and Modern,P. 337.
do testify to have been communicated
by Almighty God to his servants after a
constant exercise of Internall Prayer,
and Mortification, the Doctour, I say,
would have his Reader think that his
deriding of these is a sufficient confuta|tion.
And I may more justly think that
a sober Reader will Judge that the only
mentioning of a proceeding so contrary
to all rules of reasoning is a sufficient
Reply.
61. What hath been hitherto sayd is
even too much touching the defence of
a Book of Prayer published by M. Cressy,
in which the Church of England is so lit|le
concerned, and which was compiled
for the use of good devout humble Sou|les,
and not at all for persons of the
Doctours temper. Those eminently
learned and Pious Fathers, and particu|larly
R. F. Leander a S. Martino who
with great care perused the severall
Spirituall Treatises written by R. F.
Baker, and gave their Approbations of
them, were persons in all regards for
their profound universall Learning far
exalted above the censures of Malignant
Pedants: and the devout soules to whose
practise they recomended those pious
Instructions, have reaped such fruits
from them, such effectuall helps far
their advancement in the Divine Love
and Spirituall Perfection, that the bouf|foneries
of such a Doctour will only pro|duce
this effect upon them, to give God
daily thanks that they have escaped
from a Church in which blasphemous
Invectives against Gods Saints and the
Science of Saints are not only permitted,
but applauded and rewarded.
62. None can justly wonder that a
soule so manifestly voyd of Divine Love
should want both light and tast in such
things. Daamantem  sentit quod dici|mus,
saith S. Augustin. But does the
Doctour hope that because he under|stands
not and therefore proudly con|temns
Misticall Theology and the Exer|cises
of an Internall life, the Catholick
Church and Governours of it will abate
their esteem of that Blessing, which ma|nifestly
proves that Gods Holy Spirit does
not communicate his most sublime and
precious Gifts to Sects divided from the
Church, of which scarce any pretend to
them, and those that doe so, do evident|ly
shew by their contempt of all autho|rity,
renunciation of all Christian Charity,
furious and restles attempts of new Re|formations
and Seditious Combinations to
the ruine of all Peace, that it is a black
Spirit, which was a Murderer from the
beginning, by which they are agitated?
Whereas those humble, devout, and re|tired
soules among Catholicks, stiled by
the Doctour, Fanaticks, are so far from
any intention of disturbing Peace, and
so entirely submitted to Lawfull Autho|rity
(the Spirit of Prophets being so indis|pensably

Subiect to the Prophets) that they
are in a continuall readines to renounce
all Reuelations, Apparitions, impulses and
whatsoever extraordinary Visitations, if
they seem any wayes to occasion in
them Doubts of the Churches Faith, or to
prejudice Obedience to her Ordonnances.
63. The Doctour I am sure, conside|ring
his supposed Universall reading,
cannot be ignorant, that such Fanaticks
as these, though invisible to the busy
World, were yet esteemd Chariots of
Isral and the horsemen thereof. That
pious, wise, and Potent Christian Empe|rours
have consulted them in their
greatest affairs, and have acknowledged
themselves obliged to them for miracu|lous
Victories over Tyrants, resolving
upon warre by their encouragement,
beginning them with their benediction,
and conquering by the assistance of their
Prayers: By their Prayers, and not their
Disputations, the Church has triumphed
over Heresies, and the world been freed
from Plagues and Mortalities. At their
Names Devills have trembled, and by
their command, though absent, those
proud Spirits have with a mixture of
feare and rage quitted their habitation

in the Bodies of unhappy men. Yet the|se
the Doctour dares deride, and because
they are patient, will not perhaps re|pent,
till it be too lare, but will justify
still his impious boldnes and petulancy.
64. It is truly a sad thing to consider
with what disposition of mind persons
qualifyed, as (it seems) the Doctour is,
do apply themselves to the reading of
Books of Piety written by Catholicks. It
is as daggers piercing their hearts when
they find no advantage to expresse their
malignity: If in a great volume full of
most heavenly Instructions for the exer|cise
of all vertues and dutyes to God and
man, they can find but a line or two in|to
which they think they can make
their Venenious teeth to enter, by that
line or two they become edified, that is
comfortable nourrishment to their
minds, the whole Book besides being
nauseous to them; Would not damned
soules in Hell, if Spirituall Books were
sent them, thus read and thus descant
upon them?
65. Now whether the Doctour (and
some other of his freinds) has not
shewed himself such a Reader of Catho|lick
Books truly innocent, devout, and in

which the breathing of Gods Spirit may,
as it were, be perceived, let any indif|ferent
Reader of his Book be judge. How
many of such Books, from S. Gregory to
S. Ignatius his time, does the Doctour
shew that he has read, how many Lives
of Saints, how many Treatises of De|votion,
and among them he will give
me leave to name Sancta Sophia, and
poor Mother Iuliana? And what account
does he give to his Readers of the Spiri|tuall
Benefit reaped by him from his la|borious
reading? He it seems is not able
out of them all to suggest any point of
Instruction in Christian Doctrin, not
one good affection to God, not the least
encouragement to a vertuous holy life.
All these things are vanished out of his
memory, and evaporated out of his
brain, having never affected his heart.
What then does he yeild for his Readers
edification? He teaches him in reading
such Books to pronounce mimically and
Scornfully what he finds there concer|ning
Miracles, how wel soever attested,
and concerning Divine Favours commu|nicated
by God to his Speciall Servants:
and this being done, to call them Fana|ticks,
and so doeing to esteem such re|lations

sufficiently confuted, and such
Spirituall Books sufficiently disparaged.
He teaches him to snatch out of a great
Book three or four passages lamely and
imperfectly cited, to give what con|struction
to them he pleases, and whe|ther
he does not understand, or over|understand
them, to pronounce them
still Fanaticall, and there is an end of
those Books: By the Doctours good will
no Protestant hereafter must receiue
the least good from them, vnless pride,
malice, and contempt of godlines be
good things.
66. Now having named in the last
place poor Mother Iuliana, a devout
Anchoret about three hundred years sin|ce
living in Norwich, I must needs Signi|fy
my wonder, what could move his
Spleen and choler against her litle Book.
It is true, her language to the ears of
this age, seems exotick: But it is such
as was spoken in her time: therefore she
may be excused: Her expressions tou|ching
Gods favours to her are homely,
but that surely is no sin. For affections
to God are set down with great simpli|city
indeed, but they are withall cordi|all
and fervent, and apt to imprint them|selves,

in the heart of an unpreiudiced
Reader. The sense and tast she shews
to have had of Gods Speciall love to his
servants, of the omnipotent efficacy of
his Grace, and his impregnable defence
and watchfullnes over his Elect, to se|cure
them finally from all dangers of
Tentations, is indeed admirable. Yet the
Doctour has no eyes to see any of these
things. But through what glasses he
looked when he spied out blasphemy in
her Writing, I am not able to say: Blas|phemy,
which never hitherto could be
observed by so many learned and Reli|gious
persons as have perused them. But
it is no wonder that Spiders should suck
and digest into poyson the most whole|som
nourishment.
67. What hath been hitherto said of
Contemplative Prayer is but even too
much to such an Adversary, it being a
Subiect too Sacred and Divine to be
treated of in a Polemicall Discourse a|gainst
an Opponent of the Doctours
temper: Who, I think, is the first Pro|testant
Writer that ever made that an
argument of Controversy against the Ca|tholick
Church. The only Excuse that I
can devise for so unreasonable a quarrel

begun by him, is his indulgence to a
froward passion conceived by him, with|out
any provocation, against M. Cressy,
who severall years since published a
Book on that Subiect, called Sancta So|phia:
in which Book notwithstanding he
challenges nothing to himself, but the
Labour of making Collections and the
Method of it. In that regard therefore
it may be permitted him to commend
the Directions for the Exercise of Inter|nall
Spirituall Prayer, and the Practise
of all Christian Vertues in Perfection con|tained
in it. And this, in despight of
the Doctours unmerited malice, he does
with such confidence, that he dares
promise to himself that if any sober;
well affected Reader, though a Prote|stant,
and though at present one of the
Doctours admirers, shall seriously and
with an humble heart peruse it, he will
either apply himself to the practise of
the excellent Instructions contained in it,
or bewayle his want of Spirituall coura|ge
in not daring effectually to aspire to
so glorious an Attempt.
68. Wee must not here for|get
two Notable Saints,P. 244. which as
the Doctour confidently pretends

have given him sufficient advantage
so to denigrate their persons, as by
them to cast an aspersion on the
Church. These are a Holy Widow and a
Virgin, S. Brigit, and S. Catharine of
Siena. Both these had Supernaturall
Revelations: therefore says the Doc|tour,
they were Fanaticks. But more|over,
their Revelations touching the
Conception of our Blessed Lady do con|tradict
one the other, and the Reve|lations
of both are allowed, and of
one confirmed by the Church in a
Councill: and by consequence the Doc|tour
with assurance pronounces the
Church to be a favourer not only of
Fanaticism, but Errour also. To this
purpose the Doctour.
69. Hereto I answer, 1. That all
Catholicks acknowledge both these to
have been Saints. 2. And that each of
them hath been favoured with Super|naturall
Revelations the publick Office of
the Church testifyes. Thus much is con|fessed:
but it is utterly denyed that the
Church does so approve them, as to for|bid
any one to make iust exceptions a|gainst
them: as wee see many Writers
on both sides have done: she judges

they may in generall be usefull to stirr
up devotion in Readers minds, but she
does not confirme them as infallible.
For how could it be known to the Pope
or Councill that any Speciall Revelation
made, or pretended to be made to ano|ther,
was from God, unles the person
also testify them by Miracles? And it is
observable that when examination is
made of Miracles in order to the Canoni|zation
of any Saint, the testimony of
women will not be received. Natural|ly
imagination is stronger in them then
judgement, and whatsoever is esteemed
by them to be pious, is easily concluded
by them to be true. This I say upon sup|position
that such Revelations, were not
pretended by persons interessed on both
sides of the Controversy about the Im|maculate
Conception. And particularly
touching S. Catharine of Siena,Suar. in 3. S Th q 27. Suares
affirms That not any who have written her
life have made mention of this Revelation.
It will suffise therefore to set down he|re
what two illustrious Catholick Wri|ters
have declared touching this Point.
The former is S. Antoninus mentioned
by the Doctour.Anon. Summ. p. 1. tit. 8. c. If you say, saith he, that
some Saints, have had a Revelation of these

things, as S. Brigit: it is to be observed that
other Saints who have wrought Miracles,
as S. Catharin of Siena, have had a Reve|lation
of the contrary. And since true Pro|phets
doe sometimes think that a thing pro|ceeds
from Divine Revelation which they
utter of themselves, there is not inconve|nience
to say, that such Revelations were
not from God, but human dreames. An
example hereof may be found in the Prophet
Nathan speaking to David proposing to
him his dessign to build a Temple to God.
For David though he answered him by a
Spirit of Prophecy, the contrary hereof
after wards appeared.Baron ad A. D. 604. The other is Car|dinal
Baronius, who treating of certain
Revelations of S. Brigit and S. Mathildis,
hath these words: I doe indeed honour
and Venerate (as is due) those two Saints:
but touching the Revelations had by them,
or rather ascribed to them, I receive only
those which the Church receives, which we
know cannot approve things so repugnant.
70. I am sorry I cannot impute it to
so harmles a Principle as ignorance,P. 248. that
the Doctour speaking of two Writers
who both of them rejected these preten|ded
Revelations of both these Saints as illu|sions
and fancies, adds, What becoms

then of the Popes and Councills Infallibi|lity,
who have approved both? By which
words an unwary Reader will not
doubt but that an Oecumenical Councill
had made a Canon with an Anathema
against all those who should not ack|nowledge
all the Revelations of S. Bri|git
to have been Divine, and the belief
of them necessary to Salvation. Whenas
all that was done by the Councill was,
upon occasion of Invectives made
against those Revelations by many Ca|tholicks,
to require Ioannes a Turrecre|mata
to peruse and give his judgment of
them, which being favourable, the
Councill, saith he, approved them, that
is, freely permitted them to be read, as
contayning nothing contrary to Faith
and good Manners. Notwithstanding
which kind of approbation, we see li|berty
taken, and with leave enough
from the Church, by many Writers to
decry both the one and the other, and
there is scarce a Catholick alive that
thinks he has an obligation to believe
either of them.



. 4. Visions c. no grounds
of believing Doctrines among
Catholicks.
71. THe Doctour thinks it ad|vantageous
to his cause
against the Catholick Church,P. 235. that it
should be believed that Visions, Reve|lations,
c. are made by Catholicks
grounds of believing Severall points of
Doctrin, as Purgatory, Transsubstancia|tion
and Auricular Confession.  Indeed
if he could prove that any such Points of
Doctrine have been, or the Point of the
Conception of our B. Lady should here|after
be declared Articles of Faith upon
no surer grounds than modern Miracles
or Revelations, it would have been the
Maister-piece of all that he has, or ever
shall write. But this he durst not say
explicitely, though perhaps he is will|ing
his Readers should understand that
to have been his meaning: For then al|most

all the Councils of Gods Church
would have confuted him, since they
professe that the only ground of their Faith
is Divine Revelation made to the Church
by Christ and his Apostles, and conveyed to
posterity in Scripture and Tradition.
72. Now this the Doctour being I
am sure not able to contradict, is it to
be esteemed a preiudice to Catholick
Faith that Almighty God to confound
Hereticks and establish the belief of Ca|tholicks,
should in severall succeeding
ages afford particular Revelations, or
enable his servants to work Miracles:
And that he has done so, we have such
a Cloud of Witnesses, that credit must be
denyed to History in generall, if none
of such Witnesses must be admitted. As
for the Doctour, the only expedient
made use of by him to invalidate their
testimony, is to produce it in a stile of
Raillery.
73. As for the instituting Festivalls,
for example of the Conception of our
Blessed Lady c. it cannot be denyed but
it is a Lawfull Church-institution: and
might at any time on any occasion be
appointed: And if on some Revelation,
supposed Divine, an occasion was given

to the Pope to ordain it, this can be no
prejudice to it, being a Glorifying of
God for the Blessed Virgin, the Mother
of our Lord, her being either preserved,
(as some Catholicks say) or at least
Cleansed (as others) from the common
pollution of Originall Sin at her Concep|tion,
without any determining which
of these two hapned to her, and so the
Festivall is equally observed by Catholicks
of either Opinion. The like may be
said of the Feast of Corpus Christi, of S.
Michael the Archangll c. by none of
which the least alteration was made in
the Common Faith.
74. But truly we have great obli|gation
to the Doctour, though I believe
he does not expect wee should thank
him, for imputing to the Church the
frantick Preachings and practises of Mad|men,
and at the same time telling us,
that they were excommunicated and
other wayes punished by Popes, Princes
and Bishops. Indeed it is a terrible Argu|ment
to prove it dangerous to live in a
Church, because there Heresies, false
Revelations and impure actions are con|demned
by it. If Holy Institutours of
Religious Orders could with their Rules

give also power and will to their Sub|jects
not to transgress them, the world
would be even too happy. But this ex|ceeding
a Created power to doe, it is even
necessary that Scandalls should follow,
such as were given by a Sect of Mendi|cants,
the Authours of the horrible E|vangelium
aeternum, the Followers of
Petrus Ioannis de Oliva, the Beguini,
Fraticelli, Beguardi, the Illuminati, or
Alumbrados of Spain, and such other
Monsters, raised up by the Devill, in
a cursed imitation of the Graces and
Gifts communicated by God to his de|vout
and faithfull servants. But the Doc|tour
who can (no doubt) commend Lu|ther
for opposing and dividing God
Church, though Luther himself tells him
that he did it by the Devills instigation,
Scornfully derides and reviles any one
who shall pretend to defend the Church
by Gods Inspiration or Miracles. But 
Calvin had not failed in his designed
Miracles, by raising a man from the
dead the quite contrary way, the Doc|tour
perhaps would have been reconci|led
to Miracles and Inspirations.
75 Thus we see that nothing that
God has done, or perhaps can do, for the

benefit of his Church will please the
Doctour. If Catholicks live abstracted lives
in the Exercise of pure Spirituall Prayer,
or if God confers on any of them Super|naturall
Gifts, all this must passe for meer
Enthusiasme, though the persons with
perfect humility submit all to lawfull
Authority, and though the Doctour al|ledges
nothing to disprove any of these
things.
76. But least we may in the end
hope that he will permitt and encourage
us to keep to the Externall Devotions and
Publick Liturgy. By no meanes: there
must nothing be thought or done by
the Children of the Catholick Church,
but must be found fault with: The Li|turgy,
saith he, is a tedious and Ceremo|nious
way of externall Devotion as dull and
as cold as the Earth it self. Hereto (quia
de gustibus non est disputandum) all that I
conceive needfull to say, is that the
Doctour seems to me not yet cordially
reconciled to the Ceremonies and Com|mon
Prayer Book of his own lately a|dopted
Church, which he knows to ha|ve
been borrowed from the Catholick
Liturgy, and for that reason hated by his
freinds the Presbyterians and Indepen|dents,

and by them esteemed a tedious
and ceremonious way of Externall Dev|tion,
as dull and as cold as the Earth it
self.


. 5. Resisting Authority fal|sely
imputed to Catholick Re|ligion.
77. WE have hitherto seen the
Doctors charge of Fana|ticism
on the Catholick Church, and
his proofs also, such as they are: But he
concludes this his accusation with an
Epiphonema truly of great importance, if
rightly applied, which is The Fanati|cism
of Catholicks, in resisting Authority
under a pretence of Religion.
78. To make this good, he very
ingenuously absolves the Catholick
Church her self, and layes this fault
only on the Principles and Practises of
the Iesuiticall party, a party, saith he
most countenanced and encouraged by the
Court of Rome. And for proof of this
he produces severall Books written

and actions done by them in the last
age.
79. Hereto our Answer must be: that
Scandalls in Gods Church are unavoydable,
as our Saviour tells vs. But where will
he find any Catholick who will be
answerable for all the actions of the
Court of Rome, or all the Writings of a
single party? The Popes are absolute
Princes as well as Prelats, and if some
of them have been tainted with ambi|tin
and a desire to invade the rights of
other Princes (For what Courts have
ever been entirely free?) Such can ne|ver
want Ministers zealous, diligent
and inventive to justify all their preten|tions
and designs, whatever they are.
Vice will never want Instruments and
supporters, till the Devill himself be
converted and become a good Chri|stian,
and it will be long before this
happen.
80. But it is well known that in this
Point, Princes, and States are generally
become more clear sighted and more
wise then formerly they have been,
and by consequence the Court of Rome
also.
81. But to be more particular. If the

Doctour will think good to consult the
Iesuits, I believe they will tell him,
That if they find speciall favour in the
Court of Rome, it is not with regard to
any such Books or Actions imputed by
him to their fore fathers and which
they are far from defending: That they
have other Merits and endowments to
recommend them to the Popes Favour.
And particularly that this is not recko|ned
among their Merits, their equally
free access and more then ordinary in|terest
of favour in the Court of France
(where, the Doctour knows, such Do|ctrins
are far from being admitted) will
more then sufficiently testify. They
will further tell him that for as much as
concerns the unsafe Antimonarchicall
Doctrins contained in the foresaid Books
cited by him, it is almost a whole Age
since that they have been by their Ge|nerall
forbidden under paine of Excom|munication
and other most greivous
Censures to iustify them, either in Wri|ting,
preaching or disputing: and more
over (which is very considerable) this
Prohibition was not only made before
the condemnation of these Books in
France, but also was known to the Pope

and permitted by him. I am moreover
confident that he cannot with any tole|rable
proofs make good his accusation
of their being wanting in their fidelity
to his Majesty, or his Glorious Father, du|ring
the late rebellious warr, which
was raised and prosecuted by the Doc|tours
best quondam freinds: And more
over I may assure the Doctour, that if an
Oath were framed free from ambiguity,
and without odious phrases inserted in
it (wholly unnecessary to the substance
of it) they would not make any Scru|ple
of ioyning with all their Catholick
Brethren in taking it. But then what
thinks the Doctour of these two Proposi|tions
to be sett in the scale against his?
1. That it is absolutely unlawfull to Sub|iects
by arms to propagate or defend Reli|gion
against their Lawfull Prince. 2. That
(I say not by the Pope; to this he and his
brethren are as forward as any, but) by
no Assembly Civill or Ecclesiasticall, Sub|iects
can be authorized by arms to oppose
their Prince, upon any pretence what soe|ver.
Are he and his quondam party ready
to declare these? Will he or they damne
the execrable Covenant? Surely the
Kings safety and the publick Peace are

far more concernd in these then in the
former. This therefore would be a task
in which his Learning and Eloquence
would be worthily employed: And
more over in case himself either by
Preaching or Writing has declared the
contrary to either of these, or engaged
his soule in the Covenant, so great, so
horrible a Scandall as that, certainly
ought not only to be repented of, but
a publick revocation of it to be made. And
moreover my Lords the Bishops his Su|periours
deale but too mercifully in
not requiring also a Recantation from
him of what he has written destructive
to the Ecclesiasticall Government of that
Church, in whose revenues they have
now given him so great a share. But I
despair of being able to extort from the
Doctour a free expression of his mind
touching these two Points, which invol|ue
a secret never to be discovered. At
least then he may with Civilitie be en|treated
to satisfy the world touching
the sense of the two Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance which he has taken al|ready,
as appears by the Preferments he
enioys: unles perhaps for the tendernes
of his conscience he has been dispensed

with taking them. I doubt not but that
in the Oath of Alleagiance he cheer-fully
renounced all Authority in the Pope or
any forrain Potentate to absolue Subiects
from their Allegiance: but will he doe
the same with regard to any domestick
Power, Assembly, or State at home? This
were worth the knowing.
82. And next touching the Oath of
Supremacy,Irenic. P. 392. the Doctour during the late
execrable Vsurpers time publishing in
his Irenicum the Iudgement touching
Church Government of the prime Pa|triarch
of the English Reformation, stiled
by him that most worthy Prelat and glorious
Martyr Archbishop Cranmer (a Martyr
indeed, if an impenitent Traytor may be
called a Martyr:) and his judgment, de|clared
in an answer to a Petition of the
Clergy in the Convocation, was in brief,
That Princes and Governours may make
(Bishops and) Priests as well as Bishops
may: And that a Bishop or a Priest made
by them needeth no Consecration by the
Scripture. Moreover the Doctour signi|fies
that he had in his possession an Au|thentick
Copy of the same Cranmers Ans|wer
in resolution of certain doubts pro|pounded
by the same Clergy touching

Doctrinall Points, as about the Masses
institution, nature, receiving c. But this
Secret the Doctour envyed his Readers:
Notwithstanding we may collect the
sense of Cranmers Answer from the
Subscription to both the Resolutions, the
Form whereof is this, T. Cantuariens.
This is mine Opinion and Sentence at this
present, which I do not temerariously define,
but do remit the judgment thereof wholly to
your Majesty. So that it seems a finall
judgment both touching Government and
Doctrin is by the Prime Bishop referred
to a Child of about nine years old: a great
glory surely to the English Clergy, for
the knowledge of which they are behol|ding
to the Doctour, as the Doctour was
to Cranmer for confirming the substance
of his Book touching Church Government,
very advantageous to my Lords the Bis|hops.
83. Now this being premised, and
notice being taken that this Book, attri|buting
all this power to the Supreme Ci|vill
Governour, was printed in Cromwells
time: he cannot surely refuse to declare
whether he intended in taking lately
the Oath of Supremacy to acknowledg as
much in the King, whose Title by Law

is, Supreme Head and Governour of the
Church of England: and whether by the
Church of England is to be understood
only the Prelaticall Church, so as that all
the Doctours other Protestant Churches
are to be supposed exempt from his Iu|risdiction.
For if they be not, it is ex|pected
that the Doctour should declare
that the King as Head of the Church may
ordain Bishops and Priests for his own
Church: and Presbyters for the Presbyte|rians,
Ministers for the Independents,
Holders-forth for Anabaptists; Declarers
for Quakers and Tub-preachers for that
sort of Fanaticks. But this is not all: For
the Doctour, if holding to his Book,
seems obliged to assert a power in the
King to appoint also Articles of Belief, a
hundred ways varying and contradic|ting
one another, to fitt the fancies of
each respective Congregation. But how
would the Doctour advise him about
Fifth Monarchists? Thus much at present
upon this Subiect, by occasion of the
Doctours requiring an account from Ca|tholicks
touching their Fidelity, which
account none were less fitt to require
then the Doctour. Causa patet.
84. But after all, did it become a

Doctour of such reputation (though ha|ving
a design to doe all the mischeif he
could to Catholicks, who never provoked
him) to call into his ayd two such Au|thours
as the Answerer to the Apology for
Catholicks,P. 346. and the Answerer to Phila|nax?
For touching the former, he cannot
but know that his barbarous Answer
has mett wich a Reply already from an
Honourable pen. And for the other, whe|re
was the Doctours modesty when he
stiled himr a worthy Authour for belying
most horribly a party among Catholicks,
as if they had had an influence (and had
joyned with the Doctours friends) in
the most barbarous effects of Fanaticism
here in the murther of a most excellent
Prince? Does he not know how oft, and
particularly how upon the complaint of
the late Queen-Mother of most pre|cious
memory, he has been summoned
to make good that his forged calumny;
but all in vain? Js that wretched Ser|pent
to be stiled a worthy-Authour, who
if he had not been warmed and thawed
by English preferments, had never been
able to hiss in his own countrey, and
much less to disgorge his poyson to
the disturbance of our Island? Js any

credit to be given to him who would
haue that to be believed in England
which all France knows to be false, viz.
That his Father was a loyall subiect to
his King, that is, that he was an Apostar
from Huguenotterie, where Confession
of Faith obliges them to be Traytours and
Rebels whensoever the Honour of God (that
is, the Defence of their execrable Reli|gion)
is concerned?
85. If the Doctour had had the patien|ce
to delay a while the publishing his
Book, he might both haue cowntenan|ced
and strengthned his cause very con|siderably
by imploring the succours of
another of the same French Huguenot
brood of the loyall family of the Du
Moulins. One by Profession of late (God
Help us)  Physician, but heretofore
(as is said) for his  presented to
Cromwell, in which he celebrated his
victories, created by him a publick Rea|der
of History in the Vniversity, then
he became a Controvertist, and Teacher
of Diuinity: the Diuinity doubtles then
in fashion, and pernicious to lawfull So|verains.
Jt seems the poor Snake, not
thiving by his Drugs (for he finds very
few of the English Holy Tribes weary

of living long) betakes himself to his for|mer
Trade of railing at Papists, a Trade
at all times, but now especially, which
brings in as certain a Revenue, as if he
had sett up an Alehouse. This doughty
Controvertist to putt the world in mind
of his first Trade of Surgery, has giuen
Catholick Religion as he alone thinks, a
deadly wound in cutting the very Iu|gulum
causae. Jf his Book had come abro|ad
time enough the Doctour could not
haue refused to make use of it, being
one of the seauenty Patrons to whom
he has written most pittifully begging
Epistles, addressed to all degrees, sects
and Professions, except Bishops. And
in requitall he cannot but warrant him
now a sufficient Minister, in case he
can get Ordination from a Iustice of Peace,
or some other qualified Ciuil Magistra|te.
Poor England! art thou so unprovi|ded
of factious spirits, that French Calvi|nists
must be calld in, and hired to plant
among us the poysonnous roots of ma|licious
Huguenotterie?
86 But to return to the Doctour Him|self.P. 349.
J am far from being of his opinion,
That the most dangerous Sect among us is
of those who under pretence of setting up the

Kingdom of Christ, think it lawfull to over|turn
the Kingdoms of the world. Such we|re
Venner and his company, who (saith he)
acted to the height of Fanaticism among our
Sectaries. Thus far indeed J agree with
him, That these Frantick Fifth Mo|narchists
do more professedly teach Re|bellion
then any other Sect: but I
should renounce common Reason, if I
should affirm that such  handfull of
mad-men, as Venner and Riscrew, are a
Sect more dangerous to the Kingdom then
those numerous Armies of sober Fana|ticks
(Presbyterians, Independents, Ana|baptists,
c.) who all conspired to the
raising and prosecuting the late Rebel|lion.
Yet all these will say as much for
themselves as the Doctour has here do|ne,
viz. We condemn any opposition to Go|vernment
under any pretence whatsoeuer:P. 350.
For it was in Obedience to a Government
such as it was, that the Rebellion was
upheld; a Government divided from the
Kings, and usurped on purpose to destroy
him. To conclude this point, as zeale for
the Kings safety and the Publick Peace is
commendable in all English Subjects and
in such Strangers salso whom English
Preferments have made his Subiects, yet

certainly in the Doctour and his worthy
Huguenot Authour it seems a preposte|rous
and suspicious zeale, which has
been shewn only against a Party, of
which not one can be accused of want
of fidelity to his Maiesty, whilst they
speak not a word, nor so much as inti|mate
any apprehension of danger from
those who unanimously conspired to his
Destruction, and who, for any thing to
the contrary appears, cannot yet find
one word in the Scripture (or the Lawes
of the Kingdom) which condemns their
former Rebellion. But enough, if not too
much, of this argument, which the Do|ctour
would needs discourse upon.


. 6. Fanaticism returneed
upon the Doctour and his vvho|le
Religion.
87. THe Doctour now for the
recreation of his Readers
hauing represented Catholicks, not only
such as now liue, but many in glory
with God in heaven, travestis in a dis|guise
of Ffanaticks acting a Ffarce or

Enterlude composed by him, the glory
of which invention he may lawfully
challenge to himself alone; for I do not
find that any pattern has been giuen
him by any other Adversaries of Gods
Church: He cannot iustly take it ill, if
in some degree of requitall we endea|vour
to shew not only himself, but the
whole Church, I mean all the Churches
of Protestants, as they are Principled by
him in his Book, to be really, without
any vizard or disguise very Fanaticks.
88. Jn pursuing this subiect, we
cannot hinder the Doctour from chal|lenging
some, by him esteemed great,
advantages, in which he much glories,
and for which he giues God humble
thanks. For 1. we can find no Reli|gious
Orders among them, upon the In|stitutours
and Subjects of which we
might fasten this Title, and whom we
might Stigmatize with this brand. An
attempt indeed has once been made of
beginning such an Order of young men
and women liuing promiscuously toge|ther;
But by reason of two defects it
presently expired; For neither would
they be persuaded to vow continency (in
such circumstances truly vnreasonable:)

Neither could a Superiour, he or she be
found to whom they could be obliged
in conscience to profess Obedience; and
no wonder, since, it seems, their own
Church cannot exact it from them. 2
We cannot heare of so much as one
single person whom we might call a
Fanatick for leauing the flesh and the
world to the end he, or she might en|tirely
consecrate themselues to God in
Solitude and Exercises of Spirituall Prayer
and Mortification. 3. Jn case God should
call any one to such a state of life, there
is an vtter want among them of Instru|ctours
and Instructions proper for it, vn|les
The crumms of comfort,, The Practise
of Piety, truly for the Substance good in|nocent
Books, with store of pious affe|ctions:
or else one, a more late one, yet
better then those called, The whole duty
of man could serue their turns. But
these hauing neuer been intended for
such an vse, it cannot reasonably be ex|pected
from them. 4. They all of them
(except the Quakers and Fifth Monar|chists,
with few besides) disclaiming
all Gratuite Graces, Visions, Illumina|tions,
Inspirations, Passiue Vnions, c.
Jf vpon this account we should call any

of them besides these, Fanaticks, they
would, and very iustly, call us impu|dent
Slanderers. 5. Not one Miracle
hauing been pretended to since the
first Reformation not so much as the
curing a Tertian Ague to testify that
Reformation was pleasing to God, we
cannot reasonably accuse them of for|ging
any Miracles. 6. The Doctour might
haue done well, even in revenge
against his enemy M. Cressy and his Church
History, or as he scornfully stiles it Great
Legend, to have given to the world at
least a pretty little Legend of his Refor|med
Saints. But alas, his Records will
not furnish him with matter of that ar|gument
to fill a nutshell. So that he
has deprived us of the means of requi|ting
him with finding Fanaticks among
his Rubricated Saints. Yet if he will
consult more Ancient and some even
Primitive Records, as S. Ireneus, Tertul|lian,
and after them S. Epiphanius, S. Au|gustin,
and Philastrius, together with
other Modern writers, as Alphonsus a
Castro, Prateolus, c. who have compi|led
Books expressly touching the Lives
and Doctrins of many of his Predeces|sours,
it will goe hard if he be not able

to discover some among them whom
he may call Saints (as well as Cranmer)
and we in requitall, Fanaticks. But he
is too wise to loose his advantage.
89. And all these manifold advantages
wee yield up to him, to our shame, and
to the Doctours great contentment, and
to the glory of his Protestant Churches.
Yet all this will not discourage vs
from endeavouring at least, to iustify
that the Doctour and his Churches are
meer Fanaticks. This we confidently
pronounce, and to make this good we
will not, as he has done, exemplify in
the Writings or actions of a few persons
culld out, with an intention to baffle,
affront and reuile them, but we will
demonstrates vpon his own grounds
and Principles, that the very nature
and Essence of his Churches and Religion,
is pure putid Fanaticism.
90. Now a demonstrable proof of
this the Doctour himself affords vs in
the 13. and 15. Principles at the end
of his Book.13. Prin+ciple, His words are these: Such
a particular way of Reuelation being
made choice of by God (for the means of
making known his Will in order to the hap|pines
of Mankind) as Writing, we may

iustly say, that it is repugnant to the nature
of the Design, and the Wisdom and Good|nes
of God to giue infallible assurance to
persons in Writing his Will for the benefit
of Mankind, if those Writings may not be
vnderstood by all Persons who sincerely en|deauour
to know the meaning of them in
all such things as are necessary for their
Saluation. And consequently, there
can be no necessity supposed of any infallible
Society of men,15 Prin|ciple. either to attest or explain
those Writings among Christians.
91. What is this now but Fanaticism
in the heighth of the Notion signified
by the word, to make euery Christian
Soberly enquiring into Scripture to be his
own Teacher in all necessary Points of
Faith (and it is no matter what becoms
of vnnecessary Points) and to be a com|petent
Iudge of the true sence of Scriptu|re
in them: all this without any regard
to all Externall Authority infallible, or
fallible either; for an infallible one being
vnnecessary, what necessity can there
be of a fallible Authority, which none
is or can be bound to Belieue? If it be
Fanaticism to attend to and belieue cer|tain
pretended Illuminations, Inspira|tions
and Reuelations concerning parti|cular

matters, perhaps of no great im|portance,
with a refusall to submitt
them to any Externall Authority: what
is it to ground his whole Religion vpon
his own fancy, enquiring into the true
sense of Diuine Reuelation?
92. But perhaps the Doctour thinks
himself and his Churches secure notwith|standing
any thing here said,  because
neither himself, nor they, pretend to
any New Reuelations, Illuminations, or In|spirations
in this matter. Notwithstan|ding
he will not find an euasion by this.
For besides that, J am sure, Presbyte|rians
at least, if not the other Sects, and
likewise the Huguenots of France in
their Confession of Faith, haue always
professed that they haue not only the
true sense of Scripture by Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, but that thereby they
are enabled to distinguish true Scripture
from Apocriphall Writings: I will take
the boldnes to tell him, That he him|self
does the same, and if he denyes it,
it is because he is ignorant of what pas|ses
in his own mind.
93. To shew this, I will here pro|pose
a few Questions to him, and he not
being present to doe it himself, I will

suppose he gives me leaue to make Ans|wers
to them, such as J conceiue he
will not disavow. The. 1. Question:I. Que. Ansvv.
Does he after a sober Enquiry vnderstand
and assent to the true sense of Scripture
in all necessary Points? Answer. Yes.
2. Question.II. Qu. Ansvv. Is his Assent to such
Points an Act of meer naturall Reason
or is it a Diuine Faith? Answer.
A Diuine Faith surely as he hopes,
and is fully perswaded: For he would
be sorry if he belieued not better then
Devills. 3. Question.III Qu. Ansvv. Is a Diuine Faith
a Supernaturall Gift of Gods Holy Spirit.
Answ. Yes: the Scripture saying so ex|presly.
4. Quest.IV. Qu. Ansvv. Is this Gift of God
communicated to his servants any other
way, then by Illumination, Inspiration, or
the like Diuine operation Equivalent?
Answ. J must answer in the Doctours
place, till he better informs me, that no
other way is known. Jn the last place.
5 Q.V. Qu. Ansvv. Does he think himself fobliged to ackno|wledge
that he receies this Faith from, or
to Submitt this his perswasion of a Diuine
operation in him to the Teaching of any
Church? Answ. He will not (though
J thank God J doe) acknowledge any
Church, fallible or infallible, which

can iustly require thus much from him.
Now therefore a primo ad vltimum,
does the Doctour want any necessary
qualification to make him passe for a
perfect Fanatick and Enthusiast, a Fana|tick
by duty imposed on him from the
Essence of his Religion, and moreouer
a Teacher of Fanaticism? Jf I could ab|solue
him from this; I would very wil|lingly:
but sincerely I cannot, since he
himself has giuen me a distinct notion of
Fanaticism, by which he, and his par|ty,
vnderstands an Enthusiastick way of
Religion, or resisting Authority (Civill
or Ecclesiasticall) vnder a pretence of
Religion: by which Notion, in it self true
and proper, he is to be iudged without
Appeale.
94. Now though the Doctour takes
vpon him, and is generally conceiued
by others to be a Champion of the Church
of England, yet perhaps it would be
rashnes in me from his warrant alone
to affirme that the Church of England
(that Church, J mean which is esta|blished
by publick Authority) does
now at last ground her Faith on such a
Fanatick Principle, as the Doctour in
her name has layd: For then it might

indeed be truly sayd, that the New
Faith of the Church of England, is the
very Faith of New England. The Doc|tour,
how learned soeuer otherwise,
he is but a Neophit in this Church: and
therefore all he says not to be swal|lowed
presently without examining: if
he wrong the Church of England, J am
vnwilling to wrong her with him.
95. And one particular thing which
I have observed from his Book, makes
me suspect that my Lords the Bishops
will not avow this Principle imposed
by him on them, which is, that his Book
wants an Imprimatur. Now if an Ap|probation
was either not demanded by
him, or being demanded was refused
him: it seems strange that against order
and Publick command it should be
permitted to be so dispersed without
any Controll. But the truth is, there is
a great Mistery of late in that Formality
of Approbations: for some Books want
an Imprimatur for the Reader, which
was not wanting to the Printer. Per|haps
the Doctours virulence against
poore Catholicks was so highly appro|ved
by the grave Censor Librorum, that
rather then it should be hindred from

doing mischief to them, he was content
the Principles also should passe: which
utterly destroy the foundations of his
own Church. This may seeme more
probable, because in like manner a Li|cence
is given to the Printer for a Book
of Sermons, in one of which, compo|sed
entirely of Lying Invectives against
Catholicks, and by a most horrible ca|lumny
imputing the Pouder Treason to
the Preaching of Catholick Religion,
there is this passage becoming a Prea|cher
of the Gospell; I wish that the Lawes
against these Foxes (the Papists) might be
put in execution, as they were anciently a|gainst
Wolues. Nothing but an vtter ex|termination
of Catholicks, it seems, will
content the charitable Preacher, who
seems to intimate also, that in his Judg|ment
it is fitt a price should be sett on
every Catholicks head as formerly on
Wolues, to be payed to his murderer.
Such a Sermon as this the Printer is li|cenced
to print; but he who gave it,
being ashamed that his Approbation of
so barbarous a piece should appeare to
the world, has given order that his Li|cence
should be concealed.
96. What judgment therefore in this

regard, to make of the Doctours Book,
truly I cannot determine. Only this I
may say, That if Prelaticall Protestants
do allow him for their Champion, and
approve the Grounds of his Religion, it
is one of the most Signall Victories that
in any Age has been gained by a single
Doctour over a whole Church, the
Governours whereof will be forced to
acknowledge that they have no Autho|rity
to teach truth, or condemn Errours;
that all the people (formerly under
them) are becom Prophets, and that all
their Articles, Constitutions, and Or|donances
have been compse and en|ioyned
by an usurped Authority, of
which they are not willing to be des|poyled,
and perhaps, after the example
of a late Scottish Bishop, to do Pennan|ce
for their fault of being Bishops. But
certainly my Lords the Bishops will
hardly, with all the Doctours eloquen|ce,
be perswaded to this compliance
with him: Regard both to the Kings
and Kingdoms safety, and their own
Character will not permit them to
yeeld to an Anarchy first in the Church,
and presently after in the Kingdom.
97. Notwithstanding it cannot be de|nyed

but the Doctour may expect more
then ordinary indulgence from them,
since during their late calamities, he did
not joyn in the clamour for destroying
them.Irenic. He was no Root and branch enemy,
but on the contrary generously under|took
their defence, and with great bold|ness
told his then Maisters, that though
Episcopall goverment and Ordinations,
as likewise Deans and Chapters (which
anciently were the Bishops Counsell)
were not necessary, nor perhaps con|venient,
as matters then stood, yet nei|ther
was their utter destruction: they
might, if the State pleased, be retained
without sin, upon condition that for
their Maintenance the ravenous beasts
then in power would be content to vo|mit
up three or four hundred thousand
pounds of yearly ents. But my best
course is to leave the Doctour to plead
his own cause, much better then I can
doe; And I assure him I would not have
touched this String, nor calld to mind
these things passed, were it not that
hitherto he has made no retractation of
any thing written by him, and also if
his Principles newly published should
prevayle in mens minds, they would be

more destructive to both Kingly and
Church goverment then all the Wri|tings
of Presbyters and Independents
c.
98. But perhaps after all, the said
Principles, though pernicious to Supe|riours,
may at least produce Vnity and
peace among the people. For a man
would think if every sober enquirer (and
who thinks not himself such anone) may
be allowed to chuse a sence of Scripture
for himself, what can he desire more?
Every one then surely will be quiett
and contented. But I must tell him, Quid
verbo audio, cum facta videam. If indeed
men could be content to enioy their
Faith to themselves, and not think
themselves obliged to propagate it; if
they could with patience see their Doc|trins
confuted, their actions derided,
and their designs opposed, peace per|haps
might be hoped for ad Graecas, Ca|lendas.
99. Yet I confess that (according to
the Welsh Proverb, The Gospell and a
Stone will drive away a dogg) the Doc|tours
Principles and a severe Civill go|vernment
ioynd together, that is, a
charitable indulgence to tender con|sciences,

with a watchfull care to pre|vent
quarrells and eager disputes about
Religion, may produce that peace,
which has hitherto never been seen in
England since the Reformation, and
mens minds, being enured to tast the
pleasure of such a peace, may probably
in a short time becom as zealous against
quarrelling, as they are now for it.
100. But there is another sort of
Peace and Vnity more fitt to be the ar|gument
of Writings composed by Ec|clesiasticall
persons, that is, Vnity of
Faith and Doctrin. And this Vnity was
intended certainly by Christ, when he
left his Church established under Spiri|tuall
governours, to continue in an or|derly
Succession till the worlds end:
and was Signifyed by S. Paul, saying,
There is one Body and one Spirit: one Lord,
one Faith, and one Baptism c. who also
declares that this one Body and one Faith
is preserved by Apostles and other Go|vernours
instituted by Christ in his
Church,Eph. iv 4. 5. To the end that Gods people may
not be tossed to and fro,vers. 5. and carried about
with every wind of Doctrin c. This
Unity also is proposed and professed by
us in the Creed, I believe one holy Catho|lick

and Apostolick Church. Now this
Vnity the Doctour, seeing utterly chaced
out of his Churches principled by him,
earnestly endeavours to prove it a stran|ger
to the Catholick Church also: and
would seem to intimate that if it be pos|sible
to be attained, it must be by his
Principles. And the truth is, if men might
enioy their consciences, and would be
induced to abstain from quarrelling, per|secuting
and hating one another; Truth
in the end would probably prevaile,
were there not one hindrance more, I
feare, insuperable, which is, that Truth,
or true Religion has no other passions
and Carnall affections to combat with|all,
besides quarrelsomnes. It requires a
bending, and even breaking of the Will
to the Obedience of Lawfull Supe|riours:
it requires yet further a captiva|ting
even of the Vnderstanding to the Obe|dience
of Faith taught them by the same
Superiours: It requires also a free disco|very
of the most secret and most diffi|cult
to be acknowledged crimes, in or|der
to painfull Satisfactions to be under|taken
for their expiation, and for obtai|ning
Absolution and pardon of them: It
requires from many a totall renouncing

of all carnall Lusts, and all Externall
remedies of quenching them. These and
many other severe exactions are requi|red
by true Religion, and only by it
and therefore no wonder if Sects dis|pensing
in these things, prevaile so much
against it: Yet Gods grace is omnipotent,
and can work greater and more diffi|cult
effects in the hearts of his servants,
when he is pleased to exert it.
101. It is truly an Attempt worthy
so heroicall a Champion to pretend to
bring proofs, from which, saith he, it
appears that the Church of Rome can have
no advantage in point of Vnity above his
Protestant Churches, which is in effect
to demonstrate that one Article of our
Faith ceases to be true.
102. Let this be examined: and first
let us enquire what helps for Unity (I
mean Unity of Faith and Doctrin) Pro|testants
have, and then compare them
with those of Catholicks. First, for the
Doctour himself, who as yet, must pass
for the common Advocate of Prote|stants,
till he be disavowed, surely he
will not pretend to contribute the least
advantage to such Unity, unles he hopes
to perswade any one, That a licence gi|ven

to every Christian to chuse his own
Faith out of Scripture be a probable way
to make all agree in the same Faith: which
Licence he gives and justifying it is
the principall Design of all his Princi|ples.
Is not this all one as to say, Let
every man in England think and doe what
he pleases, and by this means all will agree
to be Good Obedient Subiects to the King?
Yet the Scripture argues the contrary,
saying, That because there was no King in
Israel, everyone went severall ways, doing
what was good in his own eyes. So that by
the Doctours way of proceeding, one
would almost believe that his meaning
was, that our Saviour had no intention
that his Church should be one, and con|sequently
that Generall Councills,
which took great paines to procure
Vnity, transgressed therein our Saviours
order.
103. But all Protestants are not of the
Doctours mind: for though they gene|rally
make Scripture, not only the Rule,
but judge also of Faith when contro|verted:
Yet they do not so neglect V|nity,
but that they profess a willingnes
to submit their judgments for the sence
of Scripture to a Lawfull generall Coun|cill.

This the Doctour cannot doe,
now that he has sett forth his Princi|ples,
unless he will confess the founda|tion
of his Protestant Religion to be
unsound. He might well enough have
done it before, whilst he was a Defen|der
of Archbishop Lawd: but now it ap|pears
that the Archbishops Principles
and his are not the same, nor probably
ever were, and I doe assure my self that
if the Archbishop were alive, none
could be more ready to condemn them.
104. Other Protestants therefore re|fuse
not submission to Councells: as may
appear by their confident demanding
them.Gesner in Re Bellar. Def. For Gesner speaking in their name
thus writes. We with the loudest voice we
can, cry out again and again, and with all
our power we humbly and earnestly beg of
Christian Kings and Emperours that a free,
Christian and Lawfull Councill may be
convked, in which the Scripture may be
permitted to be the Iudge of Controversies.
And our Countreyman Sutcliff confi|dently
cryes out that Catholicks are
afraid of Councills. Yet all the world sees
that if a Lawfull Generall Councill
were called, according to the order of all
past lawfull Councills, even those re|ceived

by Protestants, they must neces|sarily
be condemned.
105. This some others more wise
then these loud Sollicitours for Coun|cills
saw; and therefore when a Coun|cill
was ready to be called, they, provi|ding
for themselves, would not permit
any Point to be decided by Catholick
Bishops alone, but euery Minister, yea
Lay-men, must have votes in them: and
a plurality of Suffrages was not to pre|vayle,
but an equall number on both si|des
must dispute, and Lay Judges de|cide:
that is, declared Hereticks must en|ioy
greater Priviledges then Catholicks,
and instead of a Councill there must be
an Assembly of wild beasts consulting
to establish Unity in Gods Church,
which, it seems, was only to be procu|red
by confusion, and not by Order.
Therefore a certain Lutheran said well
of Calvinists calling for a Lawfull
Councill,Schlus|scb. that they did imitate a well
known Buffon calld Marcolphus, who
was wont to say, That after all his search
he could never find a fitt tree upon which he
could willingly be content to be hanged:
Such a tree would a Legitimate Coun|cill
prove to the Doctours Principled
Protestants.
106. Yet there is one expedient for
producing Unity, which the Doctour
may doe well to advise upon: for if it
take, it will certainly have that effect:
even the Quakers themselves and Fifth
Monarchists will not refuse to be of the
Doctours Church, if they be not already.
Nay, which is more, the Catholicks
will come in too. This is no invention
of mine, but was many years since sug|gested
by one of the Doctours Prote|stants,
Robert Robertson an English Ana|baptist
of Amsterdam. This surely well
meaning man perceiving how litle suc|cess
Scripture alone had to vnite Sects,
agreeing only in opposing Popery, in the
year sixteen hundred and two printed a
Book in Holland, in which he proposed
to them all this means of Vnity viz. That
they should all ioyn in a common Peti|tion
to the States to give them leave to
assemble themselves in some Town or
field, and there each Sect severally to
pray to God, one after another, that he
would shew some evident Miracle for
decision of their Controversies, and de|claring
which among them had the
Truth, (which he supposed vndoub|tedly
was not among Catholicks) And
to the end the Devill might not enter

in, and deceive them with a false Mira|cle,
the man told them he had thought
of one allowed by Scripture, and which
he was sure the Devill could not work,
namely, to make the Sun stand still for
a certain considerable time: not doub|ting
but that God of his great Goodnes
would not refuse to condescend to the
Petition of such devout servants of his
in a matter so iust and necessary.
107. I suppose the Doctour will not
deny this design (if succesfull) to be a
most powerfull and unfaileable Mean
of producing Vnity, which his Princi|ples
have utterly destroyed, and ren|dred
impossible, if not unlawfull. And
let him with all his wit and invention
devise any other more probable, since
the Catholick Churches Authority is re|iected
by him and them.
108. Notwithstanding all this, the
Doctour, according to his custom and
nature, is confident, that he has demon|strated,
that the Church of Rome can have
no advantage in Point of Vnity above his
medley Church. Now to the end any
impartiall Reader may be a competent
Judge between us, I will briefly set
down the Instruments and Means of V|nity

left by our Lord to his Church, to 
end the Truth of this Article of our
Faith, I believe one Catholick Church, may
remain to the worlds end unalterable.
1. Catholicks do ground their Faith on
Gods revealed Will in Scripture inter|preted
by Tradition. 2. They believe
that God according to his Promise, will
lead and preserve his Church in all neces|sary
Truth, or in the true sense of Scrip|ture.
3. That for this purpose, he fore|seeing
that Heresies and Schisms groun|ded
on a false sense of Scripture, would
in after times come, has established in
his Church an unfaileable succession of
Teachers of his Truth, with whom he
will continue till the worlds end. 4. It
is his Will and Command that all Chri|stians
should obey these Teachers, who are
to give an account of their soules. 5. These
Teachers constitute the Churches Hierar|chy.
6. The Vniversall Church is repre|sented
by these Teachers assembled in a
Lawfull Generall Councill. 7. Such a
Councill therefore is the Supreme Tribu|nall
of the Church, from whose Decisions
there must be no Appeale. 8. But because
the difficulties of making such Assem|blies
are extreamly great, therefore it is

necessary there should be a standing
Authority with power to prevent He|resies
and Schisms in the intervalls of
Councills, arising and disturbing the
Church. 9. This ordinary Authority is es|tablished
in the Supreme Pastour, the Bis|hop
of Rome. 10. His Iurisdiction therefore
as to such an end, extends it self to the
whole Church, and is exercised in taking
care that the Ordinances of Generall
Councills be not by any transgressed: and
also in case any Heresies arise, or that
any Controversies in Causis Majoribus can
not be otherwise ended, either to de|termine
the Points of Catholick Truth
opposed, or at least to impose Silence
upon disputants and Litigants, till he can
assemble a Councill to declare un-appea|lably
the Truth, and to do iustice upon
the guilty parties. Thus the Catholick
Church is furnished against Schisms, and
none of these Defensive arms will the
Doctour allow to any of his Protestant
Churches, and yet he confidently avows
that Catholicks have no advantage.
109. But let us consider what argu|me~ts
an over-weening witt can alledge
to prove so strange an affection; for
he might as well have said, That Gover|ment,

and such Government as obliges the
conscience, has not so much force to preserve
men in Vnity, as Anarchy has.
110. As touching his Proofs, which
take up above an hundred pages, our an|swer
to them must be, that we may yield
him in a manner all the Premises of his
faulty Sillogisms, and must deny the Con|sequence
of the Conclusions he would
draw from them. He tells us many
Tragicall Stories of miscarriages of Popes,
how they revolted from the Empire,
and upon such revolting layd the foun|dation
of greatnes to their See: How
afterward challenging to themselves a
Supreme Temporall Dominion over the
whole world, they quarrelled with
Emperours and other Christian Princes,
from whence followed rebellions, mas|sacres,
and a whole Iliad of all sorts of
mischiefs. Well: this being granted,
what follows? Therefore says he, Pa|pall
authority in Gods Church is no, good
mean to produce peace and order (nor
consequently Kingly authority in the
common wealth, since notwithstan|ding
it many Kings have exercised Ty|ranny,
and could not always prevent
rebellions.) But S. Peter and S. Paul

never thought of such an argument,
when the most abominable Monster
that ever lived governed the Roman
world. It was to Nero that they com|manded
Christians to be subiect, to pay
taxes, to yeeld honour c. and this not
only out of feare of his power, but also
for conscience sake. It was such an argu|ment
as this (as the Doctour has reason
to remember) that was made use of to
the destruction of the best King that
ever governed this Island. Be it there|fore
granted, that after a thousand years
of excellent order produced in the Chri|stian
world by the government of Popes,
some of their Successours for about an age
or two caused intolerable disorders in
the Church and Empire: What follows?
Therefore a Supreme authority in Gods
Church is of no good use at all: Nay
more, all manner of Authority is useles;
for if any authority, then Subordination:
and if Subordination, then of necessity
a Supreme.
111. From hence the Doctour descends
to a way of arguing yet less reasonable
then this: for he tells his Reader of I
know not how many Schisms, yet all
of them after the Church was above

twelve hundred years old (for before
there were scarce any:) and of yet
later disorders since S. Bernards time,
by reason of quarrels between Bishops
and Monastick orders about Exemptions
and Priviledges: likewise between
Regulars and Seculars the other day
in England, and much more such stuff
which Popes either would not, or ra|ther
could not compose, for feare of
greater disorders by endangering
Schisms yet more pernicious to the
Church then the former. And what
would he conclude from hence? The
very same as before: for his argument
in brief is this: Subiects are oft times
rebellious to their Superiours: there|fore
it were better there were no Su|periours
at all. But might he not as
rationally argue, that God is Gover|nour
of the world: yet notwithstan|ding
this the far greatest part of the
world, not in one or two, but in all
ages, from the beginning hath been
rebellious to him, therefore his Govern|ment
is of small benefitt?
112. As touching certain (truly scan|dalous)
quarrells between Bishops and
some Regulars concerning Episcopacy

and the Churches Government, the Doc|tour
ought to have taken notice that ne|ver
any Regular pretended Episcopacy to
be Antichristian, as the Doctours freinds,
the Presbyterians, Independents, and other
later Sects have done; Neither have
they declared a Government by Bishops to
be in it self indifferent, or that Ordina|tion
and Consecration of Bishops and
Priests is a meere Ceremony, and con|ferred
as well and Legally by Lay Magi|strates
as by Ecclesiasticks, as the Doc|tour
himself has done: The whole con|troversy
consisting among Catholicks
about restraining some part of Episcopall
Iurisdiction, and maintaining Priviledges
granted by some Popes to certain Regu|lars.
A vast difference therefore there
is between Catholicks and Protestants in
Disputes touching Church Government: and
utterly irremediable on the Protestants
side, whereas wee see it ended, or at
least silenced, among Catholicks.
113. But differences of this Nature
are not considerable compared to those
obiected by the Doctour in the last
place,P. 443. which are touching Matters of
Doctrin, and as he pretends of Faith:
in which regard he says that the Church

of Rome can have no advantage in
point of Vnity above others: And fur|ther,
he, not content with this, adds,
That the Popes Authority being ack|nowledged
by Catholicks the fountain
of Vnity, and all Catholicks not agree|ing
in the Popes Infallibility, Whereas
both Catholicks and Protestants agree
in the Infallibility of Scripture, which
is to Protestants a more certain way
of ending Controversy, therefore he
concludes that Protestants have a more
certain and safe way of Vnity, then
Catholicks. For that the Pope has not
a sufficient power to reduce to Vnity
parties dissenting in Doctrinall Points
of weight, such as are the Controver|sies
between the Iesuits and Domini|cans
about Grace and Free Will; be|tween
the Dominicans and Franciscans
about the Immaculate Conception c.
is, he saith, evident, since those quar|rels
have to this day continued many
ages, and are prosecuted with great
eagernes.
114. In this manner argues the Doctour,
whereto the Answer is obvious. For.
1. he trifles with and abuses an unskilfull
Reader, in telling him that the Scripture

being acknowledged on both sides to be in|fallible,
is a more certain way of ending
Controversies then the Popes determination,
who is not by many Catholick believed to be
infallible. For how can a Writing, the
sense whereof is controverted, end a
Controversy? And to say that a writing
is of it self a surer mean to end debates,
then when interpreted by a Iudge, to say
this, and to think to be believed, is to
call his Readers brutish, irrationall crea|tures,
and to make all Tribunalls ridicu|lous.
2. It is not the Popes Infallibility,
but his. Authority which ends the Con|troversies,
either by Determining the
Point in Controversy, so as his Deter|mination
is accepted by the Church: or
at least by imposing Silence among Dis|putants,
till himself in a Councill unap|pealeably
decide it: By which way of
imposing Silence severall eager Disputes
have been ended by Popes, as this age
can witness. 3. Though all Catholicks
do in thesi acknowledge that they are
obliged, at least, to silence when impo|sed
by the Pope: Yet it cannot be denyed
but that some have not complied with
this Obligation. But this is not to be im|puted
to want of Authority in the Pope,

but to the unrulines of mens passions
and pride. And the same fault we see in
Secular Tribunalls, which yet does not
hinder but that Iudges are reputed fitt
and proper to end Law suits. 4. That
neither the Pope nor the Councill of
Trent, have decided the fore mentioned
Controversies, we are to ascribe either to
the inconsiderablenes of them; or to the
want of Sufficient clearness of Scripture
or Tradition for either party; or to a just
and prudent care of preventing Schisms
in the Church by such Determinations,
wherein so considerable parties in the
Church are divided in opinion. 5. Where|as
the Doctour says that the Points in
Controversy among Catholicks, being
many of them the same agitated among
Protestants, are Points of Faith, he is ma|nifestly
mistaken: For there are among
Catholicks no Points controverted, but
such Doctrins where the sense of Scrip|tures
being variously expounded by the
two Parties, the Church as yet hath de|termined
nothing which sense of them
is de Fide (though the Parties themsel|ves
would each of them have their own
to be so,) not determined, I say, so
clearly, as that both sides are agreed

that such is the Churches Decision. As for
Protestants, what Doctrins are esteemed
Points of Faith, and what School Dispu|tes,
I think no Oedipus can resolue. Doc|tour
Stillingfleet elsewhere saith down
right,Ration Accou. p 54. That the Church of England
holds no Points to be Articles of her
Faith, but those wherein the Church of
Rome also agrees with her, and holds
the same to be such. His words are,
There is a great deale of difference between
the owning of some Propositions in order to
Peace, and the believing of them as neces|sary
Articles of Faith. The Church of En|gland
makes no Articles of Faith, but such
as have testimony and approbation of the
whole Christian world of all ages, and are
acknowledged to be such by Rome it self;
and in other things she requires Subscription
to them, not as Articles of Faith, but as
inferiour Truths, which she expects Sub|mission
to, in order to her Peace and Tran|quillity.
Thus the Doctour. But here I
cannot well understand, why he saith
her Subiects Subscribe them as inferiour
Truths, and yet maintains the Church of
England to require no Subscription to her
Articles as Truths, for that surely is a
requiring of assent to them, but a Sub|scription

of non-contradiction, or non|opposition
of them, which consists
with the parties holding them Errours.
Now methinks, this the Church of En|gland
believing nothing as of Faith, but
what the Popes and the Roman Churches
Faith also secures to them to be so,
should sound somewhat harsh in the
ears of many of his Disciples. Again, it
necessarily follows, that the Church of
Rome, notwithstanding its Idolatry, Fa|naticism
c. yet failes in no necessary
Point of Faith. 6. Lastly, that which
makes Disputes among Christians about
Dostrinall Points pernicious, is not the
heynousnes of the Errours themselves
on either Party, but the refusall to sub|mitt
to the Churches Authority when
condemning them, from whence
Schisms are inevitable, and such Refusers
then truly stiled Hereticks. No man will
deny but that the Errour of the Photi|nians
[or Socinians] called anciently
Homuncionists, for affirming Christ to be
meer man, is a most grievous Errour, in|comparably
exceeding any among Ca|tholicks:
Yet if one living in the Com|muion
of Gods Church, should hold
this most pernicious Errour, not know|ing

that the Church had condemned it,
and being ready to renounce it assoon
as he knew this,Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 4. c. 16. S. Augustin professes
he durst not call such a man an Heretick.
How the Doctour would call such an
one, I know not. But this I will iustify,
that according to the Doctours Principles
he ought to pass for as good and as well
grounded a Protestant as himself: and
therefore especially Orthodox, for not
submitting his judgment to the Church.


. 7. The Doctrin of Pen|nance
Vindicated from the
Doctours mistakes.
115. NOw notwithstanding
what hath hitherto
been said I do nothing doubt but those
popular Readers, for whom only I con|ceive,
the Doctour wrote his Book,
will still resolutely judge every line of
it unanswerable. The like they will say
concerning the other Points of accusa|tion
charged by him on the Roman
Church, as 1. many obstructions of a Holy
Life. 2. Endless Divisions. How happy

are we, will they think, who have
escaped out of such a Babel, were Fran|tick
Subiects are governed by more
Frantick Superiours? where mens ears
are deafned with endless quarrels? and
where Lawes are made against Piety? In
the former regards Papists may deserve
our pitty or contempt: but in the last
our hatred. For what cruelty is not too
Mercyfull against the Professours of a Re|ligion
which teaches so many Doctrins
hindring a good life necessary to Salva|tion,
that it is scarce possible any of them
should be an honest man? The Doctour
has told them that these wicked men
make the Sacrament of Pennance ioynd
with Contrition (that is,P. 180. as he interprets,
a remose of mind for sin) sufficient for
Salvation: But his Adversary, in effect,
bids him, with Contrition to ioyne Con|fession
and Absolution. He is contented:
but he will needs have one condition
more added, which is forsaking of sin.
which they of the Church of the Rome
not requiring, notwithstanding all their
Confessions and Absolutions a thousand
times repeated, they destroy the necessity of
a good life.
116. Here if the Doctour were asked,

Does the Catholick Church held the Doc|trin
here by him reproved? He could
not say she did, because then the express
Decision of the Councill of Trent, dis|proves
him:Conc. Triden. Sess. XIV cap. 3. Where three parts of the
Sacrament of Pennance are declared,
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction:
Now in two of these the forsaking of
sin are contained. For Contrition implies
a sorrow for sin proceeding from a love
of God victorious over sin, and conse|quently
a detestation of sin. And Satis|faction
signifies yet more, viz: A holy re|venge
taken by the Penitent upon him|self
for offending God, by denying to
himself even Lawfull pleasures because
unlawfull ones have tempted him to
sin: which is a great deale more then
Protestants require.
117. A disposition, one may say, in|feriour
to this required by the Councill,
served Davids turne, who says, I said
I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and
thou forgivest the iniquity of my sin. I can|not
now believe the Doctour will ack|nowledge
that a Sinner repentant of his
sins out of a love of God Victorious over
the Devill, the world and the flesh, and
weho tstifies that sorrow and that Love

by submitting to severe Pennances and
Mortifications, willing also to declare to
his own Confusion, his most secret sins,
with a serious purpose of amendment,
will thereby be put in a state of pardn
and Salvation: Especially having recei|ved
from Gods Authorised Ministers,
Absolution from his sins: Absolution I
say pronounced by Commission and Iuris|diction
from Christ himself, and not such
an aery Phantosme of an Absolution as the
Doctour interprets to be the applying the
Promises of pardon in Scripture to the par|ticular
case of dying persons,P. 183. for this, saith
he, is that we mean by Absolution: and
which say I, the Silliest woman in the
Doctours Parish can conferr as well and
validly as himself. But who are these
Wee, who mean no more then this by
Priestly Absolution? I am sure not the Pre|lats
of his Church, (But I must not say his
Church when I mean the Church of En|gland)
who all hitherto have justified
this as one essentiall Character of the
order of Priesthood and Episcopat; unles
since the New Reformation (not yet ten
years old) they have been content that
this Character should be wiped out by
the Doctour, and that instead of the Fa|thers

of Gods Church, Maister Calvin
should be the universall authentick
Teacher of their Clergy. But I believe the
Doctour will in vain expect this com|pliance
from them: And I am sure the
now highest and worthiest of his Pre|lats,
will not be of the number of the
Doctours Wee, who has solidly asserted
this Primitive Doctrin, and to confute
whom perhaps the Doctour has publish|ed
so pittifull a sense of Absolution; to
their preiudice ingratiating himself
with all other Sects, enemies to all Ec|clesiasticall
Orders and Ordinations, and
making every one of them (as before
Iudges of the Scriptures sense, so) now
Vsurpers of their Offices, and, as they
hope, ere long of their Revenues.
118. The Church then is manifestly
free from the charge here imputed to
Catholicks by the Doctour, and by him
made use of to deterr any one from ioy|ning
themselves to her, because in her
(not, by her) Doctrins are by some taught
destroying the necessity of a good life. All
the Doctour can say is: Some reach some
such Doctrins, which some also refute,
and the whole Church disavows. This
being so, with what conscience can the

Doctour pretend danger upon this ac|count
in being members of the Catho|lick
Church, whenas in his own Prote|stant
Churches, for which he has layd
grounds and Principles, every Christian
is allowed by himself in these Principles
to chuse not only what opinions, but
what Articles of Faith (after using a
sober enquiry into the Scriptures) they
like best. And what most horrid Doctrins
he has thereby excused and defended,
all Christendom at this time sees with
amazement and detestation.
119. Surely when the Doctour wrote
this passage he conceived himself quar|relling
not with Catholicks, who con|stantly
assert against Protestants, the ne|cessity
of good works to Salvation, and
their Efficacy in it, upon Supposition of
our Lords gracious Promise to reward
them, but with some of his own Prote|stants
(perhaps with himself) who ex|clude
all Merit of good works from a
Christians Salvation: or with his Pa|triarch
Luther, who said that good Works
did more harme then good; Therefore he
may doe well to ask them pardon after
Contrition, and Confession of his fault.
120. Certainly if he could bring

himself to a willingnes of informing
himself in true Catholick Doctrins, he
would find that the way to Salvation
there taught is much strayter then that
which is chosen by Protestants, and
Holines of Life far more strictly requi|red.
For proof of which it were suffi|cient
only to repeat what was even
now cited out of the Councill of Trent
touching the Doctrin of Pennance: But a
proof visible of late to all our eys are so
many Apostats from the Catholick
Church, Apostats first from Obedience
and Chastity, and next from Faith; For
doe not they declare to all the world
that Carnall Liberty and Carnall Lusts
drove them first out of their Monasteries,
and next out of the Church: As soon as
they come into the aire of Protestancy,
a woman becoms necessary to them, and
Fasting insupportable, and if they can
ravish from Christ a Spouse consecrated
to him, they promise to themselves a
more gainfull and honorable reception.
But if they will needs have Women,
because the woman is handsom and at|tractive,
is therefore the Pope presently
turned Antichrist? does our Lord cease
to be present in the Sacrament? is Purga|tory

presently extinguished? doe Angells
and Saints no longer deserve to be ack|nowledged
our Protectours? in a word,
have they forgotten what they former|ly
beleived and are they in a moment
inspired to answer to a new Catechism,
full of new Articles of Faith, gravely
proposed to them by a Patriarch and
Pandar for impure Apostats, out of the
Pulpitt? What influence has the woman
upon them to make all this change?
Truly the very same the Woman had
from the Creation. She presents an
Apple to them, which wonderfully
delights them to look upon (Especially
if growing in England, where they
heare the fairest are to be had.) But if
besides seeing it, they get a tast of the
Apple, their eys are presently opened, and
as it were in uno radio solis they see (all)
good and evill, and nothing appears good
but what the woman approves, and
without which they can not enjoy and
maintain the Woman, nor make a com|panion
and Mistress to our noblest
young Ladyes.
121. But leaving these putrid Carci|nomata
of the Catholick Church, and in|famous
stains to the Protestant, is it not

apparent that the Doctrin of Pennance
and Mortification hath been rejected by
Protestants, not because they are hin|drances
of good life (as the Doctour says,
and I dare say not one understanding
person in his own Parish beleives him)
but for the Severity of them, and con|tradiction
to Flesh and Blood? Besides
this, where doe we hear of Restitution
of goods got by Usury and deceit among
Protestants, there being among them no
obligation of confessing such sins, and
by consequence of making Satisfaction,
without which Absolution cannot be
granted? The Doctour will not allow
me here to name those Schooles of Holi|ness,
and Devotion, Monasteries, though
from the Primitive times esteemed a
principall Ornament of Gods Church,
because he will esteem them nothing
but Schooles of Fanaticism.
122. But in generall most certain it
is, that among Catholicks the Study of
ways promoting Holiness and Piety is
incomparably greater, but withall more
painfull, then among Protestants.
123. But this satisfies not the Doctour,P. 181.
who brings in Bishop Taylour, using the
same argument with him in his Disswa|sive

from Popery, viz: the no-necessity of
forsaking sins in the Catholick Church, since
if a man commits them again and again, he
knows a present remedy, toties quoties? it is
but confessing with Sorrow or Attrition,
and upon Absolution he is as whole, as if he
had not Sinned. Yea if after Sixty or eighty
years together of a wicked life, he shall doe
this in the Article of his death, this in|stantly
passes him into a state of Salvation.
Yea moreover the Doctour afterwards
taxes the Indulgence of the Roman
Church,P. z12 because in her Rituall she or|dains
that Extreme-Vnction should be
conferred on persons unable to confess as be|ing
under a delirium, or wholly insensible,
if before it be but probable that they desired
it, or gave any signs of Contrition. And
hereby, saith he, if any sins have remained
upon them, they are taken of by vertue of
this Sacred Vnction.
124. As touching the too great facility
allowed by some Catholick Writers in
giving Absolution toties quoties to sinners
returning to their vomit, and giving but
small signs of their Will to relinquish
sins, the Doctour does very well to taxe
it, as a great hindrance indeed to a holy
life. But because some few have practi|sed,

or perhaps taught this, he does very
ill to make this a Disswasive from ioyn|ing
to the Church herself, expressly con|demning
in the Councill of Trent such a
facility in Confessours:Conc. Tid. Ses. XIV c. 8. saying, The Priest
of our Lord ought as far as his Spirit and pru|dence
shall suggest to enioyn wholesom and
convenient Satisfactions, according to the
quality of crimes and ability of Penitents:
Least if they should happen to connive at
sins, and be indulgent to their Penitents by
enioyning sleight Pennances for grieveous
Crimes, they themselves become partakers
of the crimes of others.
125. Besides this, the Doctour, I be|lieve,
is not ignorant, though it was
not for his purpose to take notice of it,
that not very long since, among severall
dangerous Positions collected out of some
Modern Casuists, such scandalous relaxa|tions
in administring the Sacrament of
Pennance had a principall place, all
which were not only condemnd by the
Bishops of France, almost in every Dio|cese:
but also a Book, the Author of which
undertook to defend them, was solemn|ly
prohibited, and condemned by the
Pope: since which time such Doctrins
have been wholly restrained and silen|ced.



. 8. Of conferring Abso|lution
and Extreme Vnction in
articulo Mortis.
126. IN the next place for as much as
concerns the conferring Absolu|tion
and administring the Sacrament of
Extreme Vnction to persons in Articulo
Mortis, who do, or have given any sign
of Sorrow or desire of them: the Church
in her Rituall does no more then hath
been the practise ever since the first
Councill of Nicea. And S. Augustin
treating of this Subiect in a Sermon,August lib. 50 hom. tells
his Auditors that out of Charity and
care to dying persons,Hom. 41. Gods Ministers
upon the least testification of Sorrow in
such patients administer the Sacrament
to them, though despairing that they
shall live to doe works worthy of Pen|nance,
so leaving them to Gods mercy:
(This they did by warrant from the
first Councill of Arles, and the Declara|tion
of Pope Innocent) But withall he
seriously exhorts them to doe such
works in time of health, and not to

to an Absolution conferr'd in such cir|cumstances;
for though they may be confi|dent
of enioying the full effect of that Sacra|ment,
yet, saith he, I am not confident of
i. Yet notwithstanding such want of
confidence he would not be wanting to
them, to afford them all his assistance in
such a perillous hour. And if the Doctour
were seriously examined by any one of
his freinds, or by any but a Catholick,
whether in such circumstances he
would refuse an Absolution, I mean an
Absolution according to his Mode, by
applying the Promises of the Gospell to his
Patient; Sure he would not say that his
custom among his Parishioners is to bid
the poor agonizant to goe to the Devill,
for there was no hopes for him. He
would no doubt tell him of Promises,
and bid him rely upon them, though he
will not permit Catholicks to do so.
127. But the Doctour in prosecuting
this Subiect alters his Method of procee|ding.
For whereas generally in his Book
he endeavoured to make Catholick Reli|gion
odious, by telling Stories of the
actions and Doctrins of particular per|sons,
disowned by the Church: here he
absolves some Catholick Doctours,

among the rest, Monsieur Arnaud,
and charges the Church itself for tea|ching
a Doctrin (as he pretends) ma|nifestly
hindring Devotion and a Good
Life, viz. in that her Canon: Whosoe|ver
shall say,Conc. Tid. Se. VII de Sa|cram. Can. 8. that the Sacraments do not
conferr Grace, exopere operato, let him
be Anathema. Now says he, if Grace
be effectually conferred by the force of the
bare Externall action (acknowledged by
all Catholicks)P. 206. what need can there be of
a true preparation of the mind by the
exercise of Faith, Prayer, Repentance
c. in order to the receiving the benefitt
of them? He further adds, that thoug
Cassander interprets this to have res|pect
to the worth of the Priest, as if his
unworthines could hinder the Validity
and Efficacy of Sacraments, though
the receivers be never so well prepa|red:
Yet (saith he) this cannot consist
with the Councills meaning, because
in the twelfth Canon following it was
condemned expressly, and it is not to
be supposed that the Councill would
frame two Canons to condemn the
same errour.
128. Thus argues the Doctour, but
under favour deales not fairely in not

citing the Councills Canon entirely,
which had he done, would have spoy|led
his inferences from it. The words
are, Whosoever shall say that by the Sacra|ments
themselves of the New Law Grace is
not conferr'd ex opere operato, but that a
belief alone of the Divine Promise is Suffi|cient
for the obtaining Grace, Let him be
Anathema. Which Canon was made
specially against Luthers errour, who
attributed all good to Faith alone, ma|king
the Sacraments entirely useless. In
which Errour I doe not know that he is
followed by any Sober Protestants, ex|cept
the Doctour, who by his discourse
seems to renounce all benefitt from the
Sacraments themselves: he will owe
Grace to nothing but his own Faith,
Prayer c. In his opinion the Sacra|ments
of the New Law as well as the old,
are [infirma  egena elementa] weak
and beggarly elements.Gal. 4.
But Scripture and
Tradition have taught the Church, and
the Church us, otherwise, viz. That
by Baptism the Grace of Regeneration is
conferr'd; that the Holy Eucharist is
Semen immortalitatis; that by Extreme
Vnction and the Priests Prayers sins are
forgiven c.
129. Neither from hence can the
Doctour rationally inferr, that there
will be no need of a true preparation of
mind by the excuse of Faith c. since
the Church herself requires such prepa|ration
as the Doctour speaks of: And the
very term of Preparation implies that
some Benefitt is expected to be received
from the Work it self, besides, and
beyond what is obtained by Prepara|tions.
130. But this being a Doctrinall Con|troversy
and brought in only by the way
in this his present discourse, the prose|cution
of it ought to be reserved for his
worthy Adversary, if he think good:
Yet this right I will doe the Doctour,
that he has with Monsieur Arnaud justly
censured one particular Writer who re|quired
as necessary, for example, to a
worthy receiving of the most holy Eu|charist
no other preparation of mind but
only an absence of Mortall sins, to be
had by Confession of them. But will any
rationall man judge that because there
are found in a Church a few Teachers of
Security, and Sowers of pillows under mens
Ellbows, that therefore it is dangerous
to be a member of a Church most free

from warranting that Doctrin which is
scarce received by one Bishop in it.
131. Yea moreover, if he would
search among School-men who make the
largest allowances in this business, he
will find that generally all require Faith
and Repentance in the Receivers of Bap|tism,
and these two joyned with Con|fession
for the Sacrament of Pennance;
they require also the State of Grace (that
is the habit of Faith, Hope and Charity,
and so of Devotion) for the Eucharist
c. And whosoever wants any such
predispositions is reckoned by them
among such as do Ponere obicem.


. 9. Of Prayer for the
Dead.
132. ANother scandalous thing
for which the Doctour ac|cuseth
the Church of Rome is her Charity,
Charity to the dead, who are not able to
help themselves, and which evidently
has been practised by all Churches from
the beginning, till Protestantism arose.
133. But wherein lyes the fault of
this Charity?P. 183. The Doctour tells us, that

the care of a good life is taken off among
Catholicks by supposing an expation of
sin (by the Prayers of the living) after
death. Whereas wee Protestants, says
he, in our plain Doctrin teaching that
every impenitent Sinner must expect no
less then eternall vengeance in another
world, if this will not prevail upon men
to leave their sins, and lead a good life,
we cannot imagine a groundles fiction
of Purgatory should ever doe it.
134. Who would not think now
that the Doctour in such a way of dis|coursing
is willing that his Readers
should believe that Catholicks very
seldom, if ever, endeavoured to terrify
impenitent Sinners with the threat|ning
of eternall torments in Hell fire?
And no doubt if he had plainly said so
he would not have wanted some be|lieving
Readers, it being in this age so
gainfull a trade to traduce Catholicks
by odious, false imputations both in
pulpits, presses, and any where else.
135. Therefore though I must not
expect to be believed by all, that I un|derstand
the Doctrin of the Catholick
Church so well as the Doctour, yet I
will not forbear plainly to declare it.

Catholicks are taught. 1. that finally im|penitent
sinners, if guilty of mortall
sins, shall irremediably suffer everlasting
torments of Hell. 2. That Catholicks
guilty of mortall or venial sins, and re|penting
of them before death, unless
they also undergoe such Pennances and
Satisfactions as the Church imposes, or
such as in any faulty indulgence of their
Spirituall Superiours herein, the quality
of their sins and the imperfection of
their Contrition in Gods iustice requires,
and by that means dye in perfect Charity,
and their Souls entirely purged from the
stains of them, shall suffer most greivous
yet temporall, punishments after death,
since no unclean thing, remaining so, can
enter into the Kingdom of God. 3. We are
taught that many conditions are requi|red
of us to the end our Lords all, suffi|cient
Merits and Satisfactions may be
applied to us, by the Charity, Alms, and
Prayers of devout Catholicks.
136. Now such being the Catholick
Doctrin touching this Point, with what
shew of reason can any one affirm, that
this Doctrin takes away the care of a
good life? It teaches all that Protestants
teach touching the pains of Hell atten|ding

a wicked life: and withall it teaches
the terrible consequences of a tepid, ne|gligent,
imperfect, though otherwise
not bad life, which Protestants do not
teach: Protestants require to Repentance
only a change of life: but the Catholick
Church, besides this, requires Satisfac|tion
for past sins, herein following Pri|mitive
Antiquity, whose Doctrine in
this Point is thus declared by S. Augu|stin:Aug. Hom. 50. cap|vlt.
It is not Sufficient for a Penitent sin|ner
to change his manners to the better, and
to recede from evill actions, except for sins
past Satisfaction be made to God by the
dolour of Pennance, by humble sighs and
groans, by the Sacrifice of a contrite heart,
and by Almsgiving c. Thus it is that
the Catholick Church hinders a good life,
and thus do Protestants promote it.
137. Yea but, says the Doctour, a fear
of such temporall torments is in a
manner taken away by an expectation
of the Charity and Devotion of living
freinds, especially if the dead person
had been rich, and had left means of
procuring Masses c. for his soule.
Be it so: yet how ever, some terrour
there is to Catholicks, restraining them
from Security in an imperfect life, which

Protestants laugh at, whilst they promi|se
imperfect Soules with all their stains,
a present possession of heaven after
death, to be obtained not by laborious
Good Works, but by Faith, that is, a
strong fancy that their sins are certainly
forgiven, and that they are of the num|ber
of Gods Elect, in whom God sees no
sins, though themselves  their neigh|bours
see too too many.
138. But the Doctour pleases himself
in one great advantage which he has
found against this Doctrine: which is
thus expressed by him,P. 681. How easy is it
(according to this Doctrin) for a rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of God? But
with his leave, such easines of being
saved is not thereby promised to rich
men. Yet thus much We will allow
to the Doctour, that in some small re|gard
rich men may enioy an advan|tage,
as to Salvation, which poor men
want; And this surely he will not deny,
when he considers that speech of our
Saviour, who though he had formerly
said, How hardly shall a Rich man enter
into the Kingdom of heaven?Luk xvi. 9. Yet speaking
to Rich men, he counsells them, saying,
Make to your selves freinds of the Mammon

of iniquity, that when ye faile they may re|ceiue
you into euerlasting Tabernacles.
Which speech of his seems exactly per|tinent
to the present Subiect. Here it is
euident that Rich men by the ir riches
may procure that which poor men for
want of the Mammon of iniquity cannot.
139. Yet in many other regards it is
certain that poor men haue a very great
advantage aboue the Rich, being free
from many Temptations and Snares to
wich Wealth, ease and plenty exposes
men. So that at least for escaping Hell
and Purgatory the Poorer are in a much
fairer and easier way. The poor also are
these Freinds here Spoken of by our
Lord, beloued of God, who not only
with ease enter into his Kingdom, but
by their credit can help to bring their
rich benefactors thither also.
140. But after all this, the application
of the Churches and particular persons
Prayers and Suffrages for the Deceased,
that are Procured by the Alms of the
Rich, Whether it be not Vniuersall or
whether, to recompence this, the Poor
do not share more the Common Prayers
of the Church, not made with respect to
particular persons, the Church hath deter|mined

nothing. And of these Common
Prayers of the Church more applied to
the Poor and freindles, S. Augustin speaks
thus [J quote him because being a
Father of great Reputation, he may per|haps
more safely escape the Doctours
contempt and drollery] A Question being
putt to the said Father by S. Paulinus Bis|hop
of Nola, whether it were any benefit
or advantage to the soule after death to be
buried in the Memoriall, or near the
Shrine or Tombe of a Martyr? he answe|red;
it was: that so this might mind the
Kindred or freinds of the Deceased to
recommend such a soule to the Martyr,
whose Relicks lay there, so to be hel|ped
with our Lord by his Intercession
(where it may be observed, that S. Au|gustin
both allows Praying to the Mar|tyr
in the behalf of such Deceased, and
supposes the Martyrs hearing such
Prayers) But withall the Father tells
them, that should some Deceased not
have the happines to be buried in such
a Holyplace, others are not therefore
to neglect their Supplications for such,
because not so minded of them, as of
others, when they goe to the Memo|riall
of the Martyr; And then comes

to our very case, that howeuer such
soules may want Kindred or freinds
to remember them, as the other hath:
yet the Common prayers of the Church
pro defunctis are without naming any
particular persons, offred vp for them.
His words are, Adsupplicationes facien|das
pro omnibus in Christian  Catholica
Societate defunctis,Lib. de cur p motuis cap. 4. etiam tacitis nomini|bus
quorumcumque sub generali commemo|ratione
suscepit Ecclesia: Vt quibus ad ista
desunt Parentes aut Filij, aut quicunque co|gnati
velamici, ab vna eis exhibeantur pia
matre Communi.


. 10. Of Indulgences.
141. BUt toward the latter end of
his Book treating of Indulgences
the Doctour alledges a practise in the
Church which these Catholicks who
pretend to iustify it,P. 183. will, J belieue,
find very great difficulty in answering
the Doctours proofs, that it is really a
hindrance of the care of a good life. If
any therefore do find harm by relying
vpon such a Practise, they may thank
themselues, they voluntarily and wi|thout

any obligation procure such harm
to themselues.Conc. Tid. Ses. xxv Decet de In|dulg. The Councill of Trent in
its decision of this Point of Indulgences,
expressly Condemns a too frequent vse of
them, as enervating Ecclesiasticall Disci|pline,
and desirous to correct all scanda|lous
abuses crept in them, ordains an vtter
abolishment of all vnlawfull gain for the
obtaining of them, enioyning likewise all
Bishops in their Provinciall Synods to take
care that the Benefit of Indulgences may be
dispensed piously, holily and without corru|ption
to the people.
142. Now if after such solicitude she|wed
by the Councill, all abuses doe not
yet cease,Ibid. this must be imputed to hu|mane
frailty and corruption, and to the
erroneous Doctrin of some Schoolmen:
or rather some passages of them singled
out from the context, and stript from
the necessary circumstances, and so mis|applied,
whereby the power of the
Donour of them is extended without its
certain limitts, and a vertue attributed
to them far exceeding that which the
present Church acknowledges in them.
143. This seems plainly to appeare
by the words of the Councill declaring,
That since a Power of conferring Indul|gences

hath been giuen by Christ to his
Church, which from the most ancient times
hath exercised this Power, diuinely granted
to her; Therefore the Holy Synod doth teach
and command the vse of Indulgences to be
retained in the Church, as very healthfull to
Christian people, and approved by the au|thority
of Holy Councills.
144. From this Declaration of the
Councill the Doctour truly says, that some
Catholick Writers do make this Dedu|ction,
That Indulgences are only a relaxa|tion
of the ancient Severity of Church Dis|ciplin
according to the old Penitentiall
Canons.P. 516. Which Deduction seems the
lesse irrationall, since the Indulgences
inserted by the Councill are the same,
which from the most ancient times have
been exercised by the Church. And such
an vse of Indulgences if the Doctour re|fuse
to the Catholick Church, he dares not
to his own, Since he cannot deny
but that in the Spirituall Courts the
Iudges assume a power either to qualify
Corporall punishments imposed by the
Laws and Canons on Speciall sins, or
commuting them into Pecuniary. But
I must add one thing, that euen these
Indulgences may be said to extend their

vertue till after death: Since it is cer|tain
that being duly administred, and
taking away the obligation to the Seue|rity
of the Penitential Canons, they doe
consequently abate the Suffrings after
death, which otherwise the Penitent
was to vndergoe having neglected to
make Satisfaction in this life. In a word,
Catholicks are taught that Indulgences are
beneficiall to none but those that are
already in the state of Grace: And that
Remission of Penalty only, and not sin, is
conceded by them: Likewise that they
relate to Purgatory only, not to Hell:
And lastly by the form of them it ap|pears
that the vertue of them after
death is only per modum Suffragij.
145. As touching the Doctours Que|stions
concerning Indulgences if he ex|pect
an Answer to them, he must goe
into some of our Catholick Schooles,
where he will not faile to receiue Solu|tions
to them all, if they were twice as
many; but I dare not assure him that
these Solutions will give him Satisfa|ction.
For my part I have nothing to say
about them, nor, I am sure, any other
Catholicks, as a Catholick: Neither doe
I belieue that euer any Protestant Con|trovertist

wrote a Volume against the
Catholick Church, of which not near a
tenth part did in any sort concern her:
and such a Book the Doctour, certainly,
knows his to be: and by consequence
every ingenious prudent Reader will
easily discouer from how poysonous a
heart it issued, and to how vnchristian
an end it was directed.


. 11. Of the Churches Litur|gy
in a tongue not generally
understood.
146. ANother Practise in the Ca|tholick
Church there is
which the Doctour esteems a notable
hindrance to Piety,P. 188. which is, the Pu|blick
Ecclesiasticall Office being in a
Tongue vnder stood by few.P. 174. This
he will not allow to be a matter of
Discipline only, and consequently in
the Churches power to alter: Because
the Churches power is only to edifica|tion,
for a power beyond that the A|postles
themselues never challenged:
Now it is manifest, saith he, that S.

Paul judges Praying or Preaching in an
vnknown tongue not to be of edification.Cor. 14
147. Notwithstanding, with the
Doctours favour, his allegations doe not
proue the mater not to be of Discipline
meerly. For the Case stands thus: It
was far from being the Churches Primary
intention that the publick Office should
be in a tongue not vnderstood by the
people; for it was at first composed in
the language generally Spoken and vn|derstood
through Europe. But that Lan|guage
being changed by a mixture of
the Dialects of seuerall barbarous na|tions,
she thought it not prudent that
the publick Service of God composed
with great care and exactnes, should
be exposed in euery Nation to vnsskill|full
Translatours, and every age to be
varied, as Dialects did alter, it not being
in her power to examine all Translations
after every new Edition. And the same
judgme~t the most ancient  most exten|ded
Churches in the East had, all which
in a manner do to this day retain their
ancient Liturgies, now not vnderstood
by the Common ignorant people.
148. Notwithstanding to repair, as
much as may be, this incommodity, the

Roman Church (at least) has taken
great care in her Councills that the peo|ple
in all Nations should be furnished
with Devotions in their Natiue Tongues,
which are for the most part taken out
of the Publick Liturgy, and moreouer
has commanded all Pastours to interpret
to the people in the administring of Sa|craments,
especially the most Holy Eu|charist,
whatsoever they are capable of
vnderstanding: by which means there
is scarce a Rustick so ignorant but well
vnderstands what the Priest does
through the whole course of the Masse.
149. Matters standing thus, the Church
esteems it more prudent and more con|ducing
also to edification in generall, that
all Catholick Churches should serve
God vniformly in a language which
cannot be corrupted, especially such
provisions being made for the peoples
good, then to haue the Service of God
exposed to Corruptions and continuall
Changes. But if the Doctour think him|self
wiser then the whole Western and
most Eastern Churches, much ioy may
he take in his great humility.
150. But after all, how can the people
say, Amen, will the Doctour say from

S. Paul?1. Cor. 14. I answer. S. Paul in that place
Speaks not of the Common Divine Ser|vice,
which was celebrated then in a
language well vnderstood: and at Co|rinth
doubtles in the Greek tongue: but
of these Spirituall Hymns and Praises of
God extraordinary, that were delive|red
by some in a tongue vnknown. And
all that can be deduced from it, and ap|plied
to the Publick Divine servcie, is
this, that either this be performed in a
known Tongue: or when the Church
hath reasonable Motives (which she,
not we, must judge of) not to change
the formerly vsed language of it, so
much as is necessary for the common
people to vnderstand, and say Amen to,
be interpreted, as the Apostle saith there
ouer and over again.)Vers. 5. 9. 13. 27 28. Now such Prayers,
Collects, Psalms, Hymns, Litanies c. as
are thought necessary for the common
people, are interpreted by the Churches
order, and they have them ready in their
Primers, Manuels c. Euen all the parts
also of the Service of the Masse necessary
to be known by them.
151. Jt is certain that it is not out of a
desire that the people should be ignora~t
that the Church thinks not meet to

change the language of her Liturgy.
And I would to God, that were the on|ly
hindrance of reuniting England to
her once beloued Mother, for then the
breach would not last long.


. 12. Of the Churches denying
the Reading of the Bible
indifferently to all.
152. BUt the last and greatest Hin|drance
of piety,P. 15. and (which is
wonderfull) of Vnity likewise, in
the Doctours opinion, is the Roman
Church her denying the reading of Scri|pture
to all persons promiscuously, with|out
exception. This fault the Doctour
will neuer forgiue Her. And the truth
is, if euer there should be a restraint of
such liberty in England, all the Princi|ples
of his Religion would vtterly goe to
wrack. For how then should euery So|ber
Enquirer into Scripture frame a Reli|gion
to himself? How much would the
number of Sects be diminished, (which
is great pitty?) Then Pastours and Tea|chers
would perswade the people that

it is their duty to believe and obey
them, and not to be their own Dire|ctours:
which is intolerable. Therefore
in so great a concern, the Doctours zeale
in this Point aboue others may well be
forgiuen him.
153. How much would the Doctour
be beholden to that freindly man who
could furnish him with but one line out
of any Ancient Ecclesiasticall Writer,
Father or Councill to iustify the Funda|mentall
Principle of his, and; as he pre|tends
of all Protestants Religion, viz.
That euery sober enquirer may be a Iudge
infallible of the sense of Scripture in all
Points necessary to Saluation? But I can
assure him, such a freind is not to be
found. Nay I believe he would thank
that man who could shew any Ancient
Heretick an Authour of that enormous
Doctrin: for as he cannot but know
that he embraces seuerall Points con|demned
by the Ancient Church in Here|ticks,
he would, no doubt, with ioy
adopt this Point so beneficiall and neces|sary
to the fabrick of his Protestant Chur|ches.
154. To descend to our Modern times:
Though Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, c.

those disturbers of the world, to gain
the affections of the Common rabble,
were very earnest to put the Bible into
their hands, yet does the Doctour think
that they would patiently haue suffred
any of their followers to chuse any
other Religion out of it, but what they,
as Prophets sent from God, had taught
them? Nay would the Doctour take it
well of his own Parishioners if they
should doe so? Yet he is angry with
Catholicks because we rather trust the
Churches iudgment, then our own: a
strange quarrell certainly. But it is a
folly to think that any of the Common
sort of people seek into the Bible to find
their Religion there not one in ten
thousand among us but for his whole
Faith relyes vpon the credit and suppo|sed
honesty of some zealous Lecturer, or
reputed learned Doctour. Now J would
fain know of Doctour Stillingfleet
with what conscience he can suffer a
whole Congregation of well meaning
men, who can rely vpon nothing but
authority, to prefer his authority before
that of the whole Church: For nothing
can be more contrary to the Rules of
Common reason in them; and for their

sinning against Reason he must be an|swerable
to God. How does one of the
Doctours Parishioners find his whole
Religion in Scripture? Thus: The Do|ctour
will bid him read the last verse
of the 6. chap. to the Romans: (or
he will read the words to him) The
Gift of God is eternall life: Here, says he,
the Papists are plainly confuted, who
say that God rewards our good works with
Heaven. He will tell him again that the
Papists hold that our Lords body is in the
Sacrament. How shall they be confu|ted?
Christ indeed says, This is my Body:
What then? this must be vnderstood as
if he had sayd, This is the figure of my Bo|dy.
Then plain Scripture interpreted by
the Doctour is against them. Again,
Look out the first Chapter to Titus, you
will find that those who are called
Elders, or Presbiters in the fifth verse,
are called Bishops in the Seaventh: Here
our Antichristian Prelats are plainly
confuted, who exalt themselues aboue
Elders, c.
155. But one Point there is of main im|portance
to these who will find all
things in Scripture, which is, A Proof
that these Books which they are taught
to call Scripture, are the same which were

Anciently written by men inspired
by God: That they have not been cor|rupted,
and that they are rightly inter|preted.
None of all these things they
can find in Scripture: what remedy ther|fore
for this? None in the world, but
the Doctours own authority. He will
tell them perhaps that the Vniversall
Tradition of all Ages, which is of it self
credible, testifies this, and therefore
they ought to belieue it. But if they
should reply, and tell the Doctour, that
for all necessary Points of belief they
were, according to his Principles, to be
Iudges for themselues, but of that which
they call Tradition, they know not how
to iudge. If any of the Doctours Pari|shioners
should be thus troublesom:
then must he be angry, and with a
frown tell them, Will ye be Papists? Is
it not fitter ye should believe me, then
like blind Papists, pin your soules vpon
the Authority of the present Vniversall
Church? This stops their mouths: Now
they are fully satisfied, and ask pardon
for presuming to doubt, hauing such an
Oracle to teach them: that they ought
to be their own Teachers.) Thus it is
that ordinary people, even boyes and
girles, are to be fooled, and made to be|lieve

that they see all their Religion in
Scripture: whenas in very truth they
may as well be told, that they Smell it
out with their noses, as I once heard
Sir Francis Wenman say in a discourse
on a subiect like this.
156. Howeuer the whole Stress of
the Doctours Religion lying vpon it, that
euery Christian is to be a judge of
the sence of Scripture: hence it was ne|cessary
for his ends to contend Manibus
pedibusque that none should be discoura|ged
from reading Scripture: (Yet I hope
he will excuse those who are not able
to read.
157. To make this good, he employes
the vtmost of his invention, Subtilty
and reading. He who cannot find out
one single short sentence in Antiquity
to help to support the main Pillar of his
Religion: Yea moreouer he who has
not alledged one probable argument of
reason for strengthning that tottering
Pillar, except only a Negatiue one,
which is this, That Christians haue no
obligation to belieue any Church or Teacher
expounding the sence of Scripture, therefore
they must if they will be believers, believe
themselues alone: In this miserable exi|gence

this same Doctour notwithstan|ding
to proue that Christians in all times
were indulged and exhorted to read the
Scriptures, flourishes in a Luxuriant stile
with demonstrations a priori, a posterio|ri,
per reductionem ad absurdum  impos|sible,
which demonstrations also he
backs with an army of Ancient Fathers
teaching as he himself does, viz. S. Cle|ment,
S. Ignatius, S. Policarpus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origen, S. Ba|sill,
S. Hierome, S. Chrisostome, S. Augu|stin,
c. and moreouer that this was
their Doctrin is (saith he) acknowled|ged
by late Catholick Diuines, Espenceus
and Alphonsus a Castro, and (one more
I will add,) by the vnworthy Writer of
this Treatise also.
158. But this being granted, no Ca|tholick,
and, J think, no man in his right
witts will grant, that euery Porter, Cobler
or Landresse is capable to instruct them|selues
by reading the Scripture alone,
or if they cannot read them, by hearing
them read, in this Point of main impor|tance,
that Scriptures are Gods Scriptures,
or to clear the Doctrine of the Mystery
of the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation of
our Saviour, the Procession of the Holy

Ghost, or the Point of Iustification, as de|termined
by S. Paul and S. Iames, c.
I have so much confidence now in the
Doctours ingenuity that he will also
acknowledge thus much, yea by his ex|perience
in teaching ignorant people,
J am assured he has found no small dif|ficulty
in making such and other like ne|cessary
Doctrins of Christianity sink into
the minds of the rude people, though
sett down in the simplest, plainest Cate|chisms
for infants, though also those Ca|techisms
were with all his skill explai|ned
by himself.
159. Now taking this for granted
(till he contradict it) J would ask him,
Does he in his conscience think that
the forecited Fathers, when they exhor|ted
the Christians of their times to the
reading of Scriptures did not suppose
that for the sence of them in things any
way difficult or controverted they
would submitt their judgements to the
Church: which had they not supposed,
they would haue been less liberal in put|ting
the Scriptures into their hands?
For hence it is that the Bible is called by
S. Ambrose, liber Sacerdotalis, because
to be dispensed to the people according

us Bishops and Priests iudged it might
proue beneficiall to them, and in all
ambiguities to be interpreted by the
same Pastours, Besides this, the art of
Printing being then vnknown, it was
not every ordinary Mechanick who
could purchase so costly a Manuscript, as
the Bible was: every groom or Chamber|maid
could not carry it vnder their arms
to Church, vnles they could spare at least
two years wages to buy it, and hire also
a litle Asse to carry it, so great was the
bulk, considering the largenes of Let|ters
writen in these Ancient times. The
persons invited therefore by these Holy
Fathers to the frequent reading of Scri|ptures,
were for the most part those of
the higher rank, of more ingenuous edu|cation,
and so Prudence and discretion:
and especially such as they knew to be
firm to the teaching of the Church. Now
to such persons the Roman Church freely
allows the reading of Scriptures: and
on the other side, for such as the Do|ctour
qualifies with the name of Pro|testants
according to his new Mode,
that is Independents on any Authority,
the Fathers most certainly would more
strictly, then they are now, have pro-prohibited

the reading of them.
160. Neither is it much to his purpose,
his alledging that though in the time of
the first four Generall Councills the Fathers
had tryall enough of the mischief of Here|sies,P. 174.
yet notwithstanding they did not on
that account forbid the people to read the
Scriptures. For who knows not the vast
difference between the ancient and our
Modern Heresies? Anciently the In ven|tours
of Heresies, were great learned
Prelats, and subtile Philosophers, and the
obiect of their Heresies were Sublime
Mysteries of Faith, examined and framed
by them according to the grounds of
Plato's or Aristole's Philosophy, far above
the reach of Vulgar capacities; from
whence it is that Tertullian calls the
Ancient Philosophers, the Patriarchs of
Hereticks. And moreover their applica|tions
of Texts of Scriptures for confir|ming
such Heresies, were so Specula|tively
nice and acroamaticall, that both
great sharpnes of witt and learning too
were necessary to the discovering and
unridling the fallacy. Hence it came to
pass that in those dayes the Scriptures
might freely enough be read by ordinary
Christians without danger, especially

considering their intention in reading
them was not to find out a New Reli|gion,
but to instruct themselves in Piety,
and inflame their hearts in the Divine
Love.
161. Thus stood matters in the Church
during the times of the first four Gene|rall
Councills. But our Modern Heresies
are of a quite different Complexion.
They are conversant about matters ob|vious
to the weakest capacities, as the
external administration of Sacraments,
the Iurisdiction of Superiours, Civill and
Ecclesiasticall, the manner of mens De|votions,
the Institution of Religious Or|ders,
the Obligation of Vows; the Ordon|nances
of the Church teaching Fasting,
Matrimony, Celibacy, Paying of Tithes,
c. Or if about Sublime Mysteries, Men
are taught to examine such Mysteries
by naturall Reason and the Verdict of
their outward Senses. Hence it is come
to pass that our late Heresiarcks have not
been profound Subtle Philosophers, but at
the best a few Sensuall incestuous Fryars
abroad, and Popular Preachers at home:
yea, as we have lately seen, even Me|chanicks,
Souldiers or any other ignorant
persons actuated by the Spirit of Pride

and Licentiousness to begin a Sect fitt for
the palats and complexions of Seekers
after Novelties.
162. Matters therefore standing thus
in these later times, can any rationall
man be perswaded that if any of those
Holy Fathers, cited by the Doctour, had
lived among us, or if such Heresies had
been spred among their Disciples, and
pretended to have been evidently dedu|ced
from Gods Word, they would have
been so zealous in their Exhortations to
a promiscuous reading of Scriptures? But
how much think we, would such their
zeale have been cooled, in case such an
Architect of Principles, as the Doctour is,
had been in Vogue in their times? For
Principles they are which evidently
contain the most pernicious, Soule-des|troying
Heresy that ever assaulted Gods
Church: Principles which banish Peace,
Charity, Humility and Obedience vtterly
from the Church and State: Principles
which if through Gods judgment they
should generally prevaile, what think
you would become of our Saviours Pro|mise,
for there would not be left in the
world one Church at all, true or false:
Since where every one is acknowled|ged

the only inventer and Iudge of his
own Faith, there may meet a Multitude,
but it is no Church, none having right
over another; errour and truth, vertue
and vice being equally Iustifiable. Lastly
these are Principles, the admirable vanity
of which I think was never paralleld
by any Heresiarch, but a certain Rheto|rius
mentioned by Philastrius,Philast who
taught, That all Heresies were in their
precepts of life, innocent; and in their Doc|trins
true: [Omnes Hereses rect ambula|re,
 vera docere.]
163. Non sum ambitiosus in malis, I
may with a good conscience protest that
it is only Truth and a Charitable compas|sion
to soules miserably seduced by so
Comprehensive a Heresy as is contained in
the Dostours Principles, which hath
moved mee to fix such a brand upon
them: Not that I suspect that he would
approve such consequences: but I am
confident with all his skill he cannot
avoyd them.
164. Now I must acquaint the Doc|tour
that my iust indignation against
these Principles is heightned from my
own unhappines, if not guilt in being
the first who gave occasion that they

should be known and received into the
Church of England. This I am sure nei|ther
he, nor perhaps any one now alive,
does know, and therefore I will ac|quaint
him with the true Story concer|ning
them.
165. As I remember it was in the
year 1638. that I had occasion to accom|pany
a Noble freind in a iourney from
Dublin to London. When we were ready
to return, I went to a Booksellers shop
to search out some boks to be carried
back into Ireland, and among others I
bought Daill du vray usage des Peres, a
Book at that time not at all taken notice
of. That Book the same night I shewd
to my Noble dear Lord Lucius Lord Falk|land,
who perusing and liking the
Contents of it, desired me to give it him,
which I willingly did. About a month
after my return into Ireland, he sent me
a most civill letter, full of thanks both
in his own, but especially in M. Chilling|worths
name for that small present, tel|ling
me that that litle Book had saved
him a most tedious labour of reading
almost twenty great Volumes.
166. This Mysterious speech I easi|ly
understood. For M. Chillingworth a

litle before was returned out of Flan|ders;
where he had professed himself a
Catholick: and being sent for by Arch|bishop
Laud, was strictly examined by
him touching his Religion, And whe|ther
he went to Masse, or Common
Prayer; to whom he gaue this account,
That he had entertained such scruples
touching Catholick Religion, and with|all
was as yet so vnsatisfyed with the
grounds of the English Protestant Reli|gion,
that at the present his conscience
would not permitt him to goe either to
Masse or to Common Prayer. And there|fore
with his Graces leaue he was resol|ued
to spend a year or two in a solitu|de,
and the Study of Greek and Latin
Fathers, fully purposing to embrace that
Religion which appeared to him most
consonant to what the Fathers generally
taught. The Archbishop much com|mended
his design, and dismissed him
with his blessing, and a promise also
that he should enioy entire liberty to
prosecute so laudable a Study. Very
busy in this Study I found, and left him,
in England. But it was presently after
interrupted by that vnlucky Book of
Daill, which perswaded him to a light

esteem of the Holy Fathers, vpon whose
authority he would no longer rely.
But yet this did not bring him into the
Church of England, so as to think himself
obliged to belieue her Doctrins, and
whose authority he saw was much in|feriour
to the other: and from all sub|ordinate,
but diuided English Sects, he
had a horrible aversion and contempt.
Therefore without any long demurr
he fixed his mind vpon Socinian grounds,
which he afterwards shewed in a litle
Book of one of them which was an Ans|wer
to certaine Theses Posnanienses,
which Theses, as J remember, asserted
the Authority of the Catholick Church: in
opposition whereto the Socinian, reiec|ting
all Externall Authority, layd these ve|ry
grounds of his Religion: That in all ne|cessary
Doctrins the Scripture was clear:
Therefore euery sober Enquirer might with
ease find them in it, without any help of a
Teacher or at least any obligation to believe
him. Vpon these grounds M. Chilling|worth
dilated his Discourses with much
art and gracefullness of Stile in his Book
against a learned Catholick writer: And
the same grounds so discoursed on, Do|ctour
Stillingfleet has contracted Metho|dically

into his Principles: And both these
Books though manifestly destroying
all Authority in the English, or any
other Church, haue been patiently and
quietly suffred, yea commended by Su|periours
here, to their infinit dammage,
as is seene at this day: which dammage
is J belieue more sensible to them since
they see no considerable prejudice to Ca|tholicks
by them, for J doe not remember
to haue heard of any one Established
Catholick Shaken in his Faith by such
grounds: Though I confess they obctruc|ted
a good while my entrance into the
Catholick Church.
167. Now it being certain that these
Princi ples came originally into En|gland
from the Socinians (a Sect main|taining
a Fundamentall Heresy) it is of
small edification and less glory to the
English Church (in case, as the Doctour
pretends, his Faith and hers are built on
the same Principles) that she should con|sequently
acknowledge herself forced
to desert the grounds vpon which she
proceeded since the Reformation, as
being grounds by M. Chillingworths dis|covery
found to be Sandy and ruinous,
and consequently acknowledge all her

Articles of belief, all her Laws, Constitu|tions,
Canons, c. misgrounded. The
consideration of this, besides disreputa|tion,
cannot but raise great Scruples, in
the minds of her Disciples and Subiects,
till she not only disavow this her Cham|pion,
but likewise assert her Authority
by Answering all the Discourses of M.
Chillingworth, my Lord Falkland, M.
Digges, M. Whitby, Doctour Stillingfleet
and severall other Doctours and Professours
in the Vniversities, who all exalt their
Single judgments above her Authority.
168. And as for Doctour Stillingfleet
there is another task to be undertaken
by him, which I believe will give him
excercise enough. For he knowing that
the Socinians, as well as himself, do
make the plain evidence of Scripture in all
necessaries to all Sober enquirers, a Princi|ple
of their Religion, and upon this Prin|ciple
building their Heresy, his Study
must be to beat them from this Princi|ple,
which can be done no other way,
but either by confessing that the Doctrin
of Christs Divinity is not necessary to be
believed, or by demonstrating to them
that they do not understand the plainest

Texts of Scripture, not having been sober
enquirers into it. This will be a task be|coming
such an Hectorean Controvertist
as the Doctour is esteemed to be, consi|dering
how even among his freinds the
Socinans, among all Protestant Sects, are
acknowledged to have been very Labo|rious
and far most exact in interpreting
the most difficult Books of Scripture, and
this not without good Success, except
where their iudgment has been perver|ted
by a resolution to defend their pecu|liar
Hereticall Doctrins. Now by this
time I believe the Doctour sees what a
world of work his Principles have cut
out for him, which he is obliged to jus|tify
not only against Catholicks, who
abhorr them, but Socinians also who
invented them as necessary for main|taining
their Heresy,  lastly against my
Lords the Bishops his Superiours, as I ve|rily
believe. His Principles therefore be|ing
of so very main importance  being
the only considerable Subiect treated of
in his Book, my Readers must not won|der
that in so short a Treatise I have so
oft put him in mind of them, since a
horrour of the consequences of them

forced me to look on them as mihi saepe
vocandum ad partes monstrum null virtu|te
redemptum a vitijs.


. 13. The Conclusion: vvith
Advices to the Doctour.
169. THus much I judged suf|ficient
to make up an
Answer to those parts of the Doctours
Book, which do not purposely treat of a
Doctrinall Controversy: for no more
was required from mee, indeed not
quite so much: it being only the Section
of Fanaticism in which J was particu|larly
concerned. But the others intru|ded
themselves, J know not well how:
and by that means forced me also to
neglect observing the order in which
they lye in his Book. Which being no
very great fault, J hope a pardon from
the Doctour will without much diffi|culty
be obtained.
170. J shall also stand in need of
another pardon for a fault, such as it is,
willingly committed, and not yet re|pented
of, because J beleive, except

himself, none will esteem it a fault. It
is this. Observing in the Doctours Book
a world of Quotations out of Authours
which J never saw, nor intend to see,
containing many dismall Stories, and
many ridiculous passages of things done
or said by severall Catholicks in former,
and some latter, times: if J had had a
mind to examine, and say something
as in Answer to them, an impossibility
of finding out those Authours must have
been my excuse. But J have a better
Excuse then that. For if the Doctour
would have lent mee those Books out of
his Library, I should have thanked him
for his Civility, but withall I should
have refused to make use of his Offer.
For to what purpose would it have been
to turn over a heap of Books to find
out Quotations in which neither the
Church, nor myself were any way con|cerned?
Not concerned, J say, though
they had been Opinions or Actions even
of Popes themselves, being assured that
at least, never any Pope, how wicked
soever, ha's brought any Heresy into
the Church. It is to me all one whether
all his Allegations be true or false, as to

any advantage he can make of them a|gainst
the Catholick Church: unless the
Doctour will undertake to demonstrate,
That it is unlawfull, or but considera|bly
dangerous to be a Member of a
Church where any persons doe, or have
lived, who have been obnoxious to Er|rours,
or guilty of ill Actions:
171. Yet J must acknowledge that
in one regard a Book written in such a
Stile as the Doctour's is, may have an
influence on the Whole Church, and,
against his intention, produce a good
effect in it. For it may be hoped that Ca|tholicks
of the present Age will serious|ly
consider the horrible consequences of
seditious, licentious and otherwayes
unwarrantable Doctrins and Practises
of a few Catholicks in former times,
which have not only been pernicious to
the Authours themselves, but by the
Scandalousness of them have exposed the
Church her self, how innocent soever,
to the detestation of such who are with|out:
For Sins, when Scandalous are an
Vniversall and never ceasing Plague:
which moved our Saviour to say, [Vae
mundo a Scandalis:] Woe to the whole

world because of Scandalls.
172. Hoping therefore that by oc|casion
of the Doctours Book such a Bene|fit
may accrew to his Catholick Readers,
as to render them more watchfull over
themselves to prevent hereafter the like
Scandals, J think my self obliged in re|quitall,
seriously to advise him touching
the dangerous State he is now in, as to
his Soule, in regard likewise of Scandall.
He would laugh at me if I should tell
him that this danger proceeded from his
not being a Member of the Catholick
Church. It is not that therefore that I
now mean: though Woe unto him, if
in the day of Iudgment he be found sepa|rated
from our Lords Mysticall Body.
173. Not to hold him in suspence:
J take leave to admonish him, that
since the world sees that he manifestly
professes himself a Member of the En|glish-Protestant
Church established by
Law, his Mind must either answer to
his Profession, or he must be a shamefull
Hyppocrit. Now in case he be not an
Hypocrit, he is desired as a genuine En|glish-Protestant
to cast his eyes on, and
to examine severall of the first Constitu|tions

of his Church: there he will find an
Excommunication denounced ipso facto
against all such as shall (in the manner
there expressed) openly oppose any
thing contained in the Nine and-thirty
Articles, in the Books of Common Prayer
and of Ordinations of Bishops and Priests
c. Which Excommunication is there
declared to remain in force, till the Of|fender
repent (not of his boldness and
disrespect, but) of his Wicked Errour,
which he ought to revoke.
174. After he has considered this,
he may please to reflect on his Book cal|led
Irenicum (not to mention his Ser|mons
during the late Rebellion:) and
so comparing together the said Consti|tutions
ratifyed with an Excommunica|tion,
and his own Book, let him ask
his conscience whether he has not in|curred
this Excommunication, of the
Legality and Validity whereof, he,
being now supposed a declared Prote|stant
cannot, nor ought to doubt (though
J humbly conceive, J may.) Now his
fault, in case he be guilty having been
publick and notorious, and no Repen|tance,
no retractation appearing (unless

perhaps he thinks that the accepting a
thousand pounds yearly in Preferments
is vertually a Retractation) and much
less any Solemn Absolution having been
given him (unless perhaps also he thinks
that the Act of Oblivion reaches to
Heaven, discharging the conscience,
and dispensing in foro interno from an
obligation of demanding Absolution
either from Bishops, or from the Civill
Magistrat, who, according to his Tea|ching
has received the Power of the Keyes,
and can Excommunicate and Absolve as
well as any Bishop:) matters, J say,
standing thus, J must needs tell him that
all Prelaticall Protestants can no other|wise
look upon him, but as one (J doe
not say, traditum Satanae, but) excommu|nicated
and separated from Christs Mysti|call
Body. And therefore J coniure him
that he would take care of his Soule,
which must needs be in great danger,
even though in his heart he believes
such Excommunications to be bruta fulmi|na;
For in that case also he will conclude
himself at least guilty of most damnable
Hypocrisy.
175. It will now be seasonable, with

this Act of Charity, to him, to take my
leave of him, and putt a period to this
my Answer, which truly I think suffi|cient,
though perhaps he will impute
my telling him so, to an ungrounded
confidence or presumption.
176. I have onely one thing more
to say to him, which is this, that I
with reason enough may accuse him
that in writing his Book he has prevari|cated
with his Superiours. For whereas
in his Preface he tells his Readers that
He was by command publickly engaged in
the Defence of so excellent a cause as that
of the Church of England against the
Church of Rome,Preface pag. 6. even of that Church of
England,Ibid. p. 22. which, vpon the greatest enquiry
he could make, he esteems the best Church
of the Christian world; I desire no other
Iudges but the Prelats of his own Church
whether by examining his Principles J
have not demonstrated how that con|trary
to Command and his publick enga|gement,
he has been so far from defending
her, that he has betrayed the cause of his
Church to all the Fanatick Sects which
have separated from her, and with most
horrible cruelty sought her destruction,
and with her the ruine of Monarchy:

Whereby he has left her in a most for|lorn
condition, tottring upon founda|tions
and Principles, which to my cer|tain
knowledge were not extant at least
not known in England thirty years
since: In so much as if those who com|manded
him to defend her, will still
avow him her Champion, there will not
be, nor ever was, a Prelaticall Church
so miserably devested of all Authority.
And therefore let any indifferent Rea|der
judge between us two, Whether with
better Success He has defended the cause of
the Church of England against the Church
of Rome, or I, the cause of his own Church
against himself.
177. To conclude, nothing can be
more irrationall then for the Doctour,
holding to his Principles, to profess him|self
a Controvertist, till he can demonstra|te
that he has the Gift of seeing into mens
hearts. For since he allowes all Sober En|qirers
to be for themselues Iudges of the Sen|ce
of Scripture in necessaries, and Iudges like|wise
what Points are necessary, till he can
disprove the allegations of any Adver|sary,
Catholick, Protestant or Fanatick,
by demonstrating that they have either
not enquired at all, or enquired unsoberly,

and that none besides himself enquires
Soberly, it will be most unreasonable in
him to condemn, or but trouble any
Dissenters from him.
178. But alas, the misery is, None
are more eager in usurping a Magiste|riall
and Tyrannicall Power over other
mens consciences, then such as renoun|ce
all Authority internally obliging in the
Church: Because having no tye upon
mens consciences, or security in their
Subiects Obedience, they find externall
violence the only Mean to support them.
Which surely argues a horrible depr|vation
in the minds, especially of Eccle|siasticks:
which depravation can now
only be cured by the Wisedom and Power
of the Civil Magistrate. Da pacem, Do|mine,
in diebus nostris. Amen.
FINIS.







The CONTENTS.

. I. THe Authours Motive of wri|ting
this Treatise. D. Stilling|fleets
three Heads of Accusation against
the Catholick Church, c. pag. I.
. II. A Vindication of the Honour and
Sanctity of S. Benedict, c. from the
Doctours contumelious imputations. II
. III. Of the life and Prayer of Contempla|tion
derided by the Doctour. 28
. IV. Visions c. no Grounds of believing
Doctrines among Catholicks. 71
. V. Resisting Authority falsely imputed to
Catholick Religion. 76
. VI. Fanaticism returned upon the Doctour
and his whole Religion. 88
. VII. The Doctrine of Penance Vindicated
from the Doctours mistakes. 121
. VIII. Of Conferring Absolution and Ex|treme
Vnction in Articulo mortis. 132
. IX. Of Prayer for the Dead. 137
. X. Of Indulgences. 144
. XI. Of the Churches Liturgy in a tongue
not generally understood. 148
. XII. Of the Churches denying the Reading
of the Bible indifferently to all. 152
. XIII. The Conclusion: with Advics to
the Doctour. 171





ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 6. read inhuman. p. 4. l. 2. read about. ib. l. 4.
read or Obedience. p. 5. l. 16. read to the. p. 7. l. 15. r.
upon. p. 8. l. 4. read their. p. 13. l. 3. r. Preacher. p. 17. l. 25. r.
sayes. p. 47. l. 25.  26. r. severall. p. 48. l. 14. r. but be. p.
52. l. 22. r. rake out. p. 59. l. 20. r. helps for. p. 60. l. 7. read
therefore. p. 67. l. penult. r. them. ib. l. ult. r. both. p. 75. l. 12.
r. permit. p. 76. l. 19. r. herself. p. 85. l. 5. r. Apostat. p. 87.
l. penult. r. also. p. 88. l. 17. r. returned. ib. l. ult. r. Fanaticks
ib. r. Farce. p. 90. l. 8. r. flesh. p. 91. l. 17. r. nutshell. p. 92. l.
18. r. demonstrate. p. 93. in the margent. r. 15. Principle. p. 95.
l. 6. r. Points. ib. l. 16. in some of the Copies, dele not. ib. l.
24. r. receives. p. 97. l. 4. r. soever p. 100. l. 9. r. government
p. 101. l. 2. r. government. ib. l. 10. r. such an one. p. 104. l.
10. r. p. 105. l. 11. r. because. p. 110. l. 1. at the lines
nd read the. p. 117. l. 4. r. Catholicks. p. 123. l. ult. read vvho
testifies p. 136. l. 4. read. by the exercise. p. 142. l. 5. r. their.
p. 145. l. 5. r. eneruating. p. 148. l. 8. r. understood. p. 151. l.
10. r. Service. ib. l. penult. r. desire that. p. 152. in the margent
ead p. 215.




A Post-script to the Doctor.
IF this short Treatise shall after more
then half a years strugling haue the for|tune
to break through all hazards, and
arriue safe to the Doctors hands, the
Authour of it will presume, in concluding
it, to offer to him a few Requests.
The First is, That, unless he do indeed
think himself obliged in conscience, by brea|king
all Rules of Piety and humanity, to do
all manner of despight to his Catholick fellow-Subiects,
he would, hereafter at least, please
to abstain from reviling and blaspheming
Gods Saints, or traducing the most Divine
exercises of contemplative soules, more per|fectly
practised only in Heauen. Jt argued
certainly a heart brimm full of the Gall of
bitternes, that to oppose only one single line
of his Adversary (pag. 31.) in which all that
he sayes is, the mentioning new Sects and
Fanaticisms, he could allow one hundred
and twenty Pages in a senceless and execra|ble
recrimination: not considering, or ra|ther
perhaps too much considering and in|tending
that such a recrimination should re|flect

with great disparagement on the En|glish
Protestant Church, In whose Calendar
severall of those Saints to this day possess a
place. Truly in all reason his Attempt by his
Socinian Principles of depriving the Gover|nours
of that Church of all Anthority, gran|ted
by her Princes and Parliaments, ought
to haue suffised him, without traducing
her as a Canonizer of Fanaticks. What excuse
he can make for this I cannot imagine,
unless perhaps his tenderly scrupulous con|science
dictates to him that the Scottish Co|venant
requires all this and more from the
obligation whereof the Bishops cannot it
seems and his Brethren Presbiters will not ab|solue
him. If so, his zeale methinks should
incite him yet further, and particularly to
make use of the power and high esteem he
has by his late Book gotten in his Vniversity
of Cambridge, to become a Godfather in reba|ptizing
and giving a New Name to an an|cient
and famous Colledge there, which at
present has two Names both of them extre|mely
inconvenient and prejudiciall to the
Design of his beloued Book being called not
only S. Benets, but likewise Corpus Christi-Colledge:
For as long as these names conti|nue,
neither will S. Benedict pass there for
a Fanatick, nor the Reall presence be esteemed
aground of a worse then Pagan Idolatry. But

I believe he will scarce be able, with all his
Rhetorick, to obtain from them such a com|pliance,
or even perswade his own Parishio|ners
to renounce Heaven, except S. Gregory S.
Benedict, S. Francis, c. be excluded thence.
A Second Request is, that since, to his great
credit, order has been taken by his friends,
more solicitous for him then their own
Church, to render his Book unanswerable,
he would hasten his zealous Huguenot Bre|thren
of the Savoy (iust such Defenders of
the Church of England as himself) to enlarge
his conquests through France also by sen|ding
abroad their French Translation of his
formidable Book, the Rationall Account. There
will be no need to fear any officious Sear|chers,
nor the least obstruction to their dis|persing
their ware in France, for there Ca|tholicks
are so confidently secure of the in|vincible
Truth of their Religion, that the
King himself not only permits, but invites,
yea and expressly commands the subtillest
of the Huguenot Ministers to write and
publish freely whatsoever they are able to
say in defence of themselves, or against
Catholick Doctrines. Now it is manifest
that the Doctours friends, the zealous Sear|chers
and murderers of all Answers to his
Book do not believe that he has any con|fidence

at all either in the truth or hone|sty
of his cause. And iust reason they
have: since it is a cause evidently destruc|tive
both to the English Church and state, as
hath been demonstrated. And if themselves
had any regard at all either to their Church
or the Civill state and peace of the kingdom
(all betrayed by him) they would see and
acknowledge that their vigilance would
have been much better employed in pre|venting
the birth of so deformed and per|nicious
a monster.
My third Request is indeed, J fear, too
reasonable to expect it should be gran|ted
by an Adversary of the Doctors temper.
It is this. His design beeing to deterr all
English-men from Communion with the Ca|tholick
Church from a consideration of dan|gerous
Doctrines and Practises in it, he is
requested, that hereafter he would not
abuse the world by fathering on the
Church Exotick opinions of particular School|men,
and by representing the Churches
Doctrines lamely, falsely and dishonestly.
His enormous faultiness in this regard (in
mitation of Doctor Taylor) committed in
his last Book through every one of the
Points mentioned by him, may be visible
to all heedfull Readers, and irrefragable

Proofes herefare in a readiness to be pro|duced,
if his busy friends the Searchers could
be perswaded to rest in their beds in the
night time. He cannot complain of any
difficulty to find out all necessary Doctri|nes
in which Catholicks universally agree
(as we may for Proteflant Doctrines.) The
Councill of Trent alone will sufficiently
furnish him. Or if he think fitt to have
recourse to the interpretations of its De|cisions,
in all reason and conscience he ought
to content himself with such as seem to him
most moderate and rationall; Christian cha|rity
and love of Peace requiring this from
him. But I fear his unconformity hereto
must be pardoned. For his principall voca|tion
now being to be a Controvertist, to
which, it seems, he is by Superiours enga|ged,
and to which employment Preaching,
Sacraments, and all must yield: it will be
impossible for him to write volumes of
Controversy his way, if he be confined to
matters only which are pertinent, or to ar|guments
which are Logically concluding.
For how could he then delight profanc
Readers with ridiculous stories, or give
scope to his own more profane Fancy in
descanting irreligiously on the actions of
Saints, or fill up many sheets with nas|ty

occurrents raked out of dunghills, and
charging them on the Church, which ab|horrs
them more then himself. How could
he, I say, thus play the Controvertist, if he
were to assault the Church only in her ne|cessary
Doctrines and Discipline, exhibited
in her Councills? I must therefore, I fear,
prepare my self with patience to receive a
Refusall to Requests, though in my opinion
very reasonable, and which I here sett
down, because J believe they will be
esteemed such by ingenuous and judicious
Readers, who surely will not judge the
cause of Catholicks prejudiced by the Do|ctors
confutation of a Church no where ex|tant
in rerum natur, except in his own dis|ordered
Fancy.
Lastly, he is desired to consider that Al|mighty
God commands us to loue Peace and
Truth (Zach. 8. 19.) both these: For Peace
alone, without Truth, is a conspiracy in
Errour: and an imprudent zeale for Truth
may be more pernicious then Errour. Both
these therefore ought to be loved together.
And to Hate both Peace and Truth seems a
depravation scarce consistent with Human
nature, or any Rationall Agent besides the
Devill himself. Since therefore the Doctor
by demolishing all Tribunalls in Gods Church

which might peaceably end Controversies,
has endeavoured, as much as in him lyes,
to banish Peace eternally from among Chri|stians:
it is iustly to be expected from him,
that, being now become by Profession a
Controvertist, he should give some better
testimony to the world, that he is at least a
Seeker and Promoter of Truth, and that his
Design in writing, Preaching, and Dis|puting
is to conquer the iudgments of
Dissenters to a belief of that which him|self
pretends to be Truth. But can any rea|sonable
man imagine that he had so much
as a desire to convert Catholicks (who alone
seem to be esteemed by him Dissenters) by
such a Book as his last is, which they cannot
read without trembling at the blasphemies
of it, and without a horrible aversion from
one who would make their Church and
Faith odious for Doctrines and Practises
which the said Church is so far from owning
that she condemns them; and would more|over
persuade them to forsake an esta|blished
Communion, without being infor|med
whither to betake themselves? These
proceedings are so unreasonnable, that it
seems manifest he had not so much as a
thought of convincing their iudgments: so
that he will have small reason to wonder

that not one single person can be found,
whom he looks on as an enemy, who has
given him occasion to erect a Trophey: yea
moreover, though perhaps he will not be|lieve
it, that a considerable number have,
against his will, had their eyes opened by
him, to see the desperate state of that cause,
which seems to seek its last refuge in the
Protection of such an Advocat. A strange
fate certainly this is of a Book so boasted of,
and to which such conquests have been
promised. Therefore any sober Reader who
shall heedfully reflect on the Doctor's abili|ties,
will hardly be perswaded to believe
that he intended his last should be a Book of
Controversy, but rather an Engin raised by
him, to work, during the space of a few
months, some considerable mischief against
the persons of innocent Catholicks, at a sea|son,
as he thought, proper for his purpose,
when he conceived thereby the whole
Kingdom might happily be incensed against
them: Which holy design if he could effect,
it would afterward be indifferent to him
whether his Book were confuted, or not.
However, our hope is, that Dominus iudi|cabit
pauperes populi,  bumiliabit Calum|niatorem.
FINIS.





