




THE
PORTRAIT
OF
WILLIAM MARQUIS of
NEW-CASTLE
To His LADY
The LADY MARCHIONESSE.
LONDON,
Printed by Thomas Creake, 1660.






The Portrait of WILLIAM MAR|QUIS
of New-Castle.
To his Lady, the Lady MARCHIONESSE.
LEt Painters with dull Lines, and Colours faint
Go Portrait those whose bodies they Depaint,
The Poet, more then painter's requisite,
To Portrait one, who is all Sprit and Wit.
This nature seems full well t'have understood,
Framing him as nigh Spirit as she co'd,
Of Bulke not bigge, to shew Nobility,
Dos more 'ith mind's then body's greatnesse lye;
Of Visage Aquiline, as best dos fit
A piercing Judgement, and a piercing Wit:
And Flaxen Hayre, a colour dos presage
As well an Aged Youth, as Youthful Age.
And who would see th' Epitom of Wit
Let them but read the Comedies h'as Writ,

Whose Excellent VARIETIES do show
That none the world and Men, dos better know,
Nor better understands the Art, then he,
To gain them all by Noble Courtesie
Who have no greater happinesse then when
He speaks, nor greater unhapinesse agen,
Then when he ceases speaking, his discourse
H'as so much quicknesse, Energy, and force:
For Horseman-ship and Arms then, there is none
In our Age fit o Write, but he alone;
As none to Judge of it can be so fit
As those alone, who read what he has Writ;
Surmounts the Macedon, in Managing
The furious Beast, and that Albanian King
In Arms, whose blows so Inevitable were,
As none co'd Live, but those whom he wo'd spare.
This partly was in cause, his Prince did call
Him, to the Honoured charge of General,

When right was weak, if power were away,
And Sword then Scepter boar the greater sway.
Of which so brave accompt he rendred, he
(Whilst Leader) still came off with Victory.
Where 'twas his Valour, Conduct, Vigilance,
(All which, in War, do oft command o'r chance)
Or's popularity (as who commands
Must have his Souldiers Hearts, as well as Hands)
Or finally, his Fortune 'bove the rest,
What er'e it was, most certain 'tis the best
Of other Leaders was or' come, with th' same
Army, with which he alwaies overcame.
But leaving's Warlike vertue now, to come
To's civil ones, who lookt on him at home,
Imagin'd in his House they did not see
A man, but God of Hospitality,
Fed more at's Board, then nature at her Breast,
When shee's most bountiful, amongst the rest

His Entertainment of the KING was such,
The state so Royal, and expence so much,
It ever will be questioned whe're that, or
The Entertaining's Army cost him more.
So far he went both in expence and state
Above a Cressus, or Lucullus rate.
'Bove all, he was so great a Cherisher
Of Artes and Learning, as 'tis doubted where
The Air (by which they vital breath receave,
The Common Aliment, of all that breath)
To th' Lives o'th Learned, did confer more Good,
Then did his benefits, to their Livelyhood.
From which contempt of riches 'twas, that he
'Ith Common losse, lost all so cheerfully,
Who in a Noble cause, no difference made
'Twixt giving, and 'twixt loosing all he had.
Bravely in poverty, comforting himself
That where no other way's t'arive to wealth
But by ignoble means, ther's nothing more

Becom's a Nobleman then to be poor.
That petty Cottages when they ruin'd lye
Turn all to dust and rubbish presently;
But mighty pallaces and structures, farre
More Venerable by their ruins are
And in wyld Woods, Robbers and thieves molest,
Your thieves are known by going bravely drest
In others spoyls, but th' honest man's best known
By being rob'd, and spoyled of his own.
So stands he like some goodly Oake had stood
Long time the pride and glory of the Wood,
By stormes and winter, reft of all it's Leaves,
Far more their harm, and detrement, receaves
Shaddow and shelter from it then it's own,
That's more it self, when all these leaves are gone.
And if our spring tide er'e again return
(As w'are not under such a climat born
To have t' perpetual winter) you shall see
All flock agen unto this Noble Tree

And th' Nimphs  swains of Sherwood with their lays,
Dauncing about it, chanting of it's praise,
And Crowning it flowers and laurel, when
Welbeck and Bolswol shall behold agen
Their Noble Lord as flourishing and more
Then er'e in better times, he was before,
So Prophesies (for Poets are Prophets too)
The humblest honourer of him and you.
MADAM,
R. Flecknoe.




