



The Occasion of Writing
this Life.
HAd there been any hope, Tomaso's ma|lice
wou'd ever have had an end, I had
expected it; but seeing that my suffring one
injury, but invited a second, and that a third,
c. and that, as my patience at first heapt
hot burning coals upon his head, so afterwards
it poured Oyle upon the Fire, and made
it but flame the more; I knew not what Re|solution
to take. I knew him a man of a dan|gerous
Tongue, and therefore desired to have
nothing to do with him; not that I feared what
he cou'd say of me, but only, what I cou'd say
of him, being loth to use the advantage I
had over him; but since he wou'd needs urge
me, and there was no end of his malice: I
resolv'd at last, if a little sprinkling wou'd not
quench the fire, to cast on whole Cataracts,
but I wou'd do't; how ever, I owe him for this
security, that I cannot make him more mine
enemy then be is.



LIFE
OF
TOMASO
THE
Wanderer.
AN EPITOME.
LICENSED
According to Order.
Printed for the Author 1667




To Mr. Thomas Killigrew.
SIR,
THE idle Time I was
wont to spend at Playes, I
employ more profitably in wri|ting
Tomaso's Life; who being
a person not unknown unto You;
I shall send it to You, as I writ it
to Peruse, that having past your
Approbation, it may afterwards
more confidently appear abroad:
So shall I do a good office to the
publick, (for 'tis a work of no
less profit and instruction, to set
forth Vice foul and ugly, to de|test
and avoid it, then Vertue

fair and lovely to embrace and
follow it) and in particular,
Sir, declare how much I am,
Your humble and
Obedient Servant
Richard Flecknoe.





THE
LIFE
OF
Tomaso the Wanderer.

PROEMIVM.
W'Ave had ful many famous Wights,
Some styl'd Squires, and others Knights,
Who for Armes, as well as Artes
Were counted men of Excellent Parts.
As Sir Hudibras for fighting.
Gregory Nonsence for his writing.
Archy for a crafty Courtier.
Muckle John for making sport there.
Coriat one that lov'd to wander:
And Squire Apple-John for pander.
Clancy for a Furb and Cheater;
(None e're knew the slights of't better:
But for all (I'le boldly say so,)
None more famous then Tomaso.
But to leave Verse, and fall to Prose.


BEing to write Tomaso's Life, I know not
well what style to write it in; for, he's
too vicions for Raillerie, and not worth a se|rious
thought; but he's more fit for the
Satyrical style, less fit he's for any other; in
that it shall be then.
He was one born to discredit all the Pro|fessions
he was of; the Traveller, Courtier,
Soldier, Writer, and the Buffoon, in all: All
which we shall Treat of, severally and
apart, after w'ave told you his Nature and
Disposition.


Of his Nature and Disposition.
HE was so ill Natur'd, as he car'd not
in whose light he stood, so he might
see; nor whom he indamag'd, so he might
gain by it; and if he had a kindness for
any one, 'twas only for being as vicious as
himself: So even his good Nature was
but an effect of his ill; and his ill in every
thing predominant.
He thought all the World made for

him, and he for none; and that all wisdom
consisted in keeping his own, and getting
as much as he could of another Man's.
He was another Titus reverst; and thought
he had lost a day when he had harm'd and
mischiev'd none; and was so pernicious to
every one, as if that saying be true, that
one man is a Wolf unto another; 'twas never
more verified then in him; so as if King
Lucius were alive agen, he'd give more for
freeing the Land from him alone, then for|merly
he did for all the Wolves together.


How he Wandred Abroad.
HE talks of Banishment, but 'tis well
known he was forc'd to fly his Coun|try
for debt, long before any other Banish|ment
was talked of, and he bandited him|self
but as Citizens turn Bankerouts to
couzen their Creditors. Besides,
To add to his evil nature as evil Arts,
he went abroad, and in Italy studied the
Putana Errante, the Picaro in Spain, and
all the Fripons and Friponeries in France,
till he had perfectly learnt all their Arts, and
was compleatly qualified to deboish and
couzen every one.

To tell you of his Deboisheries I shou'd
offend all modest ears; and I wou'd I had
some qualifying Term, to call his deceits
and Cozenages by, (for to call every thing
by their proper Names is course, and sa|vouring
of Rusticity;) but be the name
what it will, the thing's the same.
'Twere endless to tell you how he de|ceiv'd
and coz'ned every one, of all Quali|ties,
Nations, and Religions, Iews, Italians,
Courtesans, c. but especially those of his
own Country; nor was ever any more a|dopted
for't then he, who was flattering and
insinuating, and had learnt of Lysander, that
as Children are coz'ned with Nuts and
Apples, so Men are with good words and
fair promises; and he was so wrapt up in
craft and dissimulation, as you might sooner
peel a Bulbus Root out of all his Rinds, then
unfold him out of all his subtilties; and
sweep an Earthen Flore to its last grain of
dust, then come to an end of his dissimula|tion.
So wandred he up and down, (worse
then a Mounte bank, for he cures Men, but
Tomaso made them worse those fell Druggs,
but he Fumo or smoak, and their Receipts
were for others, but his was for himself,)
till finding no more abroad, to cozen and

deboish, without which there was no li|ving
for him; (the one maintaining the
other, and either him,) he return'd home at
last, and might well say with Buscon his
fellow-Wanderer:
Con l' Art e con l' Inganno
Vivo l' mezzo part l' Anno;
Con l' Inganno e con l' Art,
Vivo l' Altra mezzo part.
That is in English,
With my Art, and with deceit,
Part of my Living I do get,
And I get the other part
With deceit and with my Art.
Being return'd, he fell to practising at
home the Artes he had learnt abroad, and
had a more profitable field for it, though
not so ample as he had before.



How he was a Courtier.
ALthough he had a better place in
Court, then he deserved, yet he would
needs add the Buffoon's place unto it, as more
suitable to his humour and disposition, and
more priviledge to abuse and raile at every
one: there being none of any Dignity in
Church or State whom he had not saucily
abus'd with his leud and scurrilous Tongue;
for he was of a bold abusive wit; and whilst
others took care of what they said, he talkt
madly, dash, dash, and never car'd how he
be spatter'd others, or defil'd himself, spa|ring
neither his own, nor others shames; and
his impudent boldness was all his wit, with
which he caus'd Laughter, but 'twas rather
forc'd then natural, and as they laught at
mischief, so they laught at him; his Jests
having always somewhat of malice in them,
and he being the worst sort of Satyr, not
against Vice, but Vertue; a profest enemy to
all that were Vertuous, and never pardon|ing
Vertue in any one.
So he was a perpetual Libel in the
Court of others, and to others of the

Court; and they but repeated his bold
speeches, when they wou'd speak ill of it,
though the worst they cou'd say of it, was
only that he was one of it.
Whence if the Court (as they say) be a
Heaven or a Firmament, where the Prince
is the Sun, and other Courtiers, (as they are
nigh to him in place) bright shining Stars, he
certainly was a dark Cloud obscuring all
the rest, and the Court wou'd shine far
brighter if he were but away.


How he was a Soldier.
DUring the Warrs, not to be a Soldier,
he made himself a Captain, and to
scape fighting, has continued so ever since,
his Sword being so little able to boast its
blood, as all its nobility lyes in the Hylt and
Belt; and it derives its honour more from
the Scabbard then the Blade.
All the Employment he had during the
Warrs, was now and then to bring up a
Convoy of Wenches to the Camp, (a sort
of terrible Engins of War, that do as much
harm and execution by Land, as Fire-Ships
do by Sea) whence he gain'd the honour|able

Title of Pimp-Master General of the
Army; in which office he continued till
(chiefly for his sins) his side at last being
overcome; he, as from some common
ship-wrack was the first that sav'd himself;
and so he were safe, car'd not what became
of all the rest.


Of his second Expedition.
I Could tell you, but that 'twere too long
a digression, how in this his second Ex|pedition,
Cum Privilegio of Cavalier and
Royalist, he coz'ned more in the Kings
name, then ever Constable apprehended, or
Judge condemned. Only I will say that
if he fleec't them before, he flay'd them
now; and plain Coz'nage might have past
for Honesty, compar'd to the tricks, slights,
project, and inventions, which he had to
cozen them, especially his own Country-men;
so as his name became as formidable to
'um as ever Drakes was to the Spaniards, or
Talbots to the French; and so it has continued
ever since. And in this and his first go|ing
abroad it was, when he fell to writing
Plays, and h'ad good witness, he cou'd
write one in a day, or two; imagine but
what stuff it must be the whist.



Of his Writings.
'TIs a great Commendation for a man
to be, tam marte quam mercurio; as
good at Artes and Armes; and so was he,
for he was good at neither; yet he would
needs be writing, though he could not
spell, and be an Author, without Rhyme
or Reason; and without any other learning,
then only that of vice and debaucherie:
Whence his writings were so scurrilous and
prophane, as for less, the Heathens ba|nisht
their Writers formerly, and the Chri|stians
burn their writings by the hand of
common Hang-men, for less Mar|tial's
Poet was damn'd, when forc'd
by the Furies to confess his crime, he
only cry'd out Scripsi, that he had
writ: and whilst others shall have o|ther
Books at the latter day pro|duced
against them, he shall only need
his own to condemn him and thou|sands
others too; (there's so much
of the Devil and of Tomaso in
them) but that fevv or none ever

read what he has writ, excepting only such
as are so bad already, his writings cannot
make them worse, and so corrupted, as they
cannot corrupt them more.
Which he perceiving, was so impudent to
bring them upon the stage, to infect that
with it too, by which he has frighted all
chast ears from thence, and will all the rest
in time, if he may have but his Playes Acted,
or the appointing of those which are.


Of his Religion.
OF his Religion I say nothing, since he
had none at all, (having left it long
before that he might make no scruple nor
conscience of any thing) and your Athiest and
Heathen were Names too serious for him,
who only made a mockery of it, and coun|ted
it all a cheat; Devotion, foppery; Scrip|ture,
fabulous; Heaven and Hell, nothing;
and Gods and Fiends, only inventions of men
to fright and terrifie Fools from being as
bravely wicked as himself; who laught and
made a fool of Machiavel, for holding that
none cou'd be extreamly vicious.



L' Envoy.
FOr his Diseases I will not touch them,
not to defile my self, who had truckt
vices for diseases so long, till he had enough
to furnish an Hospital; nor will I describe
his Person, who being a Monster of a man, I
shou'd shame and dishonour Humanity
to set him forth in any humane shape;
imagine him as ugly as you please, whilst I
declare his ugly qualities.
Onely to make an end of depainting
him, He is most commonly pictur'd
with a Dog, the right embleme of his dis|position;
only a Mastive is too ge|nerous
a beast for him, it shou'd have been
rather some moungril Cur, always craving,
and never satisfied, fawning on his greatest
enemies to serve his ends, and those once
serv'd, barking at his dearest friends; by
which Dog-tricks of his, as he was an enemy
to all, so he made every one an enemy to
him.
Thus have I briefly and in Epitome, set
forth his Life, reserving the making his
History more at large, untill I shall hear
that he is not content with this.


FINIS.





