



John Baptist's
DECREASING
AND
CHRIST's
Increasing
WITNESSED:
Being a Treatise concerning
Baptism in the Type,
AND
Baptism in the Mystery.
By John Gratton,
Well-Wisher of the Anabaptists, c.
Printed in the Year 1674.




TO THE
Friendly Unprejudic'd
READER.
Friend,
IT is no Desire in me, that because so
many have appear'd in Print, that there|fore
I would be one also that should be accoun|ted
Eminent; But having been one of the
greatest Sinners upon Earth, and therefore
have through infinite Love and free Grace
much forgiven me, my Love is so much to him
that is Lord of all, that I am not a little grie|ved
to see his Pure and Precious Truth so
strongly on all hands incountered with, and
fought against its Comfortable and Glorious
Appearance in the Lord's poor despised People,
called by the scornful World Quakers: And
seeing that this of Water-Baptism hath been
and is a Thing, they that are not only Adver|saries
to Truth, but to their own Souls, have
so publickly made use of to fight us with; I

having both been an Eye  Ear-Witness of the
same, have been not a little exercised in Mind
about this Matter, but have seriously conside|red
and tryed all their Arguments that I have
been acquainted with for this thing, and I find
them so far contrary to Truth, and the Mind of
Truth, that a Necessity fell upon me to write
what it pleased the Pure Eternal God to com|municate
unto me by his Spirit; so that what
is according to Truth  sound Iudgment thou
wilt here find written (as to the Tenor and
Substance of the Matter) from the Spirit of
God in me, and so is not mine but his; to him
be the Glory wholely given forever; But if
there be any circumstantial Defect for want of
Heed or Exactness, which may either fall up|on
me or upon the Printer, charge it in its
right Place, and lay it not upon the Spirit of
God. Having given thee this Caution; I de|sire
thee to observe in the next place my End in
the publishing this little Treatise, which is,
First, To clear Truth of Scandals in this
Point laid to our Charge: 2dly, To strength|en
the Owners and Lovers of it: 3dly, To
acquaint or inform them that are mistaken a|bout
it: And lastly, That I might so aswer
that Love so greatly bestowed upon me, as to be
clear of all Men, and stand single unto God,
whose Servant I am through Mercy, and

might bring Glory, Honour and Praise unto
his Holy Name forever.
So now, before I leave thee, I shall only
acquaint thee of the great Differences amongst
men about this thing, and then take leave:
The Presbyterian saith, Water-Baptism be|longs
to Children of Believing Parents, and
therefore they examine the Parents of their
Faith; Now if the Parent be an Vnbeliever,
then his Child is not to be accepted to this Or|dinance,
as they call it: From which I shall
only now observt this, That if this be so, then
is the Child a Sufferer for the Sin of the Fa|ther's
Vnbelief, which God hath said, shall ne|ver
be; The Child shall not suffer for the Sin
of the Father, nor the Father for the Sin of
the Child; but the Soul that sins it shall
Dye. 2dly, The Episcopal saith, The
Child is by this regenerated and born again,
sanctified and changed, and made a new
Creature; and therefore if a Child be in
Danger of Death, great Haste is made to get
it sprinkled; And if this be true, What fur|ther
need of a Saviour? 3dly, The Bap|tists
say, Believers only have Right to Wa|ter
Baptism: I grant, Believers are only
they that are Truly Baptized; but that they
are injoyn'd or commanded to observe this Wa|ter
Baptism, they now so differently observe,

I find not. But, I hope, if thou readest what
follows with a single Eye, thou mayst come to
see all these Dippers and Sprinklers, and their
Shortness in this, and gain some Acquaintance
with the Lord's Mind, as thou waitest in his
pure Light, which makes all things manifest,
to which I beseech thee to turn thy Mind, and
believe in it, that thou mayst be a Child of
Light, and then thy Fellowship will be with us,
who are Children of it; and so we may Praise
the Lord together, who is Light; to whom be
all the Honour and Glory forever and ever.
Written by one of the Least of all, yet one of the
Lord's Chosen Ones, unknown to many, yet
known by the Name of

Iohn Gratton. Monyash, the 4th of the
3d Moneth, 1674.





A
TREATISE
Concerning
BAPTISM.
THey that are baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ, live in him,
and are One Spirit with, or in him;
are all united by One Spirit into One Body,
and are Members of his Body, of his Flesh
and of his Bones, and of his Fulness receive
Grace for Grace; and know One Lord, One
Faith, One Baptism; and are One in him,
and he in them; and so are come into the
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the
End, the First and the Last; He, whose
Name is called The Word of God, by which
all things were made in Heaven and in
Earth; to him be Glory forever.
Now the Baptism of the Spirit is One in
all; and all that are baptized by the One
Spirit, are baptized into One Body, and are

all made to drink into One Spirit; and these
have no Confidence in the Flesh, but are
they that worship God in the Spirit, and are
truly led and guided by the Spirit, hear and
know his Voice, and are acquainted with his
Operations, Life, Power and Vertue; and
can do nothing acceptable to God, but what
they do in it; and so it rather may be said,
as in Truth it is, That it is the Gift or Grace
of God in them and by them, that works both to
Will and to Do of his own Good Pleasure.
Now all other Baptisms whatsoever, that
are not in the Spirit, are of no Profit;
for the Substance of all is come, I say, of
all those Shadows, Figures and Types, which
had their Day, and in their Day were ap|pointed
to be used, according to the Ap|pointment
of the Father, but were but for
an appointed Time, until the Seed came, to
whom the Promise was made, who is the
Heir, in whom all Fulness dwells [mark
that] that in all things he might have the
Preheminence; for he alone, of himself, is
sufficient and able to save to the uttermost
them that come to God by him,  him only;
without the Help of any outward Washings,
outward Offerings  Oblations, or whatever
may be named, or hath been named either
of things in Heaven or in the Earth, they are

all to give place; for him only hath God
highly exalted, and given him a Name above
every Name, that at his Name every thing,
though it hath been never so highly exalted,
should bow; and that in all things he only,
who is Heir of all, should rule as a Son over
his own House; for all these were but as Ser|vants,
and were not to abide forever; I say,
All those Types and Shadows, and whatsoever
came before him, though useful in their
Place, and to be observed in their Time, yet
were all to give place, and pass away, and
not to abide forever in the House; for they
were but Servants; and the Son is over all, 
hath Power over all, and alone hath Right
singly to Reign; of the Increase of his
Government and Kingdom there shall be no
End.
So Moses was Faithful in all his House as
a Servant, and did faithfully minister in the
Law, which was added because of Trans|gression,
until the Seed came; but when the
Seed came, to whom the Promise was, who
was and is the Heir, He, as a Son over his
own House, was and is established: I say,
When he was come, then the Servants Ser|vices
ended in that Nature, gave place, and
were taken away; he took away the First
that he might establish the Second, and that

forever, which will never be removed into
a Corner; to him be all Glory wholely
forever.
So Iohn also was faithful in his Day, as a
Fore-runner, or as One sent to run before
him, whose Way he was to prepare; and
he cryed (for he was that One, fore-told
of, whose Voice was heard in the Wilder|ness,
saying) Prepare ye the Way of the
Lord, make his Paths straight: but the Lord's
Voice, which is nigh in the Heart, cryeth,
This is the Way, walk in it; I am the Way,
the Truth and the Life; No man can come
unto the Father, but by ME [mark ME]
Said Christ, I am the Way it self, walk and
live in Me, and abide in Me; in Me ye shall
have Peace: He doth not say IN ME AND
JOHN; nor, I AND JOHN AM THE
WAY; No, no; But, I am the Way, the
Truth and the Life; I am the Light, or, am
come a Light into the World; He that believes
in Me shall not abide in Darkness, but shall
have the Light of Life [mark] Not a Life|less,
Changeable or Shadowy Light; but
an Unchangeable, Pure, Living Light; for
his Life is the Light of Men: He that
hath it, hath Life; he that hath it not,
hath not Life, but is in Darkness, under
Wrath.

So Iohn testified and said, I am not
that Light, but am sent before, to bear wit|ness
of that Light, that true Light that
enlighteneth every man that comes into
the World: I am not the Way, but a Fore|runner,
or one sent to run before, to make
Preparation for the Way of the Lord; and he
that sent me, sent me to Baptize with Water:
But, GREATER IS HE THAT SENDS,
THEN HE THAT IS SENT: For though
he came after me, yet he is and even was pre|ferred
before me, the Latchet of whose Shoe
I am not worthy to untye; he shall Baptize
with the Holy Ghost and Fire: I indeed Bap|tize
with Water, He with the Holy Ghost and
Fire: I must Decrease, he must Increase:
That he might be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come, Baptizing with Water,
as I was sent to do; for this End, that he might
be made manifest to Israel; AND WHEN
he is made manifest to Israel, then is the End
of my so Baptizing with Water ACCOM|PLISHED;
then must I Decrease, but He
must Increase; for, of the Increase of his Go|vernment
and Kingdom there shall be no
End.
Now the Day dawned, the Sun appear|ed,
and all lesser Lights were overtopped,
and all Shadows fled away. Now its true,

Iohn was a Burning and Shining Light; but
Iohn received all from above; but He that
 above all, and gives to all Men Life and
Being, is the Fulness of Light and Life; and
as he arises and ascends in his Glory, he
gives to all men liberally, as it pleaseth him;
Glory to his Name forever.
Now, that Water-baptism, or Baptizing
into Water, were only ascribed unto Iohn (as
ving Commission) both by our Saviour
Christ, and his Apostles, and by Iohn him|self,
see Mat. Chap. 3. Vers. 11, 15, 16.
where Iohn affirms, I, saith Iohn, I, mark,
Indeed Baptize you with Water unto Repen|tnce;
but, mark here all ye Water-Baptists
of all sorts, mind this, but HE that CO|NETH
AFTER, ME [mark] What then
Ihn? thou must depart it seems, if he must
 After; this word [After] signifieth
Io's going away, or giving place to him
that was to come after him: What then,
Iohn, thou art but for a Time? No; I must
Dcrease, for He is Mightier then I, whose
She Latchets I am not worthy to unloose.
Well, Iohn; And what will he do for us?
Will not he Baptize with Water? I tell
you, I Baptize with Water, that he might
be manifested to Israel; but he will exceed
me or my Baptizing into Water; for he shall

Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and Fire
whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will throughe|ly
purge his Floor, and gather his Wheat into
his Garner and burn up the Chaff with Fire
Vnquenchable.
Well, they might still have said, John,
This is a Great Work; but will he not own thee
 thy Baptism,  establish it with his forever,
or to the End of the World? [mind] Yes, might
Iohn have said; for in Effect he did say, He
will own me; for GOD SENT ME BE|FORE;
and for this End, that Christ might
be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I
come; But not that he will establish my Bap|tism
with his; for I must Decrease: and there
is no Necessity for it; for his Baptism is the
Substance of all other, and throughly purges
and refines, and makes pure; and I am but a
Fore-runner of him.
Well, But he comes to thee, to be bapti|zed
of thee? Yes; but Iohn forbad him,
saying, I have need to be Baptized of thee,
and comest thou to me? [mark] Here was
need for Iohn; I have need, said Iohn; well,
Jesus denyes it not but there was so, never|theless
Suffer it to be so NOW [mark Now]
Why Now? Because Now is thy Time; for
thou wast sent before me for this End, might

Christ have said, and this Dispensation is of
God; and thus, or therefore it becometh us to
fulfil all the Righteousness: why, then Iohn
suffered him.
But some may Object, and say, If it was
Righteousness to be Baptized into Water then,
and that Christ was, ought not we to follow
Christ in all Righteousness?
I Answer; In all Everlasting Righteous|ness
he ought to be followed; not in all the
Outward or Ministerial Part of Righteous|ness;
for there is the Righteousness of God
revealed within, from Faith to Faith, and
the Righteousness of the Law without; the
Law was Righteous, Holy, Just and Good,
and Christ fulfilled the Righteousness of the
Law; and had he not fulfilled the Law in
every Tittle, he could not have said Its Fi|nished;
but he fulfilled the Law: And he al|so
fulfilled Iohn's Dispensation, or he obey|ed
or did all the Law commanded; and he o|beyed
and did also all that was comman|ded
by the Dispensation of Iohn; and
when all the Righteousness requir'd was ful|filled,
it was Reason that he only should
have Place that had fulfilled it: So down

to the Circumcision he went, and to the
Passover, and to all the Law called for; he
humbled himself, and became obedient as a
Servant, and serv'd it in its Time  Place, and
fulfilled it in its Time and Place, and fulfill'd
its Will and Requirements; and not only so,
but bore all the Curse due to us that had
broken it, and been disobedient unto it, and
set us free from it, was the End of the Law
for Righteousness to us that believe: so that
we are not under the Law, but under Grace,
or the Gift of God that brings Salvation to
us, who have not the Shadowy Works of the
Law; but are Believers in and Obeyers of
Him, who is exalted both above the Law
and the Prophets.
So also down into the Water he goes, and
fulfilled Iohn's Dispensation, or that Righ|teousness
required by it; which when it
was fulfilled, He only was worthy to have
Place, that had fulfilled it; And having
fulfilled it, he went up straight way out
of the Water [mark] He did not there
abide or stay; but straight way went out of
the Outward thing, and then came the Word
of Power, and the Heavens were opened,
and the Holy Ghost descended like a Dove
and lighting on him; then came the Voice

from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.
Now is he descended that is also ascended,
and is now established alone; This is my be|loved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, Hear,
Hear, Hear him: He that hath Ears to hear,
let him hear what the Spirit saith: Hear him
of whom Moses, and all the Prophets, and
Iohn, who was more, spake; for now he is
come that is mightier then all, and all Pow|er
is given unto him, not unto him and Iohn,
or unto him and Moses; No: But unto him,
Him only hath God exalted to be both King
and Priest unto Israel; and he alone is esta|blished
a Priest forever, of an Unchangeable
Priesthood; not changeable nor finite, but
forever, of an unchangeable Priesthood
[mark ye] but not after the Order of Aa|ron,
nor after the Order of Iohn, but after
the Order of Melchizedeck, who met A|braham
and blessed him, him that overcame,
and blessed him; and will give to him that
overcomes to sit with him in his Throne, as
he hath overcome, and is set down in his Fa|ther's
Throne.
Not after the Order of a Carnal Com|mandment,
but after the Power of an End|less
Life: This is the Sun that choathes the

Woman, who hath the Moon (with all
changeable Dippings in Water) under her
Feet; and the least in his Kingdom is grea|ter
then Iohn, though he was more then a
Prophet.
Also in Mark 1. 8. I indeed have baptized
you with Water, but he shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost.
Also Luke 3. 16. I indeed baptize with
Water, but one mightier then I cometh, the
atcht of whose Shoe I am not worthy to un|loose,
he shall mind] baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and Fire.
But he ever takes Water-Baptism to him|self,
and never asscribes it to Christ Jesus;
but speaks of a greater Work to be done by
him, a Purging, Purifying, Refining, Cleans|ing
VVork; and Iohn's was but a Type of
what was a coming, and therefore ran be|fore,
and hasted to give place to him that
came after, who alone is himself established,
in all things to have the Preheminence.
Now [mark] this word Fore-runner, or
One sent to run before; one that runs makes
haste away, that he may finish his Course be|fore
his Time be out. Now its plainly said,
that as Iohn fulfilled his Course, he said,
Whom think ye that I am? I am not He:
Mind ye, Iohn was not He, not He that





was to be established to abide forever, a
Priest forever, of an Unchangeable Priest|hood,
but was sent before him; therefore
when the Apostle here comes in the 13th
Chapter of te Acts and Vers. 23, 24, 25.
he speaks on this wise (as he was preaching
Christ Jesus, not Iohn; he was not, I say,
preaching Iohn, nor Iohn's Baptism, but
Christ, the Seed of David) Of this Man's
Seed (saith he) hath God according to his
Promise, raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus,
when John had first preached before his Co|ming
the Baptism of Repentance to all the
People of Israel: Mind ye, all ye Baptizers
in Water, when Christ was raised unto Is|rael,
when Iohn had first preached before
his Coming [mark] Iohn had a Time we
grant and own with all our Hearts; but was
it not before his Coming here spoken of?
But when his Course was fulfilled, when Iohn
had first preached the Baptism of Repen|tance
[first, mind ye] then God raised up
unto Israel a Saviour. Oh! but Iohn could
not save; but him whom God hath raised
saveth to the uttermost them that come to
God by him, Him whom God hath raised:
And so Iohn honestly disclaims all the Ho|nour
due to Jesus Christ; and as one afraid
lest the People should asscribe any of it to

him said, Whom think ye that I am? as he
fulfilled his Course [mark that] Iohn's
Course was fulfilled; I am not he, but behold
there cometh one after me, whose Shoes of his
Feet I am not worthy to loose [Him] Behold
he is the Lamb of God that takes away the
Sins of the World; but I am not he. And so
in the 47th Verse the Apostle comes to de|clare
in much Plainness, how that Christ is set
or established,  he joyns none with him; For
so hath the Lord commanded us (saith he)
saying, I have set ther, saith the Lord, to be
a Light to the Gentiles, that THOU [mark,
not Thou and Iohn, nor Thou and Moses,
but in the singular Term, Thou] that Thou
shouldst be for Salvation unto the Ends of the
Earth, Isa. 49. 6.
But again, in John 1. 2, 26. The People
came to John, and asked him, saying unto
him, Why Baptizest thou, if thou be not that
Christ, neither Elias, nor that Prophet?
John answered them, saying, I Baptize with
Water [mark] but there standeth One among
you, whom ye know not, He it is who cometh
after me, is preferred before me, whose
Shoe's Latchet I am not worthy to unloose:
These things were done in Bethabara beyond
Jordan, where Iohn was baptizing.

The next day Iohn seeth Jesus coming
unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the Sins of the World: This
is He of whom I said, After me cometh a
Man that is preferred before me; for he was
before me, and I knew him not; but that he
might be made manifest to Israel, therefore am
I come Baptizing with Water.
Mark the End of Iohn's Baptism was, That
HE might be made manifest to Israel
therefore am I come, baptizing with Water:
So then this was the Service of Iohn's Bap|tism,
and it served for this Purpose, and
to this End, That Christ might be made ma|nifest.
And so Iohn bare Record of him, and
preached him, and not himself; but cryed,
Behold the Lamb of God; look not at Me; b hold
not Me, nor the Lamb of God and Me; no, he
never joyn'd himself to Him; but said, I
am sent before Him, and now he is come be|hold
Him, the Lamb of God; He taketh
away the Sins of the World; but look not now
at Me; I am not that Light, but am sent be|fore,
a Witness, and am come Baptizing, that
He might be made manifest; and if He were
manifest to Israel, then were my Desire an|swered,
and the End of my Labour in Water-Baptism

accomplished, so that they might be+lieve
in him.
Iohn bare Record, saying, I saw the Spi|rit
descending like a Dove, and it abode upon
him, and I knew him not; but he that sent
me to Baptize with Water, said unto me, Vpon
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and
remaining on him, the same is he that baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost; and I saw and bear Re|cord
that this is the Son of God.
See how plainly Iohn preached Christ and
his Baptism, and all along put this Distincti|on,
I Baptize with Water, He with the Holy
Ghost and Fire; I must Decrease, He must
Increase.
But they might have said, Why John,
why must thou Decrease? Why, Iohn might
have said, Because my Baptism is but wth
Water, that He might be made manifest;
but His Baptism is with the Holy Ghost and
Fire, a Baptism that exceeds mine as far as
the Light of the Sun exceeds the Light of the
Moon.
So its clear, that Iohn was sent to Bap|tize
with Water, and Christ was sent to Bap|tize
with the Holy Ghost and Fire: And
Christ fulfilled Iohn's, and the Law, and all
the Righteousness required by them, and
then was himself alone established, a Priest

forever, of an Unchangeable, Unalterable
Priesthood.
But further; for I am desirous to clear
my self of this Matter at this time from all
Opinions concerning this thing. I have
already made it appear, that Iohn himself
was on my side; and his Record is clear to
prove, That the Baptism of Christ Jesus is
that of the Holy Ghost, and that he him|self
was sent to Baptize with Water; and
he no where makes mention of any other
that was sent to Baptize with Water but
himself, I say, that was sent. In the next
place, I shall bring the Testimony of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who also at
all Times asscribeth Water-Baptism unto
Iohn.
Acts 1. 5. And being assembled together
with them, commanded them, That they should
not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
Promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye
have heard of me; for John Truly (or might
he not have said, and is it not all to one sense
had he said so, John, its True) Baptized
with Water: But mind, he doth not say,
Do you so too, or, I will baptize you with Wa|ter
also; No, no: John, said he, Truly
baptized with Water, but YE [mind Ye]

YE shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not
many dayes hence
This is the Baptism they were to wait for,
and to be by Christ baptized withal, no
Water at all injoyned to it by Christ Jesus,
though he owned it in its Time, and fulfil|led
it, as aforesaid: But [mark] now was
the Time of Promise at hand, Not many
dayes hence (saith Christ) ye shall be baptiz|ed
with the Holy Ghost.
So also Peter, in Acts 11. 16. saying,
Then remembred I the Word of the Lord, how
that he said, John indeed baptized with Wa|ter,
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost. Still Water Baptism is asscribed to
Iohn, by himself and by Christ Jesus; let
us hear what the Apostles say concerning
it.
In Acts 1. 22. Peter in his Declaration
to the Disciples concerning Iudas, and choo|sing
another in his stead, makes mention in
the 22th Verse, on this wise, Beginning
(said he) from the Baptism of John [mark]
unto that same day that he was taken up from
us, must one be ordained to be Witness with us
of his Resurrection. Here it is still asscribed
unto Iohn.
Again, in Acts 13. 23, 24, 25. Paul spea|king
of the Promise, God hath (saith he)

according to his Promise, raised unto Israel
a Saviour, Jesus, when John had first [mark
first] preached BEFORE HIS COMING
[mind] before his coming, the Baptism of Re|pentance
to all th People of Israel, and as John
fulfilled his Course. [Mind here Paul still
asscribes it to Iohn.
Again, in Acts 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. And it came
to pass, that while Apollos was at Corinth,
Paul having passd through the uppermost
Coasts, came to Ephesus, and fiding certain
Disciples there, he said unto them, Have ye
received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?
And they said unto him, WE HAVE
NOT SO MUCH AS HEARD
WHETHER THERE BE ANY
HOLY GHOST. And he said unto
thm, Vnto what then were ye Baptized?
They said, Vnto JOHN's BAPTISM.
[Mark] Had Iohn's Baptism been in the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
then how should they but have heard of a
Holy Ghost? So that here, before I pro|ceed
any further, I shall take notice of this
place a little. Water Baptism is still asscribed
here to Iohn; I indeed baptize with Water, said
John; John indeed baptized with Water,
said Christ; and say the Apostles, John ve|rily
baptized with the Baptism of Repentance,

saying unto the People, that they must believe
on Him that was to come after him, that is
(said he) on Christ Iesus: So I shall yet
bring no more Proofs for this Point, these
being sufficient. But before I leave this
Place, take notice, That though they had
been baptized unto Iohn's Baptifm, yet they
had not heard whether there was ANY Holy
Ghost; which doth clearly manifest, that
although it should be granted, that Iohn's
Baptism was still of Necessity, which far
be it from me to do, yet how doth it thwart
all our Water-Baptists of our Age, who
baptize with, or into Water, using the words
[Father, Son and Holy Ghost] which they
cannot bring Precept or Example for.
For though the Apostles did by Permission
baptize, it was but in Condescension unto
Iohn's Baptism; for Commission they cannot
bring from Christ no where; nor that they
did use the words now used by you, saying,
I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost.
So that your Practice, all of you Water-Baptists,
is contrary to the Holy Scripture;
for in this place Paul baptized those in the
Name of the Lord Jesus: And Peter (in
Acts 10.) commanded to be Baptized,
Repent, and be Baptized in the Name of the

Lord Iesus: But no where can they find,
that either Iohn, or any of the Apostles used
to say, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost: so that your
Practice in this is grounded of a sandy
Foundation, and will undoubtedly fall.
Prop as hard as you can, and take ye al|together,
ye Water-Baptists of all sorts, and
work never so hard with both Hands, your
Babel-Buildings will all fall, and great will
be the Fall thereof; and all your Props and
all your cunning Work will be broken to
pieces, and you shall never be able to raise
your Buildings again; but the chiefest of
your Workmen shall be ashamed of their
own Doings, and you shall gather Paleness
in that Day.
Oh therefore be intreated in tender Love,
I beseech you, to Return! Return out of
Babylon, unto the Gift of God, the True
Light, that makes ye all manifest, and in
which ye are all seen and comprehended: I
say in the Name of the Lord my God, and
in much Love to your Souls, be intreated to
return unto it; its near you to instruct you,
and to make all things manifest to you, if
you will come unto it. Oh turn your Minds!
How oft have you been reproved by it, and
you never found Guile in his Mouth; though

he hath told you all that ever you have done,
yet you regard him not, but prefer fading,
finite and unprofitable Things above him.
Oh! haste, haste out of Babylon, tarry not;
the Day of Vengeance is near, and then will
you come to know the True Baptism is not
into Water, but into the Name of the Fa|ther,
Son and Spirit; and that Christ (in the
28th of Matthew 18, 19.) when he sent his
Apostles out to teach all Nations, and that
the Baptism there spoken of,  commanded
by Christ, was not into Water, but into the
Name of the Father, Son and Spirit; neither
is there any such a word as Water mention'd
in his words there spoken to them; but into
the Name of the Father, Son  Hoy Ghost
he bad them baptize.
But some may say, It must needs be Water
there intendd, because that none can baptize
with the Holy Ghost, but Christ.
I Answer, True; None can but He, and
by his Power only; therefore he tells them
in the first place, that All Power is given unto
me (saith he) both in Heaven and in Earth;
and they now must not go in their own
Strength or Power, but in his Power; and

it was his Power in them and by them, that
did the Work he sent them to do; and so he
saith unto them, Without me ye can do nothing:
but lo, I am with you alwayes, even to the
End of the World: and all Power is mine.
And now you Water-Baptists, let me ask,
Now where is Iohn's Power? Iohn hath now
no Power, nor Moses hath now no Power in
a way of Administration, if all be given to
him, and be his, as I am satisfied it is: And
here its plain, he only is here established.
Now it must not be admitted for any o|ther
to have a Tabernacle standing or build|ed
with his; No; Though Peter would have
had Three, one for Moses, one for Elias, and
one for Christ: That Elias was already come
[mind] and they have done to him what|ever
they would: And is it not plain to you,
that this was Iohn the Baptist here spoken of
and intended? And yet, mind, neither Moses
nor Elias must have a Tabernacle built with
his; but a Cloud came and took them away
[mark] and Christ only left; and a Voice
from Heaven came, saying, This is my Be|loved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear
him. Oh! what would you have? How
clearly is it manifest unto all who walk not
in Darkness, that he only is by himself esta|blished

to be heard in all things: And saith
the Apostle, He that refuseth to hear this
Prophet shall be cut off from off the Earth:
And again, See ye refuse not him that speak|eth;
for if they escaped not that refused him
that spoak on Earth, even Moses, how shall
ye escape, if ye refuse him that speaks from
Heaven, whose Voce then shook the Earth?
but now says he, Yet once more will I not shake
the Earth only, but also Heaven [mark]
that those things that cannot be shaken may
remain: Mind what must remain, and how he
alone (even Christ) is above all established.
And its said again by Paul, God (saith he)
who at sundry Times and in divers Manners
spak in days past to the People by the Prophits,
hath in these last dayes spoken unto us. BY
HIS SON [mark, not by his SON and
JOHN but by his SON] whom He
hath appointed Heir of all things [mind] So
All Power is given unto me (saith Christ) Go
ye therefore, teach all Nations, Baptizing
them into the Name of the Father, Son and
Spirit, or if you had rather have it [Holy
Ghost] teaching them to observe whatever I
command you; and lo, I am with you always,
even to the End of the World; but tarry at
Jerusalem till ye have received Power from an
high; for without me ye can do nothing: So

'tis not (saith Peter) by our Strength or Righ|teousness
that this man is made whole; Why
stand ye gazing upon us, as though by our Pow|er
 Holiness it was done? Be it known unto
you, that by the Name of JESUS, whom ye
crucified, even by Faith in his Name, is this
Man made whole. And said Paul, I have la|boured
more abundantly then ye all, yet not I,
but the Gift or the Grace of God that's in me.
And so it was in his Strength that they were
more then Conquerors, and could do all
things through Christ, that strengthned them;
but before they could not, before (I say)
that they went in his Strength. So there was
need for them to wait at erusalem, till they
had received of his Fulness, of which they
all received Grace to help in Time of Need.
But now [mark] They had not Need to
have stay'd at Ierusalem for Power to have
Baptized with Water; for they had been
doing that before, and were Able enough
for that Baptism; but now they were to en|er
upon a Greater Work; and it is not they
must do it, but the Gift of God in and by
them, or the Power they received; so saith
Christ, Lo I am with you; and as many as
received him, to them he gave Power; for,
all Power is given to me (saith Christ) ALL
[mark] So though the Apostles, as Men,

could not baptize into the Name of the Fa|ther,
Son and Spirit, no more then we, as
men, can do; yet [mark] Christ in and
by them can, or us either, and in and by them
did; and when the Apostles laid their
Hands on them that believed, the Holy
Ghost fell upon them and sometimes when
they were preaching unto them, the Holy
Ghost fell upon them; yet it was not them
that could so much as preach as they ought,
but Christ in and by them: God speaks by
his Son through his Vessels of Honour, fitted
for his Use; so its not them, but Christ, who
also Raised the Dead, Opened the Eyes of
Blind, Healed the Sick, Cleansed the Le|pers,
and many great and good Works
did they, yet not they, but the Gift of God
in them and by them; and so they went in
the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Pow|er,
and preached Christ the Wisdom of
God, and the Power of God, the Savour of
Life unto Life IN THEM [mark, in them]
that are saved, and the Savour of Death
unto Death in them that perish.
But they never cryed out, Water-Baptism
is the Door; for Christ Jesus said, I am the
Door, by ME [mark, not Me and Water,
nor Me and Iohn, but BY ME] if any
man enter in, he shall be saved (Oh he is of

himself sufficient) and shall go in and cut, and
find Pasture.
The Apostles never called it as you do,
An Initiating Ordinance, and (say you) A
Command of Christ: But who say so beside
you? Where do you prove it? Prove,
Friends, whoever you are. I challenge all
the whole VVorld to prove, that Christ
ever mentioned such a thing to any of his
Ministers, as by way of Command, as Wa|ter-Baptism;
but said, as above said, Ye
(said he) shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost;
and Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them in|to
the Name of the Father, Son  holy Ghost;
say not, We cannot, be not dismay'd; for, Lo
I am with you; and all Power is given unto
me, both in Heaven and in Earth; therefore
without me ye can do nothing; but abide in
me, and then ye shall bear Fruit; in me ye shall
have Peace.
But though it were so, that he had meant
as you Baptists say he did, Water Baptism,
and that that Commission belongs to you,
(say you) the World is ot yet ended, there|fore
(say you) it is still to be observed; sup|pose
this were granted you, then I ask you,
How missed Paul of it, that he had no Share
in this Commission? for Paul saith in 1 Cor.
1. 13. That Christ sent me not (saith he)

to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel [mark]
How comes it to pass that you are greater
Sharers in this Commission then Paul? And
how must we do to know it? For if it did
not reach Paul, who was Converted, and
one not behind the Apostles, how can it reach
you? And though you may say, All are
not sent to Baptize; Then I ask you, How
must we do to know who are, and who are
not? But say you, Paul meant [NOT ON|LY]
Oh Friends! have you this Hole to
creep out at? its a little One, too little to
get out at. 'Tis your Meaning: but we must
not take your Meanings when the Lord lets
us see he means otherwise; for Paul said not
so; nor dare any true Christian say that Paul
meant so, but said what he meant, and meant
what he said.
Well, but say you Baptists, He did Bap|tize.
Its true, he did some Few; but he thanks
God they were so few: But it seems though
he did, he did not do it by Commission;
For Christ sent me not to Baptize (saith he)
but to Preach.) How then? why, by Per|mission
as he also Circumcised Timothy by
Permission, because of the Iews; but not,
because Christ had commanded it; for he
had not.

Paul himself said, If ye (speaking to the
Galatians) If ye be Circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing; yet took that Liberty for
a particular End, because of the Iews, to do
that particular Act. He also observed the
Law, and went under Seven Dayes Purifica|tion,
and had an Offering bought according
to the Law, but not, because it was comman|ded
by Christ; for Christ had not comman|ded
it, but because of the Iews: Yea, and
had (had he not? another time his Head
shorn, and was under a Vow. Much might
be said that was done by the Apostles, that
was not commanded by Christ; nor that
they left No Command to after. Ages to ob|serve.
But its also clear in Acts 26. 15, 16, 17, 18.
that Paul had no such word in his Commis|sion,
as to baptize into Water; For I (said
the Lord) have appeared unto thee for this
End or Purpose, to make thee a Minister and
a Witness, both of these things which thou hast
seen, and of those things in the which I will
appear unto thee; delivering thee from the
People, and from the Gentiles unto whom now
I send thee [mark] What to do? Not
to baptize into Water; he mentions no such
thing, no; but to open their Eyes, and to
turn them from Darkness to Light, and from

the Power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheri|tance
amongst them that are sanctified by
Faith that is in Me. This was Paul's Com|mission,
if we may so call it, as he himself
tells the King Agrippa; but here is not one
word of Water Baptism, or not only to Bap|tize,
as you Baptists say: But if you have
no better Weapons then these, thee are too
short to save your Heads.
But to proceed: You still say, The Apo|stles
did Baptize.
Peter said in the second of the Acts, RE|PENT
and be BAPTIZED every
one of you in the NAME [mark] of Isus
Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and y shall
receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost (this Bap|tism,
being for the Remission of Sins upon
Repentance, was necessary to Salvation;
but so is not yours) for the PROMISE
[mark] is unto you. But the Promie was
Not WATER-BAPTISM, but, ye
shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, said
the Lord Jesus by way of Promise: And this
is that which was spoken by the Prophet, Io|el
2. 28. And it shall come to pass in the last
dayes, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirt
upon all Flsh [mark] Was not this the Pro|mise

of God to them and their Children, and
to all that are afar off, and so on?
And in Vers. 21. Then they that gladly re|ceived
the Word, were Baptized; and THE
SAME DAY were added unto them
Three Thousand Souls [mark ye, the same
day] It was a Great Number to be bapti|zed
into Water, as you do, all of one day,
if it was so; but it is not here so said, nor
no mention made of Water in this Chapter;
so that this place will not carry your Matter
you would lay on it; for all these (its said)
continued stedfastly in the Apostles Do|ctrine;
and their Doctrine I hope, you will
own was for Christ: If any preach any other
Doctrine then what is already preached, or lay
any other Foundation then which is already
laid, let him be accursed: We preach Christ
(saith Paul) to the Jews a stumbling-block,
to the Greeks Foolishness; but unto them that
belive, Christ, the Wisdom of God, and the
Power of God. It was Christ they preached.
But say you, Philip baptized the Eunuch,
and the Iaylor was baptized, and Cornelius
and those with him Peter commanded to be
baptized in the Name of the Lord; and (say
you Baptists) when was that Command re|pealed?

I Answer; Though it was a Command,
yet it was but Peter's Command, and Peter
had not all reveal'd to him at first, but was
ignorant of things that were afterwards re|vealed,
and so were the rest of the Apostles,
witness Peter's Vision, and the Apostles
blaming Peter for going to the Gentiles,
because they yet saw not into that fore-told
Mystery, nor many before them saw it not;
but it was revealed in the Lord's Time to
them, how that the Gentiles should be Fellow-Heirs,
and Partakers of the same Glory:
But you cannot prove that Peter's Command
was obeyed: He commanded them (it is
true) to be baptized; and if they were, his
Command was fulfilled; but who comman|ded
you, or sent you? Shew us your
Commission; For Peter did not any where
that I can find, command, That Water-Bap|tism
should be observed to the World's End:
No, no; it was the Baptism of Christ Jesus,
with the Holy Ghost and Fire, that was, and
is, and will be to the End, established and
commanded in Mat. 28. by Christ: And
though the Apostles did make use of Iohn's
Baptism, yet they laid no stress upon us, that
were to come after them, to use it; neither
was it commanded by Christ for them to
use.

But come; May not I say, that they saw
not to the End of Iohn's Baptism (though
Iohn had plainly said, I must Decrease) no
more then they saw the Coming of the Gen|tiles,
till it was shewed by a Vision; and
that though Christ had said, That the True
Worship was in Spirit and in Truth, yet that
they saw not through the Outward Worship;
and have I not more Ground for it then you
have for Paul's [NOT ONLY] but if
you were in the Light, you would see that
the Apostles did see but in part, and no fur|ther
then it was revealed unto them, no more
then we do now.
But though we should say, that they did
see unto the End of Iohn's Baptism, and unto
the End of all Visible things, as I know they
did in Time, as I shall prove hereafter; yet
although they might, yet they that were
daily added, might have stumbled, had they
denyed them that of Iohn's Baptism, except
they also had seen into the Mind of God with
them in this Matter; for they were but En|terers
in as little Children, and not grown up
to man's State at first, but went from Strength
to Strength in the Spirit of the Lord, and so
the Apostles could take Liberty for the fur|therance
of the Gospel, to command Iohn's
Dispensation, bt were above it themselves,

out from under its Command, in the Power
of Christ, who was greater then Iohn, and
had all Power now himself; and so it could
not command Them, but they It: And so
Philip said unto the Eunuch, If thou believest
with all thy Heart, THOV MAYEST;
not, thou must, No; but if thou believest, thou
Mayest; he would not deny it him, though
I believe, Philip knew, that it was the Spirit's
Baptism that must sanctifie, and that Water
could not reach the Soul of any, nor any way
saisfie the Spiritual Part of Mankind. And
yet took that Liberty in the Spirit, because
of the Weakness of their yet Childish Ca|pacities
to submit to their Weakness in many
things that belonged unto the Law, as well
as in this of Iohn's. And is it not also clear,
That the Apostles would not yet seem to lay the
Building, if I may so call it, of John waste,
until they had laid and builded on a More Sure
Foundation? nor wholely preach his Baptism
useless, nor the Law neither, until such time
as the Gospel had got some hold of the People?
and then they testified of One Lord, One
Faith, ONE BAPTISM; and that
by one Spirit they were all baptived into One
Body, and had been all made to drink into One
Spirit; and that they were made able Ministers
of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but

of the Spirit: and came not with words Man's
Wisdom teacheth, but with the Words the Holy
Ghost teacheth, with which they were now bap|tized;
comparing Spiritual Things with Spi|tritual,
not with carnal, or external, or elemen|tal
Things with Spiritual, as you do, No,
no; but Spiritual with Spiritual. Now they
saw by the Revelation of the Spirit into the
Mysteries of God's Kingdom, and therefore
in Heb. 6. 1. the Apostle comes in with
these words, LEAVING (saith he) mark,
Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, let us go on unto Perfection. Come,
Friends, deal plainly for your own Souls
Good and God's Glory, and tarry not short
of him that makes Perfect, and cleanseth
from all Iniquity; and be perswaded to
come and wait for the True Baptism of
Christ, which is with the Holy Ghost and
Fire, that ye may be sanctified and refined,
and made every whit whole; for it is in
much Love to your Souls that these Lines
are written, by One that desires your Salva|tion
even as his own, and truly breathes for
the Prosperity of Zion, and the Establish|ment
of Truth and Righteousness.
But now some may Object, and say, That
the Apostles could not have left them if they had

not been in Them, or in the Vse of Them.
I Answer, True, they had so; and had
also been in the Use of those things the Law
had required; but mark, All these could not
make Perfect; The Law made nothing Per|fect
(said the Apostle) as pertaining to the
Conscience. And the Baptism of John (say
you) was but a Type: Now if the Type could
make perfect, then there would have heen
no need of the Substance; for if Perfection
had been by the Levitical Priesthood, then ve|rily
Righteousness would have been by the
Law; and now say I, If John's Baptism
could have taken or have wash'd away Sin, then
verily Righteousness would have been by John;
I mean, that men would have been then by
it made perfectly and truly Righteous: but
Iohn himself preached no such thing by
himself; but said, I am not He, but behold
him, the Lamb of God, that takes away the
Sins of the World; This is he of whom I spak
one Mightier then I cometh, he must Increase,
of the Increase of his Government and King|dom
there shall be no End.
And therefore saith the Apostle [LEA|VING]
which word therefore seems to
entail the fore going words in the Chapter

before, where he had bin telling them of their
Childishness (he mentions the Doctrine of
Baptisms, which cannot prove the Imposing
of Water-Baptism any more then all the rest)
and was now for bringing them on to a fur|ther
State, where they might know Perfe|ction,
and have Meat that would satisfie, True
Bread, that comes down from Heaven, and
impowers to be Sons of God. And it seems
clear to me, that there was some Need for
those things they had so long lain like Chil|dren
weak, and like Babes in, to be left;
Therefore LEAVING these, let us go
on to Perfection; and saith further, This
will we do, if Godpermit: But if they had
been commanded by Christ to have been
used to the World's End, then why should
Paul (for so I call that Author) have been so
earnest at that Day, which was soon after
Christ's Ascension, to have had them then to
leave them, and to go on to a more Manful,
Powerful, Perfect State: So that it is very
clear to all whose Eyes the Lord hath open|ed,
that though the Apostles had by Reason
of their Weakness, submitted to their Child|ish
Capacities, rather then they would lose
their hold they had got of them; yet this or
these things were not the Thing they were

driving at: But the Aim and End of all they
did, both in Circumcision, Passover, Vows
and Seven Dayes Purification, and Water-Baptism,
yea, and all those things they
did concerning Meats, and other things that
they did by Permission, and not by Commis|sion
from Christ, I say, their Intents in all
tese were never to establish them with
Christ Jesus, to abide as long as the World la|sted
n: But after they had held them in hand,
in order to get them on, they took all Occa|sions
they could, to bring them on further 
further, till they all come in the Unity of the
Faith unto a perfect Man in Christ Jesus,
unto the Measure of the Stature of Christ
Jesus; and so these became Useless, and all
gave place to him, who is alone by himself
established a Priest forever of an Unchange|able
Priesthood; Glory is wholy due unto him.
And so, now they came to speak of One
Baptism, One Faith and One Lord, as a fore|said;
and that by One Spirit they were all
baptized into One Body [mark, they were
ALL, he saith, ALL Baptized by One Spirit
into One Body] and had all been made to drink
into One Spirit: but none can prove that
[All] were baptized into Water; for Paul
was instrumental in the Lord's Hand, for the
concinoing and converting of many: But

he saith, He baptized none but Crispus and
Cajus, and the Houshold of Stephanus,
beside (saith he) I know not whether I bap|tized
any other but many were convin|ced
by him, doubtless very many, yea,
Multitudes; yet no man can prove, that all
that were convinced and converted by the
Gift of God in Paul, were also All baptized
into Water; yet saith he, Ye are All bapti|zed
by One Spirit, and have been [ALL]
made to drink into One Spirit; and there is
One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism.
Well, but say you Baptists, He doth not
say, There is but One Baptism. No, nor
he doth not say, There is but One Lord; must
we therefore say, There are more Lords then
One? God forbid; for to us there is but One
Lord: And he doth not say, There is but One
Faith; must we therefore say, There are
more Faiths then One? So he also saith, There
is One Baptism, and so say we too; and that
One was promised, and accomplished, and
commanded; for we believe as Christ said,
The Works that I do [mark ye, the Works
that I do] shall ye do, and greater Works then
these shall ye do: But its plainly said, That
Christ baptized not, I say, not with Water,
but with the Holy Ghost: And do you think
that he used One Baptism to them, and com|manded

them to use Another to them that
believed in him? do you think that he bap|tized
them with the Holy Ghost, and then
sent them out to baptize with Water? I
know, whatever you believe, you have said
no less; but you can never prove it: For,
the Works that I do, shall ye do; but Christ
baptized not into Water, nor never
said that they should, that you or any
other can prove; for Peter in the 11th of
Acts declares what the Lord said, when the
Disciples were talking with him about his
going in to the Gentiles: Then (said he) re|membred
I the Word of the Lord, how that
the Lord said (mark ye Christ's words) the
Lord said, John indeed baptized with Water,
but you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost.
But he no where mentions Water by way of
Commanding them to use it in Baptism; but
said, Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost;
and, Go ye, teach all Nations, baptizing them
into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; and, Lo, I am with you.
But further, I remember you Baptists
have said, That your Baptism into Water
doth signifie Death, Burial and Resurrection:
By which words you acknowledge it is but a
Type. And you further say, That no man
ought to be buried before he be dead. Now

I conclude, that the Dead you mean, are
such as are Dead to Sin; and if so, how
can ye that are dead to Sin live any longer
therein? Know ye not (saith Paul in Rom. 6.
2, 10, 7.) that so many of us as were bapti|zed
INTO (mark into) Iesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death; therefore we are
buried with him by Baptism into Death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the Dead by
the Glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in Newness of Life: And in the 7th
Verse, For he that is dead is freed from Sin.
Well, now let me ask you, are you thus dead,
buried and risen with him by your Water.
Baptism? Or can any Man conclude, that
Paul here speaks of Water-Baptism? Is it
not plainly said, into Christ; not, into Water,
but into Christ, into Death. And in Gal. 3.
27. For as many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ; and they
that are in Christ, are new Creatures (behold,
all ye Water-baptizers) all Old things pass
away, and all things become new, a new Hea|ven
and a new Earth, in which dwells Righ|teousness.
And we say, that the Sons of God
inhabit in the New and Living Way, that
which is pure, and changeth not, but en|dures
forever, and in Righteousness are they
established, and act not by the Power of a

Carnal Commandment, but in the Power
of an Endless Life; not in Imitation of the
Letter, but in the Demonstration of the
Spirit: For although it should be so as ye
would have it, That Christ had commanded
the Apostles to baptize into Water, as he never
did, nor can it be ever proved; yet if it had
been so, what is that to you? Who com|manded
you? Shew us your Commission;
Where did you receive your Power and Au|thority
in this Matter, that you both preach
and baptize? Whereas Paul saith, He was
not sent to Baptize, but to preach: And we
say, and know what we say to be true, That
we are not sent to Baptize into Water, but
to Preach the Gospel; and our Authority
came not by Man, of Man, nor from Man,
but by the Grace of God we are what we
are; and his Grace is sufficient for us, and
ever hath been since we were a People, and
so will be to the End.
And we further say, we own that Iohn
was sent to baptize with Water, and we own
him in his Day; but where did Iohn baptize
using those words, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost? for they that had been baptized unto
Iohn's Baptism had not so much as heard of
a Holy Ghost; so that this Baptism ye practise
cannot be Iohn's, nor Christ's it cannot be;





for he never had Water asscribed to him:
But Iohn, who was a true Minister in his time
of Water-baptism, said, HE (meaning Christ)
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost  Fire:
So then, if not Iohn's, as its clear it is not; for
Iohn's was a Type of the True Baptism of the
Spirit, and when the Types, Figures, Vails
and Shadows were ended, and HE, the End
and Beginning, First and Last was arisen, and
had rent the Vail from the Top to the Bot|tom,
I say, when his Sun of Righteousness
did arise, the Shadows fled away, and gave
him place over his own House to rule, whose
Right it was, then was the True Baptism
known; then came the Holy Ghost upon
them; then did the True Light shine, and the
Darkness fled way; then were they inwardly
washed, and their Understandings opened;
then was the Circumcision of the Heart
known; then was he entred into that within
the Vail, into the true Tabernacle, which
God pitched, and not Man: And so Iohn
went before as a Type, but willingly gave
place to the Substance. So that its clear, the
Baptism you use is not Iohn's, and it it much
more clear that it is not Christ's Baptism, and
so it must needs be your own, done by you
in Imitation of the Holy Men of God gone
before, who did what they did in Obedience

to the Lord, and in his Power, and were
sent by him: but, oh! who ever sent you
Baptists in this great and notable Day of the
Lord? It will one day be said, Who hath re|quired
these things at your Hands? Either
shew us your Commission, or else acknow|ledge
your great Error,  Repent, and come
unto the true Light, and walk in it, prize it
and obey it, that ye may be saved by it: For
it is not a fair Outside of the Cup or Platter,
but the inward Washing of Regeneration by
the Spirit, and a living in the Spirit; and the
whole Worship of God, say we, and say the
Scriptures the same, That the True Worship
of God is in Spirit and in Truth; but that
your Water-Baptism is Spiritual, I deny; or
that it ought to be observed in the Worship
of God, you cannot prove; but Iohn's was
ordained to be used as a Type (before the
Spirit's Worship, or the true Worship in the
Spirit was fully established) and of it self a
thing that I believe none of you dare say,
doth in any measure sanctifie and wash the
Soul: And if it be of so little Effect unto the
Soul, why, what Necessity is there for the
Continuance of it to the World's End, since
also ye cannot prove it so commanded? for,
once more let me tell you, that the Baptism
commanded in the 28th of Matthew, was

INTO the Name of the Father, Son  Spirit
or Holy Ghost: but, I say, this was not Iohn's;
for they that had been baptiz'd unto Iohn's
Baptism had not so much as heard of a Holy
Ghost (Acts 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. which they must
needs have done if they had been baptized
with the use of these words, In the Name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
But further, you acknowledge your selves
that it is but a Type; well, I ask you then,
What doth it type forth unto us; or what is
it a Type of? If it be a Type of the Baptism
of Christ, then I ask you, What further need is
there of it, when the Thing signified by it
is come? Or do you think that the Type and
Substance must remain together to the
World's End? Was it not always from the
Foundation of the Law, that when the Sub|stance
came, that the Shadows fled away?
But although you should still say, Why
then did the Apostles use it after the Spirit's
Baptism was accomplisht? I answer as before,
The Apostles had Power over it after they
saw beyond it, and could submit unto the
Weakness of Believers Capacities in many
things, as above is mentioned; but that they
saw not beyond it till it was reveal'd unto
them is clear; but then they spoak of the one
Baptism, of the one Lord  of the one Faith.

And so Iohn himself, when he saw Jesus walk|ing,
he said unto his Followers, Behold the
Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the
World: and John's Disciples LEET John
[mark] they Left John, and walked no more
with him: For Iohn's Baptism could not
wash them from their Sins; but behold, the
Lamb of God takes away Sin, puts an End to
Sins, finishes Transgression  brings in ever|lasting
Righteousness; he makes every whit
whole, and fully saves to the utmost them
that come to God by him, and makes clean
them he washeth; And if I Wash thee not,
saith he, thou hast no Part in Me: He satis|fies;
for he is the Bridegroom himself, but
Iohn was not; he, its true, was the Bride|groom's
Friend, and would not rob him of his
Prerogative or Honour, but rejoyced to hear
his Voice, and when it was heard, said, This
my Ioy therefore is fulfilled.
So we own Iohn in his place and Time, but
we own the Bridegroom above Iohn, although
Iohn was his Friend,  did what he was com|manded,
but thought not much to give him
place who had commanded him.
And so my dearly beloved Friends, it is in
much Love to all, but chiefly to you called
Anabaptists, that this is written, as I can truly
testifie in the Manifestation of that true Light

spoaken of in the Scriptures of Truth, unto
which I once more beseech you, to turn your
Minds, and believe in it, and come to walk
in it, and obey it; and then will you have
Fellowship with us, and truly our Fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Christ
Jesus; by whom we have also received the
Attonement, and in whom we live, out of
whom we cannot live; for He is our Life;
To him be Glory forever.
Written the 7th of the
1st Moneth, 1674.
Iohn Gratton.


GReat hath been the Travail of my Soul
for the Prosperity of Sion, and for her
Establishment above the Top of all the Moun|tains;
and, blessed be the Lord my God, my Eyes
behold her, and see her Beauty to exceed all the
Glory of the Earth, and her coming out of her
Wilderness State is come; I say, the Time is
come: and many have lyed or lain in the Way
side, to have drawn her aside, and would gladly
have allured and inticed her from her Beloved,
 gladly would have had her turned aside unto
other Lovers, and have cryed out unto her,
What is thy Beloved unto anothers Beloved?
and have spoken against her; and when they

could not prevail with her, have evil-entreated
her, and per secuted her for her Beloved's sake:
and many have been her Troubles, but the Lord
hath delivered her out of all: And great is her
Ioy at this Day, and her Glory exceeds all the
Glory of the Nations: Her Beauty is Perfect:
she is a Virgin, and never was defiled, but is
all Glorious; The King's Daughter is all Glo|rious
within, her Garments are of wrought
Gold, wholely pure; she has no Blemish, she
is all fair, without Spot, the only beloved of the
Lord; Glory to his Name. He hath remem|bred
her in Love, and her Sorrows has he seen,
and will plead her Cause, and subdue King|doms
for her sake, and make her Way plain be|fore
her. Oh! come unto Sion, all ye that
desire her Prosperity, and be not so foolish as to
sit down short of her; her City is free, her Gates
are open hy Day  by Night: she has no need
of the Sun by Day, nor of the Moon by Night;
but the Lord God  the Lamb are the Light
thereof: Her Light will never grow dark, her
Sun will never set, Night shall be no more upon
her; for her Sun is arisen, and as one to run
a Race is marching on, his Strength is as a
Lyon, his Voice is heard to Roar, and great
Fear is fallen and a falling upon the Beast of
Prey. Oh! who would not live in her? Her
Gates are paved with precious Pearles, her In|habitants

are all Kings and Priests unto God;
she is altogether Comely, and her Glory shall
never have an End, Amen.
Oh! who, who would not dwell here? Come,
come unto Sion, all ye that are sincere to what
ye know: Turn ye, turn at her Call, and em|brace
her Counsel: Why will ye bestow your
Money for that which is not Bread, and your
Labour for that which satisfieth not? Oh!
come unto me, saith the Lord, my Voice
is near you; How often have I called, and
ye regarded not, nor have not answered my
Requirements, but are imitating them whose
Life and Power you are out of. But now
turn ye unto the Lord with all your Hearts,
believe in his Light, and Life will you know
that never can have End; but if you still Re|fuse,
you will one day know that you were
Warned and Invited by one that truly seeks not
himself, but earnestly travails for the Welfare
of all men, and is become Servant to all for
Iesus's sake; To Him be all Honour, Praise,
and Dominion forever and for evermore.
J. G.
THE END.





