




THE
Prisoners Uindication
WITH
A Sober Expostulation
AND
REPREHENSION
OF
Persecutors.
By Iohn Gratton.
What mean ye, that ye beat my People to pieces, and grind
the faces of the Poor, saith the LORD God of Hosts?Isa. 3. 15.
Lord, how long shall the Wicked Triumph? How long shall
they utter and speak hard things? They break in pieces thy
People, O Lord, and afflict thy Heritage; they slay the
Widdow and the Stranger, and murder the Fatherless,Psal. 94. 3, 4, 5, 6.
LONDON:
Printed and Sold by Andrew Sowle, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch, 1683.






To all Persecutors, both by Words
and Actions.
A few words for the clearing of my self, and the Truth I profess
in real Love; from him that seeks the good of all Mankind
in general, having real Love to all, especially the Houshould
of Faith, who are redeemed to God, out of the Vnclean|ness
of the World, who are in Scorn called Quakers.
UPon the 16th day of the 6th Moneth, (called
August) 1680. I being at Backewell about my
trading (it being a Fair) was by two or three
Bailiffs arrested, by virtue of a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not coming to the Parish Church (so called)
and not appearing at the Spiritual Court, though I had
appeared several times, and had offered to the Parish
Priest, that if he could make it appear, that I was in an
Error, by clear Scripture, I would take him for my
Friend; And further, That if he could make it appear
from clear Scripture, that it was my duty in the sight of
God, to come to the Parish Church and conform to them,
that I would do it; but did not find it his business to seek
to inform me at that time, or any other, being not so
charitable as to bid me come another time and he would
discourse with me: But being after this never cited to
the Court again, was upon the day aforesaid taken and
sent to Darby Goal (a very strange way to convince
me of any Error, if I be in any) where I remain a Pri|soner.

After I was sent to Prison, many false charges were
flung after me, to render me and Truth odious to the
Country-People, who were ready to wonder why they
should send such a peaceable man to Prison; and I was
by my Persecutors so highly accused to be An Heretick,
A Factious Fellow, The Ringleader of a Factious People, yea,
a Blasphemer, an Enemy to Caesar, and a dangerous Fellow,
and a Spreader of dangerous Principles, and what not?
and all to make the People think hardly of me, and be|lieve,
if they could, against their Belief, that I was some
dangerous man, insomuch, that they said, I was not fit to
live, especially not fit to be loose in a Country; for by keeping
me in Prison, they had hopes to scatter the rest: At the
hearing of these strange and malicious false Calumnies, I
was not a little grieved, not for my self, but others,
who I heard, were ready to think hardly of me, because
such Reports had gained some Credit with some, that
were thought both wise and sober; they believed them,
because others believed them; those others believed
them, because my Persecutors (who are looked upon by
most to be spiritual men) reported them amongst these
black-Mouth'd uncharitable men. I could not have one
to come at me to shew me my reported sad Condition,
but in Prison I must lie, come what will come of Wife
and Children; so that then my Wife went, with two
Friends more, to the Arch-Deacon, (so called) and shew|ed
him the unreasonableness of my suffering, and the
need of my liberty; but his words were great Charges,
as aforesaid, though he never discoursed me about Reli|gion
in his life; its true, he also said, That he would come
to me, and discourse me, and if I was in the right, and he in
the wrong, I should come out of Prison, and he would go in

for me; but he yet fails to make his words good; And
I do declare to all that may see these Lines, that if I can|not
make it appear, that he is wrong and I right, I then
will be content to stay where I am; only I would be
judged by unprejudiced men to the Truth, and such as
are not partial, nor make no outward Gain of the Scrip|tures:
Many others have desired my Enlargement,
some by Letters, and some have gone in Person, but all
fails, except I will conform, and pay the Charges they
have been at in laying me in Prison; which thing I cannot,
or dare not do; For, First, I believe I ought not to con|form
to the Worship that now by the Priests of this Na|tion
is maintained by their preaching and practice; I do
not mean by their Purses; for both they and it cost the
People dear. 2dly, I believe, that though it be after the
way which they call Heresie, yet that the Worship I now
own, is the true Worship of God, and do find by good
and great experience, that the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, who is a Spirit doth approve and own it so to be;
for the Worship I own and believe is the true Worship of
God, is that spoken of in Iohn 4. 23, 24. They that Wor|ship
God aright, worship and serve him in Spirit and in Truth;
and saith our Saviour, The Father seeketh such to worship him.
3dly, Seeing our Lord Christ Jesus, did set up, appoint
and command this Worship, therefore I believe I ought
not to leave it, and run to another Worship, that is no
where commanded, either by Christ, or any of his A|postles,
thinking thereby to save my Estate, and to live
at liberty in the World, and enjoy those natural Rights
and Priviledges I am free-born Heir to, which I see the
Drunkard, Swearer, Curser and Proud Wicked Person is not
deprived of, though he be so Wicked. Lastly, Seeing I

do those things I believe I ought to do, and have not given
any just occasion of Offence, or done wrong to any man,
therefore can I not own my self in a fault, and give Mo|neys
for a Pardon to them, that while they are pardoning
others, are therein committing the highest Sins they can
approach unto; for if I have sinned it is against God, and
to him I look for Mercy; but in this I am not by him
accused or judged as a sinner, but owned and justified by
him, and can say, Its God that justifies me, who shall condemn
me? Now should I come to my Persecutors, and own
my self an Offendor, and buy their Absolution, and con|form
to their invented Ceremonies, then should I by so
doing give God's Spirit and my own Heart and Con|science
the Lye; from which I hope without offence I
may take liberty to say, Good Lord preserve me.
But seeing I must have no better treatment from my
Persecutors than a Prison, which indeed hath alwayes
been the way of argument that the false Prophets in all
Ages have taken, with things of the like Nature, as
Fines, Whips, Lyons Dens, Firey Furnaces, Faggots, and
such like. I desire they will be pleased to suffer me to
treat them a little with a few Arguments, which are in my
mind, and when I have done, I shall leave them to do, as it
shall please God to suffer them, as to me, and desire they
may consider and consult their own profit Eternally, and
not forget, that e'er long both them and I must appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ, to give an Account of
the deeds done in the Body, whether they be good or evil.
And first, I enquire of you, that persecute me and
others, whether, if it was so, as you say falsly it is, That
I was a Heretick, a factious Fellow, c. what command,
precept or example you have from Christ or his Apostles,
to lay me in Prison, seeing I am a peaceable man, and

just in my dealing,  pays to Caesar his Due, as many that
know me will witness? But instead of a command
for Persecution, doth not our Lord Christ prohibit it
several times? It may be you will say, Its no Persecu|tion
that's done in this kind to an erronious Person, c.
Though may be, for all that he is so called by you, who
call Light Darkness, and Darkness Light, is a true Chri|stian,
and Servant of Jesus Christ, but by his Persecu|tors
adjudged to be otherwise, and said, and thought to
be that he is not, which indeed is my case at present;
Yet I say again, doth not Christ prohibit all manner of
Violence, Cruelty, Imposition, and the like, when he
bids his Followers, to love their Enemies, not Persecute
their Friends; and whatsoever they would that men should
do unto them, to do so unto men, saying, This is the Law
and the Prophets; and said, With what measure you mete,
it shall be measured to you again? Is this obeying Christ's
command, in laying men in Prison? For you would not
be so done unto for your faithless Faith, and worthless
Worship; and though you profess to love God, yet
while you in Works deny him, I shall not much heed
your Profession; for he is a true lover of him that keeps
his Commandments, it will be so found one day, when
those that pretended to Preach  Prophesie in his Name,
and in his Name cast out Devils, shall be bidden, depart
from him, workers of Iniquity: And if those that preach
in his Name, and prophesie in his Name, and in his
Name cast out Devils, be sent away from him, because
they, for all that, were workers of Iniquity, what do you
think will be the Portion of those that come in the Name
of Man, and Preach and Prophesie in Man's Name, and
by Man's Authority only are held up; and instead of
casting Devils out, tell People, They must live in Sin all

the dayes of their Lives,  make People content to let the
Devil keep the House, hurry them on into Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin all the dayes of their Lives; and
for all this, tell those very People, that they are Christians,
and though they do those things they ought not,
and leave undone those things they ought, and are mise|rable
Offenders, in whom there is no Health; yet while
they put into the Priest's Mouth, are owned as a dear
Brother and Sister, and so called when they are buried by
him, though may be they have killed themselves by a
drunken-bout: Oh! how dreadful will the end of these
things be! Its a grief to my Spirit to think of it.
But farther, did not Christ command that both Tares
and Wheat should grow together? And doth not these
two Words, Wheat and Tares comprehend all mankind?
What can you make for your Practices here? If I be a
Tare, you should let me alone till the day of the Harvest;
For what hast thou to do, saith the Apostle, with another
man's Servant, to his own Master he stands or falls. And
Christ Jesus shewed a Reason also, why he would have
men to let them alone, and both grow together; For,
saith he, lest while you pluck up the Tares, ye root out the
Wheat also: Which clearly shews that men may be mi|staken,
especially those that have not an infallible Spi|rit;
for its the Spirit of God that's infallible, which
searcheth and makes all things manifest, even the deep
things of God. And we have had sufficient experience,
that under pretence of plucking up the Tares, which is
contrary to Christ's command, the Devil hath laboured
with all his Might, to root the Wheat out of the World;
and though Christ saith, He came not to destroy mens Lives,
but to save them, yet the Devil came to kill  destroy mens
Lives, not to save them: But we find Christ rebuked his

Disciples, when they would have had Fire from Heaven,
and told them, They knew not what Spirit they were of; My
Kingdom is not of this World: He did not come to be
Lord  King in an outward manner, and make men yield
to him by outward force, for if so, then would his Ser|vants
fight; but he came to set up his Kingdom within
in the Hearts of men; so that it was promised by the
Lord, that he would give him for a Covenant to the
People, and would create new Hearts in them, and
write his Law in them, and put his fear in their inward
parts, and be their God. So when Christ came, he said
to them, The Kingdom of Heaven is within you; and said
the Prophet, He shall sit as a refiners Fire, and fullers Sope,
to purifie the Heart, that it may offer an Offering in Righte|ousness.
Its true, the Apostles in their weakness, for|bad
those that they found casting out Devils in his Name,
because they did not follow him; but did Christ approve
of it? nay, he rebuked them, saying, He that gathers with
me, scatters not: He that is not against me, is for me. Me|thinks
this might be taken notice of by you Priests, that
persecute me and others; you have seen some of your
drunken Hearers become very sober men, after they
have come to hear the Quakers (as you call us) preach;
some of your Swearers, Cursing, Proud, Prophane Hear|ers
become very Careful Livers, both in Words and
Deeds; And what! doth this grieve you? Methinks you
should think such men as these, that prevail so upon
Peoples Hearts to be good men, men of your side, if you
be for God, and should, like Christ, who you call your
Lord and Master, rather rebuke such as forbid us, than
forbid us your selves; and when like Peter and Iohn, we
dare not but speak the things we hear and see, and are
commanded, not then to take us and put us in Prison;

and so stop up the Mouthes of them God hath opened,
and be angry with them, though they do what they do
freely, and look for no part of your great Revenues nei|ther:
Remember, you do not desire to be so done by; and
also its worth your notice taking, that those our Saviour
Christ whipt out of the Temple, were Buyers and Sellers:
What would you think, if such must be whipt out of your
Steeple-houses now, and such only be admitted to
Preach as would do it freely in them? But though he
did whip such out, as aforesaid, yet we never read that
he whipt any in; or that if any would not come to that
place, that then he imprisoned them, or fined them, or
the like; no, he was a Shepherd, tender and loving un|to
them; if one went astray, his way to fetch them in
hath been, and is ever by his gentle calls unto them, and
reproving, rebuking and checking of them in their
Hearts by his Spirit, and following of them with his
righteous Judgments in their inward man: So that for
want of true peace with God, many have returned again
to him, who shews them wherein they offend, and when
they return, there is more Joy in Heaven over one Sin|ner
that repents, than ninety nine Just Persons that need
no Repentance. Iust Persons, [mark that] these are none
of your Church of miserable Offenders: But let me ask
you, Is not Faith the gift of God? And that which is
not of Faith is Sin, is it not? If so, then I ask, what
you had gained if you could make a man chuse rather
to conform to your Worship, (yours I call it) contra|ry
to his Faith and Conscience, than lose his enjoyments
of Wife, Children, Liberty and Estate, any more then
a Hypocrite, one that seemed to be that he is not? nay,
may I not say any better than a plain Heretick; for I
take him to be a Heretick that is condemned of himself,

that allows himself to do that he condemns himself for.
And truly, this way of persecuting men for their Faith
and Conscience, is the only way to bring them to become
Hypocrites and Hereticks, and is the way such men
have gone in, to hold up their Idolatry and Superstition
in all Ages, witness Baals Prophets; and the old Serpent
knows it well enough; therefore it was said in the Reve|lations,
That the Devil should cast some of you into Prison:
Some of whom? some of the Servants and faithful Wit|nesses
of Jesus, who would not, could not worship the
Beast. But further, suppose I wanted Faith and a right
understanding of the things that belong to my everlast|ing
Peace, do you think that a Prison will be a means to
bring me into the true Faith? Can the Prison Walls re|ctifie
my understanding, or give me Faith and Wisdom?
Did ever Christ command the use of a Prison or Fine, or
any thing of that nature, to men that would not hear
him, nor believe him? What ground have you for this?
shew us your Foundation for these Actions, and bring
Command, Precept or Example for them from Christ or
his Servants, and then I shall think better of you; but if
not, let me tell you, one Day you may find your por|tion
to be what the Prophet said, Wo to him that spoils,
and is not spoiled. Therefore I could gladly desire, even
in pity to your own Souls, that you would consider your
doings; not that I am so much grieved for my own suffer|ing
for Truth's sake, no, though my poor Wife and
Children are near and dear to me, yet blessed be the Lord,
I have Faith in God concerning them, and believe he
will take care for them and me too, and can trust the
Lord upon all accounts, blessed be his Name forever;
though it is hard, and will be so found one Day to you,
that part me from them, to be stript from them for my

obedience to God, and laid in Prison, and by you re|ported
to be one of the worst of men: Oh! this hath
been the old way and manner of Old the Serpent and
his Instruments have taken with the Servants of Jesus
Christ, witness Paul's Accusers and Persecutors; We,
said they, have found this Man a pestilent Fellow, a mover
of Sedition, a Ring-leader of the Sect of the Nazareans, c.
And the great Rabbies of those dayes, the Scribes,
Phrisees, High Priests and Rulers, that persecuted our
great Lord and Master Jesus Christ, accused him to be
an Enemy to Caesar, a Blasphemer, and a Deceiver, c.
And you that are my Persecutors, are you not much
like these men aforesaid, who persecuted Christ and his
Apostles, and cryed to the Rulers for help, in your pro|ceedings
against me? And though some of you never
saw me as I know of, and none of you ever came to dis|course
me, or see wherein I was mistaken, as to my
Faith and Principles; yet you can fling it out, That I am
a dangerous Person, and a Deceiver, and runs up and down
the Country to delude People: Oh! these your Lyes and
False Charges will one day be remembred, except you
Repent, which I desire you may. And as I said before,
consider your doings, and see who you run parallel with;
you are but Men, you may be mistaken, seeing you are
not led by an infallible Spirit, and therefore cannot be
sure your selves are in the right; but you go by conje|ctures,
and rest upon the Judgment of ancient Fathers,
reverend Divines, Heathen Authors, or your own Con|ceivings,
or the like, and are uncertain, and leave the
People unsatisfied, and so manifest your selves to be such
as are not sent with the Lord's Message, received from
God himself, as by all your uncertain beating the Air is
manifest to every one whose Eyes the Lord hath open|ed:

So that here is great danger, if I should leave Christ
the true Light and teacher of men, who now appears by
his pure Spirit in my Heart, and shews me the things that
do belong to my Peace, and follow you, that I should then
be led to act both in Principle and Practice, and do those
things I ought not, and leave undone those things I ought to
do; and then I could not escape being a miserable Sinner
and Offender, in whom there is no health. Now suppose
I should, contrary to my Faith and Knowledge, come
to you, and live and dye in Error, for fear of being here
kept in Prison, and brought to Poverty in the World,
which, blessed be the Lord, I value not in comparison of
my Peace with him, the God of Peace, and think to
plead with God, and say, I did what I did in submission to
man's Will, who said, they were the Ministers of Christ, and
was forced to it by the chief Priests of our Country, and must
either submit to their Wills, or lie in Prison, my Goods spoil|ed,
my Wife and Children impoverished; so that I did what
I did only to save my Estate, and have my Liberty, c. or else
I would not have done it, for it was against my Faith and Con|science,
and because of the fear of Man: Will this excuse
me? If not, then I ask you, Can you excuse me to
God, and assure me of it, that if I will conform to your
Worship, and give you Monies for a Pardon of my true
obedience to God in disobedience to you? For so indeed
the case lieth; if not, that you cannot excuse me, if you
should or could force me to sin against God, then why
should not I, who am a peaceable man, and wrongs no
man, but loves all men, have my liberty to live, as I
dare dye? Seeing I must answer for my self, and stand
or fall to my own Master, what have you to do to judge
me, who am the Lord's Servant? And if not, must
stand or fall to him I serve: Or how dare you smite

your fellow Servants, and fling them in Prison that have
done you no wrong, nor owe you nothing but love,
when he that put in his fellow Servant in Prison, that
owed him a hundred Pence, was so severly judged of his
Lord, who had forgiven him a greater Debt? And has
taught to use those words in Prayer, Forgive us our Tres|passes,
as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
would you not have God answer your own desires? Con|sider
these things, and learn to do as you would be done
unto; for with the same measure you mete, it shall be
measured unto you again: And remember what our
Saviour layeth down as great offences at the last day to
those on the left Hand, Go you Cursed into everlasting Tor|ment
with the Devil and his Angels; Or, Depart from me,
ye workers of Iniquity, I know you not; for I was an hun|gry,
and you gave me no Meat; thirsty, and you gave me no
Drink; Naked, and you cloathed me not; Sick, and in Pri|son,
and you visited me not. And when they answered,
When saw we thee an hungry, thirsty, naked, c. and did not
minister unto thee? He told them, Inasmuch as you did it
not to one of the least of these that believe in me, you did it
not to me. By which its clear, he takes that which is
done to his Followers as done to himself; for indeed it
is for his sake, who teaches us to live Righteously, So|berly
and Godlily in this present evil world; and be|cause
we obey him, and keep his Commands, therefore
are we hated of all men for his Name's sake; but the
Wicked are not thus treated by you, the Swearer, Lyar,
Drunkard, Proud Person, c. are set at Liberty, and in
these dayes the men in Fashion: But if it be so great an
offence not to visit the Servants of Christ, when in di|stress;
what will it be to those that layeth them in Pri|son,
and keep them there, which is a means to bring

them into Nakedness, Hunger, Thirst and Sickness?
Was it not said, That it was better a Mill-stone was
hanged about his Nick, and he cast into the Sea, that
offended one of those little Ones that believed in Christ,
than he should have done so? If so, then what will
his portion be that not only offends them, but persecutes
them, imprisons them, spoils their Goods, belyes and slan|ders
their Person, and misrepresents them to the World,
takes the Righteousness of the Righteous from him, and
strips him from dear Wife and Children, and causeth
them to suffer also; though its said, Cursed is he that parts
Man and Wife. Oh! what excuse can you make at the
last day for these things! How unlike are you to him,
that is good to all men, and laid down his Life a ransom
for all, and doth cause his Sun to shine upon all, and his
Rain to descend upon all, and his Grace that brings Sal|vation
appears in all, and strives with all. And this al|so
you might consider, that it hath never been the pra|ctice
of any Prophet or Apostle, or Servant of Jesus
Christ, to persecute any man for Conscience sake, or for
his Faith; but on the contrary, it hath ever been the
practice of the false Prophets, that run on in the way of
Balaam, for Gifts and Rewards, greedy Dogs that can
never have enough, blind Guides, that love Darkness,
and hate the Light, Serpents that have perfect Enmity
against the Children of God; and so are Enemies to
Christ Jesus, Babylon's Merchants, who come in the
Power of the Beast, these in all Ages persecute the Lambs
followers, and hate the appearance of him, where-ever
it is; so that the Apostle saith, He that's Born after the
Flesh, persecutes him that's Born after the Spirit: Even so
it is now, and hath been in all Ages ever since Cain's
time, who slew his Brother Abel, because Abel's Works

were righteous, and his own were evil: So Cain was the
first Persecutor, and the Lord was displeased with, and
avenged the Blood of Abel upon him in Righteousness.
Now I might mention many after Cain, that were Per|secutors,
as the Sodomites, who said concerning Lot, This one
fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Iudge; because
he entertained the Angels of the Lord, they pressed sore
upon him; but the Lord delivered him, whose Righteous
Soul was grieved with the filthy Conversation of the
wicked Sodomites, and brought down his Righteous
Judgments upon their heads in a dreadful manner: And
the Aegyptians, who refused to let Israel have liberty to
go and serve the Lord, persecuted them very sore; but the
Lord wrought their Deliverance, and rendered unto Pha|raoh
and his People according to their deeds, as you may
read at large in Exodus. Likewise Iezabel that persecu|ted
them that would not worship Baal, God Almighty
brought down his heavy Judgments upon her, and the
false Prophets of Baal that fed at her Table. Remember
Proud Haman that was full of Indignation against Morde|cai,
because he stood not up nor moved for him; and how
hot he was in his mind to have Mordecai and all the Iews
young and old, destroyed and killed in one day, charging
them to the King, (to whom they were very good Sub|jects,
as appeared by Mordecai, who discovered the Trea|son
of two of the King's Chamberlains, Keepers of the
Door, who sought to lay hands on the King) That there
were a certain People scattered and dispersed among the People
in all the Provines of his Kingdom; and their Laws, saith
he, are divers from all People, neither keep they the King's
Laws; therefore it is not, saith he, for the Kings Profit to
suffer them; though we do not hear, but they were all
peaceable, and hurt no man, only in matters of Worship

and Conscience they differed from the People of the Land,
that could bow to proud Haman, who digged a Pit for
another, and fell into it himself, and was taken in the
Net which he spread for others; glory unto God forever,
whose Eyes are over the Righteous, and his Ears open
to their Prayers.
Remember it was Pashur, the son of Imer the Priest,
that smote Ieremiah the Prophet, and put him in the
Stocks, Ier. 20. 12. For what? for obeying the Lord.
Also, in chap. 26. when he spoke the Word of the Lord in
the hearing of the Priests, and of the Prophets and People,
then the Priests and the Prophets and all the People took
him, saying, Thou shalt shurely dye; and the Priests and
Prophets spoke unto the Princes, and to all the People,
saying, This man is worthy to dye, for he hath prophesied against
this City: What Priests and Prophets were these? Such as
could flatter, dissemble and lye, and turn to any thing the
people fancied to make themselves rich; see chap. 5. 26.
c. These were they that lay in wait, that set Snares and Traps,
and catched men, whose Houses were full of deceit, therefore they
are become great and waxen rich; they are waxen fat, they shine,
they overpass the deeds of the Wicked, they judge not the Cause
of the Fatherless, yet they prosper; and the Right of the Needy
do they not judge; but the Prophets prophesie falsly, and the
Priests bear rule by their Means, and my People love to have
it so; and what will you do in the end? Shall I not visit for
these things, saith the Lord? shall not my Soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? A wonderful and a horrible thing is
committed in the Land, c. the false Prophets, and the great
rich fat Priests bear rule, c. yea, from the least of them, even
to the greatest of them, every one is given to Covetousness;
and from the Prophet, even to the Priest, every one dealeth
falsly: They have healed also the hurt of the Daughter of my
people slightly, saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no peace,

Ier. 13. 14.  8. 10, 11. And because Ieremiah prophe|sied
truly to them what the Lord commanded, he was
put in Prison, chap. 32. 2. and 37. 5. and 38. 6. yea,
into a Dungeon, where his feet stuck fast in the Mire,
but the Lord preserved him, and wrought his deliver|ance.
And shall I forget to mention Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, who would not obey the Kings Law concerning
Worship, whom God preserved in the hot firey Furnace,
but those that cast them in were slain with the flame:
Likewise Daniel, who ceased not to pray, and give thanks
before his God three times a day, when the King had
given out a Law to the contrary, and the Lord delivered
him out of the Lyons Den, and those that accused him
and informed against him were cast into the Lyons Den,
with their Wives and Children, and the Lyons had Ma|stery
over them, and brake all their Bones in pieces, or
ever they came at the bottom of the Den. So its clear
thorow all the old Testament, that the words of the Apo|stle
are true, He that is born after the flesh always persecuted
him that was born after the Spirit; and so it is still; for
Iohn Baptist and our Saviour had no better entertainment
than the Prophets had had before them; for as Christ tells
us by way of Parable in Matth 21. When the Lord had
sent his Servants to those Husband-men, unto whom he let out
his Vineyard, and they beat some, killed some, and stoned some;
last of all he sent his Son, and him they took and slew also; and
to this day are the high-Priests and Rulers slaying, cru|cifying
and murdering the holy One and the Just, in his
Apostles and Servants, in whom he appears, telling the
World, This Light within, which shines in the Hearts and
Consciences of men, is a Deceiver, a Delusion of Satan, a dark
Lathorne, and what not? though it is only this that
discovers the thoughts and intents of the heart, and makes
all things manifest of what sort it is; so that the Apostle

saith, This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the
World, but men love Darkness rather than Light, because their
deeds are evil; for every one that doth evil hateth the Light,
neither cometh to the Light, lest his deeds should be reproved;
but he that doth Truth cometh to the Light, that his deeds may
be made manifest that they are wrought in God. This is very
clear, Light and Darkness cannot agree; so that it hath
ever been the works of Darkness that the Light hath con|demned,
and judged and made manifest to be Evil; and
therefore the old Serpent brings his false Accusations of the
Light,  calls it Deceit, c. and is the Deceiver himself, and
yet will not abide to hear Truth spoken of himself; no more
will his Children who are acted by him,  in whose hearts
he reigns, and fills them full of Pride, Covetousness, Envy,
Hatred and Malice, Cruelty and Filthiness; so out of their
Hearts proceed these things; and they cry to the Rulers
for help against those that preach the Gospel boldly and
freely; as they did by Stephen, (so they are doing still, or
would do, had they power) when they gnashed on him
with their Teeth, cast him out of the City, and stoned him,
having charged him falsly, That he spake Blasphemous words,
c. These have their blind Saul's to run them Errands,
to whom they give power to take them bound that are
walkers i the Light, whether they be men or women;
These command the ignorant and unlearned men (as
Peter and Iohn were) that preach boldly in the Name of
Jesus, That they preach no more in that Name: But we must
obey God rather than Man, and cannot but speak the
things that we have seen  heard. Now when the Apostles
could not but preach the things they had heard and seen,
and continued in the Power of God, working mightily,
to the healing of the sick, and such as were vexed with
unclean Spirits, then the high Priest, and those that were
with him, were filled with Indignation, and laid their

hands on the Apostles, and put them into the common
Prison; but the Lord brought them out, and sent them
into the Temple early on the next morning, where they
taught as the Lord commanded them; and there went
an Informer to the high Priest, the Captain of the Tem|ple,
and the chief Priests, and told them, That the men they
had put in Prison, were standing in the Temple, and teaching
the People; then went the Captain with the Officers, and
brought Peter and Iohn before the Council, and the high
Priest said, Did not we straitly command you, that you should
not teach in this Name, c? Then Peter  the other Apo|stle
answered, We ought to obey God rather than man, Acts 5.
(read it.) How like those Priests and Officers are these in
our days? And how plainly walk these in the steps of
those, and practise the like things against those that walk
in the Spirit and Practice of the Apostles? And how
clear is it, that in all Ages it was those that were born
after the flesh, that persecuted those that were born after
the spirit? to whom its given, not only to believe, but to
suffer for his sake; not to persecute any for his sake, no, nor
for reflecting him neither; but its evident the Persecu|tors
are such as seek to please men, not God; this is clear
from Herod, who after he had killed Iohn the Baptist, grew
more vile, and stretched out his hands to vex certain of
the Church, after Christ was mightily manifested in his
Apostles; and he killed Iames, the Brother of Iohn, with
the Sword; and because he saw it pleased the Iews, he
proceeded further to take Peter, and apprehended him,
and put him in Prison, but the Lord sent his Angel, and
delivered him out of Prison, and from the hands of proud
Herod, whom the Angel of the Lord smote, and he gave
up the ghost, and was eaten of Worms, because he gave
not God the glory. This also is clear from Pilate, who

knew (its said) That for Envy they had delivered him; yet
its also said by Mark, That Pilate being willing to content the
People, released unto them Barabbas, and delivered Jesus,
(when he had scourged him) to be Crucified. Paul also met
with the same Spirit, when the Iews saw him in the
Temple at Ierusalem, and stirred up all the people, and
laid hands on him, and cryed out, This is the man that
teacheth all men every where against the People, and the Law,
and this place; and they went about to kill him, but he was
delivered out of their hands by Lysias the chief Captain,
and sent him to Felix, where he was accused by Tertullus,
(the high Priest Ananias being present) To be a pestilent
Fellow, and a mover of Sedition amongst all the Jews through|out
the World, and a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazareans,
 that he had gone about to prophane the Temple: Paul makes
his defence before Felix, and Felix perceived the matter,
discoursed Paul afterwards, and the Power of God reach|ing
him, he trembled, yet was so bent for to get Mo|nyes;
for its said, he hoped that Money would have been given
him of Paul, that he might loose him, sent for him the oftner
and communed with him; yet when Festus came into Felix's
Room, Felix willing to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul
bound: Festus being come into the Province, the high Priest 
the chief of the Jews informed him against Paul. After that
Paul was brought before the Judgment-seat, where the
Iews laid many and grievous Complaints against Paul,
which they could not prove, Paul answered for himself;
but Festus willing to do the Iews a pleasure, answered,
Paul, wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged? for
that the Iews desired, and thought to lay wait in the way
to kill him; but Paul appealed to Caesar, and afterward
declared before Agrippa, and Bernice his Wife, and Festus,
How he had been a Persecutor of the Church himself, and went
to Damascus with Authority and Commission from the chief

Priests;  how the Lord met with him by the way, saying, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against
the pricks, c. See here how hot in their spirits these pro|fessing
Iews were, and in their blind zeal how cruel they
were in their hearts, and how the Rulers looked more at
their own Interest, to keep in favour with the people,
than to do justly to them who were maliciously and falsly
accused to them; and how clear is it that they have always
been a Generation of Cain's Children, that quenched the
Spirit of God, and set at nought all his counsel, which
persecuted them that were born of it, and lived in it, and
were never Persecutors of any for Conscience sake? So
that persecution is an evident sign of perdition, where-ever it
appears, and suffering for Christ an evident sign of salvation,
and that of God; and therefore many have taken joyful|ly
the spoiling of their goods,  rejoyced they were thought
worthy to suffer for his sake; and though they have
walked about in Goat-skins and Sheep-skins, and have been
destitute, afflicted and tormented, yet its said, The World was
not worthy of them; and they plainly declare, That they seek
a better Country, a City that hath a Foundation, whose Builder
and Maker is God: And though they go through great
Tribulation, yet they have their Robes wished, and made
white in the Blood of the Lamb, and follow the Lamb whither
soever he goeth, having an Eye to him that is invisible, and
respect to the recompence of Reward; for the Lord takes that
which is done to them as done to himself, and therefore
said he, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Oh! that you would consider these things, you that
can cry to the Rulers for help against those that cannot
hurt you, and Persecute them that are your greatest
Friends, and all mens: Cease your Cruelties, and
yield Obedience to the commands of him, who is Lord
of all, and hath bidden you do as you would be done by,

and commanded you to love all men, and do good to
all men, and to hurt no man, injure no man, defraud
no man, c. For we read not of any that were Servants
of Jesus Christ, that ever persecuted any for Conscience
sake; for Conscience is God's Throne in man, and he
only hath power over it, and it is no less than usurpation
to offer to impose upon it. You pretend to be Prote|stants,
and that that Name first came up by protesting
against Imposition; and what, is it now to be practised?
They condemned it, and so doth God and good Men
through all Ages. And it is hard that men cannot live
under the Government, except they submit their Con|sciences
to every Edict, and ask you what Religion they
must be of; though its well known, we are peaceable
men, and also sober, just, neighbourly and friendly as
any men in the Nation; neither do we make spoil of
the Creation, either in Meat, Drink or Apparel: And
so, why shall not we have liberty to live as we dare dye?
Truly it is very Unchristian dealing, either to compel us
to believe against our Belief, or else to Imprison us and
spoil our Goods for practising what we believe, when it
is not in the least contrary to the moral Law of God:
Methinks you might afford us better entertainment; the
Apostle exhorts to entertain Strangers; for so did the
good men of Old, and so entertained Angels una|wares
sometimes. And what, shall I say you do not
know us, who you in scorn call Quakers? for if you did,
I hope you would not persecute us; and though you do
not know us, yet as Strangers you might afford us bet|ter
entertainment than you do; all we desire of you, is
but Liberty to serve our God according to his mind,
without being Persecuted for it. Remember what Edom
did of Old, they refused to let Israel pass quietly through
their Land, on the King's High-way, though they





would have eaten their own Bread, and not have been
injurous to any man; Edom refused to let his Brother
Israel go. And is not this like our case? We eat no
man's Bread for nought; we covet no mans Silver, Gold
or Apparel; we injure no man, hurt no man, defraud
no man; we love all men, and do good to all men; and
all we desire, is to pass quietly through the World unto
the Kingdom of Promise: And we heartily desire you
did know us, and then you would know your selves
better; and however, one day you will know us, and
be ashamed that your entertainment of the true Servants
of Jesus Christ, hath been Fines, spoiling of Goods,
Imprisonments, Beatings, Stonings, false Accusations,
Slanders and Lyes, calling us Cheats, Hereticks, false
Prophets, and what not? this is, and hath been our en|tertainment
amongst you, and is mine at this day in Pri|son,
because I cannot, dare not play Hypocrite, and go
contrary to my Faith: But you will say, may be, That
my Faith is not true Faith, but I believe an Error. I an|swer;
you cannot prove your Charges against us from
clear Scripture, which saith, That it is not only given un|to
us to believe, but also to suffer for his sake we believe in:
But it no where saith, its given us also to make others
suffer that do not believe. And suppose I did want a
right understanding and true Faith, (I say again) do
you think that a Prison will help me? Can a Prison give
Faith? Can Prison Walls rectifie mens Understandings?
Lay aside these Carnal Crutches, and bring Spiritual
Weapons; Truth is sufficient to plead its own cause;
and Faith is the gift of God: Its only base Cain's salfe
Worship that forceth: He that will not worship the
Beast, or receive his mark in his Forehead, or in his
Hand, must be killed, or no man must Buy or Sell with
him at least: So Error and Enmity, Envy and Cruelty

alwayes go together; but the Truth is received for its
own worth; and its the manner and nature of true
Faith to work by Love; pure Religion and true, is lo|ving
God above all, and our Neighbours as our selves;
and in this love we should visit the Fatherless and Wid|dows,
and not make Widdows and Fatherless (in a sence)
by casting the Father and Husband in Prison; this is not
to keep unspotted from the World; For its said, the
World should hate us, (who are true followers of Christ)
and persecute us, and excommunicate us out of their Sy|nagogues,
and say all manner of Evil falsly against us;
yea, our Saviour tells us, They shall bring us before Kings
and Rulers for a Testimony against them: But Christ Jesus
no where bids his Disciples excommunicate those out of
their places of Worship that would not believe, nor bring
them before Kings and Rulers, or cry to Rulers for to
put them in Prison, Fine them, and spoil their Goods; Its
true, he bids them shake the Dust off their Feet for a testi|mony
against them that would not receive their Testimonies;
but when they would have had Fire from Heaven to
have destroyed those that did not receive him, Christ re|buked
them, and said, Ye know not what manner of Spirit
you are of; the Son of man is not come to destroy mens Lives,
but to save them: Its true, he tells them, The Rulers of
the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and their great
Ones exercise authority upon them; But, saith Christ, it shall
not be so amongst you, c. Remember what he compared
the angry Scribes and Pharisees to, who took offence at
both Iohn Baptist and himself, and indeed almost all that
God sent amongst them; saith he, They are like unto Chil|dren
sitting in the Market-place, and calling one to another,
and saying, We have Piped unto you, and you have not Dan|ed;
we have Mourned unto you, and you have not Lament|ed,
c. And is not this like you? who are still so Child|ish

to be angry with us, because we do not Dance after
your Pipe, nor Lament after your Mourning; Why
will you not do as you would be done by? You would
not take it well to be forc'd to Conform to us, would
you? Then I ask you, why will you not be Merciful,
(as Christ commands you) As your Father (saith he) is
Merciful, who is kind (saith he) to the Vnthankful, and to
the Evil? Let your Fruits declare you to be Branches of
the true Vine, and Children of God: Have you forgot
what's said of the man that fell among Thieves, as
he went from Ierusalem to Iericho? the Thieves stripped
him, and wounded him, and left him half dead;
now the Priest passed by, and the Levite looked on him also,
passed by and left him; but the good Samaritan took pity on
him when he came by, and bound up his Wounds, poured
in Oyl and Wine, and set him on his own Beast, and brought him
to an Inn, and took care of him; And (saith Christ) go thou
and do likewise. Alack! how many lie wounded in Sin
and Iniquity, and naked of all that's good! And must
none take pity of them? What! though it be a man of
another City or Society, if he hath Oyl and Wine, and
will lend a Hand of Help, and do good to the Wounded, and
help the Naked to a Garment, why should you be offended?
It was ill in the Priest and Levite, that would not help
him themselves, and shewed a churlish, idle, easeful, selfish
Spirit in them, that care not what comes of men, so they
can eat the Fat, and clothe themselves with the Fleece, and
live at ease: But it would have been much worse in them
if they would neither a help'd him themselves, nor suffer
another to help him; but if he did, take him and cast him in
Prison, spoil his Goods, or put him to Death. And Christ saith,
Wo unto you Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, for ye shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for you neither go in your
selves, neither suffer ye them that are entring, to go in: Wo

unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites for ye devour Widdows
Houses, (yes, in our dayes, leaves her not a Cow to give her
Milk, nor a Bed to lie on) And for a pretence (saith he) make
long Prayers; therefore you shall receive the greater Condem|nation:
Wo unto you blind Guides, who lay heavy Burdens,
and grievous to born upon men, but will not touch them with
one of your Fingers: But (saith Christ) they walk in long
Robes, love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief
places in the Synagogues, and Greetings in the Markets, and
to be called of men Rabbi, Master; But (saith he to his
Disciples) be not ye called Master, for one is your Master, even
Christ, and all you are Brethren. But perhaps you may
say, We are not your Brethren. Well, suppose we were
not, you ought to love us, if we were your Enemies;
But if we be not your Brethren, why do you take Tythes
from us? For it was never known that the Children of
Israel took Tythes of any, but only their Brethren; see
Heb. 7. 5. However, you ought to do all things in Cha|rity;
for the Wrath of man worketh not the Righteous|ness
of God: Its said, Mercy rejoyceth against Iudgment;
for he shall have Iudgment without Mercy that hath shewed no
Mercy; for if ye have bitter Envying  Strife in your hearts,
glory not, you are no better than Vnbelievers; therefore Lye
not against the Truth: For, saith the Apostle, this Wisdom
descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish:
For where Envy and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every
evil work; but the Wisdom that is from above, is pure, peace|able,
gentle and easie to be intreated; full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisie; and the
Fruits of Righteousness is sown in peace in them that make
Peace. But say you, I am a sower or mover of Sedition. So
said the Iews by Paul; but they accused him falsly, and so
do you me; for I fear God, and love all men, and herein
do I exercise my self, to have alwayes a Conscience void of

offence towards God and Men, and as much as in me lieth,
endeavour to live peaceable with all men; and do know
assuredly that I seduce no man, for the Lord hath given
me in his endless Mercy an understanding to know him
that is true: And the true Light that enlightens every
man that comes into the World, doth not lead us to se|duce
any, but reproves and condemns Seducers and Se|dition,
and makes all things manifest of what sort it is.
But if I did, or any of us did move Sedition, then it would
be seen by our Fruits, Lives and Conversations, and we
should not have that presence of God with us, which we
have; and besides, you would do well to shew us where|in;
(as the Apostle did them of Old) and shew us our Errors,
which are not to be found in a Prison, nor indeed in us, who
believe and walk in the Light, and are Children of it. But
perhaps you may say, We walk disorderly. Suppose we
do, what then? If you will take the Apostles advice, you
should withdraw from us; and if we observed not, or
obeyed not the Gospel-order, do as the Apostle bids you;
For (saith he) if any man obey not our Word by this Epistle,
note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed; Yet count him not as an Enemy, but admonish him
as a Brother. [But not one Word of a Prison or Fine.]
No, (saith he elsewhere) the Servant of the Lord must be
gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient; in Meekness in
structing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them Repentance to the acknowledgment of the
Truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the Snare
of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him at his Will: Oh,
that you would take notice of this great piece of Ad|vice!
And further concerning those that have a
form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof, from such
turn away, saith he. And so, you would shew your dis|like
of such, and disown them to be none of you; but

alas! where is the Power of Godliness to be seen, if not
in the sober, honest Quaker, as you call us? who dare
not speak his own Words, nor do his own Will, but
lays down all to follow the Lamb, in true Obedience to
what he requires and commands, though for the same
they suffer the loss of all outward things: And truly it
is seen fulfilled, that he that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer Persecution; and he that departs
from Iniquity makes himself a Prey. But the end of the
Commandment is Charity out of a pure Heart, and of a
good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned; And saith he
thus, Warn them that are Vnruly, Comfort the Feeble|minded;
Support the Weak; be Patient towards all men;
see that none render Evil for Evil unto any man, but ever
follow that which is good, both amongst your selves, and to
all men: And then what follows? Rejoyce evermore:
And truly so they might with good cause, if this coun|sel
were observed: Pray without ceasing, (saith he that
spoke in Charity) In every thing give Thanks, for this is
the Will of God in Christ Iesus concerning you; quench not
the Spirit, despise not Prophecying; prove all things, hold
fast that which is good; abstain from all appearance of Evil.
Oh, what tender Counsel this is! And what need
have we to take notice of it here in England! Nay,
he tells you elsewhere, Though he speak with the
Tongue of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am
become as sounding Brass, and a tinckling Simbal. And
though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all My|steries,
and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so
that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am
nothing; and though I bestow all my Goods to feed the
Poor; and though I give my Body to be burned, and have
not Charity, it profiteth me nothing: Charity suffereth

long, and is kind; doth not make men suffer long, for
that's unkind. And truly the Apostle is so full in this
matter, that all Profession or Religion without Cha|rity,
is nothing worth; Charity, saith he, envieth not,
beareth all things: Compare but this with Peter's words;
Add (saith he) to your Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge,
to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance Patience, to Pa|tience
Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and
to Brotherly-Kindness Charity; if these things be in you,
and abound, they make you that you shall neither be Barren
nor Vnfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ;
but he that lacketh these things, is Blind, and cannot see
afar off.
And now, if you would judge the Tree by its Fruits,
what can you find of these things in Persecution? And
if you believe Scripture, methinks you may see the
very current of it runs continually against Persecution,
Violence, Oppression, Cruelty, Uncharitableness, and
the like.
Perhaps you may say, Its not worthy to be called Perse|cution
that's done to a Heretick.
Let me Answer you once more; Suppose you, that
the Scripture is to be taken notice of, and the Precepts
therein to be minded? then see what it saith; A man
that is a Heretick, after the first and second Admonition,
reject, knowing that him that is such, is subverted and sin|neth,
being condemned of himself. So here he must be
admonished to obey what he knows; for if he did not
sin knowingly, he would not condemn himself: But if
he persist and reject Counsel, then reject him, disown
him, and have no Society with him, c. [But not one
word of putting him in Prison, Fine him, or spoil his
Goods.]

But though I thus speak, be it known to you, I am
no Heretick, (as you have been pleased to call me) for
I am not in the least condemned of my self for what I
do, in things relating to Faith and Worship; no, God
is my witness, I do what I do in Obedience to him, and
do know him to justifie me, and comfort me in my
Bonds for the same; and it is a light matter to be judg|ed
at mans day; yet I for Truths sake, was free to
clear my self of your false Charges.
But perhaps you may still say, If I be no Heretick, I
am one that causes Divisions and Offences contrary to your
Doctrine.
Well, suppose I be; nay, suppose I was one that
caused Divisions and Offences contrary to the Doctrine
of the Apostles, yet see what must be done to such;
Why, saith the Apostle, I beseech you Brethren, mark them
that cause Divisions and Offences, contrary to our Doctrine,
which ye have learned, and avoid them. Avoid them,
what is that? All flee their Company: But let me tell
you, we are none of this sort, for we cause no Divi|sions
from the Truth; it is our travail and labour in the
Lord, that men may be truly joyned unto the Truth,
and live in it; and its those that serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own Bellys, who by good
Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the
Simple; but these goods Words and fair Speeches the
People must pay them well for too, else they must
not have them: But for good Works and fair Con|versations,
those are not to be found amongst the
BELLY-SERVERS.

But may I not here venture to say by the People
called Quakers, as Paul did by the Romans, Your obe|dience
is come abroad unto all Men; yea, and I be|lieve
God will bruise Satan under our Feet shortly,
though he be suffered to cast some of us into Prison now,
for the tryal of our Faith, and accuse us falsly of many
things, as he did Iob, and makes Lyes his Refuge, yet
his time is short; and God, even our God, will over all
Exalt his own Name and Truth, to the Joy of all the
Upright-hearted.
Written in Derby Goal in the Year 1682. where I yet
remain a Prisoner. JOHN GRATTON.

Matth. 10. 7.
Go Preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at
Hand.


Luke 10. 10, 11.
But into whatsoever City ye enter, and they
receive you not, go your ways into the Streets of the same, and
say, Even the Dust of your City which cleaveth on us, we do wipe
off against you; notwithstanding, be ye assured of this, that the
Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.

THE END.





