



The Earles of
LINDSEY and CUMBERLAND'S
Petition to the
KING
AT
YORKE,
In behalfe of the
PARLIAMENT,
Iune 2. 1642.
And his Majesties gracious Assent
thereunto.
With his Majesties Commission for the con|firmation
of Truce, made between his Majesty
and the King of Casteele, the two Kings of
East-India, D. Michael de Loronha, Conde de
Linhares, Viceroy of Goa, and William
Methwold President of the
English in East-India.
In all the Lands, Places, Castles, Ports, and Coasts
of Affrica, Guyne, Bine, the Island of Saint
Thome, c. and beyond Gape bona
Speranza in the Dominions of
the King of Portugall.
London Printed for J. Harrison, Iune 11. 1642.






His Majesties gracious Assent to the Peti|tion
of the Earles of Lindsey and
Cumberland.
_THe Earle of Lindsey and Cumber|land
petitioned to his Majesty both,
to return to his Parliament (as was
expressely intimated in their Peti|tion)
and humbly desired his Maje|sty
to assent unto those Propositi|ons
which were sent by the Parliament: who de|clare
therein, That they had nothing in their de|sires
and thoughts more precious and of higher
esteeme (next to the honour and immediate Ser|vice
of Almighty God) then the just and faith|full
performance of their duty to his Majesty,
and their fidelity to the Kingdome? These said
Earles were sent for from York to attend the
House the precedent Weeke; but they shewed
the Messenger of the House speciall Warrants
under his Majesties Hand, expressely comman|ding
them to the contrary, and that should at|tend
his Majesty there, till his further pleasure
should be declared unto them.
But they being very sensible of the great in|conveniences

of this Kingdome, and what irreco|verable
danger those inconveniences may produce
if not prevented before they grow to maturity,
after a deliberate observation of the causes there|of,
did present their dutifull Petition to his Ma|jesty
in the posture as well of all sincerity as
humility: That out of his Princely Wisedome,
for the establishing his own Honours, and Safety,
and gracious tendernesse of the welfare and secu|rity
of his Subjects and Dominions, He would
be pleased to returne to his Parliament, as being
the most necessary and principall means (through
Gods blessing) of removing those jealousies and
differences, which have unhappily fallen betwixt
him and his People, and as the effectuall way to
procure both to his Majesty and to the Parlia|ment,
a constant course of their Peace and Hap|pinesse.
His Majesty tooke the Petition very graci|ously,
and desired some time of serious conside|ration
thereon, and then he would give them an
effectuall Answer. For all the distractions, and
distempers of this Kingdome are derived onely
from his Majesties absence, and if he would be so
condescentious as to returne, questionlesse these
suspitions would be expelled, and better opinions
entertained. And it is very requisite, That the
great affaires of this Kingdome, may not be con|cluded
or transacted by the advice of any pri|vate
Man, or by any unknowne and unsworne
Councellor; but that such matters as concerne

State and the publike accommodation of the
Realme, are proper for the high Court of Parlia|ment,
which is his Majesties great and supreme
Councell, ought to be debated, resolved, and
transacted onely in Parliament, and not elsewhere.
And such as shall presume to doe any thing to
the contrary, ought to be reserved to the censure
and Judgement of Parliament, and such other
matters of State as are proper for your Majesties
Privie Councell ought also to be debated and
concluded by such of the Nobility and orhers, as
shall from time to time be chosen for that place,
by approbation of both Houses of Parliament;
and that no publike Act concerning the Affaires
of the Kingdome, which are proper for your Pri|vie
Councell may be esteemed of any validity,
as proceeding from the Royall Authority, un|lesse
it be done by the advice and consent of the
Major part of the Councell, attested under their
Hands.
And without doubt His Majesty will conde|scend
to so faire a proposition, for the Parlia|ment
is his high and chiefe Court and Councell;
wherefore it is very expedient, that the doubtfull
matters of State should be descided, discussed,
and concluded by that high Senate.
His Majesty hath also sealed with his Com|mission,
and concluded, That the convention of
Truce made between D. Michal de Lronha,
Conde de Linhares, Viceroy of Goa, ad William
Mthwold President of the English in East-India,

shall be continued and kept betweene the
Subjects of both Kings in East-India, and in all
the Dominions of the most reowned King of
Portugall beyond Cap bona Speranza: and tha
the Commissioners to be named by the said
Kings, shall in East-India take Cognizance with|in
thirteen yeares of the demands, which have
been or shall be by the Subjects and Vassals of
both Kings for their commerce in India afore|said,
that so a perpetuall peace and confederation
may be confirmed and established by the said
Kings, and between their Subjects on both sides.
And because the commerce of free comming of
the Subjects of the King of great Britaine to the
Coasts and parts of Affrica, the Island of Saint
Thome, and other Islands comprehended under
them, could not yet be agreed upon by reason of
the defect of the powers sent by the most renow|ned
King of Portugall to his Embassadors, that by
this debate, this present Treatise of Peace and
Amity between both Kings and their Subjects be
not delayed it is on both prts concluded on,
That in the Lands, Places, Castles, Ports, and
Coasts of Affrica, Guyne, Bine, c. the Island of
Saint Thome, and other Islands comprehended un|der
them, wherein it shall appeare, That the Sub|jects
of Great Brittaine have dwelt for trade of
Merchandise, or have had trade or commerce
there, in the time of the King of Casteel, or hi|therto;
there shall be no alteration or change,

neither shall they have any trouble or injury
done them by the Portugals, for that cause.
And if any Customes be to be demanded from
the Subjects of the King of Great Britaine on
any Cause in the Castles, Places, and Islands a|foresaid,
they shall not be greater, or more grie|vous
then those which shall be demanded fom o|ther
Nations in league with the King of Portu|gall.
And the Subjects of the King of Portugall
wanting forreign ship for their Navigation, and
Commerce to the Coasts and Islands aforesaid
may freely at their own pleasure hire the Ship;
of the Subjects of great Britain, and that Com|missioners
and Ambassadors shall be named, by
both Kings, who shall create and conclude con|cerning
the commerce, and free-comming to the
Coasts, Islands, and Places aforesaid, which hath
been demanded by the Commissioners of the
King of Great Britain, for the Subjects of their
King, being perswaded out of the confidence of
the antient amity which hath been between the
Predecessors of the same Kings, that the most re|nowned
King of Portugall will grant to no Na|tion
whatsoever more ample Rights, Immunities
and Priviledges, then he will grant to the Sub|jects
of Great Britain.
FINIS.




