




CERTAINE INSTRVCTIONS GIVEN BY THE L. MON|TROSE, L. NAPPIER, Laerd of Keer and Blackhall.
WITH A TRVE REPORT OF The Committee for this New Treason, that they had a three-fold Designe.


LONDON,
Printed in the yeare 1641.






CERTAINE INSTRVCTIONS GIVEN BY THE L. Montrose, L. Nappier, Laerd of Keer and Blackhall.
HOw necessary it is that R. come toR. King. the Parliament.
To desire that H. be kept up till itH. Office. be seene who deserves them best. That H. be not bestowed by advice of the Elephant, for feare he crush the L.
To assure L. that R. and L. being granted, he will be powerfull to crush the Elephant.
Not to let L. drink water, except he promise not to cast it up againe. That is, not to reveale it to the Marquesse.
To assure D. and T. that except they take Gene|roDuke Traq Montrose. by the hand, they will be trod upon at home and made naked.G. Mont. R. religion and L. libertie.
To assure L. D. that G. will take him by the

hand and lead him throughout all difficulties, R. and L. being granted.

Instructions from L. Traq to L. Colonel Steward.
To counsell L. his hom comming till theyDuke Meat. Pap. Keer. heare from D. or D. heare from thence to adver|tise C. withall diligence how... are pleased with the Tablet. And if there be any particulars that they would have the L. more speciall in.
That they be not moved with Reports of any Alteration, or any thing derogate from the Ta|blet, except they heare from D.


Tablet Propositions for the King and his Majesties answer.
That the word Moderation be explained to Gene|ro annent Traq in a Letter from the Duke.
That... strive to let the Towne Wigton know how carefull T. hath been to get him satisfaction, as my Lord of Roxborough can beare witnesse, and that they may be confident of satisfaction.
It is thought most necessary that some... who will be least suspected come, or if that cannot con|veniently be, that the bearer returne with all pos|sible diligence, and howsoever, he come up be|fore.
That all meanes be used for trying the Informa|tionArgeil. E Sefor Macha. against the Dromadary, and what further can be found of his carriage, with Athol Magduffe or any other in these parts, wherein Sir Puritan and some

of the Redshankes friends can best informe and in|struct.
To assure Sir Puritan that he will get satisfacti|on annent the Ward and Marriage he desired, but that now it is a fit time to doe it for him or any o|ther so disposed as he is.
To tell Genero, that so soone as Dick comes toSr. Richard Greemes com to Court. the Schoole, who is daily expected, he will by him heare from L.
To let... know how well L. takes their care and in the discreetest way to informe your selfe of their desires, and particularly if Rick ayme upward,Smoake. that its businesse goes right.
To try the summons against T. and to send up a double, that he may compare them with that which he hath gotten, and to assure... and all o|thers, that he shall cleare himselfe of all these as cleare as day-light.
That by all meanes they labour with the plan|tations, to let them know, the Tablet being filled up, and made good, how much it concernes them to shew themselves affectionate.
That the Parliament be constitute of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Burrows.
That Religion be secured by confirming the Acts of the last generall Assembly holden at Eden|burgh, and every thing done necessary there, annent which may assure his Majesties. Subjects that there shall be no innovation in Religion in any time here|after.
That the Subjects be governed in all time com|ming conformed to the Lawes of this Kingdome

formerly established, and not otherwayes.
This done, his Majesties loyall and faithfull Sub|jects will maintaine his Majesties honour and per|son and royall authoritie against all men, and will suffer no innovation or Lawes nor otherwise to be introduced against his Majestie.
It is requisite his Majestie keepe up his office of State, and other his Majesties royall favours, to be bestowed upon such as shall best deerve at Parlia|ment, and elsewhere.
And that his Majestie be graciously pleased to be present there in person, for countenancing his own Service, and his loyall and faithfull Subjects.
His Majestie agrees to the first propositions, and upon assurance of performance of the fourth, will so dispose of his affaires, as that he shall God willing be at the Parliament in Scotland. And in the meane time will keepe up all places and offices of State, and other markes of his favour, of any great moment undisposed, untill such time as he may bestow them upon parties according to their merit and deserving at the Parliament.



A true Report of the Committee for this new Treason, that they had a threefold Designe.

FIrst, to seize on the Tower, the Lieutenant to have twenty thousand pound, his sonne to mar|ry with Straffords daughter, with means to live on;

Strafford to be sent into Ireland to send an Army hither, and to goe into France to prepare an Army from thence.
Secondly, To possesse the Northerne Armies with an ill opinion of the House, and to make them advance to London.
Thirdly, To deliver Portsmouth into Ier|mines hands, to be a Randevowes for the French Papists.

The Bishops to raise two thousand horse.
The Committee gave most of the great names in blanckes, and will report them hereafter.
The Lord of Newcastle to be Generall of the Northerne Army, and to have met them with the Army at Nottingham.
FINIS.




