



THE
ADVICE
OF
W. P.
TO
Mr. SAMVEL HARTLIB.
FOR
The Advancement of some particu|lar
Parts of LEARNING.
LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1647.




There is invented an Instrument of small
Bulke and price, easily made, and very du|rable,
whereby any Man, even at the first
sight and handling, may write two resembling
Copies of the same thing at once, as serviceably
and as fast (allowing two lines upon each page
for setting the Instruments) as by the ordinary
way. Of what Nature or in what Character, or
what Matter soever, as Paper, Parchment,
a Book, c. the said writing ought to be upon
made.
The Vse hereof will be very great to Lawyers
and Scriveners, for making of Indentures,
and all kinde of Counter-parts, to Merchants, In|telligencers,
Registers, Secretaries, Clarks; c.
for copying of Letters, Accompts, Invoices, En|tring
of Warrants, and other Records, To Schol|lers,
for Transcribing of rare Manuscripts, and
preserving Originals from falsification, and other
injuries of time. It lesseneth the Labour of Exa|mination,
serveth to discover forgeries and sur|reptitious
Copies, and to the transacting of all bu|sinesses
of writing, as with ease and speed, so with
much privacy also.




To his honoured friend Master
SAMUEL HARTLIB.
SIR,
I Have had many flying thoughts, concerning the
Advancement of Reall Learning in generall, but
particularly of the Education of Youth, Mathema|ticks,
Mechanicks, Physick, and concerning the Hi|story
of Art and Nature, with some more serious ones
concerning your owne most excellent advices for an
Office of Publick addresse. And indeed they were
but flying thoughts, for seeing what vast summes
were requisite to carry on those designes, and how un|willing
or unable men generally were to contribute
towards them, I thought it but labour lost to fix my
mind much upon them.
But it having pleased God unexpectedly, to make me
the Inventor of the Art of Double Writing, daily and
hourly usefull to all sorts of Persons in all places of
the world, and that to perpetuity, I conceived that if
there were understanding enough in Men to be sen|sible
of their own good, and Thankfulnesse or honesty
enough to reward the Contrivers of it, such Meanes
might be raised out of this Art as might at least set the
aforementioned Designs on float, and make them rea|dy
to set saile toward the haven of perfection upon e|very
opportunity of stronger gales. And thereupon I

reassumed my Meditations, which I here give you, de|siring
you and your Ingenious Freinds to remeditate
upon them and correct them, but withall to think of
the best Course, how to improve my Invention to such
advantage, as may if possible, make us capable of en|joying
more then bare Ideas of that Happinesse, which
the atchievements of our designs promiseth. I shall
desire you to shew them unto no more then needs
you must, since they can please only those few, that are
Reall Friends to the Designe of Realities, not those
who are tickled only with Rhetoricall Prefaces, Transi|tions,
 Epilogues,  charmed with fine Allusions and
Metaphors, (all which I do not condemn) wherewith,
as I had no abilities to adorne my discourse, so I wan|ted
all other requisites thereunto, Having written it
(as Your self must beare me witnesse) at your own Im|portunity
in the midst of my cares and indeavours, to
perfect mine Invention, and which is work in the
midst of my hard and perhaps unprofitable labour, to
prevent the ingratitude and backwardnesse of men to
reward him, who shall earnestly labour to expresse
himselfe,
London the 8.
Ianuary. 1647/8
Yours and your designes
most affectionate servant,
W. P.





THE
Advice
For Advancement of some particu|lar
Parts of Learning.
_TO give an exact Definition or nice Division of
Learning, or of the Advancement thereof,
we shall not undertake (it being already so
accurately done by the great Lord Verulam)
Intending onely to shew where our owne
shoe pincheth us, or to point at some pie|ces
of Knowledge, the improvement wher|of
(as we at least conceive) would make much to the ene|rall
good and comfort of all mankind, and withall to deliver
our own opinion by what meanes they may be raised some
one degree neerer to perfection.
But before we can meddle with this great Work, we must
first think of getting Labourers, by appointing some Generall
Rande vouz, where all men either able or willing to take up
armes against the many difficulties thereof, may finde enter|tainment.
That is to say, We must recommend the Institu|tion
of an Office of common Addresse according to the pro|jection
of Master Hartlib (that painfull and great instru|tment
of this Designe) whereby the wants and desires of all
may bee made knowne unto all, where men may know

what is already done in the buisinesse of Learning. What is
at present in doing, and what is intended to be done: to
the end, that by such a generall communication of designes,
and mutuall assistance; The wits and endevours of the world
may no longer be as so many scattered coales or firebrands,
which for want of union, are soone quenched, whereas being
but layed together they would have yeeled a comfortable
light and heat. For me thinkes the present condition of men is
like a field where a battle hath beene lately fought, where we
may see many leggs, and armes, and eyes lying here and there,
which for want of a union and a soule to quicken and enliven
them, are good for nothing but to feed Ravens; and infect the
aire. So we see many Wittes and Ingenuities lying scattered
up and downe the world, whereof some are now labouring to
doe what is already done, and pusling themselves to rein|vent
what is already invented, others we see quite stuck
fast in difficulties, for want of a few Directions, which some
other man (might he be met withall) both could and would
most easily give him; againe one man wants a small summe
of mony, to carry on some designe, that requires it, and there
is perhaps another, who hath twice as much ready to bestow
on the same designe, but these two having no Meanes ever to
heare the one of the other, the good Work intended and
desired, by both parties doth utterly perish and come to no|thing:
But this we passe over sleightly, though very funda|mentall
to our businesse, because the Master-builder thereof
himself hath done it so solidly. Having by this means procured
work-men and what else is necessary to the Worke, that
which we would have them to labour in, is, How to finde
out such Arts as are yet undiscovered, How to learne what
is already known, by more compendious and facile wayes,
and to apply it to more, and those more noble uses, how to
work in men an higher esteeme of Learning so as to give occa|sion,
encouragement and opportunity to more Men to apply
themselves to its Advancement.
The next thing then to be done, will be, First, to see what is
well and sufficiently done already, exploding whatsoever is
nice, contentious and meery phantasticall. All which must in

some measure be suppressed and brought into disgrace and
contempt with all men.
2. This survey may be made by perusing al Books and taking
notice of all Mechanicall Inventions.
3. In this perusall, all the Reall or Experimentall Learning
may be sifted and collected out of the said Books.
4. There must be appointed able Readers of all such Books,
with certaine and well limited Directions what to collect
out of them.
5. Every Book must be so read by two severall Persons
apart, to prevent mistakes and failings from the said Directi|ons.
6. The Directions for Reading must be such, as the Read|ers
observing them, may exactly agree in their Collecti|ons.
7. Out of all these Bookes one Booke or great Worke
may be made, though consisting of many Volumes.
8. The most Artificiall Indices Tables or other Helps for
the ready finding, remembring, and well understanding
all things contained in these Bookes must be contrived and
put in practice.
Having thus taken the height or pitch wherunto al Arts and
Sciences whatsoever, are already come; and observed where
they now stick, the ablest Men in every respective Faculty
must be set apart, to drive them on further with sufficient
maintenance, and encouragement for the same. Where|unto
it is requisite that two or three, one under another, be
employed about each Faculty, to the end that some of them
dying, or any other wise failing, there may never want men
acquainted with the whole Designe, and able to carry it on,
with the help of others to be admitted under them; And
that at least yearly Accompts be taken of those mens endea|vours,
and rewards be proportioned to them accor|dingly.
And now we shall think of whetting our tooles and pre|paring
sharp Instruments for this hard work, by delivering our
thoughts concerning Education, which are,
1. That there be instituted Ergastula Literaria, Literary|work-houses,

where Children may be taught as well to doe
something towards their living, as to Read and Write.
That the businesse of Education be not (as now) committed
to the worst and unworthiest of men, but that it be seriously
studied and practised by the best and abler persons.
That all Children of above seven yeares old may be presen|ted
to this kind of Education, none being to be excluded by
reason of the poverty and unability of their Parents, for
hereby it hath come to passe, that many are now holding the
Plough, which might have beene made fit to steere the State.
Wherfore let such poor children be imployed on works wher|by
they may earne their living, equall to their strength and.
understanding, and such as they may performe as well as
elder and abler persons, viz. attending Engines, c. And if
they cannot get their whole living, and their Parents can con|tribute
nothing at all to make it up, let them stay some|what
the longer in the Work-house.
That since few children have need of reading before
they know, or can be acquainted with the Things they read of,
or of writing, before their thoughts are worth the recording,
or they are able to put them into any forme, (which we call
inditing) much lesse of learning languages, when there bee
Books enough for their present use in their owne mother
Tongue; our opinion is, that those Things being withall
somewhat above their capacity, (as being to be attained by
Judgement, which is weakest in children) be deferred awhile,
and others more needfull for them, such as are in the order of
Nature before those afore mentioned, and are attainable by
the help of Memory, which is either most strong or unpre|occupied
in children, be studied before them. We wish there|fore
that the Educands be taught to observe and remember all
sensible Objects and Actions, whether they be Naturall or Ar|tificiall,
which the Educators must upon all occasions expound
unto them.
That they use such Exercises whether in work, or for recre|ation,
as tend to the health, agility and strength of their
bodies.
That they be taught to Read by much more compendious

meanes then are in common use, which is a thing certainly very
easie and feasible.
That they be not onely taught to Write according to our
Common Way, but also to Write Swiftly and in Reall Chara|cters,
as likewise the dextrous use of the Instruments for Wri|ting
many Copies of the same thing at once.
That the Artificiall Memory be thought upon, and if the
precepts thereof be not too farre above Childrens Capacities,
We conceive it not improper for them to learn that also.
That in no case the Art of Drawing and designing be omit|ted,
to what course of Life soever those children are to be ap|plied,
since the use thereof for expressing the conceptions of
the mind, seemes (at least to us) to be little inferiour to that
of Writing, and in many cases performeth what by words is
impossible.
That the Elements of Arithmetick and Geometry be by
all studied, being not onely of great and frequent use in all
humane Affaires but also sure guides and helps to Reason, and
especiall Remedies for a volatile and unstedy mind.
That effectuall Courses be taken to try the Abilities of the
Bodies and Minds of Children, the strength of their Memory,
inclination of their Affections either to Vice or Vertue, and to
which of them in particular, and withall to alter what is bad
in them, and increase and improve what is good, applying
all, whether good or bad, to the least Inconveniencie and most
Advantage.
That such as shall have need to learne Forraine Languages
(the use whereof would be much lessened, were the Reall and
Common Characters brought into practise) may be taught
them by incomparably more easie wayes then are now usuall.
That no ignoble, unnecessary, or condemned Part of
Learning be taught in those houses of Education, so that if a|ny
man shall vainely fall upon them, he himselfe onely may be
blamed.
That such as have any naturall ability and fitnesse to Musick
be Encouraged and Instructed therein.
That all Children, though of the highest ranke, be taught
some gentile Manufacture in their minority, such as are
Turning of curious Figures.
Making Mathematicall Instruments, Dialls, and how to
use them in Astronomicall Observations.
Making Watches and other Trochilick motions.
Limning and Painting on Glasse or in Oyle Colours.
Graving, Etching, Carving, Embossing and Molding in
sundry matters.
The Lapidaries Art of knowing, cutting and setting Iew|ells.
Grinding of Glasses Dioptricall and Catoptricall.
Botanicks and Gardening.
Making Musicall Instruments.
Navarchy and making Modells for buildings and rig|ging
of Ships.
Architecture and making Modells for houses.
The Confectioners, Perfumers or Diers Arts.
Chymistry, refining Metalls and Counterfeiting Iewells.
Anatomy making Sceletons and excarnating bowells.
Making Mariners Compasses, Globes, and other Mag|netick
Devices.
And all, for these Reasons.
1. They shall be lesse subject to be cousened by Artificers.
2. They will become more industrious in generall.
3. They will certainly bring to passe most excellent
Works being as Gentlemen, ambitious to excell ordinarie
Work-men.
4. They being able to make Experiments themselves, may
doe it with lesse charge, and more care then others will doe
it for them.
5. The Resp. Artium will be much advanced, when such
as are rich and able, are also willing to make Luciferous Expe|riments.
6. It may engage them to be Mecaenates and Patrons of
Arts.
7. It will keepe them from worse occasions of spending
their time and estates.
8. As it will be a great Ornament in prosperity, so it wil be
a great Refuge and stay in adversity and common calamity.
As for what remaines of Education, we cannot but hope

that those, whom we have desired should make it their trade,
will Supply it, and render the Idea therof much more perfect.
We have already recommended the studie of the Elements
of Arithmetick and Geometry to all Men in generall, but
they being the best grounded parts of Speculative knowledge,
and of so Vast use in all Practicall Arts. We cannot but com|mend
deeper enquiries into them. And although the way of
advancing them in particular, may be drawne from what we
have already delivered, concerning the Advancement of learn|ing
in generall, yet for the more explicite understanding of
our meaning herein, we referre to Master Pells most excel|lent
Idea thereof, written to Master Hartlib.
In the next place for the Advancement of all Mechanicall
Arts and Manufactures, we wish that there were erected a
Gymnasium Mechanicum or a Colledge of Trades-men (or
for more expedition untill such a place could be built, that
the most convenient houses for such a purpose may be either
bought or hired) wherein we would that one at least of
every Trade (but the Prime most Ingenious Work-man, the
most desirous to improve his Art,) might be allowed therein,
a handsom dwelling Rent free, which with the Credit of being
admitted into this Society, and the quick sale which certain|ly
they would have of their Commodities, when all men
would repaire thither, as to a Market of rare and exquisite
pieces of Workmanship, would be a sufficient Motive to at|tract
the very ablest Mechanicks, and such as we have describ|ed,
to desire a fellowship in this Colledge.
From this Institution we may clearly hope when the ex|cellent
in all Arts are not onely Neighbours, but intimate
Friends and Brethren, united in a Common desire and zeal to
promote them, that all Trades will miraculously prosper,
and new Inventions would be more frequent, then new fashi|ons
of Clothes and household-stuffe. Here would be the best
and most effectuall opportunities and meanes, for writing
a History of Trades in perfection and exactnesse, and what
Experiments and stuffe would all those Shops and Operations
afford to Active and Philosophicall heads, out of which, to ex|tract
that Interpretation of Nature, whereof there is so little,
and that so bad as yet extant in the world?
Within the walls of this Gymnasium or College, should be
a Nosecomium Academicum according to the most exact
and perfect Idea thereof a compleate Theatrum Botanicum,
stalls and Cages for all strange Beastes and Birds, with Ponds
and Conservatories for all exotick Fishes, here all Animalls
capable thereof should be made fit for some kind of labour
and imployment, thaa they may as well be of use living as
dead; here should be a Repositorie of all kind of Rarities
Naturall and Artificiall pieces of Antiquity, Modells of all
great and noble Engines, with Designes and Platformes of
Gardens and Buildings. The most Artificiall Fountaines and
Water-works, a Library of Select Bookes, an Astronomicall
Observatory for celestiall Bodies and Meteor, large pieces
of Ground for severall Experiments of Agriculture, Galle|eries
of the rarest Paintings and Satues, with the fairest
Globes, and Geographcall Maps of the best descriptions, and
so farre as is possible, we would have this place to be the
Epitome or Abstract of the whole world. So that a man con|versant
within those walls, would certainly prove a greater
Schollar, then the Walking Libraries so called, although he
could neither write nor read. But if a Child, before he learned
to read or write, were made acquainted with all Things, and
Actions (as he might be in this Colledge) how easily would
he understand all good Bookes afterwards, and smell out
the fopperies of bad ones. As for the Situation, Modell, Poli|cy
Oeconomy, with the Number of Officers and Retainers
to this Colledge, and the Priviledges thereof, it is as yet time
enough to delineate. Only we wish that a Society of Men
might be instituted as carefull to advance Arts as the Iesuites
are to Propagate their Religion for the government and
mannaging of it.
But what relish will there be in all those dainties whereof
we have spoken, if we want a palate to tast them, which cer|tainly
is Health, the most desirable of all earthly blessings,
and how can we in any reason expect Health, when there are
so many great difficulties in the curing of diseases and no pro|portionable
Course taken to remove them? we shall there|fore
pursue the Meanes of acquiring the Publicke Good and

comfort of Mankind a little further, and vent out conceits con|cerning
a Nosocomium Academicum or an Hospitall to cure
the Infirmities both of Physician and Patient.
We intended to have given the most perfect Idea of this
Nosocomium Academicum, and consequently to have treated
of the Situation and Fabrick of the House, Garden, Library,
Chymicall Laboratorie, Anatomicall Theater, Apotheca, with
all the Instruments and Furniture belonging to each of them,
as also of the whole Policy and Oeconomy thereof. But since
such a work could not be brought to passe without much
charge (the very naming wherof doth deter men even from the
most noble and necessary Attempts) we are contented to pour|tray
only such a Nosocomium, as may be made out of one of
our old Hospitals, without any new donations or creeping to
Benefactors, onely with a little paines taken by the Reforming
hand of Authority. For we do not doubt, but that we have
so contrived the businesse, that there is no Hospitall in its cor|rupt
estate, can be more thriftily managed then Ours. For
the Number of our Ministers are no greater then usuall, and
absolutly necessary, their Pensions no larger then are allowed
to those, who do not make the service of the Hospital, the sixth
part of their Employment and meanes of subsistance, and
yet we give encouragement enough to able men to undertake
it, without medling with any other businesse, which we strict|ly
forbid. For as the Salaries are but small, so the Charge of
the Ministers is not great (they being all to be unmarried Per|sons)
their Accommodation handsome, their Employment
(being a work of Publike and highest Charity) honourable,
and to Philosophicall Men, (who onely are to have a hand in
this businesse) most pleasant and delightfull. Besides when
their respective times are expired, their profit and esteeme
in the world cannot but be very great. For their way of breed|ing
will both procure them practice among such as are able
to reward them, and give them a dexterity and ability, to
manage and go thorough a great deale thereof.
Moreover the smalnesse of the Salary, the long servitude
among poore wretches, and restraint from Marriages, the
great paines and naturall parts required to performe duties,

will I hope, prevent all intrusions of those, whose Genius doth
not encline them to take pleasure in this way of life.
Wherefore being not at leasure to frame Utopias, we shall
onely speak of the Number and Salary of Ministers, the time
of their service with their qualifications in generall, and Du|ties
in particular, which are to be employed in this Nosoco|mium
Academicum.
The Nosocomium being fitted with all manner of Neces|saries,
shall be overseene by three or foure Curators, Men of
Learning, Honour and Worth, such as shall out of Charity and
good will to the Publique performe this Trust, who are to be
Protectors and Chancellors thereof, as also Auditors of the
Stewards Accompts.
Besides these, there shall be a Mathematician for Steward,
a Physician, Chirurgeon and Apothecary, each well versed
both in the Theory and Practise of their respective Professi|ons.
A young Physician capable at least of the degree of
Doctor, who may be called the Vice-physician, and another of
about five or sixe yeares standing in the University, who may
be called the Student. There should be also a Chirurgeon and
an Apothecary who have served their Apprentiships in the
said Faculties called the Chirurgeons and Apothecaries Mate,
with two other young men, the one to serve the Chirurgeon,
and the other the Apothecary, all understanding at least the
Latine Tongue, which may be called the Apprentices: All
these are to be chosen at first by the Curators (but afterwards
by the Society it selfe) being such as they shall be certified are
Pious, Ingenious, Laborious, Lovers of Knowledge, and par|ticularly
of the Faculty of Physick, courteous, not covetous;
and lastly such among whom there may be an harmony of
Natures and studies, so as all feare of discords, Envie and
Emulation may be taken away. There ought also to be enter|tained,
as many honest carefull ancient Widowes, to serve as
Nurses to the sick, as will be proportionable to their Number,
some whereof are to be ordinary and some extraordinary,
whereof the latter may be taken in, and dismissed againe, as
Occasion of their help, requires,
There should be allowed out of the Revenues of the Hos|pitall

to the aforenamed Ministers, besides their diets, house|roome,
washing, firing, c. and Exemption from all Taxes
and Employments in the Common-wealth, the severall sums
following, viz.



l.



To the Steward
80
per annum.


To the Physician
120


To the Vice-Physician
50


To the Chirurgeon and Apothec. each
60


To the Student
25


To the Chirurg. and Apotheck. mate
20


To each of the Apprentices
10


To each ordinary Nurse
4


To an Extraordinary by the week
3. shil.


It should be granted by the State, that whosoever hath ser|ved
his respective time in the Nosocomium, and hath a Certi|cate
therof from the Society, shall be thereby licensed to pra|ctice
his profession in any place or Corporation whatsover,
notwithstanding any former Law to the Contrary.
The Steward shall not be obliged to stay any longer then
from yeer to yeer. Each of the Faculty of Physick may serve
five yeers in each degree thereof, each of the Chirurgeons and
Apothecaries but foure.
These Circumstances being premised, we now come to the
very Essence of the whole businesse, that is, to the Description
of each of the aforenamed Ministers their particular Duty and
Function, which are as followeth, viz.
The Steward shall be a man of approved honesty, able to
give order for all reparations about the house, garden, c. to
agree and bargaine with workmen, and all that shall serve in
any Commodities into the house, he is to receive and pay all
monies, and submit the accompts thereof to the whole Socie|ty,
and they againe to the Curators. For which and other like
duties he ought to be skill'd in Mathematicks; chifely in A|rithmetick
and keeping Accompts, measuring of Land, tim|ber,
board, Architecture, frugall contrivances and the like.
But as to the Advancement of Physick, We desire he

may be skill'd in the best Rules of Judiciall Astrology, which
he may apply to calculate the Events of diseases, and Prog|nosticate
the Weather; to the end that by his Judicious
and carefull Experiments, the Wheat may be separated from
the Chaffe in that Faculty likewise; and what is good therein
may be applyed to good uses, and the rest exploded. He shall
keep a Journall of all notable Changes of Weather, and fer|tility
of Seasons, taking notice what fruits, c. have a|bounded
and what have failed, which have beene good, and
which bad, with the Reasons thereof, whether the same were
caused by Mildewes, Blasts, Unseasonable Weather, Caterpil|lers
or other Vermin; he shall take notice of the severall dis|eases,
as Staggers, Murraine, Rot, c. which in each yeare
have infested each Species of Annimals, and what In|sects
have most abounded; all which Particulars with the
Epidemicall diseases befalling man, he may compare with the
Aspects of the Celestiall bodies, and so examine the precepts
delivered unto us by the Professors of that Art.
The Physician must be a Philosopher, skill'd at large in the
Phaenomena of Nature, must understand the Greek Tongue,
be well read in good Authors, and seene in the practice of all
the ministrant parts of Physick, willing to instruct and fore|ward
all that are under him, his work shall be twice every
day deliberately to Visite and Examine all the Sick, and after
due Consideration of their Condition, to prescribe them con|venient
Medicines, and shall dictate in Latine to the Vice-Phy|sician
attending him, the History of their severall Diseases
(excluding impertinencies) he shall see all Patients in out|ward
griefes (to whom he administreth any inward remedies)
opened and dressed ever now and then, to the end that him|selfe
and the Chirurgeon may both have the same Intention
and scope in their practice. He must take care that the Chi|rurgeon
and Student keep the History of their Cures like|wise,
and that the Apothecary and Student doe the same in
in their Pharmacy and Botanicks. He shall oversee the dis|pensation
of all compound, and Preparation of all Chymical
Medicaments, giving the Apothecary directions for the ma|king
of new Enquiries and Experiments in his way; and

wise to the Chirurgeon and the rest, in theirs, when he seeth
them not otherwise employed. In briefe, he shall have an in|fluence
upon all the rest, and all the rest reciprocally upon
him, so that he being made acquainted with all the Histories
taken in the Hospitall, Laboratory, Anatomical Chamber,
garden, c. may give the reason of the most notable Phae|nomena
hapning in either of them. All which he shall com|mit
to writing and out of them, by the end of the terme
of his service, shall collect a Systeme of Physick and the most
approved Medicinall Aphorismes; taking notice by the way
where those of Hippocrates are deficient or true, and by how
many severall experiments he hath so found them. He shall
either dissect or overlook the dissection of bodies dying of
diseases, and lastly shall take care that all Luciferous experi|ments
whatsoever, may be carefully brought to him, and re|corded
for the benefit of Posterity.
The Vice-Physicians proper charge is to see the History of
Patients most exactly and constantly kept, he may now and
then reade some good Authour, but in all other things shall
endeavour to assist, and be subordinate to the Physician in all
parts of his duty, stil acting by his directions, but shall not
prescribe any Physick without the consent of the Chiefe, nor in
his absence, upon emergent occasions, without the advice of the
Master Chyrurgeons; he should be alwayes walking up and
downe from bed to bed, feeling the pulses and looking on
the Vrine and other excrements of the sick; that no considera|ble
punctilio in any circumstance whatsoever escape his ob|servation;
for the compleating of the History, He shall ap|ply
himselfe to the making of Luciferous experiments, and
to take notice of such as shall be made by others.
The Student shall assist the Chyrurgeon and Apothecary
in making the History of their Practises, to the end he may
have alwayes occasions to instruct himselfe in these ministrant
parts of physick to read such Authors, as the Chiefe Physici|an
shall appoint him, and compare all his reading with the
things themselves, whereof he readeth, as herbs, drugs, Com|pound
Medicaments, Anatomy, Chyrurgicall Instruments,
bandages, operations, c. all which we call the Real Ele|ments

of the Art. He shall by leave from the Physician in cases
of need, put his hand to helpe the Chyrurgion or Apothecary
and sometimes watch by night with the Nurses, that the per|fection
of the History may by no meanes be hazarded on their
Ignorance or carelesnesse; he may serve the Physician as an
Amanuensis, especially in such things, the transcribing where|of
may tend much to the advancement of his owne know|ledge.

Of the Chirurgions.
The Master Chyrurgion shall dresse every Patient belong|ing
to his care the first time himselfe, in the presence of him,
to whom he shall commit the said Cure afterwards, and as
it were read him a Lecture thereupon. When the other Chi|rurgions
under him are dressing, he shall, accompanied with
the student, goe from Patient to Patient to give them directi|ons
pro re Nat in their proceedings on the Cure, and dictate
to the Student the most pertinent passages hapning from
time to time, that he may keep a true and uninterrupted
History of them; He shal make Experiments by dissecting
sundry sorts of Animals, shall teach his Mates Anatomy, ex|pound
good Authors to them, shew them the Manner of
making bandages and making all Manner of operations such as
are the Laryngotomia, cutting for the stone, hernia, dropsie
and applying the trepane both upon living brutes and dead
carcases of men to the end that by practising upon these, the
best places for making incision may be knowne, and all the
dangerous parts in the way taken notice of, and upon the
others, how to avoide the Inconveniences of haemorrhagies,
struglings and the like.
The Mate shall dresse all the more difficul griefes, apply
Cauteries, make Fontanels, practise Anatomy, and Manuall
operations make Sceletons of the Sundry rare Animals which
he shall have the opportunity to cut up, excarnate bowels, ar|tificially
dry the Muscules tanne the ventricle, guts, c. and do
what else tendeth to the perfection of Anatomy, he shall al|so

at leisuretimes transcribe the History of their practice first
and originally taken by the Student.
The Apprentice shall serve the Master in spreading Plai|sters,
letting Blood in the arme, threading Pease for
Issues, whetting Instruments, scraping Lint, sowing to|gether
Bandages (which he shal also learne to apply)
he shal see dissections, read good Authors of Chirurge|ry
and see the practice of operations made by his Supe|riours.
He shall also see the Apothecaries make all such
Plaisters, Unguents, Balsames, c. (learning to choose
and know all the Herbs, Gummes and other Ingredients go|ing
into them) as are used in their practice.


Of the Apothecarie.
The Master Apothecary being a most exquisite Bota|nist,
shall take care of the Garden, that store of all use|full
Plants be kept therein, and also that such as are for
beauty or rarity be not wanting, he shall give order for
all Experiments of Grafting, Transplanting, Meliorating
the tasts, smels, c. of Plants, accelerating of Germina|tion
and Maturation in them, conservation of Exoticks
so, as in time to make them Domesticks, to try the ef|fect
of all Artificial Composts, he shall see that all Herbs,
Roots, c. be gathered in their due seasons, and that all the
most proper Courses be used for conserving them, hee
shall write of the sensile and evident Qualities of all
Drugges, as of their smell, tast, ponderosity, rarity, fri|ability,
transparency, colour, hardnesse, c. omitting
such as are not discernable by sense, or deprensible by
certaine Experiments, declaring the severall operations,
chymicall or Pharmacentical by which these Drugges
are usually, or may be best prepared; he shall set down
all the Experiments solitary or in consort, that he meet|eth
with, in the mixing or preparing any of them, as that
Camphire, will of it selfe evaporate, Terpentine washed in

water becometh white, Euphorbium in the beating will
cause excessive sneesing, that the seedes of Cucummis Asi|ninus
will of themselves leap out with great Impetuosity
one after another. That spirit of Vitriol mixed with Sy|rup
of Violets, turneth it into a faire Crimson colour,
and others of the like Nature. He shall with the Stu|dent
keep an exact History af all rare and Unusuall Ac|cidents,
hapning in his Operations, he shall take care
that all Medicaments be made according to Art, or the
Physicians particular directions: he shall ever now and
then Visite the Apotheca, to cast out thereof all decayed
Drugges and compositions, shall read Pharmaceutical and
Chymicall Institutions to his Inferiors, and teach the
plants to any of the Society that shall desire to learne
them.
The Apothecaries Mate shall transcribe the prescriptions
taken by the vice Physician, and see them carefully made up,
shall attend the Hospitall, in administring to each Patient
his Physick according to directions, applying Epithemes,
cucuphaes Embrochaes, fomentations, frictions, unctions,
giving Glysters, applying Leeches, c. he shall transcribe
the History compiled by the Master Apothecary, and the
student, and at leisure times, when as he cannot study Things
he may read good Authors in his owne Art, without med|dling
either with Physick or Chyrurgery.
The Apprentice shall read some good pharmaceuticall
Botanick and Chymicall Institutions, shal be much conver|sant
in the Garden to see the curing of tender and exotick
plants where he shall observe the working of Nature in
their growing flouring, c. he shall see the Herbs, Roots and
Seeds gathered according to directions, he shall worke
in beating and picking Drugs and on all other Operations
belonging to the preparation of Medicaments.
The Nurses shall be alwayes at hand in the Hospitall
to help the sick, that by reason of their absence they
may not be put to straine and offend themselves by often
and loud crying and calling. They shall dresse their diet

and give it them in Quality, Quantity, Time and order,
according to the Physicians directions, they shall see their
Linnen conveniently changed so as to prevent all annoy|ance
to the sick; They shall in watching endevour to ob|serve
all remarkable Accidents hapning in the night, as whe|ther
they raved or talked much in their sleepe, snorted,
coughed. c. all which they shall punctually report to
the Physician, shewing him the Urines and other Excre|ments,
telling him the time and manner wherein they
were voyded, and in breife, they being the lowest Members
of the house, they shalbe in all things obedient to their Su|periours.
It is hard so to assigne to every Minister his particular
duty, as that the businesse (which is the Recovery of the
Patients, and the Improvement of every mans knowledge
in his proper way) cannot be done better then by this di|stribution:
And it would be of ill Consequence, if here|upon
the Apprentice having done his owne work, should
refuse to help his fellow, being perchance at some time
overburthened, wherefore it is to be understood that this
contrivance shalbe no warrant to any man, not to help his
fellow, in case of Exigence, but chiefely to shew what we
desire should be done amongst them all. For we hope that
their common Frendship and desire of helping the sick and
enabling themselves, will tye them enough to performe all
these things in the most advantagious manner to these
Ends.
Having now after a fashion gone through the descripti|on
of such Societies and Institutions, as we have thought
most fit for the advancement of Reall Learning, and among
the rest, of the Ergastulum Literarium for the Education
of Children, we now come to speak of such Bookes, as be|ing
well studied and expounded in those Schooles, would
lay a very firme foundation of Learning in the Schollers.
We recommend therefore in the first place (besides those
Bookes of Collection, by us formerly mentioned, and Ma|ster
Pells three Mathematical Treatises) the compiling of a

Worke whose Title might justly be Vellus Aureum sive
Facultatum Luoriferarum discriptio Magna, wherein all the
practised wayes of getting a Subsistance and whereby Men
raise their fortunes, may be at large declared. And among
these, we wish that the History of Arts or Manufactures
might first be undertaken as the most pleasant and profita|ble
of all the rest, wherein should be discribed the whole
Processe of Manual Operations and Applications of one
Naturall thing (which we call the Elements of Artificials)
to another, with the necessarie Instruments and Machines,
whereby every peice of worke is elaborated, and made to
be what it is, unto which work bare words being not suffi|cient,
all Instruments and tooles must be pictured, and co|lours
added when the discriptions cannot be made intelligi|ble
without them.
This History must not be made out of a farrago of imper|fect
Relations made to the compiler, either by too rude or
cousening Workmen, but all things thereunto appertain|ing
must be by himselfe observed and attested by the most
Judicious and candid of each respective Profession, as well
to make the work the more Authenticke, (it being to be the
Basis of many future Inferences and Philosophations) as
the more cleerly and distinctly to enforme the compiler
himselfe, by whose Judgement as the Alembick and Indu|stry
as the fire, it is hoped that the Quintessence and Ma|gesteries
of all present Inventions may be extracted and
new ones produced in abundance.
Although it be intended to teach the making of all Arti|ficials,
yet it is not to be understood that when there hath
beene taught how to make a stoole, or a naile of one fashi|on,
that the Art of making a Chaire or a naile of another
fashion, should belong insisted on. But the Compiler should
strive to reduce the making of all Artificials in each trade
to a certaine Number and Classes of operations Tooles and
Materials, neither need he to set the Figures, or men|tion
the names of all Artificials that ever were made, but
onely of such as are most Knowne and of Common Use

amongst men: He needeth not to describe every punctilio in
making all the aforementioned particulars, and yet leave
no more defects, then may be supplyed by every common
understanding. For we question whether (if he should en|gage
himselfe in such an endlesse labour) a man by the bare
light and instruction of the Book could attaine to a dextrous
practice of a trade, whereunto hath been required seven
yeares Autopsia. But are confident that the help of this Book
will lessen the former taeditum by more then half. He should
not so abridge the Work as not to distinguish between Instru|ments
of the same name, as between a Loome to weave Ker|sies,
and another, wherein to weave silk Ribbands or Stockings.
He should all along give the Mechanicall reason of every
Instrument Materiall and operation, when the same is sen|sible
and cleere. He should all along note his own defects in
setting down these Histories, in case he had not at the time of
the writing thereof sufficient information, and withall the
deficiencies of the Trades themselves.
Now whereas there be divers Wayes and Methods of
working most Manufactures, he should in each thing stick
close to the way of some one Mr. but note al the diversities he
Knoweth,  give his Opinion of the use and goodnes of each.
Moreover the Oeconomy, Sive Ars augendas rei familiaris
in all Professions ought to be enquired into. viz. What sea|sons
of the yeare are most proper to each Worke, which the
best places and times to buy Materials, and to put off the
Commodities when finished, how most thriftily to hire, en|tertaine,
and oversee servants and Workmen, how to dispose
of every excrement and Refuse of Materials, or of broken,
worne, or otherwise unserviceable Tooles and Utensils, with
all Cauteles, Impostures and other sleights good or bad,
whereby men use to over-reach one another.
There ought to be added to this work many and vari|ous
indices besides the Alphabeticall ones, as namely one of
all the Artificials mentioned in the whole worke.
Another of all the Naturall Materials or Elements of Arti|fials,
by what Artificers used, from whence they come,

where to be had, and what are the ordinary and middle
prices of them.
Another of all the Qualities or Schemes of Matter, as o fall
liquifiable things visced friable, heavy, transparent, abstersive
or otherwise qualified according to all the classes of 1, 2, and 3.
qualities, to the end that Materials for all Intentions and Ex|periments
may be at hand and in sight.
Another of all Operations mentioned in the whole work,
as Sawing, Hewing, Filing, Boaring, Melting, Dissolving, Tur|ning,
Beating, Grinding, Boyling, Calcining, Knitting, Spin|ning,
Sowing, Twisting, c. To the end that they all may
also be at hand for the purposes aforesaid. Another of all
Tooles and Machines, as Files, Sawes, Chissels, Sheeres, Sives,
Loomes, Shuttles, Wheeles, Wedges, Knives, Skrewes, c.
for the same purpose also.
The compiler ought to publish all his conjectures, how old
Inventions may be perfected and new one produceds, giving
directions how to try the truth of them. So that by all those
unto whose hands these Books shall come perchance, all
the said suppositions may be tryed, and the successe repor|ted
to the Compiler himselfe.
The Compilers first scope in Inventions shall bee, how to
apply all Materials that grow in Abundance in this King|dome,
and whereof but in considerable use and Profits are as
yet made to more advantage to the Common-wealth. And
also how all Impotents, whether onely blind, or onely lame,
and all Children of above seven yeares old might earne
their bread, and not be so long burdensome to their Parents
and others.
There should be made a Preface to the Worke to teach
men how to make the most of experiments and to record
the successes of them whatsoever, whether according to
hopes or no, all being equally Luciferous, although not e|qually
Lucriferous.
There ought to be much Artifice used, that all the
aforementioned Indices may handsomely referre One
to anothers, that all things contained in the whole Book

may be most easily found, and most readily attend the
seekers of New Inventions.
The way to accomplish this Worke must be to en|quire
what to this purpose is already done, or in
hand, in all places and also by whom, so that Com|munication
of councels and proceedings, may (if pos|sible)
be had with those undertakers.
All Bookes of this Subject already extant in Print,
must be collected and bought, not to transcribe them,
but to examine them per Autopsiam, and Re-experi|ment
the Experiments contained in them, and withall
to give hints of New Enquiries.
The Compiler must be content to devote his whole
life to this employment, one who (as we said before)
hath the fire of Industry and the Alembick of a Curious
and rationall head, to extract the Quintescence of
whatsoever hee seeth.
He should bee as young as sufficient Abilities will
admit, to the end that he may with the concurrence of
Gods ordinary Providence, either finish, or very farre
advance the Worke, while he liveth, and also that
living long in that employment, he may heap up the
larger stock of Experiments, which how much the
greater it is in one Man, affordeth so much the more
hopes of New Inventions.
The Nature Manner, and Meanes of Writing the History
of Trades being so farre expounded, before we proceed fur|ther
therein, for the better Encouragement of Vnderta|kers,
we shall now represent such Profits and Commodities
thereof, to the Common-wealth, as we at present more
nearly reflect upon. For to Enumerate or Evaluate them
all, will be much above our Capacity.
1. All men whatsoever may hereby so look into all Pro|fessions,
as not to be too grossely cozened and abused in
them.
2. The Mysteries of Trades being so laid open, as that the
Professors of them cannot make so unlawfull and exorbitant

advantages as heretofore, Such as are Cunning and Ambi|tious
will never rest untill they have found new ones in
their stead; so that the Respublica Artium, will be so
much the more advanced.
3. Schollers and such as love to Batiocinate will have
more and better Matter to exercise their wits upon, where|as
now they pusle and tire themselves, about meer Words
and Chymaericall Notions.
4. They will Reason with more alacrity, when they
shall not only get honour by shewing their Abilities,
but profit likewise by the Invention of Fructiferous
Arts.
5. Sophistry shall not be in such esteem as heretofore,
when even Sence shall be able to unmask its vanity, and di|stinguish
it from Truth.
6 Men seeing what Arts are already invented, shall not
neede to puslle themselves to reinvent the same againe.
7. All Men in generall that have wherewithall will be
venturing at our Vellus Aureum, by making of Experi|ments:
and whether thereby they thrive or no (the Directi|ons
in the Preface being followed) they shall neverthelesse
more and more discover Nature.
8. Nay all Nations sensible of this Auri Sacra fames, will
engage in this hopefull businesse; and then certainly Many
hands will make light work in the said businesse of disco|vering
Nature.
9. All Ingenious Men and Lovers of Reall Knowledge,
have along time begged this work, wherefore it can be no
small honour to him that shall satisfie them.
10. A vast increase of honourable, profitable, and plea|sant
Inventions must needs spring from the work, when
one Man (as the Compiler thereof) may uno intuitu, see
and comprehend all the Labour and Wit of our Ancestors,
and be thereby able to supply the defects of one Trade with
the perfections of another.
11. We see that all Countries where Manufactures and
Trades flourish, as Holland, c. become potent and rich.

For how can it otherwise be? when the Revenues of the
State shall be encreased by new and more Customes, all
Beggers feeding upon the Labours of other men, and e|ven
Theeves and Robbers (made for want of better em|ployment)
shall be set on work, barren grounds made
fruitfull, wet dry, and dry wet, when even hogs and more
indocile beasts shall be taught to labour, when all vile Ma|terials
shall be turned to Noble uses, when one man or
horse shall do as much as three, and every thing improved
to strange Advantages.
12. There would not then be so many Fustian and Vn|worthy
Preachers in Divinity, so many petti foggers in
the Law, so many Quack-salvers in Physick, so many Gram|maticasters
in Country-schooles, and so many Lazy-serving
men in Gentlemens houses, when every man might learne
to live otherwise in more plenty and honour. For all men
desirous to take paines might by this Book survey all the
wayes of Subsistance, and choose out of them all, one
that best suits with his own Genius and Abilities.
13. Schollers now disesteemed for their Poverty
(what ever other thing commends them) and unable e|ven
for want of lively-hood, to perfect any thing even in
their own way, would quickly help themselves, by open|ing
Treasures, with the Key of Lucriferous Inventi|ons.
14. Boyes in stead of reading hard Hebrew words in
the Bible (where they either trample on, or play with My|steries)
or parratlike repeating heteroclitous nounes, and
verbs, might read and hear the History of Faculties expoun|ded,
so that before they be bound Apprentices to any
Trade, they may foreknow the good and bad of it, what
will and strength they have to it, and not spend seven years
in repenting, and in swimming against the stream of their
Inclinations.
All Apprentices by this Book might learn the Theory of
their Trades before they are bound to a Master, and
consequently may be exempted from the Taedium of a

seven years bondage, and having spent but about three
years with a Master, may spend the other foure in Travel|ling
to learn breeding, and the perfection of their
Trades.
As it would be more profitable to Boyes, to spend ten
or twelve years in the study of Things, and of this Book of
Faculties, then in a rabble of words, so it would be more
easie and pleasant to them, as more suitable to the natu|rall
propensions we observe in them. For we see Children
to delight in Drums, Pipes, Fiddels, Guns made of El|der-sticks
and bellowes noses, piped Keyes, c. for paint|ing
Flags and Ensignes with Elder-berries and Corn-pop|py,
making ships with Paper, and setting even Nut-shels
a swimming, handling the tooles of workemen assoone as
they turne their backs, and trying to worke themselves,
fishing, fowling, hunting, setting sprenges and traps for
birds, and other animals, making pictures in their writing
bookes, making Tops, Gigs, and Whirligigs, quilting
balls, practising divers jugling tricks upon the Cards, c.
with a million more besides. And for the Females, they
will be making Pyes with Clay, making their Babies
Clothes, and dressing them therewith, they will spit
leaves on sticks, as if they were roasting meate, they
will imitate all the talke and Actions, which they ob|serve
in their Mother and her Gossips, and punctually act
the Comedy or Tragedy (I know not whether to call it)
of a Womans lying in. By all which it is most evident,
that Children do most naturally delight in things, and are
most capable of learning them, having quick Sences to re|ceive
them and unpreoccupied memories to retaine them.
As for other things whereunto they are now adayes set,
they are altogether unfit, for want of judgement, which
is but weake in them, and also for want of Will, which is
sufficiently seene both by what we have said before, by the
difficultie in keeping them at Schools, and the punishment
they will endure rather then be altogether debarred from
this pleasure which they take in Things.
This work will be an help to Eloquence, when men by
their great acquaintance with things, might find out Si|militudes,
Metaphors, Allusions, and other graces of
discourse in abundance.
To Arithmeticians and Geometricians, supplying them
with Matter whereupon to exercise those most excellent
Sciences, Which some having with much paines once lear|ned,
do for want hereof forget againe, or unprofitably
apply about resolving needlesse Questions, and making of
new difficulties. The number of mixt Mathematicall Arts
would hereby be encreased.
For we see that Opticks are made up of pure Mathema|ticks,
the Anatomy of the eye, and some Physicall Princi|ples
concerning the Nature of light and Vision, with some
Experiments of convexe and concave glasses, Astronomy
is constituted againe of them, and some Caelestiall Phoe|nomena.
Enginry againe of them, and some Propositions
de Cochle ct Vecte. And so certainly as the number of
Axioms concerning severall subjects doth encrease by this
work, so the Number of (their Applications to pure Ma|thematicks,
id est,) New Mathematicall Arts, will en|crease
also.
Divines having so large a Booke of Gods works added
to that of his word, may the more cleerely from them
both, deduce the wisedome, power and goodnesse of the
Almighty.
Physicians observing the use of all Drugs and Operati|ons
in the production of Artificials, may with successe trans|ferre
them to better Vses in their Art.
And Lawyers when they plead concerning Trades and
Manufactures, would better Know what to say on such
Occasions.
A young beginner may Know by this Book how much
stock is needfull to set him up in his Trade.
Gentlemen falling sometimes Accidentally into Trades|men
and handicrafts company, would Know how to make
use of such Occurrences to advantage.





