



The Primitive Rule of Reformation. Delivered in a
SERMON
BEFORE
His MAIESTY at VVHITEHALL,
Feb. 1. 1662. IN
Vindication of Our CHVRCH. Against the
NOVELTIES of ROME. BY
Tho: Pierce, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY, and
President of Magdalen College in OXON.
Published by His Majesties special Command.
The Sixt Edition, more Correct then the London
Impressions: by the consent of the Author.
OXFORD,
Printed by H. H. for Ric. Royston Bookseller to His Sa|cred
Majesty, and Ric. Davis in Oxon. 1663.




TO THE
High and Mighty Monarch
Charles the II^d:
By the Grace of God, KING of
Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
Most Gratious and Dread Soveraign,
_THat which never had been ex|pos'd
unto a wittily-mista|king
and crooked world, but
in a dutiful submission to Your
Command; may at least for This, if
for no other reason, be justly offer'd to
Your Protection. And this is done with
a steady, though humble confidence of

success; because THE DEFENDER
OF THE FAITHIud 3. which was once
deliver'd unto the Saints, cannot pos|sibly
chuse but be so to him, who does ear|nestly
contend for the very same, be|cause
for no other Faith then That
which was from the Beginning.Matth 19. 8. If
for This I have contended with as much
earnestness from the Pulpit, as The
Romanists from the Press do contend
against it; I have not only theIude. 2, 3. Exhor|tation
and Authority of a Text, but the
Exigence of the Time to excuse me in it.
Now as the Romans in the Time of
the second Punick War, could not
think of a fitter way for the driving of
Hanibal out of Italy, then Scipio's mar|ching
with an Army out of Italy into
Afrique, giving Hanibal a Necessity
to go from Rome, for the raising of the
Siege which was laid to Carthage; So
could I not think of a fitter Course to dis|appoint
the Pontificians in their At|tempts

on Our Church, then thus by ma|king
it their Task to view the Infirmities
of their own. To which effect I was excited
to spend my self,2 Cor. 12. 15. and to be spent, (if I
may speak in the phrase of our Great Apo|stle,)
not from an arrogant Opinion of
any sufficiency in my self, (who am one
of the least among the Regular Sons of the
Church of England;) But as relying on
the sufficiency of the Cause I took in
hand,  especially on the Help of the All-sufficient,1 Cor. 1. 27.
who often loves to make use of
the weakest Instruments,2 Cor. 10. 4. to effect the
bringing down of the strongest Holds.
I suppose my Discourse, however inno|cent
in it self, will yet be likely to meet with
many, not onely learned and subtil, but
restless enemies; Men of pleasant Insi|nuations,
and very plausible Snares;
nay, such as are apt (where they have
Power) toEo san loco Haere|ses sunt, ut non tan arte  Industri, qum Alexandri gla|do, earum Gordius Nodus dissoivi posse, quas Herculis cla|v feriendae, qum Apollnis Lyr mti|gandae videantur, Stal. ton. in Epist. De|dic. operis de Iuslis. sub fiam. confute their Opponents
by Fire and Faggot. But when I consider
how well my Margin does lend Protecti|on

on to my Text, (for I reckon that my
Citations, which I could not with Pru|dence
represent out of a Pulpit, are the
usefullest part of my whole Performance,
because the Evidence and VVarrant
of all the rest;) I cannot fearfully appre|hend,
what VVit or Language (or ill
us'd Learning) can do against it, so far
forth as it is arm'd with Notoriety of
Fact in its Vindication; and hath the
published Confessions of those their
Ablest Hyperaspistae, who cannot cer|tainly
by them of their own perswasion,
with honor, or safety, be contradicted.
If they are guilty in their Writings,
it is rather their own, then their Readers
Fault; Nor is it their Readers, but
Their misfortune, if they are found So to
be by their own Concessions. Nor can
they rationally be angry at their Rea|der's
Necessity to believe them; especi|ally
when they write with so becoming a
proof of Impartiality, as that by which

they asperse and accuse Themselves. If
it finally shall appear, They areLuke 19. 22. con|demn'd
out of their mouthes, (as Go|liah's
Head was cut off by David,1 Sam. 17. 51. not
with David's, but with Goliah's own
Sword,) and that I am not so severe in
taking Notice of their Confessions, as
They have been unto Themselves in the
Printing of them, (for I cannot be said to
have revealed any secrets, by meerly
shewing before the Sun, what They
have sent into the Light,) I think, how|ever
They may have Appetite, They
cannot have Reason to complain.
I have intreated of many Subjects
within the Compass of an hour, on each of
which it would be easie to spend a year.
But I have spoken most at large of the Su|premacy
of the Pope; as well because it
is a Point wherein the Honor and Safe|ty
of Your Majesties Dominions are
most concern'd, as because it is the chief,

if not only Hinge, (I haveEtenim de qu re agitur cm de Prima|tu Pontificis agitur? brevissim dicam, de Summ rei Christianae, id enim quaeritur, de|beatne Ecclesia diuti|s consistere, an ver dissolvi, concidere. Bellarm. in Praes. ad li|bros de Rom. Pontif. Bellar|mines
assertion for what I say,) on which
does hang the whole stress of the
Papal Fabrick.
If herein, as I have obey'd, I shall
also be found to have serv'd Your Ma|jesty,
The sole Discharge of my Duty
will be abundantly my Reward; because
I am not more by Conscience and Ob|ligations
of Gratitude, then by the Vo|luntary
Bent and Inclinations of my
Soul,
Your Majesties most devo|ted
and most Dutiful
Subject and Chaplain,
THOMAS PIERCE.






MATTH. XIX. 8.
.
But from the beginning it was not so.

_THere are but very few things
either so little, or so great, whe|ther
in Art, or Nature, whether
in Politie, or Religion, which
are not willing to take advan|tage
from the meer credit of their Aniquity.
First for Art; Any part of Philosophy penn'd
by Hermes Trismegistus, any Script of Geography
bearing the name of Anaximander, any Musical
Composition sung by Amphion to his Harp, any
piece of the Mathematicks said to be writ by
Zoroastres, any Relique of Carved worke from
inspir'd Bezaleel,Exod. 35. 30, 34. or any remnant of Embroi|dery
from the Theopneust Aholiab, would at
least for the honor of being reckon'd to be the
first, be also reckon'd to be the best of any An|tiquarie's
Keimelia.

And as it is in the Things of Art, so is it
also in those of Nature. How do the Gentle|men
of Venice delight themselves in their
Antiquity? and yet they travel for their Oiginal
no farther back then the siege of Troy: where|as
the Arcadians derive their Pedigree even
from Iupiter and Calisto, and will needs have
their Nation exceed the Moon in Seniority.
Nay, though Aegypt (in the Judgment of. Diodor. Sic. lib. 1. p. 9. Di|odorus
the Siceleote) hath better pretensions
then any other, yet the Barbarians as well as
Greeks have still affected a Primogeniture. Nay
so far has this Ambition transported some, that
they will needs have been begun from before
the Protoplast, as it were itching to be as old as
the Iulian period, 764 years before the begin|ning
of the VVorld. Thus Antiquity hath been
courted in Art and Nature.
If in the third place we come to Politie, we
shall find Customs gaining Reverence from the
sole merit of their Duration. And as a Custom
by meer Continuance does wear it self into a
Law; so the more aged a Law is grown, the
less 'tis liable to a Repeal; by how much the
more it is stricken in years, by so much the less
it is decrepit: And that for this reason, be|cause
the longer it endures, the more it inclines
to its perfection; that is to say, its immorta|lity.

Last of all for Religion, the Case is clear out
of Tertullian.Tertul. adversus Mar|cion. l. 4. c. 5. Id verius quod prius, id prius quod
ab initio. That Religion was the truest, which
was the first; and that the first, which was from
the beginning. And as He against Marcion, so
Iustin Martyr against the Grecians, did prove
the Divinity of the Pentateuch from the Anti|quity
of its VVriter. The Iewes enjoy'd the first
Lawgiver. Justin. Mart. . p. 7. by the Confession of the Gentiles. Mo|ses
preached the God of Abraham, whilst Thales
Milesius was yet unborn. Nor was it a thing
to be imagin'd, that God should suffer the
Devil to have a Chappel in the world, before
himself had any Church. And thenceId teneamus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus cre|ditum est: quod ita de|mum fit, si sequamur Universalitatem, Anti|quitatem, Consensio|nem. Vinc. Lir. adv. Haer. c 3. Vin|centius
Lirinnsis, to prove the Truth of any
Doctrine, or the Lgality of a Practice, does argue
the Case from a Threefold Topick; The Universa|lity,
the Consent, and the Antiquity of a Tradition.
Which Rule if we apply unto the scope of
this Text, as it stands in relation unto the
Context, we shall have more to say for it then
for most Constitutions, divine, or humane: For That
of Mariage is almost as old as Nature. There
was no sooner one man, but God divided him
into two; And then no sooner were there
two, but he united them into one. This is
That sacred Institution which was made with
Mankind in a state of Innocence; the very
Ground and Foundation of all both sacred and

civil Government. It was by sending back
the Pharisees to the most venerable Antiquity,Matth. 5. 31, 32.
that our Lord here asserted the Law of wedlock,
against the old Custom of their Divorce. Whilst
they had made themselves drunk with their
muddy streams, He directed them to the Foun|tain,
to drink themselues into sobriety. They insi|sted
altogether on the Mosaical Dispensation; But
He endeavour'd to reform them by the most
Primitive Institution. They alledged a Custom,
bt He a Law. They a Permission, and that from
Moses; But He a Precept, and that from God.
They did reckon from afar off; But not, as He,
from the Beginning.
In that one Question of the Pharisees,Verse 7. VVhy
did Moses command us to give her a writing of
Divorce, and to put her away? they put a Fal|lacy
upon Christ, call'd Plurium Interrogationum.
For Moses onely permitted them to put her away;
but commanded the (if they did) to give her
a writing of Divorce. And accordingly their
Fallacy is detected by Christ in his Answer to
them. Moses (did not command, but meerly)
Verse 8. suffer'd you in your custom of making un|justifiable
Divorcements. , he per|mitted,
that is to say, he did not punish it; not
allowing it as good, but winking at it as the lesser
of two great evils. He suffer'd it to be safe
in foro Soli; could not secure you from the

Guilt, for which you must answer in foro Po|li.
And why did he suffer what he could not
approve? Not for the softness of your heads,
which made you ignorant of your Duties; but
for the hardness of your hearts, which made you
resolute not to do them: you were so barba|rous
and brutish upon every slight Cause, (or Oc|casion
rather,) that if you might not put her a|way,
you would use her worse. You would
many times beat, and sometimes murder, some|times
bury her alive, by bringing another into
her Bed. So that the Liberty of Divorce, how|ever
a poyson in it self, was (through the hard|ness
of your hearts) permitted to you for an An|tidote:
But from the Beginning it was not so.
And you must put a wide difference betwixt
an Indulgence of Man, and a Law of God. To
state the controversie aright, you must com|pare
the first Precept with your customary Pra|ctice;
not reckoning as far as from Moses onely,
but as far as from Adam too; you must not one|ly
look forward from the year of the Creation
2400. but backward from thence unto the
year of the Creation. The way to understand
the Husband's Duty towards the VVife, (and
so to reform, as not to innovate,) is to consider
the words of God when he made the VVife out
of the Husband. ForGen. 1. 27. Matth. 19. 4. He that made them at

the beginning made them Male and Female, and
saidGen. 2. 24. Matth. 19. 5. For this cause, shall a man leave Father,
and Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and they
twain shall be one Flesh. VVhat therefore God hath
joyn'd together, let not man put asunder. The
Antecedent Command was from God the Father;
the Command in the sequel from God the Son.
And though the Practice of the Iewes had been
contrariant to them both, by a Prescription al|most
as old as two thousand years; yet as old as
it was, 'twas but an overgrown Innovation. For
, from the beginning it was
not so.
Thus our Saviour, being sent to Reform the
Iews, made known the Rule of his Reformati|on.
And the Lesson which it affords us is (in my
poor judgment) of great Importance. For when
the Doctrine or Discipline of our Church esta|blisht
here in England shall be attempted by the
Corruptions of ModerneRomana Ecclesia se non tam matrem ex|hibet aliis qum No|vercam. Sedent in e Scribae  Pharisi, c. Johan. Sarisbu|riensis (ad Papam Hadrianum 4.) in Polycratic. l. 6. c. 24. Pharisees, who shall as|sert
against us (as these here did against our Sa|viour)
either their forreign Superstitions, (to say
no worse) or their domestick Profanations, (to,
say no more;) we cannot better deal with them,
then as our Saviour here dealt with the ancient
Pharisees; that is, we cannot better put them to
shame silence, then by demonstrating the No|velty
and base extraction of their Pretensions,

whilst we evince at the same instant the Sacred
Antiquity of our owne. When they obtrude their
Revelations, or teach for Doctrines of God the meer
commandments of Men, we must aske them every
one, how they read in the beginning. We may not
draw out of their Ditches, be the Currents never
so long, whilst we have waters of our own of a
nobler Taste, which we can easily trace back to
the crystal spring.
And first of all it concernes us to marke the
Emphasis, which our Ancient of dayes thought
fit to put on the Beginning, that no inferior An|tiquity
may be in danger to deceive us. For
there is hardly any Heresie or Usurpation in the
Church, which may not truly pretend to some
great Antiquity, though not so old as the Old
man, much lesse as the Old Serpent.Epiph. Haer. 75. p 904. Tom. 1. Ed. Ptav. The
Disciplinarians may fetch theirs from as far as
the Heretick rius; who wanting merit to
advance him from a Presbyter to a Bishop,
wanted not arrogance and envy to lessen the
Bishop into a Presbyter. But His Antiquity
is a Iunior, as well to that of the Anabaptists,
as to that of the Socinians. For theAugust. contra Donat. Tom. 7. lib. 2. p. 396. Edit. Basil. Ana|baptists
may boast they are as old as Agrippinus,
and theEpiph. Haer. 62. p. 513. Socinians as Sabellius. TheAugust. Tom. 6. Haer. 54. p. 25. Soli|fidians
and Antinomians are come as far as from
Eunomius. TheIren. lib. 1. c. 24. p 79. Excus. 1570. Ranters from Carpocrates.
TheEuseb. l. 3. c. 33. p. 80. Colon. Allobr|gum 1612. Millenaries from Papias. The Irre|spective

Iren. l. 1. c. 10. pag. 48, c. Epiph. Haer. 66. pag. 617. Reprobatarians from Simon Magus
and the Manichees. The Pontificians (like the
Mahumetans) have such a Rhapsody of Religion, a
Religion so compounded of several Errors and Cor|ruptions,
(which yet are blended with many
Doctrines most sound and Orthodox,) that to find
out the age of their severall Ingredients, it will
be necessary to rake into several times too.
THe great Palladium of the Conclave, the
famous point of Infallibility (which if you
take away from them, down goes their Troy,
it being absolutely impossible that the learned
Members of such a Church should glibly wal|low
so many Errors, unless by swallowing
this first, That she cannot erre;) I say, the point of
Infallibility (which is a very old Article of their
very new Creed, a Creed not perfected by its
Composers until the Council at Trent,) we can|not
better derive then from the Scholars ofIren. Advers. Hae|ret. l. 1. c. 9. p. 44. c.
Marcus in renaeus, or from the Gnosticks in
, Epiph. Tom. 1 l. 1. Haer. 26. p. 9  Idem. ibid. Haer. 27.  102. Epiphanius. They had their Purgatory
fromNote, That Bellar|mine having boasted, (Lib. 1. de Pargatoria, cap. 15.) That all the Aties, both Greek and Latine, from the very time of the Apostles, did constantly affirm the doctrine of Purgatory, could
not give an older instance, then in Origen and Tertullian, (Ibid. cap. 2.  7.  10.) but by recourse unto the Heathen. (Ibid. cap. 11.) Origen, (one of the best indeed in one
kind, but in another one of the worst of our
antient Writers, not onely an Heretick, but
an Haeresiarcha,) or at the farthest from
Tertullian, who had it from no better Au|thour

then theHoc etiam Para|cletus (i e. Montanus) frequentissim com|mendavit, c. Tert. de Anim, cap. ult.
See Bellarmine con|tradicted by the Ro|manists themselves, E. G. Roffens. contr. Lutherum, Art. 18. Polydor. Virg. Inv. Rer. lib. 8. c. 1. p. 84. Edit. Basil. 1521. Suarez in Aquin. par. 3. q. 59. art. 6. sect. 1. p. 1159.
Thomas ex Albiis East-Saxonum de Me. dio Animarum statu, per totum libr. specia|tim Demens. 9 p. 369, 370, 371. Arch-Heretick Montanus.
Nor does Bellarmine mend the matter, by de|riving
it as far as from Virgil's Aeneid, and
from Tully in his Tale of the Dream of Scipio,
and farther yet from Plato's Gorgias; unless
he thinks that an Heathen is any whit fitter
then an Heretick, to give Advantage to a
point of the Roman Faith. Their Denial of
Marriage to all that enter into the Priesthood,
is dated by themselves but from PopeLiquet item, in ori|entali  occidentali Ecclesi, usqu ad tem|pus prohibitionis  Ca|lixto factae, Sacerdotum conjugia licita suisse. Maximil. 2, apud Thu. an. l. 36. p. 305, 306. Ca|lixtus.
TheirAne Lateranense Coacilium Transub|staatiatio non suit dog|ma Fidei. Scot. in 4. Sent. Dist. 11. q. 3. Transubstantiation is from
the Lateran Council. TheirNgare non possu|mus, etiam in cclesi Latid suisse usum u. trisqspciei,  us|que ad tempora S. Tho|mae durasse. Vasq. in 3. Disput. 216. c. 3. n. 38. Half-Commu|nion
is no older then since the times of Aqui|nas;
unless they will own it from the Mani|chees,
to give it the credit of more Antiquity.
Their publick praying before the people in
an unknown Tongue, may be fetcht indeed as
far as from Gregory the Great. Their Invoca|tion
of Saints departed is no doubt an aged Er|ror,
though not so aged as they would have it
for the gaining of honour to the Invention; be|cause
St. Austin doesSuo loco  or|dine Homines Dei no|minantur, non tamen  Sacerdote qui sacrificat invocantur August. de Civitate Dei lib. 22. cap. 10. pag. 1155. deny it to have been in
his days. And (not to be endless in the begin|ning
of such a limited Discourse, as must not
presume to exceed an hour; though in so
fruitfull a field of matter, 'tis very difficult not to

be endlesse;)Pho as iratus Cy|riaco Episcopo Constan|tinopolitano, adjudica|vit Titulum Oecu|menici Pontifici Ro|mano soli. Baronius ad A. C. 606. The Vniversall Superintendency
or Supremacy of the Pope hath been a visible
usurpation ever since Boniface the Third. And
so our Adversaries of Rome have more to plead
for Their Errours then all the rest, because the
rest were but as Mushroms in their severall
times, soon starting up, and as soon cut down;
whereas the Errours of Rome do enjoy the
pretence of Duration too.
But touching each of those Errours, (I mean
the Errors of their Practice, as well as Iudg|ment,)
we can say with our Saviour in his pre|sent
Correption of the Pharisees, (whose Er|ror
was older and more authentick, that is, by
Moses his permission had more appearance of
Authority, and more to be pleaded in its ex|cuse,
then those we find in the Church of
Rome,) that fron the beginning it was not so; and
we care not whence they come, unlesse they
come from the Beginning.
Indeed in matters of meer Indifference which
are brought into the Government or outward
Discipline of the Church, every Church has the
Liberty to make her own Constitutions, not
asking leave of her Sisters, much less her
Children; onely they must not be reputed as
things without which there is no Salvation, nor
be obtruded upon the People amongst the
Articles of their Faith. We are to look upon

nothing so, but as it comes to us from the Be|ginning.
And this has ever been the Rule (I mean
the warrantable Rule) whereby to improve or
reform a Church. When Esdras was intent
on the re-building of the Temple, he sent not to
Ephesus, much lesse to Rome; he did not imi|tate
Diana's Temple, nor enquire into the
Rituals of Numa Pompilius; but had recourse
for a Temple, to that of Solomon, and for a
Ritual, to that of Moses, as having both been
prescribed by God himself. And yet we know
the Prophet Haggai made the people steep their
Ioy in a showre of Tears, by representing how
much the Copy had faln short of the Original.
The holy Prophets in the Old Testament,
shewing the way to a Reformation, advis'd the
Princes and the People to aske after the old
paths, and walk therein, as being the onely good
way for the finding of rest unto their souls, Jer.
6. 16. The Prophet Isaiah sought to regulate
what was amisse amongst the Iewes, by bid|ding
them have recourse unto the Law and the
Testimony: should not a people eek unto their God?
If any speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 19 20. And ac|cordingly
their Kings, who took a care to re|form
abuses, are in this solemn style commen|ded
for it, That they walked in the ways of their

Father David; that is, reform'd what was a|misse
by what had been from the Beginning.
So St. Paul in the New Testament, setting
right what was crooked about the Supper of the
Lord in the Church of Corinth, laid his line to
that Rule which he was sure he had receiv'd
from the Lord Himselfe, 1 Cor. 11. 23. And
thus our Saviour in my Text, finding the
Pharisees very fond of a vicious practice, which
supported it self by an old Tradition, and had
something of Moses to give it countenance in the
world, (though indeed no more then a bare
permission,) could not think of a better way to
make them sensible of their Error, (and such an
Error as was their Sin too,) then by shewing
them the great and important difference be|twixt
an old, and a primitive Custome; and
that however their breach of Wedlock had been
without check from the days of yore, yet 'twas
for this to be reform'd, that 'twas not so from the
Beginning.
In a most dutifull Conformity to which
example, our Reformers here in England
(of happy memory) having discover'd in
every part of the Church of Rome, not
onely horrible Corruptions in point of Pra|ctice,
but hideous Errors in point of Doctrine,
and that in matters of Faith too, (as I shall
find an occasion to shew anon;) and ha|ving

found by what degrees the severall Errors
and Corruptions were slily brought into the
Church, as well as the several times and seasons
wherein the Novelties received their birth and
breeding; and presently after taking notice,
that in the Council of Trent the Roman Par|tisans
were not afraid to makeVide Concil. Tri|dent. Sess. 13. Can. 2, 3. Sess. 21. Can. 1, 2, 3. Sess. 22. Can. 3, 5, 6, 8, 9 Sess. 23. Can. 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9. Sess. 25. c. quam conser cum Bull Pii Quarti. Edit. Bin. p. 444. Tom. 9. New Ar|ticles
of Faith, whilst the Sacrifice of the Mass,
the Doctrine of Purgatory, the Invocation of
Saints, the Worship of Images, and the like,
were commanded to be embraced under pain of
damnation, (as it were in contempt of the Apo|stle's
denuntiation, Gal. 1. 8. by which that
practice of those Conspirators made them lia|able
to a curse;) and farther yet, that in the
Canon of the Fourth Session of that Council, the
Roman Church was made to differ as well
from her ancient and purer self, as from all other
Churches besides her self, in that there were
many meerly humane (I do not say profane)
VVritings, and many unwritten Traditions also,
not only decreed to be ofNec non ipsas Tra|ditiones, um ad fidem tum ad mores pertinen|tes, tanquam vel  Spi|ritu Sancto diciatas, pari pictatis affectu ac reverenti suscipit ac veneratur (haec Sancta Synodus.) Trident. Conc. Sess. 4. sub. Pau|lo 3. Bin. Tom. 9. p. 354. equal Authority with
the Scriptures, but with the addition of an
Siquis libros ipsos integros,pro sacris  Canonicis non susce|p. rit,  Traditiones praedictas sciens con|tempserit, Anathema sit. ibid. Anathema to all that should not so receive
them: This (I say) being consider'd aud laid
to heart by our Reformers, (by our Kings, and
our Clergy, and Laiety too, met together in
their greatest both Ecclesiastical and Civil Coun|cils,)
they did not consult with flesh and bloud,

or expect the Court of Rome should become
their Physician, which was indeed their great
Disease; but having recourse unto the Scri|ptures
and Primitive Fathers of the Church, they
consulted those Oracles how things stood from
the Beginning: And onely separating from Them,
whom they found to have been Separatists
from the primitive Church, they therefore made
a Secession, that they might not partake of the
Romane Schisme. And whilst they made a Se|cession
for fear of Schism; (which by no other
practice could be avoided,) they studiously
kept to the Golden mean; neither destroying
the Body out of hatred to the Ulcers with
which 'twas spred, nor yet retaining any Ulcer
in a passionate dotage upon the Body.
One remarkable Infirmity it is obvious to
observe in the Popish Writers: they ever com|plaine
we have left their Church; but never
shew us that Iota, as to which we have left the
Word of God, or the Apostles, or the yet uncor|rupted
and primitive Church, or the Four first
Generall Councils. We are so zealous for Anti|quity,
(provided it be but antique enough,) that
we never have despised a meer Tradition, which
we could track by sure footsteps from as far as
the times of the purest Christians. But this is
still their childish fallacy, (be it spoken to the
shame of their greatest Giants in Dispute, who

still vouchsafe to be guilty of it,) that they con|fidently
shut up the Church in Rome, as their
Seniors the Donatists once did in Africk; and
please to call it the Catholick Church, not for|mally,
but causally, (saith Cardinal Peron,) be|cause
forsooth that particular doth infuse uni|versality
into all other Churches besides it
self: The learned Cardinal forgetting, (which
is often the effect of his very good memory,)
that the preaching of Christ was to begin at
, c. Theod. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 9. Concil. Constantinop. apud Baronium ad A. D. 382. suffragatur. Ierusalem. So it was in the Prophesie, (Isa. 2.
3. Mic. 4. 2.) and so in the completion, (Luke
24. 47.) Nor was it Rome, but Antioch, in
which the Disciples were first call'd Christians,
(Act. 11. 26.) At, apud Chrysost. ad Po|pulum Antiochen. Hom. 3. Antioch therefore there
was a Church, before St. Peter went thence to
Rome. Nay 'tis expresly affirm'd byTempore, ut scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris alsque ullo impedimen. toradios suos pri|mum indulget, id est prcepta sua, Christus Gldas in Epist. de Excid. Brit. Sect. 6. Gildas,
(an Author very much revered by the Roma|nists
themselves,) that Christianity was in Bri|tain
in the latter time of Tiberius Caesar; some
while after whose death, 'tis known that
St. Peter remain'd in Iewry. So that Rome
which pretends to be a Mother, can be no more
at the best then a Sister-Church, and not the el|dest
Sister neither.
Neglecting therefore the pretended Uni|versality
of the Roman (that is to say, of a par|ticular)
Church; let us compare her Innova|tions
with what we find from the Beginning.

For this I take to be the fittest and the most pro|fitable
Use, that we can make of the subject we
have in hand.
And first, consider we the Supremacy or
Universall Pastorship of her Popes: which is in|deed
a very old, and somewhat a prosperous
Vsurpation; an Usurpation which took its rise
from more then a thousand years ago. But
then, besides that it was sold by the Emperour
De Phoc coelis est dictum, , c. Cedre|nus, p. 334. Phocas, at once an. Idem. p. 332. Heretick and a Regi|cide,
the Devillish Murderer of Mauritius,
(who was the , the Royall Image or
Type of our late Royall Martyr of Sacred Me|mory;)
I say, besides that it was sold by the
most execrable Phocas, that is to say, by the
greatest Villain in the world, excepting Cromwell
and Pontius Pilate; and besides that it was
sold to ambitious Boniface the Third, whose
vile compliance with that Phocas was the bribe
or price with which he bought it: and besides
that it was done, not out of reverence to the
Pope, but inPhocas iratus Cy|riaco, Episcopo Con|stantinopolitano ad|judicavit Titulum Oecumenici Pontifici Romano. Baron. Annal. ad A. Ch. 606. displeasure to Cyriacus of Con|stantinople,
who (from IohnJohannes Constan|tinopolitanus sese hinc efferens, se ubique Oe|cumenicum Patriar|cham nominavit. Idem ad A. C. 595. his Predeces|sor)
usurpt the Title of Vniversall before
any Pope had pretended to it: I say, besides, or
without all this, it is sufficient for us to say,
what our Saviour here said to the ancient Pha|risees,
That from the beginning it was not so. For
looking back to the Beginning, we find The

Wall of God's City had Twelve Foundations, and in
them were the names of the Twelve Apostles of the
Lamb. (Rev. 21. 14) Paul was equal at least
to Peter, when he withstood him to the face, and
rebuked him in publick for his Dissimulation.
(Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14) Nay S^t. Peter himself, (as
well as Iames and Iohn, who were his Peers,)
although he seemed to be a Pillar, yet perceiving the
Grace that was given to Paul, gave to Barnabas
and Paul the right hand of Fellowship (Gal. 2. 9.)
And reason good: For S. Peter was but one of
the many Apostles of the Iewes; whereas S^t. Paul
was much more, the great Apostle of the Gen|tiles,
to whom the Iewes were no more then
as a River to an Ocean. Saint Peter was com|manded
not to fleece, but toJohn 21. 15, 16, 17. feed the flock:
Nor was it ever once known that he did
lord it over God's heritage, which himself had
so strictly forbid to others, 1 Pet. 5. 3. In|deed
a primacy of Order may very easily be
allow'd to the See of Rome: But for any one
Bishop to affect over his Brethren a suprema|cy
of Power and Iurisdiction, is a most impu|dent
opposition both to the Letter and the Sense
of our Saviour's precept, (Mark 10. 42, 43,
44.) Ye know, that they who are accounted to
rule over the Gentiles, exercise lordship over them,
and their greatons exercise authority upon them.
But so shall it not be among you: But whosoever will

be great among you, shall be your Minister; and
whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be the
servant of all.
That the Apostles were every one of equal
power and authority, is the positive saying of
Cyprianus ait pari omnes inter se susse potestate Apostolos; atque hoc idem suisse alios quod Petrus fu|it. Tractat. 3. de Smplicitate Praela|torum, (Edit, Co|lon. 1544.) p. 135. St. Cyprian, Pari consortio praediti  honoris
 potestatis. And St. Ierome is as expresse,
ThatSi Autoritas quae|ritur, Orbis major est Urbe, ubicunque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexan|driae, sive Tanii, e|jusdem Meriti, cjus|dem est  Sacerdotii. Potentia Divitiarum  Paupertatis Humi|litas vel subsimiorem vl inserioem Episco|pum non facit. Cae|term omnes Aposto|lorum successores sunt. Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagrium, (ex Edit. Basil. 156,.) p. 329. ive ex Edit. Paris. 1533 Tom 2. p. 117. all Bishops, in all places, whether at
Rome, or at Eugubium, at Constantinople,
or at Rhegium, are of the very same merit, as
to the quality of their Office; how much soever
they may differ in point of Revenue or of En|dowments.
Nay, by the Canons of the Two first
General Councils, (Nice, and Constantinople,)
every. Concil. Nicae. Can. 6. . Ibid. Can. 7.  quae Antioche Ecclesiae servari his Canonibus praecipiutur,  pertinent, (inquit Justellus) ut Episcopus Antio|chenus praeferatur Metrolitanis omnibus in Orientali Dioecesi. Nihil Juris illi attributum in Caetero Metropolitanos, praeter Honorem Ordinis, non autem ut Metropolitani omnes Doecesos Orientis b o jure singulari ordinarentur, ut Innocentii primi Episola ad Alexandr. Episcopum asserere videtur, contra mentem Synodi Nicaenae. Justell. p. 7. ex Edit. Gulielmi Voelli, A. D. 1661. Patriarch and Bishop is appointed to
be chief in his proper Diocese; as the Bishop of
Rome is the chief in His: And a strict, c. Con|cil. Constantinop. Oecumen. 2. Can. 2. Quid hic Canon sibi velit per [] Justellus explicat paul superis ad Can. Conc. Nic. 6. nihil Juris nimirum Antiocheno attribuendum in caeteros Metropolitanos, praeter Ordinem Honoris. In|junction is laid on all, (the Bishop of Rome not

excepted,) that they presume not to meddle in
any Diocese but their own. And the chief
Primacies of Order were granted to Rome and
to Constantinople, not for their having been the
Sees of such or such an Apostle,Confer Iustinian. Novel. Constit. 131. cap. 2. cum Canone 3. Concilii Constant. but for
being the two Seats of the two great Empires.
Witness the famous Canon of the Generall Coun|cil
at Chalcedon,Et paul post , c Concil. Chal|ced. Can. penult. decreeing to the Bishop of
Constantinople an equality of Priviledges with the
Bishop of Rome; not for any other reason,
then its having the good hap to be one of the
two Imperial Cities. Nay, no longer ago before
Boniface the Third, (who was the first Bishop
of Rome that usurpt the Title of Universal,)
I say, no longer before Him then his next
immediate Predecessor Pope Gregory the Great,
(for I reckon Sabinian was but a Cypher,)
the horrible Pride of succeeding Popes was
stigmatiz'd by a Prolepsis; by way (not of
Prophecy, but) of Anticipation. ForQuis est isle qui contra Statuta Evan|gelica, contra Cano|num Decreta, novum sibi usurpare nomen proesumit?Novis  profanis vocabulis gloriaatur.
Absi  cordibus Christianorum nomen illud Blasphemiae. Greg. Mag. Epist. 32. ad Mauritium Augustum. Gregory
writing to Mauritius the then reigning Em|perour
(and that in very many Epistles,)
touching the name of Universal, which the
Bishop of Constantinople had vainly taken unto
himself, calls it a wicked and profane and blas|phemous
Title; a Title importing, that theSed in hac ejus superbi quid aliud nis propinqua jam Antichristi esse tempora designatur? Idem ad eundem in Epist. 34. times
of Antichrist were at hand; (little thinking that

Pope Boniface would presently after his de|cease
usurp the same, and prove the Pope to
be Antichrist by the Confession of a Pope.) He
farther disputed against the Title by an Ar|gument
leading ad absurdum;Si illud nomen in Ecclesi sibi quisquam arripuit, quod apud honorum omnium ju|dicium fuit, Universa ergo Ecclesia (quod absit)  statu suo cor|ruit, quando s qui appellatur Universalis cadit. Idem. ad Eund. Epist 32.
Universalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pon|tifex appelletur, fa|tente Pap Pelagio fecundo, apud Gra|tian Decretal. p. 1. dist. 99. cap. 4.
Quis aute illud pro indignitate rei stupe|at, qud novam quan|dam indebitamque Potentiam tibi usur|pando arrogas, c? Ita Papam allo uuntur Episcopi Germa|nici apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p 47. That if any one
Bishop were Universal, there would by con|sequence
be a failing of the Universal Church,
upon the failing of such a Bishop. An Argu|ment;
ad homines, not easily to be answer'd,
whatsoever Infirmity it may labour with in
it selfe. And such an Argument is That, which
we bring against the Pope's pretended Head|ship.
For if the Pope is the Head of the Ca|tholick
Church, then the Catholick Church must
be the Body of the Pope; because the Head and
the Body are the Relative and Correlative; and
being such, they are convertible in obliquo: And
then it follows unavoidably, That when
there is no Pope at all, (which is very often,)
the Catholick Church hath then no Head; and
when there are many Popes at once, (which
hath been sometimes the case,) then the Ca|tholick
Church must have at once many Heads;
and when the Pope is Heretical, (as by the
confession of the Papists he now and then is,)
the Catholick Church hath such a Head as makes
her deserve to be beheaded.Multi Pontifices Romani errarunt; si|cut Marcellinus, qui Idolis sacrificavit; et Liberius Papa, qui Arianis consensit;  Anastasius secundus propter Haeresis Cri|men repudiatus suit ab Ecclesi:  alii etiam plurimi contra Catholicam fidem te|nuerun; ut Joannes vigesimus secundus, qui asseruit, qud filius Dei sit Major Patre  Spiritu Sancto. Didacus Stella in Luc. cap. 22. vers. 31. p. 280. col. 1. Edit. Antverp. A. D. 1593. Ad Inquisitionis Hispaniae decreta rorsus elimatus, et summ fide repurgatus. That Popes have

been Hereticks and Heathens too, not only by
denying the Godhead of the Son, and by lifting
him up above the other two Persons, but even
by sacrificing to Idols, and a totall Apostacy from
the Faith, is (a thing so clear in the wri|tings
of Platina and Onuphrius, that 'tis)
the Confession of the most zealous and
partial Asserters of their Supremacy. I know
that Stella, and those of the Spanish Inqui|sition,
do at once confesse this, and yet ad|here
to their Position,Ubi supr, verbis immediate subsequenti|bus. That (with his
Colledge of Cardinals) the Pope cannot erre,
and is the Head of the Church. But St. Hilary of
Poictiers was so offended at Pope Liberius his
espousing the Arian Heresie, that he affirm'd
the true Church to have been then onely in
France.Hilar. Pictav. de Synodis, p 287.  paul postQui|dam ex vobis firmissi|m fidei constanti intra communionem se meam continentes, se  caeteris extra Galli|as abstinuerunt. Idem. ib. 288. Ex eo inter nos tantm Communio Do|minica
continetur. So ill success have they met
withal, who have been Flatterers of the Pope
or the Court of Rome.
To conclude this first Instance in the fewest
words that I can use: Whosoever shall read
at large (what I have time onely to hint) the
many Liberties and Exemptions of the Gallican
Church, and the published Confessions of Po|pish
writers, for more then a thousand years to|gether,
touching the Papal Usurpations, and
Right of Kings, put together by Goldastus in
three great Volumes; he will not be able to

deny, (let his present perswasion be what it
will,) that the Supremacy of the Pope is but a
Prosperous Vsurpation, and hath this lying a|gainst
it, that 'twas not so from the beginning.
Secondly 'Tis true that for severall Ages,
the Church of Rome hath pretended to be infal|lible;
as well incapable of error, as not erroneous.
But from the beginning it was not so. For, (be|sides
that Infallibility is one of God's peculiar
and incommunicable Attributes,) where there is
not Omniscience, there must be Ignorance in prt;
and where Ignorance is, there may be Error.
That Heresie is Error in point of Faith, and that
Novatianism is Heresie, all sides agree: And 'tis
agreed by the Champions of the Papacy it selfe,
(such asBaron. Tom. 2. An. 254. pag. 498, 499.  seq. Baronius,Pamel. in Cyprian. Epist. 41.  73. Pamelius, andPetav. in Epiphan. ad Haeres. 59 quae est Novatianorum, pag. 226. Peta|vius,)
that Rome it self was the Nest in which
Novatianism was hatcht; and not onely so, but
that there it continued fromOnuph. in Notis ad Plat. in vt Cor|nelii. pag. 29. Col. 2. Vide Euseb. l. 6.  7. Cornelius to Cae|lestine,
which wants not much of two hun|dred
years. To passe by the Heresies of the Do|natists
and the Arians, (which strangely
prosper'd for a time, and spread themselves
over the world, the former over the VVest,
the later over the East, and as far as the Breast
of the Pope himself;) one would have thought
that the Tenet of Infallibility upon Earth had
been sufficiently prevented by the HeresieVide Bellar. Chro|nolog. ad . C. 132.  Euseb. Hst. Ec|cles. l. 3. c 39. of
the Chiliasts, wherewith the Primitive

Church her self (I mean the very Fathers of
the Primitive Church, for the two first Cen|turies
after Christ,) was not onely deceiv'd
by Papias, who was a Disciple of St. Iohn,
but (for ought I yet learn) without the
least Contradiction afforded to it. Nay the
whole Church of God (in the opinion of St.Non potest pro|bai um [i. e. Augu|stinum] existimasse hc de Eucharisti non agi, cum tam multis locis aliis probet ex hoc Johannis Testi|monio, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus esse Necessariam; idque non ut opinionem su|am sed ut Fidei  Totius Ecclesiae Dog|ma: ad resllendos Pelagianos dicat:  paul postMissam facio Augustini Innocentii primi sen|tentiam, quae sexcen|tos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesi, Eu|charistiam etiam In|fantibus necessariam. Res jam ab Ecclesi,  Mulorum seculorum usu,  Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata est, non som necessariam illis non esse, sed ne decere quidm dari. (Sess. 21 c.  Can 4.) Maldonat. (Excus. Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p. 717, 718, 719. Au|stin
and Pope Innocent the third,) and for six hun|dred
years together, (ifNon potest pro|bai um [i. e. Augu|stinum] existimasse hc de Eucharisti non agi, cum tam multis locis aliis probet ex hoc Johannis Testi|monio, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus esse Necessariam; idque non ut opinionem su|am sed ut Fidei  Totius Ecclesiae Dog|ma: ad resllendos Pelagianos dicat:  paul postMissam facio Augustini Innocentii primi sen|tentiam, quae sexcen|tos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesi, Eu|charistiam etiam In|fantibus necessariam. Res jam ab Ecclesi,  Mulorum seculorum usu,  Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata est, non som necessariam illis non esse, sed ne decere quidm dari. (Sess. 21 c.  Can 4.) Maldonat. (Excus. Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p. 717, 718, 719. Maldonate the Iesuit
may be believ'd) thought the Sacrament of Eu|charist
to have been necessary to Infants, as well
as to men of the ripest Age: and yet (as Maldo|nate
confesseth at the very same time,) it was so
plain and so grosse an Error, that notwithstand|ing
St. Austin did endeavour to confute the Pe|lagians
by it, as by a Doctrin of Faith, and of
the whole Church of God; yet the Council of
Trent was of a contrary mind, and did accor|dingly
in a Canon declare against it.
3. Pass we on to the Doctrine of Tran|substantiation,
which (if its Age may be mea|sur'd
by the very first date of its Definition,) may
be allow'd to be as old as the LateranCujus corpus  sanguis in Sacramento altaris sub speciebus Pnis  Vini veraci|ter continentur, tran|substantiatis Pane in Corpus,  Vino in sanguinem, potestate divin. Conc. Later. c. 1. In Synaxi ser Transubstantiationem definivit Eccle|sia. Diu sais erat credere, sive sub Pane consecrato, sive quocunque modo adesse verum Corpus Christi. Erasm. Annot. in 1. Cor. 7. Saltem ab annis 500 dogma Transubstantiationis sub Anathemate stabili|tum, ut ait ipse Bellarminus de Eucharist. l. 3. c. 21. Cujus etiam confessionem videre est, l. 3. c. 23. Council,

a Council held under Pope Innocent the
Third; since whom are somewhat more
then 400 years: But from the beginning it was
not so. For besides that our Saviour, just
as soon as he had said, This is my Blood, ex|plain'd
himself in the same Breath, by calling
it expresly the fruit of the Vine, and such as He
would drink new in the Kingdom of God, (Mat. 26.
29. Mark 14. 15.) there needs no more to
make the Romanists even asham'd of that Do|ctrine,
then the Concession of Aquinas, and Bel|larmine's
Inference thereupon.Corpus Christi non est co modo in oc Sa|cramento sicut Corpus in loco, quod suis Dimensionibus loco commensuratur; sed quodam special modo, qui est proprius huic Sacramento. Unde dicimus, qud Corpus Christi est in diversis altaribus, non sicut in diversis locis, sed si|cut in Sacramento. Nullo enim odo Cor|pus Christi est in hoc Sacramento localiter, quia si sset, dividere|tur  scipso. Aquin. Oper. Tom. 12. Sm. part. 3. q. 75. art. 1. ad 3. p. 23 2. col. 2. et q. 76. art. 3 et 5. ex. Edit. Antwerp. 1612. Aquinas so ar|gues,
as to imply it is Impossible, and im|ports
a Contradiction, for one body to be locally in
more places then one, and in all at once. But
Si non posset esse u|num Corpus localter in duobus locis, quia diideretur  eipso, profect nec esse posset Sacramentaliter edem ratione. Bellar. de Eucharisti, lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 511. Tom. 3, Controvers ex Edit. Paris. A. C. 1620. Bellarmine (at this) is so very angry, that
in a kind of Revenge upon Aquinas, (though
held to be the Anglical Doctor,) he needs will
infr 'tis as Impossible, and equally implies a
Contradiction, for any one body at once to be
so much as Sacramentally in more Places then
one. And therefore it cannot now be won|der'd
concerning Transubstantiation, if so long
ago as in the time of Pope Nicolas the Second,
either the Novelty was not forg'd and hammer'd
out into the shape in which we find it, or not
at all understood by the Pope Himself. For one

of the two is very clear by the famousCoactus es Beren|garius public profie|ri, Panem  Vinum, quae in altari ponun|tur, post consecrationem non solm Sacramen|tum, sed etiam verum Corpus  Sangui|nem Domini nostri Jesu Christi esse:  sensualiter non solm Sacramento, sed in ve|ritate manibus sacer|dotum tractari, frangi,  fidelium dentibus atteri, Confer Floria|cens. Histor. fragmenta  P. Pichaeo edit. inter Franc. Script. (Excus. Francof. A. C. 1596.) p. 86. cum Lanfranc. lib. cont. Berengar.  Guitmund. de Sacram. l. 1.  Alger. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 19. Sub|mission
of Berengarius, wherewith he satisfied
theSigon. de Regno Ital. l. 9. A. 1509. Synod then held at Rome, (and in which
were 113. Bishops,) though not at all unto a
Trans, but rather a Consubstantiation. Which
diversNisi san intelligas verba Berengarii, in majorem incides Haeresin, qum ipse habuit:  ideo omnia referas ad species ipsas, nam de Christi Corpore partes non facimus. Johan. Semeca Glossator in Gratian. de Consecrat. Dist. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius. Romanists themselves have not been
able not to Censure, though it was pen'd by a
A Car|dinale, scil. Humbereto Sylvae Candidae Episcopo. Guitmundus ubi supra. Cardinal, and approved of by a Council, and
very glibly swallow'd down by the Pope himself.
4. 'Tis very true that their withholding the
Cup of blessing in the Lord's Supper from the se|cular
part of their Communicants, hath been in
practice little less then 400 years. But from the
beginning it was not so. For in our Saviour's Insti|tution
we find it intended forConcil. Constant. Can. 13. p. 88. In Ecclesi Latin 1000. amplius annis tenit, ut tam Populo quam Clero in celebratione Massarum post mysteri|orum consecrationem scorsum Corpus  se|orsum Sanguis Domiai praeberetur. Cassan. Consult. 22. Vas. cap. 3. Disp. 216. c. 3. n 38. Secundum antiquam Ecclesie cosufudinem, omnes sicut communicabant Corpori, it a communi|cabant  Sanguini, qod etiam adhc in quibusdam Ecclesis servat. Aquinas in Comment. in Joh. 6. every Guest.
 is the word, Drink ye all of this Cup.
(Mat. 26. 27.) And S. Paul to the Corinthians
(consisting most of Lay-men) speaks as well of
their drinking the mystical blood, as of their ating
the Body of Christ. ( Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28, 29.) Nay
'tis confest by learned Vasquez (as well as by

Cassander, and Aquinas Himself, to be a Truth
undeniable, That the giving of both Elements in the
Roman Church it self, until the time of Aquinas,
did still continue to be in use.
5. The Church of Rome for several Ages
hath restrain'd the Holy Scriptures from the
perusal of the People. But from the beginning
it was not so. For Hebrew to the Iews was
the Mother-Tongue, and in that 'twas read
weekly before the People. It pleased God
the New Testament should be first writen in
Greek, because a Tongue the most known to
the Eastern world. And to the end that this
Candle might not be hid under a Bushel, it was
translated by St. Ierome into theSixt. Senens. Bib|liothec. l. 4. Ipse Hieron. in Epist. ad Sophron. Tom. 3. Dalmatick
Tongue, by Bishop Vulphilas into theSocrat. Hist Eccles. lib. 4. c. 17. Niceph. Hist. Eccles. l. b. 11. c. 48. Bonav. Vulcan. in Praefat. d Liturg.  lingu Getarum. Go|thick,
by St. Chrysostom intoRoccha in Biblio. thec Vatican. p. 155, 157. Armenian, by
Athelstan into Saxon, byAventin. Annal. lib. 4. Methodius into Scla|vonian,
by Iacobus de Voragine intoSixt. Senens. Bibl.  4. Italian,
by Bede and VViclf intoVide Authores citat. apd Brerew. Inqu. c. 26. p. 192. English. And not
to speake of the Syriack, Aethiopick, Arabick,
Persian, and Chaldee Versions, (which were all
for the use of the common people of those Coun|tries,)
theConfer. Blond. Ital. Illustrata, in Marchia Trivisana,  Tinto de la Nobilt di Verona, lib. 2. cap. 2. cum Hieronymi Temporibus apud Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. p. 104. Vulgar Latine was then the Vulgar
Language of the Italians, when the Old and New
Testament were turn'd into it.

6. The publique Prayers of the Romanists
have been a very long time in an unknown
Tongue, (I mean unknown to the common People,)
even as long as from the times of Pope Gregory
the Great. But from the beginning it was not so.
For 'tis as scandalously opposite to the plain
sense of Scripture, as if it were done in a meer
despight to the 14^t^h Chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, especially from the 13. to the 17.
ver. Not to speak of what is said by the. Origen. contra Celsum (ex Edit. Hoschelii, Au|gusae Vindelicorum, 1605. lib. 8. p. 414. Pri|mitive
Writers:Cum Aquinate  Ly confer Cajeta|num in 1 Cor. 14. sententiae nostrae suf|fragantem. Aquinas and Lyra do both con|fess
upon the place, That the common Service of
the Church in the Primitive times, was in the
common language too. And as the Christians of
Angelus Roccha in Bibl. Vatic. p. 157. Dalmatia,Biblioth. Vet. Patrum, Tom 6. p. 55. Habassia,Bellonius in Observ. l. 3. c. 12.  Vitriacus in Hst. Orient. cap. 79. Brocadus non ullibi in su Descriptione Terrae Sanctae. Armenia,Posevnus de Reb. Mose p 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c 12. Muscovia,Bapt. Pa|lat. de rat. Scrib. Ang. Roccha Bblioth. Vatic p. 162. Scla|vonia,
Posevnus de Reb. Mose p 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c 12. Russia, and all the Reformed parts of
Christendom, have the Service of God in
their vulgar Tongues, so hath it been in divers
Places byAventin. Annal. 1. 4. Aeneas Sylvius in Hist. Bohem. cap. 1 . Concil Bin. Tem. 3. . 90. Vide eiam Decret. l. 1. Tit. 31. cap. 14. et quicquid Authorum videre est in . laq. c. 26. Approbation first had from the Pope
himself.
7. Another Instance may be gien in
their Prohibiting of Marriage to men in Orders,
which is deriv'd by some from the thirdNempe  Papi Ca|lixto, qui. floruit A D. 20. Consule Thu|anum. in. 36. p. 305. Cen|tury
after Christ; byBishop Hall, 3. E|pist. 2. Decad. others from the eighth; and

in the rigour that now it is, from Pope Gregory
the Seventh. But from the beginning it was not so.
For Priests were permitted to have wives, both
in the Old and New Testament; (as Maximilian
Ubi supra apud Thuanum, p. 305.  306. the Second did rightly urge against the Pope:)
And the blessed Apostles (many of them) were
married men: for so I gather fromEuseb. l. 3 c. 13. Eusebius out
of Clemens Alexandrinus: and from theConstat Apostolos ip|sos, paucis exceptis, cojuges habuisse. Ubi supra apud Thua|num. Letter
of Maximilian, who did not want the Advice
of the learnedst persons in all his Empire; and
from 1 Cor. 9. 5. where St Paul asserts his liber|ty
to carry a VVife along with him, as well as
Cephas. And 'tis the Doctrine of that Apostle,
that a Bishop may be an Husband, although he
may not be the Husband of more then one Wife.
(1 Tim. 3. 2. Tit. 1. 6.) Besides, the Marriage of the
Clergy was asserted byIbid. apud Thua|num. Pphnutius in the Coun|cil
at Nice; and even by one of those, Canon. Apo|stol. 5. . Zonaras in Can. Apost. 5. p. 4. Edit. Pari. 1618. Canons
which the Romanists themselves do still avow
for Apostolical. And the forbidding men to marry
(with Saturninus, and the Gnosticks,) is worthi|call'd
by God's Apostle, The Doctrine of Devils.
(1 Tim. 4. 1. 3.)Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 22. . Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3.

8. I shall conclude with that Instance
to which our Saviour in my Text does
more peculiarly allude; I mean the Liberty
of Divorce betwixt Man and Wife, for many
more Causes then the Cause of Fornication. For
so I find it isSiquis dixerit Ec|clesiam errare, cm ob multas Causas se|parationem inter con|juges quoad totum, seu quoad cohabita|tionem, ad certum incertumve tempus, fieri osse decernit, Anathema sit. Con|cil. Trident. Sess. 24. Can 8. p. 411. Edit. Bin. Tom. 9. Paris. decreed by the Church of Rome,
with an Anathema to all that shall contradict
it. But from the Beginning it was not so. For 'tis
as opposite to the will of our Blessed Saviour
revealed to us without a Parable, (in the next
verse after my Text) as if they meant nothing
more, then the opening of a way to rebel a|gainst
him. For besides that in the Canon of
the Council at Trent, a Divorce quoad Torum / Totum
ob multas Causas was decreed to be just in
the Church of Rome, although our Lord had
twice confin'd it to the Sole Cause of Fornica|tion,
(Matth. 5. 32.  19. 9.) And besides
that the word Totun was constantly reteined.
inScil. (praeter Edit. jam nomiuatam) Edit. Col. Agp. Tom 4. part 2. p. 332. Sum. Concil. Edit. Franc. Longii  Coriolano, Antverp. A. C. 1623. p. 1024. Item Concil. General. Pauii Quin|ti Auctorit. Edit. Romae, A. C. 1628. Tom 4. p. 273. four Editions, (particulaly in That, which
had the Care and Command of Pope Paul the
Fifth,) Let it be granted that the Council did
mean no more, then a meer Sequestration from
Bed and Board, to endure for a certain or un|certain time; and not an absolute Dissolution of
the Conjugal Knot; yet in the Judgment of
Chemnitius, yea and of Maldonat Himself,
(who was as learned a Iesuite as that Society
ever had,) it would be opposite (even so) to

the Law of Christ. For heSi ob aliam Causam qum ob Fornicationem dimiserit, quamvis aliam non duxerit, moechatur; quia ux|orem suam moechari facit. Maldonat. (ex|cus Mogunt. A. D. 1624.) in Matth. 19. 9. p. 392. who putteth away his
VVife for any Cause whatsoever, besides the Cause
of Fornication, commits Adultery (saith the Ie|suit)
even for this very reason, because he
makes Her commit it, whom he unduly putteth a|way.
Atqui in Pontiicid ill Separatione (nem|pe  Toro  Mens, ad certum incetum|ve tempus,) Vincu|lum Conjugii mulis  variis modis solvi|tur  disrumpitur. Nam ad Vinculum Matrimonii pertinent hae sententae.
Et adhaerebit Uxori suae. Faciamus ei adjutorium quod sit coram ipso. Mu|lier non habet potestatem sui Corporis, sed vir. Iterum convenite, ne tentet vos Satan, propter Incontinentiam vestram. Non sunt Duo, sed una Caro. Et ipsum Matrimonium d initu, Individu vit Consuetudine. Haec vro vincula Cojugii in Pontisici separatione, quoad Tor et Cohabitationem, solvuntur et dirumpuntur. Homines igitur, contra Decretum Divnitatis. se|parant, quod Deus conjuxit. Chemnt. in Exam. Concil. Trdent. (Excus. Genev. A. D. 16 4) p. 437. Nay, Chemnitius saith farther; That the
Papal Separation from Bed and Board, is many
ways a Dissolution of the Conjugal Tye. Nor does
he content himself to say, or affirm it only,
but by a Confluence of Scriptures does make it
good, That against the Command of our
blessed Saviour (in the verse but one before
my Text,) That which God hath joyned together,
the men of Rome do put asunder.
By these and many more Corruptions in
point of Practice and Doctrine too, which
were no more then Deviations from what had
been from the Beginning, and which the
learned'st Sons of the Church of Rome have
been forced to confess in their publick writings;
the awakened part of the Christian world were
compell'd to look out for a Reformation. That
there was in the See of Rome the most abomi|nable
Practice to be imagin'd, we have the

liberalVix ullm peccatum cogitari potest, (sol Haeresi except) quo illa sedes turpiter ma|culata non fuerit, maxim ab Ann: 800. Staplet. Oper. Tom. 1. Cont. 1. q. 5. art. 3. pag. 597. excus. Paris. 1620. Confesson of zealous Stapleton himself;
and of those that have publisht theirConsule Canonas Poenitentiales Roma|nas, Bedae, Rabani Mauri, c. cum notis Antonii Augustini; Archiepiscopi Tar|raconensis, Excus. Venetiis, 1584. Peniten|tials.
We have the published Complaints of
Armachanus, and Grostead, and Nicolas de Cle|mangis,
Iohn of Hus, and Ierome of Prague,
Chancellor Gerson, and Erasmus, and the Arch|bishop
of Spalato. Ludovicus Vives, and Cassan|der,
who are known to have died in the same
Communion, did yet impartially complain of some
Corruptions.Ludov. Vives in St. August. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 27. Vives of their Feasts at the
Oratories of Martyrs, as being too much of kin
unto the Gentiles Parentalia, which in the
judgment ofParentatio Motuis species est Idololatri, quoniam  Idololatria Parentationis est speci|es. Tertul. de Specta. cap. 12. Tertullian made up a species of
Idolatry. And CassanderIta ut ad Summam adorationem, quae vel  Paganis uis simula|cris exhiberi consuevit,  ad extremam vani|tatem quam Ethnici in suis simulacris exor|nan is admiserunt, nil  nostris reliqui fa|ctum esse ideatur. Geo. Cassander in Consult de Imag.  Simulacris mhi pag. 175, 176. confesses plainly,
that the Peoples Adoration paid to Images and
Statues, was equal to the worst of the ancient
Heathen.Thuan. l. 25. pag. 760, c. So the buying and selling of Papal
Indulgences and Pardons ('tis a little thing to
say of Preferments too) was both confest and
inveigh'd against by Popish Bishops in Thuanus.
Now if with all their Corruptions in point of
Practice, which alone cannot justifie a People's
Separation from any Church, (though the Ca|thari
and the Donatists were heretofore of that
opinion,) we compare their Corruptions of
Doctrine too, and that in matter of Faith, (as

hath been shewed,) Corruptions intrenching
on Fundamentals; it will appear that That door
which was open'd by Vs in our first Reformers,
was not at all to introduce, but to let outDe Hildebrando in haec verba sententiam erunt Episcopi Ger|manici qui Concilio Wormatiensi inter|uerunt. Dum pro|fanis studes Novitati|bus, dum magis amplo qum bono nomine de|lectaris, dum inaudita Elatione distenderis, velut quidam Signifer Schismatis, omia membra Ecclsia super|b crudelitate  cru|deli superbi lacerasti: flammasque Discordiae quas in Romana Eccle|sia diris factionibus excitasti, per omnes Ec|clesias Italiae, Galliae,  Hispaniae, furiali dementia sparsisti.Per gloriosa tua Decreta (quod sine lachrymis dici non potest) Christi ser nomen perit. Im|perial. Statut.  Gol|dasto edit. Tom. 1. p. 47. Schism.
For the schism must needs be Theirs who give
the Cause of the Separation, not Theirs who
do but separate when Cause is given. Else S. Paul
had been to blame, in that he said to his Co|rinthians,
Come ye out from among them, and be
ye separate. (2 Cor. 6. 17.) The actuall De|parture
indeed was Ours, but Theirs the causal;
(as our immortal Arch-Bishop does fitly
word it:) we left them indeed when they
thrust us out; (as they cannot but go whom
the Devil drives;) But in propriety of speech,
we left their Errors, rather then Them. Or if
a Secession was made from them, 'twas in 
very same measure that they had made one
from Christ. (Whereas they, by their Hostilities
and their Excommunications, departed properly
from us, not from any Errors detected in us.
And the wo is to them by whom the offence co|meth,
(Matth. 18. 7.) not to them to whom 'tis
given. If when England was in a Flame by
Fire sent out of Italy, we did not abstein from
the quenching of it, until water might be drawn
from the River Tiber; it was because our own
Ocean, could not only do it sooner, but better
too; that is to say (without a Figure,)

It did appear by the Concession of the most
learned Popish Writers, that particular Nations
had still a power to purge themselves from
their corruptions, as well in the Church, as in
the State, without leave had from the See of
Rome; and that 'twas commonly put in
practice above a thousand years since.Ex co quo Williel|mus Nomanaiae Co|mes Terram illam de|bellado sibi subegi, Nmo in d Episcopus vel Abbas ante Ansl|mum fctus est, qui non primo suerit Homo Regs, ac de manu illus Eiscopats vel Abbatiae Investituram per dationem Virgae Pastoralis suscepit, c. Eadmerus Monach. Cantin Praef. ad Hist. Nov. pag. 2.
Sed nec ex co solm tmpore mos hic obti|nuit; Nem ante Nor|mano um etiam ad|ventum hic sitatissi|mus, ut majorum Gen|tium Antisites sacri, Episcoi nimirum  Coenobiarchae (qui sal. tem in  Re|gi)  Sacris Ecclsi|arum Cooribus |lecti, quin saepius etiam, spretis omnin Corporum Sacrorum suffragiis, in Aul designati, Annuli  Bac Pastorals, ive Pedi traditione, in Dignitatis Possessionem  Regibus nostris,  avo nixis, . Joh. Selden. in suis ad Eadmer. Notis et Spicilegio, p. 142. Hujus rei exemplum vider est apud G Malmesburiensem de Gests Re|gum, lib 2. cap 8. Quin et illud aliquando vidtur dignius quod hoc in loco notetur. Pontifici Hilde|rando Fidelitatis Iuramentum,  Guilielmo Nomanno, exigenti, Guil elmum Regem respondisseFi|elitatem facere non volo, quin nec ego promisi, nec Antecessores meos Antecessoribus tuis id fecisse omperio. Baron. Ad An. 106. Guilielmus Rufus prosssus est, Quod nullus Arch. episcopus aut piscopus Regni sui, Curiae Romanae vel Papae subesset. Matth Paris. Hist An. 1094. Vidsis etiam, peratores, et Reges Galliarum, jura sua asserntes, apud Othonem Frisingensem, Sgibertum, cosque  Historicos qui Res Hnrici Quarti Imperatoris, et ejusdem nominis Primi Rgis Anglorum con|ipsre. Inprimis ver Sigonum de Reg Ital. l. 4, 9, 10, et 11. Baron. Tom. 11. A C. 1077. Cherubi|m de Naria in Bularii Tom. 1. p. 16. et 17. Bin Concil. Tom. 3. part. 2. in Ubano, Calixto, et schall Secundis. Renatum Choppinum de Domanio Franciae, l. 2. tit. 1 sect. 6, c. Et de Sacra ti, l 1. tit. 7. Sect. 22, t 23. ad haec, Theodor Balsamon Patriarch. Antioch. in Concil. Chalced. n. 4. Joh. Naucler. Chronograph. Generat. 39. et H. Mutium Chron. German. l. 18. It did
appear that the Kings of England (at least as
much as those of Sicily,) were ever held to be
, and that by the Romanists themselves;
until by gaining from Henry the First, the
Investiture of Bishops; from Henry the Second,
an Exemption of the Clergy from Secular Courts,
and from easie King Iohn, an unworthy Sub|mission
to forreign Power; the Popes became
strong enough to call their strength the Law of
Iustice And yet their Incroachments were still
oppos'd, by the most pious and the most learned
in every Age. Concerning which it were

easie to give a satisfactory account, if it were
comely for a Sermon to exceed the limits of an
hour. In a word, it did appear from the
Code and Novels of. c. Justin, Novel Const. 131. cap. 2. Vide eti|am de mandatis Principum, Tit. 4. Novel. 17. c. 7  11. Iustinian, from the
 set out by the EmperourEvagr. l. 3. c. 14. in Mag. Biblioth. Vet. Patr. Tom. 6. Part. 2. p. 655. Zeno, from
the practice ofSigon de Reg. Ital. li. 4. ad A. C. 801.  Eginhard in vit. Car. Mag.  Baron. Annal. Tom 9. ad A. C. So p. 542. ad 545.  Tom. 10. ad A. C. 845. p. 34. Excus. Colon. Agrip. 1609. Charles the Great, (which
may be judged by the Capitulars sent abroad
in his Name,) from the designs and endeavours
of two late Emperors, Ferdinand the First,
and Maximilian the Second, from all the com|mended
Kings of Iudah, from the most pious
Christian Emperours as far as from Con|stantine
the Great, and from many Kings of
England inEdward the co|fessor, William 1. H. 1. H 3. Edw. 1. Edw. 2. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hn. 4. H. 5. H. 6. Edw. 4. Rich. 3. Hen 7. H. 8. for all which at , See Coke's Reports, par. 5. fol. 1. Caudre's Case, or De Jue Re|gis Ecclesiastico. . Balsam. in Conc. Cath. Can. 16. Popish times too; that the work of
Reformation belong'd especially to them in
their several Kingdoms. And this is certain;
that neither Prescription on the Pope's side, nor
Discontinuance on the Kings, could add a Right
unto the one, or any way lessen it in the other.
For it implies a contradiction, that what is
wrong should grow right, by being prosperous
for a longer or shorter season.
Had the Pope been contented with his
. Concil. Constantinop. Oecu.  Can. 3. . Justinian. Imp. Novel. Const. 131. c. 2 Primacy of Order, and not ambitiously af|fected

a Supremacy of Power, and over all other
Churches besides his own; we never had cast
off a Yoke which had never been put upon our
Necks: And so 'tis plain that the Usurper did
make the Schism If Sacrilege anywhere, or
Rebellion, did help reform Superstition; That
was the Fault of the Reformers, not at all of
the Reformation; not of all Reformers neither.
For the most that was done by some, was to
write after the Copy which had been set them
in my Text, by the Blessed Reformer of all
the World; which was so to reform, as not to
innovate, and to accommodate their Religion
to what they found in the Beginning.
Nay, if I may speak an Important Truth,
(which being unpassionately consider'd, and
universally laid to heart, might possibly
tend to the Peace of Christendom;) seeing it
was not so much the Church as the Court of
Rome, which proudly tod upon Crowns and
Scepters, and made Decrees with aApostolic Potestate declaramus  defini|mus, et ab omnibus judicari dbere man|damus atque statui|mus, decernentes irri|tum et , fi quid secus  quoquam quacunque Dignitate, Auctoritate,  Potestate praedito cotigr iudicari, Non obstantibus Constitut. onibus et Ordinatio|nibus Apostolcis, Aisque in word facicutibus Quiuseunque. Vule Iullam Piiquarti, Concil. Bin. Edit. Par Tom 9 p. 444.  Christus post Cnam instituerit, et suis Disciplis administra|veri sub uraque speci  et Vini oc  Sacrementum,  hoc non obstante, c. Licet in Primiti Ecclesi  sodi Sacramentum reciperctur  Fidelibus sub  spie;   con|ficiibus sub , et  laicis tantummodo sub specie Panis suscipitur. Concil. Constant. Bin. Tom. 3. Pat. 2. Sess. 13. p. 880. excus. Colon. Agippinae, 1618. non ob|stante
to Apostolical Constitutions, or whatsoever
had been enacted by any Authority whatsoever,
(the Commandments of Christ being not excepted;)

we originally departed with higher Degrees
of Indignation, from the Insolent Court, then
Church of Rome. Nor protested we so much
against the Church, (though against the
Church too,) as against the Cruel Edict first
made atIbi (i. e. Spirae, ubi erat Conventus or|dinum Imperii;) De|cretum factum est, ut Edictum Wormati|ense observaretur contra Novatores, ut omnia in ategrum re|stituantur. Contra hoc Edictum solenis fait Protestat. o, April: 16. A. D. 1529.  hinc ortum pervulgatum il|lud nomen Protestan|tium. Sethus Calvis. in Chron. ad A. C. 1529.
Lutherus impulit Io|hannem Saxoiae Se|pemvirum, aliosque Principes Germanicos, protestariconta Decreta Ratisbonae  Spirae de Religione acta. Ude Nomen Protestantium crevit. Cluverius ad A. C. 1529. p. 705. VVorms, and after cruelly re-inforced
at Spire and Ratisbone, for the confirming of
those 1 Corruptions from which the 2 Church
was to be cleans'd. To the 1 former we declar'd
a Vatinian Hatred; but to the 2 latter of the
two, we have the Charity to wish for a Recon|cilement.
That we who differ upon the way
in which we are walking towards Ierusalem,
may so look back on the Beginning from
whence at first we set out, (and from which
our Accusers have foulely swerv'd,) as to agree
in our Arrival at the same Iourney's end.
But God forbid that our Love to the Peace
without, should ever tempt us to a loss of the
Peace within us. God forbid we should return
with the Dog to his vomit, or with the Sow in the
Hebrew Proverb (which is cited by S. Peter
in his Epistle,2. Pet. 2. 22.) to her wallowing in the mire.
When I wish for a Reconcilement, I do not
mean by our Compliance with any the least of
their Defilements, but by their Harmony with us
in our being Clean.

On thisAb Ecclesi Roman non alio discessimus animo, qum ut, si correcta ad Priorem Ecclesiae sormam re|deat, nos quoque ad Illam revrtamur,  Communionem cum Ill in suis porr Coe|tibus habeamus. Apud Grot: Dscuss. p. 14  apud ipsum Zanch. in Confess. Art. 19. p. 157. Condition and Supposal; Our
Church is open to receive the bitterest Enemies
of our Church. Our Arms are open to embrace
hem, with Love, and Honour. Our Hearts
and Souls are wide open in fervent Prayers and
Supplications to the God of Purity and of Peace,
hat (in his own good time) he will bind up
he Breaches, and wipe off the stains, and raise
p the lapsed Reputation, of his divided, defiled,
sgraced Spouse; And all for the Glory, as well
s Merits, of the ever-blessed Bridegroom of all
ur Souls,
To whom, with the Father, in the Unity of
he Spirit, be ascribed by us, and by all the
World.
Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, and Power,
nd Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this time
orwards for evermore.
FINIS.




