




Aqua Triumphalis; Being a True RELATION Of the HONOURABLE the CITY of LONDONS Entertaining Their SACRED MAJESTIES UPON THE River of Thames, And Wellcoming them from HAMPTON-COURT TO WHITE-HALL. EXPRESSED, And set forth in severall Shews and Pageants the 23. day of August 1662.
VVritten by Iohn Tatham, Gent.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, by T. Childe, and L. Parry dwelling in Dogwell Court in VVhite Fryers. 1662.




THe Management and Ordering of this dayes Triumph was carried on by the Iudgement and Care of

Mr. Peter Mills, Surveyor.
Mr. Malin, Water-Bayliff.

The two City Painters. Excellent in their quality.

Mr. Thomas Whiting Joyner No lesse Excellent in their qualities.
Mr. Richard Cleere Carver. No lesse Excellent in their qualities.



August 25. 1662.
Imprimatur
I. BIRKENHEAD.




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAYOR AND Court of Aldermen.
_THe Honour of this Imployment will make my Endeavours Ambitious. If I faile your Ex|pectation herein, let the shortnesse of the time allowed me, and the uncertainty of their Majesties Arrivall intercede, which granted renders me,
Your most Obliged, And most Obedient Servant, JOHN TATHAM.





Aqua Triumphalis; Being a True RELATION OF THE Honourable the City of LONDONS Enter|taining their Sacred Majesties upon the River of Thames, and Wellcoming them from Hampton-Court to White-hall, c.
_THE Barges belonging to the severall 12. Companies, are with the Morning-tide carried up the River from White hall to Chelsey, beginning with the Mercers, Grocers, c. and ending with the inferiour Compa|nies, who are placed at Chelsey; most of the Barges are attended with a Pageant, some more richly set out then the rest, but none remisse in shewing something of Affection and Loyalty.
The Pageants are placed at the head of every Barge. That which at|tends the MERCERS is thus set forth. Under a Canopy of State is seated a Virgin, on her head a Silver Coronet. Her Garment of Violet colour'd Sattin, over which is a large cloth of Silver Mantle.
Her Attendants are three Maids of Honour, and six Pages. Her Maids of Honour are habited in Cloath of Silver, their Heads neatly Ornamented.
Her Pages are habited in Cloath of Silver Doublets, and Velvet Bree|ches, in their Hats Plumes of Feathers, and in their Hands severall Ban|ers and Escutcheons.
They are placed three of each side the Pageant.
The DRAPERS Pageant is thus set forth. Under a Canopy of State is represented a Grave Roman Magistrate, habited in a long Robe, on his

head a Helmet, in his right hand he holds a Scepter, in his left a Triple Crown, a Sword girt to him. His Attendants are four, Loyalty, Truth, Fame, and Honour. Loyalty and Truth are placed in the Front, at the two Corners; Fame and Honour at the two Rear Corners.
Loyalty is habited like a Grave Citizen, plain and decent; in one hand he holds a Banner of the Armes of England and Portugall impal'd, in the other hand a Sword, signifying his resolution to defend their Right.
Truth is habited in white, on her head a wreath of Stars; in one hand she bears a Banner of the Companies Armes, in the other a little Book.
Fame is represented in a long loose light Robe, his head circled with a wreath of intermixed Colours; in one hand he holds a Trumpet, in the other a wreath of Laurell, as intended for Loyalty.
Honour is habited in Cloath of Gold, on his head a Hat and Plume of Feathers; in one hand he holds a Shield, in which is figured a Portuges with a Sword drawn, holding it over some Indias there, figured kneeling; in the other he bears an Escutcheon, with the Armes of Egland and Portu|gall impal'd.
The MERCHANT TAILORS Pageant is thus set forth. The Stage (being 12. foot long, and 7. foot broad) is Arched with a wild Arbour, made in manner of a Wildernesse.
The two Camels (supporters of the Companies Arms) are back'd with two Indians, bearing in one hand an Escutchion of the Arms of Eng|land and Portugall impal'd. In the other hand they hold Darts down|wards, betokening subjection, Their Motto
LUSITANIAE ORIENS ET MERIDIES
There are two Moores, that attend the Camels, as their guiders.
In the Wildernesse is seated an Aged Man, representing a Pilgrim, and habited accordingly. In one hand he holds a Staff, in the other a Banner, beaing the Figure of a Golden Lamb, with this Motto,
INTER NOCENTES INNOCENS.
This alludes to St. Iohn, the Patron of their Company: for his Atten|dants he hath Faith, Hope, and Charity, who ar placed before.
Faith is presented in a flaming coloured Silk Robe, her head Circled with a Wreath of sprightly colours dilated from the Sun. In one hand she holds a Shield, on which is Figured a Young Man, endeavoring to fthom the Sea with a Staff, with this Motto,
NIL PROFUNDIUS.
In the other hand she holds a Shield, whereon is Figured a Crosse, with this Motto,
NIL SALUBRIUS.
Hope is presented in a sad Russet Garment close girt. On her head she wears a Wreath of Linnen shaddowed with the Sun-Beams. In one hand she bears a Banner, on which is Figured an Anchor, with this Motto,
SUPERABO.
In the other hand she bears a Banner with the Companies Arms.
Charity is habitd in a carelsse Robe of White Silk, and a Green man|tle, On her head a Coronet of Starres; In one hand she holds a Banner, on which is Figured an Arm out of a Cloud reaching to an Almsbasket to releive a poor person with this Motto,
CONSUMMAVI.
In the other hand she bears a Banner of the Companies Armes.
The Illustrious Iames Duke of York, that never-to-be-forgotten Prince the Duke of Gloucester, the Right Honourable the Duke of Buckingham, Duke of Ormond,  the Earl of Manchester, being all free of this Company.
The GOLDSMITHS Pageant is thus set out. Under a Canopy of State sits Iustice, her hair dishevell'd. She wears on her head a golden Crown, her Garment Gold colour, girt with a girdle of Gold, in one hand she holds a Ballance, in the other a Touch-stone. At her feet is placed two Virgins, their Hair dishevell'd, their Heads are encompassed with Wreaths of Flowers of severall Colours, as the Blew, Red, and Yellow, their ha|bits answerable. In one hand they hold a golden Hammer, in the other a golden Cup.
It would be too tedious to insert here the bravery of the rest of the Pa|geants, and being streigthned in point of time, I shall omit it.
The Barges are anchored some 40. or 50. yards distant in the middle of the River, behind them is left an open passage for Boats to passe, this side of the River is kept clear for their Majesties, and their Trayn.
Between 8. and 9. of the Clock, the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder. men, move towards Chelsey, where they attend their Majesties comming from Putney, and then the Lord Mayor leads the way down the River be|fore their Majesties.
The Grand Pageants appointed for this day are placed thus: The First at Chelsey; The second between Fox-hall and Lambeth; The third at the private Staires at Whitehall
Those thre entertain their Majesties with Speeches, in their motion to Whitehall.
There are two Drolls, one of Watermen the other of Seamen, continu|ally imployed in dancing and singing.
The Droll of Watermen is placed between Chelsey and Fox-hall.
That of Seamen between Lambeth and Whitehall, cross the Thames, where there is severall tricks of Activity performed, both on the Stage and the Rope.
And the Seamen throw themselves into severall Antick postures and dances.
So much for the Preludium: Now to the Entertainment it self



The first Entertainment on the Water is a Sea-Chariot, drawn with Sea-Horses.
IN the front whereof is seated ISIS; her hair of a light brown colour, somewhat Contorted, her head adorned with an Anadem, or Crown of all manner of Flowers be|longing and relating to Gardens, as the Red, White and Da|mask Roses, Pinks, July flowers, Violets, c. Her Garment of white Silk, intermixed with a pale green. In her right hand she bears a Scepter (made up like a Cornu-copia) out of which all sorts of Flowers seem to sprout. In her left hand she holds a Waing pot, to denote her the Lady of the Western Meadowes, and Wife to THAM. At her feet are placed several inferiour Water Nymphs, belonging to small Rivolets, who are Contributaries to her, their habits answerable to hers.
This View is presented to their MAjESTYES at Chelsey, in the head of the Lord Mayors and Companies Barges; And upon the motion of their Majesties Barge, ISIS directs her self to Them in this Speech.

DIvinest pair! whose equal Virtues claim
Affinity with Heav'n, adds life to Fame.
You! whose conjunctive sweetnesse does compleat
What ever can be thought of Good, or Great,
Proud with your Barges weight, Isis (to meet
Your unmatch'd loves) kisses your Sacred Feet;
The Turtles now may learn of You to Wooe,
And find a fellowship they never knew.
The Poets in their Fictions never dreamt
Of such a Blisse as in your meeting's meant:
Nor did th' Romantick writers ever tell
An Amorous Story (what you Act) so well.
If Dangers, overcome, sweeten Ioyes most,
Where rests Comparison? How is Fancie lost?
Though the Enamour'd Boy to ^a Sestos swome,
Our chaster Hero to Leander's come,
And Loves blest Taper burning still, in spight
Of raging Tempests, or the Envious Night.
Thus unexampled (Sir) remain, and prove
There can be no Example to your Love.
From Oxford Truant-like with Ioy I've run
To do you Lackey-service, and 'tis done.
Tham now receives you with expanded Armes,
Made happy by your Presence, and the Charms
Of Epecedian ^b Cygnets, whose soft breath
Sing their own Requiems, and Consort in death.
Though Hampton mourn, Whitehall with joyes abound,
And Eccho-like, the City takes the sound:
^c Vertumnus that doth circulate the year,
Usher'd you there, as now he waits you here;
So that we see it is an easie thing
(Such is your Presence) to Create a Spring
Where ere you come. ^d Hyems now cloathes the West
In Russian frieze, while the glad Cities drest
In her full pride, out-vying Summers Queen,
And Plenty in each house with freedom seen;
Nor do We at their happinesse repine,
'Twill come about again, on Us you'll shine,
Let them enjoy their fulnesse of You here,
So We may hope. Your Splendor the next year.
 Not to inform the knowing person, but to help such as are unacquainted with Poetical Authors and Historie, I set down the Explanations following.



EXPLANATION.
^a Leander was a famous Youth that dwelt in Abydus, a place si|tuate upon the opposite shore of Sestos, the place where Hero lived, a Beautiful Maid; To her Leander swimming by night over Helles|pont (a part of the Sea in Asia) a storm arose and drowned him. By Leander we may see the violent passion and servency of Love, that neither water could quench, nor the roaring of the waves terrifie: As Virgil (the best of Poets) in his Georgicks l. 3. takes occasion to mention.
The ^b Swans are said to sing a little before they die, which is called an Epecedean, or Funerall Song.
By ^c Vertumnus is meant the Year, returning into it self from the middle or end of September, to September again; Every moneth he assumes a new shape, wherefore he is by some thought to be Proteus, by reason of his often changes, which is said he did to Court Pomona the Goddesse of Fruits: In the Spring he appears more Lovely then in any other season of the Year, and there|fore he had usually offered (and is still attributed) to him the first Flowers of the Gardens; He is the aptest for his beloved Pomona in September and October, the return of his course, for then she likes him best.
^d Hyems is the Father of Frosts, and nipping cold, the sharpest part of Winter, it alludes to decreppid Age, and is painted like an Old man with Crutches.
Isis having ended her Speech, their MAjESTIES Train pass by another view or Pageant, in the nature of a Droll of Water|men, placed not far distance from that of Isis; in their passage the Watermen, who are continually in action, consort into this Song, being set for three parts.



SONG

I.
LEt sadness slie Boyes, flie;
The King and Queen draw nigh,
And their Loyal train
Po're in amain,
Like Hailstones from the Skie,
The Town to fill,
And fears to kill
The Tradesmen had of breaking,
Who scarce a pennie
Would spare to any.
They were so poor and sneaking;
But now
Speed the Plow,
All will be
Imploy'd, and free,
From the Mercer to the Draper,
All sorts and all sizes
Of Trades and Devises,
Will make us sing and caper.


II.
The River shall no more
Catch cold, and be bound o're,
Wee'le keep her in heat,
Use does the feat,
Though Winter fume and roar;
The Prentice he
Of each Degree,
To Lambeth, or to Fox-hall,
With their Lasses, cry
What Oares will you ply?
Where are you with a Pox all?
See then
You be men,
And stand to't;
Set a hand to't,
That our Stretchers may be working;
For if you intend Boy,
A Penny to spend Boy,
You must get it with Yerking.


III.
A Lazie life is base,
True labour we imbrace;
'Tis the best Physick
To cure the Tissick,
Ill humours purge apace;
Our sweats, and pains,
Brings health, and gains,
Which makes us bouncing merry,
We ne're are o'rejoy'd,
Till we are imploy'd
In Scullar, Oares, or Wherry:
Then Sing,
Blesse the KING,
And the QUEEN,
And all here seen,
That our Masters are, and feed us
With Meat and Wine stored
When they are once shored,
And for Spring Garden need us.



The Song ended, and upon theit MAjESTIES drawing near, one of the Watermen boldly steps forward, and expresseth himself to their MAjESTIES in these words.
HAul in, haul in for the honour of your calling, and be hang'd, do you know your Fellows no better? I have something to say for the good of ye

all: God Blesse Thee King CHARLES, and Thy Good Woman there, a Blest Creature she is I war|rant Thee, and a True: Go thy wayes for a wagg, Thou hast had a merry time on't in the West, I need say no more, a word to the Wise, Thou under|standst me, much good may it do Thee, fall to and welcome, the Devil take the Grudger; But dost hear me, don't take it in dudgeon that I am so fa|miliar with Thee, Thou maist rather take it kindly, for I am not alwayes in this good humour; though I Thee Thee, and Thou Thee, I am no Quaker, take notice of that; he that does not love Thee in his heart, may he be drawn in a Cart: God Blesse me, that Rime has put me in mind of the Old Poet my Brother Waterman, have at ye ifaith, if I have any Guts in my Brains, I'le give you a dish of Poetry to stay Your Stomack till You get further, a Distick or two does it.
We in our Hearts do foster no Deceipt,
They and our Tongues simplicity do meet,
As Sands and Fishes are thought Numberless,
So may Your Ioyes be pregnant, and increase.
And so God speed you well.




The which ended; His Majesty moves on towards an|other View, being the Second Entertainment.
WHich is a Pageant made in the manner of an Island float|ing, and presented between Fox Hall and Lambeth, with a Lion and a Unicorn standing in the Front, the Supporters of the Armes of ENGLAND: upon whose backs are placed two bigg Boyes, the one a Scotch, the other an English, and habitted accordingly, with Banners in their hands, whereon is the Armes of eitheir Nation.
In the middle of this View is seated THAM, represented in an Old Man with long Hair and Beard, which may signifie the Weeds and Sedges of the River: On his head he wears a Crown of Flowers, such as belong to Meads and fruitfull Pastures, as the Primrose, Dazy, Blewbottle, and the like: In his right hand he holds a Trident, as he is Viceroy to Thetis, and King of Rivers. In his left hand he bears a Pitcher of Water, as he is Sonne to Achelous (the Father of Rivers) and and Grandchild to Oceanus. He wears a long Silk Robe tincted with several colours like the Rainbow. On his right hand is placed a Nymph of the Water, on whose head is the Figure of Greenwich Castle. On his left hand another Nymph, on whose head is placed the Figure of Windsor Castle, which two Nymphs are holding Banners in their hands, habited in Blew and White.
Upon his MAjESTIES approach, THAM presents himself in these words.


WHen You (Great Sir!) did in Caesarean State,
Through the Glad City, Ride to meet Your fate,
(The Hand-maid to Your Right) Your Regal Throne
Which had been lost, had it not been Your Own;
So many false Pretenders laying claim
To what, they wanted Vertue to maintain:
Among the rest did that day presse to see
Phoebus display his Beams in Monarchy,
I, a Sub-servant, strove beyond my bound,
T' expresse a Loyall Error on the Ground:
Nor wonder now Tham in a House is pent,
Brittain is by this Floating Island meant,
^a Environ'd with the German Ocean,
The Irish, Scottish, and the Belgican:
This Spot of Earth that doth so much create
In other Nations Fear, 'twixt Love, and Hate;
The Name of England shakes 'em, Warr, and it
Strikes 'em into their Mother Ague fit:
And that your ample glories may encrease,
Portugal clasps you with the Arms of Peace.
That Portugall is so famous for their Kings,
And Wondrous Acts, which Worthy ^b Clio sings,
ENGLAND and PORTUGAL are one in Fame,
There is no difference 'twixt 'em but in Name,
Lisbon is London, Tagus Thames, and then,
The Portugues are become Englishmen,
The English, Portugues; both meet in hearts,
Thus Providence unites remotest parts
This strange Conjunction staggers the dull Age,
Your Shaddows no Ecclipses do presage;
For from those darker Tresses, as from Night,
Proceeds th' efficient Cause of early Light,
By which We live. It is your gracious heat
(Blest Pair) that doth each Element repleat:
When You your ^d Hymenean Triumphs kept
th West, the Eye of Ioy here never slept;
The Dreggs of grief for To the King. Your departure hence,
Were purg'd away by a retayning Sense
Of Your Return; which now so safe, does add
More The Queen. Blessings to this CITY then it had,
How to return a Thankfullness for this,
Comes not within the Rule Hypohesis.
Then though they cannot their full Ioyes express,
Be pleas'd to think their Dutie's ne'r the less.


EXPLANATION.
Why England the Floating Island?
^a It is Environ'd on the East with the German Sea; on the West with the Irish; on the North with the Scottish; on the South it is by a Narrow Sea divided from Gallia Belgica.
^b Clio, one of the Muses, that relates the Acts of Honour and Chivalry.
^c Hymeneus was the Son of Bacchus and Venus, he is the God of Marriages; Hymenea in the Neuter Gender, are the Nuptiall Ceremonies, therefore called Hymenean Rites or Triumphs.
THAM having ended his Speech, their MAJESTIES move towards White Hall, but before their drawing near, the Nobility and Gentry of their Majesties Train are Entertained by the Second Droll, Indians and Seamen (being continually in Action) with this Song.


The Seamans Song.

LIve, Ladds, live, good dayes are comming on,
This seconds that o'th Coronation:
See, see how thick the Boats and Barges come,
The River sweats to bring it's burthen home.
CAESAR and His Fortune's there,
Heavens delight, Our Kingdoms Prayer.


CHORUS.
Welcome you Starrs that them attend,To the No|bility.
From whose light you borrow yours,
May they still your Wants befriend,
So you will remember Ours.

The Song ended, and their Majesties Barge ready for landing at the Private Stairs, at White Hall, The third VIEW receives them; being a Sea Chariot made in manner of a Scollop shell, drawn with two Dolphins, on whose backs are placed two Tritons. In the front of the Chariot is seated Thetis, Her hair long and grey, dis|shevel'd; On her head is placed a triple Crown, to denote and di|stinguish her three Estates, as she is supposed to be Mother of all the Gods, Goddess of the Sea, and Empress of all Rivers. On the upper part of the Crown is fixed a Starr; on the middle circle, a silver Crescent, on the triplicite part a wreath of Flags deep green, her Robe likewise of deep green, with a loose Mantle of several colours. In the right hand she holds a Scepter, in the left a Chard or Mapp;

her Attendants are four Sea Nymphs cloathed in White and Sea|green Robes.
Thetis Addresseth her self to their Majesties in these words, alluding to the Storm, and Ioy of the Portugues, which happened at one and the same time.


MOST SACRED PAIR!
FAME having eccho'd in our Eares Your choice,
We summon'd all Our Daughters to rejoyce,
That to the five ^a Hill'd City do belong
Whose Murmurs did consort a Nuptial Song;
The Golden footed ^b Tagus, many more
That wanton 'bout the Fam'd ^c Ulyssian shore:
They being sprightly met, a sudden sound,
(As though th' imprison'd Winds had broke the Ground)
Surpriz'd our Ioyes, we guest not what it meant,
Till seconded by th' Upper Element.
At which the Voyce of Syrens became loud,
Though soft before; the humbl'd Waves grow proud
To caper into some seditious trick,
And Prey upon the Body Politick,
For so is Traffique held, The Cannons plaid,
And Fires (like Scaling-ladders) t'wards Heaven laid;
As though the Quarrells, and long-buried Odds
Betwixt the daring Giants and the Gods,
Were now : what then they could not do
With their eap'd hills, lames should aspire unto.
This gave Great Oceanus cause to 
A helpfull Councell, who concluded (All)
So mighty a Conjunction could not be,
Without a Mirable or Prodigie.
The glorious Heir to Great ^d Braganzaes Name
And the Worlds Wonder, Englands CHARLEMAIN
Th' Result being past, a trusty Triton straight
(Who at the Councell-Table then did wait)
Was forthwith sent the raging Waves to quell,
And to inquire the cause they did Rebell.
Scarce could you think ere (clad in a cold sweat)
He did return to make our hopes compleat,
Declar'd that all was clear, the Sky serene,
And Ships in Safety rode where th' Storm had been;
That the Four Winds had Liberty to meet,
Not to Destroy, but Whistle to Your Fleet
(Though rudely) tunes of Joy in different Setts,
Only to shew they were Joves Flagerets,
And every Element in its Degree
Exprest a Power knit in a Jubilee.
Thus Heaven and Earth did your blest Nuptials keep,
As well as we that Revell'd in the Deep:
Thetis her self none else allow'd to bring
This intermixed Tale to Britains King;
VVhich ended, with my Wishes I begin,
(Not 'gainst your Patience to commit a Sin:)
May You out-live the Malice of Your Foes,
VVhile they, subjected to Your Iustice, Cloze;
May You grow strong (too) in Your Peoples Love,
Which will Your Treasure, and Your Armour prove.
And You Blest Queen! so Fam'd for Piety,
May Your Deeds ever Live, Your Self ne're Dye.


EXPLANATION
Why Thetis drawn in a Sea Chariot, accompanied with Tritons, and Sea Nymphs.
By the Chariot, is meant the swift motion of the Sea, and by the diver|sity of her Attendance, are understood the various sorts of Fishes, which are said to wait upon the Sea Gods and Goddesses, because they have their being and habitation in the Sea; But Tritons are commonly taken for Nep|tunes Trumpeters, and sometimes for Sea Monsters. Thetis was also mar|ried to Peleus an excellent Navigator, and therefore is presented with gray hairs, which is partly to intimate the Antiquity of Navigation, and partly to shew the cares and fears of Seamen, who are observed to become sooner Gray hair'd then others.
Why her Mantle of severall Colours?
Bcause the Sea-water will look Red in a Storm, sometimes Blew, some|times

Green, sometimes White and Green, in which Colours her Nymphs are cloathed; for it were very improper to inferre or allude any thing in this Nature contrary to her Element, and therefore their habits are apted accordingly. So much for their shapes, now to the Speech.
^a The famous City of Lisbon in Portugall, by her Daughters are meant Rivers belonging to that Kingdom; This City is scituated upon five Hills, it is encircled with strong Castles, upon which there are 76. Turrets; this City is seven Miles in Compasse, and hath 20. Gates towards the Sea Coast.
^b The principal River in Lisbon so much spoken of and commended in antient and modern Poetry, there are 150. great and small Rivers belong|ing to Portugall.
^c Lisbon, so called of Ulysses who passed that way, her antient name was Olysippo from thence.
^d The Dukes of that name were of antient Renown, and of such Valour and successe, that Prosperity and Plenty were never wanting among the Portugues.


The Discent thus.
Don Edward (whom they call Duarte) was the 6^t^h. Son to King Emanuell, he had issue Katharine, Married to Iohn Duke of Bra|ganza, which Katharin (after the Death of King Henry her Unkle) was right Heir to the Crown of Portugall, from whom de|scended.
Iohn Duke of Braganza restored to his Right, and Crowned King of Portugall by the name of King Iohn the 4^t^h. who had issue by Donna Lucia, Daughter to the Duke of Medina Sidonia in Spain, Alfonso the 6^t^h. King of Portugall, and Donna Catharina now Queen of England.
I hope Reader this Relation hath not been too tedious to thee, it falling in my way I could not omit it.
After their Majsties and the Nobility are Landed, the Companies Barges that were in the Front, fall into the Rear, and so hasten to their severall homes.
The Songs were set by Mr. Iohn Gamble, one of His Majesties Servants, a Person well known in Musick.
FINIS.






