




His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbu|ry's Letter to the Reverend Dr. Batteley Archdeacon of that Dioecese, to be Communi|cated to the Clergy of his Archdeaconry.
Reverend Sir,
_MY Writing to You, at this time, is occa|sion'd by a sensible growth of Vice and Prophaneness in the Nation: which, to the great Affliction of all good men, ap|pears not only in the corrupt practices of particular persons; but also in the Endeavours that are used to subvert the general Prin|ciples of our holy Religion. And this with a bold|ness and openness, far beyond the examples of past times; so that if a speedy stop be not put to such National Provocations, we have just cause to fear they may bring down the heaviest Judgments of God upon Us; The preventing whereof belongs more im|mediately to us, who are the Ministers of Christ; and as such, are obliged to the utmost care and watchfulness in opposing these Instruments of Satan.
I doubt not, but many of the Parochial Clergy are sufficiently sensible both of their own duty and the dan|ger we are in: In the Cities of London and Westminster, and other places, I am sure the good effects of their

diligence have been very evident of late years. But in some Parts that are more remote, all of them may not so well understand either the Arts or the Industry of these Enemies of Religion: And therefore I thought it a Duty incumbent on the Station wherein Providence has placed me, to desire of you, to warn the Clergy of your Arch|deaconry, of these attempts against Religion and Virtue; and to excite them to a Diligence proportionable to the Danger; and to suggest to them such Methods as are most likely to work a General Reformation.
With this request, I send You such Particulars as, in my Opinion, are very necessary to be pressed upon the Clergy for the attaining so desirable an End. As,
I. That in their own Lives, and the Government of their own Families, they would make themselves Examples of a sober and regular Conversation. It is the Apostles Reasoning, If a man know not how to rule his own house (and much more his own Life and Actions) how shall he take care of the Church of God? The true method of work|ing a Reformation abroad, is to lay the foundation at home; which alone can give our Reproofs a just Weight and Au|thority: but till that is done, no Exhortations, whether in publick or private, can either be offer'd with decency, or receiv'd with reverence.
II. To Piety, they should add Prudence in all their Actions and Behaviour: which even in Private Christians is a great Ornament to Religion; but in Publick Teachers is a most necessary qualification for the due discharge of

their Ministry. A Mildness of temper, with a Gravity and Calmness in their Conversation, will not fail to gain them a general Love and Esteem among their Neighbours: and a discreet Caution in their Words and Actions, will preserve them from those little Imprudences that are sometimes so sensible an Obstruction to the good Endeavours of well|meaning Men. Persons in Holy Orders are not only bound, in the conduct of their Lives, to consider what is lawful or unlawful in it self, but also what is decent or indecent in Them, with respect to their Character and Function. Abstaining from all appearance of evil; and giving no Of|fence in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed.
III. While Our Enemies are so very industrious in seek|ing out Objections against the Christian Religion; it be|comes the Clergy (who are set apart for the Vindication of it) to be no less diligent in their Preparations for its De|fence: By acquainting themselves thorowly with the ra|tional grounds of Christianity, and the true state of such Points as are the Subjects of our present Controversies; together with the Objections which are usually made by our Adversaries of all sorts, and the Effectual Answers that have been returned to them by so many Eminent Writers of our own Church: That so they may be ready, on all occasions, to do justice and honour to our Religion; and be able to expose the folly and ignorance of these Gain|saying Men. The Cause which God has put into our hands, is undoubtedly good; but the best cause may suffer by the weakness of its Advocate: and when this happens in the matter of Religion, it gives the Adversary an occa|sion

of Triumph, and is apt to stagger the faith even of sincere and unprejudic'd Christians.
IV. It were to be wisht, that the Clergy of every Neighbourhood, would agree upon frequent Meetings, to consult for the good of Religion in general, and to ad|vise with one another about any difficulties that may hap|pen in their particular Cures. By what Methods any Evil Custom may most easily be broken; How a sinner may be most effectually reclaimed; and (in general) How each of them in their several circumstances may contribute most to the advancement of Religion. Such Consultations as these, besides the mutual benefit of advice and instru|ction, will be a natural means to excite the zeal of some, to reduce the over-eagerness of others to a due temper, and to provoke All to a Religious Emulation in the im|provement of Piety and Order within their respective Pa|rishes. And These Meetings might still be made a greater advantage to the Clergy in carrying on the Reformation of Mens Lives and Manners, by inviting the Church-War|dens of their several Parishes, and other pious persons a|mong the Laity, to joyn with them in the Execution of the most probable methods that can be suggested for those good Ends. And we may very reasonably expect the happy Effects of such a concurrence, from the Visible Success of that Noble Zeal wherewith so many about the great Cities in my Neighbourhood, do promote true Piety, and a Reformation of Manners. And therefore I desire you that you will particularly excite the Clergy to the pro|curing such assistances as these, for the more effectual discharge of their own duty.

V. It would very much further and facilitate all their Endeavours of this kind, to gain over the persons who have the greatest Esteem and Authority in their Parishes, to a hearty concern for the honour of God and Religion: fre|quently suggesting to them the Obligation that God has laid upon them to be Examples to others; and the great good that it is in their power to do, by setting a Pattern of regular living, and the unspeakable mischief of their irregular behaviour. For if once the better Sort can be brought to such a Seriousness and Sobriety, the rest will more easily follow; Example being the most powerful In|struction; and Experience teaching us that shame and fear, which arise from the Authority of such good Patterns, are commonly the most effectual restraints upon the meaner sort.
VI. Where any Person is obstinate in his Vices, and not to be reclaimed either by Teaching or Example, by Exhorta|tion or Reproof; the Ordinary ought to be informed of it, that he may proceed to reclaim such by Ecclesiastical Cen|sures: and where those are like to prove ineffectual, the Ci|vil Magistrate must be applied to, and desired to proceed a|gainst them according to the Laws in those Cases provided. Which Information and Request, especially in the Case of such incorrigible Offenders, can be made by none so pro|perly as by the Clergy; who may best be supposed to understand the necessity there is of having recourse to the Civil Magistrate. And since our Law-givers have Enacted these temporal Punishments, on purpose to assist us in the discharge of our Ministry; it would be a great failing in

us, not to make use of them when all other Methods have been tried to little or no Effect.
VII. Every Pious Person of the Laity, should, if need be, be put in mind by the Clergy, that he ought to think him|self obliged to use his best endeavours to have such Of|fenders punished by the Civil Magistrate, as can no other|wise be amended. And that when he hears his Neigh|bour swear or blaspheme the Name of God, or sees him of|fend in drunkenness or prophanation of the Lords Day, he ought not to neglect to give the Magistrate Notice of it: In such a Case to be called an Informer, will be so far from making any Man Odious in the Judgment of Sober Persons, that it will tend to his honour, when he makes it appear by his unblameable behaviour, and the care he takes of Himself and his own Family, that he doth it pure|ly for the glory of God, and the good of his Brethren. Such well disposed persons as are resolved upon this, should be encouraged to meet as oft as they can, and to consult how they may most discreetly and effectually manage It in the places where they live.
VIII. As in reforming the Laity, they ought to use the Assistance of the Civil Magistrate; so if any of their own Brethren be an irregular Liver, and cannot be reclaimed by brotherly Admonition, the neighbouring Clergy should be strictly enjoyned to make it known to you, and by you, to me; if the Case requires. That so the Offender may be Admonisht to live suitably to his Character; and if a bare Admonition will not do, he may be proceeded against by Ecclesia|stical

Censures; for the preventing such Scandals and Mis|chiefs, as will always accompany the irregular Life of a Minister of the Gospel.
IX. And whereas the Foundations of Piety and Mo|rality are best laid at the beginning, in the Religious Edu|cation of Children; I cannot but wish that every one of the Parochial Clergy would be very diligent in Catechising the Children under their Care; and not only so, but in calling upon them afterwards, as they grow up, to give such further Accounts of their Religion, as may be ex|pected from a riper Age. That being thus carefully instructed in the Faith and Duty of a Christian, they also may teach their Children the same; and so Piety, Virtue, and Goodness, may for ever flourish in our Church and Nation.
These Directions with such others of the same nature as will occur to you, I desire may be Transmitted by you to the Clergy of my Dioecese; for the Religious Go|vernment of themselves, and their People, in these dan|gerous Times. So commending you and them to the Blessing of God, I rest

Your Affectionate Brother Tho. Cantuar. Lambth. April 4^t^h. 1699.




London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.




