




VISIONES RERVM.
THE VISIONS OF THINGS. OR Foure Poems.

1. Principium  Mutabilitas Rerum. Or, The beginning and Mutabilitie of all things.
2. Cursus  Ordo rerum. Or, Art and Nature.
3. Opineo  Ratio rerum. Or, Wealth and Pouertie.
4. Malum  finis rerum, Or, Sinne and Vertue, concluding with the last Iudgement and end of all things.

Wherein the Authour expresseth his inuention by way of dreame.
By IOHN HAGTHORPE Gent.
LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop and are to be sold at his house in Distaffe Lane at the sige of the Dolphin. 1623.




TO THE MOST ILLVSTRIOVS AND most excellent CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewall, Earle of Chester, c.
AS all Eyes gaze vpon the Sunne (most excellent Prince) the Treasurer of Light and Time: so for the most part all thoughts leuell at the bestower of dig|nities and rewards, the Prince, who resembles the Sunne in his spheare. And though it be true that to me (the least and most vnfortunate of all men, wrapt vp through infinite calamities in a Cimmerian night of vnknowne obscuritie) whe|ther I consider the humblenesse of my Muse, or Fortunes, it may seeme sufficient, to obtaine by reflexion euen the least heate and light from the smallest starre in your Horizon. Yet hauing o particular respect, nor influence from any of hese, being indifferently a stranger to all, and herefore fearing a wrong starre, like a bad Sea|man,

ignorant (saue by vncertaine relation) both of their aspects and effects, their diuers motions propper, fort, c. Ignorant of all planetarie re|uolutions and eccentricities: and, in this Age of doubtfulnesse, where the most certaine things are most subiect to question, seeing least reason (with Copernicus) to beleeue, that which striues most to enfoce the sense. I resolued vpon a sud|den boldnesse to looke vp to your Princely light, constant still in its couse and shining. And ha|uing of late presented your Royall father with a small booke of Meditations, and a Suite. So re|nuing the said Suite, I mak bold now againe to present your Grace with these most rude and most vnpolisht lines, but honest matter, and not vnfit for your contemplation, which my poore Mus hauing wandred round the World to gather, layes downe at length at your Prince|ly feete (as a measure of sweetes and spices) brought from the gardens of India: vpon which if it please your Grace to cast but the least beame of your bright splendor and perfection, it kin|dles in me such a flame of affectionate zeale to to your Princely seruice, as the length of time can neuer extinguish.
Your Graces most poore but loyall and deuoted seruant,
IOHN HAGTHORPE.



TO THE READER.
REader I present to thy view some few things most obuious and most necessarie for euery mans contemplation. Namely,

1 Time, Folly, Reason, with the mu|tabilitie of all things.
2 Nature and Art, the two Parents of all things.
3 Wealth and Pouertie the two ballances of all things.
4 Sinne and Vertue, the recompensers of all things.

With the descriptions of most of them ab effectis.
The first shewes, how Folly first entertaines vs at our entrance into the house of Time, del|ding vs with a more certaine assurance of things most incertaine (vntill Reason approching, brings vs truer releation, shewing the mutabilitie, vn|certainti and change of all things.
In the second, Art and Nature seeme to vie which of them ought to bee accounted the more in|dulgent mother to mankinde, with many reasons to to intimate whether it were better to be gouerned by Art  Discipline, or to liue as some of the West Indian sauages o, only by the rule of Nature.
The third obiects a contentious litigation be|tweene Wealth and Pouertie, with the most fre|quent obiections vsed on either part, their euents and accidents incident, wherein I must entreate the iudicious Reader not to thinke mee Satericall (as perchance some carper will) but rather that I aime at the Ideas of the things, which I protest is truth.
The last seems to demonstrate the misery which Vertue suffers vnder the burthen of Sinne: wher|n Sinne seems to erect foure Altars to her selfe, where she receiues adoration and sacrifice from the high and mightie. What the scope of this is, the Reader may quickly see; and it is concluded with that which concludes all things, the last Iudge|ment.
Now for this way of expression that I seeme thu to present things past, present, aud to come; the be|ginning progresse, continuance and end of all things in a Dreame. Let no man maruaile, for this life is no better, whether you respect the shortnes and vn|certaintie. Prosperitie is a pleasant Dreame, Ad|uersitie a troublesome: onely the good or bad euen is all. To which (gentle Reader) I leaue thee wishing thee as my selfe, not what thou desirest  deseruest.
I. H.





Visiones Rerum.

Principium  Mutabilitas rerum.

CONTAINING A BRIEFE DESCRIPTI|ON OF THE PALACE of old Cronos or Time; and Logos his speech concer|ning Mutation.

CRONOS, Time. MORIA, Folly. LOGOS, Reason.

1.
BE still a while yee Wolues that me deuoure,
You sadder thoughts and sorrowes of my 
Which through my soule an Icy numnes powre,
And wholly rob me of that better part,
Which God and Nature did me once impart,
Vntill I briefly can vnfold and show
An accident be fell me long ago.



2
Which Storie that I here intend to write,
A Dreame or Vision is that me befell,
When drown'd in deepest sleepes of Darksome night,
I seem'd transported (how I cannot tell)
Into a Palace, which did so excell
For glorious structures, that mine Artlesse pen
Mut passe their praise, vnfit to vtter them.


3
A stately Hall me thought I entred,
The Pauement set with Marble and pure Gold;
An Aure roofe, with Starres illumined,
And in the same a Sunne I did behold,
Which seem'd by Art about the Center old;
And Siluer Cinthia thirteene times the yeare,
Seeming quite darkned, and as often cleare.


4
All sorts of creatures proper to the Land,
All those the watry deepes inhabiting;
Or such as twixt them both indifferent stand:
All those the  Region trauelling;
All Shrubs or Trees in Earth, or Sea, that spring,
Framd for Mans pleasure, and his vse alone,
Within these walles were wrought in wood and bone.


5
Where whilest I wandred with no mall content,
Gazing about, aloft I chnc't to spie
These lines: Thou Morall that art hither sent
To Cronos house, prepare thy selfe to die.
This touch me deepe: for often heard had I
Of cruell . Cronos, and his cutting Sithe,
Oft (tho I felt it not) th'effects did lithe



6
But streight there did before mine eyes appeare,
A wanton Dame that came with follik grace,
 Moria vaine, who scoft my drooping cheare:
Fain Heart (quoth she) what meanes this sorrow base?
Can lustie Youth feare Cronos wrinckled face?
This Dotard shall not find thee many a yeare.
Loe, while he sleeps, Ile steale his Wings and's Geare.* Folly.


7
This said, away she went, and streight return'd,
Bringing a Reade whereon she got astride.
Me thought 'twas braue to see her thus adorn'd.
Two wings she fitted then with nimble pride
To her owne shoulders, hanging downe each side;
And to be sure Times Glasse should not run out,
She broke that all, and strew'd the sand about.


8
Then (quoth she) for thy Hat (and reacht her wing)
Pluck out this feather. tis an ornament
For all my followers well fashioning;
And such as scorne old Cronos detriment.
Come, let vs spend our time in merriment;
Let's laugh, let's gather Flowers Here many a Dance
She learnt me, and much wanton Dalliance.


9
But streight she vanisht euen as Phantasmes doe,
Or Demons, which doe ayrie shapes acquire;
When Cronos in the throng himselfe did show,
And both his old armes, and his Sithe did tire
With killing, and left me her tales t'admire:
For, noting Cronos had both Sythe and Wings,
I thought her false, and long'd to know these things.



10
Within this Hall a world of people were,
All Cronos children (yet destinguisht tho)
Some Friends, and some as Seruants did appeare.
Then lookt I round, wishing to see or know
Some stranger like my selfe: and thinking so,
A thing of greatest strangenes did afford
It selfe to view, which here I will record.


11
Amongst the rest an Mutation, Times eldest child. Actor did I spie,
Whose force (tho weake in shew) did Giants proue,
(I say I saw, but nothing perfitly,
For in a Cloud it euer seem'd to moue)
A mightie Globe; it seem'd to rowle and shoue,
Where millions sought with ladders still to attaine
The top, but when she strd, still downe they came.


12
This made me now wish more then earst I did,
Some wise Oeipus to shew me all;
Nor sooner had I wisht, but I descried
A reuerend Syre, which genly did me call
Into a secret corner of this Hall;
And first of all himselfe to me he nam'd
Reason. Logos, and afterward this speech he fram'd.


13
Young man (quoth he) I see thou lately art
Armed within this place of miserie;
I am to let thee know it is my part
and Office to direct this companie:
Tho most of them indeed my precepts flie,
Trusting Moria rather, and her Mates;
But I of thee diuine some better Fates.



14
Thou seest how here each hath his seuerall guise,
Each followes his owne way, and choose their like.
Some here consume their time in flatteries,
And some in Pride: diuers delight to strike
And kill their fellowes: others nothing like,
But ease and belly-cheare (to feele, to tast)
But Cronos sweepes them all away at last.


15
A few there be, whose well directed mind
Retire themselues from forth the presse and throng,
Whose thoughts to contemplation are design'd:
Not to preuent old Cronos, nor prolong,
But to prepare for what they cannot shun:
And to auoid Morias cunning baies,
Who first abusde the entring at the Gates.


16
Logos (quoth I) Gramercy, I doe owe
To thee my selfe: thast cured my doubts and feares.
And now my chiefe desires remaines to know
Her, that behind that turning Globe appeares.
Content (quoth he) lend then a while thine eares;
While these feast, fight, or sleepe; my taske shall be
To spend an houre vpon her Historie.


17
It is Mutation, Goddesse great of things.
That in her turne doth triumph ouer all;
Who tramples on the heads of mightie Kings,
And makes the strongest Towres demolisht, fall,
Of whom I muse, and maruaile euer shall,
That ancient Rome such Temples should erect
To triuiall things, and yet her power neglect.



18
For if the course of mundane things below,
Be guided by the uer chaning Fate
Of Heauenly Orbes, from whence the causes flow
Of their effects, and what they procrate.
Her birth is then Diuine, and may relate,
And challenge Altas farre more due, then either
Fortune, Lyeus, Venus altogether.


19
Some few examples therefore will I take,
And small remonstrance from the memorie
Of former times, her forces knowne to make;
That men asleepe rockt by ,
Which vainely dreame here of eternitie,
May wake and see, since Human and Diuine
Things feele her force, they must account with Time.


20
That they which de repute their states so fixt,
As Lightning cannot blast, misfortune shake,
Might hence obserue, the web of chance is mixt,
And as they giue themselues, so must they take,
Whereof examples thousands may we make
From euery Age; yet shall a few suffie,
Drawne both from Mens and Times best memories.


21
First, to begin with Heauen; the Heauenly The fal  mutation of the Angels into deuils. Quires
Haue not been euer from her powre exempt,
But fell by Pride into eternall fires;
From compleat Ioy, from happie true content,
To be tormented there, and to torment:
Where tho the rest's by one example warn'd,
Yet are not men by thousand thousands arm'd.



22
The Change in the Planets. Lampes of Heauen, the Planets change aboue,
As well in sight, aspect, as influence.
The Sunne from his diurnall arch doth moue
After his proper motion, either hence
Certaine degrees, or neerer vs; from whence
Proceede the diuers seasons, Autumne, Spring,
Winter  Summer, whose change, change ch thing.


23
And gadding Phoebe, whose still changing face,
Doth so much spot her female chastitie,
Varies not onely in her way, but pace;
And to our seeming in her quantitie,
Which some ascribe to excentricitie.
But all of them till Plato's yeare be run,
Stray from the place of their creation.


24
The The continuall change and transmigration in the Elements. Elements, on which each thing's composde,
(Beneath the Moone) beeing and Vegetiue
To daily transmigrations are disposde,
And mongst themselues retaine a mutuall strife
Each to become other (much like our life)
Ayre doth sometimes to Fire or Water run;
And Fire an earthly habit doth put on.



25
Some thinke, the The cause of Fountaines and Riuers, ac|cording to Aristotle, by reason of the Ayres con|densation and changing into water. Ayre in hollow Caues condenc't
To be the Founts of Ornoque or Ryne:
But all men see the vapours which 
And raified, ambitiously doe clime
To th'Ayres cold Region, whence they streight decline
To snowe Clouds conucrted, then to aine,
And seeking so their natiue place againe.


26
The The generation of Thunder. hot drie umes with watery clouds shut in,
Enuiron'd round, and as in prison gyude,
To struggle streight for liberty begin,
Tho long in vane, repulst on euery side;
Vntill at last (enflamde) hey flames forth glide,
Shunning their foes embracements, while their thun|der
Amaze the people, both with feare and wonder.


27
The The change of Winds, Seas, Dayes, Nights, Winter, Summer, c. Winds still change, the Seas still ebbe and flow;
The Dayes succeed the Nights, Nights follow Dayes.
The checquered Meades giue place to Frosts and Snow;
And cloudy Winter, when the Sune displayes
His Sun-daies suit, her stomy Campe doth raise,
And yeelds to conquering Time, as Time must doe
To him that Earth shall change, and Heauen to.



28
Who maruels now if halesse The fall of Adam, and his change from great happinesse to vnspeakable miserie. Adam fel
From Innocence, and from his blest estate,
His earthly part being stuffe so mutable
Subiected vnto change by lawes of Fate,
And influence of Starres contaminate
Amongst things euer changing here confinde?
Or that to's issue he this plague resignde?


29
VVho maruels now, that Change and viissitude of Greatnesse. Princes, great and wise,
Are subiect to her powre mongst other things.
Th' Assirian Monarchs, whose great Emperies,
Reacht VVesterne , first example brigs;
First, King, then Mad-man, Beast, yet last a Kng,
And Zexes he that made the  lote,
Who fled from Salamine with one poore bote.


30
That Croessus, whom old Solo; wit implor'd,
To cenure no man happie till his end;
Those hidden Caskes that he so ador'd,
Proued but a bayte his Neighbour King to send
To's , where recording this his Friend,
 guies him Life and State,
Least some should make him like vnfortunate



31
Caesar and Pompey, that with tragedies
Fild this Worlds grand cirque. Iugurth, Hannibal,
Cassius, Brutus, both the Anthonies,
Make all repayment when reuenge doth call;
And some by foes, some by themselues doe fall:
But diuers others farre more strangely feele
Th'effects of our great Goddesse changing wheele.


32
Great Marius, sprung but from rusticke syre,
And in the fields of Arpos nourished;
First, but a Legionarie, rising higher,
Was sixt time Consull; lastly, banished,
In ruin'd Carthage forst to beg his bread:
Yet after all, by lands and seas thus tost,
Dyde with farre greater glories then he lost.


33
Why should I heare Sertorius relate,
That tasted earst so many ebbs and flowes?
Agathocles, a Potters sonne, attained the Kingdome of Sicily, and being driuen from his Kingdome, yet againe regained it, and in his old age againe lost all, and died in miserie. Iustine. Agathocles? or wofull Mithridates Kindred in his Infancy sought his life many waies, setting him to mannage a fierce Horse, which danger by his dexteritie he es|caped. They attempted the like by Poison, and thereby compeld him for safeguard of his life to liue foure yeares in the Wildernesse. After which reassuming his state and kingdom, his wife (hauing plaid false) seekes to poyson him; which hee es|capes by his Antidotes. Growes mightie; con|quers diuers Kingdomes with good successe. But making warre with the Romans, he suffers all the changes and aduersities of Fortune with great con|stancie (the very Elements fighting against him, and his most trustie Seruant betraying his children to the Romans); till his owne Sonne rising against him, and besieging him, constrained him at last to kill himselfe. Iustine. Methridate,
Then whom none tasted greater wealth or woes?
Valerian, Emperour of Rome, being ouer|come in battaile by Sapor, King of the Parthians, was made his Foote-stoole. Valerian (Sapors Foot-stoole) each man knowes.
And, Gelnier, Vandal Prince, compeld to beg
Three To wipe away his teares: To make him merrie: To relieue his hunger. things, a Spunge, a Harpe, a Loafe of bread.



34
ut no example doth illustrate more
The powre of our Mutation, then the pride
f Baiazet, whom  adore,
Coop in a Cage that -like liu'd and dyde.
ut here at home I  haue espde
Eclipst; the British Eledurs thriee
Enthron'd, deposde; and our late Edward twice



35
The The change and demolition of Cities. Courts where heretofore the Troian Knights
And all this  pompe did keepe;
And where the tents were pight of haughtie Greekes,
Now on their backe the Plow-man furrows deepe,
And silly Shepheards feede their nibling Sheepe.
Stupendious Babell to, that lasting wonder,
Les with her name entomb'd, her ashes vnder.


36
And Babilon (where Chaldian Ninus raign'd,
And Percian yrus conquered) by whose owres
Heauens studded Canopie did seeme sustain'd;
Her guilted , her vaulted Orchards, Bowres,
And pleasant soyle, made at with fertill showres,
To dens of Beasts and Theues conuerted be,
And barren Sands, as Esay did foresee.


37
Where's stately Iericho and strong Acre?
What's Egypts Thebe:, her Alexandria?
Where's Ebatane, and mightie Niniuie?
What's ancient Sydon and Csaita?
And Tyre, whose Daughters Leptis, Vtica,
And Carthage? tho they life to others gie,
Haue long agoe themselues disseast to lie.


38
What of th'Ehesians glorie is become,
Built for the honour of Diana's grace?
The stately Temple of proud ,
Where Golden veynes did  and enchase
Each costly Stone? Alas, in deepe disgrace.
The Labyrinthes of Candie and of Nile?
Some no where found, the rest are ruins vile.



39
What's now the shells, where sometime Athens grew,
And Lacedemon that so much did prize
VVise Solons and Luurgus Lawes? where's now
Delightfull Deinde reductum pro fundum littus in fi|num Baias apperit, aqua s que calidas,  ad vo|luptatem  ad sanandos morbos accommodissi|mas. Strab. Geographicorum, lib. 5. Baa with her Luxuries?
Great Cuma, vetustissimum Chalcedensium  Cumeorum aedificium antiquitate cunctas Sicilliae  Italiae vrbes antecellit. Strabo. Ibidem. Cuma to entomb'd in tuins lies?
And moderne Rome doth now no more extoll
Her selfe for Vaults Circques Collumnes, Capitoll.


40
Nor doth our Grandam singlely admit
These markes of hers, and changes in her face
VVhereby she seemeth like a Louer stript
Of choisest Iewels, yeelding chiefest grace,
But her rich intrals suffer in like case;
Euen Tagus Golden streames are growne so poore,
Because the Hills their tributes pay no more. (1) Changes in the intrals of the Earth, her Mines, and Treasures exhausted; those places that in former times haue been rich, becomming poore.



41
And but that Nature like a frugall Dame,
Doth in her secret Cabinet still hold
Some thing for after times (for feare the shame
Of pouertie should brand her being old,
Or Children taxe her of vnkindnesse) Gold,
Rich stones, and Minerals, this lauis time,
I thinke, to glase their places would resigne.


42
And yet not these alone her forces feele,
Paying Alleageance to her powerfull Name;
Not Angels, Stars, Fire, Ayre, Men, Townes, Gold, Steele,
But Countries and whole Nations doe the same;
But euen Changes of Religion. Religion subiect doth remaine
To change o in externall forme and place,
That men mistake her Robes, her Rites, her face.


43
For (all her old apparell throwne away,
Both Arns Ephod, and his Incense too;
And all those Lambs and Goats that each where lay
On fuming Altars) her old seruants now
Mutinie against her, her new tyres mis-know;
And while themselues lie plung'd in Hell black night
Of Ignorance, say others lack their sight.


44
The Ierusalem. place where earst were holy Coenants made,
And where Iehoua Marriage  did knit
With his deae , now  doth ,
And Irreligion and  it
Triumphing with an insolence vnfit,
And true Religion banisht quite away,
Is no where knowne within those coasts to stay



45
And Rome where once the Martyrs blood did raie,
To moist the seed of Christianitie.
Africk (tho neerer to the Sunne) and
In vtter darknesse now be nighted lie,
And know it not (the greater miserie.)
Faire Italy, that counted once the World
All Barbarous, for barbarismes abhord.


46
Religion there's become a very scorne,
Their Cannons and traditions haue her plac,
Which like false witnesses they still subborne,
To testifie vntrths against her face:
But not content to doe her one disgrace,
Simonie, Murder, Pride, Hipocrisie,
Lust, Blasphmy, exile her vtterly.


47
Againe, the North that sometime did produce
Nothing but darknes, that did nought good keepe
In her frozen manions, nought but Snowes, Fogs, Dews,
And Icie Mountaines floting in the deepe;
The foster of Stupiditie and Sleepe,
The parent of vnpollisht saluage minds,
Both fierce and bloody, like the Siluae kinds,


48
Is now become more blest then other Climes,
For pure Religions true profession:
For (that which was  former time),
Her warme Zeale  in the  That is in Iseland, and some parts of Nor|way,  the cirle Artick. Zone:
For here with vs Religion hath her Throne;
Iustice and Mercie  at either hand,
And Truth, her , doth before her stand.



49
Behind her come Humilitie and Peace,
Plentie and Charitie (both wondrous ag'd)
And tho Bellona and Erennis fierce,
Alecto and the Furies all enrag'd
With this her glorie, haue themselues engag'd
Against-her traine, in hope to worke her spight;
Yet guards of Angels throw them at her feete.


50
And all her Courts with Princely Seruants shine:
The best of Kings her Harrold is become
Proclaiming both her worth to present Times;
And to succeeding Ages; while his owne
(Out-lasting Time) eternall shall become
Then Arts and Armes, and all the other Graces,
Are ranckt about her in their seuerall places.


51
But now, deare Clio, I thine aide impiore,
T'impart some portion of thy sacred skill,
Or sweete Euterpe of thy Nectard store,
Into my braine some scruple to distill,
Till I haue showne with this my rustick quill,
The various change of  Body and of Mind
By Logos, to this Micrcosme assign'd 1. The changes Men suffers in Bodie.


52
This lesser World (quoth he) the  map
Of Fire and Water, Earth and 
The Sea of change, the subiect of ;
The Bulwatke gainst a world of 
Oh that the Heauens had 
To write the  of this little thing
Which learned  all the Worlds great King



53
The wondrous changes which it doth admit,
First, from not being once, to come to bee;
Then from a rude vnpollisht Chaos yet,
For to be  a thing to heare and see:
And from a thing of such infirmitie,
That creepes amongst the dust, and liks the mold,
To grow a Man of Courage stout and bold.


54
Then from a thing of such accomplisht forme,
VVhom Nature hath decreed with all the best,
Both of her skill and treasures to adorne
VVith fairest beauties, hauing right imprest
Both Soule and Body; farre before the rest
Imparting wit, and memorie to know
Both things aboue, and in the earth below.


55
VVith crisped locks out-shining Libian Gold;
VVith skin for whitenes passing Atlas snow;
And , the Pearles in stately Ormus sold;
And cheekes, the Roses that in Iurie grow:
VVhose eies like two pure Christall Heauens show;
VVhose lips as Cherries, breath as incense sweet,
And tongue as sweetest Musick doth delight.


56
That such an one  a span of Time
Be thus disrode of  excellence,
So chang'd I sa (by  diuine)
For our  high offence,






57
Should turne like those scratcht by the Beldam Ape,
Where Pendentes que genas  tales aspice rugas, quales vmbriferos vbi pandit Tabraca saltus. In vetula scalpit iam mater simia bucca. Iuuenal. Sat. 10. 193. Tabraca her shadie Groues displaies.
What change of more amazement can one shape,
Then this Times Map of ruine and disgrace;
Deafe, Sinew-shrunke, the storie of ill dayes;
Callender of Disease, which last returnes
All frosted ore, a banquet for the Wormes.


58
Now here againe an Of the Soule briefly. Ocean should I enter,
Of stormie billowes, where these barkes of yours
Are bruisde and beaten, while abroad they venture
From our knowne coasts to gather gawdy flowres,
With vaine Moria in her fatall Bowres;
Where gainst the Capes of Pride and Lust they run
Oft split before their Voyage be begun.


59
The passions of the Soule I should 
Which is a sea of more extended ;
Ad where more rudely crossing  presse
Each other, then in th'Ocean can be found
In Malstrom, or the  Sound
For here ten thousand contraries ,
Both frozen Ice, and Aetna's burning flame



60
Camelions doe not colours faster change
Then these affections: nor doe idle men
In waxe or paper forme more anticks strange
Then may be noted in the soules of them,
Whom Logos doth not compasse in, and hem:
New passions, and irregular desires,
New motions and mutations turning Gyres.


61
While tost with feauours and contrarie fits,
Of seeming zeale, but true Hypocrisie,
Now Hope wins ground, and streight Despaire that gets;
Now Auarice, now Prodigalitie;
Now haughti thoughts, then great Humilitie;
Both burning Anger, and chill frozen Feare,
Do in their turnes insult and dominere.


62
Enuie, Reuenge and Malice others whet,
To perpetrate in human bloody acts,
By Sword and Poyson their intents to get;
Or (worst of all) by some infernall pacts:
Which done, the sweetnes of those filthy facts
Ture into horror and confounding feare,
They wih  thousand deaths, their cscience clear


63
Many there be  Ambition car,
Doe madly  the Alpine Mounts,
To get beyond all  and  far:
But find  of their accounts,
Not free from  and  at the founts
Of all those  epent
That euer neere  they went



64
Men seeke for things they wish they had not found;
They wish for that which makes them oft lament;
Lament that lost, which made their griefes abound,
And grieue for lacke of that they must repent:
If had, men kisse and kill incontinent.
They pine with loue, and yet extreamely hate,
Whom so they lou'd, with hauing saciate.


65
Now plumpe cheek't mirth, now sadnes they commend,
Now sweet content yet plunge themselues in care:
To fatting ease, and sleepe their Youthes they bend,
And in old Age, their limbs forget to spare
Toyling for gaine, whereof they loose their share,
Both thanks and trauaile: thus are mortall Hearts
The stage where vainest Actors play their parts.


66
Sometime they praise the Countrie, then the Towne;
Now hih estate, now humble, low degree,
Now fruitfull trauale, streight soft beds of Downe;
Now Courtly greatnes pleaseth: by and by
The life retired, and leasure for to de.
Now bloody Ensignes, and the Cannons sound;
The~ streight way Peace, whe~ce sweeter tones redound.


67
The married man commends the single life,
And liberti, detesting to be tide
To still renewing cares, and wanton strife:
Yet (freed againe) he cannot so abide.
He pins; till he some second warre haue tride
In all affections giddly they roue,
Not constant what to hate, or what to loue



68
No certaine state of goodnesse doe they proue,
Or badnesse here: for both doe by degrees
Vnto their proper periods still moue.
Hell is the end assign'd to those that leese
The time, and grace ordaind to them: but these
That by the staires of Vertue vpward past,
Meet with perfection in the Heauens at last.


69
Now since the Heauens, and the Celestiall Quires,
And all the Elements thus change. We see
Since Princes, Cities, stateliest Towres, and Spires,
In time demollish and forgotten be.
Since all things taste of Mutabilitie
That God created; let none thinke it strange,
That Times are chang'd, and we in them doe change.


70
This said, my Vision vanisht, and reuoluing
Logos discourse within my troubled brest;
And (notwithstanding my knowne wants) resoluing
To keepe that piece which in my mind did rest,
These Lines I limbd, whereof you are possest,
Whose vse is this, that Man (a changling euer)
Might learne to worship him that changeth neuer.





Cursus  Ordo rerum. OR ART AND NA|TVRE.

1
THe Winter past, and Phoebus now begu
T'approach our Northerne Tropick, to ruiue
His tender Infants hid in Flora's wombe,
And with his beames their fetters to vngiu;
When Men and Plants seem'd to receiue new life,
Themselues attiring in their best array,
To honour Phoebus, and adorne the day,


2
I (onely I) clouded in discontent,
Wrapt vp in woe, stung with misfortunes strokes,
Hidng my selfe, my sorrowes so to vent,
In solitarie vnfrequented This was written whilest I liued in the cold Cstle of Scarborough, standing vpon a most high Rocke almost surrounded by the Sea, Rocks,
Which Thetis as enamor'd on, fast locks
Within her armes; here keeping of my Sheepe
With Morpheus Charmes, my sences fell asleepe.



3
If I did sleepe I dream'd: if waking were;
There was endeed presented to mine eye
Two Royall Queenes, whose persons did appeare
The types of beautie, and of soueraigntie,
Surpassing faite seem'd that, this faire and high;
That lowly seem'd of modest complement,
This courtly, gracefull, and magnificent


4
That on her brow a rosie Chaplet bore,
A Lilly, for a Scepter in her hand;
A Kirtle to of grassie greene shee wore;
Wherein with cunning skill did painted stand
All liuing creatures proper to the Land:
All sorts of Trees, Shrubs, Flowres, and Vegetals,
Both costly Iems, and hidden Minerals.


5
Here siluer streames slide through th'enameld Meades,
Where towring Cedars, tusts of Mrtle seeme.
Here fed the frisking Cunnies, there the Heards;
And in this cirque three battailes strange were seene,
The The Dragon and the Elephant haue be|tweene them a naturall antipathie and warre, therefore the Dragon watches him by the way, and from some high tree launces himselfe vpon him. The Elephant makes towards some tree to rub off these his vnkind embracements: but to pre|uent him, the Dragon then manacles his legs with his long winding taile. Then tries the Elephant with his hand (his Trunke) to vnloose himselfe. In|to this the Dragon presently chops his head, and there so long sucks his blood (which he mightily thirsts for to coole himselfe) that at last the Dra|gon drunke, and the Elephant drie, they both fall downe dead together: for the Elephant falling vp|vpon the Dragon, crushes him to death; gaining that reuenge in death, which in life he could not at|taine to. Plin. lib. 3. cap. 11.  12. Dragon and the Elephat betweene;
Betwixt The Ichnewmon, or Rat of Nilus, watching the Crocodile while he sleeps, leps in at his mouth, whips from thence into his belly, and from thence gnawes her selfe a passage, killing the Monster. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 25. lin. 5. th'Ichnewmon, and Nles monstrous King;
The Serpent being the naturall enemie of the Camelion, is watcht by him, where he vseth to sleepe vnder the shadow of some tree; and there the Camelion attends him in the tree, and while hee sleepeth, she distills from her mouth a cleare shining drop by a thred of the same stuffe, iust vpon the Serpents head, which no sooner toucheth him, but he dies, so strong a poyson it is. M. Sands his Tra|uels, fol. 121. Th'Aspe and Camelion, whose Spit quits her Sting.



6
The Phenix then (of winged things) was not,
Nor thneat House-wright Sea-charming The Halcyon builds a neast of the dride Sea-froth so strong, that Iron cannot hurt it. Arist. Animalium. lib. 9. cap. 14. Halcyon;
Nor was This bird called Auis Paradisus (by some Apodes, or Manu codiata,) it is found onely in the Mollucaes of the East Indies. It is neuer found aliue; for it neuer toucheth the earth, but flies and houers continually aloft in the ayre, where they lay their Eggs in a certaine hollow place of their Males backe, and their sit and hatch their young, liuing, as some thinke, onely by the Ayre. It is now worne as a Plume, the Bird being but a very small thing in the head of the Plume. Scal. Excer|citations. 228. Molluca's plumy bird forgot,
That hath no Nest nor Cradle for her young,
But her Males hollow backe, where fast tide on
With their owne strings, they restlesse euer row
Through th'Ayre (their fare) and wretched earth nere know



7
The little The Tomaneio is a very small Bird lit|tle bigger then a Flie, or a bumble Bee, ha|uing most delicate Feathers, a most loftie, shrill, and delightfull Note, not inferiour to our Nightingale, which is most admirable in so little a bodie, whose Neast with her selfe in it haue been found to weigh but twentie foure Graines: they be common in the West Indies. Lerius and Acosta. Tomaneio here I spide,
And The Cucuuio a small Bird of Hispanio|la, hath two marueilous bright Eyes vnder her Wings, besides those in her head, which serue the Barbarians in stead of Candles, or Torches, either abroad, or at home; abroad they tie them to their shoes, if at any time they chanc't to trauell late. Pet. Mart. Decades, pag. 274. she whose forehead beares two burning Lights,
And two beneath her wings, which serue to guide
The cunning Workemans hands in darkest night:
And she of which the Brittaine wonders writes,
The Barnacle. Fish, Fowle and Fruite: nor was she lesse adorn'd
Byth' The Silke-worme. seed to worme, fro~ worme to flie, transformd.



8
Here all the Flowres of Tauris, Padoa;
And all the Plants the Easterne Orchards yeelds,
Vpon their Downie Carpets smiling Lay:
And all the Druggs and Sweetes of Indian fields,
And Balsam: this grew first in Iudea, from thence transplanted neere Cairo in Egypt, where they built a great wall to fence it, to keepe it safe. They say there is now but little of it remaining. They slit the Barke of it with an Iuorie instru|ment, and from thence the precious liquor distills. Paulus Iouius. That which we haue now, coms from the West Indies. Balsam, for which Egypt strong walls builds.
The Cinamon, the Sugar-caine, the Vine,
And The Frankencense and Mirrhe trees: they vse to cut them at the time of the yeare, and from them distills a liquor, which after turnes to this kind of Gum. Plin. They grow in Arabia Foelix. hallowed boughes that weepe those fires di|uine.



9
Arbore de rais: it is a Tree in the hot Countries, whose boughes by reason of his naturall humiditie, after they haue spread a pretty distance from the first Trunke or Bole, bend downe to the earth againe, and there take new roote, and from thence grow vp as it were a new tree, some of them in this sort couering an Italian mile. Linsc. p. 103. The Indian Roote-tree shading miles of lands,
Whose moyst boughs make the coolest Galleries.
The The Herba Sentida, when any man comes towards it, shrinkes in all the Leaues; and going away, she displayes her beautie as before. Scal. Ex|cercitation. 182. And Captaine Hercourts Tra|ailes in Guiana. feeling Shrub, that shrinkes from human hand.
Arbore triste de diu, is a tree in the East Indies about Goa: it beares no fruit, but the flowre of it is like a Crosse; the nature of it is to flourish all the night full of these flowres, which at the Sunne-rising or soone after, she puts off againe; and it should seeme they wither thus, by reason of the tenuitie of the Sap which feeds them. Linsc. pag. 105. And mournefull Tree which still at Phoebus rayes
Puts off her Flowres, nights beautious liueries.
The Euphrates Lote is one of the Solsequiae, a louer of the Sunne: it hath a great long stalke which it aduanceth out of the water still by little and little as the Sunne riseth: but when the Sunne comes to his Meridian, he turnes his head downe|wards, and by mid-night (as if he would seeke him through the Center, if it were possible,) he is then so loe vnder water, that the Water-men can hard|ly find him with long poles and crookes. Plin. lib. 13. cap. 16. Lote was here that seemes to seeke her Louer:
And It is reported, I know not how truly, that in Iaua there is a tree, whose Pith is as hard as Iron. th'Iron tree, not Iron, but his Brother.



10
Vpon her shoulders then a Scarfe she had
Of party colours, gray, red, blew and greene,
In which the pourtraicts of each thing was made,
That in the licquid regions may be seene;
Both friendly Fish, and Monsters fell and keene,
Mongst whom th'earth neuer touching Dolphin bre
Chiefe place, that set th'Laconian Harpe ashore.


11
The Tyburone was here, whose nimble sin
Out-strips the fleetest Sayle in swiftest flight,
Th' Echynis, stay ship Remora next him,
Tho small of body, yet of greatest might,
The Pliny speakes of this Sea- Stella, I know not how truly. Lib. 9. cap. 60. burning Starre was here that shines so bright,
Whose touch seares all things; and although it drench
In deepest waues, yet water cannot quench.



12
The double sighted The Elops or Sturgeon (a Fish well knowne) is said to haue in his eyes two sights, which in the water is easily perceiued; the one is directed still vpwards out of the water, the other within. Elops to was here.
The The Torpedo or Cramp-fish. Cramp-fish to, that makes the Fisher lame:
Tritons like men: and some whose heads appreare
Like rocks. The Morse that at reliefe is tane,
Sea-Vnicorne, Oxe and Hippopotame,
The monstrous Rhoyder, and the Oylie Whale,
And she that with her turning wheeles may saile.


13
Within this Scarfe were intertexted to,
Three batailes that my wandring eyes beguile:
Plin. lib. 4. cap. 25. lin. 20. And Seneca in his naturall questions, lib. 4. cap. 2. relates this fight betweene the Dolphins and Crocodiles (seene by Babillius, then Gouernour of Egypt for the Romans) at one of the mouthes of Nilus, where after a long fight as it were for the Soue raigntie, the Crocodiles (bing many of them slaine) the rest ouercome, fled. A seull of Dolphins first that each yeare goe
Procession to their brinie bounds in Nile,
Whom to repulse attends the Crocodile,
But to his cost: for tho he's arm'd each where,
Saue vnder's belly, his false foe speeds there.



14
The next was of the This storie is so well knowne to Sea-men, that it needs not any relation. The Sword-fish with his Nose or Beake, as I may call it, being fashioned iust like a Scotch Sword (of which I haue seene one or two newly taken) assaults th Whale below vnder water, and with his trenchant blade so cuts and wounds him below, that he forces him aboue water, where the Thresser meetes him, and so payes him, that the monstrous beast rores and trembles for woe. Sword-fish and the Whales;
The Sword fish aided by the Thresser-fish:
The last, where The manner of the Whale-fight is this: two or three boats armed with fiue men a piece, three Rowers, one Stearer, and him that strikes; they come vpon the Whale where he lies sleeping, most commonly at first directed to his place by his loud snorting. If hee be fast alseep when he is struc|ken, he lies trembling and shaking in a kind of a|mazement, so that they haue good time to cleare themselues, and to keepe off at a distance. If he bee awake there is more danger of spoyling or drowning with the strokes of his tayle. But hauing struck him, he plunges then downe to the bottom, froting his wounded side to get out the Harping-Iron, which thereby takes the faster hold: the Boate being often in perill to goe vnder water by his vio|lent motions, if the line in vearing chance to snarle; for preuention of which, they haue an Hatchet al|waies ready, they doing all the while nothing but follow him, whilest he worketh himselfe to death. Man this monstrous Fish assailes,
Whose haughti thoughts acquire true fame in this;
Since a small cord, and Harping iron is
The engine, which being launc't at him asleepe,
Doth captiuate the King of all the Deepe.



15
These few I noted of her ornaments,
Before mine eyes did to that Goddesse moue,
Which seemd like Pallace, when her course she bent
Through the blew Welken with the Queene of Loue,
And iealous Iuno, when with gifts they stroue
To bribe the Troian Boy vnto their wills,
That fed his Snow-white Lambs on Idaes Hills.


16
Nor had she onely prudent Pallac grace,
And sacred wisdome, but did more containe
That Maiestie and Beautie in her face,
VVhich men ascribe vnto the other twaine.
In briefe, she had no blemish, nor no staine,
But rather seemd more faire then in her Youth;
A wonder, and but few will thinke us truth.


17
In a triumphant Chariot did she sit,
By which the other captiue-like did stand;
Beneath her feete a Globe, a foot-stoole fit;
That hand a Booke, this bore a siluer VVand,
VVhose powerfull charmes doth stocks and  com|mand,
Lyons and Tygers and vpon her backe
Two wings she had, th'one white, the tother blacke.



18
Vpon her head a Corronet she bore
Of rich The best Pearles are got in the Arabian Gulph at Barreyn, Catifa, Iulfar, Camaron, and from thence sent to Ormus: the next to these are those gotten at the Cape Comorrin, or the Iland of Seylon: the West Indies be farre worse, the Brit|tish of least reputation. Linsc. pag. 131. and Maf|feus. Arabian Pearle her Curles to stay;
A Syndon Vayle of Belgia she wore,
VVrought full with quaint workes of Hesperia:
A Purple Robe of Macednia
Vpon her shoulders, and with cunning rate
Therein were wrought ten thousand works most faire.


19
In stead of Gennes or of Flemmish Mares,
Two Eagles and two Elephants had she:
And for o mannage such vnequall paires,
Two mightie Giants, Gaine and Fame went by
To whip them on; the Coach-man, Industrie:
Plentie and Pleasure Lacquies were assign'd;
Vertue and Honour came as Friends behind.


20
And in this Chariot she was mounted hie
In a high Seate, which Contemplation hight
Sustain'd by foure VVheeles which doe make it flie,
VVherein in Golden characters were writ,
First, Logick, in the second Rhetorick;
Next,  and  still prest,
To count the , ,  of the rest.



21
Beneath vpon her very skirts, mine eye
Ten thouand Flowers, and precious beauties spide:
(For neerer I presume not, nor more high,
It might be construed arrogance and pride
For him that there so little hath descride:)
Ten thousand neate conceits and textures there,
Strange workes and rare inuentions did appeare.


22
Therein were wrought ten thousand Instruments.
Ten thousand Wheeles, measures of swift Time:
Ten thousand Engins strange for rare intents,
Such as Archimedes his wit diuine,
Deuisde for Ladders vp to Heauen to clime,
To steale the motions of the Starres, and here
For to comprise them in his Vitrean Sphere,


23
All scattered round about her skirts there lay
A thousand Cities wrought by cunning hand,
Where battlements and steeples did display
Their loftie pride; 'bout some of which there stands
Braue Troopes of plumed Horse, and Footemens Bands,
Squadrons of Pikes to guard the thundring shot,
Some seeming for't, some force regarding not.

Let the Reader looke for the rest of the Notes at the Latter end the Poem, by reason of the too largenesse of them.

24
Here to the life were wrought the Nauall Fights.
(1) Sallamine, (1) Actium, (1) Corinth; where the Armes
Of East and West contended 'bout their rights;
Whilest Neptune laught, gaining by both their harmes:
Tho Europe aye triumphes, who with loues charmes
Hath so entangled Neptune, that he still
Is most obsequious to performe her will:



25
Much more I saw which Time and mine intent
Of breuitie will not permit me say;
Which while I pondring stood, these Ladies bent
Their course to me, me thought with this array,
And with this equipage: the truth to say,
Much did I muse what such a Soueraigntie,
Might haue to doe with my rusticitie.


26
And musing long what titles might be fit,
What complements might best with them agree,
The chiefe of them which seem'd enthron'd to sit,
Thus shook me from my dumpes. Shepheard (quoth she)
First know, that we two, Art and Nature be.
Next, vnderstand thy Guests come from aboue,
Tho mortall shee, immortall Fates I proue.


27
Thirdly, obserue that she and I haue then
A certaine Argument, which of vs two
Be most benigne and kind to mortall men,
She Natur, and I Art. And lastly, know
The censure of our Arguments we doe
Wholly referre to thine integritie,
To whom we equall Benefactors be.


28
( I) Great Goddesses! vnworthy most
Am I into your presence for to come:
Vnworthier alas to be your Host,
Being thus dispoyl'd by Fortunes angry doome,
Both of your benefits, and of her owne:
But most vnworthy doubt I to appeare
Iudge of so great a controuerfie here.



29
But she replide: Doe not disestimate
Thy better tallent for thy pouertie,
Tho false opinion and preiudicate
Of vulgar wit, with dim and dropping eie
Saue Fortunes) sees not any Deitie;
We know Heauen loues the poore man many time,
And hates those rich, whose out-sides onely shine.


30
Our pleasure therefore is, that thou attend
To heare our Arguments with diligence;
Which duly heard and pondred in the end,
Then shalt thou sentence this our difference,
Giuing the Victor that preheminence
The iustice of their cause deserues. And streight
She thus began, and spake what now I write.


31 The Speech of Art.
This Dame (quoth she) of Mortalls all the Mother,
Of all that be composde of th'Element,
Seemes to professe, that onely Man, none other,
Is the chiefe obiect whereto her care's bent,
That he's her Darling, all things else but lent
For his behoofe Now I prooue she hath been,
More Benefactor vnto beasts, then him,


32
For when she first into this Worlds light sends them,
She kindly sutes them new at her owne cost,
With clothes that can from cold and heate defend them,
And still repaires their liuerie hrt or lost.
Poore man comes naked to this frraine coast,
And without helpe of Mid wiues, Nurces, Clothes,
He perishes: but Beasts need none of those.



33
The Foule with spread wings ore her Chickens houers:
Within her armes the Ape her youngling beares:
The Adder in her Maw her vile broode couers.
When'th (2) Succurathe the Hounds pursuing heares,
Vpon her back a tent for hers she reares,
That scornes the Hunter. In her wondrous wombe
Doth the (3) Chyarca hers as oft retombe.


34
But Neptunes tributaries, watry Nation,
Tis they of men haue greatest odds in this,
Blest in this kind by rights of their creation,
VVhose industrie and care no greater is,
About their Spawne, and breeding businesses,
Then in Earths wombe to couer their eiction,
Then leau't to Citharea's safe protection.


35
Euen to the winds and fleeting waues they throw it,
VVhich seuerd from them many a mile is blowne
Why's this? Because their World's their owne they know it,
Kind Nature tells them that they be at home.
Then here's the first Sceane where her loue is showne;
For which from greatest bountie doth proceed
VVants to supplie, or take away that need.


36
Long are poore men appendixes to Mothers,
And halfe their time in documents they spend
Amongst their Nurses, Schoole-masters, and othrs,
To know wherefore they liue, and to what end.
Long is their Seed time Haruest quickly In'd:
But long-liu'd beasts doe in a short time grow,
Fit for those ends that Nature sram'd them to.



37
No weapons she to him at all assignes,
Neither offensiue not defensiue Armes;
To these she hath imparted seuerall kinds,
Force to repll with force, and offerd harmes:
Teeth, Clawes, Hooues, Hornes, Stings fit for hot alarmes;
And for defensiue, diuers doe not want
Such priuie Coates, as Shot and Pikes can daunt.


38
Of these (4) Niles steely. sided Monster's one:
The (5) Tortyse with his bulletdaunting house:
The (6) puple spotted yallow Champion:
The (7) Carry-towre, that onely feares the Mouse
The (8) Armadillo, and the (9) Indian Boas.
All these in Armour well appointed goe,
And diuers diuersly defensed to.


39
She giues the Cockatrice a killing cie,
(10) The subtill Hen and inchanting foote;
(11) The Crampfish a benumming qualitie;
(12) The Cuttle Inkie humors blacke as soote
To die the waues, while from the nets he scout.
The (12) Zibra venomd haires to kill her Rider;
The (14) Porcupine a neuer-empty Quiuer.


40
She hath enstructed beasts with Physicks light:
The wounded Deare run streight to (15) .
The Swallowes find out (16) Cellandine for sight.
The Dog in Knot-grasse finds his remedie.
The (17) Beares wih Aron cure there malladie
(18) ' knowes th'vse of letting blood;
(19) Tortoyce and oades know Antidotes right good:



41
Each one of these, and thousands more are proud
Of some kind benefit she hath them giu'n,
Onely on man she nothing hath bestow'd,
But tender limbes, a smooth transparent skin,
Through which each little worme giues death to him
Yea, greater weaknesses in him appeares,
He drinkes it often through his eies and's ears.


42
Beasts be not subiect vnto griefes, cares, feares,
No future wants their present ioyes controle:
Blood-drying sighes, nor braine consuming teares;
Heart-eating Enuie feedes not on their soule:
Not Aarice nor Pride doth them defoule,
Winged Ambition that enflames the brets
Of mortall men, doth not disturbe their rests.


43
This said, in silence Art streight sat her downe,
To let her Riuall answere what she could.
So Nature rising like the morning-Sun,
Whose brighter beames, moyst vapours ouercloud,
Halfe vaylde in modest blushes, long she stood
At these enditements. But at last she broke
Her silence thus, and for her selfe thus spoke.

Here Art seemes to conclude her first speech, and giues Nature leaue to replie, as followeth.


44
Mortall (quoth she) these imputations here,
And foule aspersions cast on my cleare fame,
I truly must returne them (being cleare)
On Art her selfe, from whence at first they came:
Tis manifet that  for men ordaine
One onely benefit, that ballances
All these that she calls disaduantages.


45
Reason, a heauenly gift, which crownes him King
Of all the Worlds so large extendd bound:
VVhich (tho he's borno weake, wanting euery thing)
Afoords him all, wih friends encompast round,
(VVhom Reason doth instruct with iudgement sound)
And neighbours, for to helpe at such a time;
By charitie and mutuall loue men shine.


46
When he's growne vp, this yeelds him all things fit,
And to him is an armour of defence.
What Engins doth he frame with pregnant wit,
Keene Swords and Speares, blest guards of innocence?
What fiercest monster is not in suspence,
To see his glistering Helme? or a'the report
Of his firespitting musket scuds not for't?


47
All creatures feare him, as their King and Lord:
For of their flesh he at his choice doth feede;
For him fit clothing also they affoord,
Haire, Wooll and Hide which he conuerts at neede
To many an vse, such as the Heauen decreed
Ere their creation, he should best deuise,
To accommodate to his necessities.



48
For him the Bee makes Hony; and the Ewe
And gainefull Cow for him their Milke they yeeld:
For him the pritty Silke worme weaues her clew:
For him, not for her selfe, the Doue doth build:
For him the Flocks beare Wooll: for him the Field
Doth each yeere reuell in luxurious pride:
The Trees beare Fruit, and Meades are richly dide.


49
For him alone the Indian (20) Tunall Tree
Vpon her Leaues brings forth those costly Wormes
That now those Tyrian Fishes wants supply.
For him the (21) Bezars and the (22) Vnicornes
Bring these their Antidotes, their Stones and Hornes.
For him the Elephant his cordiall Teeth
The (23) Cat her costly Sweat, of Sweetes the chiefe.


50
For him and for his sake alone they know
The Weathers change, and times and seasons render,
Not for themselues, that neither plow, ne sow,
But serue the Rustick for his true Kallender:
And for him onely doe examples tender
Of Surgerie and Physick; losse of breath
Being to them the bet thin Heauens bequeath.


51
Yet this is onely halfe the good which he
Receiues from beasts, whom Reason right doth guide.
Of morall vertues many sparkes there be
In them, which serue abundantly to chide
Their haplesse Master, when his foote doth slide:
The greatest griefe that wise men ere bealls,
To see their shame in brutish animalls.



52
Of these there be prouided many a one,
Faire Characters, wherein poore erring men
May reade their duties. Firt, the Haleion,
True patterne of coniugall loue: for when
Old age enfeebled hath her mate, the Hen
Forsakes him not, but helpes his weake estate,
Because in youth he was her louing mate.


53
They haue the Doue to shew them Innocence,
The Pellican to each paternall loue:
The Swallow to ouer come by patience:
Filiall dutie doth the Storke approue:
The losse of friends the Turtle true doth mou
To sollitarines: for Industrie
They haue the Silk-worme, Ant, and pretty .


54
The profitable Oxe, and ready Horse,
The map of courage, and of mortall pride:
The Elephant of most admired force,
And diuersthings domestick to beside,
To obedience and humiliie him guide:
For these acknowledge some small benefits,
Which he for many great ones still forgts.


55
The silly (24) Cur still at his Masters foote,
Which patterne of an honest seruant is,
Which knowes his Masters friends, and who be not;
Defends his goods, and suffers nought amisse;
He prompts him still with his good qualities,
Being the mirror of fidelitie,
Of perfit friendship, magnanimitie.



56
And wherefore this? to teach the vngratefull man:
(Vnworthy Baniter I thinke on thee,
Which sold thy Noble Master Buckingham)
That thankfull Dogs then those men better be,
Which fawne and flatter that prosperitie
Which feeds them: but if Fortune frowne,
Then soonest bite, and helpe to pluck it downe.


57
The venombde (25) Aspe, whose vengeance few can 
(The poyson of his angry mind is such)
I force from lothsome caue to light to come
To teach those minds, whose soules no vertues touch,
That Iustice hath with men endured so much;
She flies to wormes, whom neither hate nor loue
Can make vniust like wretched men to proue.


58
I cause the iercest beasts of sea and land,
The Dragon, Lyon, Sealie () Crocodile,
To know their Masters, and 'endure his hand,
Growing domestick seruants in short while;
To tach in human man that will defile
His hands with blood of those that nourisht him,
That bruitest beasts and Serpents thinke it sinne.


59
I bring the raging (26) Lion from his den
In Nubian Desarts, where he vsde to pray
On weary passenger and trauelling men,
Whose hard misfortunes led them to his way,
Vnto  publike Theater to display,
That benefits euen saluage beasts doth bind,
Tho thank fulnesse seeme fled from human kind.



60
I bring the King of Pegues shady Groues,
From vnfrequented saultes and places strange,
To teach Man that his owne way still approues,
Only how-euer crookt and wide it range,
With streighter pathes of noblest beasts to change,
Whose many vertues wise mortalls discouer,
(27) Deuot, (28) iust, (29) faithfull, (30) thankfull, (31) gloris louer.


61
A world of which examples may be found
In birds and beasts euen those of brutest kind,
From whence to men great profit might redound,
If ponderd well they were, and borne in mind.
Such letters faire, as might instruct the blind.
For what is he that will not vertue loue,
When Lions, Tigers, Serpents it approue?


62
This said, me thought Art thus againe replide:
Blind Nature would betray the erring Man,
Who woes thee thus to follow her (blind guide)
VVhen I alone thy prudent Tutresse am;
Teaching thee both the Monsters fierce to tame,
And to get soueraigne Antidotes from these
That hurt thee wort, and choycet remedies.


63
The silly rurall person, if he meete
The cordiall flowers, the Vyolet or the Rose,
He passes by, or treads them vnder feete,
Euen things that greatest vertues doe enclose:
VVhilest he diseasde might oft be cured by those;
Time, Hysop, odder, Anthos, that do grow
In's Garden, he them knowes, but doth not know.



64
His Cow, his Sheepe, his Pullen and his Swin,
Containe ten thousand vertues hid in them,
VVhich might preserue his life at many a time,
If Nature were not blind, depriu'd by sin,
Of her true light; and therefore this light's 
By Heauen to me, that I might it dispose
To those, whom God for this end fittest knowes,


65
I teach him from the Scorpion to get
An Oyl, the Antidote against her teeth,
Nothing against the Vipers sting so fit
As Merridate, where her owne flesh is chiefe
Ingredient. Nothing giues more reliefe
Forth' Water-Snakes sting, or the mad Dogs tooth
Then their owne liuers sod, and eaten doth,


66
What thing more horrid then the Crocodile?
Few parts of him which are not (32) phyicall.
Who at the angry Elephant dares smile?
Who trembles not? His (33) teeth are cordiall.
The (34)  yeelds me a stone medicinall.
The Serpents (35) Caymans, and fell (36) Tyburne
They doe the ; so doth (37) Lincurions.


67
Nor doth she lesse her selfe mis-vnderstand,
That to her selfe doth arrogate the praise,
In morall vertues, for instructing man;
Since I therein enlight him with my rayes,
And each him to apply such things alwaies
To his owne good, for such as know not e,
By such examples nothing better be.



68
Witnesse (38) Brasile, Peruuia, and all
The saluage Nations of the Westerne world,
Where Nature hath been each way prodigall:
Yet are their minds and manners most abhord,
Which few signes of humanitie afford;
Of vertue none Man-eaters, bruite and euill.
Not seruing God, but worshipping the Deuill.


69
Those that haue seene faire Florence, or the Towre
Of Naples , or aged Rome,
Or Regall Tauris thy delightfull Bowres,
Or the captiue face of Constantines sad Towne;
Or Pharoes Tower, which Pharoes Rocks doth crowne,
Whose loftie Turrets kisse th'enamourd skies,
Whose various obiects steale mens dazled eies.


70
Their ornaments in Stone, Siluer and Gold
Pictures in Tables wrought, Glasse, Marble, Clothes,
With so rare skill, that those which them behold,
Seeme chang'd sometime to these, and these to those;
Their purple States, and their triumphall showes
Of Princes, People, best of all can tell,
How, much my gifts to men do  excell.


71
Yet these externall gifs are poore and small,
Compard with other benefits of mine,
Who as a Gnomon doe direct them all
To looke from shadowes, on that Sunne diune,
Which through the world both Light and Life doth 
Since  beauties only shadowes be
Of that true compleate Beauti, One and Three.



72
This said, her finger lockt her lip and me;
She beckned streight-way with her other hand,
That I enformd, now sentence should decree,
Because her modestie did here command
Her silence, and that we might vnderstand
How much selfe-praise doth true fame interest,
She ceast, well hoping I would speake the rest.


73
A taske, which pondring mine owne weakenesse right,
I found my selfe lesse fit to vnder-take,
Then Pigmies be with Giants for to fight;
And crauing they some fitter choice would make,
Euen here me thought, euen while these words we spake,
A reuerend Matron entred into place,
Call'd Truth Alethia, her I shewed the case:


74
Requested her the matter to decide
To heare, weigh, iudge with best discretion.
To which me thought she instantly replide:
Friend, for that purpose am I hither come,
Therefore obserue and lisen to my doome;
Tho bodies great, we cannot wholly view,
We iudge the whole by a part, one thread the clew.


75
Nature is saire, but Art it makes her shine.
Nature is great, but Art she makes her more.
Nature is wise, Art makes her seeme diuine.
Nature is rich, but Art still mends her store.
Nature is strong, yet doth she aide implore
From Art. Art better then by consequent,
Since she her strength, wealth, beauty doth augment.



76
Nature is of her selfe but a rude masse,
VVhich of it selfe each day to ruine tends:
VVhom Art still triues to beautifie and grace,
And to preserue and forme it euer bends
Her chiefe endeauour, tending still to mend
VVhat errs, or wants in Nature, and to plaine
Her ruder workes with some more pollisht frame.


77
Since Nature brings Man forth imperfit then,
VVith sense relucting alwaies to the mind:
And Art she tills and formes the soules of men,
Giuing them light, whom Nature hath made blind;
My sentence is to Art wholly enclin'd.
Since as the ancient sages truly tell,
Tis better ne'er to be, then not be well.


78
This said, my Vision vanisht: nothing staid
But th'airie clouds, vast sea, demoliht Phane,
My selfe and my sad thoughts, but ill appaide
VVith certaine gifts they gaue me for my paine:
For Nature angry and incenst with shame,
Warded me sicknes: Art for all my toyle,
Pouertie, cause I did her praises soyle.


(1) These three Nauall Battailes were the greatest of the World: for the prime Forces both of the East and West were drawne into them: the first was that wherein Zerxes, the great Mo|arch was ouercome by the small forces of , who was so puft vp with conceit of his great, but

vnprofitable Army, that hee raged against the Elements, as appeares by that of the Poet.
Ille tamen qualis rediit Salamina relicta, In corum, at Eurum, sollitus seuire flagellis, Barbarus, Eolio nunqua~ hoc incarcere passos, Ipsum compedibus qui vinxerat Ennosigaeu~? Nempevna naue.
The next was that of Augustus Caesar and An|thony. Marcus Anthonius brought all the forces of the East, Augustus those of the West, and in this Anthony lost the Empire. The last was that of Lepanto, fought in the Bay of Corintho, wherein Don Iohn of Austria, Generall for the Christians, gaue the Turkes a great ouerthrow.
(2) This beat is found in the Northerne parts of America; when she is pursued, she takes vp her young vpon the hollow of her backe, and with her broad bushie taile couers them as in a tent, and so flies with them.
(3) The Chyurca is bred in the Southerne parts of America; shee hath certaine lappets of skin vnder her belly, which she opens and shuts at her liking; and in the same she receiues and har|bours her young ones, and so beares them till they grow vp. Scalig. Exer. 206. They tearme it O|bassom in Virginia. Maffeus calls it Cerigon lib. 2. pag. 73.
(4) The Crocodile hath such hard Scales all ouer his body (sauing vnderneath his belly) that no Sword or Speare, can hurt him, nor small shot, hardly slaine with a Falkonet. Scal.
(5) There be Tortoyses in India, whose shells weigh three hundred pound weight. They couer houses with them in some places of the Indies. Plin. lib. 6. Scal. Excercit. 196. In the same place Scaliger relates a storie of a Traueller, who being benighted in the Ile of Trapobana, wearie and see|king some conuenient place to take vp his lodging in vpon the bare Earth for that night, and espying hard by a thing like an old Tombe all Moss-be|growne about the sides of it, and supposing it indeed to be such as it seemed, he lay downe vpon it for to rest all night, and slept soundly. But in the mor|ning perceiuing himselfe borne farre out of his way, ad from the place where hee lay downe, he began to marueile very much, looking about as a man af|feard of an Earthquake; till at last he spies the per|nicious head of his supposed Tombe, where hee had mistaken his lodging, and perceiued it to be a great Tortoyse. Scalig. Excercitations, 196. They vse the lesser Tortoyse shells in stead of Shields.
(6) The Rhynoceros hath his body all ouer armed with impenitrable Scales, or rather shields, of yllow colour, spotted all through with purple

spots: diuers haue mistaken him for the Vnicorne; for the Rhynoceros hath two hores, one vpon his nose, the other on his brow. Scal. Exercita|tions 204.
(7) The Elphants be at this day vsed in the warres, as formerly; they set Souldiers vpon them in small Turrets, with some small pieces of Ord|nance; his skin will beare the thrust of any wea|pon, and push of Pike; the Indian Kings ride vpon them. There bee of them  foote high; the Ethiopians are lesse then those of India, but those of India lesse then those of Saint Laurence. Scal. Excercitation, 204. Plin. lib. 8. Linsc.
(8) The Armadillo is a little beast of the West Indies, all couered ouer with hard shields. Lerius.
(9) Attilius Regulus, Generall of the Romans in Africk, assailed one of these Serpents, neere the Riuer Bragada, of one hundred and twentie foote long; whereon he was forc't to spend his Darts and Arrowes, and to vse all his Brakes, and Slings; and Engins of Artillerie, as if he had giuen the assault to some strong Towne of warre: and the proofe of this was to be seene by the markes in his skinne and chawes, which till the warre of Nu|mantia, remained in a Temple of Rome. Plin. l. 8. cap. 14.
(10) Pliny would perswade vs, that if the

Hyenna compasse or circle in any thing, Man or Beast, they shall not be able to stirre from the place. lib. 8. cap. 30.
(11) The Torpedo sends forth a benumming humour vp the Line, the Rod, and euen to the Fishers hand, and ouer his whole bodie sometimes, so that diuers haue fallen downe therewith into the Riuers; and in stead of catching Fish, haue catcht their death. Aristot. de Animal. lib. 9. cap. 37. There is a Riuer in India, in the Iland of Zeilam, called Arotan, very full of Fish, but not to be eaten: for if one doe but take one of the Fish in his hand, he is presently seized with a Feauor; letting the Fish goe, freed from it. Scal. Excerc. 218. 6.
(12) The Cuttle when shee is sought and laid for by the Fisher, vents out of her mouth a certaine black Inkie humour, wherewith she dies the waues, so that she scapeth vnseene. Plin. l. 9. c. 29.
(13) The Zibra is a certaine beast in Africk (most common in Congo) like a Mule, her bodie rowed with rowes of seuerall colours: they bee not vsed, because they hold an opinion, that some of their haires are venemous. Hist. of Congo.
(14) The Porcupine is a kind of Hedge-hog, but greater, and hath this particular, that by con|tracting her skin together when she list, shee will dart forth her sharpe pricks which grow vp|o

her backe in manner of Arrows, at those which pursue her. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 35.
(15) Dictamum, an Herbe only growing right in Candy; the Deare are wont to seeke out the same to feede vpon when they be shot, or wounded. Arist. l. 9. c. 6.
(16) The vse of Celandine was first found out to helpe the eyes by Swallowes. Ibid.
(17) The Beares hauing liued in their den a good part of Winter onely by sleepe, and sucking their nailes; when they goe abroad, the first thing they doe is to search out the Herbe Aron, or Wake Robbin, to open their Guts withall, obstructed with long fasting. Plutarchs Morals: and Plin. l. 8 c. 36. and Arist. de animalibus, l. 9. c. 6.
(18) The Hippopotame finding his body too full of humours, goes to certaine broken Reedes, and thereon presseth certaine Veines of his leggs, and when he hath bled sufficiently, he lutes vp the orifice againe with mud. Plutarch and Plin. lib. 4. cap. 26.
(19) The Tortoyse being to fight with the Ser|pent, prepares her selfe with Sweete Marierom. Arist. Animalib. And the Toad hauing fought with the Spider, vses Plantaine as her reliefe. Plut. Plin.
(20) The Tunall Tree is a small Plant in Me|xco

very common, out of whose Leaues spring lit|tle Worms, so much famous for their costly Dye in Graine, but especially for their rich Scarlet in graine, which haue now the chiefest praise  price, as somtime the Tirian Purple had in Rome, which was so tincted by th blood of certaine Fish, called Purples. Acosta. Hist. Ind. l. 4. and Plin. l. 9.
(21) The Bezar Stone is found in the Maw of a Sheepe or Goate with a small piece of Wood, sometimes a Straw, Tag or Pin in the middle. It is obserued, that the beast which breeds them in Perue feeds much vpon one Herbe, which it is thought they vse as an Antidote against all others, poysons, and that the Bezar is engendred in the Maw, by the iuyce of this Herbe. Linsc. p. 134. and Acosta. l. 4. c. 42. Monardes.
(22) The Vnicorne no fabulous storie by the iudgement both of learned and honest Authors: for though it be hardly, or peraduenture not to be found at this day, yet the testimony of good Authors that haue seene them aliue, and their Hornes yet so highly esteemed, whereof diuers are to be seene al|most whole and entire in the possession of great Princes, agreeing both in shape and effects, with the ancient opinion conceiued of them, makes it cleare that such there were. One the Senate of Venice sent to Solyman the Magnificent: ano|ther

Pope Clement sent to Francis the French King. P. Iouius Tome 1. lib. 18. p. 863. Scaliger speakes of diuers that hee saw; one very faire one, whole, was at Windsore Castle. But Vertoman|nus, who had the reputation of an honest Man, saith, he saw two of these beasts aliue, which were sent out of Aethiopia to the Sultan of Mecha.
(23) Zibeth vocatur odoramentum quoddam pingue crassum nigri saponis facie: quod sudor ani|malis est cui felis est figura. Qui liquorem eius es|se smen arbitra~tur ineptiunt. Strigmentu~ enim est, non humor exactus  loculis genitalibus. Scal. 211.
(24) The trustinesse and fidelitie of Dogs is so much commended by good Authors, that in the Booke intituled, Sir Philips Sidneys Vra|nia, it is aduisde, that those which in this World couet to finde a true Friend, should make search among Dogs and Spaniels for him. Authoritie and praise sufficient, if there were no more. But it is beside confirmde by a world of t|stimonies; why should I therefore (amongst so ma|ny) mention Fabius his Dog, related by Plutarh and Plinie. I will craue thy patience (Gentle Rea|der) to insert one late domestick Storie,  this domestick Animall, which I haue from Au|thors of good credit, yet liuing in London, and which also heard the Murtherer at his deah

confesse the fact: and thus it was. A Water-man taking in a Passenger at Black-wall for London, late in the Euening, going betwixt Black-wall and Greenewich, murthers his Faire as hee lay sleeping in the bote, and so in the thick Reeds leaues him. The man thus slaine had a Spaniell with him, which so long staies by his dead Master, till hunger compeld him to swim ouer the water to Greenewich  relife; where hauing fild him|selfe, he returnes againe to his dead Master: and when hunger againe prest him, swims back as be|fore for new reliefe; so long holding this course, till he was obserued by the then Keeper of Greenewich House for Queene Elizabeth, who sent Oares to follow him, and so by that meanes discouered the murthered body. Whereupon the Keeper of the House tooke home the Dog, and held him euer af|ter as a most diligent seruant, the Dog waiting still vpon his new Master to the Court, and through the Citie, yet neuer loosing him. But to conclude this Storie; so it happened some certaine time af|ter, that this poore beast following his new Master, spies out amongst a multitude, the Murtherer of his old Master, whom presently he flies vpon, rea|dy to teare him in peeces. The man threatens to kill the Dog, if they take him not vp. Hereupon they take off the Dog, and tie him vp. But the

Dogs Master (entertaining some scruple) causd the Dog to bee loosed againe, to see if againe hee would find out the same man: which done, the Dog finds him out streight amongst many others, and there againe flies vpon him in most vhement manner. Whereupon they suspected him to bee the Murtherer, carried him before the Iustice, where he presently confest the fact, and died for the same.
A thousand examples of this kind euery man can record out of his owne particular knowledge, there|fore onely two shall be annext out of famous Iulius Scaliger, which seme to me not lesse effectuall and remarkable, then those more ancient. The first is of a Countrey Fellow in the Ile of Corsica, who tracing a Beare into the Mountaines in a deepe Snow, onely accompanied with his Dog, forgetting the danger through desire to meet with the Beare, followes so farre, that when hee would haue retur|ned (all the pathes being fild vp with Snow) hee could not by any meanes discerne his way home againe, so that in fine he is there frozen to death. Some two or three dayes after his friends find him with his Dog lying at his feete: but when they come neere to touch him, his Dog flies at them, fights, teares, barkes, bites them, puts them all to flight, thinking they came to rob his Master; nei|ther becomes he more gentle by the comming in of

his masters Brothers, from whom he had oft recei|ued meate, but continues in his pertinacie so long, till they were forced to shoote at him, and to kill him.
The other is a French History of a Courtier, who being offended either with the treacherie of his friend, or else enuying him, secretly kild him, and as secretly buried him in a field not frequented. By chance the man thus slaine had a Dog with him, who being not farre off, and seeing his Master thus put in a hole, sat so long vpon his Graue, till his af|fection ouercome with hunger, forc't him to returne backe to the Court. The Chamber-fellowes of the partie thus slaine giue him meate: streight to the Graue againe goes he, but hungrie returnes as be|fore, and so long holds hee this course, till men be|gan to suspect the matter. Heereupon they fol|low him to the place, digge vp the Graue, find the Man, whom knowing they burie, taking the Dog home with them. After a while this Murtherer returnes to the Court; the Dog spies him, flies vpon him, barkes and bayes at him, and will not bee kept off him. Heereup|on hee growes suspected; yea, the King him|selfe takes notice, through the Dogges perse|uerance in this manner of accusation. The King commands him to shew the reason, why the

Dogge dod this. The Man denies the fact, and stands vpon his innocence: but still the Dogge barkes, and as much as in him lies, seekes to disturbe him in his excusations. At last therefore the King decrees, to haue the matter tried by combate: Wherein the Dogge ouer-came, and his Victorie is pourtrayed in Gold in one of the Kings dining-roomes; and euer as it decayes, is by commandement from the King repaired. Scalig. Exercitations 202. Secti|on 6.
For Magnanimitie, the Dog sent to Alexander by Porus the Indian King, is a sufficient testimo|nie; who when the King commanded Boares, Harts, or Beares to be set before him, neuer moo|ued at them, as things vnworthy of his courage. But when he lets out a Lion to him, him the Dog teares in pieces: and then setting him vpon an Elephant, him also hee brings to the ground. Quintus Curtius, and Plinnius, liber. 8. cap. 40.
(25) Pliny, lib. 10. cap. 74. relates this Sto|rie of an Aspe that haunted much to a wealthie Farmers House in Aegypt, and was continually feed by him vnder his Table. It chanc't one time one of the Aspes young ones to sting and

kill one of the Farmers children, for which deede the old Aspe in iustice flies at her owne, and kills it.
() The Egyptians who (after the manner of their vaine superstition) gaue diuine honours, and religious worship to diuers beasts, and likewise to Serpents, and Monsters, kept within their Tem|ples diuers of them, and had Crocodiles so tame, that they would at their cal come and receiue meat at their hands. Strabo Geography.
(26) This place hath relation to the Story of Androdus the Dacian slaue, reported by Plutarch, and others, and of late repeated by Montaigne, and sung by that famous Du Bartas, which be|cause it is so well knowne, I forbeare to relate it.
(27) It is obserued by some, that the Elephants do a kind of worship (falling downe on their knees) to the Moone.
(28) There appeares in all his actions of re|uenge, a proportion betweene the punishment and the offence; as for example, if a child chance to throw a stone at him, which cannot hurt him, for this he will onely heaue him vp gently with his trunke to feare him, setting him downe without other harme. If his Keeper mingle his prouant with straw and chaffe, and deceaue him of halfe his allowance, hee thinkes it enough of hee can get loose to doe as much to the Keepers Porrege-pot, as

it appeares in Plutarch But if one doe him a grea|ter iniurie, as to beate himselfe, or his Master, he repayes that with a cuffe or two, or carries him to the water, and ducks him wel ouer head and eares, and then sets him downe where he found him.
(29) Where shall a man see the office of a more faithfull seruant, then in Porus Elephant? who when his Master's mortally wounded in the battaile against Alexander, and sainting through losse of blood, the beast perceiuing him about to fall, kneeles gently downe to let his Lord descend with more ease. But when the Souldiers run to disarme him, the beast drawes courage from his wounds, sets vpon them afresh, beats them off him, and then striues to reseate his Master againe vpon his backe, neuer giuing ouer to discharge the part of a loyall seruant till he fell downe dead with wounds in the place. Q. Curtius, l. 8. The like of this hap|pened of late yeeres to the Kings of Pegue and Aua, who hauing drawne millions of men to field to descide their quarrel, at last both agreed to fight it out hand to hand themselues (like our Edmond and Canutus) but in stead of Horse they fought on Elephants. The euent was this; the King of Aua was slaine, and the King of Pegues Elephant. The Peguan mounts the beast of his enemy: but hee with sorrow of his Masters losse droopes: they

striue to comfort him with good words: but he re|fuses all comfort, weeping incessantly all the terme of dayes which they obserue in that Countrey, to mourne for the dead. Linsc.
(30) An example no lesse strange there hap|pened in the Citie of Goa, the perfect patterne of thankefulnesse. The Elephants there vse, during their time of Winter, to grow furious and mad, and then often they breake loose from their keepers, and doe much mischife. It chanc't on a time that one of them breaking out from his keeper, in this man|ner ran through, and through the streetes, ouer|throwing all things in his way: from thence hee goes to the Market place, from whence all the people fled to saue their liues; amongst the rest one Hearb-wife (who had vsed before to giue the beast Lettuce, and such Hearbs, as he past by with his keeper) for haste forgets bhind her, her little son, left in a basket vnder her stall; this the Elephant spies, takes it vp with his trunke, and (remembring that it was the child of his Benefactor, when all the people made aecount to haue seene it dasht in pieces) hee gently sets it vp vpon the stall, as a place of more safetie then vnder-foote: this done, goes on in his mad humour, ouerthrowing all things as before. Linsc. pag. 137.
(31) There are innumerable examples both in ancient and moderne Authors, witnessing the Elephants almost equall desire and thirst of glorie, euen with Man himselfe.
(32) Pliny lib. 28. cap. 8. relates many ver|tues of the Crocodile. The Crocodiles Fat good for Gangrens. Scaligers Exercitations, 196.
(33) Iuorie is a Cordiall much vsed in Phy|sick.
(34) The Toad-stone good against inflations of venemous Beasts, and against the Stone. Wec|keyrus.
(35) The Cayman breeds in his stomack a stone good against the Quartaine. Wekeyrus. There be a kind of Serpents, whose flesh is commen|ded for Vlcers, Fat for wounds, and their Slowth for helpe in Womens affaires. Parcelsus, Tome 5, pag. 238. 239. 240. and 241.
(36) The Portingalls and Spaniards haue reported, the stone got out of the Tyburones head to bee a diuine thing against the Stone and Graell. Weckeyr.
(37) The Lyncurions, a certaine stone found

in the Sand are thought to bee the congealed  of the Ownce. Plin. 8. cap. 30.
(38) For although bountifull Nature seemes euen to powre her selfe out vpon these Nations in her greatest abundance of Fish and Fowle, excel|lencie of Plants, fertilitie of soyle, abounding not onely with externall, but internall endowments: yet all these no better then curses to them through want of Art to polish them, and diuine grace to gouerne and ciuilize them: for their deuises in fish|ing and fowling giues ample testimony both of their wit and courage, notwithstanding their detestable barbarousnesse in manners and conuersation. Io|seph Acosta relates one of their fights with a Cayman or Crocodile, where the naked Indian swimming vnder his belly, there stabd him to the heart, and killed him. The like of their taking the Whale, whom he assailes after this manner: hee drawes vp close in his Canow towards the Whale sleeping, and suddenly leapes forth vpon her necke, wherewith incredible dexterity he strikes a sharpe stake into her nostrill, or vent; and when the Whale diues, he holds fast, and goes downe with it, and at his comming vp, comes vp likewise, and then strikes hee another stake into his other vent, which compells the beast to shoot himselfe on shore. Their Balsaes or bundles of Bulrushes, vpon which

they vse to fish in the roughest Sea, sat on horseback vpon them (like so many Neptunes) are no lesse ad|mirable. Ioseph. Acost. Hist. Ind. l. 3. c. 15. and Monardes. But  manner of fowling is yet more strange, where the Fowler, be it vpon Lake or Riuer obserues the wind, and hauing store of emptie Gourds for the purpose, lets them first driue with the wind amongst them, which they quickly grow familier with, and suffer them to rub against their sides and brests; which when the Fowler espies, he puts on his head a Helmet of the same stuffe, with a close Vizor therein, with which hee swimmes or wades to the Fowle so cunningly, that nought but his head appeares, which still he rowles and waggs to resemble the emptie tottring Gourds, and so he plucks them by the leggs vnder-water, and finely conuaies them into his bagge; the rest of the Flocke suspecting nothing, but supposing that they diue. Peter Martyrs Decades.





Opineo  Ratio Rerum: OR, A DISPVTE BETWIXT WEALTH AND Pouertie, c.

1
IN Winter time while Boras with blasts keen,
Had stript faire Flora of her liuerie;
And all the Forrests of their beautious greene,
Wrapping all in gray frozen pouertie,
My Muse and I pincht with this miserie,
For want of fire, and meanes good house to keepe,
We went to bed, to eure our cares with sleepe.


2
Sleeping, I dream'd, that in a flintie way,
I trauel'd, all with Briers and Thornes beset,
Narrow, vneuen, not tracted euery day
To a great Citie, and on businesse great,
And in this iourney with this vision met;
VVhose circumstances as they fell me there,
I purpose here most briefly to declare



3
Within this path I had not iournide long,
Before a knot of trauellers I side;
A feeble sort God wot, and nothing strong.
Whose names to spare the labour might betide
In vaine demands (were writ on each mans sid.
Both the commandresse, and her children two,
Friends, Seruants, Horses, Wheeles  Coach had so.


4
She that within the Waggon sat as chiefe,
Pouerty. Penia hight, her rayment torne and vile:
Pale wrinckled checkes she had, through hearty griefe,
Vpon her head a wreath of Cammanile;
Wan were her lips, where mirth did seldome smile;
Two sad slow-moouing eyes, shut casements couerd,
Bout which dark-weeping clouds of woes still houerd.


5
Her children then that there beside her sat,
Obedience and Humilitie Next them
Sat Seruitude, her Page and Fellow-mate.
The Waggoner that did direct this frame,
Was holy Feare: two white Doues drew the same,
Faire Honesty and snowie Conscience:
Her Cart was Care; Wheeles, Hope and Patience.


6 Digression to shew the house of Pouertie.
That her, or her sib siler I had seene
 Vpon a Moore, wonning no neighbour neere,
In Cottage poore, and lonesome, I did weene
Icleeped (a) , bare and thin of geare:
For but one Dish, one Table was ther there;
One onely Stoole, where each did sit by turne;
And Crumcks dung seru'd them with fire to burne.(2) Obscuritie.



7
For from her dugs did their whole Market come.
A Garden digd to bring an Oaten Cake;
One Christ all Fount, whose streame as it did run,
Seem'd as good Musick, as pure Wine to make.
One onely Spade was here, one Sickle, Rake;
One onely Knife, one Trencher, and one Pan;
In stead of Plate, a Cole-black Ebon Kan.


8
One woodden Spoone, one pretious pewter Salt,
One Seaue, for Candles here were neuer seene.
And yet if greatnesse had not made her fault,
She would haue liu'd content as Ceres Queene:
For Silence, Loue, and Peace here borne did seeme,
Where Nacke, and Ball, and simple Sim the sonne,
At Bed and Board like deare Friends all were one.


9
Securitie set open here the Gate:
For those that nothing haue, can nothing feare.
Here Peace and Loue close in the corner sat;
Content and Silence crown'd with Poppie neere
A dish of Apples was their high dayes cheere:
This is a pith of a certain plant in the East Indies, which they eate to quench the fires of Lust, those that would not haue childre~. Carussa cold, and Lettuce of light cost,
Which entertaine sweet sleepes, and banish Lust.


10
But to returne, Penia onward past
Towards Aretes Temple; so did I
When streight there came a troope, whose winged hast
Orethrew Penia rudely passing by;
For iust they met where two waies crosse did lie,
This to the Phane of Arete went on,
That vnto Fortune and Argyrion.



11
This Gallant in a loftie Coach was plaste,
And Opulence was writ vpon her brest,
Her face with quick and sparkling eies were grac't,
Smooth was her front, her cheekes with laughter prest,
Her members poulpous, and her forehead blest
With a proud Coronet, and in her hand
She likewise bore the Ensignes of command.


12
Her costly garments did more colours show
Then Iunoes foule, or thenth' Camelions thought,
Or those we see in Iris beauteous Bow;
All full of eyes her robes before were wrought
Her worldly circumspection to denote:
Her obiect Pleasure sat, and on each side
As her companions Iocus and Cupid.


13
Vpon her Coach mans brest I written view
Obliuion of God, such was his name.
The Horses then that this her Chariot drew,
Rapine and Fraude were writ vpon the same,
Her Chariot Ease, the Wheeles that it sustaine
Iniustice had and Auarice insculpt,
Cruelty and Oppressionth' last inculpt.


14
Her Children and Attendants followed last,
And some on Coursers brauely mounted were,
And some on Palfreys fine and smoothly paest:
And Boasting, Curiositie and Feare,
Hardnes of Heart, Disdaine, Pride, Children were:
Her Tendants, Vaine Delights and Luxuries,
Vulgar Applause, Opinions, Flatteries.



15
A thousand Leuits there I did behold;
Ten thousand Pleaders each where scatterd lay,
And each of these (a wonder to be told)
VVith Golden Hammers seemd to paue her way,
And as she past, deuoutly did her pray
To thinke on them, her Lacqueys to for bread,
Faire Maias sonnes knit Garlands for her head.


16
Much troubled was Penia with her Patientia. VVheele,
A little crackt, which while she sought to spell,
A bitter iarre betweene them hapt the while:
For the poore Wretch i'th' mire no sooner fell,
But Opulence extreamely gan to swell
Like Dragon fraught with angry poyson showing,
And in her head, her eyes, like Aetae glowing.


17
A thousand bitter tearmes she did bestow
On poore Penia, making th'earth resound
VVith curses, which from her black mouth did flow;
And wih her othes did seeme the Heauens to wound:
And all this fire did from this fault redound,
Because (orethrowne by her) she stopt the way,
And seemd her iourney to retard and stay.


18
She calls her twentie times base beggars brat;
Ny more, professeth her, her slaue to be,
Framde onely for her vse; and worse then that,
Accurst by Fate and all her progenie:
Then vaunts she her owne birth and fortunes hie,
And that her constitution doth surpasse
Penia's more, then Dimond common Glasse,



19
And that when first God fram'd this beautious Ball,
He gaue her as a blessing most diuine,
Both in the earth, in sea, and through them all,
Each where with most resplendant beames to shine
And that Penia was not knowne that time,
Till Eue by tasting the forbidden tree,
Bred her, the curse of her impietie.


20
In humble sort Penia did replie;
She was no slaue, but free, with like price bought:
And, tho she vaunt not of Nobilitie.
If honest, not ignoble to be thought.
Beside their pedigree from one Syre brought,
One matter and like forme, in like springs mouing,
If minds be like, deserues but like approuing.


21
But great impietie thou do'st commit,
Thinking my soule (quoth she) like Horses fram'd
To beare thy burthens, tis a vessell fit
To hold diuine things (and how much lesse stain'd
With the worlds dregs more fit) why then is fortune nam'd?
Blood, money, earth, as vantage? who haue start
In betternes tis in their better part.


22
Touching my Birth, thou err'st no lesse in that;
For Adam knew me first in Paradise,
While he liu'd naked in his best estate;
Rich in the midst of mundaine pouerties.
I teach Humilitie vnto the wise,
Obedience, and a thousand vertues moe,
Had Adam kept me, he had still liu'd so:



23
But lest thou deeme me too contemptiblie,
Conceiue it thus. The World's Gods Instrument;
The Rich and Poore, Trobles and Bases be;
Where from the Base, tho deepest sounds be sent,
Yet yeeld the lesser strings much sweete content;
And gently toucht, much harmony beget;
Much griefe if broke, while to the Base they're set:


24
Oh God (quoth Opulence) thou Catife blind,
Seest not that I'me the glory of the day?
The beautie of the face, and ioy of mind?
Where thou art, each thing languisheth away;
The flowre doth fade, and beautie doth decay;
A Winter of chill woes nips euery thing,
Of ioy or pleasure is there neuer spring.


25
All lawes of friendship do'st thou violate;
Through thee the Sye wishes his children dead.
The wife repines, the brothers grutch and hate,
And oft through thee is sold the Husbands bed.
What's more, through thee all mortall men are led
Into vile courses: Hence these mischiefes comes,
Fraudes, Rapines, Murthers, Thefts, Oppressions.


26
I giue the studeous better meanes to know:
Through thee haue perisht many Noble wits.
I giue the bounteous better meanes to shew
Their vertue, in requiting benefits:
But on thy tongue (alas) there onely sits
An emptie thankes, through thee are those ingrate,
Whose better thoughts would else remunerate.



27
Excepting thee I thinke iust no where is
The true Torpedo; whom tho none would find,
Yet while they angle for some better fish,
They meet with thee, whose hidden force so binds
Their members, and so manacles their minds,
That streight they seeme transformd to wood  stone,
Like those that earst Medusa lookt vpon.


28
And as the Thunder soures the Milke or Wine,
So the best humours are by thee quite chang'd
Into soure Accide, purest sanguine:
But I amongst th'immortall Gods am rang'd
By mortall men: for by me griefe's estrang'd,
And melancholie banisht from each heart;
I mittigate disease, deaths dolerous dart:


29
I powre in men beautie and comlinesse,
And with the spright of fortitude them fill.
Tis I that doe with Art and Wisdome blesse,
Refine the wit, and rectifie the will;
Whose parts t'aduance, as thine to ruine still:
I raise them from the dunghill, and doe place
Them many a time in Fortunes highest grace.


30
Tis I that pierce the center, thence to rend
Earths hidden treasures, to adorne the shrines.
Tis I that make the Walles, Towres, Spires transcend
Aboue the clouds, which vnto after times,
Like faire characters may declare the minds
Of those that built them: But with thine remaine
Of Wit or Worth, no past or present Fame;



31
It is for me the vtmost Iles are found;
For me that Natures closets are made knowne,
To make my Courtly Palaces abound
With ornaments of Glasse, Silke, Wood and Stone:
For me that Neptune doth with burthens grone,
Whilest the good Huswiues of each happie State
Wed Kingdomes, and their wealthes communicate,


32
With this discourse Peni deepely mou'd,
Returnd this speech to Oppulence againe.
If what thou sayst by others were opprou'd,
Then shouldst thou need no trumpet to proclaime
Thine owne worth, but thy selfe, nor mine to staine:
But false are thy selfe-praises, and vntrue
Thy scandals, notwithstanding their faire shew.


33
Strange Vertues of thy selfe thou wouldst perswade,
That by thy meanes, men polisht are with Artes;
And that by thee mens minds are thankfull made;
By thee endued with loyall louing hearts;
By thee made honest; and by thy good parts
Enricht with honour, valour, health and wit,
Peace in this life, and heauen succeeding it.


34
A comment faire, if good words could preuaile
(Without due circumstance) and bare beliefe:
But doubtlesse here thy credit needs must faile;
For euident it is thou  the thiefe,
That robs mens vnderstandings; Author chiefe
Of wanton pleasures; Enemy to these
Sweete knowledges, that are not got with ease;



33
How many thankfull persons canst thou show
For benefits receiued, that may require
(Hauing got meanes, so often wisht) and doe,
If future vse or seruice not inuite?
I could name thousands that expecting right
And merited reward, at last haue gaind
Nought but disgrace, or death, where loue was aim'd.


34
How many youthfull Heyres are to be found,
(Altho their Syres haue toyld hard many a day
And yeare for them, to adde ground vnto ground,
And Coine to Coine) that sit not downe and pray,
Great Iupiter to take them soone away?
Or Wiues that teares for dying Husbands shed,
That wish not pleasures new from wanton bed?


35
No man by thee the honester is made,
These qualities vnto the soule adhere
Not things. We see the mightie men inuade
The weaker, and them grind, deuoure and teare.
The poore are curb'd by law, restraind by feare:
Presumpteous greatnesse acteth farre more ill,
Then impotencie vrg'd by want, not will.


36
Thou mayst affoord an honourable name:
But these bare shadowes without substance be,
Tis onely vertue that acquires cleare fame:
Which he that wants, is like a fruitlesse tree,
VVhere nothing else but leaues and blossoms be;
Or like an Apple, whose exterior part
Perchance seemes faire, but's rotten at the heart.



37
Least needst thou boast of Valour, Health, or Wit;
Excesse corrupts the body, dims the mind:
A thousand Feauers, Gouts, and Dropsies sit
VVayting vpon full platters, and we find
An actiue soule but seldome is confind
To full fed body, where the mists and showres
Of daily surfets, suffocates her pores.


38
As touching peace, thou no such thing do'st giue;
The sting for wealth extorted, feare to loose,
Anxietie wherein they howerly liue,
Still doubtfull where to leaue't, to these, or those;
Their soules (like beasts in Toyles) so fast enclose,
That both in life and death to earth fast glew'd,
They make it doubtfull that no peace ensu'd.


39
Now for my selfe to answer in excuse
Thy false obiections, whereby thou wouldst show,
That euery mischiefe which the times produce,
Procedes from me, that men dishonest grow
Hence onely: I denie that this is so;
Then Fortune were a Goddesse: but we see
VVealth makes not worth, nor want dishonestie.


40
I no man dull whom Nature did not frame
Of courser mould; as spures I rather scrue
To prick him on, by vertue to ataine
Those Glories, VVisdome, honestie deserue,
And valour; and what Fortune doth reserue
For her owne children and to him denie
To make him gaine by worth and industrie.



43
Indeed I build no Cities nor proud Towres
Of costly things, of Treasures vaunt not I:
I liue in humble Cottages and Bowres
In peace, except I be disturbde of thee:
But thou art cheynd in lou'd captiuitie,
Most strongly gyude, and all that take thy part,
Not loosely by the legs, but by the heart.


44
No rest at all thou giu'st, of peace no taste,
Which not in outward things, but in content
And right religion of the soule is plaste.
Thy peace beaes euery hower some detriment;
Each losse of Office, fauour, suit, or rent,
Orethrowes it quite; to be in brauerie
Out-shind perchance: a frowne makes diuers die.


45
The vanitie of which did whilome moue
Those worthy Pagans, most of all to prize
That kind of peace, my humble state doth proue;
And counting thee the baite of miseries,
Despisde thee so, that Spargit Aristippus mediis in Sirtibus aurum. Ausonius. Aristippus, wise,
Threw all thy guyts i'th' sea; who sure did find,
That they disturbde his peace, and vext his mind.


46
Xenocrates, and Anacreon the Philosopher hauing receiued fiue talents by gift of Polycrates the Tirant, was so troubled by day in his mind, by casting and medita|ting with himself how to bestow it, and so tormented for want of sleepe in the night, for the feare he had of theeues, that at fiue dayes end he came to Poly|crates, and restored him all his money; telling him, that he would not thereafter euer sell the quiet con|tent and securitie of pouertie for a greater sum of money. Stobaeus. Zenon, another Phyloso|pher, hauing lost all his goods by a tempest at Sea, sauing a thred-bare cloake that hee kept about him, greatly reioyced, and thankt Fortune that she had taken away his goods, wherby she had deliuerd his mind from captiuitie, and made it fit to receiue those excellent treasures of Phylosophy, whereunto euer after he ment to betake himselfe. Plutack in his Treatise of the quietnesse of the Mind. diuers other moe;
Diogenes did wholly thee refuse,
Because he held thee vnto peace a foe
And vertue And euen God himselfe did chuse
My ranke, while he did mortall body vse;
So did his friends and seruants, both by word
And by example, all my praise record.



47
Scarce had Penia spoke these words of ours,
When Oppulece like some great Riuer swone
By Wintrs tempests, and excessiue showres,
Which beares down Corne and Meadows lately mone,
And mightie Woods, in many ages growne)
Flew on Pena, and her passion swellin
Ore Reasons bancks) was scarcely held from killing.



48
But halfe her cote there from her back she tore,
VVhich she did chalenge to her selfe as due
By rights I knew not; and away thence bore,
As  of the praise to'er conquest due,
And with her traine in haste away thence flew
So swift, that scarce mine eyes could rackt her pace,
Returning streight vnto her natiue place.


49
Long after whom Pena did not stay,
But followed speedily to get redresse
By some petition, or some other way,
VVith weeping cheare, and hearts great pensiuenesse.
I loging much to vnderstand no lesse
The end, then entrance to this tragedie,
To old Inuention. Eyrema, Artfull VVich I fle.


50
And her besought out of her powrefull skill,
To Oppulentia's Palace me to beare.
VVhich granted, vp we flew, more high then hill,
Higher then th'avrie dwellers euer were,
From whence great Cities, but small Townes appeare,
And Mountaines, Mose hills. Here she made me vie
Faire Belgis rich Townes, and Seeples new.


51
But here she said Penia was not knowne;
Yet were she there, the liberalitie
And kind compassion should to her be showne,
And various waies for fruitfull industrie,
VVould change her Nature. But from thence flew we
Ouer the vast sea, and the continent
Through strange lands,  to Stambolda is as much as Ciuitas Magna. Stambolds City went



52
Neere which she said this Opulentia boad,
And had for vse and ostentation raysde
Ten thousand stately buildings. Then she show'd
When on the sight we thorowly had gazde,
Structures indeed deseruing to be praysde,
For richnesse, beautie, pleasure; and by Art
(Vnseene) coueyde me through each secret part.


53
There did she shew a thousand workes diuine,
Wrought in white Paros, and red Porpherie,
In Golden Theba, spotted Serpeutiue
Tables and Collumes throwne most curiosse,
Whole rooms seel'd through with sable bonie,
And hung with Clothes, from Niles blest Memphis brought,
Or those more faire, by Virgins fingers wrought.


54
Then show'd she me the Beds in-laid with Gold,
And some with richer Stones embellished;
The Sheets pefum'd with Sweets from Batham sold,
The Flores with costly Carpets ouer-spred,
Through which into the Wardrops me she led,
Where Silke and Cloth for differing seasons fit,
In monstrous shapes, beray'd her wandring wit.


55
From thence into her Cabbinet she went,
And show'd of Ormuz Pearles the costly Chaines,
The sparkling Diamonds from Cabaya sent,
 pure Gold, digg'd from rich  veynes,
Which Stella wearing, Iun's forme reteynes.
Then show'd she all her masks, her , her tyres,
Ruffes, gartes, scarfes, plumes, lotions, pendants, wires.



56
Which hauing seene without the least offence,
Or notice taken of our being there,
We next obseru'd her great magnificence,
Her state, attendants, and excessiue cheare,
Her traines of seruants euer ready neere,
With huble reuerence, with cap and knee,
And Kookes that still deuising dishes be.


57
Her Cup-boards loaden all with Red and White,
And all her vessells wholly of the same,
Loaden with dainties, all that may delight;
Both Venson, Pheasant, Quaile, and all else tane
In Earth and Sea: then Banquets brought from Spain,
The preious Perfumes that vast Neptune yeelds
She shew'd me, and the Sweetes of Indian fields.


58
Why should I heare the daintie Syndo touch,
Richly perfum'd, and crispt with cost so trim,
That Romes preseruers were not worth so much?
Or the Gellies, vnder which with nimble fin,
In Muskie waues liue little Fishes swim?
Why name I Wines, both Spanish full of fire,
Canrie, Creet, French, Hydelberg, and Spyre?


59
Why should I note her Coaches, and Caroies?
Her easie Litter, easier Palamkeen?
The stately Saddles, curious Bits and Bosses,
With Steeds to which the same belonging been 
Some of Arabia next to Palestine,
Some Freezlanders, some Turquish, some of Spaine,
Both Barbaris and Neaplitane?



60
Why note I thousands that their times mispend,
Onely deuising pleasures new for her?
Those that the Hawkes, or those the Horses tend?
Or else the Doggs Toy, Hector, Ringwod, Pirr?
Or those by Musick that delight conerr,
By toyes, by pastimes, and by flatteries;
By songs, by sceanes, by ieasts and ooleries?


61
All these thus briefly noted as we could,
Vnseene into the Gardens streight we goe,
Where curious Labyrinths we next behold,
And Mermaids, fro~ whose brests fresh streames still flow;
And Flowres with colours more then Iris Bow;
Then Beasts, and Fowles, and Fruits each where she spies
Brought from each land t'adorne this Paradice.


62
VVhere Arbors greene of huge streight standing brothers,
VVith thick wou'n boughs, keep from the Sunnes cleare rayes,
And human eyes, the ioyes of amorous Louers;
VVhero farre-fet Quiresters doe sing the praise
Of powrefull Venus in their warbling Layes,
In vnder-groues, by Art so well design'd,
That feet, nor eyes, forbidden passage find.


63
Much more there was, which then we ouerpast,
By reason of some noyse raysde at the Gate,
To know the cause whereof, we went in hast,
And ound  there in wofull state:
For while she here redresse did impetrate,
Proud Oppulence tore off the tother piece
Of her poore cloake, and left her without fleece.



64
But not content with this, because she sought
And su'd redresse, and iustice at her doore,
She kickt her downe, treading her vnder-foote;
And while Peia mercy did implore,
Fierce Oppulentia still incenst the more,
And crossing the knowne truthes which she did say,
Did what she could to take her life away.


65
But whilest they stroue thus, from a Saffron cloud
Came nimble Mercurie with speedy wing,
Like Lightning that preuents the clamours loud,
But slow reporter of his swift comming,
Who brought this message from the Heauenly King;
And beckning silence both to great and small,
Deliuerd it with wonder of vs all.


66
Mortall (quoth he) from Him, whose powrefull hands
Sustaines the fabrick of the Worlds wide Frame;
From Him that Thunder and swift Fire commands,
Th'eheriall Regions, and the darker Raigne;
 Him that vnto  calls againe
Depriued habits, am I huher sent,
T'impart to thee his will and high intent.


67
To thee (quoth he) that seek'st to tyranize
Ore poore Pena, making Will seeme Right,
And not so much to  thine auarice,
As thy reuenge and proud disdainefull spight;
That tak'st her goods, and treadst her vnder-feete,
 thy self alone in Heauens high grace,
And her thy slaue, an abiect poore and base.



68
Fond Mortall, I am sent to let thee know,
That thou  thy selfe, to thinke that Iou
Doth with his Children, as you Mortalls doe,
Which shew most bountio still, where most you loue;
For he the quite contrarie doth approue:
And knowing how abundance spoyles your minds,
Content sometimes, for greatest wealth assignes.


69
And know, he sends Penia to the warre
Emptie of luggage gainst her mightie foes,
For her more safetie; and all theirs that are
Found valiant to sustaine these Cannon blowes:
For who in warres  by the luggage goe,
Are most part common souldiers? but the braue
That are to ight, nought but their Armours haue.


70
His creatures are you both, and both are free,
Fram'd for his glory, with one price redeem'd;
Both for your states euen equall debtors be,
Altho of you much otherwise esteem'd:
For Heauens best blessings are  men misdeem'd.
But for her wrongs which here thou do'st impose,
Heauen writes their weight in euerlasting woes.


71
Know therefore thou deceiuer, that hast lull'd
The World asleepe with thine inchanting wiles,
And so from her (like Dallilab) hast pull'd
Her strength and wisdome by thy cunning guiles,
Leauing nought else but shame to her the whiles,
Confusion, weakenes, blind securitie,
In pamperd pride, and beastly Luxurie.



72
I must denounce that as thou wert exild
Long since from stately Babylon, the Queene
Of Cities, and from the Chaldean field,
VVhere Cers all her plenties did vnteeme;
And from the fruitfuli land of Palestine,
VVhere nothing now of ancient glory rests;
Her soyle turnd sands, inhabitants turnd beasts.


73
So shalt thou for thy wickednes here wrought,
Especially for thine oppressions,
Because by thee Iustice is bought and sold,
And the world tortur'd with thy strange transgressions;
Be banisht hence, except the heauenly sessions
Preuent the time: but for Penia she
Shall to thy wrongs no more now subiect be.


74
A Virgin, and a Royall Queene there is,
Beyond the VVesterne Oceans urthest bound,
VVho many a stately kingdome doth possesse,
VVhich doth with all things good and faire abound,
VVith high felicitie and honour cround;
Nothing but one she wants, the chearefull light:
For blind she is, and wrapt in clouds of night.


75
Many faire sisters hath she, that obtaine
The best of Natures gifts; Hesperia
And faire Valencia, proud Iberia's fame,
Peloponesus, rich Natolia,
Braue Persia, and silken rob'd Media.
All which for ample dowries, and rich things,
Haue been the Brides of Csars and great Kings.



78
For some of these vaunt of their wooll, some silke,
Others great portions haue in Corne and VVine;
Some of them haue fat Heards, Honny and Milke;
Some haue the fruitfull Oliue, some rich Mine:
The meanest doth with some faire portion shine:
But their wise Parent amply doth requite
VVith all their gifts, our Virgins want of sight.


79
The loftie Ceaders of Mount Libanon;
The Oylie woods in rocky Norway sold,
(VVhere nimble Heards in grounds much fatter run)
The Silkes of China, Furres of Russia cold,
And VVines of Gaseoyne, her faire brests doe hold:
The Oyles of Piemont, halfe the Drugs and Dyes,
That the whole world containes, in her lap lyes.


80
Vnto this Queene must I Penia beare,
VVho with some certaine words which she must say,
And with her tongue her darkned eyes must cleare,
Which good this Virgin amply will repay;
For which let euery faithfull Brittaine pray.
This said, the wing'd God snatcht her thence,  vanisht;
I wakt, and from my soule all sad thoughts banisht.





Malum  finis Rerum: OR, SINNE AND VER|TVE.

1
MIne eies are dim, my toung with sorrow cleaueth,
My hands they shake, my knees together smite,
My soule doth faint, my flesh with horror freezeth,
My heart it pantes, my haires they stand vpright,
When I in hand doe take my pen to write
The things which did to me in sleepe appeare,
Which needs I must disclose, tho much I feare.


2
When silnt Night had couer'd with her cloke
The face of Earth, and euery thing sought rest,
Saue harmefull beasts, which Nature doth prouoke
To prey on weaker things; my Soule opprest
With heauy thoughts, which banisht from my brest
All pleasing and delightfull fantasies,
This Vision thus appear'd before mine eyes.



3
A naked Damsell first appear'd (whose skin
With bleeding wounds ennammeld, yet did show
The hidden beauties that had dwelt therein)
She fled from one that gaue her many a blow
With seuen-fold Whip, whose cause and selues to know
Sore did I long, and with that thought opprest,
The wronged Wight this speech to me adrest.


4
Mortall (quoth she) I see thou pittiest sore
My wrongs; but make the case thine owne,
And rust not this fals Syren, cunning whore,
Who bred in Heauen,  thence to earth thrown downe,
As to her prison, here attempts to crowne
Her selfe on Earth, sice Heauen she cannot win,
And robs my name, that's Vertue, but is Sin.


5
Trust not her painted brow, her blandishment;
Her beauties but a vizor paisted on,
A cunning baite to catch th'improuident;
She's vnder it an Ethiopian:
And tho she smoothes her wrincles all she can,
Shee's filthy, cruell: Tygres farre more kind;
They feed on foes, but she deuoures her friend.


6
Vnder her Silke and Purple brauerie,
Vnpartiall eyes shall find with perfit sight,
Her members spotted with ranck leprosie;
Her fingers armed with Harpies clawes for fight
And rapine; clouen beast-like both her feete;
A Dragons tayle which venombd foynes 
At her fond louers, in their deare embraces.



7
And tho in pompe she trauell through the world,
And most adore her, and her glittring traine;
Yet are both they, and she, fear'd and abhord,
By those, whose perfect sight desernes the same:
Therefore for thine instruction will I name
Briefly her equipage, that thou mayst see
Both what her selfe and her attendants be.


8
First, must I shew her Chariot and attire,
Wherein she makes her progresse with her traine
From East to West, The Seate is foule Desire;
The Wheeles whereon it moues, are ordid Gaine,
Selfe-Loue and Vnbehefe, and Pleasures vaine;
Her Coach-man Belzabub, or Abbaddon;
Her Mates, Megara, Alecto, Tisiphene.


9
Her Iades tha drew her on, Disdaine they be,
Pride, Enuy, Wrath, Reuenge, Ambition,
And lastly, Feare and Curiositie:
Deceite and Lies her Lacqueys by her run,
Still ready for all errands. After whom
Come her Attendants,  and Dissidence,
Confusion and tormenting Conscience.


10
Follie's her page, which still keepes Reason tide:
Hypocrisie's her Chaplaine, who still thriues,
VVhile true Zeale pines. Her Beadles, Ease Lust; Pride,
These from her Gates Repentance farre off driues,
From whence I Vertue poore these wounds deriue.
Lastly, thou feest her brood that followeth,
Her Issue, Famine, Sicknes, Warre and Death.



11
This said, foure Altars then she pointed me,
All smoking hot with Incence on the same:
The first to Ambition and to Crueltie;
Ignorance and Idolatrie retaine
The second place; the third of these did flame
To Auarize and to Oppression: last
To Luxurie and Iust the fourth was plac't.


The Altar to AMBITION and CRVLTIE.

12
And while these things she spoke, me thought appear'd
A horrid traine of fierce and bloody Wights:
Flame colour'd Robes they wore, with Crimson smerd;
Their dreadfull lookes euen yet my heart affrights.
Quoth she, all these ioy'd once in dismall ights,
And to their ends to tract a bloody way,
Which thus to sinne her first oblations pay.


13
But to auoide prolixitie (quoth she)
And to make vp a iust account with time,
Thy patience and mine owne lost libertie
I wish thee note, tis no intent of mine
Each seuerall storie here for to designe
And prosecute, but onely such as be
By chance most buious vnto mine eie.



14
Why should I point thee out accursed Caine?
Orth' Hayrie Hunter with his sinew bow?
Or those on whom iust Ioseph did complaine?
That frantick faithlesse King why should I show?
Or (1) He that made the childrens blood streame through
Iudeas streetes? whyth' sonne of (2) Gedeon?
Or that same  cruell Absalon?


15
Behold Buiris, Egypts cruell King,
That fed with humain flesh his Horses full.
Three cruell (3)  him following.
(4) Numulisinthis then the Thracian Trull:
Then Phalleris with's dreadfull brazen Bull.
Loe (5) Pontus King, and (6) Occhus false of oath,
Black Haniball, and (7) Iuguri here be both.


16
Next these, obserue the Purple Persian there
With Royall tyre, (8)  is his name;
How strange a sacrifice the wretch doth beare,
To offer cruelties vnhallowed flame.
With him (9) Astiages, and Zerxes came
This millions slew, to atcheiue his proud desire;
That cookt the children for their wofull Syre.


17
Loe, Tulli, King Serius gracelesse heyre,
Who wearie of her long-liu'd Syres delay,
Slew him, perhaps t'anticipate a yeare,
Perhaps a moneth, perhaps not a full day:
But not conent to take his life away,
Most ignominiously she causde her Horse;
That drew her Chariot, trample on his corpse:



18
She shew'd me then two (11) Romans and two Greekes,
That with their happy regall states displeasde,
Halde by Ambition into strage dislikes,
Made the world sicke, and in their time diseasde
Charen with two much labour, yet appeasde,
Nor satisfied a iot their vaine desires,
Tho shedding seas of blood to quench those ,


19
Then (as they came in sight) she did me show
Sylla, with purple face and firie eyes,
The plague of Pontus, and Romes ouerthrow,
By first inducing those sad tragodies.
And Mrrius fear'd of friends and enemies.
Then (12) Cais vile, that wisht the world to slay;
And (13) he that slew's Mother Agrippina.


20
Another (14) rew she shew'd me the that seem'd
To be ome Kingly Romans by their weede,
But tyrants were, or monsters righter deem'd,
Begot of Tigars broode, or Dragons seede,
So many innocents they causde to bleed;
Of whom some offerd Armes, some Feet, Legs, thighs,
Some Eares, some Noses, others Tongues and eyes.


21
And (15) one of these she show'd me mongst the rest
A Roaine Prince. (if true my Author tell)
Offring a heart with  fiue imprest,
Which Iesus made, if  they did spell:
But surely in the Tyrants heart was Hell,
With dying life, and liuing death who vext
Those worthy seules to vertue so conext.



22
Next these came one in (26) Polish weed attir'd,
Whom Rats and Mice had bare anatomizde:
Then of my faire his story I requir'd,
Who said, 'twas one that sometimes Royalizde
In Plish Throne; by Poyson that surprizde
His Vncles liues, whose flesh by Heauens iust doome
Turnd into Rats, the Caitife to consume.


23
Next him came one that sacrifizde to th'Ghost
Of's angry Syre, the cruell (17) Amurath
Then he that offerd vp that wofull Host,
Of Noble Grecian blood, fierce (18) Mahumeth.
Next him Valachia's Prince that put to death
So many thousand subiects seuerall waies,
As did great Tyrant Mahumet amaze.


24
In the last ranke of these she show'd me more,
Three cruell Princes foule with Patricide:
A Turke a (misnam'd) Christian, and a Moore.
The first, most cruell (20) elim, full of pride,
Who in a cup his ag'd Sires death did hide:
Friends, Brothers, Nephews kild. and th'whole world fired,
Like Phaeton; and last by fire expired.


25
The second (21) Adolphe, Duke of Guelders hight,
Who from his seate his aged Parent drew,
And him imprison'd in most lothsome plight,
Thinking to tirehim out by meanes mis-due,
Whom into like extreames Heauen iustly threw:
And as from's Sire hee banisht pace and rest,
So he a captiue liu'd and dyde distrest.



26
The third of these was (2) Amidas, the Prince
Of Tunis, who against his Sie did rise,
Tho being chiefly crusted for defence,
During his absence, gainst his enemies:
Absent he takes his Crowne, present his Eyes.
But as his Regall Sire he rob'd of sight,
Iust Heauen by sicknesse did himselfe benight.


27
After all these she shew'd me other three,
Of whom the first an English habit wore:
Wan were his Cheekes, blacke Locks, a downe cast eie,
And Camels backe; his name I sought her sore
To kno but she denyde, bad aske no more.
A thousand slaues there followed after him
With bloody bowles, where heads and hearts did swim


28
Next after whom a warlike Gaule there came,
Which in his hand a bloody brand did waue:
The robes he wore were scarlet dyde in graine,
And he himselfe like colour seemd to haue,
Who in so many millions blood did laue.
And as he wet all France with bloody showres,
So heauen at length his blood from each part powres


29
The third and last of all, whose natiue ill
And vice transcends the vice of all the rest,
As farre as Atlas doth the humblest Hill,
Or Sylons carry Towre, Galwayes small beast:
With whom worst Kings compar'd, seeme good and blest;
The (23) Russian Tyrant, Russia's shame, whose breath
Did wither all things, in whose name was death.



30
His pleasures were not like to other mens;
Sweete sounds the sternest hearts sad'st soules reioyce:
But Musick neuer pleasde his hellish sense.
He neuer laught but at some dying voyce;
Teares, sighs, sobs, grones to him were heauenly ioyes,
Who very seldome rellisht well his meate,
But when with blood and death he season'd it.


31
If any rauisht virgin did lament,
Or honourd Lady forc't vnto his will,
Or seem'd their friends or parents discontent,
Toth' stewesthey went; or (not content to kill)
He hung them ore their parents table, till
Their friends (with their dead sauour welnigh slaine)
By teares and bribes got leaue to burie them.


32
When people from the Temples vsde to come,
He vsde to loose his Beares at them in spor
Delighting much to see them seale the throng;
With which bad pastime many perisht for't.
No mercy did his anger ere consort,
Which  Kindreds; but, encreast to rage,
Entomb'd whole Cities, sparing sex nor age.


33
His ministers of mirth, his dearest friends,
His Wiues, his Whores, his Children were not sure;
The most of these he brought t'vntimely ends;
The instruments euen of his lusts impure;
The Hangmen from this Hangman's not secure:
The Beares and Tygrs in their owne Whelpes ioy
He worse then they, his owne Sonne did destroy.



34
The wondrous writing on Balthashar wall
Seemes small, compar'd with what to him was sent,
To whom from Heauen a letter downe did fall
In Marble-writ, whose sculpture sure was ment
To him that liu'd, and dyde impenitent.
And as he fatall was while he had breath,
So did his stech in death giue others death.



2. The Altar to IGNORANCE and IDOLATRY.

35
These and their ceremonies scarce were past,
When in there came another hideous crew,
Which to the second Altar went in hast,
And on the same their seuerall Incense threw:
Most of them differing both in speech, in hue,
In face and habit, being seuerall Nations,
And some in new, and some in antick fashions.


36
Then here my kind Interpreter I praid
T'enstruct me of this second company:
Who kindly granted my request, and said,
All these brought Incense to Idolatry
From euery Coast and Region farre and nigh,
Both old and new. But since so many liue,
She meant of both but short accounts to giue



37
She shewd me first vpon this Altar plac't,
The Idols worshipt by each seuerall Nation,
Whereby Iehouahs worship is defac't,
And Stocks and Stones cut after differing fashion,
Men, Beasts, Fish, Foul by vaine imagination
Are deified; yea, Satan visibly,
Not plealde alone with types inuisibly


38
She nam'd (24) th'Egyptians, leaders of the rest,
Seeking for Iis and  lost,
And for their sacred Bull but late disseast,
Lamenting sore, meaning to be at cost
With's Obsequies: for euen those things that most
Harm'd them, they worshipt; th'Aspe, the Dragons fell;
Both Birds and Beasts within their Phanes did dwell.


39
Th'Iehuewmon, and the (25) Crocodile they fed,
And feeding, with great humblenes ador'd;
And Beetles (blinded Beetles they indeed,
That so the death of Dogs and Cats deplor'd)
(Whose strange zeale that from (26) Onions aide implor'd)
Me thought now hauing found Osiris ran,
And sacrifiz'd thereto a (26) red hair'd man.


40
The Romans here sought out their rurall Pan,
Ioue, Saturne, Hercules, Mars, Liber, Play,
Mercury, and two-fronted Lanus them;
Pallas and Iuno, Veus and Flora,
With their blest Mother Berecinthya,
Chance, Vesta, Victory, and Prayus,
With thousands such, to number friuolus.



41
She showde me then th'old (27) Ethipions
Which Hammon sought, and those oraculous trees;
(a) Diana then serued by thEphesians,
And Eckrons, (28) Baalzebub, God of Flies;
(29) Sydonians, busie with the mysteries
Of their deare Sheepe god, Astert: (30) Tirians
Bowing to Apollo; and to  Syrians.


42
Then those ador'd the Sunne, the fond (31) Phoenicians,
Here in great numbers sought their loued (32) stone
(So much enricht, and serued by seuerall Nations)
Which was Piramedall form'd like a con.
And here the men of (33) Carras made great mone
To Luna, to whose Temple those ouercome
By their curst wiues, with offrings vsde to run.


43
Next these came such whom amorous fire did moue
By paires to seeke the shades, and burbling streames,
And sacred beauties of the (34)  Groue
Where Cypresse boughes forbid th'ennamourd beames
Of glorious Phoebus, in his hottest gleames
To kisse their Mother-erth, or to discouer
The secret ioye of any melting louer,


44
Th (35) Persians here ador'd their holy Fire:
The Laodiceans to Minerua paide
(According as her cruell Rites require)
Yeerely oblation of a spotlesse Maide.
Diuers there were likewise, that offerings laid
To Dago th Syren of the Phylistines.
But here from these she past to neerer times.



45
And shew'd me first the vaine (36) Tartarians,
Offering vnto their felten Deiie
Mares milke and Flesh, Next them the (37) Chyians,
And () , people of great policie,
Yet in Religion full of vanitie,
And who (as'ts easiest alway to doe euill
Through Ignorance) giue worship to the Deuill.


46
Next these came (38) Peguans as wise as they,
That Incenc't Idoll. Deuils of strange shape;
As doh Cambaa to, and Bengala.
The (39)  here fought out their Ape,
And those of , and along to th'Cape
Comorin, of Narsinga, Callicut,
That how to an Apes Tooth, and doe worship to't.


47
Then shewd she diuers did Idolatrize
Toth, Sunne and Moone, the Moores of Angola,
And Congo; some to Serpents, some to Trees.
Canibals of , Zanfara,
Then show'd she me the Witches of Medra,
Which worshipe Deuils, and doe offer them
Lou'd sacrifice of humain bodies slaine,


48
She past not byth' tawny (40) Tenustitans,
That millions to their Vitzlipuzly slew:
Seconded by th'as fond Peruuians,
Who did their  all bedew
With blood of slaughtred men. But let me view
Braillians seruing Agnan and's (41) Maracca:
 offering theirs Blood and Tobacca.



49
The next that vnto me she did display,
Of Turkie pilgrims seemd a ,
Passig the Desars of Arabia,
Who seemd as if to Meccha now they came,
Their Prophets graue (and th'house of )
These at this Atar sought mongir other things
His Tombe thereon to pay their offerings.


50
Next these came some that rought a world of trash,
, Relk; hol Crucifixes, Coffers,
Gold, Iewels,  and pue Ciptian brasse,
Vowe, Prayers, Teares, to wood and stone, vaine offers
To gods that canno: helpe, the wrongs wormes proffers:
A dull  that sencelesse  adores,
More grosse then theirs that actiue sprights implores.


51
After all these I fortun'd to 
An Idoll mongst the rest of fearefull forme:
Like humain sace it had, but ne'cr an ,
To see; vpon the brow a mightie, horne
Elephants eares, yet vse did none returne:
An eare-wide mouth, with Boare like fangs beset,
Andth' Prples tongue, as sharpe as needles wher.


52
A Ianus face it had, a morions hew,
Two wings, and many coloured plumes she wore,
The vpper parts did Giants members show,
And armes, whose finger Griffens tallents bore,
But Pgmies leggs it had, so small therefore,
That much adoe they had to make it stand,
For still it tumbled downe on euery hand.



53
Those that did worship this, brought waters sweete,
Thinking to wash it faire: but all in vaine,
In vaine they stroue to make their Ethiope white,
Pure waters were polluted by the same;
I crau'd my Faire to let me know their name:
But she vnwilling was to grant me this,
Onely she calld their Idoll Dokesis, Opine. Dokesis.


54
All these past on, amongst them diuers were
Whom I had seene, and diuers other to
I neuer knew: whom this my Virgin-faire
For breuitie omitted me to show:
But all with humble reuerence did goe
Toth' second Altar, and did lowly lowre,
While they thereon did their libations powre.



3. The Altar of AVARICE and OPRESSIO.

55
Which done, they straight-way vanisht out of sight,
And the third ranck appear'd of Suppliants then;
All which were such whom Gold did most delight,
And gaine atchie'd byth' harmes of other men.
She show'd me diuers Princes mixt with them,
Altho for breuitie she onely nam'd
Some few, whom this base vulgar vice distayn'd.



56
She show'd me Pharoe and's extorted wealth,
Extracted from the pore oppressed Iew:
And Lidian Crasus with his loued polfe:
(a) And Ptolomy whom Cypresse sometime knew.
Then the (42) icillian  did she shew,
And th' (43) Neapolitane of later time,
That causde his subiects for to keepe his Swine.


57
And after them she let me next behold
A stately traine of petty Princes then,
And Lordlings faire ttir'd in Silke and Gold,
Which saue their Robes did Polish fashion seeme;
I should haue sworne I most of them had seene:
But I confesse that I no such doe know,
And this confession to mine errours owe.


58
With stately pace me thought these  Peeres
And fierce regard, went vp to sacrifize
Chargers of Sweat, and pearly Peasans Teares,
(So oft transformed by Magick Auatice
Into those orient ones of smaller price)
They offerd shewes of Barke and Ackorne bread,
And sculles of men, which hard hearts famished.


59
A thousand Lawyers here did sacrisize.
Who offerd vp Demutres, and long delayes,
, Stops, Iniunctions, References,
And Prohibitions, that the cause betraies
Of the poore Client, and the Kernell layes
At their owne doores, restoring these the shell,
Of whom had Tophet th'ill, the world were well.



60
She showde me then another gowned crew,
And Cipresse Garlands did their browes impale;
They seem'd like mourners by their sable hew,
Yet massie chets they seem'd to tg and hale;
Vpon their shoulders bore they bills of sae,
Morgages, Nouerints, rich Iewels, Stones;
But all their offerings were of dead mens bones.



4. The Altar to LVST and LVXVRIE.

61
To the last Altar then (whereon were plac'
To Bacchus and to Venus Deitius,
Two Images, wth curious cunning grac't)
Came the fourth ranck thereto to sacrifize,
Which did with Songs and Musich iouialize,
And rosie Chaplets did their aires entwine,
Their colours youthfull weare, White, Red  Greene.


62
There 
She shewed me, and that Iustfull Paipha.
The wife of  did not ;
Nor youthfull , and faire Mellena;
Nor Troyalus, and wanton Cressida,
, Iays, Flora, and Manilius
She show'd, and , and Demetrius.



63
Popeia there she show'd, and Clodius;
She show'd me (44) Syeus and Messaline.
Then Cleopatra and Anthonius,
And many others of much later time,
And nearer home: all which to Vinus shrie,
Besides Sighes, Sonnets, Teares, and Libian Gold,
Offerd a Milke-white Goat, twice eight yeares old.


64
She noted then (45) three singled from the rest,
Whose countenance show'd their sad soules discontent;
Louers they seem'd; yet seem'd their minds ossest
With deeper woes, then Cupids languishment:
These three from three pure soules those iewels rent;
Which gain'd, with losse of liues they did repay,
And Crownes, which here on Venus shrine they lay:


65
Ten thousand more there were, whose stories she
For breuitie abridged; yet three or foure
She noted, patternes of strange Luxurie,
Pesians and Chaldeans, but past ore
All of them, saue Balthaser, who did powre
Full Challices to  holy Flame,
As earst he did amongst his cups being slaine.


66
There named she Geta th'Emperor, whose met
After no common guise to's table came,
But ranckt by letters of the Alphabet.
There named she Esope the Tragedian,
Who offerd vp a dish vnseene till than,
All the sweete singing Bira that Rom did hold,
To grace his Feast, at dearest prises sold.



67
She left not out Dennis Hetaclemt;
Iouian, and Septimius Seuerus,
Who dyde with drinking, both were not forgot;
Nor yet that Sorcerer Tiberius:
All which to  most imperious
Did offer Flaggons, and with weathes of Vine,
Adornd the Temples of his honourd shrine.


68
The Heliogabalus. Priest of  then she show'd me there,
All naked, in his chariot drawne along,
By naked women (as he did appeare
Sometime in Rome amidst the lustfull throng)
Where Gammeds and Syrens sweetely sung)
And a rare dish of minst meate offred
Of Peliens tongues, and Cocks-combs sinely .


69
She show'd me then the Emperour Maximine,
A Thracan Shepheard by originall,
Who did by all the staires of Fortune climbe
Vnto the throne and seate Imperiall.)
(But as she raide him, so she wrought his fall)
A full cram'd Glutton so  fed with cheare,
That two strong men were plac's his paunch to beare,


70
Diuers there were of later times, that seem'd
Amongst the rest she noted onely two,
The first, at first, great  I deem'd;
But better viewd by  picture, streight I know;
He softly pac't, but sore did puffe and blow:
He dranke to Bachus and with all his heart
Presented Venus with his secret part.



71
Next him came Muleasses, that 'd
His dishes with so rare and costly Sweees,
That one three little birds there were consum'd
An hundreth Crownes Next these came diuers Knights
And Princely Dames assisting at these Rits,
And millions of each banke,  she
Cut off, through th'entrance of  companie.


72
Much was I moued with what I earst had ,
My heart it vented sighe, mine eyes ,
Recording things which so long past had een,
But now alas renewed my grefes and feares,
Seeing a world of Clergic men by th'eares,
Striuing and strugling who sould first begin
To kill the greatest Hecatombs to sinne.


73
Foule worke they made, and many a bloodie streame
Forth from their broken head did trickle downe:
Sore tugged they at a triple Diademe,
And for the same was many a clouen crowne,
Their Croysiers crackt, and Miters ouerthrowne:
Such stirre there was, as any man might well
Thinke onely bred in Babylon or Hell.


74
In most disordred sort along they went,
Amongst themselues each striuing first to be.
With single sacrifizes not content,
Each of them did to euery Altar flie
With equall zeale, and like Humiliue;
Out stripping farre (if all she told me true)
The vildest Pagan either old or new.



75
Then quoth my Faire, Conuert then thine eyes, and find
In these the compleate ill of all the rest,
And vice accomplishe in so high a kind,
That Nero here would Crueltie detest,
Maximine thinke his Auarice were blost,
Mad Anthonine would Luxurie deride,
Messalme would hate lust, Popea pride.


76
Loe first comes he that drew the putrid Corse
Of's predecessor from his Marble Vrne,
And in a Synode (voyde of all remorse)
First, plac't him in Saint Peters Chaire in scorne,
Did him with Robes pontificall adorne;
Degrades him; then from's hands three fingers cuts;
Lastly, with's corpse pure Tyburs waues polutes.
Platina, de formoso, in vita Stephani sexti.

Hee that desires satisfaction for these ensuing Stories, may be truly enformed of their truth from these Authors; Platina de vitis pontificum, Onuphrius, Petrarche, Guiccardine, eminent men in their times, and all employed in great places vnder Popes.

77
Then Iohn the twelfth, a monster vile behold,
To hunting more adicted then to prayer
(When tend it for venerian tilts he could:)
The Lateran he made a brothell faire;
Saint Peters golden Challices the ware.
He, Healths to Pluto drunke; and for his paine,
By him i'th'act of lust impure was slaine.



78
I would not load thy membrie too sore,
(Quoth she) mongst many will I name but two
Damd Sorcerers, that Leagues accursed swore,
And did in woods and secret places bow,
And sacrifice th'infernali powres vnto,
Contracting most deare bargains, to obtaine
A short, disquiet, aye repented raigne.


79
The first loe there is Platina speakes of this to the full. in vi|a Siluester secundi. Siluester by name,
Whose bargaine was, that he on earth should stay
So long, till to Ierusalem he came,
A further iourney then he meant to stray.
But going to the Church, so call'd, to pray,
His Feind appeares: the Churches name he craues:
Which knowne, he droopes dies. Thus falfe Feinds deceiues.


80
That other Benedict the ninth we call,
So farre indeed from what his name imports,
That to obtaine the cursed Romain Pall,
And that with women he might freely sport,
Sealed couenants written with his owne blood fort.
And whilest he once his wicked homage made,
His Master kild him, and his owne debts paid.


81
There goes another no lesse liberall,
Another Benedict, a blessed one:
Of Priestly gifts and grace spirituall,
A man of equall note with those best knowne,
Who rauisht Nuns and Virgins, pittied none:
A daned Atheist blind with ust and pride,
The soule to be immortall he denide.



82
That Hildebrand loe here, that Hellish brand,
The sower of tedition, murther, strife,
Before whose Gate an Emperour did stand
Barefoore three dayes, attending with his wife;
Yet still he sought to rid him of his life:
Not pleasde, altho his Crowne vpon his knee
He offerd him, with base seruilitie.


83
Then show'd she him that did Pope Iohn benight,
Imprisond, and in prison causde him pine.
Then he that crown'd the Emperour with his feete,
That dogged incaelestiall Calestine.
Then Alexander Pope farre lesse diuine
Then Pagan Alexander, Persia's god,
Who vnder's feete Great Caesars neuer trod.


84
Next these, a Wretch that murtherd two Popes goes.
Calixtus then that Gregorie displac't,
Making him passe in manner dolerous
Through Rome, where earst he had been highly grac't;
Vpon a Cammell leane, and badly pac't,
Trapt with raw Goats hides, then to prisne confind him,
Where with Petre an charitie he pyn'd him.


85
Loe Balthasar that Balthasar excell'd,
Poysoning his Predecessor, to acquire
Saint Peters Chaire; whoth'holy Relicks sell'd,
To feed the fewell of his Paphian fire;
For rapes of Nunnes, and fortie vertues higher,
And Atheisme, was at Constance last deposde,
And in strong Manheyms walles he dyde enclosde.



86
Next him obserue Aeeas Siluius,
That made old Rome a new stage of delight;
Learned, but  and luxurious.
Next whom comesThis Peter Barbo was so great an enemy of Learning, and so great a louer of Ignorance: that he did vsually vpbraide the learned with the name of Hereticks; and stcktly prohibited any to name the word Accademy; and forbad the Romans to suffer their children to be taught any further, then to write and reade. out of Platina and others; cited by that excellent Du|plessis. Peter Barbo into sight,
Whose soule liu'd here in a Cimmerian night.
And (tho his rich stones dimd the Moone) dy'd poore,
Consuming all on's Bastard and his Whore.


87
There others goe, whom lust and beautie hent
To highest place. Then Agrippa de vanitate seientiarm, cap. 6 de lenoniu Sixtus loe (quoth she)
That Brothels built t'encrease Saint  rent,
And with his friends dispenc't for Sodomie
Three moneths the yeere, Iune, August, Iuly:
And he that sometime did This was one whose name the Author for some respect conceales, who feasted all the Nobility of Auignion with one dish, and this it was: In the belly of an Oxe was placed the bo|dy of a Deare in whose body againe was placed by most  Geometrick skill, all sorts of most  Fowle, mouing by deui|ses and Engins seuerall waies in such sort, that they might bee iust rosted with the Beefe, to the great admiration of the behol|ders Platina. lib de honesta voluptate. Auignion feast
Most prodigally, yet but one dish drest.



88
Then Guiccardine l. 6. and Machiauell de principe, cap 18. Borgia behold well nigh the last,
Whose auarice I doe not meane to touch,
(Slight vice for vertues oft-times here hath past)
But diuelish Artes and lust in him were such,
That to corriue with sonnes, he thought not much
In's daughters bed: so mixt he many a cup
Of death for's friends, and last himselfe did sup.


89
Then after these she let me see that Iulius,
That Peters Keyes in Tyburs waues did throw;
And Pauls keee Sword then tooke in hand most furious,
When he before Mirandula did go;
VVherewith he made whole streames of blood to flow.
Then Leo last, an Atheist worst of all
VVho did the Gospell but a Fable call.


90
These Clergie men brought vessels full of bloud,
And poisoned bowles, they offerd crueltie:
Then Teeth, Bones, Haire, old Reliques, rotten VVood.
And Idols more their Nile to Idolatrie.
To Auarice a world of soules. To Luxurie,
Delitious Cates, VVine, Silke and costly Stones
To Venus then, ten thousand little ones.


91
Here-with me thought the Altars fiercely blaz'd,
The flame the earst asrnded much more high,
The smoke ten thousand pitchy turrts raisde,
And so transcended boue the Starry skie,
Piercing the nostrils of Ioues Maiestie:
VVhereat aazde, my haires vpright they run,
 grew dim, and tongue grew stiffe and dumb.



92
For straight me thought the earth began to quake,
The water murmurd, and the ayre did sigh,
The leauy Groues seem'd sadder sounds to make
The Oen groned, and Horses snorted high:
All rebels to their Masters, eeling nigh
This end of things; and all in heart request
Great God to right their wronges, and giue the~ .


93
The Sun and Moone then streight me thought grew dim,
The Starres from heauen they fell, and lost their light;
And all the world seemd now returnd againe
To her first Chaos, and eternall night.
Then were my feares and hopes, in doubtfull ight,
When straight me thought this voice came fr aboue;
Is this the fruit of Heauens long care and loue?


94
The Earth cries out, that man her gifts abuseth.
The Sea (whose bending backe e  for gane)
That bloody streames he in her waues infuseth,
And doth corupt her spawne with bodies slaine.
The Aire that it's polluted doth complaine.
The Fire cries ou, he doth so oft enrage it,
That Cities melt, and Floods can not asswage it.


95
The Towre-bearer, and proud couragious 
Crie out, he forceth them against their will,
T'assaile with amed fides, and barbest crest
The liues of men to murther and to kill.
The Lions rore, that earst were taught to fill
Themselues on Men; whom hunger only forceth
To feed on those, Ioues fatall brand endorceth.



96
The weeping Woods of haplesse Arabye,
The sweetes which for delight and health he fram'd,
Euen these complaine, and doe for vengeance cry,
Because so oft on Idoll shrines they flam'd,
And by his lusts impure haue been defam'd.
The powrefull Hearbs, which flying breath recall,
Made by themselues Deaths Agents in their fall.


97
The Beasts, Fowle, Fish and Fruit of various kind,
Ordain'd for health, for pleasure, and for vse,
The hidden treasures to the earth assign'd;
All these likewise doe witnesse his abuse,
With which he truth and iustice doth traduce;
With which he surfes, while his brthren ine,
And in his heart denies the powre diuine.


98
The Saints lament that Heauen he still reprocheth,
The Angels grieue at his ingatitude.
The Deuils cry out, that he on them encroeheth,
And now begins to teach them to be leaud?
Therefore Iehouah doth in  conclude,
 all's accomplish, was decreed before,
The World shall end, and Time shall be no more.


99
Here-with the fires th' etheriall tracts retaines
The hidden sparkles, both in Wood and ,
The Sulphur lurking in earths secret veyne
Burst forth (me thought) and all conucend in one,
Men, Beasts, Trees, Houses for to feede vpon:
This fierie Sergeant in an houre did 
Of many hundred yeares the  to ile.



100
Then gaspt earths marble iawes; her hungry 
It opned wide, tho now no more to take,
But to restore the surfets of her youth:
Each Goale a free deliuerance to make;
The Sea restorde her Dead, each Streame and Lake,
And all the earth with new borne limbs it trembled,
VVhile soules and bodies themselues re-assembled,


101
The Kings and Princes they did sore lament,
VVishing the earth would ope and swallow them.
The gallant Dames that liu'd incontinent,
For whose deare sakes so many earst was slaine,
VVith horror here confounded, and with shame;
They wayled, they wept, they wisht to change their stat
VVith meanest slaues, or beasts they fed on late.


102
But all in vaine they wisht what cannot be:
The Trumpet sounds, and they must all appeare:
They see the angry Iudge sitting on high;
Beneath them Hell, the obiect of their feare:
No pleaders need they neither witnesse here,
Three Bookes of Conscience, Passion, Life lies ope,
Then cease the good to feare, the bad to hope.


103
The senence past, the blessed soules reioyce:
The wicked gnasht their teeth, gainst Heauen blasphe|ming;
The Deuils howld, and made a fearefull noyse,
And all the poyson of their malice teeming
On  mortalls (hopelesse of redeeming)
In burning carrs,  chaine towards Hell them hayld,
Fro~ whce, me thought, these words mine eare assaild.



104 Vox gehenna.
Oh cursed you, that why lest yee earst had time,
No councels betterd, nor examples moued,
To keepe the statutes, and the lawes diuine,
But still your blinded sence your banes approued;
Tho Christ for sinners suffred whom he loued:
We but for one offence are hither driuen,
You're lost for want of faith, whose sins were giuen.


105
VVith flaming forkes therefore weele tosse and turne yee,
In Stigian streames to Christall will we freeze yee;
In Phlegton then will we thaw, then burne yee;
Our comfort is, we're sure we cannot leese yee.
Death grazeth on yee, but he euer flies yee.
Here shall ye freeze with feare,  burne with anguish,
And pine with famine, and in darke fires languish.


106
You Tygers which did thirst for bloody streames,
And teares of others, here shall drinke your owne.
You Moles, whose eyes were dazde with Golden beames,
Yee shall haue store, great measure shall be showne,
With Ladles downe your throtes it shall be throwne.
You lustfull Goats, that ioyd in amorou gracos,
You shall be glutted here with our embraces.


107
You angry Doggs, here shall you  your fill.
You rauenous Wolues, here shall ye eate your dung.
You enuious Dragons to, that dyde to kill,
That hated still the good, the wise and strong,
Your selues vnapt for any thing but wrong,
Here shall ye feed on Aspecks; and your head
With Snakie tresses shall be couerd.



108 Poena sensus.
You Eyes that heretosore could not endure
To looke vpon the ores of Lazarus,
But highly feasted were with things impure,
With costly Pictures, and lasciuious,
With Gowns, with Gauds, with fashions rare and vicious,
With Maskes, with Shows; here shll ye nothing see
But Serpents, flying Firs, and vgly We.


109
You, you whose noses still o close were pent,
In passing by the poore and needy wight,
For whom from Ganges Odours rich were sent,
And nothing was thought costly, that was meet,
To couer Natures faults, or to delight.
You, you that Chimneys were for Indian smoke,
With pitchy Clouds and Brimstone shall yee choke.


110
You eares that earst were deafe vnto the poore,
Whom flatteries, or gaine, or charming sound
Of Musick only pleasde, you shall no more
Heare names of Honor, Grace, of Wit profound,
Valour or Beautie; here all things resound,
And eccho horror, grones of wretched Ghosts,
Othes, Blasphemies, and Yells of vs your Hosts.


111
You, you for whom the Virgins fingers spunne
The silkes of Naples, and proud Genoa,
For whom were brought soft Sables from the Donne,
And costly Ermines from Rhezania;
Who pin'd the poore that you might feast and play.
You, you whose curious touch no Downe could please,
Here burning beds of Iron is your ease.



112
You curious mouthes that nought but sweets could taste,
Whose great excesse did grutch the poore a share,
Which on your paunches millions carst did wast,
And had so many thousands still to care,
Onely to bring you dishes, strange and rare,
Here Ostrich-like shall swallow in your rage,
Toads, , or Stones, your hungers to asswage.


113 Poena damni.
Then damned soules, conceiue what you haue lost,
How faire a Citie, what a Mansion,
Prouided for yee at anothers cost;
Enricht with bauty and perfction,
Where  cares, disease, or want is none,
But all with glorie, and with wisdome shine,
Sustain'd and cherisht by that loue diuine.


114
On earth while earst you liu'd, you deemd the losse
Of Paents fauour was no little paine;
The losse of Kingdomes an exceeding crosse;
But most to loose the light, and to remaine
In dungeon darke: This losse doth all containe
I he losse of God, whse bundlesse powre diuine
Doth not your plagues in times or tearmes consine.


115
Altho ye could like Esau melt to teares;
Restore like Iudas your accursed gaine;
Like Ahab mourne in sack cloth (many yeares)
Altho you here could chatter like the Crane,
Send forth as shrill shrikes as the Pellican:
Tho ye could weepe whole Seas for euery sinne,
They're all but lost, no mercy can yee wnn



116
But here me thought I felt a sudden ioy
Run through my flesh, and wing my rauisht spright,
Feeling my selfe exempt from this anoy,
Full of coelestiall thoughts, and rare delight,
Amongst the Quires of heauenly Singers sweete.
With which high ioyes, I thinke, my soule had scapt
From forth her prison, if I had not wak.



(1) Herod surnamed the Great (tho valiant, cruell) put to death Mariamne his wife (a wo|man both chaste and beautifull;) then his owne sons Alexander and Aristobulus, the children of Beth|lem, his salse sonne Antipater, the most of his friends: and lastly (lest he should want teares at his end) gaue order for the killing of a great num|ber, shut vp in the Hippodrome. Ioseph. Antiq.
(2) Abimelech, the base sonne of Gedeon slew threescore and nine of his brethren to vsurpe. Io|sephus, pag. 117.
(3) Ptolomeus Philopater slew father, mo|ther, and wife. Ptolomeus Phiscon married his owne sister Cleopatra, sometime the wife of their brother, the King deceased, whom after he cast off, and married her Daughter, his Neece; and fea|ring the people should set vp his eldest sonne against him, he kills him. Whereupon they pull  his images; which he, interpreting as don in fauour of his sister, kills also his  that he had by her, sen|ding

his hands and feete in a chest as a present to her the day of his birth. Iustine, lib. 38. Ptolo|meus Ceraunos, the brother of Lisimachus King of Macedon, hauing rescued Queene Arsinoe, hi owne sister, from Antigonus, who slew her hus|band, and besieged her in the Citie Cassandria, af|fecting the Kingdome, made suit to his sister for marriage (hauing no other meanes to get the pos|session of her, and her children;) but his intentions being suspected by her, hee sweares by the Altars and the Gods, that he meant to make her son King. Ouercome, she yeelds, marries him, inuites him to her Citie; which he hauing seized, presently cau|ses her children to be slaine, euen in the lap of their sorrowfull mother, and exiles her selfe. Iustin. lib. 24.
(4) Numulesinthis caused the parents feede vpon their children. Valerius Maximus, lib. 9. cap. 2.
(5) Mithridates slew seuentie thousand Ro|man Merchants in one day in time of peace. Plu|tarch.
(6) Occhus, called Darius, hauing bound him|self by oath not to kill any of the conspiracie of the Magi by Sword, Poyson, Famine, or any force, de|uised a mor cruell way for them, and (as hee thought) without infringing his oath: he fills a

great deepe roome with Ashes vp to the top, and ouer the same vpon a rafter places these men, gi|uing them good cheare, wherewith being brought into a dead sleepe, they fall into this pit-sall. Val. Max. Ctesias (saith Ochus) vsed his brother Secundianus so: but this Ochus was long after Darius, the sonne of Histaspis, that supprest the Magi.
(7) Iugurth, the sonne of Masthanaball, the Base son of Masinissa, was brought vp by his Vncle Micipsa, the lawfull sonne of the said Masinissa, King of Numidia, who at his death made him co|heyre with his owne sons, Adherball and Hiemp|all, hoping by that meanes to tie him by merit, which was already bound by Blood and Kindred, to be a stay and defendr of his children in their mi|noritie: but Iugurth more cruell then the very Lions (which acknowledge benefits) after his Vncles death kills Hiempsal, warres vpon Adher|ball, and at length makes him also away: but en|ioyes the Kingdome not long, the people of Rome punishing his great impieties both with losse of Kingdome and life. Salust.
(8) Cambises hauing sent Prexaspes (one of his dearest and most trustie Friends) from Mem|phis into Persia, to make away his brother Smer|dis. At his returne againe, after the execution,

demands what they say, and what opinion they had of him in Persia. Prexaspes replies; All well, onely they thought hee loued Wine more then stood with his health. With these words the Tyrant enraged, causes Prexaspes sonne to stand as a marke for him to shoote at, and at the first shot cloue his heart, as before he said he would doe) to teach Prexaspes (who friendly admonisht him of his excesse) that hee was not drunke. Whereupon Croesus the Lidian admonishes him; hee offers to shoote at him to. He made warre so long in Ethio|pia, till his men through famine  vp one ano|ther, tything themselues by lots. Another part of his Army sent to destroy the Temple of Ammon were all lost, and ouerwhelmed with Sand, none re|turning to bring newes what Mummey their fel|lowes . Herodotus in his Thalia, page 234, 235, and 236. Seneca saith, hee caused all the peoples noses of Syria to be cut off. . de Ira. 3. c. 20
(9) Astiages being premonisht in a dreame of the translation of his Kingdome to the Persians, by meanes of Cyrus his young Nephew, gaue com|mand to Herpagus, one of his friends, to make a|way the Child. But Herpagus abhorring so great crueltie, vsed meanes to preserue him a long time secretly; til at last the King co~ming to knowledge of his life  safty, aused Herpagus for neglecting hi

command, to eate the flesh of his owne sonne at a supper. Herodotus Clyo. pag. 84.
(11) Caesar, Pompey, Alexander, Pirrhus, whose onely sinne of Ambition was the death of many millions, nothing being able to satisfie an in|satible mind: one diggs for another world, another seekes it in the Desarts of India: all of them like wilde and sauage beasts, enemies of humain society, being broke loose, run about killing and destroying others, till they loose themselues.
(12) Caius was said to be grieued, because in his time there fell no Earthquakes, Famines, nor Pestilences, to destroy the world. Hee wisht the people of Rome had but one head, that hee might strike it off at one blow. Seneca de Ira.
(13) Nero causd his Mother Agrippina to be put to death, hauing first attempted it diuers waies in vaine. Tacitus
(14) These were the Persecutors of the Church: Nero, Domitian, Marcus Anthonius Verus, Seerus, Maximine, Decius, Valerian, Auelian, Dioclesian, and Maximilian. Eusebiu and the Centuries.
(15) In Legend. Aur. it is said, that holy Ig|natius being perswaded to renounce Christ, made answere, That he could not, his Name was writ|ten vpon his Heart. Whereupon the Tyrant cau|sed

him to be opened, and found the word IESVS written therein in Golden Letters.
(16) King Poppeyle hauing slaine his two Uncles most cruelly, is persecuted of Mice and Rats by the hand of God, and hee and his Queene forc't to flie into a Towre, situated in the water: but thither they followed him, and at last deuoured him and her, no meanes being able to hinder Gods decree. These Rats seemd to come forth from the Tombes and very Graues of his dead Vnkles. This mans vsuall Oath was still, That if I doe such, or such a thing, may the Rats eate me: and so at length they did. The place is called Rats-Tower to this day. Hist. Poloniae.
(17) Amurath sacrifized at on time sixe hundred Souldiers (that yeelded vpon faith and honest conditions) to the Ghost of his dead father. Calcondillius in Hist. de Imperii Graeci lapsu in Lerius.
(18) Mahumet hauing won Constantinople, gaue himselfe to Feasts and Banquets; in which for greater pompe he put to cruell deaths the most of the Grecian Nobilitie: he cut off the head of Trene, his fairest and best beloued Parramour with his owne hand, as the onely remedie for his intem|perate loue. There happened to him a strange war|ning for his crueltie: for hauing caused fiue hun|dred

Capiues to bee slaine, and their bodies dis|membred, and throwne about) there came an Oxe rooting and lowing, and with his Hornes gathered together the pices of a Venecians body there amongst the rest: which being told to Mahumet, he againe commands the same body to be disperst. But the Oxe againe diligently seekes out the same pieces, and layes them together: wherewith Ma|humet being much mooued, caused the dead to bee buried, and giues the Oxe an allowance during life. Lerius out of Chalcondilus.
(19) Wladus, Prince of Moldauia, had a great Vale in his Country full of Gibbets, Wheeles, and other engins, whereupon there hung thirtie or fortie thousand of his owne subiects put to death by him in three yeares: With which fearefull specta|cle Mahumet the great Tyrant being amazed, be|came after more gentle, spying the greatnes of his owne faults in another, which he could not see be|fore in himsslfe. Knowles.
(20) Selym, the youngest of Baiazets sonnes, by the fauour of the Ianizares aspired to the Em|pire, disceptred his old Father Baiazet, and caused him to be poysoned; slew his Brothers and Ne|; put the most of his dearest Friends and Seruants to death: and lastly, after his victories in the East, and the conquest of Egypt, intending

great warres against the Christians, is by the hand of God stricken with a Canker, or Wild-fire in his reynes that eate him vp. Paulus Iouius, tome 1. l. 14, and tome 2. l. 19.
(21) This Adolph wearie of expecting his Fathers death, tooke the Dukdome from him, led him fiue Dutch mile barefoot in a cold night, and imprisoned him in a darke and deepe Dungeo eight moneths in most lamentable manner: but be|ing at length compeld to bring him forth, and to giue an account thereof to the Duke of Burgoyne, he onely obiects, that his Father had been Duke 44 yeeres, therefore now high time for him to come to his Birth-right. The Duke of Burgoyne at last orders the young man (being his Kinsman) to stand as Duke, and onely one small Citie to remaine to his Father, with some sixe hundred Florences the yeere during life. But Adolph flatly refused to grant him this small exhibition, but would hau him exiled the Countrey; protesting, that rather then he would condiscend to those termes, he would throw his Father into a well; and himselfe after. Soone after the Duke of Burgoyne takes him Prisoner, where hee was despightfully handled all his life, and his Fther dying, disinherited him, making the Duke of Burgoyne his Heire; After whose death young Adolph is taken

out of prison by the Ganthoyse, and is slaine at the siege of Tourney. Phil. Comminees. l. 4. c. 1.
(22) Amidas being left Gouernour of Tunis by his father Muleasses (whilest he sought aide a|mongst the Christian Princes against Barbarussa) seizes the Kingdome for himselfe, and at his fa|thers returne puts out his eyes, to disable him for gouernment, and forceth him to end his dayes in miserie as a banisht man: he lost his owne eyes to with diseases, and enioyed his Kingdome not long. Knowles.
(23) Iohn Basilides late Emperour of Russia did infiniely exceed all the Tyrants and monsters of Nature that euer were. His rapines, his lusts, his murther cannot bee numbred. It was vsuall with him for one mans offence to extirpe whole Fa|milies and Cities, and many times without any oc|casion. When the warres ceast, and that he wanted captiues to exercise himselfe vpon, then did he kill and massacre his Friends, his Lords, his Councel|lors, his Citizens; burning, hanging, drwning thousands of guiltlesse and innocent people. Hee would looke on and see his Guard defowre thou|sands of his women Captiues, and then cut them in pieces. Embassadours were not safe with him; no more were his Friends and Companions: if any man won of him in play, he would fall into passion,

and sometimes cut off their Noses and Eares. If for feare they suffered him to winne, then he would streight cause them to bee beaten as dull and slug|gish Dolts. Now if any sought (by refusing to play) to auoyd these two extremes, those hee would gre|uously handle, and perchance put to death, as con|temners of his Maiestie. Vpon some reprochfull speeches (giuen by an honest Matron) vnto one of his whores, he tooke a purpose to murther al the women of. Muscho, and had done it, before the in|stant request of his owne women. Of diuers Citties that he pnnished, he put all the inhabitants downe through certaine holes, made through the Ice, into the riuers, and so drowned them. The warnings he had from heauen were notable. Vpon a Christmas day, which was faire and cleare, came a sudden lightning from heauen, that burnt his stately Pal|lace of Sloboda, with much treasure and rich stuffe in the same. Soone after, neere the towne of Nale, there fell a strange thing; three men and three women going forth to gather sticks in the ad|ioyning wood, late towards euening, there came this voyce into their eares (without any knowne Authour) Fly Muschouians; with which amazed, they would haue fled towards the Towne, when in the instant a mightie marble stone fell downe from the heauens (sent with a great clap

of thunder) into the Snow, and seemed to be settled there in such manner, as if not throwne by violence, but placed there by an artificiall handiworke. In this Stone were written diuers lines in a strange and vnknowne character. The three men were slaine at the fall of the stone; the women with great amazement ran home, and shewed what had happened. The newes comes to Basilides; hee re|paires to the place, demands of the Metropolitan what the words did import: he in great perplexi|tie replies; he knowes not. Calling then certaine captiues (which had a great opinion of learning) he requires of them the exposition of this inscrip|tion: they fearing to be silent, told him, that these signes did pertaine to himselfe, and did concerne his People and Empire. Hereupon hee causes his Guard to breake the Stone all in pieces, and in stead of penitence goes home, and prepares for the Polo|nian warre. He died very lamentably of an Vlcer in his priuie parts, so lothsome and stinking, that the smell of it poysoned diuers. Hee had vpon his death-bed some trances, wherein it seemes hee had some taste of the infernall orments. His life and death are written at large by Paulus Oderbor|nius, a Germaine Diuine, in three Bookes, dedi|cate to Henrie Iulius, Duke of Brunswick. His body was not from the day of his death to be found

in any place, but was supposed to be conueyed away by the Deuill, not content with his soule onely. Ibi|dem. He liued in Queene Elizabeths time.
(24) The Egyptians did worship some things generally, as of beasts, their Apis or Oxe, the Dog the Cat: of Fowle, the Hawke and the Ibis: of Fish, the Lepidotus and the Oxirinchus: beside these, they had particular worships. They of Ar|sinoe to the Crocodile. They of the Citie of Her|cules did worship the Ichnewmon. The Cinopo|litani a Dog. The Licopolitani a Wolfe. The Leontopolitani a Lion. The Mendesii worshipt a Goate. The Athribitae a blind Mouse. They of Abidon worshipt Osiris (whom Herodotus page the 150, calls Bacchus. They of Hermonthis Iupiter, and an Oxe, and Orus, which Herodotus calls Apollo, pag. 199) and others other things. Strabo Geography, lib. 17. The Bubasti honourd Diana. The Citizens of Busiris, Isis (which the Greekes call Demeter, that is Ceres. The City of Say worshipt Minerua. The Helipolitanes the Sunne. They of Buris, Latona. The Papremi|ans, Mars. Herodotus Euterpe, pag. 158.
(25) Strabo saith, he saw a Crocodile in a Lake in the Shire of Arsinoe, neere to the Temple, vpon which the Priests tended with great religion and fed him, one holding open his chaps, and an

other powring in certaine Rost-meates and sweet Wine, and that hauing fild his belly, he retired streight into the Lake, till he were called againe by some new Guest, comming with new Oblations. Ex Strabone, lib. 17.
(26) Porrum  cepe nefas violare ac fran|gere morsu. et Paulo post.
Carnibus humanis vesci licet. Iuuen. Satyra 15. linea. 9.
(27) This Deitie of Iupiter Hammon was worshipt in the likenesse of a Ram. Herodotus Euterpe, pag. 151. Here it was that Alexander was premonisht of his death, with the circumstan|ces both of time, place, and the manner, as after they befell. Quintus Curtius lib. 4. and in Alex|anders owne Epistle to Arestotle, and Iust. l. 11. It seemes their Iupiter was something mutable and humerous for his shape, as men are now adayes for their fashions: for Herodotus describeth him like a Ram: and Quintus Curtius, lib. 4. saith; Id quod pro Deo colitur non eandem effigiem ha|bebat quam vulgo diis accommodauerunt ar|tifices. Sed, vmbilico maxime similis est habi|tus, smaragdo etiemmis coagmentatus.
(a) Dianae templum Chersiphron fabrica|tus est. Sed cum Herostratus quidam id incen|do consumpsisset aliud prestantius construxe|runt

mulierum ornamentis. Strabo, Geogr. lib. 14.
(28) Baalzebub was worshipt in the likenesse of a Flie. Purch.
(29) The Sydonians worshipt Iuno in the likenesse of a Sheepe.
(30) Quintus Curtius in oppugnatione. Alexandri.
(31) The Phoenicians had a stately Temple dedicated to the Sunne, of which Anthonine, Emperour of Rome, was in his priuate fortunes the High Priest, and therefore surnamed Helioga|balus, or Priest of the Sunne. Herodian, lib. 5.
(32) This Temple had in it a stone, which had thereon the figure of the Sunne. Ibid.
(33) The men of Carras that ouercame their wiues, vsed to sacrifice to god Lunus in the Tem|ple of the Moone: but if their wiues had the bet|ter, they offered vnto Luna to appease her displea|sure. Herodian, lib. 3.
(34) This place was some fiue mile from An|tioch, a Groue of mightie Cypresses, ten miles in compasse, where stood the Temple and Oracle of Apollo Daphneus. Here Iulian the Apostate desiring answere, the Deuill would not speak, be|cause the bones of Babillus the Martyr lay so neare him. Socrates, lib. 3. cap. 16. In this place

of delight, and Paradise of prophane pleasure, the Antiochian youths, and amorous Gallants vsed to pay their vowes to the Nimph Daphne: the bur|bling streames, calme winds, and flowre-be spotted earth, conspiring with the opacitie and retirednes of the place, to make the Votaries of Diana, wor|ship Daphne. Strabo. Geogr. pag. 510. lib. 15.
(35) The Persians did principally honour the Fire, counting it a God: they worshipt the Sunne and Moone, Venus, the Winds and the water, in|to which it was not lawfull to spit, to pisse, or to, cast any dead thing, Strabo, lib. 15. Herodotus. lib. 1. pag. 90. lib. 3. pag. 226.
(36) The Tartarians beyond Volga, that be|long to the Great Cham; and the Crym Tartars which inhabit on this side Volga (which Herodo|tus calls Scythia, and them Scythes;) though these professe Mahumet, yet haue they in their houses Idols and Puppets of Fel, which they offer to Doctor Fletcher and W. de Rubruquis in Ha|cluyt.
(37) The Chynoys haue Idols in their hou|ses, and Images if the deuil with Serpentine locks, and as ill-fauoured lookes as he hath heare; a trip|ple Crowne vpon his head, great teeth standing out from his mouth, and an vgly face vpon his belly: him for feare they worship, saying, that God is

good, and will doe no man harme. They paint the Deuill in their ships, and in any storme him they in|uocate, sometime working by lots, sometime by writing, which way he neuer failes to answer them, as appeares in the Discourse of Chinay. Chap. 15. where the Spanish Friers (to their no small ter|rr) heard him talking to the Chynois in the same Ship.
() The Iapons haue a strange kind of shrift, the Deuill once a yeare playing the Confessor: hee puts his Penitent into a paire of Weigh-Scales, hung vp vpon a high Spire or Piremed, from whence if he confesse not truly, he breakes his neck. Acosta. lib. 5. cap. 25.
(38) The Deuill is highly worshipt in Pegue, to whom they erect a stately Altar, adorned with varietie of Flowres and Meates to fee and feede him, that hee should not hurt them. Hist. India. pag. 321.
(39) Cidambaran is the Mother-Citie of these Pagan Rites. Here in the Temple of Peri|mall they worship an Ape called Haynemant: the tooth of this Ape was kept for a great rellick in Zeylan, till the Portugals, Ann. 15 54, ransacking the Iland, tooke this away amongst many better things. Linschot saith, the Indian Kings sent presently to the Vice-roy, and offered seuen hu|dred

thousand Duckats for it: but he burnt it be|fore their Embassadours eyes, and threw the ashes into the Sea. Notwithstanding, the Banian of Cambaia perswaded the Indian Kings, that he by miracle had preserued it, hauing been inuistbly present, and that he had changed the said tooth, putting another very like it in stead thereof. So this was againe receiued as the true one, and belie|ued by their mopping deuotion. Linfc. pag. 81. The Mallabars are all extreame Idosaters to the Deuill, and haue all their Temples full of his pictures, and Idols most fearefull to behold. They haue a certaine Coyne called Pagodes, stam|ped with his Picture. They offer themselues to voluntarie death in honour of their Idols, thinking it meritorius so to perish. Linsc. pag. 82.  69.
(40) The Mexicans or Tenustitans had in the midst of Mexico, a stately Temple, the stones of the walls all wrought in artificiall knots of Snakes (so like is that old Serpent still to himself.) Here they sacrifised to their Idoll Deuils men without number, taken in the warres, whose flesh they did (after the ceremonies ended) make merry with, The Spaniards beheld from Metazumaes Palace seuenty of their owne men thus sacrifised, amongst whom, one after his heart was drawne out; cried aloude, Knights, they haue slaine me. Within the

penetralls of this Temple, and as it were, their Sanctum Sanctorum, the Spaniards found the walls daubd with humaine blood two inches thick. About the Courts of this Temple vpon certaine rankes of trees ran many rankes of poles from one to another, whereon their hung all the Scalpes of those which had been sacrifized. This Temple was consumed by fire from Heauen, which seemed to burst forth from the very walls and stones; so that no water could quench it. Vitziliputzli was their chiefe Idoll. Ioseph. Acosta. l. 5. cap. 13.  22.  lib. 7. cap. 23. The Peruuians were no lesse cruell, sacrifizing children to their Idols, of whom Verachocha was chiefe. Acosta. l. 5. cap. 19.
(41) This Maracca is a kind of Gourd, the meate finely pickt out, then dryed and fild with Stones or Millet it makes a great noise, this is their Musicke they Dance by, this is their Ora|cle, from whence their Aignan (the Deuill) consults with them: to this they offer offerings of Meate. At certaine set times they vse to meet to performe their dancing ceremonies, in which they sing certaine Songs, and crie, Sabbath, Sab|bath; lifting vp their hands on high like the Israe|lites, and as they were commanded. Deuterono|mie 12. 6, 7. Yet for all this obseruance, their good Master the Deuill did vse to beate them,

kill them by hundreds, when he thought his worship was neglected. The pictures of their Fights, Dan|ces, Entertainements, Ceremonies, Burials, is with an ample Discourse thereon to be seene in Lerius his Hist. of Brasile, to whom I commend those that desire to know their fashions; and to Ieronimus Bezo, his Noua noui orbis Historia.
(a) Ptolomey King of Cypresse hauing heapt vp great wealth by base meanes, ouercome by his Enemie, flies to the Sea, there intending to burie himselfe and his treasure together (in Neptunes watry, but inuiolable Sepulchers) hauing for that end bored all his ships through in the keele: but ta|king compassion that so much wealth should be lost, he altars his purpose, and carries back againe to land, the future reward of his owne destruction, Valerius Maximus, lib. 9. cap. 5.
(42) Dennis, the elder Tyrant of Syracusa, was a marueilous oppressor of his people; whom when he had brought so low, that he could draw no more from them, he deuises (vpon a great Dearth that had continued by the space of two or three yeeres) to perswade the people to contribute to|wards the building of a new Temple to the God|desse Ceres, to appease her displeasure, and for that end drawes all the womens Chaines and iewels of the Countrie from them, which amounted to diuers

millions, and yet no Temple built for all that. After a while (the earth yeelding her due encrease, and the women (after their wonted manner) desiring their accustomed adornments, but fearing least the old Fox should againe play them the like trick, they petitioned, that it might bee lawfull for them to weare their rings and iewels againe, as they had formerly done; which after some nicenesse was granted them, vpon condition that euery one of them should first offer vp to the Goddesse Ceres, the price and value of such iewels as they intended to weare; the old Tyrant making by this one stra|tagm a double profit.
(43) Ferdinand King of Naples, that died at Charles the eight his entrance into Italy, com|peld his subiects to feede his Swine. He would buy vp all the Oyle and Graine in the Countrie before it were ripe, and sell it againe very deare at vn|reasonable prices. Whatsoeuer was faire and good in the Kingdome he would extort it by one meanes or other, and sold all things both Temporall and Ecclesiasticall to his best Chapmen. Hee sold the Bishoprick of Taranto for twelue thousand Duc|kats to a Iew for his son, who he said was a Chri|stian. He gaue Abbeys to Falkoners, with charge to keep him a certaine number of Hawkes at their owne charge. P. Co~minees, l. 7. c. 11. Guicc. 1.
(44) This Syleus was the most beautifull young Gentleman of all Rome, whom Massaline no lesse sollemnely, then publikely married, euen in the life of her Husband Claudius the Emperour, who being aduertised of her disorders, had scarcely the stomack to put them to death, if his seruants had not for his credit vrged the same. Tacitus Annales lib, 11. cap. 9. 10. 11.
(45) These three were Tarquine the proud, who lost his Kingdome (as Liuie relates) for the rape of Lucrece: And Roderick, last King of the Gothes in Spaine, who by occasion of the Rape of Countie Iulians daughter (which thereupon fled and brought in the Moores and Arabians) lost both his Kingdome and life, being ouerthrowne (notwithstanding his vnmatchable valour) in a Battaile of eight dayes long, Ann. 750. neere to Xeres, vpon the Riuer of Bedalack. Historie of Spaine: The third was Floris (fifth of that name) Prince of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, who imprisoned a Knight of his Court, one Gerard van Nelson, and cut off his brothers head: but being better enformed of the equitie of his cause, after a yeeres imprisonment, giues him liberty, with offers of diuers fauours, and a certaine cast-Concubine of his in marriage: which the Knight refusing with these speeches; That he was not so base to put his

Feete in his old shooes: and the Earle therewith offended, replied, But you shall. Which words the Knight forgetting, shortly after marries a faire Ladie. Whereupon (the Earle still mindfull of his former displeasure) tooke occasion to send the Gentleman from home vpon an Embassage, and himselfe in the meane time goes to the Knights house, and rauishes his Lady. Which the Knight vnderstanding at his returne, in reuenge laid an ambush for the Earle, and slew him. Historie of the Netherlands, pag. 67.


FINIS.




