




IEHOVAH,
A free Pardon, vvith many Graces therein conteyned graunted to all Christians by our most Holy and reuerent Fa+ther GOD almightie, the princi|pal high Priest and Bishoppe in Heauen and Earth: First written in the Spanish tounge, and there published by a Spaniard vnknow|en, (yet as it seemeth) the seruant of our sayde Holy Father. And now Translated into the mother English tounge, by Iohn Danyel of Clements Inne.
 Printed at London by Thomas East, for Andrew Maunsell, and are to be sould at his shop in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the Parrot.




To the right honorable, Syr Ambrose Nicholas, Lorde Maior of the Citie of LONDON: To the right vvorshipfull maister VVilliam Fleetewood esquire, Re|corder of the same: To the right wor+shipful maister Edward Osborne,  maister VVoolston Dixie esquires, and Sheriffes of the same: To the right vvorshipful their brethren the Aldermen: To the worshipful mai|ster Norton,  the rest of the priuie counsell, for the renowmed and wor|thy gouernment of the same, and to euery of them, grace and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Iesus Christ, Amen.
_WHen (as right Honora|ble and right worship|ful) I had made an ende of this my trauaile in translateing this preatie pamphlet and Pardon generall, to the receiuers of the same,  with my musinge mynde, remembring with my selfe to whome I should dedi|cate

so worthy a worke, and coulde not thinke of any with in this noble Citie more fitter to be my patro~s  defe~dors in publishinge hereof, beinge as I trust (with you) a poore me~ber of one body, whose head is Iesus Christ our Lord,  beholdi~g the firmnes of the true faith in one of the me~bres of the same body (the aucthor hereof) spronge out fro~ among the principals of Pope Antechrists pa|nyons in Spaine: I, hauing therin great co~fort  ioy, did presume to make you partakers of the same: Because I doe see dayly euery one of you, lyke worthy wightes, heades and rulers of such a no|ble citie, do practise and put in vre, by all meanes possible suche good and godly acts  orders for the good setting forth of Christs faith and true religion, as ma|keth mee to thincke, that thus in presu|minge herein, I do rather please you all, then offend any: Yf you take it in good parte, I am therby encouraged to take a greter trauail in hand, to the same effect (I trust to the glory of god) the treatise is very deuine, the conclusion comfort|able, it is also short, and therfore soone

reade ouer, wherfore I besech you most humbly to accept it, with the good will of the geuer, who will dayly pray for all you and yours, that with faith yee maye florish and prosper in all godly doinges tyll thende, and in thende, that you may inherite the celestiall kingdome, with al the benefitts in this Iubily contayned. From my house in saint Brides church|yarde the. 13. of Ianuary. 1576
Your honors and worships, most humbly, Iohn Danyell.






_REmember (dearely be|loued) that ye were not baptised in the name of men, of Images, nor yet of Idols that be dombe, to be their seruauntes, to honoure them contrary to the com|maundements of God, but in the name of Iesus Christ, because you shold wor|ship and serue him, as he doeth com|maunde, but for all that since the tyme we were indewed with knowledge, and the reason thereof, we haue bene blynded, and led astraye, farre from our duties, yet God hauing pitty vpon vs, and willing to saue vs, did so by his deuyne prouydence, although by hys ryghteous iudgement he mighte wor|thely condemne vs, wherefore let vs make no small accoumpt of this bene|fite of Pardone and Indulgence now of|fered vnto vs, by that most Holy  re|uerend Father, most worthy of prayse and glory, for that we see, he asketh no mony of vs for it, as Antichrist doeth for his trash, he demaundeth of vs no|thing but that only we shoulde haue a

sure fayth, hope, and confydence, in the same, for that he himselfe doth graunt it, and geue it vs, in his sonne Iesus Christ, and therefore, let vs not for the vayne feare of men, leaue nor let slip, the inioying of such pardons, and gra|ces, with the benefite therof, but accept the~ gladly, for as the Lord our god sai|eth, we cannot be saued without them.

A short sum of all the Indulgences, Graces  Pardons, graunted of god our most holy father, by his sonne Iesus Christ, to al faithful Christians in this Iubily mentioned, and com|manded to bee publyshed, because that all those that doe repente them of their sinnes, and tourn vnto him, may inioy the benefites, contayned in the same, in this world, the fauour of god, and in the world to come, life euerlasting.
Gala. 4. Esay. 6. Ro. 2.16._WHen the fulnesse of time was come, and the acceptable daye of our sauyng health, accor|ding to the determinate wyll

of god, ordeined in his deuine cou~saile, before the begynning and creation of the worlde,Ephe. 3. Ephe. 3. Esay. 6. Coloss. 1. Rom. 8. 2. Cor. 5. Gala. 4. 2. Tim. 1. Ephes. 2. Genes. 3. Ephe. 2. our most holy and eternall father, hauing pitty vppon vs, of his mighty free will, and bounteous lybera+lity did send his only begotte~ son, to be borne of a woman and made subiect to the lawe, because that by him shoulde be preached vnto vs the great and gra|cious reconsiliation made by him selfe betweene god the father, and vs, beeing as we were rebels, and the children of rebels, for that all by one, had incurred the payne of a rebell, to his deuyne ma|iesty, by the which the Deuil  Death, had gotten empery,Hebr. 2. Rom. 5. Iohn. 8. 1. Pet. 2. psalm. 13. Rom. 6. Ephes. 2. Deut 17. Leuit. 26 psalm. 13 rule, and the vpper hand, ouer vs absolutely, and we made the slaues of sinne, and did obey sinne, and were made abhomynable and cor|rupted, abhorrors of all righteousenes and louers of all kynde of wickednesse, deade in sinne, and buried in errors, children of wrath by nature, and sub|iect to the curses and malediction prea|ched vnto vs, as agaynst the ennemyes of gods truth, so, that as out castes, and desperate people,Zach. 9. we were without re|medy,

and ready to be cast into the pri+son of darcknesse,2. Pet. 2. Mat. 5.25 and fyre of hell, in the company of the deuill  his Aungels, of whom we did giue so wilful obedye~ce.1. Cor. 1. ephes. 2. . 3. Rom. 5. Col. 1. apoc. 1. ebre. 2.
But our blessed God, and most holy Father, as he is rich in mercy, so is he willing to shew vnto vs his imme~sible charity, with the which, although wee were his ennemies, yet he loued vs, to the end to deliuer vs from the power of darcknesse, and clense vs from our sinnes,2. Cor. 5. ephe. 5. Thes. 5. Col. 1. to make vs partakers of his righteousenesse, to destroy the Empery of the Deuyll, by the potency  mighte, of the redeemer of the world, and so to preserue vs from his iust wrath, and indignation, and or wicked condemned children of darcknesse, to make vs chil|dren of lighte,iere. 16. and so to bring vs to the kingdome of his beloued sonne Je|sus Christ, he did ordeyne, that this his good wyll,Mat. 10. should be publyquely prea|ched and declared vnto vs, to this end, after that Christe had accomplyshed,col 1. Math. 8.15.28.11. Mar. 16. and fulfilled the worcke of our redem|tion, and gloriousely tryumphed ouer all the ennemies of his glory, to our

saluation,esay. 53. he made to sounde through|out the whole world, that trumpette of the predycation of his grace and mer|cy towardes vs,iere. 31. iohn. 8. sending his legattes, and Apostles, to preach his pardon ge|nerall by his gospell, to all those, and vs that had bene traitors, and rebels, vnto him and his glory, for that beleeuyng the grace, and doctryne that on his be|halfe was pronounced vnto them and vs, they with vs, and we with them, should be absolued,  made free from all maner of Synnes, bothe veniall, and mortall, and the punishments for the same, the which they had broughte themselues and vs into.
This mercy,acts. 10.15 Rom. 16. although it were gene|rall to all, yet it did take effect, but on|ly in those, which did truely beleeue, with fayth, and that did leaue of the seruice of sinne, and did submit them selues, with all their hartes, to truth, righteousenes, and holynesse of lyfe: for it hath bene sene in our age,Gen. 6. Psal. 16. ier. 2. esay. 45 that men haue bene deceaued, forgetting of him, who is the fountayne of lyfe, and wysdome, in whome doeth consiste, all

trewe health,56. ihon. 34 Gen. 3. Rom. 5. Psal. 88.89. exod. 15 Heb. 9. and trusting in vayne thinges, we haue lyued like vnbrideled horses, in vnrighteousenesse, and ab|homynable Idolatryes, by the cause whereof, be and haue bene, wars, hon|ger, pestelence, and many other ordy|nary chastisementes, common and per|ticuler in and through al Christendom, the which are testimonies, that the wrath of god, is iustly inflamed against vs, and that the last day, of his deuyne iudgement, is at hand, our moste holy and sempiternall high prieste, with de|sire of our health, and saluation, and for that by trwe repentaunce, we should, conuert vnto hym, to be made parta|kers, of the lyfe euerlasting, moued by his mercy, doth charge, and commaund now anew, y^t this Iubily, in the which is declared the fruit of his death which is the full pardon, of all our sinnes, and offences,iere. 18. Sap. 11. be preached to all christians, throughout the whole world, because that those, which by true repentaunce, and amendment of lyfe,Math. 3. do receaue it, be and are reconfiled, and put in peace with God, and so by consequente, sette

fre from all euils, presente, and to come, the tenor whereof doth followe.


 This is the Iubily and full pardon of sins (a Culpa et Pena) most graciously granted, to the church of god, disper+sed throughoute the whole world.
_BY the auctority of our most holy Father,Gene. 1. Psal. 104 God almighty, supreme hed and prouyder for all creatures, and in the name of Iesus Christ his sonne,1. pet. 2. the great pastoure and Bi|shop of our soules, and by the vertue of the holy ghost,iohn. 14.16. maister and conseruer, of the true church, it is enioyned and ex+presly commaunded, by the vertue of holy obedience, to vs al, and to as ma|ny of vs, as haue receaued the Sacra|ment of holy baptisme, that we reade and vnderstad,Rom. 12. pet. .2. and that we giue to vn|derstand, from one to another, euery one, according to the Talent or gifte y^t wee shall receaue, hereby to preache the nature and propertie of him, who doth call vs from darcknes, to his ad|mirable light, and these imme~sible gra+ces,

 the great priuiledges graunted therin (perpetually) to all the faithfull seruau~tes of Christ,ihon. 1.5.10. Gala. 3. Rom. 6  to as many, as wilbe, and do receiue him, and doe be|leeue and truste firmely in the lyfe e|uerlasting gotten only by the sheading of his most pretious blood, for that it is he that is that christ, that from the be|ginning was promysed by god the fa|ther,Gen. 1. apoc. 13 17. iohn. 3. Mat. 1. Luke. 1. acts 4. Gen. 3. esay. 43.  53. Mat. 3.8. 2. pet. 1. colo. 1. Psal. 12.9 Heb 9. ephe. 1. Luke. 1. Rom. 5. ezech. 18. to our forefathers, to be their saui+our, and a sauioure of their sede and descendents, by whose vertue, strength and power, should be destroied that old serpent, by whom, they, their seede and discende~ts, were brought into the state of perdition, the which he did conclude by his death, and did appeasethe wrath of god, and satisfie to his iudgemente, for our sinnes and offences, and by hys righteousenesse, did obteyn for vs, most copious, plentious, and eternal redem|tion, and pardon generall for our sins, (a Culpa et Pena) as his most holy Fa|ther had decreed and ordeined, from be|fore the beginning, and creation of the world, and afterward to the ende to conuide or inuite vs, to the receite of

our health,heb. 9.10 Rom. 6. and discouering of his ry|ches and mercy, (though we be vnwor|thy) yet he notwithstanding, did loue vs by his sonne Iesus Christ, and dyd promyse vs, by his saints, and seruants the prophets, that in whatsoeuer tyme and place (although our sinnes wer ne|uer so great, and in number to the sandes of the sea, yet, if) we did cal vp|on him,ier 31. Miche. 7 with a penitent heart,  truste in his mercy, and desire pardon and forgeuenesse, at his handes, yea euen then, of his great loue, we should be so truely pardoned, and restored to hys grace and frendshyppe, as if we had neuer offended,ezech. 18. heb. 4.10 Rom. 8. phi. 2. nor sinned againste him, with promyse, neuer to remem- them agayne, notwithstanding, they were neuer so greate nor greuous, be|cause that Iesus Christe being become man, in the parson of our flesh, and in all thinges lyke vnto vs, did take vpon him our sinnes, and so by vs, was brought vnder curses and malediction,Gala. 3. 1. pet. 2. for that he tooke vppon his shoulders, our sinnes, and did suffer moste cruell death for them, vpon a tree, and by the

infinite power, and vertue of the Sa|crafice, that he tooke vpon him selfe, to offer vpon the crosse he did blot out and destroy all our offences and sinnes,esay. 59. wholy, and did obteyne by his merites onely, so riche, and plentyfull a liberty, for vs.
esay. 55. Heb. 10 gala. 2. iohn. 11. Titu 3.Low the father of all mercy, and god of all comfort and consolation, to cer|tifie vs of his good will, with y^t which, he will saue and take vs from the cap|tiuity and bondage of the devill, hauing established, in his holy church, this in|estimable treasure of redemption, of reconciliation,1. pet. 1. 1. cor. 6, Heb. 9. 1. iohns. 1 and grace gayned onely, by hys onely begotten sonne, hee dothe now most liberally, open it, vnto vs, for that as many as will, may enioy the same, and receue the benefit thereof, euery one,apoc. 1 with hauing of a sure fayth, and affiance, that the bloud of the lambe without spott, was shed, and once offe|red for the sinnes of all mankynde,2. pet. 2. heb. 8.9.10. 2. cor. 5. to be a true oblation, for the same, and that there nedeth no other satisfaction, nor absolution, before god, but onely it.
And therfore, for as much as this is o+nely

pardon for sinn,esay. 43. iohn. 1. Mat. 26. it is now publy|shed, by the infinite mercy of god, which doth pardon vs, by one, onely, Iesus Christ, whose bloud was shed, to the same end, and ther is no health in none other but in him, because there is none other name vnder heauen giuen vnto men by the which they should be saued,acts. 4. but onely his,esay. 9. Gal. 2. 1. cor. 1. 2. cor. 2. he will, that all beleuers haue and houlde, the same, by, and for, his proper wisdome, righteousnes, san|tification, and redemption, because, as he is god, and redemer of all generally, so is he, of euery one particularly, and therfore, he will that euery one of hys, in particular, shall take, haue, hould and enioy, the gracious redemption and pardon obtayned and bowght wyth christes bloude, for all mankynde, the which shal be sealed in their hartes,2. Timo. 1 ephe. 1. phi. 2. by the holy ghoste, the spirit of promyse, for that quickned by it, they should shew the fruites of holines and righteousnes with the which they do shew the~selues obedient to god, and true and liuely members of Iesus Christ, who doth say vnto all and to euery one in generall 

particuler,esay. 43. I am, I my self am he, that doth race and blot out the wickednes and offences of my people, for myne owne sake, and I will neuer more re|member their sinnes,ezech. 18. and by Ezechiell as truly as I liue, (saith the lorde) I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he tourne from his wickednes and liue:iohn. 11.7.8. and by Saint Iohn, I am the re|surection and the lyfe, he that beleueth in me, although he be deade, yt shall hee liue, and whosoeuer that doth liue and beleue in me shall neuer dye, and hee that thirsteth let him come to me, and I will geue hym drincke, and I am the lighte of the worlde, and hee that folo|weth me shall not goe in darckenes, but shall haue the light of lyfe, and therfore be doth graunt as followeth.


esay. 61.To all those that be of contrite hart that doe trust in his mercy, in his bloud, death and passion,Luke. 4. that they shalbe par|takers of the fruite of his redemption,Rom. 3. which is a full remissio~ of all their sinns and offences, for euer.
ITem, to those which are meke, pacient ' full of long suffering, which suffer rather to be iniu|red and depriued of their goods and substaunce,Mat. 5. Luke. 6. then to consent vnto sinne, Idolatry  abhomynable wicked+nes, he doth pronounce and graunt vn|to them, that they shall inherite the earth, and be in the numbre of his own children and seruauntes.
Item, to those that hould Sathan and his seruauntes, for blynd, captyue, and bonde, to hell, death, and damnation, and do giue fayth to all that is graun|ted,esay. 6. ephe. 1. colo. 2. in this Iubily, he doth graunt vnto them a trew sight in his gospell, and al|so doth set them cleare, and at a francke and free liberty, from that bondage.
Item, to those which haue obeyed sin, and were therefore banyshed, and de|pryued of the ioyes of Paradice, if now they beleeue in the, gospel and be ruled by the same,Gene. 3. iohn. 3.11. he doth graunt vnto them that they be restored wholy into a sure and firm hope, to haue  possesse them agayne, and neuer more to bee depry|ued.
Item, to those that for the hate they haue vnto wickednesse, do mortify, and kyll, wyth the spirite, the euill inclyna|tions, affections, and concupiscences of the flesh, conforme and accordyng to the profession,Rom. 8. gala. 3. colo. 3. that euery one, by the holy ghost, did make in his baptisme, hee doth graunt vnto them a glorious vic|tory in the end.
Item, to those which alwayes are in warre and stryfe with them selues, and do byde payne,Mat. 5. Luke. 6. iohn. 1.2.16. to resiste the sinne, that is in them, and in the world, and to those that goe with griefe of mynde heauy, and mornyng, for the same, hee doth graunte vnto all such, all trwe ce|lestiall and heauenly comforte, wyth promyse, that in the ende, he him selfe will wype away the teares from thyir eyes, and their heauinesse, shalbe tour|ned into ioye, and their weepyng into laughter.
Mat. 5. Luke. 6 Esay. 65. psal. 30Item, to those that do honger and thyrst for ryghteousenesse sake, and that in all thynges do procure with all theyr hartes, that which god doth com|maund, by his deuine worde, hee doeth

graunt vnto them, plenty of ioy, and heauenly delightes, that neuer shall haue end.
Item,Mat. 5. Luke. 6. iames. 1. to all those that be  haue ben mercyfull, and that haue pittied the af|flicted with a christian affect, burning with charity, to succour them in theyr necessities, he doth graunte vnto them (Plenissima indulgentia) a moste ful, francke, and free pardon, and doth geue vnto them for euer, his mercy to be their patrone, and defendour in iudge|ment, with a ioy pardurable, in the co~|pany of his sayntes and chosen.
Item, to those that are persecuted as christians,Mat. 5. pet. 4. iohn. 16. Gala. 5. for faith, loue, and righteous|nesse, he doth graunt vnto them, the blessednesse of hys heauenly kingdome, and that the sprite of his glory, and grace, shall rest vpon them, and that they haue ioy and christian delightes, in conscience, while they shalbe in this world, and for euer.
Item, to those that by Christ do beleue and trust in God, and doe purify theyr soules with loue without fayning,1. pet. 1. Mat. 7. hee doth graunt vnto them, a perseuerance

by fayth in his gospell, with a blessed ende.
Deut. 15. Tob. 4. Gala. 5. 1. cor. 7. iohn. 14.Item, to those that with the bowels of charitie, will gyue their almes, for the building and repayring of the ly|uyng temples, that Iesus Christ did re+deme, with his moste pretious bloud, which are the true pouerty, faythfull,  afflicted, he doth graunt vnto them full pardon, and that they be sanctified, by the holy ghost, to be a temple for euer, for hym to inhabite and dwell in.
Item, to al those which are faythful, and that doe know the truth, hee doeth graunt liberty,1. timo. 4 that with temperaunce and respect of charity, had to all them, that are weake in faith, that they may indifferently,1. cor. 8. Mat. 15. acts. 10. all the dayes of the yeare, with action of grace, that is, gy|uyng of thankes, vse and eate, of all kynde of meates, created of God there|fore, notwithstanding, the vayne and foolish decrees and diffe~ces, made, had, and mainteyned, by and vnder false tytles, of men without pitty, the feare of God and his righteous deuine iudg+ment.
Item,Psal. 9. Mar. 11. iohn. 14 15. iere. 29. ioel 2. to all those which in theyr heaui|nesse of mynde, and all their troubles, do ronne and apply them selues, onely to God,  call vpo~ him in the name, and by the merites of Iesus Christ his one|ly sonne, he doth graunt vnto them, a spirituall health and comfort, wyth an vnloading and setting at liberty, of their burthened, and troubled conscy|ences.
Item,ihon. 10. Mat. 6.16 to all those that hould and ac|coumpt, Iesus Christ for their onely sa|uiour, high Priest, Kyng, and Prophet, he doth graunt vnto them a full pardon and that no euyll shall preuaile against them, but that they shal be partakers of hys euerlasting kingdome, and glory.
Item, for as much, as it is necessary for the health and saluation of all chri|stians, and of euery one that is a chry|stian, to fulfill the first and moste holy sacred vow, made in baptisme, whyche is to loue alwaies righteousenes,Mar. 16. Rom. 6. Gala. 3. iames 4. 1. timo. 5. truth and godlynesse, and to abhorre the con|trary. The onely law geuer, which on|ly can saue and spill, bynde, and loose,

for that they should be able to fulfill the same,1. Thes. 4 1. cor. 6.7. doth graunt to all men and we|men, of what estate or condition soeuer they be, (being christians) that they nede not haue, nor kepe the bond of continency, for notwithstanding what soeuer vow or promyse of chastity, or virginitie, that they haue made, yet they may freely take vpon them (and enter in) to the holy estate of matrimo|ny, to auoyde fornycation, and to the ende that the holy temple of the Lord,2 cor 6. 1. cor. 3. (which is theyr bodyes) be not propha|ned, contayminated, and fall into perdi|tion, and so be destroyed, by his deuine potency and myght.
Item, to all those which for the loue, and obedyence they do owe vnto god, wyll visitt them that are imprysoned,Mat. 2.5. 1. Iames. 2 the sicke, the desolate, widdowes, and poore orfanes, and according to theyr power and habilitie with pittie, do re|lieue, and helpe them he doth graunt, vnto them, a confirmation of that hope which they haue to inioy his holy, and blessed kingdome, which is prepared for them, from the beginning of the

world.
Item,esay. 58. Mat. 25. Rom. 1.2 Heb. 15. 1. Pet. 4. to those that with charity doe prouide for, mainteine, helpe, succoure and comfort the needefull, hungry, and naked, and that doth lodge the poore straunger, he doth graunt, a confirma|tion vnto them of the same hope, that is, help vnto them, in their like necessi|ties.
Item, to all those that with a chrysti|an effect, do teach the ignoraunte,Thes. 5. 1. Pet. 3. Pro. 17. and comfort them that be heauy in mynde, for good and righteous thinges, he doth graunt Indulgentia plenaria.
Item, to all those that are superiours and masters,ephe. 6. 1. cor. 7. if they do make a christi|an profession, in gouernment, and that they with theyr inferriours and ser|uantes, doe with equality in their de|grese, kepe a christian lyfe, lyke ser|uauntes of our lord almighty, as redee|med a like, by the blood of Christe, he doth grau~t vnto them, Indulgentia ple|naria.
Item, to al those that accoumpt them selues dispensers or stewardes,1. cor. 4. mat. 13.25 of spi|rituall and temporall goods, and riches,

which they haue receaued of God, if they distribute them to gloryfie hym, and to helpe their neighboures, he doth graunt vnto them a multiplication, of the same goods and ryches, so distribu|ted, and therewyth Indulgentia plena|ria.
Item, to all those that haue not firm|ly stoode to,2. Thes. 2 and loued the truth, but haue beene beguyled and deceaued by the blynde doctryne of Antichrist and his mynysters, and induced to followe the doctryne of Deuils, whych are tra|dicions of men,1. timo. 4 ieremi 2. in place of the gospell, and that now, with a true, feruent, and harty desire, are willingly reduced to trowe and deuyne obedyence, and do know by the light of godly scriptures, the errors, superstitions, guyles, de|ceites, idolatrise,exo. 20. Deut. 6. iohn. 4. and other abhominati+ons, in the which they haue bene and doo renounce them, withall their harts, and hould the trwe god, for theyr god,  do worship him in spirite and truth, and let their whole trust depend and be vpon him, his goodnesse and promise, his high holynesse, doeth graunte vnto

the~  such like, pardon general, because they may freely performe the same, without feare of foule Antechristes ex|communications, of his inquysitors, or other his mynisters, because that for all them, or any other sensor of theyr church, (whatsoeuer) that is thondred out and doth flame agaynste them, hys hollynes doth also graunt them absolu|tion, and doeth freely restore them to his fatherly grace, that they in his Church, maye haue a place for name and being of his faythfull children, and that they liue in hope to possesse  in|ioy,1. Pet. 1. the immortall inheritaunce, not contaminated, but incorruptible which is conserued and kept, for them in the heauens.
Item, to as many as be, and desire to be, faythfull seruauntes and disci|ples of Iesus Christ, his deuyne maie|sty, and most reuerent holynes, doeth graunt, that with a stoute harte, wyth|out feare of the aforesayd exco~munica|tions, or other decree whatsoeuer, made by the said antichrist or his ministers, that they may  do reade in the Spanish,

French, Italien, English, or other mo|ther tongue or language, the bookes of the olde, and new testament, and all o|ther bookes, of trwe and sound doctrine, for that they may knowe, howe to go|uern themselues,iohn. 5.17 Deut. 12. Luke. 11. Gala. 5 esay. 8. 1. cor. 14 to liue hollily, to know him, and so to haue life euerla|sting, and herewith he doeth expressely commaund, that they suffer not them selues to be depryued of this liberty, vnder the paine of death, perdition, and damnation, together with the enemies of his grace, that do rebell agaynste his holy will and commaundements, and that haue made the sayd exco~municati|on and decreese.
Item, the same Lord Iesus Christ, trwe interpreter,iohn. 1. Mat 5.6 7. of no wil of our most holy Father, doth declare by these pre|sents, that all exco~munications, and such lyke, as be proceede from the sayd Antichrist, chiefe and high priest, of the man of same, the sonne of perdition, or from his inquisitor and false butcherly Bushops,2. Thes. 2 are trystes and of no validity nor effect, because the offyce nor power to exco~municate, is not geuen to one

that is blynd,apoc. 17. nor to a blynd and apote|staticall church, embrewed with the blend of faithfull martirs, and the sainctes of god our Lord, and gouerned by the doctryne of desperation,Tit. 1 1 timo. 4. such as are the traditions of men, but that of|fice doth belong to such a one, and to such a Church,Mat. 18. iohn. 2. whose head is Iesus Christ, to the apostles in his name, and to all such, as be their trew successors, guided by the spirite of truth, and that doe teach and liue by the trew doctrine of the gospell, so pure as possible, the rule, lock, and key, to open, and co~mu|nicate, the kingdome of heauen to all beleeuers, and to shut it agayne to all that do not beleeue, and to the vnfaith|full rebels, proceeding from (and lyke vnto) the Deuill and his members, for whatsoeuer exco~munications they bee, if they come not from the trwe courte or offyce, (which is Christes church) if they be thondred out with booke, bell, and candell, neuer so fiersly, if they bee forged and formed by the free will and forsight of them that haue the name of pastors, (and yet in truth are very I|dols

and rauening wolues) neuer so firmely,zacha 11 esay. 56. Mat. 7. yet, it is not ratified nor allow+ed in the kingdom (nor by the faithful) of Christ, but condemned and that with iust reason,Mat 23  good right. The Scribes and Pharisies, were set in Moyses chayre, and did set at naught the exco|munications,Iohn. 9.11.17. that Christ and his Apo|stles did preach, and pronounce vnto and agaynst them, yet we are taughte by the holy Ghost, to abhorre them, their examples, and the like examples, by whom soeuer they be shewed, much more, the examples of those Ante|christes which are now the mockers of God, and euen now do sit, not in the chayre of Moyses, but in the chayre of pestylence,Psal. 1 Iere. 23. 2. Cor. 2. Phil. 3. Luke. 19. Ier. 2. Iames. 1. to entrap, blinde, and be the perdition of the people of Christ, if they could, and to be the trwe members  mynisters of Sathan, and enemies to the glory of Christ, and of the bloud of the new testament. To all those that do renounce these (and such lyke) false religions, of perdition, inuented by me~, and with all their hartes doe imbrace the true, healthfull, saludable, and cele|stiall

religion, that our Lord and holy Father Iesus Christ doth teache, and by his spirite, the Patriarcks, apostles, and Prophetes, he doth graunte vnto them, plenaria indulgentia, and that they do inioy all the benefites moste blessed, that are herein contayned.
Item,apoc. 1.7 22. Heb. 1. 1. Pet. 2. all those that according to the church of God, that he taught by the fa|thers, of our faith, the holy apostles and Prophetes, doe beleeue that for all our sinnes, veniall, and others, that the bloud of Iesus Christ is the onely ma|ker cleane, the clenser, and purgatory purger of them, and that there is not, cannot,1. Iohn. 1 nor may not be any other, and that we haue no neede of any other but he,1. Pet. 1. Apoc. 7.22. vnto them and such lyke is graun|ted, by our almighty most holy Father, indulgentia plenaria, and that they re|ceyue the benefite of his passion, and so made cleane, of all theire sinnes.
Item, to all those that are studious, and desirous to heare, (and so worcke according to) the word of God whych is the onely rule for to please him by,Esay. 8.  to knowe the trwe Church, to bee en|ioyned

 incorporated with Chryst,Luke. 11. his moste mighty holynes dothe graunte vnto them, that they shalbe blessed for euermore.
Item, to all those that notwithstan|ding, the exco~munications,1. Iohn. 2.4 Rom. 13. Gala. 15. Mat. 10. Mar. 9. Ihon. 14.15. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Pet. 4. Actes. 9. Barbarian, and Turkish defenses, and decreese, and other tyrannicall, and Pagan cruelties of antechrist, and his ministers, do and will loue, receiue, incurre, co~municate, defend, helpe with counsell, sustenance, and charitable intreatise, the faythfull members of Iesus Christ, and whiche by the mercy that they haue receaued at his handes, doe acknowledge him to be their onely health and saluation, and be immitators, and followers of him, in lyfe and doctrine,  doe ronne away from the errors and other abhomyna|ble abuses, in the which they haue ly|ued contrary to the gospell, and for the same be, and haue bene, abhorred and persecuted, by the children of darcknes and of the world: his almighty holines and deuyne magnificence,Psal. 40. Mat. 10.25. doeth pro|myse and graunt vnto them, that they shalbe beloued, receiued, gwarded, kept,

comforted, prospered, deliuered from their ennemies, holpen in all their troubles and necessities, and at the last day, alowed and accepted before the fa|ther and his holy Aungels, for faithfull confessoures of his truth and righteous|nes, and in the end of al, enriched with the eternall riches, of his celestiall bles|sednesse.
Item,Iohn 1.3, 11. Gal. 5. to all those that doe, and wyll beleeue in Iesus Christ, with all theyr hartes, and all their powers, and wyll lyue with doing worckes of fayth, with a firme hope and trust in Christes me|rites, and righteousenesse, as is com|maunded by the gospel,Apoc. 14. he doth graunt vnto them (millions of millions yeres of) pardon for all their sinnes, A pena et culpa, and also peace and rest in consci|ence with promyse, that after their de|parture out of this world, they shal pre+sently enter into a full possession of the eternall kingdome of Christ Iesus.
Item, to all and euery one, and to whatsoeuer parson or parsons,Esay. 53. Ier. 32. that wil imbrace Christ and his righteousenes with a trwe fayth and hope therein (if

they be in the article of death) whether it be by signes,Ezech. 18 tokens, or wordes, so it be from the bottome of their hartes, and doe faythfully beleeue that Christ Iesus made a full satisfaction to God the Father,Rom. 3. 1. Cor. 1. for the sinnes of all man|kynde, his most high holinesse doeth grant vnto them, Plenissima indulgen|tia, a most free pardon, remission, and absolution, from all their sinnes, and are set at libertie fully for all paynes and punishmentes due for the same.
Item, because the sainctifier of al men is of nature mercifull, and doth loue, and wil the saluation of all these which he did redeeme with his moste preci|ous blood.ezech. 10. Ihon. 17. 1. Pet. 1. Psal. 144 Rom 11. He doth graunt and it is his almightines moste holy wyll, that if it chaunce that any such parson or par|sons, so in tharticle of death, do not dye at that instant time wherein they so called them selues to their duties, that for their so pure hartes and mindes towardes him, they shall not onely in|ioy, thabsolution aforesayd, but also for euer after during life, be continued in the same with health of body and soule,

in this world, and in y^e world to come life euerlasting, for God our holy Fa|ther is not onely so redy to pardone, at the hower or article of death, but also at euery hower whensoeuer his seruants will call vpon him with a penitent and pure hart.
Item, to all those which by vsurping vsury, by vnsaciable gayne, in buying and selling, by fraudulent deuises, or a|ny other vnlawful meanes, haue obtei|ned and gotten into their handes, the goods and riches of this world, if those vsurping vsurors, insaciable gayners, fraudulent deuisors, and vnlawfull do|ers, (being abhomynable sinners) doe from the bottom of their hartes repent for the same, and professe in their lyues and doctryne amendment of life, and doe seeke to make some restitution, ey|ther by rendring back againe, or recon|siliation, to them which they haue so hindred, he doth graunt vnto them that they shall rest in his tabernacle, and dwel in his holy hill, for S. Augustine sayth (Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restitua|tur oblatum) sinz are not to be forgeuen

without restitucion.


 The witnesses of the old and new Te|stamente to testify the truth and strength of this Iubily.
 in 18..25._In the booke of Genesis and in many other pla|ces of the Law, and te|stamente of scriptures, Moyses and others, doe restify, that al nations of the earth shold be blessed  saued by Iesus Christe (the sonn of Dauid of the seede of Abraham) and that they shoulde receyue by hym an eternal and celestial, benediction or blessing.
Actes. 10Item, saynt Peter doth testify, that al the Prophetes beare testimony of Ie|sus Christ, and that whosoeuer belee|ueth in him, shal receue remission of sinnes in his name.
Mat. 20.Item S. Mathewe doth testify, that Iesus Christ did say of himselfe, my comming into the world was not to be serued or ministred vnto, but to serue and minister vnto others, and to gyue

my lyfe for the redemption of many.
Item, Ecce, hae aqui, behold this is my blood which is shed for the remission of sinnes,Mat. 26. 1. Cor. 11. Mat. 8.9 and vnto one that was sicke of the Palsy, he sayd thy sinnes are forge|uen thee, for that I see there is faith in thee.
Item,Luke. 7. to a woman that was a sinner, goe thy wayes in peace, thy sinnes are pardoned, also to a woman that was sick, to a leper,  to many other he saide the same.
Item, vnto the father which had a chylde possessed with a dombe spirite, if thou couldeste beleeue,Mar. 9. all thinges were possyble vnto thee, for vnto him that beleeueth all thinges are possi|ble.
Item, saincte Luke in many places doth testefy the like in effect, and in the firste chapter he sayth,Luke. 1.2 24. Blessed be the Lord God of Israell for he hath visited and redeemed his people, and hath ray|sed a mighty saluation for vs in the house of his seruant Dauid, as he spake by the mouth. c.
Item,Luke. 1.2 24. the Aungels doe witnesse the

same, saying, feare not, (to the Shep|heards) Ecce, hae aqui, behould I bring and preach vnto you glad tidinges, and great ioy which shalbe to all people, for this daye is borne vnto you, a sauy|our, whiche is Iesus Chryste the Lorde
1 ioh. 1.4.Item, S. Iohn sayth, in this is the loue and charity of God shewed vnto vs, in that he doth send his only begot|ten sonne into the world, because hee might liue in and by him, and herein consisteth the charity and loue, not that we haue loued God, but that he hath lo|ued vs, and sente his sonne to make an attonement for our sinnes.
Item he doth commaund that repen|taunce and remission of sinnes shoulde be preched in his name throughout the whole world.Actes. 10 Luke 2.
Item, S. Iohn Baptist doth point vn|to hym wyth hys finger,1. Iohn. 1 and sayth, Ecce illi, hae illi, behold ther the lambe of god which taketh awaye the sinnes of the world.
Iohn. 3.Item, he that beleueth in Iesus Christ the sonne of God, shal haue life euerla|styng.
Item,Iohn. 5. verily, verily, I say vnto you, he that doth heare my word and beleue in him that sent me, shal haue life euer|lasting, and shal not come into damna|cion, but is escaped from Death vnto lyfe.
Item as Moyses lifted vp the Ser|pent in the wildernesse,Iohn 3. iohn. 3. Euen so shall the sonne of man be lifted vp, because that all that beleeue in him should not perish, but haue life euerlasting, for god so loued the world that he gaue his onely begotten sonne,1. iohn. 4 that al which be|leued in him should not perish, but haue life euerlasting, for God sent not hys sonne to condemne the world, but that the world through him shoulde bee sa|ued.
Item,1. iohn. 2. if any man sinne, we haue an aduocate wyth our Father, euen Iesus Christ the iust and righteous, and hee it is that obtained grace for our sinns, and not onely for ours, but for the sins of all the world
Item Sainct Iohn in his reuela|tion sayth,Apoc. 1.11.16. that he did loue vs and dyd

washe vs from our sinnes, in hys bloud.
Heb. 1.Item, sainct Paule doth witnesse, that Iesus Christ did make purgation for our sinnes, and for the sinnes of all the world.
acts. 4.15.Item, Sainct Peter sayth, that it is Christ Iesus by whome wee haue re|mission of our sinnes, and that by faith in him, our hartes are purified  made cleane from all kinde of wickednes,
Item, the Augell Gabriell did pro|nounce vnto the holy virgin Mary,Mat. 7. Zacha. 9. Esay. 53. that she shoulde conceaue and beare a sonne, whose name shee shoulde call Iesus, for that he shold saue his people from their sinnes, and deliuer them from the con|dempnation the which they were in.
Item, forasmuche as our eternall highe Priest is the onely wisdome of god,Heb. 24. 1. Cor. 1. and doth knowe the infinit vallew of these pardons, and that we our selues cannot buye their, for any thinge wee haue or can doe, (for that a thinge of such vallew infinit,1. cor. 6.7 1. Pet. 1. Rom. 5. may not be bought) the will of his Sacred Maiestie is, to co~municate them most graciously and

louingly vnto al sinners,1. Iohn. 2. that fele their necessities, and call to him for mercy, without leuinge or takinge any mony for them, for if that euerie one of vs, were Lord of or ouer the whole world, or such like, if one would graunt his seigniory or Lordship, for y^e least bene|fite contained in the same, yet it could not be boughte, for the valewe of the world may be known, and the valewe thereof is vnspeakcable, but for that he dothe knowe the greate pouertie and miserie, in which wee liue, yet by the greate and vnualuable riches,Ephe. 2. Psal. 15. of his mercy, and for that he doth knowe our necessities, better then we our selues, and of his aboundant leue, dothe com|mande, for the health of our soules,Iere. 1. all his co~missaries and officials, the Pro|phetes, Euangelistes,Ezech. 2. and mynisters of peace,Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Esay. 51. Esay. 52.  55. that with great Instancie, and earnesty, they doe call to all people, and co~maund, that they receyue this Iubily, of grace w^tout geuing for it any pe~ny of mony, or other thing that perisheth.
By the Prophet Esay he doth publi|quely co~mau~ded in this maner, all those

that thirst let them come vnto the wa|ters, and those which haue no siluer let them make hast and come, let the~ buy, and  come and buy without siluer, or any thinge this, chaunge wyne for milke, you spend and wast your mony, but not in breade, you spende your tra|uaile and receue no hire, nor rewarde.
And because hee will that the immu|tabilitie of his truthe, and the loue that hee hath towardes vs should be notori|ous, he doth desire and co~maunde that all the graces graunted in this Iubilie,esay. 54. Rom. 11. be for euer, irreuecable, with a priuilege sempiternall, to as many as receiue the same, and that it be not derogated by any other priuiledge, or decree, what so euer, neither in death nor lyfe, but that it haue alwayse, full force, effect, and vertue, to deliuer al them which receue the same, from all euils presently, and in the ende, to deliuer them, into the possessio~ of the eternall and euerlasting riches of his heauenly kingdome.
But forasmuch as you, Nom. my of|ficials, haue receued the grace of me by the gyfte of my holy Ghoste, and

haue geuen credit to my promisses and worde,Iohn. 6. Rom. 3. 1. Cor. 1. and haue receued my sonne Iesus Christ for your reconcilyatoure by the fayth that you haue in hym and his blondshedding, which is the priuie signet and seale of my church, the which I doe put to these presentes, whereby I doe graunte vnto you, all the graces, pardons, dispensations, Indulgences,  priuiledges in this Iubily, contayned: In wittnesse whereof,Iames. 2. 1. Iohn. 3. Leuit. 19. Mat. 22. I haue co~maun|ded these presentes to bee firmed with myne owne name, and sealed with my seale as aforsayde, and therefore for a signe that you haue receued the same, you shall beare in your hartes,Iohn. 13. the loue that you doe owe, and that is due vnto your neighbours, and shewe the same by your worckes. Iehouah.
Item, our most holy Father doth con|dempne all,Gala. 1. and as many as doe rebell and gainsaye any thing herein con|tained, or that doeth the contrary, and more ouer doth excommunicate them for euer from and out of his moste holy heauenly kingdome.
Here followeth the tenor of the ex|co~munication

and cursse, that the sprite of god, which into say, the holy Ghost, doth pronounce against them their fa|milliers, fautors, somnors, and doers.
The holy ghost by the Prophet Dauid to all the enemies of the grace  glorie of Christ, that by any maner of meane, or way what sooner, doe defende, stoppe, and let, the publicatio~ of these pardons, or the priuiledges therein contayned, which are the onely fruites of the Gos|pell, he doth cursse, exco~mmunicate, and perpetually enclude the out of his king|dome, in this maner, O Lorde, shed thy wrath vpon them,Psal. 68.109. Psal. 69. and let the fury of thine Ire comprehende them, there habitations be brought lowe and let no man dwell in theire tabernuckles, let theire tables bee made a mare vnto themselues, and let those thinges which shoulde haue bene for theire welth bee vnto them an occasion of fallynge, let theire eyes be blinded that they see not, and euer bowe thou downe theire backes, let them fall from one wicked|nes to another, and let them not enter into thy righteousnes, let them be wip|ped

out of the booke of the lyuinge, and let them not be writte~ in the booke of the righteoues, constitute and set thou an euell Prince ouer them,Psal. 109. and let Sathan be still at theire righte hande, let them be as duste before the winde,Psal. 35. and the Aungell of the Lorde scattering them, let theire wayes be darcke and slippery,Psal. 109. and let the Aungell of the lord persecute them, when they go to receue Iudgement, let them come forth con|dempned, and let theire praiers bee tourned into sinne,Psal 109. let their dayes bee shortened, and let another take theire charge, let the extorcioner consume all that they haue, and let y^e stranger make spoyle of their trauailes, let them cloth themselues with curssynges, and let it come into their bowels like water, and into theire bones like oyle, let curssing be vnto them as a cloake, and like a gir+dle wherwith they girde theire loynes, and let them perishe for euer in thy presence, like as did Coran, Bathan and Abiram,Nume. 16 Psal. 104 enemies of thy truth and righ|teousenes,  also to thy saintes and holy ministers, Amen.
The fourme of the absolution graun|ted to al those that receue this holy Iubily, and rather fear god then men.


Mat. 16. Iohn. 10.20. 1. Pet. 1 Acts. 20 Rom. 1. 2. cor. 5.11 Psal. 51.Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus. c.
I The minister of God the Fa|ther, by his auctority in that be|halfe to me committed, and to all graunted, also by Iesus Christ, the onely good and trwe pastor, or sheepehearde of the shape, that he did redeeme with his moste pretious bloud on his behalf,  by the vertue, efficacy,  strength of the gospel of eternal  most gracious reco~siliatio~Col. 11. y^e which w^t your harts, you haue beleeued, I absolue you from all your sinnes, vemall and o|thers, which you haue committed a|gaynst his most greate holynesses de|uyne maiestie, so that you be penitente for the same,  can finde in your harts to amend your liues: I doe restore you to the Church constituted for the liuing members of Iesus Christ, the head and espouse therof,Rom. 11. and to the participation of the two true sacraments, which are the sacrament of baptisme, and the sa|crament of the true supper of our lord,

and doe assure you of all the aforesayde graces, pardons, and priuileges, and do pronounce that it is his fatherly wyll and pleasure, that you do enioy them with an assuraunce of life euerlasting. In the name of the father, of the son,  of the holy ghost. Amen, go in peace  sin no more. Iohn. .
I am the good shapheard,Iohn. 10. that doth geue my lyfe for my sheepe, I doo know my sheepe, and they heare my voyce and followe me, and I doo geue them lyfe e|ternal, sayth Iesus Christ our sauiour.


The .x. Commaundements of Al|mightie God, published by Moyses, vvith a short explanation of the ef|fect thereof.

The first Table.
_HArken,exod. 20. Deut. 5. O Israell, I am the lord thy God, which haue brought the out of the lande of Egipt and out of the house of bondage.



The first Commaundement.

Thou shalt haue none other gods but mee.

THere is no more gods but one, in whome it is very hard for vs to put our trust onely in, not for that he is vn|trusty, but bicause we are so corrupti|ble in our fleshe, that of our selues we cannot but geue credit vnto vanity, for whosoeuer putrech his trust many thi~g maketh, a strange god of the same that he putteth his truste in, so that a man  many strange gods as are the thinges wherein he trusteth, and here|vppon it did rise at the , the wor|shipping of dombe Idolls  Images, so condempned of God, by the Prophets, but to accomplish and fulfill this com| , it is necessary to haue a constant faith, and confidence in God, that is, a perfect loue, feare, reuerence, and hope, and to let all our trust depend onely vppon him, the which is, to wor|ship him in spirit and truth,  this com|maundeme~t

is a fountaine from whe~ce doeth spring the whole Lawe, and the obseruance thereof.


The second Commaundement.

Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen Image,Deut. 4. Psal. 80. leuit. 26. esay. 41. actes. 17. Rom. 1. Iosue 24. nor the likenes of any thing that is in heauen aboue or in the earth beneath, or in the water vn|der the earth, thou shalt not bowe downe to them nor worship them, for I the Lord thy God am a gellous god, and visit the sinne of the fathers vp|pon their children, vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy vnto thousandes of them that loue me and keepe my commaundements.

BEcause God is a spirite, he doth for|bid vs heare to represent him in the likenes of any corporal or bodily thing, as though he were in it, or like it, wher|fore those that will worshippe visible thinges, and maintaine the same, con|trary

to the worde of God, are threat|ned here as Idolatoures and breakers of the lawe, because the honoure which they doe owe vnto God, they doe vse it vnto his creatures.


The third commaundement.

Leuit. 19. Mat 5. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vayne, for the Lord wil not hold him guiltles, that taketh his name in vayne.

HE doth commaunde that with our tongue we should testefy that wee haue a God almighty, whome wee ought to feare, to reuerence, and to loue, and not to sweare by his name in any light thing, nor by his creatures to co|uer a lie, but if we doe sweare, we must doe it to his glory, our saluation, and the helpe of our neighebors in good thinges, and then must we sweare one|lie by the name of the liuinge god.


The fourth commaundement

Deut. 5. ezech 20 genes. 1.2 Remember thou kepe holy the Sa|both day, Sixe dayes shalte thou labor and doe all that thou hast to doe, but the

seuenth day is the Saboth of the Lorde thy God,esay. 58. Heb. 4. in it thou shalte doe no maner of worcke, thou nor thy sonn, nor thy daughter, nor thy manseruant, nor thy mayd seruaunte, nor thy cattel, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, for in Sixe dayes the Lorde made heauen and yearth the Sea and al that is therin, and rested the seuenth day, wherefore the Lorde blessed the Seuenth day and hal|lowed it.

The ceremony of keping of the saboth day, did finishe and ende with the cery|monies and shaddowe of the lawe, by the death of Iesus Christ, but the sub|staunce therof doth remain to this day, and perpetually, that is, to kepe the sa|both spiritually, to cease from labour  worldly worke, that god may worke in vs, and that in al thinges that wee do, we geue him y^e glory, god graunt we may seeke the same for euer. Ame~. Ame~.


The Commaundements of the second table and so the first and fyfte in order.

Honour thy Father and thy Mother that thy dayes may belong in the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee.Deut. 5. Mat. 15. ephes. 6.

It is commaunded vnto vs by this commaundement, that wee reuerence and honoure our carnall fathers, euery one in his place, that is to say, our supe|riors in eache estate and degree, from the lowest to the highest, and so backe a|gaine, to helpe them in necessitie accor|ding to our habilities, to honour, reuer|ence, and obey them, for that they are called to theyr places by god,  to draw vs vnto it, to doe it according to hys word, he doth incite and incourage vs, by a chearfull and comfortable promise, and that is, our dayes shalbe enlarged, and we haue long lyfe, the which is ful|filled, in them that please god.


The Sixt commaundement

exod. 20. Mat. 5.Thou shalte doe no murther.

We are not by this precept or com|maundement onely forbidden to kill or doe any murther, and y^e interior causes of the same, but also he doth commaund a vertue cleane to the contrary and that is, to loue our neighbors as our selues, and so to doe them good, as we woulde be done vnto, yea euen to the sauegarde of their lyues, if neede bee, by all the

meanes that we possibly can deuise.


The Seuenth commaundement

Thou shalt not co~mit adultry.1. Cor. 3.1 2. Cor. 6.

Herein is forbidden all kinde of car|nall concupicence, betwene men and women, oneles it be by lawfull matry|mony, and there withall is demaunded, a chaste harte wyth cleane and pure thoughtes.


The eighte commaundement.

Thou shalt not steale.exod. 20.

THis precept or commaundemente, doth commaund vs not to steal, and therein establisheth the possession of a|ny thing that is righteousely gotten, and doth also put vs in minde of the brotherly loue which we ought to haue towardes our neighboures, and so one to an other with all humility.


The ninth commaundement.

 Thou shalte beare no false witnes a|gainst thy neighbour.Pro. 5.6.19.21.28.

IN this commaundement we are for|bidden to beare any false witnesse a|gaynst our neighboures in iudgement, and doth forbid vs to lye, backbits, and

sclaunder, but doth commaund vs to speake alwayes a truth before men, as if we did speake before our heauenly Father, the searcher of the secretes of all hartes.


The tenth commaundement.

Deut. 5. Rom. 7. Mat. 5.Thou shalt not couet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his maide, nor his manseruant nor his Oxe, not his Asse, nor any thing that is thy neigh|bours.

IN this last commaundement, he doth bid vs to be void from euell and hate|full couetousnes, and that in place ther|of be placed godly vertues, according to the good will and doctrine of god, to the profet of our neighbours, proceeding of loue to them as to our selues
Rom. 10.The ende and fulfilling of the lawe is Iesus Christ, to Iustify al beleeuers. I will shew thee O man (saith the holy ghost) that which is good,Miche. 6 that which the Lord doth require of thee, and that is, (trwely) that thou doe Iustice, loue mercy, and alwayes call vppon god.

Finis.

Glory be to God,
 I Danyell.





