





EXURGAT DEUS DISSIPENTUR INIMICI *
THE
HISTORY OF THE DE|fendors
of the Catholique Faith.
Whearevnto are added
Observations
Divine.
Politique.
Morrall.
 By Christopher Lever
Nostrum in Coelo Negotium.
LONDON Printed for Nicholas Fussell
and Humphrey Moseley, at the signe
of the Ball in Pauls Church yard. 1627.
POSUI DEUM
ADIUTOREM MEUM
NON NATVRA SED PON
TIFICIORVM ARTE FEROX.
SEMPER EADEM
BEATI PACIFICI
DONEC PAX REDDITA TERRIS
F. Hulsuis. sculp.





THE
HISTORIE
OF
THE DEFENDORS
OF THE
CATHOLIQVE FAITH. Discoursing the state of RELIGION
in England, and the care of the politique state
for Religion during the reignes of

King HENRRY 8.
King EDWARD. 6.
Queene MARIE.
Queene ELIZABETH.

And our late Souereigne, King IAMES. Kings and Queenes of England, France and Ireland,
Defendors of the most True, most Ancient, and
most CATHOLIQVE FAITH,
c.. With all, Declaring by what means these Kings  Queenes
haue obtained this Title, Defendor of the Faith, and wherein
they haue deserued it, whereunto are added,
Obseruations
DIVINE.
POLITIQVE.
MORALL.
BY CHRISTOPHER LEVER.
Nostrum in Coelo Negotium.
Printed at London by G. M. for Nicolas Fussell and Humphrey Moseley, and are
to be sold in Pauls Churchyard at the signe of the Ball. 1627.




TO
THE MOST
HIGH, MIGHTY,
And most Gratious PRINCE,
CHARLES:
By the grace of God, King of Great
Brittaine, France and Jreland, Defen|der
of the CATHOLIKE
FAITH.
YOVR MAIESTIES
MOst humble, and vnworthie Ser|uant,
CHRISTOPHER LEVER;
with
all humilitie dedicateth this Historie of the De|fendors
of the Catholike Faith, vnto your
Majestie, beseeching Almightie God to deriue
vpon your sacred name and house a perpetuall
succession of able and resolute Defendors of the
Faith; to the honour of God, the peace of the
Church, the prosperitie of the State, the
blessed memorie of your Royall Name,
and the Confusion of
Antichrist.
AMEN.




A CATALOGVE OF
the Chapters contained in this
HISTORIE.

King HENRIE 8.
1._AN induction to this Historie briefly
declaring the variable change of
Times, from the beginning to the
time of this Historie. page 1.
2. By whom and what meanes
this Title Defendor of the Faith was giuen to the
Crowne of England. pag. 19.
3. King HENRIES first Act of Defence for the Ca|tholike
Faith. pag. 31
4. Of what importance this Act for the Kings Supre|macie
was to the state of England, in respect of Pie|tie
and Policie. pag. 38.
5. Of the suppressing of Abbeys and Religious houses
in England. pag. 48.
6. Of the Kings remisse and cold proceeding in the
worke of Reformation. pag. 60.
7. Of the sixe Articles and the euill which thereof en|sewed.
pag. 77.
8. Obseruations out of the generall view of this latter
time of King HENRIE 8. pag. 91.
9. In what state King Henrie left the kingdome to the
next Defendor of the Faith, King Edward 6. p. 109
10. A comparison betweene King Henry 8. of England,
and Fredericke Barbarossa the Emperour of Germa|nie.
pag. 119.



King EDVVARD the 6.
11. OF the next Defendor of the Faith, King
Edward 6. pag. 125.
12. Of the benefit that redounds to a state by a
lawfull succession of bloud. pag. 131.
13. Of King Edwards defending the Catholike Faith
and wherein he chiefely defended it. p. 139.
14. The trouble of the State, at this time of King Ed|ward,
how they were occasioned and how compoun|ded.
p. 152.
15. A discourse of the miserie of mans life vpon oc|casion
of the Duke of Summersets death. p. 165.
16. Of king Edwards death, and how he left the state
to the next succession. 179.
17. A Comparison betweene king Iosias of Iuda, and
king Edward of England. p. 187.


Queene MARIE.
18. OF Queene Marie, and of the alteration of the
State in the beginning of her gouernment.
pag. 191.
19. In what particulars Queene Marie did most offend
the Catholike Faith. p. 201.
20. Of certaine discontents whereat Queene Marie
tooke great offence. pag. 225.
21. Of rebellion a discourse. p. 237.

22. A Comparison betweene Queene Marie of Eng|land,
and Katherine de Medicies, Queene-mother
of France. p. 245.


Queene ELIZABETH.
23. OF the next Defendresse of the FAITH,
Queene Elizabeth, and thorow what dif|ficulties
she attained the kingdome. p. 249.
24. The first act of the Queenes defence for the
Catholike Faith, after she was Queene. p. 262.
25. Of certaine state considerations which in respect of
Policie, might haue disswaded the Queene from re|forming
the state of Religion. p. 268.
26. Of the care the Queene and State had to suppresse
the enemies of the Catholike Faith. p. 282.
27. Of what importance these statutes were in the 13.
yeare of the Queene in respect of the Church and state.
p. 296.
28. Of the Christian care Queen Elizabeth had to de|fend
certaine Christian Princes and their States. p. 306.
29. A remembrance of some particulars, wherein God
hath defended this Defendresse of the Faith, Queen
Elizabeth. p. 321.
30. Of Q. Elizabeth her resolute continuing in de|fence
of the Catholike Faith. p. 329.
31. Of the last Act of the Queenes defence for the Ca|tholike
Faith. p. 333.



King IAMES.
32. OF the next Defendor of the Faith King
Iames, the Kings Maiesty that last was.
p. 335.
33. Of the Kings defending the Catholike
Faith in Scotland before hee was King of England.
p. 343.
34. In what particulars King Iames our Souereigne
hath principally defended the Catholike Faith.
p. 347.
35. A remembrance of some particulars whereby God
hath wonderfully defended the Kings Maiesty. p. 361.
36. Of the diuersity of Religions. p. 364.




THE
HISTORIE
of the Defendors
of the CATHOLIKE
FAITH.

AN INDVCTION
to this History, briefly declaring
the variable change of times, from the
first beginning to the time of this
present Historie.

CHAP. I.
_THE first time was in the
first Creation, for be|fore
God made things
there could be no time;
time being a deriuing of
things to such ends,

whereto in Gods decree they are directed.
For whatsoeuer is earthly,What Time is. euen man and the
number of his trauells, with their circum|stances,
are bound by God to a necessity of
time, beyound which all the power of earth
cannot reach. Their opinion then is both
foolish and wicked, who imagine all things
to happen by fortune, and that there is a
speciall power in the Orbs and Elements
(which they call Nature) by which, both
heauen and earth and euery worke there|of
is directed. And this opinion of Atheisme
is grounded vpon this doubt, that whereas
wee define God to bee the beginner of all
things. It is by them demanded, where that
God had his beginning, and from what hee
discended. By which forme of reasoning
they conclude against their owne vnbeleefe,
their doubting what should begin, acknow|ledgeth
a beginning, the which beginning is
God, not that God himselfe had beginning,
but that all things had their essence and de|riuation
from him: hee himselfe being infi|nite,
and without time. For as in the figure of
a Circle, is not to bee found any limit or

terme of beginning, or ending: So God
within whose Circle all things bee that are;
in whom we liue, moue, and haue our be|ing,
is infinite in time, and infinite in all his
attributes.
Secondly,The Iudge|ment of Phi|losophy. This diuine Truth is confirmed
by the sentence of the best Phylosophers,
who (with their eyes of Nature) could dis|cerne
and distinguish this Truth. But be|cause
I write to a Christian Prince I will not
therfore strengthen my selfe with prophane
authors, but much rather content mee with
the testimonie of God, whose words hath
sufficient Maiesty to answer all opposition.
By this word I know that God in the begin|ning,Gen. 1. 1.
created the world of nothing, there
being no preexistent matter whereof to
make it: and then of the dust of the Earth
made he Man, a most noble Creature, of a
matter most base, and breathed into his No|strills
the breath of Life,The Creati|on of Man. a soule so pure and
spiritual as nothing but God could be more,
being the sacred breath which hee himselfe
inspired, whereby our soules (euen after our
fall) yet relish of that diuinity, and whereby

we yet reach our meditation and spirituall
exercise to God who did inspire them.
Thirdly, And to this Man thus made, did
God giue,All things gi|uen to Man. the heauen, the earth, and all the
beauty of them; For hee himselfe in whom
was the fulnesse of all things needed not
ought that was made, but gaue them to his
seruant Man; to whom hee had made all
things seruants, reseruing Man to his owne
seruice onely. And for this end hath God
giuen Man a Law, which limits him with
strict obedience, and bindes him to the due
execution of such seruices, as may direct him
to his end, which is Gods Glory. The ob|seruance
of which Law is called Religion,
the not obseruing it a Rebellion against
God; because thereby wee oppose against
that power that made vs.The world diuided by Religion. This obseruance
of the Law of God which wee call Religon,
is that which hath deuided the world into
so many disagreements, the which like fire
that deuideth the metttle and drosse, doth
cull out the most approued of Mankinde,
vpon whom Gods decree hath set the di|stinction
of mercie, and doth marke such for

the inheritance of eternall life. Among all
which differences the maintainers of euery
seuerall call it their Religion to which they
chiefly adheare disclayming all diuersitie.
Fourthly, Yet as there is but one God,One God one Truth. so
of necessity there can be but one Truth, and
but one manner of true seruing that onely
God, and such for me must that seruice haue
as may please the liberty of the Master, and
not the base condition of seruants to ap|point.The reason of Multipli|citie of Re|ligions.
And from hence doth arise the mul|tiplicity
of Religions, that men interpose be|twixt
God and his seruice, and so denie the
most able and absolute God, both power
and wisedome in the ordering of his owne
affaires. And therefore doe men forme Re|ligions
not only diuers, but aduerse to God,
and to his own prescriptions. These wrongs
doth God suffer in his creatures, not by vio|lence
but at pleasure, and for the finishing of
such determinations, (as but to himselfe)
are most secret neither ought these diffe|rences
to distresse any mans Christian be|leefe,
or make him doubt the certainty of
Religion, because of many vncertaine Reli|gions.

For Christ Iesus who is the truth and
wisedome of his Father, saith, that he came
not to bring peace (though the Gospell of
peace) but the sword and difference, that
through the firie trial the Saints might passe
to the glory of eternall happinesse.
Fifthly,The first schisme. The first difference in Religion,
was in the first family, in Adams house the
first Man, and that betweene two Brethren,
Caine and Habell.Gen. 4. 3. Habell brought for his
offering to God the first fruits of his Sheepe,
and the fat of them, the which Sacrifice God
accepted. But Caine would not offer a Sacri|fice
of that value or nature but presents God
with fruit and trash, which God would not
accept. And this conceiued in Caine, an en|uious
emulation against his brother Habell,
which wanting grace to moderate, grew to
the highest degree of Enuie, whose nature is
to feede on blood, for so did enuious Caine
vpon the blood of vertuous Habell. This
Caine,Gen. 4. 8. Caine the Father of Scisme. this first man of blood, is a Father to
all them that loue difference, especially in
Religion, and their Religion (of all others)
is neerest Caines that staine their profession

and themselues with blood, especially with
the blood of righteous Habells. For God is
the God of mercie and not of misery, and
his delight is in the good, and not in the
blood of the righteous.
Sixthly,The first al|teration of Time. In this generation of Adam was
the first alteration of Time. For God created
all things good, and in purity hee formed
them; but Man made them euill, and by sin
deformed them. For when sinne enred our
Natures, then Man and the Creatures God
had giuen him indured alteration, and lost
that name of Goodnesse, God gaue them in
their Creation. So that nothing is now (in
his owne Nature,) Good, but onely by con|sequence
and Gods act, because by sin Man
hath spread corruption (like Leprosie) ouer
all the generations of Earth, and hath made
an alteration of times, and a difference in
the Natures of things, which had not beene,
but for the curse of sinne, which hath alte|red
their propertie, and made them subiect
to euil change, which otherwise should haue
had perpetuity of happinesse.
Seuenthly, And as Riuers the longer they

runne, the larger they spread themselues, so
sinne and the euill thereof,Time the worse for time. for the times that
are, are much worse, then the times that
were: as may appeare; if we compare times,
and descend from these beginnings to a lar|ger
processe. In the beginning, among three
men two were good, and then the greater
number were the better, but in the time
of Noah, among a world of people, God
found not a righteous man, but onely one
Noah; and then the better number was by
much the lesse. At this time God looked
downe from heauen, and beheld the earth
how it was deformed with sinne, therefore
he resolues to wash iniquity from the face of
the earth,Gen. 6. 13. and to bring a generall destructi|on
vpon all flesh. In which Iudgement his
mercy saued Noah onely and his Family. Af|ter
the Flood, when God had thus clensed
the earth, yet found he in Mans nature con|cupiscence
and a pronenesse to euill, the
which grew vp with time to a maruellous
strength; for as the generation of men in|large,
the generation of sinne doth much
more inlarge, spreading it selfe ouer all the

earth, and begetting in this new generation
of men, new and vnknowne inuentions of
euill, whereby they exceeded their euill pro|genitors
both in the number, and quallity
of their euills. For at this time popularity
and greatnesse began to be affected, and the
desire of Empire,The first de|sire of Em|pire. in ambiious and proud
spirits made men so audaciously proud, that
they durst dare heauen and giue God the
challenge. And at this time and not before,
was there vse of Pollicie, to contriue this or
that euill, to steale, murther, waste, vsurpe
and depopulate whole Kingdomes.
Eighthly, This alteration of manners,
occasioned a strange alteration in the state
of things, for these differences did reach be|yond
particular quarrells, euen to the sub|uersion
of whole states; whereby it came to
passe, that one kingdome deuoured ano|ther,
and one people did subiugate many. As
the Assyrians first,The foure Monarchies. who erected the first Mo|narchie
vnder Ninus and Simeramis, the
Parsians vnder Cyrus, the Macedonians vnder
Alexander, and the Romans vnder the go|uernement
 Conquests of Iulius Caesr. yet

all these haue had their alterations and haue
indured the misery of Conquest, euen by
such whom they reputed for barbarous and
base people.
Ninthly, The generall care that was had
of these worldly occasions, was the cause
that Religion was scarce knowne,  not re|garded:
 therfore the Church then,The state of the Church in the old world. excee|ded
not the number of some few families,
being translated from one holy Man to anot|ther,
such as were Abraham, Lot, and Iob; vn|to
the time of the twelue Patriakes, when
it began to spread into a holy generation;
and after the afflictions of Egypt and the
wildernesse it came to a flourishing and
princely state, especially in the times of Da|uid
and Salomon Kings of Israell; but not
long after in Reobohams time, tenne parts of
twelue fell backe from Religion, and became
Apostates; yea, and many times that little
Iuda, that handfull of Gods people, being
drunke with ease and prosperity, would for|get
God their mighty deliuerer, forget his
Sabbath and his Sanctuary, and giue them|selues
to Idolatrous pleasures, with such ge|nerall

appetite, as if God had giuen them li|cence
for wickednesse, no apparance or
marke of Religion in Iuda.
Tenthly,Gods Iudge|ments doe correct and not destroy. The mercifull God willing to
cure the infirmity of those times, commeth
with his Iudgements, Famine, Sword and
Pestilence, (not as in the old world to de|stroy)
but to correct the disobedience of his
people; who no sooner relish the sweetnesse
of his mercy, but wantonly returne to their
former remisnesse, and sinne with greater
appetite then before: yet for all this doth
not God forget to be mercifull, but continu|eth
himselfe in his owne nature a God most
mercifull, and most compassionate; who to
demonstrate the infinite degree of his loue
to his seruant Man, taketh from him the
burthen some condition of the Law, which
hee could not keepe, and giueth him a new
couenant, the couenant of Grace the Gos|pell
of Peace.God altereth the tnr of our Obliga|tion. And thus mercifully he alte|reth
the tenor of our obligation, and to giue
this worke of Gracefull authority, hee sen|deth
his onely begotten the Lord Christ, to
satisfie the old, and to ratfi the new Coue|nant

both by his actiue and passiue righte|ousnesse.
Eleuenthly,The happie alteration of time. Heere was the greatest alte|ration
that euer was in the witnesse of time,
for before this we were commanded, to doe
and liue, else to die: but now to beleeue one|ly
and liue. Neuer was there a more large
demonstration of Gods fauour; nor a like
time, wherein Grace was so freely offered, or
the gates of heauen so wide set open; as if
God should reach his hand of mercy to
earth,How God doth inuite men to their Saluation. to inuite vs to his eternal inheritance,
and (with the fayrest promises of Loue) to
allure vs to a state of most absolute blessed|nesse:
yet notwithstanding all this Grace,
and all these faire inuitements, so constant
were the men of those times in their euills,
that they refuse to indent with God, be the
condition neuer so easie, or his promise ne|uer
so absolute: but they combine them|selues
with all indeauour to resist the Grace
of God; they will not haue Grace though
God giue it freely; they are all Moses no
Christ, all Law no Gospell so powerfull were
they in their owne opinions, as if the Law

had beene an easie performance; And ther|fore
did they despise the work of Grace, cru|cifying
the Lord of Life, that brought it, and
that bought it with the value of his life; a
price inestimable, killing also the Apostles his
faithfull witnesses, and persecuting the
Saints, to whom God gaue Grace to appre|hend
this Mistery.
Twelfthly, Heere may a Christian man
spend his holy meditations in considering
the deprauednesse of Man, the grosse dulnes
of his Nature, and how inclinable hee is to
all euill. Contrariwise the infinite measure
of Gods mercie; who notwithstanding our
disobedience, will not vtterly destroy vs his
creatures, but in a wonderfull degree of fa|uour,
yeelds himselfe to the weakenesse of
our flesh, knowing that our nature hath a
pronenesse to euill onely: And therefore
hath he giuen free passage to the Gospell,
making it fruitfully prosper in the blood of
holy Martyrs, shed in the persecuting times
of Tyrants and wicked-Emperors.
13. And in this passage of blood did Re|ligion
march vntill the time of Constantine

the Great,Religion did liue in death who intertaining the Christian
Faith with good affection gaue it warrant for
publike exercise, whereby it spred ouer all
the knowne world with such admirable in|crease,
as God onely could giue to a cause
so heauenly.The cause of scisme in Christian Religion. And yet in the height of this
prosperity, (according to the Nature of our
flesh) the state of Christendome grew
proud, with good successe, and wanting the
opposition of heathen enemies, deuided
themselues into heresies and factions, wher|of
insewed the greatest calamitie that could
be in a Christian state, euery faction recei|uing
authority and greatnesse, according as
they were fauoured or not by the Empe|rours.
14. And this diuersity of fortune con|tinued
in Christendome for many yeares,
yet so as Christianity might be well said to
flourish, vntil the time that the Popes did ar|rogate
to their seate supremacy and vniuer|sall
power (or as the History of Florence re|porteth
it) vntill the time of Charles and Pip|pin
Kings of France,The Practi|ses of the French. who in pollicie to secure
to them and theirs the possession of the west

Empire, bound the Bishop of Rome (whose
authority might helpe that practise) by fa|uours
and friendly entertainements to their
faction. And therefore did the French pro|nounce
this sentence. That the Pope being
the Vicar of Christ, ought not to bee iudged
by men, but to Iudge all men and to deter|mine
euery difference. This sentence (whe|ther
by the Popes themselues, or by their fa|uourites,
the French Kings,) was assuredly
the Ladder for the Popes ambition, and the
cause whereof hath ensued so much euill to
the state of the Catholike Church, as that
Christendome yet is full of the markes of
that misery.
15. Now the power of God that seeth the
most secret practice on Earth, whose proui|dence
cannot bee preuented with pollicie,
suffers the measure of this euill time to fill
and ouerrunne with iniquity; so that a true
Christian might haue thought of himselfe,
as Elias, when he thought he was onely left
of Gods people: yet in that height of ini|quity,
there wanted not many Obediahs, who
hid the faithfull from the stroake of persecu|tion;

neither wanted there some euen in this
darkenesse of Time, who willingly offered
their faith to the tryall of fire, and sealed the
testimonie of their Religion, with the witnes
of their blood.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST, from this extremitie of euill
time doth this following History take
beginning,Diuine. and here may be generally
noted from the Obseruations of all times,
that God doth neuer suffer the light of his
truth to be vtterly extinct, though many
times in that degree of aduersity, as that the
eye of this world cannot see it. This is eui|dent
in the sacred Stories of the Bible, and
also in the condition of these times whereof
I write. When ignorance and Error like a
double vaile did blinde the face of Truth:
yet God whose eye of prouidence is euer
open, seeth the enuie of euill men. And (in
the time of his good pleasure) he taketh off

this double Vaile, and presents Truth na|ked
to the view of all men, as in the sequell
of this History shall appeare most eui|dent.
Secondly,Pollitique. Here hence also we may note
the instability of earthly things; and how
that Soueraignty, and Empire (the polli|tique
ends and the extremities of mens in|deuours)
are built vpon vncertainties, and
most vnconstant turnings, the which false
foundation, hath suddenly cast downe, what
many yeares, much studie, and many mens
labours had erected. Therefore is that prin|ciple
of Pollicie, not altogether without rea|son,
that Authority and Greatnesse of State re|ceiueth
strength by discords and Faction. For it is
both the nature of things and the trauell of
men to indeauour alterations, and to trans|pose
things from the present condition
wherein they are, for from this cause all Em|pires
haue had their beginning strength,
and death.
Thirdly,Morall. It is a Morall respect, that in our
constructions we Iudge not properties by
externall euidence only, for vertue and me|rit

is not giuen by Suffrage, because it is of|ten
included in the farre inferior number,
and is often banished to pouerty and con|temptible
fortune.
Fourthly, For as it is no proofe of truth to
produce multiplicitie of witnesses, where
there is a necessary relation to fauour. So
vertues and morall deserts, are not Iudged
by common examples or opinions, because
both the one and other are not free and vo|luntary,
but forced on vs by the grosse and
palpable flatteries of our infirmities.
Fifthly, It is also a morall institution that
men should somewhat disgrace themselues
in their owne dignities, not that their actions
may indure disgrace, but that their owne o|pinions
exceede not in their owne estimati|ons,
which error doth often make the most
fortunate most wretched; For if kingdomes,
Empires, and the Catholike Church haue
indured bad alterations. Let no man dare to
secure himselfe in their vncertainties.




CHAP. II.
By whom and what meanes this
Title Defendor of the Faith
was giuen to the Crowne
of England.
_FIRST, there is not in this last
age of the world any thing
more admirable, or that better
doth merit the memorie of
writing, then the reformation of Christian
Religion, reducing it to that purity of Do|ctrine,
wherein it was first deliuered. And
this in a double respect deserueth euerla|sting
memorie. First, the worthinesse of the
act it selfe, being the restoring of Religion
to the purity of Doctrine, whereby so much
good doth redound to the state of Christen|dome

as that greater cannot. Religion be|ing
the key that doth open the passage to
happinesse, and the Ladder by which wee
ascend the presence of God and holy An|gels,
whereby we are interessed into Gods
fauour, and without which it is impossible
to please God. It is admirable also in respect
of the manner and meanes, whereby this
worke was wrought, being directed by the
speciall power of Gods prouidence, to the
admiration of al them that truly consider it.
Secondly,The refor|mation of Religion. For the Act it selfe, all the lear|ned
in the world are in controuersie, whe|ther
(thereby) Religion was deformed, or
reformed. To both which opinions many
excellent learned men, diuersly adhered,
whereby they deuide the vnity of Religion
into these two diuersities;Christian Religion de|uided into Protestants and Papists. Protestants and
Papists, either of these subdeuiding it selfe a|gaine,
into many seueralls; whereby the
plaine and honest vnderstanding of men
lesse learned are distract; To see Religion,
(which in truth is but one) deuided into so
many diuersities: now because the handling
of this doth rather belong to argument,

then History; to a disputation, rather than to
a relation of the occurrents of Time. I ther|fore
leaue that as impertinent to this busi|nesse,
and onely tie my selfe to relate the
manner how Christian Religion was refor|med:How Religi|on was refor|med.
and (in speciall) how by the Crowne
of England this was done; whereby that Na|tion
hath all other Kingdomes of the Earth,
(in the highest degrees of honour and repu|tation)
much exceeded it being the first that
with victory,England the first that with victory did oppose the Pope. dared to cast off that awfull and
needlesse yoke of obedience to the seate of
Rome.
Thirdly,The first oc|casion of the alteration of Religion. The first occasion hereof was in
the time of Martin Luther, who by his dili|gence
in preaching and writing had got
great estimation in Germany, especially with
the Duke of Saxonie, because in his teaching
he opposed the vsurped authority of the
Pope, and for detesting those grosse heresies,
which by long continuance in the Church,
had gotten a generall allowance,Luthers Booke de Captiuitate Babyl. among
(almost all men.) This Luther writ a booke,
entituled, de captiuitate Babylonica so offensiue
to the state of Papacie, as the Pope and all his

speciall fauourites, were therewith very
much displeased. Whereupon King Henery
the Eighth (whether of his owne accord,K. Henery the Eighth against Lu|ther. or
by the perswasion of others, I know not) writ
against Luther, and in speciall against that
booke of his de Capt. Babil. in defence
of the Popes Supremacie.The purpose of the Kings Booke. The purpose of the
Kings booke, beeing specially to conclude
the doctrine of Pardons. Secondly, of the
Popes Supremacie. Thirdly, of the Sacra|ments
of the Church: whether this was the
Kings owne labour, or that he onely Fathe|red
it to giue it authority, is not certainely
knowne, and diuersly beleeued. Many
thinke it was not, and that his Fathering of
it was onely a pollicie of state, both to gaine
himselfe a reputation in learning, and that
by this speciall demonstration, the Pope
might be tyed to the Kings fauour, and assist
him in his Warres against the French King:
and they haue these reasons of likely-hood,
that vpon the instant publishing the said
Book, the Pope did not only fauour the Kings
enterprise, but also gaue him many other
witnesses of thankes, and among many this

aboue all, that (to his other titles of honour)
he added this aboue all, that in remem|brance
of the Kings princely care for the
State of the Catholike Religion, hee and his
Successors for euer should be stiled Defendors
of the most Catholike Faith.
Fourthly,The greatnes of the Pope at those times. And herein appeared the
greatnes of the Pope at that time, that the
greatest Princes of Christendome, thought
themselues highly rewarded, for their grea|test
trauells, if the Pope should but giue them,
the allowance of his fauour, or demonstrate
himselfe in any particular kindnesse (how
small soeuer.) And this was a matter very
considerable, in that pollitique Religion, to
gaine such opinion of holines as made him
reuerenced of the greatest Potentates.The Popes pollicie. For by
this he often made exchange, with great ad|uantage,
giuing them words for things, and
receiuing the seruices of men, for thankes,
indulgences, and pardons, which nothing
benefited the Receiuers,The Popes secret pur|pose in sti|ling the K. Defendour of the Faith. but much inlarged
his own priuate ends. Such reward had King
Henery for writing against Luther, in which
may be vnderstood the Popes secret practise,

for in giuing this honour to King Henry to
be stiled Defendor of the Faith, hee thereby
had a farther end then to honour the King,
which was to binde him to his perpetuall
seruice, which he thought he could not bet|ter
doe then by this obligation of honour,
which indeed is the greatest that can be to a
princely minde. The Pope knoweth that the
King by accepting of this stile Defendor of the
Faith, was bound in the tearmes of honour
to defend that whereof hee had taken the
protection, and so by consequence was hee
bound to all the Popes occasions; he being in
the co~mon opinio~ of the world the vniuersal
head of that faith, which the Kings Title did
binde him to defend. And this (howsoeuer
the successe did not answer to the purpose,)
yet was it great pollicie in the Pope, especial|ly
considering the danger of the times, and
that many eyes began with dislike to prie
into the deformities of the Church.
Fifthly But who can contriue against God
with successe, for the Pope in this case shot
his euill arrow against heauen, which in a
perpendiculer line, fell vpon his owne pate.

God retorting the euil against him that sent
it, making him fast in his own snare  to fall
in that pit which he had digged for another.
This is Gods doing  it is wonderfull in our
eyes.The Popes purpose dis|appointed by prouidence. For this K. whom the Pope had thought
to haue made the instrume~t of his greatnes,
did God make the instrument of his fall the
Pope gaue him the name of Defendor; But
God made the King to defend the Faith a|gainst
the Pope the enemie of Faith. For pol|licie
cannot preuent piety; and God con|founds
the wisedome of men, and can make
their subtill practises many times hitt that
marke they neuer aymed at; as in this parti|cular,
the Pope making particular choice of
the King for his Champion, whom God (the
contrary party) would imploy for the Popes
destruction, giuing him inuincible spirit, to
be the first Christian K that durst put to his
Princely hand to Ruine the walls of Babylon.
Sixthly, And if the Kings nature, and the
circumstance of time were rightly conside|red,God moueth the King a|gainst his naturall disposition.
it will appeare so admirable as God on|ly
could worke that alteration in the Kings
minde, the King himselfe being so stiffe and

resolute, as none of his predecessors (I think)
in this did equall him; especially in the
tearme of honour and reputation: and then
considering the King had written and pub|lished
his protestation to defend the Supre|macy
of the Pope, and the Religion then
profest: it may seeme the greatest obligati|on
that could be to binde his princely Na|ture,
to continue his defence of that which
before he had defended, especially in a mat|ter
of that consequence, the rather hauing
declared himselfe to the witnesse of all men.
Seuenthly, Againe, if wee consider that
Reply of Luthers to the Kings Booke,Luthers bit|ter writing. so full
of heate and bitternesse, as that euery page
(almost) hath prouocations, rather to ob|durate
the Kings heart, and to incense him
to a more resolute obstinacie, then any
waies to quallifie or reforme him: Luther
scoffingly answering the Kings arguments,
with words of such disgrace, as ill fitted the
grauity of Luther to giue, or the Maiesty of
so great a Prince (with any patience) to in|dure.Luthers mis|conceiuing.
And doubtlesse this in Luther was a
great ouersight and a misconceiuing, to

thinke to helpe his cause by traducing the
Kings person; For the resolutions of great
men are not moued by power, but by the
perswasions of inferiours. And Luther in
writing this booke against King Henery,Luthers zeale with|out discretio~.
doth rather expresse his zeale then his discre|tion:
For in all Controuerfies, the heate of words
(especially in the grauer) is a want of that mode|ration,
and Iudgement, which onely giueth seeme|linesse,
and good forme to all our actions: yet
notwithstanding all these backe occasions,
which (in mans Iudgement) might seeme
to hinder, this gracious worke, did God
effect it, and that by his instrument, King He|nery,
whom both the Pope and Luther, had
rather fitted for the contrary.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. God doth often interrupt and
destroy the violence of wicked men, and
their practise, by a contemptible, and
vnthought of meanes: for so was Luther

thought, in respect of the great and generall
authority, which then Antichrist had: the
reason is this, that where God doth place
his omnipotent Spirit, that strength is then
inuincible, but able to conuince all resi|stance.
For God (onely) can contract in the
person of one man, Valour and victory to
order and reforme the world.
Secondly,Politique. The Politique practise here is
obserued in the Pope, who with demonstra|tions
of Loue without charge, could binde
the seruice of Princes and great States vnto
him. For as it is most needfull that the bo|dies
of great Authorities should haue strong
and able supporters. So it is necessary in the
wisedome of state, to gaine and continue
that correspondencie, and indifferencie,
which may support our estimation. In which
care this politique forme is very necessary,
that in disposing our gifts of fauour we giue
least gifts to greatest men, but with most
large circumstance: because that where
there is any neerenesse of equality of state,
it is not possible to make gifts valuable, but
with Ceremonies.

Thirdly, In Luther may bee noted a mar|uellous
defect of pollicie, to labour a spiri|tuall
cause with such vntempered heate. For
if Luthers spirit had had moderation, and
that pollitique wisedome which was but ne|cessary
in his Religion and high attempts,
he would haue made a difference betweene
a principall and a second, the Pope and the
King, and not haue prosecuted against
them both with like seuerity. For Luther
could not bee ignorant, that the onely
meanes to finish the reformation he inten|ded,
was by the fauour and assistance of
Christian Princes, which care in the cause
and person of King Henry, Luther did not
obserue.
Fourthly,Morall. It is a precept worthy of gene|rall
practise, that in all societies, men should
be Communicable, and translate their offi|ces
of loue from one to another. For gifts
and retributions, howsoeuer they are lesse
worthy then our affections, yet are they our
best witnesses, and doe the better, and more
often remember vs: because they are more
open, and euident to sense.

Fifthly, Againe, moderation of spirit
which is our indifferent esteeming of our
selues with others, doth comprehend the
very excellence of all humanity, being the
most noble degree in our nature, and the
very next to the dignity of Grace. Neither
is there any morall vertue, which doth more
commend men to generall estimation, be|cause
it giueth desert to euery man that
hath it, and doth often giue (from it selfe)
dignities to such as want them.




CHAP. III.
King Henries first Act of
Defence for the Catho|like
Faith.
_THE first Act of the Kings De|fence
was in retyring himselfe
from the Popes seruice for at that
time,The first Act of the Kings Defence. were all Christian Princes
his seruants. This Act of the kings was that
which many Emperors and great Poten|tates
desired might be done, yet neuer durst
attempt to doe, or succesfully attemp|ted
it.Frederick Barbarossa. Such as was the Emperour Frederick
Barbarossa, who notwithstanding his great|nesse
both of power and spirit, yet failed he
in his attempt, though he neuer pursued any
thing with greater stomack.Henry the Second. Also King Hen|ry
the Second of England, who fayling in

the fortunes of this businesse, yeelded him|selfe
(though valiant and princely) to such
base conditions of pennance, as well may
declare the greatnesse of the Pope that im|posed
them: but with this King Henry the
Eight it may seeme, that God himselfe did
conspire, to make the worke prosperous,
and the king for being Gods instrument
perpetually famous.
Secondly,The first oc|casion of dif|ference be|tweene King Henry and the Pope. The first occasion of difference
betweene King Henry and the Pope, was the
proceedings in the diuorse of Queene Kathe|rine
the kings first wife, who before had bene
wife to Prince Arthur his Brother, wherein
the Pope vsed such small regard to quiet the
trouble of the kings Conscience, as thereby
the king and the State were very much of|fended,
and then such as did not fauour the
faction of the Pope, (for so I may call it)
tooke the aduantage of time, and grew bold
to lay open to the king the deformities of
the present time, and the glory hee might
purchase in restoring Religion to that puri|ty,
which now (in that holy profession) was
altogether defaced.

Thirdly, Those occasions so moue the
kings offence, that hee sommons his High
Court of Parlyament at Westminster, laying
before them his griefe, which was the ouer|much
power the Pope had in his kingdome,
and the small respect that hee and his State
had from the Pope: whereupon a Statute past
by consent of the three estates, whereby the
king was made supreme Head ouer the
Church of England,The King first made supreame Head. aswell in ecclesiasticall
as temporal matters, cutting off al manner of
Papal authority from the crowne of England.Anno regni. 26.
And herein may appeare the greatnes of the
king,An Argu|ment of the Kings great|nesse. and the reuerence of his Subiects, who
framed themselues to the pleasure of the
king,The benefit of Maiestie. in a matter of much difficultie and be|yond
all expectation. And this was the be|nefit
of Maiesty, which begot in them such
duty and awfull regard, which to a remisse
and familiar Prince had not beene gran|ted
Fourthly, This grant of the kings Supre|macie
was the first mortall wound the
Church of Rome receiued, loosing at that
time the best Crowne shee had in keeping,

whereby a president was giuen to all other
Christian Princes, to free themselues from
the Captiuity of that Babylon, with whose
Fornications the whole Earth was made
drunke. And this Act of the State of England
was so well approued in the Iudgement of
Christendome, as that many the best parts
thereof, (in immitation of King Henry,)
haue cast from them the bond of Papall au|thority;
yea, doubtlesse so desired it is of all
States, as (might it bee done with security)
their is no Prince or State, either Religious
or politique, but doth so enuie the greatnesse
of forraigne Supremacie, as gladly they
would bee cleered thereof, finding many
times to the great detriment of state, the in|iury
of this power, in interdictions and Pa|pall
curses, as if wee reade the diuisions of
Italy we may in them most cleerely iudge,The incon|uenience of Papall au|thoritie.
the inconuenience of the Popes vniuersall
power, the abuse whereof is so common in
those states, as that they are neuer obeyed,
but when there wanteth temporall power
to withstand them. And therefore did King
Henry nobly performe his kingly Office,

and well defend the Catholike Faith, in de|priuing
the Pope of that power, wherewith
the Christian Faith was offended,

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. God doth what he list, by what
meanes he list, so doth hee produce his
miracles by causes naturally vnfitting,
and so this miraculous alteration in the state
of Christendome, was effected by the king
his instrument, who both in Nature and o|pinion,
was thought vnlike for such Reli|gious
effects, being rather armed both by
the Pope and Luther to oppose the enter|prize.
So doth God snare the engine ma|ker;
For the Wisedome of this World is but fol|ly
with God.
Secondly,Pollitique. To obserue a iust proportion
of state is good in all degrees, but in a Soue|raigne
necessary, yet hee that exceeds his
state, doth impaire his state, and by taking
more then his owne, he doth loose his own.













CHAP. IV.
Of what importance this Act for
the Kings Supremacy was
to the state of England
in respect of Piety
and Pollicy.
_FIRST, If we consider the trauells
of men on earth, and the conti|nuall
passage of all their actions,
we shall finde that euery particu|lar
man of Spirit, or that hath but more then
common vnderstanding directeth himselfe
and his whole trauell to one of these two
ends;Goodness and greatnes the two ends whereto all men intend. eyther to be Good, or to be Great, and
according to his choice of these, hee doth
frame the practise of his life, as if to good|nesse
then is his care good, and hee doth ex|ercise
those good meanes, that may leade
him to his good end. For there is no way to

attaine good end, but by good meanes. But
he that aymeth at greatnesse, the care of his
life is much different, for to him there is no
direct way of lawfulnesse or honestie to
runne in, for he breaketh these limits, and
trauells in euery by passage how vnlawfull|soeuer:
and therefore they of this nature
allow, onely of this one principall, that
whatsoeuer may direct them to their end, be
it sinne, or shame they giue it allowance.
Such was the resolution of that Tyrant,Richard the Third of En|gland. who
making Empire his desired end, cared not
to trauell thither in the steppes of his neerest
blood, so deepe as (perhaps) to damne him|selfe.
And like vnto him are all such whose
desires leade them to vnlawfull ends, who
resoluing to obtaine their desires, resolue
likewise vpon the practise of all vngodli|nesse.
Secondly, And this practise of euill men
is in common construction called Pollicie,
whereby the name of Pollicie doth receiue
much wrong by their grosse and sencelesse
vnderstanding it, for Pollicie may bee either
good or bad according to the end whereto


out of these considerations. First, the liber|ty
that was recouered in the person of the
Prince, he resuming that absolute autho|rity
to himselfe, which before was giuen to
a stranger his enemy, whereby the King did
adde to his owne greatnesse, and diminish
the power of him that loued him not. And
how important this is to the prosperity of a
State, let the Iudgement of any sence iudge
it. Againe, there is no State or Kingdome,
vnder the awe of Popish Supremacie that
can be said (truly) to be a free State, or the
King thereof an absolute Prince, because
that Kingdome is subiugate, and that King
Subordinate to the power of another;The gouern|ment Mo|narchiall the best. where|by
the gouernement Monarchiall (which of
all others is most excellent) cannot bee said
to bee in that State, where the authority of
the Prince is deuided, or rather tran|slated
into the person of another, as in
the case of Popish Supremacie is most
euident.
Sixthly, Againe, to inherit by succession
of blood, (which is of very speciall conside|ration)
is by this forraigne Supremacie

much indangered: because where this
power is grantedAn inconue|nience of Po|pish Supre|macie. there is also giuen to the
Pope the power to alter, and dispose of Kings
and Kingdomes at his pleasure, and to tran|slate
the inheritance of States according as
hee shall please to fauour or dis-fauour the
true owners, whereof many times hath en|sued
much misery, and many calamities; So
that I verily thinke there is no part of Chri|stendome,
that hath not had a wofull expe|rience
in this great misery. That were the
Prince or the cause neuer so Iust, and holy,
or the Pope and his wicked life neuer so ap|parantly
euill, yet by this vniuersall power,
hee had power giuen him to alter the State,
and to translate Succession at his pleasure:
pretending a Religious good,Pretend and intend. but intending
eyther the aduancement of his base kin|dred,
or else some other enuious and euill
end. And how dangerous this may bee to
a Kingdome let any Iudgement determine.
Lastly, this inconuenience doth follow of
Popish Supremacie,The practise of many Treasns. the practise of so many
Treasons, wherewith the name of Christen|dome
is much spotted; For he that is resol|ued


the sufficiencie of other mens writings to
this purpose: This onely Argument, that
whereas by the testimonie of holy Scripture
wee are taught to know that man of sinne,
whom the spirit of God calleth Antichrist by
this speciall sensible signe of pride,Pride the most sensible signe of An|tichrist. in that he
being but man, shall presume to exalt him|selfe
aboue all that is called God. Now that
Kings and Princes of the Earth, are (by the
sentence of Scripture) called Gods, it is most
euident, in that place where he saith, I haue
said yee are Gods: that is,Psalme. neerest to my selfe
in your dignitie of place, representing my
power and my Maiesty, in the highest degree
vpon Earth. Then whosoeuer shall exalt
himselfe aboue these degrees of Maiesty,
must of necessity be he whom the Spirit of
God calleth that man of sinne that Anti|christ,
because his sinne is like the sinne of
the Diuels in the Creation;The sinne of the Diuels in the Creation Nymrods sinne Supre|macie. for as they did,
so doth he contend for the highest Suprema|cie:
and (Nymrod-like) he buildeth himselfe
aloft aboue the reach of Earth, reaching his
ambition, beyond the limits of mortality,
euen aboue all that is called God.

Eighthly, And therefore great reason
had the King, and so haue all the Kings of
the Earth, to cast off all friendly intertaine|ment
with him, that would exalt himselfe a|boue
all flesh, nay, aboue all that is called
God: and I am verily perswaded, that this
one respect of pride is that marke where|by
shee is best knowne to bee that Babylon,
with whose Fornications the whole Earth
hath bene poysoned, yet in these latter times
hath shee got more vgly visors to maske in
Blood and Treason; two such deformities, as
would be very apparant in the face of Reli|gion.
And God no doubt hath set these
markes in her fore-head (as he marked Cain)
that all his beloued in the world, might
know her at the first blush, and auoide the
filth of her Fornications. For where those e|uills
are; God is not in the honour of his ser|uice,
but in his Iustice and angry Maiesty.



CHAP. V.
Of the suppressing of Abbeyes and
Religious Houses in England.
_FIRST, the worke of Gods
prouidence is most worthy of
consideration, leading (by va|riable
turnings) the passage of
all transitory things to that end, whereto
God hath decreed them. In which worke
howsoeuer,God neuer altereth his purpose. God doth neuer change the
purpose of his will, yet the euents (many
times) seeme very admirable to our vder|standings
by reason of their change and va|rieties.Vicessitudo rerum.
For all things in this world are in
continuall motion, being moued as shall
please the hand of prouidence, euery thing
being like the mouing Sea, sometimes flow|ing,
sometimes in their ebb againe, some|times

vp, sometimes downe, according as
shall please that power that moues them.
And from this mouing cause is deriued that
variety in the state of Earth which men (fal|sly)
call Fortune,The variety of Fortunes. the often change whereof
to a Christian Iudgement is not strange, be|cause
he considereth the power that God
hath ouer all his creatures, and how inclina|ble
they be to alteration.
Secondly, And for particular instances:
Though Religion before these times had in|dured
an euill change, changing the truth
for many superstitious Ceremonies, yet so
venerable was the name of Religion to the
people of those times, as (notwithstanding
their misconceiuing the truth thereof) they
gaue such large demonstrations of loue and
zeale to that profession, and the Professors
as no people at any time did euer exceed
them;The regard that was gi|uen to the Pop: Church. inriching the state of Religion, both
with honourable regard, and with very am|ple
possessions. Insomuch as the Church
then might rather seeme a Triumphant, then
a Church Militant; So high was it exalted in
the degrees of worldly prosperity: yet for

all this flourish, God commeth with his rod
of correction, and (finding euill in the great|nesse
thereof) he alters their present Con|dition,
that as they had forsaken the truth
of his seruice, So hee would bereaue them
their earthly honour, wherewith the true
name of their false Religion was gorgeously
decked.
Thirdly,The first cause of alte|ration of Re|ligion. The first cause then of this alte|ration
was God himselfe, who, when hee
seeth the vessell of mens iniquity full, he fil|leth
his violl with wrath, to reforme and cor|rect,
what euill men had before deformed,
and being most Iealous of his honour,God most iealous of his honour. hee
commeth with more then common corre|ctions,
to reforme the truth of his seruice.
For so did God at this time, his angry hand
reaching destruction, beyond the liues of
those euill men, euen to their lands, houses
and possessions, making King Henry vtterly
extirpe these abused Monasteries, as the
Israelites did the Cananites, for their mon|strous
and heathenish sinnes. And therefore
no doubt did God make particular choise
of King Henry for his instrument, fitting him

with extraordinary spirit,The King well fitted for this busi|nesse. that he might the
better mannage this great businesse, where|to
God had ordained him, and wherein
God did wonderfully assist him.
Fourthly,What might moue the K. in respect of himselfe. But what might moue the King
in respect of himselfe, many men many
waies coniecture. Some, by the spoyle of
these houses that he might inrich himselfe,
and relieue the occasions of his Warres,
which then did much distresse him But
howsoeuer,Master Fox in the Act and Mon. this hath credit with him that
writeth this Storie at large, yet in that opi|nion
I doe not beleeue him. For it is not
likely that any Christian Prince in the
world, would for any respect of spoyle, de|stroy
the estates of so many (at that time re|puted)
Religious and Godly men. Others
thinke the King did this out of Stomacke,
the Pope being then in full opposition with
the King, for taking Supremacie from him in
the Church of England, that had but lately
giuen to him  his Successors for euer the
title of Defendor of the Faith; the King ima|gining
he could not secure to his posterity,
the continuance of his Supremacie, where his

enemy (the Pope) was so strong both by the
number and by the worth of these Religious
houses:The Popes strength. and therefore it is thought the King
did suppresse them in Pollicy, making that his
owne strength which he found to strength
his enemy. And this howsoeuer hath a
likely-hood, being neere the Kings dispo|sition,
yet I verily thinke the King would not
for any pollitique regard, haue brought a
generall destruction vpon that State which
then was held Religious.The cause mouing the King to the subersion of the Abbeye But rather vnder|standing
by his Visitors the great disorder
and vngodlinesse of men and women (in
those places) professing Religion, did (in the
care of conscience) scatter their assemblies,
ruine their houses, and iustly seaze that to
his vse which they with so much impietie had
abused.
Fifthly,The outrru|ding of Fry|ers, c. Vpon this consideration, did the
King outtrude the Rabble of Monkes, Nunnes,
and Fryers, and seaze their possessions, fin|ding
that their large allowance of wealth
and easie life, was cause of their wanton and
wicked trade of liuing, and that prayer, and
the exercise of true Deuotion (whereto they

were dedicate, was not that whereunto
they imployed the large beneuolence of
their Benefactors. They vsing (onely) the
formes of some superstitious prayers, and a
formality in their attire, wherein they ob|serued
a precise order, being in the maine
carriage of their liues of all people most dis|orderly.The suppres|sing of Ab|beyes good to the Church and Com|mon-Wealth
To reforme which was not onely
necessary for the truth of holy Religion, but
very conuenient for the better gouerne|ment
of the Common-Wealth, the State re|ceiuing
great detriment by allowing so
largely to those lazie and vnprofitable mem|bers,
and the Church great scandalls, by
their vngodly and heathenish liues. To re|forme
this then, was an Act in the King very
gratious, tending directly for the good of
both states, whereby he gaue proofe, that
God, and not the Pope, made speciall choice
of him and his Successors, to defend the
most True, Ancient, and Apostolike
Faith.
Sixthly,A doubt. Yet here it may be doubted, whe|ther
the King did better in the vtter extirpa|tion
of these men, their order, and houses,

or if he had reformed onely the abuse, and
left their places and possessions to others of
better life, and professing the truth of holy
Religion, whereby the euil might haue bene
taken away onely, leauing their mainte|nance
to be imployed in holy and Religious
vses, especially considering that the want in
the Protestants Religion is the want of main|tenance,
whereby many well deseruing
Schollers liue in the penurie of life vnsup|ported,
which by this meanes might abun|dantly
haue bene supplied.
Seuenthly,Answer 1. To this doubt many in their
seuerall opinions diuersly answer, some that
the standing still of their houses in the for|mer
condition of a corporation was dange|rous,
least vpon euery alteration of the
Prince, the dispossessed might againe reen|ter,
whereby the latter condition, might
proue worse then the former. And this rea|son
were good, if there might not haue bene
assurance to haue secured them, from all
danger of repossessing, (the which no doubt)
might haue bene done, if the prouidence of
the State had regarded it.

Eighthly, Others thinke the King,2. too
seuere in this his manner of correction, sup|posing
it had beene enough for him to cor|rect
but not to destroy, to reforme the a|buse,
not vtterly to haue subuerted both the
abusers and the places abused: and that his
conuerting their wealth to his owne priuate
benefit, was an argument that he did this;
not in zeale to reforme their abuses, but ra|ther
to interest himselfe into that abun|dance
of wealth they then possessed; follow|ing
herein the example of Cardinall VVolsey,Cardinall Wolsey, an euill presi|dent.
who in the yeare 1525: obtained license to
suppresse certaine Religious houses, to fur|nish
him towards the building of his two
Colledges at Oxford and Ipswich, the which
Colledges beeing founded vpon this false
ground, neuer had the good fortune to bee
finished but perished in their Birth.
Ninthly, And I verily beleeue, that how|soeuer
the King had a further respect then
to inherit their wealth, yet was there both
that and many other by occasions, strong
inducements to moue him to this seuerity
in punishing. And herein the King may be


was and is in the person of the Pope, an am|bitious
desire of vniuersality of Empire,
with vniuersall neglect and hatred.
Thirdly, Vngodly practise hath not al|waies
euill successe, if we respect the present
but if wee respect euents further of, they
are euer euill and certaine in their destru|ction.
Fourthly,Pollitique. to dissemble our intents, with
faire pretence is a principle in pollicie, which
I commend not, but remember onely.
For though no man bee bound at all times
and in euery cause to declare himselfe
in direct euidence; yet doth it much ad|uance
the honour of a Prince to be square
in all, without difference or dispropor|tion.
Fifthly, In a generall cause, it is necessary
to be generally respectiue, and not to con|ferre
that vpon one, which (with satisfacti|on)
may be giuen to manie. Therefore was
it good Pollicie in the King to distribute the
possessions of the Abbeyes he supprest, to
many of principall authority in the State:
For it is wisedome to satisfie their offence

that haue authority, rather then such as
want it.
Sixthly,Morall. It was the wisedome of the best
morall Philosophers not to place felicity in
Fortune, because of vncertainties, for hee is
onely happie, that cannot be miserable.



CHAP. VI.
Of King Henries remisse and colde
proceeding in the worke of re|formation.
_FIRST, there is nothing in the
Earth more certaine then the
vncertainty of al earthly things.
For Man (one of the best of
Gods Creatures, in respect of the excellen|cie
of his reasonable soule) doth so often
times change the condition of his life, as if
he were not of that excellencie, nor had not
that power of Iudgement and vnderstan|ding
which he hath. And this is Gods worke
in the depth of his wisedome, to whom one|ly
all things are certaine, and with whom
there is no shadow of change. God reser|uing
to himselfe the secrets of those things

whereof his will is we shall be ignorant, im|parting
onely so much to vs his creatures,
as may serue for the worke of his seruice,
he himselfe still guiding vs by his hand of
prouidence, to those ends, whereto his de|cree
hath ordained vs. And by this doth
God giue vs a demonstration of his power,
and our weakenesse, of his power in being
most certaine in all those things, which to vs
are casuall and of our weakenesse, because
we are like the ayre, we breath carryed whi|thersoeuer
it shall please the winde to moue
vs.
Secondly, The truth of this may appeare
(in the Kings particular) who notwithstan|ding
the greatnes of his spirit, and the hono|rable
attempt he had made in the cause of
Religion, whereby he had runne himselfe so
farre in the trauells of that businesse, as that
he could not well retyre, without dishono|rable
shame, the expectation of Christen|dome
seeming to depend much vpon the
Kings continuance in that course: yet euen
then did the King surcease from that Religi|ous
worke, which with so much honorable

successe he had begun. Where it may seeme
strange, that a Prince of his greatnesse,
hauing the aduise of an honorable and wise
councell,The weake|nesse of the Kings reso|lution. should lay vpon his name the im|putation
of weakenesse, not to goe forward
with that whereto his honour was so much
ingaged.
Thirdly, But if we consider the time, and
the difference of opinions in those great
men,The King ruled by per|swasion and not by Iudge|ment. to whom the King did shew himselfe
most gracious, it will then appeare, the
businesse went forward, or not, accor|ding
to the affection of the Kings Fa|uourites.
Fourthly, As in the time of Cardinall
VVolsey,Cardinall Wolsey. a man so great in the fauour of his
Prince, as that our English Chronicles cannot
match him, who in the time of his prospe|rity,
did so possesse the King, as that the
King may be said to saile with no winde but
the Cardinalls, the king being but the bo|dy
to his soule, he mouing it according to
the pleasure of his owne appetite, and ther|fore
at this time was the king all Cardinall,
putting himselfe in Print to defend the Su|premacie

of Popes. But this time did end
with the Cardinals fortunes, who being puft
vp and high swolne with the spirit of ambiti|on,
runne himselfe into strange contempts,
against the Maiesty of his Prince: who fin|ding
him so Cardinallike in pride, and
vaine glory stript him of those honours
which before he so lauishly had giuen him,
translating his fauour vpon Thomas CranmerThomas Cranmer.
Arch-Bishop of Canterburie, whom the king
finding Religious, honest, and learned, gaue
his opinion good authority.
Fifthly, And at this time the Protestants
Religion, began to haue the fauour of the
Kings protection: yet by reason of the
peaceable Nature of this Man,D. Cranmer. and because
of many other important considerations of
inconuenience; the cause of Religion went
not with that prosperity forward, as other|wise
it might. For howsoeuer we may iustly
conceiue of this learned man, that he wan|ted
neither spirit nor power, to trauell in the
most important affaires of State, the which
hee hath well declared by his resolute and
learned proceedings, in the Kings diuorse:

yet considering in what termes the State
then stood, and the particular condition of
his State, it will appeare that a necessary pro|uidence
of his own security, did inforce him
to a violent patience, and to silence and
suppresse his zealous spirit, which otherwise
would haue ventured vpon much more ha|zard.
Sixthly, For at this time Cranmer contrarie
to the lawes then inforce, was married, and
did liue with his wife to the great hazard of
his life: and this was one respect why hee
suffered so much the practise of his ene|mies,
keeping good correspondence, and
indifferent fauour, least his Mariage should
be called in question, whereby both his state
and life had beene exposed, into a danger
most eminent.
Seuenthly, And if any man obiect that
these regards of Cranmer proceeded from his
feare of temporall losse, and that he fainted
in the maine execution of his Christian
Office. I answer, that no feare but a Chri|stian
prouidence was the cause of this wari|nesse;
For he might well know, that if hee

proceeded in the difference of Religion by
violent and forcible meanes; he should then
haue had the whole power of the contrary
faction bent against him: and being (by rea|son
of his marriage) within the danger of
law, it could not be auoided but the seueri|tie
of the law should haue proceeded against
him.
Eighthly, Yet notwithstanding when the
necessarie care of Religion did require him,
there was no respect could binde him from
his earnest indeauours, as may wel appeare,
by this most resolute opposing against the
Statute of the sixe Articles. So that Cran|mer
(in true estimation) hath well deserued,
and worthily acquitted himselfe of all im|putation;
yet by reason of these occasions,
hee could not doe that, which the
opportunity of the Kings fauour did offer
him.
Ninthly, Vpon this aduantage Stephen
GardinerStephen Gardiner. builds his strength, who by obser|uance,
and cunning insinuation, shifting
himselfe into the Kings fauour, got great au|thority
in the State, and according to the

nature of his working spirit, troubles the
waters of peace of fish for Romish Religi|on,
whereto in his heart he was much incli|ned.
And this man,Gardiner a great Politi|tian. (not like Cranmer but
Matchiuellike) grounded in the secrets of Pol|licie,
seemes what he is not, and is content to
proportion himselfe to the fashions of the
time, with purpose to alter that fashion. And
this howsoeuer it were a thing very disho|nest
especially in the office of a Bishop, yet
was it a very pollitique Regard, and that
miste whereby he wrought all his inchant|ments,
for by his obseruance hee continued
in the Kings fauour, and by that fauour, he
erected the whole frame of his Policies.
Tenthly,The sixe Ar|ticles. And from this cause had the
sixe Articles beginning. Articles so bloodie,
as the letters in them, cannot number the
blood which was shed in England for them,
whereby may appeare the greatnesse of Ste|phen
Gardiners wit, that could make the King
sayle with a contrary winde, and destroy that
cause which before he had protected: and
this was, notwithstanding Cranmer his oppo|site
had then great fauour with the king, and

the highest authority and place in the king|dome.
Eleuenthly, Another of the Kings Fauou|rites
in those times of difference, was Sir
Thomas More then Lord Chancellor of Eng|land.Sir Thomas Moore.
A gentleman (in respect of his natu|ral
ornaments) worthy of much honour, for
besides the beauty of his learning, which in
great personages is very deseruing; he had
so good a moderation and temper in all his
actions,The excelle~t ornaments in Nature in Sir Thomas Moore. as no aduersity could deiect him,
neither any prosperity make him lesse in the
vse of regard, and ciuill humanity. And
notwithstanding hee was diuers from me in
that profession which I hold for truth, yet
because I write the truth of Historie, it were
very vnworthy in me to obscure, the deser|uings
of any man,The error of such as write Historie. into which error many o|thers,
and especially such as haue recorded
the passage of those times, haue vnaduisedly
falne, traducing the persons of men for their
opinions sake, and making them altogether
euill, that in many commendable things
were excellent. And because that all good
things are from God, (who giueth them ac|cording

to the pleasure of his will) it were
therefore much iniury to obscure the good|nesse
of God, wheresoeuer it shall please
him to place it, and this I write in fauour of
truth,Truth the life of all History. which may be well said to be the life,
and true mouing soule of all Historie.
Twelfthly, This Sir Thomas Moore how|soeuer
he was an enemy to the truth of the
Gospell,Moore an euemie to the Protestant Religion. yet if we compare him with Stephen
Gardiner, the comparison will make Sir
Thomas Moore lesse euill, the other being so
monstrous in his wicked practises; for the
one made conscience to equiuocate and dis|semble
himselfe, of which the other made
no reckoning. Sir Thomas vtterly refusing
the oath of Supremacie,The vnequal comparison betweene Moore and Gardiner. because in conscience
he thought he might not take it; Gardiner
had the like witnesse of his conscience yet
did take it, and therefore Stephen by dissem|bling
saued his life, which the other (by
plaine expressing himselfe lost. So that both
these, though they conspire one end, yet in
themselues are they very diuerse, the one
with a manly resolution, and with the witnes
of his blood profest himselfe and his resolu|tion,

the other by swearing and for swearing
to banne and disclaime that, which (in his
purpose) was the marke whereto hee shot
himselfe and his euill pollicies: the one en|ding
all opposition in his owne voluntary
death: the other by subtilty continuing his
euill life, that life being the death of many
the deare Children of God.
13. Another highly in the Kings fauour,
and most worthy of high fauour, was the
Lord Cromwell,Lord Crom|well. a man so resolute in the worke
he had begunne, as neuer any did pursue a
holy businesse with better Spirit, who not|withstanding
the greatnesse of his enemies,
who after the fashion of all Courts, enuie
such most, vnto whom the Prince is most
gratious, and then most, when the degrees
of honour are deriued vpon any of meane
beginning:In modera|tion. yet so could this man rule the
prosperity of his fortunes, as neither in ge|nerall
opinion, was he thought proudly to
delight them, nor yet not to vnderstand
what those honours were, which the Kings
fauour had giuen him. So aduised was he
in the passage of his honourable life, as that

use (which seeth the least aduantage) could
neuer finde iust occasion (though occasions
were sought) to scandalize his reputation,
in the generall opinion of good men. And
howsoeuer God did suffer the euill of his e|nemies
to preuaile ouer his life, yet neuer to
the death of his honourable remembrance,
to whose Godly care, all the louers of Reli|gion
in Christendome are beholding,England be|holding to the labours of the Lord Cromwell. espe|cially
the English Nation, he being a prin|cipall
instrument, whereby the King was
moued to reforme Religion.
14. In this mans time the Religious then
liuing had great hope of prosperity in their
holy cause,In this time Religion did proceed well. aswell in respect of his diligence
to that end directed, as also of the Kings in|clinable
nature, which did seeme to con|sent
with the honourable desires of the
Lord Cromwell, intertaining him in all fauou|rable
regard, giuing him names, and places
of high honour, whereby his godly cares
went the better forward hauing the strength
of the Kings authority, which he applyed to
no other end, but that God might receiue
honour, in restoring the truth of his seruice,

and that the king might not receiue disho|nour
in aba~doning the protection of faith,
whereof God by the sentence of his enemie
had made him defe~dor.His constan|cie in one course. And this good cause,
did this good man prosecute, with the best
stre~gth of his indeauor, not regarding his life
more then God that gaue it, nor the honours
of his life, more then the honors of his king,
from whose bou~ty his honors were deriued.
15. Thus we see the diuersity in the king,
whereby he grew remisse in following this
holy care,Diuersity of opinions cause of the Kings vn|constancie. which was because of the diuersi|tie
of opinions in those men, whom the king
most trusted in the state, he suffering himself
to be driuen against the currant of his owne
streames, by the violence of other mens per|swasions.
16. And here is offered a large conside|ration
of the Kings Nature, who notwith|standing
his great spirit, and his many other
honourable deseruings, he had this infirmi|tie.
That he would be induced to doe those
things,The Kings infirmitie. which were much disagreeing in
themselues, and to goe forward and back|ward
in one course, and suffer himselfe to be





moued, whether the violence of other mens
affections would carrie him, sometime for,
sometimes against Religion: and by this he
gaue an open demonstration of the weake|nesse
of his nature For there is no alterati|on
in a State that is not dangerous,Euery alte|ration in a state is dan|gerous. and then
is the danger most, when the greate ones
(great in authority and neere in the fauour
of the Prince) deuide themselues. For dif|ference,
if it be not compounded by the aw|full
Maiesty of the Prince, it will growe to
faction,  by consequence to open breach.
And though the Prince so gouerne, that
they dare not come to open difference, yet
will they worke by conspiracie, and secret
practise the confusion of each other. For
where faction is, there can be no assurance,
 men wil seek to assure themselues though
it be by the fall of others; And this euill is
best preuented by the prouidence of the
Prince; who when hee seeth deformity in
the body of the State, and that of necessity
there must bee alteration, to make such
choice of instruments, as best loue the cure,
least otherwise in steade of physicke they ad|minister

poyson, and so not cure, but de|stroy
the body diseased.
17. And this was the Kings errorThe Kings error. (who
though his purpose to reforme was good,
yet the course he tooke was not good, ma|king
ill choice of particulers to whose trust
he commended that businesse, some of them
being Protestants, some Papists; so that the
King may bee said to build with one hand,
and to cast downe with another, to reforme
Religion and to deforme it againe. And
therefore this aduice I dare giue the best
Prince in the world. Let those you loue best, and
trust most, be one in themselues and one with their
Soueraigne, and worke not vpon the foundation
Truth by contrarie meanes, for hee that so buil|deth,
buildeth Babel, that is, confusion, and not
the walles of Ierusalem.


Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. to intertaine and beginne a Re|ligious
worke, is both an honourable
and a holy attempt, but to finish it is
more, because it is possible, that vnworthy
men may vndertake and retire: But Pietie,
is not Pietie, if not constant. For no vertue
is rewarded but perseuerance.
Secondly, To faint in the prosecution of
a Religious cause, is of all cowherdice the
most shamefull and recreant, because in all
such quarrells. God is our Generall, and
doth arme his souldiers in compleate secu|rity.
Thirdly,Pollitique. A Prince that hath many about
his person, cannot but must haue much diffe|rence
in their quallities: his pollitique parte
is to obserue, and iudge the difference, and
to distinguish them to such seruice in the
State, as may make them emulous to
exceede, and not enuious to extirpe the

prosperities of one another.
Fourthly, It hath beene thought good
Pollicie, that in a Senate or Counsell of State,
it were good to haue men of opposite Iudge|ment,
because it doth prouoke both facti|ons,
from exact declaration of their best in|deauours.
This, in a state meerely pollitique
may haue pretence, but in a Religious State
it hath none; because it is impossible to goe
to one God, in one truth, by contrarie
steppes.
Fifthly, It were dishonourable and dange|rous
for a Prince, that hath his state free,
and in quiet to dissemble or to deuide
himselfe to contrarieties, because hee
that doth not declare himselfe certaine
to one, doth remaine suspected of all, and
doth giue a generall hope to generall
varieties.
Sixthly,Morall. The errour and vice is grea|ter
in retyring from vertuous procee|dings,
then the vertue is to vndertake
them. For wee are tempted by all rea|son
to vndertake them, but by none to
leaue them.

Seuenthly, Hee that composeth him|selfe
of contrarieties, doth weare a mon|strous
Shape; for humanitie and ciuill So|cietie
is bound to the Rules of vertue,
as Pietie and Religion to the Rules of
GOD.




CHAP. VII.
Of the sixe Articles, and the euill
that thereof insued.
_FIRST, the originall cause of
this euill was pretendedThe cause pretended of the sixe Ar|ticles. to be
a remedy, against the many
Sects of Religion, which then
began to multiply, when Religion was in
restoring; the State whereof being vnset|led,
gaue occasion that many busie Spirits,
according to their seuerall Iudgements,
would diuersly determine, what was the true
forme of Gods Seruice, and what was not,
whereof it came to passe, that many idle and
grosse opinions,The cause of manie grosse and sencelesse o|pinions. had many that would stifly
adheare to this or that, according as their
blinde iudgements did direct them. For it
hath euer beene and euer will be, the nature

of the worst vnderstanding people, to desire
innouation, and euer to affect that most,
which hath most singularity,The nature of the Vulgar euer opposing
the iudgement of the learned, and the pow|er
of lawfull authority; and this is a naturall
Antipathy betweene the base and the Noble,
the foolish and the wise, the bad and the bet|ter
sort of people.
Secondly, To cureAn euil cure this disease in the State
of England, was very needfull, but the care
they applyed was both vnlawfull, and very
preiudiciall, laying such salue to the soare,
as made the wound wider, and the griefe
much more sensible. For if wee remember
the whole storie of King Henries Life, there is
not any other Act that euer passed the con|sent
of a Parliament, so dishonourable to the
King, and of like offence to the Catholike
Faith, as was this of the sixe Articles,Sixe Arti|cles. especi|ally
then when the King had set his Princely
hand to the worke of reformation; where|by
he did (in a manner) disclaiming his for|mer
proceedings, pulling downe the holy
frame, which with so much labour hee had
formerly erected.

Thirdly, Yet so strong is the power of per|swasion,The power of perswasion.
especially in them wee trust, as that
oftentimes wee suffer our selues to be led to
those ends, that greatly disaduantage vs.
And this is well seene in this Act of the
Kings, which in truth did altogether tend to
the pleasure of euill men about him, and
not to his honour, nor the good of his King|domes;
he being thus perswaded by Stephen
Gardiner pretending thereby a prouident
good, but intending fire, blood, and persecu|tion
to the cause of Religion, and to the
holy Professors thereof.
Fourthly, For these Articles (whereto the
King did inioyne his Subiects to confirme
them) were all of them contrary to the Ca|tholike
Faith of the Protestants Religion, be|ing
no better then the Ladders whereby the
Bishops of Rome, haue ascended the stepps of
reputation, and worldly greatnesse; some of
them being for his gaine, others for his re|gard,
all of them the limmes of Pollicie, and
none of them proportionable to the rule of
the Catholike Religion. And therefore was
Stephen Gardiner much deceiued, when hee

thought to square out Truth, by false Rules;
making these ArticlesThe sixe Ar|ticles what they were. to iudge who was in
the Catholike Faith, yet these themselues not
Catholike, but rather worldly inuentions and
trickes of Pollicie.
 The first, auowing Transubstantiation, a
doctrine as new as the name, and but of late
yeares inuented.
 The second, denied the Sacrament to be
exhibited in both kinds to Lay-men, contra|rie
both to the commandement of Christ at
the first institution, as also contrary to the
practise of the Primitiue Church for many
hundreds of yeares.
 The third, that Priests ought not to mar|rie,
contrary to Saint Paules opinion, the
practise of the Church, and the iudgement
of holy Scripture.
 The fourth, that vowes ought to be kept,
and this hath onely a respect to a pollitique
end, being that foundation whereupon is
builded their monasteries and the wicked
rabble of lazie Fryers, and Nunnes.
 The fifth, that priuate Masses were neces|sarie,
and agreeable to Gods Word: an in|uention

to get money onely, and ridiculous
to the iudgement of all learning.
The sixth, of the necessity of auriculer 
confession. A Pollitique deuise whereby the
Pope hath vnderstanding in all states, making
his Priests intelligences, and binding the
consciences of Christians, to that slauerie,
from which God hath made them free.
And these were those Articles, which were
made the Tryers of Christian Religion,
whereto euery man was to giue his consent,
or else to haue the iudgement of law as fel|lons,
being adiudged (by the sentence of
the Church) Heretickes, cast out from the fa|uour
of God, and from the society of the
Catholike Church.
Fifthly, By this then may appeare the e|uill
that redounds to a state when the Coun|sell
of a Prince is deuided,The euil that redounds to a State when the Counsell are diuided. not conspiring
one but diuers ends, especially then; when
the Prince puts off the power of his Maie|stie,
and suffers himselfe to be led by the ea|sie
perswasions of them neere him by his fa|uour.
For if the King had had as much
the spirit of Diuinitie, as he had of Maiestie,

he would neuer haue had both a Cranmer,
and a Garidiner, a Cromwell and a Moore, to or|der
him in the affaires of his Church and
kingdome. But according as he had bene re|solued
in Religion he would only haue made
choice of such for his counsell, as had con|spired
one and the same end with him their
Soueraigne, neither is it good in the wise|dome
of state,The care of State. to entertaine them neere vs in
loue and place, whom we finde to farre from
vs in the opinion of Truth, because there is
no obligation, can make such men assured,
that worke to bring vs to a course against
our purpose, giuing vs the reines onely so
farre as may leade vs to their desired ends.
Sixthly, If this man and his euil practise
had not preuailed more with the King then
the better perswasion of the Lord Cranmer
and Cromwell, the reformationGardiner the meanes to hinder the King from reformation. of Religion
had not beene letted in so hopefull a procee|ding,
neither had the King and Parlyament
passed any such Act so bloodie, as was this
of the sixe Articles: whereby the King did
blurre the honour of that reputation he had
formerly gotten, and retyred himselfe in the

pursuite of that enterprize, which worthily
had made him very famous. And this doth
proue the greatnesse of his euill wit,Gardiners wit. that
made this alteration in the Kings Nature,
and doubtlesse if God had giuen this man
grace to haue loued honestie and truth; he
had many other quallities of good com|mendation,
which would haue bene most
flourishing in a man of holy life,Gardiners gifts. as his lear|ning,
wit, and spirit, whereby he was well fit|ted
to trauell in State businesse, but misap|plying
those to vngodly ends, they were the
defects and blemishes in the person that so
had them, and very pestilent to the State
where such men haue authority.
Seuenthly, And if we remember the time
of these sixe Articles, we shall finde it plenti|full
in the Records of Holy Martyrs, that shed
their blood in opposition of that false do|ctrine,
neither wanted they some likewise
at that time that suffered death in defence
of the Popes Supremacie.The Religio~ at this time in England, was neither the Protesta~t nor the Papist So that the Reli|gion
then profest in England, was neither
that of the Protestant, nor this of the Papist,
for at that time one and the same Law, did

denounce Iudgement against the maintai|ners
of both kindes, condemning the Prote|stant
for not subscribing to the sixe Articles,
and the Papist for not allowing the Kings
Supremacie. And therefore good cause had
he of admiration, who seeing at this time in
England three Protestants and three Papists
to die at one time, and in one place, and by
the sentence of one Law, for their consci|ence,Three Pro|testants and three Papists die at one time and in one place for their Consci|ence.
admireth thus: Deus bone, quomodo hic
viuunt gentes, hc suspenduntur Papistae, illic
comburuntur Antepapistae. Iesus saith hee) how
doe men liue here,Acts and Mon pag. 1375. for there hangs the Papist, and
heere burnes the Protestant for Religion.
Eighthly, And this came to passe because
the Kings counsell, were deuided into parts,
one halfe Protestants, the other Papists.The Kings Counsell, the one halfe Protestants the other Papists. The
Protestants maintaining the Act for the kings
Supremacie. The Papists that of the sixe Ar|ticles,
either partie executing the iudgeme~t
of the Lawe, according as in their seuerall
opinions they were affected: whereof insu|ed
the greatest calamitie that could be in a
Christian State,The miserie of these times no man making conscience
of Religion in either profession that esca|ped

punishment, onely such were free and
vnder protection, who either did dissemble,
or conforme them to the fashion of the
time. And this had not bene if the Prince
and his Lords had conspired one end, for
take vnity away, you take Truth with it,Tolle vnum, tolle verum. and
disagreements doe most assuredly presage
losse if not destruction.
Ninthly, But God who denied to his serua~t
Dauid the building of his Temple, because
his hands had bene in blood, and did re|serue
the honour of that worke for Salomon
his Sonne,2 Sam. 7. 5. a Prince of peace; So in this work
of reformation. God would not King Hen|rie
to effect it, because he had bene in blood,
and Warre, as was Dauid Salomons Father,
but he reserues it for King Edward,God would not that K. Henry but that King Edward should finish this refor|mation. a true Sa|lomon
in the wisedome and iustice of Salo|mon;
And this Prince did God ordaine to
restore the truth of his seruice. King Henrie
his Father (as did Salomons Father) preparing
onely matter for this heauenly worke, which
his Princely Sonne and not himselfe was to
finish.
Tenthly, And howsoeuer King Henry did

not go forward to this worke with that con|stancie,
as the worthinesse of the cause de|serued:
being letted by the enuie of euill
Ministers, yet hath he well deserued honou|rable
remembrance, hauing done more
than any otherKing Henry deserued well in doing more then was done be|fore him by any other. Prince in Christendome be|fore
him euer did. And if wee consider the
kings Nature (being most resolute and stiffe
in any businesse he vndertooke) there neuer
was any of his Predecessors better fitted to en|ter
into such a businesse of stomacke as hee
was, neither can it be said truely of the king
that he failed in this enterprise, for he per|formed
all he vndertooke, and would haue
done more if either his own opinion, or the
counsell of his friend, had further directed
him. And therefore hath he done honoura|bly,
in doing more than before was done,
and in doing all he had vndertaken, wherein
he exceeded the expectationThe King exceeded ex|pectation. that all men
had of him, it being a matter thought im|possible,
to preuaile (in this) against the
Pope, at this time a power so absolute, as that
both kings and Emperours, had before fai+led
in the like attempt.

Eleuenthly, And therefore I verily be|lieue
that God by his extraordinary power
was with King Henrie, making him (in this)
inuincible and powerfull to preuaile in iust
opposition, he looking downe with his eyes
of iudgement, vpon the pride and open wic|kednesse
of Papacie, and hating that the or|der
of his seruice should be so corrupted, in|cites
and assists the king,God assisted the King. to reforme what
the iniquity of others had deformed, so
grosse and sencelesse was the Liturgie of the
Church in those blacke daies of ignorance
and blinde superstition, as would grieue any
true Catholike Christian to consider, and
shame the better sort of Papists themselues to
remember. And therefore it is reason we ac|knowledge
our dutifull thankes to God for
altering this state of misery, into a conditi|on
most happie and prosperous:The Kings desert. and that
we honour their remembrance, whom God
did vse as fit instruments to this holy and
most Religious worke.


Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. It doth not conclude, but it
doth argue against Pietie and the Truth
of Religion, where there is seuerity in
execution. For as God is both most iust and
most mercifull; So all Ecclesiasticall prose|cutions
must haue temper, and indifferent
mixture.
Secondly, Calamities, Death, and persecuti|ons
cannot effect that in the Catholike
Church, which they commonly effect in
Pollitique States; to the one they are a cause
of decay and ruine; to the other of inlarge|ment,
for there is difference in the forme of
Gods generall prouidence, and of the par|ticular
care of his Church.
Thirdly, To ordaine or decree Articles,
Canons, or Statutes to iudge and binde the
conscience, it is necessary to be directed by
spirituall instruction. For though authori|ty
be in euery Prince, yet iudgement is not.

Fourthly, It is dangerous for a Prince to
commit the forming of spirituall constituti|ons,
to disagreeing mindes; for diuersity of
opinions (when it goeth by suffrage) doth
vtterly destroy the sincerity of al co~clusions.
Fifthly, It hath bene and is the PollitiquePollitique.
practise of the Romane State, to support the
bodie of her greatnesse with most terrible
persecutions, the effect doth iudge the
cause, and that pollicie is found wicked, in
the daily fall and lessening, of that antichri|stian
Empire.
Sixthly, Tolleration of Religion, is (in
some States) reputed a necessarie pollicie,
but a Religious Prince that doth loue God
more then State, can neuer tollerate that
pollicie, for God doth hate all conniuencie,
and hee is lame in truth, that halteth be|tweene
two opinions.
Seuenthly, It is necessary wisedome for a
Prince, to make difference betweene obedi|ent
and disobedient subiects, in the case of
Religion, yet is there a great difference to be
had in punishing disobedient opinions, and
disobedient facts.

Eighthly, It doth much respect a mans
particuler happinesse, to auoide singulari|tie,
and not easily to bee drawne from the
common opinion: because, (naturally) we
haue a liking of our selues, and a dislike of
others.
Ninthly,Morall. To a ciuill happinesse, is re|quired
to be able to beare all fortunes, and
not to contemne them. For it is not possi|ble
for Fortune with her infinite occasions,
to subduce the greatnesse of a vertuous
minde.
Tenthly, A vertuous disposition cannot
be supprest by opposition, for there is no|thing
can strength Patience but exercise.




CHAP. VIII.
Obseruations out of the generall view
of this latter time of King
Henries Reigne.
_FIRST, the importance of this
difference betweene the King of
England and the Pope, was such
as that all Christendome, had
earnest expectation what would be the issue
of so strange an opposition; it being thought
very dangerous in the King,The difficul|tie in the Kings at|tempt. to oppose him|selfe
against a power so generall, as the Pope
then was, and in a quarrell wherein no
Prince in Christendome would assist him.
And doubtlesse in respect of State practise,
the attempt was very hazerdous, and of lit|tle
hope to bring it to that honourable end,
as (by the fauour of God) hee did wherein

the King did exceede the expectation of all
men saue himself, and erected the Trophyes
of his honour higher, then any one before
him durst reach. And therefore this dan|gerous
(but honourable attempt, was not
by the prouidence of State, or by any earthly
wisedome but by the power of heauen,This opposi|tion was or|dered by the power of God. God
leading him thorough many dangers, and
vnlikelihoods, to an end most holy and ho|nourable,
whereby God would seeme to
make the worke his owne, and to denie to
Pollicie, and the vaine contriuements of men,
the honour thereof, who (commonly) proud
themselues to much in their owne opinion
of wisedome,The wise|dome of pol|licie is foo|lishnesse with God. which with God is found ligh|ter,
than vanitie and follie it selfe.
Secondly, For the Kings particular, it may
appeare how much hee did hazard the
peace, and fortunes of his kingdome, in gi|uing
aduantage to them that loued him not,The King gaue aduan|tage to his enemies.
to combine with his great enemie the Pope,
who with all diligence sought to make the
King odious to all other Princes, sowing the
seedes of enuie in the hearts of all men, a|gainst
this practise of the Kings, cursing him

from the fauour of God,The Popes Curses vpon King Henry and traducing him
with all dishonor, his euill practise could de|uise.
And this in those times was great disad|uantage;
because the greater parte of the
Kings Subiects thought they were in consci|ence
bound,The power of the Popes censure. to obey the Popes Censure,
whereby the Kings strength (being deuided
in it selfe) became weake,  by this meanes
was the kingdome made fit for forraigne in|uasion.
For this is generall in the practise
of all states, that where wee purpose Warre,
there we must haue faction,Faction the first part of Conquest. for faction is the
first part of Conquest; because there is no
opposition more resolute, then that which is
neerest to it selfe; and therefore of all Warre
the ciuill is most dangerous, being led by
the greatest furie of hate, and the continuall
offer of occasions.
Thirdly,A second Reason. Againe the seuerall Kingdomes
of Christendome at this time were come to
that equality of power, as made them enui|ously
regard one another; not as in the
time of the Romane Emperors, subordinate
to one absolute Prince of all, neither as in the
time before them, when as that which is

now but one,The equall partage of Christen|dome to ma|ny Princes. was many seuerall king|domes.
So equall was the partage to Chri|stian
Princes at this time, and euery State
had need to feare the greatnes of his neigh|bour,
and to take the least aduantage to
lesson him in his reputation and strength,
especially then, when the power of any one,
became extraordinarie; or their reputation
in Armes so fortunate, as might threaten
their Neighbour Nations.
Fourthly,The care of those times This was the care of those
times, and in particular a matter most con|siderable,
betweene those two famous king|domes
of England and France, which Nati|ons
(what by reason of the King of Englands
claime to the Crowne of France,England and France in continuall faction. as also be|ing
both of them prouoked with enuious
honour, to exceede each other in the ho|nour,
of armes;) there hath often bene emu|lation,
and difference, betweene these
neighbour Nations, neuer (almost) conclu|ding
peace, but for pollicie, sometimes ma|king
Sessation from Warre, that they might
againe beginne with greater violence:A pollitique regard. and
therefore would they euer combine them|selues

with such, when the enemies had
most reason to feare,England with Spaine, France with Scotland co~|federates. as England would con|federate
with Spaine, and France with Scot|land,
the neighbours of each other, being
most enuious one of another. The wisedome
of State trusting them best, who liue furthest
from vs,The aduan|tage the French had of the En|glish, by rea|son of this po|pish quarrell. because they are least able to hurt vs.
The King then may be thought by making
the Pope his enemie, not onely to giue great
aduantage to his enemie the French, but al|so
to deuide himselfe from the loue of all
Christian Princes, the Spanyards and all other
his confederates, for all these were deuided
from him by his diuision, no Prince daring
to support him against the sentence of the
Pope.God and not pollicie orde|red the king. And therefore the King was ruled by
a greater power then that of Pollicie, by the
power of God, which made him both vsefull
and very excellently fit to finish this holy
businesse.
Fifthly,Considerati|ons in respect of the Pope. Againe, in respect of the Pope,
this businesse is very considerable, as that
which for the length of many yeares, did
most importune him, being the first steppe
of his discent, from the honour of his vniuer|sall

power, which to himselfe he had appro|priate.
For he could not but foresee the dan|ger,The Pope degraded of authority.
whereinto he fell, if the Kings attempt
succeeded, who sought to degrade him
from his vsurped authority: and hee might
thinke that other Princes hauing this presi|dent,
might happily attempt as much as
King Henry had done,The Kings example da~|gerous for the Pope. especially considering
the controuersie was for regallity, which of
all earthly things is most desired, especially
by them who haue loftie place, and whose
spirits are most free and generous. And this
needed speciall preuention in the Pope,The Pope en|uied of Chri|stian Prin|ces.
considering the enuie his greatnesse had pro|cured
him, and the generall dislike was had
of his too much authority, which hee vsed
not for the peace of the Catholike Church, but
vnto many vngodly ends, whereto the
Popes many times aspired.
Sixthly, And therefore did it much im|port
the Pope, to make vp the breach King
Henrie had made, and to calme those trou|bled
Seas, that threaten wracke and desola|tion
to his highest authorities.The Popes diligence. to And surely
there wanted not any diligence the Pope

could vse, make vp this Rent the king
had made, yet was it done with such respect
to the Popes greatnes, as that the king should
rather in his obedience seeke it, then the
Pope out of any demonstration of feare offer
it,The respect the Pope had to the disho|norable yeal|ding. so respectfull was this man of earthly Ma|iesty,
and honour, as hee forgot the vse
of piety and humblenesse, quallities that (of
necessity) are tyed to the persons of all that
truly be Religious.
Seuenthly,How it did import the Pope to con|tinue friend|ly intertaine|ment with the King. In these respects it did much
respect the Pope to continue a friendly inter|tainement
with England, and not to loose a
Member whereof the whole bodie had such
vse, which had supported him many times
against the power of his greatest enemies,
especially in the time of such a Prince, who
had published his loue in print, not onely to
defend the Pope, but also the lawfullnesse of
his vniuersall power, which vniuersally was
disliked. King Henrie offering himselfe with
his two friends Mars Mercurie,The Pope lost the King by his too much neg|lect  pride. the Word,
and the sword, to defend him against all op|position.
And therefore the Pope to loose
such a friend, such a king, and such a defence,

by his too much neglect, and scorne to sa|tisfie
the trouble of that Kings Conscience,
may be thought in his iudgement foolish, in
his life wicked, and in his downefale worthi|ly
punished, and that God willed it, the king
wrought it, and the Pope in despight suffered
it, to the Glory of God, the kings honour,
and the confusion of Antichrist.
Eighthly, From this ouersight of the Popes,
this may be obserued:Authority in an euill per|son ruines it selfe. that authority and
greatnesse in an euill person, ruines it selfe
with his owne weight; neither can the great|nesse
of power stand safe, where it is not sup|ported
by the strength of iustice, and honest
proceeding,A saying of Byas. And that (as Byas saith) pro|motions
declare best what a man is. So it is true,
that where authority is so absolute, that
there is liberty without checke. Then doe
men giue best demonstrations of their Na|tures,
and most apparently discouer their af|fections,How to iudge men.
and to what ends they are most in|clined.
For by the worke we may iudge the
workeman, by the fruit of the Tree, and by
the life, the truth, and holy faith of euerie
man.

Ninthly, Againe, vpon this proud and
ambitious Bishop, may bee obserued, how
God confounds him in his owne practise,God confoun|deth the Popes pollicie he
contriueth to make the King of England his
fast friend,  his prop, wherupon to support
his vnspeakeable pride; but God he deter|mines
otherwise of that King; and leades
him to a worke more holy, honest, and ho|nourable.
The Pope in pollicie intitles him
Defendor of the Catholike Faith, because hee
writ in defence of his vsurped Supremacie,
But God maketh him and his (in deeds) to
defend the true faith, and to denie that Su|premacie.God and the Pope vtterly disagree.
So that what the Pope would haue,
God will not haue, hee commandeth, God
countermandeth, he deuiseth, God dispo|seth
and maketh the King shoote right,
whom the Pope made to leuell wrong. But
before all may bee obserued the Popes false
vnderstanding iudgement, in this case (in
respect of Piety and conscience) how much
he was led from the truth of Religion, and
from the witnesse of Truth (Gods Word)
to maintaine his vniuersall power,Papall supre|premacie gotten by state practise which his
predecessors had by state practise gotten.

For it cannot be but in this, their iudgements
were exceedingly blinded, they hauing no
example of any Church at any time for their
imitation. When the Law was giuen, God
gaue it Moses, to giue Aaron  the people, 
not Aron to giue Moses  the people,  in e|uery
cause both of state  Religion Aron the
Priest was obedient to Moses the Prince, hee
receiuing the dignity of his office from Mo|ses,
vnto whom God gaue power to giue it.
Tenthly, The like order was in the Iewish
Church, where the Prince might iudge the
Priest, and not the Priest the Prince; and so
in the practise of all times, and in all places,
vntill that CHARLES the Great,Charles the Great father of the Popes ambition. breathed
the spirit of Ambition where it is, and where
it hath for many yeares disturbed the peace
of Christendome: yet with such euidence
was this error laid open, to the vniuersall eye
of the world, by the diligence of Martin Lu|ther
and others,Luther. as the Pope could not but
vnderstand it: yet against the witnesse of his
owne conscience,Areason of the Popes ob|stinacie. did he still stifly defend it,
and this was a pollitique regard, least the
world vnderstanding him to faile in a mat|ter

so important, might thereupon call in
question the truth of that opinion, (which
in truth) is the state and strength of that Re|ligion.A principall of Papistrie.
That in precept and doctrine the Pope can|not
erre, if then he had yeelded to haue er|red
in this, he denied the truth of his foun|dation,
without which his greatnesse cannot
stand.
Eleuenthly,The fashion of antient Heretickes. And therefore (after the fa|shion
of antient heretickes) he would not
yeeld to the perswasion of truth, because he
would not haue his iudgement contradi|cted,
and shamed (by recantation to ac|knowledge
himselfe to haue done amisse:)
And this is onely the pride and Stomacke of
the too much authority of these Bishops,The pride of the Pope.
that respect greatnesse more then goodnes,
the world more then God, falshood than
truth, desiring darkenesse to obscure the ma|nie
deformities, wherewith they haue defa|ced
the name of Christian Religion.
Twelfthly,To know how to distinguish good and euil by their ends By this wee may learne to di|stinguish
the good and euill, the holy and
prophane by their end, whereto they princi|pally
aspire; for good men make goodnesse

their onely end whereto they reach, but euil
men make it onely their pretence, and like
the Lapwing, flie most where there Nest is
not, and such hath bene the care of the Ro|mane
Church,The Pope in|tituleth him|selfe the ser|uant of Gods seruants but insulteth ouer Empe|rors. intituling their Bishops, ser|uants
of Gods seruants, yet arrogate princi|pallity
ouer the highest of Gods Creatures;
They professe humility and Christian obe|dience,
but practise a tyrannie vnsupporta|ble.
They call Christian Princes their belo|ued
sonnes, but make them slaues, and ser|uants
to their vngodly wills. And from them
hath the world learned dissimulation  cun|ning
practise;Dissimulati|on commonly in. for wee see that many men
forme themselues very precisely, in the habit
of all Christian duties outwardly to gaine
a reputation, and the honour of high place,
which (when they haue obtained) they cast
off that face of holines, and discouer them|selues
in their true inuentions, such was (and
still is) the practise of Popes,The Popes greatnesse like Nebu|chadnezzars Tree couered the whole Earth. who by the
formes of holinesse, haue got a reputation
in the world, which at length came to the
growth, that it became like Nabuchadnezzars
Tree, to couer the whole earth, and to spread

it ouer all principality;  then in the height
of that prosperity,When great dissemblers dare discouer themselues. they cast off their vizard,
and discouer themselues to be but Pope, and
not Pastors, casting from them the Word,
that they may with more dexterity vse the
sword, with which (like Theeues) they Rob
Christian Princes of that Regality, which
God gaue them.
13. And therefore King Henries procee|dings
were very considerable,The Kings proceedings very impor|tant. whereof it be|houed
the Pope to be verie regardfull, as did
threaten the ruine of that frame, which the
pride and pollicie of his predecessors had
erected:  the rather because the king began
at the top of his dignities,The Kings orderly pro|ceeding. to throw downe
his Supremacie, which had ouertopped the
most soueraigne of al Christian power what|soeuer.
And herein the King may seeme to
vnderstand well what he had to doe, for by
striking the roote he was sure to perish the
branches;The bodie of Popery must needs fall when Supre|macie the head was cut off. and the best way to ruine a house,
is to vndermine the foundation,  in Warre
the victory is sure, when the enemie hath
lost that power wherein his chiefe strength
consisted: and so the body of Popery must


17. For these respects the Christian world
stood mute at the Kings businesse,The Christi|an Princes stood mute at the Kings businesse. no man
daring to set to his helping hand, so much
danger their iudgements could see in at|tempting
it, as that all could bee content to
be spectators, but no actor like King Henry,
euery man hauing earnest expectation, what
would be the issue of so strange and hazer|dous
an enterprize.
18. It is also very considerable,The French had at this time aduan|tage of the English by reason of the Pope. that the
French King had at this time aduantage
offered him, against the King of England.
The King being now in the heate of so great
a businesse, deuided from his confederate
the Pope, vnassisted by any forraigne state,
and in the danger of domesticke troubles,
whereby he was vnfurnished of a great part
of his former strength: And considering al|so
the honour the Kings of England had
got, by the conquest of France,  the strong
emulation of those two Neighbour Nati|ons;England and France en|uious of one anothers glo|ri.
being both of them enuious of one a|nothers
reputation, and greatnesse: the En|glish
being euer fortunate in those French
quarrells, and the French most desirous to

suppresse the growing reputation of the En|glish.
And therefore it may seeme, at this
time was offered an occasion to the French,
to recouer their reputation in Armes, and to
repossesse those places, which the English
then held in France; yet for all these occa|sions,
so fortunate was the King and his
people,The King fortunate. as no mis-fortune at that time did
disaduantage our Nation. God protecting
it against the euill, and beyond the expecta|tion
of all men.
19. And lastly, the King sending his Em|bassadours
to all Christian Princes,The Kings care to satis|fie the Prin|ces of Chri|stendome. to giue
them satisfaction; for that he had done, was
a care very Princely and Christian, for by
this he preuented, the many slanderous con|structions
that otherwise would haue censu|red
him; he himselfe by his Embassadours,
declaring the true purpose of his enterprize.The reason thereof.
And this was a demonstration, that the king
reputed such whom he desired to satisfie as
his kingly Brethren, and that all of them be|ing
powers, immediately vnder God, in
their owne Christian Kingdomes, it was rea|son
he should giue them a Christian satisfa|ction,

that he proceeded not in these diff|rences,
without the perswasion of Learned,
and Religious iudgement,A pollitique discretion. neither was it euill
order in the King to haue first effected what
he ment, and then to satisfie opinion. For if
hee had sent for their aduise before hee had
attempted it, he had then lost the honour of
the enterprise, and had either tied himselfe
to the pleasures of other men, or else haue
opposed against them all, the first had bene
dishonorable; the other very dangerous.



CHAP. IX.
In what State King Henrie left his
Kingdomes to the next Defendor
of the Faith, King Ed|ward
the Sixth.
_FIRST, it may seeme strange
to him that shall reade this Hi|storie,
to consider the state of
Religion, in this last time of
King Henries Reigne: Religion lying then
as it were in equall ballance, inclinable to be
sweighed, according as shall please the next
succeding Prince to fauour it. For as yet Re|ligion
was not reformed, but onely a prepa|ration
made for reformation;Religion at this time but in reforming the King ha|uing
taken from the Pope his Supremacie,
and his vniuersall authority, but not the
number of his idle ceremonies, insomuch as

the Pope may be said to haue his head then
broken,The Pope had his head broken. in loosing his authority, but his taile
yet vnperisht, reteining still the number of
his fabulous obseruances. And if I were de|manded
what was the Religion then pro|fest
in England, I could not giue it name, be|ing
no better then a Farrago, or a Religion
compounded of many diuers; the State be|ing
yet vnsetled, and but mouing to a re|formation,
for both that of the Papist and
this of the Protestant indured like extre|mities.
Secondly, And the reason was, because
the lawes then in force, were occasioned by
men diuers in opinion,Diuers law|makers, di|uers lawes. yet neere in the
greatnesse of place, either part persecuting
or prosecuting according to their seuerall
affections. So that men zealous in any pro|fession
of Religion, were in danger of
Law, and such (onely) secure that made
their conscience yeeld to generall practise,
and opinion, whereby the best and most
conscionable, had least fauour in the iudge|ment
of those lawes,The euill gouernement of the state at this time.  whereby the Com|mon-Wealth
did often lose her most vsefull

members, to the detriment of State, and a|gainst
all aduice both of pollicie and pietie.
Thirdly, For that the King was of himselfe
otherwise inclined,The King himselfe o|therwise in|clined. may appeare both by
the testimonie of them, neere his person, as
also by the witnesse of his owne words, as in
particuler to Bruno, Embassadour from Iohn
Fredericke Duke of Saxonie,D. of Saxony to whom implo|ring
his aide against the Emperour; hee an|swered,
that if the quarrell betweene him,
and the Emperor,Master Fox Act. and Mon. pag. 1478. were onely for Religion,
he should then stand to it stoutly, and hee
would in that quarrell take his part.
Fourthly, It may appeare also by the kings
dislike of such men as had withheld his for|wardnesse
to reforme,The Kings dislike of Gardiner as in speciall Stephen
Gardiner, whom the king now found to con|triue
against him, and to haue haled him
on to those ends he most disliked. And ther|fore
the King (before his death) did with|draw
his fauour from him. And howsoe|uer
he forgaue him the forfeit of his life, yet
did hee for euer after discountenance him,
causing his name to bee rased out of the
number of Executors, to whose trust hee had

commend the execution of his last will.The repen|tance  sor|row the King made for the Lord Crom|well, Be|sides
the repentance and sorrow, the King
made for the Lord Cromwells death, whom
he had found so faithfull and fit for this bu|sinesse
as neuer any Prince was better furni|shed:
the King finding the want of so choice
an instrument, would often (in griefe of
words) say, hee wanted his Cromwell in so
needfull a businesse as he had vndertaken.
Fifthly, And therefore assuredly the king
had good affection to reforme the enormi|ous
abuses of the Church,The Kings affection. and to haue pur|ged
it from all Idolatrous seruice. But God
reseruing that for the honour of Prince Ed|ward,
the next Defendor, accepted of the
Kings good purpose. And that God who
gaue him will to desire well, and his sonne
the honour to finish well, gaue them both
(we trust) his grace to die well,  to breath
their soules into his hands of mercie. And in
these tearmes did the king leaue the state to
the next Defendor his Princely Sonne,How the K. left the state. a
state full of storme and great businesse, ha|uing
entred so farre into an honourable
passage, as that the Prince, who was to inhe|rit

his Fathers cares, could not in the termes
of honour but second the most honourable
attempt of his Father.
Sixthly,Whether the King defen|ded the faith or not. It may bee demanded now whe|ther
King Henrie (according to his new stile)
did defend the Catholike Faith or not, and
in what particulars he best defended it. For it
may be obiected,Obiection. that the King not hauing
reformed Religion, but only in some few par|ticulars
hath not merited the honour of his
stile, because the Catholike Faith was not so
defended in his time, and in his kingdome,
but it indured much affliction. To this I an|swer,
that howsoeuer the king did faile in the
maine execution of his office, yet co~sidering
the greatnes of his attempt, he hath wel de|serued
euerlasting memorie,  to be recor|ded
the first Christian king Defendor of the
Faith,The King the first Christian King Defen|dor of the Faith.  the first that with honour  victory,
dated to oppose himself against the spiritual
power of the Popes,  if we consider the dan|ger
of his attempt, we shall finde it an act of
great spirit  consequence, and such as may
worthily compare with the deeds of antient
Romanes, which were of most admiration and
wonder.

Seuenthly,The King defended the Faith in two particulars. And in these two particulars
hath he principally defended the Catholike
Faith. First, in taking from the enemie of
Faith, authority and greatnes (by the act of
Supremacie) for this (as I haue said) was the
first step to the Popes downefall; and there|fore
by disinabling the enemie of Faith hee
did wel defend it. Secondly, in dissoluing the
wicked assemblies of euill men professing re|ligion,
the Fryers  Monkes, he therein per|formed
the dutie of his Christian office, be|cause
these men did not onely by their euill
life, disgrace the Christian profession, but
like drones idle themselues, yet prodigally
spending the fatte of other mens labours: a
double inconuenience to a Christian state.A double in|conuenience to a Christi|an state.
First, in maintaining such numbers of vnpro|fitable
men. Secondly, in the euill wasting
of that which might wel haue serued, the ne|cessities
of many profitable vses.
Eigthly, And therefore though king Henrie
went forward in this holy busines but slowly,
yet laid he the passage open for his son,The King made way for his Sonne. and
disarmed the enemie of his greatest strength
whereby the next Defendor K. Edward might

the better take from this Thiefe the spoyles
of Christian Princes, wherewith he had made
himselfe appeare most glorious.King Ed|ward finished what his Fa|ther had at|tempted. And so did
that princely Edward, to the glory of his
God, and the perpetuall honor of his prince|ly
name.
Ninthly,A compari|son betweene King Henry and King Edward. Now if I should compare these
two Defendors, the Father K. Henrie, and the
Son K. Edward together, and determine, whe|ther
of them hath better merited, the ho|nour
of their new stile, I shall rather giue the
palme to K. Edward,To finish a good is more then to begin it. because to finish a good,
is more  more deseruing then to begin it.
For though king Henrie did deserue well in
acting his princely part of great Maiesty, yet
did king Edward deserue better, continuing
the Sceane to the last period, euer acting one
and the same part, and not diuers as did king
Henrie his Father.
Tenthly,In respect of greatnes K. Henry was more excel|lent, in re|spect of good|nesse King Edward. Againe, if wee respect greatnesse
in their actions, the Father hath the greater
preheminence; but if goodnes, the son hath
the greater; the Father exceeding his Son, in
respect of Maiesty, and bold attempting; but
the Son his Father, in zealous prosecuting a

holy cause begun. So that betweene these
two, the Father and the Son, was shared both
greatnes  goodnes; both of them hauing,
both these in reasonable proportion, and ei|ther
exceeding other in his particular. King
Henry the Father he taketh from the Pope the
Idol of false religion,King Henry did wound Idolatry, but King Ed|ward de|stroyed it. authority  wealth, by
denying his Supremacie, and by suppressing
of Monasteries, these being his two legges,
whereupon he did support the body of his
greatnes. The Pope wanting these supporters
(Idol-like) falls to the ground where the king
there leaueth him. But king Edward with
better zeale entring Gods House, and fin|ding
this Idol bodie, and idle body in the
Church of England, casteth out that body
from the Church, which his Father left woun|ded
in the Church, cleansing the holy San|ctuary,
which by false seruice had bene long
prophaned This holy Edward (in respect of
his youth and great place) admirable for his
wisedome  holy life. And therfore did king
Henry deserue well, and somewhat defended
the Catholike Faith. But king Edward deserued
better and defended it best.


Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. It is no note of the Catholike
Church, neither of piety, to inflict ad|uersity,
disgrace, and death: but of the
contrarie, For God doth giue to his owne
these little demonstrations, to remember
them his iudgements, and to make them the
better relish eternall felicities.
Secondly, God in the worke of his iudge|ments,
doth indifferently vse the seruice of
good and badd instruments, but in his mer|cies
he doth euer imploy his best: for Mer|cie
is his most excellent attribute, and doth
reioyce against Iudgement.
Thirdly,Pollitique. It hath bene the most generall
and the most Pollitique practise of our times,
to disioyne a Prince, from his power, and by
Faction to make a Fraction in his state, for
a faction doth euer destroy one parte, if not
both.
Fourthly, It is a Court error, and (almost)

common in all States, that men with gene|rall
acclamation, applaude both the loue
and hatred of the Prince, wheresoeuer hee
shall place them; but a wise Prince will sus|pect
all such assentations, because they in|tend
but to please, and not to profit.
Fifthly,Morall. He that would continue himselfe
in generall estimation must bee both actiue
and passiue. For he that can suffer well is a|ble
to confound Enuie.
Sixthly, The same degrees of vertue are
not giuen to all men alike, but to all men
there is giuen a possibility of hauing ver|tues
in some degree, because to euery man
is giuen an vnderstanding soule, which may
apprehend it.




CHAP. X.
A Comparison betweene King
Henrie the Eighth of England,
and Frederick (sirnamed
Barbarossa) Emperour
of Germanie.
_FIRST, these two mighty Prin|ces,
King Henry of England and
the Emperour Frederick Barba|rossa,The King  the Emperor famous for their bold Attempts.
were most notable in these
last Ages, for the greatnesse of their Spirits,
and for the boldnesse of their attempting,
both of them attempting one fortune, but
with great difference of succesfull fortune;
and both of them attempting with such re|solute
stoutnesse, as that in themselues they
are of neere comparison, though in their
fortunes they were not comparable. The

Emperour hee attempts against Pope Alexan|der,The Empe|rour against Pope Alex|ander, the King against Pope leme~t They both quarrell the Pope for So|ueraigntie.
The King against Pope Clement, in this
they conspire, but the Emperour failed in his
enterprize, wherein the King got the gar|land,
and triumphed, and in this they agree
not. The Emperour he quarrells the Pope for
Soueraignety, and because he thought it in|dignity
and dishonour, to this imperiall
place, to be crowned and confirmed by the
Popes allowance. King Henry his quarrel was
for Supremacie, thinking it dishonour to
his kingly dignity, to be second to any man
in his own dominions, and in this they ve|ry
neerely consent.
Secondly,The King intended re|formation, the Empe|rour did not. Againe, the King he intends a
further care then this businesse of State,
the reformation of Christian Religion, the
which he found to be much corrupted. The
Emperour had not this good intention, but
trauells principally to reobtaine the Soue|raigne
liberty of his place, which by the
power of the Popes was taken from him, and
in this they agree not.The Empe|rour more forward least fortunate. Againe, the Emperour
neuer fainted in himselfe but continued his
princely courage to the last, though the dis|aduantage

aduantage of fortune, made him faile in his
great attempting, and though most basely
he did humble himselfe at the Pope his ene|mies
feete, yet was he forced to this by ex|tremities,
 not by any deiection or weake|nesse
of his former haughty spirit. But the
King though he had the Conquest, and
preuailed against the Pope in all hee vnder|tooke,
yet fainted he in the hope of his grea|test
businesse, not reforming Religion but in
parte, which he might haue done at his own
pleasure, being prouoked thereto by the
perswasion of prosperous fortune.The Kings weakenesse was the weakenesse of Nature not of Courage. But this
failing in the King, was not caused by the
weakenesse of his courage, but by the weake|nesse
of his Nature being easily ruled by the
perswasion of his neere fauourites, and ther|fore
in this they were vnequall.
Thirdly,The two Popes their enemies neerely agree In respect of the Popes their ene|mies,
they were both alike handled, both of
them being by both their enemies interdict
and deposed from their gouernements, but
yet with vnequall successe. For Pope Alexan|der,
did curse more effectually and to better
purpose then Pope Clement. The Emperour

being constrained by his interdictions,They both curse, but with vne|quall suc|cesse. and
bannings to surcease his forward Armes, and
with great humility to reconcile and submit
himselfe. But King Henries Pope was not so
happie in his curses, For hee did banne, and
curse the King, as much as any other Pope
in the world could doe, yet was it fruitlesse,
and to no purpose; the King not thriuing
worse but the better,These ban|ning Pope like Shemei and Balam. for this bitter banning
Shemei, who like Balam the banning Prophet,
offer sacrifice to curse with holy pretence,
and for good prosperity.
Fourthly,The Princes agree not in their ends. Lastly in their ends, were they
most vnlike, for the Emperour was continu|ally
followed with euil fortune, being forced
many times to many great extremities,The Empe|rors bad for|tunes. and
many dishonourable fallings. First, was hee
disarmed by the power of the Popes Cen|sure,
his owne people forsaking him in his
best hope, and in a time of most importance,
then was hee constrained by ineuitable ne|cessity,
to submit himselfe to the Pope, and
to implore his fauour, and either to receiue
the Crowne and the dignity of his place, at
the curtesie of his enemie, or else to bee de|priued

of all soueraigne State.The indigni|ties where|with the Pope did vse the Emperor. Againe, the
indignities wherewith the Pope did vse the
Emperor, to whom when the Emperour
made his humble submission, the Pope in
scorne of his debased Maiesty, set his foot
on the Emperours neck, with his misapply|ed
phrase of Scripture.The Popes insulting pride. Super Aspidem, c.
the which how grieuous it must needs bee to
a person of such Maiesty and spirit; let any
man that hath spirit iudge it.The Empe|rors end vn|fortunate. Lastly, his end
was vnfortunate, the naturall course of his
life being preuented by violent and sudden
death.The King very fortu|nate. But the Kings fortunes were for the
most part prosperous, and much vnequall
to the Emperor; for he did not only shunne
these dangerous fortunes, but most braue|ly
acquitted himself of all dishonourable re|tiring;
finishing whatsoeuer hee attempted,
with such ease and prosperity, as if no resi|stance
had bene made against him.In respect of themselues the two Princes were equalls, in respect of their for|tunes they disagree. In res|pect
then of themselues, and of their noble
and haughty spirits, were these Princes of
most equall and fit comparison, in respect
also of their attempts they did both conspire
one; But in their fortunes they were much

disagreeing. The King finishing that with
victory and successe, wherein the Emperour
euer failed. And yet this praise may be gi|uen
the Emperour,The Empe|rours praise. that if the Kings fortunes
had bene giuen him, it is most certaine hee
would haue vsed them to greater aduan|tage;
the king being satisfied with that title
which could not haue satisfied the great am|bition
of the Emperour.




OF THE NEXT
DEFENDOR OF THE
Faith, King EDVVARD
the Sixth.

CHAP. XI.
_FIRST, there is nothing
good, that is not deriued
from God,God the fou~|taine of good|nesse. the fountaine
of all goodnesse, for man
and all the passage of his
life, from his birth to his
buriall is altogether euill, so generally is de|prauednesse,
spread ouer all the sonnes of
Nature,All men na|turally euill. that there was neuer any (Iesus
Christ excepted) from the first man Adam,
to him that shall be the last borne, free from
the infection of sinne, so generally is that le|prosie

spread ouer all mankinde, as that no
part of the body, or any faculty of the soule
is altogether free from the euil thereof, eue|ry
man being by nature inclinable to euery
sinne, no man hauing power to doe well, for
grace is the gift of God,Grace the gift of God. neither can any
man attaine it, but he to whom it shall please
God to giue it. And therefore, when God
hath a work of grace to be wrought by men,
he giueth to such whom he shall choose for
instruments, so much of his good spirit,
as to inable them for his holy purpose; So
that,God decreeth the good and deuiseth the meanes. God both decreeth the good, and deui|seth
the meanes to compasse it. Man being
passiue, and moued to goodnesse as shall
please the spirit of God to leade him. And
therefore the glorie of euery good action
belongeth to God onely, by whose spirit it
is onely wrought and not otherwise.
Secondly, And for particular instance of
this,K. Edward. wee haue King Edward; to consider, a
Prince composed all of goodnesse, hauing
extraordinarie induments of holinesse, so
abundant was Gods grace in this Prince,K. Edward fit to finish the worke of Reformation as
thereby he was well fitted to finish the worke

of Reformation, yet wee may not giue the
honour of the businesse to the King, but to
God, who inspired him with this abundance
of grace. And thus farre onely wee honor
the King as Gods instrument, whereby it
did please him to worke; and that we admire
the gifts of Gods spirit in him, whereby hee
was made to exceede all other Princes then
liuing: hauing receiued from God the
sword of the spirit, and the Shield of Faith,
whereby hee was well able to defend the
Catholike Faith; and to retorte all the fierie
darts of the Diuell. And therefore the grea|test
glory be to God,God had the greatest part in this busi|nesse. who hath the greatest
part in this businesse; and let the King haue
honour too, whom God did please to ho|nour
as his choice instrument.
Thirdly, Such was this most noble Prince,
and princely Defendor King Edward, as the
King his Father may be said to haue defen|ded
the Catholike Faith in nothing more,
then in leauing the succession of his cares, to
such a sonne, such a Prince, and such a De|fendor:
who (notwithstanding his youth
and the many combrances of State at that

time,) went forward in reforming with such
spirit, and successe, as was admirable; his
zeale effecting, that his Fathers coldnesse
had left vndone.The King beloued of God. So that God may seeme
to haue loued him as he did Moses, giuing so
much of his spirit, as sufficiently would suf|fice
many others.The King the best of all Christian Princes then liuing. For let him be compared
with all other Princes in the world then li|uing,
and he shall bee found in true iudge|ment
to exceed them all; hauing dedicate
himselfe (wholly) to the faithfull executing
of Gods will, manifesting his holy affecti|ons,
by his continuall cares to that end di|rected.The Nation happie in K. Edward to defend the Faith.
And therefore happie was K. Henrie,
and happie was this Nation, in hauing this
Sonne of Grace to second him, and to per|fect
his religious cares whom God had
found like holy Dauid, answerable to his
owne heart; whose honourable name liueth
with those names of most honour; whose
faithfull seruice to God and Religion, doth
now flourish in many parts of Christe~dome;
and whose soule liues in the fauour of God,
and in the happie fellowship of holy Angels
and Saints.

Fourthly, This most gratious and excel|lent
Prince, as he was deriued the Defendor
of the Faith, and did by naturall discent in|herit
his fathers titles: so as his neerest and
principall care, did he entertaine the cause,
and like as he was Gods Lieftenant, hee did
maintaine those spirituall warres his Father
had vndertaken; and did proceed with such
spirit and successe, as all those quarrells haue,
that haue Christ Iesus for their generall, and
Antichrist for an enemie: so diuine was the
heauenly composition of his Nature, and so
well ordered was his education, as if both
heauen and earth had desire to make him
excellent, and to make his Character an exact
demonstration, able to instruct the most
excellent Christian Prince, how to mode|rate
betweene the power of Maiesty, and
the dutie of conscience. For if State would
iudge his Zeale, and Religion his State, he shall
be found to deserue this high praise I giue
him, and both Religion and State would
iudge him to be worthie and fit to gouerne
a Religious State.
Fifthly This happie Prince (in the little

time of his gouernement) gaue a large testi|monie
of his worth,The praise of King Ed|ward. and did both exceed the
expectation was had of him, and inlarge
their expectations that did hope well, who
though he was but young when hee entred
his gouernement, yet at his very entrance
did he better the State, labouring (with ad|mirable
care and constance) in the better
reforming of Religion, and for the safe pro|tection
of the Catholike Faith, which Truth,
(God willing) in the processe of this Histo|rie
shall appeare most euident.
Sixthly, And most Gratious Prince, to
whom I write and dedicate these labours,
let me (with reuerence and exception of
your Grace) report my opinion, that this
Nation neuer had such a Salomon, who in so
poore a number of yeares, had a like mea|sure
of those his rich treasures of Zeale,
VVisedome, Loue, and State.



Of the benefit that redounds to a
State by a lawfull successi|on
of blood.
CHAP. XII.
_FIRST, the benefit that re|dounds
to a State by a lawfull
succession of blood, may ap|peare
by the misery of many
kingdomes and great states,The miserie of manie kingdomes. the which (for
want of succession) haue indured the greatest
extremities that could bee; the examples
whereof are very common in the stories
both of Christian  heathen kings. There|fore
I will onely produce one of the old
world,Alexander of Macedon. the mighty Alexander, whose for|tunes
in the conquest of warre, made the
world tremble at his awfull name, hauing
subdued the greatest and best part of the
earth, yet leauing the conquest of his sword

to his friends diuided,Alexander leauing his Empire to his friend di|uided, did sooner perish. and not to his owne
succeeding blood entire  wholy; the Em|pire
hee had got and thus left, could not
stand, being not vnited in one soueraigne
successor, but deuided into parts; whereof
insued emulation and enuie, and at the last
vtter desolation; which happily had not
bene, if Alexander had had a Sonne Alexan|der
to haue succeeded in his Empire.
Secondly, An example neerer vs, both in
respect of time and place, is the Kingdome
of France,The king|domes of France. our Neighbour Nation. A king|dome
that hath indured the greatest extre|mities,
the misery of Warre could lay vpon
it; and this was onely occasioned by want
of succession in blood: the French King then
not hauing Issue Male to succeed him in his
Empire, gaue occasion that the king of En|gland
Edward the Third,Edward the Third. made claime to the
kingdome of France, in the right of his Mo|ther,The title of England to the crowne of France.
being suruiuing heire to Phillip sirna|med
the Fayre, to whom (by the most all|owable
Law) the Right must needs discend;
which the French vtterly withstand by rea|son
of the salique Law, which dis-inableth

women in such inheritance: yet hence hath
proceeded the greatest alteration in that
state that euer was, the kings of England,Fra~ce much vexed with English warres. by
many notable attempts and victories, defa|cing
the beautie of that famous kingdome,
which (for largenesse of Empire, and all o|ther
earthly blessings) may bee said to bee
the most soueraigne of all Christendome.
And therefore the spoyle of such a king|dome
is very lamentable, and the cause of
that spoyle much to be condemned: yea so
great is the misery of that euill cause to that
kingdome, as that they still stand in the ha|zard
of good or euill fortune,France still in the ha|zard of En|glish warres. expecting a
dangerous warre, whensoeuer the Maiesty
of any English King shall please to make
claime to that kingdome, which both by
succession and conquest is his owne.
Thirdly, Within our selues also we haue
notable examples of the misery of state,English ex|amples.
when lawfull succession doth either faile, or
is (by intrusion) interrupted. For vpon
this foundation was builded that most
famous quarrell, betweene the two hou|ses
of Yorke and Lancaster,Yorke and Lancaster. a difference

that made England to bleede in euery vaine,
neither could it euer be compounded, vntill
the succession of both those lines met in one
particular, whereby the Canons did know
one vndoubted successor without competi|tor,
to whose seruice they might addresse
themselues, whereas before they were diui|ded
into parts; some adhering to this, others
to that, as authority and loue could moue
them, whereby they broake their vnity to
make a fraction; and the truth of successionThe cause of the Eglish ciuill warres was the in|terrupting of lawfull Suc|cession.
being doubtfully vnderstood, was the cause
that men were more easily drawne (by per|swasion)
to the bloody enterprize of Warre,
which happily had not bene (or at the least)
not so violent, if the right of inheritance had
not bene interrupted by intrusion.
Fourthly, But that most Worthie of note, is
the late time of Queene ElizabethsQueene Eli|zabeth. Reigne,
a Ladie worthy of best memorie; who being
vnmarried, made her Subiects haue doubt|full
expectation, who should succeed her; the
which then was most dangerous,The danger that was fea|red by her want of Issue when the
Queene was past the hope of hauing naturall
issue. And this did not onely breede a Ielou|sie

in the heads of her owne people; but al|so
gaue occasion, that forraigne Princes had
regardfull eye to the vncertaine conditions
of those times; and among them, such espe|cially
as did most enuie the prosperity of our
Nation. For they might then hopefully be|leeue,The danger of the State.
that the Queene leauing the State in
these vncertainties, and (as they thought)
to many Competitors; it could not be, but
needs the glorie thereof would ruine, by ci|uill
discord, and part-taking, and that then
would a time bee offered them, to reuenge
and in rich themselues. And how soeuer God
hath preuentedGods preuen|tion. the euill which was (worthi|ly)
feared, yet certainely euen then was the
danger great, and the euill hopes of our ene|mies
vpon likely-hood conceiued; neither
is there any that hath vnderstanding in the
affaires of State, but will acknowledge the
eue~t of these times, did exceed the expecta|tionThe euent did exceed expectation.
that all men had of them, and that the
Kings Maiesties comming in (that last was,)
was a worke of Gods speciall prouidence,
whereby he did direct those iudgements, the
which at this time did very much threaten
our Nation.

Fifthly, By those examples may bee vn|derstood
the danger that redounds to a state,
when succession doth either faile, or is (by
intrusion) interrupted, the euill experience
whereof is not onely to be found in the alte|ration
of states, but also in the subuersion of
priuate houses.The subuer|sion of great houses. For a Son is neerer in dispo|sition
and consent of Nature, then one fur|ther
off in the degrees of blood; and for state,
such are most fit to succeed in gouernement
that are the seede of Gouernours;The Sonnes of gouernors are best fitted for gouerne|ment. Nature
traducing to them, the Maiesty and iudge|ments
of their Progenitors: and for the fa|uour
of the people; that Prince or heire ap|parant
hath it most assured, whose interest is
beleeued before he inherit; because that
breeds a generall regard in the hearts of all
men, and preuenteth the mischiefe which
otherwise might happen by conspirators.
And in this was our English Nation most
happie, in hauing this Princely Sonne King
Edward,King Ed|ward did ex|ceed and suc|ceed his Fa|ther. not onely to succeed his Father in
the rule of his kingdome, but also to exceed
him much in Religion and holy life.


Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. Procreation and to deriue po|sterity,
is one cause in the ordinance of
Marriage; for therefore hath God pla|ced
that desire in our Flesh so pronely, be|cause
the generations of our kinde should
not faile, but he continued both in number
and quallitie to maintaine the Truths of Gods
Decree.
Secondly, None can deriue any thing
from their Parent, but what their Parents
haue Naturally. Therefore is there often
much difference in the quallities of Father,
and Sonne; because our Parents giue vs our
Nature as it is, but God as hee will please to
haue it.
Thirdly,Pollitique. It was euer hazardous, and will
be to the prosperity and saftie of the State,
when the Prince is childlesse, or doth want
one certaine, knowne, vndoubted heyre, be|cause
when there is not a certainty of lawful

Succession, there is iust occasion to feare vn|lawfull
intrusion.
Fourthly, Men generally are better con|tent
to giue the respects due to soueraigntie,
to a Prince deriued, and home borne, than
to one that doth attaine soueraignty either
by suffrage or conquest, because though there
be a necessity of duty in both yet the one is
voluntary, the other violent.
Fifthly,Morall. Some Philosophers haue thought
it better to adopt children than beget them,
because it is in our power to chuse the vertu|ous,
but not to forget them.
Sixthly, It hath bene thought a shame to
die childlesse, because he that hath one lea|ueth
a part of himself, or at least the Image
of all.




CHAP. XIII.
Of King Edwards defending the
Catholike Faith, and wherein
hee chiefly defended it.
_FIRST, it is not possible I should
relate at full the worthinesse of
this Sonne of Grace, and prin|cely
Defendor King Edward; he
deseruing by much, a more honorable re|memberance,
then the tract of this Historie
can giue. So large is he in his goodnesse,
as therin he hath done more then many his
predecessors, and hath best deserued euer|lasting
memorie,The Kings praise. and to haue his name liue
in the Ranke of the best Christian Princes
that euer were, so rare were the gifts of God
in him, that hee seemed to aspire no other
end but holinesse,His mercy to his enemies. and so modest in his zeale,

as no marke of violence could euer bee dis|cerned
in him; abhorring the effusion of all
blood, euen of that of his enemies, insomuch
that I may report (with confidence) that in
his royall person, mercie  truth were met,
and that righteousnesse and peace did kisse
each other: and to conclude his praise, I be|lieue
him to haue deserued a greater com|mendation
then this I giue him.
Secondly,The particu|lar of his de|serts. And to consider the particu|lars
whereby the King hath principally de|serued
his new Stile of Defendor of the
Faith: First he no sooner had authority, but
he applied it to this holy end; beginning this
care with his Empire, and with the inheri|tance
of his kingdome,The King did inherit his kingdome and h care for Religion together. tooke vpon him the
protection of Faith, and holy worship as if
he regarded not his kingly office, but one|ly
to bee the better able to serue these hea|uenly
occasions whereto in his resolution he
was onely deuoted.
Thirdly, And therfore at his first entrance,His first care.
into his soueraignty did he publish himselfe
to the world; and declared what men should
expect from him, and how he was in the case

of Religion affected: whereupon hee made
protestation to defend, what the King his
Father had done,He secondeth his Fathers attempt. in degrading the Pope from
his Supremacie, and in scattering the wicked
fraternities of Fryers and Religious men 
women, falsly professing Religion: in which
two particulars onely, K. Henrie may seeme
to haue defended the Catholike Faith. And
therefore in giuing allowance to his Fathers
act, he hath well merited to share in the ho|nour
of the deede; and this his approuing
what was wel done, may be said to be his first
good deed; and therefore doe I ranke it for
the first holy act of King Edward, whereby he
hath deserued to bee stiled Defendor of the
most Catholike Faith.His first act of defence to the Faith.
Fourthly, This honourable beginning of
King Edward, was not interrupted by euill
meanes, as was that of King Henrie his Fa|ther,King Ed|ward was not temp|ted, as was King Henry by euill coun|sell.
neither did he retire himselfe from the
pursuite of an enterprize so honourable, but
with a holy resolution went on, in the
trauell of so needfull a businesse, resoluing
with a Christian purpose to finish what his
Father had so hopefully begunne;His holy zeale for re|formation. so strong

was he in his desire to reforme Religion, as
that all his other indeauours were but ser|uants
to that only end directed, wherein he
vsed such endeauour, as was very admirable
in his yeares, and might well witnesse how
much he was in the fauour of God, who gaue
him such rare induments in so plentifull a
manner; whereby hee was extraordinarily
fitted for the office of his great place,The King well fitted for this busi|nesse. and
for the defence of the Catholike Faith,
whereof he was made a patron.
Fifthly, And this defence the king vnder|tooke
not as a practise of state, whereby to
inlarge his particular in any earthly regard,
but hee was led thereto onely by his zeale,The King not moued by any re|spect.
and the perswasion of his conscience, who
finding by that iudgement God had giuen
him, how much the face of Religion was be|come
deformed, by superstition and grosse
seruice; and being moued by the Spirit of
God to vndertake a reformation, would not
by disobedience resist that power, that both
made him and did mooue him to that pur|pose:
And therefore with the best spirit of
a Christian Prince, he did not onely second

his Fathers honourable attempting, but far
outstript him in that most honourable
course of Reformation; his whole life being
no other then the practise of his holy care,
regarding nothing that did not regard the
aduancement thereof, and gladly giuing his
assent to whatsoeuer might further it.
Sixthly, But that wherein he hath princi|pally
defended the Catholike Faith,Wherein K. Edward principally defended the Faith. and ex|ceeded
all other Princes in his holy care, was
the vtter extirping of Papacie from his do|minions;Popery vt|terly extir|ped by the King.
denying the warrant of his autho|rity
for the publike exercise thereof; exchan|ging
falshood for Truth, and confusion for
Order, reformed Religion, which (by long
custome, and euill practise) was deformed.
And this he did with such orderly assent in
Parliament,The consent of Parlia|ment. they establishing what the kings
Prerogatiue had commanded; the King and
the State ioyntly agreeing vpon an vni|forme
order of common prayer,An vniforme order of com|mon prayer appointed by the King. inioyning
al obedient Subiects to the exercise thereof,
and denouncing such for disobedient and
rebellious, as should dare to vse the forbid|den
Ceremonies of Poperie, or any other

forme diuers, from that which had authority
from the King and Parliament: the king and
the State well vnderstanding, that the verity
of Religion,Verity could not stand without vni|tie. could not better be continued,
than by vniformity and order.
Seuenthly, And this is that which deser|uedly
hath made the king worthie of ho|nourable
name, and most worthie of all o|thers
to be stiled Defendor of the most Ca|tholike
Faith, neuer any Prince before him,
hauing done more,  with greater zeale for
Religion, then this very act king Edward
did: being in this comparable with IosiasIosias of Iu|da. the
good king of the Iewes, who with all industry
did trauell in Gods businesse, destroying the
groaues, and high places, where the Idols
had that diuine worship, which (of dutie) is
onely belonging to God. And such were
those phantasticall Ceremonies then vsed,The ceremo|nies of Pope|rie like the rites of the Heathen Priests.
more like the exercise of Heathen than of
Christian Priests, and such was the kings
care to reforme and rectefie, as may well e|quall
that of king Iosias, and worthily exceed
all his predecessors, the kings of England be|fore
him. To recite the particulars of his ho|nourable

merit were a trauell infinite, the
passage of his kingly life being nothing but
in exercise of goodnesse, the benefit where|of
this Nation doth presently enioy, and the
renowne thereof spread ouer all Christen|dome,
and therefore I will onely remem|ber
some particulars of neerest considerati|on,
and such, whose remembrance may
most dignifie the author and contriuer of
them.
Eighthly, In the yeare 1547,Anno 1547. and the
first of King Edwards Reigne, the King by
act of Parliament, did repeale all former
Statutes concerning Religion;The repeale of statutes concerning Religion. by which
Statutes the professors of Truth had bene
iudged Heretickes, and Heretickes and
false Professors approued: among the
number of euill Statutes then repealed, was
that of the sixe Articles;Sixe Arti|cles. a Statute guilty of
the blood of many the dearest Children of
God, which like an euill soare spread ouer
all the Kingdome, culling out such for the
day of slaughter, whom God had ordained
to inherit eternal life: the euil furie therof set
on fire by the turbulent Spirits of euill men,

then in authority such as were Stephen Gar|diner
Bishop of Winchester, BonnerGardiner Bonner. Bishop of
London and others who by euill Counsell
and pollice, made the latter time of King
Henrie, fill our English Chronicles with the
stories of blood, and persecution.
Ninthly, And therfore be it famous for the
honour of King Edward and most worthie of
his holy title,The Kings renowne. that his princely care gaue end
to this bloodie euill, and that he for the ho|nour
of his God,  for the peace of his saints,
hath put out these destroying fires, and blun|ted
that edge of persecution,The King put out the fires of perse|cution. which then did
Tiranize the space of sixe yeares, by the au|thority
of the sixe euill Articles. By this re|peale
did King Edward cure the wound his
Father had madeThe King did cure the wound his Father made so dangerous in the
Church and State of England; reconciling
himselfe, and the authority of his place to
the fauour of God, which (by these bloodie
Articles) his Father had verie much indange|red.
Tenthly, Againe the KingsThe Kings furtherance. holy care did
not here end, but yet respected a further be|nefit
to the Catholike Faith, neuer satisfying

himselfe to haue done well, whilst there was
ought left vndone, which either the seruice
of his place,  kingly office, or the necessity
of the present times required. And therfore
when he had cast out the abhominatio~ of his
Israell, (Popish Idolatrie) and the many errors
of that Ceremonious Seruice; hee con|tenteth
not himselfe with this good deede,
but proceedeth to a higher degree of merit,
to the true establishment of the truth of
Gods seruice; thinking it vnworthy the ho|nour
of his name, to take off from the church
the ragges it then wore, and so to leaue it
naked, and therefore did he inuest it with
orders and ornaments of decencie,The orders of the Church stablishd by the King. fitting
the fashion of Christs Spouse (the Church
Militant) whereby shee might be distingui|shed
from all diuersity whatsoeuer.
Eleuenthly, And by this meanes the
Liturgie of the Church was brought into
a right square, and proportionable to
the Rule of Gods Word, which ought to
fashion euerie Christian care, but princi|pally
the forme of Religion and holy Ser|uice.

Twelfthly, Moreouer, the commiseration
he had of the necessities of men,The King most merci|full and com|passionate. doth de|serue
a worthie remembrance, and to bee
ranked among those holy cares, that haue
made him verie famous. For clemencie and
pitifull regard in a person of such Maiesty, is
that whereby great men neerest resemble
the Nature of God,In mercie men resem|ble God. who is most mighty, yet
most mercifull. In which heauenly respect,
this good King hath so farre exceeded exam|ple,
as that I cannot giue him equall compa|rison,
with any earthly creature in those
times liuing: who notwithstanding his
greatnesse of Maiesty, and high place, would
(in his prouident care) discend to the lo|west
of his Subiects; to the lame, the poore,His care for poore.
and the fatherlesse; and with the eyes of
Christian compassion, would he view their
necessities, and accordingly prouide for
them of his owne accord, not led thereto
by the perswasion of any, saue of Gods Spi|rit,
which did continually moue him to holy
exercise; the witnesse of which his holy care,
will euer liue in the thankefull prayers of
poore people, who at this day are relieued

in Hospitalls, by him erected and giuen.Hospitalls by him erected. And
in this respect hath hee well deserued the
stile of Defendor of the Catholike Faith, de|fending
and prouiding for poore Christians
(the Children of Faith) against the powerfull
enemie necessity.
13. And these workes of mercie are the
best demonstrations we can giue,The workes of mercie the best witnes|ses of holy Faith. that wee
are in the Catholike Faith: for he that hath
not mercie, hath not faith, they being as vn|separable,
as the good Tree and the good
fruit. And such was this Noble Prince, and
so rare was he in the worke of holinesse, as
that worthely and before all others, he hath
deserued to be stiled Defendor of the most
True,The King deserued his Stile. most Antient, and most Catholike
Faith.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. A wicked Prince may effect Re|ligious
deeds, but affect them he cannot,
because such deeds, in such a one, are not

done for themselues, but for the seruice of
vnlawfull and wicked ends.
Secondly, In Gods affaires, the Prince his
seruant, may neither exceed his Commissi|on
in presuming, neither neglect it with
coldnesse, but so proportion all his Christian
proceedings, that they may receiue allow|ance
from the testimonie of God; for as the
body of a pollitique State (Subiects) are in all
ciuill respects obedient to their temporall
Lord. So all Potentates, Powers, and digni|ties
haue their superintendent (God) who
is their Lord paramont and doth command
and iudge them as his vassalls.
Thirdly, Such onely are fit to bee refor|mers
of Christian Religion as haue Autho|rity,
Truth and Zeale, Authority to doe, Truth
to distinguish  Zeale to perseuere: all which
had being and life in the person of King Ed|ward.
Fourthly,Pollitique. It was a Christian Pollicie in the
King, to establish Religion with vniformity
and order, and it is that Pollicie that doth still
maintaine the State vnited. For difference,
(though it be but in ceremonie) is a most ne|cessarie

cause of most vnnecessarie discords.
Fifthly, Such Senators are honourable, that
present themselues to causes of generall pro|fit
but such are both wise and honourable
that can either frame their Prince for such in|tentions,
or doe apprehend and forward his
good determinations.
Sixthly,Morall. To preuent disgrace and euill,
(euen in a morall life) it is necessarie to de|stroy
all cause (not onely of euill doing) but
of euill suspition. For common reputation
is nothing but Opinion which is got and lost,
aswell with Ceremonies as with Truth.




CHAP. XIIII.
The trouble of the State at this time of
King Edward how they were
occasioned and how com|pounded.
_FIRST, it hath euer bene the na|ture
of euill men, then to shew
themselues most, when goodnes
and good men are most eminent
and glorious; and the reason is in nature,
which maketh all contraries then most pow|erfull
when they are in opposition:Contraries iudge one another. for vice
is iudged by vertue, falshood by truth, and
euerie euill is best made manifest by the op|position
of goodnesse. So of the contrarie, e|uerie
good thing is made appara~t by the en|uie
of euill, which like fire that wasteth his
owne substance, to trie the golden mettall;
so doth euill Ruine in selfe in enuie and euillNote.

practise, not wasting the good, but making
it much more glorious to the view of the
world. Examples of this are in euery testi|monie
of time, and in euerie condition and
state in the world, it being onely possible
for him to alter this naturall discord, to
whom it is possible to destroy the
worke of Nature.There must be faction. Neither it is euer
to bee hoped, that all men shall con|spire
one end, without opposition and strife,
till God purge this earth, and alter the con|dition
of his creatures. Neither ought we
(for this) to condemne the diuine proui|dence,Prouidence.
as if God could not otherwise dis|pose
Nature, or that he will not preuent this
euill, but suffer the cause hee best loueth, of|tentimes
to indure most. For howsoeuer in
the wisedome of God, are many vnsearcha|ble
reasons of his will to vs vnknowne:The reason of this oppo|sition of good and euill. yet
for the reason of this opposition of good 
euill, humane reason and wisedome may suf|fice
to iudge it, because as I haue said gold is
not the worse, but the better for his firie try|all,
and a good cause is not confounded, but
confirmed by the opposition of euill.Goodnesse not confoun|ded but con|firmed by the opposition of euill. And

therefore doth God many times suffer euill
to preuaile, but neuer to the destruction of
good; and to whomsoeuer it shall please
God to giue the inheritance of heauen, it is
reason he direct vs the way, bee it by danger
or by death. For if God leade vs to Heauen
by the gates of Hell,The way is good if the end be happy the way is good be|cause
the end is happie; for most happie are
they who reach life, be the passage neuer so
dangerous,Truth. and for euer blessed be Truth, be
the opposition of enuie and euill men neuer
so malignant.
Secondly, The stories of these times is
sufficient witnesse to proue the enuious Na|ture
of euill men. For now that God had gi|uen
our Nation a Salomon for Wisedome,
and a Iosias for his Deuotion, and Zeale;
changing our miserie into mirth, our teares
into laughter, whose holy care did free holy
Martyrs from torture, and cruell persecuti|ons;
giuing to all his Subiects liberty in the
true seruing of God, which for many yeares
they had wanted, and with much blood had
bene witnessed; yet notwithstanding this
good King, and the goodnesse hee wrought,

were there many seditious and euill men,Euill men and euill practise a|gainst the King.
who (like the conspiracie of Corath) com|bine
themselues in Rebellion and wicked
practise against the Lords annointed, and
their soueraigne: some pretending Religion
which they called their conscience; others
other grieuances in the state, according as
they could deuise them. Neither wanted
there occasions in Scotland to trouble the
peace of those times;Scotland. the Scots denying to
performe that whereunto (by oath) they
were obliged, for they had bound them|selues
by oath to King Henrie the Eighth, to
performe the marriage betweene King Ed|ward
his Sonne,The Mar|riage with Q. Mary of Scotland. and the Ladie Mary of Scot|land,
whereby the inheritance of both king|domes,
had discended to one interested
heyre without competitor;The impor|tance of that Marriage. the importance
whereof, how important it was to the English
State, may to any iudgement appeare, the
not performing, begetting a discontent in
both States, and a Ielosie of both their pro|ceedings,
and such as could not bee other|wise
then with the sword determined, God
reseruing the marriage of those two warlike

Nations to honour the memorie of King
Iames our Soueraigne,King Iames our Soue|raigne. now in whose royall
person these two disagreeing kingdomes,
are (for euer) vnited: yet not withstanding
all these hard occasions, and the Kings mi|noritie,
whereby he was lesse able to trauell
in those weighty affaires of State, did God
still support him, and the prosperity of his
kingdomes,The King euer victor. giuing him victorie ouer all that
did contriue against him, and power to cha|stice
the reuolt and disobedience of such his
Subiects, as wickedly did bandie themselues
against him their Soueraigne. Neither is it o|therwise
to be thought, but this body of the
common people,Rebellio~ mo|ued by per|swasion and not by any proper motio~. was not moued to Rebelli|on
by any proper motion of it owne, but ra|ther
led by the instigation of others. For the
vulgar is like a body sencelesse, which can|not
moue it selfe, yet subiect to bee carried
with euery breath of winde, being altoge|ther
moued by perswasion and general opi|nion;
and then such as did distaste the go|uernement
of the State (as those of the Popes
faction) being the parties onely discontent
with reforming Religion,The Papists. stirres this rebelli|ous

bodie with the violence of perswasion,
wherein by reason of their common expe|rience
they are cunningly fitted,The practise of reblious Iesuits and Priests.  where|with
(in truth) they conueigh the spirit of
enmitie, and ciuill strife into the states of all
Christian Princes, whereby that Religion
hath got a name of pollicie, but vtterly lost
the renowne of pietie, the greatest Professors
thereof, being found the greatest practisers
in State that be. And by these instigators,
were the troubles in the English Nation at
that time, (and euer sithence) occasioned, to
the glorie and strength of the cause which
God hath protected, and to their confusion
that thus wickedly conspire.
Thirdly, But these troubles, as they were
occasioned by the turbulent spirits of men
desiring innouation and change, so were
they happily determined by the prouidence
of the State:The Duke of Somerset Protector. the Lord Protector the Duke of
Somerset, approuing himselfe forward and
fortunate in discharge of his high place, to
whose trust both the person of the King, and
the gouernment of his kingdome were com|mended.
And doubtlesse euen in this hath

the Duke deserued speciall commendation,His deserts.
and to be thought worthy the honour of his
high place, considering the danger of the
time, and the number of discontented per|sons
in the state;The refor|ming of Re|ligion diui|ded the king|dome into a faction. the reforming of Religion
diuiding the strength of the kingdome into
an enuious faction; whereby the dispossessed
(the Papists) vsed all meanes both of power
and pollicie, to reobtaine what by reforma|tion
of Religion they had lost; and the Pro|testants
endeauoring to secure, and continue
what (by the fauour of God) they had law|fully
gotten. And therefore the honoura|ble
compounding of these differences doth
conclude the wisedome and faithfull ser|uice,The Dukes care to com|pound these differences.
of such as then did gouerne the state.
For if the Duke had bene ambitious, and had
aspired the soueraigntie, he would neuer
haue lost the aduantage of this occasion, the
time then seruing best to haue attempted it,
the body of the Rebellious wanting onely
such a head, to haue led them to any despe|rate
attempt whatsoeuer. And therefore
howsoeuer his enemies did brand his name
with dishonourable imputations,The Duke slandered. it is very

vnlikely the Duke should haue any such dis+loyall
affections, neglecting (as I haue said)
these opportune occasions, and being so
strong in the fauour of the people.
Fourthly, But that which did most discon|tent
the King and threaten the state,The vari|ance between the Lord Protector  the Barrons. Honour and desert beget dangerous enuie. was the
variance betweene the Lord Protector and
the Barrons: whose high place, and honou|rable
deseruing had got him much dange|rous
enuie in the State, which hee by too
much sufferance, gaue aduantage to pre|uaile,
so farre as to his owne destruction. For
if the Duke by his authority, had cut off the
first beginnings of this euill,The Dukes error in pol|licie. he had preuen|ted
the mischiefe which thereof insued, and
so he might haue done that in the opportu|nity
of time with ease, which afterwards hee
would most gladly haue done, but could not
with all the authority he had compasse; be|cause
the opportunity was past,Post est occa|sio Calua. and then he
could not recall occasions, which then flie
from vs, when they are not intertained.Note. For
it be hooueth him of great place, that would
preuent the danger of enuie, (not to for|beare
the cause of enuie, which is goodnes)

but to destroy the first beginnings of enuie, 
not to giue that euill weed sufferance, which
in (short time) will grow to a strength vncon|troleable;
and then who so offers to strike,
shall but wound himselfe, and like a bird in
a trap, locke himselfe more strongly in, by
striuing to escape. And this assuredly was
the Dukes error to suffer his enemies to grow
to a strength he could not command, and
then being in their danger, he sought by
strong hand to rid himselfe;This ouer|sight was his death. wherein he
found he was much deceiued, to the losse of
his life, and to the glory of his enemies; now
from what cause this discord had beginning
is diuersly imagined,The cause of this discord. neither doth our English
Chronicles determine it, so that many seue|rall
coniectures diuersly interpret it: some
blame the Dukes improuidence,The Dukes improuide~ce. and that he
did not regard his owne security, so much as
the danger of his place required; and there|fore
suffered his enemies to practise against
him with all aduantage. Others that his e|uill
gouerning the State,His euill go|uernement of the State. did so offend the
Lords, as in their honourable care of the
State they sought redresse; and that the

Duke might either surrender his authority,
or else reforme the disordered course of his
former proceedings; to the more honour of
the King,Ambition. and the better gouernement of the
Common-Wealth: others thinke that hee
aspired the principality, and thereby runne
himselfe into the highest degree of treason;
which opinion is all malice,This opinion is all malice, no truth. and no Truth.
For questionlesse, if the Duke had bene guil|ty
of Treason, his enemies would neuer haue
condemned him of Felonie. Lastly, it is
thought the cause was nothing but a pra|ctise
of enuie,The true cause was a practise of enuie. which his honourable life and
zealous care for Religion had procured him,
who aduancing his indeauour with all con|stancie
for the reforming of Religion, and
trauelling in the state with much prosperity
and honour; hee by these meanes got a
double enemie,A double e|nemie. his religious care procured
him the hatred of the discontented persons
in the State (which then were many, and his
honourable life got him enuie in the great
ones: who then couet to suppresse the grow|ing
reputation of any,The nature of great and enuious spi|rits. whose merit may
challenge the highest degrees of honour;

for men enuie not the euill but the good of
others; and he (alwaies) is most subiect to
be enuied,Vertue most subiect to enuie. whose vertuous life shall least de|serue
it.
Sixthly, And from this cause was the vn|fortunate
end of the good Duke, the Lord
Protector, whom his enemies did not destroy
for his euill, but for his honourable and ver|tuous
life. And this howsoeuer it had the
course of orderly proceeding, according to
the tryall of law,The tryall of law only a colour to sa|tisfie reports. yet was that onely a colour
to giue it some reasonable pretence; where|by
the common mouth of the vulgar might
be stopped, which in such cases is most da|ring
and prodigall: and surely it is very re|markeable,
that a Prince of his authority
and greatnesse, Vnkle to the King, and pro|tector
of his person and state; should bee
thus forced to these hard extremities,The Dukes extremitie of hard for|tune. and
that in a Kingdome which himselfe did pro|tect
to be arrested, condemned, and execu|ted
for Felonie: and example so rare, as no
time can produce the like,The greatest are most sub|iect to the fall of Fortune. and such as may
remember the greatest, how subiect they be
to the fall of Fortune; who foyleth them

most that fall from the highest dignities.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. God doth often suffer his owne
cause Religion, euen in the hope and
prosperity thereof, to indure contrary
fortunes; sometimes by intrusion of Errors,
often by the interruption of peace. For with|out
these tryalls of opposition, and aduersi|ty,
there can be no distinction of good and
bad, neither could it merit extraordinarie
praise to be a Christian.
Secondly, In the Iudgement of Diuinity it
doth not destroy the Truth of any cause, to
suffer iniurie and violence, because the most
sacred Sonne of God, did indure them in
their extremities. Therefore are they decei|ued,
that make temporall prosperity a note
of spirituall Truth, because Truth (in this
life) may liue in banishment.
Thirdly,Pollitique. It was a wicked policie in the kings
enemies (but powerfull,) to sow Discord in

his neerest blood, for by that meanes it was
easie for them to gaine that, which other|wise
had bene difficult, because such disa|greements
are most implacable that haue
had power to destroy naturall affections, for
there is no hate like that, which is translated
out of loue.
Fourthly, It is one of the most principall
respects that should be in a Prince, to be able
to conteine his owne secrets, and in all his
important affaires, to vnderstand more than
he shall discouer; for by this meanes, hee
shall both delude the purpose of him that
would deceiue him, and by Pollitique obser|uations
discouer designes farre off.
Fifthly,Morall. Particular disquiets in a Morall
life, are ciuill warres that would destroy a
blessed peace, for as euery man is a little
world. So the order or disorder of that world
hath resemblance and fit comparison with
the state of this world.




CHAP. XV.
A Discourse of the miseries of mans
life vpon occasion of the Duke
of Somersets death.
_FIRST, It is true that at our birth
wee begin to die,Life is a sick|nesse. our life being
no better then a continuall
sicknesse, which (by many ex|tremities)
leade vs to our graue, the sanctua|rie
and house of Rest; and therefore the
best men haue least desired it,The contempt of life. and the holiest
dispised it, and that which doth stay them
from the fruition of eternall happinesse, and
tie them to the bondage of flesh (which of
all other prisons) is most slauish; especially
to a soule of diuine and heauenly contem|plation.
For the holy men of all ages haue
neuer thought it burden some to die, but
haue desired death, to release them from the

miseries of life, neither haue they feared
the Image of death,Holy men neuer feared the Image of death. when it hath bene pre|sented
in the most dreadfull forme, that Ty|rants
and wicked men could deuise: because
such men make their life but seruant to their
death, desiring onely to liue to the glorie of
their God, that so they may die in his fa|uour;Holy death setteth open the gates of life.
for such death setteth open the gates
of eternity, whereas euery houre of this our
transitory life, is subiect to many deaths, and
many hard extremities.
Secondly, The experience of this is com|mon,
and therefore lesse admirable; neither
is it strange that Christian men should dis|pise
transitorie life, and the vaine glory of
flesh, because they are bound thereto by the
dutie of Christianity; Christ himselfe, the
examples of Christians, both commanding
and commending it. And therefore is this
obedienc most worthie in the Children of
Grace,The Childre~ of Grace. The sonnes of nature. but most strange in the sonnes of Na|ture,
such as haue onely a generall vnder|standing
of God, and of his mighty power,
not knowing him in his mercie, nor in the
hope of saluation; who by the naturall iudge|ment

of sence,The iudge|ment of sense can iudge miserie of mans life. could iudge the miseries of
mans life, and therefore would preferre
death before a life so vnconstant and va|riable.
Such were the noble spirits of many
worthy men in former ages; and such were
many of those graue and learned Philoso|phers,The antient Romanes and Grecia~s.
who contemned the vaine glorie of
mans life, and triumphed in the hope of
death, being their comfort, and that wich in
their opinion, would conclude their infinite
trauell, and secure them in the pleasure of
perpetuall rest. And such were they who vn|derstanding
the immortality of the soule,
and how the faculties thereof were letted in
their diuine offices, by the indisposition of
their bodies, and the naturall pronenesse
thereof to aduersity and euill, would (by vio|lent
death) haue freed their soules from the
prison of their flesh. The which howsoeuer
it was by the rule of Religion,Against the rule of Re|ligion. both damna|ble
and foolish; yet they not knowing Reli|gion
nor the duty of conscience, gaue a no|table
demonstration how much they estee|med
death,A notable demonstratio~ more than a life so full of misery
and change.

Thirdly, Such is the miserable condition
of mans life, as that euery minute thereof is
subiect to euill change, no man hauing pow|er
to resist the infinite number of occasions
that daily threaten him: insomuch as if God
withdraw his prouidence, and leaue vs to
our guidance:Man hath more to af|flict him than all other Creatures. Because of sinne. we are then the most mise|rable
of all others, hauing more to afflict vs
than all the other creatures of God because
by our offending the Lord of all, wee haue
made both him and them our enemies. So
that all occasions and euery worke of nature,
watch the aduantage of Gods sufferance, to
reuenge themselues on man, for whose sinne
they haue indured the curse of euill. And
from hence doth issue the infinite number
of grieuances,The cause of the many grieuances of mans life. which continually threaten
the prosperity of mans life, whereby the
most pleasurable time of mans life, is subiect
to this great misery, that hee cannot secure
any little continuance of those pleasures,
wherin he so delighteth: neither can hee
preuent the sorrowes of his life, nor rid him|selfe
from the least of them; neither can he
(as he is naturall) with any patience beare

them. So that both with them and without
them, he is most miserable, and so for euer
would be, if the mercie of God, did not sup|plie
to this weakenesse, and euill condition
of our Nature.
Fourthly, Now to relate some particulars
of these infinite miseries, I first begin with
sicknesse,Sickenesse. an infirmity that beginneth with
our life,Sickenesse ordained to subdue the pride of our nature. and endeth in our graue, which
God hath ordained to subdue the pride of
mans nature, least being puft vp with too
much prosperity, we should forget that wee
are mortall and but creatures. And this in a
double respect is very grieuous to our Na|tures:A double re|spect. First, the number of sicknesses.
first in respect of the diuersity of sick|nesses,
which being infinite in number,
seeme like so many enemies to threaten our
tranquillity and quiet.Secondly, the generality. All men be|ing subiect at all times to all infir|mities. Secondly, in respect
of our selues, all men being at all times, sub|iect
to all infirmities. And therefore they
that haue heaped the glory and treasure of
this worlde, and seeme to ingrosse the plea|sures
of this life, are notwithstanding arre|sted
by sicknesse,Rich men. and that many times with
such violence as they earnestly desire death,

to release them of the miseries of life, neither
is the basest condition of men, exempt from
this generall infirmitie,The poore  the rich are both alike fflicted with sicknesse. the rich  the poore,
the base and the Noble, being in this respect
equalls, all men being alike seruants to the
sorrow of sicknesse, whose generall power
preuailes to the destruction of all flesh.
Fifthly,Pouertie of life. Another maine grieuance is po|uerty
of life, which doth depresse the spirits
of many, which otherwise would rise to those
deseruings, which in the iudgement of the
world are most honourable. And this is both
in it selfe euill and a punishment for sinne, 
also in generall opinion it is most hatefull,Pouertie hatefull to men.
and that which (almost) all men carefully
shunne, because in the reputation of the
world, men are estimated not according to
their being, what they are; but after their
hauing, how much they are in the fauour of
fortune.The false o|pinion of the world. And such men are onely esteemed
honourable, and best worthy who are most
worth, in vaine and vile possessions; the bet|ter
sort of men, commonly enioying the
least part of those earthly blessings, which
God hath giuen his creatures; by which vn|euen

distribution it commeth to passe, that
many times the honourable man,The honou|rable and the vile man do ocupi on the others place. hath the
vilde place; and the vilde man the honoura|ble,
the seruant many times exceeding his
Lord, in the true worth of honesty, and ver|tue,
by whom he is exceeded in vaine glory
and honour. And this must needs be a great
deiection to such as haue spirit to vnder|stand
themselues for when men liue in a dis|proportion
to their worth,Want d|iecteth the spirits of well deseruing men. it exceedingly
blunteth that alacrity and good spirit, which
(in a better condition of fortune) would be
gracefull.The griefe of noble spirits. And surely it cannot but grieue
the spirit of vnderstanding men, to see the
blockish and most vnworthie, like idols with
ornaments and trappings to be in|uested
with dignities, and high pre|ferments
that onely know to vse those
dignities to their couetous profit, and
not to any honourable deseruing. And
though pouerty to a good man,Pouertie to a good man is like the foyle to the Dia|mond. be but like
the foyle to a diamond, to make it appeare
the more beautifull, yet generally to man|kinde
it is most hatefull, and that which
is onely indured by necessity, and Christian

patience,The despe|rate effects of pouertie. begetting many times most dan|gerous
discontentments in them of best ap|prehension,
and obscuring the gifts of God
and nature, which otherwise would appeare
most glorious.
Sixthly Againe,Mutability and change. the variable change of
mans life, whereby he is violently carried to
many disagreeing ends, sometime to the
better sometime to the worse, according to
the seuerall power of occasions: insomuch
as in this respect a man is like a vessell at Sea,The continu+all trouble of mans life.
driuen with many contrarie windes, too and
fro, alwaies in the extremities of storme and
wearie passage, neither can any man ariue
his peacefull port before death bring him to
his graue,The graue the resting place. his life being nothing but a breath
of contrarie windes bearing him to indure
the misery of many hard and variable for|tunes.
And this euill is most sensible to those
vnto whom Fortune hath bene most grati|ous;
who enioying the pleasures of life with
full appetite, and by the change of fortune,
forced to change that state, wherin they
thought themselues most happie. For then
is aduersity in full strength, being in him

whose former life hath bene most prospe|rous;
for the common induring of bitternes
and misery, dulleth the edge thereof, and
maketh it (by much lesse sensible) to him
whome Custome hath made familiar with
griefe;Custome is another na|ture. neither are mens natures so inclinea|ble
to the good, as to the bad alteration; it
being generall in all men to moue them|selues,Men by their naturall mo|tions moue to euill, but to goodnesse by the mouing of Grace.
to their owne destruction, the moti|on
to perfection not being our owne, but the
worke of Grace, which onely hath the glo|rie
of euery good worke.
Seuenthly, It were needlesse to giue parti|cular
instance of this mutability of fortune,
euery particular man hauing instance in
himselfe to witnesse it, and for those of ex|traordinary
glory and greatnesse we may re|member
that Romane Conquerour,That Roman Conquerour. who
passing the streets of Rome in the glorie of
his Triumph, had his braines beaten forth
with a Tyle, which by casualty fell vpon
him,The Duke of Somerset. or that of better memorie the Duke of Somerset. (the occasion of this discourse,)
who from the highest degree of a Subiect,
fell into the ignominie of Treason and vn|timely

timely death. And therefore the antient Ro|manes
vnderstanding he miserie of varia|ble
fortune ordained,A custome among the antient Ro|manes. that when any of their
worthy Captaines, should ride in triumph;
a slaue should ride with him in his triumphall
Chariot, holding fast with his slauish hand,
the lawrell Crowne vpon the Conquerours
head, who then did triumph both to mode|rate
the vaine glory of the Conquerour, and
also to remember him, to what condition
he himselfe was subiect, and therefore in re|spect
of mutability of fortune,Variable for|tune maketh men misera|ble. is mans life
most miserable, no man being able to secure
himselfe in any reasonable condition of
life.
Eighthly,Discontent But that which of all other is
most burdensome is Discontent, the disease
of the soule, and that which of all other in|firmities
is most dangerous,Minde. and hard to
cure, especially in spirits of best apprehen|sion,
and in them who haue aspired the re|putation
of high place.Discontent a dangerous disease. For the spirits of
great men, are not moued to impatience
without dangerous euents, because their
anger maketh them willing, and their great|nes

maketh them able to reuenge.The danger in disconten|ting great spirits. And ther|fore
such men are neuer disco~ntent, but it pro|uoketh
either their owne or other mens de|struction;
neither is this euill tied to parti|cular
men onely, but like a generall Plague
it spreads it selfe ouer all degrees of men,
though not in like vehemencie. For the best,
and the worst, the basest and the most no|ble,
haue at some time their discontents,All men haue at some times their discon|tents.
whereby they are offended in themselues,
and wish to die; and that which is more ad|mirable,
those men renowned for holinesse
of life, haue had this loathing to liue, and de|sired
to die as Iob, Elias,Holy men haue bene discontented. and many other ho|ly
men, which may well conclude the mise|ry
of a discontented minde, and how insup|portable
it is in his extremity, for as the soule
exceedeth the body in the excellencie of
their Natures;Griefe is a greater tor|ment then sickenesse. So the grieuances of the
soule, are much more sensible to our facul|ties,
then those of our bodies; because griefe
is properly belonging to the soule, and to
the body onely by consequence or parti|cipation.
And if I were to define the grea|test
miserie on earth next to that of hell,The great|nesse of Dis|content. sin,

and damnation, I should call it discontent in
his extremitie, because (next the sorrow of
sinne) the liuing part of man his soule, hath
not any thing of like torment and affliction:
and as all other miseries are the seed from
whence doth proceed this Monster Discon|tent.
So from discontent can be expected no
better then destruction and death.
Ninthly, The last misery of our life is
Death,Death. the which at one stroake doth re|uenge
all the euill of mans life; and this how|soeuer
in it selfe it be not euill. yet in mens
generall vnderstanding, it is thought the
worst of all euills, and the most fearefull of
all other miseries. And therefore the very
name of death, hath oftentimes stroake asto|nishment
and terror in the hearts of tyrants
and euill men; knowing that death was an
enemy,Death an enemie a|gainst whom there is no re|sistance. against whom there was no resista~ce,
hauing preuailed against them of the first
age, though they liued many hundreds of
yeares. For if the honours and pleasures of
this life were infinite, and the enioyers of
them eternall, then were not the life of man
so miserable a condition; but hauing death

to controule the most glorious among men,Death doth controule the prosperi|ties of our life.
and to depriue them of their prosperity and
honours; in this respect the best of mans
life, is no better then misery and griefe,
because he foreseeth the end of all his pros|perity,
the remembrance of death sowring
the greatest part of the pleasures of life, eue|rie
man hauing griefe to loose that wherein
he so much delighteth.
Tenthly, Yet Death though his power be
geuerall ouer all flesh, is not therefore a
misery to all men,Death is not a misery to all men. but to many an end most
happie and desired. For though it be a curse
for sin to be mortall  die, yet is Death most
happie to them that die well: God by the
death of his Sonne, hauing reconsiled him|selfe
to his seruant Man;Death ma|keth holy men immor|tall. which by no other
meanes could be made immortall. But this
condition of happinesse, is not in the Nature
of Man;Good men hope for death and bad men feare it. but in the fauour and grace of
God. And therfore is death that which good
men hope, and bad men feare; the poore
mans comfort and the rich mans terror, and
that which maketh the King and the Sub|iect,Death and the graue make all things equall
the rich and the poore equall, making

of euery mans flesh but earth and putrifacti|on.
And therefore the life of man euen from
the wombe to the Graue, is nothing but mi|sery,
and vexation of Sipirit, no naturall man
hauing the pleasures thereof,No man hath plea|sures but with limi|tation. but with such
limitation, as maketh pleasure it selfe bur|densome.
Eleuenthly, The holy and good men of
the world not otherwise regarding life, then
as a time wherein to exercise their Christian
offices,To good men there is no miserie. and to such there is no miserie, nei|ther
in life nor death: happie are such to
whom God shall giue Grace to dispise the
vaine glorie of earth, and that vse the crea|tures
of God with christian moderation,How to vse the pleasures of this life. not
affecting them more then the Lord of them,
nor applying them to any other end then
holines, for which all things were created;
 most happie are they who for the honour
of their God,Who are hap|pie. and for the testimonie of his
truth, haue forsaken the pleasures of this
transitory life, and haue giuen themselues
a sacrifice to God, for so to die is to enioy
immortality and perpetuall rest.



CHAP. XVI.
Of King Edwards Death and
how hee left the State to the
next Successor.
_FIRST, it were foolish and vaine
for any man, to desire to know
the secrets of Gods will; be|cause
no man can vnderstand
more of Gods secret,No man can know any part of Gods secrets vnles God reueals them. than he himselfe shall
please to reueale: and therefore is mans
knowledge limited, being able onely to
iudg by reason, and consequence; whereas
Gods diuine workes exceed the iudgement
of sence,God not con|trarie but a|boue reason. being (not contrary but) aboue
the reach of reason. And from this cause is it,
that men commonly offend in their false
constructions,The cause of false constru|ctions. iudging of Gods worke gro|sly,
according to humane vnderstanding,
and not considering his wisedome and pow|er
by whose prouidence all things are di|rected.

For in Gods matters Christians must
beleeue,In diuine matters Christians must belieue when they cannot iudge when they cannot iudge, and it is
sufficient argument to conclude the good|nesse
of any worke, when wee know that
God is the Author: for those things which
to a naturall man seeme strange, to a refor|med
iudgement appeare much otherwise;
and there is nothing be it neuer so euill in
mans iudgement but God can make it serue
for the worke of his glory:The vse that God can make of all our actions. he being able to
make the euills of men respect an end be|yond
their expectations, and in that where|in
we iudge our selues, most miserable, can he
make vs most happie.
Secondly, And for particular instance we
may consider K. Edward,K. Edward. whom God elected
from among many thousands for the work
of his glory; hauing defended the Catholike
Faith, with a resolution most zealous  con|stant;
yet notwithstanding in the growth of
his prosperity, did God take him from the
world, and depriue the Children of faith, of
their Patron,The wonder|full effects of Gods pro|uidence. and princely Defendor, whereby
(in common iudgement) God may seeme to
be offended with his owne, and to leaue his

Saints vndefended, to the stroake of persecu|tion,
from which this holy King had defen|ded
them But thus to iudge of God were
wicked and false; because we see the Gospell
(by that interruption) did spread it self with
much more generall acceptation: the blood
of holy Martyrs being a holy seed,The blood of the Mar|tyrs was the seed of the Gospell. whereby
the Church spread into a large generation,
and who knoweth but God (to manifest to
all the world, the faith and obedience of his
holy Saints in the Church of England,) suffe|red
this persecution for the glory of their
memorie,  for a demonstration to all men,
what numbers of true Catholike Christians
had flourished vnder the protection of King
Edward their Patrone and princely Defendor.
The Saints hereby exchanging their mortall
 variable life, for eternity  perpetuall rest;
their deaths begetting the liues of many ho|ly
men like them,The deaths of a few, was the life of many. whereby the number of
Gods seruants was much augmented, to the
glory of God, and prosperity of his Church.
And therefore let no man condemne the
worke of Gods prouidence, but yeeld
his obedience to the good pleasure of God,

and let him know that God is mercifull
euen in his iudgements;God is mer|cifull in his iudgements. and that hee can
make that which doth seeme to threaten vs
most, to be the Ladder whereby we may as|cend
the highest of all preferments, the fa|uour
of God, and the fellowship of his holy
Saints.
Thirdly,The Kings death. King Edward being dead, the
state grew verie stormie and full of greate
businesse the cause being who should suc|ceed
the King, in which controuersie the
kingdome was deuided;Great occa|sions of trou|ble in the kingdome. the greatest part of
the Counsell, and the Nobility, proclaiming
Lady Iane Daughter to the Duke of Suffolke,
whose Mother was Daughter to Mary King
Henries Sister, first married to the French
King, and after to Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolke.The nobility  commns disagree in the choice of their Prince. But the greatest part of the Com|mons,
and some of the Nobility, adhering
to Lady Mary eldest Daughter to King Hen|rie
the Eighth, by his first wife Queene Ka|therine
of Spaine: and this occasion was the
trouble and death of many honourable and
worthy personages;King Ed|ward euill counselled. For whether King Ed|ward
of his owne election, or wrought by the

perswasion of others (I know not) had by his
last Will and Testament, interested the La|die
Iane, to the inheritance of his king|domes;
for this cause (as was pretended)
that the State might still continue the profes|sion
of the Protestant Religion, which could
not be hoped in the gouernement of Queene
Mary. But howsoeuer the King did thus be|queath
his kingdomes, it is very likely hee
was drawne thereto by perswasion of his no|bles;
especially of the two Dukes;Northum|berland Suffolke the cause of this great iniurie Reasons why the King did it not of his owne motion but by per|swasion. Northum|berland
and Suffolke, because hereby the in|heritance
was conueyghed to their issue, to
whom (in right) it did not belong, neither
is it likely the King of his owne motion,
would haue disinherited his owne Legiti|mate
sisters, to interest one further off. And if
Religion was the cause, why was not choise
rather made of Queene Elizabeh, then Lady
Iane? Shee being by much neerer in the de|grees
of blood, and altogether as assured in
the Protestant Religion. And therefore cer|tainely
the King was moued by others to of|fer
this iniurie to his neerest blood
Fourthly,A doubtfull question re|solued. And if the question be deman|ded,

whether in this case it was lawfull for the
King to translate the inheritance of his king|domes.
I answer, that howsoeuer the pre|tence
is faire and good, yet was the practise
euill, because wrong was offered; and those
ends are neuer good,Good ends cannot be compassed by euill meanes. the which are compas|sed
by euill meanes; and to translate inhe|ritance
where it ought not, is to contradict
Gods prouidence, by whose wisedome all
things are ordered. And therfore (no doubt)
this offence of those Dukes and their confe|derates,
conspiring with them this vnlaw|full
end, was the cause that God did suffer
the power of their enemies, to preuaile to
their destruction.God is the Father of truth. For God is the Father of
Truth, and the God of Iustice; neither would
he that men should attempt to alter the
course of his prouidence, or (by any violent
and euill meanes) pursue an end, be it neuer
so Religious and holy.What good men must do. For good men must
vse onely good meanes to reach good ends.
And therefore this practise of these Dukes in
the iudgement of Religion was not good,
notwithstanding in state practise it hath ex|ample,
and may seeme allowable.


Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. there is no pretence how faire
soeuer, can giue authority and strength
to vnlawfull actions. For God who is all-sufficient,
and who hath decreed all good
things, hath likewise deuised all good
meanes to compasse them; therefore euery
good worke doth consist of lawfull matter
and forme, for no euill thing can bee well
done, neither can any good thing bee done
euilly.
Secondly, When God by death doth
preuent the hopes that are had of a vertu|ous
Prince, it doth not argue against the
worthinesse of the Prince, but it doth
argue and conclude the vnworthinesse of the
times, for in such a case the Prince doth in|herit
happines, but his people suffer miserie.
Thirdly, It was both foolish and wicked
in the two Dukes, Northumberland and Suf|folke
to labour to erect and secure a state to

their posterity, with iniuries so apparant,
and palpable. For though God many times
suffer intrusions into titles, he doth neuer
establish them.
Fourthly,Pollitique. In the discretion of State it can|not
be thought otherwise, but where there
is vsurpation and false intrusion, there is a
miserable affliction with feare and Iealosie,
which neither the power or pollicie of any
such State can auoid, so long as God shall not
suffer their violence to preuaile against the
liues of the true inheritors.
Fifthly, It is a Pollitique wisedome in a
Prince to suspect the sincerity of al such state
aduise, that hath principall reference to the
aduancement of such Counsellors. For in
this case it is often true, that men will not
speake their iudgements but their affections.
Sixthly,Morall To be ordered by lawfulnesse in
all our actions, is not onely the iudgement of
conscience but of humanity and Morall dis|cipline;
For Morall learning doth determine
that there is nothing profitable, that is not
lawfull.




CHAP. XVII.
A Comparison betweene King Iosias
of Iuda, and King Edward of
England.
_FIRST,Iosias of Iu|da and Ed|ward of En|gland. to compare King Iosias of
Iuda, with King Edward of En|gland,
is the most equall compa|rison
of any two in the Storie of
holy Kings, both of them hauing with equall
diligence, and victory, fought Gods quarrell,
to the glory of their God, the reformation
of his seruice, the abolishing of Idolatrie, and
the confusion of the euill Ministers thereof.
First,Their age when they began their Reigne. for their age when they began their
Reignes: King Iosias began his gouerne|ment
the eighth yeare of his age; and King
Edward the ninth of his, wherein they very
neerely consent, and whereby God hath gi|uen

proofe to the world, that the power of
his Spirit, can as well preuaile in them of
youth, as in those of better yeares and expe|rience;
he being able to make the Childe
and the strong man, alike victorious, in a
cause which hee shall please to protect; as
was this of these two holy Kings,Both of these Kings con|spiring one holy end. both of
them equally conspiring one end, (the truth
of Religion) and holy worship. Againe,
Amon, Iosias his Father left the kingdome of
Iuda in the exercise of Idolatry, and so did
King Henrie Edwards Father leaue the State
of England in the practise of Popish Idola|trie;Both their Kingdomes were corrup|ted with ido|latrie.
hauing onely by suppressing of Ab|beyes,
taken from those Idols their orna|ments
and wealth, not vtterly destroying
them as did Iosias and King Edward. Againe,
Iosias when he vnderstood the will of God
by hearing his Chancellor Shaphem reade
the booke of the Law, did accordingly
frame himselfe in all obedience. So King
Edward when he vnderstood by the Learned
men of his Realme,Both of them yeeld their obedence to holy perswa|sion  effect their purpose such as Cranmer, Laty|mer,
Ridley and others, followed the Lords
businesse with like zeale and constancie, as

did Iosias; not onely abolishing the false,
but establishing the true forme of Gods ser|uice.
Againe, as Iosias left the kingdome of
Iuda to an euill Successor, his Son Iehoahaz,
who againe prouoked the people to Idola|trie:Both these Kings left their States to holy ends but euill suc|cessors.
So likewise King Edward left the inhe|ritance
of the Church and kingdome of
England, to his Sister Mary, who (like Iehoa|haz
Iosias his Sonne) did againe restore the
euill practise of Idolatrie and superstitious
Poperie vtterly defacing the godly buil|ding,
which her holy Brother had so care|fully
erected. Againe, as God did keepe his
promise with Iosias, which was to preserue
Israell the time of his life, in prosperity and
rest.Both of them fortunate to their King|domes. So did God likewise preserue England
in plenty and victory, all the time of King
Edward. And therefore these two holy kings,
seeme to conspire in all saue their deaths. Io|sias
dying in the field, king Edward in his
bed; the one reigning thirty and one yeares,
the other but sixe yeares and odd moneths;
and yet in this hath king Edward the grea|ter
honour,The honour of King Ed|ward. that he in sixe yeares did happily
finish that, which the other was thirty one

yeares in compassing, but aboue all hath he
exceeded him in leauing to posterity that
most famous Defendresse the Ladie Eliza|beth
his Sister,Q. Eliza|beth. who afterwards did proue the
glory of her Sex, and the admiration of all
the world.




OF QVEENE
MARIE, AND
of the alteration of the State
in the beginning of her
Time.

CHAP. XVIII.
_FIRST, I am now to change
my Argument, and to
write not of mercy, but
of misery, of the aduersity,
not of the prosperity of
the Gospell, and how the
Catholike Faith was offended and not de|fended,Q. Marie. The change shee made in the Church of England.
by the Successor Queene Marie, who
made the most miserable change in the state
of England, that euer that Nation indured;

she defacing the glorious worke of her Pre|decessor
of K. Edward her princely brother,
extinguishing the lights of Truth,The light of Truth put out. whereby
men were directed in the way of life,  ob|scuring
al knowledge in the mist of Ignora~ce,
and blacke error, in which blindnesse the
Christian world had for many yeares wan|dered.
This Eclipse being now againe (by
the interpositio~ of her darke time) brought
vpon this Nation.The Queene obscured the glory of this Nation. So that no light of Truth
was in her time to be seene, saue onely at the
burning Stakes of Martyrs, which holy fire
did kindle a Religious zeale in many Spe|ctators,
that beheld the mercilesse crueltie
of the tormentors, and the Christian pati|ence
of holy Saints tormented.
Secondly, And therefore I am not (as be|fore)
to declare wherein Queene Marie hath
defended the Catholike Faith,The purpose of the Histo|rie of this Queenes time. because shee
neuer defended it in the least particular: but
(of the contrarie) how shee did bend the
powers of her endeauour, both against the
profession and the professors of true Chri|stian
Faith, seeking by all violent and bloo|die
meanes, to depresse the prosperity of

Religion, whereof (by the dignity of her
place) she was made defendresse. And in
Truth it doth grieue me that I am to write the
dishonor of this Queene; which willingly I
would auoide, were the cause any other but
Religion,  but that the declaration of these
times, do tie me to a necessity of Truth, from
which I dare not aberre:The truth of History must not for any consideration be concea|led. for it were an euill
presumption in any one, to presume to write
History,  then to obscure the truth thereof
vpon what cause soeuer. For thereof would
issue a double inconuenience.The inconue|nience of misreporting the truth of Historie. First he should
wrong the vnderstandings of men in mis|reporting
the Truth,  also lay an euil impu|tation
on his name, in suppressing the know|ledge
of Truth; which is the life and true mo|uing
soule of all Historie.
Thirdly,Queene Ma|rie her ex|traordinarie induments of Nature. And this I write in fauour of Q.
Marie, because of her extraordinary indu|ments
of Nature. God hauing giuen her so
much Maiesty, and princely spirit, as might
serue to rule the greatest command in the
world;  if to her other gifts, God had giuen
her the knowledge of his Truth, she had well
deserued to haue bene named most excelle~t,

 to haue exceeded all the famous Queenes
in the world, saue her sister the most famous
Elizabeth,Q. Eliza|beth incom|parable. who hath exceeded her and al the
world in the honour of true deseruing.
Fourthly, Yet notwithstanding, all these
rare excellencies of nature merit little but
only pittie: for if the best beauty of nature,
haue not the benefit of grace, the greatest or|naments
therof, are (then) but punishment
to them that so enioy them. And therefore
they that haue not the gifts of grace, haue
nothing of worth though they haue all that
nature can giue them:Nature without grace doth merit no|thing. and happie had Q.
Marie bene if nature had giuen her lesse, and
grace more;The least gift of grace is more worth then the whole riches of Nature. because any little breath of
Gods Spirit is more worth than all other
blessings whatsoeuer; For nature adornes the
body,  grace the soule of euery one that
hath it,The gifts of Grace.  commonly where the power of wit
 great spirit is in any one Subiect, not mo|derated
by grace,The gifts of nature with|out grace are dangerous in him that hath them. they are then meanes to
make the enioyers of them most dangerous
instruments, because nature cannot moue it
self to good, but naturally to euill; and as the
naturall motion is more easie to the mouer

than the violent.The motion of Grace is  against Na|ture. So the gifts of nature are
more inclinable to euill than to good ends,
being moued to euill by their owne proper
motion, but to goodnesse by the motion of
grace, which in all naturall things is violent
 against nature. And therfore was the Q.
more dangerous, hauing so much of nature,
because she was therby armed for euill, the
want of grace making her runne her natural
course,  her great spirit  other naturall in|duments,The Queene an enemie to her selfe.
spurring her forward in her euill
passage, whereby she became enemie to her
self, mouing her self to her own destruction.
Fifthly,The Q. great ouersight. But that which made Q. Marie mon|strous
in her euill, was the two much credit
she gaue to euill counsell, suffering her selfe
to be transported,Gardiner, Bonner the Queenes e|uill instru|ments. by the violent spirits of e|uill
and reuengefull men, who conceiuing a
grounded displeasure for some hard vsage
they indured in K. Edwards time, now take
aduantage to reuenge the cause for which
they had indured displeasure;  these men
(like euill spirits) breathed the spirits of in|dignation
into the Queenes heart,  moued
her to effect most bloodie  horrible deeds,

to the great displeasure of God, and disho|nour
of her princely place.
Sixthly, for it cannot be imagined that a La|die
of her spirit,The Q good nature much abused. being (in humane respects)
mercifull  compassionate, would haue en|tred
her gouernement with such tyrannie 
terror;She entred her gouern|ment with great Tyran|ni. bearing in both hands destruction, 
(like Reuenge her self) entring the stage of her
gouernement with fire  blood) had she not
bene moued thereto by euil perswasion. Nei|ther
can it be but the Q. conscience would
condemne the course of her violent procee|ding,
 that she would iudge the large effusio~
of christia~ blood, stood not with the honour
of her name, nor with the Truth of Religion:
yet so powerfull is the authority of them we
trust,Those wee trust most may best de|ceiue vs. (especially in the case of Religion and
conscie~ce,) as that many times we suffer our
selus to be led against our own perswasio~s, by
a reuerence we beare to other mens opinio~s
Seuenthly, And this no doubt was the
cause why the Queene was so resolued in
in her bloodie persecutions,A bad per|swasion. shee giuing cre|dit
to their perswasion whom shee reputed
most Reuerend, and Learned; and they per|swading
her, she could not discharge the of|fice

of her Soueraigne place, nor defend the
Catholike Faith, but by the extirping the
Protestant Religion, which (in their opinion)
was Heresie in the highest degree: neither
could shee (as they thought) suppresse the
generall fauour, that profession had got in
generall estimation; but by seuerity  rigo|rous
laws,These euill Counsellors much decei|ued. wherein they were farre deceiued
For it is impossible that any Pollicie of man
should be able to supplant Gods Husban|drie,
which he hath made prosperous: the
Truth whereof is manifest in the experience
of these persecuting times, when as the death
of one holy man was the life of many.God raiseth a new gene|ration of holy men, from the ashes of Martyr|dome. God
raising a holy generation out of the ashes of
his holy Martyrs, the Church not decresing
but increasing by the stroake of persecution.
And in this case was the Queene counselled,
as Rehoboams was by his young states men,
to make the yoake of persecution heauie: 
whereas her Father did chastise with rodds,
she should correct with scourges: and this
was the euill counsell wherewith the Queene
was ordered,1 King. 12. 10 for shee made her yoake hea|uier
than all her Predecessors had

done, and (in truth) insupportable for any
true Christian Professor.
Eightly,Their Coun|sell was wic|ked pollicie, but no pietie. And therefore this Counsell
of theirs may haue Pollicie but no Piety, for if
the State in King Edwards time, had vsed
Gardiner and Bonner with like seuerity, and
had taken from them their euill liues, which
they had iustly forfeited, then had not these
euill Ministers bene the cause of so much
blood shed, neither happily, should the
Queene haue had any such as they, to haue
prouoked her to such dishonour and vn|godly
practise;A respect of pollicie. for it is needfull Pollicie, that
the haughty spirits of men, that haue autho|rity
and greatnesse, must either not be offen|ded,
or being moued to offence, must bee
then made sure from taking Reuenge. And
it had bene good for the Christian State,
that the ambitious spirit of Winchester, had
either not bene discontented, by his disgrace
and imprisonment, or being so offended, to
haue made him sure from reuengefull pra|ctise;
and if this had thus come to passe, no
doubt much Christian blood had bene sa|ued,
which by his meanes perished. Neither

had the Queene come into that ignominy
of blood and cruelty;Gardiner the euill spi|rit which most tempted the Queene to her seue|ritie. shee being in her own
Nature rather inclined to pittie, and mer|cifull
respect then otherwise. And therefore
though the time of Queene Maries gouerne|ment,
was the most bloodie persecution that
euer was in this Land, (I thinke) euer since
it had a Christian Prince, yet was this Ladie,
otherwise disposed in her owne Nature;
neither would shee haue made her name so
monstrous in blood,The power of conscience. had not her consci|ence
perswaded a necessity, shee being so re|solued
by their perswasion, who (shee
thought had authority to iudge her.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. Diuinity doth admit no distin|ction
of men, but the difference of good
and bad; for Gods fauour doth not look
as mans doth; men iudge by externall, but
God by internall euidence. God is no accep|ter
of persons, but men accept nothing but

the persons of men: and therfore it is often
seene, that thus God and the world diuide
their seueralls; God markes his with Grace,
the world hers with Nature and Fortune.
Secondly,Pollitique. It is a pollicie of long practise
and large proofe, that Priests, Iesuites, and
men of spirituall function, are appointed for
State designes, as the most pregnant and con|uenient
mn; for they haue this odds, that
besides their helps of learning, and much ex|perience;
they haue alwaies the reuerence
of their profession, which vndoubtedly (with
people of their owne faith) doth gaine them,
and their perswasions extraordinary credit.
Thirdly,Morall. It is a prouidence worthy of eue|ry
particular man, not rashly to be moued to
any fact or opinion, by the loue or reue|rence
we haue to the persons of them that
would perswade vs; because in this case we
doe not satisfie reason, but affection.




CHAP. XIX.
In what particulars Queene Marie
did most offend the Catholike
Faith.
_FIRST, to remember euery par|ticular
grieua~ce in this Queenes
time, were a labour infinite, nei|ther
is it my purpose to trauell so
largely therein, as others before mee haue
done. And therefore I will (onely) reduce
to memory, some particulars of most conse|que~ce,
referring him that shal require further
satisfaction, to the ecclesiasticall writings of
those times, wherein they are largely dis|coursed:The Duke of Northum|berland.
neither among these the euill for|tunes
of the Duke of Northumberland, nor of
his Sonne and daughter, the Lord Gilford
Dudley, and the Ladie Iane his Wife, because

the Duke hath worthily deserued his for|tunes,The Duke guilty of his fortunes.
and therefore did not receiue wrong
from the Queene and State. And though
the Ladie Iane and the Lord Gilford her Hus|ba~d,
were forced to take the enterprize, they
themselues being meerely passiue in that bu|sinesse,
yet hauing proceeded therein so far
as they did. I see not how Queene Marie
could giue them life and secure her selfe, es|pecially
considering the present condition
of the State,In respect of State. how inclineable it was then to
imbrace any occasion of quarrell.
Secondly,The Q. first offence. That wherein the Queene did
first offend the Christian Faith, was in taking
into her protection, such who had before
declared themselues enemies to truth and
Religion, and this was at her first comming
to the Crowne, giuing liberty and honour
to such men, whom her princely brother had
before imprisoned,Gardiner Bonner and others.  degraded; for by this
she opened hell,  let loose those euill spirits
which King Edward had shut vp; who brea|thing
Reuenge, set the Kingdome in com|bustion,The cruel|ties of these times.
burning and bloodying the holiest
and best members thereof, to the dishonour

of the Prince and Nation; the discomfort of
holy Christians, and to the discountenance
of the Catholike Faith,A double re|spect. and this (in a double
respect) was euill in Queene Marie: First,
(hereby) shee gaue an assured demonstrati|on
how (in the case of Religion) shee was af|fected.
Secondly, shee armed reuenge in 
in these men, giuing it authority, and the
countenance of great place, wherewith they
became most terrible.
Thirdly,How the Q. began her gouernement And with this prologue, did
Queene Marie begin the Tragedie of her
life, fitting her with actors who had well lear|ned
their parts of blood  persecution; out|truding
them of much better merit, whom
shee found in honourable and Reuerend
places established,D. Cranmer and others. as Doctor Cranmer Arch-Bishop
of Canterburie, the Arch-Bishop of
Yorke, the Bishop of VVinchester and many
others, giuing their dignities and places to
their greatest enemies; men not compara|ble
to them in learning and holy life, excee|ding
them onely in cruelty and blood: who
hauing gotten the sword of authority (once)
into their hands,The Papists. would not sheath it, before

it had bene made drunke with the blood of
Saints, nor before the measure of their sins
were full, whom God (for the pleasure of his
will, and for the glory of his Saints) did suf|fer
and for a time forbeare.
Fourthly, in restoring the Nurseries
of all abominations,In restoring the Abbeyes. the Abbeyes and
Monasteries she had in giuing; she did much
offend the Catholike Faith; because those
assemblies were found to abuse the name of
holinesse, making it a cloake to couer the
bodie of their wickednesse: who (like horse|leeches)
sucke the blood and best mainte|nance
of the Kingdome,The euill of a bloody life. to support their la|zie
and most licentious trade of liuing;In respect of State. and
in this did the Queene not onely offend the
truth of Religion, but also the prosperity of
her State in being so euill a president, and in
giuing so much wealth to idle and altoge|ther
vnprofitable people, and not onely idle
but euill vsers of their riches  large possessi|ons;Idle and euil vsers of wealth.
to the high offending of God, the wrong
to Christian Religion, and the impoueri|shing
of the Common-Wealth: all which
respects the Queene ought carefully to
haue regarded.

Fifthly, Againe, the Queene restoring them
did condemne the gouernement of her Fa|ther,The Queene in her iudge|ment con|demned her Father.
by whom they were dissolued, her
making them of such necessity in a Christi|an
Kingdome, made him an euill doer to
suppresse them, whereby she did dishonour
her Father in that wherein he was most ho|nourable,
he deseruing the honour of his
new stile, in this and in his act of Supremacie
onely; both which she vtterly disclaimeth,
damning the deed,The Queene erecteth that Idolatrie which her Father had defaced. and the honourable me|rit
of her Father, building againe that euill
foundation, which he to his honour had cast
downe. And therefore if he by suppressing
them hath deserued to bee stiled Defen|dor
of the Faith: shee then by supporting
them,E contrario. may be iudged to haue offended that
Catholike Faith whereof she was made De|fendresse.
Sixthly, But that which is most worthy
of sad remembrance in this Queenes time
was the alteration of Religion:The worst of the Queenes euills. she reducing
the Church of England to their former con|dition
of Popish Idolatry, which (in the
happie time of King Edward) had bene dis|continued,

she inhibiting al her subiects vp|on
grieuous paines,Her establi|shing of Po|perie. to acknowledge that
profession of Religion, which she found in
the State established, binding them to seuere
lawes, to that Romish obedience which for|merly
they had abiured.
Seuenthly, And in this she did oppose her
selfe with al violence against the Catholike
Faith,Her full op|position a|gainst the Catholike Faith. as if she meant at one blow to bee the
death of faith  true religio~;Her for|wardnes in punishing. she disclaiming
the good  proclaiming the bad; destroying
Gods holy Temple, to build the groaues 
altars of Idols,  this she did with such appe|tite,
that her gouernement was scarce begun
before this was finished. So easily is ma~s na|ture
carried by viole~ce  forcible pursuit,Mans na|ture. to
execute the most wicked and vngodly ends.
Eighthly, And as this alteration of Reli|gion,The altera|tion of Reli+gion is pre|iudiciall to the Commo~-Wealth.
was greatly to the offence of Catholike
Faith, so was it also very preiudiciall to the
State, the Kingdome hereby loosing the
Lordship of it selfe, which King Henrie with
much hazard,  great trauel had recouered.
And assuredly if the Q. conscie~ce could haue
bene perswaded, she would neuer for any

cause,The Q con|science abu|sed. haue giuen the Pope or any other Po|tentate,
the supremacie of her own state, and
among all other least of all to the Pope,The Pope hath not principality proper. who
hath no principality proper, but onely a
gouernement compounded of many thefts;
he hauing taken from euery christia~ Prince
somwhat of reuenew or dignity to make vp
the measure of his greatnes. And it was great
ouersight in the Q. to commend the trust of
her state to the Pope,The Q. o|uersight. whose ambition  aua|rice,
hath made him euer inclineable to de|ceiue:
for when the couetous hath the trea|sure
in keeping, it is hard to make him ho|nest;
 he that hath nothing but by theft, wil
be glad to imbrace oportunity  fit occasio~.
And therefore by thus altering religion,The English nation disho|noured by the Queene. she
did not only offend the Catholike faith, but
dishonor the English nation, binding it againe
in the bonds of forraigne power from which
her brother had redeemed it.
Ninthly, And from this act of Q. Maries did
proceed another equally euill or worse,
whereby she hath got a name of blood and
crueltie, and whereby she hath run her selfe
into the highest degree of euill and this

was the persecution of holy and faithfull
men;The Q. per|secutions of holy men. slaughtering Gods Saints, with such
fury and heathenish heate, as may well de|clare
the Religion and Faith of the persecu|tors.No profession of Religion but the Popes that thinke to merit by blood  per|secution.
For there is no profession of Christian
Religion in all the world, except the Papisti|call
that thinke to merit by murder, blood
and persecution: neither is there any that
haue made their names so odious, by the ef|fusion
of Christian blood as they, whereby
they haue made themselues the friends or
Antichrist, but enemies to God, and to the
truth of his holy Gospell. God hauing com|manded
his seruants to suffer, and not to in|flict
afflictions; for a Christians profession,
is to beare the Crosse,Christians must beare the Crosse  not make it. and not to make it;
and in euery euill worke holy men must suf+fer,
and wicked men doe, for such was the
condition of Christ the Lord of Christians,
bearing the rebukes of all men;The exam|ple f Christ. applying his
sacred hands to heale the infirmities of
men and not to wound and destroy them,
and as (in the Nature of God) his mercie
doth reioyce ouer all his workes,Mercy the  gift of grace. so all the
sonnes of Grace delight in the workes of

mercie, and abhorre the deeds of miserie,
and desire to preserue and not to destroy
the Images of God, nor the Temples of
his holy Spirit, for such were these holy
Martyrs,The Mar|tyrs. who in this time of Queene Mary,
witnessed the truth of their Christian pro|fession,
in the burning flames of persecution
and cruell torture.
Tenthly, So great was the persecution in
these times,The vehe|mencie of this persecution. as that no Sex, no age, nor any
condition of men were spared, the blind, the
aged, and the Infant sleeping in the holy
death of Martyrdome: And if wee may be|leeue
the remembrance of those miseries as
they are recorded,For his booke of Acts and Monuments then children new borne
at the stake, did perish at the stake, little (but
holy) Martyrs giuing their liues, as soone as
they had them for the witnesse of their Lord
Christ Iesus, and his truth, an example of
strange and incomparable crueltie, yet did
the enuie of these times reach further, to the
Sepultures of holy men deceassed,Strange ex|amples of en|uie. where
the persecutions euen there also would tri|umph,
raking vp the bones and ashes of
good men, and after with great Ceremonie

and acclamation burne them; a reuenge
very admirable, and such as onely the mal|lice
of the diuel could deuise.The graue is euery mans Sanctuary. For the Graue
is euery mans Sanctuarie, from which no
man nor no offence can take him, without
the breach of the Lawes of Nature and hu|manitie:
and to persecute and burne mens
bones the life hauing long before left them,
is a Iudgement most mercilesse, for the
doome of Nature will haue one man to die
but once,The doome of Nature. neither ought reuenge to reach
the graues of our greatest enemies; it being
enough for any that his enemy is dead, but
more then crueltie to reuiue his death and
to make him die againe. And therefore as
Iob did blame his vncomfortable friend,Note. be|cause
they did persecute him as God, and
were not content with his flesh. So wee may
lawfully condemne this Popish persecution,A reuenge like the re|uenge of Di|uels.
because they reuenge like Diuels, and are not
content with the Death of them they loue
not, but will then persecute the body, when
they cannot the soule. God hauing ta|ken
that into his bosome of mercie, and into
the saftie of his protection.

Eleuenthly, And if we truly consider the
bloody persecution of Queene Maries time,
and with what vehemency it was moued, it
will appeare to be of like crueltie with them
of the heathen Emperours in the Primitiue
Church,This perse|cution equall with them of the Primi|tiue Church. not for the number though very ma|ny,
but for the manner and cruell circum|stance.
Twelfthly, Againe the Queene in marrying
with King Philip of Spaine,King Philip of Spaine. may bee said to
haue offended the Catholike Faith, because
by that meanes shee tooke away all hope, to
be reclaimed from the stiffe defence of Po|pish
superstition,The confede|racie of the Spanih King and the Pope the King of Spaine being in
most neare confederacie with the Pope. And
this how preiudiciall it was to the profession
of the Catholike Faith, may be easily consi|dered,
hee being chosen to assist the Queene
in her defence of faith, by whom the ene|mies
of faith were principally to be suppor|ted,The Iesuites supported by the Spanish King.
and one so nearely bound to the Popes
fauour,Rome and Spaine the ladders of one anothers rising. in respect of State practise, the Pope
and the Spanish King being one anothers
Ladder, whereby they haue ascended the
steps of reputation and worldly greatnesse.

13. Againe, if wee regard the care of
State, respect of State. the Queenes marriage with the Spanish
King, was not for the prosperitie and ho|nour
of the English Nation, but rather a
meanes to depresse the glory thereof. For
howsoeuer the Queene and the State, did ar|ticulate
with King Philip,The Spanish King bound to certaine conditions. thinking thereby
they had secured the souereigntie of Eng|land,
by binding him to certaine Limitati|ons;
yet was that no assurance, but onely a
false colour, to blinde and satisfie the grosse
vnderstandings of the vulgar, lest by Rebel|lion
and tumult, they should oppose them|selues
against that purpose; for it is not to
be thought,No obligatio~ can binde the desire of the ambitious. that any obligation can binde
such men, as aspire soueraigntie, neither is it
in the practise of great States, to binde
themselues, but onely for aduantage, and
then to cast off their bonds, when their pra|ctise
is ripe, and when they dare discouer
their true intentions.Note. For bonds to him that
hath power to breake them, rather offend
then profit, and in great Spirits, the remem|brance
to bee tyed to any Conditions, doth
beget in them a desire of Libertie, and pro|vokes

them to breake that faith, where|unto
they are obliged. And from this mar|riage
of Queene Marie what could be hoped,The inconue|nience of the Queenes Marriage.
but either ciuill strife in disposing the Suc|cession,
which by this meanes might haue
had many Competitors, or else that this
Kingdome and the dominions thereof be|longing,The greatnes of Spaine.
should haue bene vnited to the So|ueraigntie
of Spaine, which already (like
Hydra) is become monstrous in largenesse;
hauing vnited to that one body many heads
many large dominions.The expecta|tion of Spaine And if this had suc|ceeded
(which no doubt was the expecta|tion
of Spaine) then had the glory of this
Isle euen then perished, and our condition
had bene alike miserable as is now that
heretofore famous Kingdome of Portingale,Portingale.
and other great States by him obtained.
And this kingdome which heretofore hath
benee the supporter of that,England the supporter of Spaine. should then haue
stood at discretion loosing the soue|raigatie,
and fortunate honour which
worthily had made it very famous; the
ambition of that State rising by the fall of
ours; the misery of this raysing the

glory of that, and we of Conquerors should
haue bene seruants,The inconue|nience. and slaues, to that peo|ple
whom before we had conquered: and
they (by our oppression) should haue
wanted a power to haue restrained them
from the generall Conquest of Christen|dome,
the which by vs hath principally
bene letted, and by them most desirously
pursued.In respect of pollicie. And therefore (in respect of Pol|licie
and the practise of State) this marriage
of Spaine was very hurtfull for our Nati|on,
ayming directly at the vtter ouerthrow
of the English Monarchie; wherein Queene
Marie was neither Poilitique nor Holy,The Queene neither pol|litique nor holy. not ho|ly
in not defending the Catholike Faith,
combining her selfe so neerely with the
Popes Confederate; and not pollitique, in
hazerding the honour of her Kingdomes, in
the hands of one so dangerous, as the King
of Spaine then was, who already was so
great, as made him iustly feared, and his
proceedings suspected. God (of his good|nesse)
disposing otherwise of this businesse,The proui|dence of God in this busi|nesse.
deriuing still a Succession of Kingly power
within our selues of our owne nation and of

our owne Kingly line; to the better defence
of the Catholike Faith, and to the perpe|tuall
honour of this our English Monarchie.
14. Lastly, Queene Marie in her vehe|ment
and vniust persecuting her most vertu|ous
Sister the Ladie Elizabeth (afterwards
Queene) did hereby very much offend
the Catholike Faith,Queene Eli|zabeth. because among all
the Religions at that time in England; this
Ladie was chiefe, not onely for holinesse of
life, but also for her eminence of place, and
dignity; being heyre apparant to the
Crowne, and in whom the hope of King
Henries issue onely remained.The hope of King Henrie his issue. And there|fore
the right of Succession remaining in her
Royal person, made her more than a priuate
one, and made the euill of her Sisters perse|cution
more monstrous, being directed a|gainst
the life of one both holy, and a Prin|cesse,
and to whom God had purposed, to
giue the inheritance of these kingdomes,
and the office to defend the profession of
faith, and holy worship. And if wee but
remember the most gratious gouernement
of this Ladie,The gouern|ment when she was Q. the time shee was Queene,

and how nobly shee hath defended the
profession of Faith and Religion, wee shall
thereby iudge how much euill Queene Marie
had done, if the euill practise against her Si|ster
Elizabeth had preuailed. Neuer any
Defendresse nor euer any Queene in the
world,Queene Eli|zabeth in|comparable. hauing finished Gods quarrell with
more honour, or with better resolution
than shee did. And therefore if this holy
life had perished,What hurt the Q. death had bene to Christe~dome the glory of her honoura|ble
actions had bene preuented, neither had
the world euer seene the admirations of her
time, nor the seuerall states of christendome,
euer had so noble a Patronesse to support
them, in their iust quarrells, against the aspi|ring
insolencie of the ambitious: nor had
the holy Saints on earth liued secure, vnder
the late protection of her mercifull wings,
whose holy faith shee hath victoriously de|fended
against all oppositions, cutting off
(not by Pollicie) onely (as did Iudith) but
by her power the head of Holophernes (Ido|latrie.)Iudith and Holopher|nes.
And thus triumphing in the spoyle
of Gods enemies shee hath purchased,
an euerliuing name of honour, and an

euerlasting inheritance in heauen, with God
and with the Children of Faith,The glorie of Queene Eli|zabeths deeds. whose
quarrell shee hath most honourably defen|ded.
15. And Queene Marie in seeking to
destroy so holy a life did not the office of
her Christian place, nor defend the quar|rell
of Faith whereunto her title bound
her.
16. In respect of State likewise,In respect of State. was this
very euill in the Queene, because by this in|iurie
to her neerest blood, shee sought to
hinder the lawfull succession. For the La|die
Elizabeth being dead, it might proue
quarrelsome,The incon|uenience. who should next inherit.
Queene Marie hauing no issue to succeed
her, was like to leaue the State to much
trouble, and to many Competitors. And
if Queene Elizabeth had not succeeded,The glory of the English Nati    of Q. Elizabeth. hap|pily
our Nation had not bene so famous in
the honour and reputation of warlike exer|cise
as now it is, neither had it flourished in
the glorie of Learning, nor in the trauell of
industrious artes as it hath, nor had there
bene that peace, that plentie, and that secu|rity

which presently we enioy; nor happily
had the State bene thus left as by her it is, to
a Prince of peace,King Iames our Soue|raigne. full of hopefull issue, by
whom and by whose posterity, England may
hope neuer to want a noble Defendor of it,
and of the Catholike Faith. And therefore
God onely bee praised who did preuent
the euill,God onely preuented the euill pur|pose of euill men. that euill men intended against
that Ladie, against this Nation, and against
the Catholike Faith. In all these respects may
appeare the euill gouernement of these
times,Queene Ma|rie led to di|shonourable ends. and how the Queene was led by di|shonourable
meanes to an end most dan|gerous,
the cause (as I haue said) was onely
the too much trust the Queene gaue to
euill Counsell whereby shee was violently
carried against her owne Nature, to most
vnchristian designes;The cause the perswa|sion of her conscience. for her conscience
did perswade her, that those things were
of absolute necessity, which (in truth)
were altogether vnlawfull. And this was
the Bishop of VVinchester Stephen Gardi|ners
care,Winchester Gardiner. to set an edge on the Queenes
offence, and to fit her for the stroake of
persecution, whereto in her Nature she

was not fit. And this hee did by the
authority of his Religious place, where|to
the Queene had speciall reuerence,
framing her selfe to doe that onely,
which in her abused conscience, shee
thought was necessarie. For there is
nothing can perswade like conscience,Nothing can perswade like consci|ence.
which in men of all Religions will desire
satisfaction and ease. And though our
conscience iudge falsly of Truth, yet
cannot that Iudgement bee vnsatisfied,
whithout Torment and much affliction:
neither is there any so powerfull to per|swade
vs,Who are most power|full to per|swadevs. as them of whom we conceiue a
reuerend opinion, and thinke Religious
and holy; because the opinion of ho|linesse
taketh away all suspition. And
therefore many times men seeming de|uoute,
and verie precise,Men see|ming deuout are best able to deceiue. are best
able to deceiue; because they are best
credited; the greatest pollititians working
their most damned proiects by men profes|sing
sanctimonious life: this being euer
a foundation in that vile Art,The ground of euill pol|licie. that pretence
and false couller are the hands of Pollicie,

whereby shee effecteth that which other|wise
were impossible. And if wee remem|ber
the number of Conspiracies, and
Treasonous designes attempted in this last
age of the world,Who are the chiefe plot|ters and actors of treasons. we shall scarce finde any
one wherein men professing Religion
were not principalls, either plotters or
practisers. The experience of the time,
finding such men most fit instruments
for such desperate attempts;Why Priests are most fit for treasons. because
they dare doe any thing, and can keepe
counsell, and as it is ieastingly said of playes,
they are not pleasant without a Foole; so it
may bee seriously said of Treasons, they
are not bloodie without a Priest,The office of Iesuits. these men
hauing got them a name of admiration, for
acting the most horrible parts of blood and
treason; wherein they haue approued
themselues forward but most vnfortunane.
And by these men was the better nature of
Queene Marie much abused,By whom the Queenes na|ture was most abused. making her
(by their euill counsell) become odious to
posterity in shedding without mercy the
blood of many holy Martyrs, treading vpon
the face of truth,  dignifying Idolatrous 

euill seruice. Vnfortunate Queene to be de|ceiued
by these euill Ministers; but woe vn|to
them by whom the offence came; happie
had shee bene, if they had neuer bene, and
happie were we, if with vs they were not, for
where they are,Who they be that trouble the peace of Israel. there is Faction, Conspira|cie,
and Treason; and it is they and their
house onely (that is the house of Poperie)
that troubleth Israell.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. There is nothing in this world,
that can continue prosperity without
all interruption. For the Spouse of Christ
(the Church) had neuer any such immunity,
but (like all other things, and for the worke
of Gods glorie) she doth often vary her
State, and like the Sunne often in clouds, and
sometimes in Eclipse. The reason is the will
of God who hath determined to leade vs

through this wildernesse, our pilgrimage to
new Ierusalem.
Secondly, It is the Popish Religion, but
no Religion, to destroy and not correct,
to iudge without mercy, and to bee ter|rible
in the prosecuting their persecuti|ons.
But our most diuine and sacred Lord
Christ hath said Blessed are yee when ye suffer
these things. Surely then cursed are they that
doe them.
Thirdly, The iudgements of God haue
relation to mens offence, being the effect
of that cause, and therefore who knoweth
but that God in iudgement to K. Henrie, gaue
him this contrariety in his Children, to
condradict and countermand one another
in the forme of their gouernements, because
the King himselfe was so full of contrarietie
and vnsetled constancie, at one time perse|cuting
both professions.
Fourthly,Pollitique. To reinduce the Ppall autho|rity
into the English State was a maruellous
improuidence in the Queene, and so direct
against all rule of State, as that questionlesse
the Queene in this made her iudgement

yeeld to conscience (as she deemed it) which
if she had not bene a woman, she would ne|uer
haue done, or at the least neuer so done
without all limitation
Fifthly, The Marriage of Queene Marie
with Spaine, was an oportunity for Spaine
to depresse the glory of this Nation, for if
the Queene had had issue by him, the
principality had bene translated to such a
Prince, as may yet iustly bee feared, to
what extremities his growing Empire in|tendeth.
Sixthly, The Queenes error in these pro|ceedings,
was to receiue her State instructi|ons,
from such Counsellors as did labour
onely to frame her to their owne designes,
not regarding the publike benefit of the
State. For doubtlesse had the Queene bene
ordered by her Pollitique State, or by any
one Counsellor in the State of honourable
quallity, she had not giuen so much of her
title and Maiestie to Rome and Spaine as by
the perswasion of her Clergie Counsell she
did.
Seuenthly,Morall. So full of labour, strife and

error is their life that vndertake the charge
of much businesse and great place, that the
Morall Philosophers doe pronounce them
most happie and rich that can bee content
with blessed pouerty.




CHAP. XX.
Of certaine Discontents whereat
Queene Marie tooke great
offence.
_FIRST, there is no man in this
life, (especially if he be of great
place or great spirit) that can
free himselfe from occasions
of discontent,No man can free himselfe from Dis|content. wherein euery man may make
triall of his owne vertue, and exercise his
Christian patience in his moderate bearing
them:The greatest  seruitude. For there is no victory equall to that
a man hath of himself, neither any seruitude
so base as to be ouercome of Discontnt. And
therefore the most worthy men haue euer
triumphed ouer Fortune, thinking it a deba|sing
of their Noble spirits, to be vanquished
by so meane an enemie. And howsoeuer

such men (in common Construction) are
reputed most miserable,The error of common iudgement. that haue most
cause of griefe, yet in true vnderstanding it
is otherwise: and then especially, when the
grieued hath patience (that true part of
Man-hood) whereby he is able to make the
greatest burden of griefe easie.The power of patience. For so did
the famous men in old time by manly Con|stancie,
and so doe Christians now by pati|ence
support a liuing courage, in the middest
of greatest extremities: Yet euer must this
moderation be regarded,A modera|tion in griefe that as our griefe
may not vtterly deiect vs, so wee must haue
sense to feele and apprehend it, least in the
one extreame wee proue cowherds, in the
other Fooles.For griefe is the true physicke of the minde. For griefe is the true phy|sicke
of the minde, which being well ap|plied
doth correct and heale vs, but other|wise
it doth destroy and make desperate,
and in this case doe men reuenge them|selues
on themselues,The euill of discontent|ment. and double the
measure of griefe wherewith they are af|flicted.
Secondly,Queene Ma|ries punish|ment. And this was Q Maries punish|ment,
who doubtlesse did verie much af|flict

her selfe in the remembrance of her
euill fortunes; some whereof I will relate,
not obseruing the order of the time, where|in
they were occasioned, but ranke them ac|cording
to their degrees in greatnesse, and
as the Queene found them most offensiue.
And as the greatest, I remember first the
trouble of her Conscience,The trouble of her consci|ence. whereby she be|came
enemie to her selfe, and hatefull to her
former proceedings,Her owne iudgement of her owne pro|ceedings. iudging them much
more viole~t, then the cause required, or then
might stand with the honour of her name,
and with the discharge of Christian Con|science,
and this shee vnderstood by a gene|rall
sense of mercy,Her Nature. whereto in her Nature
shee was inclinable, and from which shee
was violently moued by the breath of bad
perswasion. For though the Queene was
made to beleeue, that her vehement perse|cuting
the Protestants Religion,Protestants. was necessa|rie
for both states of Church and kingdome:
yet when Christian blood was shed in that
abundance,The queenes griefe. it much repented her; that shee
(by that meanes) had giuen her name so
bloody a remembrance. And in this case

might she say of Gardiner and Bonner (as Ia|cob
did of his two Sonns,Gardiner Bonner. Gen. 34. 30. Simion and Leui)
that they had made her name odious to e|uery
mans eares, and that therefore they
were Children of Blood. And surely the re|morse
of conscience, for her bloody gouern|ment,The Queene veri much in her selfe offended.
did very much afflict the Queenes
minde, whereof shee would oftentimes giue
demonstration, and by words of dislike, wit|nesse
how much she did distaste the furie of
persecution, and the generall waste those
fires had made in her Kingdomes.
Thirdly, Neither need this seeme strange
to any that Q. Marie should dislike her selfe
in her owne practise, because wee know that
Princes (though they haue soueraigne pow|er
ouer their Subiects;How the power of Princes is limited. yet hath it such limi|tation,
as that Princes themselues, somtimes
are not free, nor can compasse those ends,
which most desirously they would;  some|times
are they forced to that they would not.
The reason is,The reason. because no prince in the world
can support himselfe, without the assurance
of his Subiects:Faction. and when the State is in
Faction (as then it was for Religion) it is

most dangerous for the Prince,Faction. to Discon|tent
them by whom he is principally suppor|ted.
And Queene Mary taking vpon her
the protection of the Romish Religion, did
then binde her selfe to the heads of that fa|ction,
lest by discontenting them, she should
haue runne her selfe into a generall offence,
and so haue hazzerded the fortunes of her
State.The torment of an offen|ded consci|ence. And this was to the Queene so great
offence, as they onely can conceiue, who
haue endured the torment of an offended
conscience.
Fourthly, Another cause of Queene Ma|ries
discontent was King Philip her husband,King Philip of Spaine.
who either in truth or as she thought, did
not so louingly respect her as the sacred
bonds of marriage required, neither had
shee issue by him according to her owne
hope,Her want of issue. and the expectation of her Subiects,
and this did very much offend the Queenes
patience,The natures of women. being by the Nature of her Sex
most inclinable to apprehend such discour|tesie,
and the rather because of her princely
place,The Kings not regar|ding her. and the great spirit of Maiestie, which
shee wanted not. For the Kings not regar|ding,

or his cold regarding her did conclude
that (in his opinion) she wanted of that wor|thinesse
he had formerly imagined, and that
shee did not merit the truth of his loue and
most kind affection,Her iealou|sie of her own merit. whereto his bond of
Marriage did binde him, his not regarding
her, debasing her in worth and estimation,
whereat shee might worthily take offence;
the rather because the Queene in her owne e|lection,The queenes deseruing of King Philip.
had preferred him to her loue, and
to the honour of that Marriage before all o|ther
Princes in Christendome, communica|ting
with him the honours of her Crowne
and Dignities, to the hazzard of her life and
State, being contrary to the generall liking
of her Subiects, and for which had bene ve|ry
dangerous Rebellion in her kingdome.
And therefore this offence taking of the
Queene,The queenes offence in re|spect of King Philip very causefull. was very causefull, and vpon iust
consideration conceiued; shee hauing done
so much for him that deserued so little, and
he not recompensing the merit of her high
deseruing.
Fifthly,The third cause of her Discontent was the losse of Callis. A third cause of Queene Maries
griefe was the losse of Callis, a towne of most

importance for the English State, especially
considering the quarrell of those two king|domes,
England and France, who (besides the
English claime to that Crowne  Dignity)
haue euer had an honourable Contention
to exceed each other in the reputation of
Armes and warlike exercise; neither is it in
reason to bee hoped that these two warlike
Nations shall alwayes conspire peace, and
for euer forget the emulation and glorious
conquests of former times, hauing these
maine prouocations to hinder it,Note. the neare|nesse
of place, the equallity of power, the
difference of Religion, and the claime to the
lawfull inheritance, the least of which occa|sions,
may serue to incense a forward spirit
with desire of honourable Warre and Con|quest.Prouocations to French warres.
And then considering the importance
of the Towne of Callis, for the English wars,
and how by hauing it, the passage was euer
open to enter that kingdome: and being re|couered
by the French,Callis the key of France. England may be then
said to haue lost the key, by which it hath
heretofore so easily entred, In these respects
had the Queene good cause to grieue at so





dishonourable a losse,The reason of the Queenes griefe for the losse of Callis. and the rather it be|ing
lost by a meane power and in little space,
which had bene honourably defended ma|ny
years against the whole power of France,
and what other enuie soeuer to the glorie of
her predecessors, the disaduantage of her
Successors and her owne perpetuall disho|nour.
Sixtly  lastly,The rebellion of her sub|iects. the rebelling of her subiects
did very much discontent her, because shee
thereby vnderstood how her gouernment
was disliked, by many of her best Subiects.
For though it bee not a necessary Conclu|sion,
that where there is Rebellion, there
the State is misgouerned: yet is Rebellion e|uer
a cause that the gouernment is suspe|cted,Rebellion a cause that the gouerne|ment is sus|pected.
and those grieuances that are able to
prouoke such numbers of people against
their Souereigne, are generally belieued to
arise vpon more then common considera|tions.What is re|quired in the person of a Prince.
And therefore it is required in the per|son
of a Prince, not onely to bee of worthie
deseruing, but also to seeme to be such, be|cause
it is most needfull for them to satisfie
opinion, without which no Prince in the

world can be said to be great.
Seuenthly,The forward successe of the Rebells. Againe, the Rebells had such
forward successe in their attempting, as
thereby they did much distresse the Queene,
and threaten the fortunes of her state. For
if the proiect had proceeded according to
their plot, and as it was deuised by the chiefe
Conspirators; the issue was likely to haue
proued much more dangerous. But Sir
Thomas VVyat one of the chiefe Conspira|tors,One chiefe cause why they failed in their proiect.
imagining the proiect was reuealed, dis|couered
himselfe in Armes, before the pra|ctise
was Ripe, and before the time agreed
vpon; whereby he was vnassisted by his o|ther
Confederates, and the practise by this
meanes became abortiue and perished by
vntimely birth; which in likelyhood had
otherwise succeeded, if the whole power of
the Conspirators,Sir Thomas Wyat of Kent. had bene vnited. Sir
Thomas onely with his Countrie-men of
Kent, hauing done so much as may seeme
to haue wanted but little, to haue fini|shed
the whole businesse. And this no
doubt was GODS worke,God the ene|mie of all Conspirators who is
enemie to euerie euill practise, bee the

pretence neuer so fare and reasonable.
Eighthly, Those and many other occasi|ons
of Discontent, had Queene Marie, where|by
God gaue her to vnderstand, how much
he was displeased with her bloodie gouerne|ment,
and whereby (it may be) he had mer|cie
on her weakenesse,Gods mercie in thus pu|nishing the Queene. in laying these gen|tle
corrections on her, who had deserued the
seuerity of his angrie Iustice; she being most
vniust  most seuere in her persecuting the
Children of faith, whom by the authority of
her princely place shee was bound to pro|tect.The mercie of God to this Nation in the Queenes death.
The God of mercy be for euer praised,
who hath ended in this Kingdome the mise|rie
of persecution, making it die in the
Death of Queene Marie, in whose gouerne|ment
it had got authority and life; and may
it euer please God to deriue vpon his Church
of England a perpetuall succession of holy
and resolute Defendors of the Catholike
Faith, to the honour of Gods diuine Ma|iestie,
the good of his beloued Children (the
Children of Faith) and the true glorie of the
English Nation, Amen.


Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. Gods temporall afflictions are
mercies, for they doe but remember vs
our sinnes, and inuite our repentance;
yet they haue contrarie effects in contrarie
subiects. For to some they are physicke to
others poyson, they rectifie some and de|stroy
others. This difference haue the elect
and the reprobate.
Secondly,Pollitique. The common pretenced quar|rell
in all Rebellions, is either Religion, or
vsurpation of Empire; yet neither of these
can giue successe to such treasonable at|tempts,
because they that would alter and
transpose of Gods gouernement, and his of|ficers,
doe but fight against his prouidence,
and contradict God in his owne appoint|ments.
In this case then, the best Pollicie is
for men with patience to suffer, and let God
with victorie doe.
Thirdly,Morall. Discontentment is such a sicknesse

in the soule, as that where it is vnmodera|ted,
there is a necessarie distruction. There|fore
the wise Morall man will oppose this
enemie with reason, and inuincible pati|ence
and outtrude him from all society with
his thoughts. For if there be any thing on
Earth that can resemble hell it is Discon|tent.




CHAP. XXI.
OF REBELLION.
_FIRST, It is not in my purpose to
reckon vp the seuerall opinions
of men in this argument neither
to discourse at large herein,The diuers opinions of men in this Argument. but
onely to report my owne Iudgement, and
that which I think is answerable in this que|stion
to Religion and holy reason. For if this
controuersie were disputed, according to
the Pollitique practise of time,This contro|uersie must be iudged by Religion and not by pollicie and not by the
rules of Religion, and reformed iudgement,
it would be then verie controuersall, and re|quire
large circumstance, because the
Matchiuells of these times, diuersly disagree
in their seuerall iudgements,The Testi|monie of God the best au|thority. but if men de|sire
onely to satisfie conscience, to such men
the testimonie of God is sufficient, which

ought to square the practises of all degrees
of Christian men, and to determine all con|trouersies,
be they neuer so important; But
this tryall hath not alwaies authority in go|uernement
meerely pollitique, for Religion
and Pollicie,Religion and Pollicie two diuers. are two diuers (or rather in full
opposition) and that (many times) in the
practise of State is commendable which
in the iudgement of Religion is most dam|nable,The differe~ce of their ends and practise.
because they conspire not one, but
disagreeing ends, neither can the quarrell
of these two be euer reconciled, but onely by
these conditions, that Piety may command
Pollicie,How to re|concile piety and pollicie. and that such Pollicie may bee onely
in Christian States allowable as may be ser|uant
to the worke of holinesse, and iudged
lawfull by the sentence of true Religion. And
if these respects, had regard in Christian
States, then should not Christendome haue
had that dishonourable imputation, to bee
reputed (of the barbarous Nations) vnfaith|full
and full of dishonourable practise:
wherein the Popes haue especially abused the
Christian Faith,The Popes haue abused the Christian Faith. who (vnder the outward
face of holinesse) haue contriued and effe|cted

Conspiracies and Treasons of most
horrible report, and such as neuer were the
like by men or diuells inuented.
Secondly, And these euill Ministers doe
arrogate to themselues,The Pope doth chal|lenge autho|rity to li|cence Rebel|lion. authority (which
they would deriue from God) not onely to
license Rebellion in a Christian State, but al|so
to command it vpon paine of damnati|on;
a power which neuer any Christian
Prince durst challenge, and a pollicie, where|by
they haue principally inriched them|selues,How the Pope doth inrich him|selfe.
with wealth and dignities, taken at
the spoyle of Christian Princes; and where|with
he doth yet vnderprop the falling state
of his Empire. And this how vnequall it is
with Gods Word, may appeare to any
iudgement,The Pope no follower of any holy example. there being no example in the
Storie of the Bible for his imitation, where
any Priest did euer challenge any such soue|raigne
authority.
Thirdly, And in respect of State practise,In respect of State pra|ctise.
there was neuer any thing more dishonou|rable,
then for Princes and free States to en|ter
voluntary into a seruitude so base  sla|uish,
taking their honours from their owne

heads, to dignifie their mortall enemy, and
to feed his ambition, which (like Hell) can|not
be satisfied, who hath euer fed vpon the
bowels of their wealth, and on the blood of
Saints, and doth glorifie himself in the spoile
of Christian Princes, and thus will doe, vntill
God shall please to destroy him with the
breath of his displeasure.
Fourthly, The example of K. DauidThe exam|ple of King Dauid. may
suffice to conclude against this doctrine, who
notwithstanding he had Gods promise to in|herit
the kingdome of Israel, being by the
Prophet anointed (by which God did crown
him King) and knowing moreouer, that
God had forsaken his master Saul, hauing
taken his good Spirit from him, whereby he
was Anathemate, and interdict by the sen|tence
of God himselfe;Dauid would not conspire the death of Saul though he were a Reprobate. yet did not Dauid
(for all this) conspire against his master Saul,
but onely sought to secure his life, by with|drawing
him from the kings presence, who
hee assuredly knew did seeke after his life.
And when opportunity was offered him so
fit,Dauid refu|seth the offer of opportuni|tie to reue~ge. as that he at one stroake, might both haue
reuenged the iniuries of his greatest Enemy,

and vpon such an Enemy, as stood betweene
him and a Kingdome, yet would he not de|stroy
him being vrged thereto by the earnest
perswasion of his follower, but withstood
both them and opportunity, induring the
trouble of his Conscience, for presuming to
cut off (not his Masters head, but) the lap of
his garment only.
Fiftly,1 Sam. 24. v. 5, 6, 7. Another time Saul pursuing after
Dauid to destroy him was found by Dauid
and Abishai, sleeping with his speare at his
head, as if occasion should haue led Dauid to
an opportunity most fit, and thus haue per|swaded
him.Arare ex|ample of a holy King. See, here is thy enemy sleeping,
and here is a weapon to destroy him; which
aduantage when Abishai would most gladly
haue imbraced, he was disswaded by Dauid,
with this answere;Note. Destroy him not, for who
can lay his hand vpon the Lords Anointed,1 Sam. 2. 6. 9 and
be guiltlesse: whereby hee concludeth it to
be impossible for any man whosoeuer, to
conspire the death or dammage of his soue|raigne,Dauid and the Pope disagree in their opini|ons.
with the testimonie of good consci|ence.
And this opinion of King Dauids, is
aduerse to the practise of the Romane State,

which hath often laid their hands of blood,
and death vpon the Lords annointed; nei|ther
haue they euer done as Dauid did, de|nie
the offer of fit occasion to reuenge,
wherein they are answerable to their Italian
prouerbe.An Italian prouerbe Count Bal|tezer. If thy enemie be vp to his knees in wa|ter,
reach him thy hand to helpe him: But if hee
stand vp to the Chinne, set thy foot vpon him to
destroy him.
Sixthly, Now if King Dauids example and
authority will not serue, because he was but
Man, I will then produce his witnesse, who
was both God and Man the Lord Iesus; who
commanded the Iewes,The exam|ple of Christ. to giue obedience to
Caesar in all those duties which respect Soue|raignty;
though Caesar did not acknowledge
the Iewish Religion, but rather did persecute
that profession. Neither did he perswade re|bellion
against the Romane state, though in
his diuine wisedome he did foresee that the
Kingdome of the Iewes, (which he so much
loued) should be vtterly wasted by the pow|er
of the Romanes,God who on|ly maketh Kings, can onely depose them. whereby hee would teach
vs, that as by God (onely) Kings do Reigne,
so by him onely are they both supported,

(and as he shall onely please,) are they dis|planted
and deposed from their dignities.
Seuenthly, It is euident then, by the testi|monie
of them who are most holy and abso|lute,
(that no earthly man by the authority
of his place) hath or can giue license, to con|spire,
against any Soueraigne power what|soeuer,No earthly power can giue licensce for Rebellion.
and the reason is, because there is no
power but from God, and the powers that
be are ordained of God: and therefore to
resist that power, is to withstand God and his
ordinance, and to condemne the forme of
Gods gouernement. And such are all they,
who goe about to translate authority, where
God hath not giuen it, and to throw downe
and depose them whom God hath esta|blished,
and such are all they who either plot
or practise Rebellion, Conspiracie, or Trea|son,All traytors oppose a|gainst Gods prouidence.
or that can giue allowance thereto. Trai|tors
they be to God, Traitors to their Prince,
Traitors to their Countrie and to them|selues,
Traitors whom God will withstand as
Traitors, and iudge as Enemies.
Eighthly,The Pope his Dispensation. And though the Pope challenge
to be able, to giue that dispensation, which

Iehu had giuen him of God; yet is that one|ly
presumption in the Pope, for neither is he
God to giue any such warrant, neither is he
Gods Prophet, whose authority we may trust,
neither doth God reueale his will immedi|ately
to the Pope, as he did to his Prophet
Elisha, neither haue his Iehues euer had
that fortune and prosperous successe, as had
this; God confounding many thousands of
their damned and Rebellious practises, to
the honour of his name and to the shame of
all such euill Ministers, for this is an vnan|swerable
argument, that the Popes power to
dispence in this kinde is not from God, be|cause
many of their practises succeed not,
which if they were from God they must of
necessity prosper. And therefore neither
Prince, Priest, or Pope, can giue dispensati|on
in this kinde. God onely being able to
make that lawfull, which without his speciall
direction is most damnable.



CHAP. XXII.
A Comparison betweene Queene
Mary of England, and the
Queene-Mother of France,
Katherine de Me|dices.
_THESE two Ladies,Queene Mary. Queene Ka|therine. of all
whom the Histories of
our times record, are
nearest sutable to a para|lell;
hauing beene both
of them honourable in
place of dignity, both of them admirable
in endowments of Nature, and
both of them transported by ill counsell,
too much effusion of Christian blood, by

persecution of the Protestant Religion in
the seuerall precincts of their gouerne|ment.
I desire not to disparrage the me|morie
of noble personages. Historie will
speake vnpartially; and the Christian hearts
which reade or heare of their persecutions,Commisera|tion and Christian pittie.
will compassionate the troubles which holy
men haue endured: and though the sense
of sorrowes bee past and not sensible to
them who indured them; yet will the
knowledge of them beget a kinde of sense
of those sorrowes which other men haue
formerly sustained; and (according to
our affections) as wee loue or hate the
cause it selfe, so shall wee giue our cen|sure
of the Authors of the persecutions.
I forbeare therefore to prosecute the com|parison
in particulars;The woman a weake Sexe. the more, because
I pittie the frailty of their Sexe, which ha|uing
but weake iudgement, is the lesse able
to make resistance against stronge tempta|tions.
I onely deplore their ill hap, to sucke
the milke of so venimous a breast as the
Church of Rome; which is indeed the
Circe of the world, transforming men

by her enchanted potions into beasts, and
metamorphosing euen the innocent dispo|sition
of gentle Ladies,The vene|mous nature of the Romish doctrine. and Princesses into
a Leonine and Tiger like sauagenesse;
that Lupa Romana, which as shee first foste|red
Romulus with the teats of a shee-Woolfe,
so nurseth now all others with the like
milke, and propoundeth the highest re|wards
of heauen to them that will most play
the hell-hounds vpon earth; shee which puts
Princes vpon persecution of the Church vn|der
colour of zeale for the Church, and
stirres vp Subiects to rebellion by pretense
of piety, and giues the lawrell of Martyr|dome
vnto Treason: to her we are to im|pute
the miscarriages of these and many
other worthyes, whose better nature was
empoysoned by bad principles instilled into
them: especially we may commiserate her
of France, because her persecution there
feasted Saint Bartholmew with more Christi|an
soules at one Supper,Saint Bar|tholmewes supper of Sul. then perished by
Queene Mary the whole time of her life:
pray we almighty God, that the bloud suc|king
tyranny of that Romish strumpet may

haue an end; that shee may bee no longer
drunken with the bloud of the Saints, nor
the Princes of the earth no more intoxica|ted
with her cups of abominations; and so
passe we from this sorrowfull and sad theme
to the ioyfull times of blessed Queene ELI|ZABETH.




OF THE NEXT
DEFENDRES OF THE
Faith, Queene ELIZABETH,
and by what difficulties she
attained the King|dome.

CHAP. XXIII.
_FIRST, I am now againe
to change my Argument,
the gouernement being
thus happily changed, and
to report a time of mer|cie,
and not misery; of
preseruation and not persecution, and how
the Catholike Faith was defended not offen|ded;
of Queene Elizabeth, and not Queene
Marie Sisters (indeed) by the bond of Na|ture,
but most disagreeing in the gifts of

Grace, and holy ornaments. The one defa|cing,
the other restoring, the one wounding,
the other saluing, the one offending, the o|ther
defending the most Catholike Faith,
Queene Marie in blood,The differe~t nature of two Sisters. Queene Elizabeth in
peace, in peace with God, in peace with his
Saints, in peace with all men, saue the ene|mie
of God and Man, the Idolatrous and
false worship of Antichrist, the which (with
most zealous resolution) shee hath most
victoriously opposed, to the eternall honour
of her name on earth, and to her euerlasting
happinesse in heauen; where now shee hath
most honourable place among the fellow|ship
of those holy ones, who haue best
fought the Lords quarrell, and best defen|ded
the profession of Faith: and as it is said,
the daie and night diuide the yeare like in|different
partners:The day and night diuide the yeare. so we may say, that these
two Sisters, Queene Elizabeth and Queene Ma|rie,
haue diuided the Renowne of the
world, Queene Elizabeth (like the day) ha|uing
got the better part of fame, honoura|ble
and holy remembrance: and Queene
Marie her Sister (like the night) the worse

part a name of blood, which being vttered,
reduceth to memorie the stories of blood;
and how the Saints of God were slaughte|red,
whereby shee her selfe is made more
blacke than night, in giuing her name so
blacke and so bad a remembrance.
Secondly,The differe~ce of good and bad. This difference of good and
bad is (indeed) very common in the gene|rations
of mankinde, and not common to
any other kinde of creature saue Man. For
inuegitable things we see, that from one
roote doe proceede many branches, yet
all of them of one and the same Nature, and
all bearing one and the same fruit: but in
the generations of Man it is otherwise, for
from on Father commonly proceedeth
children of disagreeing quallities,The differe~ce of Natures. as from
one Adam was deriued both righteous Ha|bel:
and a wicked Caine, and from one Isaac,
a Iacob and an Esau, and so from one Henrie
an Elizabeth, and a Marie, a day and a night,
a mercie and a miserie, a blessed protector
and a most bloodie persecutor of the Chri|stian
Faith. And therefore was King Henrie
much in Gods sauour, and to vs was hee fa|uourable,

in making the greater part of the
Kings Children the better part,Of King Henries hap|pinesse. (which sel|dome
to any one man liuing happeneth.
God in his anger gaue our Nation but one
Marie, but in his loue he gaue vs both an
Edward and an Elizabeth, for so is God dou|ble
as much in mercie as in iudgement;God is double as much in mercie as in Iudgement. nei|ther
will he that hath care ouer all his crea|tures,
suffer the cause hee so deerely loueth
to want protection, but if he giue his Church
a Marie to trie it in the fire of persecution, he
will also giue it an Elizabeth, to restore and
refresh it. Such was our noble Defendresse,
whose care did medicine the bodie of Reli|gion
and State,Queene Eli|zabeth is helper to cure the wounds her Sister had made in the State. which her Sister had grie|uously
wounded. And for my owne parti|cular,
though there was neuer any Princesse
in the world, whose name I would more
gladly honour than Queene Elizabeth, yet
dare I not take vpon me to report her worth
(not for that I feare the face of any man in
that honest performance) but because I am
farre vnable to giue so much of honourable
remembrance as her most princely life hath
well deserued: and by fayling (in reporting

lesse than truth) I shall wrong the reputati|on
of her name, which most tenderly I loue,
and whereto I will euer be a seruant. And
therefore let such as desire to know her
worth;Wherein we may behold the deserts of Queene Eli|zabeth. reade the large storie thereof, in the
most honourable deeds of late times, there
being almost no memorable Act in Chri|stendome,
for the space of fortie yeares of
her time, wherein she had not some part of
princely deseruing; Let him view the pros|perous
face of this Nation, and therein be|hold
her merit, let him remember her fortu|nate
 victorious in her most famous victo|ries,
wise in the gouernement of her state,
iust in the liberty of Lawes, mercifull in
iudgement, and iust in determining, Let him
remember England, France, Scotland, Ireland,
Spaine, Portingale, Italy and Belgica, and all
the quarters of Christendome, in euery part
whereof is spread the remembrance of her
merit, let him aske the Turke, the Tartare and
those Emperours of most distance, and they
can report the honour and name of Queene
Elizabeth; Let him inquire at the enuie of
the greatest Potentates in Christendome, and

that will declare her worthie of most worthie
praise: if there be any one a stranger in this
Israell, and doth not or will not know her
merit, let him consult with these, or with any
of these, and he may receiue satisfaction 
better knowledge: or if this suffice not to
make her enough honourable, let him re|member
how her holy hands put out the
fires of trouble and grieuous persecutions,
loosing the holy Martyrs from the stakes of
of death and (like Gods Angell) binding
the mouth of death,The highest of her deserts and tribulation which
had wasted a great part of Gods inheritance.
And then how shee restored the Truth of
Gods seruice, vtterly abolishing Idolatrie
 grosse superstition And this is that which
best merited honourable remembrance; in|somuch
as if I had enuie and coueted to ob|scure
her princely deseruing, this her most
godly act, would (in despight of enuie and
me) declare her most worthie, and con|demne
the enuious breach of all them that
dare traduce her.In respect of greatnesse  goodnesse. And therefore I dare bold|ly
say of Queene Elizabeth, that in respect
both of greatnesse and goodnesse, she was

such an Empresse as the world neuer had a|nother
to match her; and for her Sex shee
was such a woman as (worthily) may be said
to haue exceeded all other but that most sa|cred
VirginVirgin Ma|rie. with whom I neither will nor
dare make comparison.
Thirdly, Now that wherein Queene Eli|zabeth
was most absolute,Queene Eli|zabeth most excellent in the respects of mercie and Maiesty. was principally
in those heauenly respects of mercie  Ma|iestie,
wherein I thinke she was most excel|lent
and without comparison; the which,
like two hands she applied to euerie good
worke of Church and Common-Wealth;
for by her mercie she approued her self most
Christian, and by her Maiestie a most Prin|cely Soueraigne.
In both which respects,
was this Ladie so singular, as if Grace and Na+ture
had giuen them for ornaments to make
her most excellent, and as if God would
(by her) demonstrate to the world surpas|sing
he can make that Creature vpon whom
he shall cast his heauenly ornaments. Nei|ther
doe I thinke it disparagement to any
Prince in the world,Disparage|ment. that I report Queene
Elizabeth most excellent, both because shee

was so in true estimation; and also for that
it may suffice (for the honour of any prince)
to come neere Queene Elizabeth in these ho|nourable
deseruings, she being matchlesse
for mercie vnlesse in the comparison of K.
Iames our Soueraigne,King Iames. and her successor
which with her Kingdomes hath inherited
that most gratious indument. But for Ma|iestie
she was neuer exceeded,The Queene matchlesse for Maiestie. neither can I
giue that comparison without wrong to
Queene Elizabeth, and flatterie to them
whom I should compare her.
Fourthly, And were I worthie to aduise
in a matter so serious,An importa~t aduise to all Princes. there is no Prince in
the world whom I loue; to whom I doe not
wish this regard of Maiestie, for there is no|thing
more necessarie in the person of a
Prince then Maiestie, which when it hath the
moderation of mercie and aduised iudge|ment
to order it, it is then of most excellent
beauty, and of most speciall vse. Because
where it is thus ordered,A Reason. it begetteth in
mens hearts an admiration and a Reuerence
to the person of such Maiesty, for common|ly
that which men admire they loue, and

too much familiarity doth oftentimes beget
presumption, and neglect of dutie, neither
is there any thing that doth more incour|rage
disobedience in Subiects, than remisse|nesse
and want of Maiestie in the souereigne.
And this is pretily alluded in the fable of
the frogges,Esop in mo|rall Fables. to whom (dema~ding a King) Iu|piter
cast into a poole where they were asse~|bled,
a block which falling with much noise
stroake a terror and a Reuerend feare in the
Frogges; but when they perceiued it bloc|kish,
and to want Maiestie, leape and insult
ouer it in derision and scorne, hating to giue
their obedience to that which wanted the
Maiestie to command them. And this Morall
did Queene Elizabeth well vnderstand, who
most Princelike did euer maintaine the Ma|iestie
of her high place, yet euer with the
wisedome of such moderation,The queenes moderation. as that her
Maiestie was mercifull, and her mercie ma|iesticke,
of these two principalls compoun|ding
a gouernement most honourable and
vertuous.
Fifthly, Such was this noble Queene, and
much more noble than I can report her, who

before she was Queene,Her defence of Faith be|fore she was Queene. did worthily defend
the profession of the Catholike Faith, euen to
the hazard of her princely life. God giuing
her that relish of aduersity, the better to taste
the pleasures of her most happie time which
was to follow. And if the particulars of her
troubles were indifferently considered, she
would be found very constant, and faith|full
to God-ward; and to haue indured
much for the testimonie of Faith, and to
haue had a glorious Conquest ouer all the
enemies of her religious life.An euill pra|ctise to disin|herit the Queene. First, their pra|ctise
who thought to dis-inherit her, and her
Sister, by intruding into the seate of this
Empire the Ladie Iane, whereby it was like|ly
the inheritance should haue bene conuey|ed
another way, and translated into ano|ther
Succession, which could not haue bene
without apparant danger of her life and her
Sisters; because authority that is vsurped,
cannot bee otherwise secured but by their
death that can make lawfull claime:Note. yet God
who doth euer protect truth did otherwise
dispose of this great businesse;Her trouble in her Sisters time. but if we com|pare
this with her trouble (in the time of her

Sisters gouernement) the comparison will
make this little, and that monstrous; she ha|uing
indured so much for the tryall of her
Faith, as may well approue her to bee most
valiant in Christian patience, and to haue
worthily defended the profession of the
Catholike Faith, before shee was made De|fendresse;
the storie of which her most ver|tuous
suffering,Queene Eli|zaheths Teares. I haue heretofore writ|ten
in verse; and therefore in this place I
forbeare to make particular Narration of
that which formerly I haue declared. And
in this I receiue speciall contentment, that
in my knowledge of this Souereigne La|die
Queene Elizabeth, I dare confidently
report to haue found more (in the trauell
of my time) than King Salomon withall his
experience and wisedome could euer finde,Salomon. A good wo|man.
A good Woman.



FIRST,  common with God then to helpe, when the disease is highest, and 
the expectation of good is furthest off,
for in this doth God shew his omnipotencie,
and the difference betweene the actions of
himselfe, and his creatures; for man to pro|duce
his effects doth couet the aduantage
of naturall fitting causes, but it is sufficient
cause in God that he is willing.
Secondly, There is this difference in the
punishments of good and euill men, tempo|rall,
and eternall; the good mans temporall
punishment must of necessity end; the euill
mans spirituall punishment hath an euerla|sting
necessity of being. For God hath deter|mined
all men to taste of both cups, but with
different measure.
Thirdly,Pollitique. It was a wisedome both Religi|ous
and Pollitique in the Queene to enter her
State with generall peace; for though shee

had the sword of authority in her hand, and
found in the power of her command such as
had bene very grieuous vnto her; yet did
she like a wise Princesse take no further re|uenge,
then onely name them for her ene|mies,
and so distinguish them from better
friends. For it is most needfull for a Prince
at the entring his State, to gaine the opinion
of mercie, because there is nothing can bet|ter
secure him, then the hearts and faithfull
seruice of his people.
Fourthly,Morall. There is this greatnesse euen
in men of inferior fortune, that they either
dispise the dignities they haue not, or can
with a modest patience hope them. For see|ing
that all worldly things are moued with
variable motions; what man can haue rea|son
to dispaire the fortune of some prospe|ritie.




CHAP. XXIV.
Of the first Act of Queene Eliza|beths
defence for the Catholike
Faith after she was Queene.
_FIRST, Queene Elizabeth (in
her gratious disposition) was
like the sune, which no sooner
is vp, but it riseth to the com|fort
of all Creatures: so the Queene no soo|ner
in the seate of Maiestie, but she applyeth
her cares to the vse of mercie and vertuous
deeds, casting vpon the generall face of this
Nation, her heauenly aspect and influence,
which (in the blacke time of her Sisters go|uernement)
lay in the shadow of darkenesse
and blacke obscurity. And as the neerest to
her Religious heart she beginneth (being of

important consideration) first with Gods
cause Religion,Her first care for Religion. A loue prin|cipium. laying that for her foundati|on,
whereupon she determined to erect the
whole frame of her holy life; For shee well
vnderstood, there was nothing could sup|port
her in the true estimation of honour
and vertuous liuing but Religion without the
exercise whereof, all other things are vitious
and of euill merit. And therefore did she pur|sue
this end with a most stedfast resolution,
daring to doe any thing (were it neuer so
hazerdous) that might aduantage it, and re|mouing
euery impediment, which any way
might hinder the prosperity of that procee|ding.
And because she found the bodie of
her State dangerously wounded by disor|der,The queenes care to cure the diseased State.
and euill gouernement, she therefore
(very carefully, and skilfully) applieth pre|sent
remedie, least otherwise the disease
might proue incureable, and the cause of
Religion might then bee like the common
cause of Patients,The practise of bad physi|sitions. who haue their patience
tryed by deferments and lingring cures,
which in the trade and practise of many bad
Physitions is very frequent. And this disgrace

hath the Queene well auoided, in determi|ning
first the generall cause of the Com|mon-Wealth,
before any particular end
that might respect her owne priuate.
Secondly, The euidence of this her holy
and princely care is most apparant in the re|storing
of Religion, to that Truth and Autho|ritie,Her resto|ring Religion to purity of Doctrine.
wherein in King Edwards time it was
worthily established, abolishing superstiti|ous
Poperie, which in the time of Queene Ma|rie
her Sister, had vsurped the place and dig|nitie
of true Religion. And this false worship
hath Queene Elizabeth (like a most victo|rious
Empresse) for euer vanquished, brin|ging
it downe to that pouertie of strength, as
the fauourers thereof haue little reason euer
to hope a restauration of that, which she and
her Successor,Poperie for euer banished from this Iland. our Soueraigne King Iames
haue for euer banished from the bonds of
great Brittaine.
Thirdly, And in this hath Queene Elizabeth
very fortunately defended the Catholike
Faith,King Ed|ward ouer|matched by Queene Eli|zabeth. and finished that holy quarrell with as
much honour, as euer did any Christian
Prince before her, being in this worthily

able to match if not, to ouer match her most
princely brother K. Edward, (who but for her)
may be thought (for his holy care) singular
and without comparison.
Fourthly, To reckon vp the particulars of
Queene Elizabeths merit, were a needlesse tra|uell,
both because I cannot so report them
as they are worthly, and also because they
are yet visible in the view of the gouerne|ment
of the Church and State of England,Her desert visible in the face of En|gland. as
now it standeth; our Church being still in
the flourish of that prosperity, wherein shee
left it established to the next Defendor of the
Faith, and wherein K. Iames her successor
our Souereigne doth yet continue it, and
wherein (we hope) it will be euer continued
in his hopefull posterity.
Fifthly, This noble beginning of Queene
Elizabeth, was so much to the aduancement
of the Catholike Faith, that being (by report)
made knowne to the world, was a cause that
the Children of faith who (in Queene Maries
time) did willingly banish themselues into
places of farre distance;The retur|ning of holy men from banishment to England. now hearing of this
alteration resort againe to their Countrie,

and to the protection of this Noble Defen|dresse,
who did free them from the
miserie of persecution, and vnder whose
defence they peaceably enioyed their liues
and the libertie of Reformed Conscience.
And with this holy exordium did Queene Eli|zabeth
begin the Storie of her vertuous life.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. It is a precept giuen vs by our
best Master. First seeke the Kingdome of
God. This lesson had the Queene learned
from that Doctor, who therefore did applie
her first cares to this principall end, for which
God did succeed her in others; for it is vn|questionable
true, that he that seeketh God,
shall finde all his necessarie things though
he seeke them not.
Secondly,Pollitique. The Queene by her direct ma|nifesting
her resolute purpose how in the
case of Religion, she was resolued, was both
in her selfe Religious, and had this Pollitique

respect, that thereby shee tooke feare from
her friends, and hope from her enemies, ma|king
hope and feare shift places, for that did
satisfie the expectation of her friends, which
in such case is doubtfull, and preuent the
forward hopes of the contrary faction, which
in all such alterations is ouer-daring.
Thirdly,Morall. There is this benefit in afflictions
that their vse and acquaintance, make men
valiant and able to vndergoe all fortunes,
for it is possible to make pleasure of sor|rowes,
and to vse them for recreations.
Fourthly, It is a commendable pride, mo|destly
to esteeme ourselues in our aduersi|ties,
but hee that can moderate his pride in
his prosperities, is thought the more rare ex|ample,
and deserues imitation.




CHAP. XXV.
Of certaine considerations, which in
respect of Pollicie might haue di|swaded
the Queene from re|forming
the State of
Religion.
_FIRST, It may seeme strange to
many that their should bee any
consideration able to diswade
from doing well or that any by-respect
should be so respected, as to with|draw
the purpose of one resolued to ho|ly
cares. And this in truth were strange, if
common experience did not teach vs other|wise.Experience.
For it is often times seene that such
men who haue gained fauour in generall o|pinion,
and are assuredly thought to be con|stant,
and most resolute, in that wherein
they are so reputed, doe notwithstanding

fall off from this their reputed Constancie,
and yeeld themselues ouercome by the per|swasion
of dishonest and by considerations.
Secondly, And therfore is their iudgement
much deceiued who belieue that any thing
in this world is of that assurednes,  vnuaria|ble
co~sta~cie,Nothing that is earth|ly is free from incon|stancie. as that no time, nor any perswa|sion
can altar. For the most excellent men, 
the most excellent vertues of men, are not
supported by their owne power, or by any
earthly assistance, but by the hand of God
only: in so much that when this most absolute
power, shall not supply to any particular, the
strength of such a one is but weakenes,  his
constancie but faintnes;God the one|ly supporter of mens re|solution. because (without
this heauenly prop) he cannot support the
body of his vertues, and so of necessity both
he and they must incline to bad alteration:
if then the question were demanded, what
should be the condition of all men? I would
answer, to bee constant in their holy purpo|ses:The nature of all men.
but if it be demanded what is the Na|ture
of all men? I answer, that all of all
manner of conditions, are inclineable to euil
onely and that such who ascend the degrees

of best reputation, doe it not by their own
power, neither haue they power to conti|nue
that state, but naturally cast themselues
from those deseruings whereunto God hath
raised them. Be it therefore the euerlasting
honour of their names, who haue valiantly
resisted the power of those earthen tempta|tions,
and haue had their regardfull eyes to
holy and Religious ends onely. And such
was Queene Elizabeth,Queene Eli|zabeth most constant. who (in respect of her
dangerous fortunes, was assuredly much
tempted to these earthly regards, the which
she nothing regarded in comparison of her
heauenly cares, whereto she was wholly and
assuredly deuoted.
Thirdly, And therefore I report not
what could, but what would haue diswaded
the Queene (in respect of Policie) from refor|ming
Religion; and I will plainly expresse
my selfe in this particular, because I would
most gladly auoid the euil of misconceiuing
which commonly ariseth from doubtful vn|derstanding.To auoid the misco~ceiuing
Fourthly,The Queene neuer fain|ted in her re|solution. And for the Queene, though she
neuer fainted in the care shee had vnderta|ken

for Religion, but euer continued her
course in one resolute passage, and euer
trauelled therein with much prosperity
and honour; yet there wanted not many re|gards
of Policie,Yet much tempted by state conside|rations. and state considerations,
which might haue allured her, from her ho|ly
constancie, and haue made her more
remisse and colde in the pursuit of her holy
businesse; such as heretofore haue altered
the strongest purposes of other Christian
Princes, and such as would haue altered the
Queene her selfe, had not God (by the
power of his Grace) giuen her extraordina|rie
supportations. For (as I haue said) Re|ligion
and Pollicie respect not alwaies one
end,Religion  Pollicie re|spect diuers ends. neither doe they worke by one and
the same meanes. And though in Christian
Common-Wealths it is most needfull that
Religion order state,Religion ought to or|der state. and that Christian
Princes suffer themselues to be directed by
the Law of God, and by the dutie of Consci|ence;Religion is peruerted and Scrip|ture wrested to maintaine vnlawfulnes.
yet in the practise of many states it is
otherwise, where the truth of Religion is
peruerted, and the sense of Scripture wre+sted,
to maintaine the vnlawfull vse of such

state practises, as (in the truth of holy
iudgement) are most damnable.
Fifthly, This truth is euident in the go|uernement
of such Christan States,In Popish states. whereby
license, dispensation and pardons, men may
adulterate, lye and Murther, and by the fa|uour
of their lawes, commit such outrage as
(in the iudgement of Gods Law) is death:Regards of state.
and these are regards of State, which (for ad|uantage
and profit) tollerate and protect
those things, which (in the stricktnesse of
Conscience) are altogether vnlawfull.
It is euident then both by generall obser|uation
and by speciall instance that Christi|an
Princes haue many earthly prouocations
to withdraw them from the zealous pursuite
of holy  Religious purposes, and that God
onely is able to support the best, and most
worthie, from dishonourable recusancie; and
from retyring from those diuine seruices,
whereunto they haue with great hope and
much acclamation entred.
Sixthly, And in this noble deseruing hath
Queene Elizabeth exceeded many of her prin|cely
predecessors; and therefore I report

this as one the chiefe of all her honourable
deeds,One of the chiefe of Q. Elizabeths honourable deeds. whereby she hath well declared her
selfe beloued of God, constant in her holy
purpose, and best able to defend the holy
quarrell of the Catholike Faith. For by this
victorie she had of her selfe,The victorie she had of her selfe. she hath done
that which all the world could not doe; God
hauing made her inuincible, and not to be
conquered but by her selfe.
Seuenthly, To relate the seuerall conside|rations
of state were much trauell  imper|tinent
to this busines; because the number of
them is great,  for the much diuersity, they
altering according to the variable gouerne|ment
of state, and as the alterations of time
would make them vseful. I wil therfore (on|ly)
report some few which at this time, and
in this state were very considerable.The first con|sideration of State. And first
the alteration the State indured by the Q.
altering Religion: for she could not but vn|derstand,
that her new forming the order
of Religion in her Kingdomes,The danger of altering Religion. (was in
the wisedome of State) very hazerdous;A Reason.
because thereby she must needs discontent
the greater number of her subiects, whereby

shee became subiect to the displeasure of her
owne people, and lesse able to suppresse the
disobedience of such as should dare to at|tempt
against her. For at this time the Pro|testant
Religion (to which the Queene was
zealously deuoted) had not equall greatnes
in this Kingdome, with that of the Romish,
the Papist exceeding the Protestant in
Number and power.The Queene made choise of the weaker to assist her against the stronger. And therefore the
Queene (in her election) made choise
of the weaker and lesse able part, to support
her against her better prouided enemies.
And this shee would not haue done, if shee
had yeelded to this perswasion of State, or
had regarded the dignity of her temporall
life,Her holy trust. more than the honour and dignity of
her Christian Name. But she that could not
be ouercome with euill, ouercame this euill
temptation, and resisted the power thereof
by her vertue and godly constancie.
Eighthly,The second State consi|deration was the difficul|ty in finishing Againe, the Q in thus altering
the State of Religion, did attempt a matter
very difficult, and of no easie performance,
and this she might vnderstand by her iudge|me~t
in Philosophie,  by obseruing the course

of all naturall things. For we see that those
things which moue themselues,An argume~t from the or|der of nature in their na|turall
motio~, are carried with lesse veheme~ce
then those that are moued by violent  for|ced
meanes. And the body of this kingdome
(at that time of the Q. entering the state) mo|uing
in the fauour of romish religion, wher|in
it had formerly moued for many yeares,
could not without much violence and great
difficultie be moued against that customary
motion,The impor|tance of this consideration nor be forced to retire backe in the
same steps, wherein it had formerly procee|ded:
and therfore this difficulty in finishing
was a consideration of state, which (in respect
of state) might haue diswaded the Q. holy
care from the reforming of religion,  which
would haue preuailed with any prince in the
world, who had regarded the felicity of their
temporal life, more than the honour of God
or the prosperity of the Catholike Church.
Ninthly,Third con|sideration. The displea|sure of for|reigne prin|ces. the discontentment of her neigh|bour
nations  the displeasure of the grea|test
part of Christian princes, was a speciall
consideration, and such as that nothing but
grace could be able to withstand, for it is ne|cessarie

 natural in the Natures of Princes,
 in the spirits of great persons,The desires of great per|sons. to desire ge|nerall
reputation, and that their names may
liue in the fauour of good estimation, hating
to be held hatefull, or not to haue place, in
the loue of their neighbour nations. For this
forreigne regard as it exceedingly cotenteth
the noble spirits of such as desire it;The vse of forreigne regard. so also it
is most behoofull for the security of their
persons  states; kingdomes and great states
being in this respect like particular men,In respect of England. not
able to liue in prosperity, and flourishing
wealth, without co~municating to each other
their seueral profits: neither is there any part
in the world, where the regard of co~federacy
 forraigne co~bination is so behoofull as in
the states of christendome,A Reason. because of the e|quall
partage of christendome to many seue|rall
princes, whereby they liue in iealousie of
one another;  co~monly confederate with
such forreigne power, as (in the discretion of
state) is thought to be of most conueniency,
both to aduance the glory of their nation, 
to aduantage them against their most feared
enemies, wheras it is otherwise in the spatious

gouernement of mighty Empires;The Spany|ard hath now larger Do|minions than the Duke of Muscouy. such as at
this day the Turke, the Persian and the Russian
Emperours be, and such as heretofore the Ro|mane
Emperours were, who (by reason of
their huge bodies of State,) moue almost
without resistance, neither care these migh|ty
Emperours (so much) to confederate
with their Neighbours, because they know
that (of necessity) those lesser states must
like Riuers discharge their seruice into
their Ocean.Engla~d in the midst of ma|ny disagree|ing Nations. But this Kingdome of
England being in the middest of many disa|greeing
Nations. This consideration of state
did therfore neerely concerne the Queene to
consider of, and these importances would
doubtlesse haue diswaded her holy cares,
had her cares bene any other than holy.
Tenthly, But this Noble Defendresse of
the Faith, howsoeuer shee vnderstood as
much in the wisdome of State,The queenes constancie. as anie other
Prince than liuing. Yet would she not be ru|led
by that wisdome, but (like her selfe, a
most Christian Princesse) shee contradicts
Pollicie with Pietie. And she whose Religious
Iudgement might and could teach her, that

God was able to support her Princely State
against all opposition, and to supply to al her
necessities would (not for any State conside|ration)
distrust the mighty power of his pro|uidence,
or forsake the safetie of his prote|ction
for any cause whatsoeuer. For shee
knew well that God was altogether as able
to preuaile with the lesse as with the greater
number, and that he was not like man, to
worke onely by the aduantage of meanes,God is able to worke with|out as well as with meanes.
for without meanes can he effect whatsoe|uer
shall please him, were the whole power
of earth and hel to withstand him. And ther|fore
as Sampson strong in God,Sampson. could with
his weake weapon destroy a Thousand of
his enemies; so this most resolute Defen|dresse
of the Faith, refusing the power of
earth, hath with the truth of Religion one|ly,
vanquished not a thousand onely, but
many thousands of Gods enemies where|by
she hath most nobly garded the safe pas|sage
of the Catholike Faith.
Eleuenthly, And this I report in honour
of this most excellent Queene,The honour of Queene Elizabeth. whom no re|spect
of danger or State consideration, could

remoue from her holy constancie;  whom
all the power of the earth was not able to be|reaue
of her noble spirit, whereby shee was
most excellent fit for the defence of Faith,
and wherewith she hath defended it, with as
much honourable merit, as euer any Chri|stian
Prince in the world did.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. God doth then trie the faith and
loue of his seruants, when they are pre|sented
with strong and able temptati|ons;
for these tryalls though they cannot
confirme in God any opinion of Truth, in
whom there is all knowledge, yet they serue
for the imitation of other, and for their
iudgement that will not imitate.
Secondly, He that shall fall from the ser|uice
of God, for any respect whatsoeuer;
doth iudge himselfe an Apostate, and vnwor|thy
of Gods fauour, because euen those that
loue God, if they loue him for respect, they

loue the respect and not God.
Thirdly,Pollitique. In state reason it may seeme ha|zardous
for the Queene to alter the State of
Religion, because it might haue occasio|ned
such discords in the State, as might
much distresse her peaceable beginnings, be|ing
yet vnsetled; yet considering in what
termes the State then stood, the Faction be|ing
almost indifferent in number and
strength, she might very well thinke that the
authority of her opinion would carrie ma|ny
thousands with it; because the grosse
multitude doth euer moue in the current of
the common opinion.
Fourthly, In the proceedings of State af|faires
the prosecutions must be ordered by
a discreet and setled iudgement, and not
with desperate vndertakings, which some
call Man-hood and heroicall spirit. For if
there be difference betweene a priuate man
and an ordinarie officer in the State; there
must also be difference betweene the parti|cular
cause and the generall State.
Fifthly, It is the strength of a Pollitique
State, to haue assured confederacie,  com|bination

with neighbour Nations, but the
wisedome of that state is in nothing more
iustified, than in the profitable vse of such
confederacie; for therein doth appeare the
excellence of wit, when with the onely
charge of wit, we can imploy another mans
power to our owne purposes.
Sixthly,Morall. To resist and vanquish the com|mon
knowne enemies of a vertuous life is a
victorie, which morall men haue obtained,
and doth assuredly iustifie (for good) the
happie composition of such a Nature.
Seuenthly, To maintaine correspon|dence
and indifferent fauour in mutuall so|cietie,
is most necessarie to a mans happie
condition; because he that hath the fauour
of generall opinion, hath interest in euerie
mans estate.




CHAP. XXVI.
Of the care the Queene and State had
to depresse the enemies of the Ca|tholike
Faith.
_FIRST,Mercie. the best witnesse of a
Christian life is Mercie, and the
best demonstration of mercie,
is that fauour that men shew to
their enemies; for such kindnesse is against
the perswasion of flesh, and onely caused
by the mouing of Grace. And therefore
mercie (euen in an euill man) doth merit ad|miration
at the least,The reward of Mercie. and to be reputed as a
beautious ornament in a base subiect. But
mercy in the good is a most worthie com|mendation,
and a worthinesse for which
God will exchange his best benefits. For

there is nothing wherein God is more de|lighted
then the workes of Mercie in the
heauenly exercise, whereof hee himselfe is
wonderfully contented, gladding his most
sacred diuinity, that in Mercie hee doth tri|umph,
and that his mercie hath the greatest
part in all his workings.
Secondly, And as this respect of mercie
hath preheminence in the Nature of God,Mercie hath prehemine~ce in the nature of God.
so hath it also in the reformed natures of
good men, who desire (principally) to
square themselues to this most holy propor|tion.
And in this gratious respect of mercie
hath Queene Elizabeth equalled the best
Princes that euer were so rarely was this
Queene composed of Mercie and Maiestie,Queene Eli|zabeth very mercifull.
as that in Maiestie she may iustly be reputed
most excellent,  yet in Mercie more excel|lent
than in Maiestie; the which she would of|ten
declare (euen) to the enemies of her life
and soule: For often would she reach her
hands of fauour to them whose hands were
euer readie to her destructionAn admira|ble degree of Mercie. This truth
is most euident in the view of her gratious
gouernement, who abhorred their death,

who most traiterously sought hers, and suf|fered
such peacefully to enioy their euill
consciences, who practised to destroy her
for her zeale, and constancie in the Catholike
Faith.
Thirdly, For if the Papists in the time of
Queene Marie, or if now in such places where
that Religion is profest, were or had bene so
mercifull in the iudgement of their Lawes,The mercy of Popish lawes and Papists.
as Queene Elizabeth was the time of her go|uernement;
then had not those times bene
stayned with the crying sinnes of Blood and
Persecution, neither had the bodies of Saints
perished in that abundance at the holy fires
of Martyrdome. May it therefore be for euer
recorded for the honour of Queene Eliza|beths
name;How much the Queene hath exceeded her Sister in mercie. that her mercie was more to the
bad, then theirs to the better sort of people;
and that in this most gratious indument, she
is most worthie to bee compared with the
most mercifull Prince that euer was.
Fourthly, The first yeares of her gouern|ment
may sufficiently proue this her merci|full
disposition, in which time the fauour of
her hardest Lawes, were such as that her

greatest enemies (the enemies of her life and
Religion) could not but acknowledge them
very mercifull,The purpose of the queens Lawes. seeking onely to reforme,
 not to destroy the estate or life of any one.
Fifthly, Vpon this aduantage the euill spi|rits
of men, practise against her life and dig|nitie.No meanes to reclaime the inuete|rate enuie of men.
For it is not possible that the inuete|rate
enuie of men, can be satisfied, by any
manner of faire perswasion, or suppressed
by any violent meanes, vnlesse seuerity
reach to the verie life of one so enuious: for
mercie to an euill man maketh him pre|sumptuous,
and seuerity maketh him despe|rate;
So that this disease of enuie is not cura|ble
vnlesse God please to doe it. For in this
peacefull time of the Q when mercy was so
generally conferd,Proiects de|uised by the Pope. did the Pope the enemie
of Faith  the great Polititian of the world,
deuise dangerous proiects against the Q. and
the state of Religion in England, the which
he prosecuted with much instance, and with|all
the forcible meanes he could deuise The
course he tooke was answerable to the pra|ctise
of former Popes, anathemating  ban|ning
the Queene from the hope of saluatio~,Interdictions

interdicting her Kingdomes, and absoluing
her subiects from the dutie of their naturall
obedience, commanding vpon paine of
damnation to doe that, which in the Iudge|ment
of Gods Law is damnation to doe.
This instrument Pius Quintus the Pope,Pope Pius Quintus. sent
ouer into England, and according to his vn|godly
command was it diuulged and spread
before the generall face of this Kingdome;
whereby many of the Queenes people in the
North, and in places of least knowledge and
ciuility, reconcile themselues to the Popes fa|uour,The euill effect of the Popes Bull.
and like Calues ran wilde after the lo|wing
of this curst and cursing Bull, sent forth
by the impious Pope Pius.
Sixthly, The Queene and State apprehen|ding
the danger of these proceedings, and
knowing how hazzardous it might be to her
life and state, to suffer this violence to passe
without resistance;A Parlia|ment. Call a Parliament, and
there agree vpon such Statutes, as in their
wisedomes were thought most conuenient,
to preuent the mischiefe intended against
the Queenes life, her State, and the Catholike
Faith.

Seuenthly,The cause of the statutes against Re|cusants. The cause then mouing the
Queene and State to enact those lawes (which
they call seuerity) was themselues, by reason
of their turbulent and euill spirits desiring
innouation; yea, and inuasion (who) if they
could haue bene content with the benefit of
peace, which they the~ enioyed,  wherewith
the holy men of all ages haue bene most
gladly contented, they had then preuented
those lawes, which they so much condemne;
neither had they runne their names, nor their
cause of Religion, into that suspition of the
State, as by these their treasonable designes
they haue most iustly merited.Exmalis moribus nas|cuntur bona leges. But it is anti|ent
and true, that from euill manners are de|riued
good and wholsome lawes, and they
by desire to harme the state, they did
arme it with wholsome and prouident
lawes, whereby it was made the better able
to preuent and resist their harmefull intenti|ons.
And from their euill is this Good oc|casioned,
that by attempting euill, and by
fayling in that attempt, they haue curbed
their owne power and shortned their owne
hornes, wherewith they and their Bulls had

thought to haue pusht the glory of this Na|tion.
And therefore was their Iudgement
an effect of their owne cause, and most iustly
inflicted on them. For God doth retort the
euill purposes of men against the contriuers
of them, and they that make snares and
traps to catch men, are oftentimes snared in
their owne deuises.
Eighthly, But yet those lawes which they
call seuerity,The mercy of the queens Lawes. were milde and mercifull, and
not proportionable to the greatnesse of their
offence, neither like in crueltie to the bloo|die
lawes in the time of Queene Maries go|uernement,
against the constant professors
of the Protesta~t Religion; the purpose of these
Statutes being to secure the Queene,The purpose of the Sta|tutes. and to
continue her subiects in their dutifull obe|dience,
not reaching to the life of any of the
Queenes Subiects, for their opinion of Re|ligion
onely; insomuch as the most resolute
Papist, were he assured in the dutie of his alle|giance,A large de|monstration of the queens mercie.
and not guiltie of any treasonable
practise, was not vrged by torture or extre|mities
to abiure his opinion and Faith of
Religion, but might continue himselfe in

safety vnder the assured protection of the Q.
 her mercifull lawes, it being the purpose
of the Q. and state to reclaime the disobedi|ence
of her subiects (in respect of Religion)
by faire, and not by forcible meanes, and to
effect that by the gratious meanes of mercy,
which the Pope  others lesse merciful, haue
attempted by the violent meanes of Blood,
fire and Persecution.
Ninthly,The slanders of euill and malitious men. It is therefore mallice  a verie
slander to the Q. princely name, that Gods
enemies  hers doe report her a persecutor
of Gods Saints,  that her lawes were bloo|dy
 tyrannous,  that many of that Reli|gio~
whom they call Saints, haue in this king|dome
suffered Martyrdome for the witnes
of their conscience onely,None haue haue suffered in England for their conscience onely. their being no one
particular person (I think) in all the Q time
that can truly be said thus to suffer death, but
either as actors or abettors of Treason, the
lawes hauing no authority to iudge them o|therwise;
For though by the law they were
rebellious, and disobedient Subiects that
would not co~forme themselues, to the refor|med
Religion then established:  though

by the Law they indured some easie punish|ment,
to make a difference betweene the du|tifull
 vndutifull Subiects, yet there was no
Law so strict as to giue the sentence of death
to any offending onely in Recusancie,The mercy of the Law. nei|ther
was there any law (before this occasion
of the Popes Bull) to make any the profes|sors
of that Religion,The Popes Bull the occasion of more strict Lawes. traytors vnlesse they
were actors or abettors of conspiracie or
treason in which cases the Protestants
themselues were iudged with like seue|rity.
Tenthly, And vnles the prouidence of the
state would haue slept and bene regardlesse
of the Q. the state, and state of Religion, there
could not haue bene lesse done the~ was done
for the security of al,The purpose of the state the purpose of the state
being onely to preuent, and not to reuenge
the iniuries of the Pope and his adhe|rents.
Eleuenthly, It is wonder then, the Papist
should condemne that in our state for seue|rity,The diffe|rence in the practise of these states.
which in their own states is a mercie ne|uer
practised; for with them the least suspi|tion
to fauour or affect the Protestant Religi|on

is persecuted, with much seuerity,  let a
man (in other respects) be neuer so deser|uing,
or his place  birth neuer so eminent,
if once he be conuict to be a Protestant, it is
assured death: it is strange then they iudge
vs persecutors,Our iustice more merci|full then their mercie. when our iustice hath lesse
seueritie then their mercy, we but easily cor|recting
that offence, which they punish with
death, and they seuerely punishing that
which we most easily pardon.
Twelfthly,The polli|tique regard of this seue|rity in the Romish State For how many with vs dare, and
doe fauour those dangerous instruments of
state, and how commonly dare men disco|uer
their superstitious affections in common
conference, and often with earnest reaso|nings,
defending and damning according
to their appetites, whereas with them euery
little circumstance is quarrelsome, and pre|sumptions
many times are most seuerely
punished.
13. And this seuerity in them, is assu|redly
verie considerable for their Pollitique
State of Religion, being one maine prop
whereupon they repose their greatnesse,
for it is verie necessarie for them to vse

all their forceable violence, to suppresse
that truth, which in despight of vio|lence
(like the palme) will sprout and
prosper vnder their grieuous oppres|sions.
And considering how the Prote|stant
Religion (notwithstanding their
oppressing it) hath spread it selfe into
verie spatious limits,Religion flourisheth vnder p|pression. they may well
vnderstand, how much more it should
haue flourished if by their violent
hinderances, it had not bene letted in
his prosperous growth.This Pollicie not answera|ble to piety nor holy ex|ample. But this bloo|dy
pollicie of theirs was not answera|ble
to piety and holy reason, for so
could the wise Gamaliell teach them,
who withstood the bloody counsell of
the Iewes,Act. 5. 34. who would haue persecuted
the holy Apostles withall seueritie, with
this perswasion, that if their cause
were not good, that then GOD would
be enemie vnto it, and so of it selfe it
would fall, and if it were good, it
would bee in vaine to resist it; because
GOD would support it against all resi|stance.

14. The mercie of our English Lawes
then (in matters concerning Religion one|ly)
is an assured demonstration,The mercy of English Lawes con|cerning Re|ligion. that our
Prince our State, and our Religion is mer|cifull,
and these demonstrations of mercie,
are no weake proofes that our Religion is
most Catholike and Christian, most Catholike
because of conformity to the Primitiue
Church, and most Christian, because the ex|ercise
of mercie is the best imitation of Christ
himselfe,Christ the true exam|ple of Chri|stians. the Lord and true patterne of the
Catholike and true Christian beleeuer. And
therefore the Queene and the Parliament
were both mercifull and prouident in con|cluding
these statutes the which by no other
cause but by the Papists themselues were oc|casioned.
15. The purpose of the Statutes was this
principally,The princi|pall purpose of the sta|tutes. first to prohibit the bringing o|uer
of Bulls or interdictions from the Pope.
Secondly, to restraine the Runnawaies,
and Trauellers beyond the Seas without
license, and to prohibit Iesuits and recon|siled
Papists from returning into the Queenes
Dominions, vnlesse vpon their returne,

they would submit to such as by the State
were authorized to that purpose. Now how
needfull it was for the Church and State of
England,The necessity of these Sta|tutes. to haue this prouidence for their se|curity
and peace, I purpose in the next
Chapter verie briefly to discouer.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. Such are (onely and alwaies to
be opposed as enemies to a Christian
State, as are so iudged by the sentence of
Gods Word. For seeing Christ (who is the
Word of his Father) is our Generall in all
spirituall conflicts, we must onely and al|waies
fight his battailes by his direction.
Secondly,Pollitique. To restraine disorder and dis|obedience
in subiects, the State doth vsually
resort to the wisedome of a Parliament; for
though the King by his Proclemations may
command or restraine his Subiects, he being
that one particular in whose person the
whole authority of the State consisteth: yet

doe Parliament Statutes the rather satisfie be|cause
they proceed both from the Kings au|thority,
and from the generall wisedome of
the Kingdome.
Thirdly,Morall. There is no man can liue in that
indifferencie of fauour withall, but that hee
shall haue cause to make distinction of
friend and enemie, or if he be free from all
enmity; yet he shall finde difference in his
friends, and therefore he must distinguish
them.




CHAP. XXVII.
Of what importance the Statutes in the
13. of the Queene, were in respect
of the Church and State.
_FIRST, In respect of the ChurchIn respect of the Church.
were they most important for
the which they were principal|ly
enacted:The prospe+rity of the state depen|deth on the prosperity of the Church. they did also much
import the State, because the prosperity of
the Common-Wealth doth by a necessarie
consequence depend vpon the prosperity of
the Church, for in all true Christian King|domes
the Church and the Common-Wealth,The Church and State Children of one Father.
are Children of one and the same
Parent, and though the Church be the older
and of better inheritance; yet a Christian
Common-Wealth is a Childe of the same
Father, and hath a younger brothers portio~,
in the partage of Gods blessings, the one in|heriting

felicity  eternity, the other felicity
but not eternall. And therefore whatsoe|uer
doth concerne the Church principally
doth concerne the Common-VVealth like|wise,
in a subordinate degree, and those
things which aduance a Christian State;
cannot derogate from the honour of the
Church.Respect had to Pollicie and not to piety onely. And this is true and onely true,
in holy and Religious Common-VVealths,
but not in such States, where the Church is
disinherited of Prioritie and birth-right; and
where the chiefe respect is had to Pollicie on|ly
and not to Piety.
Secondly, The importance of these statutes
(in respect of the Church) may be conside|red
in this,The Popes quarrell. that the Popes quarrell with the
Q. and the State, was for Religion onely, be|cause
the Church of England had cast off that
obedience, which formerly it had vnworthi|ly
giuen to the Popes, wherby the Popes great|nesse
and reputation in England, was not on|ly
weakened, but also his other priuate ends
of aduantages and reuennewes were ta|ken
from him. And therefore consi|dering
the quarrell was for the Religion

profest in England, the defence of the quarrell
on the Churches behalfe must needs very
much concerne it.
Thirdly,The particu|lar branches of these Sta|tutes. Againe, many of the particular
branches of those statutes, had principall re|spect
to the benefit of the Church, and to re|moue
all such euill meanes, as might any
way corrupt and abuse, the consciences of
men in the case of Religion; the Church ha|uing
found much inconuenience, by the
continuall intercourse of English, Romish pas|sengers,Inconueni|ence by En|glish Romish trauellers.
passing from England to Rome, and
from Rome to England; whereby the English
Church lay open to all the Popes perswasions;
and whereby the ignorant and baser sort of
people were withdrawne from their Christi|an
beliefe,  from the dutie of their naturall
allegiance. And therefore to preuent this in|conuenience
was a care most considerable
for the Church, and which (directly) ten|ded
to the aduancement of true Reli|gion.
Fourthly, There be also many other re|spects,
which in these Statutes, directly in|tend
the benefit of the Church, all which may

appeare most euident to any iudgement that
shall with impartiall eyes peruse them.
Fifthly,Nothing can respect the state lawfully that respe|cteth not Re|ligion also. And in truth there is nothing in
a true Christian Common-Wealth, that can
onely direct it selfe to the benefit of State on|ly;
but that Religion must withall be respe|cted,
the care of State being but the bye, and
Religion the maine of euery Christian in|tendment.
And therefore oftentimes euen
in those things which seeme most properly
to concerne the State, is Religion in them
most regarded; the care of State in respect
of Religion, being like the care of our bo|dies,A compariso~
or which holy men care, but so onely,
as for the houses of their soules, and because
of communicating those necessarie serui|ces,
which necessarily depend of each other.
These Statutes then were of most impor|tance
for the Church:Of most im|portance for the Church. that being the most
respected end, whereto they were principal|lie
directed.
Sixthly, In respect of the Common-WealthIn respect of the common-Wealth.
also were these statutes verie consi|derable
and of speciall importance, and
namely in these particulars that the enemies

of the State;The wise|dome of state hauing made dangerous at|tempts,
to innouate, and alter the State, it
behooued them, to whose wisedomes the
care of State was committed, to vse the best
preuentions they could to hinder the like
occasions; and therfore were these statutes
deuised both to cut off the euill members al|ready
corrupted in the Common-wealth,
and also to preuent all such future occasi|ons.
Seuenthly,The dange|rous inconue|nience of Ie|suites and Romish Priests. Againe, there is no Protestant
State, in the world which hath not found the
dangerous inconuenience, of Iesuites and
Popish Priests nursed in Seminaries beyond
the Seas: these men (like so many euill spi|rits)
conueighing their treasonable tempta|tions
to sillie men least able to resist; where|by
many great and dangerous Rebellions,
haue bene occasioned, and whereby many
damned and most dangerous attempts haue
bene made against the liues of Christian
Princes.
Eighthly, And for this consideration
were the Iesuites banished FranceThe Iesuites banished France. for tht
memorable villanie of theirs attempted

on the person of the French King; memora|ble
it may be for the horror of the deed, and
for circumstance of persons a Franciscan
Frier acting,Franciscan Fryer. and a Christian Prince suffering
it, and memorable for that a Pope in pub|like
Orations, did allowe the deede, and
comme~d the doer, canonizing him for holy
 happie, whose fact (without repentance)
was most wicked and damnable; daring to
do more then holy K Dauid,King Dauid. to lay his mur|therous
hands vpon the Lords Anointed.
Ninthly,A respect most needfull for the En|glish Nation. And as this is a respect conside|rable
in all States, so in no place more, then
in the English Nation, this Kingdome ha|uing
had many like attempts, and hauing
many such attemptors, who haue da|red
to enterprise such treasons, as all the
world, nor all the time in the world is not a|ble
to produce the like. And therefore to
prohibite these Runnagate Traytors, to re|turne
more dangerous Traytors then they
went; and to infect the whole with the Le|prosie
of their vngodly positions, and do|ctrines,
was a care which much regarded the
peace  the prosperous estate of this King|dome.A prouident car.

Tenthly, By these statutes the Policie of
the Romish Church was preuented.The policie of the Romish Church pre|uented For it
hath euer beene and yet is the Politike wise|dome
of that state, to send out these their
Intelligencers,Iesuites In|telligencers. their Priests and Iesuites into
all nations who (by confessions,  other se|cret
workings) vndersta~d almost the secrets
of all States,  then like Bees to their Hiue,
or Spirits to their hell) send or bring all the
vse of their trauells to the Seate of Rome;
whereby the Popes haue euer had vnderstan|ding
in the most secret affaires of State, al|most
in all Nations. And this is so behoue|full
for his greatnesse,A great means of the Popes great|nesse. as with this he may be
said to moue the bodie of his greatnes, nei|ther
without this could he support himselfe
in such estimation as he is. For when the
practise of any Prince is working against
him,The vse of Seminarie Priests and Iesuites. he hath timely vnderstanding of it, by
these his carefull Intelligencers, and by that
meanes he is the better able to worke his
owne safetie, and to preuent the intend|ments
of his aduersaries.
Eleuenthly, And therefore was this of
speciall consideration for the state, to ex|clude

them the Land, who are the betrayers
of our State Secrets, to our greatest enemies.
There are these and many other respects,
which make it most behoouefull, for the
peace and prosperous estate both of the
Church and state of England, to banish the
land of these vngodly practisers,  to bring
them their aydors, abettors, and receiuers,
within the compasse of treason;Treason. because
their practise is treason, and they themselues
most dangerous Traytors; dangerous to
men, dangerous to the soules of men, dan|gerous
to mens estates, and dangerous to the
States of Kingdomes and great States: in the
politike practise wherof they are much more
learned,Wherein Ie|suits are best learned. then in the iudgement of Diuini|tie
and Christian Religion.


Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. Religion doth not deny her spe|ciall
Ministers the Clergy the knowledge
of the very secrets of Policie, or rather
the Church (in these times) hath a necessity
that doth require such knowledge: because
there are many enemies, that present them|selues
against the peace and prosperitie of
the Church, which could not be resisted (with
victorie) but by more then common discre|tion;
yet it is one thing to know and pre|uent,
and another to trauell in vnlawfull Po|litique
designes.
Secondly,Pollitique. The Romane State doth sup|port
the body of her greatnes vpon this par|ticular
Policie, that by her Priests and Iesuites
she can discouer all States. This (in the dis|cretion
of State) is such a strength as that
she might be thought inuincible, but that
God doth fight against her.
Thirdly,Morall. hee that intrudes himselfe into

such businesse, wherein both his profession
and his particular cause would make him a
stranger, is iniurious to himselfe and others,
to himselfe, because hee must neglect his
owne particular, to others, because he doth
vndertake that cause, wherein he is, or
should be ignorant.




CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Christian care Queene ELI|ZABETH
had, to defend certaine
Christian Princes and their
STATES.
_FIRST,Euery mans care. it is euerie ones care to
prouide for themselues, and to
labour the aduancement of
their own prosperous fortunes;
but few there be who care for other men, or
that labour in the trauell of other mens af|faires.
And among all the sorts of men, these
few are the best; for by this demonstration
of Charitie they approue themselues to bee
good men and Christians;Charity doth approue vs good men  Children of God. good men by
the Law of Nature, and good Christians by
the Law of grace. This Charitable commu|nicating
of giftes and benefits, being com|manded
and commended before all earth|ly
regards. And therefore, he that with true

Christian respect loueth his neighbour kee|peth
halfe the Law, and he that loueth God
keepeth it all; yet he that made this Lawe,
could thus expound it,Loue the fulfilling of Gods Law. that no man can ob|serue
all the Lawe, vnlesse he first obserue
the halfe, neither can any man giue God his
dutie, who first will not giue his Loue to his
Neighbour, which is not giuen, vnlesse wee
declare it in our exercise of such charitable
offices, as we haue power to doe, and as the
necessities of our Christian brethren may
require them.
Secondly,The dutie of euery Chri|stian. and this is the dutie of euerie
Christian man, of what estate soeuer; it is al|so
the dutie of euerie Christian kingdome,
to support one another in their iust quarrels,
and to communicate to each other their ge|nerall
commodities.The care which ought to be regar|ded in all States. And howsoeuer in
many states (of Christian name) this strict|nesse
of conscience is not regarded; yet in
the best it is, and in all it ought to be, for the
puritie of Christian Religion is of that excel|lent
purenesse,The purity of Christian Religion. that no staine can be in the
vse thereof without dishonourable imputa|tion.
And we all know that in the practise

of heathenish and barbarous Common-Wealths,The diffe|rence of Christian and heathe|nish State.
are many things very commenda|ble
which in a Christian State would appeare
most odious, because in those States they
respect greatnesse only, and there any thing
is allowable that may helpe them forward.
But where goodnesse and vertuous name is
desired, there men neglect the offer of all
euill occasions, and embrace that onely for
lawfull and good, which (in the iudgement
of good conscience) is approued lawfull and
good.
Thirdly, And in these heauenly respects
of Christian commiseration, we haue good
cause, and so haue many Princes in Chri|stendome,Queene Eli|zabeth most compassio|nate.
to remember Queene Elizabeth
most mercifull and compassionate; who
did euer entertaine the extremities of distres|sed
Christian Princes,Distressed Christian Princes. and whose hands
were euer armed with valour, and victory, to
support them in their kingly reputations, 
to defend them from the iniuries of their
ambitious  powerful enemies. But because
the number of her princely deseruings in
this kinde were many, and to report them

would require large circumstance. I will
therefore make choise onely of some parti|culars
of best memorie, and of most impor|tance,
such as being knowne may reduce
to memorie the glory and greatnesse of the
Queenes actions. And the honour which the
name of England hath got in being gouerned
by a Ladie of so matchlesse a reputation.
Fourthly,In respect of Scotland. And as that neerest to vs in re|spect
of weighty consequence. I remember
Scotland first, a kingdome which before her
time, neuer stood assured to the fauour of
England, but what by reason of their naturall
discord, and because of the combination be|tweene
the kingdome of France and it; that
nation hath euer bene suspected of ours, and
we of them; and therefore both of vs haue
euer commonly stood in the tearmes of lea|lousie,The wise|dome of those times.
and both our Nations haue had re|gardful
eye to the proceeding of each other:
yet with such wisedome, could those times
order their affaires of State, as that these
their disagreements were not hazerdous
to the fortunes of either kingdomes;
but continued for respects of Pollicie

insomuch as the Warres of Scotland with vs,
were rather emulations than VVarres; and
ours with them were rather for manly exer|cise,Note.
than any desire to subuert or vtterly
ouerthrow the bodie of that State. And in
truth it cannot be imagined two Nations so
neere as they are (how euer made friends
by allyance or other friendly entertaine|ments)
could liue without giuing of offence
to one another, nor without many spitefull
and hot contentions, these two Kingdomes
in one Isle being like two wiues in one house,These two Kingdomes in one Isle like two wiues in one house.
vnder one and the same husband, euer be|ing
in ciuill displeasure for superiority, nei|ther
could these displeasures be euer ended,
but as God hath done it, making of these
two Nations one Monarch: the which like
one wife without competitor, he hath wed|ded
to one husband the Kings Maiestie that
last was,King Iames. and to his posterity for euer, by
whom the emulation  strife of these euer
disagreeing natio~s is for euer compounded.
Fifthly,The Queene hath the glo|rie of this deede. In the glory of which deed
Queene Elizabeth hath a greater part than
any Prince in the world; because in her life

time she did so much in that Kingdome, for
the safetie of the King and that State, as
might well declare both her power and her
princely care, for that Christian Prince and
his Kingdome;The Queene euer fauora|ble to Scot|land. defending her Kingly Sonne,
(our Kings Maiestie) in the right of his King|dome,
and in the truth of his Christian Reli|gion,
against all the enemies of his life and
State: and therefore hath shee the greater
glory, in defending a Christian King and his
Nation in their best quarrell, and against
their greatest enemies, and yet hath shee
better deserued, in leauing a Kingdome, bet|ter
then that to the King, and to his posterity
for euer.The Queene defended that nation which her predecessors had much offended. Thus did the power of the Queene
defend that Nation, which the power of her
predecessors had many times offended; she
recompensing (at once) the iniuries and
harmes, which (they) the former Kings and
Queenes (of England) had many times in|flicted
on that Kingdome. And threfore
haue they good cause to honour her re|membrance,
and to giue her name the best
merit of all the rase of her princely pre|decessors.

Sixthly, But she who was large in the vse
of her Christian mercy, could not thus
bound her vertues in the limits of an Iland,
neither could she content her selfe that she
had done well, but delighteth to continue
her well-doing. And therefore being inui|ted
by the necessitie of the French KingsThe French King. oc|casion,
Henrie the Fourth, she reacheth him
her hand of fauour to France, and there she
witnesseth the greatnesse of her power, and
the greatnesse of her mercifull regard; that
notwithstanding that Nation had bene the
corriuall of this, and had euer enuied the
prosperity of our many victories. And
though the Queene her selfe was lawfully in|terested
into the title of that Crowne,A princely regard. yet
would she not take aduantage of these op|portunities,
but so powerfully she assisted the
King; as that by her meanes, he might well
say to haue gained the garland, which with|out
the Queenes assistance had either not
bene got, or not so gainfully obtained.
Seuenthly,Obiection. And if any one obiect, the
Queene was improuident to conferre her fa|uours
to a nation, which had euer more en|uied

 opposed the prosperity of her owne
kingdome,  whereof she had no assurance,
let them remember that the Queene was ne|uer
altogether ruled by the perswasion of
State reason and that in this particular,Answer.The Queene neuer alto|gether ruled by the per|swasion of State. shee
deuiseth not how to inlarge her owne king|dome,
but how the kingdome of God
might by her be any way aduanced. And be|cause
that then the French King did declare
himselfe to professe the Protestant Religion.
she therfore thought it the office of her high
place to defend him in the cause of Religio~,The queenes reason.
 to defend that christian faith, whereof she
was made Defendresse; the which she did so
fortunately, that he obtained his kingdome,
 she a name of honour that wil liue for euer
in al those places of the world, where the ver|tues
 honourable deeds of noble persona|ges
are recorded. And let the French-men
for euer remember her name thankefully,The French|men owe thankes to the name of Queene Eli|zabeth. as
their noble Defendresse: let them reme~ber al|so
that as our english Kings haue euer bene a
terror to their natio~, so this Q. of Engla~d was
their co~fort,  she by whose fauour they ob|tained
that benefit, which prese~tly they enioy

in their King and in their peaceable
State,
Eighthly, Another instance of the Queenes
fauorable commiseration was the King and
kingdome of Portingall,The King and king|dome of portingall. the poore King
Anthonie being executed by Philip King of
Spaine, a power that (by much) did ouer|match
Anthonie, and therefore this Portingall
made his resort to implore the fauour of
Queene Elizabeth, who (after the Nature of
her gratious spirit) compassionates his great
miserie, and furnisht him very princely to|wards
the reobtaining of his king|dome.
Ninthly, And though this businesse had
not successe answerable to hopefull expecta|tion;
God otherwise disposing it, yet doth
not that diminish, the Queenes gratious
merit,None can giue victory at his plea|sure. for it is not in any earthly power to
giue victory at pleasure but to attempt one|ly,
and to leaue the successe to the will of
God. Againe, we see that the greatest earth|ly
powers haue often failed in the like at|tempts,
because (as I haue said) no Prince
can giue victory at his pleasure, but must a|bide

the fortune of the day which is alway
vncertaine.Gods iudge|ment. And who can tell but that God
(in iudgement to that people) would not
suffer the Queenes good purpose to preuaile,The doubt of Anthonies title.
neither doe all men agree on the lawfulnesse
of Anthonies title, many approuing the right
of the King of Spaine to the Crowne of Por|tingall
to be more iust than that of Anthonies:
yet the Queene is not to be blamed for taking
part with Anthonie against her profest ene|mie,
the King of Spaine then hauing declared
himselfe such an enemie to the Queene and
her State, as made it behoofull for the
Queene to apprehend all occasions to wea|ken
him.
Tenthly The Queene therefore had a
double respect in this Portingall voyage:The queenes double re|spect in this voyage. first,
to repossesse the wronged king (for so she be|leeued
him:) secondly, to disaduantage the
great enemie of her State, whereby to make
him the lesse able to offend her. And there|fore
though she failed in finishing, yet was
her purpose good, and doth merit to bee
ranked among her other honourable deeds,A reason for the Queenes excuse.
 because it was done principally in fauour

of a distressed Christian Prince to relieue
him in the extremities of his hard fortune;
it deserueth so much the more of honoura|ble
remembrance, and to bee reputed, as
an effect caused by the Queenes most grati|ous
disposition.
Eleuenthly, A fourth instance of the
Queenes gratious fauour to forraigne Prin|ces,
is Belgica the States of the Low-Coun|triesThe States of the Low-Countries.
where the Queene hath done so much as
hath made her famous in all the world,
receiuing those little pettie States into her
protection against the King of Spaine (at that
time the greatest Prince in Christendome,
the which quarrell shee did maintaine with
such aduantage, as made the king feare her
and the world admire her.
Twelfthly,A dangerous Obiection. And howsoeuer there be that
obiect, the Queene did iniurie to the Spanish
King to assist his rebellious subiects against
him (for so they repute the States of the
Low-Countries) yet doe I verily beleeue o|therwise.
For though I will not dispute the
title of the king of Spaine to these Countries,
being impertinent both to me, and to this

Historie,The answer. yet may it assuredly be concluded
that the Queene a godly and religious Ladie,
at that time ordered by as wise and honou|rable
a Counsell as was in Christendome,
would not rashly haue entred into any di|shonourable
quarrell, or haue done ought
in the generall view of the world, that stood
not with the reputation of her princely
name. And this doe they well vnderstand,
who best vnderstood the Queenes nature,The queenes nature.
who respected the honour of her princely
name as much as any other Prince euer
did.
13. And though it be iudged that the states
were Rebells to the King of Spaine,A second reason of the Queenes doings. yet consi|dering
the full opposition of that time be|tweene
England and Spaine, it may seeme
reasonable in the Queene to take this aduan|tage
offered by the Low-Countries, and
to protect them for the security of her owne
peace, aswell because of their conformity in
Religion, as also for the better disinabling
of her mortall enemie, who by all contriue|ment
sought the detriment of her state.Note. And
besides there is a great difference in them,

who moue Rebellion, and them, who im|ploy
Rebells being moued to opportune
purposes, especially considering the enmity
of him against whom they Rebell.
14. And this I write to answer the euill
rumors of such men, who are most ready
to traduce the Queenes most honourable
deseruings.Euill men readie to traduce the Queene. For neither do I condemne the
States for Rebells, neither do I acquite them
of that imputation, but onely answere for
the honour of Queene Elizabeth:The offence betweene En|gland and Spaine a sufficient reason for these pro|ceedings. that how|soeuer
the controuersie stood betweene the
Low Countries and Spaine, the offence was
so great betweene vs, and the Spaniard, as
may seeme to iustifie the Queene in her pro|ceedings.
And therefore they who calum|niate
and bite her name causelesse; doe like
Doggs, who barke against the Sunne, which
in despight of enuy and them, will for euer
shine vpon the face of the earth, and her
vertuous name (like Vertue) will appeare
more glorious by the vitious opposition of
enuie,Vertue the better for opposition. and from the false slanders of euill
men shall arise her commendation.The Queene iustifiable in this quar|rell.
15. Therefore I dare boldly conclude,

that in this particular of the Low Countries
the Queen did that was very iustifiable, con|sidering
the circumstance of the Spannish
warres, and considering with what honour
it hath beene done, shee hath merited the
highest honour, that victorie and honoura|ble
armes can deserue.The Spani|ards  the States can both report the Queenes victories. And this truth (no
doubt) the States themselues will witnesse
with me, who haue often triumphed in the
Conquest of her victories: and so will the
Spaniards too (whose experience hath made
them know her well) vnlesse that enuie, and
the remembrance of former quarrels
prompt them with false constructions.
16. In these, and in many other particu|lars,
hath the Queen declared her selfe a most
noble Defendress of the Catholike Faith,The queenes cares euer seruants to the necessi|ties of Chri|stian princes. whose
cares were euer seruants to the necessities of
such Christian States, as would desire them,
whereby shee hath with much honourable
applause) spent the number of her fortu|nate
daies, and whereby shee hath most no|bly
defended the professors, and the pro|fession
of the Catholike Faith:The honour of the English Nation. Whose king|dome
little England hath been a sanctuarie

for holy and religious persons to flie to, from
all places of trouble and persecution, and
who hath euer bene willing  able to offend
the bad  defend the better sort of people.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. To intend and prosecute our
owne good onely, doth not discharge
the duty of a Christian conscience; For
Piety is like God who hath a generall refe|rence
to all creatures.
Secondly,Pollitique. A Prince that doth support his
distressed neighbour States in their righteous
quarrells, doth a worke both Religious and
Pollitique. Religious because the rules of con|science
command such charitable supporta|tions;
and Pollitique, because his owne di|stresse
may challenge from them the like
retribution.
Thirdly,Morall. Whatsoeuer is in any mans estate
or power, more than may suffice for the wel-being
of his owne particular, hee ought to

conferre that with charitable beneuolence
vpon common distresses, only he hath liber|ty
in the choise of his particulars.



CHAP. XXIX.
A remembrance of some particulars,
wherein God hath defended this
Defendresse of the Faith
Queene ELIZABETH.
_FIRST, It is most true, that they
who defend Gods quarrell, shall
in their iust quarrells bee defen|ded
by him, and they who denie
him in any seruice, them will he denie the
fauour of his protection. For as God is most
Iealous of his honour, and hateth to be vn|regarded
of his Creature, so is he wonder|fully
contented in the faithfull seruices of
men, abhorring (in his diuine Nature) not
to double the recompence of such reward.God the best recompencer of deserts.
And therefore when God giueth comman|dements,

he giueth them with promise to
reward the obseruers of them,God most as|sured in his promises. whereby ho|ly
men haue beene euer comforted with this
assurance, that God is most assured in his
promises, it being impossible to his diuine
Nature, to be either forgetfull or vngrate|full.
Na (rather) so delighted he is with obe|dience,
that (most carefully) he apprehen|deth
euery little seruice of men,Gods reward to reward it
with infinite of benefits.
Secondly, this truth is knowne both by
holy examples, and by testimonies most ho|ly,In the queens particular.
it is knowne also in the Queenes parti|cular,
whom God did wonderfully protect
against all the power of Hell Earth. For I as|suredly
beleeue there was neuer any Christi|an
Prince in the world, against whom were so
many practises,Many pra|ctises against the Queene.  diuelish proiects attemp|ted;
her enemies co~tinually working against
her, either by their power or by their Polli|cie,
either by forraigne, or by ciuill warres; ei|ther
by open or by secret practises;The diuers sorts of pra|ctises. some|times
by inuasion,  sometimes by Rebelli|on;
by poyson often by conspiracie more of|ten;
so that there was no weapon, which in

the wisedome of diuellish art,Gods speciall prouidence for the Queenes safetie. might destroy
her, but it was brandished against her, yet did
God stand betweene her  danger, and bare
off many times the blow of death, at the in|stant
when the destroyers arme was heaued
against her; and such as haue bene solemnly
sworne to destroy her, and haue vowed their
resolutio~ by taking the Sacrament,  though
the opportunities of time and place serued
them; yet in the very act haue they fainted,
being daunted with the Maiesty of her hea|uenly
presence.Daunted with her Maiesty. And though the greatest
Princes  Potentates in Christe~dome, did com|bine
themselues against her, withall their
power whereby there was continual practise
on foot to destroy her; yet did the hand of
God leade her thorow all those dangers, and
made her trauell an honourable length of
daies, and then giue vp her soule in peace to
his hands who had so wonderfully prote|cted
her.
Thirdly,It is in vaine to resist the power of God. It was therefore fruitles and vaine
to contriue against her whom God would
defend,  by whose mighty deliuerance he
had declared himself to fauour her; some of

which particulars I will remember, the ge|nerall
being to large an argument to dis|course on.
Fourthly,Her trouble in her Sisters time. The storie of her heauie persecu|tion,
the time of her Sisters gouernement is
common to euery mans knowledge;  ther|fore
I need not report the manner of that,
nor the manner of her Christian suffering it:
yet this is worthy of obseruation that (at
that time) God did suffer her enemies to
preuaile far,Her enemies could not preuaile to her de|struction. but not to her destruction, and
it may seeme wonderful, that considering Q.
Marie did rule the State, and Stephen Gardiner
the Bishop of Winchester did rule her,  that
both of them did most perfectly hate Q Eli|zabeth:
how the Queene could possibly auoid
their euill malice.
Fifthly, And though it be obiected that
because of Queene Elizabeths innocence,An obiection.
Queene Mary and the Bishop could not haue
haue their purpose,The answer. it is otherwise: For the
displeasure of a Prince disposed to Reuenge,
can in the fairest life finde foule occasions.
And when authority hateth the person of
any one,Note. it is most easie to brand them with

offences. And this could Stephen Gardiner
well vnderstand, who had profited as much
and more in the learning of pollicie than in
piety, and holy wisedome. And therefore
though the Queenes innocence was a cause
of her safetie,The queenes innocence was a cause, but not the onely cause of her safetie. yet was there a greater cause
(the fauour of God) which did defend her
against the power of Pollicie, which her in|nocence
could not doe.
Sixthly,After she was Queene. after she was Queene, when the
storme did seeme to be past, did it then be|gin
againe with greater furie, the Pope sen|ding
his turbulent spirits into this Nation to
set the kingdome in combustion, who by
his interdictions and papall curses, did ban
the Queene from heauen,The practise of the Pope against her. absoluing her sub|iects
from their obedience: deposing the
Queene, and disposing of her Kingdomes, as
he thought conuenient. And this by reason
of the fauour of Romish Religion, did some
hurt in the State; the Earles of Westmerland
and NorthumberlandThe two Earles, Westmerla~d and Northu~|berland. by this incouragement,
raise Rebellious Armes against the Queene
and the State of Religion. But God the
great enemie of Traitors confounds this

practise of the Popes confounds his rebelli|ous
instruments the two Earles,Gods defence for the queen scatters their
rebell troopes, and giueth the Queene and ho|nourable
victory.
Seuenthly, The Pope finding these oppo|sitions
to weake, incites a more able enemie
against her,The Spanish King. Philip King of Spaine, who by rea|son
of his Indian Wealth and his large com|mand
of people, may bee thought the most
able Prince in Christendom, between whom
and the Queene the Warres were maintained
with much resolution and valour; yet by
reason of the maine distance betweene their
Kingdomes, they were lesse fearefull than o|therwise
they would haue bene, if these two,
England and Spaine had bene neighbour Na|tions.The common attempts on both sides.
And therefor the common attempts
on both parties were to Roue at Sea, and
make prey of such Merchants and others,
as had not power to resist them, whereof it
happened that both of them, both lost and
wonne, according as good occasion, and
the fortune of VVarre would fauour
them.The nature of our En|glish Warres with Spaine.
Eighthly, And in these heates and prouo|cations

did these warres continue whereby
both Nations became in the greatest hatred
of one another that could be. And the Spa|nyard
naturally proud, and hauing got ma|ny
victories in other parts of the world,
thought it much to his dishonour, that little
England should be able to resist his greatnes,
the rather he being ayded by the Pope, and
England vnassisted by any other confede|rate
saue the Low-Countries. Therefore he
made great preparation to inuade this king|dome,The Spanish preparation to inuade England.
that by the Conquest thereof he
might declare his greatnesse and (at once)
end that warre, which had bene continued
(by Sea fights and other pettie grieuances)
a long time.The inuinci|ble Nauie, Anno. 1588. And for this end was that huge
Nauie of Ships prouded by them; Christe|ned
the inuincible Nauie, which anchoring
neere our English Coast, appeared like a Ci|tie
of Ships, or like another England come
to inuade England;Their proud confidence. so confident were they
in the trust of this victory, that before hand
they would dispose of Earledomes, Lordships,
and large Possessions, bringing with them
whips and other instruments of tor|ment,

to afflict the victored English, ouer
whom they neuer were victors.
Ninthly,God hateth pride in all Creatures. But God who saw this their pre|sumptuous
pride and hated it in the Nature
of his Angels, would not flatter in the Na|ture
of the Spanyards, and that men might
know that he onely,His mighty deliuerance. and not the numbers of
men can giue victory, he in a trice dissolues
this huge Congregation of Ships; and by the
wisedome  Pollicie of one little man onely,Sir Francis Drake.
did he vtterly ouerthrow this mighty Goliah,
this huge hoast by the Spanyards reputed
and reported to be inuincible.
Tenthly, And thus did God giue a grati|ous
deliuerance to his seruant Elizabeth; ma|king
her triumph in the spoyle of her ene|mies,
and to ouerthrow that strength, which
in iudgement was thought inuincible. And
for the Queene her selfe in these weighty af|faires,How the Queene be|haued her selfe in these weighty af|faires.
she neuer gaue the least demonstrati|on
of feare, but in her owne person and
in her greatest hazard, would shee by
orations animate and inflame the valour
of her people, shewing the greatnesse of
her noble Spirit, with such proofes of Ma|iestie,

as the greatest courage in the world
could not do more. By these particulars out
of many, may appeare how much Queene
Elizabeth was in Gods fauour, and how ad|mirably
hee hath defended this most no|ble
Defendresse of the Catholike Faith.


CHAP. XXX.
Of Queene ELIZABETHS resolute
continuing the defence of the Ca|tholike
FAITH.
_FIRST, Before our endNo man cer|tainly known before his end. wee are
not certainely knowne what
we are, because of the many al|terations
 turnings, whereto
all Earthly things are subiect; for wee see
that the beginning, and the endings of ma|ny
vtterly disagree, and that many haue

a hopefull beginning, whose ends are despe|rate;
and a man may enterprise well that can|not
finish well. Therefore as euery thing is
iudged by the euent, so euery man is iudged
by his end, he being most properly said to
be such a man, as he shall declare himselfe in
his last resolutions.
Secondly,The glory of our life is to continue in well doing. It is then the glory of our life
to continue in well doing, and that no con|sideration
moue vs to retire from the vse of
vertuous deeds, and to abandon that where|by
we haue gotten a reputation of vertuous
liuing.
Thirdly,The queenes godly consta~|cie. And this godly constancie hath
well appeared in Queene Elizabeth who euer
continued her selfe most constant in her Re|ligious
Resolution. For as she was ruled be|ing
vnder gouernement, so shee ruled when
she had the gouernement, and so she left the
rule when she left the gouernement. she was
borne in the Faith of the Protestant Religion,
she liued in that Faith,She was an|swerable to her constant mot. and in that Faith she
died; her aduersity in her Sisters time could
not weary her, nor her prosperity in her own
time varie her,Semper ea|dem. but in both times was she one

without alteration. At her entring the State
she tooke vpon her the Defence of the Ca|tholike
Faith; the which she attempted no|blely,
continued constantly, and finished
happily; for as she began, so she conti|nued,
and as shee continued so shee
ended.
Fourthly,Her constan|cie apparent. This her Christian constancie
is most apparant in the view of her gouerne|ment,
where her hands were euer working
for the defence of Faith, defending it at
home,In the view of her go|uernement. defending it abroad, for her selfe de|fending
it, and defending it for others; euer
in trauell for this holy businesse, the particu|lars
whereof (if I should report them,) I
should ouercharge my poore abilitie with
too much businesse, and peraduenture pre|uent
the Labours of some other better able
to report them.The name of Queene Elizabeth cannot pe|rish in Eng|land. For it cannot be that the
honorable name of this great Queene should
euer dye, or that the remembrance of her
vertuous and Princely deedes should perish
in forgetfulnes, because this Nation which
she hath so much honoured, hath many ge|nerous
and sufficient Learned men, whose

honestie will neuer suffer, that England lose
the honour of her famous memorie, by
whose great Maiesty England it selfe, and the
name of English-man is (throughout the
world) made very famous.
Fiftly, And I heartily wish, that these my
poore vndertakings in this honorable cause,
may prouoke (be it by enuie or displeasure)
some better sufficiency to report her most
Princely deseruings: and it iustly doth moue
admiration in many, that among so much
sufficient Learning as this Land hath, such a
Queene, such a Patronesse of Pietie  Lear|ning,A request to the learned of this Land.
should not liue in the written monu|me~ts
of their best sufficiencie, whose name
hath got degrees aboue admiration, with
Princes of the greatest commaund in the
World. And most excellent Prince (may it
please your Grace I may report the loue I
will euer owe the liuing name of this dead
Queene, and the content I haue that my stu|dies
are, and haue beene imployed in these
honourable arguments: For howsoeuer in
all other things I am little in the fauour of
Fortune. Yet in this I acknowledge her li|beralitie,

that this great Princesse (by For|tune)
doth liue in the memorie of my wri|tings.


CHAP. XXXI.
Of the last act of the Queenes defence
for the Catholike Faith.
_FIRST,The last de|fence shee made for the Catholike Faith. the last act of the Queens
defence for the Catholike Faith,
was the care shee had at her
death to surrender the charge
of her high place, to a Prince faithfull and
assured, and to such a one, whom (in her
Princely iudgement) shee had found fit to
mannage a matter of that consequence.A most Chri|stian care. And
this was a care very Christian in the Queene,
and which declared the truth of her Religi|ous
affection. For they that loue and desire
the world onely;A worldly care. and that haue no hope in
the fauour of God or in the happinesse of
heauen; neuer trouble themselues to care

for that which may outliue their life, imagi|ning
that when they die, the care of the
world doth perish with them, neither haue
such any care to benefit posterity,To benefit posterity. but con|tent
themselues with the prosperitie of their
owne life.The care of Christians. But the holy care of Christians is
otherwise, and doth reach further than life,
euen to the length of all posteritie.
Secondly, for the Queene (in respect of
ciuill life) might haue thought it sufficient
for her honour, and for the discharge of her
high place, that she her selfe had finished
her holy course, with so great a commen|dation:
(but in respect of Religious life) she
hath a further care,The queenes persecution. to care to preuent all euil
meanes, which might any way ruine that
frame which she with so much painefulnesse
had erected. And to this end the Queene
hath a most Christian care, commending
the cause of the Christian  Catholike Faith,King Iames.
to the Faith and truth of the Kings Maiestie
our souereigne that was, whom by her last wil
she interested, to the title of her Crowne, and
to whom she made surrender of her office, to
defend the quarrell of the Catholike Faith.

Thirdly,Obiection. and if any man obiect, that the
Queenes nominating the Kings Maiestie at
her death to inherit her kingdomes, was of
small merit in the Queene, and of no furthe|rance
to the Kings cause, because (of neces|sity)
the inheritance must haue discended
to the King, it being his Maiesties in Iustice,
and by the right of Law.Answer. I answer, that how|soeuer
it is most true of the Kings inheri|tance,
and that it could not rightfully dis|cend
to any other: yet considering the re|uerence
was had to the person of the Queene,
and the interest she had in the hearts of all
her subiects, it had bene dangerous if she had
nominated any other to succeed her; and it
was her speciall prouidence, that at that
time she named the King to this inherita~ce.
Fourthly,Another obiection. againe, there are others who
haue blamed the Queene for not publishing
this her good purpose to the King in her life
time, and haue thought that the open ac|knowledgement
thereof, was necessarie
both to further the Kings peaceable en|trance,
and to giue satisfaction to the doubt|full
mindes of the Queenes subiects,Reasons. the igno|rant

vnlearned people being the greater part
of the body of this Land, and seeing they
could not themselues satisfie this doubt, it
was needfull they should be instructed, in
the Kings lawfull title to the Crowne, and
that publike Proclamation should haue
bene made (in the Queenes life time) to that
end, lest the simplicity of the common
people (when occasion might need them)
should be abused by false vnderstanding, and
drawne from their dutifull seruice, which
could not haue bene, if the Queene before
hand, had declared the King her Successor,
and lawfull heyre.
Fifthly,The answer. I answer, these reasons are weake
and of little consideration, and that the
Queene and her Counsell, had many weigh|ty
reasons to diswade this publique proclai|ming
of the Kings right in the Queenes time.
And these reasons haue respect to the safetie
of the Queene and her state, and to the King
and his title. For by this meanes the King
himselfe had care, not to discontent the
Queene but to continue his Grace in her fa|uourable
 estimation. Againe, it preuented

enuie, and the danger of conspiracies of such
who haue bene named for competitors.
Lastly, it was a meanes to preserue the
Queenes reputation among her subiects, a 
great part whereof, would haue bene giuen
the King before it was due, if he had bene
proclaimed heyre apparant to the Queene
and Crowne, which might haue proued
dangerous to his person, and dangerous to
the state of these kingdomes. For great men
and the great spirits of men being intitled
to much wealth and great dignities, haue not
many times the patience to attend their law|full
times, but preuent time and take it be|fore
hand, the which though it was most false
in the kings particular, yet was it needfull
the wisedome of State should then regard
it. And therefore did Queene Elizabeth that
which was most reasonable in it selfe, most
considerable for the king and the State of
England, and most conscionable for the dis|charge
of her princely place, whose honou|rable
deeds I shall euer most willingly re|port
to whose name I liue a seruant, and
whose praise I would not thus niggardly

scant, but that I vnderstand a man of much
better ability in respect of all learned suffi|ciencie;
hath vndertaken that taske.
THis Phaenix Queene
ELIZABETH is with|out
Comparison.




OF THE NEXT
DEFENDOR OF THE
Faith, King IAMES, the Kings
most excellent Majestie
that last was.

CHAP. XXXII.
_FIRST, There is no wise|dome
in the world, either
of men or Angells, that
can (certainly) foresee the
truth of future euents, or
determine what shall be
the issue of those things which are held
doubtfull. For God hath not giuen to the
nature of any Creature to know things be|fore
they be,None but God can foretell the truth of fu|ture euents. that being proper to himselfe
onely, who at one instant of time is able to
comprehend the knowledge of all things,
both past, present, and to come. For before

things were did God ordeine what should
be,Gods decree.  determine euery circumsta~ce of euery
worke of Nature, which in their appointed
times) were to follow. And these infinite nu~|ber
of varieties doth he direct by his hand
of prouide~ce to those ends he hath determi|ned,His proui|dence.
shutting them vp (in the meane time)
in the closet of his secret counsel,Councell. whereinto
the vnderstanding of any creature had neuer
liberty to enter: and when God shall please
to bring them into act, they are the~ no more
his secrets, but common to the vnderstan|dings
of al men that desire to know them. So
that they come not to mans knowledge,When Gods secrets are knowne to men.
before they passe from the secret of Gods
counsell into act, where before they are not
knowne, but onely to such choise particu|lers
to whom God shall please to make them
manifest: For as no man is able to declare
the fortunes of to morrow before the day
be ended, so in euery other worke no crea|ture
is able certainely to determine,All things are iudged by their e|uents and not otherwise. what
will be before it be; all things (in respect of
humane indgement) being iudged by their
euents and not otherwise.

Secondly,Astrlogie and calcula|ting vncer|taine. and therefore is calculating
and the iudgement of Astrologie vncertaine,
and a very mockery, hauing neither lawful|nesse
nor Truth to giue it authority. And
though the Diuiner sometime hit the
truth, hee doth it not by any certaine di|rection,
but by hap and at peraduenture,
and so the blinde may hit the Butt, and the
reporter of many lies, may fortune to tell a
truth.
Thirdly,False fore|iudging. and this false fore-iudging is of
ordinary custome in the vse of all worldly
affaires, euery man (almost) aduenturing to
Iudge before hand of euery accident, and
to determine how God shall determine of
such and such occasions, whereby they
would tie God to a necessity,The foolish impudence of men. and that
needs hee must doe that, which in their
weake iudgement, they imagine will bee
done. But God who is most absolute, and
able to doe whatsoeuer shall please
himselfe, deludeth the vaine imaginations
of men, (and out of the greatest vnlikeli|hoods)
can hee frame that which is most
desired and least hoped neither is hee

as man to iudge by apparance,God iudgeth not as man by appara~ce. or by the
consequence of humane reason, but out of
death can he raise life, out of miserie, mercie,
and in the greatest expectation of warre,
blood, and persecution, can he giue peace
safetie and preseruation.
Fourthly, Wee haue happie instance of
this in the fortunes of the Kings Maiestie that
last was:The Kings Maiesty King Iames our Souereigne, whom
God most gratiously (and beyond all expe|ctation)
did protect, making him for|tunate
to the honour of his owne name, and
for the happinesse of these Nations, combi|ning
(by him) two euer disagreeing nations
in the neerest bonds of Loue and Brother|hood.God hath ex|ceeded our hopes.
And this did God make prosperous
beyond our hopes, and beyound the euill
desires of them who loued vs not. For if we
remember the latter time of Queene Eliza|beths
reigne, and the hard condition of those
times, we shall then finde how much the mer|cie
of God hath exceeded our hopes,Mens ex|pectations deceiued. and
how much the generall opinion was decei|ued
in the construction of that euent, men
generally expecting the miserie of warre, and

ciuill strife, when God did reach vs his mer|cie,
and the large demonstration of his loue.
Fifthly,In respect of likely-hood. And (in truth) in respect of like|ly
hood, both Nations England and Scotland
had reason to haue feared more, and hoped
lesse then happened, it being not likely to
succeed as it did, and that a people inue|terate
in quarrell and warlike contention,
should in such peaceable manner shake
hands, and conspire mutually one thing,
which for many hundreds of yeares before
did euer disagree,  which is more in a mat|ter
so important, as was the vniting of both
kingdomes in the gouernement of one ab|solute
SouereigneThe practise of forreigne States our enemies. Neither was it likely
there wanted then the practise of forreigne
States, especially of such as enuied our pros|perity
and loued vs not, which might trauell
to hinder this happie coniunction, whereby
our strength became double so much as be|fore,
and therefore our enemies would co|uet
rather to suppresse than to inlarge vs,
least we hauing the kingdome of Scotland to
assist vs, which (before was commonly either
enemie or newter) might proue vnresistable

in the fortune of warre, who before we had
it, were so often Conquerours.
Sixthly,A matter very conside|rable. And this assuredly was a matter
very considerable for them to preuent, and
such as the Pollitique wisedome of States
men would carefully apprehend. For in the
disoretion of State affaires,The discreti|on of State. it is better and of
lesse difficultie to preuent the augmentati|on
of our enemies power, then when it is
augmented to scatter it.Note. And those things
in the opportunity of their times, are of ea|sie
reach, which afterwards in a time vnfit
proue vnaccessable  not within our com|pas,
and this Iudgement could not want in
them who most carefully search the secrets
of all pollicie, and trauell their wits to ap|prehend
and contriue all aduantages: yet
notwithstanding all these occasions, which
in common iudgement might haue letted
the Kings peaceable entrance into this King|dome,Gods fauour to the King.
did God bring him vnder the pro|tection
of his fauour in security and peace,
and with generall acclamation, binding the
enuie of all opposition, and making his ene|mies
shew themselues his friendly entertai|ners,

 the antie~t enemies of this kingdom
to congratulate his Kingly inheritance.The enemies of this King|dome. And
this did God with such admirable demon|stration
of his fauour, as that his Maiestie and
his Subiects of both kingdomes, haue good
cause to remember it for euer most thanke|fully:
whose life God did wonderfully pre|serue,
and whose fortunes hee did highly
aduance, leading him thorow many difficul|ties
and dangers,What the King did inherit with England. to a faire inheritance, to
inherit the obedience and faithfull ser|uice,
of a people faithfull, fortunate, and
assured: whom his predecessors the Kings
of Scotland did euer most feare, as their
most able enemie,  whom his Maiesty euer
found, his most trusty and assured Subiects:
and this was done with such prosperity and
forward successe,The Kings forward suc|cesse. that the report of the Q.
death was scarce named in our neighbour
kingdomes, but this report of the kings
peaceable entrance, was farre off generally
knowne, the good newes of the kings en|tring
outstripping the euill newes of the
Queenes death, to the comfort of all good
men, and to the admiration of all men.

Seuenthly,The King at his entring had no vse for weapon but to giue honour. neither was there need (as it
was thought) that the King and his Subiects
of Scotland should for this cause haue put
themselues into the hazard of vncertaine
warre, whereby the Kings right might haue
indured wrong, and Truth haue stood at the
discretion of warre, which had bene very
dangerous, and that which our enemies
most hoped;The happie issue decei|ued the euill ezpectation. but the happie issue was other|wise,
for neither was there any to lift vp his
daring hand to resist his Maiestie, neither
had the King any vse for weapons, but onely
wore them for ornament and to giue names
of honour to such men, whom hee thought
did or might deserue them.
Eighthly, And thus did God giue vs life
when we feared death, peace when we fea|red
warre,Gods bles|sings to our Nation. a king when we had none, a Prince,
a Patron, and a most noble Defendor of the
Catholike Faith, vnder whose protection we
enioyed peace, plenty,  security. And ther|fore
happie were we in his gratious gouern|ment,
and happie was his Maiesty whom
God found worthie, to succeed in the roy|all
seate, and in the holy cares of that most

famous Defendress of the Faith,Queene Eli|zabeth. Queen Eli|zabeth.


CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Kings defending the Catholike
Faith in Scotland, before he was
King of England.
_FIRST, there is nothing of our
owne wherein wee may iustly
glory,We ought to glory in no|thing but in well-doing. but in well-doing,
because when we doe any work
of Grace, the Spirit of God moueth in vs, and
prouoketh vs to holy exercise. And therein
(onely) we may worthily esteeme of our
selues, because we are accepted of God, and
vsed as his holy-instruments.Gods instru|ment. And in this had
the Kings Maiestie much to glory, who so
soone as euer he could moue, was moued
by the Spirit of grace, to holy and good pur|poses.The Kings care for Re|ligion.
The best proofe of this was his Prin|cely
care for Religion, wherin at all times he

approued himselfe both industrious and
resolute, and wherein he fortunately trauel|led
with much prosperity and honour. The
demonstration whereof is now visible in
the face of Scotland,The Kings reforming the state of Scotland. that kingdome being
by his Maiesties happy gouernment, redu|ced
to the first Christian Faith, and to a better
forme of Common-wealth than formerly it
had. The Church there being reformed
and purged from popish Idolatrie, which
had profaned both that and all other Chri|stian
Kingdomes.
Secondly, and in this the King deserued
euerlasting memory and praise, that he was
the first Christian King in that Kingdome,The first Protestant King in this Kingdome.
whose care gaue end to that miserie, and by
whom that Church had the truth of the Ca|tholike
Faith practised publikely, and with
the warrant of lawfull authority professed.
In which holy businesse the King was verie
fortunate, and for which God did make him
fortunate in the passage of his Princely life
assisting him in his lawfull attempts,Gods assi|stance to the Kings good cause. and
confounding the wicked practises of bad
men, who banded against his Maiestie to

destroy him. And therefore before his Ma|iestie
had the title of Defendor of the Catholike
Faith did he faithfully defend it,The King defended the quarrell of Faith before he had the title. and aduised
and enioyned his Princely Sonne Prince
Henrie to defend it. And thus did God pre|pare
the Kings Maiestie and the Prince for
the purpose of this holy businesse, and by
exercising them for the defence of Faith in
the kingdome of Scotland, to fit them
for the like care in England, wherein the King
most gratiously begunne his gouernment
and ended it,A gratious beginning  ending. and wherein we trust that his
Sonne our gratious Souereigne that now is,
and his royall seed for euer shall in these
kingdomes defend the most true, most anti|ent,
and most Catholike Faith.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. it is in vaine to indeauour things
wherein God is opposite, for no power
can alter the purpose of his prouidence.
This hath instance in the Fortunes of these

two kingdomes, England and Scotland, who
haue euer laboured their seueral extremities
to be vnited; the which when Pollitie and the
wisedome of State could not doe. God (with|out
these meanes) gaue it successe, and in an
instant bound these disagreeing nations in
the bonds of vnseparable concord.
Secondly,Pollitique. the King by publishing (in
print) his opinion of Religion and his directi|ons
for Christian gouernement, did thereby
much confirme the hopes and hearts of the
better part of our English people. For it must
needs be, that if the contrarie faction the
Papist did not withstanding this declaration
of his Maiesties presume much vpon fauour
at his entrance, this presumption would (in
all likely-hood) haue proued a practise, and
therefore was this Publike satisfaction a Re|ligious
pollicie, that did both arme his friends,
and disarme his enemies.
Thirdly,Morall. It is necessary many times to a mans
Morrall reputation to maintaine his integri|ty
by Apollogies and publike protestations
For if the person be eminent and of publike
Note, his good or euill name will be likewise
generall.




CHAP. XXXIIII.
In what particulers King IAMES
our Souereigne that was, prin|cipally
defended the Faith.
_FIRST,The altera|tion of a Prince, the alteration of State. It is often true, that the
alteration of the Prince is a cause
that the State is likewise altered,
and that those things which for|merly
in the gouernement had great autho|rity,
become not only neglected but also pu|nishable
and in great contempt. And this
though it bee not true in generall instance,
yet in euery change of a Prince, it is either
hoped of the bad, or feared of the better sort
of people. Wee had particuler witnesse of
that in our happie alteration; hap|pie,
because nothing but the very person of
the Prince was altered) the gouernement re|mained
in like degrees of happines:Nothing but the person of the Prince was altered. where|in
Queene Elizabeth (to her honourable re|nowne

nowne left it:)The euill hopes of bad men. yet then were there many
euill and discontented persons who could
hopefully perswade themselues, that the op|portunity
was then offered which they ex|pected,
and that the time serued to reinte|grate
them into fauour, and to bring their
cause vnder the safetie of the kings protecti|on,
And though in respect of the Kings par|ticuler,
there was little or no ground for any
such hope, his Maiestie hauing before hand
declared himselfe in print, how (in the case
of Religion) he was resolued, yet was there
a generall hope in that contrarie faction,The hope of factious people.
whereby they imagined somewhat would
be done if not to their absolute content, yet
to their great ease, and to the lightning the
burthen of their afflictions, which in the
Queenes time they worthily indured.
Secondly,Note. That both the Papist  the pu|ritane could conspire on hope in one particuler Prince. But that which is more strange
and worthie of note, that not onely the Pa|pists
had this hopefull imagination, but their
opposites also (whom men commonly call
Puritans) had the like conceiuing, they ho|ping
their cause should finde such large al|lowance
of fauour with the King, that they

and their opinion onely, should haue the
countenance and warrant of the Kings pro|tection.
And that both the Papist and the
regular Protestant should be iudged vnuse|full
and of necessity to bee excluded from
the Catholike Church.
Thirdly,The successe failed. And howsoeuer the successe of
this came short of common expectation, yet
was this of much more likelihood then the
other, both because their controuersie was
not for the matter of Religion: but for order
and for the manner of Ceremonie and cir|cumstance
onely, and also because the go|uernment
of the Church of Scotland,Church of Scotland. had
neere resemblance with that which they desi|red,
whereby the King might the better (or
rather) be induced to giue them and their
request friendly intertainment.The Kings resolute con|stancie. Yet notwith|standing
al these likelihoods, and the hopes
of either partie did the King incline to nei|ther,
his Maiestie finding the Church of Eng|land
(as it was established) to be the meane
and vertue betweene these two extremities,
and that their desires were not for the peace
and aduancement of the Catholike Faith, ac|cording

as both of them pretended, and
that these oppositions were either to be re|conciled,
and so made friends, or else op|posed
as enemies.
Fourthly, And this may worthily seeme
strange that these two irreconcileable opi|nions,
that of the Papist and this of the Puri|tane,
should both of them at one time, ex|pect
supportation from one and the same
Prince, and from such a Prince as had before
declared himselfe not to fauour them, that
these who neuer consent in any little resem|blance,
should thus conspire and hope in
one particular person.The reason. And the reason was
the seuerall perswations they had of the
truth of their cause, wherein the maintai|ners
of both opinions, could receiue speci|all
satisfaction in themselues, and hopefully
belieue to worke the King to that acknow|ledgement
of truth, wherein they them|selues
were resolued, and wherein (they
thought was sufficient reason to satisfie or
perswade any man.Their argu|ments of hope Besides, they might
peraduenture frame speciall arguments of
hope, to giue them incouragement in hope|full

proceeding, both of them apprehen|ding
euery little circumstance of hope, ei|ther
in the King himselfe his Nature or
fortunes.
Fiftly,How God assisted the King in this important businesse. But the mercie of God which had
wonderfully protected the Kings Maiestie in
safetie and prosperous fortune against many
dangerous practises did not now leaue him
vnassisted, but in this businesse of most im|portant
consideration, lead him to an end
full of honourable merit, God giuing him
so much of the wisdome of his Spirit, where|by
he was able to iudge and determine this
maine Controuersie, and whereby hee was
able to iudge betweene light and darknes,
Truth and falsehood, Order and disorder,
Religion and Idolatrie. And according to
this holy iudgement did the King in his ele|ction)
make particular choice,The Kings choice. confirming
the doctrine of true Religion, and the com|mendable
order which in the Church hee
found established, and confuting (by the
iudgement of his owne mouth) both these
 all the other enemies of Truth and order
whatsoeuer. Thus nobly prepared did his

Maiestie defend the Catholike Faith a|gainst
these two great enemies, enemies
both of them; for the Papist hee is e|nemie
to the Faith,The Papist and the Pu|ritane both enemies to the Catho|like Church. and the Puritan is ene|nemie
to the peace of the Catholike Church,
enemies both, yet not both alike enemies,
yet both dangerous and of much conue|nience
to bee opposed by the Defendor of
the Catholike Faith, the which his Maie|stie
did to his great commendation, and to
the honour of Almighty God.The order of the Kings proceeding against the Puritan. For the
Puritan first, the order of the Kings gratious
proceeding in this businesse is well knowne
to the world, by what lenity and fauoura|ble
meanes hee laboured to accord their
disagreements, and to vnite them to the
peace and concord of the Church, from
which they had deuided themselues. For
though by the power of his high place, he
might haue forced their obedience and
haue vsed the seueritie of correction and
seuere Iustice, yet would hee not knowing
how stiffe and wilfull they were in their opi|nion,
and therefore to gaine them his Ma|iestie
was content to vse any meanes

to put off Maiestie and the authority of
Greatnesse,The Kings most Christi|stian Care. and in his owne person to giue
their cause a fauourable hearing, and
himselfe to moderate and iudge their
disputations; and therefore were they
allowed to make choice of the best able
men among them to defend their opi|nion,
against whom were appointed of
the Reuerend Bishops of this Land, to
answer and to satisfie their arguments, in
the hearing and determining, of which
Controuersie his MaiestieHis Maie|sties religi|ous Iudge|ment. did declare
himselfe to vnderstand as much in Reli|gious
Learning as the greatest Doctor in
that presence, he himselfe confuting and
confounding all pretended reason alled|ged
against the conuenient orders of the
Church, whereby at that time hee de|clared
how well able hee was to defend
the quarrell of Faith and Religion against
all the Learning in the world.The different nature of the King, and these peeuish people. And thus
did the King discend his Maiestie to satisfie
the peeuish obstinacie of the Puritan faction.
And whereas it is obiected that these pro|ceedings
against the Puritans,Obiection. did animate

and incourage the Papist an enemie of grea|ter
importance, and that it was euill order
to begin reformation with the Puritans
and to let the Papist passe as an enemie not
regarded.Answer. I answer, the order was good and
most conuenient, and answerable to the rule
of God himselfe For iudgement beginneth
at the house of God, and it is most needfull
for him that would profitably reforme o|thers,
first to reforme himselfe.
Sixthly, And the body of this kingdome,
hauing the disease of disobedience in the
chiefe memebers thereof,A most or|derly procee|ding. it was orderly and
most necessarie; first to respect this care at
home and then to intend businesse further
of, neither could the Papist bee incouraged
by this, for they might well know that if the
King fauoured not the lesse,An argu|ment. he would not
fauour the greater enemie; and if he corre|cted
the Puritan with rods, he would whip
them with scourges. And for the Papist how|soeuer
the Kings Maiesty did vse them,Papist. with
as much fauourable regard as any Prince in
the world, would his enemies yet was there
a watchfull eye had to their proceedings,The care of the State.

and so strict a hand was held ouer them as
to distinguish them from friends; the Go|uernours
of State being most carefull to pre|uent
whatsoeuer might be by them attemp|ted,
not doing ought against them, which
might any way prouoke them to any vnlaw|full
practise.
Seuenthly,The reason. and this was vpon good con|sideration,
because the Recusants in England,
had not yet attempted ought against the
Kings person and State and therefore was
it his Religious wisedome, not to punish be|fore
they had offended, nor with strict seue|rity
to restraine them, before they had made
some treasonable attempt; whereby the pro|ceedings
against them, might be the more
iustifiable before the whole face of Christen|dome.The Papists.
But they not content with much vn|lesse
they might haue all; conspire the most
damnable treason,The Gun|powder trea|son. that euer by men or di|uels
was inuented; the report whereof (for
the rarenesse) is spread ouer all the world.
For (at one blow) they purposed to smite off
the heads of all the honourable in this Na|tion;
all the Heads because all the Gouer|nours

both principall and subordinate,
and all the Honourable, because al|most
all the wise and Reuerend in the
Kingdome, should at one Blow haue peri|shed.
Eighthly,How this might haue wrought re|uenge in the Kings desire. now how this Treason might
haue offended, a King disposed to Reuenge,
let the most patient minded in the world
iudge it; but how it did moue the Kings im|patience,
or how his Maiestie reuenged it,
let the most enuious Papist iudge it. For
presently vpon the discouerie of this neere
effected Treason;The Kings Proclema|tion. the king by his Proclama|tions
declared, that he had no purpose, to
lay their offence vpon their generall cause
of Religion;His most re|ligious mer|cie. nor that his Iustice should
reach further then to the offendors
themselues, wherein hee gaue assu|rance
of safetie to all such Recusants,
as in all other respects saue Religion were
dutifull Subiects. And though for the
better security of the king and State,
there were some Statutes enacted for the
better preuenting of the like dangers;Statutes en|acted.
yet were they verie mercifull, and farre

from the Nature of Reuenge, tending
onely to defend, and not to offend the
quiet of any peaceable Subiect.
Ninthly,The Oath of Allegiance. And whereas the Oath of
Allegiance is by many thought verie grie|uous,Blackwell the Arch-Priest.
it is strange, that any Christian
iudgement should so thinke, and that
any man should dare to condemne that
which God so highly commendeth; and
with some of their best Learned both al|low
as lawfull, and haue aduisedly taken,
the which because it is by others largely
disputed, I passe ouer.
Tenthly, Now the king to adde to all
these Christian merits and to declare him|selfe
with most direct testimonies, that
his Princely care was principally for the
Seruice of God, and the aduancement
of the Catholike Religion; hee the Lord
annointed vndertakes the quarrell of
GODS cause, concluding by inuinci|ble
arguments, that Truth which Antichrist
the Arch-enemie of the Catholike Faith had
opposed. These his most Christian and
most Princely labours, are diuulged

and laid open before the generall face of the
world, whereby that man of sin is with eui|dence
discouered, and all his painted Polli|tique
Religion, laid nakedly open, in the true
formes of his false worship; and whereby
Christian Emperours, Kings, and Potentates,
are induced by the authorities of reason, and
particuler example, to combine with God,
and Gods Lieftenants (Christian Princes) a|gainst
all forreigne confederacie whatsoe|uer.
These workes of Religious Learning in
the King, as they were of maruellous import
and strength to the Catholike Cause, so also
they made much for the Kings sacred ho|nour,
and will vndoubtedly remaine to all
posterity as ornaments of his princely
worth, and inducements to inflame with
sacred zeale the affections of his princely
Progenie, to honour and inlarge the repu|tation
of Religion and Learning. And how|soeuer
his malitious lying enemie Tortus (or
the Cardinall his Master Bellarmine,) would
disgrace the Kings sufficiencie, in this kinde
of learning, and would therefore father his
Maiesties worke vpon his Subiect of lesse au|thority,

yet are these iniuries both knowne
and iudged by many thousands, both of this
and of other Nations, that haue had expe|rience
of his extraordinary indouments:
the truth whereof it is not possible his owne
Subiects can report, without suspition of
flatterie.
Eleuenthly, I conclude then that the
Kings Maiesty most noblely defended the
Catholike Faith against all the enemies,The two great ene|mies of our Church. and prin|cipally
against these two great ones, the Pa|pist
and the Puritan.

Obseruations

Diuine.
Pollitique.
Morall.

FIRST,Diuine. there was neuer any time
wherein God had not some Patron to
giue the cause of his Church Sanctuarie:
for though it be often in distresse, it is neuer
in destruction.
Secondly,Pollitique. the Kings proceeding against
the Papists and the Puritans, did well distin|guish
the quallities of their offence, and de|clare

his owne integrity, for though he pro|ceeded
against both, yet with some distincti|on
of fauour. For the Puritan was the lesse
enemie, being enemie to the peace onely,
but the Papist both to the peace and truth of
the Catholike Faith.
Thirdly,Morall. Men measure the dgrees of
loue, and hate, according to the quallity of
the cause that moues the passion. But in par|ticular
relations, the personall respect doth
often preuaile aboue the cause. For passion
is much more strong when it is vnited in one
particuler Subiect, rather than when it is de|uided
vnto a multitude.




CHAP. XXXV.
A remembrance of some particulers,
wherein God wonderfully defen|ded
King IAMES.
_FIRST, there was neuer any
Prince in the world who had
more cause to acknowledge
Gods fauour then King Iames,The many daungers the King passed.
who trauelled his Princely life (from his
Cradle to his age thorow many dangerous
fortunes; whom God still supported against
the most able, and the most subtill practises
of his enemies. For if we reduce to memo|rie,In Scotland.
the many dangers of his life in Scotland,
and how in that kingdome his enemies did
conspire against his life and State, there is in
that time and place matter enough of ad|miration.
But if that were not, and
that wee remembred his fortunes in
England onely;England. in those few yeares of his

gouernement here, wee shall finde mat|ter
of more than admiration, and such con|spiracie
and damned practises, as would a|maze
and (with horror) affright the hearts
of tyrants and bloody practisers.
Secondly, and for Scotland first (to omit
many of lesse note) I remember that very
dangerous conspiracie of the Gowries,The conspi|racie of the Gowries. one|ly
a practise brought to that ripenesse as that
the King might seeme to be fast in the snare
his enemies had laid to betray him: yet did
God in a trice breake their snare,His deliue|uerance. free the
King, and destroy the Diuellish deuisers of that
proiect. This story is well knowne, and
therefore it need not my report, being alrea|die
related by such, who haue had better
cause to know the truth of euery circum|cumstance,
and yet in this place doth it merit
to bee named both for the rarenesse of the
practise and for the greatnesse of Gods deli|uerance.
Thirdly,At the Queenes death. at the Queenes death also did
God wonderfully assist the King, and fauour
the prosperity of his fortunes, for at that
time, when the enemies of our State, and

the enemies of our Faith did hopefully be|leeue
that the enmity of these two king|domes
England and Scotland,The Pope and Papist. would vpon
this occasion haue renued their antient
quarrells,No distur|bance to let the Kings forward en|trance. and thereby haue interrupted the
Kings peaceable entrance into this king|dome;
yet was the euent otherwise, no lit|tle
disturbance letting his Maiesties forward
entring, whereby God did mocke the ex|pectation
of his enemies, and assuredly ex|ceed
the expectation of all men.
Fourthly, that neuer to be forgotten trea|son
of blowing vp with powder,The treason of the blow|ing vp the Parliament house. a destructi|on
ment to the King, the Queene, the Prince,
the State, the house of State, the Church, the
Monuments of the Church, the bones, and
Sepultures of Princes,A destructi|on lesse mer|cifull than the Flood. a destruction lesse
mercifull then the generall Flood; because
more sudden, and yet all most generall too,
the very naming whereof may serue for e|uer,
to prouoke the people of this kingdom
to acknowledge their dutifull thankes to
God, by whose hand onely, this mighty de|liuerance
was wrought.
Fifthly, By these particulers out of many,

may appeare how God did wonderfully
protect the person of that King;God wonder|fully prote|cted the King. suffering
him to enter so farre into danger, as that he
might haue bene said, to haue stood in the
verie gates of death, the match being readi|ly
prepared to fire that powder, which if it
had bene fired, had committed the greatest
Slaughter that euer (at one instant of time)
happened. May God therefore for euer be
praised, who preuented so great a de|struction:
and let his prouidence be for euer
admired, who hath thus defended the De|fendors
of the Catholike Faith.


CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the diuersity of Religions.
_FIRST,Religion de|uideth the world. the diuersity of Religi|ons,
is one maine cause that de|uideth
the world into so many
disagreements, the maintainers
of euery seuerall Sect, disclaiming and per|secuting

al diuersity, iudging such for propha~e
 out of Gods protection, that conspire not
with them, in their opinion of Religion.The names of Christian and heathen odious to one another. And
heerehe~ce it is that the name of Iew or Turke
is odious to a Christian,  the name of Chri|stian
odious to them, they iudging vs, and we
iudging the~ Anathemates,  cursed people.
Secondly,The Chri|stians among themselues and the hea|then among themselues deuided. neither is this contention one|ly
in these opposites of Christian and hea|then;
but the heathen among themselues,
and the Christians among themselues, are
deuided into many bitter differences, the
Turke against the Persian  both against the
Iew, and so in many other particulars of the
barbarous people.Among the Christians. Among the Christians al|so
the Papist against the Protesta~t,  the Pro|testa~t
against the Papist,  the Puritan against
them both, besides many other subdiuisions.
So that the Christians in these times, haue as
many seuerall Religio~s as the old heathen 
Pagans had Gods,Christians now haue as manie Reli|gions as the Pagans had Gods. and that Idolatrie which
the people of the old world committed by
hauing multiplicity of Gods did the people
of these times co~mit by their multiplicity of
Religions. For it is al one to deny God, and

to denie his seruice, and Idolatrie is aswell
in false worship, as in no worship. For as
God is one  but one,One God, one Truth, one Religion. so there is one Reli|gion,
and but one, whereto all creatures owe
their obedience. And that men might not
preuaricate or alter the forme of Gods ser|uice,God hath prescribed an order for his seruice.
hath God himselfe prescribed vs a pre|cise
forme, how and in what forme wee
should serue him, damning all diuersity to
this his owne order, wherewith he is onely
pleased, and wherewith he is alway pleased.
Thirdly,The reason why Religion is so deuided. the reason then why Religion is
thus deuided in the Christian world, is the
many seueral constructions of Gods Word,
whereby it is both diuersly and doubtfully
vnderstood; euery man adhering to that
sence of Scripture, as to his iudgement doth
seeme most resonable. And from hence it is
that these two maine diuisions of Religion,
the Protestant and the Papist, subdeuide
themselues againe into many differences,
especially the Religion of Poperie. For
proofe whereof, we may remember that the
Church of Rome hath deuided itselfe into so
many quarrel some disputations, that searce

two Colledges conspire one truth after one
manner;The contra|dictions a|mong the learned Pa|pists. Nay, and the best learned among
them, contradict, and haue damned the opi|nions
of one another, this hath bene well
declared by many arguments of sufficient
proofe:Doctor Morton. in the Learned writings of a Reue|rend
Doctor of this Church, and which is
now very lately declared by their own disa|greements,
concerning the lawfulnesse of
taking the Oath of Allegiance;Bellarmine and Black|well. in which
Controuersie the Pope and his great Cardi|nall
Bellarmine, oppose against their Arch-Priest
Master Blackwell.
Fourthly, It is also worthie of memorie,
that diuers of them in Queene Elizabeths time
being prisoners at Wisbitch,Wisbitch. were deuided
with so much hatred, as might seme impla|cable,
the quarrell being for superiority be|tweene
the Iesuites and Secular Priests,Iesuites and Secular Priests. began
at Wisbitch, but sithence spread ouer all Chri|stendome,
neither doe I thinke, will euer
peaceably be compounded, a matter rare
that men professing one Religion and one
Faith,Note. prisoners in one place, and being by
the Law dead men, and onely continued

there by the mercie of a gratious Prince,
should thus bitterly contend about priority
and greatnesse of place. And therefore it is
most euident,In the Reli|gion of pope|ry much di|uersity. that in that Religion of
Poperie wherein they so much boast of
vniformity and generall consent, there
are many Sects and many bitter disagree|ments.
Fifthly,The Prote|stant Religi|on deuided. and for the Protestant Religion
(whereof I esteeme most reuerently) that al|so
is full of much diuersity, the vaine glorious
spirits of men disturbing the peace of that
Church, which hath flourished with much
prosperity. And these diuersities like a ciuill
warre, (and therefore a dangerous
warre) haue more indammaged the cause of
Religion,The hurts of diuided Religion. then all the other enemies in the
world euer could doe, which by reason of
singularity and strange doctrine, (with which
the grosse numbers of people are wonderful|ly
contented) they haue got a false reputa|tion
in the world of holinesse, and thereby
draw from the vnity of the Church
numbers of the basest sort of peo|ple.

Sixthly,No meanes to reclaime these disobe|dient Chri|stians. It were needlesse to reckon
vp the seuerall names of these Scismes, they
are to well knowne in this Nation, whose
peeuish obstinacie hath bene such, as that
neither Law, nor mercy neuer yet could re|claime.Obiections of the Papists.
And whereas it is obiected by the
enemies of our Faith, that because of these
diuersities, therefore our Religion is not
good.Answer. Diuersity in all Religi|ons. I answer, the argument is sencelesse,
because (as I haue proued) this diuersity is
in all Religions, and in theirs most who
most obiect against vs.Diuersity in the Iewish Church. Againe, wee all
know that the Church of the Iewes was the
true Church of God, yet in that Church
also was there much diuersity,The doctrine of the Sad|duces. for the Sad|duces
did denie the resurrection, which is a
fundamentall point of Religion, whereas
our greatest differences are onely for cir|cumstance
and order. And therefore this
their argument of diuersity, doth not con|clude
against the truth of Religion, for the
corne may bee good, which lyeth
mingled with Chaffe, and so must the
Church of GOD lie vntill the day of
Iudgement; when as Christ shall come

with his Fanne, and Seauer the good  bad,
which in the meane time must lie in one
heape, in one Church, and in one professi|on
or name of Religion.
Seuenthly,The Kings desert in this respect of vnity. in this respect of vnity did the
King most noblely defende the Catholike
Faith, disclaiming the enemies on both
hands, the proud Papist and the peeuish
Puritan: and like a most Christian Catho|like
King he directed himself to Iesus Christ,
placed as hee was crucified, betweene
these two Thieues,The true Re|ligion is like Christ be|tweene two Thieues. who (like two extremi|ties)
Neighbour this most vertuous meane.
And let it be the prayers of euery true Chri|stian,
that his Maiesties posterity for euer may
thus direct themselues to the Lord Iesus only,Christ the way, the truth, and the life.
who only is the way, the truth, and life itself.
And let neuer any Caesar of this Empire, in|cline
their fauour to either of these crucified
thieues, for though they hang with Truth, yet
are they not true. And that Religion, which
is but neere the Truth of the Catholike Faith is
not that Truth,He that is but neere truth is not true. for as God is, so is Truth, and
so is the faith of holy Religion, one and but
one with out all duplicity or difference.



The Conclusion.
_THVS I haue briefly, and but sparingly
reported the honourable deeds of the
Defendors of the Catholike Faith,
wherein if I had bene iust, and had re|lated
at full the number of their Prin|cely
deseruings, in this kinde, I should haue vnderta|ken
a businesse of infinite paines, and haue made this
volume larger then the patience of these times allow
to profitable writings. I haue therefore extract from
the number of their deeds, such particulars onely as
may abundantly serue to honour the memorie of
their names. And this trauell most Noble Prince I
present to your Highnesse consideration, not be|cause
I presume of any worth in my part of this bu|sinesse,
but because the knowledge thereof doth prin|cipally
concerne the dignity of your High place,
wherein will appeare to your Gratious presence, the
view of your most Princely Predecessors, and how
farre they trauelled themselues for the aduancement
of holy Religion; defending it with resolutions, con|stant
and prosperous. And wherein your High|nesse
may behold, what care this Christian
Kingdome hath had for the Christian
Faith, and what care it doth ex|pect
in the hope of your Maie|sty,
and in your posterity
for euer, Amen.
FINIS.





