




A Looking Glasse for LONDON AND England.
Made by Thomas Lodge Gentleman, and Robert Greene.
In Artibus Magister.
LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his shop in Gratious streete. 1594.






A LOOKING GLASSE FOR London and England.
Enters Rasin King of Niniuie, with three Kings of Cicilia, Creete, and Paphlagonia, from the ouerthrow of Ieroboam, King of Ie|rusalem.
_SO pace ye on tryumphant warriours,
Make Venus Lemmon armd in al his pomp,
Bash at the brightnesse of your hardy lookes,
For you the Viceroyes and the Caualires,
That wait on Rasins royall mightinesse:
Boast pettie kings, and glory in your fates,
That stars haue made your fortunes clime so high,
To giue attend on Rasins excellence.
Am I not he that rules great Niniuie,
Rounded with Lycas siluer flowing streams,
Whose Citie large Diametri containes,
Euen thre daies iournies length from wall to wall,
Two hundreth gates carued out of burnisht brasse,
As glorious as the portoyle of the Sunne,
And for to decke heauens battlements with pride,
Six hundreth Towers that toplesse touch the cloudes:
This Citie is the footestoole of your King,
A hundreth Lords do honour at my fete,
My scepter straineth both the poralels,
And now to t'enlarge the highnesse of my power,
I haue made Iudeas Monarch fle the field,
And beat proud Ieroboam from his holds,
Winning from Cades to Samaria,
Great Iewries God that foilde stout Benhadab,
Could not rebate the strength that Rasni brought,
For be he God in heauen, yet Uiceroyes know,
Rasni is God on earth and none but he.

Cicilia.
If louely shape, feature by natures skill,
Passing in beautie faire Endymions,
That Luna wrapt within her snowy brests,
Or that swet boy that wrought bright Venus bane,
Transformde vnto a purple Hiacynth,
If beautie Nunpareile in excellence,
May make a King match with the Gods in gre,
Rasni is God on earth, and none but he.


Creet.
If martial lookes wrapt in a cloud of wars
More fierce then Mars, lightneth fro his eyes
Sparkling reuenge and dyre disparagement:
If doughtie deds more haughtie then any done,
Seald with the smile of fortune and of fate,
Matchlesse to manage Lance and Curtelex.
If such high actions grac'd with victories,
May make a King match with the Gods in gre,
Rasni is God on earth, and none but he.


Paphlag.
If Pallas wealth.


Rasni.
Uiceroyes inough, peace Paphlagon no more,
Se wheres my sister faire Remilia,
Fairer then was the virgin Dania,
That waits on Venus with a golden show,
She that hath stolne the wealth of Rasnes lookes,
And tide his thoughts within her louely lockes,
She that is lou'd, and loue vnto your King,
Se where she comes to gratulate my fame.

Enters Radagon with Remilia, sister to Rasni, Aluia wife to Paphlagon, and other Ladies, bring a Globe seated in a ship.

Remilia.
Uictorious Monarch, second vnto Ioue,
Mars vpon earth, and Neptune on the Seas,
Whose frowne stroyes all the Ocean with a calme,
Whose smile, drawes Flora to display her pride,
Whose eye holds wanton Venus at a gaze,
Rasni the Regent of great Niniuie,
For thou hast foyld proud Ieroboams force,
And like the mustering breath of Aeolus,
That ouerturnes the pines of Libanon,
Hast scattered Iury and her vpstart groomes,
Winning from Cades to Samaria,
Remilia grets the with a kinde salute,
And for a present to thy mightinesse,
Giues the a Globe folded within a ship,
As King on earth and Lord of all the Seas,
With such a welcome vnto Nyniuie
As may thy sisters humble loue afford.


Rasni.
Sister. The title fits not thy degre,
A higher state of honour shall be thine,
The louely Trull that Mercury intrapt,
Within the curious pleasure of his tongue,
And she that basht the sun-god with her eyes,
Faire Semele the choyce of Venus maides,
Were not so beautious as Remelia.
Then sweting, sister shall not serue the turne,
But Rasnes wife, his Lemmon and his loue.
Thou shalt like Iuno wed thy selfe to Ioue,
And fold me in the riches of thy faire,
Remilia shall be Rasnes Paramour.
For why if I be Mars for warlike deds?
And thou bright Venus for thy cleare aspect,
Why should not from our loynes issue a sonne,
That might be Lord of royall soueraintie?
Of twentie worlds, if twentie worlds might be,
What saist Remilia, art thou Rasnes wife?


Remilia.
My heart doth swell with fauour of thy thoughts,
The loue of Rasni maketh me as proud
As Iuno when she wore heauens Diademe.
Thy sister borne was for thy wife by loue,
Had I the riches nature locketh vp,
To decke her darling, beautie when she smiles,
Rasin should prancke him in the pride of all.


Rasin.
Remelias loue is farre more either prisde,
Then Ieroboams or the worlds subdue,
Lordings ile haue my weddings sumptuous,
Made glorious with the treasures of the world,
Ile fetch from Albia shelues of Margarites,
And strip the Indies of their Diamonds,
And Tyre shall yeeld me tribute of her gold,
To make Remelias wedding glorious,
Ile send for all the Damosell Quenes that liue
Within the reach of Rasins gouernment,
To wait as hand-maides on Remelia,
That her attendant traine may passe the troupe
That gloried Venus at her wedding day.


Creete.
Oh my Lord, not sister to thy loue,
Tis incest and too fowle a fact for Kings,
Nature allowes no limits to such lust.


Rada.
Presumptuous Uiceroy darst thou check thy Lord,
Or twit him with the lawes that nature lowes,
Is not great Rasin aboue natures reach,
God vpon earth, and all his will is law.


Creet.
Oh flatter not, for hatefull is his choice,
And sisters loue will blemish all his worth.


Radag.
Doth not the brightnesse of his maiestie,
Shadow his deds from being counted faults.


Rasin.
Well hast thou answered within Radon,
I like the for thy learned Sophistri,
But thou of Creet that countercheckst thy King,
Packe hence in exile, Radagon the Crowne,
Be the Uicegerent of his royaltie,
And faile me not in what my thoughts may please,
For from a beggar haue I brought the vp,
And gracst thee with the honour of a Crowne,
Ye quandam king, what fed ye on delaies?


Creete.
Better no king then Uiceroy vnder him
That hath no vertue to maintaine his Crowne.


Rasni.
Remilias, what faire dames be those that wait
Attendant on thy matchlesse royaltie?


Remilia.
Tis Aluia, the faire wife to the king of Paphlagonia


Rasni.
Trust me she is faire thast Paphlagon a Iewell,
To fold the in so bright a swetings armes.


Rad.
Like you her my Lord?


Rasni.
What if I do Radagon?


Rada.
Why the~ she is yours my Lord, for mariage
Makes no exception, where Rasni doth command.


Paphla.
Ill doest thou counsel him to fancy wiues.


Rada.
Wife or not wife, what so he likes is his.


Rasni.
Well answered Radagon thou art for me,
Fed thou mine humour, and be still a king.
Lords go in tryumph of my happie loues,
And for to feast vs after all our broyles,
Frolicke and reuell it in Niniuie.
Whatsoeuer befitteth your conceited thoughts,
Or good or ill, loue or not loue my boyes,
In loue or what may satisfie your lust,
Act it my Lords, for no man dare say no.


Smith.
Denesum imperium Cum Ioue nunc teneo.

Exeunt.
Enters brought in by an Angell Oseas the Prophet, and set downe ouer the Stage in a Throne.

Angell.
Amaze not man of God, if in the spirit
Th'art brought from Iewry vnto Niniuie,
So was Elias wrapt within a storme,
And set vpon mount Carnell by the Lord,
For thou hast preacht long to the stubborne Iewes,
Whose flintie hearts haue felt no swet remorse,
But lightly valuing all the threats of God,
Haue still perseuerd in their wickednesse.
Loe I haue brought the vnto Niniuie,
The rich and royall Citie of the world,
Pampred in wealth, and ouergrowne with pride,
As Sodome and Gomorrha full of sin,
The Lord lookes downe, and cannot se one good,
Not one that couets to obey his will,
But wicked all, from Cradle to the Cruch.
Note then Oseas all their greuous sinnes,
And se the wrath of God that paies reuenge.
And when the ripenesse of their sin is full,
And thou hast written all their wicked through,
Ile carry the to Iewry backe againe,
And seate the in the great Ierusalem,
There shalt thou publish in her open stretes,
That God sends downe his hatefull wrath for sin,
On such as neuer heard his Prophets speake,
Much more will he inflict a world of plagues,
On such as heare the swetnesse of his voice,
And yet obey not what his Prophets speake,
Sit the Oseas pondring in the spirit,
The mightinesse of these fond peoples sinnes,


Oseas.
The will of the Lord be done.

Exit Angell.
Enters the Clowne and his crew of Ruffians, to go to drinke.

Ruffian.
Come on Smyth, thou shalt be one of the Crew, be|cause thou knowst where the best Ale in the Town is.


Smith.
Come on, in faith my colts I haue left my M. striking of a heat, and stole away because I would kep you com|pany.


Clowne.
Why what shall we haue this paltrie Smith with vs?



Smith.
Paltry Smith, why you in  you that you speak pettie  trade?


Clowne.
Why slaue I am a gentleman 


Smith.
A Gentleman good sir, I remember  your progenitors, your father bare office in our  man he was, and in great discredit in the parish,  two squiers liuings on him, the one was on  and then he kept the towne stage, and on  him the Sextens man, for he whipt dogs out of the  sir, your father, why sir me-thinks I se the  proper youth, he was faith aged some foure  ten, his  colour, halfe blacke halfe white, his nose was in the  gre of noses, it was nose Autem glorificam, so set  that after his death it should haue bin nailed vp in Copp  hall for a monument: well sir, I was beholding to your , for he was the first man that euer instructed me in  sterie of a pot of Ale.


2.
Well said Smith, that crost him ouer the thumbs.


Clowne.
Uillaine were it not that we go to be merry,  pier should presently quit thy opproprious termes.  O Peter, Peter, put vp thy sword I prithie heartily into thy  bard, hold in your rapier, for though I haue not a long reach  haue a short hitter. Nay then gentlemen stay me, for my  begins to rise against him, for marke the words a paltry  Oh horrible sentence, thou hast in these words I will stand  libelled against all the sound horses, whole horses, sore  Coursers, Curtalls, Iades, Cuts, Hackneies, and Mare  upon my friend, in their defence, I giue the this curse, shalt  be worth a horse of thine owne this seuen yeare.


1. Clowne.
I prithie Smith is your occupation so excellen  A paltry Smith, why ile stand to it, a Smith is Lord of the foure elements, for our yron is made of the earth, our bellowes blow out aire, our flore holdes fire, and our forge water. Nay sir, we reade in the Chronicles, that there was a God of our occupa|tion.





 a Cuckold.
 he cald your father cousin, paltry smith,  thou hast defaced their worshipfull 
 how?
 stand to it, that a Smith in his kinde is a  and a Barber. For let a Horse take a cold, or  the hots, and we straight giue him a potion or  phisicall maner that he mends straight, if  diseases, as the spuing, splent, ring-bone,  fashion, or sir a galled backe, we let him blood  clap  to him with a pestilence, that mends him with a , now if his mane grow out of order, and he haue  haires, we straight to our sheres and trim him  cut it please vs, picke his eares and make him neat,  inded sir, we are slouings for one thing, we neuer vse  musk-balls to wash him with, and the reason is sir, because  woe without kissing.


Clowne.
Well sirrha, leaue off these praises of a Smyth,  vs to the best Ale in the Towne.
 sir I haue a feate aboue all the Smythes in Niniuie, for sir  am a Philosopher that can dispute of the nature of Ale, for  you sir, a pot of Ale consists of foure parts, Imprimis the , the Toast, the Ginger, and the Nutmeg.


Clowne.
Excellent.
 Ale is a restoratiue, bread is a binder, marke you sir two ex|cellent points in phisicke, the Ginger, oh ware of that, the phi|losophers haue written of the nature of ginger, tis expullsitiue in two degres, you shal here the sentence of Galen, it wil make a man belch, cough, and fart, and is a great comfort to the hart, a proper poesie I promise you, but now to the noble vertue of the Nutmeg, it is saith one Ballad I think an English Roman was the authour, an vnderlayer to the braines, for when the Ale giues a buffet to the head, oh the Nutmeg that keepes him for while in temper.
Thus you se the discription of the vertue of a pot of Ale, now sir

to put my phisical precepts in practise  any further.


Clowne.
Whats the matter now?
Why seing I haue prouided the Ale, who is  wenches, for masters take this of me, a cup  wench, why alasse tis like an egge without salt,  without mustard.
Lead vs to the Ale, wele haue wenches inough I 


Oseas.
Iniquitie seekes out companions still,
And mortall men are armed to do ill:
London looke on, this matter nips thee neere,
Leaue off thy ryot, pride and sumptuous cheere.
Spend lesse at boord, and spare not at the doore,
But aide the infant, and releeue the poore:
Else seeking mercy being mercilesse,
Thou be adiudged to endlesse heauinesse.

Enters the Vsurer, a yoong Gentleman, and a poore man.

Vsurer.
Come on, I am euery day troubled with these nedie companions, what newes with you, what wind brings you hi|ther.


Gent.
Sir I hope how far soeuer you make it off, you remem|ber too well for me, that this is the day wherin I should pay you mony that I tooke vp of you alate in a commoditie.


Poore man.
And sir, sirreuerence of your manhood and gente|rie, I haue brought home such mony as you lent me.


Vsurer.
You yoong Gentleman is my mony readie.


Gentle.
Truly sir this time was so short, the commoditie so bad, and the promise of friends so broken, that I could not prouide it against the day, wherefore I am come to intreat you to stand my friend and to fauour me with a longer time, and I wil make you sufficient consideration.


Vsurer.
Is the winde in that doore, if thou hast my mony so it is, I will not defer a day, an houre, a minute, but take the forfeyt

 sir consider that my losse was great by the  vp, you knowe sir I borrowed of you fortie  I had ten pounds in money, and thirty pounds , which when I came to sell againe, I could get  for them, so had I sir but fiftene poundes for  In consideration of this ill bargaine, I pray you sir  month longer.


.
I answered the afore not a minute, what haue I to do how thy bargain proued, I haue thy hand set to my booke that thou receiuedst fortie pounds of me in mony.


Gent.
I sir it was your deuise that, to colour the Statute, but your conscience knowes what I had.


Poore.
Friend thou speakest Hebrew to him when thou tal|kest to him of conscience, for he hath as much conscience about the forfeyt of an Obligation, as my blinde Mare God blesse her, hath ouer a manger of Oates.


Gent.
Then there is no fauour sir?


Vsurer.
Come to morrow to me, and se how I will vse the.


Gent.
No couetous Caterpillar, know, that I haue made ex|treame shift rather then I would fall into the hands of such a ra|uening panthar, and therefore here is thy mony and deliuer me the recognisance of my lands.


Vsurer.
What a spight is this, hath sped of his Crownes, if he had mist but one halfe houre, what a goodly Farme had I got|ten for fortie pounds, well tis my cursed fortune, Oh haue I no shift to make him forfeit his recognisance.


Gent.
Come sir will you dispatch and tell your mony.

Strikes 4. a clocke.

Vsurer.
Stay, what is this a clocke foure, let me se, to be paid betwen the houres of thre and foure in the afternoone, this goes right for me, you sir, heare you not the clocke, and haue you not a counterpaine of your Obligation, the houre is past, it was to be paid betwene thre and foure, and now the clocke hath strooken

foure, I will receiue none, Ile stand to the forfeyt of the recog|nisance.


Gent.
Why sir, I hope you do but iest, why tis but foure, and will you for a minute take forfeyt of my bond, if it were so sir, I was here before foure.


Vsurer.
Why didst thou not tender thy mony then? if I offer the iniury take the law of me, complaine to the Iudge, I will re|ceiue no mony.


Poore.
Well sir, I hope you will stand my good maister for my Cow, I borrowed thirtie shillings on her, and for that I haue paid you 18. pence a weke, and for her meate you haue had her milke, and I tell you sir, she giues a goodly soape: now sir here is your mony.


Vsurer.
Hang beggarly knaue, commest to me for a Cow, did I not bind her bought and sold for a peny, and was not thy day to haue paid yesterday, thou getst no Cow at my hand.


Poore.
No Cow sir, alasse that word no Cow, goes as cold to my heart as a draught of small drinke in a frostie morning. No Cow sir, why alasse, alasse, M. Usurer, what shall become of me my wife, and my poore childe?


Vsurer.
Thou getst no Cow of me knaue, I cannot stand pra|ting with you, I must be gone.


Poore.
Nay but heare you M. Usurer, no Cow, why sir heres your thirtie shillings, I haue paid you 18. pence a weke,  there|fore there is reason I should haue my Cow.


Vsurer.
What pratest thou, haue I not answered the thy day is broken?


Poore.
Why sir alasse, my Cow is a Common-wealth to me, for first sir, she allowes me, my wife and sonne, for to banket our selues withal, Butter, Chese, Whay, Curds, Creame, sod milk, raw-milke, sower-milke, swete-milk, and butter-milke, besides sir, she saued me euery yeare a peny in Almanackes, for she was as good to me as a Prognostication, if she had but set vp her tayle and haue gallapt about the meade, my litle boy was able to say, oh father there will be a storme, her verie taile was a Kalender to me,  now to loose my cow, alas M. Usurer take pittie vpo~ me.



Vsurer.
I haue other matters to talke on, farwell fellowes.


Gent.
Why but thou couetous churle, wilt thou not receiue thy mony and deliuer me my recognisance?


Vsurer.
Ile deliuer the none, if I haue wronged the, seke thy mends at the law.


Gent.
And so I will insatiable pesant.


Poore.
And sir, rather then I will put vp this word no Cow, I will laie my wiues best gowne to pawne, I tell you sir, when the slaue vttered this word no Cow, it strooke to my heart, for my wife shall neuer haue one so fit for her turne againe, for inded sir, she is a woman that hath her twidling strings broke.


Gent.
What meanest thou by that fellow?


Poore.
Marry sir, sirreuerence of your manhood, she breakes winde behinde, and inded sir, when she sat milking of her Cow and let a fart, my other Cowes would start at the noyse, and kick downe the milke and away, but this Cow sir the gentlest Cow, my wife might blow whilst she burst, and hauing such good con|ditions, shall the Usurer come vpon me with no Cow: Nay sir, before I pocket vp this word no Cow, my wiues gowne goes to the Lawier, why alasse sir tis as ill a word to me, as no Crowne to a King.


Gent.
Well fellow, go with me, and ile helpe thee to a Law|yer.


Poore.
Marry and I will sir: No Cow, well the world goes hard.
Exeunt.

Oseas.

Oseas.
Where hatefull vsurie
Is counted husbandrie,
Where mercilesse men rob the poore,
And the needie are thrust out of doore.
Where gaine is held for conscience,
And mens pleasures is all on pence,
Where yong Gentlemen forfeit their lands,
Through riot, into the Vsurers hands:
Where pouertie is despisde  pity banished
And mercy indeed vtterly vanished.
Where men esteeme more of mony then of God,
Let that land looke to feele his wrathfull rod.
For there is no sin more odious in his sight,
Then where vsurie defraudes the poore of his right.
London take heed, these sinnes abound in thee:
The poore complaine, the widowes wronged bee.
The Gentlemen by subtiltie are spoilde,
The plough-men loose the crop for which they toild
Sin raignes in thee o London euery houre,
Repent and tempt not thus the heauenly power.

Enters Remilia, with a traine of Ladies in all royaltie.

Remilia.
Faire Quenes, yet handmaids vnto Rasnes loue,
Tell me, is not my state as glorious
As Iunoes pomp, when tyred with heauens despoile,
Clad in her vestments, spotted all with starres,
She crost the siluer path vnto her Ioue,
Is not Remilias far more beautious,
Richt with the pride of natures excellence?
Then Venus in the brightest of her shine.
My haires, surpasse they not Apollos locks,
Are not my Tresses curled with such art,
As loue delights to hide him in their faire?
Doth not mine eyne shine like the morning lampe
That tels Anrera when her loue will come?
Haue I not stolne the beautie of the heauens,
And plac'st it on the feature of my face?
Can any Goddesse make compare with me?
Or match her with the faire Remilia?


Aluida.
The beauties y^t proud Paris saw fro Troy
Mustring in Ida for the golden ball,
Were not so gorgious as Remilia.


Remilia.
I haue trickt my tramels vp with richest balme,
And made my perfumes of the purest Myrre:
The pretious drugs that Aegypts wealth affoords,
The costly paintings fetcht fro curious Tyre,
Haue mended in my face what nature mist.
Am I not the earths wonder in my lookes?


Alui.
The wonder of the earth  pride of heauen.


Remilia.
Looke Aluida a haire stands not amisse,
For womens locks are tramels of conceit,
Which do intangle loue for all his wiles.


Aluid.
Madam, vnlesse you coy it trick and trim,
And plaie the ciuill wanton ere you yeld,
Smiting disdaine of pleasures with your tongue,
Patting your princely Rasni on the cheke,
When he presumes to kisse without consent:
You marre the market, beautie nought auailes.
You must be proud, for pleasures hardly got,
And swete, if once attainde.


Remilia.
Faire Aluida,
Thy counsell makes Remilia passing wise.
Suppose that thou weart Rasnes mightinesse,
And I Remilia Prince of excellence.


Aluida.
I would be maister then of loue and the.


Remil.
Of loue and me. Proud  disdainful king,
Dar'st thou presume to touch a Deitie,
Before she grace the with a yelding smile?


Aluida.
Tut my Remilia, be not thou so coy,
Say nay, and take it.


Remilia.
Carelesse and vnkinde,
Talkes Rasni to Remilia in such sort
As if I did enioy a humane forme?
Looke on thy Loue, behold mine eyes diuine,
And dar'st thou twit me with a womans fault?
Ah Rasni thou art rash to iudge of me,
I tell the Flora oft hath woode my lips,
To lend a Rose to beautifie her spring,
The sea-Nymphs fetch their lillies from my cheks.
Then thou vnkind, and hereon would I wepe.


Alui.
And here would Aluida resigne her charge,
For were I but in thought Th'assirian King,
I neds must quite thy teares, with kisses swete,
And craue a pardon with a friendly touch,
You know it Madam though I teach it not,
The touch I meane, you smile when as you think il.


Remi.
How am I pleas'd to hear thy pritty prate,
According to the humor of my minde?
Ah Nymphs, who fairer then Remilia?
The gentle winds haue woode me with their sighes,
The frowning aire hath clerde when I did smile,
And when I tract vpon the tender grasse,
Loue that makes warme the center of the earth,
Lift vp his crest to kisse Remelias foote,
Iuno still entertaines her amorous Ioue,
With new delights, for feare he looke on me,
The Phoenix feathers are become my Fanne,
For I am beauties Phoenix in this world.
Shut close these Curtaines straight and shadow me,
For feare Apollo spie me in his walkes,
And scorne all eyes, to se Remilias eyes.
Nymphes, Knancks, sing, for Mauors draweth nigh,
Hide me in Closure, let him long to looke,
For were a Goddesse fairer then am I,
Ile scale the heauens to pull her from the place.

They draw the Curtaines and Musicke plaies.

Aluida.
Beleue me, tho she say that she is fairest,
I thinke my peny siluer by her leaue.

Enter Rasni with his Lords in pomp, who make a ward about him, with him the Magi in great pompe.

Rasni.
Magi for loue of Rasni by your Art,
By Magicke frame an Arbour out of hand,
For faire Remilia to desport her in.
Meane-while, I will bethinke me on further pomp.

Exit.
The Magi with their rods beate the ground, and from vnder the same riseth a braue Arbour, the King retur|neth in an other sute while the Trum|pettes sounde.

Rasni.
Blest be ye man of Art that grace me thus,
And blessed be this day where Himen hies,
To ioyne in vnion pride of heauen and earth.
Lightning and thunder vvherevvith Remilia is strooken.
What wondrous threatning noyse is this I heare?
What flashing lightnings trouble our delights?
When I draw neare Remelias royall Tent,
I waking, dreame of sorrow and mishap.


Rada.
Dread not O King, at ordinary chance,
These are but common exalations,
Drawne from the earth, in substance hote and drie,
Or moist and thicke, or Meteors combust,
Matters and causes incident to time,
Inkindled in the firie region first.
Tut be not now a Romane Angurer,
Approach the Tent, looke on Remelia.


Rasni.
Thou hast confirmd my doubts kinde Radagon.
Now ope ye foldes where Quene of fauour sits,
Carrying a Net within her curled locks,
Wherein the Graces are entangled oft:
Ope like th'imperiall gates where Phoebus sits,
When as he meanes to wooe his Clitia.
Necternall Cares, ye blemishers of blisse,
Cloud not mine eyes whilst I behold her face.
Remilia my delight, she answereth not.
He dravves the Curtaines and findes her stroken vvith Thunder, blacke.
How pale? as if bereau'd in fatall medes,
The balmy breath hath left her bosome quite,
My Hesperus by cloudie death is blent,
Uillaines away, fetch Sircopes of the Inde,
Fetch Balsomo the kind preserue of life,
Fetch wine of Greece, fetch oiles, fetch herbes, fetch all
To fetch her life, or I will faint and die.
They bring in all these and offer, nought preuailes.
Herbes, Oyles of Inde, alasse there nought preuailes.
Shut are the day-bright eyes, that made me se,
Lockt are the Iems of ioy in dens of death,
Yet triumph I on fate, and he on her.
Malicious mistresse of inconstancie,
Damd be thy name, that hast obscur'd my ioy,
Kings, Uiceroyes, Princes, reare a royall tombe
For my Remilia, beare her from my sight,
Whilst I in teares, wepe for Remilia.

They beare her out.

Rada.
What maketh Rasni moodie? Losse of one?
As if no more were left so faire as she?
Behold a daintie minion for the nonce,
Faire Aluida the Paphlagonian Quene,
Wooe her, and leaue this weping for the dead.


Ras.
What wooe my subiects wife that honoreth me?


Rada.
Tut Kings this meum tuum should not know.
Is she not faire? Is not her husband hence?
Hold, take her at the hands of Radagon.
A prittie peate to driue your mourne away.


Rasni.
She smiles on me, I se she is mine owne.
Wilt thou be Rasnes royall Paramour?


Rad.
She blushing yelds concent, make no dispute:
The King is sad, and must be gladded straight.
Let Paphlagonian King go mourne meane-while.

He thrust the King out, and so they Exeant.

Oseas.
Pride hath his iudgement, London looke about,
Tis not inough in shovv to be deuout,
A Furie novv from heauen to lands vnknovvne,
Hath made the Prophet speake, not to his ovvne,
The wantons flie, this pride and vaine attire,
The seales to set your tender hearts on fire.
Be faithfull in the promise you haue past,
Else Cod will plague and punish at the last.
When lust is hid in shroude of wretched life,
When craft doth dwell in bed of married wife.
Marke but the Prophets, we that shortly showes,
After death exspect for many woes.

Enters the poore man and the Gentleman, with their Lawier.

Gent.
I need not sir discourse vnto you the dutie of Lawiers in tendering the right cause of their Clients, nor the conscience you are tied vnto by higher command. Therefore suffise the Usu|rer hath done me wrong, you know the Case, and good sir, I haue strained my selfe to giue you your fes.


Lawier.
Sir if I should any way neglect so manifest a truth, I were to be accused of open periury, for the case is euident.


Poore.
And truly sir, for my case, if you helpe me not for my matter, why sir, I and my wife are quite vndone, I want my mease of milke when I goe to my worke, and my boy his bread and butter when he goes to schoole, M. Lawier pitie me, for sure|ly sir, I was faine to laie my wiues best gowne to pawne for your fes, when I lookt vpon it sir, and saw how hansomly it was tawbed with statute lace, and what a faire mockado Cape it had, and then thought how hansomely it became my wife, truly sir my heart is made of butter, it melts at the least persecution, I fell on weping, but when I thought on the words the Usurer gaue me, no Cow: then sir, I would haue stript her into her smocke, but I would make him deliuer my Cow ere I had done, therefore good M. Lawier stand my friend.


Lawier.
Trust me father, I will do for the as much as for my selfe.


Poore.
Are you married sir?


Lawier.
I marry am I father.


Poore.
Then goods Benison light on you  your good wife,

and send her that she be neuer troubled with my wiues disease.


Lawier.
Why whats thy wiues disease?


Poore.
Truly sir, she hath two open faults, and one priuie fault, sir the first is, she is too eloque~t for a poore man, and hath her words of Art, for she will call me Rascall, Rogue, Runnagate, Uarlet, Uagabond, Slaue, Knaue. Why alasse sir, and these be but holi-day tearmes, but if you heard her working-day words, in faith sir they be ratlers like thunder sir, for after the dewe fol|lowes a storme, for then am I sure either to be well buffetted, my face scratcht, or my head broken, and therefore good M. Law|yer on my knes I aske it, let me not go home again to my wife, with this word, No Cow: for then she will exercise her two faults vpon me with all extremitie.


Lawier.
Feare not man, but what is thy wiues priuy fault?


Poore.
Truly sir, thats a thing of nothing, alasse she inded strreuerence of your mastership, doth vse to breake winde in her slepe. Oh sir, here comes the Iudge, and the old Caitife the Usu|rer.

Enters the Iudge, the Vsurer, and his attendants.

Vsurer.
Sir here is fortie angels for you, and if at any time you want a hundreth pound or two, tis readie at your command, or the feding of thre or foure fat bullocks: whereas these nedie slaues can reward with nothing but a cap and akne, and therfore I pray you sir fauour my case.


Iudge.
Feare not sir, Ile do what I can for you.


Vsurer.
What maister Lawier what make you here, mine aduersary for these Clients?


Lawier.
So it chanceth now sir.


Vsurer.
I know you know the old Prouerbe, He is not wise, that is not wise for himselfe. I would not be disgracst in this acti|on, therefore here is twentie angels say nothing in the matter, and what you say, say to no purpose, for the Iudge is my friend.


Lawier.
Let me alone, Ile fit your purpose.


Iudge.
Come, where are these fellowes that are the plain|tifes, what can they say against this honest Citizen our neigh|bour, a man of good report amongst all men?



Poore.
Truly M. Iudge, he is a man much spoken off, marry euery mans cries are against him, and especially we, and there|fore I thinke we haue brought our Lawier to touch him with as much law as will fetch his landes and my Cowe, with a pesti|lence.


Gent.
Sir, I am the other plaintife and this is my Councel|lour, I beseech your honour be fauourable to me in equitie.


Iudge.
Oh Signor Mizaldo, what can you say in this Gentle|mans behalfe?


Lavvier.
Faith sir as yet litle good, sir tell you your owne case to the Iudge, for I haue so many matters in my head, that I haue almost forgotten it.


Gent.
Is the winde in that doore, why then my Lord thus, I tooke vpon this cursed Usurer, for so I may well tearme him, a commoditie of fortie poundes, whereof I receiued ten pounde in mony,  thirtie pound in Lute-strings, whereof I could by great friendship make but fiue pounds: for the assurance of this badde commoditie, I bound him my land in recognisance, I came at my day and tendred him his mony and he would not take it, for the redresse of my open wrong, I craue but iustice.


Iudge.
What say you to this sir?


Vsurer.
That first he had no Lute-strings of me, for looke you sir, I haue his owne hand to my booke for y^e receit of fortie pound.


Gent.
That was sir, but a deuise of him to colour the Sta|tute.


Iudge.
Well he hath thine owne hand, and we can craue no more in law, but now sir, he saies his mony was tendred at the day and houre.


Vsurer.
This is manifest contrary sir, and on that I will de|pose, for here is the obligation, to be paide betwene thre  foure in the after-noone, and the Clocke strooke foure before he offered it, and the words be betweene three and foure, therefore to be ten|dred before foure.


Gent.
Sir, I was there before foure,  he held me with brab|ling till the Clock strooke, and then for the breach of a minute he refused my money, and kepe the recognisance of my land for so

small a triflle: Good Signor Mizaldo speak what is law, you haue your fe, you haue heard what the case is, and therefore do me iu|stice and right, I am a yoong Gentleman and speake for my pa|trimony.


Lawier.
Faith sir, the Case is altered, you told me it before in an other maner, the law goes quite against you, and therfore you must pleade to the Iudge for fauour.


Gent.
O execrable bribery.


Poore.
Faith sir Iudge, I pray you let me be the Gentlemans Counsellour, for I can say thus much in his defence, that the U|surers Clocke is the swiftest Clock in all the Towne, tis sir like a womans tongue, it goes euer halfe an houre before the time, for when we were gone from him, other Clocks in the Towne strooke foure.


Iudge.
Hold thy prating fellow, and you yoong Gentleman, this is my ward, looke better another time both to your bargains and to the paiments, for I must giue flat sentence against you, that for default of tendering the mony betwene the houres, you haue forfeited your recognisance, and he to haue the land.


Gent.
O inspeakeable iniustice.


Poore.
O monstrous, miserable, moth-eaten Iudge.


Iudge.
Now you fellow, what haue you to say for your mat|ter?


Poore.
Maister Lawier, I laid my wiues gowne to pawne for your fes, I pray you to this gere.


Lawier.
Alasse poore man, thy matter is out of my head, and therefore I pray the tell it thy selfe.


Poore.
I hold my Cap to a noble, that the Usurer hath giuen him some gold, and he chawing it in his mouth, hath got y^e tooth|ache that he cannot speake.


Iudge.
Well sirrha, I must be short, and therefore say on.


Poore.
M. maister Iudge, I borrowed of this man thirtie shil|lings, for which I left him in pawne my good Cow, the bargaine was, he should haue eightene pence a weke and the Cows milk for vsurie: Now sir, assoone as I had gotten the mony, I brought it him, and broke but a day, and for that he refused his mony and

kepes my Cow sir.


Iudge.
Why thou hast giuen sentence against thy selfe, for in breaking thy day thou hast lost thy Cow.


Poore.
Master Lawier now for my ten shillings.


Lawier.
Faith poore man, thy Case is so bad I shall but speak against the.


Poore.
Twere good the~ I shuld haue my ten shillings again.


Lawier.
Tis my fe fellow for comming, wouldst thou haue me come for nothing?


Poore.
Why then am I like to goe home, not onely with no Cow, but no gowne, this gere goes hard.


Iudge.
Well you haue heard what fauour I can shew you, I must do iustice, come M. Mizaldo and you sir, go home with me to dinner.


Poore.
Why but M. Iudge no Cow,  M. Lawier no gowne, Then must I cleane run out of the Towne.
How chere you gentleman, you crie no lands too, the Iudge hath made you a knight for a gentleman, hath dubd you sir Iohn lack|land.


Gent.
O miserable time wherein gold is aboue God.


Poore.
Feare not man, I haue yet a fetch to get thy landes and my Cow againe, for I haue a sonne in the Court that is ei|ther a king or a kings fellow, and to him will I go  complaine on the Iudge and the Usurer both.


Gent.
And I will go with the and intreat him for my Case.


Poore.
But how shall I go home to my wife, when I shall haue nothing to say vnto her, but no Cow. Alasse sir my wiues faults will fall vpon me.


Gent.
Feare not, lets go, Ile quiet her shalt se.

Exeunt.

Oseas.
Flie Iudges flie, corruption in your Court,
The Iudge of truth, hath made your iudgement short.
Looke so to iudge that at the latter day,
Ye be not iudg'd with those that wend astray.
Who passerh iudgement for his priuate gaine,
He well may iudge, he is adiudg'd to paine.

Enters the Clowne and all his crew drunke.

Clowne.
Farewell gentle Tapster, maisters as good Ale as euer was tapt, looke to your fete, for the Ale is strong, well far|well gentle Tapster.


1. Ruffian.
Why sirrha slaue, by heauens maker, thinkest thou the wench loue the best because she laught on the, giue me but such an other word, and I will throw the pot at thy head.


Clowne.
Spill no drinke, spill no drinke, the Ale is good, Ile tel you what, Ale is Ale,  so Ile commend me to you with hear|tie commendations, farewell gentle Tapster.


2.
Why wherfore peasant scornst thou that the wench should loue me, looke but on her,  ile thrust my daggar in thy bosome.


1. Ruffian.
Well sirrha well, thart as thart, and so ile take the


2.
Why what am I?


1.
Why what thou wilt, a slaue.


2.
Then take that villaine, and learne how thou vse me ano|ther time.


1.
Oh I am slaine.


2.
Thats all one to me, I care not, now wil I in to my wench and call for a fresh pot.


Clown.
Nay but heare ye, take me with ye, for the Ale is Ale, cut a fresh toast Tapster, fil me a pot here is mony, I am no beg|gar, Ile follow the as long as the Ale lasts: a pestilence on the blocks for me, for I might haue had a fall, wel if we shal haue no Ale ile sit me downe, and so farwell gentle Tapster.

Here he fals ouer the dead man.
Enters the King, Aluida, the King of Cilicia, and of Pa|phlagonia, with other attendant.

Rasni.
What slaughtred wretch lies bleding here his last?
So neare the royall pallaice of the King,
Search out if any one be biding nie,
That can discourse the maner of his death,
Seate the faire Aluida, the faire of faires,
Let not the  once offend thine eyes,


L.
Heres one sits here a slepe my Lord,


Rasni.
Wake him and make enquiry of this thing.



Lord.
Sirrha you, hearest thou fellow?


Clowne.
If you will fill a fresh pot heres a peny, or else fare|well gentle Tapster.


Lord.
He is drunke my Lord.


Rasni.
Wele sport with him that Aluida may laugh.


L.
Sirrha thou fellow, thou must come to the King.


Clowne.
I wil not do a stroke of worke to day, for the Ale is good Ale, and you can aske but a peny for a pot, no more by the sta|tute.


L.
Uillaine heres the King, thou must come to him.


Clown.
The King come to an Ale-house, Tapster, fil me thre pots, wheres the King, is this he? giue me your hand sir, as good Ale as euer was tapt, you shall drinke while your skin cracke.


Rasni.
But hearest thou fellow, who kild this man?


Clowne.
Ile tell you sir, if you did taste of the Ale, all Nini|uie hath not such a cup of Ale, it floures in the cup sir, by my troth I spent eleuen pence beside thre rases of ginger.


Rasni.
Answer me knaue to my question, how came this man slaine?


Clowne.
Slain, why Ale is strong Ale, tis hufcap, I warrant you twill make a man well, Tapster ho, for the King a cup of ale and a fresh toast, heres two rases more.


Aluida.
Why good fellow the King talkes not of drinke, he would haue the tell him how this man came dead.


Clowne.
Dead nay, I thinke I am aliue yet, and wil drink a ful pot ere night, but here ye, if ye be the wench that fild vs drink, why so do your office,  giue vs a fresh pot, or if you be the Tap|sters wife, why so, wash the glasse cleane.


Aluida.
He is so drunke my Lord, theres no talking with him.


Clowne.
Drunke, nay then wench I am not drunke, thart a shitten queane to call me drunke, I tell the I am not drunke, I am a Smith I.

Enters the Smith, the Clownes maister.

Lord.
Sir here comes one perhaps that can tell.


Smith.
God saue you master.



Rasni.
Smith canst thou tell me how this man came dead?


Smith.
May it please your highnesse, my man here and a true of them went to the Ale-house, and came out so drunke that one of them kild another, and now sir, I am faine to leaue my shop and come to fetch him home.


Rasni.
Some of you carry away the dead bodie, drunken men must haue their fits, and sirrha Smith hence with thy man.


Smith.
Sirrha you, rise come go with me.


Clowne.
If we shall haue a pot of Ale lets haue it, heres mo|ny, hold Tapster take my purse.


Smith.
Come then with me, the pot stands full in the house.


Clowne.
I am for you, lets go, thart an honest Tapster, weele drinke sixe pots ere we part.

Exeunt.

Rasni.
Beautious, more bright then beautie in mine eyes,
Tell me faire sweting, wants thou any thing?
Conteind within the threfold circle of the world,
That may make Aluida liue full content.


Aluida.
Nothing my Lord, for all my thoughts are pleasde,
When as mine eye surfets with Rasnes sight.

Enters the King of Paphlagonia, male-content.

Rasni.
Looke how thy husband haunts our royall Courts,
How still his sight breds melancholy stormes,
Oh Aluida I am passion passionate,
And vext with wrath and anger to the death,
Mars when he held faire Venus on his kne,
And saw the limping Smith come from his forge,
Had not more deper furrowes in his brow,
Then Rasni hath to se this Paphlagon.


Alui.
Content the swet, ile salue thy sorow straight,
Rest but the ease of all thy thoughts on me,
And if I make not Rasni blyth againe,
Then say that womens fancies haue no shifts.


Paphla.
Shamst thou not Rasni though thou best a King,
To shroude adultry in thy royall seate,
Art thou arch-ruler of great Niniuie,
Who shouldst excell in vertue as in state,
And wrongst thy friend by keping backe his wife,
Haue I not battail'd in thy troupes full oft,
Gainst Aegypt, Iury, and proud Babylon,
Spending my blood to purchase thy renowne,
And is the guerdon of my chiualrie,
Ended in this abusing of my wife,
Restore her me, or I will from thy Courts,
And make discourse of thy adulterous deds.


Ras.
Why take her Paphlagon, exclaime not man,
For I do prise mine honour more then loue.
Faire Aluida go with thy husband home.


Alui.
How dare I go, sham'd with so dep misded,
Reuenge will broile within my husbands brest,
And when he hath me in the Court at home,
Then Aluida shall fele reuenge for all.


Rasni.
What saist thou king of Paphlagon to this?
Thou hearest the doubt thy wife doth stand vpon,
If she hath done amisse it is my fault,
I prithie pardon and forget all.


Paphla.
If that I meant not Rasni to forgiue,
And quite forget the follies that are past,
I would not vouch her presence in my Courts,
But she shall be my Quene, my loue, my life,
And Aluida vnto her Paphlagon
And lou'd, and more belou'd then before.


Rasni.
What saist thou Aluida to this?


Alui
That will he sweare it to my Lord the king,
And in a full carouse of Grekish wine,
Drinke downe the malice of his depe reuenge,
I will go home and loue him new againe.


Rasni.
What answeres Paphlagon?


Paphla.
That what she hath requested I wil do.


Alui.
Go damosell fetch me that swete wine
That stands within thy Closet on the shelfe,
Powre it into a standing bowle of gold,
But on shy life taste not before the king,
Make hast, why is great Rasni melancholy thus?
If promise be not kept, hate all for me.
Here is the wine my Lord, first make him sweare.


Paphla.
By Niniuies great gods, and Niniuies great king
My thoughts shall neuer be to wrong my wife,
And thereon heres a full carowse to her.


Alui
And there Rasni heres a kisse for the.
Now maist thou freely fold thine Aluida.


Paphla.
Oh I am dead, obstructions of my breath
The poison is of wondrous sharpe effect,
Cursed be all adultrous quenes say I,
And cursing so poore Paphlagon doth die.


Alui.
Now haue I not salued the sorrowes of my Lord?
Haue I not rid ariuall of thy loues,
What saist thou Rasni to thy Paramour?


Rasni.
That for this ded ile decke my Aluida,
In Sendall and in costly Sussapine,
Bordred with Pearle and India Diamond,
Ile cause great Eol perfume all his windes,
UUith richest myrre and curious Ambergrece,
Come louely minion, paragon for faire,
Come follow me swet goddesse of mine eye,
And taste the pleasures Rasni will prouide.
Exeunt.


Oseas.
Where whordome raines, there murther followes fast,
As falling leaues before the winter blast.
A wicked life trainde vp in endlesse crime,
Hath no regard vnto the latter time.
When Letchers shall be punisht for their lust,
When Princes plagu'd because they are vniust.
Foresee in time the warning bell doth towle,
Subdue the flesh, by praier to saue the soule.
London behold the cause of others wracke,
And see the sword of iustice at thy backe.
Deferre not off to morrow is too late,
By night he comes perhaps to iudge thy state.

Enter Ionas Solus.

Ionas.
From forth the depth of my imprisoned soule,
Steale you my sighes, testifie my paine,
Conuey on wings of mine immortall tone,
My zealous praiers, vnto the starrie throne:
Ah mercifull and iust thou dreadfull God,
Where is thine arme to laie reuengefull stroakes
Upon the heads of our rebellious race?
Loe Israell once that flourisht like the vine,
Is barraine laide, the beautifull encrease
Is wholly blent, and irreligious zeale
Incampeth there where vertue was inthroan'd
Ah-lasse the while, the widow wants reliefe,
The fatherlesse is wrongd by naked ned,
Deuotion slepes in sinders of Contempt,
Hypocrisie infects the holie Priest,
Aye me for this, woe me for these misdeds,
Alone I walke to thinke vpon the world,
And sigh to se thy Prophets so contem'd:
Ah-lasse contem'd by cursed Israell.
Yet Ionas rest content, tis Israels sinne
That causeth this, then muse no more thereon,
But pray amends, and mend thy owne amisse.

An Angell appeareth to Ionas.

Angel.
Amithai, sonne, I charge the muse no more,
(I am) hath power to pardon and correct,
To the pertains to do the Lords command.
Go girt thy loines, and hast the quickly hence,
To Niniuie, that mightie Citie wend,
And say this message from the Lord of hoasts,
Preach vnto them thse tidings from thy God.
Behold thy wickednesse hath tempted me,
And pierced through the ninefold orbes of heauen,
Repent, or else thy iudgement is at hand.

This said, the Angell vanisheth.

Ionas
Prostrate I lye before the Lord of hostes,
With humble eares intending his behest,
Ah honoured be Iehouahs great command,
Then Ionas must to Niniuie repaire,
Commanded as the Prophet of the Lord,
Great dangers on this iourny do awaight,
But dangers none where heauens direct the course,
What should I deme, I se, yea sighing se,
How Israell sinne, yet knowes the way of truth,
And thereby growes the by-word of the world,
How then should God in iudgement be so strict?
Gainst those who neuer heard or knew his power,
To threaten vtter ruine of them all:
Should I report this iudgement of my God,
I should incite them more to follow sinne,
And publish to the world my countries blame,
It may not be, my conscience tels me no.
Ah Ionas wilt thou proue rebellious then?
Consider ere thou fall what errour is,
My minde misgiues, to Ioppa will I fle,
And for a while to Tharsus shape my course,
Untill the Lord vnfret his angry browes.

Enter certaine Merchants of Tharsus, a Mai|ster and some Sailers.

M.
Come one braue merchants now the wind doth serue,
And swetly blowes a gale at West Southwest.
Our yardes a crosse, our anchors on the pike,
What shall we hence and take this merry gale?


Mer.
Sailers conuey our budgets strait aboord,
And we will recompence your paines at last,
If once in safetie we may Tharsus se,
M. wele feast these merry mates and the.


M.
Mean-while content your selues with silly cates,
Our beds are boordes, our feasts are full of mirth,
We vse no pompe, we are the Lords of se,
When Princes swet in care, we swincke of gle.
Orious shoulders and the pointers serue,
To be our load-stars in the lingering night,
The beauties of Arcturus we behold,
And though the Sailer is no booke-man held,
He knowes more Art then euer booke-men read.


Sailer.
By heauens well said, in honour of our trade,
Lets se the proudest scholler stir his course
Or shift his tides as silly sailers do,
Then wil we yeld them praise, else neuer none.


Mer.
Well spoken fellow in thine owne behalfe,
But let vs hence, wind tarries none you wot,
And tide and time let slip is hardly got.


M.
March to the hauen merchants, I follow you.


Ionas.
Now doth occasion further my desires,
I finde companions fit to aide my flight,
Staie sir I pray, and heare a word or two.


M.
Say on good friend, but briefly if you please,
My passengers by this time are aboord.


Ionas.
Whether pretend you to imbarke your selues


M.
To Tharsus sir, and here in Ioppa hauen
Our ship is prest and readie to depart.


Ionas.
May I haue passage for my mony then?


M.
What not for mony? pay ten siluerlings,
You are a welcome guest if so you please.


Ionas.
Hold take thy hire, I follow the my friend.


M.
Where is your budget let me beare it sir.


Ionas.
To one in peace, who saile as I do now,
Put trust in him who succoureth euery want.

Exeunt.

Ose.
When Prophets new inspirde, presume to force
And tie the power of heauen to their conceits,
When feare, promotion, pride, or simony,
Ambition, subtill craft, their thoughts disguise,
Woe to the flocke whereas the shepheards foule,
For lo the Lord at vnawares shall plague
The carelesse guide, because his flocks do stray:
The axe alreadie to the tree is set,
Beware to tempt the Lord ye men of art.

Enter Alcon, Thrasibulus, Samia, Clesiphon a lad.

Clesi.
Mother, some meat or else I die for want.


Samia.
Ah litle boy how glad thy mother would
Supply thy wants but naked ned denies:
Thy fathers slender portion in this world,
By vsury and false deceit is lost,
No charitie within this Citie bides:
All for themselues, and none to helpe the poore.


Clesi.
Father shall Clesiphon haue no reliefe?


Alcon
Faith my boy I must be flat with the, we must fed vp|on prouerbes now. As necessitie hath no law, a churles feast is better then none at all, for other remedies haue we none, except thy brother Radagon helpe vs.


Samia.
Is this thy slender care to helpe our childe?
Hath nature armde the to no more remorse?
Ah cruell man, vnkind, and pittilesse,
Come Clesiphon my boy, ile beg for the.


Clesi.
Oh how my mothers mourning moueth me?


Alcon.
Nay you shall paie me interest for getting the boye (wife) before you carry him hence. Ah-lasse woman what can Al|con do more? Ile plucke the belly out of my heart for the fwete Samia, be not so waspish.


Samia.
Ah silly man I know thy want is great,
And foolish I to craue where nothing is.
Haste Alcon haste, make haste vnto our sonne,
Who since he is in fauour of the King,
May helpe this haplesse Gentleman and vs.
For to regaine our goods from tyrants hands.


Thra.
Haue patience Samia, waight your weale from heauen,
Tho Gods haue raisde your sonne I hope for this,
To succour innocents in their distresse.
Enters Radagon, Solus
Lo where he comes from the imperiall Court,
Go let vs prostrate vs before his fete.


Alcon.
Nay by my troth, ile neuer aske my sonne blessing, che trow, cha taught him his lesson to know his father, what sonne Radagon, yfaith boy how doest the?


Rada.
Uillaine disturbe me not, I cannot stay.


Alcon.
Tut'sonne ile helpe you of that disease quickly, for I can hold the, aske thy mother knaue what cunning I haue to ease a woman when a qualme of kindnesse come too neare her sto|macke? Let me but claspe mine armes about her bodie and saie my praiers in her bosome, and she shall be healed presently.


Rada.
Traitor vnto my Princely Maiestie,
How dar'st thou laie thy hands vpon a King?


Samia.
No Traitor Radagon, but true is he,
What hath promotion bleared thus thine eye,
To scorne thy father when he visits thee?
Ah-lasse my sonne behold with ruthfull eyes,
Thy parents robd of all their worldly weale,
By subtile meanes of Usurie and guile,
The Iudges eares are deaffe and shut vp close,
All mercie slepes, then be thou in these plundges
A patron to thy mother in her paines,
Behold thy brother almost dead for foode,
Oh succour vs, that first did succour thee.


Rada.
What succour me, false callet hence auant?
Old dotard pack, moue not my patience,
I know you not, Kings neuer looke so low.


Samia.
You know vs not. Oh Radagon you know,
That knowing vs, you know your parents then,
Thou knowst this wombe first brought the forth to light,
I know these paps did foster the my sonne.


Alcon.
And I know he hath had many a pece of bread  chese at my hands, as proud as he is, that know I.


Thracib.
I waight no hope of succours in this place,
Where children hold their fathers in disgrace.


Rada.
Dare you enforce the furrowes of reuenge,
Within the browes of royall Radagon?
Uillaine auant, hence beggers with your brats,
Marshall why whip you not these rogues away?
That thus disturbe our royall Maiestie.


Clesiphon.
Mother I se it is a wondrous thing,
From base estate for to become a King:
For why methinke my brother in these fits,
Hath got a kingdome, and hath lost his wits.


Rada.
Yet more contempt before my royaltie?
Slaues fetch out tortures worse then Titius plagues,
And teare their toongs from their blasphemous heads.


Thrasi.
Ile get me gone, tho woe begon with griefe,
No hope remaines, come Alcon let vs wend.


Ra.
Twere best you did, for feare you catch your bane,


Samia.
Nay Traitor, I wil haunt the to the death,
Ungratious sonne, vntoward and peruerse,
Ile fill the heauens with ecchoes of thy pride,
And ring in euery eare thy small regard,
That doest despise thy parents in their wants,
And breathing forth my soule before thy fete,
My curses still shall haunt thy hatefull head,
And being dead, my ghost shall the pursue.

Enter Rasni King of Assiria, attended on by his sooth-sayers and Kings.

Rasni.
How now, what meane these outcries in our Court?
Where nought should sound but harmonies of heauen,
What maketh Radagon so passionate?


Samia.
Iustice O King, iustice against my sonne.


Rasni.
Thy sonne: what sonne?


Samia.
This cursed Radagon.


Rada.
Dread Monarch, this is but a lunacie,
Which griefe and want hath brought the woman to,
What doth this passion hold you euerie Moone?



Samia.
Oh polliticke in sinne and wickednesse,
Too impudent for to delude thy Prince.
Oh Rasni this same wombe first brought him foorth.
This is his father, worne with care and age,
This is his brother, poore vnhaphie lad,
And I his mother, though contemn'd by him,
With tedious toyle we got our litle good,
And brought him vp to schoole with mickle charge:
Lord how we ioy'd to se his towardnesse,
And to our selues we oft in silence said,
This youth when we are old may succour vs.
But now preferd and lifted vp by the,
UUe quite destroyed by cursed vsurie,
He scorneth me, his father, and this childe.


Clesi.
He plaies the Serpent right, describ'd in Aesopes tale,
That sought the Fosters death that lately gaue him life.


Alcon.
Nay and please your Maiesti-ship, for proofe he was my childe, search the parish booke, the Clarke wil sweare it, his god|fathers and godmothers can witnesse it, it cost me fortie pence in ale and cakes on the wiues at his christning. Hence proud King, thou shalt neuer more haue my blessing.

He takes him apart.

Rasni.
Say sooth in secret Radagon,
Is this thy father?


Rada.
Mightie King he is,
I blushing, tell it to your Maiestie.


Ras.
Thy dost thou then contemne him  his friends?


Rada.
Because he is a base and abiect swaine,
My mother and her brat both beggarly,
Unmete to be allied vnto a King.
Should I that looke on Rasnes countenance,
And march amidst his royall equipage,
Embase my selfe to speake to such as they?
Twere impious so to impaire the loue
That mightie Rasni beares to Radagon.
I would your grace would quit them from your sight
That dare presume to looke on Ioues compare.


Rasni.
I like thy pride, I praise thy pollicie,
Such should they be that wait vpon my Court.
Let me alone to answere (Radagon.)
Uillaines, seditious traitors as you be,
That scandalize the honour of a King,
Depart my Court you stales of impudence,
Unlesse you would be parted from your limmes,
So base for to intitle father-hood,
To Rasnes friend, to Rasnes fauourite?


Rada.
Hence begging scold, hence caitiue clogd with yeares,
On paine of death reuisit not the Court.
UUas I conceiu'd by such a scuruie trull,
Or brought to light by such a lump of dirt:
Go Lossell trot it to the cart and spade,
Thou art vnmete to looke vpon a King,
Much lesse to be the father of a King.


Alcon.
You may se wife what a goodly pece of worke you haue made, haue I tought you Arsmetry, as additiori multiplica|rum, the rule of thre, and all for the begetting of a boy, and to be banished for my labour. O pittifull hearing. Come Clesiphon follow me.


Clesi.
Brother beware, I oft haue heard it told,
That sonnes who do their fathers scorne, shall beg when they be old.

Exet Alcon, Clesiphon.

Radagon.
Hence bastard boy for feare you taste the whip.


Samia.
Oh all you heauens, and you eternall powers,
That sway the sword of iustice in your hands,
(If mothers curses for her sonnes contempt,
May fill the ballance of your furie full)
Powre downe the tempest of your direfull plagues,
Upon the head of cursed Radagon.
Vpon this praier she departeth, and a flame of fire appeareth from beneath, and Radagon is swallowed.
So you are iust, now triumph Samia.
Exet Samia.



Rasni.
What exorcising charme, or hatefull hag.
Hath rauished the pride of my delight?
What tortuous planets, or maleuolent
Conspiring power, repining destenie
Hath made the concaue of the earth vnclose,
And shut in ruptures louely Radagon?
If I be Lord-commander of the cloudes,
King of the earth, and Soueraigne of the seas,
What daring Saturne from his fierie denne,
Doth dart these furious flames amidst my Court?
I am not chiefe, there is more great then I,
What greater then Th'assirian Satrapos?
It may not be, and yet I feare there is,
That hath bereft me of my Radagon.


Soothsaier.
Monarch and Potentate of all our Prouinces,
Muse not so much vpon this accident,
Which is indeed nothing miraculous,
The hill of Scicely, dread Soueraigne,
Sometime on sodaine doth euacuate,
Whole flakes of fire, and spues out from below
The smoakie brands that Vulueus bellowes driue,
Whether by windes inclosed in the earth,
Or fracture of the earth by riuers force,
Such chances as was this, are often sene,
Whole Cities suncke, whole Countries drowned quite,
Then muse not at the losse of Radagon.
But frolicke with the dalliance of your loue.
Let cloathes of purple set with studdes of gold,
Embellished with all the pride of earth,
Be spred for Aluida to sit vpon.
Then thou like Mars courting the quene of loue,
Maist driue away this melancholy fit.


Rasni.
The proofe is good and philosophicall,
And more, thy counsaile plausible and swete.
Come Lords, though Rasni wants his Radagon,
Earth will repaie him many Radagons,
And Aluida with pleasant lookes reuiue,
The heart that droupes for want of Radagon.

Exeunt.

Oseas.
When disobedience raigneth in the childe,
And Princes eares by flattery be beguilde.
When lawes do passe by fauour, not by truth,
When falshood swarmeth both in old and youth.
When gold is made a god to wrong the poore,
And charitie exilde from rich mens doore.
When men by wit do labour to disproue,
The plagues for sinne, sent downe by God aboue.
Where great mens eares are stop to good aduice,
And apt to heare those tales that feed their vice.
Woe to the land, for from the East shall rise,
A lambe of peace, the scourge of vanities.
The iudge of truth, the patron of the iust,
Who soone will laie presumption in the dust.
And giue the humble poore their hearts desire,
And doome the worldlings to eternall fire.
Repent all you that heare, for feare of plagues,
O London, this and more doth swarme in thee,
Repent, repent, for why the Lord doth see.
With trembling pray, and mend what is amisse,
The swoord of iustice drawne alreadie is.

Enter the Clowne and the Smiths wife.

Clowne.
UUhy but heare you mistresse, you know a womans eies are like a paire of pattens fit to saue shooleather in sommer, and to kepe away the cold in winter, so you may like your hus|band with the one eye, because you are married, and me with the other, because I am your man. Alasse, alasse, think mistresse what a thing loue is, why it is like to an ostry fagot, that once set on fire, is as hardly quenched, as the bird Crocodill driuen out of her neast.


Wife.
Thy Adam cannot a woman winke but she must slep, and can she not loue but she must crie it out at the Crosse, know

Adam, I loue the as my selfe, now that we are together in se|cret.


Clown.
Mis. these words of yours are like to a Fox taile placed in a gentle womans Fanne, which as it is light, so it giueth life. Oh these words are as swete as a lilly, wherupon offering a bo|rachio of kisses to your vnsemly personage, I entertaine you vp|on further acquaintance.


Wife.
Alasse my husband comes.


Clowne.
Strike vp the drum, and say no words but mum.


Smith.
Sirrha you, and you huswife, well taken togither, I haue long suspected you, and now I am glad I haue found you to|gither.


Clowne.
Truly sir, and I am glad that I may do you any way pleasure, either in helping you or my mistresse.


Smith.
Boy here, and knaue you shall know it straight, I wil haue you both before the Magistrate, and there haue you surely punished.


Clowne.
Why then maister you are iealous?


Smith.
Ielous knaue, how can I be but iealous, to se you euer so familiar togither? Thou art not only content to drinke away my goods, but to abuse my wife.


Clowne.
Two good quallities, drunkennesse and leachery, but maister are you iealous?


Smith.
I knaue and thou shalt know it ere I passe, for I will beswindge thee while this roape will hold.


Wife.
My good husband abuse him not, for he neuer proffered you any wrong,


Smith.
Nay whore, thy part shall not be behinde.


Clowne.
Why suppose maister I haue offended you, is it law|full for the maister to beate the seruant for all offences?


Smith.
I marry is it knaue.


Clowne.
Then maister wil I proue by logicke, that seing all sinnes are to receiue correction, the maister is to be corrected of the man, and sir I pray you, what greater sinne is, then iealousie? tis like a mad dog that for anger bites himselfe. Therefore that I may doe my dutie to you good maister, and to make a white

sonne of you, I will so beswinge iealousie out of you, as you shall loue me the better while you liue.


Smith.
What beate thy maister knaue?


Clowne.
What beat thy man knaue? and I maister, and dou|ble beate you, because you are a man of credite, and therfore haue at you the fairest for fortie pence.


Smith.
Alasse wife, help, helpe, my man kils me.


Wife.
Nay, euen as you haue baked so brue, iealousie must be driuen out by extremities.


Clowne.
And that will I do, mistresse.


Smith.
Hold thy hand Adam, and not only I forgiue and for|get all but I will giue the a good Farme to liue on.


Clowne.
Begone Peasant, out of the compasse of my further wrath, for I am a corrector of vice, and at night I wil bring home my mistresse.


Smith.
Euen when you please good Adam.


Clowne.
When I please, marke the words, tis a lease paroll, to haue and to hold, thou shalt be mine for euer, and so lets go to the Ale-house.

Exeunt.

Oseas.
Where seruants gainst maisters do rebell,
The Common-weale may be accounted hell.
For if the feete the head shall hold in scorne,
The Cities state will fall and be forlorne.
This error London, waiteth on thy state,
Seruants amend, and maisters leaue to hate.
Let loue abound, and vertue raigne in all,
So God will hold his hand that threatneth thrall.

Enter the Merchants of Tharsus, the M. of the ship, some Sailers, wet from sea, with them the Gouer|nour of Ioppa.

Gouer. Iop.
What strange encounters met you on the sea?
That thus your Barke is battered by the flouds,
And you returne thus sea-wrackt as I se.



Mer.
Most mightie gouernor the chance is strange,
The tidings full of wonder and amaze,
Which better then we, our M. can report.


Gouer.
M. discourse vs all the accident.


M.
The faire Triones with their glimmering light
Smil'd at the foote of cleare Rootes a raine,
And in the wrath distinguishing the houres,
The Load-starre of our course dispearst his cleare,
When to the seas with blithfull westerne blasts,
We saild amaine, and let the bowling flie:
Scarce had we gone ten leagues from sight of land,
But lo an hoast of blacke and sable cloudes,
Gan to eclips Lucinas siluer face,
And with a hurling noyse from foorth the South,
A gust of winde did reare the billowes vp,
Then scantled we our sailes with spedie hands,
And tooke our drablers from our bonnets straight,
And seuered our bonnets from the courses,
Our topsailes vp, we trusse our spritsailes in,
But vainly striue they that resist the heauens.
For loe the waues incence them more and more,
Mounting with hideous roarings from the depth,
Our Barke is battered by incountring stormes,
And welny stemd by breaking of the flouds,
The sters-man pale, and carefull holds his helme,
Wherein the trust of life and safetie laie,
Till all at once (a mortall tale to tell)
Our sailes were split by Bisas bitter blast,
Our rudder broke and we bereft of hope,
There might you se with pale and gastly lookes,
The dead in thought, and dolefull merchants lifts,
Their eyes and hands vnto their Countries Gods,
The goods we cast in bowels of the sea,
A sacrifice to swage proud Neptunes ire,
Onely alone a man of Israell,
A passenger, did vnder hatches lie,
And slept secure, when we for succour praide:
Him I awooke, and said why slumberest thou?
Arise and pray, and call vpon thy God,
He will perhaps in pitie looke on vs.
Then cast we lots to know by whose amisse
Our mischiefe come, according to the guise,
And loe the lot did vnto Ionas fall,
The Israelite of whom I told you last,
Then question we his Country and his name,
Who answered vs, I am an Hebrue borne,
Who feare the Lord of heauen, who made the sea,
And fled from him for which we all are plagu'd,
So to asswage the furie of my God,
Take me and cast my carkasse in the sea,
Then shall this stormy winde and billow cease.
The heauens they know, the Hebrues God can tell,
How loth we were to execute his will:
But when no Oares nor labour might suffice,
We heaued the haplesse Ionas ouer-boord.
So ceast the storme, and calmed all the sea,
And we by strength of oares recouered shoare.


Gouer.
A wonderous chance of mighty consequence.


Mer.
Ah honored be the God that wrought the same,
For we haue vowd, that saw his wonderous workes,
To cast away prophaned Paganisme,
And count the Hebrues God the onely God.
To him this offering of the purest gold,
This mirrhe and Cascia frely I do yeld.


M.
And on his altars perfume these Turkie clothes,
This gassampine and gold ile sacrifice.


Sailer.
To him my heart and thoughts I will addict,
Then suffer vs most mightie Gouernour,
Within your Temples to do sacrifice.


Gouer.
You men of Tharsus follow me,
Who sacrifice vnto the God of heauen,
And welcome friends to Ioppais Gouernor.
Exeunt a sacrifice.



Oseas.
If warned once, the Ethnicks thus repent,
And at the first their errour do lament:
What senslesse beasts deuoured in their sinne,
Are they whom long perswations cannot winne.
Beware ye westerne Cities where the word
Is daily preached both at church and boord:
Where maiestie the Gospell doth maintaine,
Where Preachers for your good, themselues do paine.
To dally long, and still protract the time,
The Lord is iust, and you but dust and slime:
Presume not far, delaie not to amend,
Who suffereth long, will punish in the end.
Cast thy account  London in this case,
Then iudge what cause thou hast, to call for grace.

Ionas the Prophet cast out of the Whales belly vpon the Stage.

Ionas.
Lord of the light, thou maker of the world,
Behold thy hands of mercy reares me vp,
Loe from the hidious bowels of this fish,
Thou hast returnd me to the wished aire,
Loe here apparant witnesse of thy power,
The proud Leuiathan that scoures the seas,
And from his nosthrils showres out stormy flouds,
Whose backe resists the tempest of the winde,
Whose presence makes the scaly troopes to shake,
With humble stresse of his broad opened chappes,
Hath lent me harbour in the raging flouds.
Thus though my sin hath drawne me down to death,
Thy mercy hath restored me to life.
Bow ye my knes, and you my bashfull eyes,
Wepe so for griefe, as you to water would:
In trouble Lord I called vnto the,
Out of the belly of the depest hell,
I cride, and thou didst heare my voice O God:
Tis thou hadst cast me downe into the depe,
The seas and flouds did compasse me about,
I thought I had bene cast from out thy sight,
The weds were wrapt about my wretched head,
I went vnto the bottome of the hilles,
But thou O Lord my God hast brought me vp.
On the I thought when as my soule did faint,
My praiers did prease before thy mercy seate.
Then will I paie my vowes vnto the Lord,
For why saluation commeth from his throane.

The Angell appeareth.

Angell.
Ionas arise, get the to Niniuie,
And preach to them the preachings that I bad:
Haste the to se the will of heauen perform'd.

Depart Angell.

Ionas.
Iehouah I am Priest to do thy will.
What coast is this, and where am I arriu'd?
Behold swete Licas streaming in his boundes,
Bearing the walles of haughtie Niniuie,
Wheras thre hundered towns do tempt the heauen.
Faire are thy walles pride of Assiria,
But lo thy sinnes haue pierced through the cloudes.
Here will I enter boldly, since I know
My God commands, whose power no power resists.

Exet.

Oseas.
You Prophets learne by Ionas how to liue,
Repent your sinnes, whilst he doth warning giue.
Who knowes his maisters will and doth it not,
Shall suffer many stripes full well I wot.

Enter Aluida in rich attire, with the King of Cilicia, her Ladies.

Aluida.
Ladies go sit you downe amidst this bowre,
And let the Eunickes plaie you all a slepe:
Put garlands made of Roses on your heads,
And plaie the wantons whilst I talke a while.


Lady.
Thou beautifull of all the world, we will.

Enter the bowers.

Aluid.
King of Cilicia, kind and curtious,
Like to thy selfe, because a louely King,
Come laie the downe vpon thy mistresse kne,
And I will sing and talke of loue to the.


King Cili.
Most gratious Paragon of excellence,
It fits not such an abiect Prince as I,
To talke with Rasnes Paramour and loue.


Al.
To talke swet friend? who wold not talke with the?
Oh be not coy, art thou not only faire?
Come twine thine armes about this snow white neck,
A loue-nest for the great Assirian King,
Blushing I tell the faire, Cilician Prince,
None but thy selfe can merit such a grace.


K. Ci.
Madam I hope you mean not for to mock me:


Al.
No king, faire king, my meaning is to yoke the.
Heare me but sing of loue, then by my sighes,
My teares, my glauncing lookes, my changed cheare,
Thou shalt perceiue how I do hold the deare.


K. Ci.
Sing Madam if you please, but loue in iest,


Aluid.
Nay, I will loue, and sigh at euery rest.

Song.
Beautie alasse where wast thou borne?
Thus to hold thy selfe in scorne:
When as Beautie kist to wooe thee,
Thou by Beautie doest vndo mee.
Heigho, despise me not.
I and thou in sooth are one,
Fairer thou, I fairer none:
Wanton thou, and wilt thou wanton
Yeeld a cruell heart to plant on?
Do me right, and do me reason,
Crueltie is cursed treason.
Heigho I loue, heigho I loue,
Heigho, and yet he eies me not.




King.
Madam your song is passing passionate.


Alui.
And wilt thou not then pitie my estate?


King.
Aske loue of them who pitie may impart.


Alui.
I aske of the swet, thou hast stole my hart.


King.
Your loue is fixed on a greater King.


Alui.
Tut womens loue, it is a fickle thing.
I loue my Rasni for my dignitie.
I loue Cilician King for his swete eye.
I loue my Rasni since he rules the world.
But more I loue this kingly litle world.
Embrace him.
How swete he lookes? Oh were I Cinthias Pheere,
And thou Endimion, I should hold the dere:
Thus should mine armes be spred about thy necke.
Embrace his necke.
Thus would I kisse my loue at euery becke.
Kisse.
Thus would I sigh to se the swetly slepe:
And if thou wakest not soone, thus would I wepe.
And thus, and thus, and thus: thus much I loue the.

Kisse him.

King.
For all these vowes, beshrow me if I proue you:
My faith vnto my King shall not be falc'd.


Alui.
Good Lord how men are coy when they are crau'd?


King.
Madam behold our King approacheth nie.


Alui.
Thou art Endimion, then no more, heigho for him I die.
Faints. Point at the king of Cilicia.
Enter Rasni, with his Kings and Lords.
What ailes the Center of my happinesse,
Whereon depends the heauen of my delight?
Thine eyes the motors to command my world,
Thy hands the axier to maintaine my world.
Thy smiles, the prime and spring-tide of my world.
Thy frownes, the winter to afflict the world.
Thou Quene of me, I King of all the world.


Alui.
Ah feble eyes lift vp and looke on him,
She riseth as out of a traunce.
Is Rasni here? then droupe no more poore hart,
Oh how I fainted when I wanted the?
Embrace him.
How faine am I, now I may looke on the?
How glorious is my Rasni? how diuine?
Eunukes play himmes, to praise his deitie:
He is my Ioue, and I his Iuno am.


Rasni.
Sun-bright, as is the eye of sommers day,
When as he sutes Spenori all in gold,
To wooe his Leda in a swanlike shape.
Seemely as Galbocia for thy white:
Rose-coloured, lilly, louely, wanton, kinde,
Be thou the laborinth to tangle loue,
Whilst I command the crowne from Venus crest:
And pull Onoris girdle from his loines,
Enchast with Carbunckles and Diamonds,
To beautifie faire Aluida my loue.
Play Eunukes, sing in honour of her name,
Yet looke not slaues vpon her woing eyne,
For she is faire Lucina to your king,
But fierce Medusa to your baser eie.


Alui.
What if I slept, where should my pillow be?


Rasni.
Within my bosome Nimph, not on my kne.
Slepe like the smiling puritie of heauen,
When mildest wind is loath to blend the peace,
Meane-while thy balme shall from thy breath arise,
And while these closures of thy lampes be shut,
My soule may haue his peace from fancies warre.
This is my Morane, and I her Cephalus.
Wake not too soone swete Nimph, my loue is wonne:
Catnies why staie your straines, why tempt you me?

Enter the Priest of the sunne, vvith the miters on their heads, carrying fire in their hands.

Priest.
All haile vnto Th'assirian deitie.


Ras.
Priests why presume you to disturbe my peace?


Priest.
Rasni, the destinies disturbe thy peace.
Behold amidst the addittes of our Gods,
Our mightie Gods the patrons of our warre.
The ghost of dead men howling walke about,
Crying Ve, Ve, wo to this Citie woe.
The statutes of our Gods are throwne downe,
And streames of blood our altars do distaine.


Aluida.
Ah-lasse my Lord what tidings do I hear?
Shall I be slaine?

She starteth.

Rasni.
Who tempteth Aluida?
Go breake me vp the brazen doores of dreames,
And binde me cursed Morpheus in a chaine,
And fetter all the fancies of the night,
Because they do disturbe my Aluida.

A hand from out a cloud, threatneth a burning sword.

K. Cili.
Behold dread Prince, a burning sword from heauen,
Which by a threatning armeis brandished.


Rasni.
What am I threatned then amidst my throane?
Sages? you Magi? speake: what meaneth this?


Sages.
These are but clammy exhalations,
Or retro grade, coniunctions of the starres,
Or oppositions of the greater lights.
Or radiatrous finding matter fit,
That in the starrie Spheare kindled be,
Matters betokening dangers to thy foes,
But peace and honour to my Lord the King.


Rasni.
Then frolicke Uiceroies, Kings  potentates,
Driue all vaine fancies from your feble mindes.
Priests go and pray, whilst I prepare my feast,
Where Aluida and I, in pearle and gold,
Will quaffe vnto our Nobles, richest wine,
In spight of fortune, fate, or destinie.

Exeunt.

Oseas.
Woe to the traines of womens foolish lust,
In wedlocke rights that yeeld but litle trust.
That vow to one, yet common be to all,
Take warning wantons, pride will haue a fall.
Woe to the land where warnings profit nought,
Who say that nature, Gods decrees hath wrought.
VVho build one fate, and leaue the corner stone,
The God of Gods, sweete Christ the onely one.
If such escapes  London raigne in thee:
Repent, for why each sin shall punisht bee.
Repent, amend, repent, the houre is nie,
Defer not time, who knowes when he shall die?
Enters one clad in diuels attire alone.
Longer liues a merry man then a sad, and because I meane to make my selfe pleasant this night, I haue put my selfe into this attire, to make a Clowne afraid that passeth this way: for of late there haue appeared many strange apparitions, to the great fear and terror of the Citizens. Oh here my yoong maister comes.

Enters Adam and his mistresse.

Adam.
Feare not mistresse, ile bring you safe home, if my mai|ster frowne, then will I stampe and stare, and if all be not well then, why then to morrow morne put out mine eyes cleane with fortie pound.


VVife.
Oh but Adam, I am afraid to walke so late because of the spirits that appeare in the Citie.


Adam.
What are you afraid of spirits, armde as I am, with Ale, and Nutmegs, turne me loose to all the diuels in hell.


VVife.
Alasse Adam, Adam, the diuell, the diuell.


Adam.
The diuell mistresse, flie you for your safegard, let me alone, the diuell and I will deale well inough, if he haue any ho|nestie at all in him, Ile either win him with a smooth tale, or else with a toste and a cup of Ale.

The Diuell sings here.

Diuell.
Oh, oh, oh, oh, faine would I be,
If that my kingdome fulfilled I might se.
Oh, oh, oh, oh.


Clowne.
Surely this is a merry diuell, and I beleue he is

one of Lucifers Minstrels, hath a swete voice, now surely, surely, he may sing to a paire of Tongs and a Bag-pipe.


Diuell.
Oh thou art he that I seke for.


Clowne.
Spritus santus, away from me satan, I haue nothing to do with the.


Diuell.
Oh villaine thou art mine.


Clowne.
Nominus patrus, I blesse me from the, and I coniure the to tell me who thou art?


Diuell.
I am the spirit of the dead man that was slaine in thy company when we were drunke togither at the Ale.


Clown.
By my troth sir, I cry you mercy, your face is so chan|ged, that I had quite forgotten you, well maister diuell we haue tost ouer many a pot of Ale togither.


Diuell.
And therefore must thou go with me to hell.


Clowne.
I haue a pollicie to shift him, for I know he comes out of a hote place, and I know my selfe, the Smith and the diuel hath a drie tooth in his head, therefore will I leaue him a slepe and runne my way.


Diuell.
Come art thou readie.


Clowne.
Faith sir my old friend, and now goodman diuell, you know, you and I haue bene tossing many a good cup of Ale, your nose is growne verie rich, what say you, will you take a pot of Ale now at my hands, hell is like a Smiths forge full of water, and yet euer a thrust.


Diuell.
No Ale villaine, spirits cannot drinke, come get vp on my backe, that I may carrie the.


Clowne.
You know I am a Smith sir, let me looke whether you be well shod or no, for if you want a shoe, a remoue, or the clinching of a naile, I am at your command.


Diuell.
Thou hast neuer a shoe fit for me.


Clowne.
Why sir, we shooe horned beasts as well as you, Oh good Lord let me sit downe and laugh, hath neuer a clouen foote, a diuell quoth he, ile vse spritus santus nor nominus patrus no more to him, I warrant you Ile do more good vpon him with my cud|gell, now will I sit me downe and become Iustice of peace to the diuell.



Diuell.
Come art thou readie?


Clowne.
I am readie. And with this cudgell I will coniure the.


Diuell.
Oh hold thy hand, thou kilst me, thou kilst me.


Clowne.
Then may I count my selfe I thinke a tall man, that am able to kill a diuell. Now who dare deale with me in the pa|rish, or what wench in Niniuie will not loue me, when they say, there goes he that beate the diuell.

Enters Thrasibulus.

Thrasi.
Loathed is the life that now inforc'd I leade,
But since necessitie will haue it so,
(Necessitie it doth command the~ Gods)
Through euerie coast and corner now I prie,
To pilfer what I can to buy me meate.
Here haue I got a cloake not ouer old,
Which will affoord some litle sustenance,
Now will I to the broaking Usurer,
To make exchange of ware for readie coine.


Alcon.
Wife bid the Trumpets sound a prize, a prize, mark the posie, I cut this from a new married wife, by the helpe of a horne thombe and a knife, sixe shillings foure pence.


Samia.
The better lucke ours, but what haue we here, cast ap|parell. Come away man, the Usurer is neare, this is dead ware, let it not bide on our hands.


Thrasi.
Here are my partners in my pouertie,
Inforc'd to seke their fortunes as I do.
Ah-lasse that fewe men should possesse the wealth,
And many soules be forc'd to beg or steale.
Alcon well met.


Alcon.
Fellow begger whither now?


Thrasi.
To the Usurer to get gold on commoditie.


Alcon.
And I to the same place to get a vent for my villany, se where the olde crust comes, let vs salute him, God spede sir may a man abuse your patience vpon a pawne.



Vsurer.
Friend let me se it.


Alcon.
Ecce signum, a faire doublet and hose, new bought out of the pilferers shop, a hansome cloake.


Vsurer.
How were they gotten?


Thrasi.
How catch the fisher-men fish?


M.
take them as you thinke them worth, we leaue all to your conscience.


Vsurer.
Honest men, toward men, good men, my friends, like to proue good members, vse me, command me, I will maintaine your credits, there's mony, now spend not your time in idlenesse, bring me commoditie I haue crownes for you, there is two shil|lings for the, and six shillings for the.


Alcon.
A bargaine, now Samia haue at it for a new smocke, come let vs to the spring of the best liquor, whilest this lastes, tril-lill.


Vsurer.
Good fellowes, propper fellowes, my companions, far|well, I haue a pot for you.


Samia.
If he could spare it.
Enters to them Ionas.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent,
The day of horror and of torment comes,
When gredie hearts shall glutted be with fire,
When as corruptions vailde, shall be vnmaskt,
When briberies shall be repaide with bane.
When whoredomes shall be recompenc'd in hell.
When riot shall with rigor be rewarded.
When as neglect of truth, contempt of God,
Disdaine of poore men, fatherlesse and sicke,
Shall be rewarded with a bitter plague.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.
The Lord hath spoke, and I do crie it out.
There are as yet but fortie daies remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be ouerthrowne.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.
There are as yet but fortie daies remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be ouerthrowne.
Exet.



Vsur.
Confus'd in thought, oh whither shall I wend?
Exet.


Thrasi.
My conscience cries that I haue done amisse.
Exet.


Alcon.
Oh God of heauen, gainst the haue I offended.
Exet.


Samia.
Asham'd of my misdeds, where shal I hide me?
Exet.


Clesi.
Father methinks this word repent is good,
He that punish disobedience,
Doth hold a scourge for euery priuie fault.
Exet.


Oseas.
Looke London, look, with inward eies behold,
What lessons the euents do here vnfold.
Sinne growne to pride, to misery is thrall,
The warning bell is rung, beware to fall.
Ye worldly men whom wealth doth lift on hie,
Beware and feare, for worldly men must die.
The time shall come, where least suspect remaines,
The sword shall light vpon the wisest braines.
The head that deemes to ouer-top the skie,
Shall perish in his humaine pollicie.
Lo I haue said, when I haue said the truth,
When will is law, when folly guideth youth.
When shew of zeale is prankt in robes of zeale,
When Ministers powle the pride of common-weale?
When lavv is made a laborinth of strife,
When honour yeelds him friend to vvicked life.
When Princes heare by others eares their follie,
When vsury is most accounted holie.
If these shall hap, as vvould to God they might not,
The plague is neare, I speake although I vvrite not.

Enters the Angell.

Angell.
Oseas.


Oseas.
Lord.


An.
Now hath thine eies perus'd these hainous sins,
Hatefull vnto the mightie Lord of hostes,
The time is come, their sinnes are waxen ripe,
And though the Lord forewarnes, yet they repent not:
Custome of firme hath hardned all their hearts,
Now comes reuenge armed with mightie plagues,
To punish all that liue in Niniuie,
For God is iust as he is mercifull,
And doubtlesse plagues all such as scorne repent,
Thou shalt not see the desolation
That falles vnto these cursed Niniuites,
But shalt returne to great Ierusalem,
And preach vnto the people of thy God,
What mightie plagues are incident to sinne,
Unlesse repentance mittigate his ire:
Wrapt in the spirit as thou wert hither brought,
Ile seate the in Iudeas prouinces,
Feare not Oseas then to preach the word.


Oseas.
The will of the Lord be done.

Oseas taken away.
Enters Rasni with his Viceroyes, Aluida and her Ladies, to a banquet.

Rasni.
So Uiceroyes you haue pleasde me passing well,
These curious cates are gratious in mine eye.
But these Borachious of the richest wine,
Make me to thinke how blythsome we will be.
Seate the faire Iuno in the royall throne,
And I will serue the to se thy face,
That feeding on the beautie of thy lookes,
My stomacke and mine eyes may both be fild.
Come Lordings seate you, fellow mates at feast,
And frolicke wags, this is a day of gle,
This banquet is for brightsome Aluida.
Ile haue them skinck my standing bowles with wine,
And no man drinke, but quaffe a whole carouse,
Unto the health of beautious Aluida.
For who so riseth from this feast not drunke,
As I am Rasni Niniuies great King,
Shall die the death as traitor to my selfe,
For that he scornes the health of Aluida.


K. Cili.
That will I neuer do my L.
Therefore with fauour, fortune to your grace,
Carowse vnto the health of Aluida.


Rasni.
Gramercy Lording, here I take thy pledge.
And Creete to the a bowle of Grekish wine,
Here to the health of Aluida.


Creete.
Let come my Lord, Iack scincker fil it full,
A pledge vnto the health of heauenly Aluida.


Rasni.
Uassals attendant on our royall feasts,
Drinke you I say vnto my louers health,
Let none that is in Rasnes royall Court,
Go this night safe and sober to his bed.

Enters the Clowne.

Clowne.
This way he is, and here will I speake with him.


Lord.
Fellow, whither pressest thou?


Clowne.
I presse no bodie sir, I am going to speake with a friend of mine.


Lord.
Why slaue, here is none but the King and his Uice|royes.


Clowne.
The King, marry sir he is the man I would speake withall.


Lord.
Why calst him a friend of thine?


Clowne.
I marry do I sir, for if he be not my friend, ile make him my friend ere he and I passe.


Lord.
Away vassaile be gone, thou speake vnto the King.


Clowne.
I marry will I sir, and if he were a king of veluet, I will talke to him.


Rasni.
Whats the matter there, what noyce is that?


Clowne.
A boone my Liege, a boone my Liege.


Rasni.
What is it that great Rasni will not graunt
This day, vnto the meanest of his land?
In honour of his beautious Aluida?
Come hither swaine, what is it that thou crauest?


Clowne.
Faith sir nothing, but to speake a fewe sentences to your worship.



Rasni.
Say, what is it?


Clown.
I am sure sir you haue heard of the spirits that walke in the Citie here.


Rasni.
I, what of that?


Clown.
Truly sir, I haue an oration to tel you of one of them, and this it is.


Alui.
Why goest not forward with thy tale?


Clowne.
Faith mistresse, I fele an imperfection in my voyce, a disease that often troubles me, but alasse easily mended, a cup of Ale, or a cup of wine, will serue the turne.


Alui.
Fill him a bowle, and let him want no drinke.


Clown.
Oh what a pretious word was that, and let him want no drinke. Well sir, now ile tel you foorth my tale: Sir as I was comming alongst the port ryuale of Niniuie, there appeared to me a great diuell, and as hard fauoured a diuell as euer I saw: nay sir, he was a cuckoldly diuell, for he had hornes on his head. This diuell, marke you now, presseth vpon me, and sir inded, I charged him with my pike staffe, but when y^t would not serue, I came vpon him with sprytus santus, why it had bene able to haue put Lucifer out of his wits, when I saw my charme would not serue, I was in such a perplexitie, that sixe peny-worth of Iuni|per would not haue made the place swete againe.


Alui.
Why fellow weart thou so afraid?


Clowne.
Oh mistresse had you bene there and sene, his verie sight had made you shift a cleane smocke, I promise you though I were a man and counted a tall fellow, yet my Landresse calde me slouenly knaue the next day.


Rasni.
A pleasaunt slaue, forward sirrha, on with thy tale.


Clowne.
Faith sir, but I remember a word that my mistresse your bed-fellow spoake.


Rasni.
What was that fellow?


Clowne.
Oh sir, a word of comfort, a pretious word: and let him want no drinke.


Rasni.
Her word is lawe: and thou shalt want no drinke.



Clowne.
Then sir, this diuell came vpon me and would not be perswaded but he would neds carry me to hell, I proffered him a cup of Ale, thinking because he came out of so hotte a place that he was thirstie, but the diuell was not drie, and therfore the more sorie was I, well, there was no remedie but I must with him to hell, and at last I cast mine eye aside, if you knew what I spied you would laugh, sir I lookt from top to toe, and he had no clouen fete. Then I ruffled vp my haire, and set my cap on the one side,  sir grew to be a Iustice of peace to the diuel. At last in a great fume, as I am very cholloricke, and sometime so hotte in my fastin fumes that no man can abide within twentie yards of me, I start vp, and so bombasted the diuell, that sir he cried out, and ranne away.


Alui.
This pleasant knaue hath made me laugh my fill.
Rasni, now Aluida begins her quaffe,
And drinkes a full carouse vnto her King.


Rasni.
A pledge my loue, as hardie as great Ioue,
Drunke, when his Iuno heau'd a bowle to him.
Frolicke my Lord, let all the standerds walke.
Ply it till euery man hath tane his load.
How now sirrha, how chere, we haue no words of you?


Clown.
Truly sir, I was in a broune study about my mistresse.


Alui.
About me for what?


Clowne.
Truly mistresse, to thinke what a golden sentence you did speake: all the philosophers in the world could not haue said more: what come let him want no drinke. Oh wise spech.


Alui.
Uillaines why skinck you not vnto this fellow?
He makes me blyth and merry in my thoughts.
Heard you not that the King hath giuen command,
That all be drunke this day within his Court,
In quaffing to the health of Aluida?

Enters Ionas.

Ionas
Repent, repent, ye men of Niniuie repent.
The Lord hath spoken, and I do crie it out,
There are as yet but fortie daies remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be ouerthrowne.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.


Rasni.
What fellow is this, that thus disturbes our feasts,
With outcries and alarams to repent.


Clowne.
Oh sir, tis one goodman Ionas that is come from Ie|richo, and surely I thinke he hath sene some spirit by the way, and is fallen out of his wits, for he neuer leaues crying night nor day, my maister heard him, and he shut vp his shop, gaue me my Indenture, and he and his wife do nothing but fast and pray.


Ionas.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.


Rasni.
Come hither fellow, what art,  from whence commest thou?


Ionas.
Rasni, I am a Prophet of the Lord,
Sent hither by the mightie God of hostes,
To cry destruction to the Niniuites,
O Niniuie thou harlot of the world,
I raise thy neighbours round about thy boundes,
To come and see thy filthinesse and sinne.
Thus saith the Lord, the mightie God of hoste,
Your King loues chambering and wantonnesse,
Whoredome and murther do distaine his Court,
He fauoureth couetous and drunken men.
Behold therefore all like a strumpet foule,
Thou shalt be iudg'd and punisht for thy crime:
The foe shall pierce the gates with iron rampes,
The fire shall quite consume the from aboue.
The houses shall be burnt, the Infants slaine.
And women shall behold their husbands die.
Thine eldest sister is Lamana.
And Sodome on thy right hand seated is.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.
The Lord hath spoke, and I do crie it out.
There are as yet but fortie daies remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be ouerthrowne.

Exet offered.

Rasni.
Staie Prophet, staie.


Ionas.
Disturbe not him that sent me,
Let me performe the message of the Lord.
Exet.



Rasni.
My soule is buried in the hell of thoughts.
Ah Aluida, I looke on the with shame.
My Lords on sodeine fixe their eyes on ground,
As if dismayd to looke vpon the heauens.
Hence Magi, who haue flattered me in sinne.
Exet. His Sages.
Horror of minde, disturbance of my soule,
Makes me agast, for Niniuies mishap.
Lords se proclaim'd, yea se it straight proclaim'd,
That man and beast, the woman and her childe,
For fortie daies in sacke and ashes fast,
Perhaps the Lord will yeld and pittie vs.
Beare hence these wretched blandishments of sinne,
And bring me sackcloth to attire your King.
Away with pompe, my soule is full of woe:
In pittie looke on Niniuie, O God.

Exet. A man.

Alui.
Assaild with shame, with horror ouerborne,
To sorrowes sold, all guiltie of our sinne.
Come Ladies come, let vs prepare to pray.
Ah-lasse, how dare we looke on heauenly light,
That haue dispisde the maker of the same?
How may we hope for mercie from aboue,
That still dispise the warnings from aboue?
Woes me, my conscience is a heauie foe.
O patron of the poore opprest with sinne,
Looke, looke on me, that now for pittie craue,
Assaild with shame, with horror ouerborne,
To sorrow sold, all guiltie of our sinne.
Come Ladies come, let vs prepare to pray.

Exeunt.
Enter the Vsurer solus, with a halter in one hand, a dagger in the other.

Vsurer.
Groning in conscience, burdened with my crimes,
The hell of sorrow hauntes me vp and downe.
Tread where I list, me-thinkes the bleding ghostes
Of those whom my corruption brought to noughts,
Do serue for stumbling blocks before my steppes.
The fatherlesse and widow wrongd by me.
The poore oppressed by my vsurie,
Me-thinkes I se their hands reard vp to heauen,
To crie for vengeance of my couetousnesse.
Where so I walke, Ile sigh and shunne my way.
Thus am I made a monster of the world,
Hell gapes for me, heauen will not hold my soule.
You mountaines shroude me from the God of truth.
Mee-thinkes I se him sit to iudge the earth.
Se how he blots me out of the booke of life.
Oh burthen more then Atna that I beare.
Couer me hilles, and shroude me from the Lord.
Swallow me Licas, shield me from the Lord.
In life no peace: each murmuring that I heare,
Me-thinkes the sentence of damnation soundes,
Die reprobate, and hie the hence to hell.
The euill angell tempteth him, offering the knife and rope.
What fiend is this that temptes me to the death?
What is my death the harbour of my rest?
Then let me die: what second charge is this?
Me-things I heare a voice amidst mine eares,
That bids me staie: and tels me that the Lord
Is mercifull to those that do repent.
May I repent? oh thou my doubtfull soule?
Thou maist repent, the Iudge is mercifull.
Hence tooles of wrath, stales of temptation,
For I will pray and sigh vnto the Lord.
In sackcloth will I sigh, and fasting pray:
O Lord in rigor looke not on my sinnes.

He sits him downe in sack-cloathes, his hands and eyes reared to heauen.
Enters Aluida with her Ladies, with dispiearsed lookes.

Alui.
Come mournfull dames laie off your brodred locks,
And on your shoulders spred dispiearsed haires,
Let voice of musicke cease, where sorrow dwels.
Cloathed in sackcloaths, sigh your sinnes with me.
Bemone your pride, bewaile your lawlesse lusts,
With fasting mortifie your pampered loines:
Oh thinke vpon the horrour of your sinnes.
Think, think, with me, the burthen of your blames,
Woe to thy pompe, fal, e beautie, fading floure,
Blasted by age, by sicknesse, and by death.
Woe to our painted chekes, our curious oyles,
Our rich array, that fostered vs in sinne.
Woe to our idle thoughts that wound our soules.
Oh would to God all nations might receiue,
A good example by our greuous fall.


Ladies.
You that are planted there where pleasure dwels,
And thinkes your pompe as great as Niniuies,
May fall for sinne as Niniuie doth now.


Alui.
Mourne, mourne, let moane be all your melodie,
And pray with me, and I will pray for all.


Lord.
O Lord of heauen forgiue vs our misdeds.


Ladies.
O Lord of heauen forgiue vs our misdeds.


Vsurer.
O Lord of light forgiue me my misdeds.

Enters Rasni, the Kings of Assiria, with his nobles in sackcloath.

K. Cilicia.
Be not so ouercome with griefe O King,
Least you endanger life by sorrowing so.


Rasni.
King of Cilicia, should I cease my griefe,
Where as my swarming sinnes afflict my soule?
Uaine man know, this my burthen greater is,
Then euery priuate subiect in my land:
My life hath bene a loadstarre vnto them,
To guide them in the laborinth of blame,
Thus I haue taught them for to do amisse:
Then must I wepe my friend for their amisse,
The fall of Niniuie is wrought by me:
I haue maintaind this Citie in her shame.
I haue contemn'd the warnings from aboue.
I haue vpholden incest, rape, and spoyle.
Tis I that wrought the sinne, must wepe the sinne.
Oh had I teares like to the siluer streames,
That from the Alpine Mountains swetly streame,
Or had I sighes the treasures of remorse,
As plentifull as Aeolus hath blasts,
I then would tempt the heauens with my laments,
And pierce the throane of mercy by my sighes.


K. Cil.
Heauens are prepitious vnto faithful praiers.


Rasni.
But after our repent, we must lament:
Least that a worser mischiefe doth befall.
Oh pray, perhaps the Lord will pitie vs.
Oh God of truth both mercifull and iust,
Behold repentant men with pitious eyes,
We waile the life that we haue led before.
O pardon Lord, O pitie Niniuie.


Omnes.
O pardon Lord, O pitie Niniuie.


Rasni.
Let not the Infants dallying on the tent,
For fathers sinnes in iudgement be opprest.


K. Cil.
Let not the painfull mothers big with childe,
The innocents be punisht for our sinne.


Rasni.
O pardon Lord, O pitie Niniuie.


Omnes.
O pardon Lord, O pitie Niniuie.


Rasni.
O Lord of heauen, the virgins wepe to the.
The couetous man forie sorie for his sinne.
The Prince and poore, all pray before thy throane.
And wilt thou then be wroth with Niniuie?


K. Cili.
Giue truce to praier O king, and rest a space.


Rasni.
Giue truce to praiers, when times require no truce
No Princes no. Let all our subiects hie
Unto our temples, where on humbled knes,
I will exspect some mercy from aboue.
Enter the temple Omnes.

Enters Ionas, solus.

Ionas.
This is the day wherein the Lord hath said
That Niniuie shall quite be ouerthrowne.
This is the day of horror and mishap,
Fatall vnto the cursed Niniuites.
These stately Towers shall in thy watery bounds,
Swift flowing Licas find their burials,
These pallaces the pride of Assurs kings,
Shall be the bowers of desolation,
Where as the sollitary bird shall sing,
And Tygers traine their yoong ones to their nest.
O all ye nations bounded by the West,
Ye happie Iles where Prophets do abound,
Ye Cities famous in the westerne world,
Make Niniuie a president for you.
Leaue leaud desires, leaue couetous delights.
Flie vsurie, let whoredome be exilde,
Least you with Niniuie be ouerthrowne.
Loe how the sunnes inflamed torch preuailes,
Scorching the parched furrowes of the earth.
Here will I sit me downe and fixe mine eye
Upon the ruines of you wretched towne,
And lo a pleasant shade, a spreading vine,
To shelter Ionas in this sunny heate,
What meanes my God, the day is done and spent.
Lord shall my Prophecie be brought to nought?
When falles the fire? when will the iudge be wroth?
I pray the Lord remember what I said,
When I was yet within my country land,
Iehouah is too mercifull I feare.
O let me flie before a Prophet fault,
For thou art mercifull the Lord my God,
Full of compassion and of sufferance,
And doest repent in taking punishment.
Why staies thy hand? O Lord first take my life,
Before my Prophesie be brought to noughts.
Ah he is wroth, behold the gladsome vine
That did defend me from the sunny heate,
Is withered quite, and swallowed by a Serpent.
A Serpent deuoureth the vine.
Now furious Phlegon triumphs on my browes,
And heate preuailes, and I am faint in heart.

Enters the Angell.

Angell.
Art thou so angry Ionas? tell me why?


Ionas.
Iehouah I with burning heate am plungde,
And shadowed only by a silly vine,
Behold a Serpent hath deuoured it?
And lo the sunne incenst by Easterne winde,
Afflicts me with Cariculer aspect,
Would God that I might die, for well I wot,
Twere better I were dead, then rest aliue.


Angell.
Ionas art thou so angry for the vine?


Ionas.
Yea I am angry to the death my God.


Angell.
Thou hast compassion Ionas on a vine,
On which thou neuer labour didst bestow,
Thou neuer gauest it life or power to grow,
But sodeinly it sprung, and sodeinly dide.
And should not I haue great compassion
On Niniuie the Citie of the world,
Wherein there are a hundred thousand soules,
And twentie thousand infants that ne wot
The right hand from the left, beside much cattle.
Oh Ionas, looke into their Temples now,
And se the true contrition of their King:
The subiects teares, the sinners true remorse.
Then from the Lord proclaime a mercie day,
For he is pitifull as he is iust.

Exet Angelus.

Ionas.
I go my God to finish thy command,
Oh who can tell the wonders of my God,
Or talke his praises with a feruent toong.
He bringeth downe to hell, and lifts to heauen.
He drawes the yoake of bondage from the iust,
And lookes vpon the Heathen with pitious eyes:
To him all praise and honour be ascribed.
Oh who can tell the wonders of my God,
He makes the infant to proclaime his truth,
The Asse to speake, so saue the Prophets life.
The earth and sea to yeld increase for man.
Who can describe the compasse of his power?
Or testifie in termes his endlesse might?
My rauisht spright, oh whither doest thou wend?
Go and proclaime the mercy of my God.
Relieue the carefull hearted Niniuites.
And as thou weart the messenger of death,
Go bring glad tydings of recouered grace.
Enters Adam solus, with a bottle of beere in one slop, and a great peece of beefe in an other.
Well good-man Ionas, I would you had neuer come from Iury to this Country, you haue made me looke like a leane rib of roast befe, or like the picture of lent, painted vpon a read-herings cob. Alasse maisters, we are commanded by the proclamation to fast and pray, by my troth I could prettely so, so, away with praying, but for fasting, why tis so contrary to my nature, that I had ra|ther suffer a short hanging, then a long fasting. Marke me, the words be these. Thou shalt take no maner of foode for so many daies. I had as leue he should haue said, thou shalt hang thy selfe for so many daies. And yet in faith I ned not finde fault with the proclamation, for I haue a buttry, and a pantry, and a kitchen, a|bout me, for proofe, Ecce signum, this right slop is my pantry, be|hold a manchet, this place is my kitchin, for loe a pece of befe. Oh let me repeat that swet word againe: For loe a pece of bef. This is my buttry, for se, se, my friends, to my great ioy, a bot|tle of bere. Thus alasse I make shift to weare out this fasting, I driue away the time, but there go Searchers about to seke if any man breakes the Kings command. Oh here they be, in with your victuals Adam.

Enters two Searchers.

1. Searcher.
How duly the men of Niniuie kep the proclama|tion, how are they armde to repentance? we haue searcht through the whole Citie  haue not as yet found one that breaks the fast.


2. Sear.
The signe of the more grace, but staie, here sits one me-thinkes at his praiers, let vs see who it is.


1. Sear.
Tis Adam, the Smithes man, how now Adam?


Adam.
Trouble me not, thou shalt take no maner of foode, but

fast and pray.


1. Sear.
How deuoutly he sits at his orysons, but staie, me|thinkes I fele a smell of some meate or bread about him.


2. Sear.
So thinkes me too, you sirrha, what victuals haue you about you?


Adam.
Uictuals! Oh horrible blasphemie! Hinder me not of my praier, nor driue me not into a chollor, victailes! why hardst thou not the sentence, thou shalt take no foode but fast and pray?


2. Sear.
Truth so it should be, but me-thinkes I smell meate about the.


Adam.
About me my friends, these words are actions in the Case, about me, No; no: hang those gluttons that cannot fast and pray.


1. Sear.
Well, for all your words, we must search you.


Adam.
Search me, take hed what you do, my hose are my ca|stles, tis burglary if you breake ope a slop, no officer must lift vp an iron hatch, take hede my slops are iron.


2. Sear.
Oh villaine, se how he hath gotten victailes, bread, befe, and bere, where the King commanded vpon paine of death none should eate for so many daies, no not the sucking infant.


Adam.
Alasse sir, this is nothing but a modicum non necet vt me|dicus daret, why sir, a bit to comfort my stomacke.


1. Sear.
Uillaine thou shalt be hangd for it.


Adam.
These are your words, I shall be hangd for it, but first answer me to this question, how many daies haue we to fast stil?


2. Sear.
Fiue daies.


Adam.
Fiue daies, a long time, then I must be hangd?


1. Sear.
I marry must thou.


Adam.
I am your man, I am for you sir, for I had rather be hangd the~ abide so long a fast, what fiue daies? come ile vntrusse, is your halter and the gallowes, the ladder, and all such furniture in readinesse?


1. Sear.
I warrant the, shalt want none of these.


Adam.
But heare you, must I be hangd?


1. Sear.
I marry.


Adam.
And for eating of meate, then friends, know ye by these presents, I will eate vp all my meate, and drink vp all my drink, for it shall neuer be said, I was hangd with an emptie stomake.



1. Sear.
Come away knaue, wilt thou stand feding now?


Adam.
If you be so hastie, hang your selfe an houre while I come to you, for surely I will eate vp my meate.


2. Sear.
Come lets draw him away perforce.


Adam.
You say there is fiue daies yet to fast, these are your words.


2. Sear.
I sir.


Adam.
I am for you, come lets away, and yet let me be put in the Chronicles.

Enter Ionas, Rasni, Aluida, kings of Cilicia, others royally attended

Ionas.
Come carefull King, cast off thy mournfull wedes,
Exchange thy cloudie lookes to smothed smiles,
Thy teares haue pierc'd the pitious throane of grace,
Thy sighes like Imence pleasing to the Lord:
Haue bene peace-offerings for thy former pride.
Reioyce and praise his name that gaue the peace.
And you faire Nymphs, ye louely Niniuites,
Since you haue wept and fasted for the Lord,
He gratiously haue tempered his reuenge,
Beware hencefoorth to tempt him any more,
Let not the nicenesse of your beautious lookes,
Ingraft in you a high presuming minde,
For those that climbe, he casteth to the ground,
And they that humble be, he lifts aloft.


Rasni.
Lowly I bend with awfull bent of eye,
Before the dread Iehouah, God of hoste,
Despising all prophane deuice of man,
Those lustfull lures that whilome led awry,
My wanton eyes shall wound my heart no more:
And she whose youth in dalliance I abus'd,
Shall now at last become my wedlocke mate.
Faire Aluida looke not so woe begone:
If for thy sinne thy sorrow do exced,
Blessed be thou, come with a holy band,
Lets knit a knot to salue our former shame.


Alui.
With blushing lookes betokening my remorse,
I lowly yeld my King to thy behest,
So as this man of God shall thinke it good.


Ionas.
Woman, amends may neuer come too late.
A will to practise goodnesse, vertuous.
The God of heauen when sinners do repent,
Doth more reioyce then in ten thousand iust.


Rasni.
Then witnesse holie Prophet our accord.


Alui.
Plight in the presence of the Lord thy God.


Ionas.
Blest may you be, like to the flouring sheaues,
That plaie with gentle windes in sommer tide,
Like Oliue branches let your children spred:
And as the Pines in loftie Libanon,
Or as the Kids that fede on Lepher plaines,
So be the sede and ofspring of your loines.

Enters the Vsurer, Gentleman, and Alcon.

Vsurer.
Come foorth my friends whom wittingly I wrongd,
Before this man of God receiue your due,
Before our King I meane to make my peace.
Ionas behold in signe of my remorse,
I heare restore into these poore mens hands,
Their goods which I vniustly haue detaind,
And may the heauens so pardon my misdeds,
As I am penitent for my offence.


Thrasi
And what through want from others I purloynd,
Behold O King, I proffer fore thy throane:
To be restord to such as owe the same.


Ionas.
A vertuous ded pleasing to God and man,
Would God all Cities drowned in like shame,
Would take example of these Niniuites.


Rasni.
Such be the fruites of Niniuies repent,
And such for euer may our dealings be,
That he that cald vs home in height of sinne,
May smile to se our hartie penitence.
Uiceroyes proclaime a fast vnto the Lord,
Let Israels God be honoured in our land.
Let all occasion of corruption die.
For who shall fault therein, shall suffer death.
Beare witnesse God, of my vnfained zeale.
Come holie man, as thou shalt counsaile me,
My Court and Citie shall reformed be.

Exeunt.


Ionas.
Wend on in peace, and prosecute this course,
You Ilanders on whom the milder aire
Doth swetly breath the balme of kinde increase:
Whose lands are fatned with the deaw of heauen,
And made more fruitfull then Actean plaines.
You whom delitious pleasures dandle soft:
Whose eyes are blinded with securitie,
Unmaske your selues, cast error cleane aside.
O London, mayden of the mistresse Ile,
Wrapt in the foldes and swathing cloutes of shame:
In the more sinnes then Niniuie containes,
Contempt of God, dispight of reuerend age.
Neglect of law, desire to wrong the poore:
Corruption, whordome, drunkennesse, and pride.
Swolne are thy browes with impudence and shame.
O proud adulterous glorie of the West,
Thy neighbors burns, yet doest thou feare no fire.
Thy Preachers crie, yet doest thou stop thine eares.
The larum rings, yet slepest thou secure.
London awake, for feare the Lord do frowne,
I set a looking Glasse before thine eyes.
O turne, O turne, with weping to the Lord,
And thinke the praiers and vertues of thy Quene,
Defers the plague which otherwise would fall.
Repent O London, least for thine offence,
Thy shepheard faile, whom mightie God preserue,
That she may hide the pillar of his Church,
Against the stormes of Romish Antichrist:
The hand of mercy ouershead her head,
And let all faithfull subiects say, Amen.

FINIS.





