




GRANADOS DEVOTION. EXACTLY TEA|CHING HOW A MAN MAY TRVELY DEDICATE and deuote himselfe vnto God: and so become his accep|table Votary. WRITTEN IN SPA|nish, by the learned and reuerend Diuine F. Lewes of Granada. Since translated into Latine, Italian and French.
And now perused, and englished, by Francis Meres, Master of Artes,  student in Diuinity.
LONDON, Printed by E. Allde. for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold at his shop at the Royall Exchange. 1598.




TO THE WOR|SHIPFVLL AND VER|TVOVS GENTLEMAN M. William Sammes of the Middle Temple Esquire, al earthly happines, and heauenly felicity en|tyrely wished.
_Vlde, ne mittas munera superuacua, vt Faemi|nae arma: rustico li|bros: et studiis dedi|, reta: sayth that Gentile Sa|mon Seneca in his first Booke  Beneficiis. The wittiest Em|ematists will that in presenta|on of gyftes wee should fitte e humour of the partie, to home they are presented, as  send Blacke to mourners, hite to religious people, Greene  youth, and them that lyue  hope, Yellow to the couetous

and iealous, Taunie, to the man re|fus'd, Red to Martiall Captaines Blew to Marriners, Uiolet to Pro phets  Diuiners, Medley, Gray Russet to the poore  meaner sort
And little Boies, whom shamfastnes did gra
The Romaines deck'd in Scarlet like their fac
Giue Palinure his Compasse  his Carde, let Mars haue armes giue Pan the Pipe, and Corido the plough. Quod medicorum est promitunt medici, tractant fabrilia fabri. The peoples presents vn to Pallas were Bookes and Laun|ces. Such as coueted to deck the Temple of Delphos, adorne the shryne eyther with greene bayes, or melodious instruments because Apollo did as well patro|nize Musicke as Poetry.
To whome then should I ra|ther dedicate this learned and re|ligious booke of Deuotion, writt

by that rare and matchlesse Di|ine F: Ludouicus Granatensis, en to one deuout in religion, d learned in knowledge? Rare call him; because as Iacob (that ue patterne of simplicity and paynefull labour) who liued more then 2000 yeares after the eation of the world, was the rst that made a vowe vnto e Lord, vowing was then so re: so this Author almoste 000. yeeres after the re-creation f the world, is the first that Nec habuit ante eum, quem imi|taretur, nec post eum multi erunt, qui eum imitari ve|lint. rit a particuler Tractate of euotion. Matchlesse I call im, for as Iacob was the first at vowed, so wee dooe not ad in the Scriptures aboue o (so seldome were vowes ade) that followed him in owing; Iephte Anna: so I do ot thinke, that we in this dearth f Deuotion, and famine of De|uout

men, shall haue many imi|taters of him in the lyke Argu|ment. But that it may be say of him for his Deuotion, as i was sayde of Demosthenes fo his eloquence, cui adhuc pa nemo fuit, sed ne futurum quide aliquando quenquam arbitror.
Heauenly and exact I also terme this worke, both for the matter, and the manner of han|dling it. The matter teaching how a soule may soare vp to heauen,  there be vnited to God, and for e|uer liue in his presence, where is fulnesse of ioy, and plentye for euermore: And the man|ner so exactly and methodical|ly discoursing and discouering the whole matter, that vnlesse a man will bee wilfully negli|gent and idle, and sitte as a stone vpon a stone, he canno but enter into the Theater o

Gods house, and there medi|te on the wonders of the Lord  his life long.
Iosua the Captaine of the ordes hoast had foure excel|lnt qualities in him: Religion, Wsedome, Valour and Industry. Which qualities in a Captayne, Uatablus, a man very learned  the antiquities of the He|wes, doh decypher by foure eroglyphickes. The Hebrewes re brought (saith he) into Ca|an vnder foure standards or en|es, vnder euery standard were ee battalians, according to the elue tribes. The first standard s Rubens he carried in his en|e the picture of an Angell, ich signified Wisedome. Iuda ied in his ensigne a Lyon, which ified Valour and Fortitude. E|aim carried a Bull, signifying ustry. And Dan carried an Ea|gle

signifying Religion, because th Eagle mounteth vp to heauen,  flyeth looking against the Sunn So this our spirituall Captain conducting men to the Celesti Canaan, teacheth, that they th will deuote themselues vnto Go and become deuout me~, must al haue these foure qualities in th They must haue Religion, becau they must consecrate their hea vnto God. And Wisedome, becau they must be as wise as Serpentes keep their chiefest part from h that is, their heart from vaine c gitations,  inordinate affectio They must haue Valour and F titude to proceede and perseue in theyr Deuotion, and to wit stand impediments and tempt tions. And it is also necessaryly r quired, that they be Industrio because without paines Deuoti is not attained, for among all t

ours of the religious (as Aga|n was wont to say) there is no|ng more difficult then Deuo|.
To you I say (the kinde enter|er of vertue, the mirrour of a od minde) doe I dedicate this oke, vnto whome I attribute  acknowledgements, of aboun|t Schollership in the liberall ences, courteous well gouern| behauiour in Gentleman like yage, and rype experienst gement in the Lawes of our d. It very well appeareth, that  counsel of that witty Romane,  taken place in you, who thus nselled the Romane youth.
e bonas artes, moneo, Romana inuentus,
antum trepidos, vt tueare reos.
And yet what is more com|dable among men, or more eptable with God, then that ry man should seeke anothers

wealth? In this declyning a tottering state of the world  thinks I see againe reuiu'd in yo the integrity of Papinianus, t sinceritie of , and the v right  iust dealing of Phocio Aristides. Of you I may say, Polidore Virgill said of Ioan Batmansonus, Iuuenis es in hones te natus: ac ad humanitatem pa ter educatus, vt ad religionem ac modatus. Who with Mary h chosen the better part,  that o thing that is necessary. W with Great Constantine coun the cheefest ensigne of thy Gl the glorious Gospell of Christ Ie So that religion being ioy with your knowledge, y Hopes dooe promise to fals that conceipt, which the A cient world had conceiued the Empire of gold ouer La and Lawyers.

 pulsa fides, auro  iura,
rum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor.
d that prouerbe, which sayth:  Lawyers, Logicians and Swit| fight for euery body.
nd surely thus it commeth to e, when as euery Lawyer en|ureth to be as Abraham was ied vnto Sarah, that is, vnto nity and when as Hagar, that hilosophy, and her yong sonne el the Artes are her hand|es: Humanae Scientiae pedisiquae  eo|logiae. whe~ as all humane lawes, tutions and ordinances, and soeuer else in the world are e subordinate to holy Religi| hen as Lawyers are such ma|f men, as Iethroes Offiicers  es men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating coue|s. Exod. 18, 2 Qui pecunia non mouetur,  dignum spectatu arbitramur. w your loue to the Lawes, our study in them, and as ay, that Lex plus laudatur,

quando ratione probatur, so you a suredly hold, that Summa relig is summa ratio,  that all huma Sciences are but huskes of corne, they be co~pared to the fine flow of the holy Scriptures. Quod p pilla est in oculo, quod Athenae er in Graecia, hoc est Religio in ani And therefore with Leuinus T rentius you rightly estimate om placita quorumcunque hominu comparata ad Christi doctrin meram ostentationem,  fallax s dium aurae popularis. But se that your vertues are like Ar das doue, whom each Artist  held flying, but could not m flye. And seeing the dayes wh in we liue are so enuious, and full of iniquity, that they will  abide that the vertues of theuing should be published. Et  vberior pars messis tuae adhu herba, hoc est, in spe  expectati

nunc nominatim  seorsim qui reliqua ornamenta, quae in nt: malui iudiciorum illam for|am, Non Liquet, vsurpare,  temere re non intellecta vlte|progredi. Valde mihi probatur 10. Bodinus cap. 7. Me|thod. Hist. ini non minus vrbana quam ens oratio; qui de libro. Apo|seos sententiam rogatus, in|e respondit, se penitus ignora|id velit tam obscurus scrip| qui qualisque fuerit nondum at inter eruditos: sic cum um patet qui qualisque eris, m  praeposterum erit, di| qui aut qualis es aut eris,  enim quid serus vesper ve|vt est apud Gellium. And fore as Salust sayd of Car|, that hee had rather saye ng, then vnperfectly: so  rather with Timanthes,  the rest of your pregnant  vnder the vaile of deserued

Expectation, then blindfold w Cherillus to runne vpon the If your courteous acceptati shall encourage, fauour and co tenance me in this, some thing  long I will aspire to, which I  consecrate to the immortalizi of your Religion, Learning, Bou and Coutesy. And heere lea grow too tedious I make an e humbly desiring God, thro the merits of Christ Iesus, to g vnto your worship long life  health of body, dignitie with  bility of vertue, prosperity  affluence of the best things, at the last a most happy e with the saluation of your soue. London the XI. of May. 1598.
Your Worships most deuote FRANCIS MER





MOST EXCEL|ENT AND PROFI|BLE BOOKE OF DEVO|on, written by the Reuerend Diuine: Fr. Lewes of Granada.
WHAT DEVO|tion is. CHAP. I.
Euotion is a far other thing the~ many thinke: for many ose that it is a certaine ten|es  remorseful compassion ule  heart, which somtimes feele that pray: or a conso|  taste of spiritual thinges:

but Deuotion which nowe we speake of, is (if we speake proper|ly) neither of these. For carnal|men, and such as are enthralle vnder sin, do often feele this ten dernes  sensible comfort: an on the contrary parte, holy an righteous me~ in their prayers, d many timestaste of none of thes yet wee must not say that the then haue no deuotion, nor th the other haue it, albeit they ha some smacke of it.
For this cause Thomas Aqui Secunda secundae q. 82. a. 2. saith, that Deuotion is not prope ly a tendernes of heart, nor a spi tuall consolation: but hee sait that Deuotion seemeth to bee  other thing, then a certaine w lingnes and readines in yeeldi to those things, that apperta to the seruice of God. For D uotion is deriued of vowin wherupon they are called 

ut, who after a certaine man|r, doe deuote and vow them|ues vnto God, that they may oly subiect themselues vnder . This saith he: therefore by Who is a deuout man e vertue of the words Etymo|gy, he is to bee called a deuout n, who doth solemnely dedi|e and bequeath himselfe to e the Lord his God. Deuoti| certainely is that readines, erby a man doth offer vp him|e to God, and prepareth him|e to doe his most holy will.
Therefore wee call deuoti| hat good, which alwaies at|deth vppon good and holy yer: and that which alwaies tethon it, is a cheerefulnesse, dines and courage to al good, ch often times is found with|comfort, and tendernesse of t. Wherefore euen as a tra|er, A Simili|tude. after hee hath rested him|selfe

and taken meate, beginneth to feele ease, is refreshed, and re|couereth strength to walke and trauell further, although he hath no delight in his meate, nor con|tenteth his taste: so also praye which is the spirituall meate o Prayer is cause of Deuotion. the soule, is the cause of a ne fortitude and a new spirit to wall in the way of the Lord, albeit of tentimes it yeeldeth no spiritual taste.
Our Sauiour sheweth this ef|fect of Prayer, praying in the gar|den, where rysing from the ear nowe the third time with gre courage  inuincible spirit, buc ling with his enemies, whom one word he beate to the groun albeit in that his Prayer hee h neither sweetnes nor spiritu ioy: but contrarily so great an gony and contrition of spirit, th he sweate blood in such abou

dant manner, that it trickled wne by drops vpon the earth. e would haue this so come to sse, not because his grace and rtitude eyther encreased or de|eased by prayer, (for he was full  all grace) but that in his owne oper person he might shew the tue and efficacy of Prayer: ich although it hath not al|ies that tendernes of heart,  mfort of spirit ioyned vnto it:  it bringeth with it that cheer| readines,  resolute courage abide whatsoeuer aduersity: d although it doth not alwaies e away the burdenous weight tribulation, yet neuerthelesse btaineth that strength and for|de, by which it ouercom|th.
Notwithstanding heere is to be ed, that from this deuotion  dines to this good, oftentimes

that spirituall consolation do spring, which the ignorant  vn learned doe call Deuotion: an the course being altered, the sam consolation doth encrease tru deuotion, which is that alacriti and cheerefulnes of spirit, as we haue said, to doe well, as a goo Daughter seruing her Mother, making a man so much the mo ready in diuine matters, as it m keth him the more cheerefull, more comforteth him in his sou so that these twoo doe patroni the one the other, none othe wise then a faithfull mother do her daughter, and a godly daug ter her mother. Which thing n onely happeneth in these, but v ry often also in other spiritu matters, especially in these t vertues, Faith and Charity:  Faith and Charity do mutually help one another. Faith is the foundation and ro of Charity, and Charity is t

forme and life of Faith. So also s consolation doth encrease euotion, and prepareth it to c|y good worke, as very plaine - he Prophet Dauid testifieth, en he saith: I will run the way Psal. 119. hy commandements, when thou st set my heart at libertye. This erty and enlargement doth a| from spirituall ioy (for it is  properry of ioy to enlarge the rt, as on the contrary part it is property of sorrow to pinch d gripe it in) and this enlarge|nt, saith he, made not mee to lke in the way of the Lord,  te by foote to tread this path,  with exceeding great alacry|o run it, which is proper vnto uotion.
This is the reason, why the ser|ts Why Deuo|tion is to bee desired. of the Lord ought seriously esire of God this readines  ituall consolation, as we will

shew afterwards: not for the de|light, which is in it (for thi should be rather our owne loue then the loue of God) but for th fruite: because it inciteth  stir|reth vs vp to doe well, for it is  mosttruesaying, that pleasure per|fecteth the worke.


HOW PROFITABL and precious a thing De|uotion is. CHAP. II.
IF we diligently and studiousl consider, what hath beene deli|uered in the precedent Chapte we shall confesse, that Deuotio is some especiall chiefe good: fo it is a vertue exciting and stirrin vp all other vertues: and mak ing a man ready and fit for al kin of good actions. Furthermo this vertue is very laudable; f

s alwaies found in the compa| of the most excellent vertues ith the which it hath very neere iance and affinity, for they all nd to the same end: that is, De|tion, Prayer, Contemplation, Vertues al|lyed vnto Deuotion. e Exercise of diuine Loue, spi|uall Consolation, and the stu| of heauenly Wisdome; which as it were a certaine delight|sme and sweete knowledge of God, of the which in the sacred, Sriptures there are so many fa|ous prayses  commendations. ll these vertues albeit they bee stinguished and seperated in ooles, yet they are alwaies und together in the same flock society: for mostco~monly wher ere is perfect Prayer, there al| is Deuotion, Contemplation, rituall Consolation, and actu| loue of God, with all other rtues that to them haue any re|ference

or reciprocatio~. For there is so great likenes and similitude betweene these vertues, that the passage from one to another i moste easie: and although they be distinguished between them|selues, yet in the verye exercise as I said, they work together. Fo we see that when the seruants o the Lord doe proceede vnto suc exercise, first they begin of Me ditation, then they passe vnt Prayer, and from Prayer to Con. templation, and from Contem|plation they make further pro|gresse.


HOW DIFFICVLT the atchiuement of true Deuotion is. CHAP. III.
SEeing then that Deuotion i so excellent a good, no ma

doubteth but that it is difficult to aine: for there is nothing found his world, but that the diffi|tie doth equalize the excel|cy. This is manifestly to bee e in deuotion: for it is no e matter to rayse vp our ima|ation, then the which there is ing more afflicted  depres|: which notwithstanding is ired to perfect Prayer and otion. Wherefore Agathon Nothing more diffi|cult then Prayer.  wont to say, that in the busi| and labours of the Religious, ing was more hard and diffi| then Prayer. For which cause ee that many are exercised  perfeuere in other good acti| and exercises, as in Fasting, ching, Discipline  Almes|es: who notwithstanding ot tollerate nor abide the la|s of continual Prayer: which inely is much to be maruel|led

at, seing that in this most hol worke we haue the holy Spirit a helper vnto vs, and the sacre Scriptures, and the Sacrament of the Church incensours an stirrers of vs vp.
This difficulty groweth fro three rootes: The first is the cor ruption of nature, which is so de praued through sinne, that it ha no we lost that Empire and rul which at the beginning it had  uer the faculties and powers  the soule. And therefore the im gination, which is one of then doth what it listeth, vageth an wandreth whether it will, and o tentimes priuily, as a vagabo seruant, stealeth out of door before we be aware: and this  not alwaies the fault of ma but of nature weakened and e feebled through sinne.
The second roote of this dif|culty,

is euill custome, by which any through long vse and too uche license haue accustomed e~selues to run hither  thither, d to wander into all places in eir imaginations, and to floate rough all kinde of cogitations. ence it is that after that euill stome they can scarcely binde eir imaginations to any one atter, since so freely and disso|tely it hath accustomed to tra|ell and hunt into all corners of e world. How many men are ere found, who desiring to haue euotion, when they meditate pon the Lords passion, or some ther matter, and nowe scarcely auing begun to meditate, their earts are scattered  disseuered to a thousand parts, so that they annot fixe their eyes vpon Christ rucified, that thither they might end foorth the streames of their

loue?
Doe ye know whence this dis commodity commeth vnto you euen because yee haue put on an euill habit, and haue suffered you hearts to vage and wander with, out bridle or restraint whether they lysted,  whither they wold. Wherefore now when ye would bridle and restraine them ye can|not: because they are accustomed vnto licencious liberty. Therfore it is needfull for him that would attend vpon Prayer that hee shut vp the gates of his soule, against all the kindes of vaine and vn|profitable thoughts, and that by little  little he change that euill habit into a good, withdrawing his imaginations from externall things to internal,  from earthly thinges to heauenly. By thys meanes leasurely, although not sudainly our soule is brought ho~e

est, and peaceably enioyeth quillity.
Notwithstanding wee must  therfore dispaire, nor discou|e our selues: for that is a cer|e violence, but as the heart h put on that euill in a long e, so againeit must put it off in ng time, and beate backe the se of a long time by contrary . This shalbe done the sooner,  more diligent a man shall be editating vppon good mat|s; and in restraining the senses  those meanes, which make y vnto Deuotion.
The third roote is the mallice deuils, who of their inueterate y towardes mankinde, that y may hinder our saluation, do relabor to disturbe men when y pray, then at other, times en they doe not: that at the st they might take from them

the inestimable fruite of Praye  that they might depriue the of innumerable blessings spring ing from it. This Origen adm nisheth Origen in his 10. book vpon the Epistle to the Ro|mans. vs of, when he saith: T deuils and contrary powers d by all might  maine disturbe  interrupt in prayer: first that h that laboureth and sweateth  the agony and feruency of praie may not be found such an one,  to lift vp pure handes witho wrath. But if any one can obtai that he may be without wrath,  shall hardly auoyde debating  disputation: that is, vaine a superfluous cogitations. For tho shalt scarcely finde any one pray ing, to be without some idle an friuolous thought, which decly neth and diuerteth that intentio by which the minde is directed  God, and carrieth it whether  should not. And therefore th

agony and wrastling of Prayer reat  difficult, that the mind y fixedly and stedfastly attend n God, notwithstanding the lting disturbance of enemies, o violently carry the meaning im that is praying into diuers ractions and sundry imagina|s. This saith Origen, by which rds he manifestly sheweth the at difficulty of this busines.
But the diuine Grace is oppo| against all these difficulties, ich is mightier and stronger n all thinges: vpon which al|attend all the documents and structions, which heereafter we shall deliuer.



OF THOSE THING that are conducent vnto the  chiuement of true Deuotion,  first of the great longing desire to obtaine it. CHAP. IIII.
VVEe haue heeretofo tolde what Deuoti is, that it is not any particuler  speciall vertue, but all that whi accompanieth it: Now we w speake of the meanes by which  is atchieued.
First therefore that wee m winne and gaine vnto vs a goo so excellent and renowned, is a earnest and a vehement desire t possesse it, according to that  the Wise man. The most true desi of discipline is the beginning of Wis dome: and a little before, reaso

 of the same desire  intent, ith: Wisedome shineth and ne|adeth away, and is easily seene em, that loue her, and found of  as seek her, she preuenteth them  desire her, that shee may first  her selfe vnto them. Who so a|eth vnto her betimes, shall e no great trauaile, for hee shall e her sitting at his doores. To ke vpon her then is perfecte erstanding: and who so watch|or her, shall bee soone without . For she goeth about, seeking  as are meete for her, and shew|her selfe cheerefully vnto them he waies, and meeteth them in y thought. Hetherto bee the rds of the Wiseman, whereup| a little after hee concludeth t which we said before, that is: at the beginning of VVisedome e most true desire  longing for .





This happened to the W man himselfe: for hee speake not by hearesay of any vaine  mour, but taught before, not on ly of the holy Ghost, but also b the experience of the busines  selfe. Wherefore in the Chapt following hee saith of him selfe For this haue I desired, and vnde standing Sap. 8. was giue~ vnto me, I soug after her, and the spirit of Wisdo came into me. Therfore thou see that desire is the beginning o this good.
The whole sacred Scripture doth manifestly prooue this to be true. For how often I pray the doe we read in the law, and in the Prophets, that we shall find God if we seeke him with all our harts? So wee read in the booke of the Prouerbs: They that betimes watch Prouer. 8. for me, shall finde me. And in ano|ther place. If thou seekest for Prouer. 2.

wisedome as for siluer,  searchest er as for treasures, then shalt  vnderstand the feare of the d,  find the knowledge of God. to what end doe we seek for  fetcht authorities? we haue ost sure pledge and testimo| f this from our Sauiour. Aske, Math. 7. s hee, and it shall be giuen you: e and ye shall finde: knocke and ialbe opened vnto you. For who|ser asketh, receiueth: and hee t seeketh, findeth: and to him t knocketh, it shall be opened.
The reason why this desire is sffectuall to finde God is, be|se (as the Philosophers say)  uery work, especially morral, t loue of the ende is the first cse, that mooueth the worker, so that by howe much the loue d desire of the ende is greater,  so much the endeuour and igence is the greater, which is

bestowed to obtaine it. Tell  I pray thee what cast Alexan the great into so many daunge what made him to vndergoe many labours, to strike so ma battailes? what mooued him passe through so many des places, and barbarous nations, b the insatiable loue, whereby h thirsted after the Empire of t whole world? What made t seruitude of so many yeeres lig and pleasant vnto the Patriar Iacob, but the loue, by which h did affecte beauteous Rachell What doth mittigate the labou  perils of hyrelings Marine Soldiers and such like men, an doth make them easie and toll rable vnto them, but the loue  lucre and gaine? If the loue  things so base and abiect, can d so much, what shall not the lou of the chiefest good doe, if it b

rightly knowen, and truly loued?  doe not heere intice  allure  (O brother) with the fraile fading beautie of Rachel, nei| with the vaine glory of the ld, which endeth together  thy life: nor with such flee|i actions, which the winde s away: nor with the transi|e pleasures of hypocrites, ch endure but for a moment: e breefe neither with earthly es, which are deuoured of ths  rust, or are stolne away eeues: but we inuite and al| thee with the beauty of the ne Wisedome, with the king|e of Christ: with the treasure harity: with the comfort of t holy Ghost: with the meate  Angles: with true peace and  true liberty: and to con|e with the chiefest good. at canst thou desire more rich

and opulent then this treasu Blessed is the man, saith that et nall Prouer. 8. Wisedome: that heareth  watching dayly at my gates, and  uing attendance at the postes of  doores. For he that findeth me, fin eth life, and shall obtaine fauour  the Lord.
With these and such like co siderations a desire of that spi tuall couetousnes,  a thirsti for those true riches, is to be ki dled and enflamed in thy hea For it is needfull that such a desi be not luke warme, lingring slow: but liuely, careful, dillige and exact. Behold I pray th with what great care of th world, coueteous men, ambitio men, and the louers of the beau|ty of some creature doe seeke af|ter that they loue: they doe no cease by day, nor rest by night they speake not, thinke not, no

dreame not, but of those thinges ich they seek for  loue. After  same manner GOD is to be ght for of thee, although wor|er of greater diligence  at|dance, as he is more excellent n all creatures. Beholde how cumspectly and aduisedly the A Simily. der of an Army goeth forth to ht, when he begirdeth any de|ced Castle: how many kind of tagems he deuiseth; how cun|gly he vndermineth it, how ar|cially he raiseth fortresses, ma|h bulwarkes,  how many in|tions he vseth to assault  bat| the Castle, that at the length may conquer it: with no lesser e  watchfulnes must thou la|r  endeuour, that thou maist te vnto thy selfe that chiefest d: for it is written: The king|e Math 11. of heauen suffreth violence,  violent take it by force.

Worthy is he to be called happ  blessed, who seeketh God afte such a manner; for he that so seek|eth him, hath already partly fou~ him,  hath a pledge  an earne that he shall obtaine the rest. Fo to watch for God, is to seeke hi and he already hath obtained th first fruites of the holy Ghost, wh with such a desire seeketh hi The Hunter when he seeth an A Simily. of his dogges to mend his pa more then his wont,  with gre celerity to folow some direct wa he forthwith vnderstandeth tha he hath found out the footeste of some wilde beast: be reioyce  conceiueth hope of taking  praye. After the same maner th oughtest to reioyce, when th seest this;  by how much mo dilige~t  more fearful the grea nes of the desire shall make th by so much thou oughtest to 

more secure  safe: knowing as|edlye, that after these flowers ecellent fruites will succeed, and tt God hath already one of his fte placed in thy soule, as soone a hou hast giue~ vnto thee a liue|l  feeling desire of his presence. This is the meane,  this is the y, which is to be kept of them in eeking for God, who are pre|uted by the blessing of his setnes, and haue alreadie seene t beautye of Rachel, for obtai|g of which, and ioyning her in iage vnto the~, with their ioy  presuppose vnto themselues eruitude of seuen yeres. Such est neither day nor night, nei| do they desist, vntil they haue d that they seeke for, saying  the Prophet: I will not suffer  eyes to sleep, nor mine eye lids Psal. 132. mber, vntill I finde out a place e Lord, an habitation for the

mightie God of Iacob. They th think vpon this, speak this, drea of this, to these no labour, no tr ble, no burthen is grieuous, whe as they solely co~sider of the grea nes of the reward: In figure  them Ecclesiasticus saith; He th holdeth the Plough,  he that h Eccle. 38. pleasure in the goade, driueth Ox  is occupyed in their labours,  talketh of the breed of Bulloks. H ueth his minde to make furrowes, is diligent to giue the Kine fodd So is it of euery Carpenter  wo master that laboureth night  d  they that cut  graue Seales,  make sundry diuersities  giue t selues to counterfeit Imagery,  watch to performe the worke.  Smith in like manner abideth by Anuil  doth his diligence to l the Iron: the vapour of the fired eth his flesh: and he must fight  the heate of the Fornace. c.

These are the cogitations, these  the studies of Ploughmen, of ourers  Smithes, who night day sweate through the labors  their hands, that they may ob|tne the end of their desires. Let e true and sincere louer of God, itate these, let him watch and  die day and night, how he may ne vnto him so great a good, till he be weakned  languish  this cogitation and diligence: d also let him testifie by the de|tie of his body, the anxietie  auines of his minde, according hat of the Wise man; Waking Eccle. 31. er honesty pineth away the body, d the care thereof driueth away pe. But perhaps thou wilt say, u prescribest vnto me verye d meanes and conditions for  attainment of this good. Tell  I praye thee, is it not iust and t that so great a good as God

himselfe is, should be sought fo with diligence? Thou wilt aun|swer yea. The~ what lesser thogh can be demaunded, what smalle diligence, or what condition ca be more equall and reasonable  then to the atchieuement of th chiefest good to require no mor diligence, then that wherby earth|ly riches may be compassed? Fo so the wordes of the Wiseman d sound: If thou seekest for wisedom Pon. 2. as for siluer, thou shalt finde her.  Lord let the Angels laud  mag nifie thee: who being the best  chiefest of all goods, yet desire not to be sought for with great care, then the basest and vilest things, yea with no greater diligence, then siluer is accustomed to be sought with.



THE SECOND thing that begetteth De|uotion, is Fortitude  diligence. CHAP. V.
THe desire, of which we haue  spoke~, ought to haue ioyned o it great diligence and forti|e, by which all difficulties may  ouercome, which doe meete h vs and trouble vs in compas|g and winning this good. And ough, as we haue said before,  desire doth bring with it dili|gce and fortitude, yet we think it orth the labour to speake of it srally in this Chapter.
But that wee may vnderstand tse thinges the better, we must kwe, that as nature hath besto|d vpon all liuing creatures two

faculties or powers, to the prese uation Two facul|ties of the soule neces|sary vnto vertue. of them selues, one, whi we call Concupiscible, the natu and property of which, is to des whatsoeuer pertaineth to the pr seruation of it selfe or of his kin the other Irascible, whose off and propertie is to resist and fig against all difficulties and contr dictions, which any wayes hind or make resistaunce against th preseruation: so we must know that these vertues and powers  so after their manner are requi to the preseruation of a spiritu life: specially to the attaineme of this good which we speake
For first it is needfull to hau desire of that good, as wee ha said, which dooth moue a man seeke for it: then it is meete t there bee a valiant and genero spirit to conquer and ouerco many  great difficulties, wh

e meete with them that aspire he atchiuement of Deuotion.  there are manye thinges that der deuotion,  many thinges ich are required to the obtay|g of it, all which are very dif|lt  hard: therfore they craue ch busines  much fortitude  courage, to breake through se difficulties, vntill those desi| waters flowe out of the Cest|s of Bethleem, and no enimies 2. Reg. 23. er in the entrance or regresse,  hinder those, who come to we water out of them. But to ine a good so hard  difficult, at can a bare and naked desire , if it be not armed and fenced h courage and fortitude?
There thou shalt acknowledge fect, which they haue, who  with a good desire, notwith|ding haue not this fortitude, hich we speake: for they be as

creatures imperfect  monstro hauing the faculty concupiscib without the irascible, which as is not sufficie~t to the preseruatio of a naturall life, so also it wil n be sufficient for that which is sp rituall. Such are the desires of t negligent and slouthfull, of whi the Wiseman saith: The slugg lusteth prou. 13. and lusteth not: He luste when he beholdeth the beauty vertue: he lusteth not when h vnderstandeth the difficulty which are in it: as those imperfe  monstrous creatures haue o of these naturall faculties  po ers, that is, appetite, or desire: b the other they haue not, which  fortitude and courage.
For this cause in the Script fortitude and diligence are so  ten co~mended,  slouthfulnes negligence are so ofte~ disprais as the two rootes of all our go

aill. Certainly it is a thing ex|ding worthy of admiration, to he great care  watch, which oly Ghost vseth ouer slouth| and negligent men, as it is ifest in the bookes of Salo - , in which there is scarse a pter, which draweth not out rrow against such, and telleth  of the perill  danger they in. Although often times it is  and the selfe same sentence, ch is repeated, yet it is done  other words and figures,  ost the same thing is spoken housand places, that our me|ies might be stirred vp, that  therby might vnderstand, of t great moment and weight  which the holy Ghost so of|and with such importunitie  rehcarsed. In one place hee : The thoughts of the diligent Prouer. 2. rely bring aboundance: but

whosoeuer is slouthfull and neglig commeth surely to pouerty. In a other place: A slothfull hand  keth Prou. 10. poore: but the hand of the d gent maketh rich. And in anoth place: He that tilleth his land, s Pro. 12. be satisfied with bread: but he th followeth the idle, is destitute of v derstanding. Againe: Feare cast Pro. 18. downe the slouthfull,  the soules the sluggards shall hunger. He t is slouthfull in his worke, is euen  brother of him that is a great was And in the Chapter followin Slouthfulnes causeth to fall a sleep Pro. 19. a sluggish person shall be affamish But that especially is to be obs ued, which the same Salom saith in the 24. Chapter of  Prouerbes. I passed by the field Pro. 24. the slouthfull, and by the Viney of the man destitute of vndersta ing. And loe, it was all growen o with thornes,  nettles had coue

 face thereof, and the stone wall reof was broken-downe. Then I eld, and I considered it well: I ked vpon it, and receiued instruc|. Thou sluggard how long wilt ou sleep? How long will it be ere u rise from thy slumbring? Thou st yet a litle sleep, a little slumber, tle folding of the hands to sleep: So  pouerty commet has one that tra|leth by the way, and thy necessity  an armed man. Which is as ch to say, as that slouthfulnes d negligence by little and little all be turned into an habit, and at habit into nature, and by this eanes it shall so raigne and rule thee that thou shalt not finde ither meane nor way how to ue it out of thy doores, albeit ou bee mighty and magnani|ous.
Now I demaund of thee, why e holy Ghost doth so often re|peate

this sentence, and insert in so many places of his writing but that he would signifie that d ligence and fortitude is the key all our profit and commodity, a that slouthfulnes and negligenc is the roote of all our euils an hurtes? Tell me, what vertue is  that hath not some difficulty an nexed and ioyned to it? Therfo if a man haue not courage to sub due it, nor a hammer to worke  temper the Iron, on which he worketh, shall he performe any laudable peece of worke? It is ve|ry well said of Prudentius, where he speaketh of Patience.
Valerous Patience Vertues copesmate, Prudent. in Psychoma|chia.
Of euery Vertue is stronge anchorage:
Victorious becomes vertues combate,
When Patience passions doth asswage.
Naked lyes Vertue Patience wanting,
Disrob'd, disarmed and feebly panting.
For if courage and fortitude be wanting vnto Vertue, it is certain,

that he shall not be able to ouer|e the difficulty, which is al|es ioyned vnto Vertue. Ther| it is needfull, that we expell  driue away all sluggishnes  ines, arming our selues with rme and solide purpose to er this co~bate, with a resolute de to fight, and not to leaue , before we haue ouercome ry difficulty, alwaies implo|g with great submission of it the diuine grace.
We must not forth with be dis|craged nor put out of hart, whe~ a contradiction or repugnancy th meet with vs: but the~ more ragiously make resistance, and tate those, who saile against A Similie.  streame: for they by the stren| of their Oares doe striue with  violent fury of the streame,  ey be driuen backe by the ve|ment current of the riuer, they

faint not, nor leaue off, but dou their strength and more manfu and stoutly apply their Oares, a force their vessell to the finish of their enterprised voyage. Su ought our purposes to be, that firme  stable, and if at any ti it hapneth that we be ouercom let vs take hart againe and ren our stre~gth: for, as it is wont to  said, Vntyred labour ouercomm all thinges. So we see many m vnwearied in the businesses this world, who doe not leaue  their purposes, albeit fortune ( they commonly say) be not the friend. So Merchants do not pre|sently relinquish their traficke, a though sometimes they recei more losse then lucre: neither  husbandmen intermit the tillag of the earth, although their frute often times perish in the fieldes but they returne a fresh vnto the

labours, and do vse more dilige~ce ake tryal, if so a plentiful har| may recompence their losses.  much more earnest ought  to be in this holy exercise, in ch both lesser labour is to be ergone, and profite without parison greater may be ex|ed?
ut We must here note, that, as  desire, of which wee haue to| spoken, ought to haue forti|e ioyned vnto it, that it be not , so to this fortitude, humility st bee added, that it bee not ude. For although in this busi| we put to our whole strength,  labour with might  maine,  we must alwaies beleeue, that e haue not gayned so great a od vnto vs by our owne might  strength, but that the diuine ce and mercy hath bestowed pon vs. For as the Wise man

saith: The race is not to the s nor the battle to the strong, ne Ecles. 9. yet fauor to men of knowledge. If haue place in humane matt how much more shall it h place in diuine, all which dep of grace? And because grac especiallye giuen to the hum as the whole Scripture testifie here no lesse, but much more  humility profit, then fortitude the obtaining of Deuotion.
Therefore let man very hum acknowledge  confesse his o vnworthines  weaknes, let h humble himself vnder the mig ha~d of the Lord, let him come i his sight, as an infan, who kno nothing, neither can do any thin and let him beseeeh him by t merits of Christ, that hee wou vouchsafe to looke vpo~ him w the eyes of his pitye, and wou giue vnto him as to the poore

begger, the cru~mes falling fro~the of his great mercy. But with are confession  humilitye ought not to be secure, and therto care,  so commit al d: as some doe, but he must s hand to the plough,  doe  lyes in him, and then God oe that which belonges to  For as the Lord is a friend  the humble, so also is he an y vnto the slothful and idle.


E THIRD THING t begetteth Deuotion, is the watch and keeping of the heart. CHAP. VI.
Hese two Principles and  foundations being layd and lished, that we may come to ore particular handling of matter, I say, that the custody keeping of the heart is the

chiefe  principall matter, wh belongs vnto prayer  Deuoti For euen as hee, that would p A Simily. vpon an harpe, or any other  strument of musicke ought bes all things to haue his strings  tuned, that they may fitly  melodiously agree one with  other: so it is necessary also t our heart (seeing that it is  chiefe instrument of that heau ly musicke) be first well tuned prepared: for there can bee harmonious consort in a iar and vntuned instrument. He is that counsell of Salom Keep thine heart with all dilige for there out commeth life. For s ing Prou. 4. that the heart is the founta and beginning of all our actio it is certaine that as it is, so  so are all the actions that p ceede from it. Neyther  this cause onely must wee b

carefull for the guarding  watch e heart, but also for the lan|ment and tendernes of the t, which howe easily it is di|ted and disturbed cannot be ed by any wordes. For it is out doubt one of the chiefe  especiall miseries of men, e their hearts so hardly to be llected  gathered to them, so easily to be disseuered  earsed: and yet they must la|r by so many meanes, before y can obtaine a little Deuoti| and that whatsoeuer is got|is so easily lost. Wee see that ke, and many other meates  so delicate  dainty, that the y ayre doth taynt them and ke the~ vnsauery,  the vntem|atenes of the ayre, as some af|me, doth put a Lute or a harpe  of tune: much more greater thout doubtis the tendernes 

daintines of mans heart, and  troubled for lesser cause. Eu as the sight of the eyes is h with a small thing,  the brigh nes of a glasse is stained and o scured with a little breath: so much lesser chaunce, and a mu lighter hurt is enough to dim the brightnes of our heart, to da ken the eyes of our soule, and  disturb together with our Deu tion, all our good affection Therefore wee muste endeuo with great diligence, and with  our strength, that wee very car fully and safely keepe a treasu so precious, and which is so easil lost.
But if you shall aske me, fro what thinges the heart is to b kept, I say especially from two  that is, from vaine cogitations,   inordinate affections. From thes two, it is meete that the heart be

fre and pure, in which the holy st shall dwell. As Paynters wonte first to mundifie and elime the table in which they t, so also the table of our hart st to be wiped and whited, in ch the image of God shall be red and formed. This is that shing of the two tables which  Lord commanded Moses to Exod. 34. Deut. 10. e and square, that with his e hand hee might write the ds of the law in them: that ight signifie, that man must difie, polish and square the  tables of his soule, which his Vnderstanding and his l, this of affections, the other ogitations, that the Diuine er, which is the holy Spyrit,  paint and write in them ce|all Wisedome. The diffe|rence be|tween good men and euill.
herefore it standeth the ser|t of God vpon to bee vigilant

in this point: for this is one of  speciall differe~ces, which is fo betweene the good and the  for the heart of the wicked   is as an open troden publick w which is shut neither night  day: but the heart of good m is as a garden well fenced, and  well carefullye sealed, of wh none drinketh, besides God hi self. The hart of good me~ is li bed of Salomon, which threes Cant. 3. strong men guard, of valiant  of Israel, all handling the swor and are expert in warre. Suc one is the heart of good men,  with such diligence is safgard and on the contrary side the h of wicked men, is like a ves without a couer, into which  leth any vncleannes, wherfor the law such a vessell is repro ted  refused,  iudged vncle
Neither is the heart onely 

soly to be kept pure and cleane  noysome  hurtfull cogita|s, but also from inordinate ctions: for there is not any g more forcible to disturbe  uiet it, then naturall passions: re loue, hate, mirth, heauines, e, hope, desire, wrath,  other  vnto these.
ese are the winds which tosse  turmoile this sea: these be the des which obscure this hea|: these be the weights which resse our spirit. For it is cer|e that passions with their co|tions doe disturbe the heart,  their appetites doe disseuer  distract it, with their affecti| doe captiuate it,  with their turbations  inordinate mo|s doe darken and blinde it. erefore euen as our fleshly  cannot be hold the stars, nor  beauty of heauen, when it is

cloudy and ouercast, so neyth the eyes of our soules can cont plate the eternall light, when  they are obscured with the clou and passions of this life. Euen  A Simily. in cleere and pure water all o iectes are seene, euen vnto t least sand, which is in the bo tome, which cannot bee seene  water troubled  poluted: so o soule doth cleerely know, wh shee hath in her selfe, wh she is quiet and calme: but if t stormes of passions doe obscu and disturbe her, then she neyth seeth her self, nor any other thi Therefore Augustine doth wis admonish, that very circumsp ly we looke to our selues, least  winges of our soles (which  affections and desires) be dist ned and besmeared with the li of earthly thinges, whereby t may be disabled to fly to heau

 diuine things. So we read of  holy man, that although hee s a Bishop, yet hee would not angle himselfe neither with tters of his Bishoppricke, nor  any other secular busines, ies fearing, least by this anes his heart should bee in|ed and wrapped in the cogi|ons of visible matters.
r this cause we heere so great|ommend mortification  the deration and temperance of ions. For there is not any g, which so strongly doth le our heart, and captiuate it, uery one of those appetites,  especially that of loue, which  the roote of all, and so doth inere and rule ouer all the o|, none otherwise, then the e is wont to rule and raigne  the branches. For where e is a superfluous loue of any

thing, foorth with it abhorreth  contrary, and desireth that it  ueth, and feareth least it loose it reioyceth when it is presen greeueth when it is absent, an carefull, that it be not endang red, which is beloued: it is tro bled if it bee ill handled, to b briefe, after this ma~ner, the wh company of other passions  march, following whether so this captaine doth lead them. O Sauiour doth signifie so mu whe~ he saith; Where your treas is, there will your hart be also:  timating Math. 6. in what thing soeuer  whole treasure of our loue is p vpon that is bestowed also all diligence, all our cogiions,  whatsoeuer proceedeth from  hart. Therfore the seruant of  must alwaies diligently wa and haue his heart in sure ho that he may not thinke any th

 of his passions bee lead vnto  thing, which is not of God  from God. Let him not bee  but for that which seperateth  from God: Let him not bee d, but for that which leadeth  vnto God; let no thought bee e holy vnto him, nor any co|tion more vsuall, then by t meanes he may satisfie and se God: let him not liue with  other feare, loue, desire, or e: then of him, in him  for . This is the crosse, in which  Apostle gloried, when he said:  world is crucified vnto me, and Gal. 6.  to the world, which is done,  by the death of the body, but e spirit, that is, by the death e loue of all earthly thinges,  whe~ the spirit feeleth this, it is  were dead vnto al creatures, ueth onely to his creator, in me his loue is solely rooted.

Therfore in the law, comma dement was giuen to the hyg Priest, that he should neyther b ry his father nor mother, Least  be defiled by them, in touching  Leuit. 21. dead. The Lord knew that ne ther the sight, nor the corpor touch did defile men, but the a fection of the heart, which h would haue to bee so pure an cleane in his friends, that he wo not haue it trobled nor disturb neither through the occasion  losse of father, or mother. Pera uenture, my brother, it will seen hard  difficult vnto thee, whic we heere commaund thee: but  is a shame if that seeme hard vn Christians (who are as trees pla ted by the riuers of grace) whic heathen Philosophers haue con maunded their Schollers, haui none other thing to enlight them, then the light of reason.

There haue beene Philosophers d, who by their precepts haue euoured to make men heroi| diuine,  free fro~ all passions  affections: and doe wee mar| if wee bee commaunded to y about with vs a peaceable  a quiet heart, that God may ll in it?
lthough it seeme difficult vn|ee to bring so great a worke o an happy end, yet this doct| shall be profitable for thee,  thou maist knowe the scope  end, to which all thy cogita|s and desires are to be aymed  directed. It will also be pro|le vnto thee, least thou be al|ether mutable and vnstable, as e, whose heartes are like wea| cocks, set vpon the toppes of ets  steeples, which are tur| about with euerye winde.
ese are neuer like vnto them|selues,

neither continue in  state; for euen now they are  and heauye,  presently after |cond and merrye: now pleas forthwith angrye: now graue,  and by light and toyish: now  uout, straitway after dissolute.  be briefe, inwardly they are ch ged into so manye colours  sh|pes, as out ward accidents and |casions offer the~selues vnto the The Camelion is an vnclean c|ature, and forbidden in the la perhaps because he is cha~ged i to all coulours, which are laid b|fore him: no lesse vncleane are  they, who are figured by th beast: such are they that are m|ued with euerye winde, who a co~monly wont to be men vnst|ble  vnstayed, without grauit  wisdome, without honor, wit|out courage, without fortitud light, easily enclined, fainth arte

vnconstant, mutable, of whom no t thing is to be expected. uch are vnworthy the names en, for they haue effeminate light mindes: at the least they ot worthy the name of wise . For it is written; A holy man s wisdome is as firm as the Sun: Ecclus 27.  foole is changed as the Moone. e that keepeth his heart free  these two things; that is, fro~ e cogitations, and inordinate ons, he shal easily obtaine this e and puritie of heart, which rding to the Philosophers is incipall meanes to get true dome, and according to the ement of the Schoole-men, nd of a spirituall life: as  sheweth more at large in rst Collation.
 conclude, this is the last dis|ion, which is required to the emplation of diuine matters,

according to that of our SAVIO Blessed are the pure in heart,  they shall see God. For euen as in  Mat. 5. bright and cleere glasse the S beames do make the greater sp|dour, so a purified  cleane sou the beames of the diuine truth shine more cleerely.
God would not haue Dau albeit he was a righteous and  2. King 7. holy man, to build the temple,  which he would dwell, becau he was a warriour: but he woul haue it builded of Salomon  peaceable Sonne, that hee mig signifie, that a peaceable  qui hart is y^e true place, in which Go desireth to dwell. For the sam cause when the Lorde appear 3. King. 19. to Elias in the mount, he was  in the mighty stronge winde,  in the earthquake, nor in the fi but in the still and soft voyce, th is in a peaceable  quiet heart.



OF THE FOVRTH cause of Deuotion, which is a continuall re|membrance of God. CHAP. VII.
O this keeping of the heart, there is nothing more profi|e or co~modious, then alwaies alke in the presence of the d,  to haue him alwayes be| our eyes, not only in the time ayer, but in all places and at mes: for there be many, that o long modest and quiet, as  Master is present, but hee g gone, they disorder them|es, and doe follow the rage  vyolence of theyr owne af|ons.
he seruant of the Lord must

not imitate these, but he must ra|ther labor, that he may keep th heate, which he hath got in prai|er, and to continue those cogita|tions holy, which hee hath: fo these being continued and kep do lift a man to the top  heigh of perfection.
He that doth otherwaies, a his life passeth away in doing  vndoing, in weauing and vn|weauing, neyther shall hee e|uer come to his wished end
This is that happy vnyo of our spirit with God, whic the Saints haue so hyghly estee|med and made so great accoun of: for the attainement of whic they haue taken so great paines and which they haue appointe the last end of all their exercise This is that, that Dauid intimate that he had obtained, when he re|peateth so often in his Psalmes

that God was alwaies before his es; that he did co~tinually medi|te vpon his law:  that his praise as euer in his mouth. So that al|eit he was a King  very much ployed in manye businesses oth of war and peace, yet in the yddest of so many cogitations d consultations hee was quiet, d albeit so many seruants and ttendors stood about him, yet he ood alone with God.
Wherefore thou shalt doe a hing right worth thy labour, f with all thy strength thou en|deuourest, that thou mayst al|wayes haue with thee this pre|sence and remembrance of the Lord: for it shall much bene|fit and profit thee to consider that God is alwayes and euery where present, not onely by his power and presence, but also by his essence.

A King in all his territories is present by his power, and in his pallace by his presence, but by his essence, he is no where but in that place, which possesseth his body: God after all these waies is pre|sent in euery place. Which besides God is pre|sent euery where. our faith, this reason doth also prooue: It is God that giueth to all creatures to bee and to liue: God is the beginning and cause of all thinges. But seeing that it is necessary that the cause be ioyned with the effect, eyther by it selfe, or by some vertue or influence, it followeth, that sithence God is the cause of all things, that they are, that hee is also ioyned vnto them, giuing them to bee, that they are: and that not by some vertue or influence, but by him|selfe: for in God there is that distinction of things, which is in the creatures.

For whatsoeuer is in God, is of God, and therefore wheresoeuer e willeth, that somthing of him should be, he is all that.
And because the Essence of thinges is the neerest vnto the things, neither is any thing more inward in them, it followeth that God is more in them, then the thinges are in themselues. What great thing is it then, if thou hast God alwaies before thyne eyes, who carrieth thee in hys armes, who supporteth thee with his feete, who gouerneth thee by his prouidence, in whom  by whom thou liuest  hast thy being? Reme~ber that he alwaies assisteth thy soule as the creature and gouernour, who preserueth thee in thine Essence, neither is he content that he assisteth thee as thy creator and preseruer, but also hee is present with thee as

thy iustifier, bestowing vpon thee grace, loue and many holy inspi|rations  desires. Let him be the witnes of thy life, let him be the companion of thy pilgrymage, commit vnto him part of thy bu|sines, commend thy selfe vnto him in all thy perils and dangers, in the night talke with him in thy sleep, and with him awake in the morning.
Sometymes contemplate him as a glorious God among his Angels in heauen: some|times as a mortall man among men, conuersant vpon the earth: now in the bosome of his Father, now in the armes of his mother a little after wayte vpon him fly|ing into Egipt, thence returne a|gain with him out of Egipt: som|times ioyne thy selfe vnto him praying in the Garden, somtimes followe him to the Mount

euen of Caluary, neyther for|sake hym hanginge on the Crosse.
When thou sittest downe at the Table, let his Gall and Vi|neger bee the sauce of thy meate, and let the Fountayne of the bloode (flowing from his most Noble and glorious breast) bee the cup out of which thou drynkest. When thou goest to bed, imagine thy bed to bee his Crosse, and thy Pillow his Crowne of Thornes: when thou puttest off or on thy cloathes, meditate with what great igno|minye Chryste in his passion was sometymes arrayed and sometymes spoyled of his gar|mentes.
This is with those holy Vir|gins to followe the Lambe, whether soeuer hee goeth: by thys meanes thou mayest bee

be a Disciple of Christ,  alwayes remaine in his companye. In all these thinges alwayes talke with him with hu~ble speeches  full of loue: so he wil haue him self delt with, who for the greatnes of his Maiesty ought worthily to be fea|red, and for his goodnes, excee|dingly to be loued.
Although thou be busied with some manuall labour, or with any other busines, yet for this thou must not omit nor intermit this holy exercise. For the Lord hath giuen this aptnes and promptnes to our heartes, that in a moment they may be turned vnto him, al|beit the body remain occupyed in an externall worke; none other|waies then an handmayde who A Simily. worketh in y^e presence of a Queen, she standeth before her Lady with great grauitye, with presentnes of minde, and orderly composition

of body, making neither losse nor delay in her worke; that one bu|sines hindreth not another, so also our heart with due reuerence and attention, may be lifted vp to that maiestye, which filleth heauen  earth, not omitting norneglecting any of those thinges it doth.
Neither only when a man doth attend vpon any manuall labour, but also when he speaketh, study|eth or is busied, c. he may som|times haue his heart attentiue to his busines, and yet neuertheles enter into the temple of his heart, to worship the Lord,  withdraw himself from those things, which his busines requires, and speedily returne vnto GOD. Those holy creaturs are a figure of this, which Ezechiel sawe co~ming and going in the likenes of bright lightning, wherby we vnderstand the swift|nes  alacrity, by which the righ|teous

ought to be turned vnto the Lord, whe~ as vpon some godly  religious occasion they goe out of the closset of their deuotio~, to suc|cour and releeue their neighbour. But if at any time a man shall lin|ger  loyter  forget to returne vnto God, he must be stirred vp with the spurs of attentio~ and dili|gence, by turning the reynes of his heart vnto God,  saying with the Prophet; Returne O my soule into rest, because the Lord hath blessed Psal. 114. thee.


THE FIFT THING that stirreth vp Deuotion, is the vse of short Prayers, which in al pla|ces  seasons, are as dartes, to be sent vnto God. CHAP. VIII.
VVIthout doubt that man is exceding happy, that

knoweth well to obserue  keep the precedent instruction and do|cument. But that no man may fayle in it, it is most profitable in all places and seasons to vse those short  succinct prayers, of which Augustine speaketh. The brethre~ (saith he) are said to haue in Egipt August. to Proba. ofte~  frequent prayers, but those very short,  sodenly dartedforth: least that erected and aduaunced vigilancy (which is very necessa|ry for him that prayeth) vanish a|way through long delay, and too much prolixitie. Euen as they that inhabite the North partes of the A Simily. world, where the cold is veheme~t, do keep within doores, and in hot houses to defend themselues from the iniury and vntemperatenes of the weather: but they that cannot do this, come ofte~ to y^e fire,  be|ing somwhat warmed, do returne againe to their labour: so also the

seruant of God, liuing in this cold and miserable regio~ of the world, where charity is waxen key colde, and iniquity doth rage  abound, must often repayre to the fire of prayer, that he may grow warme. He is truly happy, to whome it is giuen alwayes to sit in that hot|house, of which the Prophet spea|keth: And he shal be as one, that it is hid from the wind,  couered from Esay. 32. the tempest. But let him that can|not haue this, often come to this Diuine fire, that hee may defend him selfe from windes, and from the intollerable ycenes of the fro|zen region of this world.
Hetherto belong these short  succinct Prayers, which for this cause are called darting, because as it were are the darts of a louing soule, which with great celerity are shot forth, and do wound the heart of God: by force of which,

the soule is stirred vp, and is more enflamed with the loue of God. Very many verss of Dauid are profitable  conducent vnto this purpose, which a man ought al|waies to haue in readines, that by them he may be lifted vp vnto God: not alwaies after the same manner, least the assiduity of the same wordes breed wearines, but with all variety of affections, which the holy Ghost doth stirre and rayse vp in his soule: for hee shall finde conuenient and meete verses for all these in this heauen|ly seminary of Psalmes.
Sometimes he may lift vp his heart by the affection of repen|tance, and desire of remission of sinnes, by these wordes: Turne away thy face, O Lord, from my Psal. 51. sinnes, and put away allmine ini|quitities. Erect in me a cleane hart, O God, and renue a right spirit

within me. Sometimes he may say with the affection of thankfulnes: My soule, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefites. Some|times Psal. 103. hee may say with the affe|ction of Loue and Charitye; I will loue thee deerely, O Lord my strength. The Lord is my rocke, my Psal. 18. fortresse,  hee that deliuereth me, my God,  my strength, in him will I trust. As the Hart brayeth for the riuers of water, so panteth my soule Psal. 42. after thee O God. My soule thirst|eth for God, euen for the liuing God: when shall I come  appeere before the presence of God? My teares haue beene my meate day  night, while they daylye say vnto me, where is thy God? Afterwards being inflamed with the loue of eternal happines, let him crye: O Lord of hostes, how amiable are thy Tabernacles? My Psal. 84. soule longeth, yea,  fainteth for the courtes of the Lord. Saint Hierome

writeth in a certaine Epistle, that the Fathers of Egipt had wont to haue very often in their mouthes, a short verse of the same Prophet, and to say; O that I had wings like Psal. 55. a doue, then wold I fly away  rest. Somtimes with a confession of his owne misery,  a desire of the di|uine grace let him cal; Incline thine Psal. 86. eare, O Lord,  heare me: for I am poore  needy. And to co~clude let this breefe verse be very often in our speeches  conferences: O God, hast thee to deliuer me: make hast to help me, O Lord. In like Psal. 70. manner let the times  places,  businesses, which we attend, and Of al things we must take an oc|casion of Deuotion. whatsoeuer we see or heare mini|ster occasio~ by other meanes and affections to lift vp our harts vnto God: for he that loueth God tru|ly be holdeth God in al things,  thinketh that al things doe inuite him vnto his loue. In the morning

the chirping  harmony of birds, in the night silence  quiet calm|nes inuite vs to praise the Lord. In our eating, the grace, which is bestowed vpo~ our meates for our satisfying: when in the morning wee arise, the grace which hath kept vs in our sleep,  that wee are refreshed with it: the beauty of the Sunne and starres, and the decking  embellishment of the fieldes doe intimate  insinuate vnto vs the prouidence  beautie of our Creator, and the misery  calamity of other creatures doth witnes and testifie vnto vs the di|uine grace, which God vseth in freeing and deliuering them.
When the clocke giueth a signe of the passed hower, let vs call to mind the hower of our death;  also that hower, in which God vouchsafed to dye for vs,  let vs read  meditate on those words,

which a holy Father teacheth, say|ing: Blessed be the houre in which my Lord Iesus Christ was born  dyed for me. So ofte~ as any temp|tation doth assaile vs, or any im|pure or hurtfull thought doth en|ter into vs, praier is very necessary to cast it out of our harts. In like manner as often as we enterprize and vndertake to doe any thing, wherein we feare that wee shall find contradictions  hindrances, or dread new occasions of daun|gers, it behooueth vs to defence and arme our selues with the weapons of Prayer: When we at any time goe out of our doores, when we are to haue busines with a wrangling  a contentious ma~, or to deale in any matter of great moment  consequence, when wee come to a banket, wherein there is danger of sinning, eyther through gluttony, or too much

talke, in these and suth like mat|ters a great preparation of Prayer is to be sent before. By this means all thinges will become motiues vnto vs to haue alwaies somthing to doe with God,  of all things we shall receiue fruite, and at all times haue occasion to pray. This is that continuall exercise, to the which the Apostleinuiteth vs, say|ing: Touching  admonishing your own selues, in Psalmes,  hymmes, Col. 3.  spiritual songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord. And whatsoeuer ye shal doe, in word or deed, doe all in the name of the Lord Iesus, giuing thankes to God e|uen the Father by him.
This exercise very much help|eth to Deuotion: for it is as the watchman  keeper of the house watching that none beside God enter to take possession of y^e soule. It is profitable also to preserue the

heate of Deuotion: hence it is, that they that are freequent in this consideration, doe very easily call vnto them their minds,  gather together their sences and spirits, when they are to pray.
For what other cause, doest thou think there is, that one forth with at the beginning of prayer doth enioy tranquility and peace of minde, an other scarcely afterma|ny houres,  after long praier can quiet his heart  make it peace a|ble? The cause is obuious  com|mon, because the one hath his heart gathered vnto him  war|med with these short  succinct prayers: the other through for|getfulnes of God is waxen key cold,  therefore the one sooner waxeth hot, the other later. Wee A Simily. see this in a fornace, which if it be wel heated in y^e morning, is kept hot all the day after with a little

fire: but if it grow stone colde a|gaine, it requires a great deale of fire, before it be thorowly heated again: so it is necessary that they doe, that will be deuout, that this diuine heate may be preserued in their hearts, vnlesse they will vn|dergoe new troubles in heating them so often as they goe to pray. For the Deuoton of our heart is A Simily. as heate in water, or in yron, which naturally is cold, but acci|dentally hot: for when it is taken fro~ the fire, of which it was made hot, foorth with it returneth to his former and proper estate  con|dition. He therefore that would alwaies keep yron hot, it behoo|ueth him either alwaies to keep it in the fire, or often to put it into y^e fire, that so the external heat may be kept in it: the same diligence is necessary in the nourishing and warming of our hearts.



THE SIXT THING that encreaseth deuotion, is the reading of deuout  profitable books. CHAP. IX.
THe Deuout reading of spiri|tuall bookes is very condu|cent and much auayleth to this keeping  purity of y^e hart: for as Bernard saith: our heart is like a mill, which neuer resteth, but al|waies grindeth that which is cast into it: if it be wheate, it grindeth wheate: if barly, it grindeth bar|ly. Therefore it is profitable to be busied  occupied in the reading of holy and sacred bookes, that when it doth co~sider  meditate vpon any thing, it may meditate vpon things, which it is busied  occupied in. For this cause Saint

Hierome in all his Epistles doth so much commend the reading of the holy Scripture, but especially in that, which he writ to the Vir|gin Demetria, in the beginning whereof he saith thus. Hierome in an Epistle to the Vir|gin Deme|tria. Cap. 5.
Thou sacred Virgin alwaies haue this care
And let it dayly be thy foode and fare:
That thou nourish thy minde and feede thy soule with the holy reading of the sacred Scriptures, and not suffer the seedes of tares and darnell to fall into the good ground of thine heart. In the end of the same Epistle hee doth re|peate In the last Chap. the foresaid counsel, saying: I ioyne the end to the beginning, neyther am I content once to haue admonished thee, loue the holy Scriptures, and Wisedome will loue thee: loue her, and shee will preserue thee: honor her, and she will embrace thee.



THE SEAVENTH thing that begetteh Deuotion, is the keeping of the senses. CHAP. X.
THe keeping of the senses shall very much help to the keeping of the heart: for these be as it were the gates of the Citty, by which all things enter in  go out: he therfore that keepeth wel these gates, vnto him all thinges shal be in safety. It is needful ther|fore that one keeper  watchma~ be set ouer the eyes, another ouer the eares,  a third ouer y^e mouth: for by these three gates all wares and Marchandize,  whatsoeuer is in the world, is caried into the soule, and exported out of it. So that a deuout man ought to bee deafe, dum and blind, as the holy

Fathers in Egipt were wont to say: For the gates of these senses being shut, the soule will alwaies be pure and prepared to the con|templation of heauenly thinges.
For a man must sometimes of necessity heare  see those things which are the causes of distracti|on and perturbation: wherefore let him so heare and see outward things, that they doe not conta|minate his heart. The seruant of God ought to haue his heart as a strong wall, and as a ship well built, soundly ioynted, and surely pitched, which easily repelleth the billowing waues, and albeit couered with them, yet neyther admitteth nor receiueth any into her womb. It may be to figure out this, God commaunded Noah to to make his Arke bowing  vaw|ted,  to pitch it well within and without: for such an one ought to

be the arke of our hart, that in the midst of the waters,  in the tem|pestuous deluge of this world it may be secure,  admit no waters of iniquity. They that keep their hearts after this manner, are al|waies peaceable, of a present mind,  deuout: but they that o|pen the gates to al winds, and ad|mit all affections  hurly burlies of this world, in the time of prai|er they are distracted with many contentions, warres  disturbed troublesome cogitations. It hap|neth A Simily. vnto these as to those, who go to parle  confer with a Prince with a stomacke loaden  ouer|charged with grosse and vndige|stible meates, who in the midst of their speech doe filthily vomitte foorth, what they haue greedily deuoured: so these also in the fit|test  most conuenient time of praier talking with God, do belch

foorth the garlicke and onions of Egipt, that is, cogitations and bu|sinesses of the world, of which their hearts are ful. Such in vaine doe expect fruite of their paryers: for that curse of the Patriarke is proper vnto them, saying: Thou wast light as water, thou shalt not be Gen. 49. excellent. For they haue a heart so light and powred foorth,  busi|ed with externall matters, that they so much the lesse increase within, as they are powred foorth about outward things. Such are they, that whole daies together walke abroad to see lofty build|ings, sumptuous houses, magnifi|cent temples,  such like thinges: who are desirous to see faire and beautiful sights,  to heare news: for they return to y^e houses of their harts ful of wind,  empty of De|uotio~. These as they are wandring  vnstable in their soules, so also

are they in their bodies: for they can scarely abide one moment in one place: but run vp  down fro~ one place to another:  whe~ they haue not whether to goe, they fo|low whether y^e winde leads them, seeking if they may find any thing abroad to delight them, because within the~ they haue lost true de|light  ioy. It hapneth also often times, that in such like wayes the deuill is their leader  guid, and doth lead them as he in times past led Dinah into vnhonest places, where they do not only lose their deuotion, but also their chastity  innocency. Therfore it is needfull that we eschew all these distracti|ons  perturbatio~s, that all y^e stre~|gth of our souls being gathred to|gether, we may haue greater for|titude to seek for y^e chiefest good: for it is writte~; The lord building vp Psal. 147. Ierusalem, doth gather together the dispersed of Israel.

But amongst all the owtward members, the tongue is especially Ber. in his Sermon of the three|fold keep|ing of the tongue, the hands  the heart. to bee kept: for it is as Bernard saith, a small member, but vnlesse thou take heed vnto it a great euil, little and narrow, saith he it is, but an instrument most fit to euacuate and emptie the heart. It cannot be spoken how soone and easilye the iuyce of deuotion fadeth and vanisheth away, when the mouth is opened to speake superfluous things, albeit they be good. Ther|fore it is very well spoken of a cer|taine Dctor: as sweet water stan|ding A Simily. in an open vessell, hauing no couer, dooth forthwith loose the sweetnes and grace of the sent: so the sweet and precious oyntment of deuotion, dooth loose all the vertue and efficacye, when the mouth is loosed  dissolute, that is, when the tongue doth lauish  superabound in too much talke

and prattle. Therfore it is best to be silent, and if at anye time it be needful to speake, yet speedily with the Dove returne into the Gen. 8. Arke, least thou perish in the De|luge of wordes.
And although moderation bee necessarye for all, yet it is more to be obserued of women then of men: but especiallye of Virgins, whose chiefest ornament is sham|fastnes, and silence: both beeing the keepers and preseruers of chastitye. Wherefore Saint Am|brose verye well admonisheth a Virgin in these woordes. O Vir|gin bee circumspect and choyce in thy way, least thou offend in thy tongue: for often times good words in Virgins are taken for faultes.



THE EIGHT THING that encreaseth Deuotion, is solitarines. CHAP. XI.
EXteriour solitarines doth also verye much help this keeping of the senses  the heart, as a cer|taine Schoole-man testifieth in these words: Solitarines seemeth much to auaile to the contempla|tion of heauenly thinges: for pra|yer ca~not well  decently be per|formed in tumultes  hurly bur|lies, and to heare and see manye things can scarcely be done with|out impuritye and offence. For death entreth by our windowes vnto our soules:  therfore after the example of our Lord goe into the desert, that is, as much as thou canst, seperate thy selfe from the company of others,  be solitary, if thou wilt be ioyned vnto him, 

see him by the purity of thy heart: flye also the frequent meetings  talkatiue conferences, especially of worldly persons. Seeke not for newe deuotions  amities: fill not thine eyes  eares with vaine fan|tasies,  eschew all things, which disturbe  trouble y^e quyet of the minde, and the tranquilitye of the soule, as venemous  hurtfull to the soule. For not without cause the holy Fathers desired to liue in woods, and in places farre remote from the company  frequenting of men. This saith the schoolman. But that thou maist be more con|firmed  strengthned in this, hear what Saint Bernard saith: If thou Bern. in his 40. Sermon vpon the Canticles. beest mooued with the prouoca|tion  instigation of the holy spi|rit,  dost by all meanes endeuor to make thy soule the spouse of God, sit by the Prophet solitarily, because thou hast lifted thy selfe

aboue thy selfe, longing to be espoused to the Lord of Angels. Lament. 3. Is it not aboue thy selfe to be ioy|ned vnto God, and to be one spi|rit with him? Sit solitarilye as a Tvrtle, haue nothing to doe with thy selfe, nor with the multitude and throng of others, yea forget Psal. 44. thine owne people  thy Fathers house, and the King shal haue ple|sure in thy beautye. O holy soule get thee aparte, that thou maist perform thy seruice to him alone, whome thou hast made choyce of before all others. Flye publicke assemblyes, auoide also those that are domesticall with thee: sepe|rate thy selfe from thy friendes  from them that are the neerest vnto thee, and from him that mi|nistreth vnto thee. Doost thou not knowe that thy bridegroome is shamefast, and will not affoord thee his sweete and pleasant pre|presence,

others being present? Therefore seperate thy selfe not in body, but in minde: but in in|tention, but in deuotio~, but in spi|rit. For the spirit before thy face is Christ thy Lord, and the spirit requireth not solitarines of body: albeit somtimes seperate thy selfe in body, when thou maist doe it fitly, especially in the time of pra|yer. And afterwardes: Thou art alone if thou thinkest not vpon common matters, if thou dost not affect thinges present, if thou dis|pisest that which manye loue, if thou co~temnest that which many desire, if thou eschewest braw|lings, if thou dost not languish for losses, if thou dost not remember iniuryes: otherwayes although thou beest alone in body, yet thou art not alone. Doost thou not see that thou maist bee alone, yea a|mong many?  seeing y^u art alone

amonge manye, thou art alone in what assemblye of people soeuer thou art: only beware that thou be not too curious a searcher, or too rash a iudge of other mens conuersations. Hetherto Bernard.
Therfore let a deuout man loue and seeke for solitarines, not only that which is internall, but also that which is externall: for it is certaine that the one is helped by the other. It is reported that Ar|senius heard a voyce saying vnto him: Arsenius flye, be silent  at rest. Let euery one think that the same is also spoken vnto him, and let him fly and auoyd all kinde of commerce, society, conuersation, conference, consolation, visita|tion, yea of friendes and parents, vnlesse eyther charitye require it, or necessitye commaund it. Let a man alwayes desire to be alone, let him meditate with himselfe,

let him liue to himselfe,  let him confer with God, who is the lo|uer of solitarines.
And let no man think that such a life is full of melancholye and heauines: it is so much the more delectable and pleasant, by how much the societie and familiaritie with God is sweeter, then that which is with men. For this cause Saint Hierome saith: The towne Hierome in his Epist. is a prison vnto me, but the desert a Paradice. And Bernard saith: With whome God is, he is neuer Bern. in his Epist. lesse alone, then when he is alone: for then he freelye enioyeth his heartes ioy, then hee is his owne man to enioy God in himselfe,  himself in God, c. what Paradice can be more pleasaunt in this pil|grimage, then that which God promiseth to a soule deuout, and attendinge vppon him, when as hee sayth: Beholde, I will allure Os. 2.

her,  bring her into the wildernes,  speake friendly vnto her,  I wil giue her her vineyardes from thence,  the valley of Achor for the doore of hope,  she shall sing there as in the dayes of her youth,  as in the day when she came vp out of the land of Egipt.
These be the songs  himmes of a soule asce~ding from y^e earth, and going out of this world, and by little and little, more and more encreasing in the loue and know|ledge of her Creator. These be the dayes of her spirituall youth, when the loue is stronger  more vehement. These songs are sung in the wildernes, and in the valey of Achor, which is of trouble: by which is vnderstood the humility of contrition: for there the way vnto hope is first opened vnto the soule, and there she receiueth re|mission of sinnes: there she pray|seth

and lawdeth her Creator, be|cause with so mighty an arme, and with so mercifull an hand, he hath deliuered and freed her from this world. These be the wages, which God giueth vnto his friendes for the troubles and turmoyles of the wildernes.
This solitarines is not onely profitable and conducent vnto deuotion, but also vnto all other vertues: for it cutteth off all the occasions of sin, which are wont to happen in the assemblyes and companies of men: but espe|ciallye the occasions of falling in the tongue, which almost are infi|nite. Therefore Seneca giueth ve|ry good counsaile, that solita|rines is to be sought for of him, that would keep his inno|cencye.



NINTHLY, APPOIN|ted times,  certaine sette howres, do very much make to the en|creasing of Deuotion. CHAP. XII.
ALl which before hath bene spoken, doth especiallye be|long to the keeping of the heart, which not onely is the mother of pure prayer, but also of all other vertues. But that which hereafter we are to speake, doth chiefly be|long to stirre vp deuotion. And first it is required, that a deuoute Certaine set times of prayer are be appoin|ted. man prescribe vnto himselfe ap|poynted times, and certaine sette howers to praye in, that alone he may speake with God alone. The Prophet Daniel did this, of whom Dan. 6. the Scripture speaketh, that the windowes of his chamber beeing

opened towards Ierusalem, three times a day he bended his knees,  worshiped before his God. The same did Dauid, who in y^e nights lifted vp his handes, and in the morninges did meditate of the Lord, as hee testifieth of himselfe in many places of his Psalmes: in one of which he sayth, that seauen tymes a day hee did prayse the Lord.
Luke writeth of the faythfull in the prymatiue Church, that dayly with one accorde they continued in the Temple in pray|er, and at night returned home, where they receiued the holy Communyon together, wyth gladnesse and simplycity of hart, being full of the comfort of the holy Ghost. Of those, who succeeded these, Plyne thus Pliny in an Epist. to Traian. wryteth to Traian the Empe|rour

The Christians are a people inno|cent, voyde of vice and offence, neyther haue they any other fault then that they gather themselues together in assemblies before day, where they sing prayses  hymmes, in the honor of a cer|taine man called Christ, who was crucified in Palestina. What need we many words? it is writ|ten of all the Saints, that they pas|sed the greater part of the night in spirituall exercises, prayers, contemplations and readings, ful|filling that of Dauid: In the night lift vp your hands to the Sanctuary, Psal. 145. and praise the Lord. But farre a|boue all these is that example of our Sauiour, of whome the E|uangelistes writ, that in the day time he was busied in working miracles,  in preaching the king|dome of God: but in the night perseuered in watching  prayer.

This belongeth not onely and solely to the clergy, as some vain|ly babble: but to all them, that desire to enioy God, and to come to the perfection of life. Saint Hierome in an Epis. to Celantia. Cap. 6. Hierome exhorteth a certaine no|ble Woman called Celantia to doe thus, in these words: So take care for thy house and family, that thou mayst bestowe some time and leasure vpon thy soule. Choose for thy selfe some fitte place, somewhat remooued from the noyse of thy family, into which, as into a hauen thou mayst betake thy selfe out of the great storme and tempest of thy cares, and there appease and as|swage by the tranquility of thy secret closset, the waues and billowes of cogitations raysed by outward troubles.
Let there bee so much studye of Diuine reading, so many en|tercourses

of prayers, so firme and solide cogitation of future thinges, that by this leasure thou mayst recompence all the bu|sinesses of the other time.
Neyther doe wee saye this to that ende, that wee may with|drawe thee from thine affayres, but wee doe it, tht there thou mayst learne, and there medy|tate, what an one thou oughtest to shew thy selfe in thine affaires. This saith he.
But if thou shalt aske mee, how often in a day thou shalt turne thee vnto this studie, and take this taske in hand; I cannot prescribe a certaine rule vnto thee: for all men haue not the same occasions of leysure and rea|dines.
Yet remember that in the law the twoo dayly Sacrifices, the The two daily Sacri|fices. morning Sacrifice and the eue|ning,

are very often commen|ded, which euery Christian ought spiritually to offer, withdraw|ing himselfe at those times from externall thinges, that hee may attend vppon Celestiall mat|ters.
That as twice in a day we re|freshe our bodies, that is, at din|ner, and at supper: so also twice a day wee giue the due nou|rishment vnto our soules: see|ing that it is of no lesser digni|ty, then the body: neyther is the meate lesse necessary for the soule, then for the bodye, yea it is much more necessary.
The ordinarye nourishment is necessary for the body, be|cause the naturall heate doth al|wayes consume and waste the substance of man: and therefore it is necessary, that it be repayred on the one side, as it is decayed

on the other: so the soule hath in it a pestilent heate (which is the concupiscence, and euill inclina|tion of our appetites) consuming and wasting all good: therefore it is needfull that that bee dayly repayred by Deuotion, which is wasted and decayed by that hurt|full and pestilentiall heate.
We must also know, that mans nature by sinne is corrupt, incly|nable to all earthly things, which by the weight doth drawe man vnto it, as the Wiseman saith: A corruptible body is heauy vnto the soule, and the earthly mansion keep|eth Wisedo. 9. downe the minde that is full of cares.
Therefore as they that haue the charge and keeping of a A Simily. Clocke, are wont euerye day twice to winde vp the plum|mets, for they of their owne proper motion doe by little and

little descende, and drawe to|wardes the ground: so they that desire to keep their soules vp|right, and well ordered, ought at the least twice a day to erect and lift vp her weightes: seeing that our wretched nature is so in|clynable to thinges below, that it alwayes endeuoureth to sinke downwards.
Ah howe euidently doe they dayly feele this that pray. How often doth a man (his morning prayer being ended) thinke that the weight and poyse of his clock is lifted vp into heauen, and that hee hath all his intention and will fixed aboue: so that hee seemeth not to vouchsafe to be|holde these earthly thinges: and a little after, when hee shall turne himselfe to his dayly af|fayres, and beginneth to traf|fique with men, when as the

euening commeth, he shall per|ceiue the plummet euen to haue fallen and lye vpon the earth: that is, hee shall finde his spirit so sunke downe into the earth,  inclyned to earthly thinges, as though it had neuer beene lifted nor wound vp. He therefore that wold alwayes haue the clocke of his life well ordred  gouerned, hee must alwaies haue a speciall regarde to winde vp the plum|mets and wightes of it. Yet not|withstanding so, that no violence be offered.
They that haue not conueni|ency nor leasure to pray twice in a day, let them endeuour them|selues Those that cannot long pray must haue re|course to those dar|ting pray|ers, spoken of before. to pray once. But if they cannot doe this, I knowe not what counsell to giue them else, then that they haue recourse to those short praiers, which wehaue spoken of before, which may bee

intermingled with all kinde of our occupations and businesses. For I remember that I haue seene good and godly spirits supported by the vse and helpe of these, whose condition, manner of li|uing, and infirmity did not per|mit them to haue any longer prai|ers: albeit these kinde of prayers cannot long hold out, if the foun|dation of other profounder and longer prayers be wanting.


THE TENTH THING that doth kindle Deuotion, is the continuing and perseue|ring in good exercises. CHAP. XIII.
BVt that this exercise may bee profitable, we must note, that in this place duration and long perseuerance is required in it.

For there are many found, that neuer make an end of that they once began, but alwayes weaue  vnweaue (as they say) the web of Penelope.
These propounding this way vnto themselues, doe sticke to it two or three dayes, and foorth|with are tyred and doe forget it, so that when they returne to that they began, they are so cold, and so far remoued from themselues, as if they had neuer begun, or as if they had neuer heard, no not by a dreame, what praier is. Ther|fore they betake themselues to new purposes, and they choose againe vnto themselues a new exercise, and when they haue somewhat proceeded, eyther through wearines, or because they think they haue taken paines enough, they returne vnto rest,  forget their labour.

And so they spend their whole life in building  pulling downe, and in rowling (as it is said) the stone of Sisyphus, which when they haue rowled to the midst of the mountaine, suddenly it fal|leth downe, and so in beginning and in rowling they consume their whole age.
Such are they that vpon euery small and light occasion dooe forsake their prayers and lauda|ble exercises: to whome it often happeneth (as I haue tryed by ex|perience) that whilst they pur|pose to intermit their prayers onely for two or three dayes, they intermit it all their life long.
For when they would returne vnto it, they finde no gate nor entrance vnto it: and the way vnto it becomes dayly more difficult vnto them: therefore

they stay without, and returne to the custome of their auncient life. For a man without prayer, and without spirituall exercise, is as Sampson without his hayre: who forth with loseth his stre~gth, and remaineth feeble and weake, like other men, and is greatly endangered, least he fall into the hands of his enimies.
Therefore it behooueth vs to bee firme and stable in this exer|cise: for it is certaine, that of the constancye and ordering of it, dependeth all our life.
Contemplate in the celestiall bodies, howe great a constancy and firmenes they keep in theyr course  motion, which they ne|uer cha~ged since the time, wherin they were created. For seeing that they weretobe y^e causes on which the administration of the whole world was to depe~d, it was need|full

that in them there should be great constancye, that the world might bee alwayes well ordered and disposed. So seeing that of this spirituall exercise, the whole order and processe of a spirituall life dependeth, as experience tea|cheth, it is meete and requisite, that hee that would haue his life well ordered and disposed, that hee haue the causes well ordered and disposed, on which the orde|ring of it dependeth.
See with what constancye the Prophet Daniel did obserue these three times of prayer, when nei|ther by the feare of death, nor by the gayn-sayinge of hys e|nimyes, hee could bee brought from hys accustomed order: so that hee chose rather to endaun|ger his life, then to breake off his set course of prayer.

So also a deuout man ought so firmely to purpose with himselfe, and inuiolablye decree, to attend and waite vpon God at his accu|stomed howres, that he would ra|ther faile in al other his businesses, which concerne not God, then in this one so greatly commended of GOD. Imi tate the naturall prudency of Serpe~ts, who hiding A Simily. their heads, do yeilde their whole bodyes to the smiter, that that be|ing lost, which is of lesse weight, they may preserue that which is of greater valew. Imitate the Gen. 31,  33. wisdome of the most holy Patri|arke Iacob, who returning out of Mesopotamia, and beeing to re|ceiue  entertaine his brother, whome he greatly feared, sent be|fore his sheep, oxen, and camels, with all his substance: after them he placed both his mayds  their children: after them Leah  her

children: but Rachel Ioseph, as most precious  estimable trea|sures he ordred in the last  safest place: signifying that he had ra|ther hazard all the rest, then those two, whom he so much esteemed. Tell me O thou seruant of God, what hast thou in y^e world, which thou art so much to regard, as this Rachel Ioseph? What is Rachel, but a contemplatiue life? what is Ioseph, but the spirituall sonne, which is borne of her, which is innocency  purity of life? wher|fore that treasure is more to be esteemed, then the losse of anye temporal thing: so that thou must make account rather to lose these, then fayle in the other. Therfore my brother, hap what wil, alwaies keepe with thee thy Rachel  thy Ioseph. Do not imitate them, who haue prayers, exercises,  spiritu|all thinges for a cloake  colour

of their negligence, who when they are to doe, or lose any thing, they alwayes expose the spirituall thing to the daunger, that they maye keepe and defend the tem|porall.
I knew a godly religious wo|man, who as often as she heard the sound of the howre, in which she was wont to pray, at that very same time (as it is also reported of those holy Fathers of Egipt) all An exam|ple of excel|lent Deuo|tion. other thinges beeing set aparte without delay she betooke her to her exercise. When she conferred with an other godly woman, with whose conuersatio~ she was great|ly delighted forth-with after shee heard the stroke of the passed houre, she departed from her, ab|ruptly breaking off her speech, sa|ing: If to day I shall omit mine ordinarye taske for this cause, to morowe I shall omit it for an o|ther,

(for euery day bringeth his hinderance) and stil so proceding, I shall commit a thousand errors. At another time the same deuout woman beeing with me, the like circumstances fell out, where at her departure fro~ me she shewed no token of vanitye, but of great edifying: so that scarcely three times in a yeere she fayleth in this her moste holye exercise. I haue brought this example for the be|nefite of those that be negligent, but I dare not reme~ber the fruite, that she obtained by this perseue|rance. For these times and dayes wherein we liue, are so enuious, and so full of iniquitye, that they will not abide that the vertues of the liuing should be published: as the examples of many Saintes do testifye.
There is not any thing in y^e world, y^e more speedily bringeth a man to

the height and top of perfection, then this continuance and perse|uerance, as well in the exercises of Prayer, as in the diligence and or|der of his life: for a traueller that euery day goeth forward a little, A Simily. if he perseuer and continue in his progresse, soone commeth to the end of his iorney. but if he faile and faint in it, and a little after be|gin his voyage a new, consumeth all his life in it neither euer com|eth to the end of his iorney.
But if at any time a casualty hap|pen, which cannot be refused in this life, so that thou doest stum|ble and fal, and through weaknes doest faint, doe not discourage thy selfe, nor cast away thy hope: but albeit thou fall a thousand times in a day, ryse againe and be conuerted a thousand times in a day:  in what place thy threed was broken, knit it together a|againe,

doe not goe backe to the beginning, for if thou doest, thou shalt disturbe all thy worke  la|bour.
Neyther onely is constancy The exer|cises are not to be changed. needfull in the very exercises the~|selues: but also in the manner of them. For there be some, that doe not fayle in their dayly taske: but daily change their intent and pur|pose: to day they goe this way, and to morrow that: and thus being vnstable and vnstayed in theyr affections, they remayne constant in nothing.
Sometimes they begin of the Passion: a little after they leaue it and take vnto themselues another Meditation, and another exercise.
Sometimes they clymbe vp in|to heauen, relinquish sacred hu|manytie, and ascend to the high|nes  sublimity of Diuinity. Some leaue all these, and begin of the

memory of theyr sinnes: so that they neuer prosecute the thing taken in hand, and neuer come to the end of their dyet, to which without doubte they had sooner come, if they had perseuered in the same way, albeit it was not so direct nor compendious.
It happeneth vnto these as to hunting dogges, who followe A Simily. two Hares, and take neyther: the tree hardlye encreaseth, that is often trans-planted: and the wound is slowlyer healed, when the medicines are often or dayly altered.
Seeing that there are manye and sundrye wayes, by which man goeth vnto GOD, and ma|nye manners of considerations, by which the spirite is lifted vp vnto him: let euerye one pon|der with him selfe, which is the best fitting for his purpose, and

let him entertayne and followe that: for that is the best course that he can take.
But let him beware that hee dooth not fall into the errour of manye, who when they haue found God in some one exercise, they deny that there is any other way, but that alone: which is no|thing els, but to denye that there be moe wayes, by which we goe vnto GOD: when as the holye Ghost, who is our leader and Captayne, dooth leade euerye one by his owne way, which hee seeth to be most commo|dious and conueni|ent for him.



THE ELEVENTH thing that encreaseth Deuotion, is the time, and such like circumstances. CHAP. XIIII.
MVch doe they auayle, which before wee haue spoken of, as the time, the place, the disposi|tion, and the corporall fashion  forme of him, that prayeth, with other circumstances, euery one of which are as prickes to stirre vp deuotion, especially in nouices  yong beginners: who as they are not altogether spirituall, so haue they greater need of the help and ayde of corporal things, that their heartes may bee lifted vp vnto God.
The fittest and most conueni|ent time of Prayer is mid-night,

as Bernarde saith in a certaine Ser|mon: Bern. in his 30. Sermon vpon the Cant. the resting and withdraw|ing time, saith he, is the aptest and fittest, but especially when as the night sleepe doth bring dead and deep silence, then the Prayer is powred foorth more freely and more purely: Arise in the night, saith the Prophet, in the beginning Lament. 2. of the Watches powre out thy heart like water before the face of the lord. How safely thy prayer ascendeth in the night, God alone being thy iudge,  his holy Angell thy wit|nes, who vndertaketh to present t vppon the high altar? How ac|ceptable  welcome is it, hauing the pleasing tincture of ruddye shamefastnes?
How quiet and peaceable be|ing disturbed with no clamour, nor noyse: to be breefe, how pure and sincere, being soyled with no dust of earthly carefulnes: being

tempted with no praise or flattery of the beholder? For this cause therfore the spouse no lesse sham|fastly, then warilye sought for the secret couerture both of the bed,  of the night: to pray, that is, de|siring to finde her loue. This saith Saint Bernard.
They that cannot rise at mid|night, let them endeuour to rise a little before the rising of the Sun, as the Wise man admonisheth: We ought, saith hee, to preuent the Wisedo. 16 Sun-rising to giue thanks vnto thee, and to salute thee before the day spring. In the morning the Childre~ of Israell gathered that delicate Manna, hauing in it that most ex|ellent taste of sweetnes. Dau saith in many Psalms, that he rose in the morning to praise God. Of the righteous it is said; That be|times in the morning his heart wat|cheth le. 30. for the Lord, who made him

 he pomreth foorth his prayers in the sight of the highest. In the mor|ning in the falling of the heauenly dewe, the grace of the holy Ghost descendeth also into their heartes, who meditate on GOD, by the which they may bee defended fro~ the heat of the Sun, and from the plague that destroyeth at noone day. To be briefe, this time is so conuenient to attend vppon the Lord, that the Wise man beeing delighted with this oportuniye, said: He riseth well in the morning that seeketh for good thinges, or the Prou. 2. chiefest good. For this time of all times in the day, is the conuenien|test and fittest to talke with God, and to deale in the busines of our saluation: for then all the powers  faculties of our foules are more cheerefull  ready,  better pre|pared for this dutye. Our sight is not so wandring, our stomacke

empty, our head refreshed with sleepe, the time quiet, and the heart free and fasting from the cogitations and businesse of the daye.
A short supper, and a hard bed are good meanes for early rising: Good meanes for early rising. they make the sleepe shorter,  the time of prayer longer. But a large supper, and a soft bed work the contrary: for when much is to be digested, much sleepe must be had, and the softer the bed is, the more vnwillingly it is left.
But when as eyther for age, or for infirmity, or for presence of friends, or society, a man cannot rise at that houre, yet let him not omit to watch a little, and to me|ditate in his heart of those things that belong vnto God. For it is not absurde in such necessitye to make an oratory of thy bedde, as that holy Prophet did, who said:

I cause my bedde euerye night to Psal. 6. swimme, and water my couch with teares. For as it is not inconue|nient to sit praying, when as the weakenesse of the body will not suffer any other way: so neyther is it absurd to lie and pray in bed, when as necessity, or vrgent rea|son doeth constraine it. Let thy soule bee bended and prostrated before the presence of God: and let thy body haue that forme and fashion, it maye haue: for that the best composition of the bo|dy, which doth not hinder deuo|tion. If it may be, let the man that is weake be halfe cloathed, that he may sit in his bed, if so be his weakenesse be so great that hee cannot rise.
It verye much helpeth mor|ning prayer, if a man before hee goe to sleepe doth some|what giue himselfe to prayer:

for in the morning hee shall finde in his heart the fruite of that seed, which hee sowed the night be|fore. Therefore that man doth A Simily. very well, that alwaies goeth to bed with some holie Meditation in his minde, as hee that at night couereth the coales in the ashes, that in the morning when he ry|seth, he may the more easily make a fire. And to preserue this fire the better, it is profitable, that as ofte~ at thou awakest in the night, foorth with to lift vp thine heart to God, saying. Glory bee to the Father, c. or some such like verse; for this shal very much help not onely to this which we speak of, but also to driue away vayne fansies  wanto~ thoughts which are sent of the deuill: for at this time he is wont to bee more bu|sie about a man, then at other times.

Wherefore Saint Hierome saith, that euen to the holy and sanctifi|ed bed of Dauid, which euerye night hee had wont to water with his teares, the deuill had accesse with all the pompe of his pleasure's
In the morning, when wee a wake, As soone as we awake we must thinke of God. as soone as wee open our eyes, let our heartes bee powred foorth in the remembraunce of God, before any other cogitation doth possesse them: for then the soule is so tender, and so well dis|posed, that it presently assumeth the first thought, which is offe|red: and apprehendeth it so firm|ly, that it can hardly be remooued from it, or receiue any other.
Therefore it is necessary, that wee haue recourse to the good seede, least the euill seede possesse the ground of our heartes. Of such weight is this counsell, that

the busines of the whole day de|pendeth of this moment. For thi being ordered after this manne the morning praier shalbe mor feruent and deuout: and vndoub|tedly as the morning praier i such shalbe the whole course o the day: according to that, which is written in the booke of Iob If thou wilt early seeke vnto God and pray to the Almighty: if tho Iob. 8. be pure and vpright, then surely h will awake vp vnto thee, and he wi make the habitation of thy righte|ousnesse prosperous.
In like maner a place close an solitary, is the fittest for praier: fo A place fit for praier. our lord in the night we~t out int desert places to pray, not that h had anye neede thus to prepar himselfe, or to seeke opportunity but that he might giue vs an exa~|ple what we ought to doe. For  closenesse and obscurity had no

much profited, that the heart by he eies should not wander, Saint Anthony had not blamed the Su~, when it rose: for by the bright|es of his beames it hindered the xed atte~tiuenes of his co~te~platio~.
The disposition also of the bo|dy doth bring much help, to the A fit dispo|sition of body is to be kept in praier. fting vp of the spirit, and to stir p deuotion. Our Sauiour (albe|t he needed not) sometime prai|d vnto his father, lying prostrate pon the earth: sometime his eies ifted vp to heauen. Such a like hing is read of S. Martin, who ying saide: Suffer me to lifte vp ine eies to heauen, that my spi|it may directly go vnto the lord. Cassianus writeth of the Fathers of Egypt, that oftentimes in the mid of their morning praiers, they rostrated the~selus vpo~ the erth, with admirable deuotio~ worship|ping the Lord:  forthwith with

great alacraty they raysed vp the~|selues, that it seemed not so much the easing and refreshing of their bodies, as the adoration and reue|rence of the diuine Maiestie.
According to these examples, he that prayeth, ought somtimes to vse such like iestures and cere|monies, that his heart with grea|ter facility may bee lifted vp to God: seeing that we see that no meane fruites are deriued from it.
It is good for a man sometimes with lowly humility of spirit to prostrate himself vpon the earth, adoring with all the blessed spi|rits that infinite and incompre|hensible Maiestie, who casting downe their crownes before the throne of God and the Lambe: giue glory vnto God,  acknow|ledge Apoc. 4. that whatsoeuer they haue, they receiued it from him.

When we pray we ought also to Cerimonies in prayer are not to be repre|hended. lift vp our eyes towards heauen, which ceremonies, seeing that our Sauiour himself so oftentimes vsed, they ought not to be repre|hended, but obserued, as exam|ples left vnto vs of our Master  Teacher. For albeit God is pre|sent euery where, yet heauen is his proper place, in which hee doth those works, which he doth not in other places.
Heere the reader is to be admo|nished, that it is not alwaies ne|cessary to pray with be~ded knees, seeing that by this meanes our de|uotion is often times hindred, by reason of the griese and weaknes of the body. True it is, y^t it is good to suffer some affliction in praier, seeing that the Lord in his sacri|fice, suffered so great thinges for our sins: yet this is not the chiefest fruite of praier, for in comparison

of the light, and sweetnes of ver|tue, which god bestoweth in prai|er, the griefe of the body, and cor|porall exercise seeme very small. Therfore in the time of praier let the composition and ordering of thy body be such, as may be both for thy health, and that thy soule may be quiet, and fixed vpon god alone; especially when the time of thy praier is longer, that is, of two or three houres, (as it is the custome of some) seeing that few are found, who are able to bear so long paine and griefe, without diminishing and abating of deuo|tion, which is especially required in this exercise.
I know  confesse that al these things are not of any such speciall conseque~t: yet they are co~ducent  auailable to our purposed end. For euen as rhetoritia~s, that wold co~pile  frame a perfect oration,

are not content with teaching the matters themselues alone, which are the very strength and sinewes of the oration: but also they vse o|ther maner of variations, which are not of the substance of the o|ration: as apt structure  compo|sition, fit concourse and conioy|ning of vowels and consonants, tropes, schemes, figures, c. For these make the oration perfect  absolute: so also we frame  form here an other oration celestiall  heauenly, which we are to de|claime in the presence of the de|uine maiesty: it is meete therfore, that we should omitte nothing, whether it be much, or litle, which is conducent vnto the essence and perfection of it: especially seeing that there is nothing in this kinde of discipline, which ought to bee called small or little.



THE TWELVETH thing, which stirreth vp Deuoti|on, is corporall austeritie, or exercise. CHAP. XV.
BEside al those things, which hetherto we haue spoken of, afflictions and corporall troubles and greeuances are profitable to excite and stirre vp Deuotion: as are fasting, discipline, vnsoft and rowgh apparrel, watching, a hard bed, and sober and slender dyet. Frist because such exercises are fomentations and nourishers of Prayer and Deuotion: Secondly because they are pillers and bases, on which they leane: Thirdly, for the common rule: which is, that A common rule. God doth bestow his grace vpon euery one, as he is fit to receiue it.

For none can deny, but that he is more fit and better disposed, who prepareth himselfe together both in spirit  body, then he that one|ly prepareth himselfe in spirit.
We must here know, that there are two wayes of preparing and Two waies of prepa|ring our solues vnto prayer. disposing our selues to receiue grace: one false, the oeher true. The false way is, when as a man onely in word, and with a luke warm desire doth seeke for God, without the true  internal sigh|ing and sobbing of the soule. And this is the reason, why many doe seeke for God,  do not find him: do aske,  not receiue. And in this slender  cold desire they alwaies liue  neuer finde God: because they seeke him not with all their heart, as he ought to be sought of them, who desire to find him, ac|cording to that of the Prophet. Ye Ier. 29. shall seeke me, and finde me, because

ye shall seeke me with all your heart. This is the second way of dispo|sing  preparing our selues, which here the Prophet noteth: that is, whe~ we seek for God, with a true  in ward desire,  with labor  affliction of heart. Of which God speaketh by his Prophet Ioel, say|ing. Turn you vnto me with al your hart,  with fasting,  with weep|ing, Rael. 2.  with mourning:  rent your hart,  not yourclothes,  turn vn|to the lord your god. In which place we are to note, y^t as the euil which outwardly appeareth not, either is not seen, or is not an euill indeed, or very small: so y^e inward afflictio~ of the spirit, except it outwardly break forth,  doth also afflict the body, is ether feined, or very smal. But that which doth so mightily afflict y^e spirit, that it doth also affl|ict the body, that istruly  indeed worthy to be called afflictio~,  of this the Prophet speaketh.

He that seeketh god with such an affectio~, let him assure himselfe, y^t God wil not hide himself fro~ him, but will be found of him. So the Niniuites sought him, when they fasted, mourned,  were cloathed Iomas. 3. with sackcloth: wherefore at the length they fou~d him. So the Pro|phet Daniel sought him, as he te|stifieth of himself:
At the same time, saith he, I Dani. 10. Daniell was in heauinesse for three weekes of daies, I eate no plea|sant bread, neither came flesh, in my mouth, neither did I  myselfe at al, till three weekes of daies were fulfilled. Which time being finished, hee faith that an Angel appeared vnto him in a ter|rible shape, whome in the same place, he describeth among other things saying: Feare not daniel: for from the first day that thou diddest set thine heart to vnderstand

 to humble thyself before thy God, thy woordes were heard,  I am come for thy words. See how plain|ly in this place the Scriture testi|fieth, what deuout prayer can do, when as corporal affliction is ioy|ned vnto it.
We read of that holy Euange|licall sinner, that being drowned Ioh. 20. as it were with teares, she sought the Lord in the Sepulcher: wher|fore she receiued comfort before all others, because before al other, shee sought the Lord with great affection.
But what do I speake of teares so godlye, when as the sackcloth of peruerse and wicked King A|chab, could so moue the diuine eyes  brest, as to reuoke, or at the least to defer the sentence de|nounced against him  his house?
To be briefe, as often as the Scripture remembreth that the

children of Israel mourned, fasted,  cryed vnto God, it addeth, that they were heard,  deliuered fro~ the danger they were in: wherby it most manifestly apeereth, that these are great helps to find God. Wherupon a Schoole man saith, that almost no grace descendeth into the soule of man except it e by prayer, affliction,  corporall tribulation.
There are many kindes of affli|ctions Whence the griefe of the soule in prayer a|ryseth.  austerenes of life, most acceptable vnto God  most co~|uenient to obtain grace by, which take their original from the great griefe, which the soule co~ceiueth, because she hath offended so high  exelle~t a goodnes,  also from the impatient longing desire of the soule. These teares  afflicti|ons, which are deriued from cha|rity  humility are very accepta|ble vnto GOD, as testifieth the

Prophet, who saith. The dead that ar. 2. are in the graues,  whose soules are out of their bodies, giue vnto the lord neither praise nor righteousnes: but the soule that is vexed for the great|nes of sinne,  he that goeth crook|edly,  weake,  the eyes that faile, and the hungry soule will giue thee praise and righteousnes, O Lord.
The pittifull and fatherly heart of god doth not long suffer the soule afflicted with the loue and long|ing for of her spouse, to be discon|solate, and destitute of comfort: but doth help her,  minister co~|solation vnto her. When as the mother seeth her child weeping,  desiring gugawes with teares, her hart cannot brooke that the request of her child shuld be long deferred, and that he should be hurt with weeping; but foorth|with she giueth him that hee de|sireth, and for which hee wept.

What then will he doe, that offe|red himselfe for Israell with farre greater affection, then that of the mother, who saith: Though the Esay. 49. mother forget her child of her womb yet will I not forget thee. What wil he doe, if hee doth not open the breast of his grace, and the bo|some of his mercy, and fill vs full, who saith: Yee shall sucke at my Esay. 66. breasts, ye shalbe born vpon mysides, and be ioyfull vpon my knees. After this manner they must seeke for the diuine grace: who would find it: and if they thus seeke for it, they shall be sure to finde it. For Salomon doth often promisse this in his Prouerbs: as when he saith, Pro. 8. thr they at the length shall finde Wisedome, who dayly watch at her gates, and giue atten|daunce at the poastes of her doores: insinuating by thys man|ner of speaking, that he that wold

finde her, must seek her as she is to be sought: but he seeketh her as she is to be sought, who seeketh her, not onely with the desire of spirit, but also with the labour  affection of the bodye. And here we must be circumspect and wary that all these things be done with wisedome  discretion.


THE WOORKES OF mercy are the thirteenth  last thing that encrease Deuotion. CHAP. XVI.
THE woorkes of mercy be|sids their fruite do also bring much ayd  help vnto deuotion. For albeit at a blush they seeme to make the soule lesse feruent, by reason of the sundrye businesses which happe~ in exercising them

yet they bring none other hurt, hen that water is wont to bring, which is sprinckled vp on an hot glowing gad of iron, which altho|gh A Simily. it seeme to coole the hot bur|ing iron, yet at the length it cau|th it to burne the more vehe|ently. For as God is faithful,   friend of mercy,  gracious to ose that are mercifull: so also is e carefull that his faithful  reli|ious seruaunt be not hindred in is prayer, who riseth from the ta|e, that he may minister vnto the eed of his neighbour. Therefore e Angel said to Tobias: Prayer good with fasting  almes: it is Tob. 12. tter to giue almes, then to lay vp lde. For those which exercise alms  righteousnes, shall be filled with e. And a little after; When thou dst pray with teares  didst bury e dead,  didst leaue thy dinner to de the dead in thy house in the day

time, and to bury them in the nigh I did present thy prayer before th Lord. Neyther oughtest tho onely to preferre the necessity  charitye before corporall meat but also (if need be) before spiri|tuall. For as Barnarde saith, h that leaueth spiritual consolatio that he may releeue his neighb so often as he doth this, so ofte spiritually he layeth downe h soule for him. And this is after  certaine manner to bee seperat from Christ for the brethren: it Rom. 9. for a time to bee seperated fro the conuersation, and sweete fe|lowship of Christ, that the br|thren may be benefitted. Th that are seperated from Christ a|ter this manner, at the length |ceiue all blessings, together greater aboundance. For God the length doth measure vn them by theyr owne measure, 

being mercifull vnto them, who ue shewed mercy to theyr ighbors, and fed their bodyes, cording to that of Salomon. The Pro 11. erall person shall haue plenty: and  that watereth, shall also haue ine.


F THOSE THINGS that hinder Deuotion. CHAP. XVII.

Eeing that we haue ple~tifully spo|ken of those thinges, which stirre  and encrease Deuotion: order re|ireth, that we also speake of those ngs, which are wont to hinder it: t euery way, and on euery side we y succour and help the studies,  ercises of Godly and well disposed n.


OF THE FIRST IM|pediment  hindrance of De|uotion, which is sin.
THe cheefe  principall im|pediment, which now wee will speake of, is sinne: neither onely that which y^e world is com|monly ashamed of, as being gros and heynous, but also that, whic for the most part, men make  conscience nor scruple to co~mit as esteeming it small  of no rec|koning.
Of the first we will not speak of in this place, because no ma doubteth, but that it hindreth a good in the soule: but wee w onely intreate of the second, be|cause it is the propertie of thes sinnes also to coole charitye, an therefore to extinguish the he of Deuotion.

Therfore it is requisite and be|hooueful that a deuout man make continuall war with this kinde of sinnes, which albeit they seeme small, yet they are not to bee ac|counted so, seeing that God hath forbidden them.
For as it is very well saide of Saint Hierome, we must not one|ly looke what is commaunded, but also who it is, that com|maundeth, that is, God; who as vndoubtedly hee is not smal, so hath he giuen no small com|maundement, albeit there is a difference betweene the com|maundementes: seeing also we are not ignorant, that in the day of iudgement wee must render  reason of euery idle word. For e that feareth God, neglecteth ot any thing, although it bee mall.
Furthermore wee muste haue

a regard, that there ought be great purity in the soule, into which God powreth the most precious oyntment of Deuotion: for a precious stone is not inclosed or set in earth, but in golde: ney|ther doth God put his Soue|raygne balme, but into a pure soule, cleane and free from filthy and enormous corruption. There|fore it is necessary that a man haue alwaies in his hand a ra~ging siffe, or a fine boulter, that he may wel sift and boult ouer all his actions, and diligently view, with what intente, and howe hee doth a thinges, that in all thinges h may bee pure from vanity an sinne.
Theyr opinion is diligently to bee eschewed and auoyded who are wont to saye: th sinne is not vnpardonable n

haynous, therefore it is of no great moment, if it be commit|ted.
What woman will saye to her husband; I will not bee an euill wife vnto thee, neyther will I pollute thy marryage bed: yet in other thinges I will doe, as pleaseth mee, although I shall knowe that I shall dis|please thee?
Who would or could dwell with such a woman? Such sure|lye are they, that of great and vast sinnes make a conscience, but of little make no reckoning Ecclesiasticus sayth, that he that maketh small account of little thinges, shall fall by little and little.
As a liuing body, not one|lye feareth death, but also Feauers, Woundes, yea and he Itche, and Scabbes also

albeit they bee small: so a soule, that liueth in grace, not onely feareth and abhorreth grosse and haynous sinnes, but also those, that seeme of lesser moment  doe make way and entrance to those that be grosser.
Therefore hee that seriously studieth and endeuoureth to at|taine deuotion, he must auoyde  eschew all sin, as well that which seemeth lesse, as that which is greater, that hee may lift vp pure handes in prayer, and that the feruour of Charity may al|waies liue in him.



THE SECOND IMPE|diment is the remorse of conscience. CHAP. XVIII.
AN impediment contrary to the former is too much scru|pulositie and too much griefe,  anxiety of hart, which some doe conceiue by reason of the sinne, they haue fallen into. For this of|tentimes doth bring more harme then the sinne it selfe. For seeing that it is the property of sinne to bring remorse and sting of consci|ence, there are some so subiect to this euill, that their hearts are fil|led with exceeding bitternes, hea|uines and griefe; neyther can they nowe enioy that Diuine sweet|nesse and quiet, which Prayer re|quireth.

Furthermore seeing that sinne is like vnto deadly poyson, which speedyly pearceth the heart, killeth the spirites, and bring|eth death, there be some, that falling into a sinne, are foorth|with so vanquished in minde that they lose all theyr inward strength, which before they had attained to worke well.
For as there is nothing, which doth more stirre vs vp vnto good, then the vigour and strength of the heart, so there is nothing, which doth more ex|tinguish heate and feruour in vs, then the weakenes and faint|ing of the same.
For this cause the Holy Fa|thers in the wildernesse were wont in times past to admonish their Disciples, that they should alwayes stand armed with this courage and fortitude of minde,

for by this meanes a man as it were leaning on a strong staffe, is prepared and readye to all thinges which are to bee done: but to him that faynteth or casteth downe his courage, the contrary hapneth.
Wherefore it is the common opinion of many, that moe, re|ceiue greater harme of an indis|creete estimation of sinne, then of the sinne it selfe.
This indiscreete remorse of Whence too much re|morse of conscience ariseth. conscience doth somtimes spring and arise from faint-hartednes:  sometimes from a certaine secret pride, which closely perswadeth a man that he is some body, and therfore y^e he ought not to fal into such a defect: to whom humility pro~pteth the co~trary: to whom it is no maruel if there be slidings into many defectes; for humility hath alwaies set before her eyes her

owne weaknes, and doth medi|tate on it.
This faint-hartednes also is sometimes deriued from hence, that a man doth not knowe the grace and efficacy of the redemp|tion of Christ, nor the vertue of the medicine, which he hath left vnto vs in his death and passion for the healing of this defect, and remedying of this feare.
Therefore let this be the first The first remedy a|gainst too much scru|pulositie. remedye against this euill, to knowe the Lorde, and the price, and vertue of his merits, least we at anytime cast away the hope of the Diuine mercy, whether it be in great sinnes, or in little.
Saint Iohn doth cherish this hope, when he saith: My babes 1. Ioh. 2. these thinges write I vnto you, that ye sinne not: and if any man sinne, wee haue an Aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christe

the Iust. And he is the recon|cilation for our sinnes: and not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world.
What diffidence and di|strust can then hurte or annoye thee, being shadowed with these winges, and couered with the merites of so greate an inter|cessour? All the sinnes in the worlde, if they bee compared with the merites of Christ, are nothing else, but a little light chaffe cast into the fire.
Why then dooest thou dis|courage thy selfe, seeing that such satisfaction, and so great merits are so liberally and freely offered vnto thee?
Thou wilt saye, because I offende euery day, and euerye ower, neyther doe I at anye time amend my selfe. Tell me, f Christ should dayly suffer for

thy sinnes, which thou daylye committest; is there any reason that thou shouldst dispaire? Thou wilt aunsweare, Noe: Therefore assuredly perswade thy selfe, that that death so long agoe per|formed is no lesse profitable, theu if it weredayly offered: for the Apostle sayth, that that high Priest by one oblation, Heb. 10. whych hee offered vppon the Crosse, hath clensed and sanc|tified vs for euer: he hath left that in hys Sacrifice for vs, that it may bee a perpetuall medicine and treasure vnto vs.
Thou wilt obiect againe, and say: I offend and sinne dayly, albeit God dayly powreth and heapeth his blessings and graces vppon mee, therefore I can|not but distrust, and fall from hope.

I tell thee in veritye and truth, that as nothing can bee found that doth more manyfest the mali|tiousnesse of man, then that manner of multiplying sinnes, when as the Diuine benefittes are incessantly powred vpo~ him: so also there is nothing founde, wherein the greatnesse of the Diuine goodnesse doth more appeare, then in this, that God doth without ceasing showre downe his benefittes vpon him, that blusheth not without cea|sing to offend him.
Our sinnes sayth Paule, doe manyfest the Diuine goodnesse: for neyther in Heauen, nor in Earth, nor among Fowles, nor Fishes, neyther in Hearbes nor Flowers, doth the Noblenesse nd brightnesse of the bowels nd mercy of God more excel|entlye shyne, then in thys,

that hee suffereth and forgiueth By the mul|titude of sinnes the goodnes of God is knowen. sinnes.
For if wisely and prudentlye thou knowest to vse the daunge|rous and pernitious taste of sinne, as some poyson, thou mayest make a medicine of it, by ascen|ding vp from it to that supreme goodnes, which with so great benignity suffereth thy sinnes, al|beit they are so many, and so great, that thou who committest them art not able to beare them, and although thou art wearye in bearing them, yet God is not wearye in pardoninge of them.
Therefore let the bitter pilles bee gilded ouer with the honnye of this consideration, that the too much bitternesse which is in them, may not bee tasted. Which if it be done, thou shalt manytimes tast greater sweetnes

by the consideration of this good|nes, then bitternesse by the medi|tation of thine owne wickednes. Wherefore in this case thou must doe that, which a faithfull seruant doth, who albeit he be rude and negligent, yet he hath a good and gratious Lorde, if he commit a fault; on the one side he begin|neth to tremble for his offence, but on the other side he remem|breth that hee hath a Lord full of clemency, who so often hath par|doned his offences, thereupon he hopeth, that with the same cle|mency he was woont to forgiue his former trespasses, he will also now winke at these present. Ther|fore when he doth call to minde these things, he turneth the feare and griefe, which the memorye of his sins brought forth, into ioy, which he feeleth by the conside|ration of the goodnes of his Lord.

Thy consideration ought to bee like this, as often as too much sorrow for thy sinnes doth afflict and oppresse thee: for thou do|ing this, of poyson thou shalt make for thy selfe a preseruatiue and a remedy against poyson, and thou shalt pul out the eies of thine enemy, and kill him with his own sword, and thou shalt take occa|sion of greater strength and cou|rage of those same things, which were woont to bee the causes of greater feare and trembling. If thou draw thy water thorow this channell, thou shalt water two excellent vertues, charity and hu|mility: whilest of the sinne, in|to which thou diddest fall, thou takest occasion to humble thy selfe, more manifestly acknow|ledging thine owne misery: and to loue him with a more ardent loue, vpon whose goodnes thou

doest so greatly trust,  certainly perswadest thy selfe that he will pardon and forgiue thy sins.
Furthermore we are to know, Two kind of sinnes. that there are two kinde of sins, greatly differing betweene them|selues. For there be some that sin vnwillinglye against their pur|pose and deliberation, of very weakenesse or negligence; or of the inclination, and euill habit, which remaineth in the soule, of|tentimes drawing a man vnto e|uil, before he be aware. Others are of a larger conscience, who if they abstaine from grosse and hainous sinnes, they make no conscience of those that be smaller, neyther haue they any purpose to auoyde the~: but they will eat, drink, walk and talke, that they maye spend and passe away the time, by which things they consume much time vnprofitably, and often fall into

many sins, which can very hardly be auoided in so great security  idlenes of minde. These, as long as they continue in this minde, shall neuer attaine remission of sins, for they haue no true pur|pose to leade an vpright life, but rather to continue in dissolute li|uing.
It cannot be denied, but that such like men liue in great daun|ger: for he that hath not a good and true purpose to preuaile, and ouercome all sinnes, he liueth in great daunger of damnation. For euen as he that lieth in the midst of a swift riuer, if he doth not la|bour to take fast footing, and raise vp his body, is in daunger to bee borne downe, and swallowed vp of the water: so in this spirituall life, which is like a deepe  dan|gerous riuer, he liueth in manye ieopardies of falling, who with

tooth and naile doeth not labour o profit and goe forwarde in it. They that offende after the first maner, that is (as we haue saide) either of forgetfulnesse, or of lack of good heede taking, these more easily returne vnto themselues,  obtaine pardon: for it is not in he power of man, although hee e perfect, to eschewe and auoid all kinde of sinnes: for as the wise|man saith, the righteous man fal|eth seuen times in a day, and so of|en Prou. 24. riseth againe. And Saint Au|gustine saith: Not the holiest man De Dog|mat. Eccl. s without sinne: neyther for this doth he leaue to be a righteous  a holy man, seeing that in his af|fection  purpose he preserueth and retaineth sanctity.
The Apostle willing to signi|fie vnto vs these, and other diffe|rences of sinne, saith, That vpon 1. Cor. 3. the foundation of the Church, which

is Christ, some doe builde golde, sil|uer, pretious stones; others tim|ber, haye, and stubble: and that euerie mans woorke shall be made manifest. For the daye of the Lorde, saith he, shall declare it, because it shall bee reuealed by the fire: and the fire shall trie euerye mans worke of what sort it is. They that haue builded gold, siluer,  pretious stones, they haue no cause to feare the fire: but they that haue builded timer, hay  stubble: their workes cannot but burn: yet so, that the timber doth burne longer then hay, and haye then stubble, which is consumed in the twinckling of an eie.
We haue drawen out this dis|course the longer, that we might minister effectuall medicines and remedies vnto those that are faint-hearted, and doe despaire. But because man is a creature

so blinde and weake, that often|mes he maketh of a medicine oyson, and knoweth not so to unne one extreame, that he fall ot into an other; it seemeth ood vnto me here in the ende f this Chapter to admonish, that his plaister is not ordayned nor ade for them, who are too old and confident, but for those hat be faint-harted and distrust|ull. Therefore if an audatious nd presumptuous man take this, e shall do none other thing, the~ f he tooke a confection made for he health of a colde man, and se it for the recouery of a hotte man.
Neyther doe we here teache hat weakelings and those that bee faint-hearted should alwaies abstaine from griefe and remorse of conscience for sinne, which is as a wholesome shamefastnesse

and correction, whereby we are held back, that we do not fal into the same againe: but so we teach, that they might not disturbe the peace of their harts, which is the center and place, in which God resteth. Griefe for sinne is good, but it must haue a moderation, least it runne into one of the ex|treames. Therefore the Apostle exhorteth the Corinthians, that they shoulde comforte him that was penitent; not because he e|steemed heauines and sorrow for sin vnprofitable or euill, which in that place hee commendeth by many reasons, but least that peni|tentiary should be swallowed vp with too much heauines,  least he should despaire, who was so afflicted. And this is that, which we teach in this place.



HE THIRD IMPE|diment is too much scrupulosity or anxiety. CHAP. XIX.
N like manner the scruples,  which do arise of sins, are wont ightely to hinder deuotion, by eason of the great vnquietnesse, which they bring with them. For ose that be scrupulous and ten|er of conscience are alwaies sad nd heauy, they wither  pine a|waye themselues, whether they eeld and agree vnto sinne, or not eelde: or whether they pray or ot pray: and so in other like mat|ers, which exceedingly hinder  isturbe the peace and tranquilli|y of the hart, in which god dwel|eth. For if the bed, in which the eauenly spouse lyeth be greene

and fresh flourishing, as it is saide in the Canticles, how can he re Cant. 1. in a hart, that is ouergrowen with scruples and pensiue cares, which are as thornes and nettles? But because it is not sufficient to haue saide that the scruples are to bee taken away, vnlesse a remedy be ministred against them, therfore it is necessary that we speake as well of the one, as of the other, least this doctrine be halting and vnperfect.
The causes of these scruples  Causes of scrupulosi|ty and an|xiety. anxieties are diuers, as the reme|dies of them are sundry. For God sometimes leaueth this passion in his, as he doth other griefes and tribulations, that by them hee might purge and cleanse his chil|dren from their drosse, or that a more excellent crowne might be prepared and prouided for them. And therfore there is no greater

consolation, or remedy that can ee giuen to these men, besides hat, which generally is woont to e giuen in all kinde of troubles  afflictions, of which medicines nd remedies the whole Scrip|ure is full. Sometimes they arise f melancholy, which is a humor ffecting the imaginatio~ and the ppetite with diuers passions of eauinesse and superfluous feare, from which proceede diuers and sundry scruples and disquietnesse of conscience. When this scrupu|osity ariseth from this melancho|icall humor, then the doctrine of Hyppocrates (as saith S. Hierome) is more profitable for thee, then that, which can be deliuered of vs. Some scruples also take their originall from selfe loue,  from that that men cannot distinguish betweene the thought of the hart, and the consent of the will: and

therefore it often happeneth, th they take one for another,  th that they haue grieuously offe|ded, when they haue not. For t too much loue, by which a m embraceth himself, causeth, tha man mightily feared that, whe he feareth da~ger:  this too muc loue being ioyned with y^e foresai ignorance, oftentimes maketh t feare where no feare is, ofte~time also by the craft and subtiltye  the deuill these scruples and spi|cednes of conscience are stirre vp, who when hee cannot expe the feare of God out of the soul of Christians, he maketh them t abuse it, and to feare not true dan|gers, but false and those that ar so onely in shewe. So that if hee cannot drie vp the vaine of liuing water, which God doth make to flowe and streame in our soules, he dilige~tly laboureth that it may

breake foorth in a wrong place, hat the wholsome plants of ver|ue may not be watred by it. This was the craft of that cruell tyrant Holofernes, who besiedging y^e ci|y of Bethulia, when he could not rie vp their fountaines, he caused he conduit pipes to be cut in sun|er, by which the water was con|ayed into the city,  so the wa|er running an other way, was of o vse vnto the inhabitants. Fur|hermore some become scrupu|ous, because they know not fully he goodnes of our god, nor that great desire, by which he thirsteth fter the saluation of men, especi|lly of those, which seeke after it. Wherefore they become very in|rious to the diuine goodnes: ne|er do they thinke that of God, which is to be thought: but they eal with God, as with som crafty  malitious Iudge, who seeketh

cauils and forgeries, that he may denye iustice vnto the accused, These are ignoraunt with what great desire God wisheth the sal|uation of men, not withstanding they know of the thirst that tor|mented him hanging vppon the Crosse: which thirst more afflict|ed him, then the Crosse it selfe: for he co~plained not of the crosse, but of the thirst. They lesse also vnderstand, what God chiefely desireth of a man for his thankes|giuing; that is, a heart well dis|posed, and ready to beare al kind of tribulations, rather then to of|fend God. For if a man would well vnderstand this, and woul finde such a purpose and resoluti|on in himselfe, as by the grace  God they finde, who would no commit one sin for the gaine  the whole world, he would not  easily admit such scruples  anxi|eties:

not being ignorant that he ath in his soule a pledge of ami|y so rich, and the fauour of God o plentifully.
Among other remedies, which Remedies against scrupulosi|ty. re wont to be giue~ against scru|ulosity, the first  principall is, u~bly to submit himselfe to other ens iudgme~t,  not to refuse to e gouerned by others. For our Lord, who faileth vs not in neces|ary things,  who denieth to no reature, that which te~deth to his reseruation, he would haue this emedye most effectuall against his griefe, y^e is, whe~ as man ca~not gouern himselfe by his own reaso~, hat he yeeld himselfe to be ruled y anothers wisdome. For in such  state a man ought not to beleue imselfe, because he is mistrustful, either ought he to be his owne hisician, albeit he be learned, ecause he is sicke and weake.

It helpeth also to the cure of this griefe, with all might  main to endeuour, that no place bee giuen to scruples and anxieties, neither that we yeelde vnto their suggestions. For as that is the best way to driue danger from cattell, A Simily. to keepe them from feeding in da~gerous places: so also it is need|full that we doe, if we wil driue a|way the daungers of a scrupulous heart: especially seeing that we knowe that scruples are of that quality, that by the same waye, we open the gate to one, we o|pen it also to others, so that a man may continue in this scru|pulositye all the dayes of his life.
It is a cause of scrupulositie, as we saide before, not to know the difference betweene thought and consent, but the one is ta|ken to bee as haynous as the o|ther,

which is a notable collusi|n of the Deuill. A sinful thought  not so deadly, as the victorye uer it is profitable, if it be forth|with expelled by the feare of God, or the memory of Christ rucified, because an enemy is uerthrowen and subdued. But  the matter proceede so farre, at a man giueth consent to his full thought, and determineth ctually to effect it, if time and lace be giuen, this is haynous  deede. And it is requisite to e knowne, for such a consent is Deliber|tiue con|sent. thing so filthy, frequent, and mmon among all men, that e|ry man (if so he will) may ea|y knowe, what is the difference etweene a simple thought, and a eliberatiue consent vnto it: for hat other thing is this, then ig|miniously to deale with God d to make man being marked

with the charecter of God to re|bell against him, and to viola his commandements.
There is an other degree mo Cogitatio morosa. subtill then the sormer, whi the deuines call a peeuish, oue thwarte, and morose thought and it is a deliberatiue consent not in the acte externall, b in the delight of the inward thought: that is, when as a m of sette purpose doeth persi in a cogitation, and doeth d|light himselfe in it, althoug hee desireth not to effect it  externall acte: of which  Spanyardes are woont to say albeit he doeth not drinke in  Inne, yet he delighteth to b conuersant in it. Here the scup|lous are wont to stumble, and  take occasions of anxietye a scrupulosity.
These differences are exact

 be knowen, that we maye the etter auoyde scruples and mi|akings, but especially the latter, eing exceeding daungerous, in ing both a deliberatiue consent ith delight, and a doubling both ith God and man.
But because in this matter ma|ye nice subtilties were to bee oode vppon, which scholasti|ll deuines doe copiously han|e, I will only here speake that, hich one of them remembreth, at this sinne doth not happen, t to a man without a soule, at is, to him that liueth with|ut the feare of God, who, al|eit hee outwardlye cease from ne, yet he doeth not that for ods sake, or in respect of con|ience, but in regarde of ho|ur, of the woorlde, or his wne proper commodity: For is man seeing hee dare not

offend publikely, he doth that he maye, delighting himselfe with filthy and vncleane thoughts, en|ioying a fantasticall delight, and an imaginarie pleasure, that af|ter some maner hee may satisfie himselfe.
By these and such like ende|uours and studies a man may be cured of his scrupulosity: which albeit it seeme incurable in some, yet it may be cured: especially in those, that humbly submit them|selues to others iudgement: such we see often cured, and re|stored to their right wits and former sound|nes.



THE FOVRTH IMPE|diment is any other bitternes or heauines of heart. CHAP. XX.
NOt onely the irkesomenesse  heauines of minde, which ariseth of scruples, but generally euery displeasure and bitternes of hart, which proceedeth of anger, pensiuenesse, or of any such like roote, doth bring great hinde|rance vnto deuotion. For seeing that bitternesse and sweetenesse are contrary, it is certaine that it is most difficult, yea impossible, that the bitternesse of sin, and the sweetenesse of deuotion, (which is sweeter then all other delicates of the soule) can remaine toge|ther in one and the selfe-same heart. Wherfore Saint Augustine

saide: Thou seest that thine ha is a vessell full of gall: there|fore if thou desirest to fill it with honny, it is necessary that tho first empty out all the gall. An the holy Apostle admonisheth, that we should purge, and ca out of our heartes all heauinesse and bitternesse: which as they fight with charity, so also they extinguish all the feruour of it, and the ioye of deuotion. Th proper place, which God dwel|leth in, is a milde and peaceable soule: therefore it behooueth v that we cast out al that disturbeth that peace and tranquility: least that heauenly guest depart out of it. Therefore it is meete and re|quisite that we be alwaies arme with a good purpose, that we will not euer hereafter open th gate to anye yrkesome or bitte thought: and if by chance any

breake into our house, that wee presently with all speede caste it foorth again: Casting, as the Pro|phet saieth, all our care vpon God, Psal. 54. nd enlarging our hearts, to re|eaue and beare all kinde of tri|ulation, with a faith inuincible nd a hope vndaunted.


THE FIFT IMPEDI|ment is externall comfort and sensuall delight. CHAP. XXI.
THE foure former impedi|ments haue a certaine affini|y between themselues: for either hey are sinnes, or such, as sins are ngendred of.
Nowe also let vs adde other, which although the differ some|what from the former, yet they re as hurtefull to the proc|dings

of deuotion, as the other. Among which, the loue  sweet|nes of comforts reaped by things externall and sensuall, is not the least, which altogether shutteth vppe the gate and entraunce to the loue and sweetenesse of spiri|tuall things. For as no man cal|leth a Chyrurgian to the house A Simily. of a sound man, but to the house of him that is wounded: so God commonly sendeth not his Spi|rit, who is called the comforter, to their houses, that enioy vaine ioy and comfort, but to the hou|ses of them, that be desolate and afflicted for his loue. Giue ye (saieth Salomon) strong drinke The holy spirit is not sent but to those that bee desolate and affli|cted. Prou. 31. vnto him that is ready to perishe, and wine vnto them that haue greefe of heart. Let him drinke, that he may forget his pouerty, and remember his miserye noe more. Therefore to cure this griefe,

God ordained this medicine, which he sendeth not to the house of the whole, but of the sicke. Consolation, saith Barnarde, is a delicate and dainty thing; neither is it giuen to him, that seeketh it without God.
A wife, chast and lawfull, who A Simily. deserueth and is worthy to be lo|ued alone, thinketh an iniury to be done vnto her, if she be loued together with others. So also doth God: A figure of this wee haue in Exodus: for Manna, which had so great sweetnes in it, was Exod. 16. not giuen to the Israelits in the wildernes, before the meale was spent, which was brought out of Egipt: so neyther shall that bread of Angels be giuen vnto man in this exile and banishment, vntill he hath renounced al the delights and comfort of this world.
Humane comfort is a verie in|iurious

stepdame, if any man take it in steed of Diuine consola|tion: therefore it is necessary that it be cast out of doores, least per|haps it be an hindrance vnto the other.
They doe the contrary, who on the one side will partake of the diuine consolation and sweetnes in Prayer: and afterwardes this exercise being ended will enioy worldly delights and pleasures: will eate and drinke daintily, be cloathed sumptuously, and liue in all wantonnesse and delicacy to bee breefe who will so enioy God, that they will not loose nor forgoe the vanitye and do lights of the world. But let them certainely perswade themselues, that they shall neuer profit in the way of the Lord, so long as they walke thus lamely and halting|ly.

Birdes that doe both swimme nd flye in the holy Scriptures are ounted vncleane. And what oe these birdes signifie vnto s? Surely none other thing, then he soule of a delicate and fleshly an, who will both swimme in he riuer of his owne delightes nd pleasures, and contemplate pon Diuine and high mat|ers.
Let no man deceiue himselfe: or as light and darkenesse can|ot bee together, so neyther an humane and Diuine con|olations agree together.
In like manner the fleshe nd the spirit dooe striue and ght in the selfe same man, and ee that will enioy the good of he one, it is necessary, that hee id warre and defiance vnto the ther.
The Prophet Dauid very well

vnderstood this, when hee saith, My soule refused comfort (in earth|ly Psal. 77. matters) I did thinke vpon my God, and I was delighted and pray|ed, and my delight was so great, that my spirit fainted in me. Was this a good change: or wilt thou say that the Prophet was heerein deceiued, when as hee receiued for so small and ridiculous com|forts, so ample and large consola|tions, with which his hart was so filled, that he could not beare the greatnes of them?
This is the cause, why manye come and sit by the fountaine of these delights, without any other delight in the world: for theyr soules are filled vp to the brinke with inward delights. God is Deut. 5. iealous,  with exceeding great feruour doth loue our soules, as he himselfe confesseth: therefore he will not admit other delightes

and externall loues, neither will e that they should be mingled with his.
He therefore that would large|y enioy Diuine and heauenly co~|solations; Let him followe the counsel of Augustine; Let a man leaue all thinges, that he may re|ceiue all thinges: for he shal find all thinges in God: who leaueth all things for God.


THE SIXT IMPEDI|ment is too much carke and care. CHAP. XXII.
THe contrary vnto the impe|diment of delight and plea|sure is this of too much carke and care: yet no lesse hurtefull then that: for cares and pleasures (as Christ saith) are thornes, which Luke. 8.

choke the word of God. Wherfore not without cause it is said of The two rootes of all euill. Saint Barnarde, that necessitie and desire are the two principall rootes of all the euils that be in the world.
For all euils, that are commit|ted in the world are done, ey|ther that necessitie may be auoy|ded, which bringeth punishment, or that some delight may be ob|tained, which procureth ioy. Ther|fore the cares of this necessitye hindreth as well the tast of Deuo|tion, as the quiet of Prayer: for they do so pricke  peirce y^e hart that they do not permit a man to thinke vpon any other thing, the~ of the cause from whence they spring: which alwayes presseth and pricketh the heart, and knocketh at the gate, neyther desisteth, vntill it obtaine that it sought.

Who then can sleep, or rest in he middest of so many Flyes, Waspes, and Frogges, as are n the land of Egipt? Heere sure|y that wish of the Bridegroome n the Canticles was to bee de|sired, that the Spouse may en|oy this sweete sleepe of life, a|mong so many and so diuers perturbations  disturbances of things.
But thou wilt say; Wilt thou A remedy against su|perfluous cares. giue mee any remedy, whereby I may eyther roote out, or chooke these encreasing cares, which so greatlie doe tosse and turmoile my heart? The pre|sentest remedy is, if with all en|deuour thou studiest (as much as is possible) to with drawe thy minde from all sensuall loue of thynges created, for from this loue all cares doe proceed, as we haue shewed before.

Therfore if thou wilt cease, or ra|ther banish al afflicted thoughts, and carefull pensiuenes, labour to mortifie and kill in thee all exter|nall and forraine loues. And al|though many thinges are requi|red that thou mayst liue in thys life without carking and caring, yet they may all be contained in this short sentence. Doe not loue, and thou shalt not bee afflicted: neyther be delighted in the crea|tures, but as God hath willed. Be|leeue me where this hath place, there true delight hath place: a greeuous taxe is set vpon them, that haue theyr loue and delight set vpon the creatures, and much greater are the sorrowes of the bringing foorth, then of the con|ception.
An other remedy is: if we cast all our cares vpon God: hoping most assuredly, that God will

dispose all thinges after the best anner, if we commit them vnto im: for hee hath commaunded hat we should referre all our bu|nes vnto him, and that it should e our onely care, how wee may eep his commaundementes. So id the Spouse in the Canticles; Wherfore she saith, I am my wel|eloueds, Cant. 6.  my welbeloued is mine: e is mine to procure  prouide r me all necessaries: and I am is to doe whatsoeuer pertaineth  his worship and seruice: by hich words is insinuated, that if an will wholy apply himselfe to the worship of his creator, at hee in like manner will bee holy occupied in supplying the ants and needs of his creatures. or the law of God is called in the Why the law of God is called a couenant. criptures a couenant, for no o|er cause, but because such a co~|act is made in it betweene God

and man. When I pray thee did God violate this couenant? When did he faile of his promise? With this embassage onely a certayne holy Father was wont to send a|broad his brethren to preach the word, that they might atte~d their busines with safety and securitye, saying; Cast thy burden vpon th Psal. 55. Lord,  he shal nourish thee. Wh is he among Christians yea albe it he be of the better sort, that ca doe this from his heart? Man men, saith Salomon, will boast, eue|ry Prou. 20. one of his owne goodnes: but wh can find a faithful man? This is on of the vertues most proper vn a true Christian, this begette most ioyfull peace, in this Go proueth and examineth man; an this is it, which man cannot pro|cure vnto himselfe by his own strength and vertue, but it mu bee obtained of the holy Gho

seeing that it is not giuen to any e but by the speciall grace and uour of God. All men cannot ue that steadfast faith of Susan|, who being condemned to ath, in the midst of the stones d the enemies, when the water me euen vp to her lips, and the lter was about her necke, had a aceable and quiet heart,  that  the hope, which shee reposed the Lord.
Perhaps thou wilt say; what shal A question. doe, that I may obtaine this ver|e? Follow after God with that ananitish woman euen to the The answer d: let not thine eye be without teare: labour without inter|ission, vntill thou findest this ecious pearle. Co~sider also how od God is, and how faithfull to em, that hope in him: as hee as to Dauid, Abraham, lacab,  diuers other.

Our Fathers, saith the Prophet, Psal. 22. trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliuer them. They cal|led vpon thee, and were deliuered they trusted in thee, and were  confounded. O ye sonnes, sayth th Wiseman, Looke vpon the natio Eccl. 3. of the people, and knowe, that no haue beene confounded, that hop in the Lord. For who hath conti|nued in his commaundements, an hath beene forsaken? Wilt tho that I shew thee by an example how great the faithfulnes of Go is towards them, who put they trust in him? See how faithf the seruant of God Lt was vn|to those two strangers, whome  had receiued into his house, wh he offered to those wicked Sodo|mits his two daughters being vir|gins, that according to their lust they might abuse them: onel that those two strangers might b

safe, who had reposed theyr trust  him: alleadging no other rea|n, then; That they are come vn|er Gen. 18. the shadowe of my roofe, onely elying vpon my words:  that ey may not bee frustrated of eir hope, beholde I haue twoo aughters, which as yet neuer ne we man, I will bring them orth vnto you, that you may o to them as seemeth you good:  that yee will doe no harme vn| these men, who haue commit|ed themselues to my tuition? What thinkest thou of this faith|lnes? But how much greater do|t thou thinke that the faithful|es of God is? What is in y^e crea|re, which is not found infinitely ore excellent in the Creator?  much greater is the faithfulnes f God then the faithfulnes of ma~,  his goodnes is more excellent en the goodnes of man.

And if the faithfulnes of man stretch thus farre, how farre I pray thee shall the faithfulnes of God reach? Follow in all things, and in all thy businesses and thoughtes the counsell of Saint Angustine, who saith; Cast thy selfe vpon the Lord, and feare not, that hee will hurt thee, or that hee will permit thee to fall: but hee will nourish thee, heale thee and saue thee.


THE SEVENTH M|pediment is the multitude of businesses, especially of stu|dies and contem|platiue specu|lations. CHAP. XXIII.
AS cares and anxieties of Spi|rit doe comber and disturbe deuotion, so also the occupatio

and labours of the body, when hey are too much, doe let and inder it: for those doe oppresse he spirit, that it is hardly able to ray: these doe steale away the me, that it hath no space to ray: so that these two impe|iments doe bring it to passe, hat a man hath neither time, nor pirit to attend vpon this exer|ise.
And albeit all externall occu|ations and businesses doe en|ender and beget this impedi|ent, yet especially the busines f study and learning doth effect  yea although it be of Diuinity, hen it is onely labored in for the Yea the best studies do hinder Deuotion. heory  speculation. For this heory,  speculation of the vn|erstanding is one of y^e businesses oste contrary vnto deuotion: hich sucketh vp all the vertue d iuyce of the soule; maketh

it desolate and leaueth a pleasure so drye and whithered, that it neyther tasteth nor feeleth God. For other occupations and busi|nesses, which are simply corporal, The labors of the hands doe lesse hurt and hinder De|uotion, then the ende|uours of he vnderstan|ding. as are to dig to delue, or to doe any such like thing, doe not hin|der so greatly the handling of those thinges, that belong vnto Deuotion. So the Fathers in the wildernes did exercise tillage and husbandry  made baskets, wa|ling of houses,  mats of wickers and osiers yea singing and pray|ing. The occupations and busi|nesses of the vnderstanding do ill agree with those of the will: vn|lesse they be so ordred, that they may serue for this exercise,  not hinder it: which hapned to the Saints, when they studyed: who by that study did not loose, but rather stirred vp  increased their Deuotion.

But in both businesses a mea|sure and moderatio~ is to be kept, east that whith is lesse, hurt that which is greater: that is, least Martha hurt Mary, who hath hosen the better part. Therefore  certaine holy man admonisheth is brethren, that they should so abour that they extinguish not he spirit of Deuotion, to which all thinges should be seruiceable. And the Wiseman sayth: Get the Wisedome in the time of thy leasure; he shall be filled with Wisedome that wholy attendeth on her: All the Heathen Philosophers doe con|firme this sentence, who say that the soule becommeth wise by easure and interiour rest:  not onely by the interiour rest of the Passions, but also by the exte|riour quiet of labors and occupa|tions.
For these two ought alwaies to

be ioyned together. For as a still and calme water is fitter  more disposed to represent the images of shapes of things, no otherwise then a glasse: so also in a quiet  calme soule, all things are repre|sented most cleerely and perfect|ly. For this cause the deuill vseth all diligence, that he may comber and disturbe the heartes of men with a thousand kinde of busi|nesses, paynting and imagining in them diuers false necessities of life, that they being busied and drowned in them, may haue neyther time nor minde to call vpon God.
We read that Pharaoh dyd the same thinge tipically to the Exod. 5. Children of Israell, who when they sayd that it was comman|ded vnto them of God, that they should goe into the wildernes, that they might sacryfice vnto

him: hee answeared that they were idle, and because they wold ease from their labors, therefore hey deuised this new Deuotion and sanctity: and he commaun|ded that they should be oppressed with labours,  that they should doe them, that they might not remember their Lord God. O how many hath the prince of this world drowned in the labours and workes of vanity, whome he compelleth to seeke and search for stubble throughout all the Land, and night and day to build Turrets and Towers in the mud and lay? who haue not the least leasure or oportunity, to attend vpon God, that they might sa|crifice vnto him the sacrifice of prayer: for they spend the whole tyme of theyr life in the la|boures and woorkes of Pha|raoh.

What did exclude those three inuited from that Euangelicall feast, but too much busines, and superfluous cares? The first sayd I haue bought a farme, and I must needes goe out to see it: And ano|ther Luke. 14. sayd; I haue bought fiue yo of Oxen, and I goe to prooue th The third said; I haue married  wife: and the prouiding for her, and for my family doth not per|mit me to come. And so they al|together were shut out from this most sacred banquet.
Hence it is that men alwayes occupied in earthly labours and businesses, and secluded from the companye and conuersati|on of God, by little and little become wholy carnal, and sence|les in matters belonging to theyr owne saluation.
That thou mayst acknowledge this to bee true, heare with how

greate efficacy, and vehemencie f wordes Saint Bernarde doth In his first booke of considera|tion. estifie that, writing vnto Pope Eugenius: Hence, hence, saith he,  alwaies stood in feare of thee, nd still doe feare: least the re|medye being deferred and thou ot able to sustayne the griefe, hou beest irreuocably drowned  the gulfe of daunger.
I feare I say least in the midst f thy businesses (because they be many) whylst thou distrustest of n end, thou hardenest the foun|aine; and so by little and little fter a certaine manner thou de|riuest thy selfe of the sence of eete  profitable sorrow. Thou halt doe much more wisely, if or a time thou withdrawest thy elfe from them: then suffer thy elfe to be drawen of them: and y little and little to bee lead of em whether thou wouldst not.

Doest thou aske whether? To a hard heart. Neyther proceede to demaund what that is: if thou hast not feared it, thou hast it. It is onely a hard heart, which doth not dread it selfe: because it fee|leth not it selfe.
Why doest thou demaund of mee what it is? Demaund of Hardnes of hart is de|scribed. Pharaoh. None of a hard hea hath euer attayned saluation: vn|lesse God taking pittye on him according to the Prophet, tooke Ezech. 1. from him his stony heart,  gaue him a fleshly heart.
What then is a hard heart It is that, which is neyth pearced by compunction: no mollified by loue: nor mooue by Prayers: it yeeldeth not  threates: and is hardened wi stripes.
It is vnthankfull for benefi vnfaythfull in Counsell: 

 iudgement: vnshamefast in lthines: fearelesse in daungers: humane in curtesie: rashe in iuinity: forgetting things past: eglecting thinges present: and reles of future haps.
t is that, which respecteth not a|y thing past besids iniuries one| regardfull of present pleasure: ut for thinges to come alto|ether vnprouident, except in euenge.
And that in fewe wordes  may comprehend all the euils f this horrible mischiefe: it  that, which neyther feareth od, nor reuerenceth man.
Beholde whether these cur|ed businesses are about to hale ee: if thou proceedest as thou ast begunne, so to giue thy lfe ouer vnto them, thou shalt aue to thy selfe nothing of thy lfe.

Thou losest thy time: and if I may now bee an other Iethro vnto thee, thou foolishly consu|mest thy selfe in those thinges, which are nothing els but af|fliction of spirit, exulceration of minde, and euacuation of grace.
By which it is manyfest, how great danger too much businesse doth beget, and in like man|ner, with what discretion and moderation, all businesses are to bee taken in hand, yea al|beit they be holy: when as we see the businesses annexed to so great a Bishoppricke, (which may seeme requisite and neces|sarye) are called cursed of this holy man who termeth them al|so foolish labours, and losse of time, and yet not alwaies, bu when they are vndiscreetely tak in hand.

Therefore it is necessary, that a an exactly measure the strength his spirit: that according to the ality of it he may take busines pon him, otherwise if the bur|n exceede his strength, what her thing is to be expected, but e fall and ruine of the bearer?
That we may accomplish this e better and the easilier, two o|er famous vertues are necessa|: Discretion and Fortitude. Dis|etion is the knowledge of the easure, or of the power of our rength, and daily dispensation  our time  exercise, by which e ought so to order our life, that  may be orderly disposed in all ings. Which being know newe  neede of great constancy  titude, to repell and reiect all xternall businesses, which offer emselues vnto vs: and that we ke no more burden vppon vs

(our obedience beeing alwai preserued) then we are able to vndergoe. For they that ouerload themselues with businesses at the requests and importunities of o|ther, afterwardes they faint vnder their burden, so that they cannot satisfie either one or other: and at length they vnderstand  per|ceaue, into what great daungers they haue cast the~selues by their vndiscreete arrogancy.
To this victory, that supreme vertue is also co~ducent, which di|recteth Before all thinges we must obey the calling of God. vs to follow in all things, the good pleasure and calling of God: who alwaies calleth vs to mortification of our affections, and to those exercises, by which it is attained: neither accepteth he any externall obedience, vnles first we satisfie his calling. Ther|fore the seruat of the Lord ought alwaies to haue before his eies

that saying of Saul to Dauid, whe~  promised his daughter in ma|ge vnto him, and Dauid excu|g himselfe that he was vn wor|y so royall a mariage, calling mselfe poore and of small repu|tion: saith he, The King hath no 1. Reg. 18. ede of a dowrie, but of an hun|eth foreskinnes of the Philistines,  bee auenged of the Kinges ene|ies. If then an earthlye King ath no neede of the riches of an other, howe much lesse shall at heauenly King haue neede, ho with one onely becke can uerthrowe the whole worlde? ut hee will haue none other hing, then that he may bee a|enged of his enemies, which re sinnes and sinfull affections: ee would haue the foreskinnes f these giuen vnto him, that he strength of them might be ircumcised and mortified.

And because this can hardely be brought to passe without the ex|ercise of praier and meditation, God especially requireth this o|bedience to be yeelded vnto him before all other, which we are no bound vnto. And surely it is no the least cause of the disorders  disturbances of the worlde, tha men serue God not as hee hath commaunded them, but as they themselues please.
There are certaine thinges, which in the beginning may easi|ly be repelled: but when a man hath giuen them entertainement, he cannot expell them, when he would: and when he seeth him|selfe entangled and ensnared on euery side, he cannot vnfold no deliuer himselfe, albeit he greatly wish it: therfore it much concer|neth him, that herein he vse great wisedome, and that he foresee the

danger comming a farre of, and at he arme himselfe before the anger light vpon him, and that Eccl. 18. e vse Phisicke before the disease be  owen, as the Wiseman saith.
This needeth not to be proued ith reasons: for in all places a an shal finde many examples of wise and inconsiderate men, ho in the beginning being care|s to pyse their burdens, which ey tooke vpon their shoulders: fterwardes haue fainted vnder eir loade, and too late acknow|dged their vnaduisednesse, too e lamenting and bewayling at, which in the beginning was  be auoyded or amended.
They that liue vnder obedi|nce, in this respect haue no need f long deliberation: for obedi|nce freeth a ma~ from this doubt, nd excuseth him in this busines, s well as in many other:  ther|fore

it is a great good, althoug not knowen to all men: But he A Caution. we must diligently marke, le at any time vnder colour and p tence of obedience, we satis our own will. For it oftentim commeth to passe, that man excuse themselues from this h exercise, saying, that they are c|maunded to studye, to prea or to doe some such like thin therefore they say that they  no leysure to attend vppon Go Such are not a little deceaued.  there ca~not be thought of a gre ter burden in the Church of go then the charge of such a gre Bishoprick: yet notwithstandi Saint Barnard writeth those |mous and learned books of Co|sideration vnto Pope Eugenius, which he only handleth that, th he might perswade him, that  doe not wholy drowne himse

xternall businesses: but that  daily steal some time from the es and busines of the Church,  bestow it vpon this exercise, hout which nothing can bee erly done. Among many other rds he speaketh vnto the Pope In his first booke of Considera|tion. th these; Nowe because the es be euill, let it in the meane e suffice thee to haue been ad|nished: that thou giue not thy fe wholy  alwaies vnto actio~:  sequester somtime to bestow o~ the co~sideration of thy self,  hy hart. This I say loking vnto  necessity,  not to the equity: A Prelate is to attend vpon con|templation. eit it is not beyonde equity to e place to necessity. For if that lawful, which is meet, irrefraga  reason sheweth, y^e that is abso|ely to be preferred in al things,  before al things,  only  es|cially to be imbraced, which is duce~t, forcibl'  profitabl' vnto

all things, that is vnto piety and godlines. Thou askest what is pi|ety? To attend vpon considerati|on. Perharps thou wilt say that i this I dissent from him, who de|fined piety to be the worship of God. It is not so. If thou wel con|siderest it, I haue expressed his sence in my wordes: albeit it b but in part. What is more per|nent to the worship of God, then that he admonisheth in y^e psalme, Attende and make, because I a God. Which surely in the parts o consideration is an especiall and principall thing. To bee briefe what is so auaileable to al things then by a certaine fauorable pre|sumptio~ to make the~ ours, whic are the parts of action it selfe: by forecasting after a certaine man|ner, and preordayning, what is to be done? Certainly this is neces|sary: least perchance those things

which are profitable vnto vs be|g foreseene and premeditated pon; proue dangerous and to r annoy being rashly and vnad|edly taken in hand. Which I  not doubt but hath often hap|ned to thee, in thy weighty bu|esses, and serious affaires. Ther|e no duty, nor obedience see|eth so farre to bind a man, but at it may be lawfull for him, to ke vnto him so much time, as necessary to recollect  gather s spirit vnto him, to attend vp| God, and to order his life a|ght: all these we attaine by the eanes of contemplation: as the me holy man sheweth at large, er those wordes, which a little fore we haue alledged, al which ast we be too long, we wil leaue re to relate.
Wherfore albeit this exercise nerally pertaineth to all men,

yet more especially it belong vnto those, who by reason of the estate and condition ought to b more perfect then others: as B shoppes and Clergy men: who profession it is to aspire to th ende and perfection. So also o ther obediences are to be perfo med, that they may alwaies hau respecte to that first obedienc which is neuer to be intermitted nor to be set behind: but alwai to be helped by some exercise praier, or contemplation: th man may in due time gather v to him his spirite, examine h conscience, order his life, hea his woundes, arme himsele  gainst daily dangers, and with a dent desire implore the diuines uour No serui|tude so strict and sharpe, which ought to hinder praies. and grace.
There is not anye seruitude i the world so hard and miserable which denyeth to man his 

necessityes, as to eat, to sleep, o take those things which are essary for the estate of his life. n like manner the soule hath  need of sustenance and nou|ment, and of spiritual sleepe:  it enioyeth both of them in  silence of prayer.
Therefore all obediences are giously to be gaged with this deration. But this especially eth place in those obediences, ich require no certaine tyme:  are finished in successe of e; as are to study, to preach, to erne, c. and not in those, ich are enioyned at certayne rs. Let not them, that wil not erue this rule, excuse the~selues a pretence of obedience, say| that for the loue of it they had easure to bestow vpon deuo|: for none of these obediences e such force  vertue y^e they

should depriue a man of those thinges, which bring vs to th last end, which is the perfectio promised of vs in the begin|ning.
What I say of the Clergy, I s How farre children ought to o|bey their parents in this matter. also of sonnes and daughters, w are also vnder the gouernment parents, if perhaps by them the be hardly delt with, that now  then they may giue the~selues v to prayer. For although it be n lawfull for them not to obay,  to striue against their parents: y it is lawfull sometimes to besto some timevpon this exercise: lea perchance they fal into that da gerous hardnes of heart, of whi we haue spoken before. For th misery of man is so great, th world so peruerse, and dange are so common, that if wee b a little estrange our selues fro God, great perill hangeth ou

or heades. And our heart is so clinable to the flesh, that being erated from God, who is who| and altogether spirit, it present| becommeth flesh.


HE EIGHT IMPEDI|ment is the vice of Curi|osity. CHAP. XXIIII.
THE vice of curiosity doeth also very much hurt deuoti|, which many waies may bee Curiosity is commit|ted many waies. mmitted: For it is a certaine de of curiosity, which desireth prie into the workes, the life, d conuersation of other men: ich besides that it burdeneth e heart with vaine thoughts  gitations, it also enwrappeth n manifolde imaginations and

desires,  taketh away the peace and quietnesse of the conscience. This vice is wont to be proper vn|to idle men, who when they haue no busines of their own, they busy themselues with the sayings and doings of others.
There is an other kinde of cu|riositye proper vnto the vnder|standing, and peculiarly belon|geth vnto them, who of an on|ly and sole desire to know, doe reade profane Histories, and hea|then bookes, and vnprofitable Antiquities c. In like sort they also may be called curious after the same maner, who apply their mindes to reade graue and lear|ned Authors, and yet not with this intent, that by them they maye gaine vnto themselues tru wisedome: but by the same cu|riosity onely seeke for Arte, E loquence, and the pompe  glo|ry

of wordes, or some elegant or curious sentence, which they may boast of, and vainely re|cite before others; reseruing by them no manner of profit vnto themselues. Of these saith the Wiseman: The heart of a foole is like a broken vessell, he can keepe Eccl. 21. no knowledge whiles he liueth. Sure|lye this is a most manifest signe and token of a disordered wit, and of an inordinate soule. For as Saint Augustine saieth, It is an argument of a good wit, and of a noble and generous spirite, not to loue wordes in wordes, but the truth, that is couched in hem.
Furthermore there is a certaine ther curiosity, which is an in|rdinate desire of manye, who ould haue all that belongs vnto e~, to be too exquisite, elaborate, o compt and piked, as well

in their houses, as in their appa|rell, householde stuffe, bookes, pictures, and such like orna|mentes, which cannot be desi|red nor preserued without great diligence. And when they are done otherwaies, then we would, it cannot be, but that they dis|please vs, and vexe our mindes, and bring vs to that point, that we straight thinke either of their making away, or of new repay|ring  embellishing the~. Wher|by the peace and quiet of the co~|science is loste, and the man i wholy drowned in vanity. It  not to be doubted, but that th is a very great hinderance vnt deuotion: Fot it requireth  Deuotion requireth a quiet minde. minde altogether quiet, and fr from all impediments.
The Deuill knowing this in pediment to bee so great, do bende all his strength, (as a c|taine

Doctour saith) to ensnare all men of whatsoeuer age and estate in this vice: the layety by soliciting and prouoking them to settle their chiefest care vpon the finding out  bringing in of new and outlandish kindes of apparel, householde stuffe, and such like things: The clergie and learned, that they endeuor themselues, to haue their temples, churches, col|ledges, houses, and other orna|ments curious and pretious; and this he doth vnder a shew of god|linesse, whilest hee perswadeth them, that the seruants of God doe deserue all thinges, and that they are woorthy of all honour: and therefore that it is not vici|ous nor vncomely to build sump|uous houses, to erect proude and tately pallaces, that they may dwell in them with mirth and oye. Such men haue eyther not

read, or haue ill obserued the whole some doctrines of holy,  spirituall men: for the true ser|uants of God doe little esteeme these thinges, yea they doe des|pise them, and flie from them, as from thinges, which neyther can bee gotten, nor preserued, without distraction of heart, and losse of time: which two are most contrary vnto the exercise of Deuotion. For as Deuotion is a very delicate thing: so it is obscured and lost by a light and little matter. For if the morning Sun beames did hinder the con|templation of Saint Anthony: howe much more shall the vn|quiet cogitations of seeking and keeping earthlye goods hurte, which haue well feathered win|ges swiftely to flye out of our sight?
For this cause Euangelicall

pouerty is much to be commen|ded. which at one blow cutteth off all this vaine curiositie, after his example, who when he was Lorde of all creatures, had none other bedde when he was borne, but a harde cratch, nor none o|ther house, but the common stable.


THE NINTH IMPE|diment is, if good exercises be interrupted and bro|ken off. CHAP. XXV.
IN like manner it is a great, and a very vsuall impediment vnto Deuotion, oftentimes to interrupt and break off the threed of good exercises without a lawefull cause. For wee must

know, that among all the mise|ries Our heart is easily in|clined vnto euill, but hardly vn|to good. of mans heart, one of the chiefest is, that as it is prompt and inclined to all euill, so it is remisse and slowe vnto any good. For in euill no other thing is re|quired to inflame our heart, yea and our bodye too, but a light and small thought, which by and by vanisheth awaie: but for a good affection, as Deuo|tion is, wee must search heauen and earth, and desire ayde of all thinges, which are giuen vnto vs of God. Of man it is saide, That he is a winde that passeth and commeth not againe: For with Psal. 78. great facility he goeth after va|nities, and corruptible thinges; but he returneth not againe from them, without great difficultie. Certainely, if men would pon|der with reason all their mise|ries, they should feele none grea|ter,

nor admire any more. Ther|fore wee must labour with al our strength, that Deuotion may be preserued: for as it is a very ea|sie matter to loose it, so it is a most difficult thing to recouer it being lost.
Wherefore not without cause we say, that it is a great impedi|ment in this busines, if the threed of good exercises be broke of. For when as man would afterwardes returne vnto himselfe, hee fin|deth himselfe so vnapt, and so vnfit for Deuotion, as if he had neuer had it, or that he had one|ly saluted it at the doore, and very entrance. For that happe|neth vnto him, which we reade in imes past happened to Saint Pe|er, when he saide: Maister, we aue trauelled all night, and haue Luke 5. aken nothing. The same thing appeneth vnto them, who are

negligent in this exercise, as Saint Barnarde saieth very well in these woordes: Howe long In his first booke of Considera|tion to Eu|genius. wilt thou lifte vppe thine heart in prayer, and lifte it vp in vaine? Howe long wilt thou moue thy selfe, but not any whit the for|warder? Howe long wilt thou endeuour thy selfe, but to noe purpose? Doest thou labour, and not bring foorth? Doest thou make triall, and neuer a whit the better? And whereso|euer thou beginnest, doest thou there leaue off? And in thine assye, doest thou faint? All this difficulty hence ariseth, be|cause the exercise of Deuotion is intermitted therfore thy hart is vvaxen colde, and therefore by the iust iudgement of God this punishment is inflicted vp|pon thee: that thou being ad|monished by this punishment

for thine abuse of grace recea|ued, thou mayest more wari|lye preserue it being recouered againe. Salomon excellentlye teacheth this by a notable simi|litude: If the iron (saieth he) be blunte, and one hath not whet the Eccl. 10. edge, hee must then put to more strength, and after labour wise|dome will followe. Which words, albeit they haue sundrye mea|nings, and may bee applyed to diuers things: yet most fitly they are vnderstoode of the study of Deuotion and of the holy Scrip|tures: of which Saint Hierome also doeth expound them. For experience it selfe teacheth, that  a man hath at any time lost the vse of Deuotion and the feruour of the spirite, what great trou|le hee hath, before he can a|gaine recouer them: which when ee hath eftesoones receaued,

let him be thorowly and for euer admonished, that most diligently he preserue so great benefits and blessings, least vnluckily hee a|gaine relapse into the like mis|fortune.
Furthermore, as the interrup|ting of this exercise doeth very much hinder Deuotion: so on the other side, the continuall vse of it Continuall vse of De|uotio~ doth encrease it Similies. is very conducent to the attay|ning of it. The tree that is wate|red in due season, doth encrease, and bringeth forth fruit: The childe that hath milk, and breasts ready to giue it sucke, when it desireth, groweth and waxeth bigger. A student in the libe|rall sciences, if he often repeate his lecture, and diligently fre|quent the schoole of his May|ster, in a shorte time commeth to the perfection of the Artes hee studieth: so on the contra|y

part, hee that often and much intermitteth and breaketh off his study, eyther very late, or ne|uer becometh learned. For when after a certaine time he returneth againe to his study, hee hath for|gotten those thinges, which be|fore he had learned: and so still in beginning hee consumeth his age, and spendeth his time.
It is true, that when the delay and intermission is short, or for some godly  lawfull cause, that God doth sooner restore that was lost. Hence it is that a faithfull and an obedient seruant some|times feeleth his praier doubled, after that he hath performed his obedience. But this is without controuersie, that the perfect in this intermission walk with lesser Intermissio~ of Deuoti|on doth lesse hurt the perfect then the vnperfect. daunger, then those that are yong beginners: for these are those that are of the poorer sort, and are

more hungry, if they labour not euery day, they haue not to eate: But those that are richer  more perfect, alwaies haue substance in themselues, by which they can for a time continue theyr e|state, albeit they gaine no further matter. Therefore I thinke that this is one of the cheefe differen|ces betweene the perfect and vn|perfect, to wit, that the perfect are as trees planted in a moyst and fruiteful ground, which although they be not watered, by the space of certain daies, yet they preserue their greenenes, and bring foorth fruite: but the vnperfect are like trees standing in a dry and sandy earth, vpon which if water be not dayly powred, all the beauty and strength, which they had, perish|eth: whereby it manifestly appea|reth, that they wanted sap  moi|sture within the~. Of this sort at this

day is the greater part of those y^ be Deuout; but the former sort are very few and scarce. Therfore let him that is desirous of Deuoti|tion continue  perseuere in reli|gious  godly exercises,  let him compose his life after the man|ner of a wel ordred clocke, doing all things in due time, and labour|ing as much as lyes in him, that the threed  continuance of de|uotion be not broke off.


THE TENTH IMPE|diment consisteth in delicates, and in too much meate and drinke. CHAP. XXVI.
FVrthermore another impedi|ment in this way is very noto|ious, which co~sistethin too much delicacy,  in superfluous meat  drink.

Therefore in the Scriptures Fast|ing and Prayer, as two brethren, are alwaies ioyned together; and for the same cause the holy Fa|thers, who hid themselues in the wildernes, that they might giue themselues to conte~plation were so austere in theyr fastes and ab|stinence.
For wee see, that as corporall fasting doth lift vp the spirit to God: so on the other side super|fluity of meate  drink doth cast it downe,  hindreth the course. The reason is, because to lift vp the spirit to contemplate that eternal light, and to order and dispose it for the receipt of y^e influences and splendors of that light, is a thing so hard, and so supernaturall, that as Augustine saith, it is necessary that a man bring al his force and strength together, that hee may vse it in this ascending, if he will

thither come, whither he ende|oureth.
For such an high and sublime scention requireth a light and imble slender man, and free fro~ ll heauines, that may pull him ownwards. Superfluity of meat Too much meate and drink doth many waies hinder the ascending of the soule. nd drinke is contrary to his slen|ernes and nimblenes, which not y one way, but by diuers doth inder this ascending.
First, because a great part of the 1 owers of the soule are occupyed  the worke of digestion, where| nature her selfe performeth as  were her taske, and commaun|th all the powers and faculties  doe their office and duety. ence it is, that men, after they ue well eate and drunke, are auier and more sleepy,  more fit and vnapt for any study of nsideration, or deuotion.
Secondly, because fumes and 2

vapours as out of a seething pot ascend to the braine, wherein is the seate of that faculty, which hath the cheefest part in the acti|ons of contemplation, and obscu|reth all that part, as it were with a darke cloude, and hindreth the operation of that faculty: and co~|sequently the operation of th vnderstanding. Hence that sen|tence of the Greekes sprung which Saint Hierome citeth in  Hierome in an Epist. to Nepoti|anus. certaine Epistle; A full belly be|getteth not a nimble spirit. Th contrary is written of Iulius C|sar, that he came sober and fas|ing to the Romane Empire: b which kinde of speaking is sign|fied, that with great aduisednes  wisedom he set his hand to th busines. For this is proper and p|culiar vnto men that are sober  fasting.
Thirdly, because we natura

e that the taking of too much eate and drinke doth sollicite e hart of man vnto vain things: at is to prattle, fable, geere, ort, play, and such like. For as e spirit, when it is full of De|otion, doth inuite the heart to irituall and diuine thinges: so e body being full of meate doth aw and hale the same vnto cor|rall  vaine matter. Hetherto aketh that of Gregorie: Of the Effects of gourman|dising. turity and fulnes of the body a|eth vaine ioy, trifling, babling, nality, a grosse and dull vn|rstanding, and such like. By ich wordes it appeareth, how tfull this vice is vnto him, who steneth to this ende, which  propose in this booke, and traryewise howe profitable  opposite vertue is: to wit, ting and temperance.

Chrisostome doth also accorde with him; Fasting, sayth he, doth bring foorth light and nimble feathers, that the soule may bee carried a loft, and co~template the highest thinges, and that it may be superiour to all pleasures, and to all thinges, which are counte sweet in this world. As ships o A Simily. lighter burden doe swiftly sayl through the Sea, but those tha are ouerloade~ with many burd are drowned: so fasting maketh soule light, y^e it lightly saileth ou y^e sea of this life, that it mountet aloft,  beholdeth Heauen,  those things, which are in heau meanely and basely accounti of things present, as of shadow and of those thinges that swif vade and vanish away: On t other side to eate and drinke t much, doth make the spirit sle and the body heauy,  doth c

tiuate the soule,  make it subiect to a thousand miseries.
Especially long and large sup|pers Long and large sup|pers hurt|full. doe bring much hurt and dammage vnto this exercise: first, because they do spend and con|sume that time, which is consecra|ted to holy watching, and at what ime the soule was to be fed, the ody is stuffed and glutted: and fterwardes when the stomacke s ouer burdened with meate and drinke, man can neither rise at midnight to praise the Lord, nor ray in the morning; both which imes are most profitable for this xercise.
For as Basill sayth; as a Soldier hat is ouer loaden can hardly A Simily. annage his weapon: so that an can hardly watch at his prai|rs, who is gluttonously filled ith superfluity of meates. Not nely to eate too much, but also

to feede too deliciously and deli|cately hindreth deuotio~: certainly magnificent bankets,  sumptu|ou feastes,  such like dainty su|perfluities are exceeding enemies  plagues vnto this exercise. Fo in what thing is there greate losse of time? where becommeth the spirit more inordinate? wher becommeth the wholem an mor dissolute, then among such feast and pleasures: there a man being inflamed with the heate of win  the tast of the daintyes,  wi the mirth of the feasters, sha~et not blusheth nor to blab whats euer commeth within his head What time is heer sost into wh great da~gers do men cast the selues? how many vncomely a vnseemly things doe they, who profession it is not once to na the~ how many sfts  sleigh do they find out, y^e they may co|tinually

perseuere in these misde|enors? how ofte~ hapneth it vnto he~ that for these they lose peace, harity  concord? That great Wiseman very well vnderstoode his, whe~ so often in the Prouerbs e remembreth the~, as he, in very ced had learned, how great euils id follow feastes  bankets. For e saith; Hee that loueth bankets, Prou. 22. all be in need; and hee that loueth ine and feastes shall not bee rich. nd in another place; Keep not Prou. 23. mpanie with drunkords, nor ith gluttons. For the drunkard d the glutton shall be poore, and e sleper shall bee cloathed in gges.
And againe in another place th great earnestnesse hee re|embreth, what euils and mis|iefes followe this vice; To In the same place. ome, saith hee, is woe? to whom orrowe? to whome is stife?

To whome is murmuring? to whom are woundes without cause? and to whom is the redines of the eyes? E|uen to them that tarry long at the wine, to them that goe, and seeke mixt wine. All these and many moe mischeeses doth this vic bring with it.
Wherefore the Wiseman a the length concluding this mat|ter sayth; Wine is a mocker, an stronge drinke is raging: and whoso euer is deceiued thereby, is not wis The reason is in readines; for it i most certaine, that the way t true Wisedome is by teares, an mortification of the affections which in all thinges are hindr and contraried by the delight  the body, and by the desires a appetites of pleasures. For  (Chrisostome being witnes) fi A Simily. cannot bee kindled nor kept  wet  moyst matter: so neyth

can compunction in the delights and pleasures of the bodye: for these two are so co~trary between themselues, that one killeth ano|ther: for the one is the mother of mourning, the other of laughter; the one doth binde the heart the other doth lose it.
Therefore let this be a general rule; Let the seruant of God bee A generall rule. alwayes mindefull of that moste bitter gall and vineger, which the Sonne of God tasted of for the loue of vs, let him be content with common meats, and let him take hem with that moderation, that e may be alwaies fit and apt to ift vp his spirit to heauen, and to ate any spirituall meate: so that o burden of body or meat presse r draw him downwardes. Let im reme~ber that y^e perfection of  Christian life is continuall prai|r, and society with God.

Therefore whose duety it is to haue his spirit lifted vp vnto God, his it is also to haue his spirit and body disposed and prepared vn|to it.
If a harper intend to play vpon his harpe all the day, ought he not to haue his stringes all the time well tuned and fitly agree|ing? And if a hunter or a Faulk|ner be disposed to hunt and hauk all the day, ought hee not all the time to haue his haukes and houndes at his hande? Goe to then, seeing that the life of a per|fect Christian is none other thing then, a continual hunting of God and his grace, and a continua harmonye of the inward spirit which is made by praier, it is mee and requisite, that he that will a tend vpon this exercise, that h spirit and body be disposed an apt vnto it.

This is that Saint Hierome per|swadeth In his Epist to Laeta. vnto a certaine Virgin, saying; Let the fare of a Virgin be a few hearbes, and sometimes a few small fishes. Let her so eate, that she may alwaies be hungry, that foorthwith after meate she may bee able to read, and pray. The same man also admonisheth that it is better alwayes to keepe In his Epist. to Furia. this rule in eating and drinking, then sometimes too wide to o|pen the sailes of fasting, so that the body is enfeebled thereby;  by  by after to lose the raines vnto the gullet, that man thereby is in daunger of bursting. The same man also in another place,  in o|ther words, saith: A spare dyet,  a belly alwaies hungry is prefer|red before a fast of three daies,  it is better euery day to take a lit|tle, then once to take enough.
That is the best rayne, which

leysurely descendeth vppon the earth. A sodaine and dashing showre headlong beateth downe the corne and grasse. Therefore when thou eatest thinke that pre|sently after thou art to read and pray. Hetherto Hierome.
They that liue with such mo|deration and temperance, shall haue great treasuries and store|houses of time, and in fewe dayes shall liue a long life: for all the time of their life is profitable, and not any part of it vainely passeth away. Therefore albeit a righte|ous man dye quickly, yet he hath a long life: for he profitteth eue|ry houre, and maketh gaine of e|uery moment of his life. But the wicked  vngodly, whose belly is their God, they alwaies carry about a soule dead in life,  buri|ed in the dunghill of too much meate  drinke: and so in a man|ner

they spend all their life time, in vnbuckling theyr girdles,  in prouiding  dressing superfluous meates, and in drawing foorth their houres in sleep. These ther|fore liue like Epicures,  as peo|ple borne to none other end, then to eate and drink, and to engrosse and fat their bellies, intending none other exercise, neither ha|uing regard of any other time, or busines. How then can any one say, that these doe liue a long life, or the life of a man, when as scarcely they bestow one hower vpon any thing, which is worthy the spirit  nobility of man.



THE ELEVENTH IM|pediment is the euill disposition and weakenes of the bodie. CHAP. XXVII.
AN impediment contrary to the former is (as saith Saint Bernarde) too much abstinence, and weakenes of body, or what|soeuer other euill disposition or debility, whether it be hunger or thirst, or colde, or heate, or what|soeuer other accident. For there is so great society and sympathy between the soule and the body, that when as this is ill disposed, or standeth need of any thing, the other cannot lift it selfe vp free|ly inough to contemplate and meditate on heaue~ly things with quietnesse and tranquilitye: for

the loue of her friend doth call her away and doth disquiet he, and calleth her thither, where it is greeued: neyther granteth her leaue to attend any other busines, vnlesse God of his especial grace doth dispence with it: as many times he is wont to doe.
Therefore it is meete that a Deuout man keep that modera|tion and temperaunce in chasti|cing and exercising his body, that it neyther growe grosse nor vn|fit by superfluous delicates; ney|ther that bee weakenes by too much rigour and austerity, that it faint vnder the burden.
For as we are to obserue in a harpe, that the stringes be ney|ther stretched too streight, nor loosened too slacke (for then they are eyther broken, or yeeld an vntuned and an vnpleasant sound) so in this celestiall Mu|sicke,

it is meet that the body bee neyther macerated by too much hunger, nor fatted by two much plenty: for both of them bring very much hurt to this exercise. For this cause God commaunded in the old law that salt (by which we vnderstand discretion) should be spinkled vpon al the sacrifices, that he might insinuat, that none of our sacrifices (although they be great) are acceptable vnto him vnlesse they be seasoned with salt, that is, with the sauour of discrea|tion.
But because it is a hard thing to keep a meane, and the fleshe doth alwaies seeke it selfe, there|fore it is necessary, that in these cases a mans own opinion bee al|waies suspected vnto himself:  if we must needs leane to one of y^e extremities, it is alwaies more safe, that we chose that, which is

most repugnant to the flesh, then that which fawneth  smileth on t: for albeit wee doe bridle  re|aine it, yet it will take an occa|ion sometimes to satisfie the de|ires: neither is it enough, that now  then it be defrawded of neces|ities; but we must alwaies watch: or vnlesse thou doest diligentlie watch, it will one time or other reake out, and steale many lustes nd desires, and those very super|uous.


FCERT AIN OTHER particular impediments. CHAP. XXVIII.
THe precedent impediments are generall, which com|only are wont to meet with all rts of people in the way of de|tion.

There are also other particuler hindrances, according to the na|turall dispositions and affections of euery one. As we see that cer|taine are so vnnaturally studious and diligent in that, which they haue determined to doe, that if they haue the least thing in the world in hand, they cannot rest till it be done: nay they cannot sleepe in the night, before they haue finished, that they purposed: and therefore they neuer haue a|ny leysure to perseuere in Pray|er.
Others as it were lunaticke, to whome oftentimes hapneth suc an earnest longing and feruour o minde, that they cannot contain themselues, vnlesse presently they haue their desires satisfied, albe they vtterly forsake and renounc God.
This is proper vnto those me

who are violently drawen and aled of their appetites and affec|ions, and who are alwaies accu|omed to haue their wils and de|res fulfilled; who like women reat with childe are so tickled ith immoderate appetites  af|ctions,  are so subiect vnto this ce, by reason of the euill habit, hich by long vse they haue put n, that if foorthwith they haue ot their desires satisfied, they ey|er seeme to dye, or els fal into a sease.
These the deuill draweth sily away from the exercise of ayer, drawing them after theyr petites, as if they were bound th a chayne. There are many d the worlde is euery where  full of them, that when ers goe to prayer, they goe to eyr worldly busines, who driue their weekly labors to be done

vpon the Saboath day, when they should be at Church to pray and to heare Diuine seruice and Ser|mons.
Let these men knowe, that they are the deuils slaues, and that the Deuill leadeth them bound in chaynes, whither he listeth, e|uen to theyr perdition and de|struction. Therefore let them be|ware, and seriously regard what is the cause of this their deuiation and seduction, for without all doubt (and so let them perswade themselues) it is the worke of the deuill.
But aboue all particuler im|pedymentes, the inordinate lou of any thing doth more especial|ly hurt, which is embraced with the whole minde, and with al th affection.
We must heer know that ther Euery man hath some idoll. is scarce one in the worlde sor

ligious, or so free from passions, that hath not some idoll, that he serueth, and adoreth: that is, some thing, vpon which he bestoweth his whole affections, and for the loue of which, he doth all that he can. The minde of some is who|ly swallowed vp in the studye of science and eloquence: and vpon these two studies they bestow all their endeuour and paines: so that they seeke no other thing in the worlde, they respect no other thing, but onely this: supposing that there is nothing greater then this studye, nor any thing more worthy the spirit and nobility of man.
The desire of worldly honour, the fauour of Princes and great personages, and the possessions of temporal goods doe draw others away. Thou shalt see many, who are altogether busied in heaping

together great treasuries, that they may enrich their heyres, and be saide to be the authours and founders of some noble house and family. There be also not a fewe, whose mindes are lesse ge|nerous, that then suppose them|selues happy, when they haue scraped together a certaine sum of money, whereby they maye purchase for themselues some in|heritance, or some office. There be others, that thinke of nothing more, then of some famous  no|table mariage, either for the~selues or for some of theirs, whether he be son, daughter, or cosin ger|man: for this being obtained, they suppose that there is nothing, which may further be desired. To be briefe, others are caried awaye and bound with other affections and desires, no otherwise then beasts are bound at a cratch, euery

one with their seueral halters. And when they haue once opened a way for these affectio~s vnto their heart, with the same study  loue y^e men embrace the last end, they seeke  follow after meanes, by which they may obtain, that they desire. Therfore some, night and day apply their bookes, that they may come to their wished ende: Others, as long as they liue, doe wholy endeuor the~selues to heap  hoard vp welth. Others giue the~ selues to traffike  merchandise, or do some other thing, that they may gaine vnto themselues, that they seeke for. For after that they aue giuen place to the roote, they are also compelled, will they nill hey, to giue place to al the bran|ches that sprout  spring from it. These without doubt are hurtfull plants, these are those thornes in the gospel, which choak the seed of the word of god. For the ma~ y^e

is enwrapped in these businesses with so superfluous a care, hath neyther time, nor minde at liber|ty to attend vpon the seruice of God.
Therefore it happeneth many times, that the deuil doth present|ly disturbe a man in Prayer, with|drawe him from his exercise, and casteth him headlong from hea|uen vpon the earth: and often|times haleth  pulleth him, that he may turne himselfe to effect that, to which the affection and passion of his minde doth allur and inuite him: so that when god calleth him to his table, to his embrace, to the fruition of his ioyes, and participation of his spirit, he will not come, he con|temneth the voyce of the Lorde and with greedines doth follow those vanities, to which his appe|tites doe call him.

Therefore let him be assured, hat seeketh for God thus, that he hall neuer finde him. For no man Math. 6. s our Sauiour saith, can serue two Maisters, for either he shall hate e one, and loue the other, or els he all leane to the one, and despise the her. They that doe the contrary e like vnto the new inhabitants  Samaria, which the King of sshur sent thither, of whom the cripture saith, That they  4. Reg. 17. the Lord: and also serued other ods. To these that of the Pro|et Samuell to the children of aell may be said: If ye be come 1. Reg. 7. aine vnto the Lord, with all your art, put away the strange Gods m among you, and direct your rts vnto the Lord, and serue him ly, and he shall deliuer you out of  hand of the Philistines. If men uld diligently consider, how ch that is, which they owe vn|to

God, and how little it is, that mans heart can giue: they should manifestlye see, that this wor|shippe and seruice cannot be de|uided, seeing that so much is due and so little is giuen. The bedd is streight, sayeth Esaye, that  Esay 28. cannot suffice, and the eouerin narrow that it cannot couer two.
This is perspicuously  euiden|ly seene in the streightnes of ma heart, which cannot together c|taine God and the world.
Who doth deny but that he ill linked in mariage, who caste his eies vppon an other wom beside his owne wife?-so also he ill linked vnto the diuine w|dome, whose minde is ent gled in forraine loue.
Goe to then my brother,  that thou be a chaste louer of t heauenly spouse: beware t thou be not an vnfaithfull bri

groome, or an adulterer vnto at holy and deuout Wisedome: ware that thou bring not in|thine house an harlot. For peake in truth and verity, that ere is not any whore so yonge d beautifull, which doeth so caye and quench wedlocke e, and that doeth so steale ay and consume that a man th, as any one of these affe|ons, when they are too in|dinate: for they doe quench  t out the loue of God, and doe sume all the good, that wee ght reape by it.
Therfore it is meet that he that l walke in this way, that he te out of his minde all forraine extrauagant affections,  that A heart free from appetites and concu|piscences is to be offe|red vnto God. offer his hart vnto God, as the t matter, or as cleane paper, e from al staine and pollution, t God himselfe may imprint in

it, whatsoeuer he will without a|ny contradiction. This is that re|signation, which is so much com mended of those that write of spirituall life, to which resignati on it pertaineth to offer to God heart pure  free from all earthly affections  worldly desires: tha there may not be any thing in i which may stay the influences,  hinder the operations of the ho Ghost.
Here we are to note, that tw things are required in the perf ction of euery worke, one that the agent, the other that is th patient: one that commandet the other that obeyeth. If th desirest that God should perfe his worke in thee, haue an e how these two are to be dispos of. Because it is vnmeete and v seemely that God should obey and that thou shouldest gouern

Giue to Caesar those thinges that e Caesar:  to God those things at are Gods: that is, suffer God  rule thee, to direct thee, and to ork in thee what pleaseth him: d let thy hand bee directed by shande, as a penne is in the nd of a writer, which resisteth t. But there is none other resi|nce or repugnancy besids that, hich is wrought by the affecti|s and by the will, and by theyr erations and actions.
But because in this life we can|tbee altogether free from all tward businesses and externall ercises, at y^e least let vs doe that, t our mindes bee not ouer|elmed and ouerborn of them,  let the affection of Diuine sedome haue alwayes the pter in her hand, and alwaies re sway in our endeuours and dies.

Let vs with al our heart alwaie say that of the Wiseman; I ha Sap. 8. loued her, and sought her from  youth: I desired to marrye he such loue had I vnto her beauty This is ourlast ende, this is t certaintye of our felicity, for th we were created, and for this  things were created.
Let vs thinke that wee l all the time, that wee spen in it, and whatsoeuer time d passe awaye without it (so th a lawefull cause doeth not h der) let vs suppose that it is l of vs.
Let vs handle all our ot businesse rather in bodye, th in spirit, rather with our han then with our heartes, acc ding to the counsell of the postle, saying: This then I  Brethren, because the time is sh 1. Cor. 7. hereafter that both they which 

wiues, bee as though they had one: And they that weepe, as hough they wept not: and they bat reioice, as though they reioy|ed not: and they that buye, as hough they possessed not: And ey that vse this worlde, as though hey vsed it not: for the fashion of his worlde goeth awaye. Seeing erefore that all these thinges e so short and brickle, they eserue not to be embraced with at loue and affection, which at chiefest good deserueth to e loued.
This is of so great moment, at of it alone dependeth the der of a spirituall life, as ma|festly is shewen by this Argu|ent: In morall actions the end he roote and the foundation that, which is to bee done: refore if the endes be orde| after a due and right maner

and by direct meanes, all thinges tending to them shall bee rightly ordered: but if the endes be disor|dered, chaunged and peruerted all things thither tending shall be disordred and preuented.
Therefore imagine, and firmely propound vnto thy selfe, that th cheefe foundation and ground o thy life is to bee conuersant an familiar with God; thinke tha this is thy ioy, that this is thin inheritance, that this is thy trea sure, and that this is thy cheefe good: shut thine eyes at all oth thinges, and trample them vnd thy feete, that thou mayst end uour this one thing to wit, who to deuote thy selfe vnto God. F this study (as we haue sayd) is th end, for which wee were create This is the best worke, that can done of any creature: this is  best part that Mary hath chose

this is most acceptable vnto God: this is most agreeable vnto his worship: this is the worke  la|bour of a conte~platiue life, which is more excellent and more per|fect then the actiue: to be breefe heere our heart is exercised in the actuall loue of God, which is the best of all our labours. For as Thomas Aquinus saith, the inner|most affection of charitye is the most excellent, and of all those affections that proceed from ma~, t is the moste acceptable vnto God.
Therefore to what study more excellent, or to what businesse more noble canst thou apply thy inde? If thou be a friend vnto cience, and desirest to bee taught ue Wisedome, bee secure and ithout dread, God doth heere each his friendes and familiars ch deep misteries and secrets, as

doe exceede all Philosophy. Be|sides the wisedome, that God de liuereth here, is so high, and ex|cellent, that it excelleth all gole that is, mans wisedome bein compared with it, is as a corne sande, and all siluer entring com|parison with it, is as clay.
Furthermore as no end is to b preferred before this, so neyth are other businesses and occup tions to be preferred before th exercises and meanes, by whi this end is obtayned. Whatso uer is in the world, is accident and vnstable: onely the loue God mounteth aboue all thing ruleth  preuaileth in all thin and gouerneth all things. Th is not any sinne more grieuo then to place Dagon by the A of the couenaunt, as the P stines did: but the Arke of couenant is to be seated in a m

high and eminent place, and agon is to bee cast vppon the arth groueling before the Arke f the Lord.
The loue of the end being thus rdered and disposed, all ourlife all be well ordered, but if the ue of the end be disordered, all r life will be confused and di|rbed.


F CERTAINE COM|on temptations, which are wont very much to molest and trou|ble those that are deuout and giuen to Praier. CHAP. XXIX.

IME and place nowe re|quireth, that we speake of the

more common and vsuall temptati|ons, which are wont very much to annoy and disquiet deuout men, and also that we entreate of the remedies against them.

OF THE FIRST AND most vsuall temptations, which is the want of spirituall con|solations.
THe first temptation, which is incident to very many, i too much griefe, which doeth af|flict them, when they feele not  sensible Deuotion, and when sp rituall comforts doe faile the For many when they find neyth these consolations, nor can she teares, are so troubled and mol sted in their exercises, that th fall into temptation of faint-har ednes  distrust: supposing th

God is angry with them,  that he doth loue them no more, to whome hee denyeth his wonted oyes, and accustomed consola|tions.
There be others who when di|uine consolations doe fayle them foorthwith, haue recourse vnto humane comforts, and begin to crye at the gate of the flesh, when they perceiue that the other door s shutte against them: so that hese doe no longer continue nor perseuere in the way of the Lord, hen the diuine consolations and eauenly influences are powred owne vpon them: but as soone s these are taken away, presently ey withdraw themselues from eir interprised endeuours, and ll into a forgetfulnesse of them|lues. No fruit nor commodi| is to be looked for of these, so ng as they loyter and wauer

after this manner. For they are A Simily. as that vnprofitable seede in the Gospell, that fell vppon stonye ground, where it had not much earth, and anon it sprong vp, be|cause it had no depth of earth,  when the Sunne rose vp, it was parched, and for lacke of rooting, withered away. Such neuer haue any stability nor steedfastnesse in their manner of liuing: for euen A Simily. as the Sea swelleth when the Moone encreaseth, and ebbeth, when it decreaseth: so these are gouerned by the fluxe  refluxe of spirituall consolations: nowe they haue their sences and spirits gathered together, presently af|ter dispersed  disseuered: some|times they are deuout, somtimes vndeuout and dissolute: nowe quiet, nowe vnquiet: for whe they haue none other ground no constancye besides diuine con|solations,

they cannot be stable nor constant in their maner of li|uing.
In like maner there be many, who when they doe not finde in their prayers those teares, and that compunction, they wishe, they endeuour to wrest it foorth by violence, and to expresse it as it were by the force  strength of their armes: who by howe much more they labour in this kinde, by so much they become harder, and more desolate and destitute of their purpose.
Which the Lorde hath so dis|posed, that they may vnderstand that this water  moysture is not of bloud, but of heauen: and that it is not compassed by mans strength, but is waited for by hu|mility and patience, when and howe the Lorde will giue it: for he it is, as it is written in Iob,

Who bindeth the waters in his cloudes, and the cloude is not bro|ken vnder them, who holdeth back the face of his throne,  spradeth his cloud vpon it. Who couereth the light Iob. 36. with the cloudes, and commandeth it to come againe.
But that it may more manifest|ly be declared, which hath been spoken, I will in this place set downe the causes, for which god many times doth withdrawe and deny vnto his, spirituall con|solations, and what at this time is to be done.



REASONS OR CAVSES, for which God now and then de|nieth to his friendes spiri|tuall consolations. CHAP. XXX.
FIrst and formost in this place we are to knowe, that God doth not alwaies take comfortes and consolations from his ser|uants, because their sinnes and of|fences haue deserued it: but ofte~|times for other causes: Among which this is first and chiefest, 1 that the health and life of the righteous may be preserued. For nowe and then it commeth to passe, that such is the greatnesse of ioye and comfort, which is felt in praier, and which God be|stoweth of his bounty, wisedome

and goodnesse vpon his, that if it should long continue, neyther the feeble bodye could beare it, neyther coulde they remember, what the necessity of their body required: but they would neglect to relieue themselues.
Therefore our gratious Lorde doth sometimes take from them those consolations and that ce|lestiall sweetnesse, that they may recure the weakenesse of their bo|dy, and so their life might be pre|serued without miracle, which being continued, they at the last might enioy a greater and a more royall crowne.
Sometimes hee doeth this 2 that humility may be preserued, that we may know that this goo when we haue it, is not ours, bu his: and therefore that we can|not haue it when wee would but when it pleaseth GOD, t

giue it vnto vs.
For this cause, saieth a cer|taine holy man, it is often de|nyed, when it is sought for; and it is graunted, when it is not expe|cted: that thereby it may appeare that it is the worke of the diuine grace.
In like manner God doeth a|way 3 his consolations, that hee may prooue and trie vs: that is, hat he may see whether we will e faithfull friendes vnto him at all times: as well in aduersitye, s in prosperitie: or whether wee serue him for our own com|moditye, or rather for his glo|y and loue. For a true friend, Prou. 17.  Salomon saieth, loueth at all mes: and a brother is borne for duersity.
Sometimes God doth this, that 4 y this meanes hee may take a|ay the occasion, that man may

not alwaies be occupied in the exercise of a contemplatiue life: but that he also may descende to the actiue, in which also it be|hooueth vs to be exercised, that we may be skilfull and expert in all kinde of vertue, that we may saye with the Prophet: My heart is prepared O God, my hart is prepared. He saieth twise pre|pared, that hee might signifie that his heart was prepared for the consolations of a contempla|tiue life, and also for the trou|bles of an actiue, for the sweete|nesse of the diuine loue, and for laboures for the loue of his neigh|bour, for the Crosse, and for the kingdome, to supp with the Lord at his table, and to descende with him to the battaile.
This is that the wiseman ad|monisheth vs of, when he saith: Let not thine hande be stretched

out to receiue, and close fisted to giue. For we must not onely bee prepared to receiue diuine graces but also to be sacrificed for him, if need require.
Happy is that soule, whose hart is so disposed, and who remayn|ing in that perfect subiection en|ioyeth perfect liberty, as a perfect handmayde of God, being in deed a Lady ouer all thinges: for she subiecteth all thinges vnder her, neither can any thing disturb her peace. All men cannot aspire o this degree of perfection: for Saint Gregorie saith, that there re but a few, which come to that xterity, which Aoth had, of Iud. 3. whome the Scripture sayth: that ee vsed both hands as his right and: who is a figure of perfect en, who are no lesse dexterous d expert in the workes and la|ours of the actiue life, then in the

sweetnes and delicacies of the contemplatiue, which certainely is graunted but to very few.
It also happeneth that there are certaine religious persons 5 found, which alwaies in a man|ner liue in the continuall drynesse of heart, and that not through their owne sault, but because it so pleaseth the Lord, who wil not alwaies bring his elect by the same way, nor saue them after one manner: but after many and sun|dry waies: that so his Wisedome, and prouidence might more ap|peare through those sundrye meanes, which he vseth in pro|moting and procuring the salua|tion of his elect.
Therefore hee doth not worke alwayes after the same manner, as they that doe all thinges after one example and type: but after many and sun|dry

wayes, as hee that is free,  can doe whatsoeuer it pleaseth his diuine Maiestie.
So that as hee himselfe is an infinite vertue: so hath hee dy|uers wayes to worke our salua|tion. I knowe, sayth a certaine Doctor, that this Doctrine wil be very welcome vnto certaine luke warme and idle persons: for they are wont to take this to veyle and cloake theyr negligence, saying: that they feele and taste no Deuo|tion not through their own neg|ligence, but by the diuine dis|pensation, when notwithstand|ng the cause of this their want s, that they are negligent and slouthfull in theyr Pray|ers, and that they wyth|drawe themselues from all good exercyses: neyther will hey knocke at hys gate, who neuer dispyseth theyre.

prayers, that pray feruently: but giueth them that they desire, or at least that which is conuenient  wholesome for them.
Besides the reasons remem|bred, there is another, and that God deny|eth comfort vnto his, that they be more per|fect. not the least, to wit, because God wold lift vp his elect to the high|est degree of perfection. For wee must not be ignorant, that spiritu|all consolations are the foode o infants, and the sweet milke, with which God nourisheth his, and calleth them from the pleasureso the world, that they being ina moured with the sweetnesse o these delights, may dispise al othe allurements,  being wholy pos sessed with the plesantnes of th diuine loue, may cast a way all th loue of this world. For otherwis men (so great is their weakenes could neuer bee brought to r nounce one loue, except the

found another more sweet, more pleasant, and more excellent: by which they being allured, might of their own accord forsake their former.
For this cause we see that ma|ny times the comfortes of young eginners are greater and more ensible, then theyrs, who haue eene longer exercised: for God eth that they are most necessa| for young beginners,  there|re according to the equality of heir disease, hee prouideth a re|edy for them.
But after that they bee some|hat growen, and haue encreased rough the nourishment of this od, God willeth, that they leaue  to bee children, that they ab|aine from milke, and that they e fed with more solide meate. hen I was a child, sayth the A|stle, 1. Cor. 13. I spake as a childe, I thought

as a childe: but when I became  man, I put away childish thinges. S we see among birdes, and brut beastes, howe when they hau brought foorth their young, bot the dammes together doe bring foode to the nest, and doe feed them without any trouble or la|bour of theirs: but when they are growen fledge, and haue fea thers and winges, the damme prouoke them to flye abroad to seeke theyr owne liuing,  tha they now leaue that vnperfect and idle life, and begin a bet|ter.
After the same manner o good God dealeth with his spiri ritual children, who as hee is th author both of nature  grace; s in both of them he worketh afte one and the selfe same manner But for this change, the deuotio and loue of good men towarde

God muste not bee diminished: but rather increased, and chan|ged for the better: for albeit hat loue is more sweet, yet this s stronger: that more feruent, his more peaceable: that grea|er in the fleshe, this greater in he spirit; that a man may say with the Apostle: Although we aue knowne Christ after the flesh, 2. Cor. 5. et now hencefoorth know we him o more.
When a man commeth to his estate, now he fainteth no more in tribulations, albeit the consolations themselues do faile: ea hee doth diligently watch, nd is verye carefull ouer him|elfe; whether the consolations e sent, or no.
To this degree of perfec|on all the louers of God ought o aspire: which if at length they ttain vnto, let them render to the

Lord moste harty thankes, who hath deliuered them out of the swadling bands of infantes, and hath brought them to an estate more safe and secure. The childe grew, saith the Scripture, and was Gen. 21. weaned: and Abraham made a great feast that same day, that Isaac was weaned. We are diligently to note in this place, that the Patri|arke did not make a feaste that day the child was born, when the whole family did reioyce for the birth of Isaac, but that day when he was weaned, when he cried fo his mothers dugge. How much more excellent a banket will tha eternall Father make, when he see his children weaned from al pleasures, not onely carnall an worldly, but also spirituall? Ther shall be great ioy in heauen, sayt Luk. 15. the Lord, in the presence of the An|gels of God, for one sinner that con|uerteth

albeit the vine be but yet in the bud, and be easily nipped of a small frost. But when it hath es|caped that danger, and beginneth to bring foorth clusters of grapes, then the Angels do sing Psalmes of degrees: for then the soule is ioyned by a directe orderto the first degree of perfection, euen to the last.
The first degree is to worke, and to perseuere in well doing, vntill comfort be found: and the ast is, to doe the same, whether consolations bee enioyed or not enioyed. For the soule that loueth God truely, can do nothing more acceptable vnto him, then pati|ently to suffer, if God at any time ake away that sweetnes  plea|santnes of his taste. It is manifest, hat Dauid had a great care of his, when hee protested by his Diuine consolation, saying;

Lord, if I haue beene high minded, Psal. 131. or exercised my selfe in great mat|ters, that are to high for me, the~ let my soule be euen as a weaned child. Which is, as if he should say, if I be not humble, let thy scourge come vpon me, that I may be lef and forsaken of thee, none other wise then a child that is weane and put from his mothers breasts.
How great then shall the per|fection of that soule bee, which comming to the breasts of diuin consolations, findeth them ma|ny times as it thinketh drye an barren, and yet patiently bearet it, and neuerthelesse continuet in innocency?
Therefore it is no maruell,  there bee ioy in Heauen in th preasence of Angelles, whe they see the righteous destitu of all comforte vpon the eart for they see Isaac taken out 

his swadling cloathes, put from is dugge, and by little and lit|tle to growe a perfecte man. God is wont to bestowe vpon men, that are come to this degree, part of his secrets, as vp|n them, that are perfect: accor|ding to that excellent testimony of Esay;
Whome shall God teach know|dge? and whome shall hee make Esay. 28. o vnderstand the thinges that hee eareth? them that are weaned om the milke, and drawen from be breastes: that is, them that for e loue of God haue renoun|ed all pleasures, not onelye emporall, but also spyritu|all.
For these and such like cau|s God oftentymes wythdraw|h from his seruantes spiry|all consolations: by which asons it appeareth that it

is often done without the fault o man, as the spouse her selfe test fieth in the Canticles, in thes wordes; I opened to my welbeloued Cant. 5. but my welbeloued was gone, an past: I sought him, but I could n finde him: I called him, but hee a swered me not. She opened to h Vpon the 5. Chap. of the Cant. welbeloued, signifiyng (as Sai Gregory sayth) that she did, wh she could doe, or what she oug to haue done, as far foorth as l in her, to receiue her bridegroo opening her heart, (which befo was hard) for the loue of Christ,  making free entraunce for h Bridegroome knocking at t doore, all vaine pleasures bei remoued out of the way. And y she found him not, because G often so disposeth it, for the gr ter good of his elect, as wee ha sayd before.
The starre which led the Wi Math. 2.

men out of the East, did not al|waies goe before them: but som|times did hide it selfe,  a little after was seene againe: yet both was for their benefit. Whe~ it first ppeared, it inuited them to the worship of the newe King; when t appeared not, it made the~ more ilige~t in searching out the place, where this new King should bee orne: and when it appeared a|aine, it doubled their ioy,  led em the right way, vntill it stood er the house, in which Christ as.
But what doe I speake of the r hid from the Wisemen, when  Christ a child of twelue yeeres d withdrew himself from most ocent Mary? what had she de|ued that shee should loose her ne? But the mother lost him  our comfort: sought him for  example,  found him for our

health and cure. She sought him with griefe and diligence: found him with ineffable ioy  gladnes, neyther was her loue di|minished in eyther, yea it encrea|sed, although after a differen manner: for in his absence he desire encreased, and in his pre|sence her ioy.
After this manner the true Su of righteousnes doth often arise and come vnto vs: and somtime again he goeth out of our climat yet both is for our good, and fo the repayring and amendment o our life.
Corne cast into the earth, mu haue a time as well to bee kep A Simily. cold, and to be hardned, as to b softened  kept warme, yet ne ther of these hurteth it: for by th cold  hardnes it taketh deep rooting in the earth;  by the so|nes  heate it encreaseth  spro

teth aboue the earth. If all the time the graine had beene kept warm, it would haue had no roo|ting downewards, so that a small winde would haue ouerthrowne it. So that both of these is necessa|ry, one y^e it may sprout aboue the earth, the other y^ it may take deep rooting downwards. Both sea|sons are necessary for our soules, hat they may encrease in cha|itye, and bee rooted in humi|ity. As often as they waxe cold nd drye, they knowe theyr ouerty,  are made more hum|le. But when they are visited f God, they taste of his ineffa|le sweetnesse, and are fur|er kindled and inflamed by his ue.
Seeing therfore that it behoo|th a man both to knowe God d himselfe (for the one know|dge without y^e other is not suffi|cient)

it is needfull that there be two seasons, assigned for these two knowledges: one in which man may know by experience his owne miserie: the other in which by the same experience hee may learne to know the diuine mercy, that by this knowledge hee may be more lifted vp to the loue of God,  by the other that he may more basely account of him|selfe.
By this it is manyfest, how gree|uously they erre, who relinquishe their exercise, and vtterly cast it off, when as by and by they finde not diuine consolations, when they seeke for them,  when they desire them.
It is monstrous and shamefu that any one should wishe tha God should bee pinned to h sleeue, and bound to him wit a chayne, that so often as h

list hee may pull him by the sleeue: so that if hee bee not foorthwith present with him, hee will seeke for him no more.
Worthyly did that holy wid|dow Iudith blame them, who had set downe a time, when God should help them, in which time, if he did not succour them, they decreede to looke for his ayde no longer.
Who are you, saith she, that haue tempted God? this manner of dea|ling Iudith. 8. is not the way to procure mer|cy, but rather to prouoke anger,  kindle furie. Doe you appoint a time for the mercy of the Lord? and set downe a day, when he should deliuer you?
They are worthye of the ame reprehention, who present|y would finde God, as soone as hey seeke for him: and vnlesse

foorthwith they finde him, by  by they dispaire, neyther vouch|safe they to seeke for him any fur|ther.


WHAT A MAN ought to doe, when as the current of the diuine consolations is stayed. CHAP. XXXI.
VVHen as thou seest thy selfedestitute of diuine consolations, thou must not in|termit nor breake off thine accu|stomed exercise of prayer, albeit it seeme vnsauery vnto thee. Yea then thou must come before the presence of the Lord, as one guil|ty and culpable, to examine, and with great diligence to search

thine owne conscience, and to make inquisition, whether it bee thy fault that thou hast lost the co~forts of the holy Ghost. Which if thou findest to be so, cast thy selfe humbly before his feet with that holy sinner,  feare with the Publican to lift vp thine eyes to heauen: cast thy selfe vpon the bowels of his infinite loue,  be|seech him with great trust  con|fide~ce, that he wold pardon thee,  shew thee the riches of his m|estimable patience  mercy: as well in expecting, as in pardoning him, of whome so often hee hath been prouoked to anger. If thou wilt doe this, thou shalt, extract and drawe fruite out of thy dry|nesse, yea out of thine offence; hereby taking occasion to aumble thy selfe, whylst thou eest the greatnesse of thy innes; and further cause of

greater loue to God, whilst thou seest how many and howe great sinnes he hath forgiuen thee. And also thou shalt be more wary and circumspect afterwardes, that thou sleep not, or be secure in the fight, when it goweth on: for this is the vsuall and common com|moditity, which the righteous re|ceiue by their fals.
And although in thine exer We must do that in prai|er that we may. cises thou feelest no sweetnes, yet thou must not abstaine from the~: for it is not necessary, that it shuld alwaies be sweet, which is profi|table: for oftentimes the contrary hapneth.
What shall become of the sic and weake, if they wholy abstain from meate, because they find no sauour in it? it is requisite tha somtimes they eat without taste that by little and little togethe with their helth, they may recoue

their taste. This experience teach|eth, that a man, as often as he con|tinueth in prayer with some at|tentiuenes and diligence, doing that little he can, that at length he goeth away ioyfull  full of con|solation: seeing that little he did for his part, and vnderstanding that he can doe much before the Lord, who doth all that he can, although it be but little.
That poore Widdowe cast no more into the treasurie but Luke. 21. two mites, and yet by the sen|tence of Christ she is extolled a|boue al the rich, who cast in much more. For the Lord respecteth not the quantity of the gift offer|ed, but especially the ability and vill of the giuer. He giueth much who desireth to giue enough, who giueth that he hath, who keepeth othing to himself, who omitteth othing that lyeth in him.

What great matter is it to pray, when many consolations are present? euery worldly man can doe this.
It is a hard thing when the de|uotion is small, then to powre foorth longer prayers, to haue greater humility patience,  per|seuerance in good workes. The cheefest commendation of a Pi|lot A Simily. of a ship is not in that he know eth well to guide his vessel, when the sea is calme: but when a tem|pest approacheth, then to know how to giue saile,  how to take it in, how to guide the sterne, how to man his ship, howe to con|quer fortune by diligence, an by arte to ouercome the fury o the wind, this is praise worthy i deed. When con|solation; are absent we must watch the more dili|gently.
Secondly, it is necessary th at that time, there bee great feare and diligence in thee, the

at other times: for then we must stand vpon our watch, and vpon our court of guarde: our words, workes, thoughts, and whatsoe|uer is ours is then to be examined and searched into. For because spirituall ioy doth then fayle vs, which in this our Nauigation is the chiefest oare, it is to be sup|plyed with diligence and attenti|on; although this also be grace, and that not the least. When thou seest thy selfe in this estate, thou must looke (as Saint Bernarde sayth) whether the sentinelles, which did keepe thee, doe sleep: or whether the wall is fallen downe, which did defend thee, or then all thy hope is to be pla|ed in thy weapons.
For then the wall will not de|ende thee, but thy weapons, nd thy skill in fighting.

O how great is the glory of that soule, which defendeth her selfe without a shield,  fighteth without weapons, is strong with|out fortitude, and fighting onely receiueth strength without help.
Among all the valiantes and worthies of Dauid, Benaiah is es|pecially 2. Sam. 23. praysed, who slew a Lion in the time of snow. It is great glory to kill a Lion; but much greater to kil him in winter time, when the handes are benum|med with colde, so that they can scarcely brandish a swoorde. Wherefore when the soule is al|together colde and frozen, ney|ther feeleth any heate of charitye in her: yet if shee at that time fight valiantly with the roaring Lyon, and ouercome him, is she not worthy to be numbred wit the valiants of Dauid, that is, wit the worthies of Iesus Christ?

There is no greater praise in this orlde, then to imitate the ver|es of our Sauiour: but among is vertues it is reckoned a chiefe ne, that he bare those things, hich he suffered, hauing not the ast comfort in the inferiour part f his soule. He therefore that so uffereth, and so fighteth, shal by  much be a more perfecter imi|atour of Christ, as he is further ff from all consolation.
This is to drinke of the pure cup f obedience, which is not mi|ed with any other liquor, which ight mitigate the bitternesse of , but onely with the strength of ertue.
This is that true touchstone, by which is tried who is golde, and who is lead: who is Gods true iend, and who is false.
Tell me, whether shee be the A Simily. ore faithfull wife, and worthier

to be esteemed of her husban which doth that she ought and meete, hauing her husbande a waies before her eies, who almo euery houre bestoweth gifts an benefits vpon her: or she, that farre off from her husband, wh among many letters, scarce rece ueth one from him, and yet ne uerthelesse continueth vnto hi firme in her loue, and steedfast i her fidelity? Then much mor glorious shal that soule be whic by manye daies being seperate from her bridegroome, yet sti preserueth her innocency, saying with Iob, Loe, though he slay m Iob. 13. yet will I trust in him.
That is not good ground, whic  Simily. bringeth foorth no fruit, nor nou risheth the seede, except it be continually watered: but that i good ground, and deserueth co~|mendation, which during bot

the heate of the Sunne, and the olde of winter, yet preserueth at, which was committed vnto , and doth cherish and nourish . That friend is highly to be e|eemed, who in the time of trou|le doth not depart from his fi|elity: but they, that follow Christ long as they maye eate of his read, and afterwards slip away: hey I say are not to be called his true friendes, but louers of themselues,  of their owne commo|dity.



AGAINST THEM that contemne and deride di|uine consolations. CHAP. XXXII.
ALL that, which hithert hath beene spoken, is nece|sary to heale their griefe, wh dispaire, and faint in heart, whe a sensible deuotion (as they ca it) is denyed vnto them, and a sp rituall consolation. But becau our wickednesse and peruersen is so great, that oftentimes o medicine it maketh a poyso whilest that it applyeth that to a other, which was purposed f this disease; we are to admoni in this place, that that which  therto hath beene spoken, ha

not beene saide, that therby men ould become more colde and egligent: but onely, that cou|ge and strength may be giuen o those, who are fainthearted  strustfull. For there be some, ho out of this doctrine take an ccasion to contemne, and basely ccount of diuine consolations, d exercises, by which they are btained, saying, that the sancti| and perfection of a christian e, doth not consist in spirituall nsolations, but in vertue. A Least men should co~|demne the~|selues, they contemne diuine con|solations. an doeth hate nothing more, en to bee condemned by his wne sentence:  because proud en, who neuer tasted, what god  should be condemned by that hich they are, if it be true, that y sanctity be placed in diuine nsolations: therefore they haue nd a meane to extenuate and ntemne them, least they should

haue that in themselues, whic might confound themselues, see|ing themselues naked and so fa off from all these consolation Miserable are ye, because ye ta not, how sweete the Lord is, b much more wretched are yee who that yee may excuse yo negligence, doe so we the poyso of a new errour, darkening th light of trueth, that your own malitiousnesse may not be seen and so you hide the key of wis dome and knowledge, neyth entering your selues into hea|uen, nor suffering others to e ter, for yee shut the way again them with two errours, which y haue learned in the schoole  your owne negligence.
Tell me, with what colour yee flourish ouer this your d ctrine, that ye make so small a|count of spirituall consolation

member that this doctrine is or deliuered to the negligent  outhfull (as yee bee) but to ose, that be faint-hearted and eake, who presentlye are dis|uraged, if they finde not that elpe. If an arrogant and a pre|mptuous man should feele in mselfe that comfort  strength hich by the vertue of Gods ord is giuen vnto the fearefull, d to them that are of a small th, to what other thing should profit him, but that thereby he ay be made the worser? If a other should laye in a corner A Simily. her house ratesbane or some er poyson to kill mise and s, and it should be founde of r children, and eaten; would t that bee to the destruction druine of her house, which she rposed should haue beene a nefit? After the same manner

these wicked men doe peruert al good and wholesome doctrines abusing them for themselues which are deliuered for others alwaies very studiously endeuou ring to defend the loosenesse an dissolutenes of their life.
Ye say that sanctity consistet Diuine co~|solations for what they are profitable. not in spirituall consolations Surely it is true, that sanctity co sisteth not in them, but yet the bring a great helpe vnto sanctity perfection is not placed in the but yet they are principall instr|ments for the attaintment of pe|fection.
Ye say that these consolatio are rather a part of the reward then of the desert. And this is  so true: but this reward bei seene, and tasted by experien doth kindle, and stirre vppe  heart to laboures, and that the desire to attaine so grea

good. For euen as a stone is mo|ed A Simily. more swiftly, when it appro|heth nearer his ce~ter (as the Phi|sophers say) because it now be|inneth to tast and feele the ver|e and conueniency of his natu|all place: so also mans hart crea|d of God, is more strongly mo|ed, when it nowe beginneth to ele and tast somewhat of his reator.
Ye say that the perfection of a hristian life is not placed in ma| consolations, but in bearing tiently, when they are denyed. either can I deny this: but to|ther with this patience great igence must be ioined: that the ace lost may be recouered, that al times we may bee ready for e diuine worship and ministery. r vnlesse there had beene great ckes and motiues, which stirre a man with great alacritye to

runne the way of the Lorde, t Prophet Dauid had not saide; haue runne the way of thy comma|dements, Psal. 119. because thou hast enl|ged mine heart: which is done  ioy and spirituall gladnesse: a this ioye is one of the especi fruites of the holy Ghost, wh by our heart is enlarged, and st red vp to all good. For as natur pleasure is the principall moti and cause of all the actions of n ture: so spirituall pleasure is t cause of al the actions of gra Therefore it is saide of the P et; Euery ones pleasure draw him on.
There fore that I may concl and shut vppe this matter, I sa that it behooueth vs so to wa betweene these two extream that when the grace of the di consolations is absent, we  not discourage our selues,

distrust God: neither that we be together secure and carelesse, hen we haue lost it, but that we e and suffer all things, and doe hat lyeth in vs, that we may couer it againe.


F THE SECONDE emptation, that is, of the war of importunate and outra|gious thoughts. CHAP. XXXIII.
like manner the troubles and arre of importunate and vn|ly thoughtes is a grieuous ptation, and not much diffe|g from the former, which ffle in themselues in the time raier, and do cause a man now

and then to forsake his exercise and this is that, which the deuil seeketh for in this his tempta|tion.
Why this punishment is infli|cted vpon men I know not, vnle perhaps, because they are men for this weakenesse of our natu is bred and borne with the estate which we now liue in. For ma nature through sinne is so diso dered, that the inferiour powe and faculties of our soule doe no perfectly obey the superiour pa where the will and the reaso are.
Hence it is that the sensual ap petite doth oftentimes vexe an trouble the superiour part wi many passions and desires, ney|ther haue we power to curbe an Our imagi|nation of|tentimes slippeth out of doores we being against it. conquer these first motions. O imagination also, which is an ther faculty of our soule, doe

sometimes steale away, and pri|uily slippe out of the house with|out leaue or license, wee percea|uing it, and yet not able to hinder t. This is so naturall and famili|r, that albeit men be growen to some perfection yet they cannot e altogether free from this passi|on. All the plagues of Egipt were eyther taken away, or mi|igated by the prayer of Moses; et we do not read that the gnats nd flies were taken away: that hereby might be insinuated, that lthough men grow to some per|ection of life, that they rid them|elues of foule  enormous sins, etthese gnats  flies, which are ore importunate, then hurtfull, re not altogether taken away.
Sometimes also these vnseaso|able  vnconuenient thoughts oe happen vnto vs through our wne actuall fault and will, and

then also are we worthyly puni|shed, for there is neuer fitter time nor place for punishment, then where there is a fault and an offence.
We must here note, that as in other conditions and natural pro|prieties, one is more vehemen then another: for there is no less difference of mindes, then of cou~ tenances (in which nature shew eth great variety and art) so als this importunity and outragiou nes of thoughts is naturally mor troublesome to one, then to an ther: yet he that is more tro bled and vexed, and weaker  make resistance must not dispai but contrarily plucke vp his sp|rits: for by how much men a the poorer, so much more  tle and right haue they, th rich men, to craue ayde and  leeue at places of hospitality a

succour: so hee that is more af|flicted and troubled, hath iuster cause to desire ayde and help at the bounty of the Diuine mer|cy.
For the Apostle saith, that the Rom. 8. oly Ghost, who very wel know|th how little wee can doe, doth elpe our infirmity, and that so uch the more, by how much ur necessity craueth it, as a good A Simily. oushoulder doth, who giueth to is sicke seruant more dayntye eates, then hee doth to the st, not because hee is worthy| then the rest, but because e is weaker, and in greater ed.
For these causes we conclude, at a man ought not too much afflict himselfe with griefe, whe~ is set vpon by these vagabond d disordred thoughtes, but ke by all meanes by calling

vpon God to expell them, which if he doth, they shall not so much offend God, as moue him vnto mercy and compassion, whilst he seeth how fouly our nature is cor|rupted by sinne, that scarcely we can lift vp our hearts to heauen, but presently vncleane thoughts do depresse it, and draw it down|wards. For which cause we must thinke, that as a father, who hath A Simily. a lunatike and a frantike son doth lament and grieue, when he hea|reth his son to talke wisely wi him, and presently seeth him fal out of his wittes, and run madde so also that our heauenly father doeth grieue and lament (if so i could be) when he seeth the cor|ruption of our nature to bee so great, that in that very time, wee are talking wisely with him, forth|with wee run here and there, an vage and wander through a thou

sand cogitations. He therefore that will go to prayer, ought be|fore all thinges to cast away all wandering thoughtes, and vaine cares, and alone without a com|panion ascende with Moses into he mountaine, that he maye alke with God, and the doore of Math 6. is chamber beeing shutte (as our Sauiour sayeth) hee must praye to is father in secret. But if for all his, the gnats and flies, that we aue spoken of, come to annoy hee: doe as in times past Abra|am Gen. 15. did, who when he offered a acrifice vnto God, and the foules escended vpon the sacrifice, he riue them away, that he might eepe his sacrifice cleane. If thou alt do the same, be assured, that ou shalt exceedingly please god y this sight, and that God will entifully shew the riches of his odnes vnto thee.

And the Deuill, who came merry to this combate, shall re|turne, from whence he came sor|rowfull and confounded: and he that would haue destroied thee, shall giue thee an occasion of greater glory.
Wherefore if thy minde bee chast and pure, if thou commest not to God, to satisfie thine owne will, but for loue of him, neither respectest the house of thy belo|ued, but the beloued himselfe, there is no cause, why thou shoul|dest be sad and sorrowful; for he will giue thee what thou desirest, and that which best pleaseth him, although it be not altogether so delectable. We must here note that this combate and strife wit these cogitations ought not to b done with too much labor,  to much reluctation of spirit, as som vnwisely do, who thinke that the

can cure this inconuenience with great and vehement endeuours and striuings: and they doe so plunge and turmoyle themselues in this combate, that at the length they weary and hurt both heart and head.
Whence it commeth, that they cannot long continue in prayer: and when they haue once for|saken it, they naturally abhorre it, and are afrayde to returne vn|to it, as to a thing full of griefe  labour.
This is a verye great errour: for it is not a businesse of force nd vyolence, but rather of hu|ility and grace: Therefore it is he best remedy for a man in this ase, that he co~fidently turn him|elf vnto the Lord,  humbly say; rd respect who I am? what dost hou respect of this dung, but a lthy  stinking smel? what dost

thou look for of this earth, cursed of thy mouth, and excommuni|cated of thee, but thornes and bri|ers? For this is the fruite, which it is wont to bring foorth, vnlesse thou O Lord otherwise comman|dest. After that he hath thus spo|ken let him returne to his former exercise, and let him expect with patience the visitation of the lord, who is not wont to be slow.
But that this may be vnderstood the better, wee must obserue in this place, that our heart is like a morish  fenny lake, which doth send foorth many grosse vapours, by which it doeth so darken the ayre, that scarce any thing can be seene cleerely in it: but when the Sun ariseth, by little and little those vapours are dissolued, and vanish away, and the heauen be|commeth faire and cleere. Ou heart is of the same nature, an

must haue the same remedy to dissipate and disseuer the cloudes and mists of cogitations, procee|ding from it.
Therefore it is very profitable counsell, that we doe not forth|with discourage our selues, when these grosse fogges and mistes do appeare, but that we be patient and long suffering: for by little  little the heate of Deuotion will arise in our soule, which when it s entred in, it will dissolue the fogges and mistes of cogitations, nd will make the heauen of our eart cleare and faire. Which be|ng done, tranquillity will ensue, nd quietnes and rest from al for|er labour. They that dispatch eir busines after this manner, do ot feele in it any plague or pu|ishment, but rather peace and reat co~solation: neither do they efuse to returne vnto prayer a|gaine,

as the former doe, but scarcely one praier being ended, they forthwith thinke of another: and at the first occasion they re|turne vnto it, as to a thing of great plesure, other busines being either left alone, or speedily dispatched: for it is written, They that eat me, shall haue the more hunger, and they Eccl. 24. that drinke me, shal thirst the more. This then is the reason, why some flie the labors of praier, as a thing trouble some and tedious: and o|thers perseuere in it, as in a thing delightfull and pleasant: which they very well know, who haue learned that by experience, which in this place we haue taught.



OF THE THIRD TEMP|tation, to wit, of the cogitations of blasphemy, and in|fidelitie. CHAP. XXXIIII.
THere are also other cogitati|ons more daungerous, and more importunate then the for|mer: which especially are wont o set vpon those, who first enter nto this way: and they be the co|gitations of infidelity, and blas|phemy. For carnalmen, whose co|gitations  desires are wholy car|al, albeit they be conuerted vnto he Lord, yet by  by they cannot orget the figures and similitudes f those things, which they haue eene in the world. For as Rachell when she went out of her cou~try

tooke away with her the idols of her fathers house: so these albe. it they goe out of the world, doe yet carry with them the images  figures of the world: and when they giue themselues to the con|templation of spirituall thinges, foorth with carnall and worldly matters doe represent themselus vnto them.
There be some that are so scan|dalized by this temptation, an do receaue so great hurt by it, tha they suppose the~selues to be cast awayes, and that they are vtterl reprobated of God, seeing them selues to bee impugned and a saulted with so horrible and fea full temptations, and now an then to bee ouer come by them and this is without doubt a v ry great errour. For by ho much a man is further off fro consenting vnto this temptati

or taking delight in it, by so much s he further off from the fault: for ll the danger of this temptation s placed in the delight and con|enting to it.
Therefore it is not a signe of eprobation but these temptati|ns are naturall causes pursuing hat estate, in which man liueth, nd laying hold of the disposition nd habit of mans heart. We see y dayly experience, that if any oysome or stinking thing hath ong layen in a house or shop, hat the stinke remayneth, albeit he thing that made it be cast out f doores. Neither is it maruell, if man smell of that, hee alwaies ateth, or if he speake that idiome nd dialect of speech which hee ath alwaies vsed: yea we are to inke, that as the habit to thinke lwaies euill things, doth so binde man, that he cannot thinke of

good thinges: so on the contra|ry part the vse and custome of good thinges doth so change a man that he thinketh not on euil things. In like ma~ner at y^e very be|ginning many thoughts of faith are wont to impugne and fight We are not toonarrow|ly to prye into those things, which are too high for vs. agaynst a man, especiallye a|gainst the vnderstanding of curi|ous men, not yet mortified: to whom it hapneth, as to a plain and simple country man, who comming into the pallace of a King, where are great store of fayre roomes, and rich furniture, A Simily. he cannot sufficiently wonder at them, hauing neuer seene the like before, and enquireth what is this? and what is that? So a man that bends himself to know al things, and to measure euery thing by the rule of his reason and not by the square of faith; and that accusto|meth not himself to exceed the

lymits and capacity of nature; when he is brought on a sodaine o view the pallace of King Salo|on, the greatnes of his misteries, nd the wonders of his royall ouse, he findeth so many nouels o farre exceeding the capacity of is reason, that he doth not cease o wonder  to demaund of him|elfe; What is this? and what is hat? what need was it for God  make man,  so to suffer him?  such like thinges.
These bee the considerations, ese bee the base and ignoble uestions of this rude and rustick ountrey man, accustomed to is sheepe coates, and now en|euouring to measure the great onders and deep misteryes of e Diuine Wisedome, by the easure of those things hee was ed vnto.
Therefore it is necessary, that

man being mindefull of his bas and abiect condition, doe alwaies thinke, that it is very great pre|sumption, to go about to measur God by himselfe, and to compar diuine things with humane. Fo the magnitude of the diuin things is so great and so wonder|full, that not onely it exceedet all that which man can doe, b al that he can vnderstand, or com|prehend in his minde. Further more, as there is an infinite d stance betweene to be Diuine,  to be created: so is there an i finite distance betweene the ope|rations of them both: for as th essence is, so is the manner of o|peration.
Salomon was a very wise ma yet he confesseth that man can not giue a sound reason of an thing made of God, although  be but small: how then shall h

yeeld a reason of the woorkes of ace that cannot render a reason f the workes of nature, when as ese are much more excellent en those?
As thou knowest not, saith hee, hich is the way of the spirit, nor Eccles. 1. we the bones doe growe in the ombe of her that is with childe, Hierome addeth) nor how of one se element the body of man is gested into diuers shapes  ioynts, d howe of the same seede one part commeth flesh, an other bones, an|her veynes, and another sinewes: thou knowest not the woorke of d that worketh all.
Therefore man considering is, he ought with all humilitye speake vnto himselfe these ordes of the Wiseman; If wee Wised. 9.  hardly discerne the thinges that e vpon the earth, and with great our finde out the thinges which

are before vs, who then can seek out the thinges that are in heauen  who can know the counsell of God  or who can vnderstand what Go will doe?
But what maruell is it that  man cannot search out, nor find out the works of the diuine arte when as oftentimes he cannot co~|prehende the works of other me~ who are of the same nature wit him? If one, saith Chrisostome should shew to another a vesse of excellent fine glasse, who ha neuer seene glasse before,  shul say vnto him; This beautifull  cleere vessell was made of a ce taine kinde of straw, and of san  that which is more, onely b the blast of man: the other woul neyther vnderstand him nor be leeue him, how it could possibl be. If then man ca~not vnderstan the arte  cunning of other me

whythen presumeth he to find out e arte  cunning of that Lord, ho as he is called Wonderfull,  also all his works are wonder|ll?
But what doe I speake of the orkes of other men? Tell mee ow Bees doe build their honny mbes, and temper their honny? owe a spider doth weaue her ebbe? or how a silke worme oth spinne her silke?
Wherefore if thou vnder|andest not the woorkes of ormes, nor canst imytate, hat they doe, why dooest ou in vayne tosse and tur|oyle thy selfe, to searche t and comprehende in thine derstandinge the Dyuyne orkes.
Therefore we haue heere need  great discretion, that man con|dering on the one part, how

base his nature is, and on the |ther of what excellencie the Di|uine nature is, he may follow the counsell of Ecclesiasticus, saying: Seeke not out the thinges that are Eccle. 3. too hard for thee, neither search the things rashly which are too mighty for thee. But what God hath com|maunded thee, think vpon that with reuerence, and be not curious in ma|ny of his workes: for it is not needful for thee, to see with thine eyes the things that are secret. Be not curios in superfluous things, for many things are shewed vnto thee about the capacity of men.
Therefore he that would en|ter into that sanctuary of the di|uine How the diuine works are to be loo|ked into. workes, he must enter with great humility and reuerence, ha|uing the eyes of a simple doue,  not of a crafty serpent: hauing the heart of a simple disciple, and not of a rash iudge. Be thou a ten|der

infant: for to such God is wont to teach his secrets. Do not emaund in euery thing why God hus made this and that. For this word Why is the word of the ser|ent, and the beginning of our estruction.
Shut thine eyes of reason, and pen thine eyes of faith: for faith  the instrument, by which alone iuine things are to be contem|ated and searched into. For the nsideration of humane works, e eye of reason is profitable: t in diuine matters it is rude d vnprofitable, vnlesse it be ay|d by heauenly grace.
Although all these things ge|rally pertaine to all men, yet ore especially they belong vnto ung beginners, who as young ollers  children must before  thinges beleeue; afterwardes owing more expert and ripe,

then they may more safely d|mine  iudge. For as a child A Simily. long as hee learneth his first |ments, ought to beleeue, that  master teacheth him,  not a the reason why this letter is cal A,  that B. But afterwards w hee hath learned to know his l|ters, to spell,  to ioyne toget his sillables he may demaund  reason of euery one of the~. So  that beginneth to consider of,  learne this mistery, first hee m beleeue that which is propou|ed vnto him, the~ he may by li  little proceed to the conte~p|tion of the cohaerence  conue|ency of euery thing. They that  otherwise, shal neuer come to  derstanding, according to tha the Prophet: If yee beleeue no surely ye shall not be Esay. 7. established.



 THE FOVRTH temptation, that is, of too much feare. CHAP. XXXV.
Eare also is wont to trouble  many, but especially wo|, that they dare not goe from pany to prayer, especially e night. There is not a reme| ore effectuall and forcible ercome this affection, then a d courage and perseuerance ine exercise: for this kinde of tation is not conquered by g, but by fighting: yea by fly| Feare is en|creased by flying. eareis encreased, but by figh| it is diminished,  expelled. ee doe not driue feare from A Simily. rous horses by keeping them e stable, but by leadyng

them by force of bit and spur int those places, which they feare: s also a fearefull  timerous mind is to be forced, that at the leng it may put of this vaine feare.
But I demaund of them, w so feare; What doe you feare, a why doe you feare if ye shall s that ye feare those thinges, th are of another life: it is certay that nothing can hurt thee, wit|out the consent and license of  Lord of all thinges. But if he  punish ye, hee can doe it eu where,  at al times: i he wil punish ye, neither the oportun of the place, nor the mallice  your aduersaries can hurt you without him none hath powe harme you.
If yee shall say that yee are  The power of the deuil is curtalled  limitted. raide, because ye feare the de his power is no lesse curtalled  y^e force of others: for his stren

stretcheth no further, then it see|meth good to the Diuine proui|e~ce. The Lion that killed the dis|obedient 3. Reg. 13. Prophet returning fro~ Bethel, did neither teare his dead arkasse, nor hurt his Asse. When hey came that should haue buri|d him, they found the carkasse ast in the way, and the Asse, and e Lyon standing by the deade ody: the Lyon did not eate of e carkasse, nor hurt the Asse. In is figure is shadowed, how the ower of that roaring Lyon is strayned, and how it is bound ithin lymits, and how that hee n extend his power no further, en God giueth him leaue.
And what shall I speake of the atch  ward of Angels, who are The watch and ward of Angels, waies begirting  encompas|g vs for our safety? How can  feare being fortified  fensed th such guardantes,  so many

watchmen. The seruant of Eliseus 4. Reg. 6. feared, seeing the house of his master begirt of enemies. And the Lord opened his eyes, and he sawe, and behold the mountaine was full of horses, and of fiery Chariots for the safegard and de|fence of Eliseus. Albeit thou be not a Prophet, it is sufficient that thou liuest in the feare of God, that thou mayst be partaker of his safegard and custody, according to that of the Prophet, The An|gell of the Lord pitcheth round a|bout Psal. 34. them, that feare him, and deli|uereth them.
The deuils do very well know the strength of this guard,  ther|fore one of the~ talking with God said: Doth Iob feare god for naught Iob. 1. Hast thou not made an hedge abo him and about his house, and abo all that he hath on euery side? th none can hurt him.

Look how the elder brethren doe carry their younger brethren: A Simily. when they are but little ones, in heir armes, and howe they doe The Angels doe carry vs in their armes. eep them with great care and rouidence: after the same man|er those happy spirits, which are s our elder brethren, doe keep  end vs, who are as their younger rethren, and little ones, and doe arry vs in their armes, as Dauid yth: He hath giuen his Angels Psal. 91. harge ouer thee to keep thee in all y wayes: They shall beare thee  their hands, that thou hurt not y foote against a stone. But it is ut a small thing to haue Angels eare vs in theyr handes, see|g that the Lord himselfe, our reator doth it, as the Prophet stifieth, saying: I led Ephraim Osee. 11. so, as one should beare them in his mes, but they knew not that I aled them.

This is the same which he spea|keth by his Prophet Zacharte: He that toucheth you, toucheth the ap|ple Zach. 2. of mine eye. And in the same Prophet he saith, that he will bee vnto vs a wall of fire compassing vs in on euery side. What then doest thou feare  man, being for|tified with such a wall? dost thou thinke it meet that thou shouldst rather credit thy dreames  fan|tasies, then beleeue the diuine works  promisses?
Prayer ought to make thy minde more secure, then any o|ther exercise: for where Prayer is, there (according to the iudg|ment of the best diuines) are the Angels especially present, that they may help vs in our prayer, that they may transport our prai|ers into the presence of the Lord, that they may defende vs from our enemy, and from all others,

which might disturbe that holy silence, according to that which the Bridegroome saith in the Canticles; I charge you, O daugh|ers of Ierusalem, by the roes and by Cant. 2. he hindes of the field, that ye stirre ot vp, nor waken my loue, vntill she lease. In which wordes silence is ot onely imposed vpon the di|els, but also vpon all other crea|ures of the world, that they di|urbe not the spouse of Chryst, nd her sweet sleepe of contem|lation: and also the authoritye f the holy Angels is inserted, ho are vnderstood by the roes d hindes, as well for their iftnes, as for their quicknes of derstanding, as Saint Bernarde yth.
These and such like things are  bee meditated vpon of those at be fearefull, not onely when re doth set vpon them; but also

when they are without feare, for seeing that the affectio~ procee|deth from errour,  false surmise; if so the knowledge of truth hath taken vp the hauen before, er|rour  lyes shall finde no footing in it.


THE FIRST TEMP|tation is to much sleepe. CHAP. XXXVI.
SLeepe also is wont to be tro blesome to many in the ti Diuers causes of sleep. of praier. Sometimes it proceed of necessity, sometimes of in|mity, sometimes of slouthfuln and sometimes it is sent of  deuill, to whome nothing is mo acceptable, then that this go may be hindred.

When it ariseth of necessity, that is not to be denied to the bo|dy, which is his: least in like manner it hinder that, which is ours. For great is the force of na|ture, and it will not be defrauded of things belonging vnto it. when it is bred of infirmity, let not a man trouble or vexe himselfe, for it is not his fault; neither let him be altogether ouercome of it, but let him for his part doe what hee may, nowe vsing some in|dustry, nowe and then some violence; that his prayer may not altogether slacke, without which nothing in this life can be possessed safely.
But when it proceedeth of idle|es, or is sent of the deuil, the~ an|ther remedyis to be vsed: to wit, asting, or some other austerity of ife, which doth prick  stir vp the lesh, y^ so sleep may be shake~ off.

But especially fasting doth help: for sleepe, and meate are almost alwaies ioyned together,  do go together: so y^ after too much meat followeth too much sleep, and af|ter moderate diet, moderate sleep: so much as is withdrawen from meate, so much in a manner is ta|ken from sleep. It is written of Saint Basill, that oftentimes hee passed ouer whole nights without sleep; for he was very temperate in his dyet. And this was the cause why the Saints could watch so much, and so long, for they were great fasters.
To be breefe it is a very great remedy for this euill, as also for all others, to craue ayde and help of him, who is alwaies ready to giue it vnto them that aske it. For this prouidence is denyed to no creature, whether it bee in the sea, or vpon the earth, much lesse

shall it bee denied to man being created after his image  likenes. Therefore let vs bee humble and faithfull,  let vs perseuere in cra|uing mercy, which if we doe, hee will faithfully giue vs, that we de|sire: according to that; A carnall man crediteth the law of God,  the law is faithful vnto him. For the promisses of God do not deceiue him, to whome faith  hope are not wanting. This is that which I thought good to speake of, too much sleep, which is to be auoid|ed not onely for the loue of pray|er, but also for the time, which is vnprofitably spent in it. For if one dle word be a sinne, and such a inne, that an account is to be ren|red of it at the day of iudgment: ow is it credible, that an ac|ount of time shal not be exacted, hich any one spendeth so vn|rofitably in sleeping? in which

time many exercises acceptable to God might haue been performed. And also according to the rule of Phisitions, sixe or seuen howers are sufficient to satisfie corporall necessity.
Wherefore then O Christian, dost thou consume whole winter nights in thy bed (euery one of which are as yeeres,) snorting, sleeping,  vnprofitably passing ouer the time? turning  tossing thy self fro~ one place to an other no otherwise the~ a door is turne vpo~ the hindges, now vpo~ this sid  now vpon that; whe~ in y^ mean season in thy mind thou mighte walk throughout heaue~, view th Angels,  meditate vpon the glo|ry of God? But this is worser, th nowsuch an euil custome is gro|en in the world, that no man su poseth it a sinne, nor feeleth in  conscience so great losse of tim

wherein by sleeping hee looseth so many good thinges, which by watching he might gaine vnto himselfe.


OF DISPAIR, AND presumption, which are the sixt and seuenth temp|tations. CHAP. XXXVII.
THe former of these tempta|tions is Dispaire, which tel|eth thee that it is vnpossible, that ou shouldest grow to such per|ctio~,  ascend to such an height: herefore by discouraging thee,  constraineth thee to leaue off ine enterprize. The other temp|tion i presumption, which is ontrary vnto Dispaire, and it erswadeth thee, that thou hast

already finished thy course, and that thou art come to an end, whe~ as scarcely thou art well entred. By both of them thou art defrau|ded of thy wished end. Therfore it is requisite that thou be armed on the right hand with hope, and on the left with feare: that that as a pricke may stirre thee vp to run thy course,  this as a bridle may temperate and moderate thy pace.
If thou wilt ouercome despe|ration: which ariseth eyther of the infirmity of thine owne strength, or of the difficulty of th worke, consider that this task is bequeathed vnto thee not o thine owne industry, but of th Diuine bounty, and therefor more confidently trust that thou shalt so much the more be streng|thned to walk in it, by how muc thine own stre~gth doth faile the

Wherfore this impediment shal e of great vse vnto thee: for it is ecessarye that altogether thou istrust in thy selfe, if thou hopest  reach vnto this perfection. herefore if this wretch Dispaire oth whisper in thine eare, that ou art vnsufficient, and there|re that oughtest not to enter in| the tract of this path, make an|were that through thine owne sufficiency thou art much more  to receiue the diuine helpe and sistance, to which there is no|ing vnpossible or difficult. If ou hast after this manner long ontinued in praier, and seest thy lfe not any thing to haue profi|ed, and therfore now beginnest  discourage thy selfe, thinke ith thy selfe, that God doth of|ntimes withhold his grace, that  may be better knowne to be his , and that he may be more

bountifull in giuing. For an ar|gument of which, consider how out of women a long time barren he brought forth most excellent and famous men, as Isaac, Samp|son, Samuel, Iohn Baptist, and ma|ny others. By which example comfort thy selfe, for oftentimes the labour of many yeares is dis|couered in one day.
If thine owne frailtie, the Di|uels force, the iniquitie and ma|lignitie of the present time, and whatsoeuer els may driue thee backwards, do terrifie thee; con|sider that there are many moe, which are on thy side, both in number and valour. So we reade of Eliseus, who when he saw him|selfe compassed about with the host of his enemy, he feared not as his seruant Ghazi did, for he saw a stronger army to come for his defence. And surely f thou

didst see all the Angels, and God mselfe waiting at the ende of y race, to giue thee a crowne: ou wouldest not esteeme nor eye it, if all hell should rise vp gainst thee, yea thou wouldest ioyce, to be more furiously as|ulted, that thou mightest shew y selfe more hardie and vali|t, after the example of Paule, ho prouoking against him|lfe euery creature, and stan|ing at defiance with them, yd: Who shall seperate me from Rom. 8. e loue of Christ? as if he should y, I know no force nor vio|ence either vppon the earth, r in heauen, that can draw me rom him.
It is of no lesse danger to be erswaded, that thou art alrea|ie come to the ende, then it s to dispaire of it. Therefore yther also I will bryng vnto

thee a remedy. First thou mays out of this poyson extract an an|tidote, and make this argument that then thou art the further o from the end, when thou think est, that thou hast already attay ed vnto it.
For they that are almost at th end of their race, doe more swi|ly hasten to it, lightly weyin what they haue attained in r|spect of that which remainet So Paul forgot those things th were behinde: and by how mu he stretched out himselfe towar those things that were before, b so much hee was kindled with  more feruent desire: as a stone  moued the more swiftly, the ne|rer it approacheth his center. Fu|thermore if thou thinkest th that obiect to which thou hast be infinite, alwaies thou w deeme thy selfe to be poore, n

y, and in want, albeit thou be ad|rned and inriched with manie iftes and graces. But if thou sup|ose that thou doest possesse thy lfe wholy, know that thy mind id neuer tast of any thing, but of at which is finit.
I could bring many other do|mentes and instructions to cast owne our arrogant presumptio~: t now I hasting to an end, this e precept I leaue vnto thee, at if thou wilt see, how far thou t off fro~ true prayer, view those en, that haue bene famous and cellent contemplators, in com|rison of whome thou shalt see y selfe to be so far vnder them, a Pigmy is vnder a vast  huge yant.
That I may let passe the exam|e of Christ, because it dazeleth r eies by reason of the exceding ghtnes. Veiwe but this one ex|ample

of the Apostle S. Paule, and consider of it well, and thou shalt easily vnderstand how farre thou commest short of his per|fection. Saint Paule was caryed vp to such an height, that hee himselfe knew not, whether he was in his body, or without his bodie. Surely as he had ascended aboue all creatures, so also he had aspired beyond himselfe, and was wholy swallowed vp in God.
Anthony, when as many time he had passed the whole nigh in diuine contemplation, he com|playned when the day came, an sayd: O Sun, thou returnest to soone vnto vs, and I am mad heauy by thy glimpse, becaus thou hinderest me from the mos sweet conte~platio~ of the true So
Hierome seemed in his soul to be caryed out of the world and to enioy the company of An|gels;

and comming to himselfe gaine, he sayd, that it could not e expressed with humane toong which he had seene.
Gregory, when he was aduan|ed to that high place of Bishop, e did none otherwise lame~t, be|ng taken from the sweete quiet f contemplation, and caried in|o the turbulent stormes of the world, then if a mariner should be taken out of a quiet and calme auen, and violently be thrust in|to a raging and cruell tempest.
Bernard oftentimes was so in|ward with himselfe, that he mar|ked not where he was: where|fore when on a day he had rid|den ouer a riuer, he neuer remem|bred that he had seene it.
If the Scripture say of the Queene of Saba, that there was no more spirit in her, and that she 3. Reg. 10. was greatly astonied, when she

saw the workes of Salomon: what shall be done to that soule, whose eyes the holy Ghost openeth, by that diuine light, to see, not the greatnes of Salomons workes, who was an earthly man, but the great|nes of the works of God, in which so many wonders are to be seene? I say, of workes, as well of nature, as of grace and glory?
By this thou easily perceiuest, how thou errest, in perswading thy self to haue attained that, thou hast not, seeing that thou hast so long a way to goe,  that thou ar so far off from the degree of thi perfection. And so by the one tho shalt be made more humble, se|ing how thou errest:  by the o|ther more diligent, seeing wha thou wantest if thou desirest to b perfectly vnited to him, who is  sea of an infinite magnitude.



THE EIGHT TEMP|ation is, a too greedy desire to be wise  learned. CHAP. XXXVIII.
AFter all these temptations an other followeth, which is so ch greater then the former, as ath a greater colour  showe ertue, by which many men are eiued, especiallye they, that h an earnest zeale  desire do ke for the common good. Of se we will now speak.
This desire, which doth holde y so earnestly to their studies,  this loue of science  know|ge, vnder pretence to help o|s, is too much  superfluous. ll it a loue too much,  desire erfluous; for when it is mode|, and according to reason,  not a temptation, but a law|dable

vertue,  a very profitable exercise, which is commended  all kinde of men, but especially  yong men, who do exercise the youth in that study, for by it the eschue many vices, and lea that, whereby they may we councell both themselues and o|thers: but vnlesse it be moderate|ly vsed, it much hurteth deuot|on. Neither is it a matter  greatly to be maruelled at, that All immo|derate things are hurtfull. thing so laudable, should beco so hurtful, vnlesse it be modera|ly vsed: for this is not so new  vnheard of, but any one may  that the excesse of all things,  be it they be profitable and nec|sary, is hurtfull. What is more |cessary then meate, drinke, m|derate exercise,  corporall |dicines? All these are good a necessarie; but vnlesse they  moderately taken, they are hu

l, and bring dammage. We say  same of too much study and eedines of science and know|ge, which certainely is an vn|t stepdame vnto prayer: for s studie taketh vp all the time, d wholy possesseth a man. For  a certaine Philosopher sayth) e is wise; for it manifesteth hings, and maketh men wise. ke maner the study of prayer  contemplation taketh vp all  time, and wholy possesseth a , and requireth that he be  from all other busines, that  may more conueniently at|d vpon God. Therefore great Great is the emula|tion be|tweene th studie of science  prayer. e emulation betweene these  studies, whether ought to e the chiefest part: neither is emulation lesser, then that  in times past betweene Leah  Rachel, whether of them had e right to their husband.

Furthermore studye (besides that it eyther requireth the whole time or the greater part of it, by reason of very many thinges, which are eyther to be searche into, or to be meditated vpon be|sides also the labour, which is t be spent in it) it is also an exercis which (although it be very spec|latiue and theoricke) is wont  dry vp the remorse full tendern of the heart, and the iuyce of D|uotion.
For together with business merely corporall, the spirit m also conueniently attend vp God: but when as the spirit b stoweth all his vertue  po vpon the intellectuall part,  will altogether remaineth idle,  in a manner dead, that scar not a sparke of Deuotion is fo in a man.
For these causes therefore 

said before, that studie doth very much hurt Deuotion: both be|cause it consumeth very much ime, and also, because it dryeth p the spirit, both which do hin|der this exercise.
There are certaine men, who re most strongly set vpon by this emptation, and that for singular onsiderations, which the Diuell ath in this temptation to annoy an. For the desire of know|dge (as Aristotle sayth) in all en is very naturall; so that the iuell had not a sweeter baite to snare our first parents, then the sire of knowledge: for he said, t they should be as gods, kno|ng Gen. 3. good and euill. And per|ps because with this baite he n fished so fortunately, he pro|seth to himselfe now a good ught by the sweetnes of the e baite: hoping that it will

come to passe, that we being chil|dren very like to our parents, will be taken with the same bait they were, and be deceiued, as they were, albeit we haue learned by a manifest example,  by the very experie~ce of the thing it self, how bitter the end of that way was.
The noblenes of the exercise,  the sweetnes which is in it, do ioyne the~selues vnto this natura desire. For it is apparent that the is not any exercises of ma~ (to w of a reasonable creature) fou more worthy or noble, then tho which make his better part mo perfect, that is, his reason, whi daily becommeth more perfe by the continuall vse of learnin This sweetnes is so great, and  perdurant, that a certain Philos|pher, was not afraid to say; Wi out the study of learning, I kn not whether any thing may 

found pleasant  sweet in this life. This appetite also increaseth by a esire that our own excelle~cy may The study of know|ledge wor|thy the ex|cellencie of man. e aduanced, which affection is ost powerfull. For it is not to be oubted, but that one of the espe|iall meanes, by which we are lif|ed vp to honor is wisedome. And ecause this loue is bred within e innermost bowels of man, he together endeuoureth, y^e he may mpas that meane, by which ho|r is attained, that is, y^e he may tain vnto learning  wisedom. o these the pretence of piety,  le of the co~mon good is added, hich is promoted by this study:  that this good is worthily to be sired of all me~; but especially of ose y^e are more perfect, who are nt to desire y^e aboue all things. erfore it hapneth many times, y^e der the shadow  colour of this mon good, a ma~ doth too much

cherish his owne desire and incli|nation; saying and perswading himselfe, that he doth that purely for Gods sake, which he doth for his owne naturall inclination, or for some base commoditie. For many are the ends (as S. Bernard Bernard in his 36. ser. vpon the Cant. Diuers ends of knowledge saith) why a ma~ desireth to know. For there be some that would know for this end only, that they might know, and it is foolish cu|riosity: there be some that would know, that they might be knowe~ and it is foolish vanity: and ther be some that would know, th they might sell their knowledg for money, or for honours,  it  filthy lucre. There be also so that desire to know, that th may edify, and it is charity. A there be some that would kno that they may be edified, and i wisedome. All these ends  moue the desire, and in choice 

these a man is often deceiued, when he considereth not which ught especially to moue: and his error is very dangerous.
But that we may returne vnto ur purpose, if there be so many hings, which do allure our heart nto this exercise, who shall be so ortified, or who shall be found  co~stant, that can make resista~ce gainst so many importunate sol|citations? If on the one side doe uite thee a naturall desire of owledge, and a naturall delight  study, the noblenes also of the ercise,  ambition or desire of nor, which is got by this study: d on the otherside thine owne mmoditie, and the profit of the urch  common wealth do set aire face on it, and do so ouer|d it, that it seemeth right  re|isit, who shal be found so stro~g  discreet, that being bou~d with

so manifold a chaine, doth not suffer himselfe easily to be led a|way? Therfore I said that this is a great temptatio~, for it hath many hooks  crooks, by which it lay|eth hold on the harts of men, and draweth them after it. O how oft when a man is at prayer vpon his knees, do these images  picture present the~selues before him, sol|liciting him, that spedily he mak an end of his prayer, and that h make hast to the labor of his dai study: that he reade ouer his beg lecture, that he make an end of t booke in his hands; and that  doth not let y^e day passe witho some increase of learning, alb out of this study either none,  very small profit may be hop Sometimes such is the violence this appetit, y^e the miserable so many times giueth heaue~ for ea and changeth gold for drosse,  leaueth the ope~ gates of y^e abo|dant

grace of God, to finde out a barren vain of humane wisedom. O that they knew (who do thus) what great things they be, y^e God ca~ teach,  that in a short time,  how little it is that the wit of man by his own labor can attaine vn|to,  how long a time he is about it. But be it that it is much, which man by his own trauell can gaine vnto himself, yet nothing at all or very litle ca~ it profit him without  diuine wisdome. Though a man aith the Wiseman, be neuer so per|ct Sap. 9. (that is in learning) among the hildren of men, yet if thy wisedome  Lord be not with him, he shall be othing regarded. That of Augu|ine is not much vnlike to this; Augustine in the fift booke of his Con|fessions. happy is that ma~, who knoweth  things, but knoweth not thee,  rd: happy is he y^e knoweth thee, ough he know nothing els: but  y^e knoweth thee  al thing els,

he is not the happier for them, but is only happy for thee. Who kno|weth not, that one sente~ce taught by the Almighty, is more excel|lent, and of greater consequence then all bookes, then all the wise|dome of this world, and whatso|euer Philosophers haue taught? The knowledge of the world, saith Augustine, doth swell and puff vp: but the wisedome of God puffeth not vp, but breedeth loue it doth not make a man proud  arrogant, but humble and lowly If in that houre, whe~ God actually teacheth me, I shal turne my bac vpo~ him, and if I shal forsake hi he yet hauing words in his mou  seeke for earthly maisters, sha I not offer great iniury vnto th heauenly teacher? doe I not d|spise his doctrine? do I not pr|ferre humane wisedome befo diuine? O how hardly shall t

holy Ghost come vnto him, who maketh so little account of him. But if there were but a few, who do erre in this, my co~plaint should be lesse. But what shal I say when in a maner the whole world lieth buried in this errour? One repor|eth of the streight of Megallan, hat of three ships scarcely one erisheth in it: but in this sea, of  hundred ships scarcely one is aued. O how many auditours  isciples hath the world at this ay, and how few hath Christ? nd that which is lamentable to e hearde, they that should be He repre|hendeth them, who bestow that time vpon hu|mane stu|dies which they should bestow vpon di|uine. ought vp in Christianity, and in hristes schoole, and they that tely are become conuerts, and ue receiued inauguration into e faith, that time they should end vpon this holy exercise, hereby the old man with all his ts and desires might be shaken

off, and the new man put on, as though this world was a labour but of few dayes, and of a short time, whe~ they haue scarcely ope|ned their eyes, and new begun to make an acknowledgme~t of God, presently they bestow themselues vpon the reading of heathen Phi|losophers, and vpon humane stu|dies, in which they spend many yeares, where they do not heare the name of Christ once mentio|ned. Which studies, albeit they b after a certaine maner necessary by reason of y^e change of times,  importunity of hereticks; yet th are to be esteemed as punishme~ of our life: seeing that they stea away so great a part of our tim  do banish vs for so many ye from the most sweet embraces  Christ. Especially if we co~sider,  all the writings,  al the learni of the Heathen, as Nazianz

saith, are as the scourges  plages Heathen studies the plagues of Egypt. of Egypt, which are entred into he Church by reason of our sins. But now, because the miserable estate of our life hath brought vs nto this streight, we must looke ut a conuenient time to bestow po~ this study: that is, we must la|our aboue all things, that our works be first well grounded, and hat the building of vertue haue a ure  firme foundatio~, especially  nouices and yong beginners, y^e without losse and dammage they ay be able to beare the weight f this study. But it is lamentable,  those, who are yong and tender  only feede on y^e milk of Christ, hould be called fro~ his breasts to e huskes of heathen Philoso|hers, where nothing is found ut subtilties and sophistications. or tell mee I pray thee, if wee ell consider of it, what other

other thing is this, the~ that which Pharao did in times past, that he might destroy the people of God, when he commaunded that the male children should as soone as they were borne be cast into the waters of Egypt, and drowned: and what other thing do we hea in these our times, then that h that is borne againe and renued  Christ, before he begin to i|crease, and receiue the regen|rate strength of a new man, th he is headlong cast into thes waters, that he may be choake and lose that earnest of the spiri he hath receiued?
To all things there is an appoi|ted. Eccles. 3. time, sayth the Wiseman,  time to embrace, and a time to  far from embracing. Certainly th is the time to embrace God, a by this embrace to lay such ste fast hold on his loue, that mu

water shal not be able to quench it. Afterwards the time wil come, to bee farre off from imbracing, that we may promote the profit of our neighbor.
What other thing would God Deut. 24. signifie, when he commaundeth hat the man that hath taken a ew wife should not goe a war|re, neyther that he should bee harged with any publike busi|es? What meaneth he, when hee rbiddeth that no worke should Deut. 15. e done with the first borne bul|cke, nor that the first born sheep ould bee sheared; vnlesse this de of first borne, of which we w speake, which ought to bee e from all bonde and burthen, t hee may bestowe all his ngth, and whatsoeuer he hath n his owne proper benefit? ey goe against all these com|undements, who puloyne a|way

the time from the studye of true wisedome, and bestow it vp|on humane.


REMEDIES A|gainst this temp|tation. CHAP. XXXIX.
THe first remedy against this temptation is diligently to consider, how farre vertue excee|deth wisedome, and how much diuine wisedome surpasseth hu|mane knowledge; that heereby man may see, how agreeable it i to reason, that he should bestow more labor  time vpon the on the~ vpo~ the other. Wilt thou th I speak in one word? Heare wh the Wiseman saith; Oh, how gre is hee that findeth wisedome? y Ecclesia. 25. there is none aboue him that feare

the Lord: The feare of the Lord asseth all things in cleerenes. Heare lso that of Augustine: Mankind s wont greatly to esteeme the In the pro|eme of his 4. Booke of the Trinity nowledge of terrestiall and ce|estiall things, but hee is much ore better, that preferreth the nowldge of himselfe before this cience:  that minde is worthier f greater prayse, which knoweth er own infirmity, the~ that which ot respecting it, searcheth to owe the course of the starres,  hee that alreadye knoweth em, not knowing what way  take for the attainement of his fety and saluation.
Let the wisedome of the world ue al the excellency it desireth: tit cannot escape this one mi|y, that all the profit, which is ped by it be not ouer throwne th the life.

What is more miserable then to seeke a thing with so greate cost and labour, which so soone perisheth? This is the cause, why a certaine Philosopher wept, a Hierome saith: for now when he was at deathes doore, hee was a|gast and vtterly abashed, and vn|willingly ended his life at tha very same time, at which before he began to apply his minde vnto wisedome and knowledge. Fo if there be any losse or  to be deplored and lamented i this world, certainely it is th death of a Wise man: for then  vessell is cast into the earth fu of all kinde of admirable secret Which seeing it is so, it shall be  point of great wisedome, to fo|low the counsell of our Sauiou saying; Lay not vp treasures f Math. 6. your selues vpon the earth, where  moth and canker corrupt,  whe

theeues dig through and steale. But y vp treasures for your selues in auen, where neither the moth nor anker corrupteth, and where eeues neither dig through, nor eale.
These things being so, it shall e much more profitable, to at|nd vpon the workes of charity, en vpon the speculation of the derstanding: for the fruite of e endureth for euer, but the o|er is ended with the life.
Furthermore remember that  the day of iudgement, as a cer|ne holy man saith, thou shalt t be asked what thou hast read: t what thou hast done:  not w eloquently thou hast spoken, thow wel thou hast liued. This he consideration, which being ll examined, is sufficient to uince their foolishnes, who  too much sweate at the study

of humane science. For tell mee pray thee, what in the world  more certaine vnto vs, and whic doth neuer faile vs, then to  well, and circumspectly to wal with God? what is more accept|ble vnto him then charity? This that which onely pleaseth him, for which all other thinges d please him. According to this  we shal be examined, and iudg and according to the measure this we shall be rewarded. T An vnlearn|ed ma~ with charity is better be|fore God, then a lear|ed man without charity. is so true, that if any man, I  not say had deuoured all  sciences of the world; but  conuerted to the faith all the |tions of the world; if God s finde more loue and charity  an abiect olde woman, ( hath performed none of t great matters) then in him,  not to be doubted, but that  will preferre her before him 

at her portion shall be greater heauen then his.
According to this rule no man  doubt, but that that life all bee better, and that exercise ore acceptable vnto God, which th moste vertue and efficacie,  attaine to this loue of chari|
And seeing that it is without ntrouersie, that the exercises  a contemplatiue life are more nducent to the atchyuement  this vertue, then any other, olloweth by a very good con|quent, that they are more cellent and more assured then  other.
O howe many men are there nd in these daies, who ne| learned, what a sillogisme s, neyther euer conuerted  soule; who yet notwith|ding are more precious in the

fight of God, then many preach|ers of the word, and many which seeme more wise?
Wherefore, my brother, if tho wouldst be sure of thy saluation, walk in this assured and safe way. I doe not say this, that altogether thou shouldest forsake thy study, but that thou shouldst vse it mo|derately: which in one worde Saint Augustine admonisheth  Let vs not be, saith he, prompt  August. in his book of the good of perseue|rance. quick in disputations,  slow an dull in prayers.
Moreouer all law and all nat|ral reason teacheth, that we ough so to order our studies and ende|uours in learning (as also all oth things) that we do not too mu ouer burde~ and binde our selue and that for this wee doe not l passe better thinges. For Chris|stome saith, that it is a great da|nation of man, to beautifie a

polish the tongue,  to leaue the e without order and culture: for  little skilleth howe the tongue e adorned, but it is of very great onsequence that the life be well dered.
Therefore what greater mad|s can be thought on, then to be|ow so much labour vpon a thing  no worth; and altogether to glect a matter of so great mo|ent.
This is that Saint Bernarde so iously admonisheth, wryting Bernarde in his 2. Book of conside|ration. to Pope Eugenius; Let thy con|eration, saith he, begin of thy fe; least neglecting thy selfe ou stretch it further in vaine. hat shall it profit thee, if thou ynest the whole world,  losest y selfe? Albeit thou be wise, t thou wantest wisedom if thou  not wise vnto thy selfe? But w wise vnto thy selfe? truely as

I thinke, altogether. Although thou canst discerne all misteries, and knowest the breadth of the earth, the height of heauen,  the deapth of the sea, yet if th knowest not thy selfe, thou a like vnto one that buildeth with|out a foundation, making a ruin and not a building. Whatsoeu thou buildest without thy self shall be like a heape of dust e|dangered with euery winde.
Therefore he is no wise ma that is not wise vnto himselfe.  wise man will be wise vnto hi selfe, and will first drinke of t fountaine of his owne Wel. The|fore let thy consideration begin thy self,  not onely begin of t selfe, but let it ende in thy sel Whithersoeuer it trauelled for call it againe vnto thy selfe w the fruite of saluation. Be the  vnto thy selfe,  the last vnto 

sefe. Take example of the father  all things, who both sendeth orth, and retaineth his word. y word is thy consideration. hich if it goe forth, let it not go m thee. Let it so goe out, that  may not altogether goe out. t it go so from thee, that it may t forsake thee. Thinke of no|ng against thine owne salua|n.
This word Against I haue t vsed well, I ought to haue d Besides. Whatsoeuer doth er it selfe vnto consideration, ich doth not by some meane other pertaine vnto saluation, se and renounce it.
This also ought to moue them t be studious, that so they giue selues to promote the profit of ir neighbor, that they doe not t nor hinder their own saluati| y^e they diligently take heed,

that whilst they desire to profit o|thers, they deceiue not the~selues, albeit the profit of our neighbour, ought to bee lesse in this respecte: for the law of charitye doth not commaund vs to benefit others with our apparant hurt and ma|nifest dammage. But what and if I shall prooue, that not onelye the profit of our neighbour is not diminished, but wonderfully en|creased, and that it is the onely  best way to helpe our neygh|bour, by first helping of our selues.
Beleeue me, my brother, if in deed thou studiest to profit thy A good life is the best instruction of our neighbour. neyghbour, there is none other way more conuenient to doe it, then a good life, and the exercise of prayer  meditation, by which this good life is gained vnto vs. Which doctrine I could approue by many reasons, but by reason of

the smalnes of this volume, it shal be sufficient heere to haue set downe a few of them.
The first is, that it is manyfest to all men, that the true and pro|per 1 instrument, by which wee may help our neighbour, is true wisedome. But to obtaine this, what is more profitable then the feare of God? then an approoued life? then the dayly vse and expe|rience of vertues? or the prayer and the continuall meditation of the diuine law? What is so fre|quent and common in the holy Scripture, as that; The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome. and: The fulnes of Wisedome is the feare of the Lord.
Yea without this meane it is vnpossible to obtaine this vertue: which Saint Augustine plaine|ly testifieth in these words: We Augus. in  Sermon. finde many moste negligent

and careles of righteousnes, but most greedy and desirous of wise|dome: the diuine Scripture doth teach these, that they cannot at|taine that they desire, but by kee|ping and preseruing that they neglect. O my Sonne, saith the di|uine writ, if thou desirest Wisdome, preserue righteousnes, and the Lord will shew her vnto thee. Wisedome is a grace of God, and a princi|pall gift of the holy Ghost; there|fore it is sooner and more easily got by teares, then by disputati|ons: by prayers, then by alterati|ons.
Rightly therefore saith Au|gustine; They that haue learned Augu of the words of the Apostle of the Lord Iesus Christ to bee meeke, and humble in heart, doe profit more by meditating and praying, then by reading  hear|ing. But if wisdome be a principal instrument to help others, why

shall not also the meanes, by which it is obtained, bee of the same kinde, of which wee haue now spoken?
The second reason is: To con|uert soules vnto God, is a worke 2 maruellous excellent and super|naturall: for by this, theyr cor|rupt nature, that liue wickedly, is subdued: and their euill custome, which is little weaker then na|ture, and that which is more, the power of the deuill, who possess|eth, and most strongly holdeth captiue their harts, are ouercom'd and conquered. That such powers shuld be oppressed  ouerthrow|en, it is necessary that greater po|wer  stre~gth should be present, which is not found vpo~ the earth, but in heauen: which is not so wel got by study, labor  speculation, as by teares, sighings,  the course of a good life.

Hence it is, that they that are conuerted vnto God, are no lesse the sonnes of teares, then of words: so that prayer hath no lesser part in the conuersion, then the finest oration of a most elo|quent orator.
Wherefore, as the prayer of Moses rather procured the victo|ry against Amalech, then all the Exod. 17. swordes, that were drawen: so also wee muste suppose and be|leeue, that in this victory the prai|ers, sighes, and grones of a true preacher haue no lesser part, then all the other voices and words, al|beit they be ingenious, acute, and eloquent.
The third reason is, because (as experience witnesseth) me~ do 3 offend more grossely and foulely by the corruption of their owne affections and passions, then by the ignorance of the truth. There|fore

whosoeuer applyeth himself to bridle and restraine others, and to reforme their affections, hee must rather mooue their will, the~ instruct their vnderstanding: and therefore all the masters of elo|quence do teach, that there is not That thou maist moue another, it is necessary that thou be firt mo|ued thy self a more present remedye for this malady, then that first thou bee mooued vnto that, to which thou desirest to mooue another. This is that which Quintilian saith; The sum  chiefe of this matter, saith he, as far as I can gather, co~sisteth in this, that if we would mooue o|thers, that we be first mooued our selues. And a little after; The ora|tion ought to be pronounced fro~ such a minde, which may mooue. For how can it bee, that another should grieue, that heareth, vnles I first greeue, that speak? how shal I incense another to anger, if I my selfe be not angry? how shal ano|ther

weep, if he see mee speaking with dry eyes? It cannot be. F nothing setteth on fire, or ma|keth to burne but fire: nothing maketh another thing moyste but water: neyther can any man impart heate to another, if hee hath it not himselfe.
Therefore according to that of Quintilian, who doubteth but that a Deuout man, who night  day doth nothing els, but be|wayle and meditate in the law of the Lord, is better, and fitter to teach, then any othe although he be wise, who hath neuer tryed, what it is to shed one teare for the loue o God?
Moreouer that eloquence, a Cicero sayth, which breedeth no 4 admiration, is of no price. An if such eloquence bee require to handle humane matters, wha

eloquence thinkest thou will be equired to handle diuine mat|ers, to drawe men out of theyr nnes, and to repell the forces f enemies? which things as they e supernaturall, so they require  spirit and eloquence superna|urall. To obtaine this kinde of loquence, it is certaine, that no|hing is more profitable then the oly Ghost, and so to~ speake, hat the sparkles of this Spyrit ay shine in the Sermons wee reach. For seeing that this spi|it doth exceed all the power of ature, there is nothing that doth more allure, suspend and carry nto admiration the harts of men, hen one of his sparckles: for by it he strength  power of the holy Spirit is foorth with knowen,  so men are humbled, saying with the Magitians of Phara; This is Exod. 8. he finger of God.

To all these another help is ioyned much more wonderfull, that is, the example of his life that preacheth. For there is no greater argument, that that should be beleeued which a man speaketh then that he that speaketh it doe it himselfe; and that his life agree with his doctrine. Among all sermons that is moste profitable and effectuall, by which the au|ditour is most edified, and moste profited by.
Wherefore seeing that the sanctity of life is also supernatu|rall and Diuine, the righteous are as the tongues and mansions of the holy Ghost, and all men naturally doe reuerence them,  honor them with a worship more then humane, and doe beholde and heare them, not as men, but as Angels; not as inhabitants of the earth, but as Citizens of hea|uen,

and doe admire their labors and workes, as remnants and re|maynders of the holy Ghost. All these things being considered of, doe sufficiently shew, how auaile|able it is to the helping and in|structing of others in the way of vertue, if the master and teacher himselfe be godly and an embra|cer of vertue.
Therefore they that from their hearts doe seeke God, and not themselues, ought not to respect honor, nor liberty, nor dignitie, or mastership, nor any authori|y but onely the edifiyng of their earers, that at the length they may come to that passe, that they may say that of the Apostle to Timothy; Take heede vnto thy selfe, 1. Tim. 4. nd vnto learning: continue there|: for in doing this thou shalt both aue thy selfe, and them that heare hee.

The first care ought to b ouer thy selfe, the second ouer th study and doctrine, and so it  promissed, that thy wisedom shall be auaileable to help othe This is so true, that as trees, whi A Simily. make large encrease for the salues before they beare, becom much more fruitefull afterward vnto their owners: so Preache the more learned they are, a more religious in themselues, t more profitable they are vnto |thers: and according to the qu|lity of their fruites, such shal be the profit of their auditors.



HE NINTH TEMP|ation is an vndiscreete zeale,  a desire too vehement, and earnest to succour and help o|thers. CHAP. XL.
He indiscreete desire of cer|taine, by which they too fer|tly endeuour to help theyr ghbor, with hindrance of their ne saluation, doth not much fer from the precedent temp|ion. This is one of the moste gerous temptations, which  to vs in this life. For  other are manifest, and may be ne of all men, what they are. But this dooth offer it selfe

with so faire an aspect, and see|meth so honest, that one would think that none other thing could be wished, neither that any fraude or collusion was vnder it. And this temptation is so much the grea|ter, by how much he is more ver|tuous, that is tempted: for by how much hee loueth vertue, by so much he studieth for the profit of his neighbor,  for the common good.
For euen as nothing is more naturall vnto God, then to do wel vnto all his creatures: so he that participateth more of the spirit  goodnes of God, he is more rea|dy to doe good vnto others: so that nothing doth beare more rule in the heartes of good men, then an vnpatient and continuall desire to doe good to those that be good, and to succour and re|leeue them in all things.

For this cause that crafty and ancient seducer of man, in this matter hath alwayes bin trouble|some vnto the righteous: know|ing that nothing is more fit to deceiue them, then that, to which of their owne accord they are in|clined. And so we see that many are cast headlong into most diffi|cult and hard matters, and take such burdens vpon them, which doe exceede their strength and power, and that vnder pretence and colour of this help and ayde.
Therefore we ought not to take greater heed of any desire, then of this, which doth creepe into our soules vnder colour and show of this good, and of this vertue; for it may procure vnto vs great strife and trouble. Holy Iosua, see|ing Ios. 3. the Angell of God in the ar|my, did not credit him before he had asked, Art thou ours? or our

aduersaries? So we ought not to giue credit to euery motion and thought, although it seemeth good: for we know that the an|gell of Sathan can transforme himselfe oftentimes into an An|gell of light, which he doth more often and more vsually in this worke, then in another, because he commeth hither vnder colour of piety, and as though he would inuite vs vnto charity. There|fore not without good cause the Fathers in the wildernes sayde, that oftentimes the Diuell doth call a religious man from the exercise of prayer vnder pretence of those things that are good, whilest he perswadeth them that there is a iust and an important cause, why they should do this and that, when in very deede there is none.
Therefore it is not sufficient

heere to looke into, only the qua|lity and condition of the worke, but also to scanne thorowly all circumstances, which according to the rule of wisedome are to be considered of. Amongst o|ther things, we must especially beware, that we do not so ende|uour to profit our neighbour, that wee disprofit our selues, ac|cording to that of Ecclesiasti|cus; Helpe thy neighbour accor|ding Eccles. 29. to thy power, and beware that thou thy selfe fall not. And albeit the remedyes set downe in the former Chapter against this euill be sufficient, yet I will also adde vnto them the opinion of Saint Bernard, who writeth of Bernard in his fyrst booke of considera|tion. this matter vnto Pope Eugenius, and amo~gst other things he saith: Heare then what I reprehend,  what I perswade. If thou bestow|est all thy life and wisedome vpon

action, and nothing vpon consi|deration: in some thing I com|mend thee: but in this I do not praise thee. And I thinke that no man will praise thee, who hath learned that of Ecclesiasticus: He shall get wisedome, that hath va|cant Eccles. 38. time, and is free from action. Certainely neither is he meete for action, who doth not before meditate and consider vpon it. If thou wouldest be euery bodie vnto all, like him, that was made all for all: I commend thine hu|manity: if it be complete. But how is it complete, thy selfe be|ing excluded? and thou also art a man. Therefore that thine hu|manity may be absolute  com|pleate, let it receiue thy selfe also into that bosome, into which it receiueth others. Otherwise wht shall it profit thee according to the word of the Lord, if thou

winnest all men, and losest thy selfe? wherefore when thou pos|sessest all men, possesse also thy selfe. Why alone doest thou de|fraude thy selfe of thy gifts? whi|ther doth thy spirit go, not retur|ning againe? why doest thou not looke vnto thy selfe by course, as thou doest to others? Thou art a debter both to the wise and vn|wise: and only doest thou deny thy selfe vnto thy selfe? The foole and the wiseman, the seruant and the freeman, rich and poore, man and woman, old and yong, clergy and layty, the iust and vniust, all and euery one do together parti|cipate of thee: all doe drinke of the common fountaine of thy breast: and wilt thou stand apart thirsty? If he be accursed that ma|keth his owne part the worst: what shall he be that vtterly ma|keth himselfe without part. Thy

waters are deriued into currents through the streetes: men and cattell do drinke of them: thou giuest drinke also to the Camels of Abrahams seruant: but a|mong the rest drinke thou also of the fountaine of thine owne well. Let not a stranger, saith he, drinke of it. What? art thou a stranger? To whom art thou not strange, if thou beest strange to thy selfe? To be briefe, he that is rechlesse and barren to himselfe, to whom is he good? Hetherto be the words of Bernard, which may suffice to conuince that we say; and that by them we may vndersta~d, that the great promo|ters and procurers of other mens safeties, ought not to be vnmind|full of their owne: but with great dilige~ce to regard their owne sal|uation. And also what great wis|dome we haue neede of, to order

this busines aright, least we be de|ceiued by an vndiscreet feruour of charity, and by too great a de|sire of spirituall gaine. In which matter we are to imitate the wise Virgins in the Gospell, who when the foolish Virgins desi|ed them to impart some of their yle vnto them, sayde; we feare Math. 25. ast there will not be inough for s and you: goe yee rather to them hat sell, and buy for your selues. Wherefore if thou hast a minde o immitate the wisedome of hese Virgins, so looke to o|hers, that thou doest not neg|ect thy selfe: but so bestow thy ime, that thou mayst haue time or thy selfe. If thou shalt de|aund of me, how much time s requisite for this studie? I unswere so much, as is suffi|ient to kindle the feruent af|ection of deuotion, which is,

to walke in the spirit, according to the councell of Paule: But that Galat. 5. ye may know what it is to walke in the spirit, and what profit doth follow of it, I will say none other thing, then that a man doth then walke in the spirit, when he com|meth more and more vnto God, and doth walke rather towards God, then towards himselfe: so that his heate is not now distur|bed and misled by the disposition and affections of nature, which are of himselfe, but is lifted vp o those things, which proceede from that actuall deuotion, in which he walketh: for this kinde of disposition, is not of flesh o bloud, but of the vertue of the holy Ghost, and of the continua affection of the loue and feare o God. Hence it is, that as the hear is the beginning of all our works A Simily. so according to the qualitie and

affection of our workes procee|ding of it: which thing also we see in water flowing from a foun|aine: If the fountaine be mud|die and troubled, the water will also be muddie and troubled: but f the fountaine be cleare and right, the water will be so too. So we dayly see by experience, hat of a well ordered heart, or|dered actions do proceede, and of a disordered heart, disordered ctions, according to that of our Sauiour: A good man out of the Luke. 6. ood treasure of his heart bringeth orth good, and an euill man out of e euill treasure of his heart brin|eth forth euill.
Seeing therefore that our heart s the roote and the beginning of ll our good, all our labour ought o be bestowed vpon it, that so ong we may continue in deepe nd profound prayer, til our heart

be so affected, that it being ga|thered vnto it selfe, it may alwaie abide in deuotion. To the attain|ment of which, euery prayer i not sufficient; but it must be se|riously continued: That as grou~ well watered in the morning, b A Simily. the coolenes and sweete tempe doth all that day defend the herb planted in it from the heate o the Sun: so let the soule of y^e righ|teous be watered in due season  by prayer be well moysten in God, that it may alwayes hau in it selfe the continuall coole o deuotion, by which it may be d fended fro~ the loue of the worl Therefore our deuotion ought t be like that riuer, which the scrip ture speaketh of, which went o of the garden of Eden, and wat red Gen. 2. the earth: for out of our hea which is the place of Gods dai ties, ought to flow a riuer of d

uotion so aboundant, that it may e sufficie~t to water al our works.
This is that kinde of life, which ll the Saincts haue vsed: this is e top and crest of a spirituall fe: this is the manner of liuing, hich maketh men spirituall and iuine: this is that, which orde|eth  disposeth all the works of an, in measure, weight,  num|er. To be brief, this is that, which aketh vs walke on a sure grou~d,  on euery side to be watchfull, y^e e may be wary in all things, and efenced in each respect. There|re let vs thorowly perswade our lues, that it is neuer acceptable  God, if we wholy drowne our lues in other mens businesses, eit they be of great co~seque~ce, d lose our own time, which we ould bestow vpo~ the procuring rown saluation  on y^e exercise  prayer. For albeit that other

mens businesses ought to be or|dered, and to haue their houres and appointed times (as we haue heard out of Bernard) yet they do not require that measure of time, which this continuall diligence doth, by which is effected, that the spirit is alwayes vnited to God, and alwayes caried towards him. To conclude, let vs also adde this (which in my iudge|ment Prayer is to be ioy|ned vnto preaching. is very pertinent to our pur|pose) if thou desirest nothing more, then to help thy neighbor and if thou doest looke into th state, wherein mens affaires now stand, and doest consider of th misery  calamity of the Church ioyne prayer to thy preaching For the world is not only helpe by admonition, but also by pray|er: for by preaching the peopl are admonished to flye fro~ sinne but by prayer grace is obtaine

of God, by which the life is a|mended.
Therefore let this rule be ob|serued, if thou wouldest not erre in this busines, if the ministra|tion of the diuine word be com|mitted vnto thee, beware that thou no further entangle thy selfe in worldly and temporall matters, then thy strength is able to beare, although it cary neuer so fayre a shew of charitie. For although the Apostles were full of the holy Ghost, yet they put from them all such kinde of bur|dens, so that they woulde not make prouision for the mainte|nance of the poore. Wherefore in the fourth Councell of Car|thage In the 4. Councel of Carthage, can. 17. and 18. it is commaunded, that a Bishop by himselfe should not take vpon him the gouernment and ouerseeing of widowes, or|phanes, and strangers, but that he

should do it by his Archdeacon. In like maner that he should not take vpon him the ouersight of wills  testaments, that he might the better attend vpon reading, prayer and preaching. We haue also an example of this thing in our Sauiour, who whe~ he was re|quested of one, to commaund his brother to diuide his inheritance with him, he answered: Man, Luke. 12. who made me a iudge, or a deuider ouer you? For this cause the Pri|matiue Church did not permit, that any Clergyman or Minister of God should be ordayned a ouerseer, or an executour of any mans will. Wherefore when an one dyed, leauing a minister a ouerseer of his will, he was depri|ued of it by all the suffrages of th Church, as it appeareth in a cer|taine epistle written by Saint Cy|prian. Cyp. lib. 1. epist. . 



CERTAINE ADMO|nitions to be obserued in this exer|cise against the fraudes and collusions of our auncient enemy. CHAP. XLI.
HEtherto we haue spoken of certaine common tempta|tions, which are wont to molest and annoy them that are at pray|er; now we will deliuer certaine admonitions  instructio~s, which are to be obserued in this course. And although we haue set downe certain in the end of the first part of this booke; yet, because they are only put in the end, that they may teach vs to pray, I will set downe others heere, which may

lay open the deceipts and fraudes of our enemy the Deuill, who many wayes is wont to deceiue those, that walke in this way, tur|ning good medicines into pre|sent poysons, and to shipwracke them in the very hauen.
Therefore first of all let vs pre|suppose, that nothing can bee There is nothing so good, but it may be abused by the malice of man. found in this world so good and profitable, but that by mans ma|litiousnes it may be abused vnto euill. Wherefore euill men take occasions to perseuere in their wickednes of the very goodnes and mercy of God, and of the passion of Christ. Neyther onely do they take occasions of these things, but also of vertue hir selfe, which no man can abuse, follo|wing their own affections, wher|by oftentimes they take oppor|tunity to offend. For we see ma|ny men that of fasting, abstine~ce,

knowledge, chastitie, and such like vertues, do take an occasion to be prowde, and to presume great things of themselues: ma|king that a matter and an occa|sion of mischiefe and euill, which of it selfe is an excellent and an honorable good. Wherefore S. Ambrose sayth: As I very well vnderstand that chastity is an ex|cellent good, so I feare the theefe of pride, least he steale away that which is good.
Therefore I do not so greatly maruell, if the vertue of Medita|tion be sometimes vnprofitable to some man, or if it doth bring dammage vnto him, that know|eth not how to vse it conueni|ently. But as it is an intollerable madnes to leaue the vertue of Chastity, or any other vertue or science, for none other cause, but because certaine abuse it, and by

it are proudely puffed vp; so also is it a foolish thing to relinquish meditatio~s for the abuse of some. For there is nothing vnder hea|uen, which we may not abuse.
That we may vnderstand this the better, we must know that there is not any vertue, which hath not by it some vice, carying Euery ver|tue hath some vice annexed vnto it, which hath a resem|blance of vertue. a show  a resembla~ce of vertue. For wisedome hath vaine science bearing a show of true wisedome: Iustice hath crueltie; Fortitude rashnes; Liberality prodigality; Humilitie cowardice; Affability lightnes; hope presumption; zeale vnaduisednes; feare distrust;  so in the rest; so that as in all things as well artificiall as naturall there are found some true, and some seeming so, but are not so in|deede: for there is both true gold and that which is false; lawfull money, and counterfet coyne;

true gemmes, and false gemmes: so also among vertues, some are true, and some that appeare to be so, but are not so in truth.
This therefore is the greatest difficultie, which is found in the way of vertue, which is wont to minister matter of errour vnto yong beginners, and to those that are not well exercised: for many embrace vice for vertue, as we dayly see that men are deceiued, receiuing counterfet coyne for that which is true, by reason of the likenes it hath with it. This is that which the Apostle sayth; That the Angell of Sathan doth many times transforme himselfe in|to an Angell of light: for so doth he oftentimes deceiue vs, obtru|ding vice vnto vs. being coloured with a semblance of vertue. But as we sayd before, that as it is an euill thing for a man to withdraw

himselfe from the exercise of ver|tue, because he is fearefull to fall into vice: so also is it dangerous to desist from the duty of medi|tation: but the vices and dangers are rather to be feared, which may arise from this abstaining. For it is manifest, that there is not any state, nor any maner of liuing found in the world, which hath not some danger annexed vnto it: wherefore all our life may not vnfitly be called one danger and one continuall temptation Therefore least any man be blin|ded or deceiued of himselfe, it shall be profitable to shew as it were with a finger all kinde of dangers, deceipts, and impo|stures, and to admonish what is to be done in each of them



THE FIRST ADMO|nition of the dignitie and fruite of vocall prayer. CHAP. XLII.
LEt this then be the first ad|monition: they that haue mentall prayer in estimation, let them take heed that they do not contemne vocall prayer, or reiect it as vnprofitable: because it is Whether vocall prayer differeth from men|tall prayer. manifest, that for the very sub|stance of the vertue, there is no difference betweene this and that prayer. For to call vpo~ God with the heart only, or with the heart and the mouth together, doth make nothing for the efficacie of prayer. For to adde to the voyce of the heart the voice of y^e mouth, which God hath created, that he

may be praysed and glorified by it, how can it be, that it should de|rogate any thing from the digni|tie of the work, or should import any essentiall difference? Euen as there is no essentiall difference betweene the confessions of him that speaketh, and him that wri|teth the same thing; so also prayer, which is a confession of the diuine praises, or (that I may speake more properly) a certaine petition of God for some neces|sary thing: whether this petition be made with inward words, or with outward, which are the ima|ges of internall things, there can be found no essentiall difference betweene this and that. This ma|ner of praying is profitable to stir vp deuotion, and to inflame the heart, especially when it is luke|warme,  dispersed, and therfore vnfit by his own strength to fly or

to swim: for the sweet  deuout words, and the graue sentences, which are found in it, are very ef|fectuall to do this, if they be re|peated with humilitie and atten|tion. For this cause the words of God are called fyre in the Scrip|tures; Why the words of God are called fire. for they haue vertue to warme our hearts, and to kindle in them the fyre of diuine loue. Furthermore, voyces haue (espe|cially when diuine Psalmes are sung) a certaine naturall force to beget deuotion, as Saint Augu|stine testifieth, who hearing the melodious Psalmodye of the Church, sayth, that he was won|derfully inflamed within. Besides there are many men of that spirit and complexion, that they can|not for one mome~t kepe their co|gitatio~s fixed vpo~ God: for whom this manner of praying is most fitt, that by it (following the

sense and style of the words) they may attend in heart vpon God, and talke with him. For seeing that they cannot speake vnto him with their own words, and open their owne necessities vnto him with fit words, it is a very good help for them, if they be suppor|ted with the words of holy men, and that their spirit and deuotion be ruled by them, that by this manner they may more fitly de|clare their wants vnto God. In this place deuout Christians are to be put in minde, that making a prayer, they do it with as much deuotion and affection, as lieth in them: for hereupon depe~deth all the fruit  efficacy of prayer. For in the eares of God, as Bernard Bernard in certaine entences. saith, a vehement desire is a great clamour; but a remisse intent, is a submisse  low voice: for his ears are ope~ rather to the voice of the

heart, then to the voice of y^e body.
By this it may be vnderstoode how barren and fruitles the pray|ers of certaine men are, as wel ec|clesiastical as temporal, who with such hast and swiftnes doe runne ouer their praiers, that they seeme not at all to talke with God. For they would not deale so vnadui|sedly and coldly with men, if in good earnest they would obtaine any thing of them, for as Salomon saith, The poore speaketh with prai|ers; Pro. 18. but the rich answereth roughly. For he that plainely acknowledg|eth his owne want and misery;  desireth seriously to be helped in his need; as he desireth it with all his heart, so he prayeth with al his heart,  with the Prophet calleth with strong crying, saying: I haue cryed with my whole heart, Lord heare me. I would to God that men would vnderstand and re|member,

when they pray, to whome they speake, and what busines they haue in hand. For if they vnderstoode that they had speach with that supreame Ma|iesty, in whose presence the An|gels tremble, and that they haue to deale with him about weighty and important busines, to wit, a|bout the remission of sinnes and the saluation of their soules, their eyes would be opened, and they would see that it is vnseemely, yea that it is vniust that they should so negligently conferre with such a Lord about so great and weighty matters, and to speake to him after that manner, that they would not speake to a seruant, if they would haue him to regard that they say. These S. Bernard doth secretly reprehe~d ernard in ertaine ntences. when he saith: This I say briefely, that certain, as I suppose, do som|times

in their prayer feele a dry|nes,  a certaine dulnes of mind, that praying only with their lips, they do not marke what they say, nor to whome they speake; the reason is, because oftentimes they haue vsed so vnreuere~tly to come vnto prayer without any care or premeditation. Therfore it beho|ueth vs to be vigilant in all our actions, but especially in our pray|ers: for albeit that euery hour, and in all places, as Bernard saith, the eies of the Lord do behold vs, yet Bernard in his epistles. most especially in prayer: for al|though we are always seene yet then especially when we speake vnto the Lorde, and shewe our|selues face to face. And in ano|ther place: It is a danger, if the In his 4 sermo of Lent. prayer be too feareful, but greater if it be rash; the third danger is, if it be luke warme, and not pro|ceeding from a liuely affection.

Because a feareful prayer doth not pierce heaue~; for immoderate feare doth pluck back the minde, that y^e praier cannot ascend, much lesse pierce. A luke warme prayer doth languish and faile in the as|cending, because it wanteth vi|gour. A rash praier ascendeth, but it reboundeth back againe, for it is resisted, neither doth it obtaine grace, but deserueth punishment: but that prayer which is faithfull, humble  feruent, without doubt shall pierce heauen,  shal not re|turn empty. This saith he. But those that either will not pray at all, or that will not pray otherwise then we haue said, y^e is, with too much haste, negligently  carelesly, let them not take it in ill part, that this is said vnto them: for by this meanes their coyne is become base,  the worth of it is diminish|ed and not set by.



THE SECOND AD|monition of the dignity and fruite of holy ceremonies, and of externall workes. CHAP. XXXXIII.
THe second precept, which a deuout ma~ ought to obserue s, that as he ought to haue vocall prayer in estimation (as wee sayd before) so also he ought to haue in euerence all holy ceremonies, for hey are very profitable vnto vs, Ceremonies  externall reuerence are to be made ac|count of. eing meanes to stir vp our hearts with a Deuotion  reuerence of Diuine things. For as our soule so ong as it continueth in this body oth conceiue of thinges by the

windows of the sences, by which they are presented: so it is a great helpe, that wee may worthily esteeme of diuine matters, to thinke reuerently of them, and to vse them in that maiesty and re|uerent sort, that they are to be v|sed in: for the garments,  royall robes, and great retinue, which the great states of this world vse, do moue men to such reuerence, that they regard them as kings and princes. For this cause that supreame Maiestie, and glorious Why christ did insti|tute his Sa|craments in visible things. Gouernour of the world, did in|stitute  ordaine the Sacraments of his Church in visible things, that they might yeeld an inuisible grace. For euen as he instituted them for man, who is a creature mixt of body and soule; that is, compounded of a part visible, and a part inuisible: so also they are instituted, that they might in|struct

vs, that the sight and pre|sence of that which is seene, might stirre vp a deuotion  re|uere~ce of that, which is not seene.
Furthermore all holy ceremo|nies,  externall exercises (besides that they are holy works, and pro|ceeding fro~ vertue) are very con|ducent to get  preserue internal vertues. For euen as accidents do help much to y^e preseruatio~ of the substance (without which it can|not be preserued) so ceremonies  externall works do much help to the preseruation of charity and nnocency, which is the especiall reasure of our soules. After the same manner, because man is a treature consisting of soule  bo|dy it is meete that he serue God with both, bestowing his soule pon his loue and knowledge, nd his body, and all his mem|ers and sences vpon his worship

and seruice, that all things which are of God, may also serue God.
By this meanes man is made a pure and perfect sacrifice, when hee is wholy and altogether, n no part of him being excepted bestowed vpon the seruice o his Creator, and then is fulfille that commaundement of the A|postle, who willeth vs to giue vp our bodyes a liuing sacryfice, ho|ly and acceptable vnto God and hee commaundeth that ou bodies, spirits and soules (tha is, all that is in man) bee kept in all purity and perfection, for the glory of God.
We are bound to serue God with all that is within vs: there|fore it is no reason, that the bo|dy with the members and sen|ces should withdrawe them|selues from this obedience: ye

the Apostle himselfe comaund|th, that as in the time of our lindnes. We gaue our members as Rom. 6. eapons of vnrighteousnes vnto sin: o now that we giue our members as weapons of righteousnes vnto God. Hence it appeareth, that as An|gels In Angels seruices me|rely spriitu|all are re|quired; in me~ seruic mixt. are pure spirits, so also pure worship and spirituall seruice is equired of them: but of men, ecause they are spirits includ|d in bodyes, together with their spirituall workes, which are principall, corporall workes and serui|ces are also re|quired.



THE THIRD ADMO|nition, of the reuerence and obe|dience, which is due to the preachers and ministers of the Church. CHAP. XLIIII.
LEt the third admonition b that although spirituall me do familiarly conuerse with Go and haue him their maister to ex|pell their ignorance, accordin to that of the Prophet, who sait They that are humbled at his feet Deut. 33. receiue his words and doctrine: y let them not lightly regard, b haue in great reuerence the min|sters and preachers of the wo of God: for they be instrumen of the holy Ghost, and also riue

and conduit pipes, by which the water of wisedome is conueyed nto the garden of the Church, of whome it is written: The Priests Mal. 2. ps shall preserue knowledge; and hey shall seeke the law at his mouth. f Moss, who spake face to face Exod. 18. ith God, did not despise the ounsell of Iethro his father in aw, who was an Heathen man, who wil be so arrogant, that rely|ng vpon that familiaritie which e hath with God, will contemne  doctrine of his ministers,  the dispencers of his misteries? What greater pride can be thought of? r what greater cause, for which  man should be forsaken of God, deceiued of the Deuill, and left nto himselfe? If the Apostle Paule went vp to Ierusalem, that  might communicate with the Galat. 2. ther Apostles of the Gospell, which he had learned in the third

heauen who will be so confide so to trust his owne spirit, as no to conferre with the ministers  the Church of Christ? The orde which the Diuine Wisedome v|seth in the administration of th world, is, to gouerne inferio things by superiour, and to ho|nor his ministers, whom he hat ordained to that worke, and he willeth that we alwaies haue r course vnto them, and that w should receiue grace by they hands.
It is written, that while Pet was speaking, the holy Ghost fell o Act. 10. all them which heard the word. A|ter the same manner the~ sam Spirit dayly descendeth inuisibl vpon all them, that humbly hear the worde of God out of th mouth of his ministers.
Neyther must we heere look whether the Ministers bee goo

men or euill; but onely whether they be the instruments and or|ganes of God. For that gold is A Simily. not baser, which is found among coles, then that which is found a|mong precious stones: neither is the medicine of lesser vertue, which is drunke out of a vessell of clay, then that which is drunke out of alabaster. Therefore the seruant of God ought not to de|spise the preacher, albeit he be a wicked man in his life, so long as he teacheth the word aright, for oftentimes God, who is the mai|ster of them that be humble, doth bestow by their ministery gifts and graces vpon those that be is. For the Church hath her mi|nisters, who do teach he people, whome besides the knowledge that they haue got by their owne study, the holy Ghost doth many times illuminate, and doth moue

them to speake those things, they vnderstand not: which happened vnto Caiphas, who was the hye Priest that yere. And surely we do tempt God, when we presume to get that by prayer only, which we may haue by y^e ordinary way.
It is true that for the determi|nation of spirituall matters more time is required: for besides doc|trine; charity, and the feare of God are necessary. For Science doth much illuminate, but much more charity, especially in spirituall matters, which together with the theory doe require a practise o those things.
Therfore no ma~ perfectly kno|weth the gifts and particular gra|ces of God, and the sweetnes o that hidden Manna, vnlesse h himselfe hath tasted of it. There|fore the Psalmist saith, The mout of the righteous will speake of wise|dome, Psal. 37.

and his tongue will talke of iudgement: for the law of his God is in his heart. And Ecclesiasticus sayth: The minde of a godly man Eccles. 37. doth sometimes shewe more truth, then seuen watchmen that sit aboue in an high towre. This hath place chiefely in spirituall matters, and particular causes. But for deci|ding of controuersies in matters of faith, for humane contracts, decrees, Ecclesiasticall comman|dements, and such like things, the doctors of y^e Church, and maisters of those faculties do best know: and these spiritual matters are di|ligently to be examined, y^e it may be seene, whether they agree with the rule of the diuine Scripture. To know other matters, let de|uout men (as much as lyes in the~) seeke for learned men, and those of a good co~science. For nothing in the world is more dangerous,

nor bringeth more harme, then knowledge without the feare of God: for where there is doctrine without this correction, there is pride and elation of spirit: but where there is pride, there is darkenes, ignorance, and diuine reprobation. From this fountaine all heresies present and past are bred, with infinite other euils and enormities of life. Wherefore the Wiseman sayth: Let them that bring peace be welcome vnto thee, but of a thousand haue but one counseller. When thou hast found such an one conferre with him of all thy matters, with humilitie and confidence: and do not eue|ry day seke for new maisters: for this oftentimes bringeth con|fusion, and it is a propertie of vn|constant men, and of those, that go about, seeking for fansies and opinions like their owne, neither

do they rest, till they haue found them; which being found, they say, that they are ruled by others aduice, when indeede they are ruled by their owne. By which it is manifest that it is no smal thing to know how to choose good councell, and perhaps of no lesser import and consequence, then to giue good councell.


THE FOVRTH AD|monition, of the discretion which is required to the examination of good purposes. CHAP. XLV.
THe fourth admonition not much differing fro~ the for|mer, is; That although deuout

prayer is the fountaine of good desires: for there by reason of the consideration of the perfections and blessings of God, the fyre of charity burneth, from which the sparks of good desires arise: yet a man must not too much trust these desires, running headlong after all those things he desireth, not doing that before, which Iohn admonisheth, Beleeue not e|uery spirit, but try the spirits whe|ther 1. Iohn. 4. they are of God: for often|times vice is couered vnder ver|tue; oftentimes the wolfe playeth the theefe vnder a sheepes skin; and Sathan doth transforme him|selfe into an Angell of light.
Therefore we must know, that as nature, which hath giuen to man affections and appetites to the preseruatio~ ofhis naturall life, hath also giuen him reason, that he may rule  moderate them (o|therwise

they would endanger his life) so the holy Ghost, who stirreth vp spirituall desires in the righteous, to the preseruation of a spirituall life, doth adde also dis|cretion, which may rule, examine and moderate those desires: that being so moderated, they may be rightly disposed vnto action. But because many spiritual me~ do not this, oftentimes they take matters in hand which haue no good suc|cesse, whereby it is apparent, tht they are deceiued; for they suppo|sing their desire was good, thoght all things were now so safe, that they might finish although blind|folded, that they meditated vpon. Wherefore nothing is so neces|sary, as that a ma~ should now and then examine his good desires, and his zeale; the which by how much it hath a more beawtifull shew of good, by so much it may

more easily deceiue vnder the colour of good. For this cause God in the old testament would haue salt vsed in all the sacrifices, that he might intimate vnto vs, that the sacrifices of all our works ought to be seasoned with dis|cretion. Wherefore the king of Persia, who commaunded all things to be giuen vnto the Isra|elites 1. Esd. 7. in weight and measure, which pertained vnto the buil|ding  furnshing of the temp'e; commanded, that salt should be giuen vnto them without mea|sure, for the great vse and neede of it: seeing that in all our works we haue neede of the salt of dis|cretion. For seeing that it is the eye of our soule, wee cannot conueniently moue a foote without it.



THE FIFT ADMONI|tion, that together with prayer, a man ought to be exercised in all other ver|tues. CHAP. XLVI.
THe louer of deuotion is fiftly to be admonished, that al|though prayer be an excellent vertue (for by it we obtaine the spirit of God,  his grace, which is the fountaine of all our bles|sings; and with it many vertues do concurre, as we sayd before) yet for all this a man must not so desist and leaue off, but he must also bestow his strength  might to compasse other vertues, as wel that he may satisfie his duty, to

which he is bound, as that by litle and litle he may get an habit of them. For although the feruour of charity is a great pricke vnto deuotion: yet notwithsta~ding this feruour being somewhat slacked, which oftentimes comes to passe, forth with naturall appetites  af|fections do arise, and begin to lift vp their heads, vnlesse they be bridled by the continuall exercise of vertue, so y^t they headlong cast a ma~ into many infirmities  de|bilities. Therefore it is necessary, that besides the helpe we haue of prayer, that we be also ayded of the actes  exercises of vertue, y^t by vse and continuance in them, by litle and litle we may get vnto vs an habit, and so the affections and perturbations of our minde may be restrained, that we may haue the exercise of vertue not only for the delight of Deuotion,

but also that by the customary vse of vertue, passio~s may be subdued.
But if a man in the execution of these works, especially in y^e works of mercy be somtimes distracted and disturbed, and as it were for|saken of the spirit, let him not for this discourage himselfe, ney|ther let him thinke, that he hath lost any thing in this busines, or that he shall bring forth greater fruite in an other exercise: as ma|ny thinke, who know not in what thing true vertue consisteth, both because it is not to be maruelled at, if we be troubled being dis|tracted with many businesses: and also, because that which is sweete, is not alwayes wholesome, yea many times the contrary happe|neth. For we see that it doth no lesse profit the sicke to eate with A Simily. loathing and abhorring, then it doth the sound to feede with

appetite and stomacke: neither is a purging medicine, although bit|ter, lesse profitable then other meate, although it be sweete.
They are much deceiued, that do iudge of the dignity of works by the taste, and by the sweetnes: and it oftentimes hapneth that such do not worke for that end, that they ought to worke for, that is, that the will of God might be done, but that their owne may be done: not that they might loue and seeke God, but that they might seeke themselues. Often|times I had rather haue the dis|traction and drynes of the obedi|ent, then the attention of certaine deuout men: for that is wont for the most part to be alwayes most secure, which is bitter, and con|trary to our will. Thou oughtest not here to be afraide; for often|times some defects are wont to

happen in this busines, as idle ords, c. from which he thin|eth himselfe free, that abstaineth om these exercises: for as it is A Simily. o maruell, if he be neuer woun|ed, that neuer commeth into the attaile; so also it is no maruell,  he now and then be lightly ounded, that fighteth in the auntgard. Our Lord very well oweth all our infirmities, ther|re he willeth that we should be xercised in euery good worke: eyther let him maruell that wal|eth vpon the water, if he haue e soles of his feete wet; or that s hands be a little blacke, that ucheth pitch: that is, if he sa|our of a little humane frailtie, hat conuerseth with men for the good of them: for this is spiritually to become What it is to become accursed for our brethren. accursed for them.



THE SIXT ADMON tion, that they that pray much, ought not to dispise them, that pray lesse. CHAP. XLVII.
SIxtly godly men are to be a monished, who are frequent i the exercise of praier,  in it afte a singular manner are visited  God,  do receiue many co~for by it, that they doe not iudge, n contemne those, that are mo negligent or more cold in it. F there are some (I would to Go that there were not many) wh because they shed many teares,  do feele some comfort, which a cording to their iudgeme~t, othe

seele not, they thinke themselues etter, and more spirituall then o|ers are: yea many times they ontemne them, as carnall  sen|all men, who doe neither feele or taste of God. And whilst they ppose that this remorsefull ten|ernes The co~forts of God are the cause of hurt to many. of heart, which they haue,  a certaine signe of the Diuine race, they liue securely, they row stately,  wax lofty in their wn conceiptes; saying the same, at the mother of Sampson in mes past said to her husband, at she might take away y^e feare ee had conceiued by seeing an ngell; for he feared that he shuld ye, to whome she sayd; If e Lorde woulde kill vs, hee Iud. 13. oulde not haue receyued a urnt offeringe, and a meate of|ering of our handes, neyther ould hee haue shewed vs all hese thynges, neyther haue

tould vs that which is to come. So also these seeme to say in their hearts, if we were not in the fa|uour of God, God would not be|stow these comforts vpon vs.
These must consider, that such comforts, and such motions of the spirit, are not the vertues them|selues, but instruments and helps, by which vertues are obtained: so that they are vnto vertue, that which spurres are vnto a rider, weapons vnto him that fighteth, a booke vnto a student, and a lax|atiue medicine vnto him that de|sireth to be purged. But what do spurres auaile him that will not ride? to what end are weapons, if thou wilt not fight? what doth a booke profit a student, if he wi not open it? and what doth a laxatiue medicine help or further him, who being purged yet doth not recouer his wished health?

yea all these things are rather burdenous vnto him, whom they further not vnto good: for a streighter and a greater accompt shall be exacted for them. For if o know God onely, and not to do good, be a circumsta~ce, which maketh the fault of a negligent man much more grieuous, as all scriptures do testifie, what then shall the sweete tast of God do, what shall the consolations of the oly Ghost do, which are of po|wer to make Angels of men? If e that receiued one talent to A Simily. ade and gaine with it, for hiding  in the earth, be grieuously pu|ished for it, what shall be done o him that hath fiue talents deli|ered him, and doth also hide em in the earth? If an husband|an should hyre a company of ruants to labour in his vyne|ard, with this condition, that in

the morning at his house they should haue their breakefast, and afterwardes goe to their labour  if after they had broken their fast, and taken his larges, they should not goe to his Vineyard, but to the market place there idlely to walke and talke, and vainely to spend the time, would he not be very angrye with them, if hee should finde them?
I pray thee what is that spi|rituall refection, which God giu|eth vnto his in praier, but a break|fast, with which he would streng|then them, that they might be more cheerefull  couragious t labor in his Vineyard? If therefor after this breakfast, I do not labor  that vpo~ this opinion, that Go ought that vnto me, which I hau eaten (when as in the meane sea|son I owe vnto him the labors  the Vineyard) how shall not I b

found a derider and a deluder of is Maiestie? For if he sinne lesse, at acknowledgeth his theft, and r this more humbleth himsee; e~ he that besides his theft, doth so suppose himself to be better en others, when he is a greater eefe, hee sinneth a great deale ore, and becommeth vntollera|le. Hence also springeth an other ill, that they, who are come to is point, grow incorrigible, and e dispise other mens aduices d counsels. For no man dareth rrect them, because outwardly ey pretend so great sanctimo|, neither wil they suffer any one  correct the~; for they thinke that ey go before euery one in vertue thinketh not as they do: Wher| it manifestly appeareth, how al reason me~ vse in estimating e dignity of things, while they ake boast of that, of which they

should take greater cause to feare.
That this may be vnderstood the better, we must note, that Fro~ whe~ce the conso|lations of the Spirit arise. these spirituall ioyes and conso|lations are deriued from three causes. For sometimes they pro|ceede from the holy Ghost, as we haue saide before, who by this meanes would weane men from the world,  giue them strength to ouercome the difficulties of vertue. Sometimes they arise from the noblenes of the studies, and matters, which we handle and thinke vpon: such were the delights of the Philosophers, whe~ they meditated vpon the variety, might, and arte of things created, and from hence ascended to th contemplation of God, and o seperated substances, in which (as Aristotle saith) are found ex|ceeding delights, and that by

reason of the dignity and noble|nes of such things. And so there are many, that meditating vpon the workes of God, as well of grace, as of nature: or reading the holy Scriptures, and the bookes of the Doctors of the Church, do take great delight and plea|sure in them. For, as the things hat they reade and meditate vpon, are most high and noble, so also are they most pleasant and sweete, and very powerfull to eget delight. But if there bee one other thing that delighteth (as oftentimes it commeth to asse) all that is meere naturall, either is it any signe of any sanc|ified celestiall grace. In like anner there are some (as a cer|aine Doctour saith) who of their wne nature haue a certayne weete and delightfull affection  the chiefest good, which is

God. But let such, saith hee, take heede vnto themselues, that they be not deceiued, thinking tha they haue so much charity, as they haue delight: for euery one hat so much of this vertue, as hee la|boreth,  as hee denieth himself for the loue of God. For chariti (as saith S. Gregory) is not idle Charity is not idle. but worketh great matters, if i be true: but if it worke not, it i not true charity.
These consolations may also b many times sent of the deuil, tha by the~ he may deceiue and mak me~ proude: whilst they perswad the~selues, that they are some bo|dy: or that he may detain them i some error, or sin: as he dealet with heritickes, whom he causet to take great delight in reading  Scriptures, that by this mean he may more surely binde them i their errour. He dealeth after t

same manner with sundry Chri|stians, that he may make them (as I said before) more loftie  state|ly, and lesse subiect to the coun|sels of others, that so they may al|together be made incorrigible.
These things being thus, wee may easily gather, that from what fountaine soeuer consolations do flow, that a man hath no reason o be prowde of the~, or too much o glory in them.
For if they be of the holy Ghost, here is no cause why a man hould extoll and lift vp himselfe: ut that he should rather feare, onsidering of the accou~t, which sto be rendred for the~, as we said efore. If they doe arise onely fro~ aturall thinges, and bee meerely aturall (as those were of the hilosophers) wee haue grea|er cause of feare and greefe, en of ioye and delight, consi|dering

the deceiueablenesse, cor|ruption, and vanitie of our na|ture. But if they spring from tha wicked and malignant spirit, ma hath farre greater cause of dread as he hath who hangeth betwen the hornes of a bull. For ho shall not that bird feare, whic A Simily. sta~deth in a place, when she see the baite of the fowler layd, b seeth not where the snare is s for her? So that in the one the is no cause to be prowde, and  the other there is great reaso to feare.
Yet let it be, that all the consolations are of God: yet  must consider that these fau and graces are not giuen vnto  that we should be puffed vp, a despise our neighbour, but  the, that wee should more se|uently loue God, and that w should be humbled before othe

For otherwise wee receiue the giftes of God not to our profit, but to iudgement and condem|nation; if we contemne our neigh bour.
Furthermore we must consider All men are one bo|dy. that the church of Christ is a most perfect body, in which there are diuerse members, euery one in differing in figure and office: yet all necessary for the ministery and ornament of the body. For it is necessary, that in the mistical bo|dy of the Church there be variety of members: that is, of diuerse tates and offices, that there may e no defect in the office and mi|istery, but that the Church may e altogether beautifull. For the oate of Ioseph was also party co|ured; y^t the variety of ministers spiritsmight be signified which e in the church; all which make ast vnto a happy life, but euery

one by his seuerall way. For euen A Simily. as from the circumfere~ce of a cir|cle there are many lines tending to the center: so there are many waies by which Christ leadeth his to heauen, which is the common center of euery ones selicitie.
Wherfore Christ leadeth some to this center by the way of prai|er  meditation: others by the way of preaching: others by the way of patience in aduersity; o|thers by abstinence; many by po|uerty, some by humility: some by the works of mercy:  others by other waies, al which leade  di|rect to one  the selfe same place.
Which seeing it is so, why dost thou perswade thy selfe that thy way is better  safer the~ y^e way of others? who hath giuen thee this security? If it be God alone y^t wei|gheth spirits,  searcheth hearts, who hath put the balla~ce into thy

hands, to weigh the~, as thouthink|est good,  to make thine end he|uier when thou pleasest? or who hath placed thee in this chaire, to giue such iudgement? That man is not so feruent in praier, as thou art; yet neuerthelesse, it may be (although no man hath made thee his iudge) that he is more pa|tient, more humble, and more o|bedient then thou art; and that he hath more charity, and more mercy, then thou hast: and so he may excell thee in other vertues, which are more laudable.
He doth not weep so oft, as thou weepest: neyther doth he feele, that thou feelest. And do|est thou knowe whence these teares spring, and whence this feeling is? for although com|monly wee say that they are of God, yet it may bee, that they are of an other spyritte:

it may be that they are rather of nature, then of grace: that is, they may rather flow from the tender|nes, and soft constitution of the hart, then from the spirit of God. Furthermore although they pro|ceed fro~ this spirit, yet the height of perfection consisteth not in them; but they are onely instru|ments of perfection: the victory of the battaile is not placed in these,, but they are weapons to obtaine it: our saluation lyeth not in them, but they are meanes vn|to saluation.
For the good of man co~sisteth not in the instruments,  in prepara|tions destined vnto it, but in their good vse. It were ridiculous, if a|ny one should say, that hee that hath eaten more then others, will also digge and delue more then others: for it may be, that be that hath eaten lesse, may labor more;

seeing that the one doth not of necessity follow the other. After the same manner Prayer  that comfort that God sendeth, are destined and ordred to compasse the loue of God; yet there be ma|ny, that vse not this fauour well, and that abuse the water giuen them to refresh the plantes of ver|tue, to the cherishing and fostring of their owne delights: that is, that turne and conuert the com|forts and graces, which they haue receiued, by which they should further grow in loue with God, to their owne recreation and loue of themselues.
We ought to iudge no man, much lesse Ecclesiasticall persons, who liue in the professio~ of vertues. For the conte~pt of the~ doth engender in the soule a worme so hurtful  dangerous, that it doth not onely gnaw their persons, but also their

office  ministery, which is y^e sou~|taine and spring of many euilles. Neither must we publish, or boast of in the market place the faultes and offences of our brethren, yea albeit we see the~, being mindefull of that curse of Noah, which he inflicted vpon his sonne, because he would not couer the nakednes of his father: but rather let vs fol|low the reuerence of the other two brethren, who discreetly, and with honor couered it. That great Emperour Constantine had thys spirit, amongst whose prayses, An excelle~t saying of Co~stantine this especially is numbred, that he said: If I should take a Prea|cher or a minister of Gods word in any crime, I would couer him with my cloake, that he might be seene of none. This is properly called zeale, and the spirit of Christ: but to triumph, geere, scoffe, and disdaine, when any

of the seruants of God falleth, this is proper vnto Antichrist, whome all follow, that are his members.
Neyther for ones fault, or for the fault of a few, are all straight|wayes to bee condemned: for this was palpable and grosse ig|noraunce; as if for twoo or three women, which seemed A Simily. good, and afterwardes were taken in adulterye, one should say that all married women are adulteresses.
They that liue without the fleshe, are alwayes eyther good, or euill: they alwayes stand, or fall: but they that abide yet in the flesh, sometimes fall, and after rise againe. Ifin heauen, in Para|dice, in the schoole of Christ,  in the colledge of the seuen Deacons of the church elected of y^e Apostles there was one that fell,  became

disobedient, who sold his Master, and failed in the faith: is it any maruell, if a like thing be sound in other states and congregations? The fault of them that fal from so high places, doth not diminish, but encrease their dignity, that perseuere and continue in them.


THE SEVENTH AD|monition, that all kinde of sin|gularity is to be auoided. CHAP. XLVIII.
THe seuenth admonitio~ is, that a Deuout man so liue, that as much as lyeth in him he make no vaine shew of his deuotion, and that he studiously endeuour him|self, that he may eschew all kinde

of singularity, as well in his appa|rell, as in his other actions with|out offence to God; according to the counsell of Seneca writing vn|to his friend; Looke, saith he, that thy exteriour figure bee common with other men: but that thine interiour habit may differ from them.
To this admonition it apper|taineth, A secret place to pray in is to be cho|sen. Math. 6. that the place of praier be such an one, as our Sauiour shew|eth, when he saith; But when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber: and when thou hast shut thy doore, pray vnto thy Father which is in secret,  thy Father which seeth in secret, shal reward thee openly. This I say, beit there bee many that very appily do pray in the church,  e much helped by the receiuing f the holy sacrament of the Lords pper (which without doubt ingeth great help to the~ y^t pray)

yet there are some, for whome a secret place is more fit to pray in the~ a publicke place: by reason of the danger of vain glory,  singu|larity. A secret place remoued fro~ the eies of the world is a safe haue~ for yong men  yong maides. Let deuout me~ make oratories of cor|ners,  let them there worship God in spitit and truth. For seeing that Ionas prayed in the belly of the Whale, certainely there is not any place, which is vncon|uenient to pray to God in. In this opinion was the Prophet, whe he said: My soule thirsteth fo thee, my flesh greatly longeth fo Psal. 63. thee in the barren and dye land without water. Thus I behold thee as in the Sanctuary, whe I beholde thy power and th glory.
The vices which accordin The vices of women. to Salomon, and the Apostle Pa

are especially to be reprehended in women, are these; curiositie, idlenes, pratling, vnquietnes or instability; which is, that they cannot long stay in one place. Which vices because they do not correct, they tra~sgresse the law of God,  doe forsake the study of deuotion. This one reason is suffi|cient, that they, that truely desire the glory of God, doe diligently look to the~selues, that they do not giue occasio~ to any one to slander ertue, seeing y^t the Apostle doth so ofte~ admonish, we y^t do nothing y which the doctrine of Christ aybe blasphemedin any respect.  would not haue any one here to ake any occasion to defend wo|en, that come not to church, to ray, to heare seruice  Sermons,  to receiue the holy Co~munion n those daies, that are appoin|ed: for it is one thing to take

away the necessity, and an other thing to pare away the superflui|ty. For this hath the Church thought good, this the Saintes haue taught, and amongst them Saint Hierome who in his Epi|stles doth often commend the Solitarines of women.
For this cause these persons ought alwaies to vse great discre|tion When and how often we are to co~municate in frequenting the holy com|munion. For albeit the Christi|ans in the primitiue Church did dayly communicate: yet this ex|ample is not now foorth with to be followed, because then it was no note of singularity, to do that, which all did: as it is no note of singularity to bee cloathed with a white garment in that place, where all are arrayed in the same colour. This Sacrament is to be receiued at such tymes, as the Church hath appoynted:

let some come euery moneth, o|thers euery weeke, as Augustine counsaileth, some seldome, some oftner, according to occasions, or the desire of him that would communicate, or according to the age, deuotion and state of euery one.
This admonition especially be|longeth vnto women, of a sus|pected age for vaine-glory and singularity, although neither for these, nor for any other so generall a rule can be giuen, which doth admit no ex|ception.



THE EIGHT ADMO|nition is, that too much familia|ritie as well of men, as of women, is to be eschewed. CHAP. XLIX.
THe eight admonition is, that with all endeuour we flye from the too much familiaritie as well of men, as of women: yea, although they be religious and spirituall: for it often commeth to passe, as one saith, that spiritual loue is changed into carnal loue, for the similitude and likenes of the one with the other.
This is very often, and very se|riously beat vpon by the holy Fa|thers.

S. Augustine sayth: I dare boldly say, that he that will not Aug de co|habitatio|ne clerico|rum  mu|lierum, sets de singula|ri. clerico|rum. eschew familiarity to conuerse with women, shal without doubt at the length fall. And in another place; Chastity is consorted with a grieuous companyon, whome we must not only resist, but let|ting the bridle go, fly from as far as we can. Neither are women lesse to be eschewed, because they seeme religious: because by how much they are more religi|ous, by so much the more they do sooner allure, and vnder the pre|ence of piety lurketh the lime of ust: credit me assuredly, I speake y experience, before God I lye ot: I remember that the cedars of Lybanus, that the captaines nd guides of the flockes haue allen by this plague; whose all I did no more thinke of, hen of the rebuke of Ambrose

or Hierome. And a little after: what great Bishops, and what ex|cellent Clerkes, after many fiery trials, and victorious combats, af|ter many wonderfull things done by them, are knowen to haue ship wracked with them all, when they woulde sayle in a slender barke? What mighty and strong Lyons hath this one delicate in|firmity (that is, luxury) tamed: which being vilde, base,  wret|ched, yet maketh pray of great things.
Saint Hierome doth agree vnto this: Sayth he, either be indiffe|rently Hierome in an Epist. to Nepot. ignorant of all the may des and virgins of Christ, or els indif|ferently and equally loue them: neither haue affiance and confi|dence in thy fore passed chastitie; for thou canst not be more holy then Dauid, nor more wise then Salomon. Always remember, that

a woman cast the tiller of Para|dice out of his possession.
And S. Isidoe sayth: If thou standest neere a serpent, thou shalt not be long safe: and if neere a fire, thou shalt waxe warme, albeit thou be iron. But Saint Bernard doth more vehe|mently Bernard vpon the Canticles. taxe them, that do conti|nually conuerse with women. To be alwayes with a woman, sayth he, and not to know a wo|man, is it not more, then to rayse he dead? that which is lesse thou canst not do, and shall I beleeue hee in that which is greater? Bernard sayth this, either that he ight terrifie vs, or that it is so in he truth of the matter. Be as it ill, that is at the least greatly to e feared, which so great a man  seriously vrgeth.
For these reasons, and coun|iles of the Saincts, the seruant

of God, who caryeth so great a treasure in an earthen vessell, ought to walke aduisedly and circumspectly, mortifying him|selfe in all his members, fearing in the midst of security: for this feare bringeth greater securitie. That here is to be noted, which Saint Hierome sayth; that wee must not relye vpon our fore|passed chastity: for there is no|thing so neere vnto danger, a too much confidence.
Neither only must we fly to much familiarity: but also a occasions, that dispose vnto it for he that would take away th ende, must also take away th meanes, which dispose to tha end. For oftentimes there lurket a serpent in the grasse, and tha friendship, which begun in th spirit, many times endeth in th flesh: and the gold in continu|ance

of time is turned into drosse. And albeit the thing it selfe hath a show and colour of that which is good, yet it is needefull that man alwayes thinke, that his ad|uersary sleepeth not: and that then poyson is the neerest, when e intermingleth most honny.


THE NINTH ADMO|nition, that euery one before all things ought to walke in his calling, that he may satis|fie the obligation of that estate in which he is bound. CHAP. L.
THe ninth admonition is, that a deuout man haue for a prin|pall foundation of his life, that

before all things he satisfie those things, to which he is bound by the reason and condition of h estate: which being done, let him bestow, as pleaseth him, all the o|ther time vpon the diuine wor|ship. For we must knowe, that prayer, speaking properly, is none other thing, then a petition, by which we desire grace of God, that we may walke in his com|maundements, and fulfill his wil as knowing our owne infirmiti and vnsufficiencie to walke s without his especiall grace. Th Prophet signifieth this, when h sayth, I opened my mouth and pa ted, because I loued thy commau Psal. 119. dements: as if he should say, Be|cause I haue desired to keepe th commaundements, and cann do it without the helpe of t grace  spirit, which thou giu to them that humbly aske it 

thee, for this I open my mouth in rayer, and desire of thee, that hou wouldest giue me the grace f thy spirit, that being supported y his helpe, I may keepe thy ommaundements, which I haue nely and earnestly desired.
Which seeing it is so, it is ma|ifest that the keeping of the di|ine commandements ought to e the beginning of our cogita|ons: and all our prayer, and hatsoeuer dependeth of it, is to e directed to that end. Vnder is first bond is contained, what|euer pertayneth to the estate d condition of euery one: as ose things are which belong to the ministery, to man and ife, to a Bishop, to a Iudge, to a aister, to a clyent, and to be iefe, to euery man in his seueral lling and place. For euen as ese estates are instituted of God,

so also their lawes, statutes, an ordinances are ordained of hi Therfore he that doth violate th lawes, doth resist the diuine ord nance. Therefore that vessell  election, and that sanctified ma sion of the holy Ghost, doth s often at the end almost of all h epistles, admonish euery one what his estate and condition r quireth, that is, what the son oweth to his father, and what t father to his sonne: in like man what the husband oweth to  wife, and what the wife to h husband: what the seruant owe to his maister,  what he mais to his seruant. Go to then, if the lawes and ordinauces be of Go Prayer is ordayned, that obe|dience may be preser|ued. what greater confusion can the be, then so to attend vpon pray (by which we craue ayd to kee the law of God) that in y^t mea time we neglect the keeping

e law? What other thing is this, en to leaue the ende for the eanes destinated to it? to for|ke the hauen for sayling? and to st away health for the medi|ne, by which we obtain health? what other thing is this, then at a ma~ in prayer seeketh more r himselfe, then he doth for God? d had rather satisfie himselfe, en satisfie God? for he leaueth od for the loue of himselfe: at is, he leaueth that which God mmandeth, that he may do at, which pleaseth himselfe.
To be briefe, this is none other ng, then not to vnderstand at what prayer is: neither for at it is ordained, when for it t is relinquished, which was e sought. For if all the force  efficacie of prayer consisteth ein, that we compasse vnto spirit and courage to keepe the

commaundements of God: wha ignorance then is it, to forsak the obseruance of the diuine la and to runne vnto prayer? As th Smith knoweth that his iron  A Simily. first to be heated, and to be mad soft, before he labour to make stamp in it: so prayer is to be  sed to the softening of the hear that thereby it may be made re die for the keeping of the diuin law. This then is the first an chiefest ende. to the which tr and perfect prayer is to be d rected. To declare and manife this, we haue most euident a apparent examples and argume~ in the Scriptures: but I haue fou none more excellent or more  for this purpose, then that Psal whose beginning is; Blessed  those that are vpright in their w and walke in the law of the Lor Psal. 119. Which Psalme is so great, th

the Church hath diuided it into two and twenty parts; for there are in it a hundred seuenty and sixe verses; among which scarce|ly there is one, in which mention is not made of the law, or of the commandements, or of the testi|monies, or of the wayes of God, or of his words: all which signifie he same thing. Sometimes vn|erstanding is desired to compre|end the meaning of the law of he Lord: sometimes grace is im|lored, to the keeping of it: some|mes great fruites and commo|ties are reckned vp, which come to them that obserue it, and a|aine great plagues and punish|e~ts are denounced against them at violate it: sometimes also the ophet declareth, how all his easure, all his loue, all his de|ght, and all his cogitations were stowed vpon it.

The whole Psalme then, and all the words and meditations of it, are directed to this end, that ther|by the seruant of God may vnder|stand, that he ought to haue none other aime in this world, none o|ther inherita~ce, none other glory, nor treasure, then the keeping of the diuine law: and to this end the whole station and course of our life, all our considerations, and so all the exercises of our prayers are to be directed. If this then ought to be our intent, is there any thing more contrary vnto it, then for prayer to forsake y^e very end of prayer? Saint Bernard di Prayer is to be set after pub, like good. not so, who many times willingl and of set purpose did leaue o not only prayers, but also mo deepe and profound contempla|tions, that he might execute h function of preaching and te ching (for it was his vocation) 

he testifieth in a certaine sermon in these words: If I haue found at Bern. in his 51. ser. vpo~ the Cant. any time that any of you haue profited by mine admonitions, then I confesse that it doth not any wayes grieue me, that I pre|ferred the care and cure of prea|ching before mine owne ease and quiet. I am with patience pul|led from the embraces of vn|fruitefull Rachel, that by Leah there might abound vnto mee fruites of your proceedings and profiting. Surely it shall not rke me at all of mine intermit|ed quiet, and imployment in reaching, if I shall see my seede ructifie in you, and that by it the fruites of your righteousnes are ncreased. For Charity, which eeketh not those things that are er owne, hath long ago very ea|ly perswaded me, to prefer none f mine owne desires before your

profits. To pray, to reade, to write, to meditate: and if there be any other gaines of spirituall studie, all these haue I accounted as hindera~ces for your sakes. This sayth he. And in another sermon; Do not thinke, my brother, that In his 46. sermon vpo~ the Cant. by this, any preiudice is done to the loue of thy quiet, to the actes of holy obedience, or to the tra|ditions of thy elders. Otherwise the Bridegrome will not sleepe with thee in one bed, especially in that, which for the flowers of o|bedience thou bestrawest with hemlock  brambles. For which he wil not heare thy prayers; nei|ther will he come when thou cal|lest him. For such a great louer of obedience, that had rather dye, then not obey, will not giue any part of himselfe to him that is dis|obedient. Neither will he allow of the vaine leisure of thy con|templation,

c. Furthermore, as we are to direct our prayers ac|cording The fruite of prayer is the kee|ping of the law. to this aime and leuel, so also we must examine the fruite of our prayers. For without contro|uersy, the fruite of prayer is the obseruance of the diuine law: which y^e Prophet signifieth plain|ly, who when he had said, that the ighteous man meditated day and ight in the law of the Lord, pre|sently Psal. 1. he addeth, And he shall be ike a tree planted by the riuers of waters, that wil bring forth her fruit n due season: which fruit of a cer|aintie is none other, then the keeping of the diuine comman|dements: so that from the conti|uall meditation of the law, doth pring the keeping of the law. herfore, my brother, whose duty  is to meditate vpon this holy aw, if at any time occasion be of|ered thee, to do that which the

law commaundeth, be ready to performe it: and hereby thou shalt know, whether thou hast meditated on the law of the Lord with fruit. Let the Iudge do his duty, and the Prince his: let the Bishop, the Minister, the husband, the wife, the seruant, the maister, the sonne, the father, do their du|ties also: and let euery one faith|fully execute that, which is com|mitted vnto him, and belonget vnto his place and calling. And i he seeth that it goeth not we with him, and that he goeth no the right way, let him thinke tha he abuseth this exercise, and tha this medicine will not be profi|table vnto him, because it attai neth not the end, for which it wa ordained. For if the end was by  to get a chearefull spirit,  a fres feruour to walke in the comma dements of the Lord: how sha

he be sayd to haue obtained this spirit, or this deuotion, who so vn|willingly, and so lazily goeth a|bout the keeping of the law? for deuotion is none other thing, then a promptnes and readines of mind, to do all those things, that God hath commaunded.
The greater part of the world at this day is plunged in this er|rour: For we see very many, who, that they may not vndergoe the east crosse or trouble, do altoge|ther neglect that which belongs vnto their duty, to the scandale of many, and to the wronging of themselues. Let vs graunt that they doe not belong vnto the number of these, who are truly deuout, and haue so endeuou|red themselues for the loue of God onely; yet they are to be eferred to this number, who haue aken this exercise vpon them

for delight, or for honour, or re|creation, or for to get greater au|thoritie, or for any such ende. These are they, for whome vertue heareth euill, and the exercise of prayer is defamed: whilest men do iudge not by the nature of the thing, but by the persons; neither do respect the vse, but the abuse.
The Apostle very well vnder|stoode this, and willeth to pre|uent it, writing vnto Titus, and commanding him, that he should be instant in season, and out of season, that he should admonish euery one to doo their duties. And when as now he was come vnto maryed women, he sayth: Exhort the young women to be so|ber minded, that they loue their Tit. 2. husbands, that they loue their chil|dren, that they be discreete, chast, keeping at home, good and subiect vnto their husbands, that the word

of God be not euill spoken of. Thou seest in this Chapter, how plaine|ly the Apostle doth warne euery one of his duty, propounding vn|to the~ not only what they should do, that is, to haue a care of their house c. but also from what they should abstaine, that is, that the word of God be not euill spo|ken of, and that their neighbour should not be scandalized, c. which is done, as often as any one offendeth in those things, which belong vnto his duty.
But because this matter is very ecessary, for more euidence of it will also ioyne the doctrine of e sequent admonition, wherein will more copiously speake of e ende, which is to be looked vnto in this holy exercise: and of the errours that are committed in it.



THE TENTH ADMO|nition is, of the end which is to be looked to in this exercise. CHAP. LI.
THe tenth admonition is con|uersant about the end, which is to be obserued in this exercise. For seeing that the ende is th The whole worke de|pendeth of the end. principall circumstance of moral actions, it is the roote and foun|dation of all them that follow if an errour be committed in it the whole worke becommeth e roneous: but if the end be goo then the whole work wil be goo
Therefore we must here not that the chiefest part of a Ch|stian Mortifica|tion of af|fections is the chiefest duty of a Christian. life is the mortification 

ouraffections, and the subduing of our owne wills. For the end of this life is loue and charity, and of this loue is bred a generall obedi|ence of all the diuine comman|dements, and a perfect conformi|tie of our wills with the diuine will; which Christ testifyeth plainely in the Gospell, saying: If any man loue me, he will keepe Iohn. 14. my word, and my Father will loue him, and we will come vnto him, and will dwell with him. And a little before; He that hath my commandeme~ts, and keepeth them, is he that loueth me. Hence it is, that perfect loue and perfect obe|dience seeme to be one and the selfe same thing: for he that lo|ueth, cannot but do that, which he commandeth, whome he lo|ueth; but he that hateth, con|emneth the precepts of him, whome he hateth.

Therefore to this kinde of obe|dience, mortification, and the de|niall of our owne will before all things is required. For euen as a A Simily. yong set or slip cannot be grafted into a tree, vnlesse first that branch be cut off, into whose place it is to be inserted: so the diuine will cannot be grafted into our heart, vnlesse first our owne will be lop|ped away; for these two wills are contrary one to the other. This is the function of mortifica|tion, The duty  mortifi|cation is to kill and subdue our owne will. and the vse of morall ver|tues, which are especially conuer|sant about this. For the greater part of them consisteth in this, that they may restraine some one of these passions, that they may make way for the actions of ver|tue, in which the obseruance of the diuine law consisteth. By all which it followeth, that the ende of this whole busines is loue, obe|dience,

and the mortification of al our euill affections: as in very few words Ecclesiasticus teacheth, say|ing; The children of wisedome are the Church of the righteous,  their Eccesi. 3. of-spring is obedience and loue. By which wordes he signifieth, that the chiefe fruites of righteousnes are two: for the first begotten child is the loue of God, of which is bred obedience vnto his will: the which that we may satisfie, it is needfull that our owne bee de|nyed, which is the proper duety and function of mortification. For which cause all the Saints haue made an especial account of mor|tification: for it is the first gate and entraunce vnto all other ver|tues.
This is that crosse, which our Sauiour so greatly commendeth in the Gospell, vpon which all our inordinate affections are to

be crucified, as al they haue done, and doe, of whome the Apostle speaketh; They that are Christes, Gal. 5. haue crucified the flesh with the af|fections and the lustes.
Seeing therfore that this crosse is of so great weight and mome~t, and so abhorred and hated of our flesh: and seeing that those things which are so hard and difficult, cannot bee performed without great strength and fortitude: and seeing that vnsauery relishes can|not be got downe without some sauery sauce, therfore praier is or|dained, in which both things are found. For by prayer wee obtaine What we obtaine by prayer. fortitude and courage to fight a|gainst Amalech our enemy:  by prayer the diuine grace is bestow|ed vpon vs, which alone can do al things: in it charity is kindled and exercised, which is the mother of all vertues,  by this our eyes are

daily more  more opened vnto the diuine knowledge: to be brief in it the ioy of the holy Ghost is co~municated vnto vs, by which the way of the Lord is made most pleasant and sweet vnto vs: accor|ding to that of the Prophet; I will run the way of thy commandements Psal. 119. when thou shalt enlarge mine heart.
For this cause prayer is so ex|ceedingly commended of all the Saints: not onely for that, which it is in it selfe (although it be an es|peciall acte of Religion) but al|so, and that cheefly, for the great helpe and ayde it bringeth to them that endeuor to the foresaid end.
So that it is not so praised and Praier is not th'end but a mea to obtaine the end. celebrated, because it is the ende, but because it is an especial means vnto the end: not that it is health, but because it is a medicine pro|curing health.

If any man therefore should be frequent in prayer, and yet disso|lute and lose in manners, neyther endeuour himselfe vnto vertuous actions, hee should not much dif|fer from one that is sicke and vn|sound, who alwaies vseth medi|cines, and yet is neuer the better, but still continueth in the same infirmity: he is wretched  mi|serable after a double manner; first by reason of the griefe  vex|ation of the infirmity,  second|ly because of the continuall hor|rour and annoyance of the medi|cines.
This is a principle and an axi|ome generall and true: by which any one may easily vndersta~d the sundry errours, which are wont to be committed in this respect. For or the eetnes of aier some e reiect e bitter|s of mor|fication. there are some, who when they finde sweetnes in prayer, and dif|ficulty in mortificatio~, they leaue

that which is difficult, and em|brace that which is easie: they reiect that which is bitter, and take that which is sweete,  they so giue themselues wholy to prai|er, that they make small account of mortification.
For mans heart is greedy and desirous of any pleasure, so that some Philosophers did not blush to affirme; That pleasure was the The Epi|cures. last end, and center of humane fe|licitie: But all other affirmed, that it is the baite of al euils, for by the desire of pleasure very many doe cast themselues headlong into all vices  enormities. What? is mans appetite so powerfull, that as wa|ter A Simily. of his owne naturall motion doth alwaies slide  drop down|wards, and if any one desireth to hinder that passage, he profitteth nothing for it will seeke for some corner or chinke, which it may

breake through: so also our heart is alwaies ready bent to all kinde of pleasure, so that if silence bee imposed vpon it,  any one thing be denyed vnto it; foorth with it swelleth  rageth, now winding it self this way, now y^e way, seeking for a vent,  neuer resteth, vntil it hath satisfied the lust. Therfore it is very well said of a certaine Nature is subtill. Doctor, that nature is subtill, and in all things seeketh her selfe: yea in those men, that are more per|fect and Diuine.
And rightly he calleth her sub|till, because with great modestie, so that she is not perceiued, shee entreth where she listeth: and insinuateth her selfe, whether she is not called; that she may search, if she may finde ought, that may bee either pleasant or profitable vnto her, which she may enioy, or which she may rest in.

Hence the greater part of er|rors arise, which are wont to meete with vs in this way. Hence first ariseth the corruption of the intent of the good works we do: the onely and principall ende of which is God: our sensuall appe|tite doth contrary and gaine-say this ende, which alwaies seeketh something, wherein to delight it selfe. And this is a principall and a cheefe thing, that doth corrupt al our workes, and causeth, that the Water is not altogether pure.
Hence it is that many liue in errour, thinking that they haue done many good workes, in the ministery of the Lord: which when they come to be examined at the strict iudgement of God, it presently  plainly appeareth, y^e it was not pure gold, y^e they brought, but mingled with drosse, and

full of the mud of theyr owne loue.
From this fountain it also sping|eth, that many in the exercises of prayer, of reading,  meditation, c. do hunt after nothing els, but delight, and a certaine spirituall ioy, and in this they place the height of their desire: perswad|ing themselues, because it is a spi|rituall delight, that they are now in a safe hauen, and that there cannot remaine any daunger, but in a carnall delight, they doe not marke, that selfe loue, that spirituall gluttony, coueteousnes, and such like affections, may also haue place heere, as a certaine Doctor saith:  perhaps so much the more, as these delightes are greater, and more desired.
At the least this is certaine, that the roote of all this euill is the loue of our selues, which hath an

eye alwaies vnmoueably fastned vpon priuate commodity  selfe gaine: whether it be in this mat|ter, or in that: that is, whether the commodity be of delight, or e hoped for by a false surmise, vnlesse the difference be heere|n, that the fault is greater, and the error lesser, when the delight s filthy and vnhonest; and the fault is lesser  the error greater, when the fault is not in the desire, ut in the opinion: that is, when s a man doth expect more, or ath that thing in greater price, which hee desireth, then the ature of the thinge is in it elfe.
But if thou shalt say vnto me, hat there are not many, who are hus deceiued: for that no man is o blinde, that wholy intendeth nd seeketh for delight in the ex|rcise of his prayers and studies.

I answere, that they are too ma|ny, who are thus deceiued: for we see by experience, that many are so tyed to this study and exercise, that if at any time a worke of cha|rity, or of corporall trouble be of|fered vnto them, presently they shrinke backe, and rather impose it vpon any other, then they will vndergoe it themselues. And this is a manifest signe, that such doe not purely and simply seeke for the good pleasure and will of God. For when that offereth it selfe, which they know to be plea|sing vnto God, they turne them|selues from it, and turne vnto that which is pleasing and pleasant vnto themselues: none otherwise, then if nothing was acceptable vnto God, but that which was al|so gratefull vnto men: when as in a manner the contrary is alwaies true, that that doth lesse please

men, which is most gratefull vnto God.
They that thus serue God, and oue him for such an ende, as yet hey haue not fully receiued the spirit of the adoption of the sonnes of God: but onely of seruantes, and therefore they are ather to be called hyrelings, then sonnes: for their chiefest intent s their owne commodity. Cer|aynely my Lord, hee doth not s yet know thy goodnes, who so oueth thee: neither doth he as et know of what might and ma|estie thou art, or what thou art, ho after this manner seeketh a|y thing without thee.
He that thus loueth thee, doth ot loue thee with a chast  pure oue, as the loue of the Spouse is owards her Bridegroome: but ith a fained  mercenary loue, s that is of whoores and harlots,





who rather respect the commodi|ty and the pleasure, then the per|sons, whome they loue. Wha is more foule and filthy, the to loue God with such a loue?
Hence also ariseth another er|rour, and that not a little one, tha is, when as we greatly esteeme o (as we said before) the exercise of praier, and contemne the exer|cise of mortification.
For that there is pleasure i the one, and greefe in the other and mans heart doth reiect th one, and embrace the other, dot embrace that which delighteth and reiect that which torment|eth;
This is the cause, that we se many diligent in hearing of Di|uine seruice and Sermons, an very long and copious in praier and doe diuers times receiue th holy Communion; and are wil|ling

to speake of God, and also glad to heare others speake of The abuses of many that would seeme de|uout. him; and do cheerefully conuerse with godly and religious men;  yet are prone vnto anger, lust, am|bition, and obstinate in their own conceipts and opinions; neither will giue place or depart a haire from their owne right, neither do they cease to detract and backe|bite others. They are merry  do seeke to fare deliciously, to liue daintily, to eate and drinke of the best, to cloath their body sump|tuously,  to vse themselues effe|minately; yet neuerthelesse for all his they would liue deuoted vnto God,  haue society and familia|ity with him. Hence it is, that if t any time they finde not that ac|ustomed sweetnesse in prayer, which they desire, forthwith they ast downe their heades, loose heir patience, and weep, because

they could not weepe in prayer: and they most plentifully powre foorth teares, not teares of deuo|tion, but of impatience. And such, as for this cause doe weepe, doe not shed teares because they see themselues ful of anger, pride, coueteousnes, selfe loue, and ma|ny other vices,  destitute of hu|mility, charity, and other vertues, more necessary then those teares are.
And this errour doth so farre exceede, that some of them haue their Deuotion in such re|gard and reckoning, that they eyther neglecte, or contemne true righteousnes, to the which notwithstanding they are bound by the diuine law. They think that they haue most greeuously offen|ded, if they doe not euery day heare diuine seruice; if that euery day they doe not make an end o

those prayers, they haue appoint|ed vnto themselues, and so satisfie the calender of their deuotion, which if they haue not done, they can neyther eate nor drinke quietly; when as in the meane time they can sleep soundly and sweetly, hauing their coffers and chestes stuft full of rich garments and rustie coyne, neuer conside|ring that there are so many poore and naked, which perish and faint through hunger and cold. Their conscience full of faults  crimes doth not take away their sleepe, neither doth it hinder their rest, although it be clogged with the burdens of many debts, which they are able to repay, but do not. And also whe~ as they haue not for many yeres saluted their neighbor by reason of an inueterate hate to the great scandall of much peo|ple: neyther haue regarded

those things, which belonged to their estate, and vnto the conditio~ of their family, yet for al this they haue securely slept,  not any whit haue bin trobled or disturbed for it. And yet if any of these things do offer themselues vnto them, es|pecially if they haue any trouble, or difficulty annexed vnto them; they vtterly reiect them, pull backe theyr handes, and say; that by this labour theyr heart is distracted, and their Deuotion hindred; which is none other thing, then to forsake the heade for the feete: for they make more account of the quiet of theyr heart, which disposeth vnto prai|er, then of the obedience of the Diuine law, vnto which prayer is disposed.
It is likely that such men neuer read that of our Sauiour; Not eue|ry one that saith vnto mee, Lord, Math. 7.

Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth my Fa|thers will which is in heauen.
This Deuotion without the foundation of righteousnes is one of the principall and most vniuer|sall errors, that are wont to meet with man in this way, for it alto|gether destroyeth a spirituall life in euery body. For whereas the end of this life is the fulfilling of the diuine law, and the meanes, by which we attaine this ende is prayer (as we haue often said) this errour without question peruert|eth this order; for of the end it maketh a meane,  of the meane, maketh the end,  so it confoun|deth all things.
I would to God that they were very few, who in this respecte were deceiued: But I feare, see|ing that the kingdome of selfe loue is very large, least also the

plague, which springeth from it, be very generall; albeit in some one respect it expatiateth more, then in another: yet few there be, that are altogether free from it.
Neyther let any one thinke that this Doctrine is contrary vnto that, which before we haue de|liuered, as concerning the too much busines in externall mat|ters: for that doth rebuke them that altogether forsake the exer|cise of prayer, that they may attend vpon exteriour labours: and this that wee haue heer said, is contrary to the other extreame, and doth blame them, that so giue themselues to prayer, that they will not entermeddle with any externall busines, although it be very necessary. Both of these are extreames, which vertue doth alwaies abhorre, consisting in 

meane.
For our businesses ought not to be so many and so great, as to choake our prayer; nor our pray|er ought to be in such esteeme, that for it the workes of vertue be neglected, which are proper vnto our estates and callings.


OF A REMEDY MOST profitable and avayleable a|gainst all these kindes of errors. CHAP. LII.
HE therefore that would be freed from all these er|rors, let him set downe vnto him|selfe the last end of all his labours and troubles to bee the keeping

of the law of God, and the ob|seruing of his moste holy will, and also the mortifying of hys owne will: let him vse the sweet|nes of prayer to temper  qua|lifie the cup of bitternes, and let him assuredly perswade him|self, that by how much the more any one drinketh of this cup, by so much hee hath profitted; and by how much lesse any one hath drunke of it, by so much he hath lesse profitted.
Let him diligently marke, how much hee dayly profitteth in humility, as well in that which is inward, as in that which is out|ward: how he brooketh the in|iuries, that are done vnto him: how he succourerh the infirmities of others,  releeueth the necessi|ties of his neighbor; how he hath a fellow feeling of his brethrens miseries; how he reproacheth not

the escapes  falles of his neigh|bor: and how he hath learned to hope in the Lord, when tribulati|ons are at hand; how he moderat|eth his tongue, keepeth his heart, bridleth the flesh with al her lusts  concupisences, how he gouern|eth  ordreth himselfe, as well in aduersity as in prosperity, that he be not cast downe of the one, nor puffed vp of the other. How he carrieth himselfe in all thinges with grauity and discretion. But before all thinges let him dili|gently consider, whether the loue of honour, of pleasure, of the worlde, and of such like affections bee killed and mortifi|ed in him, and according to the rule, that euery one shall finde in himselfe, let him so iudge: and not according to the quantity of sweetnes, which he shall feele in prayer.

But if we would attaine vnto Mortifica|tion is ne|cessarie. our true end indeed, it ought not to be sufficient vnto vs, to haue looked vnto prayer: but it is al|so requisite, that with one eye, and that with the best, we haue a regard vnto mortification, and with the other vnto prayer. If we will doe this, at the length wee shall come vnto true contempla|tion. Otherwise prayer will profit nothing without mortifi|cation: neither can perfect mor|tification be had, without the help of prayer.
For prayer and mortification are as two sisters, one of which doth help the other in all thinges, that are to be done.
Which two vertues were figu|red The two Alters in the temple of salomon what they signifie. and pointed at by those two Alters, that were in the temple of Salomon; vpon one of which, sacrifices were alwayes offered;

and vpon the other nothing but incense.
By the Alter of Sacrifice, on which diuerse liuing creatures were daily killed and sacrificed, mortificatio~ is vnderstood, whose duety it is, to sacrifice and cut off the heades of our appetites: By the Alter of incense, prayer is meant, which like incense kin|dled by the Diuine loue, doth as|cend out of our hearts euen vp to heauen,  there doth deale with God about the dispatch of our busines.
He therefore that after this manner desireth to bee the Temple of the liuing God, let him haue in his Soule these twoo Alters: one is his superi|our part, where alwayes may fume the incense of prayer, and meditation, that that of the Psalmographer may be fulfilled:

O how loue I thy law, it is my Psal. 119. meditation continually. The other in his inferiour part, where al|waies hee may offer Sacrifices of his concupiscences and appe|tites; that that of the Apostle may bee done; Mortifie your members which are on the earth, fornication, and vncleannesse, in|ordynate Colos 3. affection, euill concu|piscence and coueteousnes which is idolatrie.
This is that myrrh, of which the Spouse speaketh in the Can|ticles: I will goe, saith shee, into the mountaine of myrrh, and to Cant. 4. the hill of incense.
For as by incense prayer is vnderstoode, so by myrrh mor|tification is meant: which is most bitter vnto our taste, but most precious in the sight of God, and of moste acceptable sauour. Neyther doth it want a mistery,

that myrrh is attributed to the mountaine, and incense to the hill: perhaps that it might be in|sinuated, how mortification is farre more excellent then prayer, as well in difficulty, as in dignity. For as an vniuersall mortifying of all our appetites is more diffi|cult Mortifica|tion is dif|ficult. then prayer, so also it is more excellent and more necessary. And as the hill is the way vnto the mountaine, and the meanes to ascend vnto it, so prayer is the way, and the ascending to mortification. Therefore the ser|uant of God is to be admoni|shed, that the more sweetnes he feeleth in prayer, the more cheer|fully he prepare himselfe vnto greater troubles: considering that t is meete and requisite, that he suffer for that Lord, by whom he hath bene dealt with so louingly  so tenderly: and let him weigh

and marke that these consolatio~s which are giuen vnto him, are but breathings bestowed vpon him to this end, that with greater cou|rage he may returne into the field.
And we are faithfully to marke and consider, that at that very Christ in the glory of his tra~s|figuration did speake of his pas|sion. time, when the Lord was trans|figured vpon the mount, when his face did shine like the Sunne, and his garments were as white as snow: I say that at that very time, in the midst of so great ioyes he spake of those things, which afterwards he was to suf|fer at Ierusalem. What? had the busines of his passion any fel|lowship or participation with his transfiguration? If musick be vnseasonable in the time of mour|ning; shall not mourning in like manner be vnseasonable in the time of musicke, and publke re|ioycing?

Truly this hath place at the feasts and meetings of this world; but not in diuine solem|nities, where consolations are giuen for tribulations: rest for torment; and for the crosse trans|figuration. So that as often as the seruant of God feeleth any comfort, let him assuredly know, that he is cited, and prouoked vnto a new combat: and as these consoltions doe binde a man vnto tribulations; so wee must thinke, that wee are called vn|to tribulations, as often as wee feele that wee are comforted. Therefore as a diligent and care|full trueller, that entreth into an A Simily. Inne, that he may breake his fast, eateth, and withall is carefull to make an ende of the voyage he hath taken in hand, so that although his bodye be in the Inne, yet his heart and minde

is about his iourney: so also the seruant of God, when he goeth to pray, let him on the one side enioy celestiall sweetnes, and on the other side let him purpose to beare troubles and molestations for his loue, of whome he is so much made of, and who will not haue any one to eate his bread, but in the sweate of his face.
Let this then be the ende and scope of this busines; that before all things we write in our hearts these wordes of our Sauiour: If any man will come after me, let him deny himselfe, and take vp his crosse Luke. 9. dayly, and follow me. And because this crosse can hardly be taken vp, vnlesse we be helped by the fortitude and alacrity of prayer: therefore we betake our selues to this vertue, as to a most faithfull guide, which doth bring vs to this ende. Therefore that we de|sire,

is not denyed vnto vs, but graunted: and God doth bestow pon vs spirituall consolations; ot that we should rest in them, ut that we should be refreshed nd encouraged by them, to as|end euen to the top of this glo|ious mountaine. This is that hich the Prophet wished and rayed for, when he sayd: Reioice Psal. 8. he soule of thy seruant: for vnto ee, O Lord, do I lift vp my soule. And in another place, My soule all be satisfied, as with marrow Psal. d fatnesse (so with deuotion) and y mouth shall prayse thee with yfull lips. Therefore after this anner, and to this end, we ought  vse diuine consolations: not ly that we may be delighted ith them, but rather that we ay be afflicted: as that holy ule vsed them, of whome it is yd: She ouerseeth the wayes of Pro. 31.

her household, and eateth not the bread of idlenes.


THE ELEVENTH AD|monition, that visions and reue|lations are not to be desired. CHAP. LIII.
OF those things, which hi|therto haue beene spoken of, this also is concluded: If we are not to seeke for diuine conso|lations, and spirituall delights that we should rest in them, o that by them we should only b delighted; much lesse are reue|lations, visions, inspirations, o such like to be desired: for this i the very beginning of diabolical illusions. Neither let a man fear

that for this he shall be disobedi|ent to God, if he shut all his gates against all such things: for God knoweth, if he at any time will reueale any thing vnto man, how to finde an entrance, and to open his gates after that manner, that he cannot doubt, but certainely know, that God is present. So he dealt with Samuel being yet a childe, when he called him once, 1. Reg. 3. twice, and the third time: and he told him all things, that he would haue him to know, so mani|festly, that not any scruple remained vnto him, nei|ther could he doubt of his embasie.



THE TWELFTH AD|monition, that the diuine gra|ces are not boastingly to be reuealed. CHAP. LIIII.
OVr scholler, that goeth vnto the schoole of deuotion, i heere also to be admonished, that he do make no vaine boast no brag of those fauours, graces, and benefits, which God now and then is wont to bestow vpon his friends in their prayers. This is of so great moment, that a deuou man, according to the councel of S. Bernard, ought to haue written vpon the walles of his Oratory that sentence of the Prophet; My secret vnto my selfe, my secret Esay. 24.

vnto my selfe. Many do farre o|herwise, who with full mouth at ll occasions do proclaime their euotion, neither can they rest, ntill with great clamours and ublike applause they haue di|ulged that abroad, which they ele within. This (sayth a cer|aine Doctour) proceedeth not f the greatnes of deuotion, but f the incapacity of the heart: hich thing often happeneth vn| children, when as new clothes, A Simily.  new shoes are giuen vnto em; who cannot contayne the~|lues, but that they must shew em to euery one they meete. ut these men the more they ast of these graces, the more pty and destitute they are. For en as fire, or any odoriferous  fragrant smell, the more it is A Simily. uered and kept close, the more d longer it preserueth the sent,

and keepeth the heate: so also the loue of GOD and De|uotion.
There be others also, that vn|der pretence and colour of cha|rity with the secret danger of le nitie, do reueale to their friend all the blessings they haue re|ceiued of God: not considering that these benefits, which we haue, are with greater diligenc to be concealed, for the dange of vaine-glory, then the sinn wee commit, for feare of i famye.
For this cause we are to keep our secrets in all things, in whi there lurketh any occasion of v|nitie or danger: which thing o Sauiour would intimate, wh he commanded his disciples  conceale the mysterie of  glorious transfiguration: w thing he also obserued in ma

other miracles: he did this, not or any danger hee feared to ome vnto himselfe, but for our xample, that wee should do he like.


HE THIRTEENTH admonition, of the feare and re|uerence, which we are to ob|serue, when we stand in the presence of the Lord. CHAP. LV.
FVrthermore let a man also obserue this, that when he alketh with God in prayer, he oe it with as great humilitie d reuerence as may be: So at albeit his soule be as it were nderly embraced  cherished

of God, and adorned with man graces and fauours, so that it hat attained that estate, that it ma say with the Spouse: His left han is vnder mine head, and his righ hand doth embrace me: yet let hi turne his eyes into himselfe, an behold his owne vildnes, and b humbled, and tremble before s great a Maiesty. This is that which the Prophet sayth: Seru the Lord in feare, and reioyce  trembling. Reioycing with trem|bling is a new thing and vnhear of: but both of them are neces|sarye, when we come to a Lor of so great goodnes and maiesty and by how much the soule shal be more pure, by so much shal the humilitie be more accep|table: for it is written: A wom holy and modest, is a grace abou grace.
Neyther let a man thinke tha

the fire of loue is extinguished by this affection of feare: but let hym certaynely beleeue, that none other thing is done heere, then if wee should cast a little water into a hote burning fur|nace, that it might burne the more vehemently. For when as the soule on the one side doth meditate vpon the infinite im|mensitie of the diuine great|es, and on the other side, vpon he bottomles pit of her owne ildnes; by how much more she s afraide of her selfe for this difference, by so much she doth more admire the incomparable goodnes of God, who doth so ebase himselfe, that he is not a|hamed to embrace so louingly  creature so vild. Moreouer, as uch as the admiration of the iuine goodnes increaseth, so uch increaseth the loue, the

ioy, and thankesgiuing for so great a benefit, with all other fruites and motions of the holy Ghost, which are wont alwayes to dwell in such soules, which Esay signifieth saying; To whome shall I looke? euen to him that i Esay. 66. poore, and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my words? This is spiritually to take vp y^e last place,  lowest roome at the banquet according to the councell of ou Sauiour: for by and by the maiste of the feast will come, and say to thee being bidden; Friend, sit vp higher: for whosoeuer humbleth Luke. 14. himselfe, shall be exalted, and  that exalteth himself, shalbe broug low. And if this guest be so accep|table in the eyes of men; ho much more acceptable shal he b in the eyes of God, whose natu is to resist the prowde, and to gi grace vnto the humble  lowly



THE FOVRTEENTH admonition, that sometimes we must pray longer, then at other some. CHAP. LVI.
VVE sayd before that the seruant of God ought to set downe vnto himselfe cer|taine times to pray in, as we reade that Daniell did in times past, Dan. 6. who thrice a day prayed vpon his knees.
That Dauid did the like, it is manifest by that which hee sayeth; In the euening and mor|ning, Psal. 55. and at noone day will I pray, and that instantly, and he shal heare my voyce. Now let vs adde

besides the ordinary time of euery day, that a man ought at certaine howres, (all other busines set apart, although it be spirituall) wholy to giue himselfe vnto prayer and meditation, and that more plentifull foode bee be|stowed vpon the soule, to re|payre that, which was consu|med by dayly defects, and that strength may be gotten to pro|ceede further. For as the chil|dren of this world besides their A Simily. dayly repast, haue their extraor|dinary feastes and bankets, in which they are wont to exceede the manner of other refections: so it is also behoouefull, that the righteous besides theyr dayly prayer haue their feasts and spi|rituall bankets, in which theyr soules may feede not measurably (as at other times) but may be filled and stuffed with the di|uine

sweetenes, and with the plenty of Gods house.
We see that nature is not con|tent with the deaw, that in the A Simily. night time falleth vpo~ the earth, but also now and then it rayneth, and that plentifully, not for a weeke, but oftentimes longer; for so it is necessary, that the heauens should be now and then more liberall towardes the earth, and should so glut it, that neither the sunne, nor the winde may make it dry: So also our soule besides the common and dayly deaw, ought to haue certayne peculiar tymes, in which our eyes may do none other thing, then showre downe most plen|tifull teares of deuotion; by which our soule may be so filled with the vertues and iuyce of the holy Ghost, that all the tribu|lations, and all the windes of

this world may not dry it.
Albeit this course is lawdable at any time, yet especially at the chiefe solemnities and feasts of the yeare: neyther is it lesse ne|cessarye in the time of trouble, or after deliuerance from some offence, or after disturbance in some ouerth wart busines, then the recreation and refection of the body is necessary after long infirmitie. For otherwise a man cannot turne vnto himselfe, nor be renewed, vnlesse he bestow as much time vpon his returne into the way, as he spent, when he went out of the way: espe|cially seeing that wee knowe that Deuotion is of the nature of those things, which are easily lost, but being lost, are hardly recouered.
Of what weight this busines is, no man can easily declare; for

it may be that at one of these times greater giftes and graces may be receiued, then at any other time. And according to the iudgement of the diuines, any one act done with feruour, and earnest zeale, doth more in|crease charity, then many done with numnes and feeblenes. If this haue place in other actes of vertue, certainely it shall also haue place in prayer, which doth more traffick with God by the way of mercy, then by the way of iustice: and therefore it may be so feruent and so zealous, that it may obtaine more in one day, then that which is feeble and dull can obtaine in many. Such was the prayer of Sara the wife of Sara, the wife of Tobias. Tob. 3. Tobias, who for three dayes and three nights, did neither eate nor drinke, but continuing in prayer, intreated the Lord with teares.

The third day, when she percei|ued that her prayer was heard, she gaue thanks vnto God for her deliuerance. Yet it is cre|dible that shee prayed often|times before, and requested the same things, at the hands of God (for it is a most vsuall custome among the righteous to runne vnto God in all their tribula|tions) but then especially her prayers entred into the presence of the glory of the great God. For long instance and harty per|seuerance in prayer, doth adde force and heate vnto it by which it is lifted vp into hea|uen.
Anna also the mother of Sa|muel, Anna the mother of Samuel. 1. Reg. 1. for the recure of a defect that was in her, prayed with such earnestnes and feruencie, that Ely the Priest, seeing her gesture, the moouing of her lips, and the

disposition of her countenance, supposed her drunke, and com|maunded her to goe out of the Temple. When her prayer was most hot, then it was most for|cible to obtaine that she desired, hen she rose vp, and went away erry, neyther afterwards loo|ked she sad, because she lost not he hope which she had concei|ued, vntill she saw that accom|plished, which she desired.
The Ecclesiasticall histories do speake of Alexander the Bishop Socrates in the fyrst booke and second chapter of his Eccle|siasticall history. And Theo|dor. in his second booke, and 14 chapt. and others. of Constantinople, that when as Arrius came to Constanti|nople, and by the commaunde|ment of Constantine was now o be receiued into the fellow|ship of the Church, the holy Bishop being not ignorant of he fraudulent dealing that Ar|ius vsed, in his subscribing to he Nicene Councell, fell into

a dangerous gaynesaying of his admittance, and into a trouble|some purpose of disputation with him; for he wanted no threat|nings from Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia, who did patro|nize the cause of the Arrians. Alexander being in this streight, before hee would receiue Ar|rius into the Communion of the Church, and before he en|tred disputation with him, he went apart into the Temple of Peace, shutting himselfe there alone, and prostrating himselfe vpon the earth, many dayes and nights together with teares, h prayed vnto GOD, after thi manner:
O God, sayd he, graunt fo thy mercy and truth sake, that  The prayer of Alexan|der Bishop of Constan|tinople. the opinion of Arrius be tru that I may neuer liue to see th day appointed for this disputa|tion:

but if the faith that I hold be true, graunt that Arrius the Authour of all these mischiefes, may suffer condigne punishment for his impiety.
At the length the day appoin|ted came, Arrius commeth forth guarded and attended vpon with the followers and fauourers of Eusebius, all the world looking on, and expecting, what end ei|her the constancie of Alexander, r the pride of Eusebius Arrius hould haue. But presently God hewed his reuenging power vpo~  wicked  damnable endeuours f Arrius, for his wicked consci|nce stroke feare into him, feare The death of Arrius. ade his body soluble and laxa|ue, and going to the draught, eere vnto the common place, here Constantine kept his courts, ogether with his excrements, he owred forth his guts, and so

exhaled forth his soule: a punish|ment meete for such a blasphe|mous wretch.
I haue bene more prolixe in this, that those great fruites might more appeare, which are reaped by earnest, and long continued feruent prayer: which also are wont to be more excellent, when they proceede from any tribula|tion, and such like temptation: for these do stirre vp and kindle the heart of him that prayeth, and they adde greater feruency vnto him; as it happened to that Saint, who sayde: I haue labou|red crying vnto the Lord, my throte is growen hoarse, and mine eyes fayle mee, while I hope in my God. I am sure that many gra|ces are bestowed by this way, and that more will be besto|wed: therefore it is not neede|full to stay longer in this admo|nition;

for the experience of them s sufficient, who haue perseuered fter this manner, who haue lear|ed in truth and veritie, what mple fruites are reaped by such prayer.


THE FIFTENTH AD|monition, of the discretion, that ought to be vsed in the exercise of prayer. CHAP. LVII.
THere be some that want iudg|ment and discretion in their exercises; for when as all thinges betweene them and God haue prosperours successe; this pros|perity at the length becommeth offenciue vnto them, and bring|eth

an occasion of great daun|gers.
For there be some vpon whom graces seeme to bee bestowed with a full hand: these feeling the fellowship of the Lord so sweet and pleasant, do so drowne themselues in this exercise, and doe so long continue in prayer, in watching, and in other corpo|rall asperityes, that at the length theyr naturall strength doth fayle them.
Hence it is that many are troubled with fayntnesse and weaknesse of stomacke, others are payned with the head ache, others are diseased with the Megram, and swimming of the braine: by which diseases they are so afflicted, that they become vnfit not onely for corporall exer|cises, but also to pray. Therefore it is meet  requisite, that things be

considered of in the beginning, hen the feruour and consolati|ns be greater, and the experience nd discretion lesse: that we may  learne to walke, that we do not ynt in the midst of our iorney.
Of this an answere may be de|maunded A question. to a great doubt, moo|ed of a great Diuine: to wit, what they ought to doe, that on  one side are ofte~ visited of God, x in this exercise are enriched by im with many graces and bene|fits: and on the other side the strength  health of their bodye oth hinder them, that they can|ot long continue in this exercise?
To the which doubt the same The answer iuine answereth with great hu|mility and feare, saying. Truely it seemeth vnto me better to loue God,  to enioy him without in|ermission, albeit it be not with so great feruor  vehemency, the~ to,

abounde with such heate and sweetnes, and to receiue graces with so full an hand: least per|chaunce a little while after thou fallest into daunger, eyther alto|gether to loose all these thinges, or els that they decrease and dimi|nish in thee.
For I haue knowen many, sayth hee, who after they had lost their health by such man|ner of exercise, afterwards going about to refreshe and recouer themselues, and seeking to ridde themselues of this languorment of bodye, haue come to that passe, that afterwards they haue liued not onely more delicate|ly, but also more dissolutely. Therfore to eschew this danger, it is better euery day to proceed a little, and softly to goe from the lesse to the greater, and so to come to perfection; then by lit|tle

and little to goe backe and etyre, vntill thou returnest vnto issolutenes: for it is written; An heritage that is hastely gotten Prou. 20. t the beginning, shall not be bles|d in the ende. And; Riches Prou. 13. athered hastely shall bee diminish|d: but hee that gathereth them ith the hand by little  little, shall crease them.
By this it is manifest, how ne|essary the vertue of discretion , not onely that we may meete with this inconuenience (which  greate and very common) but lso with many other. Therefore  is necessary that wee alwayes esire, with all humilitye and erseueraunce, light and vnder|anding, saying with the Pro|het: Leade me foorth in thy truth Psal. 25. nd teach me: for thou art the God f my saluation: in thee doe I trust ll the day.

The other extreame contrary Against the~ that vnder colour of discretion doe liue more deli|cately. vnto the former is proper vnto delicate and effeminate persons, who vnder coulour and shew o discretion doe withdraw they bodies from all kinde of labors. It is not easie to iudge, whether of these two extreames is more dan|gerous: but that indiscretion i more vncurable; for as long as the body is sound  whole, there is hope of remedy: but when it is marred and spoyled by too much indiscretion, there is not any more hope of further good.



HE SIXTEENTH dmonition, that we ought not only to giue our selues vnto prayer, but also vnto all other vertues. CHAP. LVIII.
THere is also another daun|ger in this way, and per|aps greater then the former: nd it is this. There are ma|y men, who after they haue yuers tymes tasted of the in|stimable vertue of prayer, and aue learned, that the whole ourse of a spyrituall lyfe de|endeth of it, thynke that rayer is sufficient alone, and hat by it onely the path-way

to saluation is troden: where|vpon it followeth, that they forget other vertues, neythe are they further carefull for any so that the more profoundly theyr minde is swallowed vp i prayer, by so much they for|get other vertues: and so desi|ring with too much dilygenc to couer and hyde the bette part of theyr body, and repos all the other partes to the fury and violence of the enemy.
Hence also it is, that whe as other vertues are as it wer the foundation of prayer; tha this foundation being taken a|way, whatsoeuer is built vp|on it, muste needes fall: an therefore so long as a man a|tributeth too much to this ve|tue, hee shall profit the le in it.
For it is certaine, that a

prayer doth dispose vnto morti|cation, so also (as we said be|re) mortification, and all o|er vertues doe dispose vnto ayer: and therefore the one ithout the other is hardlye und.
Tell me I pray thee, what kind  prayer will it bee, vnlesse a igent watch bee kept in the art, in the tongue, in the eyes, d in all the sences, as wel out|rd, as inward? What prayer  it bee, if the body bee stuft  of meate, and the soule und with sundrye cogitati| and lustes of the worlde? erefore those men doe labour  turmoyle themselues in vain,  do follow after one vertue,  doe neglect all other: for ues are so combined and led together between them|es, that scarcely one can bee

founde without all the other,  all if one be missing.
Hence it is apparant, th The actions of our life are like vn|to a clocke. this whole businesse is not v like to an artificiall, and w ordered clocke, in which a dyuerse wheeles and ligamen amongst which there is th proportion, that if one of the although it bee but little, b hyndered, the whole fra becommeth disordered: a heere this prouerbiall speec hath place: The shooe bei lost, the horse falleth, a the horse falling, the rider cast downe: and so hee after the same manner, by lyttle idlenesse the whole dig|tye, and the whole good this businesse, and the fruy that were hoped by it, are alto|ther lost.
How often happeneth it, 

 man rising in the morning, and eglecting the custodye of his eart, giuing place to some vaine ought, or worldly considerati|, how often I say hapneth it, at he cannot afterwardes cast  out when he would, neither can e recollect his spirits, when hee leaseth, that in prayer hee may rmely fixe his minde vpon God? ereupon it followeth, that the orning prayer being well or|ered (which is as it were, the di|ctor of all thinges to be done at day) the whole day is well dred, and doth happily succeed, d all thinges doe prosper that e doe that day.
In like manner it followeth eerupon, that the morning prai| doth dispose vnto the euening ayer, and the euening prayer to the morning: for the aptnes d concinnity of the one, is the

aptnes and concinnity of the o|ther: but if the one be disordre the other also, and whatsoeu els dependeth of it, is easily d|ordered, and so the whole cloc is disturbed and out of frame to order which a new wee mus goe a fresh to labour, and ma daies doe slip away, before  can returne vnto our selues  gaine.
But if in the meane time an new tempest arise, or any new occasion of a newe impedimen there also daunger ariseth, an great ieopardy. And if thou sha diligently enquire, what is t seede of so great discommodit thou shalt nowe and then fin none other, then some small ne|ligence, by which thou hast |mitted some thought, which  not euill, but onely inconueni and vnseasonable for this ti

and busines.
God doth often permit such haunces, that he may make his eruants more cautelous, and cir|umspect in all things: not onely n those thinges, that are great and hard, but also in lesser mat|ters: for albeit these be mall in themselues, yet they are great, y reason they dispose a man  make him fit for greater, and herefore it is said; He that fea|eth God, hath a care of all thinges: as well of small things, as of great: for smal things by little and lit|tle bring vnto great, neyther can small things be preserued without great.
Therefore the seruant of God ought not only o regard one ver|tue alone, althogh it be great: but he must regard all together: for as one string in a Lute doth not make musick, but alltogether: so

one vertue alone is not sufficient to make this spirituall harmony, but all must sound together. And although all these vertues (as we haue said) are profitable and a|vayleable vnto this our present purpose, yet more particularly the keeping of the hart and sen|ces; the composition and right or|dering of the exteriour man, tem|perance in eating, drinking and speaking are conducent; and all the other (of which we haue spo|ken before) doe help deuotion: and he that hath not care of these, shall neuer come vnto per|fect praier.



THE SEVENTENTH admonition, that this exercise is not to be taken for an Arte, or vsed as an Arte, but to be done with great hu|mility and con|fidence. CHAP. LIX.
THe louer and embracer of Deuotion is also in this place to be admonished, that all that hath hetherto beene spoken to stirre vp Deuotion, is as a prepa|ratiue to prepare man to receiue the diuine grace: by casting away all trust in his owne strength and merits, and by reposing it in God alone.

I say this; because there are many men, who of all these rules and instructions do make an arte, supposing, that as he that learneth an arte, if he will obserue his rules, becommeth a cunning workma~: so also they thinke that hee, that well obserueth these our rules, shall obtaine that hee desireth by the vertue of them: not mark|ing, that this is nothing else, then to make an arte of grace, and to attrybute that to the rules of humane arte, which is the pure gift and mercy of the Lord.
The Doctrines of certaine spi|rituall bookes written as well in prose, as in verse, haue giuen occasion of this error: which do so exceedingly commend their rules and their manner of teach|ing, that some thinke, that by the benefit of them, they may obtain

that they desire. None otherwise then an Alchimist, teaching to A Simily. make chimicke gold, who reach|eth to his scholler this or that mi|nerall, and sayth thou shalt thus and thus prepare it, and by and by thou shalt haue pure gold: so these men say, doe this and that, speake after this manner and after that, and by and by thou shalt haue the loue and grace of God. This manner of teaching is starke naught, and farre different and dissonant from the style and grauytye of the holy Doctors: and also vnworthy the honor of the diuine grace.
For seeing that this whole busines is grace and the mercy of God; it is meete, that it be handled not as though it were of arte, but of grace: that by this manner man knowing what hee asketh, he may knowe, that

the cheefest meanes, by which he ought to dispose himselfe vnto this busines, is lowly humility, and the knowledge of his owne misery, with a most firme hope of the Diuine mercy: that by the knowledge of them both, teares may trickle downe, and prayers proceede: by which man being wayted vpon, hee may en|ter by the gate of humility, and receyue that hee desireth by humilitie, and gyue GOD thankes with humilitie: not ha|uing any trust, eyther in himselfe, or in his exercises, or in hys workes.
Which although it bee true, yet this admonition and doctrine doth not exclude our labours, or that which we ought to doe. For although he that planteth, and he that watereth, is not the same that he is that giueth the increase

who is God: yet hee willeth ne|uerthelesse that wee should plant and water, that hee may giue the increase. No man doth doubt, that any thing doth so much re|quire a guide and counsell, as a spirituall life: especially in the ioy and consolation of prayer; which as it is more delicate and diuine; so also it requireth more counsell and more instructi|ons.
And as it is vnmeete and vn|iust, that the exercise of prayer should bee taught as an Arte, least grace bee impayred and of|fended: so also man is to be ad|monished of all those thinges, that are necessary, least he stum|ble and fall in this way. For wee see some that after many yeeres dooe lyttle profit in this exercise, and others that passe theyr time ouer in recyting a

number of vocall prayers, who verye sildome dooe seriouslye thinke of, eyther that which belonges vnto God, or that which themselues speake. There|fore our Reader was to be admo|nished of both, that his labours may be more fruitefull.


THE EIGHTEENTH admonition, of other kindes of prayers and meditations, which are wont to be vsed of them, who are more ex|ercised. CHAP. LX.
IT is also to bee noted in thys place, that those meditations, which we haue deuided into ex|ercises

for euery day of the week, were written especially for yong eginners, that they might haue s it were a threed to lead them, east they wander in this labo|inth, and erre in this way as yet nknowen.
But when they haue once made some proceeding and pro|fit, it is not needfull, that they shoulde alwayes treade in the same path, but it is meet, that they go, whether the holy Ghost doth eade the~, who is wont to remoue his schollers from a lower forme to a higher. Therefore there are some, that leauing those consi|derations doe proceede to the meditations of diuine perfecti|ons, of the wonders of God, of his benefits, and in the meditation of them do dayly more and more profit, and encrease in his loue, who is infinitely good, the

giuer of all goodnes, and won|derfull in all his workes. There be others, that giue themselues to the meditation of the holy Scripture, which is the Ocean of infinite wonders and mar|uels, as many of the holy Doc|tors did, and many of the Fa|thers in the wildernes.
There bee also others, that haue matter enough to meditate vppon, eyther as concerning those thinges that haue happen|ed vnto themselues, or which they haue seene in others: whe|ther they were the woorkes of grace, or of iudgement and Dyuine iustice.
For if a man will open hys eyes, and will diligently looke into and examine his owne life from the beginning to the end from his conception and naty|uity euen to this day, hee sha

finde so manye and so greate thinges in himselfe to bee me|ditated vpon, as well benefits and fauours, which God hath bestowed vpon him, as daun|gers and perils, which GOD hath kept from him, that hee shall neuer want matter of me|ditation. But what shall I say of the admirable and wonderfull iudgementes of God, which hap|pen dayly? of the vnexpected falles of many, who thought themselues safe and secure? of the punishmentes of the diuine Iustice? of the myracles of Gods prouidence? of the works of grace, which wee daily see to woorke wonders in his ser|uants?
Let not a man sitte as a stone vppon a stone, but let him behoulde and obserue all those thynges, whych are done

vpon y^e great stage  huge Thea|ter of the house of God, which al|waies bringeth forth some nouel, which we may meditate vpon. There be others also more free to whome God hath shut the vaine of too much speculation, and hath opened the vayne of affec|tion, that the will by a quyet and peaceable vnderstandinge may bee recreated and made merrye in GOD alone, be|stowing it selfe wholye vp|on the loue of the cheefest good.
This is the moste perfecte estate of contemplation; to which we must alwayes aspire, in which a man doth not seeke as in the way, set on by the meditation of loue: but in which as in his coun|try he doth now enioy his desired loue, being nowe found, and in this he resteth as in his end, say|ing

with the Spouse, I haue found Cant.  him whom my soule loueth, I tooke hold on him, neither will I let him goe. In this state of meditation, both the labour is lesse, and the ioy and profit greater. And be|cause the labour of meditation is lesser, the time of recollection, or of preparation may be a little longer, and yet without the tyring and wearines of the body. So Moses perseuering in his pray|er, his hands being lift vp to|wards heauen, he ob|tained victory a|gainst Ama|lech.



THE NINTEENTH and last admonition is, that this exercise is not conue|nient for all kinde of men. CHAP. LXI.
FVrthermore it is to be obser|ued, that although it be very profitable for young beginners, to exercise themselues in those meditations deliuered in our ex|ercises; yet this is not altogether simply necessary; much lesse pos|sible for all men. For there are many, who by reason of infirmi|tye, especially of the head, can|not without great danger, an losse of their health, giue them|selues

vnto this exercise, especi|ally if they be yong beginners. Others are so bound vnto exter|nall busines, that they cannot leaue it without offence, neither is any time permitted them, to prepare themselues for these ex|ercises.
There are others, that haue their soules so vnquiet, vndeuout, and dry, that whatsoeuer dili|gence they vse, it seemeth to pro|fit them nothing. These ought not forthwith to breake off their prayers, but still continue, crying at his gate, who will not be wan|ting to them that with humili|tie and perseuerance call vpon him. And albeit the gate be not as yet opened vnto them, yet let them not discourage nor cast downe themselues, but wait the Lords leysure, for all good giftes come from hym, and

he bestoweth them vpon whome he will, and when he will. It shall also profit these men, to reade some deuout and spirituall books with great attention and vnder|standing, and when they come to those places, that they haue some feeling by, and which doth con|cerne their estate, let them sticke long vpon them, and lift vp their harts vnto the Lord, that hee would showre downe vpon their dry soules the deaw of his grace. This is the best remedy, that can be giuen vnto dry and vndeuo hearts; for by these meanes God oftentimes is wont to lift vp men to a deeper study of meditation.
Againe there are others, wh doe consume the whole time  their life vpon the recountin and thought of their sinnes an transgressions, neyther dare the meditate vpon the death an

passion of Christ, or vpon any such like thing, whereby they might receiue ioy and comfort. These, as we sayd before, are not comforted by this, and their vn|derstanding is conuersant in ig|norance; which Saint Bernard doth also confesse: For besides hat in this exercise some temp|ation of desperation may be ea|sily suggested, it is also vnmeete nd vnbeseeming that the ser|ants of God should alwayes walke heauily, and go as though hey were forsaken.
They do contrary vnto these, who the first day that they begin, do altogether forget their sinnes, nd by the lightnes of their eart would forthwith flye vnto e contemplation of higher mat|ers. A downefall is as neere vnto hese, as to a house without a oundation. Who afterwardes,

when they would returne to meditate on lower matters, they cannot, neyther do they know the way vnto them; because they haue accustomed themselues vn|to higher and more delicate rea|ches; and so they want both the grounds: that is, they can neither walke nor flye. Therefore it is best for vs at the first to be busied with the remembrance of our sinnes, rather then with any other thing: afterwards by little and little let vs go forward, relinqui|shing this cogitation, and draw euery day more neere and neere vnto the sacred passion of our Sa|uiour, albeit we indeede should neuer be without the cogitation and thought of both of them.
If there be any man to be found, that shal finde no iuyce of deuo|tion in these things that haue bin in this booke spoken of, and that

desireth to mediate on other matters: let him consider  me|litate on those things, which per|aine vnto death, and which be|ong vnto hell: and afterwards n those things which belong nto heauen, or on any other ood matter which y^e holy Ghost oth suggest vnto him, and let im not in any wise neglect it, or ast it away, but let him enter by hat gate he findeth open, for it is hat by which God would haue im to enter.


THE CONCLVSION of this Booke. CHAP. LXII.
HEtherto wee haue handled (Christian Reader) those

foure things, which we promised in the beginning of the booke: to wit, we haue spoken of those things, which stirre vp and pro|cure Deuotion: and of those things that hinder it: in like ma|ner of the more vsuall and com|mon temptations, which are wont to happen in this way: and of certayne admonitions and counsayles to be obserued in this exercise. I know that many other things may be spoken, but for fur|ther knowledge, I referre the reader to the Magistery of the holy Ghost, and to dayly expe|rience, which he ought to take for a mistres, who will succes|fully walke in this way. For my purpose was none other, the that by this my labour I migh bring yong beginners into thi way; who when they are entre into it, shall feele and well per|ceiue

that experience is a more profitable mistres vnto them, then any humane writings can be: which because they speake n generall, they cannot tell, what n specialty and particularily be|ongeth to euery one. And there|ore the Apostle willeth, that the eruants of God be not vnwise, Ephes. 5. ut vnderstanding, and wary alkers, that by these, and by ther meanes wee may vnder|and, what the will of God is.
It helpeth also, that a man with l humilitie and deuotion conti|ually desire of the Lord vnder|anding, that in all his wayes he ay be guided and gouerned of s spirit, comming into his pre|nce like a childe, who knoweth ne other thing. then to testifie s necessitie by his teares, but nnot vtter by words, what is cessary for him.

But if any one shall thinke, tha those things which we here teac are too much  too hard, let him assuredly knowe and beleeue that God in the time of prayer i wont to recompence all thes troubles and greeuances with a incredible ioy, and a courage ne|cessary for the walking in the wa of vertue: which is of so great mo|ment  weight, that all the pros|perities of this world, which ca happen vnto vs,  all the corpo|rall pleasures or fauours and ho|nours of this world being all hea|ped together vpon one, cannot s co~fort, nor so exhilerat  reioy the hart of man, as a faithfull an feruent prayer of two howres.
Neither is there any reason, w wee should discourage, or c downe our selues, because ma things are required vnto this e ercise: for it is manifest, that

the soule infused into the body, is sufficient to make all the mem|bers liuing, and to moue and di|ect the~ vnto their seuerall offices nd functions, which are many  iuers: so the grace of the holy Ghost, which is a forme superna|rall  diuine, when it once hath ntred into the soule, is sufficient  moue  direct it, to the acting d executing of all the duties of spirituall life: for it doth illu|inate the vnderstanding, and it acheth what is to be done, and hen it is to be done: it moueth so the will, with all the inferiour culties to all that, which is edefull to be done. For this use the Wiseman sayth, That e diuine Spirit is one and ma|: for albeit it be one in sub|nce, yet in his works it is many d manyfold: for it is he, that  do all things, that teacheth

all things, and that worketh al things. So that we do not attain the perfection of vertue by thos meanes, and by that force of na|ture, by which the heathen Phi|losophers attained vnto their na|turall and morall perfections because they had not this Spiri therefore they were constrayne with tooth and nayle to swea for each vertue seuerally, an exceedingly to afflict the~selue But true Christians, and the chi dren of God besides their ow exercises, which are wrought  them by the diuine grace, ha another especiall remedy, wh is the spirit of adoption and th heauenly seede, which bring geth forth in our soules plentifull fruites of true vertue.

FINIS. Laus tri-vni Deo.




A necessary Table, directing the reader to euery Chapter in this booke, and to euery particular Argu|ment handled in each Chapter.

The first Chapter.
VVHat Deuotion is. pag. 1.

The seuerall matters handled in this Chapter.
Deuotion is not properly a ten|dernes of heart, nor a spirituall consolation, but a willingnes and readines in yeelding to those things, that appertaine to the seruice of God. pag. 2.
Deuotion is deriued of vow|ing. ibidem.
Who is a deuout man. pag. 3.
Prayer is the cause of Deuo|tion. pag. 4.

Faith and Charity do mutually helpe one another. pag. 6.
Why Deuotion is to be desi|red. pag 7.



The second Chapter.
How profitable and precious a thing Deuotion is. pag. 8.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Deuotion maketh a man fit and ready for all good actions. ibid.
The excellentest vertues are al|lyed vnto Deuotion. pag. 9.



The third Chapter.
How difficult the atchiuement of true Deuotion is. pag. 10.

The matters handled in this Chap.
The difficulty in euery thing doth equalize the excellencye. pag. 11.

Nothing more difficult, then Prayer and Deuotion. ibidem.
This difficultie groweth from three rootes: The first is the cor|ruption of nature. pag. 12.
The second, is euill custome. pag. 13.
The third roote is the malice of Deuils. pag. 15.
The Diuine Grace is opposed against all these difficulties, which is mightier and stronger then all things. pag. 17.



The fourth Chapter.
Of those things, that are condu|cent vnto the atchiueme~t of true Deuotion, and first of the great longing desire to obtaine it. p. 18.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
The reason why this desire is so effectuall to finde God, is the

loue of the ende. pag. 21.
Thirst after Empire moued A|lexander to his conquest. pag 22.
The loue of Rachel made Iacobs seruitude easy and pleasant vnto him. ibidem.
As gaine in the end maketh the paines of all labourers and trades|men easy: so we ought to eschue no trauell to gaine vnto our selues so great a good as God is. pag. 29.



The fift Chapter.
The second thing that beget|teth Deuotion, is Fortitude and diligence. pag. 31.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Two faculties of the soule ne|cessary vnto vertue; the facultie Concupiscible, and the facultie Irascible. pag. 32.
Fortitude  diligence are migh|tily

co~mended in the Scriptures, and slothfulnes and negligence are exceedingly dispraised, as the two rootes of all our good and ill. pag. 34.
Desire must haue fortitude ioy|ned to it, that it be not idle, and fortitude must haue humility ad|ded to it, that it be not prowde. pag. 41.
As the Lord is a friend vnto the humble, so also is he an enemy vnto the slothful and idle. pag. 43.



The sixt Chapter.
The third thing that begetteth Deuotion, is the watch and kee|ping of the heart. pag. 43.

The matters handled in this Chap.
We must not only be carefull for the guarding and watch of the heart, but also for y^e languorment and tendernes of it, that it be not

disturbed. pag. 45.
The heart is easily distracted. pag. 46.
The heart is especially to be kept from two things, that is, from vaine cogitations, and mor|dinate affections. ibidem.
The difference betweene good men and euill. pag. 47.
The force of loue. pag. 51.
God dwelleth in a peaceable and quiet heart. pag. 58.



The seuenth Chapter.
Of the fourth cause of Deuoti|on, which is a continuall remem|brance of God. pag. 59.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
God is present euery where, not only by his power, but also by his essence. pag. 62.
The pliablenes and promptnes

of our hearts. pag. 66.
The swiftnes and alacritie of the motions of mans heart is fi|gured by the holy creatures in Ezechiell. pag. 67.



The eight Chapter.
The fift thing that stirreth vp deuotion, is the vse of short pray|ers, which in all places and sea|sons are as darts, to be sent vnto God. pag. 68.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
What manner of prayers the Fathers vsed in Egypt. pag. 69.
Why these short prayers are called darts. pag. 70.
Of all things we must take an occasion of Deuotion. pag. 73.
What an excellent weapon prayer is. pag 75.




The ninth Chapter.
The sixt thing that increaseth deuotion, is the reading of deuout and profitable bookes. pag. 79.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Our heart is like a mill, which neuer resteth, but always grindeth that, which is cast into it. ibid.
We must aboue and before all bookes, reade the holy Scrip|tures. pag. 80.



The tenth Chapter.
The seuenth thing that beget|teth deuotion, is the keeping of the senses. pag. 81.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Our sences be as gates, by which, things are transported in and out

of our soules. ibidem.
The holy Fathers in Egypt were wont to say, that a deuout man ought to be deafe, dumme, and blinde. ibidem.
Amongst all the outward mem|bers, the tongue is especially to be kept. pag. 86.
Shamefastnes  silence are the chiefest ornaments of Virgins, and the keepers and preseruers of chastity. pag. 87.



The eleuenth Chapter.
The eight thing that increaseth deuotion, is solitarines. pag. 88.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Prayer cannot well and de|cently be performed in tumults and hurly burlies. ibidem.
Death entreth by our windows vnto our soules. ibidem.

Solitarines of body is not chief|ly required, but solitarines of minde. pag. 91.
Who is alone, and what it is to be alone. ibidem.
Both internall and externall so|litarines required in a deuout man. pag 92.
The voyce that Arsenius heard. ibidem.
Company is to be auoyded, vn|lesse either charity require it, or necessity commaund it. ibidem.
The sayings of S. Hierome and S. Bernard as concerning solita|rines. pag. 93.
Solitarines is a keeper of inno|cency. pag. 95.



The  Chapter.
Ninthy, appointed times, and certaine set houres, do very much make to the increasing of De|uotion. pag. 96.


The matters handled in this Chap.
The heart is not only the mo|ther of pure prayer, but also of all other vertues. ibidem.
We are to appoint vnto our selues certain set times to pray in, by the examples of Daniel, Dauid, and other deuout people, the ser|uants of God. pag. 97.
The testimony of Pliny in an epistle to Traiane, concerning the Christians in the primatiue Church. pag. 98.
The two daily Sacrifices p. 100
Those that cannot long pray, must haue recourse to those dar|ting prayers spoke~ of in the eight Chapter. pag. 104.



The 13 Chapter.
The tenth thing that doth kindle deuotion, is the co~tinuing  per|seuering in good exercises. p. 105.


The matters handled in this Chapter.
To intermit prayer for a space is dangerous. pag. 107.
A man without prayer and spi|rituall exercise, is as Sampson without his haire. pag. 108
Daniel would rather endanger his life, then breake off his set course of prayer. pag. 109
The Allegoricall signification of Rachel and Ioseph. pag. 111.
An example of excellent De|uotion. pag. 112.
The dayes wherein we liue are so enuious, and so full of iniqui|tie, that they will not abide that the vertues of the liuing should be published. pag. 113.
The exercises are not to be changed. pag. 115.
In the spirituall exercise of de|uotion, euery man is to entertaine

nd follow the course, that is best tting for his purpose. pag. 116.



The 14. Chapter.
The eleuenth thing that en|easeth Deuotion, is the time,  ch like circumstances. pag. 118

The matters handled in this Chapter.
The fittest  most conuenient me of prayer is mid night. pag. 119.
They that cannot rise at mid|ght, let them rise before the ry|g of the Sunne. pag. 120.
A short supper, and a hard bed e good meanes for early rising. pag. 122.
If necessary occasions hinder y rising, make an oratory of thy d as Dauid did. pag. 123.
Praier before sleep much help|peth

morning prayer. ibidem
As soone as we awake, we mu thinke vpon God. pag. 125
A place close and solitary is th fittest for prayer, which our Sau our taught by his owne example pag. 126
A fit disposition of body is to b kept in praier, according to th example of Christ, and his Saints pag. 127
Ceremonies in praier are not t be reprehended; as to lift vp o eyes towards heauen c pa. 12



The 15. Chapter.
The twelueth thing, which sti reth vp Deuotion, is corpor austerity, or exercise. pag. 13

The matters handled in this Chapter.
God doth bestow his grace  euery one, as he is fit to receiue ibidem.

Two waies of preparing our ues vnto prayer. pag. 133.
Deuout prayer can doe vrye uch, when as corporall afflicti| is ioyned vnto it. pag. 136.
Almost no grace descende thin| the soule of man, except it be y prayer, affliction and corporall ibulation. pag. 137.
Whence the griefe of the soule  prayer ariseth. ibidem.
He seeketh Wisedome, as she is o be sought, who seeketh her, ot onely with the desire of spirit, ut also with the labor and afflic|ion of the body pag. 140.



The 16. Chapter.
The works of mercy are the 13.  last thing that encrease deuo|tion. pag. 140.

The matters handled in this Chap.
God is faithfull, and a friend of

mercy, and gracious to those, tha are mercifull. pag. 141
So often as a man leaueth his spirituall consolation, that he may releeue his neighbor, so often spi|ritually he layeth down his soule for him. pag. 142.
Of those thinges that hinder Deuotion pag. 143



The 17. Chapter.
Of the first impediment and hindrance of Deuotion, which is sinne. pag. 144.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
What kinde of sinne he spea|keth of in this Chapter. ibidem.
God powreth not the moste precious oyntement of Deuoti|n

but into a pure soule. pag. 146.
A soule, that liueth in the e|tate of grace, not onely feareth nd abhorreth grosse and hainous sinnes, but also those that seeme of lesser moment, and doe make way and entrance to those that be grosser. pag. 148.



The 18 Chapter.
The second impediment is the remorse of conscience. pag. 149.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Sinne is like vnto a deadly poi|son. pag 150.
Many receiue more harme by an vndiscreete estimation of sin, then of the sinne it selfe. pag. 151.
Whence too much remorse of conscience ariseth. ibidem.

The first remedye against too much scrupulosity. pag. 152.
All the sins in the world, if they be compared with the merits of Christ, are nothing els, but a little light chaffe cast into y^e fire. p. 153.
By the multitude of sinnes the goodnes of God is knowe~. p. 156
Two kinde of sins. pag. 159.
The differences of sin. pag. 161.
The hart of man is the center  place, in which God resteth. p. 164
Griefe for sin is good, but it must haue a moderation. ibdem.



The 19. Chapter.
The third impediment is too much scrupulosity or anxiety. pag 165.

The matters handled in this Chap.
 Causes of scrupulosity  anxie|ty. pag. 166.
Sometimes God leaueth scruples in his childre~ to exercise the~. ibid.

Sometimes they arise of melan|holy; for these y^e doctrine of Hip|ocrates is profitable. pag 167.
Some scruples take their origi|al from selfe loue. ibidem.
And some arise, because me~ can|ot distinguish, betweene the hought of the heart,  the con|ent of the will. ibidem.
Somtimes they arise by the craft  subtilty of the Deuil. pag. 168.
Some become scrupulous, be|cause they know not fully the goodnes of God. pag. 169.
Remedies against scrupulosity. pag. 171.
The first remedy is, to submitte our iudgment to other mens. ibid.
An other remedy is, not to giue place to scrupl's  anxieties p. 172
What a deliberatiue consent is. pag. 173.
What thought that is, which the diuines cal Cogitatio morosa. p. 174

He that liueth without th feare of God, liueth without  soule. pag. 175



The 20. Chapter.
The fourth impediment is a|ny other bitternes or heauynes o heart. pag. 177

The matters handled in this Chapter.
The bitternes of sinne, and the sweetnes of Deuotion cannot re|maine together in one  the selfe same heart. ibidem.
We must prepare our hearts to beare all kinde of tribulation. pag. 179



The 21. Chapter.
The first impediment is exter|all

comfort and sensuall delight. pag. 179.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
The foure former impediments re eyther sinnes, or such, as sins re engendred of. ibidem.
The holy Spirit is not sent, but o those that be desolate  afflic|ed. pag. 180.
God wil be loued alone pa, 181 Humane comfort is a very in|urious stepdame. pag. 182.
Humane and diuine consolati|ons cannot agree together. pag. 183.



The 22. Chapter.
The sixt impediment is too much carke  care. pag. 185.

The matters handled in this Chapter

Cares and pleasures are thorns which choke y^e word of God. ibid
The two roots of al euil. pa. 18
A remedy against superfluou cares. pag. 187
We must withdraw our minde from all sensuall loue of thinge created. ibidem
We must cast all our cares vpo God. pag. 188
Why the law of God is called a couenant. pag 189
The faithfulnes of God illustra|ted by the faithfulnes of Lot to his two strangers. pag. 192



The 23 Chapter.
The seuenth impediment is the multitude of businesses especial|ly of studies and contemplatiue speculations. pg. 194


The matters handled in this Chapter.
The best studies doe hinder de|uotion, when they are onely la|boured in for the Theory and spe|culation. pag. 195.
The labors of the hands doe lesse urt and hinder Deuotion, then he endeuours of the vnderstand|ng. pag. 196.
Hardnes of heart is described. pag. 202.
Discretion and Fortitude are necessary in the caryage  man|ging of our busines. pag 205.
Before all things we must obey he calling of God. pag. 20.
A prelate is to attend vpon con|emplation. pag. 211
No seruitude so strict  shrpe, which ought to hinder prayer. pag. 214.
How far children ought to obay their parents in this matter. p 216




The 24. Chapter.
The eyght impediment is th vice of curiositie. pag. 21

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Curiositie is committed m ny wayes. ibidem
This vice is proper vnto idle  fantasticall fellowes. pag. 21
They are curious and vay headed, that read bookes onel for to know, and not to bette themselues. ibidem
Neate and compt fellowes ar within the compasse of this vic pag. 219
Deuotion requireth a quie minde. pag. 220
Euangelicall pouertye at on blow cutteth of all this vaine cu|riosity. pag 223




The 25. Chapter.
The ninth impediment is, if good exercises be interrupted, and broken off. pag. 223.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Our heart is easily inclined vn|to euill, but hardly vnto good. pag. 224.
Deuotion is easily lost, but hard|ly recouered. pag. 225.
Continuall vse of deuotion doth ncrease it. pag. 228.
Intermission of deuotion doth esse hurt the perfect, then the vn|perfect. pag. 229.



The 26. Chapter.
The tenth impediment consi|steth in delicates,  in too much meate and drinke. pag. 231.

The matters handled in this Chap.

Fasting and prayer in the Scrip|tures, as two brethren, are alwaies ioyned together. pag. 232.
Too much meate  drinke doth many wayes hinder the ascen|ding of the soule. pag. 233.
A full belly begetteth not a nimble spirit. pa. 234.
Iulius Caesar came sober and fa|sting to the Roman Empire. ibid.
Effects of gourmandising. p. 235
Long and large suppers hurt|full. pag. 237
The discommodities of banket|ting and drunkennes. pag. 239
A generall rule. pag. 241.
What the diet of a virgin should be. pag. 243.



The 27. Chapter.
The eleuenth impediment is the euill disposition, and weakenes of the body. pag. 246


The matters handled in this Chap.
The body is neither to be made grosse by superfluous meates, nor to be weakened by too much au|sterity. pag. 247.
Why salt was sprinkled vpon all the sacrifices, and what is meant by it. pag. 248.



The 28. Chapter.
Of certaine other particular im|pediments. pag. 249.

The matters handled in this Chap.
A disease of nature. pag. 250
A disease of lunacy. ibidem.
Who they be that be diseased with this lunacy. pag. 251
The inordinate loue of a thing doth hinder deuotion. pag. 252
Euery man hath some Idoll. ibid.
The streightnes of ma~s hart can not co~tain God  the world. 258
A hart free fro~ concupiscences, is to be offered vnto God. pag 259

Two things required in the per|fection of euery worke, the agent and the patient. pag. 260.
The end is the roote and founda|tion of that, which is to be done. pag. 263.
Dagon, and the Arke of the co|uenant must not be placed toge|ther. pag. 266.
A disordered end, makes all the meanes disordered. pag. 267.
Of certaine common temptati|ons, which are wont very much to molest  trouble those that are deuout  giuen to prayer. p. 267.



The 29. Chapter.
Of the first  most vsuall temp|tation, which is the want of spiri|tuall consolations. pag. 268.

The matters handled in this Chap.
This temptation breedeth dis|trust. ibidem.

And causeth to haue recourse vnto humane comforts. pag. 269.
They that yeeld vnto this temp|tatio~, proue very vnco~stant. p. 270
Violence is not to be vsed in this temptation, but with patience and humilitie we must waite the Lords leisure. pag. 271.



The 30. Chapter.
Reasons or causes, for which God now  then denyeth to his frends spirituall consolations. pag. 273.

The matters handled in this Chap.
The first cause is, that the health and life of the righteous may be preserued. ibidem.
The second is, that humility may be preserued. pag. 274.
The third is, that he may try vs. pag. 275.
The fourth is, that we may des|cend to the actiue life. ibid.

The fift reason is, because it so pleaseth the Lord. pag. 278
God denyeth comfort vnto his, that they may be more perfect. pag. 280
At what time the Angels do sing Psalmes of degrees. pag. 285
We must not think, that God wil be pinned to our sleeues. pag. 292



The 31. Chapter.
What a man ought to do, when as the current of the diuine con|solations is stayed. pag. 294

The matters handled in this Chap.
Wee must not intermit, nor breake off our accustomed exer|cise of prayer. ibidem.
We must do that in prayer that we may. pag 296
God respecteth not the quantity of the gift offered, but the ability and will of the giuer. pag. 297.
Whe~ consolations are absent, we

must watch y^e more dilige~tly. 298



The 32. Chapter.
Against them, that contemne  deride diuine consolations. p. 304

The matters handled in this Chap.
Least men should condmne themselues, they contemne di|uine consolations. pag. 305
Diuine consolations for what they are profitable. pag. 308



The 33. Chapter.
Of the second temptation, that is, of the warre of importunate and outragious thoughts. pa. 311

The matters handled in this Chap.
Our imaginatio~ oftentimes slip|peth out of dores we being a|gainst it. pag. 312
We must not be too violent in this warre of thoughts, and re|luctation of spirit. pag. 318

Our heart is like a moorish and fenny lake. pag. 320.



The 34 Chapter.
Of the third temptation, to wit, of the cogitations of blasphemy, and infidelity. pag. 323.

The matters handled in this Chap.
All the danger of this tempta|tion is placed in the delight and consenting to it. pag. 325.
We are not too narrowly to pry into those things, which are too high for vs. pag. 326.
How the diuine works are to be looked into. pag. 332.
Faith is the instrume~t, by which alone diuine things are to be searched into. pag. 333.



The 35. Chapter.
Of the fourth temptation, that is, of too much feare. pag. 335.


The matters handled in this Chap.
Feare is increased by flying. ibid.
The power of the Diuell is cur|talled and limited. pag 336.
The watch and warde of An|gels. pag 337.
The Angels do carry vs in their armes. pag. 339.
God doth protect vs. ibidem.
Where prayer is, there the An|gels are present. pag. 340.
Why the Angels are called Roes and Hindes in the Can|ticles. pag. 341.



The 36. Chapter.
The fift temptation is too much sleepe. pag. 342.

The matters handled in this Chap.
Diuers causes of sleepe. ibidem.
The reason why S. Basill and o|ther of the Saints could watch so well. pag. 344.

We must render an accompt for spending our time vnprofitably in sleeping. pag. 345



The 37. Chapter.
Of despaire, and presumption, which are the sixt and seuenth temptations. pag. 347

The matters handled in this Chap.
Against these temptations we are to arme our selues with Hope and Feare. pag. 348
Eliseus guard, and Paules per|swasion, may keepe vs from de|spaire. pag. 350
The perfection of y^e Saints may keepe vs fro~ presumption. p. 353
Examples of their perfections. pag. 354



The 38. Chapter.
The 8. temptatio~ is, a too greedy desire to be wise  learned. p. 357


The matters handled in this Chap.
All immoderate thinges are hurtfull. pag. 358
Great is the emulatio~ betweene the study of science and pray|er. pag. 359
Study hindreth and hurteth de|uotion. pag 361
Desire of knowledge, in all men is very naturall, as Aristotle sayth. ibidem.
Reason becommeth dayly more perfect, by the continuall vse of learning. pag. 362
The study of knowledge wor|thy the excellency of man. p. 363
Diuers ends of knowledge, out of S. Bernard. pag. 364
A very excellent reprehension of them, who bestow that time vpon humane studyes, which they should bestow vpo~ diuine. p. 369
Heathen studyes the plagues of Egypt. pag. 371.




The 39. Chapter.
Remedies against this tempta|tion. pag. 374.

The matters handled in this Chap.
Vertue is beter the~ wisedome. ib.
If there be any losse or da~mage to be deplored in this world, cer|tainly it is the death of a Wisema~. pa. 376.
In the day of the last Iudgement God wil not aske thee what thou hast read, but what thou hast done: not how eloquently thou hast spoken, but how well thou hast liued. pag. 377.
An vnlearned man with charity, is better before God, the~ a learned man without charity. pag. 378.
A good life is the best instructi|on of our neighbor. pag. 384.
That thou maist moue another, it is necessary that thou bee first mooued thy selfe. pag. 389




The 40. Chapter.
The ninth temptation is an vn|discreet zeale, and a desire too vehement, and earnest to succour and help others. pag 393.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
They that promote and procure other mens safeties, ought not to be vnmindfull of their owne. pag 402.
Prayer is to be ioyned vnto preaching. pag. 408.



The 41. Chapter.
Certaine admonitions to be ob|serued in this exercise against the fraudes and collusions of our auncient enemy. pag. 411.


The matters handled in this Chapter.
There is nothing so good, but it may be abused by the mallice of man. pag 412.
Euery vertue hath some vice an|nexed vnto it, which hath a resem|blance of vertue. pa. 414



The 42. Chapter.
The first admonition of the dig|nity and fruite of vocall prayer. pag 417

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Whether vocall prayer differeth from mentall prayer. ibid.
Why the words of God are cal|led fire. pag. 419.
The eyes of the Lord do alwaies beholde vs, but most especially in prayer. pag 423




The 43. Chapter.
The second admonition of the dignity and fruite of holy ceremo|nies, and of externall woorkes. pag 425.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Ceremonies  external reuere~ce are to be made account of. ibid.
Why Christ did institute his Sacramentes in visible thinges. pag. 426.
In Angels seruices merely spiri|tual are required; in men seruices mixt. pag 429.



The 44 Chapter.
The third admonition, of the reuerence and obedience, which is due to the Preachers and mini|sters of the Church. pag. 430


The matters handled in this Chapter.
Preachers are the instruments of the holy Ghost  also Riuers and Conduit pipes by which the wa|ter of wisdome is conueyed into the garden of y^e Church pag. 431
We are not to look whether the ministers be good men or euil, but whether they be the instruments  organes of God. pag. 433.



The 45. Chapter.
The fourth admonition, of the discretion which is required to the examination of good purposes. pag. 437

The matters handled in this Chapter.
We must try the spirits, whether they be of God. pa. 438.
What is meant by salt, which in

the olde testament was vsed in all the sacrifices. pag 440.



The 46. Chapter.
The fift admonition, that toge|ther with praier, a ma~ ought to be exercised in al othes vertues 441.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
We must worke that the will of God may be done. pa. 444.
What it is to become accursed for our brethren. pag. 445.



The 47. Chapter.
The sixt admonition, that they that pray much, ought not to dis|pise them, that pray lesse. pa. 446.

The matters handled in this Chapter

The comfortes of God are the cause of hurt to many. pag. 447
From whence the consolations of the spirit arise. pag. 452
Charity is not idle. pag. 454
The deuill causeth heritickes to take great delight in reading the Scriptures, that by this meanes he may more surely binde them in their error. ibidem.
All men are one body. pag. 457
To co~temne y^e person of a prea|cher is exceeding dangerous. 461
An excellent saying of Constan|tine. pag. 462.



The 48. Chapter.
The seuenth admonition, that all kinde of singularity is to bee a|uoyded. pag 464.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
A secret place to pray in is to be

chosen. pag. 465.
The vices of Women. pag. 466.
When and how often we are to ommunicate. pag. 468



The 49. Chapter.
The eight admonition is, that oo much familiarity as well of en, as of women, is to be es|hewed. pag. 470.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Wee must not rely vpon our forepassed chastity, for there is nothing so neere vnto daunger, as too much confidence. pag. 474.
We must fly occasions. ibidem.



The 50. Chapter.
The ninth admonitio~, y^e euery one

before all things ought to walk in his calling, that he may satisfie the obligation of that estate in which he is bound. pag 475

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Prayer is ordained, that obedi|ence may be preserued. pag. 478.
Prayer is to be set after publike good. pag. 482.
The fruite of praier is the keep|ing of the law. pag. 485.



The 51. Chapter.
The tenth admonition is, of the end which is to be looked to in this exercise. pa 490.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
The whole worke dependeth of the end. ibidem.

Mortification of affections is the thiefest duty of a christia~ pa. 491.
The duty of mortificatio~ is to kil nd subdue our own will. p. 492.
What we obtain by praier 494.
Praier is not y^e end, but a meanes to obtaine the end. pag 495.
For the sweetnes of praier, some do reiect the bitternes of mortifi|cation. pag 496.
The opinio~ of the Epicures. 407
Nature is subtill. pag 498.
The abuse of many that would seeme deuout, pag. 505.



The 52 Chapter.
Of a remedy most profitable  uaileable against all these kindes of errors. pag. 511.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Mortification is necessary. p. 514

The two Alters in the Temple Salomon what they signifie. ibi
Mortification is difficult pa. 5
Christ in the glory of his trans guration did speake of his passi pag. 51



The 53 Chapter.
The eleuenth admonition, th visions and reuelations are not be desired. pag. 52

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Desire of reuelations, visions inspirations is the beginning diabolicall illusions. ibide
We must shut the gate of o hearts against them, that no may open it but God alone. 52



The 54 Chapter.
The twelueth admonition, that

the Diuine graces are not boast|ingly to be reuealed. pag. 524

The matters handled in this Chapter.
Graces the more they are boa|ted of, the fewer they are pa. 525
Vaineglory attendeth on boa|ters. pag. 526.



The 55. Chapter.
The thirteenth admonition, of he feare and reuerence, which we are to obserue, when we stand n the presence of the Lorde pag. 527.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
We must reioyce with trem|bling. pag 528
What it is spiritually to take vp he last place,  lowest roome at he banquet. pa 530,




The 56. Chapter.
The fourteenth admonitio~, tha sometimes we must pray longer then at other some. pa. 531

The matters handled in this Chapter.
We must pray plentifully, tha plentiful foode may be bestowe vpon our soules. pa. 532
The length of Saraes prayer, th wife of Tobias,  what issue it ha pa. 53
The force and efficacy of An naes prayer, the mother of Samue pag 536
The prayer of Alexander Bi|shop of Constantinople, whic he made, when hee should hau disputed with the heritike Arriu  what effect it had. pag. 53
The death of Arrius. pag. 539




The 57. Chapter.
The fifteenth admonition, of the discretion, that ought to be vsed in the exercise of prayer. pag. 541.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
As moderation is to be vsed in all things, so in prayer, and other spirituall exercises. pag. 542.
Against them that vnder co|lour of discretion do liue more delicately. pag. 546.



The 58. Chapter.
The sixteenth admonition, that e ought not onely to giue our elues vnto prayer, but also vnto ll other vertues. pag. 547.

The matters handled in this Chapter.

Vertues are the foundation of prayer. pag. 548.
The actions of our life are like vnto a clocke. pag. 550.
All vertues must sound together to make spirituall musick. p. 554.



The 59. Chapter.
The seuenteenth admonition, that this exercise is not to be take~ for an Arte, or vsed as an Arte, but to be done with great humi|lity and confidence. pag. 555.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
We must not make an Arte of grace. pag. 556.
We must dispose our selues vn|to this exercise, by lowly humili|ty, and the knowledge of our owne misery, with a most feruent hope of the diuine mercy. pa. 558.




The 60. Chapter.
The eighteenth admonition, of other kindes of prayers and me|ditations, which are wont to be vsed of them, who are more ex|ercised. pag. 560.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
For whome Granada writ his booke of Meditations, which when it is learned, this booke of Deuotion teacheth them, what is further to be done: so that his Meditations are but introducti|ons to this booke of Deuotion. pag. 561.
His Meditations are as a lower orme: his Deuotion as a forme igher. ibidem.



The 61. Chapter.
The nineteenth and last ad|monition

is, that this exercise is not conuenient for all kinde of men. pag. 566.

The matters handled in this Chapter.
God bestoweth his gifts vpon whome he will, and when he will. pag. 568
Deuout and spirituall booke are to be read. ibidem



The 62. Chapter.
The Conclusion of this Booke pag. 571

The matters handled in this Chapter.
He demonstrateth the exce lent and exact Methode, that h hath vsed in this booke. pag. 57
A recapitulation of those four principall things he hath spoke of in this booke; to wit, ibide

1 Of those things, which stirre vp and procure deuotion. ibid.
2 Of those things that hinder it. ibidem.
3 Of the more vsuall and com|mon temptations, which are wont to happen in this waye. ibidem.
4 Of certaine admonitions and counsayles to be obserued in this exercise. ibidem.

FINIS.




Typographus Lectori.
Cuiusuis hominis est errare: nullius, ni insipientis, in errore perseuer are: hoc igitu te rogatum velim; vt calamo tuo singula errat eo ordine, quo hic descripta vides, diligente emendes.


Pag.
line.
fault.
amended.


7
11
properry
property


58
6
there wants
in


63
19
creature
Creator


76
11
Touching
Teaching


80
7
car
care


84
5
paryers
prayers


123
13
there wants
is


164
18
penite~tiacy
penite~tiary


194
12
Mpedime~t
impedime~t


247
15
there wants
it


247
15
weakenes
weakened


250
5
vnnaturally
naturally


264
6
preuented
peruered


268
7
temptatio~s
temptation


275
9
there wants
take


284
19
there wants
shall


301
10
perfecter
perfect


342
8
First
Fift


349
9
there wants
thou


370
2
world
worke







