






 THE SECOND part of the first Booke of the Myrrour of Knighthood:
IN WHICH IS PROSECV|TED THE ILLVSTRIOVS dedes of the knight of the Sunne, and his brother Rosicleer, Sonnes vnto the Empe|rour Trebatio of Greece: With the vali|ant deedes of armes of sundry worthie Knights, very delightfull to bee read, and nothing hurtfull to bee regarded.
NOW NEWLY TRANSLA|ted out of Spanish into our vul|gar tongue by R. P.


LONDON
Printed by Thomas Este. 1599.




TO THE RIGHT worshipfull Master Thomas Powle Esquire, Clarke of the Crowne in hir Maiesties high Court of Chauncerie
_COnsidering (right Worshipful) that such men as haue excelled others in vertue or anie ex|cellent quallitie, doe shine through perpetuall fame all abroad, and are like the bright Sunne beames, surmounting (without comparison) the small and speedie decaying candles of the rude  ignoble: and seeing that this brightnesse of fame hath, and doth not onely shine in men by vertuous studies and con|templatiue exercises, but also in most worthie feats of chiual|rv and martiall prowesse (the knowledge  practise whereof Cicero, that most wise and learned Senator, deemed as necessa|rie as learning and other good gifts of the minde, to maintaine an orderlie common weale.) Considering also that as well the spirit of God hath by the hands of Moses, and of many good men since, published, and that greatly commending them, the valiaunt acts and puissant exploits of sundrie both good and mightie men at armes, as did Homere, Titus Liuius, Salust, with many mo, the right martiall and euer memorable acts of the Greekes, the Romans, c. All which records of Chiualrie ending to animate others vnto imitating the like, and beeing s a spur to instigate and prick vs forwards vnto prowesse, who lse would bee idle and lie in obscuritie: I haue thought it ot fruitlesse to publish this Mirrour of Knighthood also, in|ented and set forth rather to encourage dastards and to teach he readie minded what excellencie is in puissant and inuinci|le mindes, passing common iudgement, then to feede the rea|der

with an vntruth. Now, sithens custome hath made it to bee as a law in mens hearts obserued, that they account bookes published not to haue sufficient warrant, except they bee dedicated to some worthie personage of authoritie, I am bolde to present vnto your Worship this Booke, entituled The second part of the Mirrour of Knighthood, done out of Spanish, and now newly printed: beeseeching your Worship rather to accept of my good will shewed, than to re|spect the simplenesse of the gift. Thus ceasing to be tedious, I commit you to the tuition of the Almightie, who blesse you and all yours.
Your VVorships most assured:
T. E.



To the Reader.
_I Haue (good Reader) according to my forepas|sed promise, prosecuted the Second part of the first Booke of the Mirrour of Knighthood: after which likewise (beefore the second part alreadie Printed) followeth another booke, which is intituled in the Spanish worke, The third part of the first Booke. c. Which, with as much expedition as may bee, shall bee published: wherby both the quaint beginning, and the quoy abruption, shall be brought to a concord, though no conclusion: Yet shall the whole sto|ry be concluded with diligent spede, if thou accept with thy wonted curtesie, these passed impressions. Desiring the not to think the fulnesse of the history to be deferred of ma|lice, but by euill luck: wherefore good Reader, I besech the, beare with the abruptnesse of the translation, the errours of the impression, and the good meaning of the Authour: and thinck not euerie Actor a right Grecian Lord, no more then euery Chremes, a Corinthian churle: but contrary, that as Terence shewed the figure that then was, so our Author shadoweth the forme that should be in all Nobilitie, to wit, Chiualrie, and curtesie. Committing therefore the conside|ration of this worke to thy acceptance, I conclude
Thine to vse. T. E.



G. G. To the Reader.

IF learned Maro merited such prayse, for penning downe Aeneas trauayles strange:
Or if to heauen they Nasoes name doe rayse, that writ of men and beasts trans form'd by change:
Then shall our Spaniards toile I trust obtaine, Though no such praise, yet pardon for his paine.


For as their pens did paint the rare euents, of things succeeding, fitting for their time:
Euen so doth hee declare in his contents, the verie meanes to Honours top to clime.
Accept his will, doe not disdaine his worke, In simplest shew doth truest meaning lurke.

FINIS.





 THE SECOND PART of the first booke of the Mirrour of Knighthoode, in which is prosecuted the illustrious deedes of the Knight of the Sunne, and his brother Rosi|cleer, sonnes to the Emperour Trebatio of Greece.

OF ALL THAT HAPPE|ned vnto the Emperour Trebatio and the Princesse Bri|ana in their way vnto the Grecian Empire. CHAPTER. I.
_WIth great ioy and contentment, the Em|perour Trebatio and the Princesse Bria|na trauailed towardes the Grecian Empire, as well for the fruition of hir contented ioy, as the pleasure and ease which she hoped to haue, at such time as she should come vnto the Empire. And if it had fallen out that their departure should haue bene knowen, yet at their ease they could not follow them, for that most of their trauaile was by deserts and vninhabited places, and not by peopled townes  vila|ges: and this was the occasion that they could not come so seene vnto Grecia as they might, if they had taken the fre|quented waye. And so in great peace and quietnesse they trauailed certaine daies without any accident happaning that is worth the noting, till such time as they had passed through y^e kingdome of Hungaria,  entered among certaine mountaines which wer very craggie  troublesome to tra|uaile in, where they chaunced vpon the skirt of the moun|taine

Sarpedo, which is verye great, and was inhabited with very furious and vnciuile people. This was the cause which made them to trauaile by the lowest part of the mountaine, where they continued on their iourney till the third day, at such tyme as the Sunne was in the extrea|mest of his parching heate, which caused them to haue an earnest and great desire to drinke, for that they were thyr|stie, by reason that all that daye, and the other day past, they could finde no water, nor any other thing to drinke.
And because the great thirst which the Empresse sus|tayned was more griefe vnto the Emperour then his owne, he diligentlye searched in euery place where he came, to se if he could by any meanes finde any Towne, Uilage, or Fountayne, where they myght haue water to quench theyr thirst.
And he as trauayled in this care and sorrow, within a whyle after he discouered a certayne valley which entred in by the one side of the Mountayne,  in the middest there|of there was as it were a sluce which proceded out of the Mountayne: and it semed vnto him, that it could not he without water, for that the ground about it was very fresh and pleasant.
And presentlye leauing theyr way that they then followed, they tooke the next way which lead them vnto the valley, and with great trauaile they came thether, in the ende whereof they found sufficient of that where|of they had such nede. For that out of the foote of a high  mightie Rocke, the principall beginning of that mountaine, there was a small valley lyke vnto a medow, being verie grene and fresh,  on the one side it was inclosed with that mightie Rocke, and on the other side inuironed with great and thicke trees of all sortes, both delectable and pleasaunt.
This valley was very playne, and out of the cliftes of that rocke, there issued a sweete and a christalline foun|tayne of most excellent cleare water, which ran into the middest of that valley, whereas it made a stange: be|ing

very pleasaunt to beholde. Likewise they saw in that high Rocke, certayne steppes cut out of the hard stone like vnto stayres, which assended vp vnto a dore which was in the sayde Rocke, and it semed to be aboue fiftene adome high.
And they saw that by the dore there was cut out of the same Rocke, holes like vnto windowes, which made them thinke there should be some habitacion or dwelling in the same. And for that the place was very delightfull, it dyd in a manner inuite them to refresh themselues. There the Emperour alighted from his horse, and made him fast vn|to a Tre, and tooke the Empresse in his armes from hir paulfrie, the lyke dyd hee to all the Ladyes and Damosells, and they went vnto the Fountayne whereas they did sa|tisfie themselues of theyr desire, thinking all their trauaile well bestowed, to come vnto that pleasant and delightfull place.
Then they sate themselues downe, by the head of that spring, and did eate of such meate as Clandestria hadde brought with hir: and this mighty Emperour had for his table the lappe of the Empresse, which he did more esteme then all the great abundance of siluer and gold and other furniture in his royall and princely court. Also they re|ceiued wonderfull great pleasure and contentment at the swete and pittering noyse which the running water made, which by reason of the swiftnesse of his course semed to bee a Fountayne of christall, for the great clearenesse thereof.
And when they had eaten and well refreshed themselues with that which they brought, the Emperour dyd pull of his healme, and stretched out his body vppon the grene grasse, and laide his head on the Princesse lappe. And after that he hadde discoursed with the Princesse many wet and amorous speches, he fell a slepe, wherefore he Princesse hadde great care of him and commaunded ell hir Gentlewomen to kepe silence and to make no noyse

for feare of waking of him, and she was well contented in hir minde that they were passed the Kingdome of Hunga|ria, hoping in a short time to enter into the great Empire of Grecia. But all this in comparison was nothing vnto the great loue  contented ioy that she receiued, to se that no|ble Emperour lie a long with his head on hir lap, and sub|iect vnto hir loue, very much beholding the great seueritie and couragious countenaunce of his faire face, marking his mightie members, and the good proportion of his whole bo|die. And as hee lay vpon the grasse, it seemed to hir that in|all the world ther was not his like to be sene, he was of so excellent a stature and worthy to be beloued aboue all o|ther. And for that the Princesse by experience was fully per|swaded of his noble prowesse, shee sayd vnto hir selfe, that ther was not in all the world lady or gentlewoman, that had better chaunce then she, affirming that although Fortune in times past did shew hir selfe cruel, yet at that time she had recompenced hir with more honour and delight, higher dig|nitie and prosperitie then euer she possessed, or thought at any time to attaine vnto. But as it is a thing both gene|rall and common, that at such time as a man thinketh him|selfe to haue most felicitie in this mortall lite, he is nerest vnto perills, hauing sodainlye all his mirth tourned into mourning, with mischefes vnlooked for: so at this present it happened, for in the meane time that the Emperour tooke his rest vpon the lappe of the fayre Princesse, and shee like|wise remayned in the toppe of hir prosperitie, all hir Gen|tlewomen being at a Fountaine, washing their hands and faces with that fayre and christaline water, vpon a sodaine and vnaware they heard a great norse amongst the tres, and shrikes that semed to be of women that came toward the place wheras they were, with sorrowfull weepings and lamentecions. The Princesse and all hir Gentlewomen being amazed at that sodaine noise, saw come forth from among the tres towards the Fountaine, a mightie great and deformed Gyant, all armed, sauing the beauer of his healme was vp, and mounted on a mightie horse, hauing in

his hand a great boare speare, which had a very sharp and long blade of a span broad, and he had a fierce and furious countenance, which caused great feare vnto all them that did behold him. After him there followed ten men (meruai|lous vglie and ill fauoured to behold, and no lesse dreadfull) which wer on foote all vnarmed, with a certaine kind of vn|vsed wepons in their hands, who brought in the middest a|mongst them two knights vpon one horse, with their hands fast bound, and two Ladies vpon two palfrayes, which gaue very great and sorrowfull shrikes. But when the Princesse saw that monstrous Gyaunt come foorth of the thicket, she gaue lykewise a great shrike, and quaked for feare, in such sort that she had no more coulour in hir face then a dead body: at which noyse, as well of the Ladyes and Gentle|women, as of the Princesse, the Emperour awaked out of his sound slepe, as one that had bene greatlye afrighted, and looking about him he saw that monstrous and vglie Gyant with all his internall company comming towardes them: wherefore with a trice he rose vp and laced on his healme, and came vnto the Princesse, who was as one that had bene dead, and sayd vnto hir: Take a good hart and be couragious, for it grieueth me very much to se you in this plight, for I doubt not, (such courage receiue I by your presence, but principallie God asisting me) to de|iuer you from this monster. The Princesse was so trou|led and in such feare, that she had not any power to an|were him one word agayne: And at that time she would aue giuen all the Grecian Empire, yea, the whole world f it had bene hirs, to haue sene hir selfe and the Empe|our cleere from that monstrous Gyant. At this time the reat Gyaunt came vnto the place whereas they were, nd greatlie meruailed to see them there, although to the ontrarie reioycing, and verye much delighted with the are and excellent beautie of the Princesse, with a dread|ull and horse voyce hee sayde.
Oh my Gods, what a rich pray is this that you haue re|serued for me, these fiftene yeres haue I attempted no other thing but to rob Ladyes and Gentlewomen, with no lesse perll then paynes, and yet all this time haue I not met with one, that so much doth content me as this Lady, and in deliuering these words he approched vn to the Empe|rour, and sayde.
Tell mee thou vnhappy Knight by what euill fortune art thou come hether vnto this place? The Emperour who at that time was very angry to heare his diuellish words, and againe to see the Princesse so changed, with a stout cou|rage and wrathfull countenaunce answered him.
Tell me thou brute beast, wherfore doest thou in this manner extoll and prayse thy selfe of so euill and diuellish a custome, knowing that there is a God in heauen that will punish the for these thy euill workes which thou doest vse.
The Gyant was exceding wrathfull when the Empe|rour speake thus, so that he made no reckoning to answere him, but giuing a terrible  hoarse cry, he threw that great and big Boare Speare which he brought, at the Emperour, with so great strength,  in such sort, that if it had chanced a right with the broad end and steely point, I doubt whether his Magicall armour had bene sufficient to haue made re|sistance, but it would haue pearced thorough his body: but the Emperour foreseing that perlilous blow, mith great lightnesse clered hmiselfe from the fury thereof by leaping on the one side, so that the Boare speare stroke the ground, and with the great strength wehrewith it was throwen, it entered more then halfe the length therof into the earth.
Which when the valiaunt and couragious Em|perour saw, and finding himselfe to bee so nigh vn|to daunger, the Gyaunt being on horsebacke, and con|sidering the great aduantage which hee hadde, straight wayes layde holde vppon the bridle of the Horse,

and with his strong armed fist stroke the horse such a vlow vpon the head, that he made the braynes flye out,  he fell to the ground master and all.
The Gyant seeing that, with great hast clered himselfe from his horse,  being on soote, drew out a mightie  broad faulchon, which hung at his girdle and approched vnto the Emperour, striking him so great and mightye a blow vppon his healme, that he could not otherwise choose, but that he was constrained to stoope with both his knees to the ground, which did somewhat trouble his remembraunce, but this mightie Emperour quickly be thought himselfe agayne, and tooke his sharpe sword in both his hands, and stroke the Gi|ant such a blow vpon his thigh, that although his armour was a finger thicke of hard Stele, besides a skirt of maile which he had hanging downe, neuerthelesse he cut all a sun|der,  entered through the flesh vnto the hard bone, wher he made a sore wound, from whence great abundance of bloud ran out. The Gyant feling himselfe thus wounded,  seeing so great resistaunce to be made with one alone Knight, rea|red as though it had bene a Lyon. At which noise together with the rushing of theyr harneys, and the sound of theyr mighty blowes, there appeared out of the windowes of the Rocke another Gyant, which vnto his seeming was no lesse furious and vglie of semblaunce then the other, who seeing that mighty and well foughten battaile betwene the Em|perour  his brother,  as great hast as was possible for him, he went and armed himselfe. In the meane time the other Gyant and the Emperour made theyr battale with so great and heauie blowes that the noyse thereof did sound throughout all those mountaynes.
And the more that this Gyaunt did force himselfe to strike the Emperour, so much the more did the Emperour pro|uide to clere himselfe with great lightnesse from his terri|ble strokes, for that he knew very well it would be very perllous, if he should fasten on him but one full blow,

neuerthelesse the Emperour at all times did wounde him at his pleasure, in such sort, that what with the strength of the Giaunt, and the great pollicie and lightnesse of the Emperour the battayle was brought into great doubt, al|though the Gyaunt had lost very much bloud by these woundes which the Emperour had giuen him. For when he saw his bloud in such sort scattered vpon the ground, hee was more furious then before, and with great wrath he besturred himselfe with his Fauchon, cursing himselfe and blaspheming against his Gods, in that he could not in any wise fasten one full blow vpon his enimie, and that one Knight should bring him into so great a per|plexitie. All this while the Empresse and hir Gentlewomen did very well behold that wonderfull battayle,  had great feare to se the hugenesse of the Gyant, and perill in which the Emperour was, and so amazed, they were that they could not mooue themselues out of the place whereas they abode, but euery one of them on their knes very earnestly pray|ed vnto God with many teares, to deliuer them from that great agonie wherein they were.
And being in this agonie, they heard within the Rocke  great noyse  rushing of armour, wherewith they looked a|bout,  saw descending downe the stayres another Giant, all armed, of no lesse bignesse  dreadfull countenance then the other, who came downe in great hast, with a mightie mae of Stele in his hand. When the Princesse and hir Gentlewo|men saw him, they were more afraid then at the first,  yel|ded themselues vnto destruction,  therwith gaue meruay|lous  grieuous shrikes  cries, which was the cause that the Emperour was in a great feare of some misfortune, and looking about him to se what it might be, he perceiued ano|ther monstrous Gyaunt that discended downe his stayres with his mase in his hand:  although he did se the great danger and perill at hand, yet did not his hart faile him one ot, but with a noble and stout stomacke his strength

the more increased, so that forgetting all the traayle a|gainst that Gyant, with new strength hee strk the Gyaunt with both his hands such a blow ouerthwart the wast, that the thicke armour and skirt of maile had not sufficient strength to make defence against his mightie and strong arme, but that the sharp cutting sword must needes execute his fury, which diuiding both armour and bones, entered in|to the bowells, wherewith the Gyant with grieuous pangs of death straight waies ell downe to the ground, and with his fall made all the earth toshake.
At which time the other Gyaunt was come downe the stayres, and seeing that terrible and cruell stroke, hee lyft vp his eyes to heauen, and with  loude voyce he saide. Oh cruell and cursed Gods in whome I beleue and wor|ship, which of all you is it that hath co~sented vnto the death of my brother Argentaria? in what sort or how shall I bee reuenged of so great an outrage done vnto mee, you being aboue in the heauens, and I here vpon the earth.
And in saying these and such lyke wordes hee came to|wards the Emperour, with his mightie mase raysed in the ayre, in such forme, that it was most dreadfull to beholde: but this valyaunt Greeke whose strength was nothing in|feriour vnto his predecessors, the mightie Achilles, Pyrrhus, and Molosso, for when he saw the Gyaunt comming tow|ards him in that terrible sort, and so fiercely, in great hast he went whereas the Boare Speare stuck, and with exceding strength he pulled it out of the ground, and tooke it fast in his hand about the middest of the staffe, and ther|with he stayed and abode the comming of the Gyaunt, who as soone as he was come within eyght or nine paces of him euen as one would throw a dart at a aighted Bull, so dyd this mightie Emperour lyft vp his rygorous arme, and with great strength threw that Boare Speare at the Gyaunt, and stroke him in the middest of the breast with so great strength, that passing through armour and flesh,

the broad and Stely poynt of the Boare Speare appered at his back all bloody. And the staffe thereof, by reason of the great streangth wherewith it was throwen, dyd shake in the Gyants body till such time as he fell downe dead to the ground.
The force of this strong and mightie blow gaue great con|tentment vnto the Princesse and hir Gentlewomen, and also on the other side those men that came with the Gyant were no les amazed when they saw their Lords dead, whom they thought to bee the mightiest and strongest in all the world, and although they were many in number, yet had they no courage to withstand the fury of the Emperour, and despay|ring in themselues, of theyr securitie, they all left their prisoners, and euerie one of them procured to saue him|selfe by running away and hiding them in the thickest of that Mountayne. Then the Emperour seing that there was no more to be done, but that all was finished with that blow, he reioyced very much, and went vnto the Princesse whereas shee stoode (who had lost the Roseall cou|lour of hir face) and with a gladde and cherefull counte|naunce he sayde vnto hir thus. Lady, now assure your selfe that these people shall no more trouble you. Then the Princesse who was almost in an extasie with the great pleasure she receiued, when she saw the Emperour returne vnto hir without any wound or hurt, and the wonderfull strength that she saw in him, with great pleasure and de|lyght she saw in him in hir armes and sayd.
My Lord I haue great cause to confesse this my security, hauing so strong and mightie a Knight in my companie, but for all that my heart could not but receiue great feare to se you in such daunger, with those terrible and vglie Monsters, and I assure you that many dayes will passe beefore I shall be able to clre my selfe of the great feare which by them I haue conceiued: so that these and many other lyke amorous words passed betwixt the Emperour and the Princesse.
Then the Emperour remembred himselfe of the priso|ners that they brought with them, and left the Princesse, and went towardes them, and dyd vnloose them of the bondes wherewith they were fast bound, and saw that the two Ladyes were very fayre and meruailous richlie appa|rayled, and the two Knights very well armed, and of a good proportion, although theyr armour in many pla|ces was broken and cut, and they themselues sore woun|ded, whereby issued from them very much blood.
These Knights and Ladyes dyd behold all that passed, and saw with what valoure the Emperour dyd deale with those Gyaunts, and were greatly astonyed, meruayling who it should be, that beeing but one alone Knight, he should by his great myght and force ouercome two so mightie Gyaunts as those were, and in so short time as that. And seing themselues set at libertie by the noble and va|lyaunt prowesse of this Knight, they knew not how to gra|tifie that great benefit which they had receiued of him, but onely in gieuing him ceaselesse thanckes for the same.
The Emperour commaunded the Ladyes to bynde vp the wounds of the two Knights, that they myght loose no more blood: who dyd it with a very good will, for that they were theyr Husbands. And the Emperour asked of then who they were, and what was the occasion that the Gyaunt brought them prisoners in that sort.
Then one of the Knights sayd vnto him. Sir, you shall vnderstand that this Knight which you se here and I are bretherin, and Lords ouer the seauen valleyes: if at any time you haue heard speaking of them. And they are sci|tuated betwixt Danubia and Transiluania, and are vnder the subiection of the mightie King of Hungarie, and these Gentlewomen which are with vs are our wyues, and are lykewyse two sisters. And as wee were for our recreati|on passing away the tyme with pleasure and delyght in the company of many Knights and Gentlewomen: in one of

the sayd valleys high adioyning vnto this Mountayne Sar|pedo, being in the shadow vnder a Forrest side, hauing least care vpon any daunger or trouble, vpon a sodaine wee were beeset with this Gyant (that you first slew) and with his men, we defended our selues against the~ as well as we could, but in the ende he slew the most part of the Knights that were in our company, and the rest fled, so that we re|mayned all alone, and not beeing able to make any longer resistaunce against him, he tooke vs ioyntly with these two Gentlewomen, and brought vs in this sort as you haue sen. And this is not the first robberie that these Gyaunts haue committed.
For that of long time they haue done great harme throughout all the Prouinces that are adioyning vnto this Mountayne. And as I haue heard reported of them, the meate which doth most content them is humane flesh, which doth make vs to beleue verely, that if your soueraigne bountie, had not succoured vs in this great extremitie, in a short space we had bene eaten vp by these two Gyants and his people, and they vse most commonly to haue their habi|tation and dwelling in this Rocke which you se here, for when they are within it, if all the world should come a|gainst them, they are able to make a long resistance.
And the Knight concluding with these words, the Empe|rour was very glad and ioyfull that he had rescewed and t them at libertie from so great a danger, for they semed  him to be persons of no small estimation giuing great  to almightie God, for that he had taken away the  of so great an euill from that land.
And therewith they went all together vnto the Prin|ce, who receiued them very cureously. And straight wayes, she was knowen by the Knights, for that many times before they had sene hir: where at being very much amazed, they looked one vpon the other not knowing what to say.
When the Emperour perceiued that those Knights dyd

know the Princesse, in brefe wordes bee gaue them to vn|derstand how he was the Emperour Trebatio, and how the Princesse was his wife, and that they were going towards the Grecian Empire, and came vnto that place to seke water. for the great necessitie they had thereof, and there the Emperour requested them that at theyr retourne into theyr Countrie, they would go vnto the Court of King Ti|berio and kisse his handes in his beehalfe, and declare vnto him how and in what sort they found him at the Rock.
When these Knights vnderstood the whole matter by the Emperour, they could not satisfie them in musing at so sod|dayne and straunge a meting. And falling on theyr knees beefore the Emperour and the Princesse, they required theyr hands to kisse them, but they with great ioye and pleasure dyd make them arise from the ground, and after that bee|tweene them there had passed many delightfull words of co~|ference, the Emperour sayd that he would go se what was within the Rock, and so he ascended vp the stayers tyll he came to the doore, which he found shut in such sort, that by no meanes hee could get in, neyther would they open the doore for all his great knocking. And as they might perceiue, those that remayned within that Rock were household ser|uaunts, and two sonnes of those Gyaunts, being about the age of tenne yeres, whom they saw at the windowes be|holding all that had passed, and they shut the doore very fast, and durst not open it, for that they thought verily y^t Knight would destroy them all, in so much that the Emperour was constrayned to retourne back agayne.
After a while that the Emperour and all the rest of the companie had eased and refreshed themselues by the Foun|taine, he and the Princesse determined to depart, and the Knights with their wiues would haue borne him company, and dyd desire very earnestly the Emperour to suffer them so to doe, yet he wold not consent thereto, but desired them to returne vnto theyr owne Countrie, and to let them so alone as they were, for that he had greater pleasure to tra|uaile in that sort, then with any more company. When these

Knights vnderstood his determination, they would not stand in contention with him, nor importune him any farther, but taking theyr leaue of the Princesse, they and theyr wyues dyd retourne vnto theyr owne countrie, hauing inough for all their lyfe tyme to declare that which they saw of the worthie Emperour Trebatio, and of his high bountie, bele|uing that in all the world there was not a Knight like vn|to him. And when they came into theyr Countrie, they left theyr wyues there, and strayght way departed toward the Court of King Tiberio, to shew vnto the King theyr Em|bassage from the Emperour,  to declare vnto him the whole matter, how and in what order they were delyuered from theyr great perill as shall in this Historie by declared. And when they came vnto the Court, they were meruaylously well receiued, as you shall heare in this Chapter following.


How the Emperour Tiberio and the Princesse Briana ariued in the Empire of Grecia. Chap. 3.
_WHen the comming of the Emperour Trebatio and the Princesse Briana into Grecia, was knowen vnto the Prince of that Prouince, who was a yong Knight and one of his sub|iects, he was very much amazed, and lyke|wyse all his Subiects, for that they thought verily that many yeres past he had bene dead, and there was no other reckoning made of him, neyther would they beleue his comming to bee true, till such time as euerie one of them dyd se him with their owne eyes. And being certefied thereof, they dyd receiue him with such maiestie as the Emperour dyd remaine, and would not procede a|ny farther, but first wholy and perfectly informed him|selfe of the estate of all things with-in the Empire. And there was giuen him to vnderstand how that the King of Bohemia had bene and was gouernour of all the whole

Empire, and how that he had ruled and gouerned it with great discretion and iustice. And how that all people gene|rally were very wel content with his gouernement, at the which the Emperour receiued great pleasure, and sent vnto him giuing him to vnderstand of his comming, with the Princesse Briana, certifying him by a briefe letter of all that he had passed, and willed him to mete him at Constanti|nople. When the King and all the nobles of the Empire, who at this present were in Constantinople, heard these newes, I am not here able to expresse the great admirati|on that they had, and the exceding ioye that they in theyr hearts conceiued for that sodaine newes, in such sort that if each of them had receiued his owne Brother, they could haue possessed no more pleasure, he was so well beeloued. So in a short space these newes was published throughout all Constantinople, and was a meruailous thing to beehold the great pleasure and sports that, were in the Cittie, and generally amongst all the people.
Then the King of Bohemia, with all those noble Prin|ces and Lords dyd ioyne themselues together, and depar|ted toward Dardania, whereas they receiued the Emperour and the Princesse Briana, and conducted them vnto the great Cittie of Constantinople, with such maiestie and pomp, that neuer Prince nor Romane Emperour was so receiued into his countrie.
And when they were come vnto Constantinople, that faire and royall Princesse Briana was crowned Empresse of Gre|cia, at which coronation was made the greatest Feasts and Triumphes, with such pompeous solempnity as neuer was in all the world before that time. To which Triumph and Feasts, there dyd not onely come all the Princes, noble men, and valyant Knights naturall of the Empire, but also of all the Kingdomes and Prouinces which were nigh adioyning, vnto whom the newes came of the ariual of the great Em|perour Trebatio.
And for that the excellent and mighty dedes which the worthy Knight of the Sunne did in the Castell of Lindaraza,

should be manifest vnto all people, and that the memory thereof should not be forgotten, the Emperour commaun|ded to call together all the best Painters that were in Gre|cia, and commaunded them to paynt vpon the fore front of his Pallaice, which was next adioyning vnto the great Court, in singular perfection,  naturall sort, all the whole Iland, the Castle, the gates, and the terrible and wonder|full kepers and gards, with the mightie and perilous bat|tayle that the Knight of the Sunne had with them, and of all the rest that happened for to clere him of that inchant|ment, as hath bane told you in this Historie past. And when it, was concluded and set foorth in coulours, it was a thing very straunge to beholde, and of great admiration to all people that dyd looke thereon, insomuch that they could not beleue, that any humane man was able to dooe so great dedes of armes as was done by the Knight of the Sunne.
And all people had great desire to se him, although the Emperour had much more desire, with no lesse loue and good will, then if he had knowen him to be his naturall Sonne. And for that this great triumph shall be more spoken of in this Historie, at this present it doth leaue them tyll theyr time, and retourneth to tell you of all that passed in the Court of King Tiberio, when he knew of the departure of the Emperour Trebatio and of the Princesse Briana.


How the departure of the Emperour Trebatio and the Princesse Briana, was knowen in the Court of King Tiberio, and what passed about the same. Chap. 3.
_THe Historie sayth, for that the Gentlewo|men of the Princesse Briana were fully certified that theyr mistres kept hir Noue|na in hir chamber as she was wont to  and as I before tould you, they neuer ha any occasion to mistrust hir departure, fo that at any time before they neuer could perceiue the lea

presumption thereof, till such time as the nyne dayes were past, and the tenth day come,  seing not the chamber dore of the Princesse open they were all in a confusion, not know|ing what it should meane. So in this doubt they remayned vntill the eleuenth day, at which time not seing the cham|ber dore opened, they determined to goe thether, and began to call  knocke at the dore, but ther was none that answe|red them, whereat being more amazed, they knocked hard, and stroke mightie and great blowes at the dore, neuer the|lesse there was none that aunswered them, although they were there a great whyle knocking: and being much ama|zed thereat, they straight way gaue the Quene of Augusta to vnderstand thereof, who was in the Citie of Buda,  be|ing very much amazed at that sodayne newes, she called certayne of hir Knights Gentlewomen, and in their com|pany departed to the monestary. And when she came vnto the chamber dore of the Princesse,  found none to answere hir, for all their great knocking, shee strayght waies com|maunded hir Knights to breake open the dore, and hatchets and other things being brought for the purpose, they broke open the dore, which done the Quene with hir Knights and Gentlewomen entered the chamber, and not finding the Prin|cesse nor any other person therein, were very sore troubled  amazed, she sat hir selfe downe vpon the floore, and knew nei|ther what to say or doe, but onely to lament and to make great sorrow. And as they were in this confusion they found the Letter that was written lying vppon the Table, and directed either to the King Tiberio, or vnto the Quene, the which Letter they gaue strayght waye vnto the Quene Augusta, who with great anguish did open the same, and saw thereon written all the whole Hostorye of the mightie Emperour Trebatio and the Princesse Briana, with the true relation thereof, till such time as they de|parted, and in the end of the Letter they craued pardon for that they went away in such sort as they had done, without giuing them to vnderstande thereof, alleadging

the reason to be for the death of the Prince Edward, for that the King Oliuerio, father vnto the Prince, should not with any reason haue cause to quarrell with the King Tiberio, neyther account him as pertaker in the death of the Prince.
So when the Quene vnderstoode the effect of the Let|ter, she remayned all astonied and amazed, not knowing whether she might giue credit vnto so strange a thing as this was, although to the contrary she receyued exceeding great ioy and pleasure, for the good fortune of the Princesse hir Daughter, that in all hir life she felt not in hir selfe so much pleasure,  gaue great thanks vnto God for his exce|ding benefit which he had done vnto hir.
At that time the King Tiberio was in the Citie of Ratisbona, and the Quene Augusta strayght wayes sent messengers, such as she thought could well declare all that had happened, and by them she sent the Letter that the Em|perour had left written behinde him in the chamber of the Princesse, and the Quene remained with hir owne Gentle|women, and with the Gentlewomen of the Princesse in the monestary of the Riuer: for that it was a place of great qui|etnesse  pleasure, and sent all hir Knights and the rest of hir seruantes vnto the Citie, remayning onely with a fewe Knights for hir gard,  other seruantes, such as were nede|full for hir seruice.
The messengers which went with the Embassage vnto the King Tiberio, came vnto the Court before him, at such time as the King was accompanied with all his high Prin|ces and Knights, amongest whome there was that excellent and worthie Knight of the Sunne, carrying to heare when the departure of the Emperour and the Princesse should be declared in the Court. And when the messengers came before they King the strayght wayes declared vnto him theyr Embassage, and gaue him the Emperours Letter, which at his commaundement was read openlye in the hearing of all the Court. And when they vnderstoode all

that this History hath told you, the great admiration that all people receyued, was wonderfull:  when the King heard the contentes thereof, he remayned a great while as one being in a maze, and speake neuer a word. At last calling to his remembraunce the mightinesse of the Emperour, the great maiesty of his estate, the worthinesse of his person,  the excellencie of his royall descent, he thought within him|self that God had done much for him, in giuing him so wor|thy  mightie a sonne in law, and that his Daughter was the most happiest Princesse then liuing in the world, that in the end of all hir sorrow she had found so noble  excellent a husband. All this and many other things did greatly de|light his hart, but considering how much he was in charge for the Prince of great Britayne, he did not make any out|ward shew of his inward contentment, but demeaned him|selfe as one  in thought, and very much trou|bled.
And after that he had a great while remayned in that traunce, without speaking anye thing, he sodainly arose vp from the place whereas he sate, and leauing all his Knights and Noble men in the great hall, he intered in|to his closet, and being there alone, hee beganne again to call to his remembraunce the noble and mighty dedes of the worthy Emperour Trebatio, and the more ioy and plea|sure he semed to receiue, giuing great thankes vnto God for that all thinges by the working of his mightie hand were brought to so good and ioyfull an ende. And thus all thinges well considered, he determined to make an out|ward shew of great anger agaynst the Emperour, till such time as he might vnderstand how the King Oliuerio did take the matter, at such ime as he should heare newes thereof.
Likewise at that time came to his remembrance the mighty dedes that the Emperour declared of the Knight of the Sun,

musing with himselfe who that Knight should be that was of so great strength and power, and was very gladde and ioyfull that he had hin in his Court. And at this time all the nobles and Knights which remayned in the hall did talk one with another, and very much meruayled at the mighty deedes of the Knight of the Sunne, and all people did behold him giuing him great prayse, and extoling him vnto the heauens, in such sort that he was ashamed to heare himself so praysed: But as it is a thing most common, that against prosperitie of the vertuous there doth not lacke malicious and enuions persons, who neuer resteth to procure the exe|cution of their venimous stomackes, it so fell out amongest the Knights that were there present, there was Florinaldus, he which the Knight of the Sun did ouerthrow at the bridge before Albamira, who for that he was a stout and gallaunt Knight, receyued great griefe that the Knight of the Sunne should ouerthrow him, and especially before his Lady and mistresse, and therefore he was very destrous to seke to haue opportunitie wherein he might be reuenged,  make satisfaction of the shame and rebuke which he had receyued by him, many of those nobles and Knights that were present were his parents and kinsfolke. And I know not whe|ther it was with the great hope he hadde in his owne strength, or in the confidence of his kinsfolkes and friends, which were verye many, he determined with himselfe to seke some occasion of contention with the Knight of the Sunne.
Now at such time as these Knights were praysing him, and giuing him his deserued commendation, for the good he had done vnto the Emperour, Florinaldus replyed vnto them, and with a loude voyce, that he might be heard of all that were there present, he sayde. The Knight of the Sunne cannot in any wise excuse himselfe of a great offence, in that he did not aduertise my Lord, the King Tiberio, that the Emperour Trebatio would secretly car|rye awaye his Daughter contrarye vnto his will,

And for that he hath ben hetherto in his company, it is to be supposed that he was acquaynted with the Emperors deter|mination: and if it please my Lord the King to giue atten|cion vnto my words, he should commaund him for the same to be accordingly punished, for that in no place ther ought to be giuen any credite or trust to traycours, and therfore much lesse in the court of high and mighty Kings.
When the Sonne of Trebatio heard these wordes, his coulour chaunged, and with very anger he gnashed his teth together, striuing to mittigate his cholarike ire by re|son, and to answere Florinaldus with patience, but yet this valiant Del Phoebo could not execute his vertuous desire, for that his wrath and cholar did much more surmount his calmnesse, which did procede of his worthy  vexed hart, in such sort that he could not find which way to compasse the same without the great abusing of his honour, especially to eare so infurious and vile words spoken against him, but with a surious and frowning countenaunce, which semed to terrifie all them that did behold him, he replied vnto Flori|naldus, and sayd: These words which thou hast spoken, Flori|naldus, be villanous, and not to be suffered. Therfore vpon the same if thou wilt goe forth into the field with me, I will giue the to vnderstand that thou doest lie falselie, for that I was neuer traitour to King nor to any other crea|ture. When this stout  gallant Knight heard these words, his youthfull bloud being moued, being politike and nimble, with a trice he wrapped his cloake about his arme,  drew out his sword, with the which he would haue striken the Knight of the Sun, who was vnarmed: but giuing the enter|prise against the flower of all knights, before his sword could descend to execute his will, with a light leap more then thre paces he auoyded,  drew out his sword (which was a hea|nie and sorrowfull drawing out vnto many.) And for that Florinaldus had there many kinsefolkes  friends, and like|wise of his owne squires and seruants they altogether drew out their swords, some against the Knight of the Sunne and

other some to make peace betwixt them, so that there was not any in all the hall but hee hadde his sword readre drawen.
Now at such time as the Knight of the Sunne would haue stroen his first blow at Florinaldus, a brother of his called the Troyan Earle, with his sword in his hand, put himselfe forwards, and thought to receiue the blow which descended, cutting the Ayer with great fury,  lifting vp his sword (with pretence rather to hurt the Knight of the Sun, then to make peace, his misfortune was such, that the blow descending with so great fury stroke the sword out of his hand,  the sword of the Knight of the Sun lighted vpon his head, so that he claue it to the shoulders, and he fell downe dead vnto y^e ground, which was great griefe to Florinaldus, and vnto all the rest of his kinsfolkes  friends, that dyd se him fall: who with great desire to reuenge the death of their kinseman, did put theyr liues in great daunger, with the perill that was before them. And procured all that euer they could to wound the Knight of the Sunne. And being ma|ny and he vnarmed he found himselfe in the greatest dan|ger that euer in all his life he had bene in. Yet for all that in this desperate conflict, he did plainely show that he was the most couragious Knight of all his predecessours, and of all that followed after him. So that in all the twelue parts of this great historie as Trebatio, they haue no small cause to mencion this mighty Alfebo, more the~ any other Knight: for that this strong Knight dyd thinke nothing impossible vnto him that consisted in fates of armes, and where so e|uer he came, ther was nostrength nor courageable to make resistauns against his fury.
Now, when this couragious Gentleman dyd se him selfe inclosed with his enemies, and so many comming together to discharge and execute their fury vppon him, his wrath and courage increased in such sort, that in leaping forwardes and forwardes, striking about him on euery side, he chaunced on two of them which came

before him, being seruants vnto Florinaldus, so that with an ouerthwart blow he cut the one of them cleane a sunder by the middle,  chaunced vpon the other in the same place, that his sword entred into his bowells,  both of them fell dead to the ground. And not staying, he layd about him on euery side, so that no man dyd endure before him that was vnar|med, but hee ouerthrew him vnto the ground, and all that euer he dyd was little enough, for that with the great vio|lence and furie which they vsed without all feare, pressing vpon him in such sort, that they hurt him in thre or foure places, wher at their issued very much bloud.
Notwithstanding what with the great fory he had, and his exxeding lightnesse and deadly blowes that hee stroke, hee made the most part of all them for great feare to put them selues apart from him. And hauing space that he could turne and winde his sworde about him, there was none that was so hardye for to assayle him, but that he cut him a sunder in the myddest.
There was at that time many nobles and Knights that would haue parted and made peace betwixt them, but the tumult was such and so farre out of order, that by no mea|nes they could reforme it, till such time as the King Tibe|rio heard that great rumour and noyse in the hall, he came forth out of his closet, and tooke his royall Septer in his hand, and pressed in amongst the thickest of them very fu|riously and with great anger. And when he came where as the Knight of the Sunne was, and saw round about him so many dead persons, and amongst them the Troyan Earle, with great anger he layde hold on him and sayd, what is this O Knight, that in such order thou dst disqui|t my court, and hast slaine my Knights, so all the rest when they saw the King, they immediatly dyd retyre backe and were in quiet.
Then when the valyaunt Knight of the Sunne knew him to be the King, and heard what hee sayd, he forthwith dyd moderate his anger all that euer hee could, and sayde:

it is your Knights that doth disquiet your Court and not I and if I haue slaine any it is in defending my self from the death, which they doe procure to giue me. Of this sayde the King I will informe my selfe,  punish them that hath bene the occasion hereof. And in saying these words he demaun|ded of him his sword, which he gaue him, more for curtesies sake then for any other thing,  hauing it, he also tooke the sword of Florinaldus, and of all the rest that he suspected to be on his partye, and straight wayes called beefore him all his Knights  gard,  commaunded them to take the knight of the Sunne prisoner,  to carry him into a strong Tower which was on the one side of the Pallace,  likewise to take Florinaldus,  all those that were on his side,  to carry them vnto another Tower that was on the other side of his Pal|lace, so that both the one  the other were put in good ke|ping, but if the Knight of the Sunne had bene armed, before he would haue ben taken prisoner, he would haue made the King to haue giuen eare  to hearke vnto that he would haue said in discharging himself, but by reason that he was as it were naked, he yeelded, and had patience with all that which the King commaunded,  so they lead them vnto the Tower which was very high  well walled. And when he was therin, they made fast a very great chaine to his leg, and for to kepe him there was put thirty armed Knights, and as many mo other men. Then the Dutchesse of Pano|nia, did send vnto him a very good Surgion to heale him of his woundes. At this time the death of the Troyan Earle was published throughout all the Court, and there was made for him great lamentacion, for that the most noblest Princes and Knights that were there, were of his kins|folks. So both the one  the other complayned very much vnto the King of the Knight of the Sunne, in such sort that he was verye much inflamed agaynst him. At this time there entered into the pallace the Countesse, Lady and wife vnto the Troyan Earle, in mourning apparel, bringing with hir two young sonnes, who entering into the Hall

whereas the King was, beeganne to powre foorth sorrowful complaynts, destring iustice agaynst them that had slayne hir Husband, and seeing him lye dead vppon the floore, shee threw hir selfe vpon him, and made such lamentation, that it was a heauie thing to behold, at which sight if the King before were inflamed against the Knight of the Sunne, his indignation dyd the more increase against him, in behol|ding the great sorrow of the Countesse, and determyned in himselfe to doo iustice vpon the death of the Earle, and he ioyned vnto his indignation the great authoritie that he had to be called an executer of iustice, (which vnto manie, yea,  very mightie Monarches oftentimes is very hurtfull,  the ende of those extremities obtaine them the infamous names of Tyrants.) Then the King commaunded that the dead bodyes should bee carryed out of the hall and buryed, and the Troyan Earle was buryed with great honour, and accompanyed with the most noble and principall Knights of the Court. Now, hee being very sorrowfull for the death of the Earle, many Knights that had affection vnto the Knight of the Sunne dyd labour with him for his discharge, of being in any fault of that tumult, and dyd informe him of the great cause that he had to do that which he did in his owne defence, but there was nothing that dyd profit at all with the King, but rather he dyd shew himselfe very angry and wrathfull against them that dyd speake vnto him in the Knights behalfe, which was a great griefe vnto many which dyd know the valure and desert of the Knight of the Sunne, for it semed vnto them no reason that he should be intreated in that sort. And because that the King Tibe|rio was daylie and hourely vrged on all parts, the one cry|ing and asking iustice, and the other gayne-saying the same, he was for certaine daies very doubtfull, not know|ing how co determine what was best to bee done, but aun|swered them all to their little delyght. By this tyme the night of the Sunne was healed of his wounds, and the Dutchesse of Panonia prouided for him all things necessa|rie in the prison, performing it with as great care and di|ligence

as myght be: But when he knew the King was doubtfull of his determination, and of the great iudignati|on hee shewed against him: it dyd repent him that he suf|fered himselfe so to be taken. And he immagined with him|selfe what meanes might best be wrought sor to clere him|selfe of that imprisonment: for that the nobilitie of his va|lyant courage, could not abide to be so shut vp, and abyde the curtesie and pleasure of the King. So in this order the storie doth leaue him till the tyme serue.


How the Knight of Cupido dyd take his leaue of the Queene Arguirosa, and entred into the kingdome of Rusia, where he found a strange aduenture. Chap. 4.
_THE mightie dedes of the Emperour Tre|batio, and the worthy knighthood of the va|liant Alphebo, hath put almost in obliui|on that excellent and worthy Knight Rosi|cleer, whose amorous loue, and inuincible deedes, doo deserue a more eloquenter wri|ter then my vnskilfull pen can performe. Now if you doo remember in the Historie past, how that one way Fortune caused him to be the most saddest and sorrowful Knight that euer was seene, so full of bitter heauinesse, that whatsoeuer thing he dyd accomplish and bring to passe was not suffi|cient to make him merry. And on the other side, Fortune dyd show him very  in putting beefore him mar|ueilous and wonderfull things and aduentures of so great strangenesse, that ouer comming them by his surmounted valor, in all the world was spred a broad the fame of the Knight of Cupido. So after that he had slaine that valyant , from all the parts of Thesalia, and the confines round about, there came many people for to se him, as a thing of great admiration, in the time that he there remai|nd, for to place the Queene Arguirosa in full possession of all hir landes, and that all hir vasalls and subiectes were

quieted and setled in good order. For by reason that he was on the Quenes side, in few dayes they were all in peace and quyet.
Now when he saw that there was no more to be done, he was very desirous to go vnto some other place, wheras in recompence of the great honour and seruice done vnto him, hee might bee in some solytarie desart, to bewayle his misortune. Then remembring himselfe, hee determined to take his leaue of the Queene Arguirosa, who bare him great good will, and dyd loue him as hir selfe. And if she had not perceiued that his heart was prisoner in some other place, she would with a verie good will haue chosen him Lord of hirs, and receiued him for hir husband, without any desire to be informed farther of his estate and discent: for she re|sted wholely satisfied in that which shee saw by experience of his royall worthinesse and bountie.
And when the Knight of Cupido dyd declare vnto hir his desire to depart, and craued licence for the same, she re|ceiued so great sorrow therat, that in a long space she could not make him any aunswere. So after a whyle that she had remained in that traunce, distilling from hir christaline eyes abundaunce of teares which ran downe vpon hir faire and lyllie white chekes, lyke vnto orientall pearles: she vttered vnto him these words.
Worthie Knight, this thy departure which thou dost pre|tend, is vnto mee so great a griefe, that I hartely wish I had not knowen you, although it had cost me a great part of this my Kingdome. For considering how much I am bound vnto you, and remembring the great desert and ba|our of your person, I doo not thinck neither can I wel be|eue that there is any thing in all the world able to make me merry, or minister vnto me any pleasure or contentment but onely your presence. Oh, I would God (if hee were so pleased) that I might know your hart at libertie,  therby e able to repay you part of the great benefit whic you aue showed vnto me, in making you Lord ouer all this ingdome, and there-with I should accompt my selfe the

happiest Gentlewoman in all the world, but seing it is so that another hath possessed that place before me, and deser|ued to bee Lady of your libertie: this one thing I doo desire of thee, that wheresoeuer you become to remember me, and this my Countrie and Kingdome, the which you may take as your owne at all tymes when occasion shall serue, for that there cannot be a greater pleasure vnto me, then for you to commaund me in any thing that is requisit. And if at any tyme Fortune bring you into this countrie, with more delight then at this time you seme to be indued with all, I shall thinck my selfe most happie, that as I haue r|ceiued at your hands this kingdome, so I may lykewise ob|taine a husband at your appoyntment, for receiuing him at the hands of so worthy a Knight, it cannot be but very con|formable vnto my honour, and conuenient for my estate.
All this the Quene spake, for the great loue she bare vn|to Rosicleer, giuing him honestly to vnderstand that if it were his pleasure to receiue hir for his wife, she was very wel content therwith, but Rosicleere who had his thoughts very far from hir purpose, would not aunswere any thing wherby she might take any hold, yet gaue hir great thanks for hir curteous proffer made vnto him, and promi|sed hir alwayes to haue hir in remembrance, and to serue hir in all that euer he could. And although at that time e dyd excuse himselfe as much as hee might to clere himselfe of that charge, in prouiding hir a Husband of his owne choyce, yet time did serue that Rosicleer had opportunitie,  dyd esteme it very much,  he dyd pacifie very great and troublesome controuersies, hatreds, and discords, by which she might haue receiued great damage  harme, as in this History shall be shewed vnto you. So in the ende of many curtesies betwene them, Rosicleer tooke his leaue of th Quene, and would receiue nothing of hir but onely a good horse, which she commanded to be giuen him,  so he depar|ted out of the Citie, and in few dayes after out of the king|dome, and in passing through Dardania and Dacia, he tra|uayled many dayes, in the which there chaunced sundry

aduentures that I omit, to come vnto the effect of this hi|storie. And being foorth of the Realme of Dacia, the history sayth that he entered into the kingdome of Russia, wheras it was told him there were great and meruaylous aduen|tures. So it happened that the third day in the morning he entered into that Countrie, and came vnto a plaine moun|taine, so fresh and delectable as might be posible, and he tra|uayled so long therein, till at the last his way dyd part in twaine,  the one way was more vsed then the other, and by reason that his minde was troubled in thincking vppon his Lady the Princesse Oliuia, he was so far from his re|membrance, that he respected not which way he tooke, but followed that way which his horse voluntarily went, who entered into that which was lesse vsed,  he trauailed for|wards in that way the most part of all that day, and be|ing tormented with his loue, he remembred not to eate, nei|ther had he mynde of any other thing, til such tyme as his horse for very hunger stayed and would goe no farther, but striued to eate of the grene grasse which was in the way. And by this occasion the Knight of Cupide came vnto him|selfe, and saw that hee had lost his way, and was entered into that path, and considering the most part of the day was already past, hee quickened vp his spirits, and trauay|led with better remembrance then before he had done, ma|king great hast to come vnto some place, where he might haue somwhat to eate, and not suffer himselfe to dye despe|rately with hunger. So he followed that euill accustomed way till such time as it was almost night, and it brought him vnto the sight of very high and mightie Rocks, which were in the middest of that wildernesse, vnder the which he saw a thing that dyd put him in great admiration which was, that out of the mouth of a caue vnder those Rocks there came foorth great flames of fyer, accompanied with darke and thick smoake, which seemed to be some infernall den, the mouth of the Caue was so great, that a Knight on Horsebacke myght well enter in thereat: and being |rous to know what it should be, he drew nigh vnto it, but

his horse was so fearefull, that he could not come so nigh as the Knights will was, but was constrayned to alight from his back, and made him fast vnto a tre, and he went a foot towards that wonderfull caue. When he came nigh vnto it, he saw towards the right hand ingrauen in the hard Rock certaine Letters very fayre, which semed to be of great antiquity, and he read them, finding them to be as followeth.
This is the caue of the wise Artidon, who dyed for the loue of Artidea, daughter vnto king Liberio, the onely heyre of this Kingdome, who in recompence of hir cruelty doth and shall remaine here, giuing true aunsweres vnto all that shall be demaunded of hir, till such tyme as a Knight shall come, who with his great bounty and force can ouer|come the terrible kepers of the entrie hereof, and set hir at lybertie, and then shall this entrie be fre vnto all those that will know any thing of the wyse man.
When the Knight of Cupide had well read these Letters and vnderstood them, he very much meruayled at that straunge aduenture, and strayght way it mooued in him a great good will and desire to prooue the same, both to se and know what was within the caue, and euen as one that dyd abhor his owne lyfe, so he delyghted not in any other thing but in great and perillous aduentures,  indeuoured to giue the attempt vnto them when he had opportunitie, but by reason it was late, and that it waxed dark, he deter|mined to let the enterprise alone till the next morning, for that the night might be a hinderance vnto him for the per|formance. And therewith he pulled off his Horse Bridle, to let him fede vpon the grasse there abouts, and he as one that had no care of himselfe, layde him a long vpon the grene grasse, and then his minde began a new to be trou|bled with his accustomed thoughts, not remembring that in all the day before he had not eaten any thing, neyther dyd he know where to get any meat to refresh himselfe at that tyme of the nyght, and calling to his remembraunce the cruell words in the Letter of the Princesse Oliuia, his

heart suffered so great grese and passions, that tumbling himselfe vpon the grasse from the one side to the other, hee sayde: Oh earth, that for all mortalytie thou openest thy selfe, and receiuest them into thy bosome, wherefore doost not thou now at this present open thy bowells and receiue me into the, for being buried, I should receiue great con|tentment. I know not wherefore I lyue any longer, or wherefore I am suffered in this world, for that I haue lost all hope to se any more the Princesse Oliuia. Oh that this aduenture which I meane to prooue might be the last, and that I might dye here within this caue, although the occa|sion of my death be neuer knowen nor heard of. So these and many other words of great lamentation he vttered, that it was most greuous to heare, and passed away a pece of the first part of the night with great sorrow. And the nyght being very darke, vppon a sodayne he heard a noise and murmuring of people, which caused him to aryse vp to se what it should be, and he saw at the foote of the Rock a great fire, and round about the same there were a company of Shepheards, and those were they which made that noyse. And being desirous to know what they could say more of that caue, he determined to goe whereas they were, and when he came vnto them, he saluted them with very curteous words. When the Shepheards saw him of so goodly a stature, and armed with so precious and rych armour, they receiued him as a Knight of estimation, and gaue him very good intertainment, and dyd inuite him to theyr supper, which they had in a readinesse, and after that he had surrendered vnto them thankes for theyr courtesie, he sat downe amongst them by the sier.
Then one of the shepheards, who semed to be the chefe a|mong them, and that had more vnderstanding, and was of a better conuersation then all y^e rest, did demand of the Knight of Cupide, what aduenture had brought him at that tyme of the night to that place? The Knight aunswered and sayde. I am a straunger in this Countrie, and now it is three dayes since I first entered into this Kingdome,

and for that I dyd not know nor yet doo, this countrie, my fortune hath brought mee hether this euening, and seing that the night drew on, fearing to be intangled in vnaccu|stomed wayes, I determined to remaine there hard by the Court till the morning, pretending to prooue that aduen|ture when the day was come. And afterward when I saw you together here, I thought it best to come into your co~|pany, as well to eate somewhat (for that I am very hun|grie) as also to informe my selfe of you touching the aduen|ture of this caue of Artidon, for till this euening that I did come hether and se it, I neuer before heard any mention therof. Then the shepheards sayd, sir Knight, seing that you haue given vs to vnderstand the occasion of your comming hether, wee will now giue you to vnderstand what we know, and what at any time we could learne of the aduen|ture of this cause,  possiblie after you vnderstand it, it will withdraw you from this great good will and determinaty|on that you haue, to giue the proofe and enterprise. And in the meane time that which we haue for our supper shall be made ready,  of such as we haue with a very good will you shall eate your part, for that your person and presence doth deserue no lesse.
Now, that which we doo know and of long time past haue heard say touching this Caue, is, that in time past almost out of memorie, there was in this Kingdome of Russia a Knight called Artidon, who being a Knight of great courage and high lynage, and gentle of disposition, was also the wy|sest in the magicall art that could be found in many coun|tries. And in the chiefest time and flower of all his Knight|hood and science, this Kingdome was gouerned by a Ladie called Artedea, who at the death of the King hir father was very yong, but when she came vnto the state of marryage, the was so fayre and of so great beautie, that many Princes and Knights desired to haue hir for wife, but among all those that in their seruice dyd most indeuour to obtaine hir loue, there was not one of them that in so noble and valyaunt manner did demeane himselfe as Artedon dyd, for not alone

in dedes of armes, but also by his science, he dyd mighty  wonderfull things in hir seruice. But his fate  misfortune was such, that the quene did not onely withdraw hir loue from him, but did also hate  abhorre him to the death:  all that euer he did in hir seruice did moue hir to be melancho|like  very angry. This worthy Artidon had his loue so in|tirely fixed vpun hir, that he would doe any thing for hir de|light, but all that he dyd was not estemed of the Quene, which was the occasion that after he was fully certified  vnderstoode hir great crueltie, he sell into a mortall sicke|nesse,  being without all hope of remedy of the Quene, he determined to reuenge himself on hir before he dyed. So on a night by his great learning, he tooke the Quene out of hir bed  brought hir vnto his caue:  that night there was thundring  lightning, that with the great noise therof, they thought verely the whole world would haue sonke. But in the morning when they saw that the Quane was gone,  could not finde hir, they sought for hir in all parts, but all was in vayne, for that chauncing to come this way,  rea|ding that which is there grauen in the Rocke, they straight wayes vnderstoode that the wise Artidon had brought hir thether, in reuenge of the great cruelty that she vsed to him. Whervpon ther was diuers Knights that would proue the entrie into the caue, and it fell out with them as you shall beare. All such Knights as were in loue dyd enter in tho|rough the fier, without receyuing any hurt, but within a while after they were put back  throwen out againe some arke dead, and other some very sore hurt and ill intrea|ted. And when it was demaunded of them what they saw within the caue, and what happened vnto them, they sayde hat at the entry thereof ther was a great Bull, which dyd efend the entry, and at the first encounter he stroke them with his hornes, and dorue them out of the caue, and this Bull was of so great and wonderfull bignesse and fierce|esse that the like hath not bene sene,  his hornes were  so great hardnesse that they semed to be stele,  all such

Knights as did not loue, at the hoore that they gaue the en|terprise, they felt so great heate  torment, that they were constrayned to returne back again, so y^t they could not come vnto the knowledge of the Quene, neyther vnto this day hath ther bene any that hath had so much prowesse to come vnto the knowledge of hir, although there haue come many Knights out of diuers and sundry countryes to proue this aduenture, and it is now a great time past since any enter|prise hath ben giuen, and yet all the people of this Country do liue in hope that their Quene shall be deliuered out of this inchantment, so that euer since the time of hir inchan|ting this Kingdome hath ben ruled by gouernours, and not one hether to hath borne, the name of King, but at such time as any doe enter into this ground, they are sworne to de|liuer the Kingdome vnto the quene Artidea, at such time as she is deliuered out of that inchaunted caue. At this present he y^t is gouernour of this country is a yong knight of great vertue  wisdome, whose name is Luziro, and diuers then be y^t be cunning in Art magicke, that haue told him y^t in the time of his gouernment the quene shall be set at liberty from the Inchantment of Artidon, so y^t they doe looke for hir deliuery daily. This is sir Knight that which I haue heard declared and spoken by ancient men, and here I do tell you of a truth that the kepers of that caue haue caused so great seare in all this country, that of long time there hath ben no Knight so hardy to giue the enterprise vnto the caue,  I doe not thinke him to be a wise man that will put himselfe to proue this aduenture, for that hether to ther hath not bell a Knight of so much prowes as to conquer the first keper,  it is to be beleeued, that the caue is not kept by that alone bull, but y^t ther is some other keeper as ill or worse then he.
The Knight of Cupid was glad and did very much re|ioyce at this good newes which the shepheard had told him of this aduenture,  giuing him great thanks for the same he said, that for any thing he would not let but giue the en ter prise thereto if the day were come. Whereat the shep heardes were greatlie amazed, and did request him a

that they might to leaue and giu ouer this determination, and not to put himselfe into such perill, for y^t by no meanes he could escape the death, or els to be very sore hurt. At this time theyr poore supper was ready, and set vpon the grene grasse wheras they sate downe to supper together,  when they had supped the Shepheards went and tooke their rests,  slept,  the Knight of Cupid did solitarily put himself a part, and sate downe vpon the grasse vnder a tre;  there passed that night with great desire to proue the entry of the caue,  thought the night a thousand yeere til that day was come.


How the Knight of Cupid entered into the dreadfull caue of Artidon, and of all that happened there, Chap. 5.
_SO the next day in the morning when the Sunne began to shew himselfe ouer all the earth, the worthy Knight of Cupid arose vp, and looked for the shepheards, and saw them where they lay all a long vppon the grene grasse and were all a slepe very soundly,  without all care, as those that were not troubled with any kind of sorrow for to disturbe them of their rest, and calling to remembrance the great number of nights y^t he had passed wholy without any slepe or taking any rest,  of his great ares and profound thoughts, that did not all onely bannish way all sleepe in y^e night, but also in y^e day time it brought im into exceding admiration, which did sore trouble his houghts,  caused him to lift vp his eyes to heauen  say.
Oh Fortune how little are we bound vnto the, all we whom thou hast brought into this world with dignitye nd honour, and caused vs to exercise and vse all military Knighthood, it had bene much better for vs, and with grea|er ease  quiet rest void of all care, to passe our times in  meane and a base estate, here in these grene and flouri|ing fieldes, whereas is all the quietnesse in the world:

And not with so much pleasure in the courts of Kings and Princes, whereas we doe see  make captiue our owne liber|ties, and venture our liues and honours euery houre,  a|gayne if it be not with losse of bloud and great perils, he is not worthy of honour nor to  beare the name of a Knight, but doth greatly defame the order of Knighthoode, wharas they slepe  passe the sweet nights with great quietnesse  receiue no infamie nor rebuke but doe comfort and reioyce themselues all night long with the peceable freshnes of the aire, wheras is all quietnesse of the wild beasts, the silence of the birds, the pittering noyse of the running of waters, y^e great freshnesse of the trees, the swet  odoriferous smels of all flowers, which I say is vnto the soule  hart a continu|all peace  concord,  in the breake of the day a new forme  mosicke, for to recreat themselues in their golden slepe, the swet noise and musicke of the birds, who doth with the flittering of their wings  notes, almost inuite a man to all delights, and afterward the golden bemes of the Sun, at all times when he doth shew himself, doth reioyce  recreat all humane harts, and all the rest of the day following is spent with great mirth  pastime, with sufferable heats, vnder y^e freshnesse of the grene tres,  when night commeth on the~, they altogether ioyne about the comfortable fire, whereas they haue a peaceable and friendly conuersation with great affection,  that which is most in this fortunate and happy estate, is, that fortune cannot much hurt them, for y^t in smal matters they do with great ease execute their anger, so that we are void of al these benefits, we I say y^t liue in this trou|blesome estate of militarie knighthood, for that the first day we be armed Knights, we begin to seeke the death for our selues, and life for others, we are alwayes be wrapt with great dangers and perils for the sauegard of our liues and honours, so that I know not what difference is be wixt our trauayles,  the traualies of them which are alwayes vpon the seas, tossed here and ther with great torments  troubles And if this life be common to all Knightes as in especiall it is vnto the sonnes of high and mightie Kings,

to whom and at what time Fortune will vse hir crueltye she doth not lacke some matter of occasion to execute hir wrath For I doe account that marriner to be vnwise, that knowing of the storme and tempest, will leaue his Port and ingulfe himselfe wilfullie into the seas. And it is not the wisest part of a man, especially of him that doth desire to liue with rest, to seeke highnesse and honour, and therby frequent himselfe where all daungers are apparaunt. And in saying these wordes he began to goe towardes the place wher the shepheards were,  at the noise that he made in his going, they did all awake out of their sound sleepe:  when they saw him they did all arise vp on foote, and did sa|lute him very curteously,  when they vnderstoode of him that hee would giue the enterprise to proue the entering into the caue, they all together did goe with him, and promised him that they would there remaine till such time as they did know what should become of him, and so they went all together towardes the caue, and when they came thether, the Knight of Cupid did take his leaue of the shepherds, and when he saw those wonderfull flames that proceeded out of the mouth of the caue, hee iugded that there must neds be many meruailous and daungerous ad|uentures within, and at the sight of that present perill his courage and fury did very much increase, and he commit|ted himselfe vnto God, beginning to put himselfe into the fire,  for that he was so true a seruaunt vnto Cupid, that merualious fire did not hurt him any thing at all, but found it true as the shepheards had told him. Then he pas|sed through the fire, and went forwards till he came into the caue, whereas no fire was, but yet it gaue so great a light and brightnesse, that he might see all that was within very playnlie, and he went towards a very narrow lane, which seemed to be cut out of that rock,  was so straight that thre Knights could not passe together through it, but with great difficultie:  ouer the lane it was couered with arthes very stronglie, like as it is in sellers. And as the Knight of Cupid went towards it, he straight waies heard

a great  wonderfull noise like vnto a Thunder bolt, which descendeth vnto the earth, throwen out of the region of the ayre,  it was that out of the inner parts of the caue there came towards him, alongst that narrow lane, a mighty great Bull, who seemed to fill all the lane with his bignesse, and according vnto the fury which he brought with him,  his long  sharp hornes, the could not choose but must neds be terrible to behold,  I know not how any humane hart could haue had so much strength  force, but that he must re|ceyue great feare  dread in seing so terrible a beast com|ming towards him,  especially in so narow a place as that was, wher he could not turne himself to the one side nor to the other, but of very force he must abide that terrible blow of the Bull, yet this valiant  worthy Knight whose heart was more harder then any Diamond, with a stout courage as one that made little account thereof, did abide the com|ming of that furious bull. So when the Bull came nigh him, he bare his head very low to strike him, but the Knight layd fast hold with both his hands vpon his sharp hornes,  here was a thing of great wonder done by the Knight, for that according vnto the fury and violence which the Bull brought with him, it was sufficient to ouerthrow a tower to the ground, but this mighty Knight which y^e great strength of his strong armes did stay his fury although he made the Knight to recoyle backwards foure paces, but firming su his feet  vsing his great strength, he gate againe the grou he lost, the Bull when he felt so great strength against him, began to roare so terribly that all the mountaynes semed to open thereat. And when the shepheards that were with|out did heare that terrible roaring, they were at a point to depart thence,  not to abide the comming of the Knight of Cupid, they receiued so great a feare. Then the Bull with a new fury  violence made the Knight of Cupid to recoyle backward again, in such sort that if he had not at that pinch vsed his mighty force  strength, he had ben cleane throwen out of the caue, but his strength did so much increase at that

present, that forcing the Bull therewith, he carried him be|fore him in that narrow lane,  the Bull being not able to make resistance against him, was carried perforce through the lane, till he came to a very faire  large court, which was all paued with coloured brickes, which cast a great light,  was founded vpon great  mighty pillers of marble, round about the court there were gallaries meruaylously wrought  very faire,  according to the excellent work y^t was ther, it gaue him to vnderstand that there was other then humane creatures at the making of it. Here in this court the Knight of Cupid  the fierce Bull, the one did car|ry the other sometimes forwards, somtimes backwards in this their wrastling, that it was wonderfull, eyther of them procuring all that euer he might to ouercome his aduersary. Then the Knight thought within himself that in that order he could little profit agaynst the Bull, neyther doe him any harme, but determined to let him loose  to assault him with his sword, which when he had done he did repent it very much, for that when the Bull was loose, he semed to be more terrible then he was before,  retyring backward to fetch his course, he ran against him with great fury  strength, that the Knight had inough to do to clere himselfe from his terrible  mightie blowes. And although he did strike him very strongly with his sword, yet he dyd the Bull no more harme then if he had beene made of steele and his sword of woode, and after that he had proued many times with his sword, and saw that it dyd not profit at all, but rather brought himselfe in great daunger, euery time that the Bull came against him he determined to tourne vnto his first contention, and to trauayle all that euer might ee to ouerthrow him to the ground. And so hee did, that when the Bull came against him, with his head low is strike him with his hornes, be layde fast holde vpon him, and a new began their wrastling, continuing a great while n this contention, the one forcing the other with all their strength and power they hadde, vp and downe the Court.

This conflict endured so long, that in the end the bull wax|ed somewhat weary, at which time the Knight when he per|ceiued it, he crossed his armes,  wrong the Bulls head on the one side,  thrust him forwards with so great strength that he ouerthrew him on his backe to the ground. Upon a sodaine the Bull being ouercome the Sunne was all dark|ned,  the heauens, in such sort that the court was as darke as it had bene at midnight, and vpon the same there was great thunderings and lightnings, as it seemed that al that mighty worke would sinke or be ouerthrowen, and sure it would haue bene a thing verie dreadfull vnto any other, that had not his hart so stout and couragious as the Knight of Cupid, but this did not indure long, for likewise vpon a sodaine this great tempests of lightning and thunder dyd end and vanish away, and the day turned to be very fayre and clere. At which time there appeared vnto the Knight of Cupid a new and straunge and vnlooked for daunger, which was, that in the time that the tempest did indure, this fierce bull which lay a long vpon the ground, his bow|els were opened in the middest all a long his belly, and straight way there came foorth a darke and thicke mist, the which did indure a while, till such time as by little and lit|tle it dyd consume away, and hee saw in the same mist in the middest of the court a blacke lumpe that after the mist was gone appeared to be a great and fearefull dragon, who shaking hir selfe did stretch out hir wings, which did couer a great part of that court likewise she stretched forth hir si|nued legges and pawes, and shewed hir sharpe clawes and opening hir deformed mouth, she shewed forth hir tuskes, which were like vnto Elephants teeth, and out of hir nose and eyes she threw forth great flames of fiere, accompanied with blacke and thicke smoake, which made hir seme the more horrible, and when she had streched forth hir selfe a great while, as one that awaked out of a sound slepe, she arose vpon hir feete and gaue terrible and great shrikes, that she semed to be some infernall monster, and straight wayes went towards the Knight,  according to hir gat

sercenesse and lightnesse, he had nede of a stout and coura|gious heart that would abide and withstand hir fury, but the sonne of Trebatio who was desperate with loue, did not alonely esteme a little this horrible and terrible Dragon, but this present danger which was agreable vnto his mis|fortune: and with a valiant courage, he dyd abide hir com|ming. And when the Dragon would haue caught him in hir deformed mouth, and haue fastned vpon his shoulders, hir cruell and sharp nayles, he put himselfe on the one side with great lightnesse, and hauing the Dragon on his right side, he stroke hir with all his strength a terrible blow vp|pon the head, that he thought verily therewith to haue par|ted it in the middest, but the sword dyd no more harme on hir, then if hee had stroke vpon a hard Diamond, and beeing very much amazed thereat, he said within himselfe, that all those things were infernall and fantasticall, but hee had not so soone made an ende of striking the blow, when as this horrible dragon returned vpon him, and hauing no tyme to cleere himselfe from hir, shee put hir strong legges vpon his shoulders, and clasped hir cruell nailes on his back, and gry|ped him with so great strength, that she had passed through all his bowells, if the force of his magicall and fine armour had not made defence against hir, and by reason that his ar|mour was made by that art, the hardnesse and sharpnesse of hir cruell nayles were not sufficient to pearce the~ through, yet notwithstanding this valiant Knight dyd feele himselfe very sore troubled, as well with the fier and smoke which shee threw from hir, as with the great strength wherewith shee dyd gripe him, and although he thrust at hir with the poynt of his sword vnder hir belly, yet he dyd hir no more harme then if he had stroke vppon a Rock in this sort the stout Knight had the worst of this contencion, and was put in great perill and daunger, but his noble and stout cou|rage could not suffer to see himselfe so embraced with that infernall beast wherefore letting his sword fall out of his hand, with his fist he strake hir such a blow vpon the head, with so great courage and strength that hee made all h

teth to chatter together the one with the other, and being therewith somewhat astonyed, she withdrew hir selfe from him, and hee then beeing at lybertye, and hauing more roome to profit himselfe with his strong  rygorous arme, hee straight way vppon the same with his close armed fist, which I may resemble vnto a Mase of yron, stroke the dra|gon the second blow in the same place wheras he had stroke the other, and what with the great fury wherewith it was stroke, and the amazement of the first blow, the scull of that monster which was as hard as flynt, was beaten  broken downe into the braynes, yet at this present the dragon was not slayne, but rather dyd seeme more horrible and diuellish then beefore, for beating of hir wyngs and rysing vp in the ayre, shee made a dreadfull noyse, and with hir terrible and long tayle she beate the pauement, in such sort that all the court and the galleries round about it did shake, the Knight was greatly amazed to se hir fiercenesse and infernall fu|ry, and stoode still to se what would come thereof, and by reason that all which the Dragon did was with the pangs of death, in a small tyme after she fell downe dead, and o a sodayne the floore dyd open and the Bull and the Dragon fell both in thereat and were consumed, and the earth shut vp againe, so that there remayned no mention of them. And when the Knight of Cupide saw all these straunge aduen|tures, he was wonderfully astonyed at them, as on that had seene very few of such lyke inchauntments, so he recouered his sword which he threw from him, and put it vp in his sheath, and looked round about, bee thinking himselfe what was best to doe, and as hee looked about him, he saw vpon a wal that was right before him vnder one of the galleries in that court, a thing which put him in great admiration which was, that he saw there portraied his owne figure and lykenesse, with the deuice of his armour, and the entering into the Caue, and all that happened in the contencion he had with the Bull and the Dragon, till such time as they were consumed into the earth, euery thing perticularly a it was, that he himselfe could not declare it so perfectly a

it dyd appeare there vppon the wall, and the Bull and the Dragon appered there so fierce and furious, as though they had bene a liue. And when hee had well perused all this, he sayde within himselfe, that the wisedome and knowledge of Artidon was great, and remembring the great passion and sorrow of loue which he passed and suffered, and the great dising and hatred which he found in hir whom he so en|tirely loued, he gaue a great sigh  sayde: Oh cruell  ty|rannous loue, there is no wisdome and vnderstanding able to refraine himselfe  leaue the, neither any strength suffi|cyent to make resistance against thee, so that I beleue thy power and strength is more in the wise and most ripest of wit, and strong of courage, much more then in any other ba|ler person: as the fire is most furious of force being made with strong  hard timber, but yet thou respectest no estate, neither one nor other, neither the strong nor feble person, they ought not to paint the with thy eyes shut, for so much as all they which do serue thee are blinde, and thou with thy shut eyes dost behold all theyr sorrowes and troubles, and giuest them their payment for theyr seruice. And in saying these words he went from that place, and on the other side hee saw a great  broad payre of stayres, very wel wrought, which went vp vnto the gallaries, and it semed to bee the way which hee should take, wherefore he ascended vp the stayres, and when hee came into the galleries hee saw that they were very broade, and well wrought with straunge worke,  thre of those galleries were on that side the court whereas he had the contention with the monsters, and on the other side toward a very fayre Orcharde, fresh and de|lectable, full of all sort of grene tres and sweet flowers, whereas hee heard a meruailous sweet harmony of many yrdes, which were in that Orchard, and on the other side of the Gallerie was there meruaylous great and straunge buyldinges, and in the same Gallerie there was a doore open for to enter into that worke, so the Knight of Cupide entered in, and came into a Qua|dran: which appeared very cleere, bryght, and fayre,

and on the one side thereof there was a doore, which semed to be shut on the inside, who had to keepe and gard the same a mighty great and dreadfull Gyant, with an yron Mase in his hand, who as soone as hee saw the Knight, with both his hands lift vp his Mase aboue his head, and dyd abide till such time as the Knight should come vnto him, with so ter|rible countenaunce, that any man would haue thought it great solly to haue autted im, and ouer the doore was written Letters to this effect.
When this doore shall be open, then shall the Quene Artidea be at lybertie, and the entrie heerein shall bee free vnto all people.
And when he had read it, he thought within himselfe that for to make an ende of that aduenture, he must nedes haue battayle with the Gyaunt. And so without any more tarry|ing, with his sword in his hand hee went towards him. When the Gyaunt saw him nigh, he discharged from a lost his great and mightie Mase, thinking to strike the Knight of Cupide on the head, but he who alwaies had in remem|e what was best for him to dooe, with a meruailous great lyghtnesse leapt on the one side in such sort, that the eat yron mase fell downe vpon the floore, and with the fu|ry wherwith it was stroke, it made all the pallace to shake: this ghtie blow was not so soone giuen, when that the worthie Knight threw a some at him and stroke him on the breast, and according vnto the great strength wherwith it was giuen, it had beene sufficient to haue passed through the Gyants body, although he was armed with strong yron, but his armour was made by such art, that it made the point of his sword to double and bow vnto the hilts, and made no signe therof in his armour. Then the Gyant lift vp his mase againe to strike him another blow but this valiant Knight seing the smal harme that he could doo him with his sword, determyned to assault him by some other meanes, and see|ing that the Gyant dyd discharge his blow he entered in so|close with him, that he was constrayned to fall downe on both his knees for to clere himselfe from the fury thereof,

and rising vp againe with great lightnesse, finding him|selfe nigh the Gyaunt, he threw his sword from him, and with both his handes layde fast holde in the middest of the Gyaunts Mase, and pulled at it with so great strength, that he pulled it out of his hands, and was very ioyfull for the winning thereof. But as soone as the Gyaunt had lost his mase, vpon a sodaine he vanished away that hee was neuer more sene, and the Knight of Cupide remayned all alone very much meruailing at such sodaine and straunge things as hee saw there, and when he perceiued that there was no more to doo but to open the doore, hee went to it and prooued to open it, but he could not mooue it neither on the one part nor on the other, although he put great strength to open the same,  seing that he colde not profit with his strength, he tooke the Gyants Mase in his hands and sayd: It dooth come all to one purpose to breake thee by force, as to open the by policie or art,  therewith hee stroke a mightie blow in the middest of the doore, that hee brok it all to small pe|ces, and vpon a sodane at the same time he heard a great and terrible noyse of Thunder, that the heauens semed to open therewith, and in all the Kingdome of Russia was heard that terrible noise, which caused all men to feare and wonder, for that the day was very fayre and clere,  could not imagine what should bee the occasion to mooue any such thing in the Region of the Ayre, and after that this great Thundering and noise was past, the Knight of Cupide saw that the entrie in at the doore was clere, and without any impediments, so he entered in thereat and came into ano|ther Quadran, which was meruailous bright  cleere onely by the vertue of precyous stones which were very big, set round about the wals, and in the middest of this Quadran, there was in manner of a stage, very straungele wrought and round about it steps like stayres for to go vp vpon, and vpon the same stage there was set in a chayre very richlie wrought, the Queene Artidea who was very fayre  roy|ally apparayled, who lened hir head vpon hir arme, and there was beeholding a Knight of a very good countenance

and disposition, who was all armed with guilt armour, and brodered with precious stones, kneeling vpon his knees be|fore hir, hauing his breast open, shewing vnto the Queene his bloody heart, and although his countenaunce dyd shew him to be dead, yet the wound and the blood was so fresh, as though at the same instant it had beene done. This Knight was the wyse Artidon, who willingly and with his owne handes dyd wound and open his breast, after that he had brought the Queene thether, at the houre that the Knight of Cupide entered into that Quadran and saw all this, the same houre was the inchauntment vndone, and the Queene was at lybertie, who when she lyft vp hir eyes and saw him, she straight waies vnderstood that that Knight had fi|nished that aduenture, and set hir at libertie, for the which being ioyfull, she arose from the place where she was set, and when the Knight of Cupide saw hir aryse, he went towardes h. and dyd salute hir very curteously, and she spake vnto him saying: O gentle Knight, wherewith can I gratifie you for this great benefit which by your mightie bountie and prowesse this day I haue receiued, in that I am at liberty and clere of this heauy and sorrowfull prison, in the which I haue ben so many yeres, dooing no other thing but liue in continuall sorrow and lamentation for the death of this Knight. Tell me I pray the who thou art, and in what estate doth all my Kingdome remaine, for that I be|leeue, by reason of the long tyme that I haue bene here, there is no memorie nor mencion of me.
Then the Knight of Cupid said, Lady, vnto god thou ough|test to surrender these thancks, and not to mee, for that he hath beene the principal dooer, and he it is that hath deliue|red thee out of this Inchantment, and that which I of my part haue done, it is sufficient satisfaction, for y^t I haue done it in the seruice of such a person as you are. And as touch|ing the rest which you doo aske of me, you shal vnderstand that I am a straunge Knight and was neuer in this coun|trie beefore it was within these foure dayes that I ente|red into it, notwithstanding in this small tyme I haue vn|derstood

by certaine shepheards which I left here without the caue, that in all your kingdome there is great memory of you, and that they doo looke for your retourne daylie, and since your first entrie into this Caue vntill this daye the kingdome hath beene in power of gouernours, and none hath beene called King. And beleue this of a certaintie, that your libertie will be vnto all them great ioye and de|lyght, and they will receyue you with no small honour.
The Quene was very glad and dyd reioyce to heare those words. And when she saw the excellent beauty of the Knight of Cupid, who had the beauer of his healme lift vp, she was greatly amazed thereat, and thought within hir selfe that she could not make him better satisfaction for that which he had done for hir, then to take him for hir husband. And thincking the tyme long to se hir selfe clere out of that place she sayde, that if he were desirous to know the truth of any thing of the wyse Artidon, that he which was kneeling on his knes vppon the Scaffolde was the same, and that he would giue him the true and perfect aunswere of all things that should be demaunded of him. The Knight of Cupide who was very glad thereof, went vnto the wyse Artidon, and sayd.
O gentle Knight and wyse Artidon, let now thy misfor|tune giue comfort vnto my sorrow, which thou doost know is very great, and how that it should bee vnto me a glory|ous death, that in opening of my breast, and shewing my heart vnto that cruell Lady, I might cause hir to wepe, and it were but one teare of pittie to haue compassyon of me.
Lykewyse thou doost well know the great misfortune of the Princesse Briana my Mother, and how the Prince Eeward my Father and my Lord. hir spowse was lost, and we could neuer heare any newes of him, and also my brother the Gentleman of the Sunne was lost being but an infant, and neuer yet could newes be heard of him, now heere I besire the that thou dost giue me some newes of them, or to tell me whether they be alyue or dead,

or whether I shall goe to seke them, for that whatsoeuer thou shalt tell mee, I shall hold it for a truth, and when thou hast satisfied mee of the truth heerof, then I will desire the to tell mee some newes of that which passeth in the court of King Oliuerio, and as for the Princesse Oliuia my mistresse, I know well that I doo not deserue to know any thing of hir. And when hee had made an end of saying these words, straight wayes the wyse man dyd open his eyes,  dyd looke vpon the Knight of Cupide, and when he had wel beholden him, he answered and sayde: Worthie Knight of Cupide, thou oughtest to haue thy selfe in great estimation, for that thou hast finished and made an ende of this aduenture, the which many could not haue done, although they were both mightie and worthie Knights that haue come hether, and giuen the enterprise of the same, although they haue done other wonderfull and great dedes of armes, for the great compassion which thou hast hadde of my death I giue the thanks therefore, and in reward of the same I will tel the straunge and secret things, which shall giue the great con|tentment, touching that which thou hast demanded of me of the Prince Edward,  of thy brother. And in saying these wordes he tolde him perticularly all the whole Historie of the great Emperour Trebatio, from the first time that he was in loue with the Princesse Briana, till such time as he went out of the Castle of Lindaraza, by the high prowesse of the Knight of the Sunne,  how he went in his company into Hungaria, and how hee carryed the Princesse into his Em|pre of Grecia. So likewise he tolde him how that mightie and valiaunt Knight who tooke the Emperour Trebatio his Father out of the inchanted Castell, was the Knight of the Sunne, of whom he was succoured, being at the poynt of death in the Iland of Candramarte, and how it was that Gentleman of the Sunne his brother, who beeing a yong in|tant was lost at the Monestarie of the Riuer, who at this present is a Pagan and dooth lyue in the law of the Gen|tiles, for that he hath bene brought vp amongst Pagans, and dooth not know whose sonne he is, although hee hath

ben in Hungaria, in the court of his grandfather, the King Tiberio  hath done so high  mighty deeds of Knighthood, as euer hath ben seene or heard of. When the Knight of Cu|pid heard al this, he receyued very great content  was very glad that the long  heauy sorrow of the Princesse his mo|ther was remedyed, the which did giue hir ally no small sorrow  griefe. And being in this delight the wise man pro|ceded forwards in his talke and sayd.
Touching the newes that thou dost aske of me of the Court of the King Oliuerio, I giue thee to vnderstand that all which at this present they doe intreat of there, is, that y^e Prince of Lusitania is very much in loue with the Princesse Oliuia, and hath demaunded hir of the King hir Father for spouse,  the King hath promised him the graunt therof, and what shall happen therof I cannot ell, neyther what the Princesse Oliuia doth pretend therin, for that to me there is not graunted so much liberty as to discouer or declare the secrets of harts, neyther of that which hath passed at this present. And now pardon me for that I cannot aunswere the vnto any other thing whatsoeuer thou wilt demaund of me. And in saying these words the wise Artidon did close vp his eyes,  remayned dead as before.
But when the Knight of Cupid vnderstood what he sayde touching the Princesse Oliuia, his bloud wared cold in his bo|dy,  all the pleasure which before he receiued, was now tur|ned into heauinesse,  hauing no power to dissemble any lon|ger, he cast vp his eyes vnto the heauens and vttered words of great lamentation, and with so terrible sighinges and complayntes, that the Quene Artidea, who was behol|ding him, hadde great compassion of his sorrow. And beeing in this griefe, he heard a great noyse of people which were comming vp the stayres into the Gallerye: And looking what it should be, he saw the Shepheards that remayned without the caue abiding his successe, who when they perceyued that hee tarried so long, and came r soorth, and agayne hearing the great noyse of the bat|tayle

of the Bull, as also when the Dragon was ingendered, they were greatly amazed, whervpon two of them went to carry these newes vnto the Prince Luziro, who was in a citie but a mile from that place. And in the meane time that these two Shepheards were declaring vnto the Prince all that they heard, after that the Knight had entred into the caue, at that instant was heard that great  terrible thun|dering which was made when the Knight of Cupid brake the doore of the inchaunted Quadran, with the yron male of the Giant, at which time the Quene was set at liberty, which when the Prince  all his Knights heard that terri|ble  wonderfull noyse, they all suspected that that Knight had broke vp  vndone that Inchauntment and straunge ad|uenture of the caue, for that it was told him by many wise men, that in his time the Quene should be discharged  set at liberty. So strayght way the Prince tooke his horse,  be|ing accompanyed with many noble Knights he came vnto the cae, and when he came thether he saw that the letters that were wont to be there were altered,  other letters conteyning these words in their place.
This aduenture was finished by the Knight of Cupid, who did set at liberty the Quene Artidea, and in remem|braunce therof ther doth remaine within the wise Artidon, of whom all those that are touched with amorous passions, may passe the flames of fire without any impediment, and know of him all that euer they will aske.
When the Prince and all those that came with him had read that writing, they were meruaylous glad and ioy|ful, and thought long to see the Queene, and the Knight that had set hir at liberty. And without any more tarrying they entered in through the flames of fire, and for that the most part of them were young men  louers, they passed in quiet without any  of the fire, and went forwardes on till they came into the court,  there they did all of them behold the wll, wheron was portrayed the Knight of Cu|pid, making his battayles with the Bull, Dragon, Gyant,

which was wonderfull to be sene, as well for the flercenes and straungenes of the battailes, as for the great subtitye and art that was in the setting forth of the story vpon the wall. After that they had well perused the same, they went forwards vp the stayres and came into the galleries. This was the noyse that the queene  the Knight of Cupid heard,  tarrying to se what it should be, the Prince of Luziro, ac|companied with all his Knights entered into the quadran,  when they saw the queene, whom the Knight of Cupid had by the hand they were greatly amazed to see hir so faire  beautifull,  when they came vnto hir, they asked hir hands to kisse them,  told hir who they were. When the Queene vnderstood he was the Prince Luziro, who was gouernour of the realme in hir absence, she was very glad and ioyfull, and intertayned him with a very good grace, and asked of him how he did know that the aduenture was furnished, be|cause he came so quicklie thether. And then he told vnto hir what the shepheards had declared to him, and of the great noise of thunder which they heard, he affirmed that to be the occasion that they came thether so soone, and after that the Prince had talked with the queene, he turned vnto the Knight and did imbrace him, receiuing him with wordes of great curtesie  friendship, who was like wise greatly astonied at his mightie  faire countenaunce, which was agreable vn|to his great curtesie  courage shewed in that aduenture,  being very desirous to know who y^t stout  valiant Knight should be, they requested the queene to demaund it of him,  for that the Quene heard that which the wise Artidon had said vnto him, she strayght waies declared that he was the Emperours son of Greece,  wondering very much thereat, they could not but looke  behold him with great affection.
So after that among them ther had, passed many cur|tous wordes, the Prince Luziro and all the rest that came with him, dyd indeauour themselues to beholde the straunge thinges of that inchaunted Quadran. And when they saw the wise. Artidon with his breast open

in such sort that they might discouer his hart, they wer mo|ued  had great compassion on him,  did very much extoll  prayse his wisdome  bounty, in that he would rather dye then profite himselfe of the Quene agaynst hyr will. And when they had viewed all things that was to be sene, they went forth of that inchaunted Quadran,  descended into the fayre  broad court,  returned a new and beheld that time|rous battayle which was ther figured,  would not beleue that in any humane Knight there should be so much force  strength, as was shewed to be vsed in those battayles. So that after they had wel debated the matter touching y^e vali|antnesse of that worthy knight, they all together went forth of the caue,  went vnto the city, wheras that fayre Quene was receyned with great honour  admiration of all peo|ple,  within a few dayes after the Quene and the Prince Luziro were made sure together,  at theyr Marriage there was made great feasts  triumphs. And here the historye doth leaue them at this present, for to tell you of two wor|thy  estemed Princes Brandizell and Clauerindo, whom we left in the court of the King of Polonia.


How the two Princes Brandizell and Clauerindo departed from the Kingdome of Polonia, and came into the Kingdome of Fraunce, and of all the rest that happened. Chap. 6.
_NOw we must call to remembraunce those two valiaunt Princes Brandizell and Claue|rindo, whom we left in the Kingdome of Polonia, wheras the Prince Brandizel was well beloued of the Princesse Clarinea, af|ter that he had deliuered hir out of the pow|er of the Giant. Now the the history sayth that after these two Princes had soiourned ther certaine dayes, they asked lisence of the King to depart, for that they had great desire to

goe  seeke out their friend the Knight of the Sun, without whom they could not bee in quiet one houre. Likewise the Prince Clauerindo had great desire to goe and know his pa|rents, and although that the King was very sorrowfull for their departure, yet he could not deny them, but granted the~ leaue,  did offer vnto them very many  rich gifts, but the two Princes would receiue nothing of him. So one day bee|fore they should depart, the Prince Brandizel had opportuni|tie to talke with the Princesse, and in the end of great com|munication that passed betwixt them of loue, he tooke his leue of hir,  promised hyr to returne againe into that Countrie with as much speed as might be. Then these two Princes de|parted,  in their companie Armineo, vnckle vnto the Prince, and went towards the sea,  being entred into their shippe, they began to nauigate towards the Kingdome of Fraunce,  that coast bare out from the Ocean sea towards the Sep|tentrion, which was the occasion that they trauailed fiftene or sixteene dayes, without happening vnto them any thing worth the telling, till the seuenteenth day they ariued in a very faire and pleasaunt Port of Normandie, which was vn|to them all their great ioy and pleasure, but in especiall vn|to Armineo, for that knowing the Countrye hee wept with great ioy, for that hee was returned againe into it,  there they heard newes of Oristeo,  of the Quene Olindia, who were at that present in the famous Citie of Paris, and were very sad  sorrowfull, for that they could neuer heare any newes of theyr sonne the Prince Clauerindo, nor of his vnkle Armineo. Then they accounted together among them selues what was best to be done, and in the end of many de|bates they thought it best and did conclude, that before they went to Paris, or gaue the King to vnderstand any thing of their arriuall they would goe and proue the aduentures in that Kingdome, and atchieuing some of them, it might be the occasion that they should be knowen with more .
nd according therevnto they prepared all thiinges,

and for the space of thre noneths they went through all the countries,  did many  wonderfull dedes of armes, by the which they got so great fame, that they had no other talke in all the Kingdome, but of the two Knights with Flower de Luces, for that either of them had for his deuise a Flower de Luce,  for that the King Oristeo was informed many times of the great Knighthood of these two Knights, he had much desire to see  know them, that he might doe them honour. So after that these two Princes had in this time trauailed all the whole land, they concluded betwixt them to goe vn|to Paris  ther first before they made themselues to be know|en vnto the King, to maintaine a iust for the space of two moneths,  to put for the price therof a very faire tent, which was giuen them by the wise Lirgandeo that was so strange and rich, that the like was not to be found. Now when they came vnto the Citie they straight way went vnto the Tyl yeard, which was right before the Kings pallace,  ther they commaunded their rich Tent to be armed,  sent an Embas|sage vnto y^ King Oristeo giuing him to vnderstand of their comming,  crauing pardon for that they did not their duty in going to kisse his handes, till such time as those iustes which they had ordained were finished. Whe~ the King heard thereof, he was very glad, and reioyced, as one that hadde great desire to know so good Knightes as they were, and a|gayne to see some of theyr great bounty and valiauntnesse, which hath bene tolde him. And there with he retourned them thankes for their Embassage, and sent them word that he receiued great pleasure, that such Knightes as they were come vnto his Court, and if it were so that they had nede or lacke any thing, he would commaund them to he furnished of all necessaries. To conclude, for that this Histo|rye cannot song remaine herein, for that which is to be spo|ken of the Gran Trebatio  his Sonnes, wholie I doe passe ouer all the wonderfull dedes of these two Princes, but yet they say that in the space of two monethes these two Prin|ces did maintayne theyr iust, that there was not in all

Fraunce a Knight of estimacion  valure, but was euerthro|wen by these Princes in the presence of the King  Quene, who were daily at the windowes to behold them,  thought that in the world could not be two Knights of more force  strength But the King was somewhat sorrowfull in himself, and thought it a great dishonour to his court, for that there was not one Knight of valure, but all were ouerthromen by the other, but this sorrow  griefe endured but a while, for that the last day of the iusts the Prince Clauerindo dyd make himselfe knowen, as in the chapter following shall be told you.


 How the two Princes Brandizell and Clauerindo being in the Citie of Paris, there came thether a Giant called Bran|dafuel, with whom the Prince Clauerindo had a verye strong and furious battayle. Chap. 7.
_THE great fame which these two Princes gate in the iusts that they did maintaine in the Citie of Paris, was such, that not on|ly the Knights of the kingdome, but also di|uers Knightes of other prouinces  coun|tries dyd come to proue themselues with them, and as it is a common thing the fame,  in especiall of such not able iusts, doe flie abroad into all parts. It happened at that time ther dwelt in a litle Iland in y^e Ocean sea, nere vnto Normadie, a Gyant called Brandafuriel, of a very great stature  deformed, with whom the King Oristeo was glad to hold friendship  peace, for the great damage and harme which he did vpon the sea at all times when it pleased him. And for that this Iland was compassed with high  mightye Rockes, which made it so strong, that all his power wer not sufficient for to doe him anye harme, he beeing within,

when the fame of these two Knights which were in Paris, came vnto the Gyants eares, and of the rich Tent that was prepared for the prise of this Iust, it strayght wayes gaue him a desire to goe thether, as one that was certaine that ten such Knights as they were, were not sufficient to defend the Tent but that by his prowesse he must bring it away And to execute his determination, he strayght way departed from the citie of Paris,  caryed in his company to the number of ten Knights: and came thether one day before that the two moneths of the Iusts did end, wheras the two Princes were doing of meruailous deedes of armes. And as the great place was full of Knights, as well straungers, as those naturally borne in that Kingdome: at which time the great  furious Gyaunt entred in amongst them, bidding them to make him way, with a loud  terible voice. And when they saw him so great  ill fauored, they al feared him,  made him a large  brode way, that he might passe forwards. And when the Ci|aunt saw the rich Tent where it was, hee went towards it and did behold it with great admiration, and it  on|to him to be very rich and straunge: and after  he ad satisfied himselfe with the sight thereof, hee said: which bee the Knights which doth defende this Tent. The Prince Clauerindo, who was nighest vnto him sayd: I am hee that doth defend it, with an other Knight my companion there|fore say what thy pleasure is. That which I will say said the Gyant, is, That where you are but two Knights for to defend it, I would you were twentie together. For win|ning of it it will be vnto me more honor to win it of twen|tie, then of two alone Knights. But seing that you are no more, come on let vs goe vnto the battayle: and come both of you against me. For that with one alone blow I will hoyse you both out of your saddles, the one of you with my lace an for other I will take him vnder my arme. The Prince Clanerindo was very much offended and an|gry at  pride of the Gyaunt  answered him saying. It is alwaies the custome of you Giants, to abound in to h

arogancie and pride, which maketh me not verie much to maruaile, of any thing that thou hast saide. Therefore take vnto the thy speare, and I alone will defend the tent from thee. And if thou dost ouerthrow mee from my horse, the Tent shall be thine, without any deniall of mee or my com|panion. The Gyaunt when hee saw him-selfe so little este|med of one Knight, he was so full of fury and wrath, that he could not refraine his yre, but drew out a mighty great and broud fauchon which was hanging at his girdell, and went to strike the Prince Clauerindo vppon the healme, thincking there-with to cleaue him downe vnto the wast. But the Prince who was a very stout and pollitike Knight, and in many things dyd resemble his friend the Knight of the Sunne, before that the Faulchin could execute the Gyaunts determination, hee gaue a great leap with his horse on the one side, that the Gyaunt lost his blow, and it was sticke in vaine. And by reason that the blow descended right downe, hee stroke his owne horse vpon the head, that he cloue it in two peeces and hee fell downe dead to the ground with his maister so that the Gyant could not rise vp againe without great paine and griefe, for that the horse in his fall caught the Gyaunts leg vnder him. The King and all that dyd be|hold them, fell in a laughter, and had great pleasure in that which the Gyant had done: Although his comming thether was a great griefe vnto manie. For according vnto the great fame which he had in those parts, they thought verely that the two Knights could not haue sufficient force and might for to defend the Tent, but that hee would win it and carrie it away. When the Gyaunt saw himselfe without a horse, with great yre hee arose vp and went towardes the Prince who with a trice leaped from his horse back for that hee would haue no aduantage of him,  drew out his sword and did abide his comming: so that beetwixt the~ there began  very angry and well foughten battaile, striking on euery e, that it was strange  wonderful to beehold. The prince Clauerindo was mighty of person  well proportioned, light and strong, beesides all this, hee had his amonr made and

tempered by art magicke, which was giuen him by the wise Lirgandeo, of the which he was sure that whatsoeuer blow his aduersary dyd fasten vppon him, it should not hurt him, which was the occasion that although the Gyaunt were of much more force, yet he should maintayne himselfe verie wel against him and make him to abate his great arrogan|sie and pride. And by reason that the Gyant was bigge and heauy, the Prince did strike him at all times at his pleasure, and many times he did cut his armour and flesh, whereat issued out great abundance of blood.
The King and all those that did beholde the battaile, greatly maruailed at the prowesse of that Knight, but a|boue all, his vnckle Armineo, was very glad and ioyfull, that he made his partie so good in the battaile,  said with|in himselfe, that it he dyd perseuer and bring it vnto a good ende, that with great honour the Prince might discouer him selfe vnto his Parents: and dyd pray to God with all his hart to aide and help him in that battaile, for that it conti|newed still very dangerous and full of perill. For that thi great and furious Gyaunt when he saw that his Fauchon could not enter, nor deminish the armour of his aduersarie Hee dyd procure all that euer he could for to strike him vp|pon the healme to astonish him, for that hee neuer chansed to strike him vppon the Healme, but that hee made him some|times to bow his knes to the ground, and other times to stoope with his hand to keepe himselfe from falling, in such sort that the battaile was in ballance very doubtfull, for more then an houre, that there was knowen no vauntage betwixt them, but onely that the Gyant was wounded, and the Prince not.
It was a great incouraging vnto the prince Clauerindo, to se himselfe in presence of his Parentes, and hoped that very shortly he would giue them to vnderstand thereof. And this was the occasion that made him to bee the more fury|ous against his enimie. The Gyant when he saw himselfe wounded, and all the ground be sprinckled with his blood, he greatly wondred at the strength and resistance of his ene|mie:

and finding all things cleane contrary vnto his expec|tation before hee began the battell, h was almost ashamed, yet he beleued that the state of his victorie dyd remaine onely in the striking of one full blow vpon the Helme of his aduersary. And therewith hee tooke his great Fauchon in both his hands, and went towards y^ prince, making a show as though hee should strike him vpon the heade, whereat the Prince stooped on the one side, and the Gyaunt dyd stay the striking of his blow, till afterward vnaduisedly at his plea|sure, he stroke him vpon the Inchanted Healme, that it made all them that looked on, to maruaile how he could sustaine or suffer such wonderfull fury, for that it was sufficient to haue cloue a great rock asunder, but by reason of the ver|tue of his armour, made by that wyse Lyrgandeo for such necessities, that the Prince receiued no damage of that fu|rious blow: but by the great strength wherewith it was giuen, hee thought verely all his skull had bene broken to peces, and therewith he bowed his knes to the ground, remayning for a good space all astonied, that he could not arise vp.
When the furious Gyant saw him in that trance, he tur|ned againe and lift vp his mightie Fauchon and stroke him an other blow in the verie same place, and by reason that with the other blow his fauchon was crased with the force and strength of the second blow, it brake in thre peces, in such sort, that there remayned in his hands but onely the hilt, which was the occasion that the blow dyd no harme, otherwise it had cost him his lyfe, and with the noyse there|of he came vnto himselfe, and arose vp somewhat amazed, and with the furie of that great blow, hee dyd not see that the Gyaunt was without a Sword, but entred in with him in a great rage, and stroke him such an ouerthwrat blow vpon the thigh, that he cut his armour and flesh vnto the hard bone: of the which the Gyaunt felt himselfe verie euill.
The Gyant seing himselfe without wepon, he wold haue entred in with his enimy, to haue caught him in his armes.

but the Prince vnderstanding his pretence, recoyling back threw a foyne at him, which chaunced on his beauer which was broken, and thrust him thorough and through the head, wherewith this firce and vglie Brandafuriell fell downe dead to the ground, it was vnto all them that dyd beholds what passed, a great admyration and wonder, when they saw so sterce and mighty a Gyaunt, who in all those parts was greatly dreaded  feared, in so short space ouerthrowen and slayne, by one onely Knight, and for that the King could not away with him for certayne angers and griefes which continually he dyd vnto him, hee was very glad and receiued great ioy for his death, and thought long to know the Knight who had done that valyaunt and worthie deede, being certified within himselfe, that there was not a Knight in all the world lyke vnto him in courage and strength.
When the Prince Clauerindo saw himselfe cleere of that monstrous Gyant, he lifted vp his eyes to heauen and gaue great thankes vnto the almightie God, and put his sword into his sheath, and went towardes the Prince Brandizell Armineo his vnckle, who receiued him with great plea|sure and ioye, seing the honour  prayse which hee had won in that place, and said amongst themselues that it was not then time to kepe them any longer vnknowen, but great reason to discouer themselues. And therewith they all thre together went towards the place wheras the King and the Queene were, accompanied with all the principall Knights of the Court, and when they came beefore them, without ta|king of their healme, they dyd their duetie and reuerence, the King receiued them verie gladlie, and reioyced much with them. Them Armineo beegan to speake and saide.
Most mightie King, you shall vnderstand that these Knights are come from straunge Countries vnto this thy court, not so much to get honour here amongst thy Knights as to giue the certaine newes, at the which thou wilt re|ceiue great ioy and contentment, which are concerning thy sonne the Prince Clauerindo, who many yeeres past was lost, beeing carried away by a great rouer from his Coun|trie,

who at this present is a liue and doth very well, and is waxed such a Knight, that in the whole world you haue very few lyke vnto him, and in company with him is his vnckle Armineo, with no small desire to come and se thee, and euer since they were taken by that Rouer, they haue bene alwaies together, and as we doo vnderstand they wil not be long from hence.
The King when he heard these ioyfull newes, with a loude voyce sayde: Oh mighty God, is it possible that my Sonne Clauerindo and my Brother Armineo be aliue, and that there hath bene in my court who hath seene them, and neuer tould me till now, and so long time past. And in say|ing these words he turned vnto Armineo and said: Gentle Knight, seing that you haue brought me so ioyfull newes, I pray you also tell me where you dyd leaue them, that I may send to seke them, so shall I haue my ioye wholy ful|filled. It shall not nede that your highnes doo send to seke them said Armineo, for that they are within the Kingdome of Fraunce, and will be here very shortly. When Armi|neo had sayde these words, the King was in a great doubt whether this which the Knight had told him was true, and whether he spake it in manner of mockage. The Quene who was present when she heard these words, thought it a thing impossible to be true. Then the King arose vp from the place whereas he sat, and went vnto Armineo, and cost his armes about his neck, saying: O gentle Knight, tell me if this be true which thou hast sayde, or whether thou boost it to mocke with me, for that my sad and sorrowfull hart cannot beeleue this ioyfull newes to be of truth.
Then Armineo sayd. I will not tell any thing vnto your highnesse but that which is of truth, and for that you shall be put in greater admiration vnderstand that he which slew in your presence that vgly and monstrous Gyaunt Brandafuriell, is the Prince Clauerindo your Sonne, and the other Knight his companyon is the Prince of Persia, and I am thy Brother Armineo. And in saying these words they all thre pulled of theyr Healmes, and strayght wayes the

King and the Quene did know Armineo, and although the Prince was lost in his tender age, yet in the proportion of his face they did very well remember him, at which words with a sodaine and vnlooked for ioy, they ran vnto him and clasped their armes about him, and remained a great while embraced together, and could not speake one word with the great ioy and pleasure which they receiued. So in the end when that their harls and armes had contented themselues with that louing and ioyfull meting, they fel into commu|nication, wheras betwixt the~ ther passed a great discourse of their liues, whereby the King and the Quene was fully satisfied of all that the Prince Clauerindo and Armineo had passed, after such time as they were taken prisoners by the power of that great rouer Mambriniano. So when the king and the Quene heard of the great misfortunes  traualles that their son had passed,  was now in their presence ac|companied with that mightie Prince Brandizel, with whom hee was brought vp, there was no ioy that might be compa|red vnto theirs, and they gaue great thanks vnto God, for such his mercifull benefits shewed vpon them. When these newes was published abroade, I am not here able to de|clare the general ioy  pleasure which was made, not alone in the great Citie of Paris, but in all the kingdome ther was great and solempne feasts made, the which endured a long while. And for that the Historie hath verie much to tell of other Knights, at this present it doth leaue to speake any more of them, and returneth vnto the Knight of the Sunne whom we left prisoners in the court of King Tiberio.


How the Knight of the Sunne escaped out of the pri|son where hee was kept, and perforce departed from the Court of the King Tiberio. Chap. 8.
THe Historie sheweth that the Knight of the Sunne was thirty daies prisoner in the tower wheras we left him, at the great Citie of Ratisbona, in which time the king Ti|berio

dyd neuer determine what should be done-touching the death of the Troyan Earle, but was rather in a great doubt, not knowing what to conclude therein, for that on the one side the wife and children of the Earle, and all his parents and kinsefolkes, who were verie manie, and of the principallest of the Court, dyd euery daye and houre importunate him for to doo iustice vpon the Knight, and on the other part, considering the great valure and deserr, and the soueraigne excellencie that seemed to bee in him, he could not consent in his hart that such a Knight as he was should dye, although his offence had bene farre greater then his was, and as the king remained in this doubt, the Knight of the Sunne was no lesse perplexed, seing himselfe so long time in prison,  that the King would not determine what his will was therein. Likewise the same time Florinaldus was prisoner in another tower, vnto whom the payne and trouble of his imprisonment was not so much griefe, as his desire was earnest to be reuenged on the Knight of the Sunne, in especiall for the shame which he receiued at his handes beefore his Lady Albamira, as much as for the death of the Troyan Earle, and for that he was a vallaunt Knight, he could not perswade himselfe that the Knight of the Sunne should haue anie vauntage of him, if hee ente|red battaile with him by the sword, and thought within himselfe that by no other meanes hee could make satisfacti|on of his honour, but to defie him to mortall battayle for the death of the Earle his brother, and to demand of the King lisence for the same, and as hee determined, hee put it in execution, and called vnto him a Squier of his, and sent him vnto the Knight of the Sunne, for to tell him that it was not vnknowen what words dyd passe beetwixt them, and how that he had slaine the Troyan Earle his brother, o that vpon the same occasion he dyd defie and challenge him to mortall battayle, and if it were so that he ac|cepted battayle, hee for his part would procure lysence of the King for the same. So the uyer went with his message, and declared it vnto the Knight of the Sunne,

who was verie glad and ioyfull thereof, not for any good will  he had to make battayle with Florinaldus, for that he had no desire to dishonour or shame him, but the chiefest occasion of his ioye was, to recouer his horse and armour, wherewith to defende himselfe, and not to suffer himselfe to bee taken and carried againe vnto prison. And there with he saide vnto the squyer, that he should tell his Lord that he was very sorrie for the death of his Brother, and that he dyd well know that hee was in the fault of all that passed, to that neuerthelesse seeing he demaunded the battayle, he could doo no otherwise but make his defence, and so hee pro|mised to accept the battaile, as far foorth as the King wold giue them lysence. Then the Squyer retourned with this answere vnto his Lord, who when he heard the meeknesse of the Knight of the Sunne, his stoute courage dyd the more increase, and sent strayght way vnto the King a certayne Knight of his part for to aske lisence, that he  the Knight of the Sunne myght enter battayle about the death of the Earle, affirming that it was his request against the Knight of the Sunne.
Now you shall vnderstand that it was the vse and cu|stome of that Country, that the Brother or any other vnto the fourth degree of the kindred, might reuenge the death of his brother or any other kinseman, of him whatsoeuer he were that committed the murther, and the law beeing such, the King could doo no lesse but giue lysence vnto all that which Florinaldus did request. When Florinaldus dyd vnder|stand the same, hee was well content, and the next day fol|lowing the battayle was appoynted to bee held in the mid|dest of the great court. The day being come, the King sent vnto the Knight of the Sun his sword, and when the houre approched that they should make theyr battayle, the King commaunded 500 Knights, and as many more foote me to  and keep Florinaldus and the Knight of the Sunne, that they might hae the field in quyet and safetie.
And beesides all this they had all the principals and Knights of the Court to accompany them, so that they went out of

the prison wheras they were with great hnour. And when they came into the place, the King and all the rest of the no|bles were at the windowes, and the people in other places wheras they might best se the battaile. Incontinentlye all those which did beare them company, at the commandement of the King did a part themselues from the two Knights,  were appointed for Iudges the Duke of Austria,  the Earle of Denmarke, who were the best esteemed in all the Court, did deuide the space betwixt the two Knights,  put each of them in his place. When the Knight of the Sunne saw him|selfe at liberty, he sayd vnto himselfe: Oh mighty Emperour Trebatio, how maist thou blame me of forgetfulnes towards thy maiestie, for that I haue not performed the vow which I promised the, to see thee straight after thy comming into Grecia the Gods do know how much I haue desired it, not|withstanding if it fortune this day, my purpose is to se the very shortly. And in saying these words the Trumpet sound|ed vnto the battayle,  the gallant  valiaunt Knight Flo|rinaldus did strike his furious horse with the spurs,  made towards the Knight of the Sunne, for his courage  furious force was such at that time that it seemed fortune could not be contrary vnto him in any wise. Likewise the strong  mightie Greeke came forth to meete him, with so great fu|rye, that in the running of his horse, the ground semed to tremble whereas hee went, and in the middest of their course they ioyned together with theyr Speares, and Flo|rinaldus brake his great Speare vppon the fine armour of the Knight of the Sunne, in such sort that he shieue|red it in a thousand peeces, which flew into the ayre, but this strong and stout Knight remayned firme in his Sad|dle, and made his encounter with Florinaldus, striking him on the breast with so great power and strength, that he ouerthrew him and his horse to the ground one vppon another, in such for that his horse fell vpon him, that he could not arise by any meanes, whereby this gallaunt and  Knight was very ill intreated, and lay along vpon

the ground as though he had bene dead, wherfore the King and all they that did behold the battayle were much ama|zed at the great power and force of the knight of the Sunne, saying one to another that he hadde not his like in all the world.
Strayght way there was heard in the great place many shrikes and cryings, and looking what they should be, they saw it was the kinsefolkes of Florinaldus, who thought that he had bene slaine, and beganne to lament his death, and the death of the Earle. When the knight of the Sunne saw Florinaldus did not rise vp agayne, he went vnto the Iudges and demaunded of them if there were a|ny more to be done to clere himselfe from that enterprise To whom the Iudges aunswered, that touching the bat|tayle there was nothing else to bee done, and as for any other thing, they did not know the Kinges pleasure. In the meane time the King was very sorrowfull, and thought surely that Florinaldus had bene dead, wherfore he called his chamberlaine and commaunded him to goe and charge the Knight of the Sunne to reourne agayne into the pri|son, and that the gardes should beare him company till he came to the Tower, where he should remaine as pri|soner. But when the Knight had done this message vnto the Knight of the Sunne, he went to the windowes whereas the King was, and with a loude voyce he sayde.
In the Courtes of high and mighty Kings they ought not to intreate a trauailing Knight in this sort as you doe me, for if I slew the Troyan Earle, it was with my sword in my hand, defending my selfe like a Knight, from them which sought my death, and for that I doe not deserue any punishment, neyther was there any reason why I should be so long in prison. But now seing you doe commaund me to returne agayne vnto prison, let euery one defend and kepe himselfe from me as well as he can, for that I do pretend to kepe my libertie. And in saying these wordes

he drew out his Sword, and set Spurres vnto his Horse, and pressed among the thickest of the garde, which hadde compassed him about, and with the great fury that he had, hee made way through the thickest, ouerthrowing some with his Sword,  other some with his horse. The King strayght waies perceiued the pretence of the Knight,  being very an|gry, with a loud voise commaunded the Knights of the gard and the foote men for to take him. And at the commaunde|ment of the King, the Knights of the gard, resorted vnto the place wheras the Knight of the Sunne was,  in great num|ber they put themselues before him with their swordes in their hands,  ouer laded him with very many blowes,  al|though the Knights were many, yet in a short time he made them to recoyle, and to giue him way, flourishing with his Sword in his furious hand, about him, on the one side  on the other, in such sort that he neuer stroke blow but that he slew or ouerthrew a Knight.
The slaughter that he made among them was such, and in so great number, that although the knightes and all the foote men dyd the best they could to take him, yet in spight of them all, this furious knight made way before him, and went from amongst them out the place. And chauncing into a narrow streat, he set spurres to his horse and made him runne with great swiftnesse, till such time as he was out of the Citie in the fielde. The slaughter which he made amongest them, and the great feare which they receiued, was such, that there was not one so hardy that durst follow after him, but to content the King they custered a great number together, and followed him through the streate a trotting pase, and although they went a great number together, yet they which wer formost stayed their horse brides, being vnwilling to ouertake that furious knight, so that the knight of the Sunne had time to a part himselfe a great way from the Citie, and chan|ced vnto a way which brought him vnto the riuer Danubia,





and trauailed along by it with all the spede he might, for that if the people of the King should follow him, they should not ouertake him, for that he had no desire to haue battaile with the Knights of King Tiberio, as well for that he was very weary, as that hee was vnwilling to doe any more harme then he had done,  so he trauailed all the rest of that day till it was night,  because he knew not the Countrie, he determined to stay and rest himselfe in a very fayre and greene forrest, which was betwixt the riuer  the high way, and the place seemed vnto him to be very delightfull  fit for to rest in, wherfore he alighted from his Horse,  pulled of his Healme,  sate downe vpon the greene,  leaned vnto a tre, wheras he did rest himself from that great trauaile which he had passed all that day before,  by reason that he came thether very weary, he straight wayes fell a sleepe,  therein he passed a good part of the night, which was verye fayre by reason of the Moone light, and about midnight vp|on a sodaine he awaked through a great noyse which pas|sed the highway, as it semed,  bearkening what it should be, somewhat amazed with his sodaine awaking, he heard that it was a great cry and lamentation of Ladyes Gen|tlewomen, and much rushing of armour, wher with he put on his healme and did abide their comming on foote. Here the History leaueth them, for to tell you of all that passed in the Court of King Tiberio, and of other thinges which happe|ned in this time.


Of all that passed in the court of King Tiberio, after the Knight of the Sunne was departed, and how the bretheren of the Duke of Pannonia, and Aridon of the Wildernesse did determine to reuenge themselues of the King Tiberio, for that he would not pardon their deaths. Chap. 9.
_WIth great shame and reproch the Knights of the King Tiberio remayned, by reason that they were so many, and yet not able to pre|uayle agaynst one alone Knight, and much meruayling at that which they saw him doe, they said one vnto another, y^t it was not pos|sible he should be a humane Knight. And when they came before the King  tolde him that he was gone, and that they could not make resistaunce against him, he seemed to be ve|ry wrathfull against them,  was ashamed, taking it for a great reproch vnto his Court, but that which troubled him most was, the complaints  teares of the parents  kinse|folkes of Florinaldus,  of the wife  children of the Earle, for that they all together kneled before him, which caused him to be more wrathfull against the Knight of the Sunne. Then strayght waies the Knightes of Florinaldus did take theyr Lord out of the place and caryed him vnto his lodging, and for that he had no wound nor hurt but onely the brusing  torment of the fall, he straight waies came vnto himselfe  was quickly whole  sound, with which the rumour of his parents  kinsfolkes was some what mittigated,  the King Tiberio lost some part of his great griefe which he before sustayned. And when he was somewhat in quiet  his anger ouer past, he called to his remembrance all that he had sene the Knight of the Sunne doe,  the gentle grace  curtesie that he vsed with all men, for the which he did deserue to be honoured  esteemed of all,  conceiuing anger against him|selfe, he said in his mind, that he had rather haue lost a great part of his estate, then such a Knight should haue depar|ted from his court so much abused,  many times when he thought therof he was very sorry for that which he had done against him. Now let vs leaue the King in his repentaunce, and many other of the principall Knightes in his Court, who likewise were very sorrye for the departure of the Knight of the Sunne, and let vs tell of other thinges which happened in that time.
If you doe remember that after the Knight of the Sun, had ouercome that stout  valiant Knight Aridon of the blacke wood, the Duke of Pannonia, and he confessed all the treason that was conspired betwixt them against the Dutchesse, and how that the King commaunded theyr heads should be cut off in the middest of the place, without any pardon, although many Knights  great Lords did importunate the King for their pardon. Now the History saith that this Aridon, of the blacke wood had a brother called Egion, a young man of a mightie stature  force, and of a singuler courage for to at|tempt any thing, who was in the blacke wood, at such time as Aridon was beheaded. Also the Duke of Pannonia had likewise another brother called Farmonte, a valiant Knight and very proud, being Lord ouer many Countries in high Almaine nigh vnto the blacke wood, who went abroad se|king his aduentures in those parts,  had got vnto himselfe great fame  renowne, for many dedes of armes which he had done in that country. Now when the death of their bre|thren came vnto their knowledge,  in what sort the King Tiberio commaunded them to be slaine, they were very sor|rowfull for the same, and eyther of them determined within himselfe to annoy the King Tiberio all that euer they could, till such time as they were reuenged of the death of theyr brethren. It so fell out that these two ioyned together, and were both of one minde and determination, concluding be|twene them to be both together at the execution of reueng|ment, for that they may the better bring to passe theyr pre|tence,  to annoy the king. Both these knights were in great securitie in their countryes,  were altogether one helping and aiding another with great friendshippe, for that those Countryes ouer which they were Lordes and gouernours were very montanish and craggie, in such sort that there could not procede against them any great hoast, but that they might easily make theyr defence, and with very few people.
When they were agred and conformed together Egi|on

brother vnto Aridon, by whose death he was then Lord ouer the blacke woode, determined to goe vnto the court of King Tiberio,  ther to informe himselfe of all that had pas|sed touching the death of his brother,  for to spy out how  in what manner hee might be reuenged on the King, so he came vnto the Court in secrete wise, not making himselfe knowen what he was, wheras he was certified of all that he would desire. Likewise he was giuen to vnderstand how that the Quene Augusta was with hir Ladies Gentlewo|men at the Monestary of the Riuer,  ther remained euer since that the Emperour Trebatio had carried away y^e Prin|cesse Briana. This Egion did very well consider the scituati|on of the Monestarie, and of the Knights which the Quene had for hir gard  keping,  thought within himselfe that in that place better then in any other, he might make satisfac|tion of his desire. Wherewith he returned vnto his owne country,  conferred with Farmonte, and certified him of all that had passed, and tolde that he had found out a fit place and opportunitye agreable to bee reuenged of the King, namelie that the Quene Augusta with all hir Ladies and Gentlewomen were at the Monestary of the Riuer, which was farre from the place wheras the King dyd abide, and although she had certaine Knightes for hir gard, yet they might goe so well prouided, that in despight of them all, they would goe take the Quene and hir Gentlewomen,  bring them vnto their owne Countryes, whereas they should be in safetie from all the whole power of the King Tiberio.
When Farmonte heard these words, being a couragi|ous Knight, he lyked very well of that which Egion had vttered, and thought it good to giue vnderstanding of all this their pretence, vnto a Gyaunt called Barbario, who had his dwelling thereby on the shirt of the mount Sar|pedo, who was a great friend vnto them, and mightye and strong in deedes of armes, thinking with his helpe to destroye all the whole power of the King Tiberio,

whe~ he had opened this vnto Egion, they both determined to goe  talke with him,  to desire him if it were his pleasure, to be a companion in that enterprise. This accordingly they acco~plished, manifesting vnto him all their pretence  deter|mination, when he vnderstood it, dyd strayght offer them his company,  also certaine other valiant Knights which he had with him, being such as desired no other thing, but to haue oportunitie where they might imploy their force  strength to doe mischiefe. And to conclude, he came away with them, carying with him ten of his Knights, who were very big of stature,  of great strength, with whom he durst giue the enterprise against a thousand Knights.
And when they came vnto the blacke wood, Egion dyd chuse other ten Knightes of the best and strongest that hee had. So being ioyned together, they dyd depart and tooke theyr way towards the Monestarie of the Riuer: and en|tring into Hungaria, they went three and three to gether, because ther should grow no suspicion, and the most of their trauayle was by night. In this order they trauayled, that at length they came to the Monestary of the Ryuer, and were not suspected of any, whereby the might haue occa|sion to follow them, to see what they pretended. So tarying the one for the other, they ioyned all together, and being in good order, vpon a very fayre and cleare moneshine night, they set vpon the monestary, brake the doores, entred in, and tooke the Quene with all hir Gentlewomen, out of theyr chambers, at whose great shrickes and cryes, the Knightes which were of their gard beeing lodged in certaine houses out of the monestary, did awake,  being all amased, they began to arme themselues, in such great hast, that ther wer ioyned together more then fortye, who went vnto the place where as the no se was, so that beetwixt the Knightes and the Gyant, began a great conflict, but it fell out very euill with them, for that the most part of them were armed with out light, and vpon a sodayne, so that they lacked many pe ces of their armour. And more, the power of the Giant

with Egion and Farmonte, was so strong, that they alone had beene sufficient to destroy them all: so that in a small time there was the most part of them slayne, and the rest that remained did hide themselues, for the great feare that they had: Insomuch that they had time and space to take the Quene and many of hir gentlewomen into their pow|er. And for that purpose they brought with them a Coach. with foure wheles, drawen with six mightie Horsses, and very swift, such as in a short space wold cary them a great way: into the which coach they put the Queene and hir gen|tlewomen, whose lamentacions were so loude, that they might bee heard a great way. Then they all together pla|ced themselues round about the coach, and stroke the horse,  in great hast they beegan to trauaile towards theyr coun|trie, vyry glad and ioyfull for the rich pray which they had obtayned. And continually as the Knights which were of the garde and keeping of the Queene, came thether at theyr great shreckes, they dyd not cease to follow the coach, and had battayle with the Gyant and their Knights in the way, but the Gyaunt did intreate them all in such sort, that some dead, and other some very sore hurt, hee left them lying a|long the way whereas they went.
This was the great noyse of rmour  the cryes which dyd wake the Knight of the Sunne out of his sleepe, in the Forrest, thinking vpon that great trauae which hee had with the Knights of the King Tiberio, in the Citie o Ratis|bona: and in the verie same night dyd this wrong happen vnto the Quene, and the coach dyd draw neere the place whereas he was a sleepe. And as this good Knight awa|ked vppon a sodayne almost amased, and bead a far of the great shrikes of the Gentlewomen, hee straight way lad on his Helme, and went to seeke his horse, who was feeding on the greene grasse, and brideled him  leapt into the sad|dle: at which time the Gyaunt and the Knights came right against him wheras he was. And by reason that the moone dyd shine very bright, hee saw them comming in this order. Beefore the coach went the Gyant Barbario, mounted vpon a

mightie Horse all armed, with a great Iron Mase in his hand all bloody with the great companie of Knights which he had slaine that night, and according vnto his furious and dreadfull countenaunce there were few Knights that durst abe beefore him. And on both sides of the Coach, rode the two valiant knights Egion and Farmonte, with ech of them a battaile axe in their hands. And their furious and fearse semblaunce which they showed, was no lesse to be feared, (by reason of the greatnes of their bodies) then the Gyants. And after the coach ther followed to the number of fiftene knights, which remayned of twentie that they brought foorth, all on horsebacke, and well armed: who went ke|ping of the Gentlewomen, that they should not fall out of the coach. All this the Knight of the Sunne stayed to behold, and by the shricks which the gentlewomen gaue, and by the words which they spake, he dyd well vnderstand, that the Gyant and those Knights dyd carrie the~ away by force. And although it semed to be an vnequall match and verie ter|rible, that one alone Knight should thinck to set them at ly|bertie, yet this mightie and valyant Greke made no stay, but with a valyant courage set spurres vnto his Horse and issued out of the forrest whereas he abode: and came into the high way, and put himselfe before the Gyant and sayde these words. Tell me Gyaunt what is the occasion that thou dost carry these gentele women perforce against their wils. When this great Barbario in that sort saw the Knight be|fore him, and the great hardinesse wherewith he spake vn|to him, without making any answere, he lift vp his great mase of Iron, and went against him to haue stroke him vp|o the head, with a right downe blow: but the Knight of the Sunne had his sword drawen in his hand,  et spurs vnto his Horse side and made him giue a great and a light leape on the one side, wherewith he cleared himselfe from that terrible blow, and the mase fell downe to the ground: and with the great force and strength wherewith it was stroken, it lackt little that the Gyaunt had not fallen to the ground after the mase, for that he stoped with all his body

forwards vpon the saddle bow. And before he had any time to settle himselfe againe, the Knight of the Sunne entred in with him, and raysing vp himselfe in his Styrops, he stroke with both his hands so furious and terrible a blow at his wa. that by reason the ioynts of his armour was in that place in a maner broken with his former conflicts, he cut the body in two peces, in such sort, that the one halfe remained in the Saddle, and the other halfe from the wast vpward fell downe to the ground: and it was so quicklie done, that when Egion and that mightie Farmonte behelde the battaile, with that wonderfull and terrible blow,  saw the halfe body of the Gyant fell vnto the earth. And behol|ding the knight which had done that dede, with his sword in his hand all bloody, they receiued great admiracion, and either of them thought within him-selfe, that it should bee some selestiall creature, sent from God for to destroy them: for that they could not perswade with themselues that in a mortall man there should be so great force and strength. Yet because they were valyant Knights, and high minded, and of proude condition, either of them dyd assault him with great yre and wrath: and the first that approched vn|to him was the mighty Farmonte, who with both his hands stroke such a right downe blow at the Knight of the Sunne, which lighted vpon his right shoulder, that it had bene suf|ficient to cleane him to his breast, if that his inchaunted armour had not defended him. And by reason that the hat|chet could not cut, the strength of the blow was the heaui|er, in such sort, that it made him to double and bow his bo|die forwards, that his breast touched the saddle bow, and he hadde not well settled him-selfe in his saddle agayne, when that on the other side, he was assalted by the migh|tie Egion, who with his mightie hatchet, stroke a nother right downe blow at him, that if he had chaunsed to hit him, it could not but nedes it must haue done him great harme.
But this couragious and valyant Knight, whose exce|ding lightnesse and strength, was in all poynts equall:

stroke his horse with the spurres, and made him to leap on the one side, which was the occasion that he cleered himselfe from the ry therof, and therwith he entered in with that mightie Farmonte, and stroke him such a blow vppon the head, that if hee had not clasped himselfe about the horse neck, he had fallen downe vnto the ground, hee had no soo giuen this blow, but that the stout Egion lift vp his Hatchet againe and stroke him another blow vppon the Helme, that he made him decline his head vnto his breast, beeing somewhat amazed therewith. All this that passed, as wll with the Knight of the Sunne as the Gyaunt and the rest, the Quene Augusta  hir Gentlewomen which were in the Coach dyd beehould, for that those which draue the Horse that dyd draw the Coach dyd stay, and the night was very cleere, and the Moone dyd shine so bright that it seemed to bee day, and they greatly meruailed at the sodaine death of the Gyaunt, and lykewise of the battaile which that a|lone knight made with the other two knights, and certaine|ly they beelued that that knight was sent from God. In this time the mighty Farmonte had stroke the Knight of the Sunne a terrible blow vppon his Healme, with so great fu|ry and force, that hee thought vorely his teth had beene bro|ken with chattering and beating one against another, then this valiaunt and couragious knight seing the great resi|staunce that was against him, his force increased, and he tooke his sword in both his hands, and raysed himselfe in his rops, he striking a mighty blow at the stoute Egion, which lighted vpon his shoulder in all ill houre for him, for after that he neuer sorrowed for the death of his brother A|ridon, for that the fine and well tempered sword did cut the hardned steele of his armour, and neuer rested ther, but dis|cended downe vnto hi wast, and spared neyther flesh nor bones. but that fore quarter with all the rest of the vnhap|py Egion fel downe dead vnto the ground. When the migh|ty Farmonte saw that terrible blow, and his companyons dead, he knew not what to say nor think of the great force of his aduersarie, yet the great pride which he had would

not suffer him to acknowledge his mightie power, but bloo|dilie he pressed forwards, thincking by one onely blow to take reuengement of all the harme which was done, not foreseeing that which should happen, and lifting vp his ste|lie hatchet, with both his hands he stroke a mightie blow vpon the hard and Inchaunted Healme of the Knight of the Sunne, so that it sounded throughout all the woods and for|rests very strongly, and astonied him that he had no re|membraunce, in such sort that his horse carried him more then ten pace from the place whereas he was, but yet be|fore the mightie Farmonte had tyme to giue him another blow hee was come againe to himselfe, and remembring the mightie and furious stroke which hee had receiued, full of wrathfull ire and courage, he tooke his Sword in both his hands, and setting spurres vnto his horse sides, hee pres|sed towardes that mightie Farmonte, to gratifie the blow which he had receiued, who with a stout and proud courage dyd abide his comming. The Knight of the Sunne raysed himselfe on his stirrops, and gaue him such a blow vppon the head, that hee cloue it downe to the shoulders, wherwith he fell from his horse dead to the earth. At which time ther approached with the noyse of the battayle all the Knights which followed the Coach, and when they saw theyr Lords in that battaile with one alone Knight, they would not help them, for that they thought either of them sufficient to vse him at their pleasure, and therefore they put themselues on the one side to beehold the battayle, but when they per|ceiued both their Lords with two blows so sodainely slaine, theyr blood waxed could within theyr bodies, and they dyd verely beleue that the same Knight was some infernal spi|rite, and no humane creature, yet beecause they were many, they tooke courage one of another, and dyd assayle him all together striking at him very strongly, and by reason that they were all valiant and chosen Knights, they had put the Knight of the Sunne in great ieopardie, if he had not bene of so valyant courage as hee was, who with so valyant and stout a courage did behaue himselfe amongst those Knights

that if there had ben as many more, they had not ben suf|ficient to haue brought him into any xtremitie, for that in a smal time with his furious strokes, of some he cloue their heads a sunder, and of other some he cut away their armes, and other some he ouerthrew to the ground meruailously wounded, in such sort (because they had no Lords nor ma|sters to giue account vnto) all those which remained aliue and not wounded, determined to flie away, and thought it great folly any longer to abide those mortal and wonderful blows, but turned their backes and fledde with all the hast they could, leauing that strong and mightie knight all a|lone, who seing that there was no more to be done, went vnto the coach to se who they were that came therein. And when the Quene Augusta and all hir Ladyes and Gentle|women saw them dead and wounded, which carried them as prisoners,  that there remained no more but the mighty knight all alone, they gaue great thancks vnto almightie god, and wept for very ioy to see themselues at liberty. And the Quene hauing great desire to know who that worthy knight should be, she spake vnto him and sayde.
Oh happie and fortunate knight, whom I beleue to be the mightiest and worthiest in all the world, tell vs I pray the who thou art, that I may know whom to gratifie, for this great benefit that we haue receiued in destroying of these traytors that carried vs away prisoners. When the Quene had saide these words, the Knight of the Sunne did know hir, for that he had seene hir before, at such time as he had the battaile with Aridon, and being much amazed to see hir in that place, and in the power of those euil persons, was on the contrary very ioyfull, for that he had done vnto hir that seruice, dyd lift vp the beauer of his Healme and sayde. Lady I giue great thankes vnto my Gods for that it hath pleased them to bring me hether at this time,  in so good opportunitie to serue you, for that I assure you I was very ignoraunt and knew nothing herof, but beeing soundly a sleepe within this forrest, I was awaked by the great noise which they made, so that determining what it should be, I

arose vp and came towards this place, and you shal vnder|stand that I am the Knight of the Sunne, he (if your high|nesse cal to remembrance) that had battaile in your presence with Aridon of the black woode, and by reason of a sodeine iniurie which hath chanced vnto me, with certaine Knights in the court of the king, I came hether into this forrest this night to slepe and take my rest. When the Quene vnder|stood that it was the Knight of the Sunne, and knew him by the Sunn which he had vpon his armour, hir ioy  pleasure did the more increase,  thincking hir selfe in a great deale more safetie then before, she said: Now I doo well know  vnderstand that my fortune is falne out much better then I did make reckoning of, for that it hath pleased God to haue so great a care ouer me, as to bring me such a Knight in this our most extremitie, and considering the great good which thy co~ming hath bene vnto vs, I cannot impute it, but vnto the goodnes of God in this our necessity. In the meane time that the Quene was saying these words  other such lyke, certayne of hir Knights which followed hir somewhat out of the way from the coach, onely for to spie out  know the way whether they went for to giue the king to vnderstand thereof. So long as they heard the noise of the battaile, they burst not approch nigh whereas they were, but afterward when they heard that the Gentlewomen held their peace,  left off their shrikes and lamentation, they by little  little drew nigh vnto y^e place wheras the coach was, til such time as they saw the Gyant  the two knights,  others ly a long on the ground, some starke dead, and other some verie sore hurt, complaining their misfortune. Likewise they saw the Knight of the Sun talking with the Quene, who~ they knew by the deuise he had of the Sun,  being much amazed at that wonderfull sight, they drew nigh vnto them, and when the quene knew that they were of hir company, she tooke great pleasure with them,  commaunded them to bring before hir one of those knights of y^e Giant y^t lay vpon the ground hurt, the knights acco~plished hir co~mandement,  when they had brought one of those knights before hir, she demanded who

they were that had taken hir and hir Gentlewomen priso|ners,  what was the cause that they dyd it, threatning him with death if he did not tell the truth, and to the contrarie, his lyfe if hee dyd tell hir the whole effect, and promised him to haue him healed of his wounds. The wounded Knight seing that it would little auayle him to hide any thing, considering that theyr Lords were slaine  dead, dyd playn|ly and clerely declare vnto hir who they were, and of all that had passed, and what was the occasion that they did it, according as you haue heard before in this Historie. And when the Queene vnderstood the whole effect of hir impri|sonment, hir body trembled with the feare that she receiued, knowing not how to recompence the Knight of the Sunne for the great pleasure which he had shewed vnto them, but desired him to beare hir companie vnto the Court of the King, promising him large and rich gifts, but because the Knight of the Sunne had a greater desire to goe see the Em|perour Trebatio, then regard of riches and estate, he gaue humble thanckes vnto the Quene for hir gentle offer, and dyd excuse himselfe in the best sort hee could, saying, that he had a iourney in hand which hee could by no meanes leaue of at that present, but he hoped that the time would come he should returne and serue the King, and be in his court. So after that they had a great discourse about this matter, the Knight of the Sunne tooke his leaue of the Quene, at which time were come together tenne or twelue of the Quenes Knights, who had hid themselues for fear of the Gyaunt, and when they saw that they could not by anie meanes perswade the Knight of the Sunne to retourne vnto the court againe, they suffered him to depart, although it grie|ued them very much that hee should depart in such sort, be|fore the king had rewarded him, for the great benefit which they all receiued at his hands. In the end the Knight of the Sunne departed from the Quene, and left hir in the com|panie of hir Gentlewomen and Knights, who determined to goe vnto the court of the King. And when those Knights saw the great and wonderfull blowes wherewith he had

slayne the Gyaunt  his companions, being very much ama|zed they looked one vpon another,  said that it seemed to be a thing impossible that a humane wight should do such won|derfull dedes. And for that it should be beleued of them which did not se the battayle betwixt them,  because ther should remaine a perpetuall testimonie  memory of the same, the quene Augusta determined to carry vnto y^e court of the King the bodyes of the Gyant,  of Egion Farmonte, cloue  cut in peces in such sort as you haue heard,  for the same purpose she commaunded the coach to be prepared, she  all hir Gentlewomen came forth therof,  caused the dead bodies to be put therin, so ther they passed away the rest of the night which remained,  two of those Knights did returne vnto the monestary of the Riuer, to giue them to vnderstand of all that had passed,  to bring palfraies  all things necessary for the Quene  hir Gentlewomen. When the morning was come, and all things in a readynesse, they tooke the way which lead them towards the court, carrying with them in their companye the Coach, wherein was the bodies of the Gyant and of Egion and Farmonte, who were very great and bigge, and for that the woundes wherwith they were slayne, were very terrible and wonderfull to be|hold, it put all them whom they met by the way in great admiration and especially when they vnderstoode that one alone Knight had done that deede. There were some of the Knightes that were in the gard and keeping of the Quene, strayght way when they saw the assault which the Gyant and his companions made in the monestary, and seeing that they were many and that all their power was not suf|ficient to make resistaunce, they straight way departed in ost with as great hast as was possible for to giue the King Tiberio to vnderstand thereof,  with the great hast which they made, the next day in the morning they came before the , and told vnto him all that passed, saying that if out of hand he did not with his Knights giue aide  succour, the Queene  all hir Gentlewomen should be carried away pri|soners.

When the King vnderstood these newes, he was very much troubled, and fearing that the Queene should receiue some harme, he commaunded that his Knights should arme themselues with all the speed that might be, which , they departed to the number of two hundred Knights, and tooke their way towards the Monestary of the Riuer. After that they were departed there were many other Knights that were arming themselues for to follow those that wer gone before,  being all in a readinesse with as great hast as euer teir horses could run they followed the other, in this sort they continued their trauaile till it was somewhat late, at which time those Knights which went formost did discouer a far of comming towards them the Queene  all hir gentle|women  Knights, bringing before them the coach  when they were satisfied that it was the Quene, with great  ex|ceding ioy they went  told the King, who was very heauy and full of sorrow, supposing that his succor should come too late, by reason of the great distance that was betwixt the one and the other, but straight way when he vnderstood the newes that his knights gaue him, he receiued so much com|fort, that it seemed to reuiue him from death to life,  there|with he passed forwards,  rode before them all, wheras he saw the Quene  all hir Gentlewomen  knights comming,  the coach before them, wherin was the bodies of the giant and of the two dead Knights,  being nigh it, they staed, and with great admiration beheld those terrible  wonderfull wonds, and could not imagine with themselues what it should be, but being halfe amazed at that wonderfull sight, they remained till the Quene came, whom the King dyd embrace  receiue with as great ioy as if they had not sene one another a long time before. Then the King demaunded how and in what sort she was set at liberty. To whom the quene said: My Lord, you shall vnderstand that I and my gentlewomen being in the monestary of the riuer, we wer assaulted by this Gyaunt  two Knights that we doe bring heere dead, who had in their company more then twentye

Knights, which came with them, who killing  wounding the most part of the knights that were of my gard, they toke vs  caried vs away prisoners in this coach that we bring here,  according vnto the great hast  swift course wherwith we were carried, I am certaine that all your succour had come too late, but God was so pleased  my good fortune, that this night past trauailing by the edge of a forrest, there was a knight sleeping, who afterward I knew to be the knight w^t the deuise of the Sun, which made the battaile with Aridon of the black wood, who being sodainly awaked by our great shrikes  sorrowfull lamentations, came forth into the high way to see what it should be,  he alone had battell with the Gyant  these two knights,  hath intreated the~ in this sort as you doe se,  besides all this he slew and wounded all the rest of the knights that came with them, himself remaining whole  sound, wthout any wound or hurt,  we set at li|berty, with great ioy  pleasure, especially when we knew who hee was,  afterward came vnto y^t place certain of my knights that did follow the coach wherin we were,  by one of their knights that were wounded and lay on the ground, we did vnderstand who they were that did carry vs priso|ners  for what cause they did assalt vs,  ther the Quene declared vnto the King all that euer the Knight of the Sun had done for them in that battaile  rescew,  how he depar|ted from hr,  how she could not by any meanes cause him to returne vnto the court for to receiue his reward for that worthy and valiant dede which he had done for hir. When the King vnderstoode that it was the Knight of the Sunne, who in the deliuerie of the Queene had done so high and worthy acts, one way he receiued great pleasure  another way he suffered great griefe, for that he had not dne him being in his court) the honour that vnto so noble and vali|nt a Knight appertayned, and was very angry with the Queene, for that she did suffer him to depart  go away in  order, and thought that if it were possible to ouertake nd finde him, he himselfe in person would follow him.

But when all the Knights which came in company with the king Tiberio vnderstood that the Knight of the Sunne had done all this, they greatly meruailed,  beholding those won|derfull wounds which the gyant knights had, they thought it a thing vnpossible that any humane Knight should doe it,  wondering therat they had inough to doe to looke one vp|on the other. Straight way in this sort the king  the quen returned  tooke their way towards the Citie of Ratisbona, with all their Knights, carying with them the Coach  the dead bodies,  the fame of the Knight of the Sunne increased, in such sort that neuer after his memory was lost in those parts,  for long time after they had inough to doe to com|municate therof, wheras this History doth leaue them for to tell you what happened vnto the Knight of the Sunne.


 How the Knight of the Sunne came vnto a castle, whereas hee did deliuer a Gentlewoman, and recouered two Pages, whom hee carried with him. Ca. 10.
_AFter that the high and mightie Alphoebo was departed from the Queene Augusta,  would not stay in any place for to rest him|selfe, although he had great nede thereof, be|cause if the king and his Knights should fol|low him, they should not ouertake him,  so he continued his iourny, pretending to passe into Grecia,  to goe se his great friend the Emperour Trebatio,  with this pretence he trauailed  passed away the rest of the night which remayned  the morning being come, he chaunced in|to a very large  plaine field, all couered with pleasaunt  grene hearbes, in which he trauailed a good while, for that it was somewhat long,  toward the end therof at the foot of a small mountaine, he saw a castle, which seemed vnto him to be very fayre, and hauing great desire to repose himselfe and to eate some thing, he determined to goe thether

And before he came to it, as far as a man might throw a stone, he saw come forth of the castell gate, a Gentlewoman, running  giuing great shrikes, and after hir followed two knights armed with their swords drawen in their handes, threatning hir that if she would not tarry, they would kill hir. In this sort they all thre came running towards the place wheras the Knight of the Sun was:  by reason that the knights wer armed, they could not ouertake hir, till such time as she came wheras he was. And when the Gentlewo|man saw him so mighty  so well proportioned, she lyft vp hir voice  said. Succour me gentle Knight,  deliuer me from these traitours, who pretend to rauish me The Gentlewo|man had no soner said these wordes, but that the Knight of the Sunne alyghted from his horse,  put himselfe before the~ with his sword drawen in his hand, and sayd: what meane you gentle Knights, that you both follow one alone Gentle|woman. They who were full of mallice  very proud, with|out answering one word, they assalted him, and stroke each of them a blow at him with their swords, but hard was their happe, for that they knew not what they did, neyther did they know him, which with so great meekenesse spake vnto them. He then seeing their great discourtesie, and little respect which they had, he stroke the one of them such a blow vppon the head, that he cloue it in two peeces, and he fell downe dead vnto the ground, and finding the other on his right side, he stroke at him an ouerthwart blow, that he cut of his sword arme hard by the shoulder: and when he saw his companion dead, and himselfe with out an arme, ma|king very dolorous and greeuous complaints, he ran about the field, and had all his life time after to repent himselfe for that wrong which he would haue done vnto that gentle|woman. Who when she saw hir selfe at libertie from those two knights, and in so short a space, being very much ama|sed at the might of that Knight. She came vnto him and with weping said, Oh good and gentle Knight, seing that God had giuen you so much bounty  strength, succour and

help my father and two brotheren, which are in that castell which you se before you,  are at the poynt to be slayne by certain traterous knights, that do pretend to kill them. And when the knight of the Sun heard this, with a trise he went vnto the Castell,  as he entred in therat, he heard great rushing of armour in the galleries about the court. And go|ing vp, hee saw y^t it was foure armed Knighs at the entrie of a dore, who did striue to come in therat, and in the inside, ther was an ancient man, with two well proportioned yng men vnarmed, hauing but onely their swords in their hands who did defend the entrie. And when the Knight of the Sun came where as the foure Knights was, the first that he met with all he stroke him so terrible a blow, that he ouerthrew him dead at the fete of his companions. Who being verye much amazed at that sodaine mischiefe, tourned themselues about to see who it should be that had done that harme. And when they saw the Knight of the Sunne all alone with his sword in his hand, they left them with whom they had the battaile at the dore,  went against him, and with great fury began to lay vppon him, but this their brauery did not indure long, for that in a short time with very few blowes he gaue them to vnderstand who he was, for that he ouerthrew one of them to the ground, and the other two being very sore wounded, ranne away and left him alone, till such time as the ancient man and the two yong men that were with in the dore came forth, who when they saw what the Knight of the Sunne had done in so short a space, they greatly meruailed, although they straight way knew him by the deuise he had of the Sunne, for that they were present at such time as he had battaile with Aridon of the blacke woode: and no lesse musing at his ariuall the|ther, they went towards him and demaunded his hands to kisse them, for the great friendship which he shewed vnto them. And he receiued them with great courtesie and said My friendes, I pray you tell mee what was the occasion that these Knights would haue slayne you, and other two

Knights which followed a Gentlewoman out of this castell|wo I haue also deliuered from them, and she will be here straight way. Then the auncient old man, who seemed by his grauitie to bee honourable, beeing very ioyfull for that hee heard his daughter was at libertie, answered him and sayd as followeth.
Oh worthy knight, I doe verely beleue that thou art sent of God, to defend and maintayne the feeble and weake persons,  to chastise the proude and arrogat For that I was present at such time as thou wert brought vnto the ci|tie of Ratisbona, for to make battaile with Aridon of the blacke woode, and now at this present art come for to set me at liberty from this great outrage which these knights would haue done vnto me: so that I verely beleue that by great mistery thou art sent for our aid  help, therfore (gen|tle Knight) thou shalt vnderstand, that the occasion wher|fore these traiterous Knights would haue slaine vs, was, for that the one of them many dayes past, dyd demaund of me for wife my daughter, whom you haue deliuered out of their power. And for that I did know he was an euill, ma|licious  a traiterous knight,  a very coward, I would ne|uer graunt vnto the same: neyther wold my daughter con|sent ther vnto. And for to reuenge themselues thereof, this morning at such time as the gate of the Castell was open, we being without all feare  suspection, vppon a sodaine, the sixe Knights which you haue sene, entred in,  amongst them came the same Knights which I haue tolde you of. And because I did perceiue their determination was to kill vs,  to carry away my daughter with violence and parforce, which certainly,  without all doubt had happened in this or|der, if it had not pleased God that thou shouldest haue come hether to giue vs aide and succour.
So at such time as this auncient man hadde made an end in saying these wordes, the Gentlewoman his daugh|ter, whom the Knight of the Sunne had deliuered from the two Knights, came whereas they were.

For whose comming the father and hir bretheren receiued double ioy,  the no lesse ioyfull, for that she found them cleere from the outrage which they would haue done vnto them. So that neyther of them dyd know in what sort they might gratifie the Knight of the Sunne, for the great benefit which they had receiued at his hands, but offred vnto him all that they had. And for that he found in them so great good will, he determined to way there certaine dayes, to comfort and ease himselfe: for that hee found his bodye in many places brused  ill intreated, with the battailes which he had with the Knights of the King Tiberio,  the Gyaunt and with his Knights when he set at liberty the Quene Augusta, for al|though his good armour did defend him from being woun|ded, yet his body could not but receiue great damage,  he tormented by the heauy waight and strength of the blowes which he receiued,  he felt himselfe vory sore therwith, in such sort, that he had great nede to be cured therof. All which he declared vnto the lord of the castle,  vnto his sonnes, who were very ioyfull,  receiued great contentment at the same, as those who were very desirous to serue  pleasure him in all that euer they could. So the knight of the Sunne remay|ned ther certaine daies in which time he was meruailously well cured of his bruses, by the gentlewoman, who was cun|ning  expert in chirurgery,  did it with a very good grace.
The Gentlewomans name was Oliuia, and hir fathers name was Onorio, and his sonnes names were Aurellio, Binnano, and they all did loue him very much, and would that he should neuer depart from thence, from their compa|nie. But at such time that he would neds depart, the fa|ther requested the Knight to graunt him a bowne, which was, that he should receiue into seruice his two sonnes, and cary them with him for his pages. The Knight of the Sun knowing them to be young men of great vertue, well pro|portioned and couragious in what so euer necessitie should happen: he tooke them with him, and they did serue him for pages. And time did serue that they did very well sere

him, and their Father and mother did recompence the loue which they bare vnto him, as shall be told you in the second part of this History. So at this present wee wil leaue them departed from the Castell, to tell you of other things which chaunced in this time.


Of the great triumphes which were made in Constan|tinople for the comming of the Emperour Treba|tio, and how the death of the Prince Edward was bruted in great Britaine, and of all that happened. Chapter. 11.
_THe great sorrow and heauinesse which the Grecians receiued for the losse of their Em|perour Trebatio was not so much, but that the ioye and pleasure was much more which they possessed for his vnlooked for retourne, and that was well sene and perceiued ge|nerally in all estates, the knights in ordeining and making great Iustes and Tourneies, and other militarie exercises, and others in inuenting new deuises of playes, and occasi|ons of ioy and pleasure, in such sort, that throughout all the whole Empire they practised no other thing but pastimes and pleasure, as well in the one sort of people as in the other,  that which was most to bee considered of, was, that this mightie Emperour, the more for to reioyce and plea|sure his owne subiects, dyd commaund to be proclaymed a solempne Iust, not onely in the Countries be longing vnto the Empire, but also in all the Kingdomes and Prouin|ces thereto adioyning, giuing and graunting safe conduct to all that euer would come thether, as well Pagans as Christians, of what kinde of law and sect so euer they were, and for that these Iusts were published in many parts, and that the Emperour gaue fre and safe conduct, what with some for to se what passed, and other some to proue them|selues in the iusts, there came so many knights that it was a straunge thing to beehold, and euery day there was great

Iusts and  in the mightie Citie of Constantinople, whereas the worthy and valiant knights dyd giue testimo|ny of their great bounty, and either of them did labour and trauaile for to get honor, but they which did shew the~selues most gallantest and valiant in those iusts, were Rodamarte Pince of Sardenia, sonne vnto Alselo, who was one of the twelue that went with the Emperour Trebatio to the Mo|nasterie of the riuer  Alpino, Lord of Lemos, and Rodofeo, Prince of the Rhodes, Artidoro Prince of Candia, all yong men and amoros, who for their great knighthood dyd get exceeding same at these feasts and iusts. In these pastimes ther passed many daies, and euery day there came new and strange knights, vnto whom y^e Emperour Trebatio did much honour, and did spend liberally amongst them a great part of his terasury, and for that these feasts  pastimes did in|dure very long,  that ther succeded in them many strange things, as shal be told you in this History, let vs leaue them new begun, and tell of other things that succeded in this tie, which is very needfull for this present Historie: for as much as the returne and comming of the Emperour Treba|tio was published in all places, and that the manner of the death of prince Edward was knowen. The newes of all this came vnto the eares of the king Oliuerio, who although he had almost forgot the losse of the Prince, by reason of the long time passed since it happened, yet these new news of his death was so dolorous, that it did renue within his thought the great loue which hee bare vnto him, as vnto his sonne, that in a small time they thought verely he would die with very sorrow, but the principal remedy that he tooke for his comfort, was to determine himselfe to take reuengement for the Princes death vppon the Emperour, and although hi power was not so great as the power of the Emperour, ye he thought that the king Tiberio to fulfill the great obly|gation in the which he was bound vnto him, would giu him aide and succour: and againe the Prince Don Silueri would likewise succour him with all his power, which wa very great, giuing him for spouse his daughter the Prince

Oliuia, according as he had determined. And besides this, the king of Spaine who was his very friend, would succor him all that he could,  here with he might very well reuenge himselfe vpon the Emperour, and destroy all his Empire. All this the king determined in his thought,  the great passion and griefe which he had for the death of his son, would not suffer any other thought to enter in his breast,  with this determination he sent messengers vnto the king Tiberio to giue him to vnderstand how he was determined to he re|uenged for the death of his son,  desired him of al friendship to aide him in his determination, knowing how much he was bound therto, for that he was slaine in his seruice. And touching all his determination he did write him a letter at large, of the which he had an answere againe to his desire, for that y^e king Tiberio acknowledging how much hee was bound vnto him, could doe nothing to the contrary but offer himself in all y^t he might to help him, although he wished for his part that all were excused, for it semed vnto him that if the Emperour Trebatio slew the prince Edward, it was with his speare in his hand,  in battell one with the other, lyke knights, and therfore he should not be blamed in such sort, to take such reuengement against him, and although he had all this within his thought,  was well content to haue y^e Em|perour for his son in law, yet he wold not giue any body to vnderstand therof, for that he was a king which alwaies had a great respect in matters of estimation and honour, which was the occasion that the king Oliuerio as aforesaid, had of him a very good answere, and to his contentment. Likewise he wrote to the king of Spaine, who also did offer vnto him all hee requested when he had nede thereof. In the meane time that all this passed, y^e king Oliuerio trauailed with the Princesse Oliuia his daughter, that she should think wel to receiue for hir spouse the Prince Don Siluerio, laying before hir his great valure, and the necessitie hee had of him: so considering this matter many times the king did importu|nate hir, sometimes with requestes, and other times with threatenings, in such sort that this fayre. Princesse was

in the greatest perplexity that euer Lady or Gentlewoman could bee, and euerie moment shee desired death, whereby she might be cleee from his continuall requests, and which she had determined to giue hir selfe, when shee did se that there was no other remedie. Likewise it was knowen in England, that Rosicleer the young knight, who had left so great fame in all that countrie, was sonne vnto the Empe|rour Trebatio and the Empresse Briana, which newes did greatly content all people. And when the Princesse Oliuia vnderstood the whole misterie, one way hir ioye surmoun|ted, in seeing that hee whom she loued more then hir owne selfe, was sonne vnto so mightie an Emperour, and that ther was not betweene them the kindred which shee thought had bene, and another way shee dyd greatly repent hir selfe of that which she had done against him, and the more was hir griefe when shee called to remembrance all that which had passed, insomuch that she did nothing else but wepe at all times when she was alone. Now after the king hir father had receiued an answere from the King Tiberio, and from the King of Spaine, talking with Don Siluerio, he gaue him to vnderstand his determined purpose,  a new he di offer vnto him his daughter, the Lady Oliuia for his spouse, saying that first before hee did performe the same, it should be great reason that he returne into his kingdome of Lusi|tania, and giue his parents to vnderstand thereof, and to let them know all the warre that hee did determine to begin against the Emperour Trebatio, for that he might haue his people in a readynesse for to him giue all the ayde and suc|cour that possiblie he could, for that the Prince dyd in|irelie loue the Princesse Oliuia, hee desired nothing more then to plesure the king in all that he could, so that straight way he did promise the King to performe all that he had commanded. So all things beeing in a readinesse that was necessarie for his voyage, hee went to sea, and tooke his way towardes the Kingdome of Lusitania, whom this Historie dooth leaue till time dooch serue, for to tell you of the thre worthie Princesse, Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Tar|tarian

Zoylo, of whom a long time we haue not spokn of.


How the three Princes, Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, who wnt in the demaund of Rosicleer, came into the Kingdome of Lusitania, and of all that happened vnto them there. Chap. 12.
_THis Historie hath verie long forgot to speake of these thre excellent Princes, Bar|gandell, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, not for that their worthie deedes of Knighthoode are not worthie to be spoken off, but onely for that wee haue so much to intreate of Trebatio and his children, that this historie hath inough to doe to declare their morthinesse, you doe remem|ber how these thre Princes all together with a very good will and one consent, departed from the kingdome of ng|land, to goe and seeke out their vory friend Rosicleer, and af|ter a long time that they trauailed by sea, in the ende they ariued in the Empire of Trabisond, whereas they saw that fayre Princesse Claridiana, who dyd put them in great ad|miration onelie for to be hold hir high and mightie deedes of knighthoode, and hir straunge demeanour, with the excel|lent grace and curtesie that she vsed with all men, so in the end of certaine daies that they there remained, they did take their leaue of the Princes, and departed out of that Coun|trie, and went againe vnto the Sea, without any other de|termination whether to goe, but onelie whether theyr for|tune would bring them. Now the History saith, that in this sort they dyd nauigate by Sea a long time, till it happened vpon a day verie earely in the morning they discouered land, which being knowen by the marriners, they said that it was the Kingdome of Lusitania. And when these three Princes vnderstood the certantie thereof, they determined there to goe a land hoping y^t they should heare some newes of their friend Rosicleer, for that they were certaine wher|soeuer hee did beecome, his noble valiantnesse was such, that

it would be noised throughout all the Countrie. Wherefore they left the sea, and beeing a land they tooke their Horsses and followed the way which they liked best, and trauailed by it a good while, which in the ende brought them vnto the top of a mighty , from whence they did discouer somwhat a far of, a mighty great plaine, and in the most therof was scituated a faire Citie, hard by a riuers side, which seemed to be very great  huge. Also they saw without the citie in the filds a great armie of knights and men of war, with many tents  , by which these thre Princes vnderstood that the Citie was besiged, and thervpon they consulted amongst themselues what was best to be done, so in the ende of many speches they determined to goe into the camp,  ther to in|forme themselues of the occasion of those wars,  knowing the truth they would leane vnto the part that they thought had most reason, therewith they descended into the plaine,  trauiled by it til they came vnto the armie,  straight way there came out against them more then twentie knights, to know whether they were their friends or their enimies. Then these Knights did compasse the Princes round about,  demanded of them fro~ whence they came,  what they sought in those parts, and they answered that they were straunge Knights, and not knowen in that countrie, and for that they had seene their camp they came thether as Knights that doth srue for wages, Then those of the camp when they heard their answere,  saw that they semed to be Knights of esti|matio~, as wel by their rich armor which they had, as by their good  gentle dispositions, determined to conduct them before the king their Lord, for that he might determine with them at his plesure, and so they brought them before their Lord, who was king of Balachia, which pretended to take the king|dome o Lufitania (for that it bordered vpon him) and entred into that countrie with a mightie armie, and she that was Lady  gouernour at that time was widow woman called Lauinia, who had a daughter whose name was Olimpa, a ve|rie fayre Damsell, and by reason that shee had no husband, neither power to bee compared vnto the King of Balachia,

was besiged in the same Citie, defending hir selfe within with such people as she had, in the best maner y^t she might. All this was told vnto these princes in y^e way as they went before the king. When they came before the king of Balachia they found him in his tent, accompanied with many knights and on the one side of him there was a Gyant, of a meruai|lous huge  big stature, and of so horrible and fierce a coun|tenance, that it would make one afraide to looke vpon him, and whe~ the king saw those three knights, he asked of them of whence they were,  likewise if it pleased them to serue him in his wars. The Tartarian Zoylo who could speake the language, was requested of the rest of his companions to answere for them, who sayde.
You shall vnderstand O king of Balachia, that we are tra|uailing knights,  of the countrie of Tartaria, and do trauell into the world to seke our aduentures, and although we be exercised in the wars, yet we are accustomed to serue none in them, except first we know what our wages shal be, and it is in this order as I will tell you, and therof there is not to be diminished or taken away any thing, so that we thre will iust with all such knights as will come foorth against vs till such time as we be ouerthrowen, and if so fall out y^t wee at the first encounter be ouerthrowen, then we thre will serue the one whole yere for nothing, and if it be our fortune to ouerthrow any, the~ either of vs so many knights as is ouer throwen by vs, looke how much wages all they together haue, so much must either of vs haue, according to the number that he doth ouerthrow. This is our vse and custome of seruice in the wars, therfore O king, looke if that this our manner of seruice content the, and if not, giue vs lysence to depart, that we may goe to some other place to seke our aduenture.
When the Tartarian Zoylo had made an end of this his spech, the king and all that were in his Tent laughed very much at that which was spoken, not for that they did think much in the wages which they did aske, but for that ther se med to be amongst them Knights, y^t if they might come forth

to the iust with them, at the first should remaine and serue a whole yeare without any wages, and for that they knew this for a certaintie, the king did straight way graunt vn|to all that which the Tartarian Zoylo had demanded, and sayd that he was verie well content to stand vnto that should happen, and the matter being by all them agred vp|pon, these thre Princes went out of the Campe into the plaine field, wheras they might iust at their pleasure. Like|wise the King went foorth with his principall Knights, such as did serue him for wages, to se what should happen.
Now the king commanded straight way perticularly the best and most valyauntest Knights that were in all the Camp should come forth to iust with the thre Princes, who were in a redinesse a horseback with their speares in their handes, abiding the comming of those who should iust with them. The first which came foorth to iust with them, were thre valiant Knights, of a mightie proportion and stature, such as in all the camp could not be found the lyke, and be|ing in their places one agaynst another, they made them|selues ready vnto the iust, but whosoeuer had sene them at that time, would haue iudged the thre Princes at the first encounter should haue remayned without any wages, and especially the King who laughed at the accord which was made beetwixt them, but it fell out cleane contrarie vnto their thought, for that all sixe together mette in the middest of their course, and the three Knights of the Campe broke their speares vpon the Princes without moouing of them in their Saddles, but the Princes made their encounter with so great force, that they hoised them out of their saddles, in such sort that they tumbled vpon the ground, and passed for|wards so stiffe and vpright in their course, that they put the King and all those that dyd beehold them in great admira|tion, but not long after there came forth other thre Knights to the iust, which were also thre of the best and most este|med amongst all the rest, and looke as these Princes dyd serue the first, so dyd they serue those thre, and ouerthrew them to the ground, and finally in the space of one houre

they had ouerthrowen to the number of fiftene Knights of the most valiantest  worthiest amongst them all. Then the King found himselfe halfe ashamed  mocked, with the bar|gaine he had made with them,  it seemed vnto him that ac|cording vnto their great valiantnes  strength, they would haue ouerthrowen all the knights that were in the campe, the one after the other, so that according vnto the bargaine, all his treasure should not be sufficient to pay their wages. When that mightie  monstrous Gyant that was with the King saw him that he was somewhat sad  heauy for that which the Knights had done, he commaunded straight way to be brought vnto him a horse which was very great  con|formable vnto his bignesse,  straight way he leaped vppon him,  chose one of the bigest speares that he could finde a|mongst all the rest,  said vnto the king that he would iust with those Knights,  bad them come all thre against him, and that he hoped so to intreat them in the iust, that after|ward they should neyther bee able to take wages nor to weare armour. The King receiued great delight when he saw the Gyant on horsbacke,  was very certaine that his power and strength was to performe all that which he had said, yea, if they had bene ten such knights together as they were. And when this proud  furtous Gyant was in a readi|nes to the iust, these valtant Princes who were very desi|rous to get honour, either of them did procure to proue their aduenture with him, but this mighty Tartarian with many requests vnto his companions did begin to iust with this mightie Gyant,  when the Gyant saw that alone knight did put himselfe before him, he would not moue one iot from the place whereas he was, but cried out vnto the knights, that they should come forth against him all thre. But when he saw his words did little profit him, with great fury  infer|nall courage he made his course against the valiant Tar|tarian, who with a worthy courage, as one that was both stout  strong of hart, broched his horse with the spurs and went forth to met him,  in the middest of their course they met so strongly together, y^t their great speares were broken

into small shiuers  this stout Tartarian did double with his body backwards, in such sort that his head strike di vpon y^ Horse crouper,  being somewhat astonied with that strong incounter, he passed forwards on his Horse,  straight waies did settle himselfe agayne in the saddle, but the strong  de|formed Gyant, Horse  all fell downe vnto the ground, with which fall they made a meruaylous great noise,  he had his saddle fast betwixt his legges. When the King Balachia saw his Gyant on the earth, he was very heauy in his hart, and commaunded that no more Knights should come forth to the iust, but that the three Princes should be brought before him, at which time the monstrous giant did arise from the ground, and drew out a great  mighty fauchon which he had at his girdle,  went towards the Princes  said, that they all thre together should make battaile with him.
The thre Princes not making any reckoning of his wordes, on horsebacke as they were, went before the King, and asked him if he were content to pay them theyr bar|gaine that was made betwixt them, if not, they would de|part vnto some other place whereas they thought best. Then the King who was meruaylous angrye and offended with them, aunswered and sayd I will that you serue me in this my warres, and afterward it shall be at my pleasure to pay you for your seruice, and if you will graunt vnto this with a good will doe it, if not I will make you perforce. Then these three Princes who had no desire to tary ther, although the King would giue them all the treasure that hee had, but onely intended to serue and helpe the Quene Lauinia, for that it seemed vnto them that she had most right, without speaking any word vnto the King tourned about their hor|ses, and tooke their way towardes a great bridge of stone, which passed ouer the riuer, and at the farther end therof was the gate of the Citie, and vpon the said brige and wal of the Citie there were many people, and because the campe was very nigh the citie, they might well discerne all that had passed with the thre Princes, and what they had done,

and very much meruailed to what purpose it was done, and could not imagine who those thre valiant knights should be.
Now when the King Balachia saw that the thre Prin|ces went their way, with great wrath  anger he began to cry out with a loude voice vnto his knights commaunding them to take them perforce. At which commandement ma|ny of his Knightes did follow them with as great sped as their horses could run, but before they could ouertake them, these three Princes, were entred vpon the bridge. And when they saw so many people following the~ they drew out their swords  turned backe vpon them. And wounded many of them. But by reason of the great company that assualted them, they were put to great extremitie,  forced to retire backewards towards the citie. And by reason that the bridge was somwhat narow, it did profit them very much in that their enimies could not assault them but all before, to whom they did very great harme. This battaile indured betwixt them more then halfe an houre, in which time they slew of their enemies more then twentie Knights. And when those which were within the citie saw all that passed, they thought it best to open the gates vnto those Knights, that so valiant|ly  with great strength defended themselues,  determined to retaine them, on their part, to help them to make defence against their enimies, for that they did withdraw them|selues towards the Citie.
This determination they performed for as these thre Princes did by little and little retire towards the gates of the citie, so when they came nigh them, they that were vp|on the walles and battilments of the citie, did shoote many arrowes, and threw stones, and other things at their eni|mies, with the which they did them very great harme, and made them to retire backwards, by reason whereof they had space for to open a  doore of the Gates, by the which the thre Princes entered in, and the Postere being  againe they of the citie receiued them very wl,

and gaue them good intertainment, and much meruailed at their great valour  strength,  the Princes with like curte|sie did returne them thankes for that which they had done, and that in their defence they would doe all that euer was in their powers. There was amongst these people a knight who was principall of them,  had the charge ouer that gate, and this Knight carryed the three Princes before the Quene Lauinia, accompanied with many other knights Gentlemen, and when they came before hir, they gaue hir to vnderstand of all that they had seene those three knights doe,  how they came of their owne good will to serue hir in hir wars. The Quene when she heard that which the knight had told hir, receiued great ioy in their gentle disposition  good propor|tion, receiuing them very curteously, and doing them all the honour she could,  offering hir selfe wholy vnto them,  like did aduertise them of the small reason that the King had to besiege them. These Princes answered hir with wonted cur|tesie, and did offer themselues vnto the Quene so liberally that she was almost satisfied of the sauegard of hir citie. Then they remayned ther all that day without doing any other thing, and the King of Balachia remayned in his camp with great anger and sorrowfull heauinesse, that those thre Knights were gone from him in that order, and did sweare a mightie oath that he would make them die an euill death, if he might get them into his power. And although he had, at this present great wrath against them, ther did not passe very long time after, but that they did grieue him much more, and made him repent himself for that he did not giue them better intertainment, when they first entred into his campe, as in this chapter following shall be told you.


 How the three Princes Bargandell, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, issued forth with such people as were in the citie, vnto the camp of their enimies, and of the mighty deed of armes that they did there. Chap. 13.
_WHen the next day was come, these thre prin|ces were very desirous to go forth of the ci|tie against their enimies, and to raise vp the sege that was against the citie, and set at li|bertie the Queene Lauinia, from that incon|ueniens. They requested to know what co~|pany of people were in the citie. And mstering them they found that ther were in all, a thousand Knights,  three thou|sand footemen, all well armed,  very couragious, for to doe all that which was commaunded vnto them. And they were certified that in the campe of their enemies, ther might bee fiue thousand Knights, and vi. thousand footemen. Yet for all that it seemed vnto the valiaunt stomakes of these Princes, that they might goe forth, with the people which they had, to giue the assalt and attempt against their enimies. So straight way they commanded that euery man should make him ready,  this being done, they left the citie well proui|ded  in good gard:  commaunded the gates of the citie to be opened,  they issued out, in very good order.
In the foreward went these three mightie and worthy Princes, and all the rest when they saw them so mightie and well proporcioned of members, and very stout, receyued great courage. Then those which were in the companie without, when they saw the people of the citie came forth, they were greatly amazed, and did verely beleue that those thre Knightes had hartened and giuen them courage to at|tempt the field. The King strayght way commaunded that all his people should bee put in order with all spe possi|ble: but by reason that their enimies came vpon them vn|awares, before they could be in order, they were assalted of them,  receiued great damage, and yet it could little haue aduauntaged them, if the three Princes had not beene ther, who beeing in the fore front, dyd wounde, kill and ouer|throw all that came before them, and put themselues so far amongst their enemies, that their owne people could not follow them, without great trauaile.
So when the King saw this great destruction which the thre Knights made amongst his Knights, he pulled himselfe by the beard, and blasphemed against himselfe, for that when he had them in his tent, he dyd not co~maund that they should be taken  put to a cruell death. Then the huge  monstrous Gyant which was ther, left the King,  pressed in great hast towards that place whereas the thre Princes were:  the first that he met with all was with the Tartarian Zoylo,  when he knew him to be the same that did ouerthrow him in the Iust, he was very ioyfull therof,  made towards him. When this aproued and worthy Tartarian saw him com|ming, with a valiant  stout courage, he did abide him: so that betwixt them there began a stout  well foughten bat|tayle. And although the Giant was very great  monstrous, and had aduantage by his mightie members, and great strength, yet to oppose against the same, the Prince of Tar|tarie, had very good armour, made by art magicke, in such sort, that by no meanes it could not be cut nor broken. So that he did strike at this furious Gyant so mighty  terri|ble blowes, that many times he pearced both his armour  flesh, that the blood ran out in diuers places. At the same time the other two worthy Princes, Bargandell and Lyria|mandro did meruailous dedes of armes, and were all to be brewed in blood, with the great number which they hadde slayne:  were so feared amongst their enimies, that wher|soeuer they went, they made them way. And when their owne people dyd se the great valiantnesse and worthy dedes which they did, they receiued great courage, and dyd very great harme and damage vpon their enimies. And al|though this dyd indure for a while, yet it could not endure no longer then the whole campe was gathered together  put in order. And for that they were a great number more then those of thec itie, with great violence they pressed vp|on them, in such sort, that these two Princes could not chuse but perforce they must retyre backewardes. And when the Tartarian Zoylo, who was in battaile with the Giant per|ceued

that his companions did retire, he thought it not wis|dome to remaine there alone amongst so many, but at that instant he left the Gyant  put himselfe amongst his compa|nions, making them to retire in very good order, that their enimies might not do them any harme. The giant when he saw himselfe clere from his enemie, he was not sory for it, but departed  made no accompt of him, for that his courage was abated in meting his match. So all those of the citie retired, vntill they came vpon the bridge,  in good order they entred into y^ citie. And although their enimies would haue entred in with them, yet the thre Princes which were the last,  those souldiers which were vpon the wals and battil|ments, did defend the entry so that they returned vnto the camp, wher as they found the King very heauy  sad, to se the great damage which he had receued that day of his eni|mies,  the great number which he saw those thre Knights to kill, who before he had in little estimaion. On the other side, those of the citie receiued great ioye, as well for that which they had done, as to haue on their part those three knights, with whom they recouered more hart  courage the~ before. In the time of all this conflict the Quene Lauinia,  hi daughter Olimpia, were vpon the top of a tower that was night the walles of the citie, from which place they did se all that passed. And when they saw the thre Princes com|ming, with great ioy and pleasure, they went farther to re|ceiue them,  did them snch honor, as vnto those (next vnto God) she put hir whole trust  confidence in: not doubting by them to be deliuered from that great wrong done vnto hi. So ther they rested themselues, the rest of the day which remained, till the next day was come, in the which they dyd all, as shalbe told you in this chapter following.


 How these three Princes went forth the second time into he camp, and were taken prisoners by their enemies. ea 14.
THE sorrow  griefe which the King of Balachia receued was very much, as well for the slaughter  harm don  his people, as also for the comming of those thre knights

to them of the citie, by whom they had recouered such cou|rage: whereas before they were at a point to yelde them|selues. And it semed vnto him, that according as that day they came forth vpon them, so they would doe it oftner,  did imagine within himselfe how  by what meanes he might be reuenged on those thre knights,  take away from his ad|uersaries the force and aide which they had of them. And ha|uing determined with himselfe what was best to be done, he commaunded to call vnto him the Gyant whose name was Fulgoso,  when he came before him he sayd, doe thus which I commaund thee, choose in all the whole campe a thousand knights of the best thou canst finde, and in a readinesse with them,  when thou dost see our enimies come forth of the ci|tie, thou  all these knights shall haue no other charge, but to take the three knights which went from hence, and bring them prisoners before mee: for that I doe se that in those three onely resteth the force  strength of our enimies. The Gyant who was no lesse wrathfull, then the King, with a ve|ry good will did promise to accomplish all that he had com|maunded. And so he departed from the king,  began to choose out the knights that should serue his turne for that attempt, and vnto euery one perticularly he gaue his charge what he should doe. So they were all in a readinesse, tarying the time, when their enemies should come forth. And all the rest of the souldiers were continually in very good order, verye destrous to be reuenged, of the harme which they had before receiued. When the next morning was come, these thre Princes had great desire to finish that which they had be|gunne, for that they would follow  proserute their enter|prise: wherfore they determined to goe forth of the citie as they did the day before. And for the same purpose they ga|thered together the best souldiers that were in all the citie, and commaunded the gates to be open,  they issued out in very good order.
Now when they were passed the bridge, they set vppon their enimes, whom they found not vnprouidd, as the day

before, but in a readinesse tarrying their comming, so that beetwixt them there beegan a very stout and well foughtn battaile, and there these three princes went all together be|fore, working wonders, wounding killing, and ouerthrow|ing all that euer they met, in such sort, that they made large way whereas they went. In this sort indured the battaile more then one houre, and all things went well with them of the Citie, but sodeinly came vpon them the Gyaunt Ful|goso with his thousand knights, and for that they hadde no other charge but to take these thre Princes, they straight waies compassed the~ about, in such sort that not one of their companie could come nigh them by a great space. Then this mightie Gyaunt began the battayle alone with these three knights, for that according vnto his force and strength they had mough to doe with him,  in the meane time that they were in battaile with the Gyaunt, the knights of the Gyaunt did kill their horses, and in falling vnto the ground they all together charged themselues vpon them, and with the help of the Gyaunt they were not able to make any re|sistance, neither was theyr great prowesse and strength suf|ficient to defend themselues, but that they must nedes be taken prisoners. When they tooke away theyr swords, and pulled of their Helmes, and carried them before the king, who was in his Tent, very ioyfull when hee saw them brought prisoners. And by reason that the three princes did lack in the battaile, those of the Citie could not make any farther resistance against their aduersaries, and therefore they did retire in the best wise they could into the Citie, and when they found missing in their companie the thre knights, and vnderstoode that they were prisoners, I am not able to declare their great sorrow and griefe which they receiued, for that besides the loue they bare them, they ho|ped also by their help to make defence against theyr foes, and if theyr absence and lacke was left amongst the com|mon people, much more was the griefe that the Quene La|ima and hir Daughter receiued when they heard that sor|owful newes, so that it seemed that they were past all hope

of remedie, for that they had lost those thre knights, which caused them to be verie heauie, and could dooe nothing but weepe. And now to returne to them that were in the camp, the Historie sayth that the King and all the rest were very ioyull, for that he had in his power the thre knights, and thought that he could not reuenge himselfe vppon them to commaund them straight wayes to be put to death, but would vse some other straunger reuengement, intending to kepe them prisoners in such cruell prisons, whereas they should by little and little bee consumed and die, and to giue them euery day torments, because their ende should conti|nue long, and would not suffer that at once they should be slaine, and therewith hee commaunded the Gyaunt Fulgoso, that he should take vnto him twentie knights and carri them vnto the castle of stone which he had taken, that was but thre miles from that place, and straight way the giant put all things in a readinesse, and bound fast the hands o the Princes, and so put them vpon their Horsses, and with twentie Knightes they tooke the way towards the Castle, whereas the king had commaunded to carrie them. When these thre Princes saw themselues so carried, with their hands bound like vnto malefactors, they were very heauie and sad with themselues,  knew not what to do, but to haue patience at that sodaine chance and mis fortune, not hauing any other comfort, but to receiue their death with a verie good courage, in what sort so euer they would giue it them. The loue of these Princes was so much the one vnto the other, and their great valour and bountie was so apparant amongst them, that they receiued as great griefe the one for the other, as though it had bene perticularly to each of the~, and either of them desired to dye for to saue the other two of his companions. So when they had trauailed from the campe the space of two miles, they passed by the foote of a smal mountaine, and when these thre Princes lift vp their eyes for to behould that Mountayne, they saw descending from the top thereof a knight of a mighty stature of his bo|die, and of a good disposition, verie well armed and moun|ted

vpon a good Horse, who semed by his demeanour to bee a knight of estimation, who descended the mountaine a re|sonable pace, and came towards them, and for that this Hi|story her after will declare vnto you who this knight was, he doth leaue all at this present, till time doe serue to tell of other matters.


How the Knight of the Sunne going towards the Em|pire of Grecia, should haue been taken by treason at a Bridge, and of all that passed therein. Chapter 15.
_THE Historie sayth that the knight of the Sunne remained eight daies in the Castle of Onorio, at such time as he found himselfe whole and sound, and felt no griefe of his great trauaile which he receiued, with the Gyant  his knights, so he tooke his leaue of the Lord of the Castle, and of his daughter Oliria,  car|ried with him his two sonnes Aurelio and Bynano, whom he gaue vnto him for to be his Pages, and after he had a long time trauailed, it happened vpon a day somewhat late towards the euening, they came vnto a Bridge which was vpon the riuer Danubia, vpon the which there was a migh|tie, great, and well towred Castell, one of the most strongest that euer he saw in all his life, and this Castell did belong vnto the king Tiberio, and it was edified there very strong, for that it was in the vttermost partes of all Hungaria, and was scituated ther for that his enemies could not enter into his Countrie with any armie, but onely that way, by reason that the Riuer there was verie great, and he that was Liefetenaunt and had the keping of the Castell, was the Troyan Earle, before the Knight of the Sunne slew him, and after his death the King dyd commit the charge and keping thereof vnto his Brother Florinal|dus, for that he was a knight of great estimatian, and one

of the principallest of his Court, who not forgetting the uill will which he had conceiued against the knight of the Sunne, hee determined to take him prisoner in that Castell, and when by force hee could not doo it, he would doo it by treason. For vnderstanding of a certaintie that hee could not passe by any other way, but that onely, as it in dede fell out, that at such time as the Knight of the Sun should come thether, Florinaldus was within the Castell with more then twentie knights, abiding his comming. So when the knight came thether, he ound the gates of the bridge shut, which was vnder that mightie Castle, and he tooke the ring of the gate in his hand and gaue great strokes, at which noyse there appeared at a window a very faire Gentlewo|man, and well apparayled, and when she saw the Knight of the Sunne, shee straight waies knew him by the tokens shee had of him, and speaking vnto him, she sayd: What is it that you would haue gentle Knight, that you knocke so hard at the gates. When the Knight of the Sunne saw the Gentlewoman, saluting hir very curteously he reply|ed: That which I would haue (fayre Gentlewoman) is, that you would commaund the gates to be opened, that we may passe and goe forwards on our iourney, for that accor|ding as it hath bene tould me, there is no other way to passe, but by this Bridge. I am very well content to doo this which thou dost demaunde, saide the Gentlewoman, but yet first thou must doe that which other Knights doe when they come to passe this way. What is that which I must doe, sayd the Knight of the Sunne, for it may bee such a thing that I shall haue great pleasure and delight to doo it. That which thou must doe said the Gentlewoman, is to iust with a knight,  if it so fall out that he doo ouerthrow thee from thy horse to the ground, thou shalt leaue here thy name written, and then passe forwardes on thy iourney, and if so e that you doo ouerthrow the Knight, you must arrie heere all night, and receiue the honour that shall be done vnto you, and in the morning you may depart whe|ther your pleasure is.
All this I am very well content to doo, sayd the Knight of the Sunne, therefore commaund that the gates may be opened. Tarrie a while sayd the Gentlewoman, and there|with shee withdrew hir selfe from the window, and within a small while after the gates were opened, and there came foorth a verie big and well proportioned knight, mounted vpon a good horse,  well armed, seming to bee of a good dis|position, and without speaking any word vnto the Knight of the Sunne, he went and put himsele in the field with his speare in his hand readie vnto the iust. Then the Knight of the Sunne tooke his speare and prepared himselfe, and bee|ing both in a readinesse they broched their horses with their spurs, and with great fury and force they made their incou~|ter, which was in such sort that the Knight of the Sunne encountered with the Knight of the Bridge with so great force, that he bare him ouer the horse crouper, with the sad|dle betwixt his legs, and he fell downe to the ground, and the Knight of the Sunne passed his course forwards without receiuing any harme. Then the Knight who was throwen downe arose vp, and without speaking euer a word went into the Castle. This Knight was Florinaldus, who as yet did not acknowledge himselfe, but would prooue his good for|tune the third time with the Knight of the Sunne. Then the Gentlewoman which spake vnto him at the window, came downe vnto the gate, accompanied with other two Gentlewomen, and when she came vnto the Knight of the Sunne, she sayde.
Of a truth gentle knight, thy great bountie is such, that vnto thee more then to any other, with great reason we ought to giue the seruice and honour, which in this Castell we be accustomed to doe vnto valiaunt Knights, and see|ing it is now late, and you cannot goe farre this night, a|light from your horse and goe wee vp into the Castle,  rest your selfe, whereas we wil doo you all the honour that pos|siblie we may. The Knight of the Sunne would verie faine haue proceded on his iourney, and not haue stayed there, but considering his promise, and againe that it was verie





late, he determined to accomplish that which semed vnto him with a  good will the Gentlewoman had desired. And therewith he dyd alight from his Horse and his Pa|ges did the like, and it was commaunded that their Horses should be kept in good order, and the Gentlewoman went vnto the Knight of the , and tooke him by the hand and lead him vp into the castle, whereas he was serued and banketted with , and diuers sorts of fruits  other things, till such time as supper was made readie, so they sat downe and were serued with diuers kindes of meates, in as ample manner as could be at the table of King Tibe|rio. And all this while there appeared not in the castle one knight, but Gentlewomen and householde seruaunts, at which the knight of the Sunne was greatly amazed, and asked of that faire Gentlewoman what was become of the knight with whom he did iust. And the Gentlewoman an|swered, that at such time as he is ouerthrowne by any knight, he neuer dare come in hir presence againe, till such time as he hath ouerthrowen some other knight. And in tal|king of this and other things wherein they most delighted, they passed the time away till it was time to goe to take their rest, then ther came two Gentlewomen with two sil|uer candlestickes, and candles therein, whereby the Knight of the Sun perceiued that it was for his departure to bed, and taking leaue of that faire gentlewoman, hee went with the other two, who brought him vnto a chamber which was very faire and richly hanged, in the which was a rich bed, wherefore hee greatly meruayled at the honour which they did vnto him So when hee came into the chamber the Gen|tlewomen left the Candles and departed, and his Pages did vnarme their Lord, and he went into the bedde, one of the Pages who was called Bynnano was of a verie prompt wit and vnderstanding, and verie craftie in all his beings, and hee seeing the great honour which they did vn|to his Lord, not knowing him, and that there was not sene in all the Castle a knight sturring, neither the knight that was ouerthrowen in the iust, mistrusted some thing,

which was the occasion that he perused verie well all the chamber round about whereas his Lord should slepe, and lifting vp a cloath of Tapisterie which hung vppon a wall in the same chamber, hee discouered a halfe doore behinde it, which had neither locke nor boult, at the which he receiued little pleasure, but went vnto his Lord and tolde him of it, saying.
My Lord, you haue trauailed many daies in this Coun|trie of Hungaria, and by your great valiant knighthood, you haue got vnto your selfe many friends, and on the contra|rie likewise many enimies, therefore where so euer you doe come in any place, and the parties in that place not being by you knowen, it is requisite to haue some iealousie, and to mistrust the worst, especially alwaies to bee well aui|sed, for that with great ease by the way of treason, a cow|ard and weake person doth take reuengement of a worthy and valiaunt knight, and this considered, so much the more as a man is couragious, so much the lesse ought he to trust. I haue here very well considered of the great honor which in this Castle they haue done vnto you, without knowing you, neither haue you done any thing for them:  againe, I haue not sene one knight sturring in all this Castel, nei|ther the knight that you did ouerthrow at the gate of the Bridge in the iust, at which I greatly meruaile, and I doo suspect some treason, for that I haue found a false doore be|hinde this cloath of Tapistrie, which hath neither locke nor olt, nor any other thing to make it fast withall, whereby you may rest in quiet, therefore my iudgement is, that you rme your selfe againe to be in a readinesse whatsoeuer hall happen, and so armed you may lay your selfe downe gaine vppon this bed and slepe, and in the meane time I nd my brother will be vigilant, and readie to awake you  wee doo heare any sturring.
When the Page had made an ende of saying these words, e Knight of the Sunne receiued great contentment to eare him speake so wisele and discretly, and semed that

he had great reason in that hee sade. So taking his coun|saile hee arose vp againe and armed himselfe, and being ar|med hee laide him downe pon the bed, and the two Pages likewise did say themselues downe vpon another bed, which was prouided for them, and leauing the candles burning in the Candlestickes all the night, the two Pages in the meane time that the one did sleepe the other did wae, wathing till such time as that happened, which shall be tolde you in the next Chapter following.


How Florinaldus wold haue taken the Knight of the Sunne by treason, and how hee slew his Knights, and receiued Florinaldus to his mercie, and of all that happened beesides. Chap. 16.
_VEry much ought they to haue in estimation and prise, the good and faythfull seruants, when that ioyntly therewith they be of a harp vnderstanding, wise, and of a prompt wit: for besides the seruing of their Lords with reuerence, dutie, and discreation, they doe supplie many ouer-sightes which often times men do fall into, and the wise aduise of a good seruant doth come to more effect, then of a perfect friend. And heere I doo digresse fro~ the iudgement of some wise men, that say a man ought to haue but few seruants, and those to be the most vilest, fo that with them a man shall liue with more care. But my iudgement is, that rather with them they should liue more viciouslie, for that the vilenesse and simplicitie of the ser|uant, is vnto the master a peaceable meanes to live beastly, but vnto him that wil liue vertuously  wel, the shame  dis|cretio~ of a wise seruant is a great warning, not to ouershoot himselfe. And many times he doth determine with himselfe that, which reason nor the knowledge of God cannot with|drew him from his disordinate desies, yet the sham|fastnesse of a wise and discreta seruant doth somwhat di|sturbe him. Well, seeing that this doth bring profit for the

soule, and for the honour of man, wherfore should we not ra|ther entertaine them that be wise  able to giue good coun|saile, thn those which can neither profit their master nor the~ selues. Besides all this, there is to be reapt of a discreet ser|uant many other good things as to be politike, touching the estate  liuing of his Lord  master, as looking to his lands  goods,  respecting his honour,  by his fidelitie great rest  quietnes, and many times a conuersation of life, as it happe|ned vnto this mightie  valiant Knight of whom we haue spoken that all his extreame  singuler bountie had not ben sufficient to haue deliuered him from the death if it had not ben by the discreation of the wise  prompt vnderstanding of Bynnano. And now to returne vnto the matter. The His|torie sayth, that Florinaldus with his twenty knights all ar|med were in a redinesse, so at midnight when they thought the Knight of the Sunne had bene in his soundest slepe, in as secret manner as might be they went vnto the false dore which was behinde the Tapistrie, in the chamber of the Knight of the Sun,  when they thought to haue entered in therat all together, with a great number of Torches light before them, the two Pages heard the rushing of their ar|mor,  before that halfe of them could enter in, they had cal|led their Lord, who with a trice was on his fete,  when he saw these armed knightes enter in at the dore, some with hachets of armes, and other some with their swoord dra|wen in their handes, with great anger and furious wrath he receiued them, and drawing out his fine cutting sword, he stroke the formost of them vppon the healme, that he cloue him downe to the breast, wherewith he ell downe dead to the ground, and he was scarce fallen when that hee stroke another with a bie blow vppon his necke, that he made his head flie from his body, and fell against the wall on the other side. Then all the rest when they saw so sodaine a mischiefe following them by him, whom they thought to haue found in his bedde and a sleepe, theyr loud waxed cold in their bodyes, and would not haue

willingly haue bene there for all the goods in the world,  would faine haue fled back againe the way they came, bu Florinaldus who was the hindermost of all,  kept the doore, would not let them goe forth, but that they should doe their best against the Knight of the Sunne. And so they returned a vpon him, and by reason they were many, they laide vpo him like a company of smiths, when they doe beat their yro on the anfield. And if his armour had not ben very good,  could not be but that he had ben in great danger, yet by  mighty courage he was without all feare,  put himselfe a|mongst them, in such sort, that in a short space he sle  uerthrew very sore wounded to the ground the most par of them,  the rest which remained, returned  went forth  the same dore whereby they entred, in spite of Florinald that did kepe it,  among them that went forth, the Knigh of the Sunne did likewise goe forth,  the first that e m withall was Florinaldus, which semed vnto him to be o of all the rest, as well by the rich armour that he wore,  by keeping the rest that they should not flye,  he  such a blow vpon his healme, that he made him soup  bo his kne to the ground,  as the History hath told you,  naldus was very proud of hart,  of great strength,  neu lacked courage to attempt any thing against the  the Sunne,  seeing himselfe at that time in so great extrem tie, he would proue his fortune against him , stroke him so strong and mightie a blow vppon his  that the Knight of the Sunne did fele the paine  of ver grieuous, and ther with he stroke Florinaldus another in  compence of that which he hadde , with muc more strength, that he made him fele his great suy, an nothing dismaying thereat, he pressed vnto him, and  tempted a braue  furious battaile, for that his  was very good and made by art magicke, which  occasion at the first, although the  of the Knght the Sunne were very strong and terrible, they  him 

much harme, but as this valiant and sout grekes anger  fury increased more  more, you might haue seene how that the proud knight, sometimes he stouped with his knes to the greund, and sometimes with his hands, that he hadde i|nough to defend himselfe, and to arise vp, so that he had no time to strike at his aduersary, but was almost out of his wittes with anger, and thought vnto himselfe that he had all the force of the world against him, and when he saw that his life could not long endure, but nedes he must haue pa|tience vnto fortune,  that his power and strength was not sufficient to goe through with his intention, he determined to yeeld himselfe vnto the mercy of him whom God  good fortune was fauourable vnto, and to root out from his hart that euill intent which he alwaie pretended against him,  therwith he pulled off his Healme  put himself before him, saying.
Oh worthie and valiaunt Knight, the best that euer was girt with sword, here I doe acknowledge and con|fsse my great offence, and that I doe deserue a worser pu|nishment then death, for that which I haue conspired a|gainst thee, and my euill determination hath increased eue|ry day more and more fince the time that I was ouerthro|wen by the at the passge of a bridge which I kept. Now heere I doe pray and desire the, that thou wouldest pardon and forgiue me all that is past, and receiue me into thy friendship, which I shall more esteeme of, then any thing in all the world.
When Florinaldus hadde sayde these wordes, and that the Knight of the Sunne didde know him, all the blowes that he receiued that night did not trouble him, as that did penitrate into his hart, and abate his great cou|rage and ire, for that he did not onely pardon him, with a very good will, but did also forgiue all the harme that euer he had done vnto him or vnto any other of his parents or friendes, for that he didde acknowledge the same, and

was very sorry and repented himselfe, not withstanding for to proue whether that which he had said were but dissembled because he saw himselfe in that great extremitie, he said. Of a truth Florinaldus I doe not pretend by any meanes to re|ceue thee into my company  friendship,  lesse will I put any confidence or trust in thee, till such time as thou dost accom plish one thing which I will tell thee In this I shall thinke my selfe most happie, said Florinaldus, that you would com|maund me to doe the thing, wherein I may shew the great desire that I haue of your friendship  conuersation. That which I will you shall do said the knight of the Sun, is, that out of hand you doe depart hence, and take your iourney throughout as many Countries as you can, but especiallye through the countrie of Fraunce, in the demaund of a Knight which hath a Flower de luce for his deuise, whose name is Clauerindo,  when you haue found him do my commendati|ons vnto him,  tell him that I doe goe straight vnto Con|stantinople,  how I doe meane to tarry ther till such time as I doe heare some newes from him. With all this I am very well contented said Florinaldus,  then these two dyd embrace one another,  from that day forwards, they were perfect friendes, as more at large shall be told you in this Historie.
So the Knight of the Sun with his Pages departed from this Castle towards the Empire of Grecia, and Florinaldus in the demaund of the Knight with the Flower de Luce. And here this Historie doeth leaue them till time doth serue,  returneth to tell you of the noble knight of Cupid, wheras we left him in the Kingdome of Russia.


How the Knight of Cupid departed from the King|dome of Russia, and of all that happened vnto him in his iourney. Chap. 17.
_CErtaine dayes the Knight of Cupid remay|ned in the court of King Luziro, by the ear|nest request of him and the Quene, who did honour and loue him, and had him in prise aboue all the Knights of the world, in such sort that they would he should haue remayned with them in their company alwaies,  neuer de|part from thence, but for that he could neuer be in quiet, nei|ther take pleasure or comfort in the honour, which they did vnto him, after that he had heard the newes of the Princesse Oliuia, certaine daies passed he tooke his leaue of the king  Queene, who did offer vnto him very largely at all times whensoeuer he should haue any neede of them or of their e|state. And being departed from the Court, he determined with himselfe what was best he should doe,  thought that it should be good to passe into Grecia,  there to know his fa|ther the mighty Emperour Trebatio,  to giue him to vnder|stand that the mightie  valiant Knight of the Sun was his sonne,  likewise his brother, whom he had a very great de|sire to se, calling to remembrance that which he did for him in the Iland of Candramarte,  receiued great ioy  content|ment in himself to haue such a valiant  worthy knight vnto his brother,  to be sonnes vnto so noble a father,  also the great remedye that was had for the sorrowfull losse of the Princesse Briana his mother. But as he did delight himselfe in these thoughts, straight way there came vnto his remem|brance, that which the wise Artidon had told him of the Princesse Oliuia which caused vnto him so great a sorrow  griefe that all his pleasure and great contentment was for|gotten,  it made him to abhorre his owne lif  all y^e world,  thought within himselfe to goe wher all they should neuer after heare newes of him. For that hee could not perswade with himselfe, thinking it a thing impossible for him to liue in the world, neither to receiue any comfort amongest his parents and friends. When that he should vnderstand how that the Princesse Oliuia was in the power of any other

Knight, thus he trauailed in a great confusion,  could not determine with himselfe what was best for him to doe, and being troubled in his mind he passed the Kingdome of Rus|sia,  trauailed other thre daies in another kingdome adioy|ning thervnto,  by reason that his minde was alwaies oc|cupied with these profound  contrary thoughts, all his tra|uaile for the most part was out of the high wayes,  many times he was benighted in the fields,  would passe a whole day without eating any thing. So it happened one day ve|ry early in the morning, hauing lost his way, he found him|selfe amongst a great number of mountaines,  was so far ingulfed amongest them that he could not finde the way to come out, neither did he know where he was, till the most part of the day was past,  then he discouered a mountaine which was higher then all the rest,  determined to goe vp to the top of the same, to see if he could from thence disco|uer any way or towne whether he might resort. Then he went vp vnto the top of that mountaine although it was with great trauaile,  being at the top hee was there a good while,  looked round about him towards all parts,  did dis|couer a mightie Country,  very plaine,  that place wher|as he was, was the craggedst part of all that country. Also he discouered a narow way, for to descend from those moun|taines into the plaine, wher he saw a mighty broad  vsed way which passed alongst by the foote of that mountaine,  as he would haue descended towards that place, he saw som what a far of comming towards him a company of knights, whose armour glistered very much,  among them he saw one that was more higher then all the rest from the breast vpwards,  he seemed vnto him, although it was a far off to be a Giant,  being very desirous to know who they should be, he stoode still, till such time as they drew nigher,  then he saw that in the middest of that ambush of knights ther came other thre Knights on horseback with their helmes off,  their hands bound behind them, whom he did well perceiue to be carried prisoners against their willes.
These were the thre Princes Bargandel, Lyriamandro,  the Tartarian Zoylo, which were carried prisoners in the po|wer of the giant, at the commaundement of the King Bala|chia, and the Knight which they saw come downe from the mountaine towards them, as the History hath told you be fore, was the knight of Cupid, who seeing the~ to bring those knights prisoners,  very desirous to know who  what it should be, did descend downe the mountaine towardes the high way whereas they should passe,  when he drew nigh vnto them, hee straight waies knew them to be the thre Princes his very great friendes,  very much meruailed to see them in that case,  vpon a sodaine the water ran downe his cheekes,  his hart was ready to burst with great sor|row  griefe, to se such perelesse princes caried in that sort, and being straight waies desirous to venture his life in that present daunger for to performe that wherin he was great|ly bound, for the defence of his friends, he put himselfe into the middest of the high way with his speare in his hand,  the great giant Fulgoso came formost of all the rest, moun|ted vpon a mightie horse,  armed with very thick  strong armour of frele,  with a speare in his hand so bigge, that it semed to be a Pine tree,  the beauer of his healme vp, that a far off one might discerne his monstrous  euill fauoured countenance, and when the Knight of Cupid saw that it was but labour lost to talke with that sort people,  words spent in vaine, he broched his Horse with the spurres, and with so great fury that it semed to be a Thunder bolt, he made his course against the giant, who when he saw him come run|ning against him, with so great a noise  furious a violence, one way he thought he had bene some foolish Knight,  beside himselfe,  to y^e contrary he very much meruailed to see him comming with so galia~t a grace  furious courage,  without any more tarrying e set spurs vnto his mightie Horse and went forth to met him so fast as his Horse could run, and in the middest of their course they mette both together,

and this worthy and valiant knight of Cupid stroke the p|ant in the middest of his body, his speare being made of the hart of a Cpres tree.  the head of very fine tempered stele, which was giuen him by the king Luziro for a very precious and excellent good one at his departure from him,  his en|counter was so strong, that before his spere did breake, the sharp  well hardned head did pearce through the ill tempe|red harneis of that great giant,  ran through his body, ap|pearing at his backe,  therwith he fell downe dead to the ground,  with the mightie fall he brake the strong staffe of the speare,  the Knight of Cupid receiued so great encoun|ter of the Giant that it made him loose his stirops,  to let loose the raines of his horse bridle,  passed forwards with|out receiuing any more harme,  before that he came wher|as the other Knights were, he had recouered both his stirops and the rames of his Horse againe. When the three Princes and the Knights of the Giant saw that great  terrible en|counter, they very much meruailed thereat,  remayned a|stonied and amazed, and thought it so wonderfull that they could not tell what to say vnto it, and with great sorrow and griefe for the death of their Lord, all the knights toge|ther assaulted the knight of Cupld, and with great shrikes and shoutes they compassed him round about, and laid vp|pon him with all the power and strength they could, and although they were many, yet this stout  valiaunt knight did quickly abate their courage, for that at the first three blowes which he stroke at them which came formost, he ouerthrew thre of them to the ground very sore wounded and almost dead, and after besturred himselfe amongst the rest with so great fury that it was a wonder to se. The thre Princes who did beholde all that passed, knew not what to say, to see one knight of so great bountie and force, to attempt the battaile against a Gyaunt and so manye Knights, and with a good will they would haue giuen all that euer they were worth to haue bene loose and at liber|tie for to haue holpen that Knight. But at that time

there was no nede of their succour, for that in lesse then halfe an houre the sonne of Trebatio had ouerthrowen to the ground dead and erie sore wounded the most part of all his enimies, and the rest that remained seeing so great slaughter, thought themselues in no securitie, but tourned their Horse bridis  fled that way which they came as fast as their Horses could run, and neuer forgot the eare which they receiued neither did they looke backe till such time as they came into the camp afore the king, some with their fa|ces cut, and some their armes, they told him that one alone knight came against them in the high way and slew the gi|ant and all the rest, sauing they which saued themselues by flight. The King and all those that were with them verie much meruailed at that sodaine misfortune, and thought it a thing impossible that any humane creature should giue such an enterprise  goe through therewith, neyther to haue so much hardynesse and courage of heart. The King recei|uing great sorrow and griefe for the death of the giant, did out of hand commaund a companie of knights to be armed in a readinesse,  returne vnto the knight of Cupide. When he saw himselfe clere and at libertie from his enimies, determined to set the thre Princes at libertie, and not to make himselfe to be knowen vnto them for two causes, the one for that he departed from them out of England, without giuing them to vnderstand thereof, and the other, for that they should not carrie anie newes of him to the Court of King Oliuerio, for that the Princesse Oliuia commaunded him in hir Letter to depart thether, whereas she might ne|uer heere any newes of him, and for these causes he would not make himselfe knowen onto y^e three Princes, but came onto them and did vnbince them, and ct a sunder the cords wherewith they were bound, and counterfaiting his speach nd voyce in the best wise he could, hee asked of them who hey were, and what was the occasion that they were carri|d away in that sort. Then they who were no lsse amazed  his great bountie, then glad to see themselues at libertie, aue hartie thanckes for that which hee had done for them,

and the Tartarian Zoylo declared vnto him of whence they were, and likewise tolde him of all that happened vn|to him and his companions since the time that they first en|tered into the kingdome of Lusitania vntill that houre that they delyuered them. When the knight of Cupide vnder|stood all the whole effect, he receiued great ioye within him|self, for that he had succoured his friends in so great a neces|sitie. And beeing demaunded of them who he was, for that they might know him of whom they had receiued so great a benefit he answered them that he was a strange knight of that Country, and that he could not discouer nor tel vnto them his name, till such time as he had finished a iourney which he had taken in hand, but if they were desirous to re|turne and aide the quene Lauinia, he would goe with them and beare them company, and doe for hir all that lay in his power. When the thre Princes heard him say those words they were very glad and ioyfull, for that theyr whole de|sire was to returne vnto the Cittie, as well for the succour of the Quene Lauinia and hir daughter, as to bee reuenged on their aduersaries, as of the king of Balachia, for that they were verie angrie and wrathfull against him, and behol|ding often and verie much that knight, how hee was ador|ned with all bountie, they said one vnto another, that in all things he resembled Rosicleer, as well in his great valour as in the gentle disposition of his body, and in all the rest of his behauiour, and calling him to remembraunce, and how that they could not heare any newes of him, the teares ran from the eyes of either of them for the loue they bare vnto him. And beeing asked by the knight of Cupide the occasi|on wherefore they should shed those teares, they tould him that they all thre went in the demaund of a Knight that in all thinges, as well in behauiour as in proporcy|on of body was lyke vnto him, and how that the remem|braunce of him was the occasion of those teares, for that many dayes a gone he departed from them, and since that time they could neuer heare any newes of him. At this present the Knight of Cupide receiued great sorrow and

griefe, in seing that those thre Princes being of so great valour went in his demaund, and that occasion did so serue, that he could not discouer himselfe vnto them. Here may you plainely perceiue what the discurtesie of the Princesse Oliuia did cause, for that it caused him to withdraw fro~ him the great pleasure and contentment that he should receiue in discouering himselfe vnto his friends. So after that they had talked of these and other like things, the thre Princes tooke each of them a horse o? those knights that were slaine, and they foure together tooke their way towards the Citie, although by the counsaile of the tartarian Zoylo they went not the right way, suspecting that when the king of Balachia should vnderstand of the death of the Gyant, hee would send some people against the~, but their determination was not to be sene til such time as they were come nigh vnto y^e camp, and then put themselues into the Citie if neede so required, and in this sort although the King did send his power they should not meete with them, but that they might much more at their plesure come nigh the camp of their contraries, and consulting amongst themselues what was best for them to doo, they determined to giue the assault vpon their enimies sodainely, and to prease through them till such time as they might get the Bridge, and being there they were very cer|taine that when those of the Cittie should se them, they would issue foorth and succour them, or at the least waies they would open the gates that they might enter in, and looke as they had determined they did put in practise, and all these foure together dyd enter into the Camp of theyr eni|mies, cutting, wounding, and killing, that it was a wonder to see the great effusion which they made amongest them, and neuer rested til such time as they came vnto the bridge, whereas they dyd defend themselues very, valiantly, from them that followed them, where those of the Cittie did se all that passed.
And when they knew that those worthy Knights were their friends, they were very glad and reioyced to se them,

and did open vnto them the gates of the Citie,  very much meruailed at the other knight that cme with y^e three prin|ces, for that they saw the great slaughter which hee made amongst his enimies with his sword in his hand, and whe~ these soure Knights saw the gates of the Citie opened, they did retire by little  little vpon the bridge, vntill such time as their enimies dyd leaue off following them, as well for the mortall blowes they gaue them, as for the great harme they receiued by them which were vppon the walles of the Citie, so that they had time at their pleasure to enter into the Cittie, and when they were within they shut the gates, and receiued them with great ioye, and carried them beefore the Queene, whose ioy was so great for the returne of these three Princes that I am not able to expresse it, for that hir comfort and hope that shee had in them was very much, and theyr imprisonment was a grieuous corsie vnto hir heart. So there they did repose  rest themselues all that day, and all the next following, with a great deale more ioy then at any time beefore. The next day being come the knight of Cupide and the thre Princes commaunded that all such people as they thought could doe any thing to arme them|selues vnto the battaile, and so in very good order they went forth into the field against their enimies, and ouercame and brake the Campe and slew the King, and the most part of those that were with him, and the rest ranne theyr way, so that those of Lusitania remained with the victorie, and pur|sued theyr enimies till such time as the night dyd with|draw them backe, and made them to retire, and it was a thing to be wondered at, to see the great feates and deeds of armes that the knight of Cupide did that day, for it may bee sayde, that hee alone was the occasion of breaking vp of the Camp of their enimies, and the destruction of all the whole armie of the king of Balachia, so that on the one part as w as one the other, they verie much meruayled of the incri|dyble dedes which they saw done in that battaile. No when the night was come, the knight of Cupide seeing that there was no more nede of his help, he determined to de|part

very secretlie, for that he saw by the determination of the thre Princes that it was a thing imposible to kepe himselfe close long, but that hee must bee knowen by them. Therefore hee called a knight of the Citie a side, and sayde vnto him, that at such time as the people were gathered to|gether and entered into the Citie, he shuld tel the Quene and those thre strange knight, that hee was departed and gone about certaine businesse that dyd importune him ve|rie much, and that they should not by any meanes follow him, neither hope of his returne, for that hee knew not whe|ther hee should euer returne againe or no, and so he depar|ted ont of the Camp, and with a trotting pace trauayled all that euer he could that night, very sorrowfull in his hart for that he could not reioyce himselfe in the company of his verie friends, who with so louing and perfect friendship went to seeke him. With these sorrowfull thoughts that night he trauailed so long that he came vnto the sea,  the next day in the morning, he entered into a Ship of mer|chandise, which ariued at that place to refresh themselues with fresh water, and were bound vnto Alexandria. Now to returne vnto the thre Princes, the Historie saith that at such time as they had gathered theyr people together, and would haue entered into the Citie, they found wanting the knight of Cupide, and being very sorrowfull for his absence they went seking him, and asking for him of all that they met, till such time as they came to the knight, with whom the knight of Cupide had talked, and he tolde vnto them his mbassage and all that hee had sayd vnto him. And when the hree Princes vnderstoode of his departure, they were verie orrowfull for the same, and remembring the valiant dedes at they saw him doo, and the great boud in the which they ere bound vnto him, they were verie desirous to haue owen him, and to haue had him in their companie, and ery one of them thought in his minde that he should be osicleer, for that they were fully resolued amongest them|ues that there was not a knight in all the world y^t was le to doo for them that which hee did, but onely Rosicleer,

but straight way they put this thought from them, in saying that if it were Rosicleer, there was no occasion wherfore he should keepe himself from them  not be knowen, seeing that he vnderstood that they went in his demaund. Thus with a great desire which they had to know who this knight shuld bee, all y^t night they would not enter into the citie, but sent vnto the quene requesting hir to pardon them, they straight way departed to go seeke out the knight of Cupid,  the next day in the morning they came vnto the sea side,  vnto the Port whereas he did ship himselfe,  there they had newes of him, by the tokens that they gaue. So from thence they departed in his demaund in an other ship, that the Quens Lauinia commanded to be giuen them, and here the history doth leaue them trauailing by sea, and returneth vnto the knight of Cupide who departed and went before them.


How the knight of Cupid ariued in the kingdome of Phe|nicia, whereas hee deliuered from the death a knight, who afterward was a very great friend of his. Chap. 18.
_THE great sorrow and griefe which the worthie knight of Cupide sustained in his hart cannot be here expressed, as well for the louing of his dere friends in those cou~|tries,  not making himselfe knowen vnto them, as for the newes which was giuen him to vnderstand in the caue of the wise Artydon, concer|ning the princesse Oliuia, and being sore afflicted with th thoughts they sailed sixe daies with a prosperous winde, but the seuenth day they were taken with a mightie great an perillous torment, which made them loose their way,  wer constrained by the furious force thereof to take port in th kingdome of Phenicia, whereas the merchants determin to goe a land, and there to rest themselues certaine daye for that they were verie wearie and Sea sick, by reason  the great storme the which they had past. When the knigh of Cupid was a land, and saw that the countrie semed but

him to be very fruitfull, fresh, and pleasant, he determined with himself to see the countrie in the meane time that the marriners did trim their ship,  make prouision of all that was necessarie, and so he tooke his horse  went alone from the port, taking the way which led him vnto a mighty great Citie that was but sixe miles from that port. And when he had trauailed two miles fro~ the port, hee saw a far of from him in the same high way where he went, a great number of Knights, which seemed vnto him that they were in bat|taile they so beesturred themselues, and therewith he did a|mend his pace to know what it should meane, and when he came nigh vnto them, he saw that it was more them twen|tie knights who had compassed about one alone Knight, who was a of a very big stature, and armed with blackarmour, who made battaile with them all, and did defend himself ve|rie stoutly and strongly, and had ouerthrowen wounded to the ground sixe of them, so that he semed to be a valyant Knight and of good estimation. When the Knight of Cupide had well marked him, and saw him so valiantly defend him|selfe, he receiued great contentment, and determined to suc|cor him in that conflict, perswading him that the truth and right was on his part, for that there was so manie against one, and without any more tarrying he set spurres to his Horse sides, and with his Sword in his hand he put him|selfe in the middest of them that had compassed him about, and before that hee stroke any blow he sayd. Knights holde your handes and bee in quyet a while, and let me vnder|stand what is the occasion of this battaile, that so manie Knights are against one? All of them did well heare and vnderstand what he sayd, but the answere which they made vnto him, was, that they all stroke at him, as they which made no reckoning of him, which was a sorrowfull houre for some of them, for that when the knight of Cupid dyd se their villanie, his anger dyd presently increase, and he lift vp his strong arme and stroke one of them vpon y^e healme, that e cloue his head downe to his shoulders, so that he fel from is horse dead to the earth,  he was scarce downe when the

stroke another vpon y^e shoulder, so that he cloue him to the breast, and besturred himselfe amongst them with so great fury, that before they did perceiue their losse and harme he had ouerthrowen halfe of them to the ground. When this mightie knight who first made battaile with them all, saw himselfe succoured and aided in that time as hee thought his life to be lost, he receiued great ioy and contentment, and was very much amazed to se the straunge curtesie of that Knight, and the furious strokes which hee gaue vnto his contraries, the which was such, that if he had not seene it with his owne eyes hee would neuer haue beeleued it, and with that new and vnlooked for aide  succour, his strength and courage did so increase, that he stroke such a blow vpon the arme of one of them that was next him, that hee cut it cleane a sunder, and it fell to the ground holding his shelde fast and he stroke another vpon the head that he cloue it to the eyes, and ouerthrew him from his horse to the ground, so that afterward they could not strike any more blows, for that the rest of the Knights seing the great slaughter and effusion of blood which those two Knights made, thought their liues in small securitie, and fled away with all the hast they could, being to the number of sixe or seauen knights, so that these two valiaunt knights were left alone,  when the knight with the black armour saw himselfe clere from his contraries, he lift vp his beauer and went vnto the knight of Cupide, saying.
O gentle knight  the best that euer was sene, for I be|leeue that in all the world is not thy like, wherewith she be able to greatifie this good turne which you haue done vn|to me, I cannot surely with lesse then to offer my life, so that next vnto God by you I haue my life,  at least wayt deliuered me that I was not carried away prisoner, whi would haue bene vnto me more grieuous then my dea Sir knight, saide Rosicleer, your great valour doth deser far more then this, and I doo account my selfe verie w satisfied for that I haue done, dooing it for so worthie knight as you, neuerthelesse I desire you to tell me if y

are of this Country,  what is the occasion that you had this battaile against so many knights? To whom this Knight replied: This question which you doe demannd of me doth require long time to declare, and for that these Knights be|longeth vnto the King of this Countrie, whom we haue had this controuersie with,  I doe beleeue that when these that be run away shall come before him, he will send a number more of knights after vs, therefore me thinkes it shall doe well that we apart our selues out of this way,  goe vp to|wards the mountaine,  there we shall be sure not to meete with them, and riding by the way I will declare vnto you the whole effect of this that you doe demaund. These words which he spake liked well the Knight of Cupid,  therewith they departed from that place and went towards certaine mountaines which were towardes the right hand, then the knight with the blacke armour began to make relation vn|to the knight of Cupid, and said.
Sir Knight, you shall vnderstand that I am called Sacri|doro,  not long since was King of Antiochia,  as rich and prosperous as any other king could be, but Fortune hath pursued me in such sort,  shewed hir selfe so rigorous vnto me that in a very short time I haue lost my Kingdome, and am left all alone bannished from a great number of very good knights which I had continually with me, some of them e dead  slaine,  other some in prison,  the occasion of all this hath bn, that the king Polidarco, lord of this country, hath a daughter, whose name is Oriselua, a very faire dam|sell, endurd with many good graces  Princelike conditions, to whom I did  do at this present beare great loue, which was the occasion that I did demaund hir in mariage of the king hir father, who would not giue hir vnto me, in con|sideration that in times past he had certaine controuersies with the king my Father, for which cause I did moue wars with him, thinking by force to get that which by he way of request I could not obtaine.
Wherevpon either of vs did ioyne and gather toge|ther the greatest armie that possible we could, so that in the end we ioyned in battaile, wheras my cruell fortune  desti|nie would, that all my campe was broken  destroyed,  I escaped out of the field by great aduenture,  by reason that I had no people, knights nor souldiers, for to defend my king|dome, in few daies they made a conquest of all, without lea|uing me either towne or village, wherein I might rest my selfe, yea,  although I doe se my selfe so destroyed  ouer|throwen, yet the loue is so great that I haue vnto the prin|cesse Oriselua, that I cannot goe out of this country, for that I would euery day heare some newes of hir,  although I haue procured to goe in all the secret possibie, yet it hath ben giuen the king to vnderstand therof, who caused forth-with many knights to be put in diuers places, either for to kill me or to take me prisoner, and these knights with whom I made the battaile were the kings, so that if it had not bene for your good succour I had bene slaine, or els caried before the king their lor, who I doe beleue would straight waies haue commaunded to be put to the most cruell death that could be inuented, for that in times past my father slew his father in battaile, since which time he had alwaies this ran|cour  great enmitie against me. This is sir knight, y^ whole effect of that which you demanded of me,  now seing that I haue giuen vnto you the whole relation of my life, I doe heere very much desire you to tell me your name,  of what Country you are, that I may know to whom I haue disco|uered my selfe,  to whom I shall remaine in dutifull obliga|tion all the daies of my life.
When the King Sacridoro had made an end of decla|ring this, the knight of Cupid was moued vnto great com|passion, and iontlie therewith he had singuler affection vn|to him, for that he semed to be a person of great valour and of like desert, and for that his high bounty did deserue to b had in reputation of any good Knight,  especially for that

the passions of loue had ben the occasion y^t he was brought into that state, the which alone was sufficient to moue any to haue compassion on him, for that there is o other griefe, sorrow, peruerse fortune, nor aduersitie, more worthy to be pittied the~ that, he was a great while before he could make him any aunswere, in which time his aduersitie did grieue him very much, but in the end he spake vnto him  said.
Of a truth worthy king, this discourse which you haue made vnto me of your estate, hath bene vnto me very sor|rowfull  grieuous, for that so terrible a fall of fortune is sufficient to ouerthrow any valiant hart or stout courage,  especiallie being wounded with loue as you haue told me,  that thing alone is sufficient to cause me to haue compassi|on on you,  all this being true,  your aduersity very great, yet it cannot be denied but y^t your hart must be more stout|er  valiante, if that with a good stomacke you doe passe it ouer, and not hold it as a new thing happened vnto you, but as a thing which of long time past before it chaunced was knowen vnto you,  daylie looked for, for that the vali|ant courage doth mittigate  weaken the hardinesse of for|tune with the vertue of the spirit,  in nothing it is so quick|ly knowen as in the greatest extremities of their aduersiti|es. Fortune may very well ouerthrow a strong knight, but yet his valiant courage may be such, that the shall haue no power to get the victorie of him. He is ouerthrowen that doth thinke himselfe vanquished,  he that hath all his hope void as a thing dead,   whose courage is such, that all re|medies doth seme vnto him dissolute. You haue lost your kingdome very slightie,  by the losse of one battaile, so like|wise it may fall out, that by another battaile you may get it againe, for it is a common thing in wars, to ouercome,  to be ouercome,  many times we do se those which one day hath victorie, when the day before they lost it. Possiblie worthie king, you will say, that touching this which I haue sayd, you haue no prouision,  are alone without any army,

neyther any power requisit, whereby you should haue any hope to recouer againe your Kingdome.
To this I auns were, that I haue your aduersary the King Polidarco in a far more weaker estate, and that it may so fall out that you shall ee equall in the field, for that hee hath your kingdome by tyrannie, and against all reason, all those whom he hath on his side and in his behalfe (or at least waies) the most part of them, in the end will returne against him and be on your side  behalfe, for that many  infinit times it hath beene sene, a tiranous King doth finde himselfe alone  without company being in the midst of all his subiects, yea, at such time as he thinketh himself to haue the most company,  to be in power the most strongest. And it may be (worthy King) that this your sodaine fall  mis|fortune, is the punishment of almightie GOD, giuen vnto you for some secret  iust cause, and being by you acknow|ledged, he hath giuen you to vnderstand therby how  what a fraile thing all humane power and strength is, at such time as we doe lack his diuine fauour  if it be his pleasure he will returne you againe vnto your honour  high estate. Therfore if God be so pleased you haue no nede to seeke a|ny inconueniences, neither to breake your head how and in what manner it shall be brought to passe, but to strengthen and comfort your selfe,  to fortifie your valiaunt courage against all that shall happen.
This I saye, for that it semeth vnto me that you shall doe well to leaue trauailing in this Countrie, for so much as you doe it in great perill and daunger, and pro|fite you very little, and retourne vnto Antiochia your owne Country, there to talke and conferre one with an other, and procure to gather together your friendes and most principallest sbiectes, such as you were wont to haue and to trust. For that it cannot be but there bee some that do remain aliue, who with feare or else thinking y^t you are not aliue, or perhaps lost, dare not discouer themselues,

and then when you haue gathered together some of your party, euery day you shall finde your selfe increased,  then time will tell you what you shall doe,  according vnto your disposition  strength as y^ time shall serue. I for my part do assure you, (although I haue to goe another way) yet for the great sorrow  griefe that I receiue for this your misfor|tune, I will goe with you into your Country,  will not goe forth one step out of your company, till such time as I doe see how all thing will passe, in this your enterprise and pro|uing of fortune. And in that you doe aske of me my name, and what Country man I am? Surely I am so desperate  doe so much abhorre my owne life, that not many daies since, by chaunce I met with the greatest friends that I haue in the world, who trauailed in my demaund, and without ma|king my selfe knowen vnto them I departed  left them, for that I would not that they should vnderstand that I am a|liue, but now seing that you most valiant  worthy knight, haue declared vnto me, and very plainly, the whole discourse of your trauaile,  the secret of your hart  estate, it now seemeth vnto me, that I shall haue no reason to hide my selfe from you, vnderstand then that I am Rosicleer, sonne vnto Trebatio, the Emperour of Grece, and the mpresse Briana, daughter vnto the King Tiberio of Hungaria, and by my misfortune I am out of fauour and cast off by a precious Princesse, whom I doe loue with all my heart, by whom I am constrained to trauaile these straunge countries, one|ly with the name of the Knight of Cupid, for that no newes of me might come vnto the eares of that cruell Princesse, who with the same condition did graunt vnto mee my life. And herewith the knight of Cupid made an ende of his wordes.
When the King Sacridoro vnderstoode who that Knight was that gaue him so good and sound counsaile, and so libe|rally did offer vnto him his company he did sodainly con|eiue in his hart a great loue and friendshippe, in so ample  manner, that he neuer had the like to any other Knight,

the which thing did shew it selfe, as in this History shall ap|peare. So he went vnto the Knight of Cupid and said: Oh worthie  most excellent prince, now may I say that I haue no occasion to complaine on Fortune, for that it hath not ta|ken from me so much as I haue this day, onely in knowing of you,  seeing in you so great a comfort, for certainlie I do beleue  hope, that if I haue your soueraigne bounty with me, not onely to get againe my lost kingdome, but also to haue the kingdome in my power, of the king Polidarco my enimie: Unto the, O mercifull God, I doe giue ininite thankes, for that I acknowledge this my remedy doth pro|cede from the,  from thy hands, and so I will accept it,  therefore soueraigue prince, here I doe accept  receiue the great curtesie that you offered vnto me,  will psse into Aniochia in your company, with no lesse ioy  assurance, then as though I were in the middest of a mightie  strong army. With these  other words of great curtesie betwixt them they passed on their way,  when they were departed out of that high way they trauailed forwards by the sies of high  mighty mountaines verie craggy which were vp|on the right hand,  being there, the king Sacridoro said vn|to the knight of Cupid: You shall vnderstand (worthy prince) that for to passe into Antiochia, either we must proceed for|wards this way in which we now are, by the plaine coun|try, or else we must trauaile ouer these high mountains which be here before vs,  by either of them there is great perill  daunger, for if we trauaile this plaine Country, we must of very force passe through a great part of the Coun|try of the king Polidarco, and considering the number o spies that he hath laide in wait for me, it cannot be chose but that I shall be knowen, so that euery day we shal haue great and perillous battailes with the knights of th King, and againe if we doe passe along the toppes of  mountaines, they say that it is not inhabited, but all  and that there is on them verie many terrible and furiou beastes, so that of long time since there hath none 

that way for feare of them, therefore valiant knight consi|der vnto which of these two daungers we shall offer our selues. The knight of Cupid did study a while vpon y^e same, and afterward aunswered  said: Of two euills it is good alwaies to eschue the worst, and it seemeth vnto me that to passe this plaine through the land of the king Polidarco, is not onely perillous for the battailes which we doe looke for with his knights, but also it is very hurtfull vnto vs, for you be knowen, whereby we shall not at ease enter into your kingdome. Therefore it semeth best vnto me that we take this way by the mountains, for although ther be wild beasts, as you say, we shall with more ease ouercome them then ar|med men, for that God did make man Lord, giuing him po|wer ouer all wilde beasts,  what by strength or by pollicie ther is no kind of wild beast, be he neuer so furious, but by man he is subdued and brought into subiection. When the knight of Cupid had vttered these words vnto the king Sa|cridoro, his counsell did like him very well,  therewith they tooke their iourney towardes the top of those mountaines, which were of so great height, that all that day  the next day following they had enough to doe to get vnto the top of them,  when they were aboue they saw that it was verye plaine, although they saw in them many great  thick woods, and full of bushes, which made it to be more hard to passe,  for lack of trauailing that way ther was no vsuall path, which was the occasion that their trauaile was more trou|blesome vnto them, but for that the harts of either of them were more harder then that countrie, with a valiant and sout courage they followed their iourney till such time as ther happened vnto them that which shall be tolde you in the next Chapter following.


Of a straunge aduenture which happened vnto the knight of Cupid and the king Sacridoro, trauailing by the moun|taines of Phenicia. Chap. 19.
_AS these two worthye and valiaunt knights trauailed together vpon those sharp and fra|grant mountaines, the one imparted vnto the other all the whole estate of their amo|rous pessions, so that both in declaring as well of the one as the other, it seemed vnto them that they did not eele the wearinesse of their iourney, and in this sort they trauailed two daies without eating a|ny thing, but of such wild fruit as they found in euery place whereas they went. So the third day at such time as the Sunne was about an houre high, trauailing without anie care by a forrest, which seemed to be a more quiet  peacea|ble Country then that which they had before trauailed in. Upon a sodaine their horses started,  their haire began to stand vpright,  they were afraide,  braied  snorted in such sort, that they could not make them procede forwarde, and looking about them towards euery side, to se what it should be that caused the same,  on a sodaine ther came forth of the most thickest of the Forrest two great sauage  wild men, who in the bignesse of their bodies seemed to be giants, who were mounted vpon two Lions very furious, which serued them for horses, without any bridle or other kinde of thing, but they had each of them in their handes a mighty great, heauie,  knotted club, with the which they did gouerne their Lions to goe what way it pleased them, and when they had discouered the two knights, they went towards them, and when they approched them, the feare was so great that their horses receiued, that all the pollicie and strength which the knights could vse, was not sufficient to make them goe to|wards the sauage men. So before they could haue leasure to alight from their horses, these sauages were come vnto the~, vpon their tamed Lions, and finding the knights with their backes towards them, for that their horses did cast them|selues about, they stroke them with their knottie clubbes two such blowes vpon their fiue and stelie healmes, with

so great strength, that they made them stoupe forwardes with theyr breasts vpon the saddle bowes, being somewhat amazed. And before that they could come well againe to themselues, these sauages stroke them other two blowes that brought them out of their remembraunces, and there|with they tooke them in their armes from theyr horses, and carryed them into the thickest of that forrest, and they had not borne them far, but they came vnto a verie great foun|tayne, which semed to be in the manner of a cesterne, and the water was as cleere as Christal, but it was of so great depth, that it seemed to haue no bottome. When they were come thether, these wilde men dyd lay the two knights vp|pon the ground without any remembraunce as they were beefore, and alighting from their lyons, they made them fast vnto two Tres there by, and straight way they began to giue terrible and mightie blaringes and shrikes, such as might be heard a great way, at which noise in a short time there was gathered together about that Fountaine more then twentie sauages, such as they were, some riding vpon Wolues, and other some vpon other wilde beasts, some of them which came nigh vnto the knights whereas they lay, dyd labour and trauaile all that euer they could to vnarme them,  for that they were not expert in the vse of armour, they dyd nothing but tumble them vp and downe from the one side to the other, and could not finde which way to get of theyr armour. And in tumbling of them in this sort, the knight of Cupid came vnto himselfe, and he seing in what state he was, in spight of all those that were vnarming him he rose vp from the ground whereas he lay, and drew out his fine cutting Swoord which was giuen him by the Quene ulia, and with great fury and inflamed wrath, he stroke the first that hee found next him such a terrible blow vppon the wast that he cut him in two peces,  ouerthrew him dead to the ground, and so he serued the second, and the third,  when all the rest of these wilde men saw what had passed, they were in a great feare, yet for all that they tooke vnto them their great knotted clubbes, and all together as|saulted

him, and whe~ they had compassed him round about on euery side, they laid vpon him so strongly, that the knight of Cupide was put to great trauayle, for that with theyr strong  heauy blows they all to brused his flesh and bones, but seeing that hee had no other thing to deliuer him from that reproch but onely his sword, hee so behaued himselfe therewith, besturring him from the one side to the other, that the effusion of blood was so great amongst those sauage people, that the clere and christall water of that fountaine was dyed red with the blood of them, and the battaile be|twixt them was very terrile and bloody, and if this battaile had endured long, this good and valyaunt knight had sound himselfe in great peril and daunger, for that there was no humne creature able to suffer the mightie blowes which those sauage people did strike with their clubs, being strok so thick, as commonly a smith doth strike vpon his anfield, but his valiaunt and stout courage was such, and his force and fury, that in a small time hee made such destruction a|mongst them, that of more then twentie which were there of them, there remained aliue but three, who ran away with all the hast they might, and put themselues into the thickest of the Forrest, and all the rest lay along vpon the ground, some their armes cut off, and some theyr heads clouen in peces, and some their shoulders clouen to their breasts, and other some cut cleane a sunder in the middest, that whoso|euer had sene so great estruction amongst such barbaros people and furious sauages as they were, would certainely beleue that there had beene no humane power  strength able to haue done it, and when this battaile was finished, this worthie knight remained so wearie and brused of his body, that hee could not stand vpon his feete, and beeing very drie, he went vnto the Fountaine, and pulled of his helme, and whereas the water was most clerest  troubled with the blood, the same for to drincke, and drinking thereof, he had not well staunched his great thirst when he fldowne vnto the ground without any feeling or remembrance.
And at the same time that he was drincking, the good King Sacridoro was come to himselfe, and when he saw that great slaughter that was vppon the ground, and the knight of Cupid a foote a drinking, he remained as one ama|zed and beside himselfe, and could neyther arise vp nor speake one word, seing that, which semed vnto him to be a thing the most straungest and wonderfull that euer was seene or could be imagined,  at that time that the knight of Cupide did fall downe to the ground in a sound, at the same instant there came forth of the profound depth of that Fountaine a Monster of the Sea, very great, and of bodie verie horrible and wonderfull to behould, who had the face of a maide, with hir haire hanging downe halfe hir bodie, so soone as she was out of the fountaine she went vnto the knight of Cupide, who lay along vpon the ground, and tooke him in hir armes, and returned vnto the fountaine and dy|ued downe to the bottome thereof with the Knight, in such sort that they could not bee seene, neither was ther any signe of them. When this good king Sacridoro saw his very friend so conuaied into the water and carried away by that Mon|ster, whether as bee could not imagine to the contrarie, but euen to bee made hir foode, I cannot here declare the great griefe and anguish that hee felt in his hart, in such sort, that if hi death at that present had bene presented vnto him, it could not haue grieued him more, and all times when he dyd remember the losse of his friend, the most worthiest Prince in his opinion that was in all the world, and againe the great remedie that he had conceiued in his hart, to haue recoueed by his aide and help, he could not by any manes suffer so great sorrow, but fel downe vnto the ground as one that were gaspng for life, tumbling himself vpon the earth, giuing very grieuous sighes and grones, lamenting much his misfortune with words of great sorow and lamentati|on,  in this sort be passed away all the rest of the day which remained, and likewise the whole night following, till the second day was come, in the which happened as shall be tolde you in this next chapter following.



How the three Princes Bargandell Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, came vnto the fountaine whereas the king Sacridoro was lamenting the death of his great friend the knight of Cupide, and how they were aduer|tised by him who hee was, and of all that happened therein. Chap. 20.
_YOu do well remember how that we left the thre Princes, Bargandel, Lyriamandro,  the Tartarian Zoylo, in the kingdome of Lusita|nia in the demaund of the Knight of Cupide. Now the Historie sayth that the thre prin|ces had betwixt them a great controuersie which of the two should be most valiantest and of higher bountie, eyther the Knight of Cupide, or theyr very friend Rosicleer, and were very desirous to heare some newes as wel of the one as of the other,  with this great desire they did trauayle till they came to the same Port whereas the knight of Cupid had imbarked himselfe, whereas they heard newes of him of very many the which had seene him, and therewith they put themselues in a good ship,  committed themselues vnto God, and sayling by the sea, they were ta|ken with the same storme and torment that wee spake of in the Chapter before. And whether it was by the great wis|dome of Artemidoro, or by fortune, I know not, but theyr Ship dyd aruie in the Kingdome of Phenicia, in the same Port wheras the knight of Cupide did disimbarke himselfe, and this was the next day following after that they had entered in, and of the merchaunts that were there they vn|derstoode newes of the Knight of Cupide, and how that the day before he was departed into the Countrie, and hauing these newes, they straight way departed and followed him, and dyd aske of euery one that they met for him. So they were certified by certaiine shepheards, (as there were very many on the skirts of those mountaines) how that hee and the king Sacridoro did take their way towards the wilder|nesse,

When the thre Princes had fully certified themselues therof, with great ioy they followed him so long, that in the ende they came nigh vnto the fountaine of the sauage peo|ple, and before they came vnto the fountaine, they found the Horse of the King Sacridoro and of the Knight of Cupide, which ran about the fields, drawing after them their sad|dles and bridles, and when they saw them and knew the one of them to be the horse of the knight of Cupide, they were greatly troubled in their minds, and knew not what to say, but looked one vpon another, and seemed that it could not be well with their masters, seing their Horsses runne in such sort about the field, and for that they were all of a mer|uailous strong and stout courage, they did offer theyr liues into what so euer perill or daunger should happen. Thus they went round about from one part to another seking these two Knights, and in the ende they trauailed so much that they came vnto the great and faire fountaine, whereas they saw the wonderfull slaughter of the sauage people, which lay alongst the ground, and found the King Sacrido|ro stretched vpon the earth, as one that had neither reason nor vnderstanding, but beside himselfe, with the great sor|row, weping, and grieuous lamentation which he passed that night past, and all the day before, and when they saw him in this case, and likewise the great slaughter made vp|pon that wilde and furious sort of people, they receiued great admiration, and thought verily that the king Sacrido|ro had bene dead, and iudged that he and the Knight of Cupide had done the same, and for to certifie themselues the etter, they all thre alighted from their Horsses, and came nto the King and pulled off his helme, and therewith they ooke water out of the Fountayne and threw it vpon his ce, and for that hee had receiued no other harme but drou|nesse with watching and weping, he quickly came vnto mselfe, and when he saw those Knights beefore him, hee gan a new both to sigh and wepe verie piteously, shed|any teares, and he saide.
O sir knights, wherefore haue you done vnto me so much

harme, as to cause me to come agayne vnto my remem|braunce, you should haue suffered me to dye, that I might not haue felt any more such euill fortune, let me pray you malte an ende of this sorrowfull lyfe, for that there is no o|ther thing that can comfort me. Oh Trebatio, Emperour of Grecia, who shall beare vnto thee this heauie newes of thy sonne the knight of Cupide? Who dare come before thy presence to giue thee to vnderstand of this grieuous and de|lorous misfortune? These and other many such words, said this good King Sacridoro, lamenting the death of his great friend. When these three Princes vnderstood, that he was sonne vnto the Emperour Trebatio, whose great fame came vnto their eares: very much amezed and sore troubled, they dyd beholde one an other, and knew not what to say vnto that which they had heard spoken. And being very desirous to know to what ende it was spoken, they came vnto the King Sacridoro, and dyd comfort him in the best wise they could, and desired him to tell them what was become of the knight of Cupide, for that of long time they had trauailed in his demaund. So when the King saw the thre Princes, which as well in their armour as in their disposition se|med vnto him to be knights of great estimation. With ma|ny teares and great sighes, hee tolde vnto them all that which had happened vnto him, and vnto the knight of Cupid with the sauage people, and in what sort the monster dyd carrie away the knight of Cupide into the deapth of that Fountaine. Also hee tolde them that this knight was called by his other name Rosicleer, and was sonne vnto the Empe|rour Trebatio, and of the Empresse Briana. When the prin|ces vnderstood that the knight of Cupid was Rosicleer their very friend, eyther of them receiued so great sorrow and heauinesse, as though he had bene dead before them. And hauing no power to suffer so dolorous newes, euerie one o them threw himselfe vpon the ground, and without speak|ing any word, eyther of them dyd wepe and be waile th death of their friend very grieuouslie.
When the king Sacridoro vnderstood that those thre Knights were friends vnto the Knight of Cupide, he re|ceiued a new sorrow and griefe in his heart, to se them la|ment  sorrow for his death, and with this great rage and mortall anguish he went vnto the Fountaine, and standing vpon his feete hee dyd beehold the profound deepenesse of the water,  thre times he was ready to throw himselfe ther|in, and many times hee retired back againe, but in the ende (the wise Artemidoro saith) that he said these words: Oh worthy and valyant knight of Cupide, seing that my cru|ell destinie will not permit that in lyfe time I cannot en|ioye thy company and friendshippe, my death shall now follow hine, and one Sepulcher shal possesse both thy bones and mine. And in saying these words he slipped forwardes with his fete into the fountaine, all armed as he was, and with the great waight of his armour, he sunke straight waies vnto the bottome of the water, in such sort that hee was no more sene. The wise Artemidoro doeth write this notable acte done by this king, declaring that the loue and friendship which he had vnto Rosicleer, was the occasion that he desired to liue no longer, for that he thought verily he had bene dead. But the wise Lyrgandeo sayth, that the King Sacridoro had some knowledge of this meruaylous Fountaine, and that he had some hope to finde his friend the knight of Cupid aliue, but how so euer it was, it was a thing worthie of great memorie, and the greatest expery|ence of friendshippe that euer was sene. And when the hre Princes heard the words which the King sayde, and aw him throw himselfe into the Fountaine, they knew not what to say, but semed as though they had ben in a dreame, ut yet if the danger of the losse of their soules had not dis|urbed them, euery one of them very gladly and with verie ood will could haue found in his hart to haue done so much s the king Sacridoro did, and there they remained all that y and all the night following, and did no other thing but ment. So the next day they thought it could not profit the~ remaine ther,  determined to returne to sea,  goe to the

court of the King Oliuerio, and from thence to depart vnto their owne cou~tries, and so they departed from thence, and retourned the way which they came so sad and sorrowfull, that many daies after they could not receiue any comfort, neither could there any pleasure enter into them. Whom this Historie doth leaue till time doth serue, for to tell you of the worthie Knight of the Sunne, whom we left trauai|ling towards the Empire of Gercia.


Of a straunge aduenture which the knight of the Sunne found trauailing towards the Grecian Empire, Chapter 21.
_AFter that the mightie Alphoebo was de|parted from the bridge whereas hee had the battaile with Florinaldus, and his knights, the historie saith that in few daies he entered in|to the Empire of Grecia, vpon that side which is beetwixt Dardenie and Macedonia and tra|uailing certaine daies in that Countrie, he alwaies kept his right way towards Constantinople. So it happened vp|on a day as he trauailed by a broad  vsed way which went from one Citie to another, at such time as the greatest force of the Sunne was ouerpassed, hee saw in the same way com|ming towards him a great multitude of people, and the mo part of the~ seemed to be Gentlewomen, amongst whom the seemed o be armed giants, and as they came a far of, it hap|pened to be a thing of great maiestie and highnesse, and th knight of the sun being very destrous to know who it shal bee, did put himselfe somwhat out of the way on Horseba as he was, and stoode still, and tarried till all that peop should passe by, for that all things in that Countrie seem very straunge vnto him, and likewise at this time a thi greatly to bee meruailed at, for although hee could not |iecture with him what occasion should moue him to be tro|bled, yet he fit within himselfe a great weaknes, as thou

he should haue sounded which made him to thinke in his art that he should heare of some new  straunge euent,  being thus troubled with himselfe, within a while after those peo|ple which he had seene passe by, but the great wonders and meruas which he saw there at that present, no tongue can tell nor pcan write the secret therof yea, such, that if Homer were present for to make description therof, yet for all that, the wonderfull matter contained therof, would sur|mount his eloquent stile  the pleasantnesse of the Historie, the sweet harmonie of his song. To conclude, the wise Ar|temidoro saith, that the aduenture was worthy to be at chie|ued of so high  worthy a knight,  did not appertaine vnto any other that was baser then the sonne of Trebatio, and if that soueraigne Princes without all comparison of beauty and fairenesse, Claridiana had not bene discouered  knowen by the Princes in Trabisond. Then the author might well haue said, that all the beauty of the world was ioyned toge|ther in this aduenture, the which came in this order.
There came formost of all twentie damselles, and eue|rie one very richly apparailed, and mounted vppon But ornes, all betrapped with cloth of golde, and euery one of them had on their heads a very faire and gallant bunch of eathers, and all these came by three and three, which was a raunge sight to bee seene,  after these Damsells came a ery great and triumphant Chariot, the which was carri|d vpon twelue wheles of very fine Iuorie, and drawen with twelue Unicornes, as white as the Snow, and all the arnesse that belonged vnto them was of very fine golde, nd euery one of these vnicornes had vpon him a dwarfe, with a whippe in his hand to gouerne him. This Chariot as very long of one hundreth foote, and fiftene foot broad, nd the Chariot was couered all ouer with a Tent verye chlie wrought with golde and silke, and vnder that Tent as there made a diuision of chambers and closets, and in e fore part of y^e chariot from the tent, ther was in manner f a tabernacle very high, and all the fore part discouered 

open. And vnder the same was ther wrought with gold two arkes, the one ioyning to the other, of so excellent and rich worke, that according to the great  sumptuous riches, ther was neuer Emperour of Rome in his most triumph that had the like arks made vnto him, and vnder the same arkes there was two chaires, all of gold  precious stones,  in one of those chaires there sate a Damsell, that according vnto the great maiestie  beautie which she had, semed to be some ce|lestiall creature come downe from the heauens. And it is not to be beleued that Helena, for whom there were stayne so many thousandes of Grekes  Troyans, was so fayre as she. Thiy Damsell was apparailed in a roabe of cloth of golde, all set full of fiue Sapheres, with very faire  strange worke,  she had vpon hir head a call made of Emeraudes, in maner of a net, through the which hir yeolow haire was sene, that it semed to be thirde of fine golde, and for that she was as white as Snow, she semed of so great beautie, that no humane vnderstanding was able to comprehende the same. Under the other arke hard by that, ther sate in the chaire, a knight all armed sauing his head, of a high sta|ture and well made, his face was very faire and of a good and gentle proportion, and his armour was so strange and rich, that the line was neuer sene in the world, for that it was made all of scales of fish, which is in the Athlantike sea, d as white as milke, and as hard as any Diamond, and all the ioynts and lasings thereof was garnished with very fine golde and precious stones, wrought very strange|lie,  beside that, they were of much more force, then if they had bene of fine steele, (and tempered by art magicke) they were so straunge and faire in shew, that any king or Em|perour of high estate would gladlie desire to haue the like. He hadde also a swoord at his girdle girt vnto him, the hangers and the scabbard were all of fine golde, and the pommell and ball was of a fine Emeraude. He hadd vp|pon his head a Hat of grene Silke, all full of small Ru|bies, and hadde a very faire brouch in it. And for that he

was white and faire of face, it did become him meruay|lously well: he carried his arme vppon the chaire,  leaned his head on his hand lookeing downewards w^t his eies some|what with a sad countenaunce, that  seemed ee had some care, and at the feete of this knight  of the Damsell that sat by him, ther sat sie Gentlewomen, all apaailed in cloth of suer, brodered with very straunge  rich worke of gold  stones, who were crowned with crownes of gold vpon their heads like vnto Queenes,  had in their hands certaine in|struments in forme of Lutes, with the which they made ve|ry swete musicke. And before this Chariot came on foote twelue Gyants of a meruailous great  huge staure, all armed with very fine  shining stele, and euery one of them had a hatchet of armes in his hand, and according vnto the fierce  furious figure which they shewed, it was a wonder|full  terrible sight to behold. Likewise behinde this Chari|ot ther came other twelue Gyants, in such order as the first did, but these came all mounted vpon great  mightie hor|ses,  had in their hands heauie clubbes,  they came riding two  two together. In this sort did this triumphant Cha|riot passe by the knight of the Sun, with so great a maiestie and high estate, that it was very meruailous  straunge to beholde. When the knight of the Sunne had well behelde all that passed by him, and had contemplated himselfe in beholding that faire Damsell which sate by the knight, he thought verily that he had ioyed in some celestiall and di|nine vision. So when the Chariot was passed by and out of sight, he remayned as one blinde and astonied, euen as the Sunne vppon a sodaine should loose hir light, or as if the day should be tourned to night: Euen so didde he remaine as one halfe amazed for a while, and as one that had not knowen what had passed, and for that he would the more better satisfie himselfe of that which he had sene, as one which still remayned in a great doubt, he bro|ched his Horse with the spurs and rode before the chariot,

and staied himselfe till such time as they should passe by him againe. Now when he saw that Damsell,  had contempla|ted on that strange  soueraigne beautie, straight way his hard  strong hart that neuer was ouercome by loue, was in such sort wounded, that of long time after many  diffi|cult remedies were sought to heale that cankering wound, and he that no humane power was sufficient to moue out of his saddle, was by the shew of that faire sight so troubled in his vnder standing, that his strength failed him, in such sort, that if his Page Bynnano had not ben, who did very well perceius his perturbation, and staied him, otherwise as one without anie remembraunce he had fallen downe to the ground, but his Page Bynnano very quicklie came to his Lord the knight of the Sun,  held him fast in his armes with all his strength hee could, saying: What is this my Lord that before this faire company you doe shew your selfe so feeble  weake: Unto which the knight of the Sun did aun|swere neuer a word, but as one amazed  astomed he knew not what to say. In the meane time the damsells which rode before the Cahriot on their Unicornes, did very much bee|hold the kinght of the Sunne,  he seemed vnto them that he was the best proportioned knight that euer they had seene,  one of these damsells who seemed to be more pittifull then all the rest,  his great alteration,  how his Page did su|staine him in his armes, supposing that he had beene in a sound, she let the Chariot passe forward  came where the knight of the Sunne was,  said vnto his Pages: Brethe|ren, I pray you tel me what is the sicknesse of this knight, for that it seemeth to me he is in a sound.
The Knight of the Sunne when he saw the Damsell, of whom he might informe himselfe of that which he so much destred, comming somewhat vnto himselfe answered hir and sayde.
Fayre Damsell there hath happened vnto   sodayne sicknesse, that I my selfe doe not know  to name, wherefore I cannot aduertise you thereof,

but now seing it hath ben your pleasure to haue some care ouer me, I doe most hartelie desire you to declare vnto me what they are that ride in that Chariot,  whether they are going in such triumphant sort, for it may so fall out, in the meane time that you doe giue me to vnderstand therof, this my sicknesse will leaue me,  heerein I shall be much bound vnto you, and if I may require that courtesie. The damsell who receiued great contentment in his company said: Of a truth sir knight, although it will be somewhat tedious to declare vnto you all this which you doe demaund of me, yet I will tell it you with a very good will, for that your beha|uiour doth deserue that I accomplish this, yea,  much more for you. The knight of the Sun did giue hir great thankes for hir gentle offer,  she began to tell vnto him that which was his desire, saying.
You shall vnderstand sir Knight, that in the Gran Caaia within the Orient all Regions owelleth an high and migh|tie Lord called Alicandro, who is Emperour of Tartaria the great, and of the Scitiha, and Lord ouer all the Ilands Ori|entales and Meridionales, who by his mightie power hath brought in subiection almost all the kings  mightie Lords of Asia, for the which hee is called the mightie Emperour king of kings and Lord of Lordes, and commeth of the li|nage of the diuine Gods, whome we doe honour  worship, for which cause all we that by his vassals  subiects haue him in more reputation then any humane creature. This migh|tie Emperour when he was a young man was married vn|to a damsell, who for hir great bountie  beauty was had in reputation for a deuine Goddesse, and being with childe by the Emperour, when hir time was come, she was dely|uered at one birth of a sonne and a daughter, which be those two that are in the Chariot vnder the two rich arkes, and the Damsell is called Lindabrides, and the Knight Meri|dian, and as you se hir without comparison faire and beau|tifull so is he, neither more nor lesse without comparison in armes, for that in those partes there was neuer sene

knight of so much strength that could compare himself with him,  it is to be supposed that Iupiter was neuer so mightie  strong as he is, of whom he is reported to descend. So when these two Princes came vnto age, ther was a great conten|tion amongst the kings  mightie Lords, subiects vnto the Emperour, which of these two should be sworne for Prince  soueraigne ruler of that great estate  empresse, after the death of the emperour, for that in those countries as wel the daughter as the Baron, if she be first borne, doth succede in the kingdome, and this controuersie was not onely amongst the subiects, but also betwixt the Emperour  Empresse, for that the Empresse did loue least the Prince Meridian,  the Emperor did affect most the Princesse Lindabrides,  was ve|ry desirous that she might succed him in his estate,  in the meane time that this contention endured amongst them, the Emperour commanded to call together all the wise men as could be found in art magicke,  these he charged that they should giue their iudgement,  prognosticate vpon the succes|sion of these two Princes,  to declare which of them would best reserue his diuine linage,  his high consecrated estate. Now all these wise men gaue their iudgement,  in the end of many daies the most part of them, especially the wisest, did ioyntlie conclude, that by the off-spring of the Princesse the Tartarian Princesse shoule be exalted, and the linage of the Emperour should be by hir better reserued, for that they found how a knight in a nother Empire in Europe should marrie with hir, who should come to be the most highest  puisaunt Prince in all the world, of whome should succede very famous knights. Other wise men ther were which did prognosticate the contrary,  said that the Princesse would be the occasion that that high  mightie estate should be de|stroyed  ouerthrowen,  that hir wedding should be lamen|ted in all Asia, much more then the wedding was that was made with Helena,  the sonne of Priamus. When the Em|perour  all his nobles did se the great controuersie betwixt

the wise men,  well vnderstood their iudgements  prognos|tications, they came to a conclusion betwixt themselues,  did determine that the Prince Meridian and the Princesse Lindabrides should come in this sort as you haue sene into this great Empire of Grecia, for that they found that there was no other Empire in all Europe,  that they should tra|uaile through all the kingdomes  prouinces in the Empire. And if it be so y^t the princesse Lindabrides did finde a knight that could ouercome the Prince Meridian in battaile, that he should enter into the Chariot  sit downe in the Prin|cesse chaire,  that afterward he should defend hir great  excellent beautie for the space of thre moneths, in the court of the Emperour,  if in the meane time he found not a knght that could ouercome him, that then he should returne with the Princesse to the court of the Emperour Alicandro, and ther he shall be married vnto hir,  made heire of that great Empire. And if it be so that the Prince Meridian do trauaile through all these kingdomes  Prouinces,  finde neuer a knight that can ouercome  get the victorie of him in bat|tell, that then he should remaine for prince  successour of all the great estate of that empire,  the like preferment should be giuen vnto him, whosoeuer should ouercome him that o|uercame the Princesse. And this we holde for certainty that the prince Meridian shall remaine with the Emperor, or els he that shall succed him, shal be the best knight that is to be found in all the world. And in this sort it semed best vnto y^e Emperour  all his nobles to appease the controuersie, and the best way that the truest prognostication should come to effect. So the emperour  the empresse being very well con|tent here with, commanded that this chariot of triumph to be made, with the maiestie which you haue sene, so that it is now two moneths since we entred into the Empire of Gre|cia,  we haue passed Dalmasia Dardania, and Missia, Thes|salia, Macedonia and Archadia, and other Prouinces, in the which the Prince hath had manye battailes. And as

yet he could neuer finde knight, but that he ouercame him,  had the victorie with great ease, but now he is very sad and heauie, as one that hath some great care, for that comming vnto the court of the King of Macedonia, after he had ouer|come the Prince  many other knights he was striken with the loue of the Princesse Florabindia, daughter vnto the king of Macedonia, who is the fairest damsell that euer I saw in all my life, except the Princesse Lindabrides, our Lady  mi|stres,  now the way we take is towards Constantinople, for that it hath bene told vs that ther are ioyned together the most highest Princes  valiantest knights of all the em|pire. Wheras our prince Meridian may the better shew his great bountie, for that according as he is of might  power, I doe beleue the Grekes shall haue inough to talk of him all the daies of ther liues.
Now here haue I told vnto you gentle knight, all your desire, therefore I commit you to the Gods, and I will de|part, the Chariot is gone a great way before, therefore par|don me, for I cannot tarrie any longer. And in saying these wordes this damsell departed vppon hir Unicorne, and the knight of the Sunne remained very much amazed at that so straunge an aduenture, and was very glad and reioyced within himselfe for that his sicknesse might haue some re|medie, although he thought that he was not worthie of so great a benefit, yet he had heart and stomacke to giue the attempt vnto a thing of greater importaunce, and did lit|tle esteme any knight in the whole world, and yet he had no courage to conceiue that he was worthie to come to so high an estate, and so he remained amazed a good while, and by reason that his new sicknesse did trouble him verie much, he lacked vnderstanding to direct him in what he had to doe, till within a while after he came vnto himselfe, and broched his Horse with his spurres, he rode forwards and saide. What is this, wherevpon doe I stay, for that I se it is impossible for mee to liue, if I left to comfort my selfe with the diuine beautie and sight of the Princesse? And

with this he put himselfe before the chariot with great good will to speake vnto the Prince Meridian, and as he turned his horse for to beholde that faire face of the Princesse, his tongue fayled him, and as one boyde of reason and vnder|standing he stood still with his horse, without speaking any word, till such time as the chariot was passed by and gone a great way. So when the knight of the Sunne was come againe vnto his remembrance, hee began to bee angry with himselfe, for that he semed to be of so smal a courage, and striking his horse once againe with the spurs, he ouer tooke the triumphant Chariot, and putting himselfe befort it, he commaunded the dwarfes to stay the Unicornes, and com|ming as nigh as euer hee could vnto the Prince  the prin|cesse, with a troubled voyce he sayd these words.
The diuine Gods be in your gard and keping, mightie and worthie Prince of the Scithians, by one of your Dam|sels I doo vnderstand the manner and occasion of your com|ming hether into this Countrie being so far from yours, and although I thinke my selfe vnworthie of so high a re|compence as is granted vnto him that shall ouercome you, yet me thinkes by all reason I am bound to answere in the iustice of this soueraigne Princesse Lyndabrides, for that according vnto hir great beautie, she deserueth to be Lady and Gouernesse, not onely of the Emperour of the Scythi|ans, but of all the whole world, certainly I had rather serue you and bee at your commaundement, then giue occasion of your discontentment, but seing that it canot be done by any other menaes, I desire you y^t you wold take it in good part, that in consideration thereof we may enter in the battell, and pardon this my enterprise, for that surelie it doth not proceede so much of the confidence that I haue of mine owne power and strength, as it doth by the dutie I owe vnto so diuine and soueraigne a Princesse.
In the meane time that the Knight of the Sunne was speaking these wordes, the Prince Meridian dyd very much behold him, and it semed that he was the best proportio|ned knight that euer he had sene, although he had the bea|uer

downe, and receiuing no lesse delight at his words, then at his gentle disposition, with a great and seuere counte|nance, he answered him, saying:
Sir Knight, I doe gratifie very much your courteous words, as well for them as for your gentle disposition. And I doo certainely beleue, that your bountie cannot be small. And the battaile which you doo demaund of me, I accept for that I come for no other thing in this sort and manner as you se. And in saying these words, he arose from the chaire whereas he sat. And straight way two of these Gyaunts which went a foote, entered in, vnder the Chariot,  brought foorth there a horse, the most fayrest and strongest that euer was sene: and somewhat disforming from other horses, for that he had his body very bigge, and the hinmost halfe was all as blacke as any Ieate, and the halfe forwards was as white as the driuen snow, his head was very little, and in the midst of his forehead was there a little horne like vnto an Unicorne: and in his legges he had foure ioynts, for which cause he was very light, and did runne as swift and quick as the winde, and as yet there was neuer Horse that could ouertake him, and some saide that this Horse was in|gendered of a mare and a Unicorne, the which they affirme for certainty, as well for his forme and making, as for that they haue in that Countrie of Scythia Tartaria many U|nicornes, and oftentimes they are sene in the fields feding with the Mares. To conclude, this horse as well in his strength as in his swiftnesse was the best Horse that euer was sene, and was called Cornerino, by reason of the horne that he had in his forehead.
They brought him foorth all couered with cloth of golde, and with a bush of white feathers on his head, and all his Saddle was enameled, and brodered about with Orien|tall Pearles, the styroppes were of fine golde, and his bri|dle and all the other trappinges were of fine golde and silke, and for that the Horse was very great and faire, and his furniture so rich, certainely he semed to be the Horse

of some mightie Prince. So this worthie Prince Meridian did mount vpon his horse, and it was a thing greatly to be mernailed at, to se him on horseback with that strange and rich armour that he brought with him, and his mighty and big proportion and gentle disposition dyd meruailously be|come him, and this worthie Knight of the Sunne reioyced very much to se him in that order, and had great content|ment to se him. But if this Prince Meridian did seeme so braue on horsebacke, what shall we say of that gran Al|phoebo, in whom all the proportion and gentle disposition of humane was comprehended, for vnto all them that dyd behold him, he caused great admiration, and therewith he began to mooue his Horse and to tourne him in the fielde, and the Prince Meridian did behould him very well, and did straight way conceiue within himselfe, that it should be a Knight of great prowesse, for that before he neuer saw a Knight better set and well made, and he tooke great pleasure to behould him.
Likewise this beautifull and soueraigne Princesse was ouercome by that sodayne and vnlooked for sight, for in lifting vp with great maiestie hir gray and Christaline eyes, she saw the Knight of Sunne and his goodly proporti|on and gallaunt demeanour, wherewith hir hart did so al|ter, that she bare him better good will, and had him in more estimation then any other knight that she had sene. So these stout and valiaunt Knights did put themselues in a readinesse to the battaile, and what happened therein shall be tolde you in this Chapter following.


Of the stout and well foughten battaile betwixt the Knight of the Sunne and the Prince Me|ridian, and of all that happened afterward. Chapter. 22.
_IT was so straunge as worthie to behelde, those two stout and valiaunt warriours, the Knight of the Sunne and the Prince Meri|dian, who were with their Speares in their hands one against another, with so furious semblaunce, that all those which dyd behold them were amazed, and seemed by their furious demeanour that the battaile betwixt them would be very rigorous and well foughten, therewith the Knight of the Sunne did cast vp his eyes vpon the faire Princesse Lyndabrides, and when hee saw that faire and celestial face, which semed to bee an Angell of heauen, straight way he felt all his strength and force to fayle him, and that hee had not the hart that he was wont to haue, neyther the courage and force wherewith he was wont to enter into battayle, and beeing very much a|mazed thereat, he lift vp his eyes vnto heauen and sayd.
Oh immortall Gods, at whose will and commaundement all things are roled and gouerned, doe not now shew your selues contrarie in this battaile which I doo determine to make against this Knight, and although he dooe descende from your diuine progeme, this heauenlie Princesse Linda|brides his sister doth the lyke, and with no lesse reason then he, doth deserue to be Lady and gouernesse of that mighty and consecrated estate of the Emperour Alicandro hir Fa|ther. And if it be so that herein I shall not haue your fa|uour, consent that I may haue the fauour of this Princesse, which if I doo obtaine, I will not feare all the whole world if it be against me.
And when he had said these words, it semed vnto him his heart dyd reioyce and was verie much comforted. So straight way sixe of those Dwarfes which rode vpon the Unicornes that drew the Chariot dyd sound their Trum|pets, the which did make a verie great and timerous noyse, at the sound whereof these stout warriours did moue them|selues the one against the other,  the great swiftnesse and furie of that Horse Cornerino was such, that it seemed hee

could not be sene in his swift course, and the ground vnder him, but although the horse of the knight of the Sunne was not so swift as hee, yet the great hast  fury which his ma|ster vsed made him run with so great swiftnes, that almost in the midst of the course they did meete together, and the en|counter was so strong, that their mighty speares were shee|uered in such sort that the splinters slew into the aire, and these stout warriours did passe y^e one by the other, and ney|ther of them were mooued in their saddles,  yet for all that it seemed that the great violence and force of their horses in their course was nothing abated, but with great lightnesse they turned them about, and these two knights gaue the as|sault one against another with their swords, and began to strike in such furious sort, that they seemed to be all on fire, with y^e great abundance of sparkles which slew out of their armour, and throughout all the field was heard the great noise of their terrible blows, and many knights which tra|uayled in those partes came vnto that place to se what it should bee, and beeholding that terrible and well foughten battaile beetwixt those two knights, did stay as halfe amaz|ed thereat. This furious battaile beetwixt them did endure more then one houre, and there was no aduantage knowen then, and for that the armour of the Prince Meridian was the best in all y^e world,  likewise the armour of the knight of the Sunne of no lesse strength then his, the sharp edges of their cutting Swords had not so much force as to enter, neither to vnbuckle their armour, although they did execute their mightie blowes with all the force and strength possi|ble, by which meanes they were both in great securitie not to bee wounded, notwithstanding for all that, the great and mightie fury wherewith they dyd strike one another, dyd make them many times to stagger and bee amazed, and al|most beside themselues and put them in great daunger, and when the Knight of the Sunne did feele the great courage and strength of the Prince Meridian, hee did coniecture with himselfe that the Gods were all on his side, so that it was ot possible to ouercome him.
Likewise the Prince Meridian saide vnto himselfe, without all doubt this is the Greke knight which the Southsayers and wise men of my father did prognosticate should be mar|ried vnto the Princesse Lindabrides my sister, and that he should descend from high estate, for it semed him that if all the force of these knights that euer he had battel with, were ioyned together, it was not so much as that which he onely in this one knight, and both in thought and fury of their bat|taile, they were equall. As this faire Princesse Lindabrides did behould them, she lost the pleasant and faire colour of hir face,  was greatly troubled to se hir brother brought into such extremitie, for that she thought there was not a|ny Knight in all the world that might compare with him. At this present the worthie Prince Meridian did strike the knight of the Sunne such a blow with both his hands vpon the helme, that he tooke away the sight of his eyes, and the raines of his bridle fell out of his hands, but straight way this gran Alphoebo gaue him his payment, and stroke him so terrible a blow vpon his hard and Diamond Healme, that it made no lesse noise then the Thunder doth in the re|gion of the aire, when it Thundereth downe the Thunder|bolt, and troubling his remembrance he fell forwards vppon his Saddle bow, without other moouing, and his Horse Cornerino carryed him round about the fielde with|out any remembraunce. This worthie Prince reuiued pre|sently, and seing himselfe so far from his enimie, he set spurs to his horse with great fury, and ran against him, and when he came nigh vnto him, he stroke him such a blow vpon the healme, that the Knight of the Sunne thought verely his eyes shold haue ben burned out of his head, with the great aboundaunce of sparkles of fire that flew from thence, but the Prince Meridian dyd not goe without his payment, for that the Knight of the Sunne retourned vpon him with great furie, so that the one laide vpon the other very strongly, and the battayle betwixt them dyd endure

more then two houres, in such sort that the Gyauntes and many other Knights which came thether at the noyse of the battaile, greatly meruayled, and dyd wonder with themselues, how they could in any wyse endure so much trauaile.
Lykewise the faire Princesse Lyndabrides, who with great admiration did behold the battaile, was in a strange confusion in hir selfe, and could not imagine what that knight should be that was so strong, and with so great va|lour and prowesse dyd maintaine the battayle against hir Brother, and which was of so mightie personage, and of so good proportion. In this sort dyd these valyaunt and worthie warriours contended full two houres and a halfe, and there was no aduauntage knowen of eyther part, but in the ende the wrath of the Knight of the Sunne did so increase, that his blowes semed to be of more strength and fury then at the beginning, but the Prince Meridian did con alwayes in one estate, and his force was at all times equall, and seing his aduersary so strong before him, with both his handes he stroke him such a blow vppon the shoulder that he made him stoupe with his body forwards vpon the saddle bow. The Knight of the Sunne with a trise did raise himselfe vp againe, and setting againe in his saddle, he tooke his sword in both his hands, and stroke so terrible a blow at the Prince vppon his hard Healme, and with so great strength, that if he had not embraced the Horse neck, he had fallen downe to the ground, and the blow was so heauie vnto him, that he had thought a whole Tower had fallen vpon him, and when he knew and felt the great force and strength of his enimie, he lift vp his eyes to Heauen and sayde.
Oh soueraigne Gods, saue and defend me from this knight, for that according to his great force and might, and the inuinsible power that he vseth against me, I aue no securitie of my lyfe vnder this hard and strong rmour.

And in saying these words he raised himselfe vp in his sad|dle, and stretched himselfe vpon his stirops, and with both his hands he stroke the knight of the Sunne such a terrible blow vpon his magicall  that hee made all the teeth in his head to chatter one against the other, and to decline his head downe to his breast, who considering himselfe againe gratified his salutation with another blow, so furious, that he brought him out of all remembraunce, and his horse carried him throughout all the field as though hee had beene dead. The Knight of the Sunne at that time did stand still and not mooue himselfe, but abode still till such time as he should recouer. The Prince as soone as he was come againe vnto himselfe, tooke his Swoord in both his handes, and with great fury made towards the knight of the Sunne, who seeing him comming towards him dyd the lyke, and in the middest of their course they met together, and raysing the~selues both together vpon their stirrops, they stroke two such terrible and mightie blowes vpon their healmes, that the Knight of the Sunne ouerthrew the Prince Meridian to the ground so bolde of feling that he moued neither hand nor foote, but lay as one that had beene dead. Likewise the blow which the Prince gaue vnto the knight of the Sunne, was with so great force and strength that he made him bow with all his body forwards downe to his horse necke, and also hee stroke his healme from his head. Wherewith he remained vnarmed, and shewed to al the people his fale and seuere countenaunce full of royall maiestie. And by reason that hee was chafed in the battaile, his coulour was the more liuelie and amorous, and in such sort that there was no feminine heart of so great force, that could make any resistaunce against that terrible and sodaine blow of naturall beautie. So that when the Princesse Lyndabri|des dyd se him, neyther the maiestie of hir high estate, nor th valoure of his couragious heart was sufficient to resist, but that she must nedes bee taken prisoner with his beau|tie and loue, in such sort, that many dayes after passed be|fore they could finde remedie for to minister a salue to the

cruell sore of Cupid, which hir hart receiued at that sodaine and vnlooked for ioy. Likewise when he saw hir brother ly|ing a ng vpon the ground as though he had ben dead. She ther lost hir fresh  liuelie coulour,  fell in a sound in the armes of hir Ladies  gentlewomen, then the knight of the Sun alighted from his horse,  went vnto the Prince  pul|led his healme from his head, and saw that all his face was swollen,  that he voided much blood at his mouth, for which he was very sorrowfull, for he thought he had ben dead, the which he would should not haue happened for all the goods in the world, for that his sister the Princesse Lindabrides should conceiue no displeasure against him. And againe, he had him in great estimation, for that he was a knight of such valour  prowesse, but he was quickely clered of that sor|row, for that after he had giuen him some aire, he straght way by little  little came vnto himselfe. So when he was wholie in his perfect remembrance,  saw himselfe vnarmed and in the armes of his aduersary, with a mightie courage he embraced patience,  yelded himselfe vnto that his pre|sent misfortune in being so ouercome,  with a cherefull and seuere countenance he spake vnto the knight of the Sun and said.
Ualiaunt and worthie knight, seing that the deuine Gods hath permitted me by you to be ouercome, and that I haue lost the victorie, I doe verily beleue that it is a thing agreed and determined in their diuine counsell, that you must be successour in the sacred Empire of the Tarta|rians, and to haue to wife the Princesse Lindabrides my si|ster, for according vnto your great valour and desert, you are that Greeke knight of whom there hath beene so many and very high matters prognosticated by the wise men of Tartaria, and such as are expert in art magicke. And for that you haue all their fauour on your side, doe not delaie, ut prosecute your good fortune, and goe with my sister vn|o the Court of the Emperoor Trebatio, wherat you must efend and maintaine hir beautie for the space of two mo|neths,

and this time being finished, you may with great ho|nour accompany my sister vnto the Empire of Tartaria, and ther at your comming all that hath bene promised shall be performed without diminishing any parcell thereof. For w^t a knight of great worthinesse both in courage  curtesie, the Emperour my father  all his subiects will be very well content. When the Prince had made an end of saying these words, the knight of the Sun did aunswere thus.
Oh high and soueraigne Prince, the great furie of your blowes,  the perill  daunger wherin I found my selfe in this our battaile, hath shewed  fully certified me of your great force  strength,  how that the deuine Gods haue ben fauourable vnto me, in defending  keeping me from the fu|rie and force of your mightie arme. And as touching these words which you haue said vnto me, yuor princelie  seuere countenance doe fuilie assure me that your bountie is much more then any other humane creatures,  that your great vertue cannot but proceede from the high progenie of the heauens. And as touching this curtesie which you doe pro|mise me, I doe thinke my selfe vnworthie to receiue it, be|ing the greatest honour that anie humane hart can haue. And heere I doe request your highnesse that you would re|turne  sit downe againe in your seat,  prosecute your be|gun iourney,  I promise you that heereafter I will neuer demaund any right or title that I haue in this aduenture And againe, for that this soueraigne Princesse Lindabride shall not loose y^e right of hir victorie, let it be deuided in this manner: betwixt you  hir part that high  mightie estat of the Emperour Alicandro, for seeing hee is Lord ouer s many lands, there will be sufficient for both of you.
Then the Prince Meridiaan who was endued with a vertue and courtesie, embracing the Knight of the Sunn said.
Worthie Knight, your great bountie doeth deser all that is giuen vnto you, and much more. And there

no reason (although you doe excuse you selfe) but that you should inioy that which you haue got by your great noble promesse. And of all the good fortune that doth happen vnto the Princesse Lindabrides, my sister, I doe make reckoning to haue my part. And I doe receiue as much delight that shee doth succeede in the empire of Tartaria, as though I did suc|ceede therin my selfe, and especially for that you shall be hir husband, by whom it hath bene prognosticated, in our estate shall be increased all goodnesse  honor.
And in concluding these words, the prince Meridian dyd take the knight of the Sun by the hand,  did carrie him vn|to the faire Lindabrides, who as soone as they came before hir, arose from hir chaire,  did make vnto them great reue|rence,  they likewise did vnto hir their obedience,  then the Prince Meridian laid.
Lady  sister, receiue vnto you this knight that here com|meth vnto me, for this is he whom the diuine Gods haue promised  ordained for you,  he that aboue all knights in the world doth deserue to bee Lord ouer the great Empire of Tartaria: before the Prince Meridian  the knight of the Sun, came vnto the princes Lindabrides, she was wounded with his loue,  those wordes which were spoken vnto hir, did open the wound more, yet for all that in hir behauiour she made on outward shew therof, but with great grauity  sobrietie, she answered them and said.
My Lord and brother, I do giue to the Gods great thanks, for that you haue escaped from the furie of the battaile past being so cruell  rigorous, I would not see you againe in it for all the empire of the mighty Emperour our Father, no, although I should possesse the whole world it would profit me little, when that it should returne vnto your damage: and this knight I receiue (not for that the gods hath promi|ed him vnto me) but for that he is giuen me by you,  heere  certifie you, that ther is not in me so much discurtesie as to efuse him. When the Princesse had made an end of saying hese words, the knight of the Sunne receiued so great ioy,

that he knew not whether it was in heauen or earth, but kneeling downe before the Princesse, he asked hir hands to kisse them, which she would not consent vnto, but toke him by the hands  caused him to arise,  after that ther had passed betwixt them many words of great curtesie  loue, they all three together entred into the chariot vnder that rich tent,  in a very faire  rich quadran, they sate downe, whereas they were serued with many precious conserues  other de|licates, with the which they did comfort themselues for the great trauaile which they had passed,  the exceding pleasure which the knight of the Sun,  the Princesse Lindabrides did receiue in beholding one another, to see themselues together, was such, as they seemed to be transported into another world. Now when the banket was ended, the Prince Meri|dian  the knight of the sun walked vp  downe in that qua|dran  the Prince desired the knight of the Sun to tell him who he was, and of what country. And there he did declare vnto him how he was called,  as much as he knew beside of himselfe. At which the Prince meruailed, thinking within himselfe that this knight should be borne by great mistery, and that he was sonne vnto some of his Gods, for that so straunge  meruailous beautie, with that soueraigne and mightie force could not be comprehended in any so amplie, except he were some diuine creature. After that they had largely talked together of all his estate, the Prince Meridi|an discouered vnto the knight of the Sunne the entire loue which he bare vnto the Princesse Floralidia, daughter vnto the mightie king of Macedonia. And more, he told him that he was determined to returne vnto the court of the king of Macedonia,  to remaine ther certaine daies vnknowen:  the better to accomplish the same, he desired him to let him haue his armour  Horse,  he would leaue him his, with the which he might likewise goe vnto the court of the Empe|rour Trebatio,  be ther in those triumphs vnknowen fo the space of two months, which he must accomplish in defen|ding the beautie of the princesse Lindabrides my sister.

And before that time were accomplished, if it pleased God to send him health he would come thether,  that all thre to|gether they would returne vnto the gran Tartaria. Then the knight of the Sun agreed that all should be done as he had deuised, saying that any thing which vnto him semed good should please him,  that he should receiue great delight ther|by. With this determination they passed away all the rest of y^e day that remained, vntill it was time to goe to supper. And ther within the Chariot they supped all thre together with so great maiestie, as though they had ben in the court of the Emperour Alicandro.


 How the Prince Meridian did leaue the Chariot of the prin|ces Lindabrides his sister, and how he went with the armour and horse of the Knight of the Sunne, vnto the Court of the King of Macedonia. Chapter. 23.
_WHen the night was come the prince Meridian, talked with his sister,  told hir that he was determined to goe vnto the court of the king of Macedonia in secret wise,  not to be know|en,  the better for to accomplish the same, he would arme himself with the armour of the knight of the Sun,  promised her that before the two mo|neths were finished, that he would met hir againe at Con|stantinople,  then all they thre would returne vnto y^e gran Tartaria. And although the princesse did shew hir selfe to bee very sorrowfull for the same, yet in the end she yelded vnto all that he pleased to command. So straight way he armed himselfe with the armour of the knight of the sun, which did fit him very well, for that they were almost both of one sta|ture. Likewise he toke vnto him his sword  his horse,  toke his leaue of the knight of the Sun  of the Princesse Linda|brides his sister, and with onely two Pages he entered the

way which lead him vnto the citie of Macedonia,  for that it was then time to rest, this fatre Princesse did take hir leaue of the knight of the sun,  being accompanied with all hir Damsels, she entred into a closet which was appointed for hir selfe, in which she lay, and the Damsells that had the crownes of gold vpon their heads, which were all Quenes and great gentlewomen,  all the other damsells did lye in another chamber nighadioyning vnto that of the Princesse. And all those giants had the gard  keeping of them in this order following. Sixe of them without round about the cha|riot,  other sixe within at the chamber dore of the Princesse  all hir Damsells,  the other twelue giants did slpe till it was midnight, at which time they did arise  then the o|ther twelue slept till it was morning, so that they did watch equallie  in order. Likewise at that present they caried the knight of the Sun vnto the prince Meridians chamber, which was a good way from the chamber of the Princesse, wher he was serued with two damsells, till such time as he was vn|ready  laid into a verie rich bed, wheras he passed all that night with so profound thoughts, that he could not sleepe one whit, for that ther was represented in his hart that An|gelicall force of the faire Princesse Lindabrides, which made him as one astonied  amazed, with contemplating therein, many times he did talk vnto himselfe,  did arise out of his bed, imagining whether it should be a dreame or some other fantasie which had entred into his thought, and he had such great desire to haue the day come, that he might returne  comfort himselfe with the Angelicall vision, that he thought euery houre to be a whole night. But it was not the knight of the Sun alone that was troubled in thought, but also the princesse Lindabrides tumbled  tossed in hir bed, as one to whom such amorous thoughts  passions was very rare, for she had hir hart out of quiet,  could not slepe one houre in all the night, but alwaies had in hir remembrance hir new gest which was lodged in hir Chariot,  his straunge  mer|uailous countenance was so printed in hir mind, that she did

verilie beleue the Gods had sent him vnto hir as a thing of their owne choice, for that he was in all points agreable vn|to his valour  strength. In this sort did the one  the other passe away that night, till the next day was come,  then they did as shall be told you in this next Chapter following.


How the Knight of the Sunne and the princesse Lindabrides trauailed towards Constantinople,  sent messengers to the Emperour Trebatio, to giue him to vnderstand of their comming. Chap. 24.
_WHen the next day was come, the knight of the Sun did arise from his bed,  his Pages did help to arme himselfe with that gallant and strong armour of the prince Meridian,  like|wise did gird about him his rich sword, and when he was armed, it was straunge to be sene how well it did become him. And when he vnderstoode that the Princesse Lindabrides was vp  ready, and that she would come forth, he went towardes hir chamber doore, but when he should come before hir presence, his flesh trembled, as though a whole armie of knights would assalt him. And when he was entered into hir chamber, he found the faire Princesse accompanied with hir damsells  ready to come forth,  shewing vnto him great curtesie (whom the Prin|cesse was not a little ioyfull to see) she spake vnto him  said. Sir Knight, how hath it ben with you all this night in your new lodging. Uery well faire Ladie, answered he,  I could well haue slept in that rich  soft bed which I had, if other oc|casions had not troubled my mind  caused me to watch: the~ according vnto your saying sayd the princesse, you haue not slept well. No forsooth Lady, sayde the Knight, for that cares be enemies to rest  slepe,  doe bannish away all ease,  es|pecially when they be new conceiued.
The Princesse did very well vnderstand to what intent their words were spoken, and it did nothing grieue hir to heare them rehearsed, yet because she would not make any outward shew that she vnderstoode them, she saide. Unto all sorts of men it is naturall to be carefull,  ther is none that can liue with so great felicitie in this life, but at one time or other he shall be troubled with carrs, therfore let vs goe vn|to our seates and commaund that the chariot may goe for|wards on our iourney, for that it is time. And in saying these words she went forth of hir chamber, and the knight of the Sun did take hir, by the hand,  they went together till such time as they came vnto their seates, wheras they sate downe vnder the arks of that triumphant chariot,  straight waies the Damsells mounted on their Unicornes,  the gy|ants did put themselues in order, in the same maner as when the knight of the Sun did see them the day before,  straight way they began to take their way towards Constantino|ple. So when this Alphoebo did se himselfe set downe by that precious  faire Princesse, he was as one in an extasie with the great ioy  pleasure that he receiued,  it semed vnto him that his ioy was equall to the celestiall glorie which the faithfull inioy after their departure out of this world. And this faire Princesse did as greatlie reioyce to haue by hir him whom she loued with all hir heart, but hir great maiestie that she shewed in outward appearance was such, that the knight of the Sunne durst not be so bold as to make manifest vnto hir his loue, but rather had hir in estimation, as though there had ben present Iuno, his princi|pall Goddesse. In this order they trauailed certaine dayes, till such time as they came within one daies iourney of Constantinople, and then the knight of the Sunne said vn|to the Princesse, that it should be good to send some mes|sengers vnto the Emperour Trebatio, to giue him vnder|standing of their comming, for that he was a Prince that would very much reioyce and haue great pleasure therein. Which thing semed good vnto the Princesse, and she cal|led

straight way before hir foure of those Gyaunts which were on Horsebacke, who were Kings, and had crownes of siluer vpon their heads, and dyd informe them what they should say, and sent them vnto the Emperour Trebatio. So these foure kings went vnto Constantinople, and they ente|red into the great Court at such time as it was full of di|uerse armed knights, for to celebrate the Feastes and tri|umphes which were there ordained. And at such time as the Emperour Trebatio and the Empresse Briana were at the windowes of the pallace, beholding the great feasts and Iourneyes which were there made. And when these foure Gyants did enter into the great Court, all people dyd very well beehould them, and made them way that they might passe whether they would. So they demaunded for the Em|perour, who beeing certified what they were, they went vn|to the Pallace gate and did alight from their Horsses, and went vp whereas the Emperour was, and much people fol|lowed them to know wherefore their comming was, being so sodaine. And when they came before the Emperour, one of the Gyants saide these words following.
Most high and mightie Emperour, you shall vnder|stand that in the Orientall regions of Scythia the diuine Gods dyd create a Damsell, who is endued with so great grace and beautie, that she is had in no lesse estimation then a celestiall creature, who is daughter vnto the migh|tie Emperour of the Tartarians, King of kings, and Lord ouer all the Lords in the Orient. This Damsell is called Lyndabrides, and she hath a brother called Meridian, of so great bountie and strength, that it is to be beleued in all the whole world his equall is not to be found, and by reason that both these Princes were borne together at one birth, there hath growen a great controuersie as well betwixt the Emperour Alicandro and the Empresse, as amongst all his subiects, which of these two should be sworne for Prince  successor of all those kingdomes. And in the ende of many and diuerse iudgements of prognostications and

deuination, it was concluded that these two Princes should come into this thy Empire of Grecia, in such triumphaunt manner as you shall quickly se, in such sort, that if there be any knight, that in part and defence of the Princesse Lin|dabrides did enter into battaile with the Prince Meridian, and ouercome him, that the same knight should possesse the place of the Prince, and for the space of two months defend and maintaine the beautie of this Princesse in thy Court. And if it so fall out he be not ouercome by any nother knight, that the~ hee shall haue for spouse the faire Princesse Lyndabrides, and shall be successour with hir in the great Empire of Tartaria, and hee that shall ouercome the other, and make hir defence for the space of two months, shal haue the like. And to the contrary, if the Prince Meridian, after that he hath trauailed throughout all the kingdomes and prouinces of thy Empire,  is not ouercome but doth main|taine still the victorie, that then he should be sworne for Prince and euerlasting successour of the whole Empire. So that in this sort and for this occasion they came vnto your Empire. And after that the Prince Meridian had trauayled through some kingdomes and ouercome many Princes and knighis, the diuine gods did permit them at length to meete with a knight of so much bountie and force, that entering into battaile with the Prince hee got the victorie, and dyd ouerthrow him from his horse to the ground with one blow with his sword that he gaue him: and that being done, he entered into his place, and being readie with the Prin|cesse to come hether to this thy court, they first determined to send vs hether vnto you, from them we should desire to kisse your Emperiall hands, and to request you that you would accept and receiue their comming in good part, for that their intension is for no other thing but to serue you. This is onely our comming hether, therefore your plea|sure may be to consider hereof, and to giue vs our aun|swere.
The Emperour and the Empresse, and all those which heard what the Gyants had sayd, very much meruailed at

so straunge an aduenture, and the Emperour did not let to thinck within himselfe, that possiblie the knight which dyd ouercome the Prince Meridian should be the knight of the Sunne his great friend, for whom he looked euery day, and did very much meruaile at his long tarrying, whom he lo|ued with no lesse good wil then if he had knowen him to be his sonne, and was very desirous to know of the Gyaunts what signes  tokens he had, and the deuise vpon his sheeld and armour, but he could not learne of the~ by any means, for that they were willed before that they should not tell him. For the knight of the Sunne was determined to enter into the Court vnknowen and dyd call himselfe the knight of the Chariot. Then the Emperour arose vp from the place whereas he sat, for to giue answere vnto the Gyaunts of their Embassage, and sayd.
Friends, you may declare vnto your Lady the Prin|cesse Lyndabrides, and vnto the knight that doth come with hir, that the Princesse and I receiue great pleasure for their comming into this Countrie, and wee shal deeme it no small courtesie, that they wil come vnto this court at what time so euer their pleasure is, and I promise you here shall bee done vnto them all the seruice wee can, although it will not be sufficient for so high and mighty a Lady. And here with the Giants tooke their leaue of the Emperour and the Em|presse, and retourned vnto the Princesse, declaring vnto hir and the knight of the chariot the whole answere of the Em|perour, who decrede the next day to enter in Gonstantino|ple. When the night was past they did the day following, that which shall be tould you in the next Chapter.


Of the entering of the knight of the Chariot and the faire Princesse Lyndabrides into Constantinople. Chapter 25.
_YOu remember the great feasts  triumphs which the Emperour Trebatio commanded to be published, not onely in the Grecian Empire, but also in other kingdomes, lands, and Prouinces, adioyning there vnto, and of the safe conduct that he gaue vnto al knights as wel Pagans as Christians, that wold come vnto him. Now the Historie saith, that when the time drew nigh that these feasts, and triumphs shuld be celebrated, ther were so many knights gathered together as wel strangers as naturals, y^t they could not be all reciued into y^e great citie, but that the Emperour was constrained to commaund to arme a great number of Tents in the fielde, wherein were lodged verie many Knights, and neuer in Grecia vntill that day was sene so great  gallant a number of knights together, for that the most part of all them that came vnto those feasts, were knights of estimation, and armed very richle, and the mightie Emperour hereat receiued great delight, and dyd shew vnto them great liberalitie, in such ample sort, that they all greatly meruailed and said, that he was the migh|tiest Prince in the whole earth. So these feasts being be|gun, ther was one day in the great place of Constantinople meruaylous iustings and full of armed Knights, and all the windowes and galleries were replenished with people. And those which that day dyd best behaue themselues, was Artidoro Prince of Candia, and Alpino Lord of Scicilia, and Dardante Prince of Dalmatia, but they which more then all these dyd shew themselues gallant and stout, were Rodomarte Prince of Sardenna, and Rodafeo, Lord of the Iland of the Rhodes, who had ouerthrowen so manie Knightes that day, that all people did thinck verily they would carrie away the price of the iust, the which was very rich, which the Emperour dyd ordayne and apoint for them, who most worthiest and stoutest dyd behae themselues in those triumphes. The mightie Emperour

Trebatio  the Princesse Briana was at a window of their great Pallace, beholding those iustes with very great ioye and contentment, to se such a number of glistring Knights as were in that great place, and at such time as they were in the chiefest of the iustes and most hottest, with all their force and vigor, vpon one side of the place there beganne a|mongst the people a great umult or wondering,  straight way they heard a noyse and sound of Trumpets, wtih so great violence and force, that it made houses to tremble, in such sort that one could not heare another what was spoken. So after that the Trumpets had left sounding, they heard Musicke of sundrie Instruments, whose melodie was so Heauenly and sweet, that all those which heard it thought they had bene rauished in their sences, and the noise of that Musicke was so loude, that it might be heard throughout all the whole place. At which sodaine and swet noyse all the people tourned theyr eyes that way, whereas they saw entering into the great place a number of Damsells, moun|ted vpon Unicornes, meruailous richly apparailed, so that euerie one of them semed to be a Quene, and they ente|red in order, in two rankes, and each of them had in theyr handes an Instrument, wherewith they made that swet and concordant Musicke. Straight after them they saw comming in the triumphaunt Chariot the fayre Princesse Lyndabrides with hir Damsells, and the twelue Gyaunts before them, who came with so great a maiestie and soue|raigntie, that it put straunge admiration in all them that did beehold it, and this faire Princesse and the knight of the Chariot were set in their Chaires, vnder those triumphant rkes, and at theyr fet sat the sixe Quenes with crowens of golde vpon their heads, but when the soueraigne  fayre princesse was well sene  noted of all, it semed wonderfull vnto them. Likewise they saw the Knight of the Sunne armed with that fayre and rich armour of the Prince Me|idian, and his helme vpon his head, because he would not be knowen of the Emperour, he put them in great admirati|n. In this sort dyd this triumphant Chariot passe through

the great place, till such time as they came vnder the win|dowes wheras the Emperour and the Empresse were, where the Dwarfes did stay the Vnicornes that did draw the chari|ot, and being right ouer against one another, by reason that the chariot was very high, and the window wherin the Em|perour stood was very low. The faire Princesse and y^e knight of the Chariot did arise vp fro~ their seates, and made reue|rence vnto the Emperour and the Empresse, who with no lesse curtesie did receiue them, shewing great pleasure and delight for their comming. And returning all foure, they sat the~selues downe againe into their places, wher there passed bet wixt them many words of conference, wherein was vsed great reuerence and crtesie: and herewith they departed and passed forwards, and the triumphant Chariot was put on the side of that great court, wheras all the Damseuls did alight from their Vnicornes, and went vnto the chariot, and the Gyants did put the Vnicornes in the nether part of the chariot, and likewise their horses, the~ all the foure  twenty Gyants placed themselues round about the chariot, to gard and kepe the same,  put all the people in feare at their fu|rious countenaunces, and straight way one of them tooke a Letter of parchment which had the seales of the Emperour Alicandro, and read it out aloud, that all people might well heare it,  did declare the forme of all that aduenture, and the great promise and preferment which the Emperour had graunted vnto him that did defend the beautie of the Prin|cesse Lyndabrides, for the space of two moneths in the court of the Emperour Trebatio. When he had made an ende of reading thereof, and that this aduenur was well vnder|stood, many of those most estemed Knights were very ioy|full and tooke great pleasure therein, euery one thinking in himselfe to haue his part therein, and thought long till such time as they might proue themselues with the knight of the chariot, who tarried not long, but did giue them ul satisfac|tion of their desire, for that as soone as the letter was read two of those Gyants dyd bring foorth his Horse Cornerino, very richly trimmed, in such sort as he was brought forth

for y^e Prince Meridian, at whose sight they not a little mer|uaile, and the knight of the Sun making great reuerence vn|to the Princesse, descended fro~ the chariot, and lept on horse|back,  besides his mighty proportion, the great beauty and riches of his armour, and of the saddle and all other trap|pings  necessaryes belonging to his Horse, he was a specta|cle for all the Knights that were in that place,  taking a speare in his hand, he went  put himselfe in place wheras the iusts were made, with such gallant demeanour  gentle disposition, that before they saw him strike a blow with speare or sword, they all iudged him to bee of great bounty and strength, and to be a knight of woonderfull estimation and price, he was not well setteled in his place of iust with his horse Cornerino, when there came before him a big and well proportioned knight, who amongst all the Greeks was had, in greatest estimation, this was the stout Alpino, Lord of the Iland of Lemos, who had done that day many dedes of Knighthood, and haing both of them theyr Speares in theyr hands, one of the Gyaunts of the Chariot dyd sound a Trumpet, at which sound these two knights did begin to mooue themselues one against the other, and with the great wiftnesse of the Horse Cornerino, it semed in a moment they ioyned togethr. This strong A lpino, who thought to aue part of that precious Ladie, by the great force and strength of the encounter which he receiued, lost the sad|le of his Horse, and found him along the ground, lying so uill intreated therewith, that he tooke his spech from him or a great season, and the knight of the chariot passed for|wardes in his course, so vpright in his Saddle before, as hough hee had made no encounter. The Emperour and all e rest that were in that assembly, were amazed to see that ighty Alpino ouerthrowen, but yet in a short time they  more at the knight of the Sun,  had him in grea|r estimation, for that presently there came against him to  Artidoro, Prince of Candia, Alfonte, Lord of Sicilia, and  Prince of Dalmatia, called Dardante,  the two Princes  and Rodafeo, the valyantest of all the Grekes,

all which he dyd ouerthrow to the ground at the first en|counter,  not one of them did once moue him in his saddle. To conclude, that day hee did ouerthrow all knights that came to the iust against him, which were to the number of more then fiftie, as well strangers as naturals of the Em|pire of Grecia, and the like hee did to all them that came a|gainst him in eight dayes following, and in some dayes he dyd ouerthrow more then an hundreath, and there was not one that dyd abide him the second encounter. So that the great Chiualrie and worthie dedes of Kighthoode of the knight of the Sunne, was manifest in the court of the migh|tie Emperour Trebatio, and he knew not what to say, but that the Knight of the Chariot was the best Knight in all the world, and that he had made more strength then any humane creature, and the Emperour Trebatio, who had continually his minde vppon his friend the Knight of the Sunne, was in a great doubt, for that he could not heare any newes of him, and it semed vnto him that the Knight of the Chariot dyd resemble him very much, as well in pro|portion, as in his great strength which he saw in him, and could not by any meanes perswade with himselfe but he should be the same, but yet he had great credite and was fully resolued that if it were his friend, he would not but make himselfe knowen for the great friendshippe that was bet wixt them. In the same time the precious and so|ueraigne Princesse Lyndabrides was very ioyefull to  the mightie Knighthoode of hir Knight, and was fullie per|swaded that hir Gods had created him to bee the worthies and strongest in all the world, and chosen him for hir  which was the occasion that she did loue him so much, and in such sort that shee could not be out of his presence on moment, as one that was very certaine and sure that ther was no other Knight of so great bountie, nor any peruer fortune, of so great force to seperate the loue that was b|twixt them. But yet for that all humane things are  such sort, that there is no firmenesse nor stabilitie in them Long time did not passe but this souerainge Princesse ha

great feare of Fortune, as hereafter you shall vnderstand. And heere the Historie doeth leaue the court of the mightie Emperoor Trebatio, to declare of a damsell, whom nature had endued with beautie, aboue all creatures in the world, which was able to ouerthrow the great pleasure of the so|ueraigne Prince of the Scithians.


Of a straunge aduenture which happened vnto the Prin|cesse Claridiana, being a hunting. Chap. 26.
_AFter that the thre Princes, Bargandel, Liri+amandro,  the Tarrarian Zoylo, were de|parted from the empire of Trabisond as the Historie hath told you, the royall princesse Claridiana, who receiued the order of knight|hoode, vsed for hir exercise to goe on hunting, and she tooke great pleasure therein, that ther was no o|her thing that did like hir but onely that, and the game wherin she most delighted, was the wild Boare, Lyons, and Beares,  other sauage beastes, that were perillous  diffi|cult to be slaine. And for that she could not at all times find these wild  furious beasts when she would, it was the oc|casion y^t one day she determined to go vnto the mountaines of Oligas in Galatia, sixe daies iourny from Trabisond, wher|as it was told hir that ther were many wild beasts, for hat the mou~tains were very high,  void of all inhabitants,  vpon the top of them ther were great forrests full of tres, nd very thick  bushie. So she asked lisence of hir parents, who graunted it vnto bir with a good will, as they which were desirous to pleasure hir in all things, for y^t she was so aire  couragious. So this faire princesse did take with hir iftie knights to beare hir company, and sixe gentlewomen o wait vppon hir and to serue hir, besides a great number  other seruants and hunts-men, and they departed from Trabisond, and in the end of eight dayes they came vnto the ountaines of Oligas, whereas she commaunded to be pit|ched

many tents  pauilions, for to lodge hir self  hir peo|ple, for that hir determination was to tarrie ther a whole moneth, because the country did like hir very well, although the mountaines were exceding high,  they found in them many plaines  valleys, very pleasant  delightfull for that time of the yeare, for that the same was very hot,  ther the Princesse found great abundance of all kinde of game, wher she did satisfie hir whole desire,  it was a strange thing to se hir when she rode a hunting, vpon a mightie great and light horse, apparailed in grene veluet,  a hat of the same, wherwith she couered hir golden haire, the which was knit vp in a call of gold,  she carried in hir hand a boare speare, with a very sharp  fine steled head,  at hir neck a horne of Iuorie, so that in hir demeanour she semed to be some Se|raphin come downe from heauen. In this order she went forth to seke hir game,  when she had found any wild beast, she ran after them like a whirle wind,  although they were very great  furious, yet she would euer quell  kill them with hir bare speare, so that in the space of fiftene dayes, that she was ther, she had slaine many wild boares  heares  two Lions, at the which she receiued great contentment, and as it happened vpon a day she did enter into the moun|taines more then at thre times being alone  without any company, she came into a mightie great and broad plaine, wheras she saw come forth of the thickest of the forrest, a very great hart, faire,  as whie as snow, who although he came forth without any feare, yet at such time as he saw y^e princesse, he began to take his course through the plaine,  when she saw y^e hart to be so geat  faire, as one y^t had great desire to ouertake him, she began to run hir horse after him with great swiftnesse,  with such lightnesse, y^e it semed sh did not hurt any grasse wheras hir horse did tread. So she ran a great way, but the Princesse could not ouertake th hart, neither was the hart far from hir, til such time as  were at the farthest part of that great plaine, wheras th Hart did enter into a thicket, and as the Princesse woul

haue entered in to haue followed the Hart, vpon a sodaine ther was before hir a very great  dreadfull Lion, such a one as would haue put any good knight in great feare, which raising vp himselfe on his hinder fete, was as high as the Princesse on horsbacke, who pretending to make his pray, would haue griped hir with his great  heauy pawes vpon the shoulders, but she with a valiant and manlike courage stroke him in the midst of his breast with hir boare spear, so terrible a blow, that it passed through his body,  he fell downe dead to the ground. When she had done this, being very desirous to ouertake this white hart, she followed hir course after him,  running a while in that thicket, in the end she came into a little plaine, which was compassed a|bout with that thicket, in the midst of the which she saw a great hole, in manner of a caue, which entred into y^e ground,  straight waies she saw comming forth thereat a mightie great serpent,  wonderfull to behold, who beating with his wings  giuing terrible shricks went towards the Princes Claridiana with his terrible mouth open, so great  wide, that a man might very well passe in therat. When the ro|all Princesse did se him comming, wich a stout hart  vali|ant courage she did abide him till he came nigh vnto hir,  hauing in hir hand that bloudy boare speare, wherwith she flew the furious Lion, she stretched out that warlike and strong arme,  threw it at the Serpent with so great force and strength,  chaunced to strike him in the midst of that nmeasurable mouth which he had open, thinking to haue made his pray vpon the Princesse, that almost all the boare Speare was hidde in his bodie, and passed through his owelles, in such sort, that this monstrous and dredfull Sepent could not  himselfe out of that place, he was so wounded with the Boare Speare, and giuing manye great and terrible shrikes, within a little time e fell downe dead to the ground. This being done, he Princesse was very much amazed, and did behold the Serpent being dead, and it semed vnto hir to be the most

fiercest that euer she had sene or heard off,  thought with|in hir selfe, that wher all such Porters  kepers were, it could not bee chosen but that ther was some secret within. And as she was determined to goe towardes the mouth of the caue, she saw comming forth therat an old woman, who seemed by hir personage  apparell to be a person of authori|tie, who comming vnto hir said. The faire  royall princesse Claridiana is very well welcome, for that many daies past you haue ben of me meruailouslie wished  looked for. This worthie Princesse when she saw that she was knowen by the old woman, being very much amazed, she said: Of a truth gentle madame, your words,  that which hath happe|ned here vnto me, doth put me in great admiration,  I do not know what I should say vnto this which I haue sene. The old woman answered, I doe well beleue that all this which you haue seene doth make you meruaile very much, for that as yet you doe not know the secret of this aduen|ture, but come,  goe with me,  you shall vnderstand the mi|sterie therof. When the old woman had said these wordes, the worthy  valiant Princesse alighted from hir horse, and made him fast vnto a tre,  went vnto the woman, who tooke hir by the hand  lead hir vnto the caue,  going down a paire of turning staires, they went so long till they came into a very saire Hall foure square,  although it was vn|der the ground, yet it was so light as though the Sun di shine therein, by reason of a great precious stone that was set in the wall thereof, from the which proceded that great light,  ther was in the middest of that hall a table of Al|blaster, very white,  vpon the table lay a whole armour, with the sword,  was so garnished with rich pearles, that it seemed to be of great valour  estimation. And when they came nigh vnto it, the old woman said vnto the Princesse.
Worthie Gentlewoman, this armour which you doe  here, did belong vnto the Quene Pantasillia, who was slaine at the destruction of Troy, the which is one of the best

in all the world, for so soone as shee was slaine they were brought hether by a wise man that did foresee  know that it should be atchieued by a damosell, who in forre of armes,  beautie, should ar surmount that famous queene. And for to gard  kepe the same, he put that Lyon,  that wonderfull Serpent, which you haue slaine: for whosoeuer had come h|ther, that had not ben of so high  heroicall courage as you are, could not atchiue the same, neyther come vnto the sight therof. And for as much as by your prowesse, they belong to you, you may well take them  arme your selfe with them, for that ther shall succeed vnto you meruailous  wonderful things, which shall be the occasion that you will haue them in great estimacion,  this is the end of this aduenture,  the occasion that you were brought hether by that white Hart. And for that I do perceiue you are desirous to know who I am, you shall vnderstand that I am called Oligas, of whom those great mountaines doth take their names, for that I haue many yeares past, had my habitation  dwelling place here as you haue seene. And for the knowledge  vnderstand|ing that I haue in the art magicke, my fame is spred in ma|ny regions: and heere doth neuer  aduentures in these Mountaines, for such knights as come hether.
When the old woman had vttered these words, the princes was much amazed to heare hir,  no lesse ioyfull for the pre|cious armour which she had obtained. Then she armed hir selfe ther with,  they wer as fit for hir as if it had ben made of purpose. And after she was armed, y^e wise Oligas did take hir by the hand  said: come worthy princes  go with me,  I will shew you things that you will reioyce at. Then this Lady did cary hir out of one quadran into an other, till such time as they came into a faire  great hall, wherevpon the was was painted all the fairest damosells that were in all the world? such as in times past had the fame to be faire  beautifull. Amongst the which y^e princes did see hir owne face pictured,  next vnto hir, she saw the Empresse Briana, and the

faire and beautifull Oliuia, at whose great beautie they did much meruaile. And going forwards, they saw the faire  ex|cellent Lady Lindabrides, sitting in hir triumphant Chariot, at whose great maiestie, and soueraigne beautie, this royall Princesse was very much amazed. And turning vnto the la|dy Oligas, she asked of hir who that gentle woman should be, and wherfore she did put hir selfe into that chariot. So after a while y^t they had well perused all y^t was ther to be sene, this Lady tooke the princesse by the hand  lead hir out of that hall into another, wheras was pictured all the famous knights that hath ben  wer at that present in all the world,  all such as were dead  past, were painted vpon another: amongst the which she saw pictured, that illustrious  wor|thy Greeke, the knight of the Sun, who aboue all the rest did manifest himselfe, as did apere:  had before him all y^e whole castell of Lindaraza,  the great mightie  wonderfull bat|tailes that he had with the knight of triumphant chariet,  the faire Lindabrides therin, in the like manner as he was in Constantinople, defending hir great beautie. And as the roi|all princes did cast hir eies vpon him,  did consider his migh|tie statnre  gentle disposition,  his seuere cou~tenance, who semed to bee more a celestiall creature then any humane knight. And ioyning therevnto his great  mightie wonder|full dedes  prowesse, which was portraied ther before him. She straight way found hir selfe wounded with his loue, in whose heroicall  liberall hart, did neuer enter any humane thought before: was now all onely with that sight, taken prisoner in such sort, that life should first want, before that she should be released and at libertie. And because she would dissemble that new  amorous passion, she asked of the old Lady, who that knight should be, then the Lady, who did wel vnderstand hir thought, said: you shall vnderstand faire prin|cesse, that this knight is called the knight of the Sun,  now by another name is called the knight of the Chariot: this is be that doth defend in Constantinople, the beautie of that

Lady Lindabrides, according as I haue tolde you, when you did behold the infant. And as yet it is not knowen whose son he is, nor he doth not know his father nor his mother, but the time will come  that shortly, that they shalbe knowen, greatly vnto their honour and praise. And thus much I can certifie you, thnt neuer amongst knights past of old antiqui|tie, neither at this present hath ben, nor is, that is equall vn|to this valiant  worthie knight,  his worthie  heroycall dedes will extinguish  blot out all other before his time, and all others that shall come after htm.
These were wordes that caused the wounded hart of the Princes to be the more tormented, for considering the great worthinesse of his person, and the ielosie that she felt in hir mind,  had of that Princesse Lindabrides caused hir loue to be the more greater. And from that present she had great desire to passe into Grecia,  to se with hir eies, that knight whose picture had robbed hir of hir libertie. And shee was fullie certified within hir selfe, that if the knight of the cha|riot did once beholde hir beautie  fairenesse, that he would quickly forget that princesse, whose beautie he doth now de|fend, although she should appeare to be more fairer. And ha|uing these thoughts within hir, she was a good while  could not take away hir eies, in beholding y^e picture of the knight of the Sun, till such time as hauing shame of that old lady, she put hir eies apart,  did behold the mighty Trebatio,  his sonne Rosicleer, who in his stature  countenance, did very much resemble the knight of the Sun. And for to know who they were, she did aske of the old Lady, and she did tell hir that next vnto the knight of the Sun, that they two were the best  strongest knights in all the world. And how that, that mightie Emperour, was he whom the knight of the Sunne had taken and deliuered out of the inchantment of Lindaraza, as she had seene in the painting of the knight of the Sunne. So being much amazed at that she had sene, she remained there till she thought it requi|sit to returne vnto hir companye, for that they should not

trouble themselues in seking hir. And ther with he said vnto the old Lady, that she would depart if it were hir pleasure,  that she had no other thing to commaund hir. Unto whom she answered, saying, that the might vse hir discreation, al|though she had many other thinges to shew hir, which she should keepe close vntill such time as occasion serued to come that way againe, at whose sight she should take great plea|snre. And therewith she tooke hir by the hand and carried hir forth the same way she entred, till such time as they were out of the caue, wheras the old Lady committed hir to God, and taking hir leaue of the princesse she returned into hir caue,  straight way vpon a sodaine the caue was vanished a|way, in such sort, that the princesse could see it no more,  re|mained a while amazed at that which had happened she toke hir horse wheras she had left him tied to a tre,  sought out hir company, very glad  ioyfull for that precious armour which she had won, although otherwise she were so farre in loue with the knight of the Chariot, that she thought long to returne vnto Trabisond,  depart from thence  passe in|to Grecia, for to se that knight, for she thought with hir self, that he alone was aboue all the rest of the world, that did deserue to inioy hir person  beautie. And with this great desire she trauailed, till such time as by the sound of hir horne hir knights came vnto hir, who meruailed to se hir armed with that precious and rich armour,  did receiue hir with great ioy  pleasure for that they had gone about seeking for hir a good while, complayning very much for hir absence, for that they nspected some mishap had chaunced vnto hir. The Princesse did riceiue them very curteously, and decla|red vnto the manner how she got that rich armour, and so he went with them vnto their Tents, and the next day in the morning they departed to Trabisond, for that with hir new and amorous passions which troubled hir, she did not like well of those desarts, neither did she receiue so great delight in hir hunting and game as she was wont to doe, but all hir desire was to see the knight of the Sunne

and all hir ioy was in Grecia, desiring there to manifest hir beautie. And here the Historie doth leaue hir till the time serue for to tell you of the knight of Cupid, whom we left in the depth of the mountaine of Phenicia.


Of that which happened vnto the sorrowfull knight of Cupid, after that hee was carried into the Fountaine of the sauage people. Chapter 27.
_YOu doe well remember of the straunge and sodaine losse of that amorous and stronge knight Rosicleer, how after he had drunke of the water of the Fountaine of the Sauage people, hee fell downe on the ground, and how that there came foorth of that Fountayne a monster of the Sea, and tooke him in hir armes, and carri|ed him vnto the deapth and bottome of the water. And how that his great and faithfull friend the King Sacridoro not hauing so much patience as to suffer so great losse, did throw himselfe after him into the fountaine, with great good will to receiue the death with him. Now the Historie saith that the meruayles of this fountayne were very many and strange, for that so soone as this amorous knight was in the depth of that water, he found himselfe in a very fayre and and grene field ful of flowres, wheras the calmenesse of the aire, and the cleerenes of the Sun seemed vnto him to be the same as it was before, although co~sidering what he had be|fore suffered, he semed to bee in another world,  looking a|bout for the monster that had brought him thether, hee saw that she was a faire damsell  well proportioned, who with a merry cou~tenance came vnto him  said: Ualiant  hardy knight, by your great bounty  strength, you haue obtained to come  drink of y^e water of this fountaine,  by drinking therof you are come hether, therfore I will giue you to vn|derstand of this aduenture,  of the merueilous things that you shall here see. For I hope in God and my good For|tune,

that you are the knight for whom I haue many daies looked, by whose great strength, considering you be so loy|all and perfect a louer, to set me at liberty out of this place, and also being a worthy Prince, who doth suffer euery day very grieuous and mortall paine. When the fayre Damsell had spoke these words the knight of Cupide did salute hir very curteously, and therwith she began to declare hir ad|uentnre, saying.
You shall vnderstand (gentle knight) that the king Po|lidarco, who is now king ouer this Countrie, had a son cal|led Don Lusindo, who being dubbed knight, was one of the strongest and well proportionedst knight y^t could be found in all these parts. Likewise y^e king Polidarco had a brother, a very wise man in the art Magicke, who dwelled in these mountaines, and in this valley, which semeth vnto you to be a new world, and this wise man was my father, who for my better sauegard and honour, did carry me vnto the courtof the king Polidarco, wheras I continued certaine yeres in the company of the quene  hir daughter Oriselua. And be|ing there, the prince Don Lusindo fell in loue with me, inso|much that in the end of many daies he did so importune me, that he plighted me his faith and troth to take me for his wife, and I hauing my confidence therein, he did obtaine of me all that his pleasure was, and although this was kept secret many daies, yet in the ende it came to be discouered, for that my father was very old, and knowing that his time was come that he should die, he did procure to marry me and giue mee vnto a husband, according vnto my estate and honour. And being very importunate with me therein, I was constrained of necessitie to declare vnto him y^t I was made sure vnto the Prince Lusindo, and how that he was my spouse and husband. And at such time as the king my fa|ther went vnto the prince, for to know of him the truth, he denyed it and sayd that there neuer passed beetwixt vs any such promise. And all that euer my Father could, was not sufficient to make him confesse the truth. And he seing the

great disloyalty of him, determined before he did die to be reuenged of that iniury, and likewise of me, in such sort, that in time ther might be some remedy,  so by his great know|ledge he brought the prince hether vnto his habitation, and put him into a quadran full of fire, wheras he is continual|ly burning, and without ceasing he crieth out  giueth terri|ble shrikes,  cannot come foorth of that quadran. And when he was put therin, he said, that by no ma~ner of wise he could be cleere of that great torment and peine, till such time as a knight, who by his bounty  prowesse, should come vnto the fountaine of the sauage people and drinck of the water, and drinking therof, he shuld discouer the entry into this habita|tio~, as you haue discouered the same. And how y^t this knight by the great loialty of his loue should supply the great dis|loialty of the prince,  how he should take him forth of that quadran wheras he is, by y^e force and strength of his armes, first getting the victorie by battaile, and how that after he is deliuered from that place, he should receiue ad take me to bee his spouse,  tell the truth of all that had passed. This being ordained and done, my father died, and here I doo re|maine all alone very sad and sorrowfull for his death, and with great griefe and compassion of the prince, for that ther cannot be a more grieuous thing in the world the~ to heare him shrike and lament. And although the king his Father did know of a certaintie that the wise man his brother did bring him hether vnto this habitation, to be reuenged on him, yet for all that, he could neuer finde the entrie into it, although he hath procured by all meanes y^t euer was possi|ble. So that the king and the quene his mother, and all the rest of the kingdome doo liue in great sorrow and heauinesse for the losse of the prince: for this habitation hath an other entry by a Caue, which in all the world doth beare y^e fame, ut the entrie thereof is so perilous and dark, that there is o humane knight dare enter it, and there is none but I a|one that doth know of this entry into the valley. And seing hat you, most ventrous knight, is he, by whom my Father

saide should be concluded and finished, this aduenture.
Therefore I pray and desire you, to take compassion of this Prince, and of mee, who doo likewise in my hart fele euery way his paine and griefe: and goe set him at libertie, that possessing the same, he may goe and comfort his Parents, giuing them the ioy and pleasure, that in his recouering a|gaine they might receiue. And heere with the Gentlewoman made an ende of hir tale. And the knight of Cupide remai|ned, and maruailed at that which he had heard. And hauing a great desire to set at libertie the Prince Lusindo, he re|quested the damsell to shew him wher he was,  he would doo all that in him did lye for to set him at libertie.
And when hee had sayd these words, the damsell did take him by the hand,  lead him through that floorishing grene Ualley, till they came vnto certaine high  mighty Rocks, wherewith all that valley was compassed about. And there was cut out of one rock a paire of staires, wher at this da|mosell and the knight of Cupide went vp, till such time as they came vnto a dore, where into they entred, and came into very many great and faire roomes, at the beauty wher|of the knight of Cupid greatly maruailed, for that besides they were all cut out of the hard stone, they semed to be the straungest kinde of work that euer hee saw in his lyfe. And straight way when he beganne to enter in thereat, they might here the Prince Don Lusindo complaine with great and terrible shricke.
So they went forwards till they came vnto the Quadran of Fyer, the doore whereof was open, where|at he saw the bright flames of Fyer, of which the whole quadran was full, which was a thing of great wonder. And he saw in the midst of the Quadran, the prince all armed, with his Sword in his hand, sitting in a Chayre, and could not mooue, neither to the one part nor to the other, and it was very pittifull to se his demeanor. And when they came thether, the damosell sayd vnto the knight of Cupide: wor|thy knight, if you be amorous, and haue not committed an disloyaltie against your friend, you may without all le

or feare enter into this fire which you se before you, and bring out the Prince from the place whereas hee is, and the fire shall by no means hurt you, but if you be no loyall nor firme louer, the fire will burne you as it doth the prince, and you shall haue no power to goe forwardes with this enter|prise for that the prince is a valiant knight, and will make his defence very strongly for a good while. The knight of Cupide when hee heard hir say these words, had little care to make hir aunswere, but without any more tarrying hee went in at the doore of the Quadran, and went forwards till hee came whereas the Prince was, and the fire did not hurt him any thing at all, who as soone as he saw him, a|rose from the Chayre whereas he sat, and with his sword in his hand went to strike him, and charged him with great and mighty blowes, but hee who had no other desire nor de|termination, but to procure his bringing out of that place, drew not out his Swoord against him, but with his migh|tie, great, and strong armes he tooke him by the wast, and in spite of his hart he lift him vp from the ground, and car|ried him through the Quadran, till he came vnto the doore whereas the fayre Damsell did tarry for them, and when he had brought him thether, the Prince beegan to make great resistance in his defence, as one that were beeside him|selfe, and ignoraunt of the good that should come vnto him. The knight of Cupide seing that the Prince did set all his strength against him, he likewise inforced his strength, and ouerthrew him downe to the ground out at the doore, wher|as straight way the Prince did finde himselfe at libertie f that terrible fire and paine he suffered. And before he ould arise vp, the knight of Cupide did pull off his Healme nd said vnto him. You are but dead Prince Don Lusindo,  you doo not acknowledge this Damsell to be your wyfe. nd when the Prince saw the Damsell and dyd know hir, e receiued great delyght to se hir there, and sayd. Of a uth gentle Knight, for this thinge which you doo aske of e, there is no nede to certifie me with the feare of death,  that I haue very much repented me of the great disloi|altie

I haue vsed towards hir, and there is nothing that I desire more, then to take hir vnto my spouse and wyfe, as surely she already is. In saying these words the knight of Cupid did a part himselfe from him, and gaue the prince his hand, helping him to arise from the grou~d. And being on foot he did imbrace the fayre Pinarda with great loue, for so the damsel was called. And the prince returning vnto the knight of Cupid, he gaue him harty thanks for that which he had done for him, and requested him to giue him to vnderstand of whom he had receiued so great a benefit, and he tould him that he was called the knight of Cupide, and how that he was of the kingdome of Hungarie. And when the Prince saw that he made no more declaration of himselfe, he would not be importunate with him, for that he perceiued wel how he was vnwilling to be knowen, and for that it grew to be very late, the faire Pinarda did request them to take theyr rest that night in that habitation, whereas they were both of them very well serued, and ther grew betwixt the~ great friendship So the next day they all thre together descended out of that habitation, by y^e same staires wherby the knight of Cupide did goe vp, and descending downe into the grene valley, they saw comming towards them a knight of bigge stature and very well armed, whereat they were all much amazed, but straight waies when they drew nigher, he was knowen to be that valiant and worthy king Sacridoro, who as it hath bene tould you did throw himselfe into the depth of the fountaine, whereas he found himselfe in that grene and flourishing medow, and he went to seke out the knight of Cupide, greatly amazed at that which he saw, for that it semed he was in a new world. And whe~ the knight of Cu|pide knew him, with the greatest pleasure and delight i all the world he went towards him, and there they did im brace one another, as though they had not seene one anothe a long time, and there they declared the one vnto the othe what had happened vnto eyther of them. And straight wa the knight of Cupide made knowen vnto the Prince Lu|sindo, his friend the king Sacridoro, and gaue him to vnder|stand,

that by his occasion and for his cause he came vnto that ftaine of the Sauages, and that he ought to thank him for his libertie. The Prince who had knowen him be|fore, and knew of the great loue that he bare to his sister Oriselua, with great ioy and pleasure he dyd imbrace him, and promised him that he wold doo so much with his father, that they should be friends, and giue him the Princesse for his wife, with the which the King Sacridoro was so ioyfull, that he was as one beside himselfe with the great pleasure which he receiued, and gaue thanks vnto God for that be|nefit shewed vnto him, in meting with that good knight of Cupid, who was the occasion of his remedie. So after that betwixt them there had passed very much talke, they deter|mined to goe vnto the court of the king Polidarco, and they departed from that place, hauing in their company the faire Pinardo,  went through the famous caue of Phenicia, wher of hath ben spoken so much,  there they did vnderstand the occasion of that terrible  fearefull noyse which continually was there heard, for the which there was none that durst giue the enterprise to goe into the caue, and was by reason of the valley which the knight of Cupid found himselfe in, at such time as he was taken into the fountaine of the Saua|es, was so depe, and compassed about with such high and ightie rocks, so that neuer any man could enter in, neither ould they climbe vp vnto the top of those mountaines, nor ome to the knowledge of any such valley that was in that ace amongst those rocks, and vnder those rocks and mou~|ines there was a caue that passed through, which was ve| obscure and darke, and also narrow, by reason whereof, gether with other open parts in the same Rock, the ayre d enter in, passing through from the one side vnto the her, and the noise was so great that it made in the same ue, and by cliffes thereof, that it was very time|s and fearefull to behould, in such sort that there s none durst enter in there at, wherevppon it was led the terrible Caue of Phenicia. So the Knight

of Cupid, and the king Sacridoro, and the prince Don Lusin|do, with the princesse Pinarda, went foorth of the caue, and all foure together went vnto the court of the king Polidar|co. Who when he vnderstood of the comming of the Prince Don Lusindo his sonne, the great ioy and pleasure which he and the Quene did receiue cannot be expressed, and the ho|nour which was done vnto them, for the time that they re|mained there. In which time the king Sacridoro was made sure vnto the princesse Oriselua, for whose sake he had passed great misfortunes and troubles. And the prince don Lusindo was married vnto the faire Pinarda, at which marriage, ther was made great feasts and triumphs in all the kingdome And here the Historie doth leaue them till time doo serue.


How the three Princes, Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, went vnto Constantinople, whereas they gaue vnderstanding of the death of Rosicleer.
_FUL of sorrow and heauinesse departed the princes Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Ta|tarian Zoylo, out of the kingdome of Fenici for y^e losse of their great and especiall frien Rosicleer, as those who certainely beleu that he was dead. And without receiui any comfort or consolation, they trauayled many daies  Sea, till in the ende they ariued in the Empire of Grecia whereas they vnderstood of all y^t had passed with the Emp rour Trebatio, and the Empresse Briana. But when Ly mandro did vnderstand and know the good fortune of  sister, he did therewith mittigate the great sorrow that  suffered for the newes he brought. And hauing a great  sire to se the Empresse, and to know the Emperour, th all thre accorded together to goe vnto Constantinople. A in that time y^e fame was so great in all parts, of the knig of the Chariot, that in what place wheresoeuer they ca

her was no other communication but of him,  of his great prowesse,  of the knightes that euery day he did ouerthrow to the ground. And by reason that this was the occasion to bring vnto their remembraunce, the high bountie of their friend, the knight of Cupid, they could doe no other thing but wepe  sigh, with great sorrow, saying to themselues, that if they had him in their company, they might get honour in Constantinople: for that the knight of the chariot could not be of so high a courage and force, but that he would vnhorse him and get the victorie.
So when they were come vnto Constantinople, they did one day enter into the great place, at such time as it was full of knights, as well straungers as of their owne country. And the knight of the Chariot had ouerthrowen the worthiest  best knights that wer ther. So these three princes did proue themselues with the knight of the chariot, but he ouerthrew them all to the ground. But first they had broken with him ech of them thre two speares, which was vnto the~ no small honour, for that vntill that time, there was not one knight that had fastened themselues to breake two speares: and it was the occasion that they were well estemed of all the be|holders. And so without any more staying, they went to make themselues knowen vnto the Emperour,  to the Empresse, who were very desirous to know who they were. But whe~ the empresse did know hir brother,  the Emperour was in|formed who they all thre were. I cannot expresse the great ioy  pleasure, which they receiued, at their comming thether,  according there vnto they gaue them entertainment. For hat the desire which the empresse had to heare newes of hir brother, was very great, because she loued him exceding well,  likewise to know somewhat of hir sonne Rosicleer, or that they two were very great friends. And as it is a hing naturall, that when a person is most at his contented oy and pleasure, in this life: sodainly they are mixed with reat sorrow and bitter heauinesse. And it now fell out, for hat these thre. Princes did not know that Rosicleer was

son vnto the Emperour  the Empresse Baiana, at such time as both parties were in the chiefest of their delight  recei|ued great contentment. Liriamandro did declare all that hap|pened vnto them by Rosicleer,  of his great strength  wor|thinesse,  of all that which he had done for them being vn|knowen, but in the end he told of his strange  dolorous losse,  in what sort the king Sacridoro did throw himselfe after him  was ske downe into the depth of that fountaine. When the Empresse vnderstood this of hir sonne Rosicleer, she thought verily to haue died presently, with the great sor|row which she receiued, and ther with she fell downe to the ground in a sound. Then the mightie emperour who did ve|rie well vnderstand the occasion, did vse all diligence to co~|fort hir, for that those newes were a corsie vnto his heart likewise, but yet dissembling his sorrow, with great courage he toke the empresse in his armes  did comfort hir all that euer he could. And when these newes were published through out all the citie, they began to make great lamentation, in such sort, that the feasts  iusts did cease  stay for certaine daies. Likewise the thre princes were very sad  sorrowfull that they had brought such heauie newes,  their great sad|nesse   paine did increase more then before, when they vnderstood that their perfect friend Rosicleer was sonne vnto so high  mighty parents, as also so nigh kinsman vnto Bargandel Liriamandro. So they remained there certaine daies, whereas the Emperour  the Empresse did them much honour,  were with them very royally entertained, and for that the two princes Bargandell Liriamandro had great de|sire to se their loues, Rodasilua Siluerina, in one night very secretly they departed out of Constantinople, and taking the way towards England, they trauailed till they came vnto a part of the Ocean sea which was in Rone,  ther they dyd ship themselues  came into England, wher they were very well receiued of the King Oliuerio:  being asked for theyr friend Rosicleer, they gaue him to vnderstand of the sorrow|full lesse of him, for whom the king receiued great griefe 

sorrow, for that he loued him very well. But whe~ the newes ca vnto the vnderstanding of the Princesse Oliuia, there could be no sorrow equall vnto hirs, neither any tongue so eloquent for to expresse the halfe part therof, for that the did loue Rosicleer more then hir owne selfe, and at that present death had ben more welcome vnto hir then such sorrowfull newes, so that at the sodaine hearing thereof she remained one whole houre without any remembrance, in such sort y^t she semed rather to be dead then aliue. And when she came vnto hr selfe hir sorrow did double increase, and in a more deadlie traunce then before, she fell downe vpon hir bedde, wheras she lay the most part of all the day without speaking any word till such time as a damsell that was with hir fea|ring that she had ben dead, ran  told the king, who straight way went vnto his chamber, acco~panied with many knights. And being very much amazed to se his daughter in y^t case, he procured for hir many remedies, by which this faire prin|cesse did come againe vnto hir selfe, although hir desire was rather to die then to liue. And seing hir selfe in the presence of hir father  of so many knights, she could not manifest the great griefe which she felt in hir hart, which was the occa|sion that hir paine was the more. And it is to be beeleued that at that present she had died, if God had not preserued hir for a farther benefit more then she did hope for, or thinke off. And because that all this great sorrow  griefe of the princes was for hir more glory  pleasure in time to come. The History doth leaue to speak any more of hir till occasi|on serue,  sheweth of other things which happened in the meane time.


How Florinaldus came into the kingdome of Fraunce, where hee was taken prisoner at a bridge,  how by two knights that came thether hee was set at libertie, whom hee knew to bee the knights of the flower de luces, which he sought. Chapter. 29.
_THe good Lnight Florinaldus, who by the com|maundement of the knight of the Sun went in the quest of the knightes of the flower d Luses,  trauailed through many and diuers countries, till such time as he came into the kingdome of Fraunce, comming at length vn|to a bridge, which was vpon the riuer Rodano, he saw two knights very fierce,  by seming valiant, who were brethren vnto Brandafuriel, that mighty and strong Gyant which the Prince Clauerindo, slew in the great citie of Paris, and they were come vnto that place for no other occasion but to kepe passage,  to doe all the damage they could vnto the king O|risteo  his knights. The one of them was called Crudamon|te,  the other Rocardo, being of their bodies  lims as giants,  they had in that place taken diuers prisoners,  slaine ma|ny knights,  before that Florinaldus did passe that bridge, he must neds iust with one of them,  his fortune was such, y^t by the strong encounter he receiued his Horse  himself fell downe to the ground, in such sort that one of his legs was vnder his Horse, so that he could not make any longer bat|taile,  the mightie Rocardo, which was he that made the iust with him, if he had not imbraced himselfe about his Horse necke, had likewise fallen downe to the ground, with that strong encounter which he had receiued. So Florinal|dus was taken prisoner,  put into fast hold, but it was not long after that the newes of these two knights came vnto, y^e court of the king Oristeo,  being vnderstood by y^e two prin|ces Clauerindo Brandizel, they in great secret departed from the court to make combat with them. And when they came vnto the bridge, ther was betwixt the~ foure a very fierce and stout battell, in which the two Princes found themselues greatly perplexed, for y^t these two were very stout  valiant knights, yet for all y^t the goodnesse of their armour did stand them in great sted,  againe, they were of such courage, that in the end they got the victorie, and slew them, and cut off

their heads,  sent them vnto the king Oristeo,  requested of him pardon, for that they had departed without lisence, certifieng moreouer, that they were gone to seeke out their friend the knight of the Sun. And in as short time as possi|bly might bee they would returne againe vnto the court. Now when these two bretheren were dead, the two princes did set at liberty all the prisoners that were there, amongst whom was Florinaldus,  when he saw the deuise of the slow|er de uses, he straight way knew that those wer the knights, in whose demaund he had trauailed. And therwith he went vnto them,  declared the Embassage of the knight of the Sun. And when they vnderstood the same, if ther had ben gi|uen vnt them all the world, at that present they could not haue receiued greater pleasure, especially after that Florinal|dus did tell them all that he had done in the Iland of Linda|raza,  afterward how that the Emperour Trebatio entered into Hungaria,  of all the rest. So that these two princes wer as men amazed to heare him tell of those high  mighty deeds, and thought the time very long till they did see him. With this great desire they all departed from that bridge  tra|uailed till they came vnto Marsella, wheras they id imbark themselues, and tooke their way towards Grecia. Whom the Historie leaueth till fit time, for to declare of the Knight of Cupid, whom we left in the kingdome of Phenicia.


 How the Knight of Cupid and the King Sacridoro departed from the kingdome of Phenicia for the Empire of Grecia. Chap. 30.
_VEry great  solempne feasts were celebra|ted in the kingdome of Phenicia, at the mar|riage of the valiaunt and well esteemed King Sacridoro, and the Prince Don Lu|sindo, with the faire Pinarda, and also for o giue delight and pleasure to the Knight

of Cupid, whom they did honour  had in so great estimati|on as the worthiest  most valiant knight in all the world,  were all greatly amazed, as well at his great grace  ver|tue, as at his bounty and strength, yet notwithstanding for that he had alwaies in his memorye the discurtesie of the princesse Oliuia, any thing whatsoeuer he did se could not make him merry, neither giue him any contentment, so that continually he was very sad  heauy, for the which his great friend the King Sacridoro was very sorry  roceiued great griefe, for that he knew from whence his euil  infirmitie proceded,  did comfort him as much as possibly he could, in saying, that per aduenture the princes Oliuia had she wed him that discurtesie, for that she did not know who it was,  that it did not agree, neither was it requisite for hir honour to shew fauour vnto any knight, except he were a king or prince such as with all honour  maiestie she might receiue for hir spouse, but (said he) possibly when she knoweth that you are sonne vnto th Emperour Trebatio  the Empresse Briana, she will repent  change hir minde, and that he was such a Knight as that princesse Oliuia should receiue great delight to receiue him into hir seruice. And then he gaue counsell that he should goe into Greece,  make himselfe knowen vn|to his parents,  from thence he might take his iourny into England,  ther to proue once againe his fortune. And in say|ing these  other such like words in effect, this good king Sa|cridoro comforted the Knight of Cupid. And after that the feasts  triumphs were ended, he said that he would depart  go towards the empire of Greece. And with that determi|nation he asked leaue of the king Sacridoro, but he which bare him no lesse good will then vnto the quene Oriselua his wife, sayd, that in no manner of wise he would consent vnto to his departure, except he were in his company, for that he would beare him company, vntill such time as he made him|selfe knowen vnto the Emperour Trebatio, his father, but the knight of the Sun would very faine haue excused that iourney, saying vnto him that it was not a thing that bese|med

him to be absent at that present time from his country, being new married, for that possible the king Polidarco, his father in law,  the Quene Oriselua his wife would be an|gry, but all that did profit very lile, for the king was deter|mined to goe with him, and although he thought againe to loose all his kingdome, yet would he not leaue his company. So that the Knight of Cupid was constrained against his will, to take him in his company, the which he refused, think|ing that the king Polidarco,  the Qene Oriselua would re|ceiue some griefe  anger for his departure, and yet he had so great delight in his familiaritie  friendship, that it semed vnto him in all his life time he neuer met with a knight, so conformble vnto his, neither that with a better will did of|fer vnto him friendship. And although at time he did refuse his company, yet time did come afterward that it was very necessary  profitable vnto him, as he reafter shall bee tolde you in this History.
And for that the king Sacridoro did know the great desire the Knight of Cupid had to depart, talking on a time with the king Polidarco, and the Quene his wife, he gaue them to vnderstand how that the Knight of Cupid was sonne vnto the Emperour Trebatio and of the Empresse Briana, and how that hee would depart toward Grecia, to make himselfe knowen vnto his Father, for which cause he could not but beare him company, for the great obliga|tion in which he was bound vnto him, and did desire them that they would thinke well thereof. And although his de|parture grieued them very much, yet seeing the great reson that he had, they answered that he might doe as he thought best, for that it semed vnto them he had great reason there|in,  they much meruailed that the Knight of Cupid should be so high and mightie a Prince. At length when they had taken their leaue of them and of the Prince Don Lusindo, who was also very sorrowfull for their departure, they went out of the citie,  trauailed vnto the sea coast, wher they did

imbarke themselues,  toke the way towards Grecia, wher| that happened vnto them which shall be told you in this Chapter following.


Of a verie fierce and perillous battaile which the Knight of Cupid had with a famous giant in the Grecian Em|pire. Chap. 31.
_THe sorrow  griefe was very much which was in the whole empire of Grecia, by rea|son of the newes touching the death of Ro|sicleer, for the Emperour did commaund, that for the space of one moneth all mirth  pastimes which were made in the great citie of Constantinople, whereas were so many  excellent knights, that it was a strange thing to behold. Which knights not hauing any thing to doe, some departed into their owne countries,  other some went out of the court to seke their aduentures in the Empire, till such time as the month was passed. In the end of which, the Knight of the Chariot should returne to defend the beautie of the faire princesse Linda|brides so that at that time the citie of Constantinople was left voide, and all the land of the Empire full of Knights, as well strangers as naturalls amongst whom there did not lacke to bee euerie day great contentions. It fell out in this time that ther came into Grecia a mightie great  famous giant called Mandroco, who was Lord of Achia, which was an Iland ioyning vnto the grecian empire, of so great force  strength that he was inuinsible,  of long time the whole countrie of Grecia did not like well of him, for that he great|ly harmed them, as well by land  by sea, and as this migh|tie Giaunt heard the report of the high dedes of chialrie done by the Knight of the Chariot, in the great citie of Constantinople, and likewise of the great safe conduct gran|ted by the Emperour, with the great desire he had to proue himselfe with him, and to make manifest his mightie force

and strength in that Court, he passed into Grecia, and came thether two daies after the demaund of the Knight of the Chariot, and being determined to remaine there till the moneth was accomplished, hee trauailed in the Empire, and with what knight so euer he met, he should not depart, but first proue himselfe with him, and o all such as he did ouer|throw to the ground, he would, take their Horsses from the~, and whe~ he had ioyned a great number together, he would send them into his Iland. So he behaued himselfe, that in space of twelue daies he had euer throwen more then two hunded Knights, and all their Horses were his and for that they did finde themselues agreeued, many of those Knights did make theyr complaint vnto the Emperour of their mis|vsing, who receiued so great sorrow and griefe, that he him selfe would haue gone in person, to haue proued himselfe a|gainst him, if the Empresse had not hindred him. And a|gaine, calling to remembrance the safe conduct that he had graunted vnto all Knights, he wold not send any people against him, for that hee would not break his promise. So that hee receiued great griefe for that which euery day was tolde him of that gyant. And his great name and fame was spread throughout all that Countrie, in such sort, that many Knight did procure to apart himselfe out of that way wher|as he went, and vnto all Knights his name was terrible, and they said that in all the world there was not a Gyant so mighty and strong. And trauayling in this sort, it so fell out, that in the same time there came into the Countrie of Grecia the Knight of Cupide, and the good King Sacridoro, and straight waies there was giuen them to vnderstand of the high dedes of the Knight of the Chariot, and how that he remained in Constantinople, till such time as the month was accomplished, for to returne and defend the beautie of the fayre Princesse Lindabrides. Likewise they heard the great complaints which was made of the mighty Gyant Mandroco. The Knight of Cupide hauing great desire to mete with him, did direct his way toward that way wher|as it was tould him that he went. And it fell out one day

that as he and y^e king Sacridoro did passe through a mighty and great vsed way, they saw the giant comming the same way, with more then thirty of his owne knights, which bare him company, and he was of so high and big stature, that he did appeare aboue all the rest from the brest vpwards, and when these two Knights came nigh vnto them, the Gyaunt dyd behould them, and liking well both of the Knights and theyr Horsses,  straight waies sayd that they should pre|pare themselues vnto the iust with him, one to one, or both together, which their pleasure was, and best liked them.
Then the Knight of Cupid, who had a great desire to proue himself with the giant, requested the King Sacridoro, that he would let him haue the first battell. To whom he answer|ed, that he should doo his pleasure, although he would haue ben very glad first to haue proued his owne fortune,  so y^e Knight of Cupid, without answering any word, went and put himself in one part of the high way. And when the Gy|aunt saw him so big and well made, it liked him well, and laughed vnto himselfe, because he would iust alone with him, and might profit himselfe with his companion. The gy|aunt had vnder him a very fayre and mighty Horse called Rondarte, that next vnto the Horse Cornerino was the best in all the world, and for that hee was so mighty and strong, he trauailed on him, for if he had not beene such a one, ther were no horse that were able to sustaine and suffer him, for that hee was so big, and againe the great waight of his ar|mour which was more, and being on Horseback he had a mightie great  big speare in his hand of so great waight, that a Knight had inough to doo to lift it fro~ the ground,  therwith he put himselfe right against the knight of Cupid, in the presence of many Knights y^t were gathered together to se what should passe betwixt them. So both of tham did broch theyr horses with their spurs, with so great fury, that it semed the ground wold sincke wheras theyr horsses ran. So they met together, and made theyr encounter, which was with so great strength, that their mightie great and bigge

speares dyd flie into the aire all in sheuers, and the Gyant lost his saddle, and had a great fall vnto the ground, but the Knight of Cupid kept his course forwards on, somwhat as|tonied with the force of that incounter, which made all the Knights of the gyant,  those which were ther gathered to|gether to se that contention, and all those which had sene the worthie knight of y^e Chariot, said, that without all doubt it was he, and that he had gone abroad with other armor, because he would not be knowen,  to proue himselfe with the Gyant, for that in his gentle disposition, and great force  strength in his incounter, he did resemble him very much. So when this mightie Gyaunt saw himselfe ouerthrowen to the ground, he knew not whether it was a dreame, or truth which he saw, he was so amazed, and semed that it was not possible that he should be ouerthrowen, and his e|nimie remaine in his saddle, whom he saw returning back againe on Horsback, and when hee came vnto him he sayd.
It is great right and reason Gyant, that thou possessest the same order and condition that thou diddest ordaine for them, with whom thou hast iusted, which is, that he who so euer is ouer throwen to the ground, to loose his Horse, and to be his o whom he receiued the incounter, that did ouer|throw him. Then the Gyant did looke vpon him with a ve|ry fierce and furious countenance, that it semed ther flew out of his eyes great lightning and sparckles of fire, and ayde.
Here I doo giue and yelde vnto the my Horse, for that hou ast won him, but I wil so handle the, that liuing thou hal not inoy him, although all the gods doo come downe fro~ eauen to aide  help the. And in saying these words, he a|ose from the ground, and drew out a very great and heauy auchon that he had at his side  went towards the knight f Cupide with it in his hands, who would not abide him n Horsback, but with great lightnesse he leapt foorthwith  his Horse-backe, and drew out his sine cutting woord which he had wonne before of Candramarte,

that was of the Quene Iulia, and went forth with the same in his hand to receiue the Gyant, and as they met to strike both to gether at one time, the Knight of Cupid did stay his sword in the aire, and tarrte till such time as the Gyaunt had discharged first his blow and at such time as his great Fauchon did descend, he leaped on the one side with great lightnesse, that his blow could not fasten vppon him, and beeing downe, hee entered into him with a stout and coura|gious stomacke, and giue him such an ouerthwart blow vpon the thigh that hee cut both armour and flesh vnto the hard bone out of the which wound there issued great abun|dance of blood. The Gyant did complaine very much of this wound, and beegan with a great noise to cry out against the heauens, and with great ire and courage he turned againe and ut vp his curting fauchon, and beecause he would not misse his blow, he stroke the Knight of Cupid ouerthwart his wast with so great fury, that if his armour had not ben made by the great wisdome of Artemidoro, he had cut and parted him in two peeces. And therewith he made him to flie on the one side more then six paces, and thought verily that all his bones had bene broken, and before that he could settle himselfe for to returne against him to giue him his pament, this great and mighty Gyant was vpon him, and lift vp his mighty fauchon, and would haue stroke him a right downe blow, but this valant and good Knight see|ing himselfe in so great extremity, with soueraigne courage and with a valiant hart,  strength, hee let loose the sword out of his hand, and before that the Gyant could execute his blow, for that hee had his armes all a high, hee entered in with him, and embraced him with his strong arms abou his wast, that hee made him to loose the force of his blow and with so great strength he charged him vpon that thig which was wounded, that sore against his will, hee ouer threw him to the ground, who fell in such order that it se med a great wall had fallen downe. The Gyant when h saw himselfe vnder foote, hee did force himselfe all that eue hee could for to se vp againe, and thrust with his strong

armes at the knight of Cupid, for to get him fro~ ouer him, but he did vse so great policie, that he did recouer his sword againe which dyd hang by the wrist band, and putting the point therof to his visor of his helme, he thrust it in therat, in such sort that he thrust it through and through his head, so that ther was slaine that great and famous Giant Man|droco, with so great wonder vnto them which dyd se him slaine, as though he had bene an immortal man, for that no humane strength had ben sufficient to haue slaine him. And when his knights did se him lying a long vpon the ground and dead, beeing very desirious to reuenge the death of their Lord, they all together did assault the worthy knight of Cu|pid,  did compasse him round about for to kill him. So whe~ the valiant king Sacridoro saw his very friend in that great extremity, he stroke his horse with his spurs, and put himself amgst the thickest of them, and the knight of Cupid began to strike vpon his enimies, in such sort, that euery blow that he oke was with so great fury, that either he slew one, or ouerthrew one to the ground. And the king Sacridoro did hlp him with so great strength, that more then six he ouer|threw dead to y^e earth, at which time the knights that were there gathered together for to se the battell, when they saw the giant dead, and the high bounty of the two knights, more then twenty of them returned in their behalfe, so that in a little time after that they came to help them, the knights of the Gyant were all slaine, and all those receiued great con|tentment and pleasure at the death of the Gyant, for that they were all amazed  had great feare of him. And seing the high  mighty prowesse of the knight that slew him, they were all very desirous to know him, and so some of the~ dyd oyne themselues together, and did desire him to tell the~ his ame, for that they were desirous to know what he was hat had done so great benefit and good vnto all that Coun|trie.
Then he surrendred vnto them great thankes for the reat ayde and succour he had receiued at their hands, and uld vnto them that he was called the Knight of Cupid,

and that he could not at that time giue them any farther to vnderstand  that those Knights did cease from troubling him any farther, but alwaies had in elofie that he should be the Knight of the Chariot, for that in all things he did resem|ble him very much. So when that the knight of Cupid and the king Sacridoro departed from that place, certaine of the knights which were ther, considering the great contentment and please that the Emperour and all his court would re|ceiue, for the death of that Giant. Euen dead as he was, they tooke him,  laid him ouerthwart vpon a horse, in the saddle, but by reason of his great length his head and fet did traile vpon y^e ground, and in that sort they carried him vnto Con|stantinople, hauing great ioy  pleasure, and no lesse wonder, vnto all the~ that did se him. And whe~ they came vnto Con|stantinople, they made representation of him, vnto the Empe|rour,  declared vnto him, all the manner how and in want order the Knight of Cupide had staine him, how was not a little amazed,  semed vnto him that the Knight which had done that acte, could not be but of great  exceding valour, for that the giant was of great strength and force: and that there was not one of so great name  fame amongst all the Ilands of the Terreno sea. So the Emperour had great desire to se  know him, for that by the signes  tokens which he vnderstood of him, it gaue him in his minde, that he should be the Knight of the Sun: Whom he had a great desire to see,  very much marueled that he came not thether, accor|ding vnto his promise. So in this sort the fame of the knight of Cupid, began to be knowen throughout all y^e whole Em|pire of Greece. And after that the Gyant was slayne, the Knight of Cupid, neither the king Sacridoro, wold not enter into Constantinople, till such time as the Knight of the Cha|riot did returne to defend the beauty of the Princesse Linda|brides, but trauailed in that Countrie certaine daies, in the which they dyd many dedes of great Chiualrie, whereby their fame did increase, in such sort, that there was no other communication, but of them: likewise there was great con|tencion growne amongst many, which of the two Knights,

he of Cupid, or he of the Chariot, should be the best propor|cioned and strongest Knight: and all in generall had great desire to se them both together in battaile, the one against the other. And did beleue very certainely, that they two were the best Knights that were in all the world.


How the Knight of the Chariot returned to defend the beautie of the Princesse Lindabrides, in the mightie Citie of Constantinople, whereas happened very strange things. Chap. 31.
_AT such tyme as was accomplished the Mooneth that the Emperour had commanded the triumphs and feasts to cease, for the death of his Son Rosi|cleer. Straight way y^e great citie of Constantino|ple, began againe to be furnished w^t al sorts of worthy  va|aliant knights, as well strangers of their natiue countrie, who had trauailed throughout that countrie, to passe away the time of the Emperours commandement. So for to prooue the aduentures with the knight of the Chariot, and other some to se his mighty Knighthood. So y^e first day that the knight of y^e Chariot entred into y^e place, he ouerthrew more the~ twenty knights, such as were very famous,  came from far countries, for to proue themselues with him. The Empe|rour and y^e Empresse were in the windowes of theyr great allaice, with so sad and sorrowfull semblant, y^t it did well appeare in them, y^e great griefe which they receiued, for the eath of their sonne. And being in this Iust, there entred nto the place thre worthy Knights, of a strong and big pro|portion, and armed with very rich armour, wrought and rauen with great cost. The which were straight wayes nowen, by the Knight of the Chariot, in the deuice which ey brought: And were ioyfull of their comming, for that ese thre knights were the two valiant princes Brandizel, Clauerindo,  his! friend Florinaldos, who were come in the

demaund of the knight of the Sun. And when they heard the great report and fame of the knight of the Chariot, they came thether to prooue themselues with him, and so they entered into the great place, and Florinaldus was the first that put himselfe against the knight of the Chariot. And at such time as he should make his encounter, the knight dyd lift vp the point of his speare because hee would not strike Florinaldus, but yet Florinaldus made his encou~ter w^t so great strength, y^t he sheuered his speare al to peces,  either of them passed the one by the other, without any moouing. So then they re|turned to make the second encounter, and looke as the knight of the Chariot did the first encou~ter, so he did now likewise againe, because he would not hurt him, which was the occa|sion that Florinaldus did plainely vnderstand that his aduer|sary would not encounter against him, and ther with he did a part himselfe from y^e place of iust, meruailing very much at the great curtesie which y^e knight of the Chariot did vse with him. So straight way entered into the iust that stout and valiant Brandizel, but to conclude, it happened with him as with the prince Clauerindo, as it happened with Florinal|dus, so that they were constrained to withdraw themselues all thre halfe abashed, for the little profit that did proced o their encounters, and no lesse meruailed at the great curte|sie wich the knight of the Chariot did vse with them, for th which they conceiued within themselues that he should b their great friend the knight of the Sunne, for that in his de meanour in all points he did resemble him very much, and againe, that setting him a part, that there was not in al th world a knight of so great power and strength. At that tim that the great place was al couered with people and arme knights, on the one side thereof they saw enter in a might knight of his body, and mounted vpon a very faire  grea Horse, and was armed with so precious and rich armour that amongst all the knights there was not the like, excep the armour of the Knight of the Chariot, he brought wi him thre Damsells, all mounted vpon their palfrayes, a

brought with them certaine fardels. Likewise a very foule  ill faued dwarffe, which caried his speare  shield. And be|ing within the place, he turned his Horse head,  went  put himselfe nigh vnto the triumphant Chariot, wheras he bee|gan to behold  to vew that precious  faire princes, Linda|brides, who receiued great pleasure, in beholding the great  mighty valour of hir knight. So after that he had vewed hir a good space, he departed from thence,  went vnto the knight of the Chariot, and saluting him very curteously, he said: of a truth worthy knight, the great beauty of this precious prin|cesse, doth far exceed. And that you haue great reson to detend the same. Notwithstanding, I doe know a damsell, very strange  far from this country, that if you did see hir, doubt|lesse she would seeme vnto you to be of no lesse beauty, then the princes. This cannot be said the Knight of the Chariot, for that the princes Lindabrides my mistresse, doth exced in fairenesse  beautie and like good grace, all the damsels, la|dies and gentlewomen, that are in all the world. And this will I affirme and defend against all such, as shall say the contrary. Upon the proofe thereof, said the Knight, I will Iust with you. And possibly I will make you to know the contrary: the which he did very well accomplish and per|forme, although there were many that did laugh at him. So when hee had sayd these wordes, the straunge Knight toke of the dwarfe his speare and shield which he brought, and with a very wrathfull and strange semblaunce, he put himselfe on the one side of the Iust, the knight of the chari|t dyd the like, and began to take their course together with great force and strength. And in the middest of their ourse, they made a very great  mightie encounter, brea|ing their speares,  shiuering them all in splinters, with|out any mension or mouing in their saddles, or doing any more harme, but passed their course forwards with great . And returned and made their second encoun|er, where at the straunge Knight lost his stirrops, and the eanes of his horse fell out of his hand, and did somewhat

decline him selfe in his saddle: yet for all this he ran for|wards on his course,  quickly recouered himself againe, al|though very sore troubled,  no lesse amazed at that mighty  strong encounter which he had receiued. The knight of the Sun did follow his course,  kept himselfe vpright, although it seemed vnto him, that to be the strongest encounter, that euer he receiued vnto that time,  had that strange knight in great estimaion. And being determined to make the third encounter,  ready to take their course, ther entred into the middest of the place, a dwarffe, the least  the most ill fauo|redst that euer was seene, who came riding vpon a roane Horse,  brought in his hands two speares all glt,  mar|uailosly well made,  went directly vnto the Knight of the Sun, and giuing vnto him one of those speares he said. This speare is sent vnto you by a wise man, who hath great desire to serue you,  doth send it you, for to iust with this Knight who is before you. And he doth giue you to vnderstand, that therwith you shall make such an entounter, that all y^e force and strength thereof, shall returne against your selfe,  shall passe through your mighty  stout hart, and death shall first conclud with you, before that wound be healed. And when he had said these words, the Knight of the Sunne did receiue the speare,  was very much amazed at the words that he heard spoken. And without any more saying, the dwarffe departed from him,  went vnto the strange Knight,  gaue vnto him the other speare which he brought,  said: This speare a wise man doth send it vnto you for to iust with the Knight of the Sun,  he doth giue thee to vnderstand, that at this encounter thou shalt ouercome thy contrary,  shalt make him to lose the name which now he hath,  thou shalt remaine wounded for euer. And whe~ he had made an end of saying these words, not staying any longer, but strake his Horse with his whip,  returned the way back againe, wher he came. And all men remained very much amazed: but much more the knight of the Chariot  the strange knight,  could not vnderstand to

what end those words were spoken, but left their speares which they had  toke the speares which the Dwarffe had brought them, and spurring their Horses they began to run one against another with great fury,  in the midst of their swift course, at such time as all people did behold them,  lo|king what should be the end of their encounter: the two worthy knights did encounter very strongly together,  ey|ther of them chanced to strike one another vpon the beauers of their helmes. Now whether it was hap or fortune, or whe|ther those guilt speres did work by art or instuence,, I know not, but both these knights did fall backwards,  strok their heads vpon their horses croupers,  the lasings of both their helmes did faile,  they fell from their heads. But straight way they setled themselues vpright againe,  as you see that shining Sun  the faire Diana, when they doe appeare: euen so semed the faces of these two knights, for that the knight of the Sun did shew that perfect  seuere countenance, which vntill that time not one that was in all that place had seene. And of the other part, the strange knight did seme to be the soueraine,  without comparison in beauty, that faire, Clari|diana, whose Rubicomde haire which semed to be of fine gold fell loose  spred about hir eares,  hanged ouer all hir backe, parted in the midst, as though it had ben don by a compasse, showing hir celestiall face, which seemed vnto all people, to be some diuine creature. What should I say vnto that faire Medusa who did transport men into stones, yet was shee not to be compared to this royall princesse, who with hir celestiall  faire countenance did put all those that were in that place, in great  strange admiration,  almost astomed and amazed, not beleuing to the contrary, but it should bee some diuine vision: So that the faire Pincesse Lindabrides could not with much reason blame hir
knight of the Sunne, if that he were wounded by that mighty  strong blow,  that the true  perfect loue which he bare vnto hir, should be somewhat troubled.

for that the force thereof was such, that he was not able to make any resistance, but that his hart was clouen asonder in the midst,  the one halfe remained rotted as before it was. And the other half he did yeld vnto that soueraigne princes that was before him. So straight way when he felt himselfe wounded, he considered of the words which the dwarfe had spoken,  knew that they fel out to be true, not knowing what to say vnto that straunge aduenture which happened vnto him. But when the royal princes did se that pleasant coun|tenaunce, whose all onely picture did wound hir vnto y^e hart,  made hir to come into those parts, the ioy  pleasure which she receiued, I am not able to expresse: and hir loue did the more increase, for y^t it seemed vnto hir, that by a great deale, that royall presence that she had before hir, might be com|pared vnto the figure which she saw in y^e mountaines of Oli|gas. Then the knight of the Sun went vnto hir  said, wor|thy gentlewoman, shew vs I pray you so much , as to tell vnto vs, who you are: for that according vnto the strange things which we do se in you, we cannot beleue to the contrary, but that you do desend from the heauens, and that you are y^e diuine goddesse Palas, of whose sight, I should thinke my selfe happie, if feare did not put me in doubt to obtaine so great glory. Then the princes with a merry and cherefull countenaunce, did answere him and said. Worthie knight, your great valour doth constraine and force me to giue you to vnderstand of all that you doe aske, although when I came vnto this court it was with intent, not to giue my selfe to be knowen. You shall vnderstand that I am called Claridiana, and I am daughter vnto the Emperour of Trapisond, and of the Empresse his wife, who in hir time did exercise military knighthood:  for that the great fame of your high prowesse doth so far extend in the world, I departed out of Trapisond for to come into these parts, not for any other purpose, but to proue my selfe with you. And now I doe thinke my trauaile well bestowed that I haue taken, for y^t I doe know so mightie  strong a knight.
Oh what great ioy  contentment did the Knight of the Sun receiue when he heard these words, as well for that hee did know who she was, as also that she was a humane dam|sell, wheron he might occupie his thoughts,  likewise the great honour that she did vnto him  saying that his sonne had brought hir thether. And as he would haue made an an|swere, at the same instant came thether the mightie Empe|ror Trebatio, who as sone as he knew the knight of y^e Sun, in great hast he withdrew himselfe from the window  came vnto him. When the knight of the Sun saw him comming, with a trice he alighted from his Horse,  kneling downe before him he demanded his hands to kisse them, crauing par|don for that he did not before that time make himselfe to be knowen. The mighty Emperour did imbrace him with en|tire affection, shewing vnto him so great ioy  pleasure, as though he had knowen him to be his son,  hauing him in his armes, he said. My friend, how could your hart suffer so long time to refraine to speake vnto me, for certainly ccording vnto the great desire which I haue had to se you,  the great care that I haue had of your so long absence, doth make me say that you haue done me great wrong, in not discouering your selfe vnto me in all this time that you haue ben here. My Lord, answered the knight of the Sun, I do acknowledge my errour wherin I haue erred, yet I am worthy to be par|doned of your highnesse, for that loue hath ben the occasion hereof,  it may please your highnesse to speake vnto this damsell, who is y^e soueraigne princesse Claridiana,  daughter vnto y^e emperour of Trabisond. When the emperour vnder|stood therof, for that before he knew nothing, being very much amazed, he went towards hir. When the princesse saw them comming, she did alight from hir horse,  receiued them both with a meruailous, great,  dutifull reuerence. And the em|perour began first to speake vnto hir, and said.
Since when did my desert deserue to see in my Court so great goodnesse  honour: certainly I shall neuer be able to

doe seruice vnto God, for to gratifie this great curtesie. My Lord answered the princes, the great valour of your person,  the mightinesse of this your Court doth deserue, that all the rest of the princes in the world should come to serue you:  I for my part doe account my selfe happy to find my selfe here, whereas is ioyned together all the worthines of the whole world. So after that these  many other words had passed betwixt them, they all thre together went towards y^e great pallace,  when they came thether, the empresse Briana was aduertised, how that the Knight of the Sun  the prin|cesse Claridiana were ther, who with great ioy and pleasure went forth to met them, wheras the Empresse did imbrace the princesse with great loue, and ther passed betwixt them words of great curtesie. Likewise y^e empresse entertained the knight of the Sun,  as he kneled down before hir for to kisse hir hands, the empresse did take him by the hand,  made him to arise vp,  as in his semblance he did resemle very much hir son Rosicleer, as well in hir face, as in the proportion and disposition of his person, the teares issued from hir eyes, for that it gaue hir occasion to remember hir lost sons,  giuing a great sigh, she said within hir sele: Oh that if God were so pleased to vse so great curtesie vnto me, as that this knight were one of my sonnes. And with hir tender hart ouercome with sorrow, she said: Gentle knight, I finde my selfe very much grieued, because you haue ben so many daies here in this court,  that neither the emperour my lord nor I haue knowen you, for that many daies we haue tarried  looked for you, as for one vnto whom we are most bound vnto in this world. This my fault, said the knight of the Sunne, your highnesse pleasure may bee, to impute it vnto the Princesse Lindabrides, who hath ben the occasion therof, for that in no|thing I could take greater delight, then to come  serue my Lord the emperour,  your highnesse. With these  such like words they entred into the great pallace,  comming into a great  faire Hall, the empresse sae downe on the one side with the princesse Claridiana,  the emperour with the knight

of the Sun sae downe on the other side of the hall, whereas the one did declare vnto the other the whole discourse of all that happened vnto them, after such time as they parted a  in the kingdome of Hungaria,  either of them recey|ued great pleasure to heare one another. In this time the faire princes Lindabrides, who was in hir triumphant Cha|riot, had no security, neither receiued any contentment, for ha|uing seene the soueraigne beauty and great maiestie of that roiall princesse Claridiana, which seemed vnto hir to surmou~t  passe any humane iudgement or vnderstanding, she waxed very heauy of Hart  sorrowfull, which caused to ingender in hir many ealous thoughts,  complayned against hir gods  nature, for that they created so great beauty  maiesty in that damsell,  began somwhat to suspect the new amorous passions of hir Knight. So being very sad  heauy,  no lesse meruailing at al that which had happened, she arose vp from the chaire wheras she sate,  went into hir chamber,  threw hir selfe vpon hir bed, wheras she lay weping a great space, and the longer the knight of the Sun did stay his returne, the more did hir paine increase through the iealousie which she conceiued.


 How the Knight of the Sunne returned to defend the beau|ty of the faire Princesse Lindabrides, and what happened beesides. Chapter. 33.
_AFter that the Emperour Terbatio and the knight of the Sunne had betwixt them de|clared the whole discourse of all that which had happened, as well of the one as of the other, the Emperour was very desirous that the knight of the Sunne should remaine and lodge within the pallace, but the knight of the Sunne

aswered, that by no meanes he could doe to the contrary, but kepe company with the princesse Lindabrides, till such time as was accomplished the two moneths that he should defend hir beauty,  at such time as he should take his leaue of them, he was in a great confusion of himselfe, not know|ing which way or how he might returne vnto his demaund without offence vnto his mistres the Princesse Claridiana, whom he loued with all his Hart, and being in hir presence, ther remained in him no memory of the princesse Lindabri|des. Being in this confusion within himselfe, not knowing what to doe, the royall princesse Claridiana, who was not a little ioyfull to se him in hir presence, spake vnto him  said: It shall be very requisit (worthy knight) that you doe re|turne vnto your demaund, for according vnto the iustice y^t you haue of the princesse Lindabrides, I doe thinke it ended. Then the knight of the Sunne who was not a little ioyfull when he heard these words, answered saying: Soueraigne Lady, my demaund is brought to a conclusion, for that you haue made an end thereof, getting the victory of mee by the strength of your rigorous arme, in making me to acknow|ledge the contrary, in beholding your excellent beautie. Then the princes said, not for that I haue any vantage of you in prowesse, for that vnto all people it is knowen to the contrary, and looke how far you doe excede me in chi|ualry, so far doth the faire Princesse ezced mee in beauty, neyther haue I done any thing which should be the occasi|on to disturbe you, that you goe not forwards with your demaund. This will not I doe, except you will commaund me, sayd the knight of the Sunne. And as hee stoode in con|tention, not for to goe without hir lisence, the Princesse Cla|ridiana did  great pleasure therin, although to the con|trary she was so high minded, that although the worthy knight of the Sunne doth defend the beautie and gentle dis|position of the Princesse Lindabrides, yet she receyued no griefe for the same, because she knew very well, and vnto all other it was manifest, the great aduantage that she

had of hir, and whatsoeuer affection the worthy Knight of the Sun did beare vnto hir, was not sufficient to make hir acknowledge the same. And this was the occasion that she had so great trust in the knight of the Sun. And afterwar it fell so out, that this confidence did bring hir almost to the point of death, and she said vnto him: Ualiant and worthie Knight, I shal receiue great courtesie in that you doo accom|plish y^t which I haue desired you,  if it be but onely reioyce my selfe in your high and mighty Knighthood, so that you shall doo me great pleasure to returne vnto your accusto|med demand. Heer with the Knight of the Sun dyd take his leaue of hir, and of the Emperour Empresse, and mounting vpon his Horse, he went out of the pallace with great desire to speake with the two princes Brandizel Clauerindo, who were with Florinaldus adiding his co~ming. So whe~ he came into the place, he went straight vnto them  lead them into a secret Chamber within the Chariot, whereas they made themselues knowen the one vnto the other, where they em|braced the one the other with great delight, as those which loued together like vnto perfect frinds. And with y^e great de|sire they had to se one another, they remained a gret while embraced before any of them could speake, but after that they were somewhat quyeted, the two Princes Brandizel and Chaueryndo dyd giue the Knight of the Sunne to vn|derstand all that euer they had passed, after such time as they were seperated at the sea. And the knight of the Sunne did declare y^e like vnto them. Wherein they passed all that day till night drew on, at such time as the knight of the Sun would goe and speake with the Princesse. And so he tooke his leaue of them in saying that hee would returne againe straight waies. The two Princes and Florinaldus dyd re|maine lodged in one part of the Chariot, wheras they were prouided for of all things necessarie for them.
The Knight of the Sunne who went to speake with the Princesse, found hir in hir Chamber sitting in a Chayre, where she slept, and leaning hir head vpon hir hand. There

was two torches of  burning in hir Chamber, at the light wherof shee being a sleepe, seemed so faire and beauty|full that the Knight of the Sunne seeing hir, it was the occa|sion that his  lou  renue againe, in such sort, that hee had cleane forgot the Princesse Claridiana, and so he stood still a good while and did beehould hir, and semed vnto him that ther was not y^e like thing to be desired in all y^e world, and being in this thought, the faire Princesse did awake, and when the aw the Knight beore hir, she was very ioyfull for the same, yet for all that with a very sad   semblaunce shee spake vnto him, saying: What hath beene the occasion of a thing so straunge vnto me, worthy Knight, that you haue not come to see me all this day? My Lady and mistresse (said the knight of the Sun) the renuing of acquaintance with the Emperour, and with other of my friends, hath bene the occasion thereof. And the Gods doth knw how I shuld haue receiued much more contentment, if I had remained in your presence. My presence wold little haue profited you, sayd the Princesse, for that you tooke so great pleasure, and reioyced your selfe in the sight of that fayre Princesse Claridiana. The Knight of the Sunne who well vnderstood hir iealous hart, very desirous to put it a|way from hir, said: The deuine Gods hath not created your great beautie with such aduauntage aboue all the Gentle|women in the world, that the presence of another Gentle|woman should be sufficient to giue occasion that yours should be forgotten,  in especiall of this your Knight, who doth think that in the heauens he should not receiue rest, if your presence should fayle him. With these  other lyke amorous words which the Knight of the Sun said vnto hir, the faire Princesse was somwhat pacified, and forgot a great part of the suspition she had. So these two were together a great part of the night, talking of things in which they re|ceiued delight,  I am fully perswaded with my selfe, that if the Knight of the Sunne had not returned to see the Prin|cesse Claridiana, that the memorie of hir would haue trou|bled him, for that the force of hir excellent beauy, and the

swet  amorous conuersation that she had with him was such, that the knight of the Sunne thought himselfe mos hap|pye. At that time it was past midnight, and the Princesse said vnto the Knight of the Sunne that hee should go to bed, and so he tooke his leaue of hir,  returned vnto his friends, and there they lodged all foure together in one chamber, in foure beds, whereas they slept the rest of the night which remained, till the next day, in which succeded all that which you shall vnderstand in the next Chapter following.


How the Knight of the Sunne did defend the beautie of the Princesse Lyndabrides, and how there ente|red into the iusting place the knight of Cupid, and the king Sacridoro. Chapter 34.
_WHen the next day was come, the knight of the Sunne should goe foorth to defend the beau|ty of the faire Princesse Lindabrides, at such time as the great place of the Emperiall citie of Constantinople was garnished with very many valiant and glistering Knights, and the mighty Emperour Empresse were at the windowes of the great pallace. Lykewise the Princesse Clarichana, who was hat day apparailed like a Gentlewoman. Also the princesse indabrides was in the triumphant Chariot. So the Knight f the Sunne came foorth armed with that precious armour, ounted vpon his Horse Cornerino, that all people receiued reat contentment at his strange and gentle disposition, but  especiall the faire Princesse Claridiana, who thought that ight to be a thousand yeres, hir desire was so great to se im againe. So after that this gentle Knight had aduanced imselfe on Horsbacke a while, with a quiet pace he went nd put himselfe at the lit, abiding y^e iust against him what  euer he were that would giue the enterprise.

And from that place, hee cast his eies vpon the royall Prin|cesse Claridiana who was next vnto the Empresse, But when he saw hir strange and soueraigne beauty, the wound which the night past was cured and made whole, with the presence and conuersation of the Princesse Lindabrides, did now re|turne and open againe, in such sort, that it was requisite to procure other more difficult  stronger remedies for to cure the same. The faire  gallant princesse Lindabrides did great|ly feare the same, for when she saw the faire princesse Cla|ridiana,  did well cosider the great force of hir beautie and greace, the cause did worke in hir effect, in such sort, that she could not receiue any contentment in hir sad  heauie hart. So that after it was not long whe~ ther came forth against the Knight of the Sunne many Knights, and iusted with him, but in lesse then one houre he had brought vnto the ground more then twenty Knights, of such as held themselues most valiantest  of greatest prise. And being about noone tide, on the one side of that great place, they saw entering in two Knights, of the which one of them was that worthie Knight of Cupid,  the other was the good king Sacridoro, his loyall and great friend. And for that he was knowen by his de|uice, and his great fame was spread abroad in all the Em|pire of Greece, there arose a great rumour amongst all the people, in saying that the same was the famous Knight of Cupid, who slew the great Gyant Mandroco, and how that the Knight of the Chariot had found now his equall. And all in generall had great desire to se them prooue their strange and mightie forces, the one against the other. And the mightie Emperour when he vnderstood that it was th Knight of Cupid, he was very glad and reioyced much a his comming, for that he was very desirous to know him, and to giue him all the honour that such a Knight doth de|serue. And turning vnto the Empresse Claridiana, he sayde You shall vnderstand (fayre Lady) that all the people tha are in this great place are altered, at the comming of thi Knight which bringeth the deuise of Cupid, for that hee i

one of the best and most famous knights that hath come into this Countrie, and all in generall hath great desire to se him prooue himselfe with the worthie Knight of the Sunne. Then the Princesse Claridiana did very much behould the Knight of Cupide, and saw that he was very big and well made, and that in all points he did resemble very much the Knight of the Sunne, she sayd that they had great reason to giue him the name and fame, as the Emperour had sayde. At that time as the Knight of Cupide and the king Sacrido|ro did enter into that great place, they did not know that the Knight of the Chariot was knowen to be the Knight of the Sunne, for that they came then from theyr iourney, and had trauailed that day seauen miles, and the Knight of Cu|pid had great desire to proue himselfe with the knight of the Chariot, as wel for that he could not suffer that any knight should make defence, and say that there was a fayrer Gen|tlewoman then his mistresse, the Princesse Oliuia, and first before he would consent therevnto, it should cost him his lyfe. And with this determination he passed forwards more into the place, and all people that did behould him receiued great contentment. And when he came vnto the Knight of the Chariot, he saluted him very curteously, and sayd.
Worthy Knight, I had rather serue you, then giue you any occasion of anger with battaile, for that your great bountie is so notorious and manifest vnto all people, yet notwithstanding your demaund is of so great importance, that there is no Knight whatsoeuer he be, that doth know what lone is, can eyther suffer nor consent vnto the same, ill such time as he doth proue his aduenture with you, for lthough the Princesse Lindabrides be very faire and beuti|ull, yet there be damsels and Gentlewomen in the world hat doth account themselues as faire and as beautifull as he. And I my selfe doo serue one, that as I haue iustice on  part for to defend hir beautie, I haue so great securitie f bountie and force for to comath with you vpon this de|aund, I would not thinke much to take from you this

enterprise. The Knight of y^e Sun who receiued great delight, did answere him and said: Sir knight, I doo giue you great thankes for the  vsed,  the selfe same good wil I haue alwaies to bee at your commandement, for y^t the great fame which is spread abroad in this Countrie of your high and mighty knighthood doth constraine any good knight to haue you in prise and estimation. And in that you doo say of my demand, I would my gods were so pleased, that my bountie were conformable and agreable vnto the iustice and right which I haue of my part, and if I were sure thereof, then would I against all the Knights in the world defend y^e con|trary, not withstanding if you doo think y^t both in the one  in the other there is lack of my part, come let vs goe and make the proofe therof, for that first I wil loose my life before I wil leaue to doo all that in me lyeth. When the knight of Cupid heard this, without making any more answere he turned about his Horse,  the knight of the Sun did the like, and either of them did put themselues at the list,  the knight of the Sunne said vnto himselfe: Oh high  soueraigne gods, with a deuout  humble hart I request your aide  help to succour me in this battell, for that I shal haue to doo with so famous and worthy a knight. And if it be so that you be fa|uourable vnto me, although all the Knights in this great place dooe help him, yet shall I not feare them. But when the Knight of Cupid dyd see himselfe beefore the Emperour Trebatio his father, and the Empresse his mother, he did not let to say: Oh high  mighty God, the creator of all things, here I do desire thy diuine maiestie, who hether to in all the battailes which I haue made, hast giuen me the victorie, let mee not now I pray thee be forgotten nor denied of your aide and help, for that in any of them past the death should neuer haue greued me if I had bene ouercome. What happened betwixt them you shall vnderstand in this Chap|ter following.



Of the wonderfull and cruell battaile made beetwixt the knight of the Sun and the knight of Cupid, and of the perrillous ende and successe thereof. Chapter 30.
_THere was great attention and silence in the great place,  at the windows of the mighty citie of Constantinople, abiding to se the pe|rillous  dangerous contention that should be beetwixt the knight of the Sunne and the knight of Cupid. Then the two worthy and valiantest knights in the world stroke their urious Horses with their spurs, and made the~ to run with so great swift|nesse, that the ground semed to tremble vnder them,  it put great admiration in all those that did behold their furious estures, and the fierce end of their rigorous encounters, but especially the princesse Lindabrides, who lost that roseall cou|our of hir faire face, in such sort, that she had no courage to ehould the running of their swift course. These furious knights made so great hast in their long course, that whe~ it was thought they had not begun, these valiant knights with heir great  big speares did execute their encounters with  great strength of their armes and puissant force of their odies, that theyr big and long Speares being broken in eces, the sheuers thereof flew into the ayre, shewing the  of these two Knights, with so great noyse and umbling, as commonly the hard shingle doth by the Sea oast, being throwen vp by the force and strength of the ormy Sea: And these two worthie knights with no lesse ry then a Thunder-bolt, passed by one another, without  mention of griefe receiued by that strong and rigo|us encounter. Their furious Horsses had scarce made an  of their long course, when that with strange lightnesse  turned their horses about, almost as swift as the ayre, awing out their fine cutting swords, and with a trise,

their light Horses were togther, and they stroke both toge|ther the one at the other such blowes, that warding it with their sheelds, they were both of them clouen a sunder in the midst, and their swords descended vpon their Helmes with so great force and strength, that both of them declined their heads, as though they had done reuerence the one vnto the other, like brethren as they were. And when they saw that in their shelds there was no defence, the rest that remained of them they hrew off their armes to the ground, and with with theyr swords in both theyr hands, they beegan to strike one another, in such sort, that it semed they could not endure one quarter of an houre, but that these valyaunt Knights should be cut all to peces in this perillous battell, for that theyr strong blowes were far out of measure, and although their armour, for that they were the best in all the world, it did defend them that they could not be wounded, yet for all that the great force and waight of their mighty blowes dyd all to bruse their flesh and bones, but yet these worthie Knights dyd not faint any thing at all, but rather their fury and force did the more increase, and were so furi|ous in this theyr wonderfull battaile, and their blowes so thick, that scarcely they could be perceiued, but the Knight of the Sunn stroke the knight of Cupid such a blow vpon his rich and strong helme, that hee made the fire to flie out ther|at in great abundance, the which tooke away the sight of his eyes, and did depriue him somewhat of his feeling. And as the Knight of the Sunne would haue doubled another blow vpon him, the Knight of Cupid was wholy come a|gaine to himselfe, and beefore he could discharge the same, he made his light horse to leape on the one side, in such sort that his blow was stroken in vayne, with so great forc and strength, that he had fallen downe to the ground afte his sword, if he had not sustained himselfe by the pommel of his saddle, but this blow was not so soone discharged when the Knight of Cupide entered in with his Horse, an with both his handes hee stroke the Knight of the Sunne  strong a blow vpon his Heime, that he depriued him alt|gether

of his feling,  made him to loose his stirrops, and the bridle of his horse. And the furious horse being tormented with that mightie blow, did somwhat apart himselfe from y^t place, wheras they made their battaile. The emperour Tro|batio,  the Princesse Claridiana, was greatly amazed, when they saw the Knight of the Sunne, brought into that estate. Likewise the precious Princesse Lindabrides out of hir tri|umphant Chariot, with great sorrow  griefe, did behold the same. But all this did not indure long, for that the Knight of Cupid for all the hast that he made could not come to dou|ble vpon him, so soone as the valiant Knight of the Sun, was come againe vnto himselfe,  recouered his bridle  stirrups. And full of mortall courage, being to the presence of his La|dies,  by one all onely Knight to be so ill intreated, he lift vp his strong armes, with his sword in both his hands, and spurred forwardes his furious Horse, with so great wrath, that all them that did behold him, were greatly amazed:  comming vnto y^e Knight of Cupid he stroke him such a right downe blow with so great force  strength, that he made him to decline and stoope with his head downe to the horse neck,  the bloud ranne out at his eares and nose, and out of all fe|ling, he rested with his breast on his saddle bow. And his horse carried him from the one place to the other, in such sort that it seemed that he had in him no life, till such time as within a little space he came againe vnto himselfe: and se|ng himselfe in that sort vsed, with great griefe he beegan o say: Oh soueraigne God, who hath bene my ider and uccourer, in all battailes past, which I haue sustained and  the victory of braue and furious Gyants, and valiaunt Knights, now I doe most hartely desire the, at this present o be fauourable vnto me, for I doe acknowledge and con|esse, that with out thy help, I shall not be able to make my efence against this couragious Knight: for that he is the  that in all my life I haue proued. And do not con|ent my God, that I be ouercome, before my parents, and efore I doe giue my selfe to be knowen, except it be by the

knight of the Sun my brother. And in saying these words, the valiant knight of Cupid, stroke his furious horse with the spurs,  returned vpon the knight of the Sun,  with so cou|ragious force, hee stroke so terrible a blow, with his hands, vpon his rich  precious helme, that the sound thereof was heard through all the Citie of Constantinople,  was char|ged so much therwith, that he thought verely that his eyes and all the teth in his head were broken, by the great abun|dance of bloud that issued out from the lasing of his helme. And his horse Cornerino, did founder vnder him, with the great force and wayght of the same blow,  so remayned a good while,  could not arise, till such time as the Knight of the Sun with great fury did quicken him with his spurs:  said within himselfe, that with great reason the Knight of Cupid was so praysed in the court, for that ther was neuer Knight or Gyant, that euer did bring him into that extremi|tie. So ther againe these valiant warriors did returne vn|to their battaile, with so furious brauenesse, that all those which did behold them, were greatly amazed, musing how that two humane bodyes could endure so long, and suffer so great torment. And with great reason they saide, that those two knights was the flower of all the knights in the world.
The Emperour Trebatio being very much amazed to se the knight of the Sun in that extremity, he said vnto the prin|ces Claridiana. Oh who had sene the high  mighty knight|hood that was done by the knight of the Sun in the Iland of Lindaraza, vpon the monstrous giants  wild beasts,  the great prowes done against so many worthie knights, as well in this court, as in other places, that semed to be done by some diuine prouidence, rather then by any humane knight. And now to se him in so great danger to be ouercome by one alone Knight, surely it is a strange thing,  to be won|dred at. Of a truth, said the faire princes, they which haue not sene, cannot well beleue it, but yet it semeth vnto me that the knight of Cupid should be such a Knight, that wher

he is knowen he is had in the like reputacion, as the knight of the Sun is with you.
In this time the valiant knights neuer seased, neither were they weary, although more then two houres they combatted together, but semed rather with more force  fury, then at the beginning, they did perseuer in the strong battaile, stri|king the one the other with so great fury, that many times their heauy blowes did astony them, as well the one as the other,  brought them both vnto the point to be ouercome.
Which was the occasion that their stout couragis did ga|ther more strength,  their strong armes the more force:  made either of them to think, that it were better to be slaine then to be ouercome, before them, whom they did combatte, which was the occasion, that their battaile was of a great deale more force then at the beginning. And againe, if their horses had not ben the best in all the world, they could not haue caried them, neither haue suffered the great trauaile, which their maisters put them vnto, with entring in,  rety|ring backe, with the Arong  heauy blowes which they re|ceiued,  the light leapes  springes which they gaue, forced by their sharpe spurs was sufficient to haue weried them: but by reason that their horses were so good,  their armour so suer, all the state of the battaile remained in the force  he strength of the knights. And by reason, that either of the~ was suffiently furnished therewith, was the occasion that the battaile went in such sort, that betwixt them ther was not knowen any vauntage.
And as the Knight of the Sunne at that tyme did behold the faire Princesse Lindabrides, and saw hir to be so sadde and lost all hir coulour, he suspected the occasion to be in the perill of the battayle. With a new fury, and double force, hee stroke so mightie a blow at the Knight of Cupid, that he thought veily with that alone blow, to haue finished the battaile, for that his armes did hang lash downe,  his head vpon his horse neck,  he without remembrance, in such sort

that his Horse caried him about that great place, and all men did loke when he would haue fallen from his Horse to the ground.
And for that the Knight of the sun did think that he had ben dead, he did leaue to follow him. But yet he had not conclu|ded to giue a compasse round about with his Horse, in signe of victory, when the good Knight of Cupid was wholy come a|gaine to himselfe,  was setled in his saddle, and recouering his sword which he had lost by the strength of that blow w^t great fury he spurred his great and furious Horse,  went towards the knight of the Sun, and setling himselfe vpon his stirrops, he stroke him such a blow vpon the shoulder, that if his inchanted armour had not ben such, without all doubt, he had clouen him vnto the Horse saddle. But by reason that they were so strong, his sword made no more signe on him, then if he hadde stroke vpon an anfield of stele. Yet for all that the knight of the Sun was so charged with that blow, that if he had not imbraced himselfe about his horse neck, he had fallen downe vnto the ground.
Oh how great was the wrath which the knight of the Sun receiued, in seing himselfe brought into so great extremity, before the royall and beautifull Princes Claridiana, and the faire princesse Lindabrides. It caused the fury of his mortall blowes to double, and to be angry with himselfe, for that one alone Knight should so long endure against him.
But what did all his wrath and fury profit him, for that he hadde to doe with that strong and worthy Ro|sicleer, the verye same who next vnto him, was the best Knight in all the world. And the same, that if all the Knights in that place should moue attempt agaynst him, his valiaunt and couragious heart should not faile him one iotte. And seing him selfe beefore the Emperour his Father, and the Empresse his Mother, if he got no the victory of the battaile, it would vtterly discourag him to come any more into their Court and presence

which caused him to execute these rigorous blowes, with so great force, that it made the knight of the Sun, to wonder at his great strength. At this time the one was knowen so well to the other, that the end of the battell was very doubtfull, for that the greatest part of the day was past, wherein the valiant  worthy knights had combatted,  no lesse vantage to be iudged betwixt them then at the beginning. At which the Emperour  the princesse  all the rest of the knights  Ladies that were in the pallace, very much meruailed, and said that the knight of the Sun had met with his match. Like|wise the valiant king Sacridoro, for that he knew the great force  strength of the Knight of Cupid, was greatly ama|zed that the knight of the Sunne, should so long endure with him,  said vnto himselfe: Surely not without great reason the high bounty of the knight of the Chariot is extolled, that he alone doth maintaine himselfe against him, that the sa|uage people of the inchanted fountaine could not endure one halfe houre, and against him that the fierce Tiger and mon|strous Gyant, which were kepers of the Prince Lusindo, could not make any resistance. And in saying these words he desired God of his goodnesse to graunt the victory vnto his perfect friend, for that beefore the Emperour Terbatio  Empresse Briana, his father and mother, he might not be disgraced, which would be the occasion that he should neuer come more beefore them. In this time the blowes of these two valiant Knightes were so rigorous, that all those which did beholde them were greatly amazed, and two miles about that place was the noise of their blowes heard as though it had ben thunder, putting the hearers in great feare, and the lookers one waxed wery, but they semed with new force to begin the battell againe. So in this sort these valiaunt Knightes did perseuer in their rigorous battayle, without any ceasing, but still executing their terrible blows the one vpon the other, till more then sixe houres were past since the beginning of their combat, and it semed that the Sunne would seperate the battaile, for that she

began to withdraw hir selfe into the occidentall Regions. At this time it semed vnto the knight of Cudid, that in all that day he had done very little, and that the day was almost spent, being very angry with himselfe, he said.
Oh lasie  cowardly knight of Cupid, with what face canst thou come into the presence of the emperour Trebatio,  ac|knowledge him to be thy father, seing that in his presence one Knight hath brought the into this extremity. Is it pos|sible that I am that same Rosicleer, who in the court of the king Oliuerio pushed out of their saddles so many knights  gyants,  he who alwaies thought that ther was none but he that was worthy to put his thought  care vpon the prin|cesse Oliuia. Now doe I se that I haue no reason to blame that princesse for intreating me so euill, for that with one a|lone knight I cannot defend the iustice of hir great beautie. What is become of that great hardines wherwith I attem|ted the inchanted caue of Aridon,  the mighty force wher|with I did ouercome those two furious beasts? Certainly I doe beleue that all is lost and gone, for that I cannot now make resistance against one knight: It is possible that I am that Knight of Cupid, that in all the battailes that he hath attempted in his life time got the victory? No surely, for that by one alone Knight I am at the point to be ouercome. Now I doe se that from this day forwards I must dye without all hope of any remedy for my sorrow and griefe, for that I am impotent,  doe lack my force  strength for to reuenge me of the prince Don Siluerio,  the occasion I hoped to haue giuen, that the princesse Oliuia should haue vnderstood of hir errour: Oh my loyall, true,  perfect friend king Sacridoro, what reason was it that did moue the for to throw thy self into that profound  depe fountaine of the Sauages, and a|gaine, for to leaue thy louing wife  naturall kingdome, for to beare  kepe company with a Knight, who before thy presence is at the point by one alone knight to be ouercome. And you Bargandel Liriamandro, with the Tartarian Zoy|lo

with what reason haue you left your mighty kingdomes,  tyauile in the world to seeke Rosicleer, your great friend, hauing other which doth ouerpasse him very much: Oh knight of the Sun wher is now your singuler bounty, and in what place haue you trauailed y^e you haue not met with this Knight, whereby might haue ben excused this great reproch that your brother doth looke to receiue this day: Oh how it oth grieue me not for to know you, for that I shall not be able to say that I am your brother.
At the same time the knight of the Sun, with no lesse sor|row  griefe, said vnto himselfe.
Oh weake  cowardly knight, how much doth it stand the in hand from this day forwardes to loose the name of the Snn, for that all those which hath ben by the ouercome vn|der that name, doe account the for a coward  of litle force, seing the by one alone knight to be brought vnto this per|plexitie. Is it possible that I am he that had so much cou|rage,  was so hardy as to set my mind on two of the most highest damsells in all the world: Of a truth if I be the same with great reason I ought to receiue of them my payment for this my great folly, in considering what they are,  I at the point to be ouercome in their presence. Oh royall prin|cesse Claridiana, how may you thinke your selfe mocked, that comming from so far countries onely for to se the wonder|full deds of the knight of the Sun, whose fame was so spred throughout all the world. And in the first battaile which you haue sene him to make, you doe see with the blowes of one alone knight brought out of his remembrance many times,  his horse to cary him as a thing dead throughout the field. How can I from this day forwards without great shame come before you, hauing receiued me for your knight, and cannot in your presence defend your rare and singular beauty.
With what reason and boldnesse dare I before the Em|presse binde my selfe vnto your seruice, seeing that in so

short time I haue found my equall. What reason is ther to the contrary, that you being in the most extremity of all the damsells in the world that likewise he to be the most valian|test amongst all knights, that durst be so bold to set his mind on you.
So these valiant Knights saying these  other words vnto themselues, did so much animate their couragious stomacks, that eight houres were past since the beginning of their ri|gorous battaile,  at that time their wonderfull blowes se|med to be with more force  strength, and their horses with their great  continuall labour waxed weary, but these two valiant knights at that time semed to fight with new force  strength,  neuer ceased striking one another such terrible blowes, that the standers by had their eares filled with the sound of their fine tempered armour, and were so greatly a|mazed to se the great trauaile that they suffered in that bartaile,  likewise to se with what great force  strength they did execute the same, in the end of long time that they had indured,  semed that ther was neuer done by them the like prowesse nor actiuitie, as was done at that prelent, as truth was, for that neither of them in all their liues was e|uer brought into the like extremity or perill, as they wer in this battaile, nor neuer had the like feare to be ouercome. But the great shame  reproch, with the iealousie of their honor, did so much touch either of them, that it made them without feeling any trauaile to procure all that in them lay for to get the victory, or ele to die in the demaund. So at this time the golden Diana began to shew hir light in the ori|entall Regions, and the worthy Knight of Cudid not estee|ming his owne life, if he should not get the victory of the Knight of the Sunne, with both his hands, raising himselfe in his stirops, he stroke him so terrible a blow, that it did depriue him of his vnderstanding,  made him to fall back|wards vpon the backe of the saddle, that his head touched the horse crouper, and his weary Horse carried him about that great place, in such sort, that all those which saw him,

thought that he had bene dead. But when the Princesse Claridiana did se him in that plight, hir blood waxed could within hir body, and being sore troubled, she asked the Emperour if he were dead or no, but he was at that won|derfull blow so troubled, that he had no power at all for to answere hir, but whosoeuer at this time had sene the face of the faire Princesse Lindabrides, would haue knowen by hir coulour the great loue that she did beare vnto him, but at such time as the Knight of the Sun did come agayne vnto himselfe, there was neuer Lion nor furious beast more outragious then he was, and considering the great danger and perill that hee was in, his out ragious heart was so full of mortall anguish, with vnmeasurable wrath, y^t he stroke his light horse with the Spurs, and crushed his teth toge|ther, that it semed sparkes of fire proceded from his eyes, and like vnto a whirle winde he ran towards the Knight of Cupid, who seeing him recouered againe, made likewise against him with so great fury, that the ground where his Horse dyd runne semed to tremble: Oh how great was the feare which the fury of these valyaunt knights caused in them that did behold their mortall wrath, comming the one against the other, terrifying their vnderstanding to a|bide the end of their mortall blowes. I doo beleeue certainly that ther was not one knight in all that place, of what force and strength so euer he was, that seing the fury of those valiant knights, but he would haue bene terrified, neither was there any friend, although he had bene fully satisfied of the bountie of any of them, but would haue prayed vnto God for them, seing them in that great perill. The Em|perour Trebatio, with the great loue that he bare vnto the Knight of the Sunne, and the desire that he had to know the knight of Cupid, receiued no lesse feare then all the rest, and sayd.
Oh mightie God, thou who madest these Knights of no|thing, I praie and desire thee to aide and succour them, and let them not execute theyr great wrath the one vppon the other, neyther doe not permit that the Knight of the Sunne

be slaine before he doo acknowledge thy great power, and turne vnto thy lawes, that his soule bee not condempned to immortall paine. So the swift course of theyr furious Hor|ses ioyned theyr encounters, and the two wrathfull Knights raysing themselues in theyr stirrops, pretending to make an end of theyr long and doubtfull battell, with the extremitie of all theyr force and strength, they stroke one another with so great wrath vpon theyr fine Helmes, that although the fine edges of theyr mightie cutting swoords could not enter nor cut theyr inchanted armour, yet these valiaunt Knights were so ouerlayd with the great might and power of theyr blows, that the knight of Cupid was constrained to decline himselfe on the one side, and therwith hee fell downe to the ground, wheras he lay, and mooued neither hand nor foot, but was as one that were dead, and the inuinsible knight of the Sun by the force of the blow was cleane voide of any vnder|standing, and had likewise fallen to the ground if Fortune had not fauoured him, that he fell forwards vpon the saddle bow, that his head touched the Horse necke, and his armes hung downe on both sides, and voyded great abundance of blood out of his mouth  eyes, in such sort, that they thought him likewise to be as dead as the Knight of Cupid, and his horse beeing tormented with that terrible blow did founder vnder him, and remained without any moouing, as though the bones of his legges had bene broken. At which sight all those that were in that great place, receiued so great sorrow and griefe at the extremitie of these two valiant Knights, that thinking they had bene dead, they lamented as though they had bene theyr naturall bretheren. But the Princesse Lindabrides when she saw hir Knight in that estate, not ha|uing any power to resist so mortall a griefe, had not the power to gouerne hir selfe, but fell in a sound,  had fallen out of hir Chaire wheras she sat, if hir Gentlewomen had not ben, who seing hir in that case, tooke hir in their armes, and carryed hir into hir closet, and laide hir vppon hir bed,

whereas she had more semblaunce to be dead, then as one hauing any lyfe.
Likewise the Princesse Claridiana, with no lesse paine and griefe did beholde hir knight, who with the mightinesse of hir couragious heart did make resistance against that amo|rous thought which loue caused within hir. Who with no lesse sorrow and griefe when he saw the Knights in this ex|tremitie, and as though he had knowen the~ to bee his sons, he withdrew himselfe from the window,  descended downe into the great place, accompanied with many Knights, he went whereas these knights were, and found that they were compassed about with their perfect friends, the two Princes and the king Sacridoro, who lamented with great abundance of teares, and caused theyr Helmes to bee pulled of, and to throw water in theyr faces, thinking therewith and with the aire they would come againe to themselues, but all was in vaine that they did, for that there was in them no o|ther signe, but as though they had bene starke dead. For which occasion  with dolorous griefe the Emperour com|maunded them to be carried vnto his Royall Pallace, and caused their armour to be taken off, and to be laide in se|uerall beds, which was in two quadrans, very richly hang|ed, ioyning the one vnto the other.
Then were called together the best Hhisitions and Sur|gions that were in all the whole citie of Constantinople, who did behold and peruse them very well,  tolde vnto the Em|perour that they were not dead, although they were in great peril of their liues. Who being somwhat comforted therby, commaunded that foorth-with theyr faces should be washed and made cleane, that were all to be rayed with boold, and swollen, and did not a little meruaile in their mindes when they saw the great beautie of the Knight of Cupid, and the small quantitie of yeeres which he semed to haue. And how that hee resembled very much the Knight of the Sunne,

and he had so great loue vnto both those Knights, that he would haue giuen halfe his estate to haue seene them out of that great perill. So after the Phisicions and Surgions had well perused them, they found that the greatest euill which they had, was wearinesse of theyr bodies, and all their bones and flesh brused, by the mightie force of theyr terri|ble blowes. So they ministered vnto them very swet and comfortable ointments, and all that was necessay for them and most conuenient, and commaunded that euerie man should depart from thence and lette them alone, that they might slepe and take theyr rest, with onely two Pages, which were in another chamber ther by with great silence, that whensoeuer these knights should come vnto themselues they should call the Phisitions and Surgions. In this time there was not a knight in y^e citie of Constantinople, neither in that great place, nor in their Tents in the field, as well straungers and Countrie men, that did occupie themselues in any other communication, but in the wonderfull and ti|merous battaile of these two Knights, and of their mightie blowes, perticularly euery thing as it was, and sayde, that there was neuer seene in all the world such lyke contenti|on betwixt two knights, with so great strength, force, and perill, neyther was any Damsell or Gentlewoman that saw the perill of these two Knights, but dyd verie much lament the same, and sayde, that if these two Knights dyd die, that the flower of all knighthood in the world was fi|nished and ended. But in this time what dyd those two Princes Brandizel and Claueryndo and his verie friend Florinaldus? Surely no other thing all that night but la|ment for theyr very friend the Knight of the Sunne, and making so great sorrow, that it would haue mooued anie to haue had compassion that should haue heard them. But what shall I say of that valyaunt and worthy King Sacri|doro, his perfect friend, that when the night was come, he found himselfe all alone in that great place, without the companie of his very friend the Knight of Cupid, and not knowing where to lodge himselfe, surely his sorrow and

griefe was such, that if he thought to finde his friend the Knight of Cupid in the profound depth of the sea, he would haue throwen himselfe therin, as he did into the depe foun|taine of the sauage people, for to take reuengement on that monster who carryed his friend away. So he went foorth of the Citie, and being in the fields hee dyd alight from his horse,  laid himselfe downe vpon the grene grasse, whereas hee passed away all that night, with great lamentation, be|wayling y^e misfortune of his perfect friend. The history doth not declare any thing of the faire Princesse Lindabrides, but that she passed all that night in sorrow and griefe. But he saith that the princesse Claridiana when she was alone in hir chamber, there was no sufficiencie in the highnesse of hir e|state, neither in the generositie of hir couragious hart, for to draw hir fro~ the lamenting of y^e misfortune of hir knight, in such sort, that all the night she did no other thing but shed abundaunce of teares which ranne downe by hir Christall chekes, and spake such lamentable and sorrowfull words, that it semed hir life could not haue endured till the next day, if it had not pleased God to haue giuen remedy therin, as in the next Chapter shall be declared.


How the knight of the Sunne and the knight of Cupid, were come againe vnto themselues,  how they were knowen to bee bretheren by a meruaylous meanes. Chapter 36.
_NOw was the time come that the vniuer|sall creator and maker of all this, would that these straunge meruayles should be manifest vnto all men, and that the great trauailes and biter complaints of the Em|presse Briana should come to an ende, his diuine prouidence doth so ordaine all things, that at such time as the losse of the Greke Princes was very certaine vnto them, and that there was great suspition and doubt

in the liues of the two worthie Knights of the Sunne and of Cupid, at that time were the lost princes found againe, and these famous knights clere of their perill, and knowen to be sons vnto their royall fathers, for that with more honour they might celebrate the triumphes and feasts of theyr na|turall Princes. So after that this rigorous  furious bat|taile was ended, about midnight the knight of the Sun came vnto himselfe and awaked out of his long and heauie place. And when he was well setled in his remembrance, he called so minde the passed battell, but seing himselfe naked  alone in that bed, with a torch burning in the quadran, e straight way suspected what it should be, and thought verily that the knight of Cupid had got the victorie,  hee ouercome. Wher|at he reciued so great sorrow and griefe, that he though it better to be dead then to remaine with life, and was the oc|casion that he fell againe in a sound, and so remained more then one houre, at which time he returned againe vnto him selfe, with mortall anguish and inward griefe, he sayd.
Oh false and deceiuable Gods, how much haue you bene by me honoured and worshipped, now I dooe beleeue that your sect is false  euil, and all we which doo beleue therin, we doo erre and are out of the right way. How could your diuine prouidence (if you haue any aboue men) permit  suf|fer that he who in this world was no lesse estemed the~ you in the heauens, to be by one Christian before so high and mightte Princes  knights brought to be ouercome. Wher|fore hath it ben sayd that your high and diuine power was very much extended vpon the knight of the Sunne, and now by one enimie of your law is come to be destroyed? Where|fore dyd you put into him more higher estate and prowesse then euer was in any other Knight,  now so soone to come vnto reproch and shame. Oh how conuenient it is that I die, or else to goe whereas I shall neuer more be seene, ra|ther then with so great reproch to come vnto the Court of the Emperour Trebatio.
Oh Princesse Claridiana, wherefore would you by the ri|gorous force of your arme that the Knight of the Chariot was knowen to be the knight of the Sunne, that now in so short time the high renowne and fame of his great valiant|nesse is lost: Oh how much better it had bene for me to haue bene flame, being the knight of the Chariot, then now being knowen to be the Knight of the Sun, to be ouercome and loose the victorie, for that whatsoeuer had chanced vnder this name of the Chariot, should not with so great reason haue receiued the reproch. Oh how much better and more acceptable had it bene for me, to haue bene some base and towardly Knight, and not by so high and mighty dedes by me done, which caused in mee so much pride, for to put my minde vpon the most highest damsels in al the world. From this day forwards it doth not behooue me to come in theyr presence, but procure my death, or else to goe whereas they shall heere after neuer heare of my name.
And in saying these words he receiued so great courage, that he blasphemed against his Gods, calling them false diceiuers, making an oath to destroye all such Idolls and Temples of theyrs as were in that Countrie. And with great fury he arose out of his bed, and went seking of his armour round about the Chamber, with determination for to depart from thence whereas they should neuer heare any newes of him. So when he saw that in all that Quadran hee could not finde his armour, for that the Emperour had commanded them to be layde vp and kept, by the light of a Torch that was in another Quadran, he went thether to looke for his armour, but at such time as he would haue entered in therat, he heard a Knight which did greatly com|plaine himselfe which lay in another bed, and for to heare his orrowful complaint, he stayid himselfe without at the doore.
This was the Knight of Cupid, who being come againe nto himselfe, with great griefe and sorrow was readie o burst to se himselfe alone and vnarmed in that place,

beleuing that the knight of the Chariot had ouercome him, and the Emperour had commanded him to bee brought the|ther to be cured, and amongst many other things he sayde thus.
Oh heauie and vncomfortable Knight of Cupid, what misfortune did mooue thy desire to come and seke the Court of the Emperour Trebatio, for to se the great meruailes of the Knight of the Chariot, for that therin thou hast bene so feeble  faint, so that it doth not behooue thee by no meanes, to acknowledge thy selfe vnto the one to bee his son, neither to goe  seeke the other to acknowledge him to be thy bro|ther. How dare I bee so bold as to say that I am son vnto the Emperour Trebatio, who is the highest  mightiest Em|perour in all the world, or for to say that I am brother vnto the knight of the Sun, he being the flower of all knighthood in the world, and to be ouercome by another  not by him? Oh sorrowfull Rosicleer, how much doth it profit the to goe whereas thou maist neuer more bee sene, and not to come any more in the company of men, seeing at such time as thy fame was most spread in the world, fortune hath giuen thee so great a fall: Oh Princes and Knights of the world, how many of you hath bene by me ouercome, from this day for|wards you nede not to speake any more of the Knight of Cupid, for that all his honour  victorie is transported vnto the Knight of the Chariot: Oh Princesse of England, my hart is not now so sad, as yours may reioyce and be glad. And if you haue forgotten Rosicleer, I haue no reason to com|playne, for you being the most precious Damsell in the world, you haue no reason to haue in estimation a Knight that so quickly is ouercome and shamed: What reuenge|ment can I take now of the Prince Don Siluerio, of whom the Princesse Oliuia hoped for to frustrate, and make satis|faction of hir errour: Where is now all hir confidence, see|ing that first I am ouercome, what hope shall I haue of a|ny victorie: Oh valiant and worthie Knight of the Sunne, what is become of your soueraigne bountie, that you hau

not met with this knight of the Chariot. Certainly I doe be|leeue, y^t it should haue gon otherwise with you, the~ with this sorrowfull Knight of Cupid, your brother Oh haw from this day forwards, may you be without all good hope for to know your royall parents, for that ther is none that doth know who they are but I alone. It doth accomplish me first to die, then for to discouer it so greatly vnto my shame. In saying these  many other words, this sorrowfull knight would haue rysen vp from his bed, to haue departed from thence. But when the knight of the Sun had well vnderstood all that was said, he was the most ioyfullest man in all the world,  so na|ked as he was, he entred into the quadran,  with his armes abroad went towards him  said: Oh my Lord and perfect friend Rosicleer, what fortune is this vnto me, that without knowing you I haue ben by your rigorous blowes so ill in|treated, in such sort, that without any remembrance I was almost at the point of death. Behold here your friend the knight of the Sun, the same, who in the Iland of the false gy|ant, before that I did know you, I got the battaile, for to suc|cour that faire damsell. Behold me here, I am the knight of the Chariot, with whom yester day you made the stout  pe|rillous battaile, who according vnto the entertainment that he had of you, it had ben better that you had first knowen him to be the Knight of the Sun, so should I not haue recey|ued so much damage. And here I doe desire you that if you oe know any thing of my progeny, to let me vnderstand thereof, for behold I am the Knight of the Sun. And for that you shall the better beleeue that I doe say, behold here the marke that I haue vpon my body, for being borne with the ame, I was called by this name, of the Sun, at which time s I was found at the sea in a small boat, by Florion. And in aying these words he did open his shirt at his breast,  dyd how the signe of the Sun, which was vpon his right side.
So when Rosicleer had well vnderstood, what the worthy Knight of the Sunne had sayde, and knowing him by his

face, and by the signe of the Sun on his body. He saw before him the present romedy, of all his sorow, which was such,  of so great force, that neuer in all his life he receiued the like. And againe, in knowing his brother the knight of the Sun, he receiued so great ioy and pleasure, and was so glad, that as one halfe amazed and from himselfe, he imbrased him, and so remained a good while without any power to speake, not knowing whether it was of a truth that which he had sene, or some false vision with the which many times he hath be deluded.
But after many amorous and comfortable words of the knight of the Sun, he was fully certified, and put out of all doubt,  returned a new to embrace him, shedding many salt tears, which distilled downe his brest, he said as followeth.
Oh diuine power  maiestie of him that the heauens and earth doth gouerne, how haue I deserued so great merite, that at such time as I was in the greatest fauour of fortune, I was vpon a sodaine brought vnto the estate to be ouer throwen downe into the pit: And by the I am reserued  comforted,  haue attained to know him to bee my brother, which is the most famous knight in all the world, whom I thought to be my great and mortall enemie.
Oh my Lord and knight of the Sunne, acknowledge this knight of Cupid, which is the same Rosicleer, who you going in the small bark at the Iland of the gyant, did deliuer fro~ death:  although I doe not deserue so great a benefit, yet I giue you to vnderstand that I am your brother, and both borne at one time  at one byrth, of the high  mighty em|presse Briana, at such time as she was at the Monestary of the Riuer: being with childe, by our high  mighty father the Emperour Trebatio And by a misfortune which happe|ned vnto the nurse, who did nourish bring and vs vp for hir owne children, you were lost in a small boate, which by the furious force of a mighty deepe  perillous Riuer, and with the swift course therof, you were caried into the maine sea,

and ther was tossed vp  downe till such time as you were found by Florion, the Prince of Persia.
The two pages which was in another quadran hard by to watch them with the noise which the Knight of the Sun did make at such time as he arose out of his bed, they did a|wake,  heard all that passed betwixt the two Knights: who being almost from themselues with the great ioy  pleasure they receiued, they toke a torch that was light in that qua|dran,  without making themselues ready, they went run|ning vnto the place wheras the Emperour Trebatio  the empresse Briana lay,  were a slepe. And neuer rested knock|ing  giuing great blowes at the dore, till such time as they were answered by the gard, that kept them. And the pages in great hast willed them to open the dore, for that they brought vnto the Emperour, the most ioyfullest newes that euer in all his life he receiued.
The gard who did know the pages by their speach being very much amazed therat, did open the dore, and they with|out any staying, went in with the burning torch in their hands, wheras the Emperour  the empresse were a slepe, and with a high and loud voice, they sayd: Oh high  migh|tie Emperour Trebatio, and you soueraigne Empresse Bri|ana, arise vp from your beads, and you shall se the knight of the sun and the knight of Cupid aliue. And by the great pro|uidence of God, they are knowne to be bretheren. The one is the gentleman of the Sunne, and the other is Rosicleer, both your lost sonnes.
So when the Emperour Trebatio and the Empresse Briana heard that newes of so great ioy and pleasure, without any more tarrying, they arose out of their beds, and couered them selues with certaine mantells, which were very rich, and in great hast they forthwith went nto the quadran or lodging whereas they left them. So when the Empresse came vnto their lodging, she did behold he christalline face of Rosicleer, who did know the same,

although she had not sene him of long time:  againe, he was very much growne in bignesse of his body  person.
But when she was fully certified that to be most true which was told hir, without tarrying for the Emperour she ran vnto him,  did imbrace him with great loue  ioy, and toke him out of the armes of the knight of the Sun, who was in his shirt,  embraced with him. But the great ioy, which the Empresse receiued, to haue him in hir armes, was such, that she had no power to speake in a great space. But in the end, with shedding of great abundance of teares, she did re|prehend him, for being so long away from hir. In this time, the Emperour came  did imbrace the knight of the Sun, with so great pleasure, that scarcely he could kepe himselfe vpright. Who when he saw the Emperour, he kneeled down before him,  asked of him his hands for to kisse them,  said: It may please your highnesse to giue vnto me your hands, as vnto the knight of the Sun, your faithfull seruant, where with I may wholy  intirely reioyce my selfe,  enioy that great benefit, which the high gods, this night hath permit|ted that I should know for father, him whom vnto their di|uine power doth make equall. The knight of the Sun, had no more time for to speak, for that the Emperour did embrace him,  made him to arise from the ground,  kissed him with great loue, as much for that he was the knight of the Sun as for that hee knew him to bee his childe.
And in shedding many teares, which ranne downe by thei chekes, for great ioy, he embraced him again,  said. Oh  loyall  faithfull friend, and louing sonne, with what word shall I giue thanks, vnto my soueraigne Lord  god, for th great benefit which he hath shewed vnto me, this night, t acknowledge my selfe to be father vnto him who is the fl wer of all knighthood in the world,  without knowing hi to be sonne, is the onely person that I most loued an made accompt of in all the world. Surely I know n

what to say, but to receiue it for so great a merit, that it se|meth vnto me that I doe lack force and strength for to con|ceiue it, In this time the pleasant  amorous words which passed betwixt the faire Empresse Briana  hir son Rosicleer, was with so great ioy  pleasure,  they receiued so great contentment, that I know not wherto to compare it, but vn|to that ioy which the Emperour Trebatio  the Empresse Briana receiued, when they met together in the monestarie of the Riuer, after long time that the Emperour was ab|sent. So with this soueraigne ioy the Empresse did not re|member the knight of the Sunne, till such time as Rosicleer said: May it please your highnesse to speake vnto my bro|ther the Knight of the Sun,  to acknowledge him for the best son that euer was borne of mother. Then the Empresse all astonyed  amazed, as one awaked out of hir slepe vpon a sodaine, she left Rosicleer  went vnto the knight of the Sun, who was still in his shirt,  at the opening of his shirt be|fore, she did se the signe of the Sunne that was on his brest, wherat she receiued so great ioy  pleasure, that if the Em|perour had not ben who did sustaine hir, she had fallen down vnto the ground. Then the knight of the Sun did knele down before hir,  toke hir hands  kissed them very often, till such time as she being rauished with ioy, threw hir armes about his neck,  fell downe vpon him, and kissing him on that faire face, with a terrible sigh of great loue she said.
Oh Knight of the Sunne, the loyall and perfect friend of my Lord the emperour Trebatio, how shall I now reioyce my selfe in this great benefit which my Lord God hath shewed vnto me, to haue the knowledge of so worthie a sonne, if the feare which I haue of Fortune doe not disturbe me, in remembring the solitary life which I lead, and re|loycing my selfe in your childhood and with what sodayne chaunge Fortune did carrye you away from me. Likewise the great sorrow and griefe which I receiued for your loue was such, that as yet I am not perfect in my selfe, neither

can I beleue that in one who was inuironed with so great sorrow  bitter anguish, should receiue so great mirth and ioy, so that in the remembrance of all troubles past, if it should not be reioyced with this present ioy, to mitigate the fury therof, my feminine force  strength were not iufficient to suffer the fury of this great pleasure the which is come vnto me, in acknowledging such a valiant  worthy knight to be my sonne: Oh how now doe I giue great thanks vnto my God, for the trauailes  troubles, which your losse  the absence of my Lord the Emperour hath caused vnto me, see|ing that I am now paied with so high a gift,  ioyfull reward. Saying these  many other words, the Empresse Briana had the knight of the Sun so fast imbraced in hir armes, with hir face ioyning vnto his, that hee had no power to make any answere. And for that these two bretheren were still in their shirts, the pages which were nigh them in the quadran, had belonging vnto them two mantels, wherwith they did couer themselues,  the Knight of Cupid with the greatest pleasure that euer he felt in all his life, went  kneeled down before the Emperour  said.
Let it please your soueraigne highnesse to know me the Knight of Cupid, who hath not receiued small trauaile for your absence,  for the losse of my brother the Knight of the Sun, in seking of you both in strange Countries, very far  aparted fro~ these countries, although it was not in so ample maner, as was requisite to the seruice of my Lord the Em|perour Trebatio, for that at that time we had him rather for an enimie then for a Father, but for the accomplishment of that which I was bound vnto my Lady the Empresse. And for to know who was the occasion that my Lady the Em|presse should lead so straight  solitary a life, which she main|tained in the monestarie of the Riuer, which was a thing that touched me very much. But now knowing the occasion  ground therof, I doe not meruaile so much, but onely how she could sustain hir self  liue one moment without his pre|sence

And againe if she had not said that he was called the prince Edward, I doe beleeue that she wold not haue ben decei|ned,  being innocent, she did not mistrust any such deceit.
So vath no lesse ioy and pleasure then vnto the knight of the Sun, the Emperour did imbrace him,  made him to arise from the ground  said: Oh my son Rosicleer, how it seemeth vnto me that you were not content, neither receiued any pleasure at this deceit or pollicy, as you doe say I vsed with the Empresse your mother, but in consideration of the fruit that I receiued in doing the same, I may compare it vnto your lo suffering  being quiet,  delating of the time that I could not receiue the great ioy  pleasure that I should in the acknowledging of such a Sun. Tell me for Gods loue, what hath bene the occasion that you haue refrayned your selfe so long time,  delated to giue me this soueraigne ioy which now I do receiue: if it befor the deceit  pollicy which I vsed with the Empresse your mother. The fruit which proceded therof is sufficient to excuse that errour done, if it had ben of greater importaunce, but what reason haue I to excuse my selfe from the occasion that made me to doe it. Then Rosicleer not a little abashed at that which the Emperour had said vnto him, answered: If the ouer-plus o the reason which I haue to reioyce mee in the acknow|ledging of such a father. I had to incourage me, to publike my selfe for his sonne. Then had your highnesse reason to blame mee, in the detayning my selfe so long herein. And because I doe find my selfe not worthy to deserue so great a benef, I did make detraction thereof, till this time should supply the great lacke which was in my valour. So that your highnesse may of truth vnderstand, that all that which happened vnto me by the Knight of the Sunne my brother, had beene done by some other Knight. First I would haue consented to the death, then with so great shame to haue ac|knowledged my selfe to be sonne vnto such parents. The Emperour would very ayne haue aunswered Rosicleer,

but that the Empresse and the knight of the Sun came vnto them,  altogether they did a new embrace each other, in such sort, that they had no time for to speake,  the ioy  pleasure was so much in the Empresse Briana, that she was almost from hir selfe,  could not well satisfie hir eies in the behol|ding of hir sonnes,  shewed vnto the emperour the signes tokens which they had vpon their brests,  brought them in|to the world at their birth. So that betwixt them there pas|sed a great discourse of many things, which did greatly aug|ment their ioy  pleasure, of all that had happened vnto the~, that if I should here make perticuler relation, I should ne|uer make an end, therfore to auoide tediousnesse I doe let it passe, it is sufficient that the readers heere of doe vnderstand the great reason, as well of the parents as of the children, for to recoice themselues of this new  sodaine pleasure. In this time it was published throughout all the pallace, these good  strange newes,  the noise  rushing was so great a|mongst them with the hast they made for to goe  see their new princes, that all the whole citie was in a rumour  tu|mult, suspecting that it had ben some other thing,  was the occasion that there resorted much people vnto the Pal|lace, in so great abundance, tha he pallace was full,  coul no more enter. Likewise the sts had so great prease, that one could scarce passe by another. But when it was know|en vnto all people of the acknowledging of their new prin|ces, ther was so great plesure amongst them, that in a short time all the whole Citie was so lightsome, as at noone daies with the great light of Bonefires  Torches that was in euery street therof, with many pastimes  new inuentions of so great mirth, that it semed that ther were ioyned to|gether all the pastimes and pleasures in the world. The royall Princesse Claridiana was not the last that came for to see these new Princes, for that so soone as she heard of the great ioy which was caused by this new and straunge newes, she arose ont of hir bed, and couered hir selfe with

a precious and rich robe, lined with Martines furre, which was brought hir by hir Damselles, and hir golden hayre hanging downe, with so great beautie, that she was este|med rather for some diuine Goddesse, then any humane creature. She went vnto the place whereas the Emperour and the Empresse with their sonnes, were embracing one another. And for that hir Gentlewomen went before hir, with lyght Torches in theyr handes, euerie one dyd giue place vnto hir, and did receiue hir with great honour and curtesie. But with a gratious and smiling countenance ac|companied with great seuerity, she left them all, and went and did embrace the worthy Knight of the Sunne, and saide: If that by the force of my armes, worthie  valiant Prince, did cause you to receiue any anger and griefe, when I made you to be knowen for the knight of the Sunne, with the same armes I wil now make satisfaction of my fault, in embrasing of you, as the son of the Emperour Trebatio, and of my Lady the Empresse Briana. The great pleasure which the worthie Knight of the Sunne receiued of this embracing ought not to be compared vnto that which was the occasion that he came vnto the knowledge of his father and brother. But this may well be saide, that he could not receiue greater pleasure and contentment, if at that time the whole world and all the riches therin had ben giuen vnto him, for when he felt himselfe touched with those delicate armes  warlike hands, he thought verily that in al his life he could not re|ceiue the like glorie, and humbling himselfe very much, with a meke voice he said: As it was perillous vnto the knight of the Sunne, that rigorous encounter, which by your strong arme (worthy princesse) he receiued, yet this soueraigne and great benefit, which as son vnto the Emperour Trebatio I haue receiued, I doo acknowledge my selfe to bee fully sa|tisfied and paide of that high recompence, although it was not so small the harme which I receiued by that encounter, that I think to receiue any satisfaction, but will rather put me in farther perill and daunger. The Princesse Claridiana

dyd very well vnderstand the last words that were spoken by the knight of the Sunne, but dissembling with him she left him and went vnto the knight of Cupid,  said: Let it be in good time the acknowledging of the knight of Cupid, for that ther was no cause sufficient, being lesse the~ this, for to make peace with him, who in this battell did shew so much enmi|tie. And for the part that I haue therin, if that by any other knight the knight of the Sunne should be put into so great ex|tremitie, I say I am very glad for y^t it happened to be done by you. For to conclude, it was gods plesure, that all bounty and goodnesse in the world should consist in the blood of the Emperor Tiebatio, wherin the knight of Cupid is pertaker with the knight of the Sun, so that it is not much to be mer|ailed at, that the bounty of the one and of the other should bee equall. So after that Rosicleer had answered the royall Princesse Claridiana, straight way came vnto them, the two worthie Princes Brandizel and Clauerindo, who when they heard the newes, almost fro~ themselues with the great oye which they receiued, they came in great hast for to see their good friend the Knight of the Sunne, whom they did embrace with so gret loue, as though they wold neuer haue separated themselues. The Knight of the Sun gaue vnderstanding vnto the Emperour, and to all that were present, who and what these Princes were. Of the which they did al greatly reioyce, and the Emperour with great ioy and pleasure said.
Oh what great wrong hath bene done vnto me he|therto, that being in this my Court, such, and so high and mightie Knights, and I could neuer haue any knowledge thereof, for to doo vnto them the honour that vnto such per|sonages doth appertaine. And now haue I my ioy and con|tnt fully accomplished, for that I haue so high and mightie Princes and Knights that bee pertakers with me therein.
At this time was the reioyeings and pleasures so great in the Pallaie, as also in the Citie, that one could carce heare an other with the great noyse y^t was amongst them.
And as the Knight of Cupid looked round about him on euerie side, and could not se his faythfull friend the King Sacridoro, being somwhat troubled therwith, he did enquire after him, and there lacked not them which did tell him, that when the battaile was concluded betwixt him  the knight of the Sunne, that hee was seene to go foorth of the Citie ve|ry sorrowfull and comfortlesse, but they knew not whether hee wae gone. The Emperour by and by when hee vnder|stood what was the occasion of his sonnes alteration, reioy|cing very much that he had so high and mightie a king in his Court. Foorthwith he commanded certaine Knights to goe  seeke him out, towards that way which hee was seene to depart. Who in a small time they found him out, wher|as hee lay a long in the grene fielde almost from himselfe with great sorrow and weeping, that he semed to bee dead. And when they had brought him to himselfe againe, one of the Knights saide.
What doo you make here sir Knight, that you doo not goe and help to celebrate this great mirth  ioy which is made, for the acknowledging of the new princes of Greece? What feasts and reioycings be these, saide the King Sacridoro, I for my part am more fitter to command to make preparati|on for my buriall, then to celebrate any Feastes. Then the knights saide, may it please you to arise vp, for you shall vn|derstand that the knight of Cupid your faithful friend, hath sent vs to seeke you out, praying you to come and beare him company, to reioyce in that he hath knowen the knight of the Sun to be his brother, and son vnto the Emperor Trebatio, which is that knight of the Chariot, with whom he made the battaile the day past. What is this that you doo tell me, said the king Sacridoro, that the Knight of the Chariot is brother vnto the Knight of Cupid.
Yea surely, that hee is, said the knight, but and you will not beeleue me, lift vp your eyes and looke towards the Citie, and you shall se the great Feasts and triumphs which are

made therein, for the acknowledging of theyr new Princes. The king Sacidoro, who was no lesse amazed then ioyefull at those newes, looked towards the Citie, and saw that with the cressets, fires, and other lights, as though the Citie had bene on fire. In great hast he arose vp, and the knights which came to seeke him, fetched his horse, who was loose in y^e field, and bridled him, the~ they all together leaped vpon their hor|ses, and went towards the mighty pallace, and met with so many maskes and other kindes of pleasure, that almost they could not passe through the stretes. And when they came wheras the Emperour  the Princes were, this good king was knowen by them straight by the deuice of his armour,  he who first went foorth for to receiue him, was the Emperor Trebatio, who clasping his armes about his neck, saide.
Now is all my desire accomplished (worthie King) for that I am come to the knowledge of him, who for that he would not loose the knight of Cupid, his faithfull friend, did abhorre his life,  sought his owne death in the deepe foun|taine of the Sauages, wheras he could haue no other hope but to die the death: Oh happy and fortunate son Rosicleer, that could obtaine so high and faithful a friend. And more happy are you (worthy King) that in dooing of this worthy act of friendship, you haue filled all the whole world with y^e fame thereof, in such sort, that it will neuer decaie nor be forgot|ten, so long as the reason of man doth endure.
The king kneeling downe would haue taken his hands to haue kissed them, but the Emperour did cause him to a|rise from the ground, and would not consent therevnto. Then did all the rest come and imbrace him, and did him great honour, for that it was knowen to them all what he had done for Rosicleer, by the other Princes which came thether, as you haue heard in the Historie. So for a perpe|tuall memorie herof, because that such a worthie dede should not bee forgotten, the Emperour commanded that it should bee portrayed in the fore front of his mightie Pal|lace,

nigh vnto the aduenture of Lindaraza, which made all them that did beholde the same to meruaile much thereat, When Rosicleer came to embrace the king Sacridoro, theyr ioy and pleasure was no lesse at that time, then if they had not sene one another in twentie yeares. In this time the good Pages of the Knight of the Sunne, who neuer depar|ted from theyr Lord, from the time that the battaile was finished, vntill the time that the worthie Knights were knowen for Bretheren, and the great sorrow and griefe which they receiued for that which was past, was nothing in comparison so much, but their ioy and plesure was much more, in that they saw before theyr eyes, and thought all theyr labour meruaylouslie well bestowed (which at all times they well accustomed to doo in ample manner) vpon so worthie and valyant a Lord. And as they did partly vn|derstand the loue that theyr Lord the Knight of the Sunne had to the Princesse Lindabrides, and remembring that she remayned in a great sound at such time as the battail be|twene the two brethren was ended, Aurelio sayd vnto his brother Bynnano, that he should remaine there with theyr Lord, and that he would goe and carrie these newes vnto the Princesse Lindabrides, for that possiblte she had no vn|derstanding thereof. So he departed out of the Pallace and wnt vnto the triumphant Chariot, whereas he found the Gyants in theyr watch verie heauie and sorrowfull, for that all of them thought verily the Princesse Lindabrides had bene dead, for that she neuer returned nor came vn|to hir selfe from the time that they carryed the Knight of the Sunne out of the iusting place, and for that Aurelia was knowen of all the gards, hee went vp into the Chariot, vn|to the chamber whereas the Princesse was layde vpon hir bed, and hir Damsells round about hir as though she had bene dead, who were very much comforted when they saw and knew him, and with the great desire that they had to know what was become of the knight of the Sunne, they asked of him where he was? Let vs doo so much that we may bring the Princesse againe vnto hir remembraunce,

said Aurelio, for that I doo bring newes that she will not a little reioyce ir selfe at. And therewith hir Damsels  hee tooke the Princesse by the hand,  made hir to sit vpright vp|on hir rich bed,  threw on hir face meruaylous swet wa|ters,  vsed such remedies that she somewhat came againe vnto hir selfe, that seing Aurelio with a merry and cherful voice, he said. What is this Lady, that in the time that your highnesse ought to be most merry and glad, in helping to ce|lebrate the great ioy  pleasure, which my Lord the Knight of the Sun doth receiue, in acknowledging himselfe to be son vnto the Emperour Trebatio, and brother vnto the Knight of Cupid, with whom yesterday he made that rigorous bat|tell,  now you to be so sorrowfull  sad, and out of all re|me~brance,  as yet the newes is not fully knowen abroade. You shall vnderstand that my Lord the knight of the Sun is very well, thanks be to almighty god. And for that the Em|peror Trebatio his father,  the Empresse Briana his mother, will not giue him leaue to come  see your highnesse, he doth send me to desire you to pardon him for this night, till to morrow it be day. At which newes the great ioy  pleasure which the fayre Princesse receiued was such, that if the Page had not ben so well knowen as he was, she could not haue beleued it, but because he was knowen to be so faithfull a seruant vnto the knight of the Sun, she was fully perswa|ded of the truth, and arose vp from hir bed as merry  as ioyful as euer she was in all hir life,  said that by no means she would remaine there, but goe  se the knight of the Sun, and speake vnto y^e Emperour Trebatio,  vnto the Empress Briana, and help them to reioyce the acknowledging of their lost sons,  therwith she called hir damsels to help to make hir ready,  to trim hir in the best and richest manner that was possible, calling to remembraunce how the Princess Claridiana was in the pallace, who would not let but to be present at the acknowledging of the knight of the Sunne, in consideration whereof she determined to goe in such sort, that she might assure y^ feare which the princesse Claridiana

did put hir in. So after that she was by hir damsels made ready and put in gallant and rich order, she commanded to call vnto hir two of the principallest Gyaunts that were there amongst the rest, and taking him by the hand she dis|cended out of the Chariot, and before hir went a great num|ber of damsels with Torches burning in theyr hands, and were so richly apparailed, that either of them semed to be a quene, and hir traine was carried vp by two very fayre damsels, with crowns of gold vpon theyr heads, because they were quenes, and they had other two damsels which carri|ed vp theyr traines, and came last, and in the midst amongst the Damsels that carried the burning Torches before the Princesse, there went foure Gyants, of those of the gard, all armed with very bright and glistering armour, and each of them a mightie Fauchon in his hand, who were so furious and terrible to beholde, that the sight of them (to all that did looke on the~) was a sufficient sauegard vnto the Prin|cesse. And in the same order ther went other foure Gyants after the princesse, who were no lesse sauegard vnto hir, and for that she was one of the fayrest damsels that was in all the world, and so richly apparailed, shee semed by the light of the Torches to be so exceding fayre, that many which were reioycing themselues in the citie, and celebrating these great feasts, did forget themselues in theyr owne inuenti|ons and sports, and remayned astonied and amazed in be|holding the straunge beautie and soueraigne highnesse and estate, which y^e Princesse had. In this sort she passed through the great place till she came vnto the mightie Pallace, and entered in therat. When the Emperour vnderstood of hir comming, and all those which were with him, they went oorth to meete  receiue hir, and all that were ther present, ere not a little amazed at the strange beauty of the prin|esse, vnto whom when they had done all their dutie  reue|ence, the Empresse Briana receiued hir and tooke hir by the and, and tooke the Princesse Claridiana in the other hand.
So they went all thre into a very faire and well garni|shed quadran, wheras thay did passe all the rest of the night which remained with so great mirth and pleasure, that it is better  be thought on then tolde, althought the  Claridiana was in no such securitie as before, who at times did behold the knight of the Sunne, and semed vnto hir that there lack no reason for to loue the Princesse Lindabrides, if there remained any remnaunt of loue in him, after that he had sene hir, although on the other part, with great reason shee hir selfe in estimation, and was in all things assured, if that she had bene satified, that by reason the Knight of the Sunne would gouerne himselfe, yet the great feare of the Princesse Claridiana was nothing in comparison to that which the princesse Lindabrides felt, with hir perilous grace and countenance. For when she saw the great vantage that she had ouer all that euer she had sene, and the great rea|son that the knight had for to loue hir, she was in great per|plexitie of mind and thought, that she did very much repent hir selfe for comming thether.
Likewise in this time the Knight of the Sunne was not so firme in the loue of the one, but many times he was ouer|come with the sight of the other, neither had he brought him|selfe into such bondage, but that he had liberty for to renue the loue lost,  although his minde was brought into such alteration and contensious battell, as he neuer found him|selfe in the like, yet his body in such sort did refraine the de|sire which his couetous eyhad for to beholde, that he gaue vnto none of all them that were there present, any occasio of suspition of his griefe, neither vnto any of the Damsell occasion for to thinke any thing but the feare of theyr beau|ties, and the great reason that either of them had for to  beloued, which desert surmounted in eyther of them.
In this time the Emperour Trebatio and the  Briana neuer ceased to enquire and asked of their preciou sonnes, what things had chanced vnto them in aduentures

vntill that time that they were knowen. Unto the which sometimes their sons,  sometimes their fathfull friends did satisfie themselues in such sort, that not onely the emperour  the Empresse, but also all those that were present to heare them were greatly amazed,  gaue great thankes vnto god for his miracles shewed vpon those knights. Although they had greater reason to meruaile within a while after, because the wise Artemidoro came thether,  did shew the chronicle of all that two worthie knights had done, wherin was decla|red perticularlie the worthy deds of either of them,  like|wise of their friends. So in declaring what had happened vnto them, they passed away the rest of the night which re|mained, with so great contentment vnto the hearers therof, that they wished the night longer, so that he might not leue off declaring those things.


 Of the great feasts  triumphs that were made in the great Citie of Constantinople, for the acknowledging of the prin|ces, and of a certaine aduenture which came at that time thether, whereat all the Knightes of the Court were at the point to be lost. Chapter. 37.
_THe next day in the morning the reioycing  pleasure that was in the great city of Con|stantinople, with the inuentions that the ci|tizens had, the more to increase the same, was in such sort, that the strange Knights, which found themselues present therat, had great reason to say that it was the best  most richest citie that any prince had in all the world,  the people thereof so loyall  faithfull as any subiects might possibly be. Likewise the Grekish knights mounted vpon very good horses, garni|shed and betrapped with very rich cloth of Golde and , and did passe throughout all the great Citie, and

made a great noise vpon te paued strets, which did not a little augment the great feasts: amongst whom there dyd not lacke princes of great estimation, and knights of great fame. And for that they were subiects vnto the Emperour Trebatio, they did as well shew themselues very gallant  ioyfull, in acknowledging of their new princes. And all of them went  did kisse their hands, who receiued them with great loue, embrasing of them  acknowledging some of the~ for very good  faithfull friends, more then for subiects, but in especiall, the good  valiant prince Rodafeo, prince of the Rhodes, Rodamarte,  other valiant princes  knights, which the knight of the Sunne in the Iust, did know them to be of great bounty,  worthy to be estemed. So this day the em|perour Trebatio did inuite to dyne with him, all princes  Knights of fame, as well strangers as of his countries, that were in the court. And with the great importunance of him and of the Empresse Briana, of force ther must remaine with them that day the faire princes Lindabrides, who with a bet|ter good will, would haue remained in the place, whereas she had little securitie of hir loue, in the princesse Claridiana: and for that as then it was not a time to take any armour, the emperour, princes  knights, did aparell  adornat them|selues, with cloth of gold and silk, of great valour, and was conformable vnto their high estates. At which time y^e prin|ces Claridiana, did not forget the rich apparell, the which hir damsels brought for hir from Trapisond, the which in con|tention of the princes Lindabrides, she did put on, and was so well garnished, that it might well be said, that the stones  pearles that was on it, to be worth halfe some kingdome.
So likewise the Empresse, who was as braue and a gallant as the other two, came forth, and all thre on hors backe, they went to heare diuine seruice, at a Monestar that was without the Citie, in a faire fresh and gren felde, with whom there went out  great a number o knights for to beare them company, that the stretes of th

great citie could not hold them, so that the most part of the~ were constrained to remaine in the field,  yet the Empe|rour  the princes were not come of the pallace. But before him ther came forth, all those princes  knights of greatest estimaion of Greece, so gallantly apparailed and furnished, that it did augment very much his great estate.
So after them came the good Emperour, in the midst be|twixt his sons, all mounted vpon great  mighty horses, so gallant  well proporsioned, that it might well be said, that in all the world ther were not thre knights of so gallant a semblance, as they were. And the contentment was so great which all their louing subiects did receiue, that they did con|temne with an other to put themselues in places where as best they might recreate themselues in the seking of them. Likewise, all the windowes of the Citie were full of dam|sels  gentlewomen, not a little wondering at their strange  big proportions, giuing great thankes  praise vnto God, for that in all this time he did preserue, defend  kepe them. And by reason that the Emperour was in the inchantment of Lindaraza in the prime of his yeres, they all thre did so much resemble the one the other, that they could scant be knowen the one from the other, but that his sons were som|what bigger of body then their father was. So after them came the faire Empresse Briana, vpon a Moyle, very richly garnished  betrapped. And the king Sacridoro did lead him by the bridle, the empresse was so gallant  faire, that in all the whole empire of Greece could not be found neither lady or damsell, that being put before hir, but that she had great vantage ouer them, except it were the excellent beautie, tho two faire ladies  princes, who went the one on the one side and the other on the other of the empresse. One of them was nounted vpon a white Unicorne,  the other vpon a white awfery: and the two Princes Clauerindo and Brandizel, dyd lead them by their bridels.
And they were of as gentle dispositions of their bodies, as they were faire and beautifull in their faces, that like the beames of the Sun, they did dimme the sight of all them that behold them. And amongst the people there was not a little contempt  strife which of these two should be most fairest,  of best proporsion, although much more greater was the con|tention that either of them had in their harts, for the knight of the Sun, for they knew not to which of them he would yeld himselfe prisoner, but the force  strength of the presence of eyther of them was such, that it could not be iudged but to be a continuall contention, without hope of any victory,  al|though ther was some vantage in the perillous sight  sur|mounted grace of the royall princesse, more then in the faire Lady, yet considering the long time and great conuersation that she had with the knight of the Sunne, was the occasion that ther was such attension within his hart, that he had not so much vnderstanding for to acknowledge the small vaun|tage that was betwixt them, by reason whereof he was brought into that estate, that the knight of the Sun should ne|uer haue ben by any of them ouercome, except the presence of one of them had lacked. So in this order they went to|wards the monestary, with the Gyants of the princesse, hin|dermost of all them,  their Damsels, very strongly armed for their sauegard. So they issued out of the Citie into the field wheras the monestary was, and there the Knightes of Greece, as well as the straunge Knight did make a great triumph and gallaunt shew with their Horses, and for that they were all lustie and valiaunt knightes, and mer|uylonslie richly apparailed, and it was a great comfort, ioy and pleasure, vnto all those people which did beholde them.
When they came vnto the Monestarie, the Knight of the Sunne did alight from his Horse with a trise, and for that he knew not which of his Ladies he might be bold first to take downe from their Horse, he left them both, and went

vnto the Empresse his mother,  toke hir in his armes  lif|ted hir from hir Moile, wheron she was riding,  sate hir downe vpon the greene grasse,  the Emperour  Rosicleer did alight the Princes. Then they altogether entred into the monestary, whereas they heard diuine seruice with great solempnitie, yet the two sons did not so much reioyce them|selues therat, as the Emperour their father did, for that the presence of those faire Ladies did cause Rosicleer to call vn|to remembraunce the great beauty of the Princesse Oliuia, who was no lesse in degree then any of them, so that there could no ioy nor pastime enter into his hart, that was suffi|ent to take away that great heauinesse that so long time was rooted in him, but rather the conuersation of his parents  of the princes  Knights, did cause in him the more sorow, for that he could not occupy himselfe in those depe and pro|found thoughts as he was to doe, and was very desirous to find some meanes, how with reason he might leaue that life which he then lead very much against his will,  seke some other way which was more agreeble vnto his vnfortunate estate. In this day the knight of the Sun, more by diuine in|spiration, then for any duty vnto his parents, did receiue the holy sacrament of baptisme,  did confesse that all those gods in the which he did beleue, to be false  liers,  did returne vnto the law  faith of Christ, with so great will  deter|mined mind, as though he had ben a long time before instruc|ted therin, for he had alwaies before his eyes,  could not be fully satisfied that it should be good, that law in the which he had liued hether to, which was the occasion that with the more ease he did attaine to the perfection of the law of god. In which he continued his life time, like a true  faithfull Christian. At the which the precious Princesse Lindabri|des did receiue so great sorrow and griefe, that she semed to prognosticate vnto hir selfe, that the Knight of the Sunne was not ordained for hir, neyther for to be Lord and raigne ouer the great Empire of the Seythians. And to the contra|rie,

the princesse Claridiana was so glad  ioyfull, for that she was wholy perswaded of hir securitie therby,  also void of the feare y^t she had of y^e great beauty of the faire Princesse Lindabrides, (although time did serue that shee could haue had a much greater in effect.) So the diuine seruice was en|ded,  euery one of them in such order as they went forth re|turned backe againe vnto the royall pallace, whereas they dined together, in the one part of the pallace more then two thousand Knights,  in the other part in a faire great qua|dran, which opened vpon a very fresh  odiferous grene gar|den, wheras the Empresse dined, with all hir Ladies, Dam|sels,  gentlewomen,  in the meane time while they wer at dinner, ther was so great melody  musicke, with strange in|entions of mirth,  the grear abundance that ther was of all thinges for their seruice, that with great reason all the straungers in generall did say, that it was the most highest and royallest Court that was in all the world,  the empe|rour to be y^e most worthiest prince, for y^t in ample maner he did know how to honour all good  worthy knights. And to se the Emperour  Princes, with all other Knights so gallant|ly apparalled with cloth of golde and silke, adorned full of precious stones ond pearles, with their faces  proporsions of so exquisit beautie. And on the other part the Empresse, with the Princesse Lindabrides, and the princesse Claridiana, with all their Damsels and Gentlewoman, the Knights be|ing serued with Squires and Pages exceding gallantly ap|parailed, and the Ladies were serued at their Table with very faire Gentlewomen and well apparailed, that surelye it semed ther was comprehended all the bounty and beau|tye in the world. And there were many Knightes at the boorde that did forget to eat, and were as halfe amazed or astonied in beeholding the mighty and strange thinges that were done in that great hall all the dinner time, which semed vnto them to be the straungest that euer they had sene.
So being in this order all together as you haue heard, and dinner being done,  all the tables taken vp, they saw ente|ring in at the doore of the great hall a gentlewoman, who did very much digresse from all those that were in the qua|dran, as well in apparell as in hir person  disposition, in such sort, that all which were ther present did beholde hir, for that she was very faire of face, and so high of person, that she did surmount all the knights that were ther foure fingers, she came apparailed with a large roabe, which couered all hir body downe to hir fet,  was wrought with so many diuer|sities of silke, full of precious stones  pearles from the top vnto the lower part,  was made fast before with gold  pre|cious stones of great price, which did become hir very well, the haire of hir head was very yeolow,  curled, knit behind hir eares, in such sort, that being seperated in the midst, they were brought ouer hir shoulders, and hung ouer hir breasts downe to his knes, and at the endes of the partition of hir haire, she had hanging two precious stones, either of them as big as a reasonable apple, the which did augment hir beau|ty the more.
This Gentlewoman brought leading by the hand, a knight of a very big body and members,  resembled very much the prince Brandizel, who was ther present, but that he was high|er then he was by a fingers breadth,  was armed with ar|mour that was very well guilt, that it semed to be of very fine gold,  was wrought by meruailous cunning,  garnish|ed so full of precious stones, that it did manyfest vnto them all to be a Knight of great estimation, his sheld was all of fine Stele,  in the golden field therof ther was grauen two Lyons of Siluer, and a knight with a bloudie sword in his hands, who at two blowes did part them both a sunder in the midst, he had the beauer of his healme lifted vp, in such sort that they might discouer  se his face to bee swartish and boystrous.





and his countenaunce very fierce, that it gaue them all to vnderstand, that he should be very proud  arrogant,  after them came two dwarfes, very little,  of so ill fauoured sem|blaunce, that it made all them that were in the hall great|ly to laugh. The one of them caried vp the traine of the dam|sell,  the other dwarffe caried the knights sheld, which was a great deale heauier  higher then he was, for that being at his backe, ther was nothing seene of the dwarfe, but see|med that the shield was caried in the aire, without helpe of any person. When this Knight  y^t gentlewoman were in y^e midst of the great hall euery one held his peace,  ther was great silence to heare what their demand should be,  know|ing the Emperour for that he was set at the vpper end of the Table, and againe be the Emperiall armes that was ouer wheras he sate, they turned themselues towards him. And the gentlewoman began with a loud voice, that all that wer ther present might heare hir, and said.
The high  mighty power,  the diuine prouidence of the high Gods, kepe  increase the mighty estate, of the empe|rour Trebatio,  of all the worthy  valiant Knights of this thy Court, for that they being ouercome, the victory of the Arabicall prince may be the more extolled, the better to ob|taine  deserue the loue of the quene of Carmania. You shall vnderstand emperour Trebatio, that this knight who is here present is called Rodaran, prince  lord of Arabia the great, of that which is called Felix, for that it is a country of great abundance, wheras the influences of the same,  all the celes|tiall operations doth most reioyce themselues. And I am cal|led Carmania, for that I am quene of Carmania,  the occa|sion that we are come hether into these far Countries is, for that this being a young man and a Knight, doubtfull to finde such another in all the worlde for his valiauntnesse and force, being very desirous to get honour, he departed out of his owne Country,  after that he had done mer|uailous and incredible feates of armes, he ariued in my

kingdome of Carmania, where when he had sene my grat and strange beautie,  I being a damsell and not married, it chanced that he fell in loue with me, and vttered vnto me all his whole mind, but first he told who he was,  requested me to receiue him for my husband. The which, so that it might not be preiudiciall to my honour, nor hurtfull vnto my fame, but profitable vnto my estate, for that he is so high and mighty a prince,  so valiant a knight, I did co~clude and grant him my loue, vpon this condition, that first he should doo such feats of armes as I should se  vnderstand, that he was the best  most valiantest Knight in all the world, and if not, it was not for him to procure my loue, for y^t I would by no meanes marry with him, neither with any other. For as I haue my selfe in estimation to excel in beautie  high|nesse of birth  estate all the damsels that are now liuing. So likewise he whom I will take for to be my husband, shal surmount all other knights. The which condition this knight did accept and grant vnto, and moreouer he said, that the choice should be mine to appoint wherin he shuld proue himselfe, and how that he would in all points performe my request,  he would speake no more words therin, till such time as all should be very manifest and plaine. And I being very desirous to know the truth therof, not giuing any cre|dit vnto those mightie acts which I herd to be told of him, I caused an vnckle of mine to come vnto me, who was ve|ry expert in the art magicke, and I desired him that by his art hee wold aduertise wherin and how I should proue this knight to be (as it was reported) the best knight in all the world. Who after that he well perused his bookes  studied in this my request, he tolde me that he had found by his art, that in the Court of the Emperour Trebatio in the citie of Constantinople, that there should be in this day in the great hall ioyned together the flower of all Knighthoode in the world, and the most famous and valyauntest Princes and Knights therein. And that it semed vnto him, that

there was no better opportunitie to accomplish my desire then this, and how that this Knight and I should come vn|to this court, and he to defend and maintaine the quarrell, in saying that I am the most precious and fairest Damsell in all the world, against all amorous Knights that shall say the contrarie, and he to be the onely Knight, aboue all other that dooth deserue my loue. The which counsaile se|med so conformable vnto my great desire, and he graun|ted vnto the same. At the same very instaunt we depar|ted on our iourney, and in the ende of much trauaile we are come hether the selfe same day that the wise man dyd tell me, and according vnto that which I dooe se in this great hall, I doo finde it to be true, although I am doubt|full amongst so goodly a companie of Knights to finde a|nie that is to be compared vnto this valyaunt and wor|thie Prince Rodaran, and how that the fame of this court is much more then the dedes thereof. And for that this our long iourney shall not be ended without receiuing some benefit and profit, here I doo desire you most high  mightie Emperor, to giue leaue and lisence vnto these your knights, that in this case they may procure to do their best, otherwise with great reason they might haue shame to come before their amorous Dames, if that you too refraine the consent|ment hereof, and not to defend them in this case with all their might  power, but first I doo giue you to vnderstand, that before that this valiant Prince Rodaran doo enter into battell with any of these knights, it shall be vpon this con|dition, that if he be by any knight ouercome, that both he  I to be prisoners vnto him y^t getteth the victorie, to do with vs all that his will  pleasure shall be. And if it be so that he doth ouercome any knight, that likewise in the same or|der he to be his prisoner, to carry him into his Countrie, or to doo his pleasure w^t him. And againe, although the Prince Rodaran as one that is without all feare, would in the midst of the place of this great Citie make the proofe of his great

bounty, for that it should be the more manifest vnto you all: yet I being no man, and somewhat timerous, for the great loue which I doo beare vnto him, haue requested him that it might not be here in this citie, for that the imprisonment of so high Princes  knights as be here present, might grow vnto great perill  danger, and great disturbance to vse his will of his prisoners, after they be ouercome. And for that the security of all parts shall be more certaine to auoid the inconueniences that may happen to the contrarie, it shall be good, and seemeth vnto me very conuenient, that these trials do passe at the bridge of the white Iasper ston, that which is on the first arme of the fiue Riuers, which runneth into the Riuer of Danubia, and runneth into the Sea Maditaraneo, which is in the confines  vtter parts of this mightie Em|pire, wheras the Prince Rodaran shall tarrie and abide the comming of all such knights as will combat in the defence of this demand, and neuer to depart the field till such time as he be ouercome, or else to remaine with the victorie of all Knights, of what estate and same so euer they be. And for se|curitie, that y^e prince Rodaran shall performe  kepe all that is said, according vnto the order of knighthood, he shall giue his gage afore all and vnto all that is in this great hall.
And therewith the Prince Rodaran did throw his gantlet so high, that all those which were there might se it, in token of defiaunce. And without saying any more, or dooing any reuerence, they departed out of y^e great hal, leauing amongst all them that were therein a great laughter, as well at the demaund of the Gentlewoman, as at the disposition of the Dwarfes, although they receiued great contentment at the disposition of the knight, and ther were many that were ve|ry desirous to make the first proofe with him, and beleued of a certaintie, that according as he was of members and stature, that he should be of great force and strength.
With this desire there were diuerse that arose vp from the

table, and went vnto the Emperour,  asked lisence that they might go  prooue themselues with that knight, amongst the which, the first was that good Knight Rodamarte, Prince of the Rhodes, a yong Knight,  one of the valiantest that was in the Emperours Court. Likewise the valiant Prince Ro|dafeo, who was also a very good Knight, and both of them in loue with faire ladies that were with the Empresse, the one of them was daughter vnto the king of Bohemia, called A|milinia,  the other was daughter vnto the king of Dalmatia, called Salandria, who receiuing great contentment of theyr valiant desires  good dispositions, did shew vnto them great fauour  curtesie determining to take them to be their hus|bands. Likewise in this demaund ther lacked not y^ valiant Brandizel, who sustained great passions with the griefe that he receiued for the absence of the fayre Princesse Clarinea, would in hir absence doo hir this seruice, for that the beauty of that Gentlewoman was nothing in comparison vnto his Lady. And with no lesse good will y^e good king Sacridoro came foorth to aske lisence,  after him Rosicleer,  the knight of the Sun, all being on foot before the Emperour, did desire him to giue them lisence to giue the first attempt: who with a plea|sant laughter said that he knew not what to say in that case, but did remit it vnto the Princesse Claridiana, that she shuld determine what they should doo therin. Who did excuse hir selfe in all that euer she could,  did remit it vnto the prin|cesse Lindabrides, yet for all that it fell out that in the ende shee must neds determine and conclude the great contenti|on that was amongst all those Knights, who should be the first that should giue the attempt. So she concluded that the first enterprise should he giuen by him that dyd first aske lisence of the Emperour, and next vnto him the second that demaunded lisence, and so the third, in the same or|der as they craued lisence. And although it was a griefe vnto them which should be the last, hauing for certayntie that the first would conclude the demaund of Rodaran, yet

for all that they thought the sentence iust and right which was giuen by the royall Princesse Claridiana, who if at that time had bene lawfull, with a very good will she wold haue bene the first hir selfe y^t should haue defended hir owne beautie, rather then to haue made the order and repetition she did vnto the knights. The Prince Rodamarte would pre|sently haue departed in the demand, but the Emperour by no meanes would consent ther vnto, but said that in all that day they shuld not meddle therin, neither should any knight arme himselfe, neither doo any other thing but spend y^e time in pastime  plesure,  celebrate that feast for the acknow|ledging of his sons,  how that they had time inough after|ward to accomplish their desires. So y^t they spent the time in no other thing, but in making of mirth and pastime, with meruailous straunge  new inuentions, holden in the place of that great Citie by the Citizens, that gaue great con|tentment vnto all the Knights, who likewise did dance with the Ladies and Damsells of the Empresse, who were verie faire and pleasant. Likewise the Knight of the Sun did dance with y^e princesse Claridiana,  with the princesse Lindabrides, with so gentle  curteous demeanour, that they receiued so great contentment therein, as to se him in his armour, al|though according vnto his depe thoughts, he had more care to rule his eies to beholde them in equall manner, then he had to kepe his fete in compasse in his dauncing. So the night drew on,  all those which dined with the Emperour did likewise sup with him, and after supper they passed away the most part of the night in dauncing and mirth. At which tune the princesse Lindabrides, although it was great griefe vnto hir for to depart fro~ the presence of y^e knight of the Sun, yet would she returne vnto hir Chariot. The Emperor and y^e Empresse did importunate hir very much for to tarry ther, and to remaine in the Pallace, but all that euer they could doe dd profit nothing at all. So she returned vnto hir Chariot, accompanied with the Emperour and all the rest

of the Princes and knights, til such time as she was within the Chariot, whereas they did all take their leaue of hir, and returned backe, vnto the pallace, which was a great griefe vnto the Knight of the Sun, for that he could not carry and remaine to slepe in the Charior as he was wont to doo, and no lesse was the griefe of the princesse Lindabrides whe~ she saw him depart, and although the acknowledging of y^e knight of the Sunne did cause hir very much to reioyce for that he was of so high estate, yet she would for hir part haue giuen the halfe of hir lands, vpon the condition that she had neuer knowen him what he was, for that she was better in quiet when she vnderstood no other thing but onely his great va|l our  bounty, and the name of the Knight of the Sun,  the great securitie that she had to marry with him, then now to know him to be of so high blood and linage, wich the pe|rill that she doth suspect, and a thing apparaunt before hir eies, which was the occasion that in all that night she could not take any rest nor slepe, with the great care and griefe which she receiued, and hir minde so tumbled  tossed with diuerse such strange thoughts concerning the Knight of the Sunne, that neuer in all hir life she found hir selfe in the like confusion. For one way considering with what intent she departed out of hir owne Countrie, and how that hir bro|ther the Prince Meridian was gone and left hir,  another way, the acknowledging of the knight of the Sunne, and the renouncing of his law, and likewise the comming of the Princesse Claridiana, with hir estate, and surmounting beau|tie, did cause hir to suspect very much that the knight of the Sunne would wholy giue ouer the enterprise that he had taken in hand, so that she did account hir selfe to be the vn|happiest and most vnfortunatest Damsell that was borne into the world, and with the great griefe that this doubtful thought did cause in hir, she saide.
Oh high and diuine prouidence of the immortall Gods, whom all the whole nation of the Oriental and Septentri|onall

Scythians doo worship, with reason hath your diuine power to permit, that vpon the vnhappie Princesse Linda|brides, such strange things should be shewed, as it for that it should be published in all the world, how that I was con|strained to bannish my selfe from mine owne Country, and to trauaile in the world to seke other straunge Countries, wheras onely for one Knight I doo hate  abhor myne owne life, and my libertie brought into great captiuitie? Oh how much it had bene better for me to haue bene accounted a|mongst the meaner sort of Gentlewomen, for then I should not haue had reason to haue procured the extreamest of all Knights, neither should I haue had any reason to captiue my selfe for him, but now reson doth require that I despaire with my selfe, for my fortune doth lack to giue me any aide or remedy: Oh immortall gods, seing that in the strangenes of my beautie, you would manifest your high and mightie power, wherfore did you not onely make me and no other, to be the deseruer of him, that onely doth deserue to inioye my great beautie and fayrenesse: Wherfore did you make another so equall vnto me, which is the occasion that I doo sustaine this great griefe, I would it were your diuine pleasure, that seing alone I doo deserue the Knight of the Sunne, that the Princesse Claridiana might he she, for that she beeing the onely deseruer of him, will be the occasion to excuse betwixt vs a great iealousie and cruell contenti|on, for that I had rather to account my selfe vnworthie of such a Knight, then to inioy him with so equall a compani|on, for that neither of vs in this sort can liue in any secu|ritie, but will rather be a continuall dying, for being vn|to one alone, the remembraunce of the other will be the occasion of great daunger, and she which should be for|gotten, in remembring the victorie of the other, would cause in hir a cruell and mortall griefe: Oh I am with|out all good Fortune, what shall I dooe, considering that I am none but my selfe, whether shall I goe, being

a prisoner; What comfort shall I take seing that I am whithout all remedy? What counsaile shall I take hauing no vnderstanding, neither is there any power to perswade me to reason, but will rather the more increase my sorrow and griefe? What shall I doo, if I doo remaine here, I shall lack reson to sustaine my selfe,  considering my high estate, will cause a farther griefe:  againe, the sight of the knight of the Sunne cannot bee so ioyfull vnto me, as the presence of Claridiana will be hurtfull. And if I depart out of this Countrie, and returned vnto mine owne, it will be no other thing but to separate the life and soule from the body. And to liue without the presence of the Knight of the Sunne, will be a life vnto me, as vnto those who are in the darke, and see no light. But alasse what do I say, although they receiue nor se no light, yet the paine doth not trouble them: but it I do finde my selfe banished out of the presence of the knight of the Sunne, there can be no paine in the world compared vnto that which I shall suffer. Oh Knight of the Sunne, how mightie and straunge is your Fortune, that onely in your ha~ds doth remaine the whole remedie of the Princesse Lin|dabrides, shee who in beautie and fairenesse is excellent and doth excede, and amongst all Ladies is the most highest, and yet will let to giue hir remedie, but rather condempne hir vnto cruell death. Wherefore haue I so many Lordshippes and kingdoms, with so many thousaads of people, which the diuine Gods hath giuen vnto mee, when that with all those ioyntly with my straunge  exquisite beautie, I cannot sub|iect the will of one alone Knight.
The sorrowfull Princesse Lindabrides had scarce made an ende of saying these words, when that voyde of all me|morie and vnderstanding, she remayned vpon hir bed as one that were dead, whereas she remained all that night, without comming againe to hir selfe. With no lesse sorrow and griefe the worthie Knight of the Sunne passed away the night without slepe, calling to minde all that had pas|sed betwixt him and the Princesse Lindabrides, and the

great loue which vnto that day he bare vnto hir, ioyntlye with his meruailous surpassing beautie: which was in such sort figued in his hart, that it made great resistance against the loue which he had vnto the princesse Claridiana, in especi|all, when she was not in presence. But being both present, y^e great liking he had of the royall Princes, did almost ouer come him: who at that time neither more nor lesse, did take as little ca~se, as the others did slepe. For that the great loue which she had vnto the knight of the Sun did not let but put some doubt in that which hir wounded hart so much desired. And although the highnesse of hir estate  the excellency of hir beauty, did almost wholy perswade hir of securitie, that the knight of the Sun would not forget hir. Yet the sight of the princes Lindabrides, and hir remaining in the court did cause in hir some Ielosie, not knowing what would bee the end of that hir demaund. Likewise she had great doubt in hir hope: For that at such time as the princesse should returne into hir owne country, the knight of the Sun could not doe o the contrary, but to beare hir company, so that the continu|all conuersation of them two together, would be the occasi|on of that, which being in hir presence, might be excused. So with these  such like thoughts, they passed away the night: n the which the good knight of Cupid neither more nor lesse, did not slepe very much, whose passions are not to be accou~|ed, nor compared with the rest. For if I should here declare ll that euer he passed for his lady  mistresse, the faire prin|es Oliuia, all this history were not sufficient to hold it, al|hough it were very much bigger. It is sufficient that he pas|ed away the night with no lesse care, then the others that  haue told you of: although his passions were not so strau~ge nto him, as it was vnto the other their griefes. But the fu|e of his sorow was somewhat apeased, with the hope that e had for to be reuenged on him, who was the occasion of ll his euill  mortall paine. So at that time it was oysed  the great Citie of Constantinople, and in all the whole

Empire of Greece, the great army that was making in a redinesse in england,  the occasion wherfore they did ordaine the same. Which was the occasion that the sorowfull knight of Cupid, did thinke euery day a whole yeare, with the great desire he had to se himselfe with the prince don Siluerio, not for that he would haue any recompence at his hands, for that it semed vnto him, that he was in no fault, but onely to giue to vnderstand vnto the princes Oliuia, the small reason that she had so for to cast him off. So in this sort they passed away all that night, very conformable in their sleping  rests, but very different in their variable and pensiue thoughts.


Who the valiant Rodaran was, and the Damsell, and the occasion wherefore they came vnto the Court of the Emperour Trebatio. Cap. 28.
_THe comming of this valiant knight Rodaran vnto the court of the Emperour Trebatio, was not so voide of occasion, but that there was comprehended there in great discipt, mischiefe,  treason:  an euill preiudiciall vnto all Christendome,  hurtfull vnto the best princes  Knights therin. All the which came in such or|der knit  put together, that it lacked but little all to be lost, if it had not ben by the diine prouidence, (who forgetting the offences  his people) did by his infinit mercy  goodnesse prouide a remedy: although many times, for the sins of the people, doth permit many  continuall persecucions, done by the vnbeleuers, vpon the Christians, to make them the bet|ter to know him,  to leaue all their euill  wickednesse,  to returne vnto him. Yet for all that, he neuer doth so ab|horre  leaue them, for to bring the Christians vnto vtter confusion  end: as it hath apeared in the old and ancient times, amongst the lawes  customes of men, nor neuer will

so long as this world shall endure.
You doe well remember how that in this history hath en told you, that at such time as the worthy knight of the Sunne did first se the Princesse Lindabrides, hee did partly vnder|stand of the mighty power of the emperour Alicandro, hir father, how that he was king ouer the Scithians,  emperour ouer the Tartarians,  Lord ouer all the Indians  Regions orientals, from whence it grew that he was had in reputa|tion of the greatest  mightiest prince in all the world. Like|wise he was lord of the great Cataya, wheras is that migh|ty citie which is of one hundreth miles compasse,  of all the rest that is in the Orientall India, in that part wheras a|mongst all his subiects he was called the mightye king of kings, Emperour of the Tartarians,  the Lord of the Orien|tall Indians, son  heirs vnto the high Gods. This title they gaue vnto him, because the people of these countries had it for a law  custome amongst them,  alwaies had in reue|rence his predecessours which were Emperours, before the emperour Alicandro, to be sons  heires of their false gods, in whom they did all beleue  worship. Besides all this, this mighty emperour had in his subiection all the kings  lords that were in the orientall part of the Indians, vnto the me|ridionall, which are nine kingdomes, all very great  migh|ty, and full of great riches: so that with great reason they might say, that he was the mightiest emperour  king in all the worh. Heere the History saith that many e deceiued to thinke that this mightie empire should be christians, for al|though they haue amongst them some part of the law, which God gaue vnto that great Captayne Moses, yet theyr law doeth differ very farre from the true and perfect law of Iesus Christ, for that they bee all Idolaters, and euery one of these kings doeth beleue in that which seemeth vn|to him best, for that there is no law nor commaundement to make them incline to anye kinde of goodnesse for the sauegarde of their owne soules. So it happened on a time as this mightie Emperour Alicandro was in his

great city of Neptaya, which is in Cataya the great, very pen|siue  sad, for that hee could here no newes of the children y^e Prince Meridian  the Princesse Lindabrides, reprehending himselfe very much, for hee had so sent them foorth into the world. One day being accompanied with all his mightye Knights  lords his subiects, he receiued so great sorrow and griefe in the remembring of his children, that it caused him to wepe. And leaning his cheke vpon one of his hands, he shed forth many salt teares which ran down vpon his white face. The which being sene by those peres his subiects, they were all very much amazed, what should bee the occasion that the Emperour should wepe.
So before that any did arise vp to demaund of him the oc|casion, ther arose vp amongst them a king, who was king of Gedrosia, an old man of more then one hundreth yeares, who amongst all the rest present, was estemed to be the wisest in Astrologie,  deuination, that could be found in all Asia. And all they did giue so great credit vnto that which he did tell them should happen, as though it had ben all ready ac|complished: the which king dyd wepe very bitterly,  with so great sorrow, that almost he could not speake, but yet he said. Oh high  mighty king of the Scythians,  Emperour of the Tartarians, if you had as good iudgement of the know|ledge of things to come here after, as now to conceiue in matters present, then wold you leue of this great wepings for your children, who are very well  in health,  in place whereas they are very much honored and had in estimaci|on as they doe deserue. For that the time will come y^t thou shalt wepe and bewaile, thine owne losse and destection, of all thy vassalles and subiectes, with whose blood, all the feldes of the mightie Empire of Greece I doe see be sprink|led, and yet I cannot atchiue to know how, nor the occasion therof: but onely I doe se by great signes and notable to|kens of the colestiall influences, and my knowledge doth so farre extend that I doe know, that my daies doth draw

vnto an end, and I cannot endure long. In the grecian Em|pire he that is the most mightiest king  Emperor  great|est Lord in all the world, shall loose his great strength,  ha|ing lost his owne liberty, the most valiantest  worthyest knights that shall be ther at that present, shall loose their liues and the quantitie shall be so great, that the waters of Inno shall loose their christallyne colour, and shall be changed into red blood, which shall giue testimony of the greatest destruc|tion of Knights that euer hath bene in the world. The which I cannot by my knowledge atchieue nor thinke to fall vpon any other, but vpon the, for that at this present thou art the most mightiest Emperour in all the world. And if it be so that vnto my words you or any of yours do giue any cre|dit, procure out of hand with great wisdome to seeke remedy to preuent the same, and to cut off so great an euill as is prognosticated against vs. And if vnto these my words you will giue no credite, the time it selfe will giue a perfect te|stimonie of this that I haue said, when that you shall haue no time nor space for to giue any remedy at all vnto the same.
Without saying any more this old king of Gedrosia, did set himselfe downe againe in his place, leauing this mighty em|perour  all the other kings and Knights that were in that great hall, very much amazed at the words which hee had spoken,  knew not what to say, but being amazed they did looke one vpon another,  spake neuer a word. But this migh|ty Emperour who alwaies found the prognosticating  de|uining of this old king to be true, yet he thought this to be a thing impossible,  not to giue any credit thervnto, but yet to heare farther what he would say, after a certaine space that he had bethought himselfe, he said.
The great wisedome which I doe know to be in you, good king of Gedrosia, and the truth which you haue sayd, that the cause of my weping was the remembraunce and taling to minde my louing children, and the great sorrow

and griefe which I doe receiue by their absence, is a suffici|ent peswasion that I  all that be heere present should giue wholy credit vnto all this which you haue said, but yet it is not knowen vnto you  all this nobility, that my power and strength is such  of so great force, that if all the whole world should ioyne together,  make their confederacie against me, yet were they not sufficient to bring me vnto that estate to be ouercome, neither once to abate any point of my mighty power, much lesse the Empire of Greece, for that I am ful|ly perswaded that the least of you here present, with the po|wer which you haue in your kingdome, is sufficient to de|stroy it,  to consume it with fire  vter ruine (if any occasi|on of controuersie should be betwixt vs) as yet ther is none, neither is ther any mistrust of the same, for that it is a cou~|try very strange vnto vs, and likewise very far of from this Country.
When the Emperour had said these words he helde his peace  shewed so mery semblance and countenance, that it semed vnto the king of Gedrosia that the Emperour gaue but small credit vnto that which he had said, who with great anger arose vp againe and sayd.
High and mighty Emperour, the great confidence  trust that you haue in your high estate and power doth cause you to make a iest at these things which I haue told you, for that it semeth a thing impossible, without any consideration, how that ther is no securitie of worldly things, for when a man doth thinke himselfe to be most surest, then he is farthest off,  as it doth happen vnto all estates, so likewise high  migh|ty Princes doe fall and come vnto destruction, euen at such time as they account themselues to be in the greatest fa|uour of Fortune, then is their fall the greater. And here I doe tell you againe for a certainty, that all that which I haue told is of a truth,  shall come to passe, without failing any iot therof. And for that you shall not put so great con|fidence

in the mighty power  strength which you haue here I do giue you to vnderstand, that before one yere doth come about thr shal, be oyned together in the great citie of Con|stantinople, which is in the empire of Grecit (that you haue in so little estimation) such a number of Knights, although not very many, yet they shall be such, that they alone shall be sufficient (being together) for to destroy the greatest and mightiest army that you and all your subiects, in their king|domes  Lordships can ioyne together. And if y^t out of hand you do not procure that these knights, (or at the least) the principallest of them may loose their liues, to auoide the in|conueniences that are pronounced against vs. And if you wil not, here I doe returne  say to you againe, that the sharpe edges of their ine cutting swords shall vse such cruelty vp|on yours, that the small brookes shall be turned into great Riuers with their blouds. Therfore considering my duty,  that which I doe owe vnto your high estate, to giue whole credit vnto these my words,  to prouid such remedy as shall be conuenient for so great a perill prepared against vs.
Without speaking any more wordes this olde king of Gedrosia set himselfe agayne in his place, leauing this mightye Emperour and all those Kings and Nobles that were ther present, much more amazed then they were at the first, although they were fully perswaded and beleued of a certainty, that it was impossible to finde in all the world so many Knightes that might compare themselues with them that were at that present in that court, no not by a great deale, whith was the occasion that wheras bee|fore they did not giue full credit vnto those wordes which the King Gedrosia had sayde. At this time they gaue lesse and made a mocke at him and at his diuinations, but yet for that the Emperour Alicandro was verye wise, and hadde great experience of the small security that was in the prosperous estates of this transitorye worlde,

with a wan colour  sorrowfull semblance, he fell in a great imagination  depe thought, musing vpon the words which the King Gedrosia had said. And as the Emperour was in this sort a great while without speaking any word, but ve|ry pensiue  heauie, amongst the rest of all those kings  no|bles that were in that great hall, the valiant Rodaran arose vp  put himself on foot, who was king of Arabia, subiect vnto the Emperour Alicandro, a young man,  so valiant, that in all Asia there was not a knight to be found, that by a great deale was able to compare himself with him in mighty pro|wesse  feates of armes, and for that he was so furious and stubburne, he was feared of all,  all that were in the whole Empire of Tartaria, were very desirous to pleasure him, and not one that durst anger him in any respect, except it were that valiant Prince Meridian, with whom he would neuer contend nor procure to combat, yet ther was neuer other knight nor Giant that euer did abide the battaile with him one houre. This Rodaran with great courage and anger, as though fire should proced out of his eies, began and said as followeth.
I doe not know high  mighty emperour of Tartaria, with what reason is attributed vnto thee the name of the diuine,  the parentage that you haue of the high  diuine Gods, that you doe suffer in your presence,  in the presence of so many mightie kings  lords your subiects, that the king of Gedro|sia should be so bold  hardy to speake these blasphemies, the which he hath said, for that I do beleue, that if all the pow|er of the gods,  the rest of all the whole world besides, shuld ioyne themselues together by the Deity that you haue re|ceiued by your predecessors, if they were all ioyned toge|ther, yet were they not sufficient to comprehend this, the which the king hath saide, much lesse the Emperour of Greece, and the knights that shall there be assembled and ioyned together. And here I doe sweare vnto you by the order of Knighthood that I haue receiued, and by my king|lie

estate, that if I had the~ all together in the fielde against me, I doo thinke to kill and destroy them all, or make them to yeeld as prisoners. And againe, if it be so that the diuina|tions of this olde King of Gedrosia doo put any feare or dreade into your harts, and that his words should seme vn|to you to be true, and that the remedy the which he hath ordained will be sufficient for to auoide the great inconue|niences, in making away those knights. Heere beefore your diuine highnesse, and before all that be here present I doo promise, that at such time as these knights shal assemble and ioyne together in the Citie of Constantinople, to be there present in that Court, and will maintaine and defend that the Quene Carmania, my well beloued Lady and mistris, is the most fayrest Lady in all the world. And with all those that shall say vnto the contrarie, vppon the same reason I wil combat with him, vntill such time as one of vs be dead or yelded prisoner vnto the other, vpon condition that he who hath the victorie, shall vse his pleasure with him that is ouercome. So that in this sort either they shall remaine the most weakest and cowardliest knights in the world, or else I will bring them prisoners before your presence, for that the king of Gedrosia may loose the great feare which he hath conceiued of them.
When he had made an ende of speaking, there was not one King nor Knight amongest all them in the great hall that durst make any answere vnto those proude words of Rodaran, but onely the king of Gedrosia, who rising vpon his fete did answere him, saying.
If thou wert so valiaunt of armes and dedes Rodaran, as proude in thy words, then should I be fully certified, that thou wouldest be sufficient to accomplish much more then here thou hast said, and that there were not in all the world a Knight that might compare himselfe with the, but for that thy strength and prowesse is far different and con|trarie vnto thy great pride, here I doo giue the to vnder|stande that this day twelue moneths there shall be such Knights assembled and ioyned together in Constantino|ple,

that whereas thou shalt excede them in the one, they shall excede the in the other. And it shall happen vnto the many houres in the daye that thou shalt acknowledge this to be true, all this which I haue sayde vnto the, al|though at this present it semeth vnto the to be a fable and lye. And I doo desire no other reuengement for the iniury which I haue receiued at thy hands, but onely the repre|hension which thou thy selfe shalt make at such time as it shall be vnto the well knowen. And for that my words shall seme vnto the to be of lesse credit, and that thou shalt haue farther experience of that which I by the starres and celestiall opperations doo vnderstand and know, here I doo giue the to vnderstand (that if thou doost goe forwards with this enterprise which thou hast promised) thou shalt finde in the Citie of Constantinople a woman, who with hir singular beuty  fairnes shal far excel the beuty of y^e quene of Carmania, thy lady,  with the great force  strength of hir arme, shall abate thy courage and make the to yeld.
And therewith he held his peace, but the great pride of that valiant Rodaran encreased, in such sort, when he heard those words of the olde King Gedrosia, and his anger was so great, that if the Emperour and those kings which were there present had not disturbed him, with determined pur|pose he went towards him to haue throwen him out at the window. But when he saw that he could not execute his pretence, with great anger and courage he went out of the hall, swearing great oathes, that he would accomplish and performe all that which hee had promised,  that being finished, to take reuengement of the great iniurie which he had receiued of the olde king Gedrosia. Wherewith he left all that were ther present greatly amazed at his pride and hardinesse. And so departed vnto the kingdome of Carmania, whereas all his ioy was, for that he was amorous of the Quene of Carmania, who was in great royaltie and estate, and very faire. And in processe of time finding himselfe in great fauour with hir, and hauing hir aide and help to his

contentment, he straight way gaue hir to vnderstand of all that which had passed with him in the court of the mightie Emperour of Tartaria, and of his promise that he had made before all those which were there present, in saying that he could not in any maner of wise excuse the same, but that he must nedes begin the enterprise of his iourney towardes Greece out of hand. The Quene Carmania was very wise and of a good iudgement and vnderstanding,  if it had bene in hir power, she would very faine haue hindred this iour|ney, and for that she knew very well the condition of this valiaunt and stout Rodaran, and that there were none that were able to perswade him from the contrarye of this his determined purpose, she wold not by any means say ought against him, but with a merrie countenaunce she dyd of|fer hir selfe to goe with him into Greece, vpon co~dition that he would grant vnto hir one thing that she would demand of him, if his pleasure were that she should goe with him. The which with a very good will hee did graunt vnto hir. And she promised him to beare him companie. Then dyd they ordaine all things necessary, for to carry with him on his iourney, but halfe the yere was almost past before they could begin to trauaile, for that the quene co~manded a net of yron to be made, very arteficially  cunningly wrought,  it could not be made an ende of in any shorter time.
And although that Rodaran did often times aske where|fore the same was made, yet for all that the Quene would neuer tell him, but after that this net was made, and all things in a redinesse, this valiant Rodaran  the Quene de|parted out of the Countrie of Carmania,  carried in theyr company certaine knights and Pages which were necessary, and after that they had passed many and diuerse countries, they came vnto the port of Tenedon, whereas they did im|barke themselues, and tooke their way towards Greece.
And although there happened vnto this mightie Prince in his iourney many strange and wonderfull things, because it is not necessarie, this Historie doth not make any men|tion thereof, but onely in the ende of many daies and great trauaile, they ariued in Greece, not far from Constanti|nople. This valiaunt Rodaran was determined to execute his enterprise within the Citie of Constantinople, but the Quene of Carmania did disturbe him, and sayde, that now was the time come that he should performe the gift that he had promised hir before he did depart out of Carmania, which was, that the contension which should passe with him and the Knights of Greece, should not be executed in the Citie of Constantinople, but in the place whereas she would appoynt it. The which Rodaran, although it did grieue him very much, yet durst he not say against it be|cause he promised hir. So they nauigated all along the shoare, till they came vnto the Bridge called Iasp, which is the first passage ouer Danubia towards the sea, and was the most strongest that was vpon all the riuer, and furni|shed full of Towres and battlements, and especiallie thre towers of great force and admiration, the one at the entrie vppon the Bridge, and the other in the midst, and the third at the farther ende, all wrought with fine white Iasper stone, of so great strength, that it semed impossible to be taken or wonne by force of armes. And this Bridge was mayntained and kept by the Emperour of Greece, by rea|son that the people which doth inhabit on the one side of the fiue armes which procedeth from Danubia, and runneth into the sea Fuxino, they are very barbarous, furious, and beastlie, and many times they doo enter into that Countri and doo very much harme therein. And although the Em|perour would make a conquest ouer them, as diuers times he hath put it in practise, yet hee cannot, for that they haue neyther Cities, Townes, nor villages, neyther any dwel|ling houses, but onely great Caues vnder the ground, whereas they doo make theyr habitation, because they are so beastlie and brutish. In consideration whereof it dyd

behoue the Emperour to haue that bridge very stronge and exceding well kept, and it was for that alongst the Riuer there was none other passage. When this valiant Rodaran and the Quene ariued at that bridge,  saw it to be a place very conuenient for their purpose, straight way the prince Rodaran did prepare himselfe for to win the same,  being armed  in very good order, hee tooke the quene by the hand, and without any more company they went towards y^e gate of the bridge,  knocked therat,  for that they were all a|lone, the gate was straight way opened. When they were entered within the first Tower, this valiant Rodaran com|manded those that were the keepers therof, that they should yeld vp the towers and bridge, and that they should depart with quietnesse. Who seing him alone  they so many, wold not obey his commandement, but did procure to defend the towers  the bridge, and wold not suffer him to perswadge any farther. But this valiant Rodaran in a smal time did so behaue himselfe amongst them, that wounding and killing the most part of them, the rest were constraynd  thought it good for the sauegard of their liues to yeld, and to doo all that he commaunded them. And so they deliuered vnto him all the keyes of the gates and towers, and departed thence at their liberty, with the losse of the most part of their com|panions, and although they were ashamed so manye to be slaine and ouercome by one alone Knight, which made them to refraine comming into the Emperours presence, yet ther did not lack (who before Rodaran did enter into Con|stantinople) that did aduise the Emperour thereof. At such ime as he came thether, he was very angrie with him|elfe, for that he was so bolde to giue that enterprise, and if t had not bene for the disturbing of their great feasts and riumphs which were made there for their sons, he would aue sent thether such as should haue rewarded him vnto is contentment for his boldnesse. But when that Roda|an was come vnto the Court, and the Emperour fullie sa|sfied of his demaund, he was very glad and ioyefull, for

that he had so good opportunity, whereby he should receiue his pyment for his boldnesse, and small account that he made of him and his estate. So when this valyant Roda|ran and the Quene of Carmania saw themselues Lords and gouernours ouer the whole bridge and their Towers, they commaunded all those that came in theyr companie to enter in thereat, whereas they dyd establish their abiding, and caused the ship wherein they came thether, which was at the sea, to enter into the riuer, and to surge close vnto the bridge, wheras they did let fall their ancker, and made hir very fast, for that in the same Ship Rodaran did determine, hauing ouercome the most part of the best and principallest knights in all Greece, to put them prisoners into the same ship, and returne with them into his owne Countrie. So af|ter that the Quene of Carmania had well perused the scitu|ation of the bridges,  of the towers, she saw that the tower that was in the midst of the Bridge was made in such sort, that beneath it was round like vnto an arke and hollow, without any gate, but as broad as the bridge was, wheras she caused the net of yron to be hanged in the highest part of the hollownesse within, in such sort, that it could not be sene nor descerned without, but it was so large, that it oc|cupied all the bignesse of the vaut within, and in such sort the Quene of Carmania caused it to be hanged, that in pul|lling of a cord, ordained for that purpose, the whole nt should fall downe.
When Rodaran saw the net hanged vp and put in good or|der, he was very desirous to know to what purpose it was put there, and did importune the quene so much, that in the end she was constrained to declare it vnto him, saying.
You shall vnderstand (my Lord) that the great loue which I dooe beare vnto you, hath caused me to feare that which your valyaunt and singular bountie doth assure me and put me in great doubt of, and although that I am fully perswaded that there is not in all the world a knight that can compare his bounty vnto yours, yet it semeth vnto mo,

that hauing to do with so many who wil prooue themselues against you, it cannot be chosen but there must nedes be some amongst them that will trouble you so much being wearie, that you shall receiue some harme on your person. And therefore being mooued with the great loue that I doe beare vnto you, I haue caused to be made and put in this yron net which you se, that at what time so euer being in battaile with those Knights, you shall finde your selfe to be in any extremitie, that then you may retire your selfe with him whom at that present you doo combat, till that you are both right vnderneath this net, and being there, then pre|sently both you and your aduersarie shall take your ease. And this (Sir) is the whole cause and effect why I haue caused this net to be made. And if it be so that this which I haue done dooe cause in you any disconentment or griefe, here I doo craue pardon, and doo request you to attribute the occasion, as a fault committed by a woman, for when an offence is committed for loue and good will, it is the ea|sier to be pardoned and forgiuen.
This valiaunt Rodaran in all his life time dyd not re|ceiue so great grife and sorrow, as at that present, when he did vnderstand  se what the Quene had ordayned, and it seemed nto him that she had doubt of the victorie that he hoped to haue of the Greekish Knights, yet for all that the loue that he bare vnto hir was such, that he would not say against that which she had done, but shewing himselfe to be very angrie for the same, he saide.
Lady and mistres, it doth griue me very much, that the Prince of Arabia is so little knowen vnto you: What oo you thinke that in all the world there is one for one, hat is of so great strength, that of himselfe he is sufficy| to bring me into so great extremitie in battaile, that I hall be driuen to seke for rest and succour, for to bring nto an ende this my enterprise which I haue vnderta|.
And if the battell which I had with the Prince Meridian in your kingdome of Carmania, doth cause you to suspect or haue any doubt in me. You doo well vnderstand that the occasion doth grow by the Deitie that is in him, of the immortall gods, from whom he  all his progenitors doth desend, and would not consent nor suffer, that by any humane knight he should be ouercome, so that our battell was separated, with|out any victorie of eyther of our part. The which was no small fauour and honour vnto me, that the Gods would make me equall vnto their diuine bountie. And seing that the Prince Meridian is he, who onely is pertaker of the di|uine Deitie, and no vauntage betwixt vs two, for very cer|taine  sure I may account the victorie of my part against the Grekish Knights, without thinking of any nede of help in the bataile, that I shall haue with them.
The Quene was very discrete and wise, and with hir a|morous and sweet words dyd pacifie him, in such sort, that the net dyd still remaine as she had commaunded it to be put, for a farther effect then she dyd giue Rodaran to vnder|stand. And although at that time it did cause in him great anger and griefe, yet before many daies had passed, he re|ceiued great contentment and pleasure therein, so that this was the occasion that mooued this valiant Rodaran and the Quene of Carmania to come vnto the Court of the Empe|rour Trebatio, and the occasion of this their demaund.


How the Prince Rodamarte went vnto the bridge of Iaspe, for to combat with the valiaunt Rodaran. Chapter 39.
_WIth great care and small rest the alyaunt Prince Rodamarte did passe away the night, thincking long till the morning was come, for to depart vnto the bridge of Iaspe, for to combat with Rodaran, for that the day be|fore

he liked him very well,  semed to be a knight of great valour. Yet for all that, he was of so valiant a courage, that he had no feare of his might  big proportion, but very ear|ly in the morning before that the sun had couered the earth, he was armed, with very strong armour,  his horse trym|med  dressed very richly with cloth of gold, which did signi|fie vnto all people his high estate. So in this sort he went foorth of Constantinople, with but onely one page, which did carry his speare  his sheld. And hauing his minde occupi|ed on the loue of the princesse Analiria, he trauailed so much that the next day he came vnto the bridge of the Iaspe: But Rodaran  the quene with great quietnesse,  contentment, did abide the comming of the grekish knights. So when Ro|damarte came vnto the gate of the first tower, he found that it was fast shut,  he commanded his page to call there at, who with the ring that hong at the gate, he gaue great and mighty blowes,  straight way apeared one of the kepers out of a window, somewhat high,  perceiuing that it was a Knight of the emperour Trebatio, he willed him to tarrye a while  the gate should be opened vnto him. The keper straight way went  told his Lord Rodaran, who inconti|nently did arme himselfe with his strong  rich armour, and requested the Quene that she would with hir owne hands help him,  said. Ldy now shal you  the difference that is betwixt the greekish Knights,  your , and how euill shalbe accomplished the prouises of that king of Gedrosia. So when that all things was in very ood order, he comma~|ded that the gate of the first tower shuld be open, so that y^e Prince Rodamarte did enter in there at, and comming on the Bridge in the space that was betwixt the first Bridge and the second, which was as long, as y^e corse of a good horse might indure. There he found Rodaran, mounted on Horse backe, with his speare in his hand, who was so bigge and of so great stature, that he lacked but little, to be as bigge as a giant. And at the farther end of the great space that was





from the first tower vnto the middle tower, vnder the vaut therof, was the queene, Carmania, sitting in a chaire of estate, with cushions  pillowes of cloth of gold very richly,  curi|ously wrought with silk. So when the prince came vnto the place wheras Rodaran was, he did salute him very curteously  said. Thou shalt vnderstand Rodaran, that I am a knight of the Emperour Trebatio, one of them that thou didst dis|ceiue openly in the great hall of his Court. And for the loue of a faire Lady whom I doe serue, I am come hether, for to chastise the, for thy great folly, which thou spakest beefore the most fairest damsels,  most valiantest knights in all the world. Therfore turne thy horse for to Iust with me, or els turne  deny all that thou spakest ther. With great laugh|ter  disdaine Rodaran answered vnto the prince Rodamarte  said, of a truth knight, if that my Lady the quene of Car|mania, were not before me  in presence, possible it were bet|ter for me to deny that which I haue spoken, then to iust w^t you, for that you doe seeme to be a gentill  valiant knight. But for so much as she is present, I know not how to ex|cuse my selfe, but first consent to loose my life. then to com|mit any such offence. Therfore as reason doth require, seing that you do know who I am, let me likewise know by whom I shall be ouercome. I am said he Rodamarte, prince of Cy|pres,  vassayle vnto the emperour Trebatio: Therfore leaue of these thy words,  let vs come to the effect of dedes, y^t thou maist beleue of certainty, that which thou hast now spoken in mockage  gesting. Unto the immortall gods I doe giue great thanks, said Rodaran, for that so far as I can perceiue by your gentil semblance, that you do seme to be a knight of great estimation, if my iudgement doe not disceiue me. And therewith all these two valiant knights did depart the one from the other, Rodamarte toward the foote of the bridge whereas he entred in,  Rodaran toward the place whereas the quene was. And when he came nigh vnto hir, with great pride he saide: Lady, I pray you to giue very good enter|tainment

vnto this prisoner, for that he is the prince of cy|presse. And therewith all the one moued against the other with so great fury, that it semed the bridge did shake vnder them. And in the midst of their swift course, these two made their encounter, in such sort, that their saues were sheuered in peces,  they passed forwardes on without any mouing by the force thereof, till such time as they iustled together with their bodies horse  man. And by reason that the valy|ant Rodaran was bigger of body  of more force  strength, he stroke the prince in such sort, that he ouerthrew him horse  all to the ground, so cleane void of all memory, as though he had stroke against a mighty rocke,  he broching his horse with the spurs, passed ouer the Prince, who was so euill in|treated, that he could not arise, till such time as Rodaran re|turned with his horse,  alighted from him,  toke his sword from his girdell,  his healme of his head,  did help to raise him from the ground. And when he was come vnto himselfe, he toke him by the hand and lead him to the Quene Car|mania, who when she knew who he was, she receiued him very well,  said: Gentle knight what doe you thinke of my Lord Rodaran be all the other Knights of Grecia like vnto him. Lady and Quene, answered Rodamarte, if this conten|tion doth long endure, the knights of Grecia, will seme vn|to you to be other maner of knights then Rodaran.
Well said she, for that you shall se how much you are de|ceiued, here you shall remaine with vs till such time as the best knights of the Emperours court be brought hether to beare you co~pany. Then Rodaran did cause him to be vnar|med,  to be put at his foot a great chaine,  commanded him to be put into a depe and darke dungeon, whereas he was certaine daies, with more sorrow  griefe to loose the victo|ry in that demand, then to be ouercome as he was. Then his page which came with him, departed from thence, and retur|ned vnto Constantinople, with a sorrowfull hart.
And one day at such time as the Emperour with his sons, and all the knights, in the court were in great pastimes and pleasures, sporting themselues, with dauncing in companie with the Empresse  hir Ladies  gentlewomen,  the prin|ces Lindabrides,  Claridiana with them. The page entred in|to the court with so great sorow  griefe, that he was scarce able to speake, for to tell the heauy newes of the prince Ro|damarte, yet as well as he could he gaue them to vnderstand of all that he had passed with Rodaran, at the which they did all meruaile very much for that Rodamarte was had in re|putation for one of the best knights that was in all the em|pire of Greece,  the emperour receiued great griefe that it fell so out, that by one alone knight he should be ouercome. Then straight way that valiant  estemed prince Rodafeo, who was the second by lot to go forth, without speaking any word departed out of the great hall, the emperour seing his determination did commend him vnto god,  so did the rest that were ther present, but especially his lady the princesse, who when she saw him depart, hir hart was ready to part a sunder. When this valiant prince came vnto his lodging, he armed himselfe with very strong  rich armour,  com|manded his horse to be trapped with cloth of gold, which did signifie vnto all men his   high estate, and so departed out of Constantinople with one alone squier,  when he came vnto the bridge, the like happened vnto him by Rodaran, as happened vnto Rodamarte, and was put prisoner with him in the same dungion, whereas they receyued so great sorrow and griefe to be in such a demaund ouercome, that rather they desired to dye then to liue. So when the valtaunt Rodaran saw that he had two prisoners, and both prin|ces o so great valour and estimation, he was so proude and high minded that it was strange, and beeleued of a certaintie that those two were the best knightes that were in all the Emperours Court, and was as pleasaunt and idyfull with the quene, as though he had ouercome the~ all.

And was very sorrowfull because that this victory did not passe in the great citie of Constantinople, thinking that ther, better then in any other place, he might reioyce himselfe of his great pride  vain glory,  did very much reprehend the queene for that ther was so much time lost in Carmania, in making that yron net for that they had no nede therof. The Quene seing that he had great reason so to say, helde hir peace,  answered nothing ther vnto. When the prince Roda|feo was ouercome  prisoner, his squier returned backe a|gaine vnto Constantinople, and watching the time that the Emperour  all his Knights were together, he entered into the court,  declared all that which happened vnto the prince, at the which they were greatly amazed,  from that day for|wards they had the valiant Rodaran in much more estima|tion, seing that he had ouercome two of the best knights that the Emperour had,  although at that present the emperour receiued for them great sorow  griefe, suspecting that these two princes should be ill intreated in the power of Roda|ran, yet because he was fully certified that ther remained be|hinde such knights for to combat with him, that very shortly would not ouely set them at liberty, but also bring Rodaran prisoner vnto him. So for that the third lot did fall vnto the mighty  valiant prince Brandizel, to take this enterprise  demaund, straight way as soone as the squier of Rodafeo had told the newes of his Lords imprisonment, he arose vp from the place wheras he was set nigh vnto the knight of the Sun and put himselfe before the Emperour,  asked lisence for to goe and combat with Rodaran, who did graunt it vnto him, and said.
I am very sorrowfull (mightye and valiaunt Prince) that you were not the first that went in this demaund, for if you had, I doe beleue of a certaintie, that Rodaran should not haue had any occasion to boast himselfe of the victorye of any knights of my Court. And therewith the Prince doing his duety vnto the Emperour, departed out of the

great hall,  went vnto his lodging for to arme himselfe  the knight of the Sun said vnto the emperour. This may your highnesse with great reason speake vnto the prince Brandi|zel, for y^t in the great wars of Persia, I haue the best knights that were in all Asia, ag~ainst the bablonians,  I could not se one that in armes  prowesse could match with him. And againe, if by the diuine prouidence ther had not ben remedy put in the acknowledging the one the other, his high  migh|ty bounty had bene to me full dere, in a battaile which we had at the sea, without knowing one another, the which bat|taile endured betwixt vs more then sixe houres. So ther the knight of y^e Sun did declare vnto the emperour all that hap|ned betwene them two,  what he had seene him doe against his knights at the sea. Likewise some part of his valiantnes the Prince Claueryndo had told him of, and done in his pre|sence  company. At the which all those that were ther pre|sent meruayled very much. And the Emperour answered, his precious  gentle proportion doth cause me to beleue much more then he is able to doe. And with this they all de|parted, abiding the newes of all that shall passe with this valiant prince.


 How the Prince Brandizell went to combat with Ro|daran, and of the strong and rigorous battaile hee had with him. Cap. 40.
_AFter that the valiant Prince of Persia was armed with very rich  glistering armour, and mounted ou a mightie courser, which did shew forth his great magnifisence, and conformable vnto his estate, with one alone Squier, for to carry his speare and healme, he departed out of the great citie of Constantinople, and

tooke his way towardes the bridge of Iaspe, not without great griefe and sorrow in finding himselfe absent from the presence of that faire Clarinea, although he receiued great comfort in being in company with the knight of the Sun. And with the great desire that he had for to bring Rodaran pri|soner vnto the Emperour, hee trauailed so much that in a short time he came vnto the bridge of Iaspe. At which time Rodaran  the queene Carmania were both sitting in a win|dowe of the tower of the same bridge,  saw him comming. Who semed vnto him to be a Knight of great bounty  esti|mation, by the big  mighty proportion of his body. At whose sight Rodaran did arme himselfe,  being mounted vpon his courser, the quene commanded that the gates should be ope|ned vnto the prince, who entred in therat, but in any wise they would not suffer his squier to enter in with him,  be|ing entred into the first tower, the gates were shut very fast at the commandement of the Quene, so that his squier re|mained without. And when he came vnto the place whereas Rodaran was armed  mounted vpon his horse, the prince sa|luted him  made reuerence vnto the quene like a curteous knight as he was. Unto whom Rodaran with far more pride than crtsiee, returned his saluation, and said.
Sir Knight, if thy dedes be conformable vnto the presence of thy person, then hath the Emperour Trebatio done verse well to let the be one of the first to come  combat with me, for that by ouercomming the, this contention shall straight way cease, for that I am perswaded ther shall not remaine a knight in all his court that shall be able to resist my de|maund. But yet I doe desire, that first before thou dost enter into battaile with me, that thou wilt tell me who thou art, for that I doe very much muse  meruaile within my selfe, that in this country I should finde a knight, being natural|ly borne therin, so mighty of person,  of good  gentle dispo|sition as thou art. Unto whom this valiaunt  couragious prince w^t great ekenesse did answere him in this maner.
Not in the mightinesse of personages, neither in the abun|dance of words, doth consist the bounty  force of knightes, but in the great vertue  valiantnesse of a couragious hart. And here I say vnto the (although I am more bigger of personage then any other that doth remaine in the court of the emperour) yet after such time as I am by the ouercome, the Emperour Trebatio hath such knightes remaining with him, that the victory of them shall seme vnto the very doubt|full, although at this present thou art very certaine to ouer|come me. And in that thou dost aske of me who I am, here I giue the to vnderstand that I am a Knight of the empe|rour Trebatios,  a very friend vnto he knight of the Sunne, the which is a thing at this present that I haue in great e|stimation. And in saying these words the prince did turne a|bout his furious horse, and Rodaran did like, who when he saw the Quene, whereas she sat in hir accustomed place at the second tower, with hir face very pale and wan, halfe dis|mayed, for that the prince did seeme vnto hir to be a valiant knight, he said vnto hir.
Lady, pacifie your selfe,  you shall se that at this encoun|ter with my speare, I will cause you to forget the feare which you haue of this monster. And therewith these two valiaunt Knights with the great fury of theyr Horses, and with their great and long speares in their handes, in the middest of their swift course they made their terrible en|counter, in such sort, that vpon their shields their mightye Speares were sheuered all to peces,  neither of them at that terrible encounter made any semblaunce of mouing in their saddles, and at such time as they did ioyne  mete together with all the force of their bodies, it was with so great force and strength, that neither of them could proced forwards, but that Horse  man came all vnto the ground, and made so great a noise with rushing of the harneyes together (by reason that it was with so great strength) that it semed as though a great pece of ordinace had shot off. At which time the Squyer of the Prince Brandizel, who re|mayned

without the gates, dyd not let to pray vnto his Gods for the victorie of his Lord, after that he heard the noise of that terrible encounter, which made him verie much to meruaile, but much more did Rodaran meruayle, at a thing which semed vnto him very straunge, to se him|selfe ouerthrowen to the ground by the encounter of one alone knight, whereas before he thought that there was not one Knight in all the world that was able to doo it vn|to him. Likewise he was greatly ashamed to see himselfe vnhorsed before the presence of his Lady  Quene, which caused to increase in him great anger and furie, for to re|uenge himselfe of that iniurie, and drew out his Swoord the which was very great and broade, and went agaynst the Prince, who was not a little amazed to se him come a|gainst him with so great furie and force, and seing his de|termination, did likewise draw out his Swoord and met him, and both of them stroke together with so great furie and force, that at the first blowes theyr shelds were cut a|sunder, and theyr swoords descended vpon theyr Healmes with so great strength, that it made both of them to decline theyr heads downe vnto theyr breasts, and made each other of them fele and acknowledge the force and strength of his aduersarie, and from that time these two warriors dyd strike such mightie and furious blowes the one vpon the other, with so great strength, that it was wonderfull to beholde, alwaies procuring where to strike his aduersa|rie, for to doo him most harme, and although theyr armour were of so straunge and excellent mixture, that there was neuer force nor strength of man, neyther any Swoord so fine, that could cut or perish them, which was the occasion that it did saue them from wounding one another, yet for all that, they dyd strike their blowes so thicke, and in such great hast, that at such time as they dyd fasten a right and sure blow, they did greatlie bruse one anothers flesh and bones, so that either of them dyd procure the best he could to defend himselfe from the terrible blowes of his enimie.
At this time was passed a good houre, from the time that

they first began their battaile, at which time Rodaran se|ing, that although he dyd his best in executing his furie, that there was no vauntage to be sene of neither of theyr parts, he was verie much amazed at the great force and strength of his aduersarie, and began somwhat to acknow|ledge the great reason that the olde King of Gedrosia had, in praysing and extolling the high and mightie dedes of the Knights of Greece: moreouer, he sayde vnto himselfe, that that knight alone was sufficient for to destroy halfe the armie of the Emperour Alycandro, and by reason that his pride was very great, and he himselfe of a valyaunt and stout courage, although the victorie should be very late, yet hee supposed that the fury of the Prince Brandizel could not endure long against him, and being fullie perswaded in his thought, he made so great hast in striking of the Prince, that he made him very much to meruaile at his stout and valyant courage, because it troubled him very much, and brought him into that perplexitie, that he was driuen to besturre himselfe from the one side of the Bridge vnto the other, for to cleere himselfe from some of his great blowes, which to the contrarie he should haue receiued, and made him to vse more lightnesse then the bigge proportion of his body could well indure, and for that their sheelds were all cut and broken in peces, in such sort that there was no de|fence in them, the whole state of the battaile was in the great and mightie force in striking on another, executting their blowes with theyr swoords in both theyr hands, in such furious sort, that the one had great feare of the other, their bones and flesh were all brused with the mightie force of their blowes, and their bodies so wearied, that if it were not for the great valour of theyr hearts and courage, and againe the losse of victorie so shamefull and reprobrious, ther was neither of them, but with a very good will would haue throwen himselfe along vppon the ground to haue taken some rest, but by reason that they were so valyaunt Knights, and very few in all the whole world that were

able to haue any vauntage of them, would not shew one a nother the great necessitie in the which they wer brought, Rodaran for that he was in the presence of the quene, who was very sad and heauie in hir semblance, and no lesse mer|uailed to se the cruell battayle that was betwene them. Likewise the Prince Brandizel, with the remembraunce of the faire princesse Clarinea, and of the Emperour Trebatio, and all the rest of the knights of his court, he thought it bet|ter to die ther a thousand deaths, then to returne back vn|to the court, and loose the victory, at which thoughts they re|couered so great courage,  gathered so great strength from theyr valiant harts, that eyther of them looked as well for death as victorie. At which time there had passed more then thre houres from the beginning of their battell all which time they neuer rested themselues, nor ceased not to oppresse the one the other all that in them was possible. Which was the occasion that the mightie and couragious stomacke of that valiaunt Rodaran was not sufficient, neyther the pre|sence of the quene of Carmania, but that his great pride did abate (which before was neuer brought in subiection) and of pure necessitie and force, by reason of his great weari|nesse, withdrew himselfe on the one side, and with the great griefe thereof he began to speake vnto the prince and said. Knight hold thy hands, and let vs rest our selues a while, for that there doth continue time inough to finish our battell.
Likewise the Prince Brandizel at that time was brought into so great necessitie of rest, that without answering him any word, he did likewise withdraw himselfe,  leaned vpon the pmell of his sword for to take some ease, and immagi|ned vpon the great strength and courage of Rodaran. And it semed vnto him that in all his life time he neuer com|batted with any knight or giant that euer dyd charge him with so great and terrible blows, neither that euer did en|dure so long battayle with him without taking some rest, but onely that most worthie and valyaunt Knight of the Sunne. And he thought verily within himselfe, that if the

force of Rodaran did long endure, it could not be otherwise but that he should be ouercome and loose the victory, and yet considering what a great shamd and rebuke it would be vnto him to come before the Emperour Trebatio, and the rest of his great friends, the Knight of the Sunne and the Prince Clauerindo, he did fully determine with himselfe to loose his life fiting on foote, and not to be ouerthrowen from his Horse to the ground, and to loose the victorie. At this present time likewise Rodaran was leaning vppon his swoord to breath himselfe, and called vnto his remembrance the words that the olde king of Gedrosia had sayde vnto him, and semed that they would proue to bee true, and did verie much commend his great wisdome and knowledge, and dyd reprehend his owne gpeat pride, and would with a very good will haue giuen the greatest part of his estate, vpon co~dition that he had not put himselfe in this demaund, and contention, because he found himselfe to be so wearie, and that in so long time they had battaile and combat toge|ther, there was no vantage to be iudged on either part, he thought of a certaintie that it could not be otherwise, ibut he must be ouercome and loose the victory. And as he was beholding of the Prince, and very much meruailing at his great force and bountie, it semed vnto him that according vnto the mightinesse of his person and the richnesse of his armour, that he should be some Knight of high estate. So after a while that he had well breathed and refreshed him|selfe he saide.
Wherefore haue not we great care ouer our selues, and wish that we had not knowen one another, for that accor|ding vnto that which hath passed betwixt vs in this first battell, and againe, that which we doo looke for in the second battell, cannot be, but that eyther of vs will sooner consent to die, then to be ouer come and loose the victory. Therefore I doo desire the by the vertue of that thing that in all the world thou doost best loue, that thou doost tell me who thou art, for that according vnto thy mightie stature and great bountie, I cannot beleue that thou  ee a Knight

of the Empire of Greece.
Here the Prince Brandizel could not by any meanes let, but certifie him of his demaund, hauing coniured him in that sort, and therefore sayde.
Rodaran, because thou hast so great desire to know who I am, I will giue the to vnderstand, although it dooth grieue me very much to tell the. Thou shalt vnderstand that I am Brandizel, prince and right heire vnto the whole, Countrie of Persia, and sonne vnto the king Florion, and of the Quene Balisea. Great thanckes doe I giue vnto the high and immortall Gods, for that I was fully certified within my selfe, that so valyant a knight as thou art could not be borne in this Countrie, therefore here once againe I doo desire the that thou wilt tell me the occasion that so mightie a Prince as thou art, and beeing a Pagan, that thou dooest abide and recreate thy selfe in straunge Coun|tries, and to shew thy selfe so great a friend vnto Christi|ans: Tell me I pray the, if thou hast receiued their lawes, and customes, and left the law of the Pagans? Thou doost demaund of me great account, sayd the Prince, but for that thou shalt not beleue all that which thou hast saide, I will bee briefe  giue the to vnderstand in few words. I doo be|leue that thou doost know, or at the least wayes hast heard, of the great battailes and contentions that passed be|twixt my Father the King Florion, and the mightie Africa|no, who had vsurped and taken away my Fathers king|dome. I haue heard the same (said Rodaran) and I was cal|led vnto the sayd warres, and for that I did se that Afri|cano had neither reason nor iustice, I dyd refuse the iour|ney, and would not goe with him. Then the Prince sayde, you shall vnderstand that in these warres my Father got the victorie, and recouered all his lands the which he had lost, but especially by the great force, strength, and bountie of the valyaunt Knight of the Sunne, and Sonne vnto the Emperour Trebatio, who at this present remayneth in his Court, and by the prowesse of the Prince Clauerindo, sonne vnto the king Oristeo of Fraunce, both the which being ve|rie

young were lost, and both found at the Sea by the king my father, who carried them with him, whereas they two and I were brought vp all thre together, and from that time there dyd grow so great loue and friendship betwixt vs, which was the occasion, ioyntly with the dutie which I owe vnto them, that I am come in theyr company into this Countrie,  cannot certifie my selfe, neither am I at quyet but when I am with them, and in their companie and con|uersation. This is the occasion wherefore I am come into this countrie, because you are so desirous to know,  here I meane to remaine so long as these princes abide in y^e Em|perours Court. Oh Prince Brandizel, saide Rodaran, now I plainely se and perceiue how that the high Gods are ve|ry angrie with the Pagan people, and will plague and pu|nish vs by the hands and power of the Christians, for that we haue now at this present, more then at any time here|tofore so great confidence in them. Oh Prince of Persia, if the losse and destruction of thy naturall Countrie doo cause in the any sorrow, or the destruction of the Pagan people doo cause any griefe, then would thy hart lament, and cause the to leaue off this great friendship which thou hast with the Christians, and take vpon the mortall warre against them, for here I doo giue the to vnderstand before the great Cane, king of the Cambalos, and Emperour of Tar|taria, and before all Kings and Lords, his subiects and vas|sals, the King Gedrosia, who is one of the wisest in deuina|tion and Astrologie, that is to be found in all the world, to whom at that present I gaue but small credit, hee dyd de|clare and pronounce that in our dayes and times should be stayne and destroyed the most part of all the Pagan peo|ple in the fields of Greece, by the mightie force and power of the Knights that be therein, and that there the greatest and mightiest Kings in all Asia shall loose theyr gouernment  estates. Unto whose words I made no contradiction, for that it semed vnto me to be a thing impossible. And moreouer he said, that in the Empire of Greece there were such Knights, that if meanes were not found by one way

or other to disturbe them, that they alone were sufficient to accomplish and bring to passe all this which I haue sayd. And for this occasion I departed out of my Kingdome and Countrie, and dyd promise the Emperour Alycandro ne|uer to retourne againe vnto the same, till such time as I came vnto the Empire of Greece, and there with my pow|er and force to take prisoners the best Knights that be in all the Empire, and to carrie them away with me vnto the Emperour Alycandro,  now seing that you doo know my determination and purpose, and the great profit that will grow thereof vnto all Asia, I doo desire thee by the seruice and dutie which thou dost owe vnto the high Gods, that leauing the great friendship which thou hast with the Christians, let vs two procure to take and carrie them pri|soners into our Countrie, that by them we may raunsome and set our selues at libertie from the great destruction which is prognosticated to be done vnto vs by them, which by no meanes can be excused, except first we doo this which I haue tolde the. Then the Prince Brandizel answered and saide. Let the Pagans remaine in their Countrie, and let the Christians alone in theyrs, for that this remedie which thou hast taken in hand Rodaran, will verie little profit to excuse the harme which thou hast spoken of, be|ing a thing determined by the high powers. And here I dooe giue the to vnderstand that there doth remaine many Knights in the Citie of Constantinople, and such, as ten such knights as thou art be not sufficient to take one of them, and to bring him vnto prison. And here I doo ad|vise the to take good hede and beware of the furie of the Knight of the Sunne, before whom there is no humane reature able to make any resistance. And in that thou oost request me to leaue of theyr friendship, and to be|ome theyr enimie, speake no more thereof vnto me, for I oo more esteme their friendship and loue, and to be friend nto the sonnes of the Emperour Trebatio, and his friends, hen to be a Prince, yea more then to be Lord ouer all A|ia. And if thou wilt leaue off this demaund which thou

bringest with the, and goe vnto the Court of the Empe|rour Trebatio, and become a brother in our friendship, there shall be done vnto thee the honour that to such a knight be|longeth, and if not, let vs returne againe vnto our battell, and he which of vs two shall be ouercome, let him doo all that the other who winneth the victorie shall commaund, and so shall be excused all the requestes that are betwixt vs two.
Here Rodaran was very sorrowfull, because he found so small comfort of the Prince in this his determination, and beleuing that onely in the ouercomming of that knight dyd consist the accomplishing of his aduenture, and that it might so fall out, by the victorie of him to end his demaund, for that which the Prince had tould he could not beleeue, neyther giue credite that those knights which dyd remayne behinde in the court, should be such as he dyd report them to be, but with the great anger which his words did cause in him, with a couragious stomacke he tooke his swoord in both his hands, and went against the Prince, and stroke him such a right downe blow vppon his fine and precyou healme, that with the noyse and force thereof it thundered in his eares, and so dazeled his eyes, that he was constray|ned to fall with his hands vpon the ground, not in such sort that he lost his remembrance, neither did his couragious hart fayle him, but was set in such a heate, with the anger of that mightie blow, that with great lightnesse he arose vp againe, and with his sword in both his hands he stroke so terrible a blow, being ouerthwart vpon the strong helme of Rodaran, that he made him to fall on the other side with the force of all his body vppon the wall of the Bridge, the which did sustaine him, that he fell not to the ground, ney|ther into the riuer, although whereas he receiued the blow with the sworde, it dyd grieue him in such sort, that he thought verily the eare and the iaw on that side had bene broken all to peces. Lykewise the blow which he recey|ued vppon the wall dyd grieue him very much, that if it had not bene by the great fury that he receiued, which dyd

sustaine him, he could not haue kept him vpright on his fet, but his anger  fury was such, that as one that had not re|ceiued any hurt nor harme, with great lightnesse returned vpon the prince,  began to strike at him such terrible  thick blowes, as though the battaile wer but then new begun. At the which the prince was very much amazed,  did force him selfe all that euer he could, to strike at Rodaran, the migh|tiest blowes that it was possible for him to giue, in such sort that the battaile was at that time in the greatest fury that euer it was. And the noise of their terrible  thicke blowes vpon their fine helmes, was so great, that the towers  gates of the bridge did seme to tremble. Then the squier of the prince who was without, was very much amazed that the battayle did so long endure, fearing that Rodaran dyd not make the battaile with the prince alone, for that it did so long indure, which caused him to goe from one place vnto an other, procuring wher he might be to se what passed betwixt them, to certifie the truth therof. And as he went alongst the waters side, he went so far that he might discouer the space of the bridge that was betwixt the two towers,  although the walls or battilments of the bridge were somwhat high, yet for that the knights were both very bigge of theyr per|sons, that he might from their brestes vpwardes discerne them, so that part of their battaile he might perceiue. And when this squier did se that they were alone, and the great heate and fury of their battaile, which seemed at that time to be but new begun, he was greatly astoned and as one halfe amazed, and could not perswade with himselfe, that in two knightes could be comprehended so great force and strength. So these two knightes continued in the second battaile more then one hower, and no vauntage could be knowne betwene them, although both of them, had done to the vttermost that was in their power, force  strength. And for that they were both of them of very bigge bodies, and the trauaile great which they had passed, and the ter|rible and mighty blowes by the one and the other receued,

did so much torment them, that they were brought vnto the estate, that their strengthes did faile them, in such sort that eyther of them was at that estate, and thought verely to be ouercome.
So when that Rodaran, saw that his contention did little profit him,  could not help himselfe in the battaile, he then called to remembrance, that which the quene Carmania, had aduised him off,  was, that in that place wheras she was, he should finde ease, at such time as hee found himselfe in the greatest necessitie in the battaile, which caused him little  litle to retire backwards towardes the place whereas shee was, giuing  receiuing blowes, as the time did serue.
The Prince Brandizel, likewise at that time was in that perplexitie that he was ready to yeelde himselfe for to be o|uercome, but when he saw that Rodaran, did begin to retire, with the great ioy  pleasure which he receiued to see him so vpon a sodaine to fainte, that he began a new to recouer his force  strength,  followed him, striking at him with all the might he could, but his faintnesse and warinesse was so great, that he could scarce life one leg after an other for to follow him: the which when Rodaran did perceiue, he would with a very good will haue returned to haue made resistance for that it seemed vnto him that in a small time he should ouercome him, for that the prince was so weary and feble, But when he would haue forced himselfe thervnto, he fea|red that he was wholy depriued of his strength,  his armes so sore with wearinesse, that he was constrained still to re|tire backwardes, till such time as he himselfe  the prince, were wholy vnder the uaut or arch of the second tower of the bridge, wheras the queene Carmania, nigh vnto the same, sate in hir estate. Who when she saw that these two knights were so weary that almost they could not stand vpon theyr feete.
She pulled a corde of Silke which hanged by hir,  came downe from the height of the arch, which caused that arti|ficiall

net of yron to fall down vpon both those knights, in such sort, that their heades were fast in the net,  their legs and armes so fast bound with all their body, and with so great strength, that they were not able to turne them selues on the one side nor on the other, but were taken prisoners in such sort, that if they were not made loose by other, it were a thing impossible to be loosed.
So when this was done, the quene arose vp from the place wheras she sat,  commanded a great chaine to be brought,  the helme of the prince to be taken off,  the chaine to be put about his neck, likewise they made his hands fast with ma|nakils, that he was not able to moue nor to doe any thing.
Then she commanded a gentlewoman that a key should be brought, wherewith she did open a lock that the not was made fast with all,  cleered out of the net, both the prince  Rodaran. They being out, the cord was pulled,  the net car|ried vp againe into the place whereas it was before. But when this valiant prince Brandizel, saw himselfe betraied  prisoner, he thought verily to haue burst with anger:  with great yre  wrath he said vnto Rodaran. Oh false  traite|rous knight, what reason hath moued the being a knight of so great power  strength in armes,  of so high estate, for to commit so great treason, against one alone knight, ma|king battaile against the, his body against thine.
Tell mee traitour, how canst thou consent to be called knight, when thou dost vse so great villanie vnto the noble order of Knighthood.
How canst thou praise and extoll thy selfe, in the great Asia, to haue ouercome and gotten the victory ouer knights of Grecia, when that with so great falsehood  treason thou hast apprehended them.
Rodaran, was verye much amazed at this which the Quene had done, and at the great subtilnesse of the arte where with she did assure him of this victory against those Grecian Knightes, And for that before this time, he dyd not

know the secret of hir polesie,  making himselfe very igno|rant therof, he answered  said. Thou hast no reason, prince of Persia, to call me traitour, for that in all my life time I haue not committed any treason. And here I doe sweare vnto the by the high god, that I was as ignorant of this which the quene hath done, as thy selfe. And retiring back|wards towards hir, was, for that I being weary in the bat|taile  very faint, I thought by the sight of hir to recoyer some force and strength, for that the loue which I doe bear vnto hir, is very much. Well said the Prince, seing it is so that thou art without fault, do so much that my helme may be brought vnto me again,  that this chaine may be taken a|way,  let vs returne againe vnto our battaile. I will not consent ther vnto said the quene, for that thou art my pri|soner. And Rodaran, shall not giue vnto this liberty. Then lady said the prince, giue it you vnto me, for no longer time, then to make an end of our battaile:  that being finished, I doe promise you by the faith of a knight, to returne againe vnto your person. For vnto such a lady as you are, what so euer knight he be, wil thinke well to be your prisoner.
Truely I doe like as ill of this as of the other, sayde the Quene of Carmania, for that at such time as the battayle shalbe finished betwene the  Rodaran, thou shalt remaine in such pitifull case, that I shall receiue no profit of thy im|prisonment. Therfore goe your wayes at this time  beare company with the other Knights of the emperour Trebatio, and giue them some comfort, for that they are very sad and sorrowfull, to finde themselues prisoners: and very shortlie we will send others for to comfort the also. And take this of a certainty, that we will not carry you from hence till such time as we haue all the best Knights that the Empe|rour Trebatio hath here prisoners, to beare you company.
And forth with they carried the prince away from thence who was so angry and furious, that it semed that he felt no

wearynesse of the battaile past, but rather if all the world were his, he would giue it, vpon condition that he had on his healme,  his sword in his hand, for to take reuengement of this treason vpon Rodaran. So they tooke him  put him in to a deepe dungion next the water, which was in the second tower wheras the other two knights Rodamarte  Rodaseo were, who were greatly amazed when they saw the prince Brandizel to be brought in that order, thinking that hee had ben ouercome by Rodaran, but the prince who knew them ve|ry well, with the great sorrow and griefe that he receiued when he saw them, he gaue them to vnderstand of all that which had happened betwixt him  Rodaran,  of the great treason which the Queene had ordained, wherby they were fully perswaded that all the rest of the knights which remai|ned in the court of the emperour Trebatio, would be brought thether prisoners, if they had not some aduertisment giuen them therof. With this thought (which grieued them not a lile) these thre good knights did passe away the time, tarry| to se what fortune would dispose of them. And straight waies after that the Quene Carmania vnderstood who the prince was, she sent a damsell of hirs vnto him who did vn|arme him,  caused him to be laid in a bed which was brought thether, whereas he was cured with very good  comforta|ble ointments, of those great blows which he receiued, wher with all his body was full  his flesh all to brused, whereby was giuen to vnderstand the great contention that was be|twixt him  Rodaran. The squier of the Prince who remai|ned without, receiued great contentment when he saw Ro|daran retire backwards, ready to yeld the victory,  hauing lost the sight of both these two Knights, when they entred in vnder the second tower, he remained ther to vndersta~d what the end would be, till such time as he saw Rodaran re|turne with his sword in his hand, who commaunded the gates of the first tower to be opened, and being very much amazed because he could not se his Lord, he ran vnto the

gate,  meting with Rodaran with a heauie chere, he asked what was become of his Lord? To whom Rodaran said, he is ouercome  hath lost the victory,  doth remaine prisoner, therfore doe thou returne vnto the emperour,  bid him send other knights,  such as can better defend themselues then those which he hath sent hetherto, for that these doe remaine my prisoners. The squier durst not giue him any answere, but departed from thence very sorrowfull,  with great we|ping, he returned vnto Constantinople,  at such time as the emperour was accompanied with all his princes  knights, he entred into the great hall wheras they wer,  ther he de|clared vnto them the newes, and all that had passed, with is much sorrow, that he was scarce able to tell it vnto them. When the Emperour and all that were there present had heard  vnderstood the words of the squier, they were very much amazed that such a knight as the Prince was should be ouercome by Rodaran, but amongst them all the knight of the Sun  the Prince Clauerindo were amazed most, for they knew very well his great bounty  prowesse,  could not beleeue that it should be true, for that ther was not  knight in all the world that was sufficient to abate his cou|rage  get the victory, but the sorrow  griefe which euery one of them receiued was such, that out of hand they would haue armed themselues for to goe  combat with Rodaran, but this stout  valiant king Sacridoro, who was the fourth person that did demand the enterprise, did disturbe them of their desire, and straight way arose vp from the place wher as he was set, and put himselfe before the emperour, and as|ked lisence of him, who straight waies did graunt it vnto him, saying.
Ualyant King, I pray God grant vnto you the victory a|gaynst that strong  stout pagan,  deliuer the from trea|son, for I doe beleue that y^e imprisonme~t of such knights can not be without some treason or falsehoode. So after that the king Sacridoro was departed, the knight of the Sun said,

that if ther were not some treason vsed with Rodaran, that the prince Brandizel would rather consent to die then to bee ouercome. And of this your highnesse may be well assured, said Rosicleer, that if the king Sacridoro doe not end this contention, that all we shall haue inough to doe with Ro|daran, for except it were with the Knight of the Sun my bro|ther, I neuer met with so valiant a knight. I holde him for no lesse, said the Emperour, for his presence doth performe the same,  the same which we haue heard of him. In all this life, although the imprisonment of the thre princes were some griefe vnto them, yet for all that they ceased not con|tinually to make great feasts  sports throughout all the great citie,  in the Emperours pallaice, wheras euery day the princesse Claridiana came  many other ladies  gentle|women, they had great plesure  delight in making amongst themselues so great feasts  sports, that they passed away all the time in great pleasure  pastimes, although the iealous thoughts of the princes Lindabrides wold not by any meanes suffer hir to reioyce hir selfe in any kind of pastime, but it was the occasion that she receiued the greater griefe, be|cause the princes Claridiana at all times was in presence,  hir great beautie  gentill grace would not suffer hir to as|sure hir selfe of the great loue she had vnto the knight of the Sun, who alwaies when he was in presence of these two ladies, was so troubled, that all that were ther present dyd greatlye meruaile that he was so quiet and hadde so few wordes, and the other for that he was no more wearyer, of the which the princesse Claridiana did not let but had some suspition of that which hir great beautie and desert dyd as|sure hir. And because the knight of the Sunne didde not behold hir, and cast his eye vppon hir, so often as she desi|red, she was in a great confusion and troubled within hir selfe, not knowing whether he did it or no, for that he would not haue that those which were ther present should haue any suspition of the loue that he bare vnto hir,

or whether the presence of the princes Lindabrides did cause any forgetfullnesse of his part towards hir. So because this History must more at leasure declare of their loues, it doth returne to tell you of the King Sacridoro, who were depar|ted in the demaund of Rodaran.


 How the king Sacridoro went to combat with Rodaran,  of all that happened vnto them therein. Chapter. 41.
_THe valiaunt King Sacridoro after that he was departed out of the great hall, went straight vnto his lodging, wheras hee was armed with his strong and rich armour,  mounting vpon a mighty great and light horse, accompanied with one alone page, for to cary his speare, he departed out of Constantinople,  with the great desire he had to proue himselfe with Rodaran, in a short time he came vnto the bridge,  as soone as Rodaran had discouered him from the top of one of the towers, he straight way armed himselfe with his strong  rich armour  being mounted vpon his horse, he commanded that the gates of the first tower should be opened, wherat the king Sacridoro en|tred, with his speare in his hand,  straight waies the gates were shut againe, leauing his page without, who did as the squier of Brandizel did, procure wher he might see  beholde the battaile. The king Sacridoro as soone as he was within, found Rodaran mounted vpon his horse, and very well ar|med, with his speare in his hand, whom he did salute ve|rye curteouslie. To whom Rndaran said, knight, thou art welcome, for that according vnto the semblance and good proportion, thou shouldest be one of the best esteemed knights that the emperour Trebatio hath in all his Court. There|fore I pray the tell mee who thou art, that I may vnder|stand with whom I shall make battayle, and I am sure if the emperour doe send the, it is to amend the faults of the

Prince of Persia, and it should appeare that thou art in great estimation, for to come and reuenge the Prince, who was so valyaunt, that I neuer in all my lyfe had so much trauayle to ouercome one knight. To whom the King aun|swered and sayde. Thou shalt vnderstand Rodaran that I am called Sacridoro, and am king of Antiochia, and Knight vnto the Emperour Trebatio, and a perfect friend vnto Ro|sicleer, his sonne, who otherwise is called the knight of Cu|pid, of whose valiaunt and mightie dedes I am sure thou hast heard tell. Of a truth I haue heard great talke of him (sayd Rodaran) for that in all Asia ther is not a thing more noysed and published abroade, then the great aduenture which he finished in the caue of Phenicia. And one of the chiefest occasions which hath brought me into this country is, for to proue my selfe with him, for that I cannot  of truth, that hee should bee so valiant as the fame  of him in all y^ countrie. To whom the king answered, of my faith I doo promise the, that if once thou doost prooue him, he will bring the out of this doubt, for all that thou hast heard speak in him, is nothing, in comparison of that which thou shalt finde of him, if thou doost once prooue him. Truth it is thou hast ouercome  got the victorie of such knights, that there bee few in the world like vnto them, and although I doo come hether to combat with the, I doo come more for to put my selfe out of doubt, of a mistrust that I haue, for that I cannot beeleue that thou couldest get the victory of them without some falsehood or deceite, and for to thinck that I can doo more against thee then they were able, for in all things, they were able to amend my faults. Thou shalt straight wayes se, sayde Rodaran, whether that my power and force be able to dooe more then this or no. And ther with he turned about his horse, and tooke so much scope as was sufficient for his Horse. The King did the like, so both of them with their Speares in their hands, broched their furious Horsses, who made their course with so great swiftnesse, that quickly they were together, whereas they did execute the force and strength of their furious encoun|ter,

and shieuered their Speares all to peces vppon theyr fine armour, after that they had glanced from their shelds, and with the force of their furious encounter, their horses ioyned together with their mightie bodies, that horse and man fell vpon the ground, and being fast in their saddles, the euill fortune of the king Sacridoro was such, that one of his logges doubled vnder his Horse, in such sort, that by no meanes he could pull it out, nor clere himselfe to arise againe, and Rodaran with the force of the mightie fall, was so astonyed and amazed, that voyde of remembraunce he lay along vpon the ground without moouing hand or foote, but as one that were dead. The occasion thereof was, for that he was so big membred and footed withall, that the rigorous fall was more perillous vnto him then vnto the king Sacridoro. But when the Quene Carmania saw all that had passed, she arose vp from the place wheras she sat in companie with all hir Ladies, and came whereas these two Knights were on the ground, and tooke of Rodarans healme and gaue him aire, so that hee came againe to him|selfe presently, and arose vp on his fete, and was greatlie amazed at the great strength of the king Sacridoro,  went towards him, who with very anger was readie to burst, to se himselfe in that great extremitie, and could not help himselfe. Rodaran pulled of his healme from his head, and tooke his swoord from him, and made fast a mightie great chaine vnto his legge, and put a payre of manacles vpon his hands, and so carried him prisoner whereas the other Princes were, with so great sorrow and griefe for that which had happened, that if it had not bene for the losse of his soule, he would haue slaine himselfe. And when the other Princes did know the valyaunt king Sacridoro, their sorow and paine dyd double increase. And when eyther of them had tolde him all that they had passed with Rodaran, he and all the rest were very sad and heauie, for that they did beleue of certaintie, if God did not put remedie there|in, it were not possible that there should remaine any good knight, but bee brought all to prison. So there they remay|ned

all foure together very sorrowfull, til their fortune did procure to the contrarie, but their sorrow and griefe was not so much to se themselues so in prison, as Rodaran recei|ued ioy and pleasure, for the good fortune that he had with the King Sacridoro, for that according vnto y^e great encoun|ter that he receiued of him he should haue passed great ex|tremitie, if he had ioyned with him in battaile with theyr swoords, so that at this time he made little account of the rest of the knights which remained, because hee had brought into his power these other past, who were very valiant and of great prowesse. The Page of the King Sacridoro when he saw his Lord carried to prison and his healme from his head, after hee had made that great encounter, he would tar|rie no longer, but with great sorrow returned vnto Con|stantinople, whereas he gaue the Emperour to vnderstand ud all the Knights that were there present, the heauie newes of all that had passed, which caused such an admira|tion in all them that heard it, that they knew not what to say, but that Rodaran was the most valiauntest and stron|gest knight that was in all the Pagan land. And the sor|row and griefe was so much that the Emperour receiued, that hee wold haue armed himselfe, and haue gone and proo|ued himselfe with Rodaran, but that his sonne Rosicleer, who receiued greatest griefe for the imprisonment of the king Sacridoro, and was the fifth to whom the lot dyd fall out to follow the demaund. Without any more tarrying he asked lisence of his Father, who committing him vnto God, dyd graunt it vnto him, saying.
My welbeeloued and good sonne, vse thy selfe in such sort that thou maist reuenge the iniurie done vnto thy friends. And in this thing I doo acknowledge the great benefit that God hath done vnto me, in that I doo know the and thy Brother to be my sonnes, which is the occasion that my court is so greatly honoured with so many valiant knights, and now in this time that Rodaran hath put vs into this great extremitie, which would haue fallen out very euill if we should haue lacked you.
But whereas your highnesse is, said Rosicleer, we might be well forborne, for if it were so that we were all prisoners vnto Rodaran, we should receiue great comfort, and haue our libertie very certaine, if you alone did remaine. God deliuer you from this, said the Emperour, for although ther should be no lack in my good will to receiue death to set you at liberty, yet my force  strength should want for to supplie the lack of such knights. And therwith Rosicleer dyd humble himselfe vnto the Emperour, and departed out of the great hall,  went vnto his lodging for to arme himselfe, leauing the Emperour and all the rest very ioyfull, be leeuing of a certaintie, that for his great bountie  mightie power, ther was not a Knight in all the world (setting a part his bro|ther the inuinsible Knight of the Sunne) that might be com|pared vnto him. In the which they were not deceiued, al|though it happened not so well vnto Rosicleer in the  which he had with Rodaran as they thought, as in the chap|ter following shall be declared vnto you.


Of the strong and well foughten battaile that the vali|and Rosicleer had with that stout Pagan Rodaran, and of all that happened vnto them therein. Chapter 42.
_THE valyaunt and well estemed Rosicleer departed out of the Citie of Constantinople, carryeng vpon his sheeld the deuise of Cupid, by the which hee was knowen and looked on of all people. Likewise the windowes were full of Ladies and Damsels, who prayed vn|to God for the victorie of theyr Prince, as though hee had beene their owne brother, who trauailed with so depe and profound thoughts, mixed with sorrow, which were vnto him as much care, as to se himselfe with Rodaran in bat|tell, and to bring him prisoner vnto the Emperour. In this sort did the Prince trauaile towards the Bridge of Iaspe,

and being sore troubled within his thoughts, oftentimes he had lost his way, if his page which went with him had not put him in remembrance, which was the occasion that he made the time long before he came vnto the bridge, and for that the remembraunce of Don Siluerio dyd cause vnto him great sorrow and griefe, that many times he sayd vn|to himselfe: Oh if God were so pleased, that in satisfaction of the great trauayle which the Princesse Oliuia hath cau|sed me to haue, that this knight were Don Siluerio, he that I doo now goe to seeke, and although the great fauour which he hath, is sufficient to defend him from all the world, yet the great reason which I haue to complaine my selfe, is suf|ficient that I dooe execute vpon him this my great anger  wrath. And in this thing alone the Princesse Oliuia must pardon me, for although I would rather suffer death then in any thing to cause hir to receiue anger, yet cannot I let to dooe that and much more, to giue hir vnderstanding of the small reason that she had to forget me and receiue another. And here I doo protest that if death doth not cut me off first, I will reuenge this my bloody wrath, and then perhaps she will wepe and lament hir errour. And al|thought this is not sufficient to make satisfaction vnto this my vnhappie Fortune, neyther can it giue anie remidie or ease vnto this great griefe, the which I haue for hir cause receiued, yet it shall suffice me that another shall not boast himselfe, to haue obtained and got that which I haue lost, neither any other to reioice himselfe with that which doth cause my sorrow and griefe. And although that this shall e against all reason,  that Don Siluerio doth dot deserue  at my hands, yet shall it be comfortable vnto my heart,  that it is so captiue vnto loue, it dooth consent vnto no eason.
Rosicleer in saying these words, and other lyke in ef|ect, after much trauaile he came vnto the bridge of Iaspe, ho straight waies was knowen by Rodaran, by the de|se that he had of Cupid, whose great fame and renowne  that time was spread throughout all Asia, more then

any Knight therein. When he was armed with his heauie and strong armour, he straight waies mounted vpon one of the biggest and lightest horses that he had, and the Quene being in hir royal seat of estate, commanded the gate of the first tower to be opened, wherein this valiant Rosicleer en|tered without any suspition. And when he drew nigh vn|to Rodaran, he dyd salute him and sayde. The knight of Cu|pid and sonne vnto the Emperour Trebatio is verie wel|come vnto me for that his great fame which flieth through|out all the world of his great and valiant deeds, as also the great desire which I haue to prooue his great strength with mine, more then the desire that I haue to apprehend the knights of the Emperour, hath caused me for to come he|ther into these Countries. Both the one  the other, might haue bene excused Rodaran, sayde the knight of Cupid, for that men beeing in their owne Countries are subiect vnto the blowes of Fortune, and haue nough to doo for to cleer themselues thereof, much more to come and seeke the perils and daunger in a straunge Countrie, it were much better for thee to haue friends in Greece. And if the Quene o Carmania doo beare the so great loue, as she hath published, we would rather procure thy rest and quyetnesse, and not thy troubles and trauailes, wherein thou doost so much pu thy life in aduenture. It had been better excused of thy part, saide Rodaran, the seeking of the aduenture vnder the wa|ter of the Fountaine of Phenicia, then my comming hether to seke the Knights of Grecia, but for that both Kinges, Princes, and Knights, are no more, but as the world dooth yeeld vnto them honour and promotion for theyr deserued dedes. Then it is not much that we aduenture our liues, the more to increase our honours, for that according as thou hast saide, in all places men are subiect vnto the perills and dangers of this world, and vnto the terrible blowes of for|tune when she listeth to strike vs, notwithstanding if thou doost pretend to make battayle with me, vpon the occasion which you know, choose the aduantage of the bridge to the contentment, if not, returne back againe from whence thou

commest, and make no more preaching vnto me. But the answere  the valiaunt Rosicleer made vnto him was, hee turned about his light Horse, and put downe the beauer of his helme, with his speare in his hand he went  put him selfe at the end of the bridge,  Rodaran dyd the like,  bee|ing both setled, they stroke their horsses with so great fury with theyr spurs, that they made them run like the winde, and in the middest of theyr furious course they made theyr encounter,  executed the strength of their mightie speares, in such sort, that glauncing vpon their shelds, they lighted vpon theyr fine harneis, and sheuered all to peces, and the splinters ew a great way into the field, yet these two va|liant Knights remained as firme in their saddles, as though they had made no encounter at all, and passed the one by the other without touching, and with a trise they returned a|gaine with their Horsses, and their swoords in their hands, and assaulted one another so stronglie, that the first blow that Rodaran stroke at Rosicleer, lighted vpon his Healme with so great strength, that he made him decline his head to his breast, but the first blow that Rosicleer stroke at him, was such a one, that the sheld which he lift vp for to ward the same, was cut in peeces hard by his hand, but the fine cutting Swoord of the Queene Iuha, not remayning there, did descend downe vpon his healme with so great fury and force, that hee made him decline his head downe vnto his Horse necke, who felt such great griefe with that terrible blow, that he thought verily that all his head had  in eeces, and began to say vnto himselfe: Oh high and im|mortall Gods, in whom I and all the Arabians doo beleue, et here thy diuine power defend me from this strong and aliant Knight, for if it fall out so, that I receiue many such lows as this was, it cannot be otherwise, but that needes  must here ende my dayes: Oh old King of Gedrosia, who ould haue beleeued that I shuld haue found in the Christi| knights so much strength.
Oh you immortall Gods, saue and defende the mightie

Emperour of the gran Tartaria, that he come not into this Empire of Greece, for to acknowledge  prooue the knights of the Emperour Trebatio, his Court, for that I doo assure you if you come hether, that you nor none of yours will re|turne againe vnto Arabia, for that these alone knights are sufficient to destroy you all, if that now by my power and force I doo not make resistance, and put order for to disturbe them.
And in saying these words, Rodaran with great cou|rage stroke at Rosicleer great  mightie blowes, who like|wise receiued such by the hands of his aduersarie, that if it should haue endured long, he must needes haue receiued the worst. And hauing great confidence in his mighty strength and in the bignesse of his body, determined to assault his aduersarie by proofe thereof, and therewith he threw his Swoord from him, and caught Rosicleer in his armes, and trauailed with his stre~gth all that euer he could for to hoise him out of his saddle, or to ouerthrow him to the ground, but Rosicleer who was as strong as he, dyd not refuse the wrastling, but likewise threw his Swoord from him, and caught him betwixt his strong armes, and dyd so stronglie crush him, that Rosicleer dyd well perceiue that his deter|mination dyd not fall out as he thought. So in this sort for a good space they trauayled the one to ouerthrow the other, but there was no aduauntage perceiued betwene them, neyther could the one ouerthrow his aduersarie, till in the end after gret trauayle they both together dyd force themselues so much, clasping theyr knes hard vnto theyr saddle, hauing one another in their armes, they did so much, that both theyr Horsses foundered and fell with theyr ma|sters vnto the ground, and being downe, for to arise againe they were constrained to loose themselues. who with a  were vpon their fete, and returned to their battaile againe with their swoords, for they could little profit themselues with wrastling, in the which contention they endured more then two houres, without knowing any aduauntage in ey|ther of them, although in the ende it semed vnto Rodaran

that Rosicleer, did execute his fury with so great courage  lightnesse, as when he first began the battaile,  saw plainly that whatsoeuer he could do, he should get no victory of him, but saw the perill of his destruction to be very certaine, if he should long endure his strong  terrible blowes, which was the occasion that he dissembled  shewed himselfe to be much more weary then he was,  began litle  litle to reti|er backwards, towards the place wheras the quene of Car|menia was: alwaies striking at Rosicleer, his blowes of more fury and force, who followed him, for that he should not gather any suspition of falsehood. So in this sort they did combat togther very strongly, till such time as they were both vnder the arch or vaute, hard by whereas the Queene was: who seing Rodaran, so nigh the point to be ouercome, she pulled the cord,  made the Iron net to fall downe vpon both the knights in such sort, that they were both prisoners,  so fast baund, that they could not moue themselues to the one part nor to the other. And straight waies the quene of Carmania, arose vp from the place wheras she sate,  went vnto Rosicleer,  pulled of his helme from his head,  likewise toke away his sword,  he could not defend the same,  cau|sed manakles to be put vpon his wrists,  a great chaine at his necke. And this being done, she opened the yron net, and caused it to he drawen vp, as it was before, and the Knights cleare of the same: But when Rosicleer saw this great dis|eit  treason, he was so angry  full of courage, that being as he was, if he had had his sword in his hand, he would haue rewarded Rodaran according vnto his deserts. But when he saw that ther was no remedy, with great patience  wis|dome he did ouercome the great force of his yre, paciently suffering that his peruers fortune:  with great discreation he said vnto Rodaran, I doe much meruaile what thy mea|ning and determinate purpose is, to vse such disceipt for to apprehend good and worthy knights: for that their ouer|throw cannot aduance vnto the any honour, neither their

imprisonment giue the any profit. To whom Rodaran aun|swered  said: Doe not thou think Knight of Cupid, that I haue profited my selfe in vsing of this remedy to get the pri|soner, for it hath not bene for feare or doubt that I had of the battaile, or for necessitie of helpe for to ouercome  get the victory of the: no no, but onely for that I doe se that ther doth remain a great number of good knights with whom I must combat: so that I would not detaine my self so long in the apprehending of one alone knight. For that I haue promised, in a very short time, to present vnto the mightye Emperour of Tartaria, the best knights in all Grecia, for pri|soners. Who for that you are all enemies vnto our sect and lawes, he would gladly se you all slaine. Unto which words of Rodaran, Rosicleer would not answere any thing, but suf|fered them to cary him wheras the other knights were pri|soners: who hauing heard the great noise  rumour of the battaile, they were meruailously astonied, fearing what it should be. But when they saw them bring thether Rosicleer with his helme taken of,  a great chaine at his necke, theyr sorrow  griese did increase, in such sort, that either of them would haue giuen the aduenture against ten such as Roda|ran, for to se themselues at liberty, onely for to giue him his payment for this his great treason.
But when Rosicleer, did se them, his sorrow  paine was so great, that he could not speake, but they forceing them|selues all that euer they could, did comfort him, saying: That now was the time to put away sorrow  griefe and to be thankfull vnto almighty god, for that seing that the knight of the Sun, was abrod,  at liberty, that God would not con|sent that so great treason should goe forwards, but that by the force  strength of his armes, he will put remedy, the better that we may vnderstand and know, that the great force and strength of men, neither the great and surpassing beautie  valour of knights, is not sufficient, whereas doth lacke his diuine succour.
At this time the great ioy  pleasure, which Rodaran recei|ued, was out of all measure, seing hee had got for prisoner that famous  valiant Knight of Cupid. And that ther could remaine no other knight, that was able to make any resist|ance against his great force  strength, but onely the knight of the Sun, of whom he had heard tell of his meruailous and strange deds of armes. And hoped to haue him very shortly ther prisoner, with y^e rest of the Knights, by y^e aid of this sub|till art of the queue Carmania, vnto whom he gaue great thanks for the great pollicy vsed therin. Wheras before he was very greuous and sorrowfull for the same, thinking it should not be requisit nor nedefull in any respect.
So when that the page of Rosicleer, who was within per|ceiued that the battaile was ended, he knocked very strong|ly at the gate by the ring, till such time, as he was answe|red  giuen to vnderstand, that his master was ouercome  lost the victory,  was prisoner:  how that he should depart vnto the emperour Trebatio,  tell him that he should send an other knight. The page when he heard these words, with great sorrow  heauinesse, he departed from thence,  sayde within himselfe: well, seing that Rodaran had ouercome the Knight of Cupid, so likewise he would ouercome  haue the victory of all the rest that remained. And many times he did curse  ban Rodaran,  the quene Carmania, for y^t they came vnto the court, at that time of so great feastes  triumphes, which the Emperour made, for acknowledging of his sons: and therby to cause vnto them so great sorrow  griefe. So when he came vnto Constantinople, he awayted such time as the Emperour was at dinner, accompanied with all his best knights: at which time he entred into the great hal, wher as they were,  began to declare vnto them (shedding so ma|ny teares, that almost he could not speake) how that Rosi|cleer remayned prisoner,  of all that passed with Rodaran, sauing in what sort he was taken prisoner: for that in the place wheras he stoode for to se the battaile he could not se

any part of the second tower, so that he could say nothing therein.
But when the emperour  all the rest of the knights heard those heauy newes, they were so greatly amazed, that they were almost out of their wittes, not knowing what to say, but looking the one vpon the other, and semed vnto them as though it had ben a dreame. But when these newes came to the hearing of the Empresse, hir sorrowfull greefe was so great, that as one dead, she fell down into the lap of the princes Claridiana, who sat next vnto hir,  procured with all hir force, to bring hir to hir selfe againe, and did comfort hir, saying, that she had no reason so much to set vnto hyr hart the imprisonment of Rosicleer,  how that she was ful|ly perswaded, that it was a thing impossible, except it wer by treason,  requested hir to pacifie hir selfe, for that there remained such knightes behind, who very quickly would dis|couer the secret therof,  when that this will not serue, Ro|daran is still in your country out of the which you ned not let them to depart and carry away their prise.
At which time the knight of the Sun, without any more tarrying arose out of the place whereas he was with so great anger, that his faire and white coulour, was turned into sanguine and black.
And asking licence of the emperour, he departed out of the great hall,  went vnto his lodging  armed himselfe with his strong and bright armour,  mounting vpon his strange  light horse, he departed out of Constantinople,  toke his way towards the bridge of the Iaspe, with as great desire to se himself with Rodaran, as to returne wheras he might comfort and reioyce himselfe with the sight of his Ladies: without whose sight, in such like passions, it semed that it was not possible that he could liue: who at this present this History doth leaue, for to tell you of other things that pas|sed in the meane time in England.



 How the Prince Don Siluerio returned and demaunded of the king his daughter the Princesse Oliuia, to wife, and be|cause she would not marrye with him, shee returned with hir knights, and of all that chanced therin. Chap. 43.
_YOu haue heard what great sorrow  griefe the newes of the death of Rosicleer did cause in the Court of the King Oliuerio,  likewise how ioyfull the prince Don Siluerio was, for that the king had giuen him his word  pro|mise that the princesse Oliuia should marrye with him, but he did not so much desire it, as the princes did hate him. For although that the heauy newes of the death of Rosicleer did touch hir very neere, yet she repented hir selfe so much, for that crueltie which she had vsed vnto him,  the great loue that the remembrance of him did cause in hir, that rather she would consent to death, then agree vnto that which the king hir father had requested of hir diuers and sundry times. And for that the prince Don Siluerio dyd many times importune the king to performe his promise, which was the thing he most desired. Who answered him, that till such time as he had ended the wars which he had with the emperour Trebatio, hee could not by any meanes conclude with the princes, which was the occasion that con|tinually he passed the time in grieuous passions, supposing that it was for no other thing, but a pollisie, to cause the prin|cesse to giue hir father such an answere as should be contra|ry to his will  desire. And because the time to giue case and remedy vnto his desire was so long, and he not able to en|dure, (his sorrow and griefe was such) the delay there|of. Upon a day, at such time as he found the princesse Roda|silua all alone he did verye earnestly desire hir, that by all wayes and meanes possible she should learne to know of the Princesse Oliuia the truth of the aunswere which she

made vnto the king hir father at such time as he tolde hir that he would marry hir with him, whether, it was with good will and determined purpose to accomplish the same at the time appointed, or whether she did it to prolong the time, be|ing moued by some hatred towards him, for that according vnto hir answere, he would determine what were best for him to doe. Then the princesse Rodasilua who had great de|sire to vse remedy and to case the sorrowfull passions of hir brother, did promise him to doe all that euer in hir power was possible to be done,  so tooke hir leaue  departed from him,  waited hir time. It chanced afterward vpon a day at such time as the princesse Oliuia was alone in hir closet, she went  knocked at the doore,  being knowen who she was, the doore was opened straight waies,  she went in,  found the princesse with hir countenance very heauy  sorrowfull, and hir eyes swollen with continuall weping,  hir faire chekes which before were wont to be rudy  full, was now so leane  wan, as though she had ben new risin out of some great sicknesse or infirmity. And finding hir in this order, be|ing moued thereby vnto great compassion, she said: What is this my lady  mistres, is it not sufficient, the time wher|in I serued you for maid of honor,  the great good will that continully I had in any thing that did appertaine vnto your seruice, in the which I was alwaies faithfull  true,  do I not now deserue to know the occasion wherefore, and from whence doth procede (that wheras at other times you were wont to be very merry  ioyfull,  giuen to pleasure  pas|times,  now vpon the sodaine to be so sorrowfull  sad) for that I haue sene your great beauty  fairenesse to snrmou~t all other damsels  gentlewomen in the world,  now I doe se all lost  in a mortall hew. Tell me the occasion for gods sake wherfore it should grow, that I might do my good will and therin shew the great loue that I doe beare vnto you, in seking remedy for the same. And here I do protest that if

you will not giue me to vnderstand the occasion hereof, that forth with I wil depart from hence vnto mine own country, for that I do not determine to serue any more those that so euill doe reward them that doe trauaile in their seruice.
At which words of the princesse Rodasilua, the princesse O|liuia receiued no ioy nor pleasure, but rather did the more in|crease hir paine  griefe, for that she knew not what to an|swere vnto such an importunat demaund although after a while that she held hir peace, with great desire that she had to turne hir of,  to send hir away, she said.
Lady it is very doubtfull and hard to thinke that any per|son in the world can perseuer in their great pleasure  con|tentment,  neuer to receiue any sadnesse nor griefes in their liues, no, for sure it is a thing that onely is receiued for those happy creatures who doe reioyce themselues in the celesti|all glory,  if at this present that I am so sad  discontented as you do se me, it is not a thing to be meruailed at, for y^t it is no new thing to all vs that doe line in this world, euery day to receiue pleasure  displeasure. And if in all this time I haue not told you the occasion wherfore I am sad, it hath not ben for lack of good will for to pleasure you, neither lack of knowledge of the good deeds which continually I haue re|ceiued by you, but onely the euill which I do fele in me is such,  of such quality, that I my selfe doe not vnderstand it for to shew it vnto the phisition, whereby he might procure some Phisick for to remedy the same. But this onely I can say, that I do find my selfe very sad, for that ther is nothing that can giue me any contentment to reioyce  recreat my selfe. Likewise I doe fele my selfe mortall, for that I doe hate and abhorre to liue, so that ther is no Phisicke to be ministred, wheras sicknesse is not knowen And this great heauinesse  discontentment doth proceed from my hart, and there is none but the heart that can declare from whence the occasion doth proceede.
This is all that I can aduertise you, my ladies  princes,  if this doe not giue you satisfaction, you must pardon me, for that I am not to giue you any farther intelligence. In this hath your highnes shewed me great fauor, said Rodasilua, in y^t you would vouchsafe to declare vnto me the qualitie of this your infirmitie, which is one of the strangest diseases that euer I heard of in all my life. And being such a sicknesse as you haue told me, it cannot be knowen, neyther is ther any phisicke to be ministred, I promise you I know not what to say therevnto, but onely this,  in my iudgement it is best, that you take vnto your selfe a husband, hauing now so good opportunitie, in that the king your father doth offer vnto you such a mariage, as is conuenient for your honour  es|tate. And although I am a damsell  haue no experience of these matters, yet by my selfe I may iudge of another,  doe suppose that ther is nothing vnder the Sun that is more pro|fitable to giue you pleasure,  to cause you to haue content|ment,  to put from you this heauinesse which you haue vp|on your stomacke:  seing that it is a thing certaine that you must doe hereafter, as you haue promised  giuen your word vnto the king Oliuerio, your father, in my opinion it were better out of hand to procure the same,  not to pro|long the time, but take time whilest time doth serue, for that peraduenture the time will come that you would,  then you cannot, for as you haue said, ther is no constancy in things of this world,  euery day you haue a new chaunge,  the con|ditions of men doe alter. At which words the princes Oliuia dyd well vnderstand, that the whole communication of the Princesse Rodasilua did extend in the fauour of Don Sil|uerio hir brother, for the which, being angry, as shee, who did hate and aborre him more then any thing in all the world, pretending to put hir out of all doubt, and that she should not afterwardes come vnto hir any more with the like enterprise, she aunswered hir agayne and sayde: Lady I doe giue you great thankes for this remedy which

you haue giuen me for my great sicknesse, and dooe accept very much your good will therein, but yet I should thincke much better of you (seing as you doo say that your whole desire is that I might haue remedie for the same (that such Phisicke as you doo wish vnto mee, might extend wholie to expulse this my great sorrow and griefe, and not vnder cou|lour of pretence to ease and help me, to procure to put re|medie in some other, fayning to applie it wholie vnto mee. Therefore Lady and Princesse Rodasylua, here I doo giue you to vnderstand of a certaintie, that there is no remedy of Phisicke that can giue remedy and ease of this my great euill, no I say, not to one part thereof, but onely death, which I doo desire to take me out of this world. And now seing that I haue so plainely declared vnto you that your counsayle giuen me for my comfort and ease, doth little pro|fit, and therein no remedie nor help is to bee hoped of, I doo most hartelie desire you to speake no more vnto me there|of from this day forwards, for that it is not vnknowen vn|to you how yong and tender I am of age, and that there is no time lost in me for to tarrie, and when time shall serue, I will accomplish and performe all that shall be reason, and whatsoeuer the King my father shall commaund me. And in that you doo say, that peraduenture when I would, then opportunitie will not serue: Lady, you doo know well that there be many Princes in the world, and other Lords of great estate, and againe, that I am a damsell and daughter vnto such a Father, that with the help of God I shall not remaine by the walls and lost. And herewith the Princesse Oliuia dyd holde hir peace, and arose vp from the place whereas she was, for that Rodasilua should not replie any more in hir begunne pretence. Who hearing and wel vnderstanding all that the Princesse hadde sayde vnto hir, with-out any more woords she departed out of the Closet, and went vnto hir owne lodging, and presentlie sent for the Prince hir brother, and declared vnto him all that she had passed with the Princesse Oliuia, who receiued so great sorrow and griefe, that in a good space he could not speake

one word, but the Princesse Rodasilua his sister did comfort him, saying, that hee should be quyet and haue patience, and to dissemble all that possiblie hee could, for that shee hoped with the help of God that time would serue that the Prin|cesse Oliuia would be better perswaded,  that shee did be|leeue that all hir sorrow  griefe was for the death of Ro|sicleer,  that being once forgotten, then would she acknow|ledge the great benefit which she should obtain in receiuing so noble a Prince for hir husband,  giue God great thanks for the same. So betwixt the~ there passed much other com|munication about that matter,  in the end they tooke their leaue of one another  departed, but the prince Don Siluerio receied so great sorrow  griefe, that a great time fter ther neuer entred in him any mirth or pastime, but alwaies in great sadnesse, languishing with the great suspition that hee had of his loue the Princesse Oliuia, till such time as he be|thought himselfe of a pollicie, wherby he might remedy him|selfe of his great sorrow and griefe,  beecause opportunitie dyd not serue, hee did delay the time till he did execute it, as shall bee tolde you heereafter in this Historie.


How the Knight of the Sunne went to combat with Rodaran, and how by a demand hee left his de|termined iourney. Chapter 44.
_WIth great desire the Knight of the Sunne tra|uayled towards the Bridge of Iaspe, for to bee with that Pagan Rodaran, with so vali|ant a courage, that he thought more of the time that he should be absent from the sight and companie of his Ladies, the~ of the braue and  battayle which he should haue with Roda|ran, and although tenne of the most brauest and valyaun| Knights in all the world did abide his comming, for

to haue contention with him, yet for all that it should not bee any occasion to put from him his amorous thought and great care, neither cause him to receiue any feare in his va|liant  couragious stomacke. And being ingused with these his amorous passions, his horse caried him whether he wold. And calling to remembraunce the Princesse Claridiana and the fatre Princesse Lindabrides, the absence of them was the occasion that he thought verily his hart wold haue parted a sunder in two peces. In this sort hee trauailed towards the bridge the first day, and the second day that he departed out of Constantinople, trauailing in a great broade vsed way, he saw a far of comming towards him a knight of a big stature, and mounted vpon a mighty couser, and armed with verie rich and precious armour, and brought in his company a la|die of great beautie, meruaylouslie well apparaled, and mounted vppon a Palfray. And when he approched nigh vnto them, hauing a great pleasure to beehould the Knight, he stayed his horse, and saluting them with great curtesie, hee asked of them if they were of that Countrie, and whe|ther they trauayled. Then the Knight who was greatlie amazed at the singular disposition of the Knight of the Sunne, and the straungenesse of his armour and horse, dyd answere him and sayde, that they were not of that Coun|trie, but straungers. And what should be the occasion to mooue him to aske that question. The Knight of the Sunne replyed agayne saying: for no other intent but to doo vn|to you all the pleasure that in me dooth lye, for your gen|tle disposition caused me to demaund this question. I pray God that I may gratifie your great courtesie, sayde the straunge Knight. And here I doo giue you great thanks for your good will offered vnto me, beeing as I am.
You shall vnderstand sir knight, that I am of a Countrie very straunge and far from this land, and I am come he|ther in the demaund of a knight who is called the Knight of the Sunne, whose fame is such, that I am come foorth of my Countrie to seke him. Therefore sir Knight, if you cane giue me any newes of him, and ell where I shal finde him,

you shall doo me great pleasure and curtesie therein. At which words the Knight of the Sunne was very much ama|zed, hearing that a knight of a strange countrie should come in his demaund, and beeing very desirous to know his Em|bassage, he answered and sayd.
Of a truth sir Knight, you could not haue met with one that better could haue giuen you newes of this knight then with mee, for I can giue you to vnderstand where you shall finde him before one houre bee past, but yet first before I doo tell you where he is, I shall receiue great curtesie if you do tell mee what the occasion is that you doo come in this sort to seke him. The knight was very glad and ioyfull when he heard that newes, for that it was the thing that at that time he most desired, and thinking the time long to know where hee might finde him, hee sayd. Of a truth sir Knight, although there had bene no occasion of your part to binde me to declare vnto you the occasion of my comming, your great curtesie and gentle disposition is sufficient to cause me to declare vnto you that which you doo demaund, and to binde mee to doo in your seruice any other thing whatso|euer your pleasure is to commaund me.
And now you shall vnderstand that I am King Lyseo of Lydia, and this Lady whom I bring with me is my wyfe, and our euill hap and misfortune hath beene such, that at such time as we were most prosperous and receiued grea|test ioy and contentment in our Kingdomes, and most at our ease, a cruell tyrant and King of Arcadia, in respect of certaine contentions which chanced beetwixt vs two, being trauayling knights, he is now risen vp against me, and as a mortall enimie dooth inuade my kingdome, with so great puissnce of Knights and Gyaunts, and hath entered into the same, and hath spoyled and taken all, sauing one alon Citie called Lydia, whereas I haue defended my selfe for the space of two mooneths with those small companie of knights which remayned with great trauayle, and euerie day is presented vnto vs death before our eyes. So in the ende of this time, I seeing that the strength and power

of the king dyd dayly increase, and that mine did still dimi|nish, and that I had no remedie to defend and deliuer that Citie, which is the principall force and strength of all my Kingdome, the remnant of my knights called a counsell to|gether, and commaund what was best to bee done therein, and they all with one consent thought it best that I should goe and seke some aide and succour, wherewith wee might defend our selues from our enimies, and giue mee theyr words that they would defend the Cittie till such time as I returned. And I seing that it was the thing that dyd ehoooue me very much, I fell at a consent with them that they should make their defence,  abide my retourne for the space of two moneths, and ie it so fell out that in that space I did not returne againe, that they should conclude a truse with y^e king of Arcadia for a certaine space, as they thought best. This being agred vpon, in great secrecie I and my wise departed out of the Citie, with determination to seeke out some aide and succour, wherewith I may defend the Citie of Lydia, for in making defence thereof, almost the whole Kingdome is defended. And that being lost, it is without all hope euer to recouer the same againe. And be|hinking my selfe vnto what king or Emperor I were best o goe to procure succour, I could not imagine any place wherein so short time I might accomplish my desire, as to eke out that valyaunt Knight of the Sunne, whose fame is o much spread abroad throughout all Asia, after the great arres of Persia, so that the great confidence which I haue  him hath brought me into this Countrie, and I am ful|y perswaded that if I dooe carrie him in my companie to idia, that he alone is sufficient for to raise the siege from he Citie, for that all the force and strength of that warre nd great power, dooth consist in the death of the king of Arcadia, and if that the Knight of the Sunne doo giue vnto im the death, it is sufficient to conclude and end the wars, r when all the rest of his armie shall finde themselues ithout their king and Lord, they will returne agayne in| theyr owne Countrie. And that which now doeth most





grieue me (gentle Knight) is, that it is now fortie dayes since my departure out of Lydia, and by reason of a great storme and foule weather which happenyd vnto vs at the Sea, we could not ariue here in this Countrie any sooner. So that there resteth vnto me no more but twentie daies of the time that I set with my Knights for to returne, who cannot by any meanes doo otherwise after that time be ex|pired, but to yeld vp the Citie, for they haue no victualle for any longer time, and although at that instaunt I  finde out the Knight of the Sunne, yet shall we haue inoug to doo to come thether in time. So gentle knight, this is al that I can aduertise you of, that you haue saked and de|maunded of me, therefore I pray you now to tel me whe I may finde this knight of the Sunne, for that accordin vnto the great excellencie and vertue which is spoken  him throughout all the world, I beleue that there will b nothing to the contrarie to disturbe him, but that he  haue pittie and compassyon vppon me, for that God  not created a knight of so great estimation, but onely to  mend such great wrongs done in this world.
When the Knight of the Sunne had vnderst the demaund of the King Lyeso, in all his life he dyd  finde himselfe in so great confusion and trouble, for that  the one part the demaund which hee made against Rod|ran, and the imprisonment of his great friends dyd cau and binde him not to leaue off his enterprise begun, and  the other part the great and extreame necessitie of  King and of that sorrowfull quene, who in the meane ti that the King dyd declare vnto the Knight of the Sunne  you haue heard, did wepe verie pitteouslie, the which  ued him vnto great pittie, in such sort, that for any thi as he thought, he could with no reason leaue hir, but g them sucour and help, and seing that the time was short that the King Lyseo should returne vnto the Citie Lidia, it semed vnto him a thing impossible, first to conclu the demaund of the Pagan Rodaran, the which he det|mined, and afterward to giue them aide and succour, wh

was the occasion that he was in great doubt, and for a good space he could not speake one woord, till such time as the king asked him wherfore he did not answere him. Where|to the Knight of the Sunne answered and sayd:
Mightie King and Lord, doo not you muse nor meruayle that vntill this time I haue not aunswered you, for that at this instant hath happened vnto me two things of great importaunce, and if I leaue eyther of them vndone, it will be vnto mee as grieuos as death. The one of them is, that Rodaran king of Arabia is at the bridge of Iaspe, which is n the confines of this Empire of Greece, and I am going hether to combat with him, for that he hath prisoner a bro|her of mine, and many other Knights of the Emperour Trebatios court. And the other is your demaund and great ecessitie, the which doth grieue me as much as though it ere vnto my selfe, becase you shall vnderstand that I am he knight of the Sunne whom you doo come to seke, and lthough there be not in me that bountie which you haue oken of, yet there shall not lack good wil for to put my life  aduenture in your seruice. And because this my demaund  Rodaran hath chaunced at this instant, and likwise your reat necessitie, which dooth not requyre any delay, hath  the occasion that I am thus troubled, and in this great , for that I cannot accomplish them both according  my desire, but now seing it is so fallen out, and that  in the confidence the which you haue had in me, you  left to seeke and procure aide and succour in other pla|. And now the time is very short, and you cannot other|ise procure for your selues, hap what hap shall, and come hat shall come, I am determined to goe out of hand with . And in the meane time that we shall with the fauour  God clere our selues, and set our selues at libertie from  war, I doo beleue that Rodaran will not depart out of , for that in the Court of the Emperour there doo re| many valiaunt knights, with whom he will haue i| to doo before he canne ouercome them all.
But whe~ the king Liseo vnderstood that he was the knight of the Sunne, and with what determination he dyd offer himselfe in their aide and succour, in all his life he did not receiue greater ioye and pleasure, and went vnto him and embraced him, saying: Great and infinit thankes dooe I giue vnto my Lord God, for that it hath pleased him to let me se so high and worthie a Knight, and I may well per|swade my selfe, that you being a knight of so strange and gentle disposition, can be no other, but he whose fame is in all the world, and not a little amazed at your straunge and excellet bountie. And now seing that it is my fortune to come into this great extremitie, and that you of necessiti must make an ende of this your pretendd enterprise, God forbid that euer you should leaue this your determined pre|tence for to accomhlish my necesitie it were much better that I loose my whole Kingdome, then to hazard the liue of so precious and valyaunt knights. Therefore I will re|turne againe into Lidia, and procure to be with my knight before my time be expired, and there offer my selfe vnto death with them, for to accomplish  performe that which I haue promised. Then the Knight of the Sunne who wa wholie determined to goe with the King sayde. I am ful|lie determined to accomplish all that which I haue sayde and if it be so that you are not content therewith, here  dooe sweare vnto you by the order of Knighthood, that  am purposed to goe thether all alone, for that your necess tie dooth not requyre anie delay. And for this my demau which I haue beegunne, I shall haue time inough, for th Rodaran cannot depart towards any place, but I shall find him to execute my fury on him. And likewise there  remayne in Greece many valyaunt Knights, who will  taine him for the time, and I am very sure that it was  possible for him to apprehend those knights whom he  prisoners in his power, except it were by some treason falsehood.
At which time the King Lyseo would with a verie  will haue stayed with the knight of the Sunne, from 

determined pretence, all onely for that he would not that he should haue left his first demaund, but by any meanes he would not be perswaded thervnto, so that in the best waies he could, he did gratifie his great courtesie  good will offered vnto him, still perswading to the contrary in saying, that it were better that he should perish, then so many noble knights. But all was spoken in vaine and nothing would serue, for that the knight of the Sun would depart with them in their company,  leaue of his first  owne demaund. So strayght way without any longer tarrying, in company with y^e king  quene, they toke their ieurney towards Lidia:  the king said vnto the quene, that he was the most vertuous knight that euer he saw in all the world,  how that the great fame that went of him, was with ust reason. So in this sort thy trauailed till they came vnto a little castell, wher as they determined to ary, for that the night was come vpon them: and there resting themselues, very earely in the morning they arose  did prosecute their iourney. And they had not rauailed long when that out of the same castell, they saw ome forth sixe armed knights, who likewise soiourned ther, ll that night:  following them, they did ouertake them  the entry of a great vally,  when they drew nih, one of he knights said. Sir knights you vnderstand, that your horse  armour doth giue great contentment vnto these my com|,  I for my part, doth all onely desire this Lady, for  she seemeth to be very faire,  to be of high estate, ther|, out of hand it doth accomplish you, to leaue them, except  will dye in our hands. Then the knight of the Sun, who  the first was with them very meke  sufferable,  with  dissimulation he said: Sir knight, if we doe giue and  vnto you our armour,  our horse, will you not be ntent to leaue with vs this Lady. No of truth, sayde the , for that I ad rather lye and take my ease with hir  night, then to haue all the horse and armour that is in  the world.
Then the knight of the Sun, who could no longer suffer so great villany nor outrage to passe before the presence of the king,  finding himselfe very nigh vnto the knight, he lift vp his fist  stroke him with his armed hand, such a blow vpon the helme, that he buckled it vnto the skull in such sort that he broke it all to peeces,  he fell from his horse dead to the ground. The rest of the knights his compaions, when they saw tht terrible blow, they were very much amazed, for y^t neuer in all their liues they saw the like done, and with s great strength,  wished that they had not put themselues in that demaund and enterprise. But yet  themselues, for that they were many, they drew forth their swords and wnt against him,  did assaut him, with mighty  terrible blowes. Yet or all that the knight of the Sun made litle ac|compt of them,  would not drw his swoord, but stroke a other of them such a terrible blow with his armed fist, that likewise he ouerthrew him from his horse dead to y^e ground,  said, god forbide that I should drawout my swoord to de|file it vpon so vile people as these be, that without all shame doth demaund our   armour,  yet not content, bu  so would hae th queene for to defile hir. Then the king Li|seo, who was one of the  knights in the world, be|ing very much amazed, at the great bounty  strength of th knight of the Sun could no longer forbeare himselfe, but  his sword drawen in his had, he assaulted the knights tha remained. And the first that hee mette with all, he cut of  arme,  with a trise, he stroke at another  wounded him  ry fore,  ouer threw him from his horse to the ground. An the knight of the Sun, at that time stroke an other with  armed fit, that he all to be brused his helme  skull,  oue threw him dead to the ground, so that ther remained of  sixe, but one aliue, and seeing himselfe all alone, thought no  to tary, but set spurs vnto his horse, and ran  with all the hast he could.
o that these two valiant knights remayned all 

with great content to see themselues clere of those discour|teous knights, as als to see the proe of the great valiantnes of either of them,  so they returned onwards on their iour|ney,  had great pleasure  pastime, at the demaund of those vncourteous knightes they trauailed till such time as they came vnto the sea coast,  vnto the pat wheras they found the ship out of the which the king  quene had disembarked themselues: into the which they entred,  found the winde very prosperous and so great, that within thre daies after their departure, they ariued at a port or hauen of Asia, wher as they went a land,  toe their way towardes Lidia, al|waies trauailing in great hast for that they would come to the citie, at the time that the king Liseo, had appointed and promised vnto the knights, but yet for all the hast that euer they could make, their time was accomplished,  ouer and a|boue, more then ten daies, at the end of the which, one day in the after noone, at such time as night drew on, they had sight of their enemies, who had thir camp still pitched  compas|sed round about the citie. And that day they assalted the ci|tie,  made a meruaileus great skirmish in such sort that they lacked very litle to eter into the citie,  the most part of the knights that made their defence, were slaine: who did defend the citie with great force, and like good and loyall vassalle, alwaies determined first to dye the death, then for  vp the citie. Although they were all that remained so weake and so feeble, that if they had returned to giue a new sault, by reason of their great wearinesse,  wounds, they must nedes haue yelded vnto the death  were all ve|ry much amazed, that the king Liseo, was not returned a|gaine according vnto his promis, for that they had him in estimation for one of the best knightes that was in all those parts,  they feared very much least some ill fortune or mis| should haue happened vnto him.
So when these two Knightes came within the sight of the campe wher their enemies wre, the king Liseo said,

my very friend and Lord, what doe you think is best for vs to do, for to enter into the citie, that we may giue some com|fort vnto those sorrowfull and afflieted knights. You doe best know worthy king, what is best to be done in this case, said the knight of the Sun,  therfore if it wer possible before y^t I doe enter, I would very faine know how far the force and strength of these knights doth extend: therefore if it please you, to take the queene behind you vpon your horse, and pro|cure in all that euer you may, for to get vnto the gates of the citie,  cause your Knights to kepe y^e gates open, for that I will bee ther very quickly. Doe all things according vnto your pleasure said the king,  I pray God to giue vnto you such victory, that our enemies might vnderstand  know, that as yet the king Liseo, is neither dead, nor ouercome. So when the night waxed dark, the king in the best maner hee could, he toke the qeene behind him on his horse,  embrased the knight of the Sunne, shedding many teares, he toke his leaue with the queene,  departed by a narrow lane, which he knew very well,  went towards the citie:  although he met by the way with diuers, yet for all that, hauing no feare by reason that he spake the language very well, they made litle reckoning of him,  did not mistrust y^t he should be any of their enemies. Then the knight of the Sun when he suppo|sed that the king had passed the campe, he toke his speare in his hand,  dre nigh vnto his enemies:  when he saw them, that they were with out watch, or care of any euill that might appen vnto them, e committed himselfe vnto God,  put himselfe amongst his enemies:  with his speare he began to kill  to destroy so many of the knights  other souldiers, that his great force  strength was quickly kno|wen, by the number tht lay dead in the field. For that in a short space, he had flame more then fiftie of them, at the nois of whom with a trie all the whole camp was in an vpro and cried vnto armour.
And after that this valiant knight had broken his ,

with his swoord in his hands he pressed still forwardes a|mongst them, in such sort, that he seemed to be some infernal creature. And without finding any great resistaunce he ap|proched vnto the tents that were in the field, which were very many  rich, wheras he found in them very many that seemed to be valiant Knights, who at the noyse  vprare of the souldiers wer all armed,  in their company many great and deformed giants, that semed to be great towers, who when they saw all the people run away,  saw not their e|nemies follow them, being greatly amazed therat, they stood still  knew not which way to depart, but when the valiant knights drew nigh vnto them, the first knight that he met withall, he stroke him such a blow vpon his helme, that cle|uing it  his head downe vnto the breast, he ouerthrew him dead to the ground  turning himselfe about, he stroke ano|ther vpon the wast, that he cut him a sunder in the midst,  ouerthrew him from his horse likewise dead to the ground, which made all the knights that wer ther not a litle to mer|uaile,  for that this valiant  worthy knight would not at that time tary any longer, he set spurs vnto his furious horse  passed through the camp with so great fury that ther was not one knight that could get before him,  being seene by one of the most valiantest giants amongst the rest, with a great mase in his hand he followed him, pretending to strike him with the same. The knight of the Sun perceiuing it, tourned about with his horse,  before that the giant could execute his mighty blow with his mase, he stroke him so terrible a blow vpon the wast, that his sharp cutting sword entred into his bowels, that he fell down from his horse dead to the ground, and then without any stayin he put himselfe in the mid|dest of the whole campe and made so great a spoile amongst his enemies, that he whom hee found in his way might well thinke himselfe vnhappy. So that they all fledde and ran before him, as from some infernall creature, that ac|cording vnto the great destruction that he made amongest

them, they thought him to be no other. In this sort this vali|ant knight went throughout the whole camp, without find|ing one that was so hardy to disturbe him,  slew w^t his own hands more they two hundreth knights,  being all embrued in blood, he came vnto the gates of the citie, wheras he found the king Liseo, who being knowen by his knights  subiects, did open the gates,  did abide his comming. And when they saw the knight of the Sun to come, all to be raied with blood, the knig straight waies did imagine what had passed with him  embraced him saying: Oh my good  perfect friend now I am fully perswaded that it hath pleased god to give me full remedy,  set at liberty all my kingdome, onely in that I haue your valiant person here with me. At this time the most principallest of all the knights of the citie came vnto them,  with great contentment  ioy to se their Lord and king they entred into the citie,  commanded the gates to be shut very strongly,  exceding good watch  ward to be kept,  they altogether went vnto the pallace, wheras they were of the quene meruailously well receiued  entertained and did vnarme the knight of the Sun with hir own hands, and there they did repose  rest themselues that night, not without great care  complaints vnto their king, to see them|selues in such great affliction,  almost all the people in their Country lost.
Likewise also was the valiant knight of the Sun sore trou|bled with his amorous thoughts of the faire princes Linda|brides, and of the princesse Claridiana, which thoughts were more troublesome vnto him then the furious battaile which he should haue with his enemies the next day following. But when he remembred his brother, and the rest of his friends that were prisoners with Rodaran, he receiued so great sor|row  griefe, that he thought long till the day was come,  had a good trust and confidence in God, that very shortly he should se himself clere from his enemies,  for to haue time to returne vnto the bridge of the iaspe,  to conclude his pre|tence

to combat with Rodaran.
Likewise at this time all those that were in the campe of the king of Arcadia, did not take their rest in perfect quiet|nesse, but when they remembred that which dyd passe with the beginning of the night, they all trembled with theyr great feare which they receiued of that worthy  valiaunt knight. And when they had made relation of all that had hap|ned vnto the king of Arcadia, he began to blaspheme against his gods, for that it was not his fortune to met with him,  they were all amazed, because they could not vnderstand  know who that valiant Knight should be. And againe they were fully perswaded that it could not be the king Liseo, for that he was not a knight of so great valour, for to make such destruction amongst them, for that they had combatted with him diuers  sundry times  likewyse others had ben so ventrous as to enter into their camp, but neuer did shew so great force,  the King being very desirous to know who he should be  to se him, he passed away all that night with much more care then any of the rest.


How the Knight of the Sunne and the King Ly|seo went out into the camp of their enemies,  of the cruell battaile that thy had with them. Chapter. 45.
_THe next day very earlye in the morning, the good king Lyseo and the valiant knight of the Sunne, after that they had commit|ted themselues to God and broken theyr fastes, they armed themselues with theyr strong and rich armour, and went out in|to the great court of the Pallaice, where|as

were ioyned together before the king all the knights of the citie, who did exhort them to be valiant,  to put their liues in aduenture fighting, seeing that the goodnesse of God had brought him back againe,  in his company so valiant  wor|thy a knight, who did offer themselues vnto death in what|soeuer it pleased the king to command them. The king gaue them great thanks for their great loyaltie,  did animate their couragious harts in the best wise he could, saying: My good friends and loyall subiects, I haue alwaies had before mine eies the great loue which you do beare me,  now you doe shew it more amply, that you haue kept  defended this my citie, in the time that I haue ben from you in procuring this aid  succour, God for his infinit goodnesse  mercy sake graunt vs victory ouer our enemies, that I may haue oppor|tunitie to gratifie you for this your great loyalty  trauaile. And I haue good hope in my Lord Iesus Christ that it will so fall out, onely for that I haue this happy  worthy knight in my company, whose fame doth sound throughout all the whole world,  all you together ought to haue him in grea|ter estimacion then if I had brought a meruallous huge  mighty army of knights. And in saying these words, he com|manded to number the people that were in the citie,  they found that ther was to the number of one thousand of very good knights  valiant,  two thousand other, that might wel beare armour,  turning towards the knight of the Sun, h said. Ualiant  worthy knight,  my very friend, your plea|sure is to command what is best to be done, for all we will obey you as our principall captaine and defender. Then the knight of the Sun humbling himselfe very much said.
Worthie King, I am not come hether into this Coun|try, but to serue you with my person, therefore I pray you commaund what we shall doe, for I purpose to be the first that shall obey it, and for my part I giue you to vnderstand that forasmuch as all these your knights are very weary

of the battayles past, I my selfe alone this day will goe foorth into the camp, and there to procure all that is in my power agaynst your enimies, for that principally with the fauour of almightie God I will doo so much, that they shall receiue damage and griefe. But when the King Lyseo and all his Knights heard those woords, they meruayled great|lie at the mightie stomake and courage of the Knight of the Sunne, and with great admiration did beolde him, and it dyd seeme vnto them a thing impossible that in a Knight of so few yeres should remaine so great force and strength, that he alone should offer to put himselfe into the field a|gainst more then twentie thousand Knights, and as many more souldiers that were in the camp of the King of Arca|dia, whereas was amongst them the brauest Knights and Gyants that were in the Pagan Countrie. Then the good king Lyseo who could not by any meanes abide to remaine in the Cittie, sayde, that he might doo all that his pleasure was to commaund, but he would not in any manner of wise remaine behinde in the Citie, but that hee would also goe out in his companie. Then doo what your pleasure is my Lord, sayde the knight of the Sunne, for hauing you in my companie, I will not feare all these our enimies. And so contrarie vnto the wills of all the other Knights, they prepared for to go forth they two alone together, and before the time that the Sunne had mounted to mid day, these two valiant  worthie warriours being armed with theyr strong and rich armour, and mounted vpon theyr mightie and furious courses, they commaunded the gates of the Ci|tie to be opened, and at such time as the Quene and all the rest of the Ladies, Knights, and people were vpon the tow|rs and battlements of the Citie for to behoulde all that should passe, they went foorth of the Citie, and when they ad passed a mightie long  broade bridge which was nigh nto the walls, vnder the which ranne a great and depe ater, and putting themselues a little out of the way for o view the Camp, whereas they remained a while, and be|ors they entered into the armie, the knight of the Sunne

tooke from his neck a very fayre and rich Bugle, and blew it with so great strength, that it made all the hearers therof in the campe for to tremble. And being discouered by theyr enimies, the King of Arcadia dyd strayght wayes vnder|stand that it should be the Knight that so troubled them the night past, and therewith commaunded that the best of all his Knights should be armed, and that they should goe foorth for to know what was their demaund. The first a|mongst all those Knights that went foorth, was Brother vnto the King, called Momfriero, a valiant Knight and stout of his person, and worthie in feates of armes, and such a one, that in all the Pagan Countrie there was found verie few, so gallant and so liuelie in any kinde of exercise, and meruailous presumptious, who being mounted vppon a great and furious courser whet out of the camp, and with great threatnings and oaths he swore that with the first encounter that hee should make with his speare, for to bring him prisoner vnto the King. When he came vnto the place whereas the Knight of the Sunne was, with great pride and arrogancie he sayde.
Tell me thou simple and captiue Knight, what great boldnesse and folly is this of thine, that thou being but one alone, darest for to sound thy horne against so great an ar|mie as this is, wheras ther be knights sufficient for to con|quer the whole world, and here I dooe sweare vnto thee by the high Gods, that before it be long I will giue the thy reward for this thy great follie, because thou shalt not ad|uaunce thy selfe here after, how that before Momfriero thou diddest this or that. And in saying those woords he drew nigh vnto him, reseruing that which was requisit for the course of his horse, and with his speare in his hand he came against the Knight of the Sunne; who wished and desired no other thing, and with the force of his horse Cornerino he made against him, and although the course was very long, yet with a trice they met together with so great fury, that the earth seemed to tremble vnder them, they made theyr encounter in such sort, that the valiant pagan sheuered his

great Speare all in small sheuers, but at such time as he thought all had bene finished, he found himselfe from his Horse vppon the ground by the great encounter of his ene|my in such sort, that he was constrained to leaue his saddle, and the Knight of the Sunne passed forwards as though he had done nothing at all, and this valiaunt Pagan was not so soone ouerthrowen, but presently he arose vp againe, and drew out his swoord, thinking that the Knight of the Sunne would haue returned againe vpon him, but he making litle account of him, did blow his horne againe. Then the king of Arcadia, who from his Tent did beholde all that passed, being greatly amazed to se his brother ouerthrowen, sent another knight called Rufier, who was a great Lord in Ar|cadia, and one of the most brauest that he had in all the camp, who being mounted on a mighty courser went out of the camp, with so great pride  arrogancie, that he thought verely to reuenge the iniurie done vnto Momfriero, but his expectation fell out cleane contrarie, for when he came to make his encounter with the Knight of the Sun, he gaue him such a blow with his speare, that he pearced him quite through, that he ouerthrew him dead vnto the ground, and breaking his speare therewith, he drew out his great and sharp cutting swoord, and in his companie the King Lyseo, they put themselues into the presse of the Campe whereas they made great slaughter, killing and ouerthrowing as though they had ben all naked without armour: Oh how ioyfull were all those of the Citie, when they saw the great meruailes of their Captaines, and theyr great boun|tie and surmounted strength, and to the contrarie how the King of Arcadia was amazed when that he saw two alone knights for to doo so great murther and destruction in his mightie and puissant armie, and sayde with himselfe, that if all the world should haue tould him the lyke, he could not haue beleued it, except he had sene it with his owne eyes, and for that he would se more of theyr wonderfull dedes, he dyd not procure to arme himselfe, neither would he mooue fro~ the place whereas he was but

stoode still beholding the two valiant knights how they dyd beehaue themselues amongest their enimies, who without finding anie thing that dyd disturbe them in theyr way, they went throughout the whole armie, killing and woun|ding all that they met withall, in such sort that they were all to bee raed with blood, and the field lay full of dead bo|dies, and whereas it was beefore all dust, it was now tur|ned into durt. At this time was well perceiued the migh|ti and valyaunt courage of the Knight of the Sunne, who was so furious and fierce in his battaile, that whereas the King Lyseo did kill or wound one, hee for his part did kill foure, so that they slew betwixt them that day more then three hundreth Knights, and in the ende there went foorth to make resistance against them two great and stout Gyants, and with their mightie mases in their hands, they went towards the place whereas the Knights were. Then the Knight of the Sunne because they should not take so great paines as to come vnto them whereas they were, but seeing them a far off to come towards them, hee went foorth to mete them, and scarcely they could haue so much lea|sure as to life vp theyr mases for to strike them, when that the Knight of the Sunne with great lightnesse stroke one of those Gyants with his swoord in both his hands so terri|ble a blow vpon his right shoulder, that hee cut him downe to his bowells, in such sort, that the fore quarter with his right arme did part from his body, and he fell from his horse dead to the ground. Then the other Gyaunt who saw the ill successe of his companion, beeganne to roare, and to dis|charge his heauie clubbe vpon the Knights head, but this couragious knight perceiuing the same, set spurres vnto his horse, who springing forwards, did clere his maister from that terrible blow, so that his mase fell downe vnto the ground, at which time the good King Lyseo dyd finde him|selfe nigh vnto the Gyant, and stroke him so terrible a blow vppon his arme, that he cut his armour and flesh vnto the hard bone. At which time the Knight of the Sunne was embraced with other Knights, and the Gyaunt lyft vp his

mase againe, and stroke the King Lyseo so strong a blow vpon his hard and rich helme, that hee made him fall back|wards vppon his saddle bow without any remembraunce, with his head vpon the horse neck,  his armes hanging on both sides as though he had ben dead, and vodid out of the beauer of his healme great abundaunce of blood. Then the knight of the Sunne, who at the noise of that terrible blow dyd looke about him to se what it should be, and when he saw the King in that great perplexitie as though he had beene dead, his sorrow and griefe was such, that neuer in all his lyfe he receiued the lyke, and wished that he had not brought him out that day vnto the battaile, but seeing that it was then requisit to reuenge the same, with more furie and wrath then euer he receiued, he went towards the gi|ant, who was readie to strike the king Lyseo another blow, and raysing himselfe in his stirrops, with the force of both his hands he stroke the Gyant such a blow vpon his head, as though hee had no armour vpon him, he cloue him downe vnto the breast,  the Gyant fell downe dead to the ground, then the King of Arcadia and all those that were with him wondered greatlie when they saw that terrible and mor|tall blow stroken, theyr blood waxed colde in theyr bodies, and all theyr bones did shake, and receiued such feare, that there was not one that was so hardie almost scarce to looke vpon him, much lesse to assault him, and the King of Arcadia ayd vnto himselfe: Oh immortall Gods, who could haue beeleued that your power dooth so farre extend, to make a ortall man so mightie, that at two blowes he hath slaine wo of the most valyauntest Gyaunts that were in all the orld, and he alone sufficient to make resistaunce agaynst wentie thousand Knights, the flower of all the Pagan Countrie. And I doo verily beleue, seing that you doo force e to speake it, that the force and strength of this knight  much more then yours, and if it were possible for him to oe vp into the heauens, as he is here on the earth, he wold  destroy you all. At this time all those which were  the Citie, when they saw the disgrace of the King Lyseo

all the great ioy and pleasure which they receiued to~ se the wonderfull meruayles of those two Knights was tourned into great sorrow and heauinesse, and began amongst them grieuous lamentations, but especially the Quene, who fell in a deadly sound,  so remained more then one houre, but in the meane time this inuinsible Knight not making any stay at the death of the Gyaunt, without departing fro~ the king Lyseo, did such wonderfull dedes round about him, that they durst oot come nigh him to assalt him by a great space, but with great sorrow withdrew themselues, because their liues depended in receiuing but one blow of his hands, if he chaunced to hit them right, and although a far off they threw at him Darts, Launces, and swoords, as well at his Horse as at him, yet they did him little harme, for that his armour was such as the historie hath shewed, and his horse was all couered with a very small and light mayle, made by such art, that ther was no weapon able to cut nor pearce it, for so the Prince Meridian had caused it to bee made, of whom he wonne his armour as you haue read, which dyd not a little profit in the mightie and immortal deeds of this inuinsible knight, for if that his owne armour and the ar|mour of his Horse had not bene of so great force and strength, it had not bene possible for him to haue fini|shed and brought to an ende so many perillous battayles and contentions as hee hath done. When this good knight saw that his enimies with great feare dyd flye from him and gaue him way, he went vnto the king Lyseo and tooke him in his armes, and rubbed and chafed him in such sort, that he came againe vnto himselfe, and when hee saw the great perill and daunger wherein he was brought, and the great slaughter which the knight of the Sunne hadde made he lift vp his hands to heauen, and gaue great thanks vnto almightie God, and with a very good courage he ioyned with him, and with great and mighty blowes he began to help him, with desire to reuenge the great perill in which his enimies had brought him: in this sort these two knights put themselues into the thickest of their enimies, making s

great slaughter, that they were iudged rather to be diuells of hell, then mortall knights, and there was none that was so bolde that durst withstand them in their way, and by rea|son the night drew on, they being all bloodie, and almost wearie with killing and wounding of theyr enimies, they beegan to take theyr way towards the Citie, with so great quietnesse as the rauening Lyon after she hath had hir pray doth depart through the feeble and weake heards of cattel, but the King of Arcadia when hee saw them depart so qui|etly and to their contentment, by his outwarde shew he se|med to be so furious  full of wrath, that not one that was about him durst come in his presence, but with many vpro|brious woords he rebuked them, saying: Oh vile people and of base courage, how is it y^t you are not ashamed that two alone Knights against so many as are of you, hath had so great courage and boldnesse, to enter into our camp,  hath slaine so many of your brethren, kinsfolks, and friends, and to suffer the~ to depart in so quiet sort as they doo, as though they had done vs no barme at all. Here I doo make a vow and sweare by the high Gods, whom I esteme but little, that to morrow if they returne bether agayne, to arme my selfe,  with mine owne hands to take reuengement of him that all you together cannot doo. At that time there was in presence with the King many stout and valiaunt Knights, who thought it a great shame and small manhood to be so many against two alone Knights, and therefore they would not arme themselues that day, who when they saw the King to be so angry and wrathfull, euery one of them made a solempne oath, to take cruell reuengement of those two Knights, if the next day they dyd come foorth againe. In this time if the sorrow  griefe was verie much with them in the Camp, the great ioye and contented pleasure of them of the Citie, to the contrarie was as great, when they saw those two valiant warriours returne together, and caused the gates to be opened, and went foorth to receiue them, and ould not satisfie themselues in honouring of them,  gaue great thancks vnto God in that hee had sent vnto them so

valiant a knight, for when they saw his great and singu|lar bountie, they were all fully perswaded that God had sent him vnto them for to aide  succour them in this great necessitie. But when they came vnto the Kings pallace, I am not here able to recite the great ioy  pleasure where|with the Quene receiued them, who thought of a certain|tie that the king had bene dead, but when she saw him by hir, she knew not what to doo for ioy, but with hir owne hands dyd vnarme the King and the Knight of the Sunne, and would not consent that any other should help hir, and because theyr armour was so strong and exceeding good in making defence, they had not receiued any one wound that was nedfull of curing. So there was brought vnto each of them strayght wayes a new gowne, and putting them on, they sat downe vnto supper, and passed away that night with more contentment  ioye, then any night before since the King of Arcadia came into that Kingdome. Whom at this present the historie dooth leaue, for to declare vnto you what passed in the Court of the Emperour Trebatio, after the knight of the Sunne was departed from the Court.


How Rodaran sent vnto the Emperour Trebatio, de|manding more Knights, and who went foorth in the demaund. Chapter 46.
_EIght daies remained Rodaran at the bridge of Iaspe, tarrying for some knight that should come from the Court of the Empe|rour Trebatio, for to combat with him, in the ende of the which when he saw that none came, he sent a damsell of the Quene of Carmanias vnto the Emperour Trebatio, giuing him to vnderstand how that all those Knights which were sent by him were prisoners, and that he should send more Knights, and if not, how that he was determined to depart into his owne Countrie with those Knights which he had in his

power. So the damsell departed, with this hir message,  at such time as the emperor, with other princes  knights, wer in the great hall of the pallas, this damsell entrrd in therat|and without acknowledging any courtesie she went before the Emperour, and said.
Rodaran, king of Arabia, my Lord doth send me to giue the o vnderstand emperour Trebatio, how that all those knights which thou didst send vnto him, are prisoners,  doth me wil hee to send other knightes, such as may with their great bounty  strength set them at liberty,  if not, he is determi|ned to depart into his owne country, and to cary them with him prisoners that already he hath,  will declare in all pla|ces that ther were no knights in thy court that durst come forth to combat with him.
When the damsell had made an end of saying these words, she returned back  went out of the great hall,  without a|ny tarrying returned vnto Rodaran, leauing the emperour  all his knightes that were with him in great admiration  sorrow, beleuing that the knight of the Sun was also pri|,  as men halfe amazed they looked one vpon another,  new not what to say,  ther was not one of them that could eleue, that such knights as went forth for to combat with Rodaran, could be taken prisoners, except it were by some reat treason. Then the valiant Clauerindo, who could no onger suffer his couragious hart so swelled but asking li|ence of the emperour, he departed towardes the bridge of y^e , more with pretence to vnderstand if ther were vsed a| treason,  for to be prisoner with his friends, then for any ope he had to conclude that which the knight of the Sun osicleer could not doo. And when this valiant prince came  y^ bridge, the battaile that was betwene him  Roda| was so well foughten, that they were more then halfe day in great contention, and could not get the victory  of another, neither was there any vauntage knowen of ther side, but in the end Rodaran feling himselfe weary   the night drew on, he began to vse his accustomed re|medy,

and did retire backwards: this valiaunt prince with great courage did follow him, till such time as they were vnder the  of the second tower. Then the quene did pul the cord.  let the yron net to fall downe vpon those knights, in uch ort, that they were both prisoners,  straight way they pulled of the princes helme,  toke a way his swood, and when his hands were bound, they tooke him out of the net,  did cary him prisoner vnto the other knights. Great was the sorrow  griefe which these good knights receiued, when they saw themselues together prisoners by so great treason. And seeing that they were in place whereas they could not profit themselues of their force  strength, but to haue pati|ence,  to suffer that terrible blow of fortune, they commit|ted themselues vnto God, till such time as it pleased him to dispose of them to his pleasure. So when this valiant prince was likewise prisoner with the rest, Rodaran sent the dam|sell againe vnto the emperour, for to giue him to vndersta~d how that the knight which he sent last was also prisoner:  that he should send other knights of great bounty in armes. But when the emperour did eare that message, without speaking vnto the damsell or  any other that was ther present, he arose vp  wen all alone into his closet. And knee|ling downe vpon the ground, shedding many salt and bitter teares from his eies, he began to complaine himselfe saying. Oh high  mightie Lord, the creator of all things, without whose good will  permission nothing can be done. Heere I  acknowledge that the great pride  presumtion of all mor tall men is such, and being by the abhorred, many times i the occasion, y^t being by thee forgotten, they fall into grea troubles  necessitie, by the which we may vnderstand, tha all our great force  strength, high estates, and all goodne which we doo receiue doth procede  come wholly and onel from thee,  by thy will  permission:  lacking thy aid an help, we are of our selues nothing at all. And I a morta man, at such time as I thought to be most highest in estat  most  est, with the new acknowledging of my worthy

valiant sons, with the high  mighty knighthood of my court, with whom I did beleeue to be sufficient for to conquer the whole world. Forgetting with my great pride  presumpti|on, to giue the thanks for so great benefite which by thee I haue obtained  now is the occasion that I am by thee for gotten  voide of thy mightie hand  power. And in a short time I do se my sons  all my knights which was y^e flower of all the world, in the power of one pagan,  prisoners  I my selfe in danger to be with them. Here I doo humbly de|sire thee my Lord good, seeing that I doo acknowledge my fault, that I alone may receiue the punishment. And doo not permit that so many good knights to perish  decay. In say|ing these  other like lamentable woords, the good emperour all that day he would not goe foorth of his closet: but when night was come, he armed himselfe very secretly, with his strong  rich armour,  tooke a mightie great  light horse, and with one squer, he departed out of the citie,  tooke his way towardes the bridge of the Iaspe, leauing order that they should say that he was in his chamber very sick,  that he commanded that none should enter in vnto him for that if they did know of his departure, all knights of the Court would follow aftr him, which was contrary to his desire. So in this sort went this worthy emperour, with so great desire to finde himselfe with Rodaran, that he thought euery hower to be a whole day. But yet hee made so great hast that the fist day after his departure, he ariued at the bridge of the Iaspe, without finding any aduenture by the way, worth the telling. And at his comming vnto the bridge,  knocked at the gate, and straight way it was open and the Emperour entred in ther at, and hi squier would hau entred in with him, but those that were at the gate woul ot let him to go in, so that the squier did striue with the and did stand in contention, and one of the men tooke vp  ogell and stroke the squier, that it greeued him very sor t which noyse the Emperour looked beehind him, and saw is squier to be so misused, he drew out his sword and  that man such a terrible blow, that hee euerthrew

him dead to the ground, the rest seeing their companion slain, they began altogether to buckle with the emperour, but he vsed himselfe so with them, that in a small time of ten which were of them, he slew eight,  the other two ran away for to tell their lord what had passed,  the gate remained with ot any kepers, so that the emperour entred the bridge, and his  with him,  he had not wel passed halfe the bridge, when Rodaran armed with strong armour,  mounted on his furious horse, with his speare in his hand be came orth and met him,  with presumptuous and proud words he saide: Knight, thou semest to be some innocent  variable person, thou comming to combat with me, thou ast made contenti|on with my men. Heere I sweare vnto thee by the high god, that thy life shall make me recompence for theirs, but first I will that thou tell me whether thou art the Emperour Trebatio, or some of his court, for that hetherto thoe which hath come hether, haue not ben so vncourteous as thou  ben. Then he said, thou shalt vnderstand Rodaran, that I am the emperour whom thou oost speak of,  not beleuing tha thy strength is sufficient to ouercome and take prisoners so good knights as thou hast in thy power, I am come hether  combat with thee, for to know by experience that which  many times hath ben told me of the therfore looke vnto th self, for thou shalt haue  to doe heerein,  let passe th death of thy keepers. And in saying these words, the good  perour turned about his horse: likewise Rodaran no lesse  full as much meruailing to see the emperour ther, turned  bout his horse, and being both in place to begin their cours they both of them together set spurs vnto their horses,   the midst of the bridge they made their encounter, and  each other with their speares in such sort, that they were  broken in peces, and passed by one another without  any more harme, and tourned their horses about  with their Swoords drawen, and their shieldes on  shoulders they assauited the one the other verye  lye, and the one of them stroke the other with so 

force  strenzth, that the noise ran all alongst the riuer. Ro|daran did so much opresse the Emperour with his mightye blowes, that he gaue him to vnderstand, that he was a knight of great bounty. Likewise he receiued such blowes of the em|perour, that Rodaran did very well fele  vnderstand him to be so good a knight as any of the other knights that came before him,  many times he said vnto himselfe, that with great reason those valiant knights did serue the Emperour Trebatio, for that he was of his owne person the most wor|thiest prince that euer e saw or elt,  seemed vnto him, that forsomuch as he was come thether vnto the combat, ther re|mained in the court no other knight that was of any accou~t or estimation, which was the occasion that he did animate  force himselfe very much for to onerome him,  did charge him with great  mighty blowes, but he had to doo with the emperour Ttebatio, father vnto the knight of the Sun  vnto Rosicleer,  such a one for his person, that setting his sons a part, ther was not a more valiant  worthie knight in all the world, who with the great sorrow  griefe which he re|ceiued for the imprisonment of his knights, did so charge Ro|daran with his mightie blowes, that although his strong  fine armour did saue him rom death, yet many times he brought him out of his remembrance, that his horse caried him round about the bridge.
In this sort the battaile enured more then thre heures,  could neither of them ouercome the other, but in the end be|cause their horses waxed weary, they concluded together to leaue them,  to make their battaile on foot,  for that they might then more at their ease bestur themselues to execute their terrible blowes, the battaile at that time semed to be more furious  well foughten, for their sheelds wer all bro|ken in peces,  with the strength of both their hands they stroke the one vpon the others elme, that it made them to sound like bels, and their ares were so full with the noyse therof that it was straunge. And many times these stot

Knightes with the mightye strength of theyr blowes, were constrained to vowe their heades downe vnto their breasts, and stoupe with their knes to the ground, and likewise with their handes to staye them from fal|ling all together, yet with a trise they recouered themselues againe,  abated nothing of their couragious striking one of another, although they were all to shaken with the force of theyr blowes, yet the one had not so soone discharged his blow as the other had his swoord aloft for to recompence the same  if at one time the emperour did bow his knes to the grou~d straight waies the mighty Rodaran did stoup with his hands, because he would not altogether fall downe,  sometimes he fell vpon his face, as halfe amazed. At this time was Roda|ran very much amazed at the great and high bounty of the Emperour Ttebatio,  thought verily vnto himselfe that it was not possible for him to get the victory of that rigorous battaile, if he did not profit himselfe of his wonted remedy  treason, yet was he meruailous desirous to ouercome that Magnanime,  valiant emperour in battaile, for that he had taken all the other Knights prisoners by that treason, he would not if it were possible, but ouercome the emperour by force of armes, which was the occasion that he did very much enforce himselfe to augment his blowes, but by reason of the great fury of the emperour,  the mortall  troublesome blowes which he stroke, brought him into great feblenesse  to be weary, the emperour was not cleane void, but by rea|son of the long endurance of the battaile, he waxed likewise weary, so that both of them had great nede for to rest the~|selues some what, of the great trauaile which they had passed, and did withdraw themselurs both together,  tested them|selues vpon the  of their rich swoords,  without speaking any word the one vnto the other, they remained so a good space, till such time as the Emperour feling himselfe somewhat refreshed said.
Tell mee Rodaran, what is the occasion that thou being such a knight as thou art,  so mighty a prince,  king of A|rabia,

hast left thine owne country,  come into these strange countries, so far from thine, whereas wee are all contrarye vnto you in customes and lawes.
Well, said Rodaran, seing that you so liberally haue shew|en vnto me who you were, I will straight way giue you to vnderstand of your demand. You shall vnderstand that on a time I being in the court of the mightie Emperour of Tar taria, which is the gran Cataya, by the mouth of the king Ge|drosia (who is an old man,  very well seene in the art of ni|gromancy, I heard him say, that the knights of Greece be|fore many yeares did passe, shall destroy all the Tartarians  pagans,  bring vnto destruction the most mightiest kings and Lords that are in all those countries,  ouerthrow all their Iols downe vnto the ground in despite of our Gods,  for that the words of that king did make the emperour  all the kings  noble men that were ther present greatly to meruaile, I in the midst amongst them did arise bp,  gaue my word  promise in their presence, for to come into these parts,  by mine owne hands for to take  carry away pri|souers all the knights of Greece,  for that they all did make a ieast thereat, and thought it a thing impossible, I straight waies departed out of the court,  toke in my company the quene of Carmania my spouse  wife,  am come hether, and done as is apparant vnto you, And with pretence  good wil when I haue prisoners the best  most estemed knights of all the court to depart vnto the sea,  returne againe vnto Tar|taria,  ther to make a present before the emperour of all the prisoners that I shall cary, that he man doe with them all that his will  pleasure is and according vnto the euill will which he doth beare vnto the christians, he will cause them all to die an cruell death, so  as they shall be presented before him. Therfore emperour Trebatio, looke well vnto ty selfe, for that I doe desire more to cary thee prisoner, then to enioy the kingdome of Carmania, although it were more greater then the whole Empire of Tartaria.
God will doo better with vs then thou doost think for, said the emperour,  being very angry  wrathfull at the euill pre|tence of Rodaran, he went vnto him  in such sort beegan to charge him with his strong  heauy blowes, brusing both his bones and flesh, that he was constrained to bestur himselfe, more for the defence of the blowes e receiuid, then for to procure to strike any. At this time was more then sixe houres past since the beginning of the battaile, at which time the worthy emperour with new force  strength did double his blowes,  in such sort did intreat Rodaran, that he was with|out all hope of victory of that battaile, which caused him to retire backwards vpon the bridge, for to seke remedy for the sauegard of his life, although it was a great griefe vnto  for to doo it,  was the occasion that this good emperour was brought subiect vnto the cruell blow of fortune, as the others were,  there he was taken prisoner in the yron net, wheras he vnderstood all the treason, whereby all the other knights were taken prisoners,  straight waies they pulled off his helme,  tooke away his rich  precious swoord, and bound his hands,  made fast to his fet a great  long chain,  caryed him wheras the other knights were, but when they saw him brought thether,  he them prisoners, either of them receiued so great sorrow  griefe, that they thought verilye to burst with anger,  ther were knights amongst them that would gladly haue yeelded themselues vnto death out of ha~d, vpon condition, to be but one houre at liberty, but especially the worthy Rosicleer, who when he saw the emperour his fa|ther prisoner, his sorow  griefe was so much, that he could not speake one word. Then Rodaran when he saw that he had prisoners the most principalest Knights of all Greece, with the counsaile and consent of the Quene Carmania, his wife, he put himselfe presently into his ship, which was at an aner in the riuer hard by the bridge of the Iaspe. Likewise all the prisoners in verye good order with the Quene Carmania, and all their people, they commaunded

to hoyse sayle, and being very glad and ioyfull of theyr no|ble pray, and the winde prosperous, in short time they were put into the mayne Sea, whereas they shaped theyr course the nighest way they could for to goe vnto the Emperour of Tartaria. Rodaran receiued the greatest contentment that euer man could receiue, for that he very well knew by expe|rience, that the present which he carried, was the most wor|thiest and valyauntest knights that were in all the woorld. Also hee thought that the Emperour of Tartaria and all his nobles would haue him in great reputation for that polly|cie which he vsed heerein. Let this now remaine for an ex|ample vnto all kings and mightie Lords, wherin they may se the small securitie which they haue in their high estate, and how subiect they are vnto mutable Fortune, for that at such time as they are exalted all aloft, with great pride and presumption they forget God, who is the author of all good|nesse, and he once leauing them, they are straight waies o|uerthrowen, and brought into such perils and dangers, that none but god alone is sufficient to deliuer them, fro~ whence doth procede the myrrour, to see how little their own power and strength is, when they thincke they are exalted in the most highest estate, as it hath happened vnto the good Em|perour Trebatio, who at such time as he thought to be so puissant and strong to conquer the whole world,  mounted so high, that neuer Emperour nor king atchieued the like, in a short time he was taken prisoner, with his son,  other va|liant Princes, onely by one Pagan. Whom at this present, the Historie doth leaue, to declare vnto you what chanced in Constantinople after the Emperour departed.


How it was knowen in Constantinople the impri|sonment of the Emperour, and what was done in consideration thereof. Chapter 47.
_AT such time as the squier which was with the Emperour saw his Lord prisoner, and the great treason which was vsed to take him, without any more tarrieng he returned vnto Co~stantinople as fast as his horse could run and at such time as ther was ioined to|gether in the great hall of the pallace many princes  wor|thy knights, he entered in at the doore,  with a loud voice e said: O princes  knights of Greece, what doo you hare so without care or consideration, and doo not procure to go and help the Emperor our Lord who by the greatest treason that euer was seene or heard of is taken prisoner by Rodaran. At which time all the princes and knights were amazed at the words, and there grew a great vprore amongst them, and demanded of him how and in what sort it happened, who in breefe did declare it vnto the~, the which was presently pub|lished in the great pallace, and throughout all the citie. And when it came vnto the eares of the Empresse, in hir estate wheras she sat she fell in a sound,  was in the armes of hir Ladies more the~ an hore as one that were dead,  in all the pallace was made such sorow  lamentatio, as though the Emperour had beene slayne, and with a trise therewere ma|ny princes and knights armed, and ioyned together a com|panie of more then two hundreth, who departed out of the citie all together as fast as their horses could run, and they tooke theyr way towards the Bridge of the Iaspe, but all did  little, for that when they came vnto the Bridge, they found that Rodaran with hi rich pray was gone, and they could finde no signe which way, so that they knew not whether to follow them. In this time the great valour of the Princesse Claridiana was not absent, for that aseer she had verie wiselie and curteously comforted the Empresse, she promised hir and gaue hir hir woord neuer to returne any more vnto the Empire of Greece, without the Empe|rour, and straight way she was armed with strong and rich , and mounted vpon a light horse, onely accompanied

with hir Damsels, she departed out of the Citie, and when shee came vnto the bridge of the Iaspe, she found the knights that went out to seke the Emperour, very sorrowfull and without all comfort, because they knew not which way to go seeke Rodaran, some of them embarked themselues to the sea, and other some went trauailing into the land to go and seeke him, but the Princesse finding in a port (which was nigh vnto the place whereas they were) a ship reaie in all points, she embarked hir selfe therein all alone with hir Damsels,  it semed vnto hir that seing that Rodaran dyd carry with him so rich a pray, that it did not beehooue him to stay in the countrie. So she put hir selfe vnto the sea, with|out knowing any certaine way whether to trauayle, but onely committed hir selfe vnto Fortune. So they naiga|ted fiue dayes at the Sea, without finding any aduenture worthie the telling, in the ende whereof verie earlie in the morning they discouered land nigh vnto them, which was pleasant and wel furnished with all maner of grene tres, and hauing great desire to goe a shore, they commaunded to hoise out their oat. So the Princes and hir damsels went a land, and she mounting vpon hir horse, and hir Damsels vpon their Palfraies, they began to trauaile by a very na|row and small vsed path, which went through a Ualley, which was garnished full of very swet Roses, and other odoriferous flowers and hearbs, and they had scarce trauai|led therein one mile, whe~ they saw comming against them a damsel vpon a palfray, so fast as hee could runne, and men running threatning to kill hir, if she would not stay, but whe~ she found hir self nigh vnto the princesse, shee said: Oh knight defend me fro~ these traytors, for they haue commit|ted the greatest treason that euer you heard. Then the prin|cesse hauing hir helme on, she put hir selfe before these men, because they should not come vnto the damsell, who would not withdraw themselues, but perforce would haue layde holde vpon the Damsell, wherewith the Princesse with hir Speare stroke one of them therewith, that she gored him cleane through, and  fell downe dead vnto the ground.

Then one of the other offered to strike at the princes with a great fauchon that he had in his hand, who perceiuing it, spurred hir horse ouer him, who tore him all to peces vn|der his feete, and slew him, and offering to strike the other with hir speare, he tooke his legges and ran so fast as euer hee could the way hee came. Then the Damsell being at libertie, the Princesse demanded of hir what was the occa|sion that those men did follow and pursue hir? Ah sir, sayd the Damsell, doo you returne with all spede backe againe the way you came, and make no longer tarriaunce in this place, for if you be taken it is not possible that you should liue any longer. Tell me first the occasion why, sayde the Princesse, then afterward I will doo that which semeth best vnto mee.
Sir knight (said the damsell) here before goeth a giant, the greatest and most furious that euer was sene by men, who with more then twentie knights in his company, doth carrie prisoner the Queene of Hiberia, with the Princesse Theophilia hir daughter, and  more Ladies and Dam|sells of hirs, who by force this infernall Gyant did take a|way from the King Hiberia, and more then fortie Knights of his, who were passing away the time abroad in a verie delightfull forrest, this Gyaunt did put vs all together into a Ship of his, and hath brought vs hether prisoners, carry|ing vs into a Castle which is there a little before, from whence I came running away, and it semeth vnto me better to dye in the handes of them that shall follow me, then to be prisoner in the power of that infernall Gyant.
The Damsell finishing these woords, shee receyued so great feare, that the Princesse could not stay hir, but more by force then with hir good will, she caused hir to returne againe in hir companie the way which she came, in which they had not trauayled verie farr, when they saw com|ming towards them tenne Knights as fast as their horses could runne, who beeing aduertised by him that ran away, they came in the demaund of the Knight which had slayne

the other two men. And when they saw them, by the signes and tokens that the man had giuen them, they vnderstood that it should bee the Princesse, then all together with theyr swoords in theyr hands they ranne against hir, but she re|ceiued them in such sort, that shee receiued no harme of their encounters, but she stroke one of them so right, that y^e poynt of hir speare came foorth at his back, and fell downe dead to the ground, and breaking hir speare with that encounter, she drew out hir swoord and began to combat with them, and dyd so behaue hir selfe, that in a short time she had slaine the one halfe of them, and although those Knights did charge hir verie much with their strong blowes, yet by rea|son that hir armour was so good, she was in great security not to receiue any wound, by reason whereof, without all feare she put hir selfe amongst them, striking such mortall blowes, that it was wonderfull to beholde, and neuer rested till shee had slaine all saue two, who seeing the great force  strength of the Princesse, durst not tarrie any longer, but returned the way they came as fast as theyr Horsses could rnne. The Damsell at this time would verie fayne haue had the Princesse returne backe againe, and not haue gone any farther, but hir couragious and valyaunt stomacke would not consent therevnto, but followed the other in that way they went. After they had trauayled in that way a small space, they discouered vpon the top of a high Rocke a Castle, very great and full of towers, and compassed about with a very strong wall, and comming nigh vnto the same they saw come foorth of the gate a Gyant, the greatest and tallest that euer they saw in all theyr liues, and mounted vpon a great and mightie courser,  in his companie more then ten Knights, who came that way wherein the Prin|cesse trauayled, but as soone as the Damsell of the Quene had spyed them, shee had no desire to stay, but returned back againe the way she came as fast a hir palfray could runne, but the Princesse who receiued no feare of the Gyaunt nor of his Knights, kept  hir way towards them, and when the Gyaunt came nigh vnto hir, with a hoarse and hollow

voyce he sayd: Oh foolish and vnhappie knight, how is it, knowing that I am Orbion, and hauing slaine my knights, thou durst be so bold and haue so great courage to tarry and abide my comming, it dooth greue mee for the anger which thou hast giuen me, for that it will be vnto thee a great honour to be slaine at my hands, and I smally satisfied for the death of my Knights, in taking away thy lyfe. Far more foolish and vnhappie, maist thou account thy selfe Gy|ant, saide the Princesse, if thou didst know thy selfe, know|ing that god is in the heauens to punish all euill dedes, and how darest thou be so bold to vse so great euil and illany. Therefore out of hand make recompence of all this euill which thou hast done, and set at libertie all those which thou hast prisoners in thy Castle, if thou wilt that the diuine iu|stice bee not executed on thee this day. The proude Gyant when he heard those woords was so full of anger  wrath, that a thicke smoake came out of his Beauer, and without answering any woord he turned about his horse, and with his Speare in his hand he came against the Princesse, say|ing: Oh if the high Gods were so pleased, that the wert that great Siracusano and Achilles the Greeke, ioutly with Hector of Troy, that all three together I might depriue the~ of theyr , wherewith I might somwhat ass wage this my great wrath and anger. This valiant  worthy Prin|cesse did not refuse that terrible and cruel encounter of that furious Gyant, but with hir speare in hir hand went foorth to met him, and meeting togyther in theyr first course, the Gyaunt encountered with the Princesse in the midst of all hir body with so great strength, that if hir armour had not beene made by the art of the Queene of Pantafilia, it had not ben possible for hir to haue escaped death, for if hee had made that encounter against two other Knights, hee had surelie yearced them through, and for that the force of hir fine ar|mour would not consent to be broken, the head of his spear glaunced on the one side, and the staffe was sheeuered all t peces, in such sort y^t the princesse  cleere of that encoun|ter, but she made hir encounter with so great force again

she Gyant, that chancing on the one side vnder his arme, it perced him through his harneis,  hir speare appeared more then halfe on the other side, making a little wound, and by force of that strong encou~ter, his horse was ouerthrowen to the ground,  in his fall one of his legs chaunced vnder his Horse, in such sort, that by any meanes he could not mooue himselfe,  as the princesse would haue returned vpon him, all the Gyants knights came against hir, and compassed hir round about, and charged hir with mightie blows on euery side, but when shee saw hir selfe in that necessitie, shee drew out hir sword, and in a small time gaue them to vnderstand hir great bountie, and stroke at them such blows, that they durst not come nigh hir, at which time she had ouerthrow|en and slaine more then halfe, in all which time the Gyaunt could not by any meanes clere his leg fro~ vnder his horse, and if so bee that any of his Knights alighted to help him, the princesse was presently with him and slew him, so that all the bttayle was with his Knights, and this valyaunt princesse had so great confidence in hir excellent and strong armour, that shee put hir selfe amongst them, as the rutsh|ing Wolfe amongst the poore and simple lambs, and she ne|uer stroke blow but shee dyd kill or sore wound a Knight.
There was not as yet full an houre passed since the beegin|ning of the battayle, when this royall Princesse had slayne the most part of the Knights, and the rest which remained eeing much amazed at hir mortall blowes, ranne away, so that she remained all alone in the field with the Gyant, and  hir selfe clere fro~ all those knights, with a trise she  from hir horse, and giuing the bridle to one of hir , shee went vnto the Gyaunt, who was blaspheming gainst his gods, in seeing his knights slaine before his eies, nd could not help them, but the first thing which this royall  did, she tooke the horse off his leg, and did help him  arise rom the ground, saying: Orbion, heere thou shalt  how little the force of man auaileth, when they  forgotten of God,  for their euill works they lack diuine : Tarry a little, said the Gyaunt, for as yet I am not

at the poynt to acknowledge this, and there with he drew out a mightie great and broad Fauchon, and went against the Princesse, and stroke hir such a blow vpon the healme, that it sounded throughout all the Ualley, and if it had not beene verie good and of great force, both head and body he had clouen cleane a sunder in the middest, and for all that it made hir to stoupe with hir hands vnto the ground, yet dyd not this worthie Ladie receiue any feare, but ra|ther it did encrease hir force and courage, wherewith she returned vnto him,  stroke him such an ouerthwart blow vppon his leg, that it cut both harneys and flesh vnto the hard bone, whereat ranne out great abundaunte of blood, then the Gyaunt retourned againe with great fury for to strike the Princesse vpon the healme, pretending with that blow to conclude the battayle betweene them, but she ta|king warning by the first which she receiued, with great lightnesse dyd cleere hir selfe from the fury thereof, and his blow descended downe to the ground, that the fauchon en|tered into the earth almost vp to the hilts, and beefore that the Gyaunt could pull out his Fauchon, the Princesse cast a thrust at the visor of his healme, in such sort, that chaun|cing in the sight, it passed through his head on the other side, so that the Gyant fell downe dead to the ground. This being done, the Princesse gaue great thancks vnto almigh|tie God, for that great victorie which he had granted vnto hir, and mounting vppon hir Hors, she tooke hir way to|wards the Castle, and when she came there the gates were opened vnto hir, for that the small companie which remay|ned aliue of the people of the Gyant, receiued greater plea|sure then sorrow for his death, onely for his euill and cru|ell customes and confines. The Princesse straight way en|tered in, and called for the keyes of all the Castle, and de|manded where the Quene was,  shee was brought foorth with vnto a great quadran, whereas she found the Quene with the Princesse Theophilia, and all their Ladies  Gen|tlewomen, in great sorrow and heauinesse, without any hope of succour, who when they heard of the death of the gi|ant

 of all that had passed, their ioy was such, that till such time as out of a window they did se him dead in the field, they could not beleue it. And as the princes entred in wher|as the queene  the princesse was, they vnderstanding what she had done in their deliuering, they went towards hir say|ing: Ualiant  worthy knight, the liuing God reward the for that which thou hast done in our behalfe,  here we doe most hartely pray you to pull of your healme, or els to tell vs your name, that we may know vnto whom we are bound for this great benefit shewed vnto vs. Then the princes the more to glad  comfort them, did pull of hir helme,  did de|clare vnto them who she was. And she remained so faire  so full of beautie after the great trauaile that she had pas|sed, that it was as great meruaile to behold hir, as Diana in breake of the day: the queene  the princesse were greatly amazed at that great wonder,  looked the one vpon the o|ther, beleeuing it rather to be a dream then of truth, all that which they saw. But in the end being fully satisfied the queene and the princesse did imbrace hir, giuing hir great thanks for that she had done for them. So they remained there all the rest of that day  all the night: and the next day in the morning the princes ordained  made lord of that castell, a knight of the giants, for that he semed to be a good knight,  the quene  the princesse with all their ladies  gentlewo|men did depart from thence,  the princesse did beare them company vnto the port. And in the way as they went, they met with the damsell that ran away, who for very shame would not come in presence of the quene, although they all had great mirth  pastime with hir, for the small confidence she had in the princes. So when they came vnto the port, they all imbarked themselues in the same ship wherein the princes came into that country:  hauing the time  wind very prosperous, the next day they ariued at Hiberia,  they had not all fully disimbarked themselues a land, when that thether came the King with more then two thousand

knights, who went in the demaund  seeking of Orbion, who|had caried away the queene,  when he met them ther,  v|derstood of them all that had passed, his ioy  pleasure was such, as to the iudgement I reter me: but when he was ful|ly certified by the quene who the knight was that put them at libertye, he went towarde the princesse,  said: Worthy Lady, iue me your royall hands that I may  them, for I owe it vnto you for this great benefit shewed vnto me,  all kings  princes in the world, are bound vnto your great highnesse  bounty. The princesse did then imbrace him say|ing: Unto God doo I giue great thanks for his great bene|fits showed vnto me, in that he hath permitted that I haue done this great seruice vnto the quene  vnto the princes, and likewise in excusing your trauaile begun to sake out Orbion. And now seing that there is no more to bee done herein, in your seruice, I doo most hartely desire you to giue me lisence to depart, for that I haue very much to doo in o|ther places. And so very much against the kings wil, he tooke leaue of hir,  offred himselfe  all his kingdome at hir com|mandement. So she departed from them  traailed eyght daies without finding any aduenture, till in the end she was cleane out of Hiberia,  entred into another kingdome  vp|on a sodaine at such time as the knight of the Sun was past, she discouered a great way off from hir, a mighty army o knights, with very rich tents  ancients: likewise she saw nigh vnto that army, a great  well  citie, out of the which there went foorth one alone knight,  within a littl while after she saw him to make battaile with the most strongest knights that euer she saw,  in beholding this fier battaile the history leaueth hir, till opportunitie.


 How that the Knight of the Sun and the king Liseo  forth the second day against their enemies,  of the hig knighthood which they shewed in their battell. Chap. 48.
_IN the kingdome of Lidia, was not the knight of the Sun idle, neither receiued he much ease in the time y^t he was there, for that calling to reme~brance the imprisonment of his friends, and also the great loue which hee bare vnto the princesse Claridiana, whom he exceedingly loued,  also vnto the faire princesse Lindabrides, was the oc|casion that he could not take any rest, but was put in the greatest care  doubt that euer he had in all his life. Not knowing when to cleare himselfe of that which he had pro|mised vnto his new friend, the king Liseo. And because that the time shuld not passe away  wares. The next day af|ter the battaile as the history hath told you, the king Liseo, determined to goe foorth againe in his company. Then the knight of the Sun bid request him very much, to let him that day goe foorth alone, for that they should haue other dayes wherin they would goe soorth both together. The which the king Liseo by no meanes would consent therto, saying: that first he would consent to loose all his kingdome, for that it did accomplish him so to ee, rather then to consent to se him in y^ camp amongst his enimies alone. But the knight of the Sun hauing a great desire to goe forth alone said. Here I doo sweare vnto you my good Lord, that if you doo not like wall hereof, that I will leaue all your friendship, the which I doo esteeme very much,  depart whereas you shall neuer heare more of me. Then the king when hee saw him so de|termined, saide: My good friend, doo your pleasure, yet con|sider I pray you what pleasure I can receiue to see you in y^e midst of mine enimies, and not be a partner of your paine: notwithstanding seing you are therewith content, I will not contend against any thing you will command. So this valiant Knight being armed with his strong and rich ar|mour, and mounted vpon his horse, somwhat before that the Snne had any sorce, he went foorth out of the Citie, at which time the king and the quene,  all the kinghts and

Ladies were vpon the towers of the citie, and at the battle ments, for to behold  see what should passe with this valy|ant  warlike knight, who before that he came into the camp, did set his horne vnto his mouth  did blow it so strong and loud, that ther was no knight so stout in all the camp, know|ing who he was that did sound it, but his hart would trem|ble thereat, and such were there that would gladly haue gi|uen all that they had, vpon condition that they had not en|tred into the kingdome of Lidia, although to the contrary ther were many other which did neuer proue his blowes,  were very valiant  stout, who did arme themselues, and at the commandeme~t of the king they went forth against him,  the first that went foorth amongst them, was one named Alberro,  borne in Seras,  being a Knight arraunt, he came in company with the king of Arcadia to those parts,  was counted for one of the most valiauntest knights that was a|mongst the pagans,  his armour was so excellent good and made by such art that ther was no blow of sword able to cut it, who was mounted vpon his horse with great prid and arrogancy, and went towardes the knight of the Sun, and without any other salutation or curtesie hee said: It shall well appeare foolish and simple knight, that in y^ battaile which thou hadst in this field, thou diddest not meete any enemie so valiant as I am, for if thou hadt yesterday proued and felt the force of my blowes, thou wouldest not haue returned this day to deie vs with so great boldnes.
Well said the knight of the Sun if thou hast thy selfe in so great estimation, and that there is not a knight in all the campe that is thy equall: Wherefore diddest thou not yesterday come forth and make resistance, seeing I made so great slaughter amongst thy companions, and in resisting therof thou maist well vnderstand and know that ther  no more in the, then in any of them, for it seemed vnto  great villanie to be so many against the alone, sayde  berro, but now that we are alone together I will  thee to vnderstand that it is true all that I haue said.

And in saying these words both of them turned about theyr horses, with their speares in their hands,  made their en|counter the one against the other, with so great swiftnes of their horses, that they which did beehold them could scarce ary the sight of their eies after them,  their encounter was with so great force  strength, that this valiant pagan very much against his will was thrust out of his saddle, and the knight of the Sun passed forwards on,  lost one of his stir|rops, but the force of that stronge encounter greued him very much, and he was not well setled againe in his saddle, when there came foorth to iust against him another valiant pagan, called Pirro,  brother vnto Albero, no lesse valiant  prou then he was, who did encounter him very strongly  for that he came vpon him on a sodaine, and stroke him vn|awares, i laced very little to haue ouerthrowen him from his horse out of his , but this couragious knight fra|ming himselfe very strongly with his swoord in his hand, stroke him such a blow vpon his helme, that all amazed he  him fall forwards vpon the sadle pommell,  as he would haue stroken another blow, he heard behind him a great noise of horses,  turning him about to se what it shuld be, he saw that it was a knight that came to encounter him, with a big speare in his hand behind him,  being well adui|sed at such time as he should strike him with his speare he put himselfe with great lightnes on the one side,  cut his speare a sunder in the middest with his sword,  the knight passed forwards on without dooing any more harme, this was a valiant Moore called Gruto, and borne in Africa, and beeing a wandering Knight he came in that countrye, in the company of the ing of Arcadia, for one of the stoutest and most valiantest knightes in all the whole army, whom the ing sent out against the knight of the Sunne, bele|uing that with the ayde and helpe of the others they should ouercome  take him. So strayght wayes after him ame another knight called Breo, brothers sone vnto the  and no lesse valiaunt then the others, who likewise

broke his speare vpon the knight of the Sun, who mooued no more in his saddle, then if he had made his encounter against a strong tower. At this time the valiant Alberro was mou~|ted againe on horseback, and Pirro was come againe vnto himselfe, so that they two in company with Gruto Breo, all foure together with their swords drawen in their hands as|salted the knight of the Sun,  began to charge him with so many hard blowes, that it had ben sufficient to haue cut  broken an anfield of stele into peces, and there was neuer Knight in the world at one time so assaulted as the knight of the Sun was, for that he made battaile  resistance against foure of the most valiauntest knightes that were in all the country of the pagans,  such, that either of them were suffi|cient to fight against twentye knightes, but this was that knight of the Sun, he whom all Persia Hungaria, and all the whole Empire of Greece, with the greatest part of all the world did tremble when they heard him named, and he who with his great bounty did bring in subiection the terrible  fearefull keepers of the castle of Lindaraza,  he whose high and mighty knighthood is such, as neuer was heard of, who did strike  charge these foure knights with so terrible and mightie blowes, all together, that the wide fields  valleyes, with the sumptuous workes of the great citie, with the ti|merous noyse of that cruell battayle was full with y^e sound,  because their armour was of so great excellency, that no sword being neuer so sharp could pearce  cut them, all the whole state of the battaile remayned in their great  migh|tie strengths,  ouercharging of their terrible blowes vpon one another. Then the stout  valiant Alberro, who shewed himselfe very rigorous in the battaile, when he saw that the king of Arcadia,  all the whole army stoode  did behold them,  seemed to bee a great shame  rebuke that on alone knight should so defend  maintaine himselfe against foure knights,  such as they were, with his sword in both his hands he stroke him such a blow ouerthwart the visor of his helme,

and because his mighty cutting sword could not enter ther in, yet it tooke away the sight of his eies,  ther flew so many sparks of fire out therat, that it semed the whole helme, to burne ther with, but yet for all that this valiant warriour was nothing amazed or astonied thereat, but procuring to giue him his payment for the same, stroke him so terrible a blow, that out of all remembrance he made him fall backe|wards vpon his horse crouper,  his horse caried him round about the field, voiding at his mouth  nose great abundance of blood. But when his brother Pirro saw that, beleuing y^t he had ben slaine, he stroke such a blow at the knight of the Sun, that he made him to loose the raines of his horse bridle,  was therwith som what astonied,  being not fully cleere from the fury thereof, when that the stout Breo stroke him another blow vpon his hard healme, that the noise  sound therof was heard a good way  the knight of the Sun so ouer|charged therwith, that he declined with his head downe to his horse neck,  as Gruto came vnto him to strike him an other blow, thinking therby to ouerthrow him out of his sad|dle, with great lightnes he raised himselfe againe,  with the great ire the which hee had, hee stroke such an ouerthwart blow at Alberro with both his hands in the midst of all his body, that be all to brused his armour,  with the great force therof he broke his ribs  his gall within his body, in such sort, that he fell from his horse downe to the ground: Oh how much was the great sorow  griefe which the king re|ceiued when he saw that terrible and wonderfull blow, for that his cosin was very rich  a knight that was best belo|ued aboue all other knights that he had and also for that he conceiued within his mind, that if that knight should endure long, that he would not leaue one knight aliue in all the whole camp that is of any reputation.
So with the great griefe which the losse of his knights caused him to haue, with a trise he caused himselfe to be ar|med with his strong armour, which was a finger thick of very fine stele, and so good as any was in all the world,

and being mounted on a strong  light horse he went out of the camp with his speare in his hand, saying: Oh that my fortune wer so good, that as I go against this valiant knight, I might make battaile against all my false gods, in whom I haue beleeued  put my confidence, for if they were all a|gainst me,  they were knights in this world, I think verily to ouercome them all,  make them to know  vnderstand that the power  strength of this knight is much more then theirs. The king had not fully concluded in saying these words, when the valiant Pirro with one blow that the knight of the Sun gaue him with his swoord, fell from his horse as though he had bene dead, but when the King saw that, with wonderfull force he went towards him,  with a great  broad fauchon in his hand he stroke the knight of the Sun vpon the helme, that it tooke way the sight of his eyes,  de|priued him of his vnderstanding, and his horse caried him a while about the field, for you shall vnderstand that y^e king of Arcadia was so stout  couragious a knight, that neuer any knight with whom he did make battaile with, could endure with him a whole day in the field,  was of great fame and feared amongst the pagans, but yet he did not goe away boa|sting himselfe of this blow, for the knight of the Sun before the king could strike him the second, returned  came again to himself,  set spurs vnto his horse,  came running against the king like a whirle wind,  with his swoord in both his hands he stroke him such a blow vpon his healme, that he made him to fall forwards vpon his horse necke,  the blood ran out both at his mouth  nose, and his horse carried him round about the field out of his remembrance, as though he had ben dead, at which time Alberro was come againe to himselfe, and he and Gruto together did terribly assault the knight of the Sunne, chargeing him with great and heauye blowes, the which he felt and grieued him very much for though his armour did defend him from wounding, yet for all that it could not excuse him, but that his flesh must haue

bene very fore brused with those mighty  strong blowes, and it had beene better for him to haue contended agaynst the whole armie, then against those foure knights, for that being embraced with a great number, the valiant knights could neuer haue so good opportunity to execuse their migh|tie blowes vpon him, but in such sort these valyaunt Pa|gans did so charge him, that he felt himselfe sore troubled, but yet for all this, not faynting nor loosing one point of his courage, but rather increasing more and more, did so be|haue himselfe with those two stout Pagans, that in a small time he had ouercome them, if the king of Arcadia had not come againe to himselfe, and Pirro mounted againe vpon his Horse, who seing themselues so euill intreated, with great fury and courage they went to help theyr company|ons, which was the occasion that at that time their battell was more kindled and better foughten then it was in all the day before, for when these stout Pagans saw them|selues all foure together, theyr courage and force did the more increase, and herein the knight of the Sunne was nothing behinde them, for the more they did charge him, the more his strength increased. At this time it was more then three houres since their battaile began, without taking any rest either of them, and those that beeheld them waxed wea|rie, and likewise the Pagans meruailously tormented with the mightie blowes which they had receiued, and the knight of the Sunne more angrie  wrathfull then he was all the day beefore, and his anger did so far exceede, and his force so much increase, y^t at one blow he ouerthrew the stout Gruto to the ground, and with an other blow he ouerthrew Pirro, but the valiant Berro stroke him so strong a blow vpon his helme, that he made him to stoupe  decline his head to his horse neck, but he made no brags therof, for that the knight of the Sunne returned his payment with so great furie and force, that buckling his helme,  breaking therewith all to eces the skull of his head, he ouerthrew him dead to the ground, and with a trise hee turned vpon the king of Arca|dia, who was comming against him to strike him, and strok

him such an ouerthwart blow on the one side, that he ouer|threw him on the other side. Then this valiant and worthy knight without any longer staying amongst them, but with as great fury as a whirle wind he put himselfe in the midst of the whole armie, and wounded  slew so many, that al the way wheras he went, he left it full of dead bodies, so that ther was not one in all the camp that durst make resistance against him, but passed through amongst them, as commonly the bayted Bull, beeing well pricked with darts dooth passe through a co~pany of men. At this time the day passed away, and night came on, and this valiant Knight somwhat wea|rie with wounding and killing of Pagans, all to be brued with blood he departed out of the Camp, and without any following him he came vnto the gates of the citie, the which were straight wais opened, and he found at the entrie in therat, the king Lyseo all armed in a readinesse to goe foorth in his aide and help, if he were driuen to any necessitie, of whom he was receiued with great ioy  pleasure, and the gates being shut, they went vnto the pallace, whereas with great mirth and ioy they were receiued by the quene, and supped together with great ioy and pleasure, and tooke their ease all that night, and the knight of the Sunne determined not to goe foorth other two daies to the battaile.


How Rodaran came to land, and by great aduenture hee came vnto the kingdome of Lidia. Chapter 49.
_WIth great pride did this Pagan Rodaran na|uigate by sea with his rich pray of the pri|soners which hee carryed, for to present them before the Emperour of Tartaria, who was no lesse endued with wisedome  patience, the~ with force and strength, for to suffer that terrible and cruell blow of Fortune, alwaies abiding the good houre that fortune would vse vpon them, and as so ma|ny

knights as well in vertue as in prowesse, was not who|lie forgotten of God, as appeared here at this present, for that he did ordaine theyr fortune in such sort, that the ship in the which they were carried, and dyd ariue in the King|dome of Phrigia, and for that it was the right way to goe vnto Tartaria, Rodaran and the Quene went a land, and commaunded that the prisoners lykewise should be taken out of the ship, who were all bound in chaynes, so that they were carryed very strongly and in good order. So in this sort they trauailad fiue daies without happening any thing vnto them worth the telling, in the ende of the which they came into the Kingdome of Lidia, and came in the sight of the camp of the King of Arcadia, and Rodaran demaunded whose armie that same was, and it was declared vnto him the truth thereof, who receiued great ioy and contentment therat, for that the king of Arcadia was a very great friend of his, for being in the Court of the Emperour of Tartaria, and a trauailing knight, he had great acquaintance and fre|quentation with him, and hauing great desire to se him, and giue him vnderstanding of his pray the which he carri|ed, he sayd vnto the Quene Carmania, that he would go vnto him for to se him, and she thought it good, and consen|ted thervnto. So they went and carried their prisoners be|fore the king, and when they came vnto the tent of the king of Arcadia, they alighted from theyr horses and entered in herat, and as soone as he knew that it was Rodaran, with reat curtesie  pleasure he receiued them, for that this was he greatest friend he had in all the world. And whe~ he vn|derstood the occasion wherfore he came into those parts, and f the prisoners he brought with him, the King very glad nd ioyfull caused them to be brought into his tent, wher| he honoured them very much, and gaue Rodaran to vn|derstand of all that euer he had passed and done in the king| of Lidia,  how that he had brought his enterprise vn| that estate, that he had almost taken that last citie, and w that there was come to help them a Knight, the most liantest  strongest that euer in all his life he had sene,

and gaue to vnderstand of all that he hath done, in thre times that he came foorth to battaile with his people, at the which Rodaran was greatly amazed, and as one that all rancour and mallaice was not cleane rooted out of him, he had great desire to se that knight, and to combat with him, beleeuing that he should conclude and make an ende of that which the whole armie before could not dooe. So Rodaran remayned till the next day hoping therein to se that valy|ant Knight. Whereat the King of Arcadia receiued great ioy  contentment, thincking that if he and Rodaran might haue the knight of the Sunne betwixt them, that hee could not by any meanes escape, but either be slaine or taken pri|soner. In this sort they passed away that day, and the night with great pleasure, although it was vnto the prisoners o|uer much sorrow and griefe, alwaies with patience abiding the good houre of Fortune.


How the Knight of the Sunne went out the third time into the camp of the king of Arcadia,  what happened therein. Chapter 50.
_THE next day after that Rodaran came into the Kings Camp, the knight of the Sun was determined to go out into the field, with the great desire he had to clere himselfe of that enterprise, for to returne again into Greece, as well to combat with Rodaran, as to re|create himselfe with his Ladies, the absence of whom was vnto him no small griefe: likewise he was put in great perplexity and care, for that according vnto the great num|ber of people which the king of Arcadia had with him in his Camp, it was not possible for him to clere himselfe so soone as he thought he should, which was the occasion that very earely in the morning, before the Sunne did shew hir selfe this valiant warriour being armed with his rich  strong armour, and mounted vpon his great and light horse, with a mighty seare well steeled in his hand, he went out of the

Citie, and very much against the will of the King Lyseo, whom he caused to tarrie within the Citie in a readinesse, for to come foorth to ayde and help him, if any cause of ne|cessity did call him, and to giue him his whole contentment he would not say any thing agaynst him that his pleasure was to dooe. So when this couragious Knight came vnto the Camp, he blew his horne with so great strength, that it was heard throughout all those wide and broad fields, and put great feare in the most part of all them that wer in the Campe, for that there were very few of them that had any securitie, salling into his hands. Then the King of Arcadia vnderstanding the demaund of the Knight, dyd straight wayes commaund the most valiauntest and strongest in all the armie to arme themselues, and commaunded to set thayres without the doore of his tent, whereas he and Ro|daran sat downe, to se and beehold from thence all that the Knight of the Sunne should doo. It was not long after that there went out of the Camp a valiaunt Pagan called Alri|o, who was mounted vpon a mightie great Horse, and ar|med with guilt armour, ull of rich precious stones, which certified them that he was of high estate, and went towards the Knight of the Sun, and with a great speare in his hand, with the which he gaue him a verie strong encounter, in such sort, that his speare was sheeuered all to peces, and the Knight of the Sunne thereat made no mention of moouing  his saddle, but he made his encounter so strongly against is enimie, that by reason of the stiffenesie of his Speare, nd the fineneste of the others armour, that would not con|tent to be broken, with the force of that blow hee was hoi|d out of his saddle, and throwen ouer the horse crouper to e ground, tenne pces from his horse, and the blow chaun|ed vnder his breast in such sort, that before he came vnto e ground his breath was gone, and he starke dead, and though at this blow all the Pagans wondered great| yet for all that came foorth another Knight, no lesse ar|gant and proude then valiant, who at the first encounter  beare Alrifo companie. Then after him came foorth ten

knights together, of the valiantest and strongest that were in all the whole armie, all the which this valiant and wor|thie warriour dyd ouerthrow to the ground some starke dead, and other some so euil intreated and brused with theyr falls, that afterward they would serue to vse no armour And this being done, there was not one Knight in all the camp that was of so great force that durst go foorth to com|bat with him, so that he was there trrieng a good while to see if any would come foorth against him. All this being sene by Rodaran, and how that there was none that durst take vpon him the enterprise, with a trise he causee himself to be armed with his strong armour, and being mounted vppon his big and light Horse, with a great Speare in his hand he went foorth agaynst the Knight of the Sunne, who when he saw him comming so big and well membred, he had him in estimtion to be a very good knight, and choosing himselfe a good Speare, amongst a great number which hee caused to be brought out of the Citie, hee did abide the com|ming of Rodaran, who when he came nigh vnto him, he said.
Thou shalt vnderstand, sir Knight, that I am newly come into this camp, and hearing very much spoken of thee thy valiant deds, it hath giuen mee great good will to come and se part thereof, and for that according vnto that which I haue seene thou semest to be a good knight, I would that thou wouldest leaue to be anie more agaynst the King o Arcadia, and to forget the friendship and fauour which tho shwest in the part of the king Liseo, and I will carrie the in my companie, and doo so much that the King of Arcadia shal receiue the to be his night, and to pardon and forgiu the all that is past. And if thou wilt doo this which I d offer vnto the, I will receiue the vnto my friendship an be thy friend, and if not, se that thou doost defend thy sel from me, for that I wil make the by force to doo that whi thou wouldest not by faire meanes. Then the Knight of  Sunne, who receiued better contentment at his gallant d position, then any pleasure in his words, with great ek nesse answered him and sayde.
Sir knight, who are you that is so valiant, that alone doth presume to dooe with me that which all this whole armie hath not had power to accomplish. To whom hee sayd: He|therto I haue not denied my name to and that hath deman|ded it of me, neither will I now, nor ro~ this day forwards. Neither will I denie mine vnto thee, said the Knight of the Sunne. Then the knight said: Thou shalt vnderstand that I am Rodaran, King of Arabia, who with the force of my arme thinke to flush that which all thi whole armie haue not power to doo. Oh how ioyfull was the Knight of the Sun when he heard those woords, and knowing him to be that Rodaran, and the person which in all the world he most desi|red to meete with, as well to combat with him, as to know of the imprisonment of his brother, and of his louing friends, and the more to kepe himselfe sacret, hee sayd: Is it possi|ble that thou art that Rodaran, who in companie with the Queene Carmania passed into Greece, to combat with the knights of the Emperour Trebatio. To whom he aunswe|red very quickly, and sayd: I am he, and more thou shalt vnderstand that by the force of my strong arme I haue pri|soners the best knights that are in all Greece, and likewise the Emperours person. All the which I doo bring with me in my companie prisonrs, for to present the~ before the Em|perour of Tartaria, to dooe with them all that his pleasure is to commaund. Then the knight of the Sunne without ma|king any tarryeng, but as glad as euer he was in all his life giuing great thankes vnto God, that his fortune was so good to finde Rodaran at that instant, hee set Spurs vnto his horse and turned him about, and came against Rodaran who likewise came against him,  ran against one another with so great fury, that the earth seemed to shake in theyr wift course,  in the midst thereof they made their encoun|ters, which were such, that their speares were broken to pe|es,  passed by one another without receiuing any harme,  rning about with their swords in their hands, they assal|d one another with so great force, that they which be held  were terrified,  the Knight at the Sun vnderstood that

Rodaran was very valiaunt and stout. Likewise Rodaran thought not that he had to doo with the Knight of the Sun, but when he saw how stronglie he dyd strike his blowes, and the little account he made of his blowes, with great sorrow he sayd vnto himselfe.
Oh high and mightie Gods, what a number of strange meruailes bee there in this world, for that I thought verily there was not any that was able to be compared vnto me in force and strength, and yet I found those in Greece that did far surmount and passe me therein, and beleuing that there was none other in all the world, now without seeking of them, I haue met with one, with whom I hope of n other remedie, but to bee slayne by him, or else to bee ouer|come. And with the great griefe that the remembraunc hereof caused vnto him, he tooke his Swoord in both hi hands, and stroke the Knight of the Sunne so strong a blo vpon his helme, that hee tooke away the sight of his eyes an depriued him of his remembraunce, and so hee remayned  stoyned a little space, and before that Rodaran had an time to strike him another, the valyaunt Knight was com againe vnto himsele, and with great wrath he stroke Rodaran such an ouerthwart blow on the one side of his healm that if he had not clasped himselfe about his horse necke, h must needes haue fallen vnto the ground, and hee had n well seteled himselfe agayne in his saddie, when he stro him another right downe blow vppon his Healme with great strength, that he fell downe backwards vpon his hor crouper, cleane out of all remembraunce, and his horse c ryed him round about the field, voyding at his mouth a nose great abundaunce of blood, and hee was so long befo he came againe vnto himselfe, that all men thought he h bene dead, and without dooing him any farther harme,  Knight of the Sunne tarryed till he came vnto himselfe gayne. When the King of Arcadia saw this and how eu his friend was intreated, with as great anger as thou he would haue burst, with a trise he was armed with  thick armour, and mounted vpon a mightie great 

light horse he went out of the camp,  went toward y^e knight of the Sun, without taking any speare, but with his great  broad fanchon he stroke at him so heauy  strong a blow, that it grieed very much the knight of the Sun, who answered him with the like, that all the wide fields were full with the sound. Then y^e prisoners who were in the tent of the king,  very much amazed to heare the sound of so terrible a blow, asked of them that were in the tent what it should be, and straight waies it was told them that he should be some wor|thy in prowesse that could maintaine and defend himself a|gainst two so valiant pagans. At this time the king of Ar|cadia stroke the knight of the Sun so terrible a blow that his eares were tormented with the sound therof,  lost the sight of his eies,  remained astonied a good while, although it was not so long that the King had space to strike him another, but it was in an euill houre for him, for when the knight of the Sun came againe vnto himselfe, all kindled in wrath  with more fury then a thunder-bolt he assaulted the king,  with both his hands he stroke him so strong a blow vpon his helme, that as one that were dead he ouerthrew him from his horse to the ground, voiding great abundaunce of blood out of his eares  nose, at which time the knight of the Sun had scarce withdrawen himselfe from giuing of that blow, when Rodaran came againe vnto himselfe and went against him,  with both his hands he gaue him such a mighty blow, that it was heard a great way off,  the knight of the Sun to keepe himselfe from falling, was constrained to embrace his armes about the horse neck,  felt by force of that great blow that Rodaran was both strong  stout, but for so much as at that instaunt all ire and wrath did remaine in him, with one alone blow he pretended to make an end of that battayle, for that hee thought the time very long till he knw some newes of those prisoners his deere friendes, and therewith taking his swoord in both his hands, ray|sing himselfe in his stirroppes, changing his white cou|lour

into perfect red, like vnto the braue  ramping lion that followeth the fearefull Deere, euen so went this wrathfull knight against Rodaran,  stroke him a blow ouerthwart his helme, that out of all remembraunce he threw him as dead at his horse feete,  leauing these two Pagans in such sort that all men iudged they had beene dead, with no lesse fury then a whirle wind he put himselfe in the camp amongst his enemies, killing  wounding all that euer he found in his way, so that ther was none that made any resistance against him, but they all ranne away before him, that he found noe with whom to fight, except he did follow them to ouertake them,  hee thought himselfe most happiest that was farthest of from him. In this sort this valiant knight pressed into the camp,  went so far, that at the last all embrued with blood of them which he had flaine, hee came vnto the Tent of the king of Arcadia, wheras he was put in great perplexitie  trouble, for that there was ioyned together many stout and strong knights, who altogether did assault him very strong|ly, but he feling the great resistance that ther was made a|gainst him, did double his blowes with mortall fury, that his force did appeare to he more at that time, then it was in all the day before. All this time of the battaile from the be|ginning that the knight of the Sun went out of the citie vn|to that instaunt, the royall princesse Claridiana was behold|ing the same, for that this was the contention of the thre knights that she staied to behold, at such time as the history did leaue hir, which was the knight of the Sun combatting with Rodaran and the king. Then the Princesse drawing more nigher, did straight way know him, as well by his armour  horse, as by the mightie  singuler disposition of his body,  the better for to behold his high knighthood, she staed  stoode still,  meruailed very much at that which she saw, and although she did se it before hir eies, yet she could not beleue it, and said.
It is not possible that although there were here those

two captaines of the mightie Affrica Scipion,  with them Hercules  the mightie Sampson, that all they together were not sufficient to doo that which this alone Knight doth on his enemies. Of truth I haue great reason for to loue him, as the highest  most precious knight in all the world. And in saying these wordes, seeing that he was compassed round about w^t so great a multitude of knights she stroke hir horse with the spurs with so great fury,  put hir selfe in the midst of the camp,  neuer staied till such time as she came wher|as the knight of the Sun was,  began to deale such blowes, that she made his enimies to run away. At which sight the knight of the Sun was put in great admiration,  could not imagine who that valiant Knight should bee,  being verie ioyfull of so good aid  succour, he put himselfe amongst his enemies, killing  ouerthrowing so many, that they all ran away before him as from the death, and with great fauour that he had of the princes, and the valiantnesse that she vsed, he left hir at the doore of the tent,  alighted from his horse and entred in,  stroke such mortall blowes at them that he met, that he made them all to retire backwardes,  to put themselues into another roome in the Tent, whereas they thought better to defend themselues, but the knight of the Sun with terrible furye followed after them, and with a few blowes he slew sixe or seauen of them in presence of the Emperour and all the rest of the prisoners that were with him, who were greatly amazed at such a sodaine chaunce, not knowing what it should be, and very much meruay|led beholding the great wonders the which he did in theyr presence, but when in beholding they knew him very well by his armour,  by the mightinesse of his person (although hee was all bathed in blood) I cannot heere rehearse the great ioy  pleasure which they receiued, seeing themselues in that great necessitie,  vpon a sodaine in that time vnoo ked for, so great succour, surely they did beleue that he was  thether by the power of almightie God. And as

yet this good Knight had not seene them, for that he was occu|pied in disimbarking himselfe with them that he had before him, vpon whom he stroke such mortall blowes, that some of them he cut a sunder in the midst, and other some he cloue down to y^e teeth,  others to their brests, with such mortall destruction, that in a smal time ther remained not one of all their enemies aliue in the tent, for that the princes Claridi|ana did worthely defend the entry, in wounding  killing all those that came nigh vnto hir. At this time because the king Liseo had seene all that the knight of the Sun had done,  how farre he had put himselfe in amongst his enemies, hauing great desire either to be slaine or else to se an end of his li|berty, all such as were within the citie  able to weare ar|mour, went forth to aid the knight of the sun if nede so re|quired, they put themselues amongst their euemies, defend|ing that none should come  giue succour vnto the king, who still with Rodaran were in a sound  from themselues,  as they came al forth with desire to die or to be at liberty, like mad dogs they put the~selues amongst their enemies,  slew many of them, but in especiall the good king Liseo who ne|uer stroke blow, but that he slew or ouerthrew a knight to the ground,  by reason of the great hurt  damage which they of the camp receiued on that side hauing great ned of aid  succour, they all did leaue the battaile at the tent and went thether, although there remained not so few agaynst the Princesse, but that she had mough to doe. Now when the Knight of the Sunne was cleere of his enemies, he saw the prisoners wheras they were in a corner of the Tent, all of them with great chaines at their legges, and know|ing them, on the one part he shed many salt teares from his eies, for to see so high and mightie Princes brought into so great extremitie, and on the other part he was as ioyful as euer he was in all his life, because his fortune was so good to bring him to giue them their liberty, and lifting vp the beauer of his helme, he went and kneled downe before the Emperour his father, and tooke his hand and kissed them,

but the emperour with a tender loue, more then of a father, in shedding many teares that ranne downe by his chekes, with great ioy and pleasure he did embrace him, saying: I was very certaine  sure, my welbeloued son, that we should not lack your aid  succour in the time of this our great ne|cessitie,  heere I giue great thanks vnto the soueraigne cre|ator, that by his mightie power you were sent at this time to giue vs liberty. Then Rosicleer and all the rest of those mighty princes and knights did embrace him,  could not be|leeue that he should be the knight of the Sun, with the great ioy  contentment they receiued when they saw him, who pulled off all their chaines,  set them at liberty,  tooke from one of them that was ther slaine, the keies of certaine chests, wheras was all their armour, so that they lacked not one peece of them, for that Rodaran  the queene Carmania com|manded all to be kept very well, that none should be lost. All this time was the quene Carmania hidden in a closet of the same tent, so heauy  sad to see all y^t passed, that she thought with very sorrow to haue died. And in the meane time that the emperour  the rest were arming of themselues in great hast, the knight of the Sun returned to succour and help that Knight, whom he left defending of the doore of the tent, that none should enter in therat,  it was that worthy  royall princesse Claridiana, whom he found very brauely and stout|lye combatting with a great number of knights, and hadde before hir at the entry of the Tent, very many slaine and wounded, and for that she kept hir selfe in the inside of the entry, she defended hir selfe the better from all that came against hir. But when he came amongst them with his mightie blowes, he made all his enemies to a part them|selues from the doore of the Tent, for when they saw him comming, euery one dyd procure to make way all that euer they could from him, for that they thought verily he could be no mortall man, doing that which they saw him doe. At this time the good king Liseo came with all his knights to|gether

in an ambushment, in the midst of the camp, killing and wounding his enimies, that they thought them to be all rauening Lions, but yet in the end if they had endured long, ther could not one of the~ haue remained aliue, for they were but a small number,  their enemies very many  valiaunt. So at this time the good emperour and all the rest of those worthy princes  knights were armed,  with their swords drawen in their handes with the greatest fury in all the world they went out of the tent, and as those which had a great desire to reuenge themselues in a small time they made such a slaughter amongst their enimies, that they thought it best to giue them way, so that they had time  space inough to prouide themselues of horses, of those which ran round about the field of the knights that were slaine,  when they were all mounted on horsback they ioyned themselues to|gether in an ambushment  put themselues in the midst of all the battaile with so great fury,  stroke such cruell  mor|tall blowes, that ther were none in all the camp that durst abide beefore them. Who so had sene the good Emperour Trebatio at that present, in the middest of his two sons, kil|ling  wounding so many, that hee was all to be bathed in blood,  did well appeare by the blowes he gaue the great good will which he had to reuenge himselfe,  that valaunt prince Rosicleer did strange feates, that whosoeuer had sene him might well know him to be brother vnto the knight of the Sun. Likewise the mightie  furious Prince Brandizell with king Sacridoro Rodamarte, it might well be said that all they were a sepulchre vnto their enimies, for that they were very many that were slaine that day,  for that ther was none that did know the princes Claridiana, seeing the mortall blowes which she gaue, and the wonderfull things which shee did, they all meruailed much, not knowing who that mighty  strong Knight should be,  they had a merua|lous great desire to know him. To conclude, for that this ex|cellent company kept themselues together, they made such a slaughter amongst their enimies, that which way so euer

they went they made a broad way,  in a small time they came  ioyned with the good king Liseo  his knights, who were wonderfully amazed when they saw the knight of the Sun accompanied with so many stout  valiant knights, and could not by any meanes imagine what it should meane,  being all ioyned together, those that were with the king Li|seo receiued great conrage,  their enimies harts failed, and much the more because they had no captain to gouerne the~,  put them in courage,  mistrusting the worst, many of the~ ran away out of the campe, procuring each one to saue his owne life,  when the rest saw some of their co~panions run away, they out of hand did the like, in such sort, that in the end of one houre, the prisoners were at liberty, ther remai|ned not one in all the camp of the king of Arcadia, except it were those that were slaine  wounded, which were more then halfe of them. And when they saw themselues at liberty  clere of their enemies, not finding one with whom to ight, the king Liseo went vnto the knight of the Sun, and pulled off his belme, and embraced him, saying. Ah my good Lord and perfect friend, how can I gratifie this great good bene|fit the which this day I haue receiued of your great wor|thinesse, for by you I haue recouered my lost Kingdome, therfore worthy Prince, I doe most hartelye desire you to tell me who these valiant knights be, and from whence so excellent a companye should come. Then presentlie the knight of the Sunne, who did esteeme verye much of him, declared vnto him who they were, and by what aduenture he had found them there. At this time the Emperour and all the rest of the Princes and knights had taken off their elmes, and the king Liseo was the gladdest man in all the world, and went to kisse the emperours hands, saying: May it please your soueraigne highnesse to giue your handes to kisse them, for that through you I am restored vnto my lost kingdome. This high and worthy Emperour did embrace him with great loue, so likewise did all the other Princes  knights,  ther passed betwixt the~ many curtous words,

yet for all this was not the royall princesse Claridiana kno|wen. And being desired by the emperour  all the other prin|ces  knights to giue them vnderstanding who  what he was, she straight way pulled off hir helme, wheras he dyd discouer hir yeolow haire, which was bound vp with a net of gold, very richly  wonderfullye wrought,  by reason of hir great  which she receiued in the passed battaile, hir colour was somewhat mooued, wherwith she shewed so perfect  singuler beauty, that verily she semed vnto them all, to be rather some diuine creature, then any humane per|son,  ther was neuer a one there but she semed vnto them to bee some celestiall thing. Then the Emperour and all the rest of the knights that did know hir, being as much amazed at hir beauty, as to see hir ther at that instant, went all vnto hir.  did welcome hir with great curtesie. And the emperour said: My Lady  mistres, this liberty the which I and all these princes  knights haue receiued, it cannot bee but by the hands of so high a damsell as you are,  I pray God that we may be able to gratifie you for the same. Unto the knight of the Sunne, said the Princesse, ought you to sur|render and giue these thankes, for that for him is ordayned and kept the atchiuing of all good aduentures, and to giue the finall conclusion of y^ same. What might heere be thought of the great ioy and pleasure which this amorous and va|liant knight conceiued, when that in that time and place he found himselfe in the presenc of his Lady and mistres, hauing seene what shee had done for him beefore hee knew hir. Truely this mirth and gladnesse was so much, that he thought all his vnderstanding to bee transported into a ce|lestiall glory whereas the chosen doth remaine, and going towards hir, he said: Your soueraigne beauty may please to giue vnto mee your sere hands, that I may kisse them, in acknowledging of the great curtesie which all wee haue receyued by your soueraigne aide and succour, and for that all enterprises which I doe take in hand may haue credit, it shall be done in your seruice and prayse, as I am bound,

and likewise all good and valyaunt Knights in the world. Then the Princesse who receiued great contentment at his words, layd hir armes vpon his shoulders and sayd: Wor|thie Prince, your politike dealings and excellent bountie sooth so far excell, that it is not needefull for me to expresse the same, neyther any other, but onely to behold what is done by your valiant hands heere in this Camp, and vnto this there is good witnesse, who is the king Liseo and all his knights. And passing beetwixt them many other amorous words, the Knight of the Sunne dyd tell them all how and by what aduenture he came thether, and all that happened with him after hee departed out of Greece. The like dyd the Princesse Claridiana, so that all the whole companie vnder|stood by what order they were there assembled and ioyned. In the meane time that they were in this acknowledging one another, those of Lidia were not idle, for they minded no other thing but to robbe and destroy all that were in the Tents and Campe of the King of Arcadia, and finding there great store of riches and treasure which the king had brought, euery one of them did so lade themselues, that euer after they remayned very rich, and thought their long and great trauaile to bee well employed, the end fell out so pros|perous vnto them. Then the Emperour Trebatio out of hand commaunded that the Quene Carmania should be brought before him, for there should be no harme done vnto hir, who when she thought verily that Rodaran had bene slayne, tare hir haire, and dyd such iustice on hir selfe, that they thought verily it would bee hir death. And asking of them whether the king of Arcadia and Rodaran were aliue or dead, they went straight wayes vnto the place whereas they lay a long vppon the ground, and commaunded that theyr Healmes, should be pulled off, and fresh water to bee throwen vpon their face to refresh them,  straight wayes they came agayne vnto themselues, and when they vnder|stood in what estate and perplexity they were all this time, their sorrow and griefe was such, that they thought it had bene better for them to haue beene slaine, then to suffer so

great misfortune: but when the King of Arcadia, dyd look about him for his armie, and could se neuer a Knight on his part, but those that were slayne and lay in the field, with very sorrow and griefe he thought verely his heart would haue burst. Likewise when Rodaran, saw all his pri|soners at libertie, and he ouercome by one alone Knight, the great sorrow and griefe which he receiued, could not be here expressed, and if hee had had his helme and his swoord, and on horsebacke, hee would haue tarryed there no longer. Then strayght wayes the King Lyseo, dyd desire all these worthie warriers, to repaire vnto the Citie for to refresh themselues, and to take their ease, who consented vnto his request, and went towards the citie, and carryed with them theyr prisoners, whereas they were receiued of all the Ci|tizens and nobles of all the kingdome, that were there pre|sent, with so great ioy and triumphes, that the whole Citie seemed to be on , with the great bonefiers  other lights which were made in euery streete of the Citie, not remem|bring any of their troubles past. So when they came vnto the Queenes pallace, who was very wyse and discrete, she receiued them with such courtesie, as was requisit to so no|ble persons: whereas they were all vnarmed, and recrea|ted with verie swet waters and oyntments requisit for such hurts and bruses as they had receiued. For although theyr armour dyd defend them from wounding, yet could not their flesh be free from bruses, by the force of such terri|ble blowes as they receiued. And in especiall the knight of the Sunne in the battaile which he had with Rodaran, and the King of Arcadia, although hee estemed it in nothing, with the great contentment and pleasure which hee recei|ued in seeing before him the fayre Princesse Claridiana, not he alone who loued hir as his owne soule, dyd receiue con|tentment, but likewise the Emperour,  the other princes  knights did reioyse very much,  had hir in that reputation as hir high estate deserued. So in this sort they passed away all that night in great pastimes  pleasure, till the next day in the morning, in the which the king Liseo, went vnto the

mperour and vnto the Knight of the Sun,  asked of them what their pleasures was to doo with the king of Arcadia, Rodaran, for that they were their prisoners. To whom the Emperor said that those prisoners did belong vnto y^e knight of the Sun, and how that he would giue order what should be done with the~. The knight of the Sun when that he heard that, he would very faine haue excused himselfe therof, but it did little profit him his excuses, but that generally it was concluded, that all should be done as he would command it. So hee seeing their determination, co~manded to bee brought before him Rodaran, and the king of Arcadia, vnto whom he said. The high estates great riches  soueraine gifts which fortune yeldeth in this world,  by the wil of god is depar|ted amongst men, often times is the occasion that pride doth increase, the more in them:  hauing cleane forgotten that they are mortal, and subiect vnto any misfortune. Contrary vnto all reason they put themselues in exercises to compre|hend things of great waite and no lesse perillos, as though there were not a god to withstand the~, thinking themselues to haue power ouer all fortune: from whence doth proceede, that whe~ they thinke the~selues most surest and most highest in their throne, lacking the chiefe and principall ground of reason and iustice, the whele of their hope, being very swift and of no securitie, turneth about, and throweth downe vnto the ground, that which is most highest, in such sort, that ther is no humaine creature able to resist, so great force. And so it hath happened vnto you, for being made Lords and kings ouer great and mightie Kingdomes, and likewise endewed with force and strength, yet there increased in you so great pride, that all semed little, the which you had of your owne, but against all reason  iustice, you came to seke that which at such time as you thought all concluded and ended, then were you farthest of, and brought in that estate that you doo well vnderstand  know, how little the power of men is, whe~ in wrongfull causes you apply your selues Now in the behalfe of the Emperour my lord,  these knights I require you to sweare to be true to King Liseo and his kingdome.

but returne vnto your owne Countries  Kingdomes, and procure to defend them, and kepe your selues therein, and not to giue from hence forwards any such attempts as he|therto you haue done, for if you doo you can looke for no |ther thing but losse of your liues or else shame vnto your persons. And first before all other things, to make satisfacti|on vnto the King Lyseo of all such hurts and damages as hath bene done in his kingdome, and likewise to surrender and yelde vp all such things as you haue taken from him, lands, and otherwise, without any delay.
At which words of the knight of the Sunne, the two Kings receiued no great contentment, for they were so rooted in pride  mischiefe, that it could not be rooted out till such time as they were vtterly ouerthrowen and lost in the fields of Grecia but now seeing in what estate they were,  how that it did behoue the~ to shew more patience then they had, they swore before the Knight of the Sunne to performe  fulfill all that he would demand them,  for theyr libertie which they receiued at their hands they gaue great thanks. And so they with the Quene Carmania taking thir leaue of all the~, they departed thence, and went towards their owne Countries and kingdomes, wheras they had inough to doo to tell of the knights of the Emperour Trebatio, so that in the most part of all the Pagan Countrie, his name was feared Whom at this present this historie dooth leaue till time dooth serue.


How the Emperour Trebatio with all his Princes and knights departed out of the Kingdome of Lidia towards Constantinople. Chapter 51.
_THre daies after the departure of the King of Arcadia and Rodaran, remayned the Emperour in Lidia, with all the rest of the Princes and Knights in great myrth and pastime with the King Lyseo and all his

nobles, in the ende whereof they thought it time to goe and se the Empresse, and the rest of Greece, whom they were well assured to bee very sad and sorrowfull for theyr ab|sence. So concluding together, they determined the fourth day in the morning to depart. The time beeing come, they all dyd take theyr leaue of the Quene, who shed many teares to se them depart, and the king Liseo went to beare them companie till they came to the sea side, for they could not by any meanes cause him to abide in the Citie. So they trauailed seauen daies, in the ende whereof they came vnto the Sea, whereas the king did take his leaue of them, embracing them all, offering himselfe at their commaunde|ment at all times when occasion should serue. And after that hee was departed fro~ them, hee found himselfe very so|litary without their company, and in especiall without the companie of the Knight of the Sunne, for that hee esteemed more his company and friendship then all his whole King|dome. The Emperour and all those that went with him dyd imbarke themselues in a very good Shippe, and tooke their way towards Constantinople, and hauing the winde and weather very fayre and prisoners, they made theyr nauigation whith great ioy and pleasure generally amongst them all, but in especially the knight of the Sunne, who fin|ding himselfe alwayes in presence of the royall Princesse Claridiana, hee was as pleasant and ioyfull as euer hee was in all his life, and although many times all the rest that were in the ship, were at the ship side sporting themselues, when that hee had opportunitie to speake and vtter his minde, yet for all that hee had so great respect vnto hir, that t seemed vnto him that hee lacked bouldnesse to vtter vnto ir his paine and griefe, and for that the royall Princesse, either more nor lesse then he was, troubled with morous assions, dyd not let at all tymes to make some outwarde ew thereof, which was the occasion that it caused him so ake heart at grasse, and speake vnto hir, who with no sse curtesie and , as the Pagans  vse when ey doo  and worship theyr false Gods, in such sort

he began to speake and said: Excellent and royall princes of Trabisond, your soueraigne highnesse and the diuine ex|cellencie of your royall person, being by the Knight of the Sunne sene and knowen how far it dooth extend, dooth make him not to bee so hardy and bolde for to publish himselfe to bee yours, for that it semeth vnto him not to deserue to in|ioy so great fauour and renowme, and as I am now a Chri|stian, and doo beleue in the law of the true God, whereas I was wont to be a Gentile, then might you be well assu|red, that in no other God in heauen or on earth would I beleue in, but onely in you, neyther would I recommend my soule and bodie vnto any other: and as I am perswa|ded that in thinking herein, much more in speaking, cannot be without great offence vnto God, yet if it were before his diuine Maiestie, I might make any excuse, I would per|forme this that I say, and here I giue many and infinit thanckes vnto the soueraigne creator, that not onelie hath brought me out of that blinde custome and law of the Gen|tiles, and hath giuen me the law of grace, but also he hath sustained me vntill this time for to behold your soueraigne beautie, that onely therein I may also know his great might  power. God also made the heauens, the earth, and the starres, and endued them with greatnesse and lyght of great beautie, but yet ob diuine clemencie, in you alone i more to be seene then in all them, I will not declare vnto you (royall Princesse) how that singular beautie and faire|nesse haue bene the occasion that my heart dooth receiue sorrow and griefe, yet I may say that it is rather glorie then payne, for that without it I am not able to liue one moment. And here I doo giue you to vnderstand that I am so much yours, that so long as this soule dooth sustaine my body, my heart shall not neyther cannot, but continu|ally haue you for my Lady and mistresse. Therefore soue|raigne Princesse, I doo most hartely desire you to shew so much fauour vnto the Knight of the Sun, as to graunt him lisence to be yours, for that without it, hee liuing cannot choose but serue you, and for that with my life I will no

offend you (if you doo not receiue contentment herewith) I will giue my selfe the death.
The royall Princesse at these woords receiued neyther anger nor griefe, but beeing very pleasant and merrie for that he had sayd vnto hir, with an excellent grace  great humilitie she answered him and saide.
Knight of the Sunne, who for his name, which is the name of so high a prince, by desert deserueth to be lost, and in how much is this name amongst the most estemed Knights in all the world had in estimation, I doo not know by what reason hee should so little esteeme himselfe, and so far exalt mee, that for to publish himselfe to bee mine, hee saith that hee lacketh courage and bouldnesse, heere I giue you to vnder|stand that I haue in such estimation your mightie dedes, and the great worthinesse of your person, that for to receiue you to bee my knight, I am therewith very well content, and with all onely this, I doo beleeue that in all the world there is not a Damsell that is equall vnto my highnesse. And farther you shall vnderstand (gentle knight) that the great fame of your high Knighthoode was the occasion that I came out of Trabisond, onely for to se you, therefore my good Lord, from this day forwards, procure that we may returne thether with as much speed and in as short time as may bee, for that I desire very much, that in the Court of the Emperour my Father, so high a Prince and so worthie a Knight as you are might be knowen. Then the knight of the Sunne with more contentment then euer he recei|ued in all his life, kneled dowen before the Princesse and would haue kissed hir handes for the great curtesie shewed vnto him, but she in no wise would consent therevnto, but caused him to stand vp, and tooke him in hir armes, wheras grew beetwene the~ so great loue, that nothing was to sepe|rate them but onely death and although these louing words passed betwene them,  seemed that there was no conclusion of any thing, yet in their harts there was so strong a knot ade, that beefore it should be vndone, it should be greatly amented. So they passed the time in these  other resons, in

the which time theyr Ship dyd nauigate with prosperous windes, and the fift day after theyr departure from Lidia, they ariued in a port or hauen of Grecia, whereas they dyd disimbarke themselues, and went a land, from whence they had not trauayled far, when they met many Knights, who went seking of Rodaran, meruaylous sad and heauie for the imprisonment of the Emperour, and all the other Prin|ces and knights that were with him, who when they knew the Emperour and the rest, so fast as theyr horsses could runne they went vnto Constantinople, to carrie the newes. And as soone as it was knowen throughout the great Cit|tie, there were very few that remained, but they went forth to mete theyr good Lord, the Emperour and his sons, and receiued them with so great ioy and pleasure as though they had bene theyr owne kinsfolkes or children, and had bene very long absent from them. So they entered into the great pallace, whereas of the Empresse they were receiued with that ioy and contentment, as in such like absence may be conceiued, and with no small complaining of the Empresse vnto the Emperour, for that he all alone, and without gi|uing hir to vnderstand, would goe foorth and put himselfe into so great perill. Straight wayes it was knowen throughout the whole Citie all that had passed, and the great deceit and treason that Rodaran vsed for to take pri|soners all thse Knights. Then the Emperour the more to extoll and make manifest the worthie dedes of the Knight of the Sunne, commaunded to be paynted all that euer had happened from the first time that Rodaran came vnto the Court, vntill such time as he departed after the battayle in Lidia,  to be done in the fore front of the great pallace nigh vnto the aduenture of the Iland of Lindaraza, and for that it was done by the hands of excellent workmen and ve|ry naturall, it did not a little amplifie  set foorth the grea bountie of the knight of the Sunne.
So in this sort with great ioy and pleasure they re|mayned a good while in the Court without happening an

thing worth the telling, but the knight of the Sun receiued not so great ioy  contentment, in finding himself in the pre|sence of his ladies, as the princesse Lindabrides receiued sor|row  griefe to se the great conuersation which the knight of the Sun had with the princesse Claridiana,  the great pe|rill which hir presence might cause vnto hir, which was the occasion that she receiued no pleasure, but was alwaies ve|ry sad  perisiue,  caused vnto the Emperour and Empresse great sorrow  griefe seing hir in that case, thinking that she receiued some displeasure in his court, which greatly dis|contented hir, because she did not as she was wont, shewing hir selfe pleasant,  many times they asked of hir the occasi|on, offering to doe all that was possible whereby she might receiue ioy. And she answered them with great dissmulatt|on, saying, that ther was nothing that caused hir to be so sad, but onely because shee could neuer heare any newes of hir brother the prince Meridian, since his departure from hir. Then the Emperour beleeuing it to be as she had told him, presently sent abroad knights into all parts to seeke him,  dailye did comfort the princesse,  that beefore long hir brother Meridian would come thether. Likewise at this time the good knight Rosicleer was not altogether at his ease, for that idlenesse and eass was the occasion that he called to re|membrance things passed, in such sort that the old wound of his loue began to renue  feaster againe, so that within few daiee that he had remained in Constantinople, his owne na|turall country  habitation, waxed  vnto him,  the onuersation of his father, mother,  brother (for that he could not receiue any pleasure or delight) did cause vnto him great   griefe,  did aborre their companie  all his delight as to be alone,  to any place wher mirth  pastime was e could not abide. All the which increased in him so much, that in the end he determined with himselfe to doe that as eereafter shall be told you.



 How the Empresse Briana was deliuered of a sonne, and of the great feasts that were made at his birth. Chapter. 52
_IT is said in this famous history that the mightie emperour Trebatio had another and the third son, by the faire empresse Briana, of whom is made great mencion in the second part of this history, for that was one of the most mightiest  famous knights in all the world,  that next vnto his singuled bretheren the knight of the Sun Rosicleer, ther was none equall vnto him,  many times combatting with his bretheren vnknowen, he put the~ in great hazard,  with either of them he hath maintayned battaile almost a whole day,  in the end it was very small the vantage they had of him, so that this valiant knight did finish so many mortall dedes, that they deserue to be spoken of,  to be put in the number of his bretheren,  in all other things, as in body  stature, he was conformable  equal vn|to them,  did resemble so much the knight of the Sun in his face, that many times he was taken for him,  if it were not that he was of fewer yeres, with great difficulty might you know the one from the other. This valiant  fortunat prince, as the wise Artemidoro saith, was borne straight after the emperour and all his company came from the kingdome of Lidia, for that when that stout Pagan Rodaran came into Greece, the empresse was very big with child. It doth apere that the wise Lirgandeo doth make difference, for he doth make no mencion of this yong gentleman, till the conclusion of the great battailes which they passed betwene the empe|rour Alicandro of Tartaria, and the Emperour Trebatio of Greece, from which time he doth declare meruailous  won|derfull things done by him. I doe beleue that the occasion of this is, because that the wise Lirgandeo did not se him, till

such time as he came into Greece,  made no mention of him till all the battaile was finished,  at such time as the empe|rour  all the rest tooke their rest with great ioy  pleasure, after the great trauaile which they receiued in the wars past, for that at this time the young gentleman, was verye tender of yeares,  passed not sixe yeres of age, so that till that time ther is no more mention made of him, then is in this chapter, but afterwards these two wise men doe begin to writ of him meruailous great  wonderfull deds,  doo both agre in their writings. When the time was come that this royall empresse should be deliuered ther chaunced a thing of great admiration  meruaile, which did shew  declare a very high and great mistery in the birth of this hild, which was that night and very moment that he was borne, the Moone did shine so bright  cleere,  threw from hir such glistering beames of light, that it seemed to bee the Sun,  the most part of all the earth was so clere, as com|monly it is in the morning, when the Sunne doth spred hir beames abroad. This was seene iust at midnight,  did en|dure for the space of halfe a quarter of an houre, i it put all those that saw it in great admiration,  those which after|wards heard tell thereof,  greatly meruailing thereat, they demaunded of the wise men what that strange token might singnifie,  ther was none that could declare the signification therof, but onely the wise Artemidore, who was at that pre|sent in Constantinople, who did tell them plainly that it did pronosticat  shew that the features  deedes of that yong prince, should so clerely shine in the obscure  dark regions of the barbarous people, as the moone did shew hir shining light, in the obsure darknesse of the night. And time did come that it was perfectly seene  proued to be true all that this wise man had told them, for that by his occasion the most part of the orientall regions were turned into the christian faith and true belefe in Iesus Christ.
After this which the wise man had told him, as also for

that the child was borne very faire. The Emperour and the empresse  his sons were very glad  ioyfull,  all the knights of the court,  the citizens began to make great feasts and pastimes for the birth of the new prince, the which endured in the Citie for the space of one moonth,  afterwards as the child did increase in yeeres, so did he increase in bounty and bignesse of body, in such sort that all men meruailed greatly ther at, and said, that according vnto the wonderfull tokens sene at the birth of that child, it could not be but that hee should recouer as great fame  be as singuler in bounty as his bretheren. And many times the princesse Claridiana,  the faire princesse Lindabrides did take him in their armes, and shewes him great ioy  loue, for that he was brother vnto the knight of the Sun,  said that neuer in all their  they saw a childe of so great perfection, but this was nothing to that which they would haue done, if they had knowen how that be should quench the fury  perillous discord that was betwene them, for certaintie if it had not ben done by him, neither the oue nor the other should haue liued in security, and for that this history shall make perfect relation in his time, at this time ther shall be no more said, till such time as the wise men in their writing of this happy prince shall a|gree in one  be conformable, which shall be at the age of sixe yeares as is aforesaid, for till that time he was nouri|shed  brought vp in the court of the Emperour his rather, vnder the cockering and wing of the Empresse his mother. And now let vs returne vnto the faire princes Lindabrides, for we haue great  meruailous things to declare of hir.


 How the Princesse Lindabrides before the Emperour, Prin|ces, and knights of his court, did aske a boone of the knight of the Sunne, and hee granted it vnto hir, which was the oc|casion that hee must depart out of the Empire of Greece. Chap. 53.
_LOng time was the Princesse Lindabrides in the court of the Emperour Trebatio, without hauing any mirth, ioy or pleasure, for that she saw that the knight of the Sun did frequent very much with the princesse Claridiana, and that it seemed vnto hir that he did not loue hir, as before time he did,  being fully perswaded, that alone the presence of the princesse was the occasion of all hir euill, many times she imagined with hir selfe how and by what meanes she might take him away from the same, for that hir great beauty might take effect in him, so that she might liue in more security, and for that hir minde was alwaies troubled ther with, in the end she determined to doo as you shall heare. Upon a day at such time as was ioyned together the Emperour  all the Princes and worthy knights of the court with the empresse  the princesse Claridiana,  all their Ladies  gentlewomen, making great feasts  pastimes in the great hall, at such time as they were most in quiet, the princesse Lindabrides rose vp  stood on hir fet,  when they saw hir demeanour they all held their peace.
Then she began to speake saying.
High  mightie Emperour of Greece, if valiant princes  mightie knights for the maintaining of their honours, are bound to respect ladies  damsels in their necessities, as by their promise  oath made, at such time as they doe receiue the order of knighthood: in how much more are bound so high princes  knights as are heere present, to respect a dam|sell of so high estate as I am, who is banished from hir natu|ral contr,  come into this, as vnto the court of the most hghest king  emperour in all the world. And heere I say of truth that if the remedy of my necessitie doth now faile me according as I would haue it,  denied me by so high princes, with iust reason may I account my selfe for an vnhappye damsell. Therfore now in the presence of you all I doo aske a boone of the knight of the Sun, who is heere present, y^e which

I doe request that it may be by him granted vnto me, and likewise consented, by you most high  mighty Emperour  Empresse. All that were ther present were very much ama|zed at the words of the princesse, not knowing what should be the occasion why she should aske that boone. And first shee would haue the grant before she would declare hir demand. Then the knight of the Sun seing that the princesse would not declare, but first he must be bound, he was somewhat in a confusion, although he made no outward shew therof: but vpon a sodaine, he arose vp,  answered hir, saying. My good Lady, if the dutie which I haue to serue so high a damsell as you are, you doo not esteeme in more, then in giuing of my word, here I doo graunt vnto you the boone, which you haue asked of me, although of the securitie I am agreued, accor|ding to the benefits which I haue receiued. Uery well sayd the princesse, seing that you haue granted me of your part, likewise I desire the emperour,  my Lady the empresse, to consent  graunt vnto the same, that I may be sure of all parts. We doo graunt vnto the same, said the Emperour  the empresse, laughing very much at the security which the princesse emanded. Now shall you vnderstand the boone the which I doo craue, saide the Princesse. For so much as the knight of the Sun did ouercome the prince Meridian my bro|ther,  that I remained in his power, that now he cary me vnto the court of the Emperour my father, whereas it is great reason that I doo retourne, being so long since my de|parture from thence. And this I will that he shall doo, with|out hauing the company of any other. When the knight of the Sun, heard the boone which the princesse demaunded, hee was in a great confusion, but the princesse Claridiana, was in a greater, but yet she made signes vnto him with hir eyes, that he should grant vnto hir all that euer she would de|maund, for that it seemed vnto hir, that with his honur he could not  to the contrary,  ther the knight of the Sun did promise hir to beare hir company till shee came vnto the

court of the Emperour hir father,  although it grieued the emperour  the empresse very much, yet ther was no other remedy, but he must consent vnto the same by the voice of all the rest,  being concluded, their departure was determi|ned to be within eight daies following, with great ioy vnto the princes Lindabrides,  much griefe vnto the princesse Cla|ridiana, who seeing that the knight of the Sun must needs ab|sent himselfe from hir,  that it was for his honor to depart into far countries, hir sorrowfull heuines was so great, that she could not dissemble so much, but some part thereof was discouered,  especially considering the perillous companye that he had with him, for that in hir presence, she had no feare of the princesse Lindabrides, for that the singularity of hir ex|cellent beautye did fully assure hir, but in hir absence shee knew not what continuall conuersation of the princes, with the knight of the Sun would work, and being much troubled with this thought, she called vnto hir a damsell, one of them that was most priuat with hir,  said: Arcania my welbelo|ued damsell, as vnto the most trustiest  faithfullest seruant the which I haue, I will commit one thing into thy hands, the which doth importune no more but to haue continuall pleasure, ioy,  quietnesse, or els sorrow  heauinesse all the dates of my life, and I would you should put such diligence therm, as euer you haue had in things which belongeth vn|to me. You doo vnderstand how that the knight of the Sun hath promised vnto the princesse Lindabrides to goe with hir and beare hir company vnto the court of the emperour hir father,  I knowing the great worthinesse of the knight of the Sun, as well in his owne person, as in his high estate  blnd from whence he doth discend, I am fully determined in my hart, consenting thervnto my father the Emperour and the Empresse my Mother, to take him for my husband, as the most highest and mightiest Knight in all the world, and for the accomplishing and performing of this, I finde nothing more contrary, then the great beautye

of the Princesse Lindabrides,  the continuall conuersation which the knight of the Sun shall haue with hir in this long iourney, and my pretence is to know whether the knight of the Sun doth eare any affection or loue vnto the Princesse Lyndabrides or no, for if it doo so fall out, it is not conueni|ent that so high a damsell as I am should set my minde any more on him,  the better that I may be certified hee , it doth behooue me that you goe in his company  whatsoeuer thing shall happen vnto the by the way (but death) doo not leaue their company till such time as the knight of the Sun doth returne againe into his Country,  doing so, you may very perfectly  truly informe me of all that shall passe. The~ Arcana vnderstanding all that the princes had said vnto hir, she kneled downe before hir,  kissed hir hands for the great curtesie which he shewed vnto hir, because she did commit that secret vnto hir before any other,  promised hir to put all dligence therein that was possible. And not long after that the damsll had made an ende of saying these wordes, when the knight of the Sun hanced to passe that way wher|as they were all alone,  his comming was, with pretence to speake with the princesse, if time and place might serue. nd when he saw hir all alone with hir damsell, hee drew nigh vnto hi  made great reuerence,  almost scarce able to vt|ter his words, he said: M Lady  mistres, what is it that your soueraigne highnsse will command this sorrowull knight, who bannished out of your presnce, doth go to ac|complish that  which he hath grantd vnto the princes Lindabrides. The almightie God doth know my lord, said y^ princesse how great a  it s vnto me your departure, and how solitary I shall find my selfe in your absence, but for that we are more ound o regard our honours  high estate, thn o be  vnto our wis. I can doo o otherwise but  then my selfe the bst I may for this departure,  comfort my elfe with the hoe I haue of your spedy returne, but one thing I wil y^t you take with you of mine in this iourny, to put you in  of this

Countrie, and of hir that gaue it you. And in this Damsell wo is the faithfullest  best beloued that I haue, who will serue you with that loyaltie and care as she doth owe vnto my seruice, and shee shall not depart fro~ you till such time as you returne vnto my presence. With great ioy and plea|sure did the knight of the Sun receiue that  and  which the Princes shewed vnto him, and with the great sorrow which he felt for his departure from hir sayd: Now I say that my departure is good, and all my griefe turned vnto glory, for that your soueraigne highness in this great perplerity hath giuen me company, now with great reason shall I trauale in comort, for that your royall person doth griue at my departure, and the great benefit which you of|fer vnto mee, in this your Damsell Arcana, I doo receiue it with humble thanks, and it shall be vnto mee great com|fort to haue beefore me one that so long time hath beene in company and conuersation of your highnesse, although this damsell to cause mee to haue in remembrance this countrie doth little seue my turne, for that I haue remembrance on no other thing, but onely in thincking that your highnesse doth  looke for my returne, and heerewith my desire shall bee such to returne, that all such time as they oo de|taine mee, will be sorrow and griefe vnto my  hart. Thse and many other communications in effect passed bee|twixt the Princesse Claridiana and the knight of the Sun, till such time as with great griefe they tooke their leues, and he departed, and for that the day of theyr departure drew on, all things that were necessarie for their ionrncy were made in a readinesse and the Emperour commaunded such prouisio~ to be made for the Chariot of the Prinesse Lindabri|des in such sort, that they had small ack o any refreshing, till such time as they came vnto Scithia.
When the day was come that they must depart, they were all in a readinesse and in the triumphant Cha|riot there was such swet Musicke with Trumpets, that it od well signifie their departure, but the Knight

of the Sunne, neither the Princesse Lindabrides would enter into the Chariot, for that the Emperor and all those Princes and knights would goe foorth to take their leaues of them, the knight of the Sunne was mounted vpon his horse, and the Princese Lindabrides vpon an Vnicorne, and beeing accom|panied with the Emperour and all those valiaunt Princes and Knights, which were to the number of more then thre thousand, taking hir leaue of the Empresse, who was so full of sorrow and griefe, that she thought hir soule would de|part from hir body, seing that hir san did depart from his owne Countrie, into a Countrie so far off, and although hir sorrow and griefe were very much, yet that of the royall princesse Claridiana was much more, who seeing hir selfe ab|sent from him whom shee so much loued, and how that he went in company with them that put hir in so great perill, hir stou courage neither hir royal estate was not sufficient to withdraw hir, but that she receiued so terrible a griefe, that it tooke away all ioy  comfort from hir hart, and ha|uing no power to goe foorth to beare them company, she re|mayned all alone in hir chamber, dissembling that shee was not well, and lying vpon hir bed vttering (with many salt teares) such sorrowfull and lamentable words, mixed with heauie and deepe sighs, that it shewed hir great griefe. Now to returne vnto the knight of the Sunne, who was departed two miles from the Citie, wheras the Emperour  all those Princes and knights did take their leaues of them, and re|turned vnto the Citie, and found themselues very solitarie without the company of the Knight of the Sunne, who was with the princesse Lindabrides in hir Chariot, and had great griefe for his departure from his friends whom the history doth leaue at this present, and the faire Princesse Claridiana very solitary, the which y^e absence of hir knight did increase daiely more  more, and finding hir selfe in no rest nor qui|etnesse in that Countrie, shee had great desire to retourne vnto hir owne,  such time as shee heard newes of the knight of the Sunne.



How the Knight of Cupid in the company with the King Sacridoro went out of Constantinople,  of all that happened more. Chapter 54.
_CErtayne dayes after the departure of the Knight of the Sunne, did Rosicleer abide in the Citie of Constantinople, the more for to giue contentment vnto the Emperour Empresse his knowen parents, the~ for any contentment he had with himselfe although he was singu|larly well beloued of his friends  vassalls, and in such sort, that if his hart had not beene set  fully satisfied in another place, in all the world he could not finde himselfe so well as in that countrie, for that all the Princes knights that were came hether to celebrate the great feasts  triumphs, dyd still remaine thr in the court, for that the Emperour ricei|ued great pleasure of their companie, for which occasion ther were none of them departed: but the old sore of loue of the Princesse Oliuia did feaster a new, by reason of his great idlenesse, there was nothing that was sufficient to giue him any delight, but continually he was very sad  pensiue, and full of care, so that the Emperour Empresse with all the o|ther Princes and Knights his friends, beeleued that he had some secret inirmity, which was the occasion of his sorrow|full demeanour, and was a very griefe vnto them all, and by reason that this sorrowful and amorous passion did day|ly inerase more and more in him, and made him so carefull that he could not take any kinde of rest nor quietnesse in the Court of the Emperour his father, he fully determined to depart from thence, and considering the great obligation in which the King Sacridoro was bound vnto him, he could not choose, but with great reason request to haue his companie. So one day finding himselfe all alone with him, hee tould him what he was determined to dooe, and how that his wll was to goe vnto England, and there to

certifie him selfe fully and wholly, of all that had past with the princesse Oliuia. And although it did not seme well vn|to the King Sacridoro, that Rosicleer should leaue the Em|perour his father and his mother, at such time, as they can|not but receiue great sorrow  griese for his departure, yet seein his determined purpose therein, and the small con|tentment which hee receiued in that court, hee could not but neds must consent vnto all that he requested, and offer him selfe in person to beare him . whether so euer his pleasure was. So betwene these two friends was concu|ded when they ould depart, and in great secret, for that they would not be disturbed by any. And so in a night, they two all alone, nd one page, they departed: And Rosi|cleer, left a Letier written for the Emperour his Father,  hee gaue him to vnderstand, how that he and the King Sacridoro, went vpon a iourney, the which did import the~ very much. And desire him of pardn, for that they were deyared without his lisence: and that their returne should bee in as short time as was possible. So the next day after theyr departure, they were found lacking, the Emperour asked for them, and strayght way was brought vnto him the letter which Rosicleer left beehinde him, by the which he vnderstood his departure, for the which he and the Empresse Briana, and all the rest of the Princes  in the Court, were very sorrowfull. But for that he  in his let|ter that his returne ould bee with  they did com|fort themselues with that hope, praying vnto God to pros|pr him in his iourney and to returne with health.
So these two perfct and faithfull friends, trauailed with so great spede, all that night, that the next day in the mor|ning, they found themselues a great way departed from that mightie Citie of Constantinople. And beeing certayne that none, in the beehalfe of the Emperour, would ollow them, somwhat for to ease their horse of the great trauayl they had al that night, they alighted at the house of a foster, or keeper of a Forrest, somwhat out of the broad way. And after that they had well refreshed themselues and their

Horse, they returned vnto their trauaile, wherein they en|dewred many daies, in the which they dyd meruailous and wonderfull deedes: all the which this historie doth leaue of the telling, for if that all things which was done should be made mencion heere, there would be no nde of this booke. To conclude, of necessitie they must needes passe through all the whole Countrie of Grecia, and the great Ocean Sea for to imbarke themselues for England, (whereas he thought the time long till hee came thether) and not taking the right way, in the ende of many dayes, they  in the bor|ders of the great Empire of Russia, on that part which falleth toward high Almaine. And trauayling therein cer|taine , at such time as they had passed the greater part thereof: vppon a day, in the same way wherein they tra|uailed, they saw comming towards them, a great bushment of more then twntie Knights. And when they came nigh vnto them they saw one in the middest of them that dyd surmount all the rest of the companie two spans in height, and so big of all his members, that it did appeare he should bee of mightie  great force of armes. They brought also with them three Damsels, with their hands bound, and vpon their palfraies, who made meruailous great and pit|tifull lamentation, and with great shrikes they did giue to vnderstand, that they were carried away by force. So when these two vaiant Knights came nig vnto them, they were mooed vnto great compassion in such sort that theyr coura|gious stomackes could not suffer that before them any dam|sell should he perforced, and Rosicleer comming nigh vnto that great knight, who appeared by the riches of his armor, to be Lord ouer all the rest, hee sayde vnto him in this manner.
Tll me if it please you for God loue, what great euill ath these Damsels committed, that they doo deserue to be arried thus prisoners. Then the knight who had his bea|er lift vp, with a fierce countenance hee did beehold them, nd as though hee were very angry at that demaund, with reat prde hee answered him and sayde.
From whence hast thou had so great hardinesse, thou foolish and simple Knight, that thou darest to aske of the mightie Fulmineo, the occasion wherefore he dooth apprehend Dam|sels. It dooth well appeare that thou art a stranger in this Countrie, then thou hast not heard of my great fame. And for that thou mayst tell newes of my great wonders, when thou art in thy Countrie, thou shalt vnderstand that I am called Eulmineo, as I haue tould the: And I am sonne vn|to the mightie Gyant, Brumaleon, Lord ouer seuen castels that I haue in this Countrie, and of so great strength, that they are sufficient to make theyr defence against all the whole world. It is now ten yeres since my father died, and since that time hetherto, I haue it for a custome, to leaue neither Ladies nor damsels, that semeth faire in mine eies, but that I doo take them parforce, and doo carrie them vn|to my Castels, and dooe solas my selfe with them. And when I doo finde others that dooth better content mee. I doo take them and let the other goe: so that I haue in my Castels, great store of them. And although the Emperour of Russia being very angry and wrathfull of my dooings, hath prooued to driue mee out of his countrie, yet hath he neuer been able to doo it, but all onely in hearing mee named, he dooth trem|ble with feare, and alwayes I haue in my company these knights as thou seest, and in my castels I haue as many moe, not so much for the guard and defence of my person, as for the authority of my Lordship. Here haue I tould vnto the knight, all that thou hast demaunded of me, that thou maist tell thereof when the doost finde thy selfe in place, where|as they haue not heard of my fame. And in sayeng these woords he left them, and would haue passed forwards his iourney, but Rosicleer, and the King Sacridoro, were very much amazed when they heard of that euill and abhomina|ble custome,  determined to put their liues in aduenture, to cause that great knight to amend his life, and to leaue of that euill custome, Rosicleer put him-selfe before him and sayde. I would very gladly desire to know of the Fulmi|neo, if the contentment which thou doost receiue in this thy

biuellish lyfe, can suffer to receiue any counsayle, and con|sidering how abhominable thy woorkes are, and thou wilt acknowledge the errour in the which thou art, repenting the of the same, and neuer after to vse them any more, and turne ouer a new leafe, taking vnto thy selfe some other kinde of life that may be more profit vnto thy body, and ho|nour vnto the person, but principally for thy soule, and in dooing so, thy high and mightie Lord of all powers, of his bountifull and great mercie will pardon thee of all these great euils which thou hast done, and thou shalt excuse the selfe of the infernall paines, to the which thy soule is con|demned, and if thou wilt not dooe this, behold the iustice of God who can no longer suffer thy abhominable dedes, and seing that there is no amendement in thy lyfe, when thou oost thinck least thereof, will fall vpon thee to thy vtter de|struction. Oh straunge Knight, sayd Fulmineo, how I am now fullie certified that thou art altogether foolish, in that hou doost put thy selfe to preach vnto me, and to giue me counsaile, but I my selfe am in the fault thereof, beecause I stayed and vsed words with the, and although I gaue the to vnderstand of my woneerfull dedes, yet did I not tell the the principall of them, the which I will giue the to vn|derstand, because it shall be a warning vnto the how to returne an answere to me any more. Know that being my Father Brumaleon, one of the most strongest and vali|antest Gyauntes which was to be found in all the world, onely for reprehending me for a rape the which I dyd vn|to a Damsell, and did offer to giue me counsayle to the con|trarie, I did defie him euen to the battell, and hand to hand  slew him, although as then I was very young and tender f age, for at that time I was not ful eighteene yeres of age. Now seing I did this against mine owne father for giuing e counsayle, consider what I will doo against the, if thou  stand in contention herein, and make me angry.
And in saying these words, without speaking any more, (for  was not his custome to stay long with any) he broched

his furious Horse with his Spurres, commaunding his knights to proceede forwards he would haue departed, but that valiant Knight Rosicleer who was a great enimie vn|to such as he was, and could not suffer that any in his pre|sence should receiue rebuke or shame, and especially , seing that it was labour lost to speake vnto that vile Gyaunt, hee tooke his speare in his hand and put himselfe before him, saying.
For as much as thy eares are deafe for to receiue coun|sale, choose vnto thy selfe that part of the field that dooth best please thee, for that possiblie with the death thou shalt know how profitable it will be to amend thy life, therfore take to thee thy weapon and defend thy selfe, for it doth be|hooue thee by force to dooe that which thou wilt not of thy owne good will, for alwayes I haue heard say, that the euill and naughtie tre it is best to dig him vp by the roote.
When Rosicleer had sayd these words, he turned about his horse, and tooke that part of the field that liked him best, and with his speare in his hand hee put himselfe before Ful|mineo, who laughing very much beegan to goe forwards his way with great anger, saying.
Captiue Knight, thou shalt not get by me so much ho|nour, in saying thou diddest enter aloe in battayle with mee. Then Rosicleer sayd: Thou vile and euill beast, and the head of all pride and presumption, take vnto thee thy weapon and defend thy selfe from . Then Fulmineo when he heard this, with great re ee pulled downe the beauer of his helme, and aparted himsele from his Knights, without speare of swoord in his hand, and sayde: Come a|gainst mee, thou foolish and caprime knight, that for as much as thou hast heard of my dedes, it shall be good that by ex|perience thou doost prooue my force and strength, for that without speare or other weapon I will take from the all thy armour  weapon that thou bringest with the. Then Rosicleer being very angry at the great pride of Fulmineo came vnto him and saide: Brute and diuellish brast, take vnto the thy launce and sword, and come against me, for

that I am not such a knight that will combat with the with any aduantage,  for that Fulmenio did stand in contention not to take any weapon, Rosicleer threw his speare from him  assalted him with his swoord in his hand,  stroke him such a blow vpon his helme, that he made him decline his head downe to his brest,  Fulmineo in all his life neuer receiued the like blow, that he thought verily his teeth had ben broken in his head with beating one against another,  being very much amazed at the great strength of that knight,  semed vnto him to bee such a one, that without weapon he could not ouercome him, he drew out from his side a great  broad sword, and went against Rosicleer to strike him on the head with great strength, that chaucing vpon his helme it made him somwhat astonied  if his helme had not ben very good, he had clonen him downe to the brest but Fulmineo did not aduance himselfe very much in giuing that blow, for the va|liant Rosicleer did strike him such another on his right shoul|der, that by reason of the great strength of his armour his sword could not cut it, yet for all that it did charge him so much, that if hee had not imbraced himselfe about his horse neck, he had fallen downe to the ground: Oh how greatly a|mzed was Fulmineo at the great force and strength of Ro|sicleer, for when he saw with what courage hee stroke his blowes, and feeling the mightie force of them, he said with in himselfe: By fortune is ther returned againe into y^e world that Greeke Achilles, or that valiant Hector, for that he was fully perswaded that he was not in all the world that could bring him into so great extremitie,  yet he hoped to kill the~ both, if they entred into battaile with him,  for that he was one of the strongest  brauest knights in all the world, with|out abating any thing of his great strength, but still incre|sing his couragious furye, in such sort, that he beganne to lay vppon the valyaunt and stout Rosicleer, with so strong blowes, that if he had bene an  of , he had surely cloue it in peces. Likewise if it had beene

one other knight with other armour, he had ben clouen asun|der. But by reason that the valiant Rosicleer was in perfect security with his armour, (although somtimes with y^e great fury of his blowes, he was astomed,  almost from himselfe) yet he did answere him, with other blowes of so great fury that Fulmineo, being tormented with them, did roare like a Bull. So that in this contension  rigorus combat, these two endured more then two houres,  euery blow that was stroke, did make each other to doubt of his life. And for that I will not be tedious, to tell all things perticulerly, the which was done in this well foughten  perillous battaile, I will conclude  tell you what hapned in the end. It was ordained by the diuine prouidence, that this mighty Fulmi|neo, should make an end of his euill  diuellish life: who be|ing very angry with himselfe,  blaspheming against all his goods,  against all things both in the heauens  on the earth, for that one alone knight did endure so long in battaile a|gainst him. With an infernall fury which he had within him, (as it seemed by the great quantity of smoake which came foorth at his beauer) he went against Rosicleer,  with both his hands as he stroke him such a blow vpon his inchanted  rich helme, that if his sword had not glanced vpon his shoul|der, o doubt he had ben in great perill. Yet for all that, it was so terrible, that it tooke his remembrance from him,  made him to fall forwards vpon his saddle bow, in such sort, that all men did think that he would haue fallen down dead to the ground. But this good knight did not long remaine in this trance, but came againe to himselfe,  with a trise he setled himselfe in his saddle,  stroke his horse Rondarte, with his spurs, with so urious wrath  mortall courage, that the earth seemed to tremble vnder him:  raising himself a good span in his sadle, he went to wards his enemy,  stroke him such a blow vpon his steely helme, that he cloue it a sun|der,  cut his head all to peces. And with the great strength of y^e blow, his borse was so charged, that he bowed his knes

to the ground,  so remained a good space before he arose vp againe. In this sort the euill Fulmineo did make his end,  his soule condempned vnto hell, wheras with continuall tor|ment he is plagued for his euill deds, as shall be done vnto those that in this world with so great pride doth commit y^e like offence, if that by the permission of god he doth not repe~t him of them before he die, for that his neighbour being by him iniured, at the day of iudgement he will aske vengea~ce of the same. But when the knights of Fulmineo saw their Lord slaine  dead, they were greatly amazed to se him so soone ouercome  slaine by one alone knight, that they were without all hart  courage for to reuenge his death, and re|mained all astonied and amazed without any moouing, as though they had ben a company of Images made of stone,  beholding of Rosicleer, who seemed vnto them to be a knight sent from god to punish  chastise the euill deds and life of Fulmineo. So after that Rosicleer had giuen thanks vnto al|mighty god for his great victory hauing compassion vpon y^e damsels which they brought with the~ tied, he went towards them for to set them at liberty. And when he came vnto the first, he straight waies knew hir to be Fidelia, one of y^e dam|sels of the princesse Oliuia, she whom in England brought vn|to him the sentence of banishment,  straight waies calling to reme~brance all that euer had passed he receiued so great sorrow  griefe, that his hart was all couered with sadnesse in such sort, that cleane void of all remembrance he fell fro~ his horse to the ground as though he had ben dead. This his great friend the king Sacridoro, when hee saw him in that traunce, with a trice he alighted from his horse and went towardes him with great angish and griefe, not know|ing what it should be the occasion of that sodaine  strange alteration, and taking him in his armes, he lifted him vp from the ground, thinking that in giuing him ayre hee would retourne agayne vnto his remembraunce, but all that euer he could doe, did profite him very little,

for that he was in such sort, that he semed to haue no li within him. Then the knights of Fulmenio, who were verie glad  ioyfull for the death of their Lord, did vnloose y^e dam|sels,  the knights with the damsels came together for to help the king Sacridoro, to lift him from the ground,  to carrie him vnto one of the castles of Fulmenio, which was there nigh at hand, and when they puled of his helme for to giue him are, the damsell Fidelia knew him straight waies by his faire face, although in many  before she had not  him, which was the occasion that he was somwhat alred,  knowing him  seeing him in that estate  perplexity,  shed|ding many teares she wept vey vitterly ouer him, although otherwise she was halfe from hir selfe with great ioy that she had found him, for that many daies before she had tra|uatled in his dmaund,  for that the time was long,  Rosi|cleer cae not vnto himselfe, and they seeing that it was a sound accompanied with anguish  very deepe sigbes, those of Fulmenio did take him in their armes,  with the helpe of the king Sacridoro they carted him vnto a castle that was ther igh at hand, wheras they said him vpon a bed,  when the Dwsell Fidelia had tolde the king Sacridoro of whence she was, hee straight waies vnderstoode the occasion from whence did proceede all this alteration  euill of Rosicleer,  straight waies requested all the Knights that were ther to depart,  let him alone,  being all departed the king reques|ted the damsell to tell him if she brought any message vnto his friend Rosicleer, for that of long time trauailing in his compante, hee knew of his loue, so well as himselfe.
And when Fidelia vnderstood that that was the king Sa|cridoro of whom she had heard so much of his dooings with out any suspition she tolde him how that she was damsell vnto the faire Princesse Oliuia,  how that she brought him a letter from hir. How is this said the king, is not the prin|cesse Oliuia as yet married?
No surely, said Fidelia, for first she will consent to die a thou|sand deaths, then to forget the great loue which shee doth beare vnto Rosicleer. Oh lord haue mercy vpon me, said the king, how hath Rosicleer ben deceiued, for that it was told him that Oliuia was maried, which was the occasion, that a thousand times he hath ben at y^e point of death. And in saying these words with the great ioy he receiued, he went vnto Rosicleer, wheras he lay,  toke him by the arme,  did shake him in such sort, that he made him somwhat to come to his remembrance. Then the damsell Fidelia, went vnto him and said: My lord wherfore will you not speake vnto me, who with so great trauaile  griefe, hath wandred through all the world, this two yeares in strange countries in seeking of you. And being at this time wholly in his remembrance,  vnderstood what the damsell had said, with great anguish of mind and pale couler, hee said. Ah Fidelia, how wouldest thou that I should liue before hir, who brought me the sentence of my death. How can I liue one moment, calling to remem|brance the ast houre that thou didst see me, when thou didst leaue me, more dead then aliue, from that time hetherto, ther hath not entred one ot of ioy or mirth in my hart. And if it had not ben for the great regard which I haue (as a christian) vnto my soule, I could not hetherto haue sustained my selfe, but a thousand times, I had slaine my self, for that I would not liue without the loue of the princesse Oliuia. What hart is that so diamant hard  strong, that seing and knowing my fortune,  the pernersenes thereof, that would not be moued vnto compassion. For that in all the world, the sight of the princes Oliuia, was demed, neither vnto the vn|reasonable beasts of the fieldes, nor vnto foules of the ayer that flyeth, neyther vnto the stars and plannets of the hea|uens, vnto all these were nothing hidden, but vnto all thing permitted the sight and presence of Oliuia, but all onely that vnfortunate Rosicleer whose life was sustined onely with the sight of hir, was prohibited a forbidden hir presence. Ah

my good Fidelia what aduensure hath brought the into this country, tell mee I pray thee,  giue me to vnderstand some|thing of the princesse Oliuia, my Lady  mistresse, to whom my name is so greatly abhorred. Yet for all that it shall be to me great quietnesse, to here tell somthing of hir. And in saying these words, he went vnto the damsell  did imbrace hir, with some contentment, more then he ha before, for that he saw before him, the faithfullest  trustiest secretary of y^e princes Oliuia, his mistresse, of whom he might very perfect|ly informe himselfe of that which his hart did desire. Then Fidelia, who could not refraine hir selfe from weping, when she remembred the cruell letter, which she deliuered vnto him in england:  the great sorrow  griefe, which he recei|ued by occasion of the same: she tooke foorth a letter out of hir bosom, the which she brought with hir,  deliuered it vn|to Rosicleer, saying: My goodlord, take beee this letter which is sent you from the princesse Oliuia, my mistresse, and by it you shall vnderstand, what part she hath sustained  had of your griefe  sorrow, and what griefe it hath ben vnto hir, your absence:  as a witnesse of the same, I can giue you to vnderstand,  doo verely beleeue, that ther is not a dam|sell in all the world, at this present borne, that hath sustay|ned so heauy  sorrowfull a life, as she hath done since y^t you departed out of england. My lord what shall I say vnto you, I haue had hir in my armes more then a thousand times for dead, without any hope of life. And hir sorrow  griefe is so much, for that she hath done against you, y^t ther is nothing y^t she hath desired so much as for the death. Thre times haue I gone foorth into the world, trauailing all about to seke you, and euery time I haue bene foorth hale a yere. But when I returned vnto the princesse Oliuia, without giuing hir any word of you, hir sorow, griefe  care was such, that I being moued with great compassion, came foorth agayne in your demaund. And that with the great perill of my own person, and the newes which I heard of your death, did giue me occasion for to returne backe againe. And vnto the

contrary, vnderstanding the great sorrow which my Laye wold vse with me, I was determined rather to die, trauay|ling from one country to another, then to return into Eng|land: but God who knoweth the harts of all creatures hath permitted that this should proceede no farther, but hath giueu me so good fortune as to finde you. When Fidelia had ended these words, the ioy which Rosicleer receiued was such when he heard that swet newes from his mistres, not beleuing that that which he heard should be true, but rather a dreme,  comming againe vnto himself, he went vnto Fidelia  said: My good friend and welbeloued Fidelia, I desire you by him which created all things,  by the dutie which you owe vnto my lady the princes Oliuia, that you doo tell me if this which I haue heard, hath ben the principall, occasion of your com|ming, or whether you haue spoken it to comfort me in this sorrowfull life which I haue had continually, for I cannot beleue that the princes Oliuia hath receiued any griefe for me, hauing bannished me out of the kingdome of England, as  by the cruell words of the letter which she sent me by my faithfull friend,  if it be now true which you haue told me, happy am I,  more happy is the life in which I haue li|ued so long in sorow, for y^t I am now recompenced with so soer agine a reward: it hath ben told me that my mistres the prines Oliuia was maried, which was the occasion of my, greater sorow. And how is it possible that all this should be true which you haue told me? Then Fidelia answered, I haue told you the truth of all my lord,  in that you say that she is maried it is the thing y^t is  off from hir hart, fo although the king hir father would haue married hir vnto the prince of Lusitania,  did importune hir very much to accept the same, yet could he neuer conclude with hir to accept the mariage, but first she would rather consent to re|ceiue a thousand deaths, the~ to doo it, so that to performe all that which doth owe vnto your loue, she hath en brought into great extremitie and daunger with hir father. The great ioye which Rosicleer receiued hreat, was such,

that he thought himself to be transported into another world. So taking the letter of his lady  mistres, he did kisse it ma|ny times, for that it had ben many times in hir hands,  did open it, weras was written as followeth.



The Letter of the Princesse Oliuia to Rosieleer.
IF the paine which I receiue in writing, were not confir|mable to that which thy desert doth deserue, then should not I haue any  to write, neither reso to aske par|don for that which is past, but yet ob Rosicleer, the great force  strength which caused your highnes to make defence, was the occasion to make the wound more greater in my hart. I did send to bannish the out of my presence, for that I might not perill my selfe with thy continuall presence, but in doo|ing that, I did bannish my owne soule from my body, whose absence shall continue  endure so long, as thou art absent from me,  am so far from reason,  so void of memory, since the time that thou departedst from this court, that when I doo consider of my owne life, I know not whether I liue or dreme, or whether I am a woman or monster, for that life is odious vnto me, and I doo abhorre all pleasure,  the com|pany of my damsels is great griefe vnto me,  when I am alone I am tormented, my eares are deafe  doo not heare, my eies blind  cannot see,  my tongue dumbe and cannot speake, except it be to name Rosicleer, in such sort are all my sences prisoners vnto thee, that in no other thing they doo occupy themselues in, but onely in accusing me for the error the which I haue committed against thee: my eies say that they are blinde, for that they cannot see the goodnesse that they were wont to see, my eares deafe, for that they cannot heare that continuall praise which they were wont, of thy person, the telling of thy mighty deeds, the victorye of thy perillous battailes, the great fame of thy high knighthood,

and the continuall prayse of thy high and wonderfull at|tempts. My memorie saith that it doth remember, that one|lie with thy presence all the whole Kingdome of England was glad and ioyfull. In the Court of the King my father, thou didst exalt such as were good Knights, and didst o|nour them, and didst chastice and  such as were euill, and proud Gyants didst thou make humble  eeke. Like|wise Damsels dyd trauayle all alone, for that onely in thy name they went in great securitie. And the Princesse Oliuia in onely seeing thee was alwaies ioyfull and gallant aboue all the rest. And now my vnderstanding dooth tell mee that all is changed topsie turuie, and cleane contrarie vnto that it was wont to be, all the whole kingdome of England very sad  sorrowful, the court of the king Oliuerio ouerthrowen, for that good knights lacke therin,  the euill doth increase, and such as are proude doth augment, and damsels as Or|phants doo truile with no securitie, but dooth mstrust all knights: all doth finde lack of they presence, all doth weepe and bee wste thy departure, all dooth curse the houre of thy departure,  the occasion that mooued therevnto. But what shall Oliuia now doo, who hath beene the occasion of all this, and yet vnto hir hath thy departure bene more greeuous? O a truth, if that with my death I could haue made a meanes for all this, with a very good will a thousand times I would haue ben glad to haue receiued it, and should haue thought i the least of all my deadly sorrows. But alas what shall I doo, if I doo lack death for my remedy, th shal I loose all the hope I haue to se thee, the which if I doo loose, I shall thinke my soule far more then lost,  in this sort I shall not make any recompence for this great errour, neither you sa|tisfied for the great hurt and harme receiued, so that I take t for the better choyce to liue, sustayning my life with this ope,  for that I doo greatly feare that my life cannot long endure, if thy comming bee not with breuity, therefore I doo end this Damsell to seeke thee, for to desire thee (in first par|oning of that which is past) that thou wouldest not permit

that my soule depart out of this world, till such time as my eyes may reioyce themselues with the sight of the, for that onely therewith I shall thinke my selfe happie, and for that in all other matters thou mayst giue perfect credit to this my faythfull secretarie, and vnderstand all my sorrowfull passions, I doo inlarge no farther, but remaine prayeng vn|to God to keepe  defend thy person, and to direct thy paths arighi.



When Rosicleer had read this Letter, and knew it to  hirs, what shall I say vnto the great ioy  pleasure which he receiued, but that it was equall vnto the great sorrow and griefe which he suffered, for that as one from him selfe he was reading,  did not contemplate himselfe with those swet and amorous words of his Lady and mistres, and the great loue which she dyd professe in hir letter, and how  did repent hir selfe of all that was past, of all the which he receiued so great ioy and contentment, that all his sences were occupyed therewith, in such sort that he  him selfe transported into the celestiall glorie, so that he had no tongue for to speake vnto the King Sacridoro, neyther fete for to remoue himself out of that place, nor eies for to looke vpon Fidelia, but onely occupied in recreating himself in that contemplation, reading and beholding that Letter many times. In the ende he remembred himselfe as one that dyd awake out of a dreame, and went vnto the King Sacridoro, and embraced him  sayd: Oh my Lord  perfect friend, I desire you to put me out of all doubt of this doubtfull thing which I haue before me, for that you shall vnderstand, that looke how much the glorie is which at this present I re|ceiue, so much more will the paine and griefe be vnto me if it fall out otherwise.
Therefore tell me (I pray you,) whether I doo slepe or am awake, or whether it be true that I doo now se, or whether it be one of those dreames which I was wont to haue, doo not let me I pray you to liue deceiued, for that is ot reason, one so vnhappie and voyde of good fortune as I

am, should recreate and content himselfe with so high a be|nefit as this is. Behould how I doo dreame that the Prin|cesse Oliuia hath sent mee a Letter by hir secretarie Fidelia, and hauing compassion on mee, she would that I should be hirs, and to goe into England for to serue hir, and be at hir commandement, and doth write to me such amorous words, that there is no humane creature that dooth deserue the same, much lesse a man that is so forgotten as I am: Be|hould here Fidelia, heere is the Letter, the hand and seale of my Lady and mistres, the Princesse Oliuia: Tell me I pray you, whether I doo slepe or dreame, and whether it bee true this which I doo se. The King did not meruayle much at all this which passed because he dyd very well vnder|stand the operation of loue, but embracing him, he tooke him by the hand and sayde: Oh my Lord Rosicleer and perfect friend, now I doo se the great wonders of God, and how great his mercie is, for that he dooth forget none that doth put their trust in him, for when I was very prosperous in riches, high  estate, and accompanied with all my vassalls and subiects, and in soueraigne hope for to ouercome, and haue that which I most desired, straight waies I found my selfe very far from the easement of my griefe, and the ende of al my desire separated, for that I was ouerthrowen from my estate, and all my kingdome destroyed, my people ouer|come and left desolate without my vassalls, and bannished, out of mine owne Countrie, and throwen out into the world,  sunke into a lake whereas I found all that which I desire, remedie for my sorrow, and recouered againe my Kingdome, and restored vnto mine owne estate, and aboue all things, I recouered a good  perfect friend of you, there|fore all affiction and tribulation in the world, God dooth permit it vnto them that he doth not forget, and when they dooe thincke themselues most afflicted and troubled, ouer|throwen and brought most low, and most without all hope, and voyde of all goodnesse, at such time with a trise and in a moment they are brought into more higher estate then they were before, with ioy and prosperitie,

giuing them occasion for to esteme and haue in more ho|nour the thing that they most desire, and so hath it happe|ned vnto you my good friend Rosicleer, for that at such time as thou didst abhorre thy owne lyfe, and when thy sorrow and griefe had most gouernement ouer the, and when that all hope of remedie was past and farthest off from thee, vp|pon a sodaine hath come vnto you remedie for all things, and in so high order, that you your selfe cannot be leue it, and you doo thinke your selfe vnworthie of that which God hath ordained for you, therefore surrender vnto god thanks for the same, and gratifie this Damsell for hir great tra|uaile which shee hath taken for you, and doo not ay that it is a dreame or mockage, that which we doo all se with our eyes. At which words of the King, Rosicleer came wholie to himselfe, and hauing no hart to speake, with the great ioy he receiued, he embraced the King and Fidilia many times, and by exteriour tokens and signes, he dyd communicate his pleasure and ioye vnto them. Then afterwards Rosi|cleer demaunded of Fidelia all what had  by whome he vnderstoode all that euer shee dyd know of the Prin|cesse Oliuia, for there shee made manifest vnto him hir lyfe, hir passions, and hir cares, and all that euer had passed in the Letters, and how by them shee vnderstood him to be Sonne vnto the Princesse Briana, and afterward it was published that he was sonne vnto the Emperour Trebatio. Likewise shee toulde him the occasion of the writing of the first Letter, and the great repentance which she had for the same, the great anguish and griefe shee had for Don Siluerio, the great good will of the king hir father, and the great im|portance hee vsed, also the great  of the Princesse Oliuia, all which when Rosicleer heard, hee was as you may iudge of all them that faitfully and truely dooe loue, at such time as they are giuen to vnderstand any thing of their best beeloued: the which things vnto such as are free from all loue are counted but trfles, and childrens toyes, where|as to the contrarie vnto them they are pearles and preci|ous stones.
Then the King seing them in this profound and depe rehearsall, tooke him by the hands and sayd: My good Lord let all these matters passe for this time, and let vs vnder|stand that which dooth most accomplish you, which is to goe into England, whereas you shall vnderstand and know all these matters of the Princesse Oliuia, for that I doo perceiue by the long trauayle, in the which Fidelia hath gone, in see|king of you, that you delay the time very long.
Then Rosicleer, as thouh he did awake out of a sound slepe came vnto himselfe, and savd. O high and soueraine Lord and God, here I doo giue infinite thanckes vnto thy holy name, for that it hath pleased you to put remedy in the life of this your Knight, with this vnlooked for remedie. And vnto you my very good friend Fidelia I doo giue great thanks for the great trauaile the which you haue passed and taken, in seeking of me, that I may goe comfort and recre|ate my selfe, in the sight and countenance of my Lady and Mistresse. And I doo desire of God, to graunt me lyfe, that I may gratifie your large pilgrimage, which you haue pas|sed, n seeking mee. And tourning himselfe vnto the King, hee sayde: Pardon mee, I pray you my good Lord, these my amorous passions, and let vs goe whether your pleasure is to command vs, without tarrying any longer. So straight wayes they commaunded the knghts of Fulmineo, to bring before them all the Ladies and damsels, that were in all the Castels. And being brought before them, they were more then thirtie, all very faire and full of sorrow. All the which Rosicleer, dyd commaund, that they should goe and present hemselues before the Emperour of Russia in saying, that wo  Knights, hath slaine Fulmineo, and that they doo urrender and yeed vnto him all his Countrie and lands, or that Fulmineo, hath left no heire. And vnto the Damsels e did giue all such riches as hee found within the Castells. nd for to set order in this and in all  things, they tar|ed there that day and that night: and for that his desire as so great for to goe into England, the night semed so , that hee thought the day would neuer haue apeared.

So the next day, at such time as the Sunne did scarce ap|peare, when they were armed with their rich  bright ar|mour, and mounted vpon their good horses, these two valy|ant knights and perfect friends went forth of the castle, and in their company the damsell Fidelia, leauing a good Knight which was Fulmineos in the gard and keping of the Castle and all the rest, till such time as the Emperour of Russia dyd commaund his pleasure to be done with them. So all they together tooke their right way towards the sea, where|as they might embarke themselues for England, where the historie dooth leaue them til time dooth serue. So the Ladies and damsels of Fulmineo went before the Emperour,  de|clared vnto him the embassage of the knights,  of all that euer had passed, for the which he receiued great ioy  plea|sure,  meruailed greatly that one alone knight had slayne Fulmineo,  was very sorrowfull for the departure of those two knights,  would haue giuen a good part of his countrie for to haue had them remained in his court,  presently gaue vnto those ladies and Damsels all the castles and lands of Fulmineo, in recompence of the great harme and damage which they receiued of him. The Emperour as well as all the rest that did border vpon the countrie of Fulmineo, gaue great laude and praise vnto god, because he was out of the world, and would very faine haue sene and knowen that knight that had so much force and strength for to kill him.


How the knight of the Sunnne and the faire Princesse Lindabrides went forwards on their iourney towards the great Tartaria, and of the stout battayle that the knight of the Sunne had with the Troian Oristides. Chapter 55.
LOng tyme dyd the knight of the Sunne and the fayr Princesse Lindabrides trauayled together towards th gran Tartaria, with great maiestie in hir triumphant Cha|riot, which did manifest their high estate vnto all that sa

them. In this sort they trauayled without happening vn|to them any thing worth the telling, till they came vnto a conuenient port, whereas they might embarke themselues towards the gran Tartaria, and by reason of the continuall conuersation of the Princesse, and the Knight of the Sunne, and the great beautie and soueraigne grace of the Princes Lindabrides, which continually in the eyes of the Knight of the Sunne dyd worke effect, in such sort, that what so e|uer contrary might bee presented before him, was not suffi|cient, but that his hard and stonie hart must of force be mo|lified, and cloue it a sunder in the middest in such sort, that the old wound did rankle a new, and he put in far greater extremities then at the first beginning, for that the Prin|cesse Lindabrides depriued him of all his sences, and as the Diamond stone dooth draw yron vnto him, so dooth she bring vnto hir all his thoughts, so that the Princesse Claridiana by reson of hir absence, the remembrance of hir great beau|tie is forgotten, and the wound which hee receiued at his heart by hi singular beautie, is not now felt, by reason of the great griefe of the Princesse being present, so that his eyes could behould no other comfort nor pleasure, neither dooth his thoughts desire any other glorie, so that he dooth not occupie himselfe in any other thing, but to serue hir, and to gieue hir all the contentment possible, hir presence s vnto him great ioy, comfort, and pleasure, and hir ab|ence great sorrow, paine, and griefe. When the Sun should rise he sayth, that it is slouthfull, and when that it goeth owne, hee sayth that it flyeth, for that all the day time he oth reioyce himselfe with the sight and conuersation of the rincesse, and the night dooth separate them a sunder the ne from the other. At this time you may beleue that the rincesse Lindabrides was more gladder and ioyefull then hen she was in the citie of Constantinople, in the presence f the Princesse Claridiana, for now seing hir Knight by , and considering the great loue which she bare vnto hir  in the wa trauayling towards the Court of the Em| Alycandro, hir father, hir contented pleasure was

so great, that she neuer thought to be so merrie, neyther to inioy so great glory. So when they came vnto the sea ide, they imbarked themselues in a very fayre and great ship, wherein they put themselues into the power of the waues. And vpon a day when the knight of the Sun found himselfe alone with the princesse Lindabrides, amongst other matters which passed betwene them, hee sayde.
Lady and Princesse of the gran Tartaria, if I dyd thincke that my ouer much paine and inward griefe were perfectly knowen vnto you, then would not I at this present declare it, neyther the remedie for the same would I craue at your hands, for if you my Lady and Mistres, did vnderstand and know how grieuously I doo fele it, and in you to raigne a|ny good will to doo mee good, then would you of your proper good will procure to put remedy to the same without my as|king, for that I cannot beeleue nor thinke that it is possible, that Nature hath formed a Damsell endued with so great beauty  soueraigne grace, that it doth surmount all which at this present are borne, and should lacke in you pittie, the which is an extremitie amongst Damsels, for whereas any pittie doth dwell, they cannot bee without compassion, and hauing comassion to procure to put remedie in so sorrow|full a hart as mine is, which in euery houre and moment is in liuely flames burning and languishing in burning coales. The shining beames of your sight hath so kindled my thoughts, that they be all occupied in your seruice, and hath likewise scorched all my inward parts, and all my sences are blinde, my body all to peeces, and my soule as immortal alwaies. Therefore Lady I doo desire you, that although my paine is equall vnto that which they haue that are condem|ned to the proound lake, yet that in our remedies we  bee different that the mercy which doth lack for the~, let it be in you for to help mee, that I may be cleere fro~ so terrible a fire. And doo not delay any longer my remedy, for my griefe is so great, that it cannot suffer any delay because that ther|by I may be brought vnto such extremitie, that then you

would shew me this pleasure of remedy, then shall not I be able to receiue it at your hands.
And in concluding these words, the knight of the Sun with as great courage as euer he had, went vnto hir  kissed hir on one of hir faire cheekes. Then the princesse, who very wel vnderstood the woords of the knght of the Sun,  his desire, al|though she was very glad  ioyfull to see the great loue that he did beare hir, which was the thing that she did most desire, yet for all that she was so full of honesty,  adorned with so great maiestie  highnesse, that she was cleane contrary vn|to the purpose of the knight of the Sun,  would rather con|sent to die, then to yeeld vnto any such thing, and so making some semblaunce as though she were angry, accompanied with great grauitie, she answered him and said.
Knight of the Sun, my very good  perfect friend, I would neuer haue beleued that the true  perfect loue which I haue borne vnto you, should haue ben recompeced w^t the like sin|glene  puritie of loue,  to haue proceeded from a pure  perfect thought, for that of mine owne part I haue alwaies thought to be sure,  in the great force  strength of your person I had alwaies hope of defence against such like re|proch, at such time as I was most captiue and ouercome by loue,  most kindled in the burning flames therof. I hoped in your soueraigne vertue to haue found defence for my imbe|: but now alasse, I find all to be contrary and cleane changed from my expectation. What, will you giue remedy vnto your sorrow and griefe, with that which will redound much to my barme? Will you first serue your owne turne  accomplish your owne desire, without any consideration of my highnesse  honestie, the which if you did beare good wil  loue, as you doo publish, you would neuer procure so great harme vnto me, for it should be more griefe vnto the the sor|row that I shuld receiue, then thy own griefe: neither shuld you receiue any ioy in that, which shuld cause in me griefe.  and knight of the Sunne, that I hau not my selfe

in so little estimation, that you should thinke that my loue were so base to cause such desires, nor the desires so mortall that should cause vnto you paine, but rather I doo think that things aboue nature doo cause ne paine vnto men, hauing want therof: So likewise my high  royall estate accompa|nied with soueraigne beautie should be to you holden as a thing aboue nature, so by that meanes you should not haue the paine  griefe which you publish, neither for to seke  procure such vnsemely remedy, I will not inlarge any far|ther herein, for that I am angry,  with anger ought little to be spoken,  especially with friendes. It is sufficient good knight of the Sun, that I doo loue you more then my selfe, and when time doth serue I will dooe that which loue  reason doth bind me, that shall be at such time as we shall come vn|to the gran Tartaria, by the Emperour my father,  all those mightie kings and lords of his court, with great , e|quall vnto your highnes, our marriage shall be ,  in the meane time haue patience  bridle your owne   affections,  doo not loose the glory of your great  mightie deds, in being vanquished by your owne affection, for as the victory is greater that a man doth get of himselfe, so much greater is the victory when he doth ouercome his own will, for to that which reason doth deny,  a greater shame when that by a base knight he is ouercome, for that the first is, for the lack which is of vertue and of the person, for so much as they did not lacke force  strength for to make resistance,  secondly, the lack was in nature, for that it gaue him no more strength for to defend himselfe.
And herewith the princes made an end of hir reasoning, be|ing somwhat moed, hir redicond colour apeered, signifying that pure anger was the occasion therof. Whose words toke so great effect in the knight of the Sun that one way it dyd grieue him very much, for that he had declared vnto hir his desre,  otherwise the great maiesty  highnesse of the prin|cesse,

was so augmented in his loue, that he didde loue, hir much more from that day forwards then before,  asking pardon of hir, he kissed hir hands perforce. At this time Ar|cadia, was not so farre of, but that shee did vnderstand part of their communication, for that at all times when she saw the knight of the Sun  the princes Lindabrides all alone, she straight waies procured to put hir selfe in place wheras she might heare what passed betwene them,  hauing very well vnderstood what passed, it did grieue bir very much, for the great sorrow which the princesse Claridiana would receiue when she should vnderstand the truth therof, especially seeing it is a thing that may be held, for that according as she did vnderstand, that they two had great good will to be married at such time as they came vnto the gran Tartaria, and so dis|sembling hir griefe in the best wise she could, she tarried and did abide the time, that fortune would ordaine therein.
So at this time, being thre daies after their departure towards the port wheras they did imbarke themselues, they did ariue at the port of enedon, hard by that place wher|as ther was wont to be the great Citie of Troy, where they went a land,  by hir gyants were taken out of the ship of the triumphant chariot,  placing themselues in order with soueraigne maiestie as before, they began to take their iour|ney by land,  they had not well rauailed full two houres, when that they saw before them, a very high and well owred Castle, scituated at the foote of a Bridge. So when they came nigh vnto it, they saw that the Riuer was so depe, that of force they must passe ouer the Bridge with the Chariot, which hadde breadth inough for the same. And as yet the Unicornes were scarce entered vppon the Bridge, when that there came foorth out of the Castle a Knight armed with very rich and substantiall armour, and mounted vppon a great horse, who was so great and so well made, that in all theyr lines they hadd

not , so great  well proportioned a knight. Who when he came nigh vnto them, he lifted vp his beuer  said. Lords you shall vnderstand that the passage ouer the bridge is de|fended by me, against all knights, that presumeth to passe this way, except first they doo leaue here their shields, and their names written thervpon, in confessing themselues to be ouer come by the troyan Oristedes. And seeing the great maiestie of your comming, it doth giue me occasion to giue you better entertainment then I accustome to doo. For that you shall vnderstand the ancient custome of this bridge,  likewise the bondage wherin I am bound, for the defence  keeping heere of, is, that I must show no curtesie to any knight that here passeth. The knight of the Sun was very much troubled, as well at the good dispositio~ of Oristedes, as at his gentle speech and great courtesie:  being very desirous to know more of him he said. Sir knight I doo giue you great thanks for your good will  courtesie shewed vnto vs,  for that you shall not break any custome that hath ben so long kept at this bridge, I will doo what doth lie in me, for to make the passage ree for vs. And when I can do no more, then will I doe that the which I am constrained vnto by force.
But yet of courtesie I require you sir knight tell me what is the occasion that you doo call your selfe troyan,  wherfore doo you kepe  defend the custome at this bridge. For that according vnto the long time that is past since that this citie of Troy was destroied by the greks, I doo beleue that ther is no knight that doth remaine, that is of the troians blood. I will tell you, said Oristedes, for that you haue so great de|sire to know it. And I dooe meruayle that you cannot beleue this which I haue sayde, for that all those that hath not bene accustomed to come this wayes, are like|wise deceyued, for that the ancient writers, neuer wrot of that which I will shew you. You shall vnderstand gentle Knight, that at such time as this great citie of Troy, was

beseged by the grekes, there came in the aide  succour of the king Priamus, quene of the Amazons, named Pantasilla, who hauing heard many times in hir owne Countrye to praise  extoll the great strength  valiantnesse of Hector, more for his loue then for any zeale she had to defend Troy, she came together with very many people of hir for to se him  in the time of that siege, the queene declared vnto Hec|tor the great loue she bare vnto him,  he who was no lesse affectioned vnto hir granted hir all that euer she would de|mand, so that the quene was begotten with child by Hector,  was deliuered of a son whom they called Pireo, the troy|an, who very secretly  not knowen to any body, was gi|uen vnto a nurse borne in that citie, to be brought vp as hir owne child. So after the death of king Priamus  all his sons,  the destruction of the citie, ther remained certaine citizens of a base sort, such as y^e greekes made no account of, amongst whom it chanced the nurse who brought vp Pireo was one of them, who knowing whose son he was, did bring him vp with great care, till such time as he was a man,  by nature he was enclined to the exercise of armes, so he gaue himself onely thervnto,  had delight in no other thing,  for that it was manifest vnto him whose sonne he was, for to sustaine some memory of the citie of Troy,  of his father, he caused this bridge to be made,  this castle, and ordained a custome that no knight might passe that way, but first to combatte with him  to leaue herein his shield  his name, saying that he was ouercome by him,  in the time of his life he o|uercame so many knights, that they are without number,  when he died hee left beehinde him a young sonne, and com|maunded that all those that did discend from him, should maintaine that custome, which of long time hath beene maintained at that bridge, so that all those which haue suc|ceeded in this Countrye from him vntill this time, hath maintayned  kept that order  custome, and hath ouer|come so great a number of knights, that in all that great

forrest which you doo se, there is no roome almost to hang their sheeles. And in saying these words, he shewed vnto the~ the forrest, whose tres were all full of shelds, which dyd hang vpon the boughes  branches, some of them were gli|stering,  other some with great antiquitie had lost their co|lours,  ther were so many of them, that without great dif|ficultie they could not be told,  proceeding forwards, Ori|stedes said: This is the occasion why  wherefore this cus|tome is kept  maintained at this bridge. And I will keepe and defend the same so long as I doo liue, for that my lineall descent doth come from that noble stock of Pireo,  his fa|ther Hector,  for that ther hath remained no other remem|brance of Troy, this shal remain for a memory of the noble blood that was ther spilt.
The knight of the Sun reioyced very much at that which Oristedes had told him,  did esteme him little for that he came of that royall blood of Troy,  semed vnto him accor|ding to his disposition, that he could not but be like in vali|antnes vnto his predecessours,  giuing him great thankes for that which he had told him of his life  custome, he sayd vnto him: Well gentle knight, seing it is so that you can|not choose but kepe  maintaine this your custome, neither I nor all these that dooe come with me cannot passe this bridge without making battaile, or els to returne agayne the way which we haue come. Let vs if you please, procure to do all that in vs doth lie,  vnto him that doth lack fortune, let him doo all that the other doth commaund. And in saying these words the knight of the Sun descended out of the chari|ot  commaunding his horse to be brought foorth, he mounted vpon him,  with his speare in his hand he went  put him|selfe at the entry of the bridge, of the which Oristedes was very much amazed, and seing him comming with so great maiestie,  in the company of so faire a damsell, he did ve|rily beleue him to be some knight of high estate,  of great

bounte of armes,  although he was a very valiant knight his mightie demeanour did not cause in him any faintnes,  although he had had perfect intelligence that he had ben the most valiantest knight in all the world, yet he had no doubt to combat with him, for that he had kept  maintained that bridge more then eight yeres, in which time he had ouer|come more then one thousand knights, yet he neuer met with knight that by very much might compare himself with him.
And then with as valiant a courage as appertayned vnto his progenie, he went  put himselfe right against the knght of the Sun, and both of them at one time did broach their hor|ses with their spurs, and with so great fury, that the bridge seemed to be ouerthorwen,  both the Knights to be on fire, with the great quantitie of sparkes that came foorth of that paued pauement, and in the midst of the bridge they made their encounter in such sort, that their speares were she ue|red all to peces,  they passed the one by the other as though they had done nothing, and with a trise they turned about their horses with their swoords in their hands they assalted one another,  the first blowes that were striken, it semed that all that valley was full of the sound thereof, being stiken vppon their inchaunted healmes, whereas all those were executed, and beeing nothing amazed nor astonied therwith, but with great furye and wrathulnesse they did assalt each other with their sound blowes, and being meruailousie ouercharged with the great force of them, it made them to declie their heads to their breasts, so that eyther of them did feele the great force of his auersarye, and Oristedes said vnto himselfe, that neuer in all the daies of his life did he combat with a more valiaunter and worthyer Knight, but beeing determined to giue to vn|derstand his great force and strength, without any feare or dread, hee beganne to charge the knight of the Sunne with his terrible blowes, and with so great force and strength,

that he made him to bestur himselfe from the one part to the other, because that he should not fasten a full blow vpon him,  this valiant knight of the Sun said vnto himselfe, that not without iust cause  great reason the fame of that worthie Hector endured so long in the world, and now prouing that knight, who doth proceede of that ancent stock, he doth finde him,  doo beleeue that ther is not a more valianter knight then he is to be found in all the world,  seeing that it was necessary  stood him vpon to vse against him all his power  strength, he presently charged him with his mightie  furi|ous blowes. So these two worthy knights endured in their battayle more then one houre without ceasing or taking any breath, but breaking their shields  tearing of their shirts f maile that was so fine, sustaining the terrible blowes ofth other,  by reason of the great goodnes  finenesse of theyr armour  helmes, their furious swoords could not execute a|ny wound, yet for all that their flesh  bones were all , and many times they brought each other out of all rmem|brance,  seeing that their battaile endured very long, with|out acknowledging any aduantage betwene them. The princesse Lindabrides was very much amazed, likewise all the ladies  the damsels,  giants that were with hir,   Oistedes for an extreame  valiant knight, that so long did sustaine himselfe against the furie of the knight of the Sun. Now was it almost two houres that these two valiaunt knights were in their battaile, when that the knight of the Sun with very much shame  anger, for that the battayle endured so long before the princesse, and with one alone knight, with both his hands he stroke such a blow at Ori|stedes, vpon his fine and inchanted helme, that the ound thereof was heard throughout all that valley and forrest, and endured a good space, and made him to fall forwardes vpon his saddle bow out of all remembrance, and his horse carried him along the bridge till he came vnto the Castle gate, wheras hee stayed till such time as Oristedes came a|gaine

vnto himselfe, very much tormented with the force of that mightie blow, and all his face berayed with blood, and ranne out at his nose and mouth, and when he saw himselfe in that case, with more furie then euer hee was in all his life, hee set spurs vnto his horse, and made him to run towards he Knight of the Sunne with more fury then his wearinesse would well consent, and with his sword in both his hands hee stroke him such a terrible blow vpon his fine inchanted helme, in such sort, that if his swerd had not som|what glaunced, vpon his shoulder, it would haue put him in great perill, for that the fury of that blow was such, that the knight of the Sun had fallen from his horse to the ground, if he had not embraced himselfe about his horse neck, and was so greatly amazed at the great force  strength o Oristedes, that hee sayd vnto himselfe.
Oh valyaunt and famous Grekes, such as were ioyned together at the siege of this great Citie of Troy, with how great reason, (aboue all things the which dooth happen in this world) ought you to be honoured and praysed, for that you dyd not alone resist the great force of the Sonnes of Priamus, but also you dyd destroy and ouerthrow all his generation, with all the whole power of the Troyans: Oh Achilles that Captayne of Greece, with what reason can I name my selfe and say, that I dooe procede of the noble blood, fro~ whence my father the Emperour dooth descend for that it was not vnto the so much reproch the blows of that stout warrior, the first begotten of Priamus, as are vnto me the blows of this knight, who doth descend of his linage. And of truth I doo say, that if of this reproch I doo not reuenge my selfe, I doo pretend neuer herafter to name my selfe for a Breeke. And in saying these words the fury which he had was so great, that hee hasted with great spede towards the valiaunt Oristedes, who being not very well experien|ced with such lyke force, dyd abide his comming, and with both his hands he stroke him such an ouerthwart blow vpon his strong and inchaunted healme, that he made it to

flye of his head, and so vnarmed he fel from his horse to the ground, so far out of remembraunce and from himselfe, that he could not arise vp againe, till such time as the Knight of the Sunne did alight from his horse, and did help him. And when that he had receiued aire, he came againe vnto him|selfe, and the Knight of the Sun tooke vp his helme, and gaue it vnto the knight, saying: Gentill knight take vnto you ar|mour, and doo not loose by their ack, that which your great bounty doth assure you. Then Oristedes, when he saw the great curtesie of the Knight of the Sun, he threw his sword vnto the ground, and sayd. My gods will not consent, for so much as I doo lacke Fortune, for to defend my selfe, that I doo let to acknowledge, that I am by you ouercome. It is sufficient gentill knight that you haue ouercome mee in bat|tell of armes, and not now to ouercome me in courtesie.
Then the valyant and worthy Knight of the Sunne) wh had no good will to combat with him any more) being very ioyfull, he went vnto him saying: Happy art thou gentill knight, that your deedes doo giue to vnderstand of your dis|cent, from that noble and valiant Knight Hector. For as there doth remaine in you force and strength of armes, so is ther no lack of vertue in you. I am he that is ouercome, and he hath the victory that will not that our battell should procede any further. And in saying these words the two knights did embrace one another. And the knight of the Sun at the request of Oristedes did tel him who he was,  know|ing the same, at that time he did discemble, a maruailous do|lour and griefe the which he receiued at his hart. And dyd complaine very much against his gods, for that they semed to bee so fauorable vnto the Greeks against the Troyans. So likewise when that he did know who the Princesse Linda|brides was, he went vnto hir,  making a great reuerence, he would haue kissed hir hands, for that he did know hir in the court of the Emperour hir father,  was two yeres in the same court, wheras he did so high feats of knighthood, that he was esteemed to be one of the best knighs in all his owne

countrie, and likewise in the gran Tartaria, and for that he was so great a friend vnto the Prince Meridian, he did not combat with him about his demaund, and if that Oristedes would haue remained and abode in the court of the Empe|rour Alicandro, hee would haue made him a mightie Lord, but vnderstanding the death of his father, and for to mayn|tayne that custome, he returned vnto Troy, whereas hard by the bridge there was a little Citie, to the number of two thousand households, and inhabited by the descent of such as remained at the destruction of the great citie of the Troians, and likewise vnto such Gieekes whom the countrie did like well. Now to returne vnto the purpose, then did the Prin|cesse receiue Oristedes with great loue, and said: Is it true my friend, will you thus intreate vs in your owne Coun|trie, we would not vse you in this sort in Tartaria, if we had you there. Soueraigne Princesse, said Oristedes may it please your highnesse to pardon  forgiue me this errour, for that my dutie in the which I was bound by mine ancestours to maintaine this custome, as also lacke of knowing you, was the occasion that I haue committed this ouer-sight, and for that Oristedes dyd know of the demaund that the Prince Meridian did bringe out of his countrie, he demanded of the Princesse for him. And she tolde him how that the Knight of the Sunne had battell with him,  of all that passed betwixt them both. The which when Oristedes vnderstood, he dyd comfort himselfe very much, for that it semed vnto him to be no reproach, for to be ouercome by so valiant a knight, by whom Meridian was first ouercome, who thought that ther was not a knight in all the world that could match him. So receiuing great contentment for the acknowledge of the Princesse, as also to know that she should be married to so valiant a knight, with great ioy  plesure he said. For that which vnto so high a princesse as you are is due, I think it is no reson that in this sort alone you shuld enter into the gran Cataia, wheras are assembled y^e mightiest lords in the world, in the emperors court, therfore if you please I will go before,

and carry them the newes of your comming, that they may receiue you, as your high estate dooth deserue, for that I am sure that the Emperour wil be as glad as euer he was in all his lyfe with the newes, and I shall receiue great con|tentment to finde my selfe present in the Court of the Em|perour Alycandro, at the celebrating of so high a marriage, and at the great triumphs  feasts as shall be there made, as also for my bounden dutie, for the great good will which alwayes the Emperour bare vnto me. The Knight of the Sunne would very fayne haue disturbed the voyage of O|ristedes, for to haue excused the great trauayle which he should receiue in that iourney, for that it was very long, and needes must passe through very strange Countries, but he offered this with so great good will, that it did profit no|thing all that euer he could doo for to disturb him of his iour|ney. So for that day they all went vnto the Citie, whereas they were meruailously wel receiued, and were serued of al things very abundantly. Then the knight of the Sunne looke|ing out of a high window of the pallace, he saw peces of walls and towers of old antiquitie, which was a memorie of the great Citie of Troy, and round about the same the wide and broad fields, whose sight caused the teares to fall from his eyes, when hee remembred the great number of worthy knights, as wel Greeks as Troyans that were there slaine, and behoulding the great circuite thereof, which dyd extend from the one side vnto the other foure miles,  the smalnesse of the Citie at that present, and the great demon|stration of towers  other mightie building, hee said within himselfe: Oh weake, miserable, and feeble life of man, what confidence or securitie canne mortall men haue in the great riches and pompe of this world, considering with great at|tention the sodaine  vncertaine mouings  changes of hu|mane things,  how sodainly they are ouercome  destroyed. Who had seene the great citie of Troy compassed about with so strong wals, and fortified with so high and great towers, and furnished with sumptuous buildings, full of people,

gouerned by so mighty a King, and defended by so famous captaines, who had knowen the King Priamus, Lord ouer the principall regions Orientalls and Meridionalls, of the great Asia. Who had sene his mightie power, his great ri|ches, his pride and high estate, the great number of vassalls and subiects, the worthinesse of his Captaines, the singular force and strength of his sons, and all these vpon a sodaine and vnlooked for, the great Citie of Troy destroyed and bea|ten downe, theyr strong walls ouerthrowen, with their to|wers, theyr mightie pallaces and buildings flat vpon the ground, King Priamus and his sonnes gored to death, Hec|tor drawen about the fielde, Policena hir throat cut, the Quene stoned to death, Andromica, with the notable Ma|trons of Troy defiled, the whole Citie destroyed, the Citi|zens , and their wiues, and widowes banished from theyr naturall Countrie, with their young sonnes in theyr armes, dispearsed throughout the world. all is lost and all is goe, and no memorie left, but that which is for a far|ther griefe, in remembring that which is past, leauing be|hide that which doth giue vs continuall sorrow and griefe, and considering thereof, it dooth make vs greatly to mer|nayle, in seing how that fortune sometimes dooth exalt vs aloft, and at other times dooth throw vs downe, tossing vs this way and that way, lyke a tennis ball. Now I know of a truth, that with great reason the Marriners doth call he tempest, Fortune, and not without great occasion wise en dooth say, that it is very troublesome to suffer prospe|itie, and that it is requist for to learne to suffer the a|undaunce of Fortune, for as that wise Poet Lirico sayth,  the high and mightie Pine Tres are oftenest beaten  tormented with the windes, and the highest Towers  the greatest falls, and on the high mountaines and  dooth the thunder-bolts commonly strike. It is said  the humane highnesse of it selfe, is vnquiet and with| securitie, for that there is nothing that can be so secret,  it commeth to be discouered, as care, trauayle, enuie,  feare, weping, and in the ende death. And lykewise I

doo now know to be true, that how happy so euer the be|ginning is, the end is vncertaine and doubtfull, for that all humane things dooe turne about lyke a whele, and after a quyet and calme Sea, followeth tempests and troubled wa|ters, and after a clere morning a clowdie euening. There|fore comfort your selues you Greekes and Troyans, that haue bene banished in these fieldes of Troy, for that the fame of your mightie dedes is out of the subiection of For|tune, and it cannot be that by hir you be ouerthrowen so long as the world endure. In saying these and many other words the knight of the Sunne remained a good while at the same window, with great sorrow and griefe which the re|membrance of all those things did cause vnto him. So night drew on, and euery one went to take their rest,  after that they had stayed there two dayes, the knight Oristedes tooke his leaue of them, and tooke in his companie two Pages, and departed out of the Citie,  tooke his iourney towards the gran Cataia, and gran Tartaria, vnto the court of the Em|perour Alycandro, which was in the gran Cataia. So that at this present the Historie doth leaue him with the Knight of the Sunne and the Princesse Lindabrides, till time serueth.


How Rosicleer and the king Sacridoro came into England, and what happened with them there. Chapter 56.
_MAny dayes trauailed Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro towards the kingdome of England with so great desire to find themselues there that Rosicleer dyd thinke euey day to be  whole yere,  passed through many countries wheras happened vnto them many  

things worthy to be kept in memorie. Yet the historie dooth let them passe for shortning of time. But in the end of much trauaile, they came vnto a port hauen of Holand, whereas they found a ship that was readie to depart for England. And being very glad, for that they found so good oportunitie, they entred into the saide ship, wherein they found many Ladies and damsels, accompanied with certaine knights, who decla|red that they went vnto the Citie of London, vnto certaine triumphs and feasts which was made at y^e marriage of the Princesse Oliuia, with the Prince of Lusitania, for that in ma|ny  bordering there about, it was commanded to bee .  when Rosicleer heard that, he was very much , not knowing what it should meane, but the damsel,  who did very well know the determined wil of the Pricesse, did straight way fall in the reckoning there|of,  . ir knight feare not, and doo not dismay your selfe, for without all doubt ther is no other thing in this matter  be , but this which I will tell you: and is, that he prince  Siluerio, hath very much importuned the king  this marriage. And he seing the great necessitie that  in, for to maintaine these wars against the  Trebatio, and hauing nede of his aide and help, will  vto him his daughter in marriage, although it be a|gainst hir will. But this one thing you shall vnderstand  me to be for certayne, and to builde vpon the Princesse liuia, that at such time as hir father will compell hir to doo  thing perforce, that first she will kill hir owne selfe, the~  vnto the same. And so it ell out true, as the damsell elia, dd coniecture, for that the sorrow and paine of the nce Don Siluerio, did so much increse, seeing the little good ll that the Princesse Oliuia dyd beare vnto him: vpon a  such time as the King was occupyed in preparing ldiers in a redinesse, and other things necessary and con|ient for the warres, the Prince finding him selfe all  with him, be sayde: That for so much as it was not  vnto him, of his promise made, to giue  the Princesse Oliuia, for his wife, he destred him for

to accomplish the same, and to giue hir vnto him for his spouse, if he would that he should performe that which he had promised him, of people for the warres, for that to the contrarie he would retourne againe into his owne Coun|trie with his Knights. Then when the King saw with what determined will he spake vnto him, he was very sor|rowfull for the same, and remayned a good space with-out makeing him any auns were, in which time he remembred how many and sundrie times he had procured that marri|age of his daughter, and like wise how often he had impor|tuned hir for the same, who alwayes dyd apart hir selfe by diuerse excuses, as though she had no great desire therunto. So that if he should grant vnto the Princes desire, it must of force be done contrarie  against the will of his daugh|ter, wherein he did hope of no good successe of that Marry|age to be done agaynst hir will, for that in such cases the principall to be considered amongst men, as well in high estate, as in meaner sort, is to vnderstand th good will  their daughters, for that onely in them doth consist the forc of Matrimonie. And if there be lacking this poynt therein they may better say that it is violence then Marriage. An agayne, the wound in his heart was so fresh for the death  the Prince Edward his sonne, that he little estemed to  uenture his estate and lyfe, for to be reuenged for the sam and as these grieuous passions after that once they be  ted in man, dooth shut vp all their sences  vnderstanding that they cannot haue any iudgement within themselues to consider any thing with reason: Euen so the  griefe which the King conceiued for the death of his sonne dyd so shut vp his vnderstanding, that he desired no  thing but reuengement. So he determined for to force  constraine his Daughter vnto that Marriage, onely for satisfie his appetite and euill desire, not hauing before  eyes, neither consideration that after that all should be nished and done, according as he would haue it, that  sonne should remaine dad, and his daughter lost and  away, for that he married hir against hir will, and 

seing that if he should deny to accomplish his promise vnto the prince, he would returne againe into his owne country with all his people,  without him he could not doo that which he so greatly doth desire. So after a while that he was tro|bled with these thoughts, he returned vnto the prince  said: Worthy prince of Lusitania, if I haue withdrawen my selfe in giuing you my daughter to wife (according as you haue demanded hir of mee) doo not you thinke that it hath beene neglected, or that ther hath lacked in me any good will, for that rather more then you I doo desire the same, but the de|traction hereof hath ben for two causes, the one, in part of my daughter, for that she is young  tender of age, she hath no good will to be maried so soone, the other, in consideration of the great wars which we doo looke for and the great hast that we doo make for the same, I would that first all these wars should be fiished  made an end of,  then afterwards with a great deale more quietnesse should your mariage be celebrated with that honour  highnes as is requisit vnto so high princes. But now seeing it is so that you cannot suffer so long delay, I wil accomplish  performe all your request,   promise you to giue you my daughter for wife,  will diliuer hir vnto you as I haue promised, before these wars begin,  I will at the celebrating of this mariage (for that the princesse is the onely heyre vnto these kingdomes) that ter be made great  solempne feasts,  that it be proclay|med in all the kingdomes  prouinces ioyning hereabouts, for that this day two moonths I will haue it agred  con|cluded.
Wherae the prince Don Siluerio was very glad  ioyfull, thy force did kisse the kings hands,  offred vnto him all his knights,  his estate, at all times when he would commaund them, then the prince did take his leaue of the king,  straight waies it was knowen throughout all the citie,  the feasts were proclaimed. But when the newes came to the eares of

 Oliuia, hir sorrow  griefe was so great, that many times she was at the point of death,  was fully determined within hir selfe, that at such time as hir Father would vse that force vnto hir, that first before she would consent ther vnto she would kill hir selfe. Then the king knowing hir will  mind to be contrary vnto his pretence, commanded hir to be put into a tower,  alonely in the company of hir damsels,  commanded that none should either see or speake with hir, beleuing that therby she would reclaime hir selfe,  yeld vnto his request. In the meane time the prince Don Siluerio made ready  put in order all that was requisite  nedefull for those feastes, with so great expenses,  now in|uentios, as neuer the like hath be seene, for that this was one of the most riches princes in all the world,  had brought with him more then fiftie thousand knights into England,  amongst them were such, that they thought that in all the world was not their equals. These were the great triumphs and feats that were told vnto Rosicleer  the king Sacrido|ro in the ship whereas they came passengers, all the which they beleed to be as Fidelia had told vnto them,  with the great desire that Rosicleer had to mete with Don Siluerio, he thought to be very slow the swift course  sailing of th ship, as though she did not moue out of the place. So in this sort the ship did nauigate a leauen daies, in the end wherof they ariued in a port of Scotland, which was a prouince of England,  disibarking themselues they gaue great thanks vnto them which came with them in the ship, for their good conuersation, they tooke their leaue of them  departed all alone,  it was consented betwene them that Fidelia should goe before, and giue vnderstanding vnto the princesse Oli|uia of their comming, and afterwards finding hir conforma|ble vnto their will, they would determine what was best to be done.



 How Fidelia went to the Prince Oliuia, and gaue hir vnder|standing of the comming of Rosicleer. Chapter. 57.
_AS you haue heard before, it was concluded betwene the two knights that Fidelia should goe before vnto the Citie of London, for to carry newes vnto the princesse Oliuia of th comming of Rosicleer,  to vnderstand the e|state of all things. So she tooke hir leaue of them  departed on hir tourney,  they two remained in a monestary of religious men, which was foure miles from London in great confusion, not knowing how to determine themselues in these matters, that they stoode them so much vpon, seeing with what great hast they did prouide all things necessary for those triumphs  feasts,  the celebrating of y^e mariage of the princesse Oliuia, for that within foure daies the time would be expired of the two moneths which were appointed as it was told the~ of many that they ouertoke go|ing vnto the triumphs. And Rosicleer hearing the same, was so full of anguish in hart, that he seemed like a foole, furious  from himselfe,  would neither eate nor drinke, neither all that euer the king Sacridoro could say or doo, was sufficient for to appease him,  many times he did arme himselfe and would haue taken his horse for to goe and seeke the prince Don Siluerio, and wheresoeuer he had found him, to haue sline him, but by the great wisedome and gouernment of the king, by force and against his will he did stay and de|taine him, alwaies putting before him the ill successe that would proceede in doing the same, and how that he might therein bring himselfe into a meruailous perplexitie, and bee an occasion that the princesse Oliuia shall bee put wher|as hee shall neuer se hir. Likewise y^t he should consider how Fidelia was gone to speake with the princes Oliuia,  that it was not good till such time as she had sent hir answere,  giuen vs to vnderstand hir purpose, not to giue any at|tempt. With which prswasions Rosicleer staid himslfe,

although very sorrowfull, and without any contentment, or hope of remedy. He did abide the returne of Fidelia,  the an|swere she should bring from hir ladye the princesse. Who when she came vnto the citie of London, she went vnto the great pallas whereas she found not the princes, but it was told hir how that the king had commanded hir to be caried into a strong tower, wheras no bodie could neither see hir, nor speak with hir, but only two damsels, who did serue hir,  without opening any doore, to any body all such things as was necessary for hir, was drawen vp at a window. This tower was scituated, vpon a high rock, very strong,  nygh vnto a very broad  depe riuer,  walled round about. And the king kept the keies therof, for that he would that none should enter in therat for to visit the Princes, for that she seeing hir selfe so solitary,  in so great straightnes, would be the occasion, that she would yeld hir selfe vnto mariage,  to doo all that the kings pleasure was to command hir, al|though it were all onely for to be clere of so straight  soli|tary life. So when Fidelia, came vnto the gates of the tower,  saw that they were shut, she knocked at a ring that hong therat, till such time, as a damsell whom she did know very will, did looke out at a window: who when she knew Fidelia, being very much amazed to se hir, she said. What hath ben become of you my sister Fidelia, that in so long time, you haue not come to visit the princes our mistresse, for that your ab|sence hath grieued hir very much, and hath thought long for your comming. To whom Fidelia, answered  said, my good friend I haue ben all this time in Scotland in my mothers house, for that I was very sick,  till now she would neuer let me depart from hir. Then the other damsell said, if you doo meane to come in hether, you must goe vnto the king, for that he hath the keies of the tower. Then Fidelia very heauy when she heard these newes she would stay ther no longer, but went vnto the kings pallas. And entring into his cha~|ber, finding him all alone, she kneled downe before him, and kised his hands.
Then the king when he knew hir, he was very glad  ioyful of hir comming,  said, my friend Fidelia, wher haue you ben so long, that you haue not come to se vs: vnto whom she said, in Scotland with my parentes,  here I doe desire your highnesse to pardon me. For that,  by reason of a great in|firmitie which my father had, was the occasion that I haue deteyned my selfe so long,  haue not come to acknowledge my duetie  seruice vnto the princesse my lady  mistresse. Thou art welcome said the king,  here I doe desire the, to goe  see the princesse,  to declare vnto hir the great benefit which will come vnto hir, in taking for husband, the prince Don Siluerio. And ther the king did declare vnto hir all that was appointed to be done, for that he had hir in reputation for hir grauitie,  wisdome, and thought that the Princesse would giue more credit vnto hir words, then vnto any other. Then Fidelia, who made a very good semblance, shewing that all that was done, did seeme very well,  that the king had grea reason therin: did promise vnto him, to tel and per|sware the princesse in such sort, that she would make to re|moue hir purpose Then the king gaue the keies of the tow|er, vnto one of his priuy chamber,  commanded him to go with Fidelia,  to open the gates of the tower,  bring Fide|lia ,  to locke the gates againe, and to bring him the keies. So Fidelia did take hir leaue of the king,  went with the knight vnto the tower, wheras the gates were opened,  she being within, they were shut againe,  the keies brought to the king. Then Fidelia, went vp into the tower, vnto the chamber of hir lady  mistresse, who hauing newes of hir en|tring into the tower, did abide hir comming, in so great con|fusion and sorrow, as euer she was in all hir life, suspecting the newes to be very euill that Fidelia should bring hir. And being in hir chamber all alone, faining not to be verie well, whereby shee might the better vnderstand of Fidelia the whole effect of hir message. Who so soone as she entred into the chamber, she kneeled downe before hir, and did kisse

hir hands, at which time the princesse had no power to speak vnto hir, she was so sodainly taken,  pinched at hir hart, mis|doubting hir embassage, but after a while comming againe vnto hir selfe, as though she had awaked out of a dreame or sound slepe, and seeing in presence an other damsell, who at the same instance, entred in she said. Thou art welcome my Fidelia, tell me how thy mother doth who hath ben the occa|sion of thy so long tarying ther. Ah my good lady, said Fide|lia, my mother hath lien so sicke, that a thousand times I thought she would haue died,  although that I would many times before, haue departed to haue come hether, yet would she neuer consent therevnto, till now that thankes be vnto God she doth remaine very well. I am very glad therof, said the Princesse, although I haue thought long for your com|ming. And in saying these wordes the other damsell went foorth,  Fidelia, did shut the doore after hir, so that the princes,  Fidelia remained all alone. And seing that she would giue hir newes of hir embassage, she was againe so sodainly ta|ken that she had no hart to heare hir, but looked so pale, as though she had ben dead, trembling with all hir body  flesh, as though she had ben afraide to heare what Fidelia would say. Who with a gentle laughter to see the princes in that case, she said. If the straunge countries, high waies, moun|taines,  desolat places, in the which I haue trauailed  the troubles which I haue suffered, and the great perills in the which I haue seene my selfe, were manifest vnto you (my la|dy  mistresse) then doe I will beleue that you should be sa|tisfied, of the great loue,  good will, that your Fidelia, hath to serue you. How oftentimes in the cruell teth,  vnmercifull nailes of furious beasts, did I think to be torne all to peeces, finding my selfe all alone in the deserts of Siria,  inhabited Petrea. How many times in the high towers and rowling mountaines of sand, haue I ben deliuered, out of the deserts of Affrica,  how many tunes hath mine honor put beene to sale,  I to be lost in so many strange countries, in the which I haue passed, and fallen into the power of monstrous and

strange kind of people,  of different maners  customes, I haue found  sene my selfe in all these perils  daungers,  God hath brought me out  deliuered me from all these tri|bulations,  in the end of all, when I was past all hope to find out him that I sought,  at such time as my honour was in the greatest perill to be lost,  being caried prisoner with my hands bound, in the power of the most euillest knight y^t euer humaine nature framed,  so valiant in armes, that all the whole empire of Russia did feare  tremble at him, then did god aide  help me, by meting of that happy  fortunate Knight, he who neuer in the world was borne the like, for refuge  defence of damsels, he who had trauailed  wande|red throughout all the world, accomplishing the banishment that by you was commanded him, whose life was as a fan|tasie vnto his soule, with more desire of death then to liue, his fortune at this time did bring him, whereas without knowing me he slew that euill knight that caried me priso|ner, with other damsels the which he had taken, and after that he had saine him, comming for to set vs at liberty, he straight waies knew me,  calling to his remembrance that cruell sentence of yours the which I caried vnto him,  de|liuered after that out of the like perill he had deliuered me, his griefe was such in his heart, that for the space of two houres we had him for dead, at which time if the letter of your succour had not ben presented vnto him, I beleeue he would ther haue ended his daies. To conclude, he read your letter,  ther with receiued so great ioy, that he semed to be transported into another world and of truth my lady, you may beleeue, that according vnto the sorrowfull life which he hath lead, and the ouer much troubles which he hath pas|sed for your occasion, that now he is as one restored from death to life, he is come with me, and hath brought with him that worthy king Sacridoro, he who many times you haue heard tell, did launch himselfe into the fountaine of the Sa|uages after him, so that they are now the greatest friends in the world.
They are altogether,  oo remaine in a place foure miles from hence, tarrieng to know what your pleasure is to com|mand them. The princes was so attentiue vnto that which hir damsell told, that when she had made an end of hir tale, with the great ioy which she receiued, the teares ran down hir faire chekes,  felt within hir hart so meruailous plea|sure  soueraigne contentment, that she found hir self cleane changed from that she was wont to be, in such sort that she had no tongue to speake vnto Fidelia, neither did she reme~|ber to make hir answere, for that all hir sences were occu|pied in thinking on Rosicleer, not beleuing to receiue so great a benefit as to se him. Then Fidelia seing hir in that case, to e hir by the hands,  bringing hir to remembrance, she said: Lady, why doo not you answere me, and giue mee thanks for this security which I haue done, for I perceyue that now I haue accomplished and brought to passe all that you so much desired, you make no account of me: Ab Fidelia, said the princes, my hart is full of anguish  griefe, that I cannot comprehend so great a benefit which God doth shew vnto me, onely in that I know that Rosicleer is aliue, and if he did come see me, hauing my perfect remembrance, my pleasure  contented ioy should be such, that in all things I should thinke my selfe happy, if death did take me in Rosi|cleers armes. Lady, saide Fidelia, let all such matters passe, and let vs be diligent in that which is most conuenient to reserne the life of you and Rosicleer, and to make all things sure for that which is to come, for with death you can put small remedy in that which is past. Ah my Fidelia, said the Princesse, one euill being past, another is come, doo you not se this my close keping, and how fast my Father hath me in this tower, that of a thousand other dam|sells I cannot be seene. And aboue all this, he hath promi|sed vnto Don Siluerio, that within these foure daies, he will marry me vnto him, and deliuer me in his power, to lead my life with him, therefore my good friend, ima|gine with your selfe what is best to bee done, in this my

great trouble, for that I know not what I should say. Fide|lia likewise was at hir wittes end, not knowing what was best to be done, for that the tower whereas they were was so strong, and the windowes of so great height, that it was not possible for any to enter into the tower, except it were by the gate. So that both of them passed away the day in great confusion, and likewise the night, without sleeping a|ny whit at all, but talking and imagining what was best to be done, in that so dangerous and perillous a case.


How Fidelia departed from the Court, and went to speake with rosicleer at the Monasterie, wher|as shee left him. Chapter 58.
_WHen the next morning was come, Fidelia said vnto the princesse, that forasmuch as beetwixt them two they could finde no remedie how and by what meanes Rosicleer might come and speake with hir, that if it were hir plea|sure shee would goe vnto the place whereas she left them,  se if they could determine some meanes for to disturb this that the king did determine to doo with Don Siluerio,  set hir at liberty out of that secret bondage. The which counsaile semed very good vnto the Princesse and com|maunded hir presently to goe foorth and put it in vre. But how is it possible to go forth, the king hauing y^e keyes of the tower? Feare not for this said Fidelia, for I haue good reme|dy for the same. And in saying this she went vnto a window, and seing an ancient man tht passed vp  downe,  calling him vnto hir, she bad him to come nigh vnto the tower, and said vnto him: Good man, for gods loue I do desire the to do so much for me, as to go vnto the king,  to tell him that Fi|delia the damsell of the Princesse Oliuia, would speake with him about certayne matters which dooth accomplish very much hir highnesse,  that I would desire him to commaund

the gate of the tower to be opened that I may come foorth. This ancient man tooke his leaue of hir,  promised to per|forme hir request So he went vnto y^e king, and declared the message of Fidelia, who whe~ he heard it was very glad and ioyfull, beeleuing that it was concerning that which he had sayd vnto hir,  deliuered the keyes vnto his chamberlaine, who was a very honest old man, and commanded him to go  to open the tower gate, that Fidelia might come out. Then the chamberlaine did as he was commanded,  Fidelia tooke hir leaue of the Princesse  went vnto the king, and taking him on the one side somwhat a part, she sayd: Soueraigns Lord, you shall vnderstand that I haue got the victorie of the princesse,  she sayth, that seeing it is your pleasure she is very wel content to marry with the prince Don Siluerio, and if she hath not hetherto consented, the occasion hath ben hir yong  tender age, and also considering the great wars which is looked for, she knew not how God would dispose with hir husband, for that he is a young and very couragi|ous, by reason wherof he would put himselfe wheras should be the greatest peril and danger. At which words the king receiued so great contentment, that hee sayde vnto Fidelia. There is nothing in the world that doeth so much content me for to marry hir against hir will, would be a griuous corsiue vnto my hart, and therewith he cast his armes a|bout hir neck, and embraced hir, and gaue hir great thanks for hir trauaile therein, and promised hir for hir paines ta|ken, to marry hir very honourably. If it please your high|nesse, sayd Fidelia, the Princesse my Lady willeth me to goe vnto the Monastery of Nuns, that is twelue miles fro~ this Citie, to comm~aund them to make certaine workes which shee hath great neede of. Let it bee done in Gods name sayd the King, goe thy wayes and God send thee good speede. And heerwith Fidelia tooke hir leaue of the king, very ioyfull, and shee beeing gone, the king presently sent for don Siluerio, and when hee came hee sayde vnto him, how the Princesse was content to bee married vnto him, and that all things should be made readie for the marriage. But when the prince don

Siluerio heard that newes, there was no ioy and pleasure in the world that might bee compared vnto his, and being proud with the same, he went and gaue all his knights vn|derstanding therof, and presently it was published through|out all the Citie, for the which they were very ioyfull, and the preparation for the feasts and triumphs went forwarde more then it dyd beefore. Then Fidilia who in all this time dyd not sleepe, but in great hast trauayled towards the mo|nasterie, whereas shee left the two knights, and at hir com|ming thether Rosicleer receiued hir with great pleasure, for he thought euerie houre he trauailed to be a whole yere. And when shee had declared vnto him the whole estate of all things, and of the great ioy which the Princesse receiued for his comming, one way he was very ioyfull, for that his La|dy shewed him so great loue, and another way he was in great confusion, not knowing what order might be taken for to deliuer his Lady and mistresse out of that great per|plexitie in the which she was brought, with the which she was brought with the marriage of the prince Don Siluerio, but in the ende after great debating beetwene them, the king Sacridoro who receiued as great griefe for the sorrow of his friend as though it had been vnto himselfe: My good Lord and friend, that which I can say is this, that for these and such like attempts god did ordaine knights in the world for to surpasse others, and so likewise to bee in greater per|ls,  for to doo such things that should seme to surpasse and exceede nature, and to appeare straunge vnto others, for if the lustaining of perils were equall in all degrees, then for very little should serue the extremitie of knights, for that they should not finde wherein to exercise themselues, for to appeare valianter then others. Therefore seing that God hath made you more valyaunter then any in the world, you ought for to put your person in aduenture to put re|medie in this matter, with reproach and perill vnto your erson, such as neuer hath bene sene in Knight, seing that he Princesse Oliuia is so fast locked in, that to take

hir out from thence it is a thing impossible, and it is now requisit that you doo pacifie your altered minde, that you may the better abide time and season to worke or feate.
And my iudgement is this, that we doo waight the time that the king shall command the Princesse to be taken out of the Tower, to carrie hir vnto the pallace for to celebrate the Marriage with Don Siluerio at which time there will be little memorie of armour, but all occupied in apparay|ling themselues, and to seeke out new inuentions, then we to enter in, and to take the princesse from them, and paying with your rigorous arme him who shall withstand vs, for that at that time they shal not haue so great strentgh, for to cause vs to stay, and if once we get well out of the Citie, we haue the sea at hand, wheras we cannot lack a ship, all furnished and readie for to make Sayle, we being once within, and betwixt this and that place our horse be so good, that I beleeue there is not any that can ouertake vs, of all remedies impossible, this is one amongst them that is pos|sible to be done, therefore now my Lord, consider with your slfe, what is best to be done in this extremitie. Then Ro|sicleer who was meruaylous attentiue vnto these words which the King Sacridoro had sayde: hauing his hart so va|liant and couragious for such like attempts, and likeing the counsaile of that inuention very well, before that the King had fully ended his iudgement, when that he would haue put himselfe in that enterprise, and finding this to be the best remedy, they concluded, and straight wayes therewith they all thre departed to the sea side, which was not far of, and when they came thether they procured to seeke out and to prouide for to serue theyr turne a good Ship, and amongst a great number of strangers that were come the|they with people for to se theyr feasts, they chaunced to en|ter into one, which semed vnto them to be the strongest and the best sayler amongst them all. And talking with the master or patron thereof, they found him to bee of the Empire of Greece, and Rosicleer knowing him by hi speech to be of Greece, hee tooke him a part, and dyd discouer

vnto him who he was, and tolde him what great necessity hee had of him and of his shep, promising him excellent pay|ment, with the aduantage, if so be that they did well escape with their enterprise, and without reproch. Then the Mai|ster of the Ship being a Grecian, and hauing heard of Ro|sicleer, was very glad and ioyfull, for that he had so good opportunitie to serue him, would haue kissed his hands, as the hands of his Lord and Prince, and offered him not onely his ship, but also his lyfe to serue him at that and all other times. Then Rosicleer with great loue embraced him, and gaue him great thankes, and all the rest of the day that re|mayned, they were in the Ship with him, putting in or|der all things necessary, as vnto so perilous an enterprise was requisit. So the next day drew on of the marriage, as it was agrede, which should bee the third day, in the which time these two perfect friends did peruse and mend their ar|mour, and fortified theyr ship, for it semed according vnto the great necessitie into the which they were driuen, that it was all nedefull. So the next day being come, Fidelia took hir leaue of them, and went vnto the citie,  straight waies vnto the king, who commaunded that the Tower should bee opened, willing hir to doo his hearty commendations vnto his daughter, and to tell hir that she should make hir selfe in a readinesse, for the next day she should come foorth to see the great feasts  triumphs which the Prince Don Siluerio hath ordayned for hir sake. With this Fidelia tooke hir leaue of the king and departed, and the gates of the Tower being opened, shee entered in therat,  the gates were shut againe s beefore. When she came vnto the Princesse, they two to|ether entred into hir closet all alone, and there Fidilia de|lared vnto the Princesse all that euer she had passed with he King hir Father, and what was concluded with the two ights. And when the Princesse vnderstood the great perill nd daunger in the which shee should put hir selfe, hir heart  hir to think thereof, and waxing pale of coulour, she  as though shee had ben dead, not knowing whe|her she were in Heauen or in the earth. At which time Fi|delia,

dyd comfort hir saying: What is this my Lady and mistresse, at such time as his death was most published, and you enuironed with most mortall anguish, at that time, you had a good hart for to suffer all,  courage for to discemble. And now you that haue your knight so nigh at hand with hope quickly for to se him, you doo lacke force for to suffer, and your hart doo faile you for to enioy him, that more then your owne lyfe you haue desired. For Gods loue doo it not, my Lady, but rather animate your salfe, and do you reioyse, for that in such great necessitie, the great valour of noble courage is knowen: and in especiall, whereas no euill may chance vnto you, but rather a further benefit and content|ment of minde, more then hetherto it hath bene vnto you. And if once Rosicleer, haue got you into his power, then is there nothing that can be hurtfull vnto you, for to ourne you to any griefe, for that you haue recouered for your hus|band, the most high and worthiest Prince in all the world as well in his estate, as of his person. Then the Princess sayde, with a great sigh, ah, Fidelia, I haue no dread nor per|ill of my owne part, for that I dyd choose rather to kill my selfe, then to doo any other thing to the contrarie. So that I haue little feare in any other thing, touching my selfe: but my feare is onely for Rosicleer, for that this his enter|prise the which he dooth take in hand is great, his life must needs be in great perill, if God for his  mersie do not maruaylously delyuer him. For this cause (sayde Fidelia,) hath God made him of such force aboue all other, for tha hee hath deliuered and cleered himselfe, in greater daungers then this is: so if God permit, he will clere himselfe o this. And I doo beleeue, that God hath not forgot you, bu will deliuer you, with your honour, out of this rebuke, an will not permit that your father the king, shuld do so grea outrage, in forcing you to marrie against your will. S with these  other such words in effect, did Fidelia perswad the princesse Oliuia, in such sort, that she did not esteme an perill that should happen vnto hir, with the great hope tha she had for to se Rosicleer, although other wayes the grea

loue which she did beare vnto him did make hir to fear more then his great bounty did make hir securitie. So all that same day they passed with great confusion, tarrying till the next day did come, that the great triumphs  feasts shuld be made,  that the prinsse should be taken out of the tower for that the next day following should be the day of the marriage.


How the great triumphs and feasts of the marriage of the Princesse Oliuia were celebrated, and of all that happened therein. Chapter. 59.
_WHen the day was come that the marriage of the Princesse Oliuia, with the prince don Sil|uerio should be celebrated, the great Citie of London was so ful of people as well straun|gers, as those borne in the Countrie, that the streets could scarce hold them,  all the streets were full with the military knighthood of Lusitania, y^e which did publish  set foorth the great power  mightinesse of the prince don Siluerio, who was that day apparailed with very ich apparel, of cloth of Affrica, full of meruailous precious tones of the Indias Orientals,  accompanied with many va|iant knights of his owne, and also borne in the countrie of ngland, and in company with the king, they went vnto the hurch, and in the midst amongst them the thre precious nd estemed Princes, Bargandel, Liriamandro, and  Zoylo, vnto whom the Prince Don Siluerio dyd offer  friendship. Then when seruice was done, the King  inuite, to dinner with him, all the most estemed nights that were in the Court, as well straungers as ose of the Countrie, and there was so great a number of , that they could scarce be placed in the mightie pallace.

And after that with great maiestie  pomp they had ended their dinner, they together did accompany the king vnto the tower, for to take out the princesse Oliuia, who being aduer|tised by Fidelia what she should doo, was meruaylous richly apparayled, abiding they time that the should come to take hir out of the tower, and dissembling with hir selfe cleane contrarie vnto that which was in hir stomacke.
So when the gates of the tower were opened, she descen|ded downe from hir closet, accompanied with hir damsells, and Brandizel Lyriamandro did take hir and set hir vppon a white Palfraye, which was ordayned for hir, meruaylous richly traped, and being accompanied with the most prin|cipallest Knights in all the court, they carried hir vnto hir pallace, and put hir in a royall estate that was appoynted, whereas she might se all the feasts and triumphs. When don Siluerio saw hir to bee so fayre and of so great beauty, that in all the whole world was not hir pere at that pre|sen, he was as ioyfull as euer hee was in all his lyfe, and was so gallant and mercie, as though they had giuen vnto him all the whole world, and did pretend to doo such things that day, that the Princesse should haue him in estimati|on for a very valyant Knight. Their triumphs and feasts they had ordayned in this sort, fiftie of those knights and o the principallest that hee brought with him out of Lusita|nia, dyd hang theyr sheldes round about the Tents, which were pitched in the midst of the great court of the pallace and theyr names written vppon theyr sheldes, and all th knights were within their tents, abiding all other Knight that would come and combat with them, as well with thei swords as with theyr speares, and whatsoeuer Knight dy come and touch any of those sheelds, presenly should com|foorth hee whose nme was written therevpon to comb with him, and on the other part of the great court was do Siluerio in another Tent, very richly wrought with gold and silke, an was ordayned, that all such ventrous Knight as had in Iust or combat ouercome any of his Knights should afterwards Combat with him one after another

and he had his shield likewise hanged vpon his tent, as the o|thers had, setting himself in a chaire at the tent doore, wher|as he might very well at his pleasure se all that euer was done by his knights. And the king was set in his roiall place appointed,  hauing in his company, those three worthy prin|ces, Bargandell, Lyriamandro,  the tartarian Zoylo, who be|cause they were so great friends vnto the prince Don Silue|rio, they would not as that day iust, but did beare the king company. Likewise many other princes and knights which came thether to see the triumphs  feasts,  being all set in order, the usts began, for ther was come forth into the court an english knight called Amberto, very valiant  couragi|ous,  famous in all that country, who straight waies at his curing in, she wing a valiant mind, he went vnto the tents, and with his speare he touched the shields of the knights of Lusitania, whose owner straight waies came foorth, who was one of the stoutest that was amongst them all, whose name was Bramides,  being mounted vppon a strong and great horse, with his speare in his hand he put himselfe into the field,  Amberto doing the like, with so great fury and force as their horses could run, they made their encounter, which was in such sort, that the english knight was pushed out of his saddle downe to the ground,  Bramides of Lusitauia pro|ceded forwards on his course, without any mouing, and as though he had done nothing, for the which he was estemed of the king Oliuerio  of all those that beeheld him to be a worthy knight,  presently after the foile of Amberto, came foorth into y^e court a strange knight, who was very desirous to get honor, but at the first encounter Bramides of Lusitania uerthrew him,  without staying he ouerthrew sixe or sea|en that came forth to iust with him,  this being done, he went into his tent, wher the prince Don Siluerio receiued so great pleasure, that he did not let but say vnto the king (who was in his roiall estate hard by wheras he was) how doth our maiestie like the knight of Lusitania that can so wel behaue themselues and maintaine the field.
It semeth vnto me said the king, that if all they be con|formeble vnto this knight, they ought to be had in great esti|mation. At this time entred another valiant knight into the field, and was naturally borne in Fraunce, called Reno, who touching with his speare one of the shelds, ther came straight waies another knight of Lusitania, who although he was a very valiant knight, yet the French knight was of so great force, that at the first encounter he ouerthrew him to the ground,  passed on his course as though he had done nothing at all,  presently taking another speare in his hand, he went vnto the prince Don Siluerio,  touched his sheld with his speare,  straight waies the prince came foorth mounted vp|on his mightie horse, very gallant  couragious,  ioyning in their encounter, although the french king was very valiant, yet the prince was of far greater strength, by reason wher|of he gaue him and his horse a great fall vnto the ground. Wherat the king  all those that did behold it, receiued mer|uailous great contentment of the prince Don Siluerio. So y^e most part of the day was passed away, wherein the knights of Lusitania had ouerthrowen vnto the ground more the fiue hundreth other knights,  the prince Don Siluerio in al that time receiued no foile that was any thing to his reproch for the which he was very glad  ioyfull,  thought that i all the world at that present there was not one like vnt him, who imagined that the princesse Oliuia receiued grea contentment therat, who had hir vnderstanding occupied i other matters, and had hir mind so occupied vpon Rosiclee that she had no regard vnto any thing that was done in  the great court, and hauing continually before hir eyes th great reproch which should be done vnto hir that night, sh was so full of feare, that many times hir hart did faile hi but by reason of hir shamefastnes (for that all people ver much beheld hir great beautie) she did couer  hide a  part of hir sorrow. At this time because the knights of  had ouerthrowen so many in the field, ther was not

knight in all the court sene to proue their aduentures, of the which Don Siluerio with great pleasure said vnto the king: I beleeue that for the knights of England this day, the knights of Lusitania cannot loose their custome, to haue the better in feats of armes. At which words of the prince Don Siluerio ther were diuers knights in company with the king that re|ceiued great griefe, especially two ancient knights, kinsmen vnto the king Oliuerio, who in their time were valiaunt knights,  because age would not agre that they should put on armour, they were like to burst with anger, in seing how the knights of Lusitania would disgrace the knights of England. Then vpon a sodaine ther were amongst the coun|try-men of the country a great rumor, which seemed to be of some sodaine ioy,  looking what it should be, they saw en|tering on the one side of the great place a knight of a very big stature,  armed with rich armour,  mounted vpon a great horse, who by his gallant disposition semed they knew to be Brandamarte, the best knight which at that time was in all the court, he was borne in England, a yong man  verye valiant,  since the small time that he was an armed knight, by his mightie prowesse he hath got very much honour. And all those of the country had great hope in him that he wold defend the honour of his Country against those knights of Lusitania. The King likewise was very desirous that his Knights might not receyue any reproch. When Brandamar|te came vnto the Tents, he touched one of the shields with his speare, and straight waies the owner therof came forth, mounted vpon a mightie horse, and comming vnto the iust, (because the knight of Lusitania was very valiaunt) yet Brandamarte was much more, and ouerthrew the other vn|to the ground, and without any farther delay he touch|ed other sixe sheeldes, and at the first encounters he ouer|threw the owners of them to the ground, which gave great contentment vnto the king Oliuerio, and vnto all those of the Country, for that hee defended so valianutlie

the honour of their country: But their ioy endured not long, for that after that Brandamarte had touched the shield of Bra|mides of Lusitania, with his speare, he came straight wayes foorth,  for that they were both of them very good  valiant knights, they made their encounter very strongly, in such sort, that Bramides of Lusitania, lost his stirrups and passed his course forwardes on, without receiuing any other harme. And Brandamarte, with his horse, (who was somewhat wea|ry) was constrained of very orce to fall vnto the ground, at which fall ther was few in all that great place, but was ve|ry sorie:  the wore, for that after that he was euerthrow|en for the space of a good houre, there was not one Knight y^t durst enter into the great court. And the knights of Lusitania with great prid, was aduansing  praising themselues. But in especiall, Bramides, who with a loude voice, that all the people might heare him, he said: Come foorth, come foorth, you knights of England, that you may vnderstand and know, how valiant  of great strength, the knights of Lusitania, are. The~ the prince Don Siluerio, who was in his tent, hard by the place wheras the king was, with great pride  contentment that he had of the honour, which his knights had got, he said vnto the king. Now mightie king you shall vnderstand, that not without great cause the knights of Lusitania, are estemed for the best knightes in all the world, for that in any place whersoeuer they beecome, they neuer loose, but alwaies get honor. And I doo beleue  haue it for a certainty, that with these first thousand knights, that I haue heere with mee, of Lusitania, that I am not able alone to make war against the emperour Trebatio, but also to conquer the most part of all the world. At these wordes of the prince vnto the king, not one which was with him receiued any contentment. But in especial those two ancient knights, the one of them was cal|led Adriano, who could not suffer to heare y^e great reproch, but with very anger, he said: My Lord  prince, of truth I may speake it, that the bountie  force of all the world, doth

not consist in the knights of Lusitania, for that I haue seene in this country such, that if they were here now at this pre|sent, that all your knights would get by them but litle honor. Then the prince said, I would that god were so pleased, that those knights were here now at this time, for that I  my knights would very quickly bring you out of this doubt. So at this time, some of the knights of Lusitania, were very ioy|full for the honour  victory which they had receiued,  other some as sad  sorrowfull, for the reproch  shame happened vnto them, by the knights of the country, at which time vp|on a sodaine  vnlooked for, they saw two knights which en|tred into that mightie place, of so gallant  gentle dispositi|on,  well armed, as euer they saw in all their liues, of the which, one of them vpon his mightie horse did put himselfe right ouer against the great pallas,  the other went vnto the tents of the knights of Lusitania, and touched one of the knights shields with his speare, and straight way the owner therof came foorth. And this strange  venterous knight, made his encounter with so great strength, that in the middest of that great place, hee ouerthrew him from his horse to the ground, his heeles vpwards,  so far from himself as though he had ben dead.
Then straight waies came forth an other, who with great lightnes he shoued him out of the saddle, so that he was ta|ken in mens armes  caried him into the tent, for that all y^e bones of his body were shaken  brused, with that strongs encounter. And without any long tarying, hee ouerthrew o|ther ten knights of them, entreting them in such sort, that not one of them all could arise from the ground, of himselfe, but that they were caried in other mens armes, into their tents. At the which the king Oliuerio,  all that were there present, were greatly amazed, and could not learne by any meanes to know who those two valiant knights should be. Then all thse of England receiued great ioy and content|ment, for that they saw that the knights of Lusitania, there pride and ioy did abate.
And Adriano said vnto the king, I beleue that the Prince Don Siluerio is not, well pleased with this knight. Let him alone said the king, for I haue a good hope that his knights will cary away but litle honour of that which is past. Then Bramides of Lusitania came foorth mounted vpon a myghtye great horse,  with a big speare in his hand he gaue a turne about the place, shewing great prid,  thinking certainly that at the first encounter he would ouerthrow y^e valiant knight, but it fell not out according vnto his expectation, for that they made their incounter with such force that Bramides vp|on the sheld of the strange knight sheuered his speare all to sheuers, but the knight made no shew of moouing in his sad|dle, but he made his encounter so strongly against Bramides, that heauing him right out of his sadle, he caried him a good way off from his horse, with his head to the ground and his heles vpwards,  was so astonied with that terrible blow, that he could not arise from the ground, till such time as some of his companions tooke him vp,  caried him into their tent. Oh how great was the griefe that the prince Don Sil|uerio conceiued when he saw his knights receiue so great re|proch,  the knights of England with so great ioy  pleasure, because they saw that strange knight defend their honors so valiantly. The king and the two ancient knights that were with him, desired very much to know who that knight should be, and likewise his companion, who as it semed vnto them, was as one amazed, beholding that mightie pallace,  in his semblance  proportion seemed to be no lesse valiant the~ his companion, as it was of truth, for that it was that valiant Rosicleer, who had not so much gouernment of himselfe for to saffer, but nedes he must come foorth into that great place with the king Sacridoro, for to behold that day the princesse Oliuia, but that he saw the princes in hir royall estate, shew|ing foorth hir soueraigne countenance with so singuler beau|ty, he was as one astonied  amazed, not knowing whether he were in Heauen or on Earth, and the great glory th

which he felt within himselfe when that he had before him that precious sight so long of him desired, that forgetting himselfe he remained in one place without any power for to mooue himselfe, but as one depriued of his wits. And the o|ther was that stout  strong king Sacridoro, who seeing the great mischance of his companion, would make some shew of his great bountie, and by reason that he was of so great bountie, in lesse then one houre he ouerthrew vnto y^e ground all those fiftie knights, all very euill intreated,  ill beestead with the force of the mighty fals which they had receiued,  the great pleasure the which Adriano receiued hereat was such, that he could not let but say vnto the prince Don Silue|rio, how doo you like this my lord, now you may well see that the bountie of all the world doth not consist onelye in the knights of Lusitania: By God I doo sweare, that according vnto the vsing which these knights haue receiued, the empe|ror Trebatio shall be in great securitye of them for anye harme he shall receiue at their hands. The prince was so full of sorow,  so angry for that which hapned vnto his knights, that without making any answer vnto Adriano, with great fury he mounted vpon his great horse,  tooke a speare in his hand,  put himselfe ready at a point for to reuenge the inu|rie done vnto his knights. At whith time the valiant Zoylo, for that he was a great friend vnto the prince, fearing that ther should happen some reproch vnto him, saide vnto the king: Truely my lord, if it please your highnes, I would ve|ry much that the prince Don Siluerio might excuse the iust|ing at this time with that straunge  ventrous knight, for that he hath gotten this day very much honour,  I would not that now he should loose it againe Surely said the king Oliuerio, I should be very sorrowfull, and I would that all might well be excused, and they seperated if there were any good meane for the same. I will goe and part them sayd the artarian Zoylo.
And therwith he arose vp from the place wher he sate by the king,  descended downe the court,  mounting vpon a horse very gallantly  richly trapped, which was brought vnto him, he went vnto the king Sacridoro, and said.
Sir knight, by the way of curtesie I doo hartely desire you that this day you would cease your high  valiant deedes, for you haue done inough to giue testimonie of great boun|ty,  at this time to depart, for that the king Oliuerio shall receiue great contentment  courtesie in so doing. Then the king Sacridoro, who knew him very well, since the time that he saw him at the fountaine of the sauages,  hauing great desire to shew him plesure, answered him  said: Sir knight not onely in this, but in all other things whatsoeuer your pleasure is to commaund me, with all my hart  power I will doo it to doo you pleasure. So after that the valiaunt Zoylo dad gratified him with great thanks for his curtesie, the king Sacridoro departed  went vnto the place wheras Rosicleer was as one amazed  astonied, beholding the great beauty of the princes Oliuia,  shaking him by the hand, he said: Come let vs now depart from heuce, for we haue tari|ed here very long. Then Rosicleer comming to himselfe, as one which did awake out of a dead slepe, set spurs to his light horse, and went with the king Sacridoro  put them|selues in a by way out of that great place, in such sort, that in a short space they were out of sight, and the prince Don Siluerio ramained very furious and full of anger, for that the knight was departed from thence before he did first take reuengement for the iniurie done vnto his Knightes, and for that it waxd late,  againe there were no knights left for to iust, there began straight waies a great noise of sounding of Triumpets, and other instrumentes of musick, which was done in such sort, that all the whole Citie dyd ring thereof, and here with the iusts were made an end, the Tents taken out of that great place, and the Prince Don Siluerio, with great honour, accompanied with many

Princes and knights, was brought vnto the mightie pallace, wheras he was very well receiued by the king,  was car|ried into a Chamber which was on the one side of the great hall, wheras he was vnarmed. The Princesse Oliuia beefore this time knew Rosicleer, for Fidelia when shee saw him ad|uertised hir, wherat shee receiued great contentment,  dyd esteeme all hir trauailes  sorrows which shee had receiued well bestowed, although when she remembred y^e great hurly burly that shuld be that night, hir hart was very much out of quyet, and full of anguish, and could not by any meanes be merry, but with great sighs and bitter teares she desired God to deliuer hir well out of all those daungers.


How that at such time as the King Oliuerio and the mightie Princes and knights of the Court were ioyned together, that the Princesse Oliuia and the Prince Don Siluerio should take handes, Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro entered into the mightie pallace, and what happened therin. Chapter. 60.
_AFter that Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro were departed out of the place whereas the iusts were made, they both put the~selues into a Forrest which ioyned nigh vnto the Citie, whereas they remayned till the night was come, being fully determyned what they should doo, for that they had left their ship at the coast, all in a redinesse  very wel appointed,  considering in what great peril  danger they did put themselues, they praied vnto god with all their harts for to deliuer the~ well out of that great reproch,  hauing a very good hope y^t god wold aide  succour them, for that which they went about was in a iust  right cause, for to set fre the great wrong  harme done vnto the Princesse. The day being past and the night come, they

issued out of the forrest, and entered into the citie,  for that ther were so many knights, as well strangers as Countrie men, they could not be perceiued, for the strets were full of them,  likewise the night being darke, theyr armour could not be discouered, neither was ther any account made ther|of, for that it was a time void of suspition, so they drew nigh vnto the pallace, at such time as the Princesse Oliuia  the Prince Don Siluerio should ioyne hands together, vowing matrimonie, the pallace being clere  light with the great number of torches and candles that were ther lighted, that it seemed to be mid day, and there were so great a number of people, that they could scarce mooue by one another. All this time went Fidelia very diligently vp and downe the pallace, and when she saw the houre draw nere that theyr pretence should be put in execution, she went out of the pal|lace, and taking with hir a bundle of things necessarie for the princesse, she went towards the sea side, and put hir selfe in the ship, abiding the time to se what fortune would doo for hir Lady and mistres, and for those worthy and valiant Knights, and was in so great feare, that for any thing she would not be put in the like againe. All this time was the Princesse Oliuia so full of anguish and alteration, that she knew not whether she were aliue or dead, and being in a quadran nigh vnto the great hall, accompanied with all hir Ladies  damsels, readie to be taken foorth to ioyne hands with the Prince, she many times fell in a sound, and being very much comforted by the Princesses Rodasilua Silueri|na, yet all that euer they could doo did profit very little, ney|ther could she recouer any force nor receiue any comfort, for that the houre was come that she shuld passe that great affliction, and in remembraunce thereof she thought verily that hir hart would haue leapt out of hir dody. At this pre|sent time Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro, came vnto the pallace, and by a false doore which Rosicleer knew very well, they entered into a chamber wheras the princesse was, lea|uing their Horses with a Page of the kings, who put them vnder a portall where they could not bee sene of the peo|ple,

so they went vp a narrow payre of stayres till they came into the great hall, whereas they found the King Oli|uerio, with all those mighty Princes and knights, in a fayre Quadran, in company with the prince Don Siluerio, abiding the comming of the Princesse Oliuia, to take hir to his spouse. Lykewise on the other side of the hall in another Quadran was the Princesse Oliuia, accompanied with all hir Ladies and Damsels, and with the Princesse Rodasilua and Siluerina, who had hir in the midst beetwixt them, and when they would haue gone whereas the King was, the Princesse Oliuia could not step one foot forwards, but fell in a sound in the armes of the other Princesses. Then when these two valiant knights saw it was time, they entered both together into the quadran, and the king Sacridoro car|ryed his Swoord drawen in his hand, and his sheld on his arme, the which put a great teare amongst all the Ladyes and Damsels, and Rosicleer went straight vnto the Prin|cesse Oliuia his Lady, and tooke hir in his armes, lifting hir from the ground, all which time she was in a sound, and by reason at theyr entering in, all those Ladyes and dam|sells gaue great shrikes and out cryes, there came pre|sently to that place many Knights, and being without armour they drew out theyr Swoords, and doubled theyr cloakes about theyr armes, and went to rescue and take away the Princesse from Rosicleer, who carried hir in his armes, but for that the good King Sacridoro was at hand in a redinesse, with foure blows which he gaue, he ouerthrew foure Knights dead to the ground, of them that first appro|ched wher they were, the which did put so great feare in all the rest, that they durst not come nigh him, so that Rosicleer had roome to come vnto the narrow stayres, which descen|ded downe to the false doore. Then the King Sacridoro put himselfe in the face of all the people, and dyd so much, that Rosicleer came vnto the place whereas his horse was, and findeing none for to disturbe him, he mounted forth|with vpon his Horse, and tooke the Princesse in his armes before him, and he had the Page to tarrie for his Lord,

and setting spurres vnto his good horse Rodarte (which he had of the Gyant Mandroco, and one of the strongest and lightest that was in all the world) within a short time he found himselfe out of the Citie, and with so great iury, that it semed a Thunder-bolt or whirle winde, he tooke his course throughout those fields with so great swiftnesse, that the grasse whereon his horse trode, semed as though it moo|ued not. This valyaunt Rosicleer trauayled with so great ioy and contentment for that rich pray which he carryed, that he could scarce beleue hee had so great a Iewell with him. At which time the Princesse Oliuia was in a sound, without any sence of knowledge who carryed hir away, and by reason of the great care of the people, in the which the king Sacridoro remayned, troubled so much Rosicleer, that it was the occasion he forced his Horse with so great sped, that in a short time he came vnto the sea coast, and strayght wayes he entered into a Shippe, and layde the Princesse vppon a bed, and kissed hir, and left hir in the companie of Fidelia hir damsell, and he went a shoare and mounted vpon his horse, and with as great spede he retur|ned back agayne, to seke out his perfect friend the King Sacridoro, who in all this time had done meruaylous dedes, but by reason that the King and all the other Princes and Knights that were in the Quadran, at the great shrikes and outcries of the damsels were come thether, they had so co~passed him round about, that he could not mooue himselfe neyther on the one part nor on the other, but for that they were all vnarmed, he quickly made such a slaughter a|mongs them, that the rest durst not come night him, so that he had tyme to descend the stayres, and comming vnder the porch, wheaeas his Page was with his horse, although that a great number descended the stayres after him, yet in spight of them all he mounted vppon his Horse, and by reason that the number was great, being on Horsebacke he slew many of them, then the page mounted vppon his Horse, and broching them furyousie with theyr Spurres, of pure force they went out of the Pallace. In the meane

time the Prince Don Siluerio seing what had happened, was the most furious  angriest Knight in the world, and entered into his chamber, and armed himselfe with hie rich and glistering armour, and the like did many other Princes and knights, as well those which were borne in England, as of those which he brought with him out of Lusitania, and being armed he came vnto the place whereas hee left the king, and when hee saw that they were gone, in great bast they calied for their horses, and mounting on them they fol|low their enimies with so great fury, that many of theyr horses burst in their running, and in pursuing of them they met with many that tolde them newes of the King Sacri|doro, and they forced so much their horses in following af|ter them, that the Prince Don Siluerio uertooke the King Sacridoro a myle out of the Citie, who when he saw him come alone, dyd abide his comming, and when he came vn|to him, with an outragious fury he stroke the King such a blow vpon his helme that he made him to decling his head downe to the brest, but the King returned such another vn|pon his helme, that he had ouerthrowen him to the ground if he had not embraced himselfe about his horse necke, but the Prince receiued so great griefe for the carrying away of the Princesse, that hee feared not the perill of the battell, but with great fury and courage he beganne to strike at the King, charging him with very furious and terrible blowes, but all that dyd profit him very little, for that the king was a great deale more stronger then he was, so that it could not haue fallen out well with him, if the battayle had endured long, but at this time there were ioyned toge|her with him more then one hundreth Knights, the which yd compasse the good and valyaunt King round about, and harged him with very great and thicke blowes, but he who was very valyaunt and couragious, dyd verie little steme his life (for that it was in the quarrell, and his du|ie which he did owne vnto his perfect friend Rosicleer) and  such sort he dyd animate himselfe, that in a small time e had slayne more then twentie knights, and if there had

not bene so many of them, he would by the help of al|mightie God, and his great strength, quickly haue clered himself of them, but by reason that there were so many, and more and more they encreased, that he found himselfe in great perill, and at the point to be slayne. But at this time that valyaunt Rosicleer, who semed to come lyke vnto a whirle winde vppon his great and swift Horse, when that he came vnto the place whereas they made that cruell and perillous battell, and seing in what great danger and perill they had brought his friend, he strayght way put himselfe amongst the thickest of them, lyke vnto a rauishing Lyon, some he cloue their heads a sunder, and some he cut of theyr armes, and other some he cut a sunder by the wast, and did so hehaue himselfe amongst them, that in a small time, he had ouerthrowen the halfe of them dead to the ground.
Then when the king Sacridoro, knew the great aide and succour which he had, with a new fore he charged so his enimies, that betwixt the~ both they dyd so much, that there was not a knight in all the field that durst abide them, but onely the Prince Don Siluerio, who being wounded with mortallsorrow  griefe, for the carrying away of the Prin|cesse Oliuia, with more courage then strength or force, he dyd combat with both of them, charging them with very great and heauie blowes. Then Rosicleer, who seing that that one Knight dyd disturbe them of theyr iourney, with|out knowing him, he stroke him so terrible a blow vpon his sine healme, that all amazed and astonied from himselfe, he fell from his horse to the ground. That being done, these two good and perfect friends would not make any long stay|ing, but set Spurs vnto theyr surions horses, and ran wit so great lightnesse, that there was none that could ouertak them, till such time as they came vnto the sea side. Now a this time, came the king Oliuerio, out of the citie, with mor then tenne thousand knights, as well straungers, as of hi owne Countrie, and followed the pursute of their enimies And when they came vnto the place where-as the battall was fought, they were greatly amazed to se that grea

slaughter and eusion of blood, and could not beleue that a|ny humane Knight should haue so much force and strength for to make so great slaughter as there was done, and hel|ping vp the Prince Don Siluerio from the ground, who lay a long vpon the earth as though hee had bene dead, with|out moouing of hand nor foote, they all together in an am|bushment followed the pursuite of their enimies, those two Knights, but for all the great hast which they made in their running, at such time as they came vnto the Sea sie, they were all entered into theyr ship, and the Greeke master of the same beeing all in a readynesse, brought whom his an|kers, and hoysed foorth his sayles, and beegan to nauigate vp|pon the calme waters of the Ocean sea, for that at that pre|sent they found fortune and winde fauourable vnto them, there was no glory in all the world that might be compa|red vnto this of the perfect louer Rosicleer, when hee saw so much at his ease and will, and in his power, hir for whom he had passed so great sorrow and griefe. Then when the Princesse Oliuia was come agayne vnto hir selfe, she tooke him in hir armes  kissed him very often, vttering woords of perfect loue,  although as yet she was not cleane voyde of the alteration in the which she was brought, yet finding hir selfe in the armes of him whom she so much loued, she receiued great pleasure  contentment, and much more, to se hir selfe fre from that great force, which the king hir fa|ther agaynst all reason and iustice would haue constrained agaynst hir will to marrie with the Prince Don Siluerio, and agayne, calling to remembraunce what great sorrow and griefe which the absence of Rosicleer dyd cause hir to ustayne, she therewith receiued so great contentment and lorie to se him in hir presence, that shee thought hir elfe to be new risen from death to lyfe, comforting and eioycing hir selfe with the presence of him that shee so long ooked for.
Then when the king Oliuerio and the Prince Don Sil|erio, and the other Princes and knights that came with hem, when they approched vnto the water side, and saw that

the ship was departed, and perfectly informed how that the knights and the princesse were therin, they receiued so great sorrow  griefe, that the king was at the point of death, and the Prince if they had not held him, would haue leaped into the sea, and for that they could not vnderstand nor know in whose power the Princesse was carried away, their payne and griefe was the greater, and in great hast they caused a great company of ships to be made in a readinesse to fol|low them,  beeing all in very good order, there entered into them many knights, as well those of Lusitania, as knights of England, and being in this preparation, ther was a marriner of another ship which came vnto y^e king and said: Mightie Prince, a Damsell which was in the ship that is departed, gaue me this Letter to giue vnto your highnesse, if that by fortune you should come hether. Then the king being very much amazed, not knowing who it should be that left that letter, he tooke it  opened it, and saw that it was the firme of Fidelia, and read the contents as followeth.
HIgh and mightie king of Englang, Fidelia, Damsell, and seruant vnto the Princesse Oliuia, dooth wish vnto the health, that therwith thou maist put away all sorrow|full passions from thy hart, and to know how far the power of almightie God doth extend,  how subiect all Knigs and Princes, and mightie Lords, ought to be vnto his ordinan|ces and lawes, as well for that they are good and iust, as al|so because man hath not power to resist them. Thou pre|tendest to marrie thy one and onely Daughter and heyre vnto all these kimgdomes, giuing hir a husband vnto  she should be continually obedient, without any respect or consideration of hir good will and loue, neyther of hir  and quietnesse, but onely for a desire which you haue to goe and take reuengement for the death of Prince Edward thy Sonne: Behold king Oliuerio, that the lawes of God dooth not permit that thou shouldest dooe this force of ma|trimony,

which thou hast pretended to doo vnto thy daughter, for that the reuengement of all things is reserued for  vn|to him who hath power for to doo it. The soueraigne creator of all things would not permit that thou shouldst be an ho|micide vnto thine owne daughter, as thou hadst ben if this present remedye had not preuented the same, for that the princesse Oliuia had ordained to kill hir selfe, the same nyght that they should haue ben made sure together, but the diuine prouidence did so ordaine  prouide, that the greeke Prince Rosicleer, thy very friend (who being wounded with the loue of the princes thy daughter) should come  set at liberty this great outrage of forcing,  to take hir out of thy power,  to cary hir vnto the soueraigne empire of his father, whereas with great maiesty conformable vnto hir highnes, shall their mariage be celebrated: therfore they  I doo desire thee for that thy honor  the honor of thy daughter shall be by this change greatly augmented, that thou wouldst conceiue well ,  to haue patience, for that it can be no otherwise, alwaies obeying as our duty is, the diuine prouidence.
When the king had read this letter,  well vnderstood the ontents therof, he was one way greatly amazed, to vnder|tand that Rosicleer was aliue,  another way his paine and riefe did double in him, considering the two great iniuries hat were done vnto him by the father  the sonne,  as one  himselfe with the great sorrow he receiued, he wept   out with a loud voice saying: Oh fortune  my great  how much doo you shew your selues to be my eni|ie, that thou art not content that the emperour Trebasio  my welbeloued son the Prince Edward, but that now  is come his son,  hath robbed me of my daughter,  onely heire of these kingdome: Oh soueraigne creator, herefore dooest thou suffer so great arrogancy in these ? why dost thou not at once destroy them,  throw  out of this world, as thou threwest Lusifer out of hea|uen:

Oh kings  princes of the world, come  ioyne your elues all together in my fauour,  giue me aide, for to take reuengement of two so notable iniuries: Behold that the pride of Greece doth eueryday increase, in such sort, that in time they will be Lords  gouernours ouer all the whole world,  put you all from your mightie kingdomes  high estates. Likewise the great lamentations that Don Siluerio made when he saw his mariage so changed, was such, that ther was none that heard him but was moued vnto great compassion. In great hast was made in a readinesse twelue great ships,  diuers other small ships, in the which ther was imbarked more then ten thousand knights very well armed and likewise with them did imbarke themselues the prince Don Siluerio with the thre princes, Bargandel, Liriamandro,  the tartarian Zoylo,  in great hast they made saile that way which Rosicleer went, although the thre princes had a|nother determination, contrary vnto Don Siluerios, for whe~ they vnrerstood that he who had caried away the Princesse was Rosicleer, they were as glad as euer they were in all their liues, although they could not perfectly beleue that hee should be aliue. Then they called to remembra~ce all that had passed at the fountaine of the sauages with them, and were fully determined that if it were certainly Rosicleer,  did o|uertake him, that first they would consent to their owne death rather then he should receiue any harme, for that they were all thre of them such friends vnto Rosicleer, that ex|cept it were the king Sacridoro, in all the whole world he had not the like. So they waied their ankers,  hoist sailes,  began to take their iourney after the other ships, with as much saile as euer they could make, they did nauigat through the great ocean sea with as much sped as euer they could,  the king Oliuerio returned back againe vnto his citie  pal|lace, very heauy  sorrowfull, wheras straight waies with great speed he began to gather together people for the war Writing vnto the mightiest kings in all christendome, desi|ring

them for to aide  succour him with all the people that were possible, for the furniture of his wars, giuing them to vnderstand the great iniuries which he had receiued of the emperour of Greece,  his son,  how greatly he was bound for to reuenge himself of the same. Wheras the history doth leaue them all time doth serue, for to tell you of the knight of the Sun who remained at y^e broken citie of Troy,  of y^e troi|an Oristedes, who was trauailing towards the gran Cataia.


 How the Troyan Oristedes came vnto the Court of the Emperour Alicandro, and gaue him vnderstanding of the comming of the rinceffe Lindabrides. Chapter. 61.
_THe history saith that Oristedes the Troian, made so great sped in his iourney towards the gran Cataia, wheras the emperour Ali|candro was,  after that he had passed the first two Scithias, in the end of fiftie daies he entered into the third, which did belong vnto the Emperour Alicandro,  the gran Cataia was in the confines of the third Scithia, which fallethmore towards the Orient, vnder the which was the mighty emperour of Tar|taria, the great,  many other kingdomes, subiect vnto the em|perour Alicandro, wherby he was estemed to be the migh|tiest lord in the world. Besids all this, all the kingdomes  Lordships of the Orient were subiect to him. So when this good knight Oristedes was entred into the third Scithia, with|in one moonth after be entred into the gran Cataia, wher he vnderstood that the emperour was in  citie called Neptaia, which had aboue an hundreth  fiftie thousand householdes within the wals,  when he came vnto the said citie, he went vnto the pallaice,  entring in therat, he found the Empe|rour in the great hall, accompanied with many kings and Lords that were his subiects.
And entring in therat he pulled of his helme,  went  kne|led downe before that mightye Emperour, for to kisse his hands: but he who knew him very well,  very glad for to see him ther, made him to arise vp on his feet againe  did embrace him saying, Oristedes, my very good friend, thy ab|sence hath not caused vnto me so much sorow  griee, as now ty comming doth cause me to be glad and ioyfull.
Then Oristedes said, my good lord  emperour you shall re|ceiue much more contentment, when that you dooe vnder|stand the newes that I dooe bring vnto you, for that you shall vnderstand that the princes Lindabrides, your daughter is comming,  very nigh vnto this country:  doth bring in hir company a knight, the most valiant est that euer the gods did create in all the world, and hauing the prince Meridian, your son, trauailed throughout many countries, till he came vnto the empre of Grecia,  neuer could find any one knight, that in bounty  force, was equall vnto him. But this alone knight, who did ouercome me in equall battaile,  since he hath defended the beauty of the Princes Lindabrides, with the best knights that is in the world. And when he came vn|to Troy, whereas I doo dwell, defending the passage of the bridge, kept by old antiquitie, hauing battaile with him, hee ouercame me. And at his co~mandement I am come hether, for to bring you newes of their comming. And for that you shall se  vnderstand, how fauourably the gods hath bene vnto the princes, in giuing vnto hir so valiant a knight, you shall vnderstand, that if hee dooe excede in bounty, of knight|hood, there is no lacke in him of maiestie and high estate, for that hee is sonne vnto the Emperour of Grecia, being accounted the mightyest Prince, that is amongest all the Christiane.
So when the Emperour Alicandro hadde well vnder|stoode all that Oristedes, hadde tolde him, he was so full of ioy and mirth, that he thought that in all his life he neuer receiued the one halfe of so great comfort  pleasure,

for that he louod the princes Lindabrides, much more then the prince Meridian. And would giue a good part of his estate, so that the Princesse might remaine with the whole Empire. And for that he was fully certified of the high bounty, of O|ristedes,  of the prince Meridian, his sonne. That he was cer|taine  suer, that the knight that should ouercome them, in battaile, should surmount all other knights in the whole world. And so with great ioy, he did embrace Oristedes,  gaue him great thanks for his comming. All the other lords and knights that were in the great hall, they were greatly ama|zed when they vnderstoode that one alone knight did ouer|come in battaile two such valiant knights as they were. For that they thought verily that in all the world could not be found others that could be equall vnto them. So strayght waies the Emperour Alicandro, caused these newes to be published throughout all his kingdome  lordship, comman|ding all his vssailes  subiects, to prepare  make themselues in a redines, to be at the great triumphs  feasts which he doth pretend to make, at the mariage of the princes Lindabri|des, his daughter. All this while the knight of the Sun, went tranailing in his triumphant chariot,  the more that y^e con|uersation of the princes did continue, so much the more, dyd his hart burne in the flaming fier of hir loue, in such sort, y^t he neuer remembred the faire princes Claridiana, neither the emerour his father, nor Rosicleer, his brother, neither his two perfect friends Brandizel Clauerindo, of all his memory he was cleane void, forgetting his owne naturall country,  all transported  kindled in the amorous loue of the princes, and onely in contemplating himselfe in beholding hir great beautie, was all his ioy  delight, so that he remembred no other thing. Wherat none ought much to meruaile, for that the surpassing beautye of this noble princes, (accompanyed with so high and soueraigne maiestie) was such, that I doo beleeue that there was neuer knight borne in this world, that keping continuall company with hir as the knight of

the Sun dead,  hauing before him that perillous sight, that could clere himselfe or withstand the firie darts of loue (al|though we may well dessemble the great loyalty that it told of other knights, for that it is to tell of things surmounting nature, or els it is so ar to extoll knights, for to make them to beare off to be men.) So that if the knight of the Sun with the presence of the princesse had forgot himselfe, to the con|trary, the princes with the presence of him was the pleasant|est lady in all the world,  receiued great contentment one|ly in thinking that at their comming vnto the court of the emperour hir father, their marriage should straight wayes be celebrated. So after that they had trauailed one mooneth in the mighty Asia, they entred into the second Scithia, wher|as they saw so many  so strange formes of people and cus|tomes, that the Knight of the Sun went very much amazed, and although many things worthy of telling hapned vnto them in this iourny, yet this history doth leaue them, for that if he should detaine himselfe in telling of them, he shuld leaue off to declare the principall, for that the greater part is vn|told. To conclude, in the end they entred into the country o the gran Cataia. Then the emperour when he vnderstood that they were within a daies iourney of Neptaia, whereas he was, he went foorth to met them accompanied with mor then fiftie kings  lords, his subiects,  euery one a crowne  gold vpon his head, and more then a thousand knights tha went in gard. And when they came whereas they met th triumphant chariot, they alighted from their horses,  wen  kissed the hands of the princes Lindabrides,  embraced th knight of the Sun,  he receiued them with great ioy  co|tentment,  when the emperour drew nigh, the knight of th Sun kneled downe before him for to kisse his hands, but th emperor with great pleasure meruailed at his mightie pr|portion  gallant semblance, would not consent therevnt but embraced him with great loue,  kissed him, saying:

dooe desire the high  mighty gods, my sonne, to graunt you health, that you may enioy many yeres your youthfulnesse, for that your comming into this country hath made me ve|ry glad  ioyfull. And I doo desire them (my good lord) said the knight of the Sun, to preserue your person  emperiall estat for that all we your subiects, may doo our duties in your ser|uice. Then Oristedes the troyan came vnto him, as one that had a great desire to see him,  the knight of the Sun embra|ced him with great loue,  all those kings  knights meruai|led much at his mightie proportion,  musing how that  knight of so few yeres should consist so great force  stre~gth. So after that all had giuen him entertainment, the empe|rour went vnto the triumpha~t chariot,  ascended vp into it the faire princes did fall downe vpon hir knees  kissed his hands,  the emperour likewise kissed hir,  receiued hir with great loue,  passing betwene them many words of great pleasure, he set himself downe in the triumphant chariot, in the midst betwene the princes  the knight of the Sun,  all the other kings  lords, mounted vpon their horses,  com|passed the Chariot round about, taking their iourney to|wards the mightie Citie of Neptaya, whereas of an infinit number of people, as well women as men, with great so|lempnitie they were receiued, being all much amazed at his gentle and gallant disposition. Likewise the knight of the Sun did very much meruaile at the mighty greatnes of that ci|tie, and of the great abundance of people that were therin, and saide vnto himselfe, that not without great reason the Emperour was estemed for the mightiest Prince in all the world. So likewise when they came vnto the mightie pal|lace, he was no lesse amazed to se the great sumptuousnes and riches thereof, for that in all his life he neuer saw the like, no not by a great deale, for that it seemed o be a ci|tie compassed about with verye strong walles and high towers.

When they came thether they all alighted from their hor|ses,  entred into that mighty pallace, whereas they passed away the rest of the day that remained,  all that night in great  solempne feasts. And it was concluded amongst the~ all, that within fifteene daies they should begin to make the great triumphs  feasts for the mariage of the knight of the Sun,  the princes Lindabrides, at the which triumph shal be present the most strongest king and knights in all the pagan country, for to see by experience the great bounty that hath ben published of the knight of the Sun, who all this time re|ceiued great ioy  contentment, for the time drew on to fi|nish his great desire,  although the loue of the princes,  hir great desert were the principall occasion that he should be desirous to marry with hir. Likewise considered, he might thinke himselfe happye to haue to wife the daughter of so mightie an emperour,  heire vnto so high estate. With this determination  firme loue he passed away that time verie much honored of the emperour,  respected of all those lords  kings his vassailes, for that they all had a great delight  pleasure in him. Whom the historye doth leaue at the pre|sent to tell of other things that hapned in the meane time.


 How the two Princes Brandizel and Clauerindo, departed from the Court of the Emperour Trebatio,  what happe|ned vnto them being at the sea. Chapter. 62.
_AFter the departure of the knight of the Sun, the two princes Brandizel Clauerindo did a bide certaine daies in the court of the empe|rour Trebatio of whom  likewise of all his knights, they were honoured  esteemed,  by reason of the great loue which the Prince Brandizel bare vnto the princesse Clarinea, she could not take any rest nor be at quiet.

S vpon a~ day being in conuersation with his friend Cla|ueryndo, hee sayd: That for so much as the Knight of the Sunne was not there with them, me thinckes it should be good (in the meane time till he returned agayne) to fly from this idlenesse in the which wee are, and to go and seeke some aduentures for to increase our honour, and to exercise mi|litarie Knighthood. The which counsayle lyked the Prince very well, and vnderstanding the will of Brandizell, he strayght wayes sayde that hee should dooe all that his plea|sure was, for that hee should receyue great contentment therein. So both of them asked lisence of the Emperour for to depart, promising him to returne againe so soone as they heard that the Knight of the Sunne was returned agayne. So the Emperor (although very much against his will, and by theyr great importunancie) did grant leaue vnto them. So these two perfect friends departed from Constantino|ple, and when they came vnto the waters side, they entered into a ship which they found readie to depart towards the kingdome of Polonia. After that they were departed  had sayled on theyr voyage foure dayes, there beegan to arise a great storme at the sea, and at midnight the winde began to blow so terrible, and the Sea to worke so far out of all or|der, that sometimes they thought that the waues carryed the ship vp into the cloudes, and other tymes they thought the Ship to fall downe to the deapth thereof, and the Ship receiued such a leake, that whatsoeuer the marriners could doo with the Pompe and otherwise, yet might they goe vp to the knees in water aboue the balest, for the which cause these two good knights made no other reckoning but to be lost, which caused them with all theyr harts to praye vn|to God to haue mercie on them, and to forgiue them theyr sinnes, and also if it were his diuine pleasure to delyuer them out of that great torment. When the day was come those boysterous windes dyd so beate the Ship tum|bling and tossing it from one part to another, in such fort, that it could no longer indure, but opened a sunder in the midest, so that these two Knights had no other refuge, but

eyther of them to take holde of the first planke that came vnto theyr hands. Then God who dyd reserue them for a greater effect, did deliuer them that they were not drowned in that torment, for that they had not fully halfe an houre. sustained themselues vpon their planks in the water, when that those mightie high and great waues dyd carrye them vpon the shoare. The Prince Brandizel in Polonia, and the Prince Clauerindo vpon an Iland that semed to be full of thick and grene tres, who when he was vpon the shoare, and saw himself clere of that great torment, he gaue great thanckes vnto almightie God for his wonderfull benefits shewed vnto him in that his deliuerance,  dyd very much lament the losse of his friend Brandizel, not knowing what was become of him. And being very desirous to know in what Countrie he was, finding a narrow and small vsed way, he followed the same, and trauayling therein a mile, he meruayled very much that he could se no people, ney|ther anie towne or inhabitaunce, the Countrie being so fresh and full of Tres that it semed vnto him neuer in all his lyfe to haue sene a Countrie so delightsome. So after a great while that he had trauayled by that narrow path, at such time as the Sun began to waxe hot, and found him|selfe out from amongst those tres, hee entered into a great and wide plaine, in the midst of the which he saw a mightie high and well towred Castle, the which was of Lyndaraza, the sight wherof put him in great admiration, and it semed vnto him y^t it could not bee wrought by any humane hands, and beeing very desirous to know who it shuld be that was Lord of that meruaylous Castle, he hasted his pace more then before, and went towards the same, and the nigher hee came to it the more he meruayled.
So when he came and saw that wide and depe ditch, and that there was no other entrie into the Castell but onelie by the bridge, he went thether, and found that the gate was shut, and hauing at the ring thereof a very fayre and rich horne of Iuorie, with a scroule vpon it which sayde.
Thou Knight, whose fortune hath brought the hether, if thou art determined to know anie thing of this great and strong Castle, blow this horne, and thou shalt not lacke one to make thee aunswere, and haue a great care in defending thy selfe from the Porter, for that hee will put thy lyfe in great perill.
The Prince heereat was very much amazed, and could not imagine what it should bee, but hauing a great desire to know what should be within, without any longer tarry|ing, and with a valiant courage he tooke the horne and put it to his mouth,  began to sound it with so great strength, that the sound was heard throughout all the Castell, and he had not scarce pulled the Horne from his mouth, when that with a great rushing and noyse the gates were open, and there issued out at the gate a furious beast called Bra|ma, and the most horrible and euill fauouredst that euer was sene formed by nature, for that his body was as big as two good horses, and his legges more bigger then a buls legge, and each legge had fiue clawes, and the least of them was a span long, and as bigge as a mans finger, and his mouth so bigge, that a man might well goe in thereat, and was all furnished with very big tuskes, and as sharp as a rasour, and he threw out at his mouth great abundaunce of fire and smoake, in such sort, that it semed to be Hell mouth, and he came foorth with so great brauenesse, that there was no man but onely at the sight of hir would haue receiued great feare. And as soone as this Brama was come foorth, it went strayght wayes towards the Prince, and in his hastynesse he would haue gored him with his sharp tuskes, but the Prince who was polytike and very lyght, gaue a leape on the one side, and clered himselfe from the fury thereof, and passing by him with his swoord he thrust so terrible a foyne at that monster, that chancing betwene two ribs, it entered into his body vp to the hilts, and pul|ling the sword out, there followed great abundance of blood out at the wound. Then when the furious Brama felt him|selfe hurt, with as great fury as euer was sene, he returned

vnto the Prince, who bearing his head very lowe, in such sort, that by no meanes hee could defende himselfe, but must of force abide his fury, who stroke him with his tuskes so terrible a blow, that hee threw him from the ground tenne paces from him backwards, so that if his armour had not bene made by that wise man Lyrgandeo, at that blow he had parted him a sunder in the midst, yet for all that, the Prince was so euill intreated with the mightie fall, that if he had not bene of so valiant a courage, it had not bene possible for him to haue risen agayne from the ground, but by reason that he was one of the most valiantest Knights in all the world, with a trise he arose vp agayne, and at such time as this furious Brama came~ towards him againe, for to claspe him betwixt his cruell and sharp clawes, he firmed himselfe sure vpon his fete, and tooke his sword in both his hands, and determined to put his lyfe in aduen|ture in striking of one blow, and so hee dyd, for at such time as this Brama came vnto him, he stroke him so stronge a blow with both his hands vppon his monstrous head, and for that his Swoord was very good and sharpe, and stroke with so good a will of the Prince, that it cloue it cleane a|sunder, and the sword entered into the ground a good span, so that the monstrous beast fell downe dead to the ground beefore the Prince, who praysed God greatly for that victo|rie which hee had, and remayned a good while bee houlding that great beast, and was very much amazed at his strange forme and furious composition, and being very desirous to know and vnderstand the ende of that straunge aduen|ture, without any longer tarrying hee entered in at the great gates that were open, and as hee went in vnder the first tower, lookeing on the one side, hee saw proportioned on the wall, his perfect friend the Knight of the Sunne, and it was so arteficially done, that it seemed to bee himselfe in person, and beeing greatly amazed thereat, he stayed to he holde the whole circumstaunce thereof, and there hee saw the thre first battailes the which hee made vpon the bridge, paynted very naturally. And calling to remembraunce

that which the Emperour Trebatio had commanded to be paynted vpon the fore front of the pallace, he straight waies fell in reckoning what it should be, and how that was the Iland of Lyndaraza, whereas the Knight of the Sunne tooke out and set at liberty the Emperour Trebatio, and receiuing great ioye and contentment to se painted there the mighty and wonderful deds of his great friend, he passed forwards, and finding that there was no doore shut to ake any resi|stance, he entered into euery part therof, without any feare or dread, and in euery hall or chamber wherein hee entered,  stayed to beehold the braue and perillous battailes that had there passed with the Knight of the Sun, and of all them were so perfectly set forth, that it semed to bee new done as then, and beeing as greatly amazed to see all this, as also the sumptuous buildings, it seemed rather to him to be things celestall, and not made by the handes of any humane crea|ture. And when he had passed through all the doores, halls, and chambers, whereas the Knight of the Sunne had made battayls, he entered into the great and mightie Court, wheras he was no lesse amazed then before at the strange makeing thereof and great riches. So in this sort he pro|ceded forwards, and went vp a broad payre of stayres into a mighty Gallerie, whereas he discouered the doore, and thre steps of beaten stluer, and comming to them he entered in at the doore, where he saw the fayre Lyndaraza and all hir Damsels, playing vpon Harps, with so excellent a grace, that the sweet noyse of Musicke semed to ascend vp in|o the Heauens, and filled his cares with the sweet melo|ie, in such sort, that as a man depriued of his vnderstan|ing, the Prince remained at the entrie of the doore, and se|ed vnto him that the voyce of Lyndaraza was rather ce|estiall then humane, and therewith he was straight wayes aken prisoner with hir loue, and neuer before was there uer Lady or Damsell that was Lord of his hart. So then yndaraza tooking towards the doore had spide the Prince, nd strayght wayes left off hir playing and singing, and

hir damsells, tooke hir by the hands, and did lift hir vp from hir state wheras shee sat and with a countenance as thouh she had ben angry, she sayd: Who are you sir knight, that hath bene so bould, without my lysence, to enter into this my castell. Then the Prince who was beholding of hir, as one amazed, and was very sorrie, for that he had giuen hir occasion to be angry, with a trise he pulled of his healme: and discouered so faire  comly a countenance, that it was strange to behold, and kneling downe before hir, he sayd, Fayre Lady, I doo most hartely desire you to pardon me, for this great anger which you doo conceie  show against mee, for my comming in hether, for as I was ignoraunt to se that which I haue now sene, so am I without fault for my comming in. And if it be so that I haue committed anie offence, in recompence thereof, is sufficient the great grife which your great beautie hath caused vnto me. And  er|rour which I haue made, cannot bee compared, nor like e|quall vnto my griefe. Well sayd the fayre Lindaraza, if you will that I shall pardon you, sir Knight, you must tell me who you are, and how the keper of my castle did let you  come in. Then the Prince sayde, at the commaundement of such a fayre Lady, I cannot chuse but to be obedient, and in especiall, I, who in all onely your good will, doth  my lyfe. Therefore you shall vnderstand my good Ladie that I am called Clauarindo,  I am prince, and right  vnto the Kingdome of Fraunce. And the keper of this ca stell dyd consent to my comming in for that in makeing , I lew him. And being very desirous to  what should e heere within this castell, which seemed  me rather to be celestiall, then humaine: I dyd prosecut my entring, and finding no disturbance, I rested not till ame hether, whereas (I dooe beleeue) I haue found  death, if your anger (fayre Lady, against me) doo  All this time, the fayre Lindaraza was beeholding the  tie proporsion, and fayre countenaunce of the Prince.  so ar as he remembred by the words of hir nkle,  leued , that he was the same vnto whom the entry

this castle was ordayned for, and causing him to arise from the ground, hee said: It is not to be suffered, that against the highnesse of your royall estate and the great desert of your person, that any should retayne anger, therefore worthie Prince, you are hartely welcome vnto this Castle, and car|rying him into  rich close, hir damsels vnarmed him, and was serued with verie fine and rich roabes necessarie at that time,  then the faire Lindaraza said: Worthy Knight, I doo most hartelie desire you to tell me by what fortune you came hether vnto this Iland, whereas the entrie is con|seaed vnto very few Knights, and likewise  you can tell me any newes of the Emperour Trebatio, my lord, for that since the time e was carried away from hence by a knight of mighty Knighthood, we neuer heard any newes of him. Then the Prince who was with great pleasure contem|plting himselfe in hir great beauty, and as one that could giue hir relation of all together, hee told hir of all that had passed till such time as he departed out of that court of the Emperour. Of the which the fayre Lindabrides receiued so great pleasure, to heare those newes, that hir beauty increa|sed the more. And beeing in this communication, Flamides (who was gone a hunting in the Forrest) came home, and when  saw the Prince hee was very gald, for that he vn|derstood that hee should be the knight, by whom his nephew Lindaraza should bee set at libertie,  entering into the qua|dran whereas they were, and knowen vnto the Prince who he was, he receiued him with curteous entertainment, and they both embraced one another with great oue. So they passd away the rest of the day which remained with great pleasure, and when the night came, the Prince and Flamides ay both in one chamber, whereas the Prince declared vnto Flamides the great loue which hee bare vnto Lindaraza, and esired him that he might haue the carrying of her vnto the Court of the Emperour hir father, for that his determina|ion was, to demaund hir for his wife, and according vnto he great loue and friendship that was beetwixt them, they eleeued verily that shee should not be denyed.
Then Flamines who receiued greater contentment thereat, then at any other thing, sayd, that he was very well con|tent, and that he should doo him great pleasure therein. So betwixt them both it was consented, that they all together should depart from thence the next day. Whereas this Hi|storie dooth leaue them till time dooth serue, for to tell you what happened vnto the Prince Brandizel.


How the Prince Brandizel was deliuered from the tor|ment of the Sea, and what happened vnto him after|wards. Chapter. 63.
_IN great peril to be drowned the prince Bran|dizel found himselfe in that furious torment, which chaunced vnto them at the Sea, but God would not permit that such a knight as he was should dye, but first to acknowledge his Christian lawe, dyd direct his fortune in such sort, that the planke wheron he swam, was carryed by those vniuersall and great rouling waues vnto the shoare, which semed to be very good, fresh, and fertiel. When this wearyed and afflicted Prince was a land, he knew the Countrie, for that he had bene in it before, and it was the kingdome of Polonia, whereas he did deliuer and cleere out of the power of the Gyant, the fayre Princesse Clarinea, his Lady, and for that he knew the Countrie very well, one way he was very sad and sorrowfull, for the great perill in the which remained hir very friend Clauerindo,  other|wise he was the gladdest man in all the world, for that he was in that Countrie, and so nigh vnto the Princesse his Lady, but when he considered with himselfe that he was on foot, and so euill intreated with the sea hee was ashamed so to shew himselfe before the King, neyther knew he no what to doo, nor whether hee might goe, for to remedie him selfe in that necessitie. The time of the yere as then was very hot, and after that he had dryed himselfe in the Sun, he put himselfe into a gallant fresh  greene Forrest, which

was along the sea side,  comming vnto a fountaine of very cleere  christalline water, shadowed with boughs of verye greene  odoriferous tres, he stooped and dronke of the same wate,  after he had well refreshed himslfe he sae downe vpon  grene grasse,  pulled off his helme  laid himselfe downe,  what with the pittering of the leaues of the trees,  with the pleasant aire, likewise with the swet noise of the running of the water, he fell in a sound sleepe,  being ther a , the king of Polonia who was on hunting in the same forrest, chanced with his knights, for to come vnto the same place,  when the king  his knights did first see him, they were greatly amazed to see a knight of so gentle dispo|sition to lie along vpon the grasse,  especially in that place, but by reason his helme was off, they did very much behold him,  in the end they knew him to be the prince Brandizel,  great frind, at the which he was greatly amazed for to see him ther alone,  without any horse, yet was he the gladst man in all the world,  did alight from his horse  went vn|to him, and shaking him by the armes, the prince did awake out of his sleepe,  when he knew the king he was much a|mazed,  with a trise hee arose vp and went for to kisse his hands, but the king who did loue him very well did embrace him with geat loue, and asked him how he came into that country all alone,  by what aduenture. To whom y^e prince said, with great desire to serue your ,  there he de|clare vno him all that hapned vnto him,  vnto the prince Clauerindo,  vnderstanding all, the king was very sorow|full for the great perill and danger in the which the prince Clauerindo remained, although he thought all for the best,  was very glad to see in that country the prince Brandizel, for that he had a great dsire to maie him vnto the princes Clarinea his daughter for that it semed vnto him to be one of the bet knights in all the world.
So after that there had passed betwixt them manye

things, the king commaunded a horse to be giuen vnto the prince,  so they departed together vnto the citie of Poloni, which was but foure miles from that place, whereas they were meruailouly well reteined, but especially of the prin|ces, whose ioy  pleasure was such, that it could not be re|hersed, at such time as she vnderstood of the comming of him whom hir hart so greatly desired and whom she thougt so long for his comming. The history cannot here detaine him selfe long, but onely how that the prince remained ther cer|taine daies in the which time the wise Lirgandeo vnderstan|ding the great care in the which he was in, for that he dust not marie himselfe without the lisence of his father, did send him letters from the king Florion, and from the quene his mother, by the which they gaue him lisence to mary with the princesse Clarinea,  desired him to returne  se them so soone as it was possible,  the prince being glad therof, dyd shew them vnto the king, who likewise did reioyce therat. So straight wsies the mariage was made in such sort, that the prince did inioy the princesse Clarineo, wheras the histo|ry doth leaue them till time doth serue.


 Of the great triumphs  feasts that were made in the court of the Emperour Alycandro. Chapter. 64.
_THe day drew on in the which the mariage of the knight of the Sun with the princesse Lindabrides should be celebrated,  the whole citie of Neptaia, with the wide  broad fields, were all furnished with valiant, worthy,  well estemed knights, which semed to be a mightie army, amongst them ther lacked not high  mightie kings,  valiant  stout knights, for that all the flower of the pagans were ioyned together in the court of the emperour Alicandro, Wherat the knight of the Sun was greatly ama|zed

for that if he had not sene it, he could not haue beleued that the power os any one Lord in all the world could not haue extended so far. At this time the knight of the Sun was estemed and honoured of all those mightie kings, Lords, and knights, who thought long for the day of the triumphs, for to se by experience some part of his great bountie that was so noised abroad, for that they could not beleue that he should be of so great force  strength but that ther were a great number of pagans in that court that would shew themselues more valiaunter then he. In this time the great ioy  con|tentment which the Princesse Lindabrides receiued cannot be expressed, for that the day approched nigh in the which hir welbeloued knight shall be giuen hir to husband, so that ther were no ioy nor pleasure that might be compared vnto hirs, or that as then she was voide of all feare,  in great secu|rity of that great doubt which the presence of the princesse Claridiana did put hir in. So the dext day was come, in the which the great triumphs  feasts should be celebrated, for that the next day following they should be maried, in which day the emperour (in a fresh  grene garden, which was ioyning vnto the pallace) did inuite all those mighty kings, princes,  estemed knights, that were ther present, for to dine with him, the which was done with great solempnitie, and great store of musick of diuers sorts. The dinner was ended somwhat betimes,  all those knights which would enter in|to the , went to arme themselues,  the mperour put himselfe in his royall place appointed to be holde all that should passe, accompanied with such ancient kings  knights that for their age they could not weare armour nor ust. And straight wais the faire princes Lindabrides, who was so brauely  richly apparailed, as neuer the like was seene, came foorth accompanied with more then two hundreth of ladies  damsels, which were very faire  of high estate an lignage, and were carried vnto a place of estate, that was very richy hanged, and was appointed for them, on the

one side of that mighty court. So when that all the windows, ,  all other places were urnished with people, knights began to apeare in the court, a great number. Then the knight of the Sun being armed with his rich armour, that he had of Meridian,  mounted vpon his light horse, he came foorth into the place, all to he trapped with cloth of fil|ur, wrought with beaten gold,  set full of precious stones,  which was worth a whole ingdome. He likewise had a  of blew silk, wrught with gold, which the prin|ces Lindbrides, did giue him  did become him meruailously well,  for that he came foorth accompanied with many prin|ces  knights,  with the sound of many instruments it gaue him so great maiestie, that it well seemed that he was the most highest prince in all the world. And all men receiued great contentment of his mighty proporcion, for that he was the best made knight,  the comeliest both on horsbacke  en foote, armed  varmed, that was o be found amongst all   pagans. And the most excellentest painers in Grecia, did send his picture for a mruaile into all y^e word, and was no lese wondred at of all  that did see it. So when the knight of the Sun was ented into the great place, he rode round about the same,  being done he put himselfe at his , with a mightie great speare in his hand,  pulled downe is beuer,  straight waies they began to  vnto the Iust. It was not long after, when ther came foorth against him a pagan knight, and prince of Cambray, a young man  very desirous to get honor, who was armed with  ry rich armour,  mounted vpon a great Horse, who  against the knight of the Sun, who likewise came foorth  receiue him, and made their encounter, with so great force  strength, that the prince of Cambray all to be shiuered hi speare, vpon the strong armor of the knight of the Sun, with out doing him any oher harme: but he made his  with so great force, y^t as though he had ben a child, he  him out of the sadle vnto the ground,  he passed 

on, as thouh he had done nothing. And for that they had the prince in estimation of a valiant knight, they were all very much amazed to see him so quickly ouer throwen. The~ straight waies after him came foorth Bracazar, king of the Sandalos, with a crowne of gold vpon his helme, which did signifie him to be a king, who was very proud, and a knight very much feared amongst the pagans,  comming against the knight of the Sun, they made their encounters in such sort, that when the pride of Bracazar did mast increase, he found himselfe o|uerthrowen vnto the ground, vnto his great reproch,  the knight of the Sun, without any moouing,  with great furie of his horse, did passe forwardes on without receiuing any harme. So straight waies ther came foorth another pagan, vnto the encounter called, Gebreo, king of the Teras, one of the principalest in all y^e court of the emperour, who thought at the first encounter, to ouer throw the knight of the Sunne,  with great fury went against him,  strok him, such a blow with his speare, that he made him somwhat to decline back|wards vpon his saddle. But the knight of the Sun, made his encounter with so great strength, that he ouer threw him  his horse vnto the ground. Then without any further tary|ing, ther came foorh other three strong and valiant pagans, whom he ouerthrew at their first encounters, to the ground,  so great wonder vnto the emperour,  vnto all those that did bhold him that they could not beleue that in any humane knight, should remaine so great force, or the like were able for to doo. But much more they were amazed, whe~ that the most part of the day he passed away in that sor,  had  to the ground, more then one hundreth of paga knights, of kings  other mightie lords, without any shew of wearinesse in him, or receiuing any damage at all, but as one that ad done nothing.
Then the  Oristedes, who was ner vnto the m|perour, sad: Of truth I cannot beleeue, but all the Gods in the heauens did ione to gether at the making and n|gendring of this knigt, and did vse him in all their powers

and strengthe, for that comming bether  to be lord ouer all these thy countries kingdomes  ioueraigne Emperour, to be equall with them. Then the emperour saide, I doo verly beleeue the same for as the high gods hath brought me he|ther this knight, for to marie him with my daughter,  to be lord ouer this my high estate, euen so had they great care  consideration, for to make him of so geat courage, aboue all them that are in the world. And I so glad for to receiue him to be my son, that ther is no other ioy, that I doo dsire nor looke for. So whilest that the emperour,  the Troian Onste|des, was talking haereof, there entered into the great place, twelue giants, all together of so huge bignes, that they see|med to be towers,  all mounted vpon mighty elephants,  armed with armour made of scalles  bones, bordered with with fine gold  precious stones, with crownes of siluer ve|ry curiously wrought, vpon their helmes,  their elophants were couered with skins,  lined with very fine white , which did become them very well. And ther entred in after them twelue dwarffes, of the Pigmeres, which were their pages, and all mounted vpon Elophants, who carried theyr speares  shields, which were of so great hugenes, that they were all together hid vnder them, that no part of them could be perseued, in such sort, that beholding the mightie hugenes of the one,  the small stature of the other, might very well be considered the great contrarietie that is in the operati|on of nature. Then so soone as they were entred in, the em|perour straight waies sent word to know what they were  it was giuen to vnderstand, that they were the kings of the orientall Ilands, which were very many  very aboun|dant, full of gold  siluer  precious stones,  wheras all the whole nation, as well women as men, were giants. Although not far from them was the country of pigmeres:  for that these kings did vnderstand of these great feasts  triumphs, they were agreed altogether to   see them, ech of them beleeuing that twenty of the  that might be ioy|ned

together, were not able to equall themselues vnto his great force  strengeth. And to say the truth, they were the greatest  valiantest in all the world, for that they were of the naturall generation of giants, for others ther be abroad in countries, that although they seme to be as big as they be, et are they not of the nation that they be of.
When these twelue Gants were entred into the great  mightie place, all the whole company wondered greatly, for they were the greatest that euer they had sene, and beeing mounted vpon these Elophants, they semed an vnusuall thing to ust with,  no knight would iust with them, for that twentie knights together were not sufficient once to mooue them. So straight waies one of them put himselfe right a|gainst the knight of the Sun, with a speare in his hand, of so huge bignes, that it semed to be the mast of a ship, who sha|ked it with such vnusuall force of his arme, that all men mused at it,  seeing him so great  fearefull, ther were few in all that place but were very sorry to se him put himself against the knight of the Sun, but especially the Emperour Alicandro, and much more the princesse his daughter, who could not abide to se hir knight put in that great perill, but sodaily lost hir coulour  fell in a sound in the armes of hir ladies  damsels, who had very much to do before they could bring hir againe vnto hir selfe. But this worthy  couragi|ous knight, who made no wonder at the hugenes of the Gi|an but choosing the greatest and strongest speare that was  a great number that were ther, and setting spurs vnto his swift horse and with so great ury, that it seemed like a whirle winde, he went towardes that mightie Gy|ant, who so fast as the Elophant could runne, came against him and ioyning together in the middest of the , the speares point of the Giant did pearce through the shield of the knight of the Sunne, and by reason that his armour ws the finest and the strongest that was in all the world,

the speare could not pearce it, but glanced on the one side, so that the speare apeered at the back of the knight of the Sun, with his shield vpon the point, for that the buckles thereof were broken, and vpon a sodaine in that place was there a geat rumor,  shriks amongst the people, thinking that he had ben slaine, but the valant knight who had not his equall in all the world, determined ther to shew his bountye, made his enter in such sort vpon the broad breast of that dreadfull Giant, by reason that the speare was great  strong,  be|fore it did breake he ouerthrew him  his Elephant to the ground, whose fall made so great a noise, as though a whole tower had fallen downe,  he proceded forwards on his fu|rious course as though he had receiued no encounter at all, which made all those that were present to wonder at that mightie blow. Then the valiant Oristedes said vnto the em|perour: I doo beleue that if the ancestors of this knight, the grekes, and mine of the roians, which were together at the siege of Troy, were now aliue, not one of them should get a|ny honour by this knight, neither could they doo such mer|uailes in knighthood, for that if this we haue sene, should be related vnto vs in histories, are giuen vs to vnderstand by others, the most part therof we neuer should nor could, bee leeue, but rather iudge it to be a thing impossible. Of a truth said the emperour, your troian ancestors were very good  singuler knights, but yet I dooe beleue that this knight is better then euer they were,  being in this co~munication, the second giant came foorth to iust with the knight of the Sun, who taking another shield, as fast as his horse could run mo|ued against him,  so mightely they made their encounter, that the speare of the giant, by reason that it was big, and chanced a full blow on the knight of the Sun, y^t it made him to decline backewards somewhat,  brake not, but glanced vp|wards without dooing any other harme, so that hee setteled himselfe, but he made his encounter with the Gyaunt so strongly, that vnhorsing him from his Elephant, he threw

him to the ground, and the good Knight passed forwards, leauing the giant with so great anger, that the smoke cme out at his beauer, as from a chimney with fire. Then straight waies came foorth the third Gyant, whom this va|lyaunt knight dyd ouerthrow vnto the ground in the same order as hee dyd the other in uch sort hee perseuered in his valiaunt bounty, that the first part of the day lacked to con|clude, when that of the twelue giants, hee had ouerthrowe a leauen of them to ground, without once moouing in his Saddle at the encounter of any of them, putting so great wonder in all them which beeheld him, that seeing it beefore their eies, they thought it a thing impossible to bee beleeued. And the faire Princesse Lindabrides seeing hir knight clere from so mightie encounters, was no lesse ioyfull, as to se him so far absent from the presence of the fayre Princesse Claridiana, although she was not in full securitie in seing the last Gyaunt which remayned, who semed vnto hir to be the best and most wonderfull, and so it was of truth, for that this was the most brauest  strongest of them all, ad although they were all Kings, euery one of them ouer his Iland, yet by reason of his great brauenesse and mightie force, they were all subiect vnto this, and they estemed him for theyr Lord and principall amongst them, and in signe and token thereof, this had his crowne of fine golde mer|uailous richly wrought with precious stones, and the other were all of siluer, and hee was called Bradaman Campeon, which was as much to say in theyr language, mighty king, Captayne, or Champyon, and was Lord ouer the Iland Serpentaria, which is the most biggest and principallest a|mongst all the Orientall Ilands. The wise Artemidoro sayth, that this was he that dyd compile the mightie dedes of he Knight of the Sunne, in those parts whereas this Bradaman dwelt, was the most mightiest and valyauntest Gyaunt that euer was seene, and hee who had most power ouer all the Gyaunts of the Orient all Ilands, for that by reason of the great fiercenesse of that nation, there was ne|uer any that had so much power as to bring them into

subiection, but in the time of this Bradaman Campeon, they were constrayned to be subiect vnto him, in such sort, that in onely hearing him named, they did tremble and quake, and in respect of him, they did not onely take him to be theyr Lord, but did also serue and obey all such kings as were put in by him into any of those Ilands, and would not suffer any for to raigne longer then it was his will and pleasure.
This great Campeon seeing his strong companyons so o|uerthrowen and loose the victorie, he receiued thereat ney|ther sorrow nor griefe, but was rather very glad and ioy|full, to se the great valour of that knight, for that (as he ho|ped to) to ouercome him, he might the~ the better shew foorth his great bountie, although it seemed vnto him to get verie little honour in ouercomming of him, considering the great encounters and iusts which he had made before with so many Gyants and Knights, and approching vnto the knight of the Sunne vpon his mighty Elophant, which seemed to be a great tower, he sayde.
Sir Knight, thou oughtest to haue thy selfe in great e|stimation, for that thou hast with so great lightnesse ouer|throwen my companions, which are the most strongest Gy|ants in all my Kingdomes, and for that thou shalt not de|ceiue thy selfe of thy victorie, the which thou hast got of them, neyther thy bountie to make the so hardie for to en|ter with me alone into contention, I will giue the to vn|derstand that I am Bradaman Campeon, Lord ouer the Ori|entall Ilands, he that if all the Knights in the world were ioyned together in the  agaynst him, he dooth thinke to put them vnto the sword first, beefore they should ouercome him by armes. Likewise or that I would not that the re|proch of my companions should be left vnreuenged, I will giue the this libertie, for to choose fiftie knights of the best that thou canst find in all this company, and that you come all together to combat with mee, and not to let me take a|ny rest till such time as I doo kill and vanquish you all.
The great brauerie of the Gyant for all that, dyd not put

any feare into this worthy knight, although he semed vnto him, to be one of the most deformedst of stature that euer he saw in all his life: yet his valyant courage was such, that with the help of god, he hoped to abate his pride,  with that confidence he answered  said: I do giue the great thanks Bramadan, for this tale which y^u hast tolde vnto mee although (for to giue occasion to haue the in greater estimation) it had been better, that an other had giuen mee to vnderstand of thy great fame, and not told me by thy selfe. For that there can nothing be wel done, whe~ that it is aduanced and set foorth by the der thereof, but must nedes loose a great part of the ertue, and touching that, whereas thou sayst, that I should choose vnto me fifty Knights for to help me, I giue the no thanckes for the same, for that I am fullie perswaded, that thou doost it for vaine-glorie, and to boast thy selfe, more than for any honour or profit thou doost meane towards me: therefore take vnto the thy weapon and come forth against me, for with the fauour and help of God, one of lesser stature then thou art, although his better seruant did quell a Gyant as thou art: so likewise may I ouercome thee: for that thou mayst the better know the great miracles of god, and how mighty they are. Bradaman, who very well vnderstood, what the Knight of the Sunne had sayd, makeing a great laughter, he sayd: Knight, if before I had the in reputatio of valyaunt, I now accompt the for simple and foolish, for that thou wilt attempt things that are beyond nature, and vnpossible: so that I doo ac|compt it rather to folly then to any manhoode or strength: take into thy companie the Knights which I doo will thee, otherwise it will be a great reproch to me, when it shall be knowen in my Countrie, that I doo take a speare to iust with one alone Knight. Then the Knight of the Sunne sayd, it is more honour to ouercome one knight, than to be ouer|come by one hundreth. And if in thy Countrie it be a great shame for to iust agaynst one alone Knight, so lykewise  my countrie a great dishonour, whe~ it shall bee knowen, that

for to combat with the I seke companie and help, there|fore I will combate with thee alone if thou wilt, if not, make thy returne backe agayne from whence thou camst, and let other good Knights come vnto the Iust, who dooth thincke long for the Same. Bradaman at these words was very an|grie, and lykewise for the Knight of the Sunne, beecause he would continue with him alone, and as one amazed hee re|mayned not knowing what to dooe, one way seming to be great necessitie in him to combate with him alone, and an other way great reproach and shame, to leaue his compa|nions quarrell vnreuenged. The Emperour and all those tht were with him dyd well heare and vnderstand all that passed beetwixt them, not a little wondering at the fierce|nesse of that monstrous and valiant Gyant, and dyd great|ly feare his strength and vnreasonable stature, seming vn|to them vnpossible that anie humane Knight should ouer|come him. Now when Bradaman saw that his brauenesse nor importunations dyd little preuayle him to perswade the Knight of the Sunne not to enter into battayle with him alone, with great furie he tourned the raynes of his mightie Elephant, and broching him with his spurrs, he : Well, seing that thy follie hath so disquieted me, if all the Gods in the Heauens should ioyne together with teyr powers for to succour and aide the, yet shall they not bee sufficient for to deliuer thee out of my hands, and more hee syd: O  and reprochfull Bradaman, at the mensi|oning of whose name all the whole earth almost doth tremble, and now one alone knight so valiuant and hardie, that hee dare put himselfe in the field against mee: how and which way might I take reuengement of this so great otrage. And in saying these words with a mightie great speare in his hand, which seemed to bee as bigge as a Pine Tree, and as fat as his Elephant could runne, he went a|gaynst the Knight of the Sunne, who calling vpon God for hs ayde and uccour, lykewyse ranne agaynst him, with so great swiftnesse, that heauen and earth seemed to tremble, so that the lookers on had great feare to beehold him, arry|ing

to see the successe of that rigorous encounter, the which was such, and with so great force and strength that theyr speares (although they were very big) were sheeuered all to peces without any moouing either of them in theyr sad|dles till such time as they came to mete together with theyr bodyes and horses. Then the good Horse Cornerino with his sharpe and hard horne, broched the Elphaunt in the middest of the breast, in such sort, that wounding hm very sre, hee ouerthrew him dead to the ground with his master Bramadan vpon him, who gaue such a blow vppon the earth with his fall, that it semed a mightie Tower to haue fallen he made so great noyse. Likewise the Knight of the Sunne with his Horse being tormented with the mightie encounter of Bradaman and his Elephaunt, almost astonied they came both to the ground, yet with a tryse this couragious knight rose vp vpon his feete,  with his swoord deawen in his hand, and his sheld on his arme, he went agaynst Bradaman, who greatly amazed at that stronge encounter, was vpon his feete, with a great bat of yron in both his hands, at the ende whereof was hanged by strong chaines of pron foure great peliets of the same mettall, the which he long about his head, flourishing with such urie to see himselfe ouerthrowen at the first encounter by one alone Knight, that he wished all the whole place to bee ful of Knights, and agaynst him, that hee might the better exe|cute his fury, and comming nigh vnto the Knight of the Sunne, with great fury and forc hee let drie at him so ter|rible a blow, that the bigge pellets on his bat whirled in the ayre, and made so great a noyse, that there was none in all the place, but onely in seeing of him so fierce and outra|gious, but were meruailously afraide. But this mighty and valiant knight, seeing so terrible and mortall a blow com|ming vpon him, with great discretion made shew as though hee would abide the fury thereof, but yet at such time as he would discharge the same, by reason that the Graunt was rry hgh, and the blo stroke ouerthwart hee with great  stoped downe to the ground, in such sort, that the

blow went ouer him without touching him any thing at all. And with the great fury of the bat and the pellets, it made the Gyant to turne twise about with all his body. In the meane time this valiaunt knight, did strike him such a blow vpon his leg, that what with the great strength wherewith it was stroken, and the finenesse of his swoord, it cut his armour and the flesh vnto the hard bone, whereat issued ve|ry much blood, that the earth was all to be sprinkled there|with. But when that Bradaman, felt himselfe wounded, and saw his aduersarie before im, with so great courage, his wrath, anger and mortall courage was such that he might be compared vnto one of the infernall furies, for that ther came foorth at his visor so much smoake and sparkles of fy|er, as though it had beene full of gunne pouder and Brim|stone. And with so great brauenesse, that he put great feare in all them that dyd behould him, with both his hands, he began to throw that great and heauie bat about his head, with so great force and swiftnesse, that it semed to make a round cerkle, and the waighty pellets of yron that hung thereat, made a whirling noyse in the ayre. And so with this dreadfull semblance, he went agaynst the knight of the Sun, being very certayne and sure, that if any of those pellets, should fasten vpon him, that it would breake him all to pe|ces. But he who in the lyke extremities his hart neuer fayle him, seing that it dyd accomplish him to  from his aduersarie, or else to abide that daungerous blow, from the which it was not possible to escape the death, if any of those pellets did chance to hit him. At such time as he came nigh him,  that the pellets had passed once about whiling hard by his vsar of his helmr, before that hee could come about againe, with great lightnesse, hee put himselfe within the force of the blow, and oyned with the Gyant, in such sort, that when hee came about with his swelling blow agayne, the pellets missed their purpose, but with the hand end of the club he stroke the Knight of the Sun with so great strength that he thought verely, that all his armour and bones had bene broke a sunder in the midst: and by reson of the grea

strength and swiftnesse wherewith the pellets flew about, was the occasion that the bat flew out of the Giants hands, and ell a great way from him on the ground. The which when the good Knight saw, beeing very glad, he cleered him|selfe from him, and said: I promise thee from this time for|wards, thou shalt not profit thy selfe any more of this thy dreadfull weapon against mee. Then the Gyaunt who made no reckoning thereof, drew out a great broade fauchon the which he had hanging at his ide, and saide: knight, doo not incourage the selfe any more for this, that if all the heauens and  were ioyned together in thy faour, yet should they not be sufficient for to deliuer thy life out of my hands. And in saying these words, he went vnto the Knight of the Sunne, for to strike him a blow vppon his head, the which was done so quickly, that the Knight had no leasure for to clere himselfe, but warding it with his swoord and shelde in the best wise he could, and chauncing vnder his swoord, he loue his sheld a sunder in the middest, and the force of the blow descended downe vpon his Healme with so great strength, that it made him to stoup with his knes  hands. downe to the ground, and if his healme had not bene won|erfull good, at that same blow he had clouen him downe vnto the girdle, yet for all this, that valyaunt knight fayn|ted nothing at all, but with great lightnesse he arose vp a|ayne, and by reason that the Gyaunt was of great height, he could not procure to wound him fro~ the wast vpwards, herefore he tooke his Swoord in both his hands and stroke im such an ouerthwart blow, vpon the left leg, that he cut  harneys and flesh to the hard bone, and made a grea| wound then the other before, whereout there issued ve| much blood, whereat Bradaman recouered so great out|agious fury, that he wished that all the great place were ll of knights to contend against him, wheron he might the  execute his blow, for that the Knight of the Sunne ith his great lightnesse and force dyd cleere himselfe from , in such sort, that it was a great meruayle for him to  one sure blow vpon him, which was the occasion that

the battayle endured more then two houres betwixt them, with so great force and strength, that there was no iudge|ment to be giuen betweene them who should haue the vic|torie. All those which beheld this braue battell were very much amazed at the fury and force of Bradaman, and much more at the bountie of that valyant knight,  how hee could so long endure agaynst him. Then the Emperour Alicandro (although hee had great doubt of the battaile) yet he mer|uayled very much, and sayd vnto Oristedes, the singular bountie of the Knight of the Sunne is to be wondered at, who likewise with words of great prayse sayde, that there was not a knight in all the world that in bounty  strength was lyke vnto him. In this time the fayre Princesse with the out ward shew of hir heauy countenaunce, and the going and comming of hir rubicond coulour, gaue to vnderstand what great sorrow and griefe hir heart receyued for to see hir welbeloued knight put into so great perill and trouble, and occupyed hir selfe in no other thing, but praying vnto hir Gods for to giue him the victorie, at which time the splendant Sun drew nigh vnto the Occident regions, and the sad darknesse of the night began to couer the earth, whe~ the furious Bradaman and the good Knight of the Sunne had endured thre houres in the battayle, without taking anie rest, yet at that time they stroke so fierce and furious one a|gaynst an other, as though it dyd but as then begin, and Bradaman laboured with great courage for to fasten one sure blow vpon the Knight of the Sunne, beeleuing verelie ther with to make an end of that battayle, but all that euer hee dyd procure to dooe, was to little purpose, for that this worthie knight knowing the great perill and daunger of his mortall blowes, dyd procure by all meanes to defende and cleere himselfe fro~ them and with great fury and light|nesse hee dyd still strike and wound him on his big legs in such sort, that although his armour was made of fine and hard bones of Elephaunts, yet when the night drew on, he had more then ten wounds on them, whereout ranne so great abundance of blood, that all the place was baraye

therwith, as though ther had ben two bulls slaine, the quan|titie, was so much by reason whereof the giants force and strength abated, in suth sort, that he did not execute his ble|wes with so great strength as he did at the first, the which being knowen by the knight of the Sun, his fury  orce in|creased the more  Bradaman fainted by the losse of so much bood,  being without all power  strength, he fell downe vn|to the ground, whose fall was so terrible  heauie, that it made the whole pallace, with all the towers to shake, which was as great oy  pleasure vnto them that did behold it, as it was sorrow  griefe vnto all the giants, the compani|ons of Bradaman, who were ready to burst with pure anger, to see their lord to be ouer come  loose the victory,  the knight of the Sun giuing thanks vnto almighty god for that great victory, went vnto Bradaman,  pulled off his helme to se if he were dead or not, and when he saw that he was but in a sound, he commanded straight waies that he should be caried from thence, wheras he might be cured of his wounds. The which was straight way done, and his wounds washed and bound vp,  found that he was in no perill of death, although if the knight of the Sun had knowen at that time what would haue hapned, with a very good will he would haue ct off his head, before he would haue commanded him to b , for that euery drop of blood which was ther spilt, cost full deerly the emperour of Greece. Thus this braue  perillous bat|taile being concluded, the horse of the knight of the Sun was straight waes brought vnto him,   theron, all those kings  mighty lords came for to beare him company with such gallant noise of musick, that it shewed the great males|tie of those kings  Princes that were ther present. In this sort they bare this knight company till hee came vnto the mightie pallace, dooing him such honour as the like was ne|uer done vnto any Prince or Knight, and beeing ente|red into the pallace, in company with those Kings, ordes, and knights, the mightie Emperour Alicandro came 

into the galleries for to receiue him,  embracing him with great loue he : Oh my doore  weibeloued son, how hap|py  ioyfull was that day when first I knew you, I may ac|cont my selfe happy in that I had a daughter for to deserue so aliant a knight. Then the knigh of the Sunne kneling dwne before him, sai: In this am I onely bound to giue great thanks vnto God,  to accunt myselfe happy  for|tunte, for that I acknowledge for my father so soueraign a lord. And being in this conference, the empresse came  em|braced him with great loue, although vntill that time she did with him euill for the great loue which she bre vnto hir son the prince Meridian, yet hauing seene that day the great meruailes by him done, hir mallice was turned into great loue,  accounted hir selfe happy in obtaining such a son in law Then they altogether entered into a very great qua|dra, wheras he was vnarmed,  being supper time, the fair princs Lindabrides was brought thether with great torch light,  much musike, whereas they suped altogether with great ioy  , the knight of the Sun  the faire prin|ces Lindabrides were set together, wheres passed betwixt them many amorous questions, the which did greatye in|crease their amorous desires,  by reason of the great quan|tity of lights that were in the quadran, their beauties dyd redouble more then before,  gaue great contentmnt vnto all the lookers on. So after that they had spped, began the feasts of dancing, in the which the knight of the Sun did  with the princes, with so notable  excellent grace, with the like disposition, that it was a thing worth of beholding. Likewise thse kings  lords did dance with the ldies and damsells of the princesse, who were very faire, in the which mirth and pastime they passed away the greatest part o the night, and for that the Knight of the Sunne was verye wearie of his great trauayle the past, the Emperour would not that that night they should be made sure toge|ther, but commanded it to be referred till the next day fol|lowing

Thus midnight being past, all men went vnto their rest and the knight of the Sunne at two of the clocke in the morning tooke his leaue of the Princesse Lindabrides, with great sorrow  griefe, for that his desired glorye was put off and delaied till the next day. So being departe the one from the other, the knight of the Sunne was carryed into his chamber, wheras he euer lay since his comming thether, and being laid in his rich bed, he passed a|way that night, as shall be tolde you in the first Chapter of the next booke.

Thus endeth the second part of the first booke of the Mirrour of Knighthood.





THE TABLE.

OF all that happened vnto the Emperour Trebatio and the Princesse Briana in their way vnto the Grecian Em|pire Chapter. 1. Folio. 1.
How the Emperour Trebatio and the Princesse Briana ariued in the Empire of Grecia. Chap 2. fol. 7
How the departure of the Emperour Trebatio  the princes Briana, was knowen in the court of kig Tiberio,  what passed about the same. Chap. 3 fol. 8.
How the knight of Cupid did take his leaue of the Queene Arguirosa  entred into the kingdome of Russia, where hee found a strange aduenture. Chap. 4. fol. 13.
How the knight of Cupid entered into the dreadfull caue of Artidon, and of all that happened ther. Chap 5. fol. 18.
How the two Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo departed from the kingdome of Polonia  came into the kingdome of France, and of all the rest that happened. chap 6. fol. 26
How the two Princes Brandizel and Clauerindo, beeing in the Citie of Parris, there came thether Branbafuriel, with whom the Prince Clauerindo had a very strong and furious battaile. Chap 7. fol. 28.
How the knight of the Sun escaped out of prison where hee was, and perforce departed from the Court of the king Ti|berio Chap. 8. fol. 31.
Of all that passed in the court of the king Tiberio, after the knight of the Sun was departed, and how the bretheren of the Duke of Pannonia, and Aridon of the wildernes did de|termine to reuenge themselues of the king Tiberio, for that he would not pardon their deaths. chap. 9. fol 34.
How the knight of the Sun came vnto a Castle, whereas hee did deliuer a Gentlewoman,  recouered two Pages whom hee carried with him. Chap. 10. fol 42.
Of the great triumphes which were made in Constantinople for the comming of the Emperour Trebatio, and how the death of the Prince Edward was bruted in great Brittine, and of all that happened Chap 11. fol. 45.
How the three Princes, Bargandel, Liriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, who went in the demaund of Rosicleer came into the kingdome of Lusitania, and of all that hap|pened

 vnto them there. Chap. 12. fol 47
How the three Princes, Bargadel, Lyriamandro, and the  Zoylo, issued footh with such people as were in the Citie vnto the Camp of their enmies, and of the mightie deedes of armes that they did there. Chap. 13. fol 50
How these three Princes went forth the second time into the camp,  were taken prisoners by their enimies. cap. 14.  52
How the Knight of the Sunne geing towards the  of Grecia, should haue beene taken by treason at a bridge, and of all that pased therein. chap. 15. fol. 54
How Florinaldus would haue taken the Knight of Sunne by treason, and how he slew his knights,  receiued Florinaldus to his ,  of all that happened besides. cap. 16. o. 56
How the Knight of Cupide departed from the Kingdome of Russia and of all that happened vnto him in his iourney. Chapter 17. folio 58
How the Knight of Cupid ariued in the Kingdome of Phe|cia, whereas he deliuered from death a Knight, who after|ward was a very great friend of his. Chap. 18. fol. 63
Of a straunge aduenture which happened vnto the Knight of Cupid and the King Sacridoro, trauayling by the moun|taines of Phenica. chap. 19. folio. 68
How the three Princes Bargandel, Liriamadro, and the Tar|tarian Zoylo, came vnto the fountaine wheras the King Sacri|doro was lamenting the death of his great friend the Knight of Cupid, and how they were aduertised by him who he was, and of all that hapned therein. chap. 20. fol. 70
Of a strange aduenture which the Knight of the Sunne found trauavling towards the Grecian Empire. chap. 1. fol. 72
Of a stout and well foughten battaile beetwixt the Knight of the Sunne and the Prince Meridian, and of all that happe|ned afterward. chap. 22. fol 78
How the Prince Meridian did leaue the Chariot of the Prin|cess Lydabrides his sister, and how hee went with the armour and horse of the Knight of the Sun vnto the  of the King of Macedonia. chap. 23. fol. 83
How the Knight of the Sunne and the Princessee Lindabrides trauayled towards Constantinople, and sent messenge to

the Emperour Trebatio, to giue him to vnderstand of theyr comming chap. 24. fol. 84
Of the entering of the Knight of the Chariot, and the fayre princesse Lindabrides into Constantinople cap. 25 fol. 86
Of a straunge aduenture which happened vnto the Princesse Claridiana beeing a hunting. chap. 26. fol. 89
Of that which hapned vnto the sorrowfull Knight of Cupid, after he was carried to the fountaine of the sauage people. chapter. 27. folio. 93
How the three Princes, Bargandel, Liriamando,  the Tartari|an Zoylo, went vnto Constantinople, whereas they gaue vn|derstanding of the death of Rosicleer. chap. 28. fol. 96
How Florinaldus came into the kingdome of France wher he was taken prisoner at a bridge, and how by two Knights that came thether hee was set at libertie, whom he knew to be the knights of the flower de luces, which he sought. cha. 29. fol. 98
How the Knight of Cupid  the king Sacridoro departed fro~ the kingdome of Penicia, for the Empire of Greece. ca. 30. f. 99
Of a fierce  perrillous battell which the knight of Cupid had wiah a famous Giant in the Grecian Empire. cha. 31. fo. 100.
How the knight of the chariot returned to defend the beautie of the Princesse Lindabrides, in the mightie citie of Constan|tinople, whereas hapned straunge things. chap. 32. fol. 104
How the knight of the Sun returned to defend the beautie of the princes Lindabrides  what hapned besides. ca. 33. fol. 108
How the knight of the Sun did defend the beutie of y^e princesse Lindabrides and how there entred into the iusting place the Knight of Cupid, and the king Sacridoro. chap. 34. fol. 109
Of the wonderfull and cruell battell made betwixt the knight of the Sunue and the Knight of Cupid, and of the perillous ende and successe thereof. chap, 35. fol. 112
How the Knight of the Sunne and the knight of Cupid were come againe vnto themselues, and how they were knowen to bee brethren by a meruaylous meanes. chap. 36. fol. 119
Of the great feasts and triumphs which were made in the great Citie of Constantinople, for the acknowledging of the Prin|ces, and of a certaine aduenture which came at that time the|ther, whereat all the Knights of the Court were at the poynt

to bee lost. Chap. 37. folio. 129
Who the valiaunt Rodaran was, and the damsell, and the oc|casion wherfore they came vnto the court of the Emperour Trebatio. chap. 38. folio. 137
How the prince Brandizel went to combat with Rodran, and of the strong and rigorous battaile they had. cap. 40. fo. 148
How the Prince Rodamarte went vnto the bridge of lasp, for to combat with the valiant Rodaran. chap. 36. fol. 144
How the King Sacridoro went to combat with Rodaran, and of all that happened vnto them therein chap. 41. fo. 156
Of the stonk and well foughten battayle that the valyaunt Rosicleer had with that stout Pagan Rodaran, and of all that happened vnto them therein. chap. 42. fol. 158
How the Prince Don Siluerio returned, and demanded of the King, his daughter the Princesse Oliuia, to wife, and beccause she wold not marrie with him, she returned with hir knigts: and of all that chanced therein. chap. 43. folio. 171
How the knight of the Sun went to combat with Rodaran, and by a demand he left his determined iourney. cap. 44. fo. 173
How the Knight of the Sunne and the King Lyseo went out into the campe of their enimies, and of the cruell battayle that they had with them. chap. 45. fol. 172
How Rodaran sent vnto the Emperour, demaunding more Knights, and who went forth in the demaund. cap. 46 fo 176
How it was knowen in Constantinople the imprisonment of the Emperour, and what was done in consideration thereof. Chapter 47. fol. 181
How the Knight of the Sunne.  the King Liseo went foorth the second day against their enimies, and of the high Knigh|hood which they shewed in their battaile. chap. 48 fol. 185
How Rodaran came to lande and by great aduentue hee came vnto the Kingdome of Lidia. chap. 49. fol. 189
How the Knight of the Sunne went out the third time into the camp of the King of Arcadia, and what hapned therein. Chapter. 50. folio. 195
How the Emperour Trebatio with all his Princes and knights departed out of the Kingdome of Lidia towards Constan|. chap. 51. fol. 198
How the Empresse Briana was deliuered of a sonne, and of the great feasts that were made at his birth. Chap. 52. fol. 201
How the princesse Lindabrides beefore the Emperour, Princs, and Knights of the Court, did aske a boone of the Knight of the Sunne, and hee graunted it vnto hir, which was the occasion that hee must depart out of the Empire of Greece. Chapter 53. folio. 202
How the Knight of Cupid in companie with the King Sacri|doro went vnto Constantinople, and of all that happened more. chap. 54. fol. 206
How the Knight of the Sunne and the fayre Princesse Linda|brides went forwardes on their iourney towardes the great Tartaria and of the stout battaile that the Knight of the Sun had with the Troyan Oristedes. chap. 55. fol. 215
How Rosicleer and the king Sacridoro came into England  what happened with them there. chap. 56. fol. 223
How Fidelia went vnto the Princesse Oliuia, and gaue hir vn derstanding of the comming of Rosicleere. chap. 57. fo. 22
How Fidelia departed from the court,  went to speake wit Rosicleer at the monastery, wheras she left him ca. 58. fo. 22
How the great Triumphs and Feasts of the marriage of th Princesse Oliuia were celebrated, and of all that happened therein. chap. 59. fol. 23
How at such time as the king Oliuerio  the mights Princ and knights of the court were ioyned together that the Pri cesse Oliuia and the prinee Don Siluerio should take hand Rosicleer  the King Sacridoro entred into the mightie  lace, and what happened therein. chap. 60. fol. 2
How the Troyan Oristedes came vnto the court of the E perour Alicandro, and gaue him vnderstanding of the co ming of the Princesse Lindabrides. cap. 61. fol. 2
How the two Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo, depar from the court of the Emperour Trebatio, and what hap ned vnto them beeing at the sea. chap. 62. fol. 2
How the Prince Brandizel was deliuered from the tormen the sea,  what hapned vnto him afterwards. 63. fol. 2
Of the great triumphs and feasts that were made in the  of the Emperour Alicandro chap. 64. fol. 2

FINIS.





